The scornful QUAKERS ANSVVERED, AND Their railing REPLY refuted: BY The
meanest of the LORDS Servants MAGNUS BYNE.

Beware of false Prophets, They come unto you in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly
are ravening Wolves.

Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they be of God: Because
many false Prophets are gone out into the World.

LONDON, Printed by William Bentley for Andrew Crook, at the sign of the green
Dragon in Paul's Churchyard, 1656.

To the READER.
DEar friend, I speak to thy conscience in much tenderness unto thy Soul:
Learn to fear the great God more and more: For blessed is the man that fears
always: Wait upon the Lord, and he shall renew thy strength: Go unto him, as
unto thine exceeding joy: Love all the appearances of his Son, as the comfort
of Saints in all generations: Watch over thine own heart; Stand in awe and sin
not: Let the Lord come into his Temple, and Worship him alone: Take heed of
every gin and snare of the old serpent, who is in a great rage, because he has
but a short time: Be sober and quiet in thy Spirit, and hear the Lord speak;
His word is nigh thee, within thee, walk in the strength of it, and this will
keep thee from the paths of the destroyer: Long in thy Spirit to see the new
Jerusalem, the new Heavens, and the new earth, wherein dwells righteousness:
Let thy moderation be known to all men; for the Lord, the desire of all
Nations, is at hand: Stand still, be calm, be meek, and thou shall see his
salvation: Let thy Spirit groan and travel in pain with longing to see the Lord
arising to work; For men abused by the old Dragon seek to make void his Law:
And among all the vanities which I have seen under the Sun, take heed of the
two foolish, blind, mad, generations of Ranters and Quakers: The former of
which I have seen the Lord scatter, and appear in great wrath to consume,
rebuking the evil Spirit in them, and laying them open to their shame among
their enemies: The latter of these I have had some dealings with, and find
them more furious and raging than all that have gone before them; and
notwithstanding all their show of holiness, wisdom, humility, temperance; yet,
by a little dealing with them, I find nothing but impurity, folly, pride,
madness, even to admiration and wonder, in all their doting questions, fowl
mouthed answers, vain janglings, railing accusations, even as if Satan had left
all others, and brought all his power along with him, to fill their hearts and
tongues with all manner of blasphemies and evil speakings against all others,
but their own deluded party: And strange it is to see, how Satan in them is
divided against Satan: Satan rails, blasphemes; and then to save himself, cries
out, 't is Satan he blasphemes and and rails at in others: The Devil mocks,
jeers, scoffs, rages in their filthy hearts and tongues; and when he is seen
and manifested by his carriage to be the evil one, presently he condemns
himself, and says 't is the Devil all my fury is powered out upon, 't is him I
condemn in men and women, not the similitude of God, the man, or woman to whom
I speak: Thus the Liar and the Murderer in these men raging, speaks to excuse
himself from his lying and murdering, by persuading simple people, 't is
himself he aims at: And yet such a strong enchantment I find in this mad
carriage, that some poor Souls are even overcome with their violence, and have
thrown away not the light and grace of God only, that once appeared in them in
show, but even their reason and humanity too, and subjected themselves to this
carnal yoke, for fear of being still condemned by the Devil; Take one passage
of a great Prophet of their own, one Tho. Law-Cock, who, meeting at one Goodman
Matthews house near me, was called aside by the woman of the house, of good
report, but almost turned a Quaker; to whom the woman in kindness said, Sir,
will you eat something which I have provided? The Quaker replied, What shall I
eat with Devils and Dogs? and pointing to a Dog, There Is thy Companion, thy
fellow creature, of the same nature with thy self, (says the Quaker) and shall
I eat with thee a Devil, a Dog? And was not this a good argument at the first
meeting to persuade the woman to be a Quaker? And when the woman began to reply
something to excuse her great sin of asking this man of God (as he calls
himself) to eat, he opens his box again, and calls her Whore and Harlot; and
was not this another good argument to persuade her? And yet this woman, and the
man too, begins to believe in the Quakers, and to admire their light and power,
lusting after the painted image, and innocent spotless religion, which th^se
poor deluded wretches have set up and made: And as they have dealt with this
woman, so with some others whom I know, prevailing with them, and upon them,
even by the same Magical power of Satan's workings in them: Therefore it
behooveth us all to look to our building upon the Rock; to our interest in the
holy one of God, to our receiving and walking in Jesus Christ the Lord, rooted
and built up in him, that so the gates of Hell may not prevail against us.

Further, a little to lay open this blind seer Lawcock, at one meeting with
some Baptists, he was demanded whether Christ suffered and died at Jerusalem:
His answer was, That Christ suffered, but Christ did not die, and yet it was
not Christ who suffered neither, but that which was born of the Virgin: See
here his contradictions of himself, and his contempt and denial of the death
of Christ: And yet afterward at another meeting, being in the presence, I
charged him with this, and he presently cried out, Thou lie, I acknowledge
Christ both suffered and died; and yet this man must be infallible in the midst
of all these contradictions against himself. Further, at the same meeting, when
I was present, and beginning to lay open his folly, (the Quaker exhorting to
meekness and silence, and the like, but presently falling a railing, cursing,
and roaring against Priests and hirelings) I asked him in patience how these
speeches could hang together, we must be meek, calm, quiet, but he must roar
and rage? At the first dash the man cries out, thou lie, thou art a beast,
and the like: and entreating the man to sit down, and be meek, according to his
own speech, he foams out his own shame still: A litte after, wondering at the
madness of the Prophet, at the trouble and torment of the evil Spirit in him,
I desired him to speak but two words of sense and reason, and I would be
silent, the man roars again, Thou art a belly-god, thou art a beast: And is not
this a goodly Apostle, Prophet, Teacher? Let all men judge that will not be
like the beasts, unreasonable. Further, desiring a Scripture to maintain
something, he spoke against the priesthood, he cries out, will thou believe
nothing but Scripture? Thus the man can add and take away at his pleasure,
though such are accursed of God, Gal. 1. 8, 9. Rev. 22, 18. Further applying
the speech of Christ unto himself; before Abraham was, I am, I asking him
whether he was not ashamed, did ever Saint apply that unto himself? He
answered, he understood it of the Spirit that was within him, blasphemously
applying the Divine Spirit that dwelt in the Son of God, to the filthy Spirit
of Belial that dwelt in him: And yet this man must be perfect, sinlesse, and
infallible. But to let him alone with his father, the Devil, and to come to
another, with whom I had some dealing by conference, and by questions and
answers, and replies on both sides: This man was one Thomas Lawson, who had a
companion with him; This man and his companion I find contradicting the other
in two things. 1. Lawcock, he owns the sufferings of Christ, but not his dying;
yet another time, both his suffering and dying: But Lawson scoffs at the
sufferings and dying of Christ in the flesh, as none of his Cross, as you
shall see in his papers: Here Is no Harmony you see amongst the Quakers, but
Quaker against Quaker, one against another. 2. Lawson's companion told me he
was Christ, and what he spoke was Scripture; This Lawson yielded unto by his
silence; But Lawcock denied this speech, and his brethren in it, though he said
in effect as much, when he cried out; Before Abraham was, I am, yet he would
not be Christ: Still here is Satan divided against Satan, and so it must be,
that his Kingdom may fall. And yet these wretched men delude poor people, and
say, that at the meetings of Quakers in the North, when there have been three
hundred and five hundred Quakers together, they have been all of one heart, and
one mind, and so they are indeed, being all under the power of the Prince of
the air, the Spirit that now works in all the Children of disobedience, where I
leave them in chains of darkness to the judgment of the great day.

As concerning their questions propounded to me in writing, I gave them but a
brief answer, not minding to make any thing public unto the world, knowing
mine inability to come forth in print in the midst of such a variety of
judgments abroad; yet receiving a reply from Lawson, full of lying and
railings, and evil surmisings, I was pressed in my spirit to give some
satisfaction unto my friends of these men's folly and madness, as also of mine
own experiences in the dealings of God with me, so far as concerns the matter
in hand: And therefore, my dear hearts, put on the whole Armor of God, that ye
may be able to stand in the midst of all the winds and storms of Satan's fury,
lean to the Rock Christ, wherein is everlasting strength to keep you in this
hour of temptation and confusion; Own the unity of the spirit, the seed of God
in all your companions in tribulation, and make this the bond of peace. All ye
whose faces are toward Sion, fall not out by the way: Live in peace and love.
Though there be a variety of ways thither according to Gods Divine
dispensations, yet in all the ways of God there is an Unity and Harmony, as
they tend to one point and center of rest and joy in himself. Make him thine
aim then, he is the Sion we are all going unto: Be not discouraged by the way,
though some draw back, others grow weary, others step aside, others revile and
blaspheme: Look thou to God, he is thy father, thou art his Son and Heir. Let
all thy knowledge, and wisdom, and light, and graces, and comforts thou have
received from God, make thee not great and high, and something, but little, and
low, and nothing still in thine own estimation: Take heed of Thorns and Briars,
and Chafe, and this untoward generation of Godless, shameless men: And so I
commend thee unto him, who is able to keep thee from falling, and to present
thee blameless before the Throne of his glory, to whom be praise and dominion
in the Church by Jesus Christ, throughout all ages, world without end.

Thine in the Lord Magnus Byne.

The scornful QUAKERS ANSWERED, And their railing Reply refuted.
Quest. WHat is the first principle of pure Religion?

Answ. The first principle of pure Religion is the Son of God dwelling in us:
He is the band of union between God and us, or an Emanuell, God with us: He who
lives in this principle is taught to be Religious: And so he is bound and tied
by love to worship the Father in Spirit, who is the Center, into which all
Religion runs, and where all that is pure stays.

Quest. What is the Yoke of Christ?

Answ. Its the Fathers work and will: This is easy to the Son, because of that
spirit or principle of love that dwell's in him, to his Father, which moves him
naturally and affectionately to do the will of his Father, and to finish his
work: And this is the yoke that lies upon every Christian.

Quest. What is the Burden of Christ?

Answ. Its his sufferings under all the weaknesses, infirmities and sins of the
world, from the beginning thereof to this very day, who is therefore called the
Lamb slain from the foundation of the world: This is light to the invincible
Spirit of Christ, who alone is able to overcome evil with good, though the
least reproach or suffering be a grievous load and burden to the weak low
Spirit of flesh and blood, which centers and lives no higher than self and this
creation: And this is the burden of every Christian, which through faith is
made light and easy to overcome as it is written, Whosoever is born of God
overcomes the world, and this is the victory that overcomes the world, even
our faith. 1 John 3. 4.

Quest. What is the Talent which to every one is given to improve?

Answ. Its that measure of the light and truth which is given to, and
manifested in every man which comes into the world; as it is written of Christ,
He was the true light which lights every one who comes into the world. John.
1. 9.

Quest. What is the Cross of Christ, and what does it tend unto?

Answ. Its the crucifying, dying, and suffering in the flesh, which the head
and all the members must and shall pass through, or be baptized with, before
they enter into the glory of the Father; which tends to the burning up of all
fleshly visibilities, discoveries, enioyments, dispensations that are temporal
and shadowish, that the Father, and his Son, and Sons, may live in that
oneness of spirit and glory, where God shall be all in all.

Quest. Who are they that bring their Talent out of the earth, it to improve?

Answ. Those who through the eternal spirit arise from under all the rubbish
of the elementary world, whence and where all bodies, by the strong Word of
God, are made and live: That soul that is awakened and risen with Christ to
live in the light of the inner world or new Creature, and to slide from thence
forth unto the dark world in the works of righteousness and true holiness, is
the soul that brings his Talent out of the earth, it to improve.

Quest. Who are they that hide their Talents in the earth to their condemnation?

Answ. Men that sin away the light and Spirit, or promise of the Father made
out in their Spirits and consciences by the noble wisdom of God, woing and
importuning them within in the Center of their souls to turn unto the Lord,
and so love darkness rather then light to their own condemnation: or rather
men who love to live below in flesh and sin, and this creation or world, rather
than above with the Father and the Son, making out love, and truth, and grace
in their Spirits to bring them reconciled to God, these are they who hide their
Talents in the earth to their condemnation.

Quest. Where is it, and by what that God speaks unto man?

Answ. God speaks unto man within, there he stands in the gate of the soul,
and by many invitations, woings, operations, which are as so many Angels or
messengers of love and life, he entreats men to come in and be saved; as it is
written, Look unto me, and be ye saved, for I am a God, and there is none
else: This inward speaking of God is backed likewise with outward speakings,
from the heavens and earth, and things that are made from the Scriptures, which
are a firm testimony and witness of the mind of God to man: sometimes from
Mercies, sometimes from judgments, sometimes from the words or mind of God put
into other men's months: All which variety of witnesses declare the one will
and mind of the Father, which he is pleased more immediately to declare within
by his own voice.

Quest. What is that, which unto the gentiles is manifest, showing unto them
what of God may be known?

Answ. It is the truth of the Deity, or the eternal power and Godhead, which
teaches them by the things that are made to own and glorify a Creator; and so
the unthankefull and stubborn are left without excuse. Romans 1. 20. 21.

Quest. What is its operation in all from the rising of the Sun, to the going
down thereof?

Answ. The light and truth of the Deity, which is manifested to, and showed in
every man from the things that are made, teaches every man to own a God, and
to worship him, and so to abstain from evil, and do good; which operation
being choked and abused by most, hence these wallow in the mire of sin and
wickedness and superstitious vanities, being given up thereunto by the Lord, as
a just punishment for their loving darkness rather than the light of God.

Quest. What is the flaming sword which turns every way to keep the tree of
life?

Answ. It may be the Administration of the Law within, which as a light or
flame shows every man his sin and shame: and so, as with a sword, cuts him off
every way in the midst of his best actions, performances and obedience, from
entering into life by his own power: Or the fierceness in the anger of God,
which turns every way to keep every uncleance person and thing from entering
into the Paradise of God, to eat of the tree of life, till it be washed and
cleansed from its filthiness; as it is written, Rev. 21. 22. there shall in no
wise enter into the holy City any thing that is unclean, etc.

Quest. What is the City which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt?

Answ. All the unregenerate world, which are as Sodom and Egypt full of sin and
wickedness; or the Antichristian formal Church, which strouts it out with a
show of wisdom, learning, letter, and History, as if it were a well built
City, or a true Church of God, but within is Wolvish, Envious, Dogged, full of
blood, cruelty and persecution against Christ, and every appearance of Christ
in his saints: This is the great City, which spiritually is called Sodom and
Egypt, where our Lord was crucified: And in her is found the blood of Prophets,
and of Saints, and of all that are ssain upon the earth: In brief, Egypt and
Sodom are the kingdom of flesh and darkness, where Christ and the true Church
are presecuted, and crucified in Spirit.

Quest. What is the language of Egypt?

Answ. Egypt speaks nothing but bondage and war to the people of God: Egypt
cannot endure that an holy Church should grow up in his dominions: he will
murder Abell or the innocent still: Egypt is all for himself, to manitaine
himself in greatness, and pomp, and dominion in the world, to rule and be a
great potent Lord in the flesh: If he preach, or pray, or read, or hear, or
appear sometimes as a seeming holy man; yet all is aiming at his name,
greatness, and credit in the world. His heart cannot cleave to and love the
Son of God: He must persecute and devour the poor and needy in the earth. This
is the language of Egypt, or that which Egypt declares.

Quest. What is the cry of the wilderness, and what is the language of the
wilderness, and whether thou were ever in the wilderness, yea or nay?

Answ. The wilderness unto some is a state of confusion, sin and death, where
God is not at all remembered, minded, or known. The wilderness unto others is
such a state, wherein the soul is awakened by the voice of Christ within to
remember and mind the Lord, and in the midst of all its confusions to cry, and
long, and wait for his revealing, coming, manifesting: And in this wilderness
I have been, and here I have cried, been payned, and the Lord has heard my
supplication, and delivered me from my fears, and brought me out into a
wealthy place, or into a condition of love, joy, and rest; and fulness in
himself. Further, the wilderness unto others is a condition of temptation,
which the Lord sometimes leads his people into, to try and refine them, and to
make his might and power known in their preservation, deliverance, and
salvation. Unto others yet the wilderness is a condition of solitarines and
retiredness of spirit, where the soul is carried away from the fashions and
practices of the world, as likewise above the tumults, rage, and violence of
the world, sweetly to solace herself in her beloved, and to walk in his way,
which is a way of peace, light, and holiness. The cry of the soul in this state
of lonenesse is all for God, and the will of God, its risen as it were out of
the world, and gone away from all other company to enjoy a fuller sight of the
Lords beauty, and to have a more exact communion with his Majesty: And this is
a wilderness a gracious heart delights much to be in.

Quest. What is the language of Canaan?

Answ. In Canaan is heard the voice of peace, love, and meekness: Here Is no
judging, murmuring complaining, dividing, persecuting, murdering: These are the
ways of Egypt and Babell. In Canaan there is rest from all the works of Egypt,
and darkness: Here Is unity in the midst of variety: Here all are looking into
the oneness, into the pure image and nature of the Father; and this light
keeps harmony and agreement between all the sons of Canaan: And so in Canaan
there is joy, melody, singing Halleluja's: Here the world is not mentioned,
flesh and blood is not at all remembered with delight, the former things are
passed away, and all is become new: God alone is made mention of to be Lord and
King, and set up upon the Throne for ever.

Quest. What is the vail which divides between the holy and most holy?

Answ. It Is the flesh of Christ, and all outward dispensations, which divide
and keep Saints whilst in weakness and bondage, though holy in some measure,
from entering into the most holy, into the substance and truth it self, or into
the choicest glory of the father. This vail of flesh in Christ was rent when he
suffered death, or was crucified in the flesh: Through which death or rending
of the vail of flesh, he entered himself, and made way also for us to enter into
glory. Heb^ 10. 19. 20. Having therefore boldness to enter into the holiest by
the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way which he has consecrated for us
through the vail, that is to say, his flesh: And when this vail of flesh, of
letter, and shadows, and outward dispensations is rent, and crucified by the
eternal spirit in the true Christian, then he the Christian enters into the
holiest, into the glory and joy of his Father.

Quest. What is the death which over all men is passed? and how came thou to
live?

Answ. It Is first the breaking of the body, or this earthly Tabernacle, which
comes upon all without exception for sin, Romans 5. 12. Secondly it is the dying
unto Paradise, and the Kingdom of God, which man has drawn upon himself by his
lusting after, and eating of the fruit of the four elements: By this lusting
and eating he becomes infected and poisoned in his mind, and will, with the
fruit of the Sun and Stars: And this is the taking and eating of the Tree of
temptation, and his leaving the Tree of life, and the heavenly fruit: And thus
he becomes an earthly man, and dead: Death sticks in his mind and soul, and
man is dead to all feeding upon God, and the Son of God, who is the Tree of
life. Man can no more feed upon the fruit which grows upon this Tree of life,
which is Christ, till Christ awake and arise in the center of his soul, and
carry him through all the Trees of temptation, or the pleasures, pomp, and
glory of the outward world, into the inward, or holy, pure element of this
spiritual body, and pure nature, and there awaken him to eat of the Tree of
life, and live for ever: And this is the way whereby I and all the Sons of God
come to pass from the spiritual death into the spiritual life, in the pure
nature of Jesus Christ.

Quest. What is deaths reign from Adam to Moses? And to Moses how did thou
come?

Answ. From Adam to Moses there was no law written without; all the law was
within upon the conscience, here was the rule or law, which God gave the worlds
to walk by: Now the world acting against this light and law within kept sin in
the world from Adam to Moses: for till the law, viz. given out by Moses, sin
was in the world, Romans 5. 13. Now sin always brings men under the reign of
death, and so death reigned over all from Adam to Moses: All had a law given
within, otherwise they could have had no sin; for where there is no law, there
is no transgression: Now men's breaking of this inward law was their sin, and
this their sin brought them all under the power and reign of death: And thus it
is still; though there had been no Moses to write Gods commands in outward
tables, or Scripture, yet the law being written within upon the conscience by
the finger of God, we sinning against this law do plunge our selves into the
reign of death, wrath, and condemnation, we kindle the Root of the fire, and
that being awakened makes our Hell, or self-comdemnation within, because we
have sinned against our light: Now by this light and law within we come to know
Moses, and that all the law she has written are holy, just and good; because
we find the same within, that he has written without; and nothing without,
but what is in spirit and power within.

Quest. Who are they which sin not after the similitude of Adams transgression,
which till Moses death reigned over?

Answ. They are infants in years, according to some, who, although they sin not
actually after the manner of Adam, yet they have sin and death written in their
nature, according to the weakness of this creation: Or they are infants in
knowledge, who, although they have not such full discoveries of the mind of
God, and such strength to stand as Adam had, and so their sin be not so great
as Adam, which is to sin after his similitude, yet they have a plain law
within, as before, which bids them not act, or eat that which the Lord forbids:
They living contrary unto this law, fall into sin and death: And in this
childish condition are we all sound, till the Lord quicken and save us.

Quest. Art thou called immediately by the great God of Heaven and earth into
the Ministry, yea, or nay?

Answ. That Ministry I act in, I have the anointing of the Spirit which does
sufficiently warrant my call: But as for those, who are called through Arts and
Sciences and men's ordinations without this anointing, I know they are the
Pillars of Antichrist, which I cannot own for the Apostles of Christ: My
calling teaches me to renounce my fleshly wisdom, and to live upon the grace
and love of God, commending that manifestation of the truth that is in me to
every man's conscience in the sight of Christ.

Quest. Have thou seen Gods face, yea, or nay?

Answ. To see the invisible God with carnal eyes I never did, nor shall; for no
man has heard his voice, nor seen his shape: but with the enlightened mind I
have in some measure seen his face, nay, his heart, in the precious revelations
and discoveries of his Son toward me in love; which Son is the face, and
heart, and brightness of God, opened in love, wherein he shows and speaks
forth plainly his exceeding kindness and goodness to all his Children: This
face of God I have thus seen, which is more to me than a thousand worlds.

Quest. Have thou heard Gods voice immediately from Heaven and earth, yea, or
nay?

Answ. I have heard his voice, as I have seen his face, viz. inwardly,
spiritually; which voice of his has fetched me out of the grave of darkness,
sin, and misery, and translated me into the Kingdom of his dear Son, where I
have righteousness, peace, and joy, and that in power, which makes these
things in me unspeakable and full of glory.

Quest. Who baptized John the Baptist?

Answ. Even he baptized him by his Spirit into his administration, who sent him
first forth to baptize with water; he being the first who was called to that
baptism of water, had no need of the baptism of any other but of him who sent
him.

Quest. Whether is Jesus Christ the end of all figures?

Answ. Yea, I look upon Jesus Christ as the end and fulfilling of all types and
shadows, he being the substance, for whose sake all figures were ordained; and
when he is come, the figure disappears, or the shadow flies away.

Quest. Whether Jesus Christ baptized any with outward water, yea, or nay?

Answ. We read that Christ was baptized himself with water by John, who was the
Minister of water; but Jesus Christ himself never baptized, or administered
water in his own person, John 4. 1, 2.

Quest. Whether John was a Prophet? And whether Jesus Christ be the end of the
Prophets, and prophetical figures, yea, or nay?

Answ. John was a Prophet nearer the more clear Revelation of Jesus Christ than
the rest, and therefore more in the light; for a greater Prophet than John has
not risen, and yet as other Prophets, he was one rather upon the account of the
Law than the Gospel: For he who was least in the Kingdom of God, or
administration of the Gospel, was greater than he, Matt. 11. 11. Now Christ is
the end, or fulfilling of John, and the rest of the Prophets, and their
shadowish ministrations, and all the Lords people under the ministration of
Christ's reign within are made Kings, and Priests, and Prophets unto God in
their own persons.

Quest. Whether he, whose Commission is in Ink and Paper without him, be not a
Minister of the Letter, and not of the Spirit, one that walks by tradition and
imitation, and not by command, and so shut out of the true ministry?

Answ. Such an one I look upon as a Thief and Robber, because not entering in by
the door of the Spirit within into the sheepfold: And though these men speak
the words of Moses, of Christ, and other holy men of God, yet having no
experience of the truth and enjoyment of what they speak within, hence they can
be but Lip-Ministers, and make but Lip-Christians, being rather mockers of
Christ and his Spirit in the Saints, than Ambassadors from Heaven to awaken
Christ in men's consciences, and to set him up to reign as King and Lord in men's
Spirits, which is the end of the Lord by the Ministry of those whom he sends.

Quest. Whether Jesus Christ, who sent forth Disciples, sent them to spread
abroad John and his Ministry, who was a Prophet; or himself, who was the end
of the Prophets greater than John, who baptizeth with the holy Ghost, in whom
alone is salvation, yea, or nay; yet, who owns him sets every thing in its
place, time, and season?

Answ. The end of Christ's sending out to preach was, that thereby the Nations
might be baptized, not into the name of John, or Peter, or James, or Paul, but
into the name of God, that they might understand and know God, and Jesus Christ
whom he has sent, that men might become the Lords Disciples, and not the
Disciples of men; and so we find the Apostles not preaching up themselves, but
Jesus Christ the Lord, and themselves servants, Apostles, men sent to minister
as they had received: And the main drift of their preaching we find was to
declare the Gospel, glad tidings of grace and peace through Christ unto the
Sons of men; to open the mystery of Christ which was hidden from former ages,
and to entreat men through Christ to be reconciled unto God, to bring to a
receiving all from Christ, and to a placing all in Christ, who of God is made
unto all his wisdom, righteousness, and redemption, and that by way of Spirit
and power, working all these in their Souls: In brief, Christ sent out his
Disciples to declare himself, to preach salvation in his name, and to persuade
the world to faith and meekness, and love and self-denial, etc. through their
taking in Christ to work all these in their Souls: And yet they were to give
every outward person, and ordinance God was to make use of, or had made use of
before, its due respect, plate and season.

Quest. Whether the baptism unto Moses in the Cloud and in the Sea was
outward, yea, or nay?

Answ. The baptism unto Moses in the Cloud and in the Sea I take not to be
literal, but metaphorical, and a typical baptism. The Cloud typically holds
forth the presence of God, overshadowing, protecting, and defending them from
their enemies: And their passing through the Sea on dry ground, when their
enemies were overwhelmed and drowned, holds forth the wonderful power of God
in their deliverance and defense: These were two great Declarations of Gods
power, and providence toward that people, by which they were baptized unto
Moses, that is, confirmed in the truth of his administration, and so taught to
believe God and his servant Moses, whom he had sent by a strong hand to bring
them out of Egypt into Canaan.

Quest. Whether the one baptism which Paul spoke of who was not sent to
baptize, was with outward water, or with the baptism of Christ, who is greater
than John?

Answ. The baptism which Paul calls one is the baptism of Christ upon all his,
whereby they are baptized spiritually into an oneness of nature with himself;
as their faith is one, so their baptism one.

Quest. Whether that baptism which Peter witnesses to have, which was not the
putting away this filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience
toward God by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, was with outward water, yea,
or nay?

Answ. This baptism the Apostle here speaks of must needs be an inward thing
wrought in the soul by the resurrection, or appearing of Christ there in
spirit, through whose coming the conscience comes to be cleansed from guilt,
and shame, and fear, and so the soul can go unto God cheerfully and safely, as
one saved through the baptism, or spiritual work of the Son of God within.

Quest. Whether that cup of which Jesus Christ said, that henceforth he would
not drink of the fruit of the wine, till he did drink it new with them in his
Fathers kingdom, was an outward cup, yea, or nay?

Answ. This cup, and drinking in the Fathers kingdom must needs be a spiritual
cup, and drinking; for in the Kingdom of God there is no eating and drinking of
earthly fruit, all is heavenly, and Paradisicall; there is no eating and
drinking of any thing, but what flows from the nature and spirit, and fulness
of the Father.

Quest. Whether any outward cup be drunk in the Kingdom of God, yea, or nay?

Answ. There Is no carnal sensual cup, or liquor to be drunk in this Kingdom,
but spiritual liquor only, poured out of a spiritual cup into a spiritual body.

Quest. What is the flesh and blood of Christ, which except a man eat and drink
he has no life in him; which eating and drinking he that does it, knows he
dwells in Christ, and Christ in him? Whether this be outward bread and wine,
yea, or nay? And whether his flesh and blood can be carried about in baskets
and bottles, yea, or nay; seeing at Christ's preaching of this, the Jews, which
had the letter, strove about that saying, And many of the Disciples murmured,
and said, it was an hard saying, who could hear it, and turned away, and
walked no more with Jesus?

Answ. That flesh and blood of Christ which gives life to Saints must needs be
spiritual, this is that which quickens, when the outward Sacramental profits
little: this spiritual flesh and blood of Christ is his pure nature and virtue
which creates life; quickens, nourishes, and feeds the soul of the Christian up
in his spiritual life, and union with the Father: And when this spiritual
nature, virtue, or body of Christ in spirit is given into the soul, then the
soul can say in truth, I know the Son of God is come, and has given me an
understanding to know him that is true, and I am in him that is true, even in
his Son Jesus Christ: And this Jesus Christ is the true God unto the Saint, and
the eternal life of the Saint: and in this day the Christian knows that Christ
is his by being in him, and he is Christ's by dwelling in him; and he, who knows
not this, has no true Christ nor life: This the Jews of old, and the Jews in
spirit still look upon as an hard saying, that the very body and blood of
Christ must thus be eaten in spirit, otherwise no eternal life: give them the
flesh that they may be sensible of, as for this Jesus in spirit they cannot
receive him, because they see him not, neither know him.

Quest. The cup of blessing which Paul spoke of to the Corinthians, who were
the Temples of the holy Ghost which they blessed, which was the Communion of
the blood of Christ, and the bread which they brake: which was the ^ommunion of
the body of Christ, whether was this an outward cup and outward bread, yea, or
nay?

Was that o^^ bread which they were all partakers of outward, yea, or nay?

The Cup of the Lord, and the Table of the Lord, which Paul spoke of to the
Corinthians, was they an outward Cup and Table, yea, or nay?

The Cup of Devils, and the Table of Devils, was they an outward Cup and Table,
yea, or nay?

Answ. I answer in brief, they are all to be understood of inward and spiritual
things, though the outward figures and things are not to be contemned, so long
as the Lord makes them a Table for his weak children to sit with him at, to
give them out refreshing and comforts in their weakness: But when the Lord is
clearly gone out of an administration, then that becomes through Satan's getting
into it, a Table of the Devil, which he sets his dark children at, to cozen
them with a show and shadow, when the truth, and life, and substance is gone.

Quest. What is the beast which John saw, was like unto a Leopard?

Answ. The beast is the wisdom and understanding of the flesh, or spirit of
man, which in the various turnings, windings, appearances, and comings of it
forth, according to the reason and wisdom, and apprehensions of men in the dark
world of flesh and blood, is like unto a party colored, or spotted beast, such
as the Leopard is: Hence it is written, can the Leopard change his spots? Can
the wisdom of the flesh, and the bestial man change his fowl and beastly
abominations of all sorts, which stick and grow up in his nature? Besides. I
have read of the Leopard, that it is an exceeding wild beast, that cannot be
tamed, very furious and malicious against the very image of a man, and very
cunning and crafty in catching of his prey: Such is the nature of fleshly
wisdom and fleshly men, they cannot be tamed, but are still full of fury
against the image, or true appearances of God in man, and very cunning to prey
upon the righteous seed, seeking to devour the man-child as soon as ever he
appears to be born in the world: This is the beast which is like unto a
Leopard.

Quest. What is the beast all the world wonders after?

Answ. Some make him the Pope, but I never yet found all the world wondering
after him, though he be the beast in an outward eminent figure, and have many
worshippers and followers in the world: But the beast is the fleshly wisdom,
or spirit of man, which is always setting up a false Christ or anointed one in
the place and office of Christ unto us, either our own righteousness, or our
own wit and carnal reason, which teaches us to depart from God, and to subsist
of our selves, live of our selves, be wise of our selves, worship of our
selves: So that flesh with all the wisdom and power of it, is the beast that
all the world willingly wonders after, insomuch that they are naturally
constrained, compelled, and overcome to its obedience, which is their wondering
after the beast.

Quest. What is the beast, and what is the number of his name, whose name is
666?

Answ. The number of the beast is the number of a man, though to those who are
deceived by him, he appears as a God that cannot err; yet to the man that has
understanding, or his eyes opened through the anointing of God, he has but the
perfection and compleatnesse of a man, who in the height of all his imaginary
compleatnesse and fullness in himself, and of himself, is but a poor, empty,
miserable shadow, altogether lighter than vanity; This is the number, or sum
of all the power and wisdom of the flesh; It is but an imagination of
compleatnesse and fullness, it is not perfection and fullness it self, and so
it leaves a man where it finds him in a poor, miserable, imperfect, and undone
estate: And therefore the number of the beast is but 666. it reaches not to the
bringing of a man to the number seven, or to a state of perfection, rest, and
fullness, but still leaves in the number 6. or in a state of weakness,
bondage, misery, even like a poor wretched sinful man.

Quest. What is the woman which John saw sit upon a Scarlet colored beast,
full of names of blasphemy?

Answ. The woman is the false Antichristian Cainish Church, which rides in
Pomp, and Triumph upon the stately wisdom and power of the flesh, and here
cries out, what wisdom is like unto mine? What power able to make war with
mine? And in this state and Pomp she rides on, crucifying to her utmost skill,
all the appearances of Christ in the glory and Kingdom of his father, or all
higher and lower discoveries of God in his Saints, breathing nothing but blood,
persecution, and blasphemy against the Tabernacle of God, and them that dwell
in Heaven: And so the false, and formal Church, and Christian are the great
whore, who denies the Lord to be her husband, and being married to her own
fleshly reason, and wisdom, she wholly bends the same against every beloved
appearance of God, by persecution and blasphemy: This is the woman upon the
Scarlet colored beast, full of names of blasphemy.

Quest. Whether any come to the opening and fulfilling of Scripture, and to see
those things which John saw, but only those who have the same spirit, which
John, and the holy men of God had, yea, or nay? And whether he be Christ that
has not the same spirit, yea, or nay?

Answ. As all Scripture was given by inspiration, so only truly understood
and known by inspiration: The Letter may be understood by the help of tongues,
and sciences, of study and learning, and other men's interpretations, so far as
these are lights to open the Letter: but the spirit and truth of Scripture
cannot be seen and known, but by the breathings and operations of the same
spirit, which the holy man of God had: And this is the Key of the Lord, which
has opened the Scriptures in some measure unto me, and through this power of
the spirit of the Lord, I have seen the Scriptures in some measure fulfilled;
And this is the power I wait upon to make good, and fulfill all that is written
within and without, and he that has not this spirit to rule over him in love,
light, and life, is no true Christian, no true Christ, or anointed one of God.

Quest. Whether as well he that pays Tithes, as he that takes Tithes, be not
Antichrist, holding up the first priesthood, which took Tithe by a Law, and
denying Christ the unchangeable Priest, who put an end to Tithe, to the first
priesthood, and to the Law?

Answ. If any take Tithes, as a Priest, of the Tribe of Levi, in a way of
holding up shadows, and figures, and carnal ordinances, in room of the
substance and truth of these, and looks more to his own gain than the things
of Jesus Christ, this man is an Antichrist, that denies Christ's coming in the
flesh, and is a thief and robber, that comes not in by the door into the
sheepfold, but some other way. But if a man take Tithes as a Tribute and
portion of the earth, which the Lord has reserved and given to him to nourish
himself and his family, and the Church of God (for a Minister must be
Hospitable) if a man take Tithes, though it be for preaching and his waiting
upon the Ministry of the Gospel, to declare what he has seen and heard of
God, aiming only at the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ in the hearts of
the people, and take only for his livelihood in the flesh, this man is no
Antichrist that denies Christ's coming in the flesh; for the Gospel holds
clearly forth a maintenance and double honor due to the preachers of it: And
if but a tenth of old, were to be given for the nourishing of them that hold
forth the shadow, surely not a tenth only, but much more ought to be given for
the nourishing of them that hold forth the substance. And whereas it may be
said that Ministers preach up themselves, and shadows still, not Christ the
Lord, and themselves the peoples servants for Christ's sake, and many thrust
themselves into the office of the Ministry for a piece of bread, and take unto
themselves this honor before they are called of God, for filthy lucres sake: I
answer, those that are found in this posture, I know there is a sad vial of
wrath to be poured out upon them: as for mine own part, I find all sorts of
people railing on me, and speaking all manner of evil of me, and though the
pretense be Tithes, and other grievous things that their hearts have imagined;
yet the truth is, 't is not my Tithes, nor infirmities; so much as my light and
freedom and enlargement, that makes my being an eyesore unto the world: For my
taking of Tithes I know it is with so much moderation and respect unto all men's
conditions with whom I deal, that no wise man or honest man can ever say I
dealt harshly, or unbeseeming a Christian with him in this business of Tithes:
But thou take Tithes? Answer, Well I do, and for the present I find the Lord
giving me this maintenance, as an encouragement from himself, and so long as I
find it made clean, or sanctified to my use, and my spirit not defiled, nor
divided from God by it, and God maintaining my liberty of conscience to serve
him in my generation and place, so long I shall be free to take it with
thankfulness, well knowing, that nothing is unclean of it self, but to him
who esteems any thing to be unclean, to him it is uncleaness.

The scornful QUAKERS railing Reply refuted.
Tho Lawson.
I Have read thy papers, and in them art thou seen to be full of lying,
railing, accusing, condemning, according to the spirit of thy Father, who was a
Murderer and a liar from the beginning: The truth thou can not own in
another, no more than the Jews could in Christ: The pride and hautines of thine
heart has deceived thee through hopes to Lord it in thy dark form, where thy
folly is manifest to all: I call it thy dark form; where God is veiled,
crucified, dead; and neither scripture, nor light within is made any more than
a Ladder to help thee up into Gods throne, and here Lucifer-like, thou must
needs be in Heaven, and there thou see all the ways and works that are done
under the Sun, and here thou can call all but thine own party, flesh, Devils,
Sorcerers, and damnest all that wear not thy mark and form, and from thy
presence they must go into the lake that burns with fire and brim-stone, among
the Drunkards and Whoremongers, and Dogs, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and
Ranters, and Atheists, and whosoever loves and makes a lie: This is the
language that flows from thy proud pen: See, read, consider thy papers, let
the light that is in thee be judge, and the light that is in all men: And yet,
like the Harlot, thou criest out aloud, such an one is an Whore, I am none: The
Priest rails, scoffs, jeers, but my tongue is a wonderful stranger to all
this: Thus a dark Whorish heart knows no shame: Michael durst not bring railing
accusation against the Devil, but said, The Lord rebuke thee: He durst not rail
against the very Devil, knowing that as he is a creature, he has his life and
being in God, but as he lives in himself, in his own will and pride, so he
becomes a Devil: But this truth thou know not through thy darkness, and so
art found railing, and that not at the Devil only, but men, who are made after
the similitude of God; and yet it may be the Lord may rebuke thee. Though
others cannot, I can willingly let thee alone without persecuting, imprisoning,
banishing; I see all these things do but nourish Satan's Kingdom in every dark
form, rather than pull it down; and therefore I can pray for thee, and do thee
good, and show thee kindness, and leave thee to stand, or fall to the light of
God in thee, which is thy judge.

Rep. In the outside of thy paper, thou call me Priest: but why is this name
so odious to thee? Answ. Do thou not know that all the Lords people are Kings
and Priests? The name upon any other account I own not: The light within thee
tells thee thou call me Priest in pride and scorn.

Repl. In thy preamble thou say, The just God of heaven and earth, into our
hands in our measures the just balance has committed, wherein all my
profession, notion, and comprehension is tried and denied.

Answ. First thy just balance thou gloriest in, is not the balance of the
sanctuary, full of the light, truth, word, and power of God: But 2. It is the
balance of thine own corrupt reason, fancy, dream, full of flesh and self, of
thine own weakness, blindness, darkness: And so 3. This balance is not
committed to thee from the just God, who abhors thy peevishness, folly, false
visions, but from thy father, the Prince of darkness; he has put into thy
hand the unjust balance of thine own wisdom, which is enmity against God, and
every appearance of God: And 4. in this balance of flesh and fancy, thou art
found incapable of weighing and trying the ways and workings of God in
another. And so 5. In the midst of thy comprehending others, art thou
comprehended and seen thy self, and laid open to thy shame amongst the Heathen.
And so 6. Lastly, the balance that is just, which comes from God, have thou
lost, and so have nothing to measure, and weigh things with, which is
accompanied with the Authority and light of God: And hence all thy reply and
answer to me is found to be airy, frothy, stuffed and filled with nothing but
wind and scorn, and so thou go on and says:

Repl. My conversation is corrupt, and life unsavory, and I am one in nature
with all the Priests of the Nation.

Answ. Here thou beginnest to show what thy balance is; being found presently
in the corrupt will and life of the old accuser; And here thou art but the
mouth and tongue of Satan, who is always accusing, and condemning, when God is
forgiving and healing: That I differ from others in their corruptions, is more
through the Lords grace than my deservings: And this grace of the Lord is that
which leads me out of the ways, customs, pride and pleasures of the world
more and more; And yet I cannot say, I am pure without all sin and spot; for
then I should make God like man, a liar, whose light word tells me otherwise;
and yet notwithstanding all the corruptions thou layest to my charge, I find
the Lord through grace still forgiving and healing, and warming mine heart with
a strong thirsting after more of the power of godliness: And this keeps me from
scoffing at any thing I see in thee, but the pride and folly which thou
discoverest plainly; which makes thee cry out, I am rich, full, and have need
of nothing, and yet know not that thou art poor, and blind, and miserable,
and naked, and have need of all things: which if thou knew, would soon make
thee meek, lowly, peaceable, gentle, doing good to all men, even thine enemies,
which thou can not do, and so art not like the heavenly father, Mat. 5. 43.
44. 45. Read that place if thou can, and weigh it in the just balance, and
put in thy self in one scale, thou will soon see how light thou art, and how
thy selfish carnal nature fights with the generous loving nature of God, whom
thou know not by living in his nature and spirit: And so to the Questions.

Repl. In mine answer to the first thou scoffest at my saying, Christ is the
first principle of pure Religion and cryest out, O shame of my profession, who
at the first would be at the Son the fundation in Sion, and know not that which
turns the mind out of the earth, and leads to Sinai: There is a light which
shines in a dark place; which, who are in it are in the welldoing, and in their
measure in the pure Religion, and it who knows, in it they see, what the first
principle is, and know thee to be a liar, which light leads unto the day Star,
2 Pet. 1. 19. Which light is before the day Star is come unto, which is the
Son, and him who is come unto, is in the pure Religion.

Answ. From a principle are derived two things. 1. The esse or being. 2. The
cognosse, the manifestation, discovery or knowing of a thing to be what it is;
Now according to both these Christ is the first principle of all pure Religion:
It Is he who begots and works it in the heart of man, and so brings it into
being; and it is he who discovers and shows what the pure Religion is, and so
brings it into knowledge; and this knowledge is drawn from a sight and feeling
of the work it self upon the heart; and so to make some application of this to
what thou say, and wondrest so much at, that thou will be religious, and
that in the best too, even in that which is pure, and that without the Son of
God: We see, hear, read what Christ says of himself, Mat. 11. 27. No man
knows the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him:
and John. 1. 18. No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son who
is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him: and John. 14. 6. I am the
way, the truth, and the life, and John. 15. 5. Without me ye can do nothing:
surely then, if there be no knowing of the Father, no seeing of the Father, but
by the Son; no coming to the Father, but by this way and means; no bringing
forth any fruit, any thing that is pure without the Son, how comes it to pass,
that ye must needs begin your Religion below, or without the Son? Must thy dark
mind consult with flesh and blood to make thee Religious? Or must we needs go
to Sinai (as thou intimates) to make us first Religious? Was not Paul there,
and what did he learn, but to glory in that which afterward was his loss and
shame? Was he not a blasphemer, injurious, and a persecuter, till the Lord had
mercy on him, and revealed his Son in him? Surely, methinkes thou may easily
learn this lesson from what is written, to make Christ the beginning of thy
pure Religion, to make him the mover, the power, the principle, that first sets
thy heart aright in Religion: And this thou art compelled to say in thy
confused reply, That he who is come unto Christ is in the pure Religion, and
so art judged out of thine own mouth to speak contrary unto thy own light: And
though thou would infer from the Apostles words, 2 Pet. 1. 19. That there is
a light which shines in the creature before Christ come, yet that light thou
art feign to acknowledge does proceed from the Son, and lead unto him: so that
Christ is still the Fountain, and first cause of light: and by the light of
Christ within we come to see, and know, that the Scriptures are the sure Word
of God, and so we are led into the pure Religion, according to what is written
in the Scriptures of truth: and the end of this Scripture is again to turn us
unto Christ, who is the spirit and truth of the Scriptures; and so Christ is
still the first and last in all the discoveries we have of God: he is all the
light we have, by night and day: and though the Scriptures are a precious
light, yet all the light that is in them is but borrowed from the Son: and if
we see them not, know them not in his light, and through his light, they may
shine long enough before the day will break in our hearts; but when Christ
leads us into the meaning of Scriptures, and brings us to live in the power and
truth of them, which is himself; then by degrees it becomes day with us, and
this day still leads us into the pure Religion, according to what is written
within, and without; and when we wander in the least, is as a voice behind us,
saying, this is the way, walk in it, this is the old way: And this voice of
Christ alone has such power in it, both to begin and perfect us in Religion,
that without it, all we do is not well done, and so is but the sacrifice of the
wicked, which is an abomination. And so to sum up this, know. 1. That ye cannot
know the meaning of the Scriptures without Christ: 2. Ye cannot live the life
of the Scriptures, without Christ lead ye into it: 3. Ye cannot be in the pure
Religion, without Christ first work it, and bring it into being, and light in
the heart: 4. Ye cannot be in the volume of the book in a clear reading of what
is written, much less in the life and body of the book, which is Christ, the
substance, without Christ himself manifested in you: And so thou, who seem
to be Religious, learn to bridle thine own tongue, otherwise thou do but
deceive thine own heart, and all thy Religion is vain: and learn to know thine
own light, who, in thine answer to my ten queries about the light that is in
heathens, and the light that is peculiar to the Saints of God, say, that the
light of Christ is the only guide to them that follow it, and besides it, there
is no guide to Jew, or Gentile: And so if this light of Christ be the only
guide; surely it must be the only guide into all pure Religion, and so the
first principle of that which is pure: And thou, who criest out, O shame, art
judged out of thine own mouth to be shameless and impudent, in scoffing at the
first principle of pure Religion to be the Son of God dwelling in us.

Repl. In mine answer to thy second Question, thou deniest the Fathers work and
will to be the yoke of Christ, and tellest me, That I, who am a stranger to the
first principle of pure Religion, from me is the yoke of Christ, and the burden
of Christ hid, and so I am coming about the thing in words, but the thing it
self is hid from me, etc.

Answ. The Pharisees were full of questions; and in their fastings, disfiguring
their faces, sad countenances, outside holiness, great abstinence, vain
repetitions, striving and contending against every thing but what themselves
did, or spoke, were a fit figure of this questioning generation: Thou dark
Pharisee, thou look so much upon thy questions, thou can not look at all
upon the answer: If thou speak of the Person of Christ, the Mediator, which
thou deniest, his work was to glorify his Father on earth, to finish the work
which he gave him to do: If thou speak of Christ the manifestation of the
Father in his Children, his work is there likewise to do the will of his
Father, by subjecting the creature to the yoke, or will of God, that God may be
glorified: so that the Fathers work and will is Christ's yoke, which he was
contented to be subject unto: And this is the Christians yoke, that Christ
teaches the soul wherein he lives, to put his neck under, and be subject unto:
And so the yoke of Christ, what was it, and what is it, but to be subject to
his Fathers will? Not to be his own, but his Fathers: I came not to do my own
will, but the will of him, who sent me. But what was the work of God which
Christ had to do? Answer, It lay in two things: 1. To bear our griefs, and
carry our sorrows, to be smitten, wounded, and grieved for our iniquities, to
bear our sin, and all the sorrow, grief, and Hell, due unto us for them. 2. His
work was likewise to make reconciliation, and peace manifest unto the World,
and to work men's hearts into a belief of what he has done and wrought for them
to bring about their deliverance and salvation: Were thou rightly acquainted
with this work, and the meekness, and lowliness of the person, who wrought
it, thou would soon see this to be a great yoke and task to come under, and
do: But this is History; and to show thy self wise, this is trampled under thy
feet, and of no account with thee, and so thou deniest the Lord that bought
thee; and in thy dark fancy leapest into the mystery, and say, I see not
that which turns the creature into the work and will of God: Here thou art upon
the light within, and th^s thou art still dreaming of, though thou know not
what it is, nor whence it comes: for this would never move thee to slight the
letter, the History, the blood of Christ without, but would bring thee into a
rejoicing in all the Fathers work and will, which the Son lived in.

Repl. Further thou say, The yoke of Christ is where the work and will of the
Devil is lived in; for Christ is the true light.

Answ. And so say I too: The work and will of God ought to be lived in by that
man, who wrests his neck from the yoke, and scorns to be subject unto God, as
his father: And thus the light tells me it is with thee, thou live in the
nature which spurns off the yoke, living in pride, and high conceit of thine
own worth, in haughtiness, envy, and strife, and this makes thee fancy thy
self to be a Christ and God; and so instead of judging thy self, and confessing
thine own vileness, and nothingnesse, thou must speak evil of thy brother, and
condemn all besides thy self; Nay, God, and Christ, and Scripture, and light
within must all concur to set thee up upon the Throne, to be the only judge
of the world, otherwise be all Anathema: and thus instead of putting thy neck
under the yoke of Christ, and learning meekness and sweetness out of his
nature, thou put thy neck under the work and will of the evil one, and so
make good thine own words in thy self, that the yoke of Christ is there,
where the work and will of the Devil is lived in.

Repl. Further thou say, I love darkness, mine own ways more then the
light, and Heifer-like I wrest my neck from the yoke, which limits the carnal,
and puts a stop to the earthly mind.

Answ. Thou that judge another, and do the same, do thou think to
escape the judgment of God? I know, I have no good thing in my flesh, no more
have thou, therefore let us bewail it together, Rom 7. 18. to 24. But though
there be nothing good in the first man, yet in the second all is good, and
through him the first is limited, stopped, and stayed in my spirit, though thou
see it not: and he teaches me to tremble indeed, and to abhor my self, and
mine own ways, and yet to delight in the Law of God in the inner man; and this
is the yoke I desire continually may be about my neck.

Repl. Further, thou say, I am telling of that faith which gives victory
over the world, and yet am found in the pollutions, ways, customs, and
pleasure thereof, and am a covetous hireling.

Answ. I know the light within, which is much in thy mouth, but never in thy
heart, tells thee no such news, neither do I care much to answer such
accusations, knowing full well from whence they come, and whither they go, and
these I shall never be without whole volumes of, whilst I meddle with this
unreasonable generation: But know to thy sorrow, all thy railing, and accusing,
torments me not, hurts me not, nay, it does me much good: This I see through
faith, and this faith of mine remains as a Bulwork against all thy rage, and
the rest of the world.

Repl. Thou say, I scoff at such, who come into the Doctrine of Christ.

Answ. Thou blind Pharisee, how dare thou talk of the Doctrine of Christ,
who deniest his person, and sufferings in the flesh, and say, Christ
suffered not, no it was that only which was born of the Virgin which suffered,
and yet thou may hear even this also called Christ the Lord, Luke 2. 11.
Will thou talk of yea, and nay, and thou, and thee, and yet deny the great
Declarations of the Gospel as no true Doctrine: Thou blind guide, know that
thou art ever out of the Doctrine of Christ, and when thou criest out, lo here,
lo there, I am Christ, come buy all of me, this is a Doctrine I cannot but
slight; nay, abhor, and that because it is not according to the Doctrine of
Christ: and thy proud spirit the Lord abhors, which must pick and choose, and
observe here and there a letter, or phrase of the Gospel in the outward man,
when as in thine heart thou deniest the high great things of the Gospel, and so
art straining at a Gnat, and swallowing down a Camel.

Repl. But I live in pride, and devour the creation upon my lusts, and think it
strange that others run not into the same excess of riot.

Answ. My rejoicing is this, the Testimony of a good conscience, that from the
day of my beginning to taste of the love of the Son of God, I could never
slight his poorest Members under any form, but if many have slighted, abused,
and disowned me, because I have seen their nakedness, this their weakness I
cannot help, all that I wish to them all, is health and salvation in the Lord.

As for my devouring the creation, and thinking much of others, because they
run not with me into the same excess of riot: All this proceeds from thy
darkness, which is the strongest power that rules thee; and when thou have
little to say, thou say the old lesson over again, and confutest me passing
well with railings and slanders; this darkness in thee can see no faults at
home, nor cover any fault abroad: Neither do I desire thee to spare me, for I
see thou have no love, or light that overcomes in thee, therefore go on; when
thine envy dies, thy form will wither; for envy is the support of thy form: If
thou had the faith of Gods elect, which thou say I am a Reprobate unto,
that would work in thee by love, and this love would be universal to all the
seed of God in any form, or way of God, and so thou would with the Apostle
become all things to all men, that thou might gain some: But in this there
is a great mystery, which thou can not see through the scantinesse of thy
love, which must have all look with one face, or form, otherwise it cannot love.

Repl. Thou tellest me, I say, the Cross of Christ is the crucifying,
suffering, and dying in the flesh, etc. and in thine answer thou say, Behold
my ignorance again appears, (this he scoffs at three, or four times, that the
Cross of Christ should be his sufferings,) and so to be alive in the flesh, am
I made manifest, and dead to the life of God.

Answ. The Cross of Christ comprehends three things in it.

1. His sufferings for us in the days of his flesh, from the beginning of his
appearance, to his Crucifying at Jerusalem.

2. His sufferings in us, during the time of our stay in Sodom and Egypt, all
which is the time of our ignorance and darkness, wherein we crucify the Lord
of glory; now we live, flesh, and sin flourishes, and Christ is as one
crucified, dead, and buried unto us.

3. It comprehends our sufferings in the flesh after his example, which is our
witnessing his Cross, and this begins when Christ arises from death to life in
us, and appears reigning; Now we suffer and die with him, and are contented to
be emptied of all our glorying in the flesh, as Christ was, this is the time of
our suffering, and of Christ's living; And this suffering in our sinful flesh
and nature, is the happiest day with us that ever began; For this suffering
goes before our glory, and always ends in the Crown: For if we suffer with
him, not only in reproaches, revilings, and persecutions without from the
world, but likewise inwardly, in having all our glory ^tained, and our lusts,
and sins ruined; if we thus suffer, we shall likewise be glorified together
with him: And now to apply this to what thou say; The sufferings of Christ
in the first of these senses, I know, is made as a thing of naught with many a
carnal heart, who looks upon this only as a figure, type, and shadow; as if
Christ came into the world to suffer so much at the hands of sinners, only to
act his part upon a stage, and so after a flourish to go out, and to purchase
thereby no redemption for the poor sons of men: But friend, look into the
Scriptures, and be ashamed of thine ignorance in this matter, was all this no
suffering of Christ, no part of his Cross? Does not Peter tell us, Christ
suffered for us in the flesh, 1 Pet. 4. 1. and was there not a real thing done
by it? And therefore the Scriptures say, once he appeared in the end of the
world, to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself, once he appeared: And in
another place, the way into the holiest is by the blood of Jesus; not by our
blood, as if we were our own Saviors, but by the blood of Jesus: And Christ
laid down his life, a ransom for many: And we are redeemed, not with Gold and
Silver, but with the precious blood of the Son of God: Why cannot all this
Doctrine be remembered, as well as thou and thee? Is not this that Cross of
Christ, which is foolishness to them that perish, and a stumbling block to the
wise Jews? And did not the Apostle preach through this Cross reconciliation to
the world, and forgiveness of sins to all that believe, Romans 3. 24, 25. Ephesians.
1. 7. 1 John 10 7. Heb. 9. 22. to the end, 10. 10. Do not all these places
speak of Christ's crucifying and sufferings, in which cross lies the foundation
of our comfort and salvation? And must all this stand only for a figure and
cipher? Is thine heart so lifted up to despise what Christ has done, and
suffered for thee? Surely then thou have no lot nor portion in this matter: But
all this is history, and has wrought in me (thou say) we dying and
suffering in the flesh, and so I am still a stranger to the cross of Christ:
But friend, before thou judge another, judge thy self, and lay thy foundation
low, otherwise thy building will fall: Lay it in the blood of Christ, otherwise
there is no remission, no salvation: Then descend into thine own heart, and see
how Christ has layen bleeding under his cross, how thou have made him to
serve with thine iniquities, and whether this have touched thine heart to bleed
with him, to suffer, and die with him in thy flesh, 1 Pet. 4. 1. And consider
now, if thy pride live, thou thy self, and thy will, live, then Christ is still
under his cross to thee, and thou can not bear witness unto his cross, but
if thou, even thou thy self art dead, and crucified with Christ, then thou
know his cross, and art conformable to him in death; and then thy sin and
flesh will die, and thy painted holiness, thy blameless life, thy strictness,
righteousness, and all thine observations will die, and wither too in
justification, as it was with Paul, Phil. 3, 7, 8. And so thou will glory in
nothing but Christ, and what he acts for thee, and works in thee, who was dead,
but now is alive for evermore; and so thou will empty thy self of thy self,
thou will be nothing, base, and vile in thine own eyes, humble, meek, and
lowly: But this thou art a stranger unto, and see the root of thy sins remains
within, in the pride of thine heart, and this makes thee bind heavy burdens
upon others, but if they want thine help, thou will not touch it with one of
thy fingers: they must look for nothing but Pharaohs cruelty and chiding: As
for mine own part, I look for nothing from man, my help is in the name of the
Lord, and my share in the cross and death of Christ, and in his resurrection;
I look for no help from man, who is a liar: And this liar in thee tells thee, I
am an enemy unto the cross of Christ, live in the flesh, dead to the life of
God: But to thee I say, so long as mine own heart condemns me not, I can see
mine enemy is slain, my will crucified, and I am quickened to pass more and
more into the life of God; A sense of this within upon my spirit makes void all
the accusations and condemnations of the world.

Repl. But thou tellest me, I mind earthly things, my God is my belly, and I
have got the Tithes of two Parishes to maintain me in pride and fullness.

Answ. Though the old man mind the earthly with thee, yet Christ in me minds
the heavenly, and he teaches me to make the Father of all my comforts, not my
belly, my God: Further know, my Tithe of two Parishes is not so much of mine
own getting, as thy Pigge, and Duck, and maintenance thou gettest from silly
women in their husbands absence, for saying an old tale ^ver that thou had
said forty times over before: If thou will know where this was, ask thy
conscience, and that will tell thee: As for that providence that feeds me and
thee, thou know it not, and so art angry at all which God gives unto thy
fellow servants.

Repl. Further (thou say) I reproach such, who run not into the same excess
of riot with me.

Answ. As for excess in evil, the grace of my God teaches me to abhor it,
and so I cannot choose but reproach such with it, who run into it; but if I see
men modest, sober, and scrupleing outward things, as Tithes, or the like out of
mere conscience, such I cannot but own and love, especially, if I see them free
from pride and glorying in what they do, which is the spoil of all.

Repl. But thou see destruction to be mine end (thou say) and an
Antichrist I am, and all Tythe-mongers.

Answ. Yet surely with God there is mercy, and I shall look to him, not man, to
be saved: Further, thou know he is an Antichrist, who exalts himself, and
denies the Father and the Son, this is Scripture; not he, who takes Tithes, or
denies Tithes, that is not Scripture; And so though thou deny Tithes, yet thou
art still an Antichrist, who exaltest thy self, not the Father and the Son;
Therefore look to it, that destruction and condemnation be not thy portion for
ever.

Repl. Further, thou say, though I have glorious words of Christ, yet I know
not the Cross of Christ, being alive in the flesh, not crucified, not dead to
sin, for where the dying is, that nature is limited, etc.

Answ. Here thou make a vain repetition of Words, and, like the Pharisee,
thou can acknowledge no truth in another, for this would spoil the sale of
thy perfect form: Had thou read mine answer with understanding, thou might
have learned in it, that the Cross of Christ must be passed under by every
truly anointed Christian, as well as by Christ, the head; And so we must
suffer in our flesh, as he did in his flesh, and when we thus suffer, the man
of sin is crucified and limited: This thou might have seen in mine answer,
had thou eyes to see, but the pride, and fullness of thy fleshly heart has
closed them up; As for my dying, and suffering in flesh, and sin, I desire the
just God, not unjust man, to be the Judge; he knows what sin is, and the dying
is, but the heart of man is deceitful above all things, and knows nothing by
nature of the spiritual things of God: If thou had the Lord, the just Judge,
in the midst of thy spirit quickened, he would have shaken thee out of thy
earthly heaven, and dug up that root of bitterness out of thine heart,
which springs from the bottomless pit in thee, which root has been spared
through thine own indulgence to thy self, as that within thee bears thee
witness.

Repl. Thou tellest me, The cross is foolishness to me.

Answ. It is so to reason in me, but to faith, it is the power of God, and the
wisdom of God: to thee indeed it is foolishness, who instead of believing in
the cross of Christ, make nothing of the blood of Christ shed at Jerusalem,
and so art fondly prying into the mystery, before the foundation be laid.

Repl. Thou say, When I am searched into, I am found an Alien to the ground
of truth, and yet through the pride of mine heart, I said to such as I had
formerly bewitched through my lies in hypocrisy, that the questions were low
and simple things.

Answ. Thou, I say, art not capable of discerning, either the truth, or an
Alien from it, who have no other balance, but thine own weak reason, and dream
to weigh things with; As for my bewitching any through my lies, let them speak
and show me what error, or sin, or mischief I ever persuaded them unto: If
they came to me, they were welcome, if they are nearer to God, it is well; if
further off, that is ill: I never did much glory in their company, since I found
them carried about with wind and fables; As for thy questions, thou see I
make a sober answer without bitterness, or railing; though some of them I
found alike, and some of them I know not what: This I know will grieve thee, to
see thy glory stained and slighted never so little, seeing thou art the
Pharisee that gloryest in thy questions.

Repl. Thou say, The least measure of the life of the kingdom is hid from me.

Answ. The life of the kingdom begins in the cross of Christ; since this has
had it is power in me to my crucifying and slaying in any measure, I have found
the life of the kingdom springing up, and in this kingdom I have some measure
of righteousness, peace, and so it is not altogether hid from me: But thou
rebellious wretch, where will thou begin to enter into the kingdom where life
is, who look upon the cross of Christ as a foolish thing, and make his
sufferings, and crucifyings in the flesh no cross, no part of his cross; and
so swine-like tramplest under thy feet the precious blood of the Son of God,
and make it veil to thee, and so know not where life begins: though the
cross of Christ, without in the flesh, and history thou may read, and learn
exactly too, and yet not begin the life of the kingdom, without the virtue and
power of it crucify thy self, and flesh, and arm thee with the mind of
Christ, to empty thy self of all thy glory, and to humble thee at the feet of
God to death, as Christ did.

Repl. But thou say, I use my tongue, and say, the Lord says, when I have
nothing but the letter, and harlot-like trim my self with it, and sit in an
high seat in my imaginations, even above the seed, which by the fowls of the
air is devoured.

Answ. The letter of the Scriptures, being a declaration of the mind, and love
of God to man, I look upon as one of the choice vessels of the Lords sanctuary;
and the flesh, body, and sufferings of Christ to purchase, and make peace for
us, I look upon as a vessel, without which the Lords sanctuary cannot be
furnished with the Oil of life, or the beginnings of salvation: This letter
concerning Christ, especially, together with all the rest of the Scriptures, I
look upon as a precious mercy, and light unto the Sons of men; And yet all
this, without the meaning and fulfilling of Scriptures in us, and to us, by the
anointing of the spirit, availes nothing unto our salvation and inward
consolation: so that letter and history, joined with the spirit of the Lord,
opening, and sealing the meaning and substance to my spirit, is the Word of the
Lord to me; And friend, this tongue of mine, which thou say I use, was given
me to this end, to use against all such, as shall no less than commit
fornication with the letter, when it seems to favor their weak imaginations
and forms, but yet cannot endure to unite with the meaning, and mystery
couched, or vayled under the letter; And thus it is with the Quakers in their
carnal tremblings, Cattle of Tithes, Priests, the word Master, Father, the
titles of thou, you, yea, nay, and the like. In these things their souls are
drunk with the letter, and made they are against all interpretations and
meanings put upon the letter, though by the Lords spirit; but in the great
things of Christ, and resurrection, and judgment, and heaven, and hell after
this life, here the letter is profanely trampled upon, slighted, abused,
contradicted; and their fancy, meanings, and sensual interpretations must be
all the Scripture in such matters; and so sometimes they are glorying in the
letter, but cannot endure the meaning, and fulfilling; at other times they are
glorying in the mystery, and meaning, but cannot endure the letter: See here,
friends, what a nose of wax, as the Papists call it, ye make of the Scriptures
of truth, and how they are wrested by you, as by all other dark forms and
professions, only to uphold your golden image, that your own fingers have
made: This I cannot pass by in you with silence, neither that high seat ye
seek to creep into, even the seat of God, crying out lo here, lo there, I am
Christ, I am wise, I am perfect, without all spot: All this is so manifest
against both, letter, and meaning of Scriptures, that though I should hold my
peace, the stones in the street would cry out against you. And so thou, who
say, I harlot-like trim my self with the letter, take heed how thou
harlot-like trimmest thy self with Gods glory, that others may ignorantly
worship thee for God, who art a poor broken idol: And take heed how by talking
of a light within, which I own in it is place, thou profanely despisest what is
written in the letter, seeing that also is a light that shines in a dark place,
and so to be owned of us too: And take heed, how in thy high-flowen lofty
spirit thou be not found in that which thou condemnest in another, viz. among
the fowls of the air, seeking to devour all the precious seed of God, that is
sown in any form, or people besides thine own.

Repl. But I would deceive such, thou say, who are going right on their way.

Answ. If by way thou understand a following of Christ in the way of life, such
I cannot deceive; for no man can pluck such out of Christ's hand, he and his
father are greater than all, and sufficiently able to preserve all theirs from
all delusions, and pollutions of men: If thou mean by their way, man's way, or
thy way, which is a way of sense, and reason, and flesh, such as are going in
this way, my desire is to undeceive: But in any way of God be as strict, and
holy as the will, or rather as the grace of God shall teach you to be, only
have a care, that ye begin not in the spirit, and end in the flesh, and so
stick in the washing of the cup, or platter, or outside, when the heart is
proud and lofty, and does all it does to justify it self with the proud
Pharisee.

Repl. But thou say again, I know not the Cross, which is the power of God
to them that are saved, and the blood of his Cross, who makes peace I know
not, and so am unwashed in the blood of the Lamb, a Sow wallowing in the mire,
that is my figure: I wallow in pride and covetousness, etc.

Answ. Through the blood of the everlasting covenant, I have seen and believed
the love that God has to me, and I own the blood of his Cross, who has made
peace for me: This, through faith in it, becomes the power of God to save me;
and this Cross, having its efficacy upon my Soul, becomes the ruin of Satan's
Kingdom in my flesh: And now I am not ashamed to tell thee, I know no mire I
wallow in, but that of scandals, reproaches, accusations, slanders from Satan
and his Spirit, who rules in the dark world; and yet through the power and
virtue of the Cross, am I freed from fear of this mire, and this power carries
me forth out of the mire of corruption, and teaches me to die daily, to live
more to him, and in him, who is my life and Savior: And this I know is
accepted, according to what I have: And now, who art thou that condemnest? It
is God that justifies, and sets me free from the reign of sin and death, though
I find still enough in the flesh within me, to keep me humble and low, yet
thou, who wilt needs be my judge, know, that in the midst of all Satan's
railings, and accusings, and condemnings of me by thee, I can sweetly behold
the Lord causing all these things to work together for my good, and easily
making void thy condemnations.

Repl. Further, thou tellest me I take upon me to tell what the flaming sword
is, and guess one thing and another thing.

Answ. Here thou art still in the image of thy father, either railing, or
scoffing, when thou know not what to reply, or say. It seems thy questions
were so deep in thy conceit, that none could answer them, but by ghessing, and
so they might be in thy double doubtful sense: Did thou ever hear of the
Oracles of old among the Heathen, whither people resorting to ask the event of
things, the subtle Devil always gave forth his answers in a double doubtful
sense, and by this trick he kept up his credit in that blind generation: Just
like his answers then are thy questions now, always taken in a double sense,
and when they are answered in the Letter, then thou flyest unto the spirit; and
when they are answered in the spirit, then thou flyest unto the Letter; and so
like thy father, between both, thou seek to maintain thy credit among thy
blind friends: for that is thy God, thy credit; and yet it may be God may open
thine eyes, I can but guess at it, seeing thou have so willingly denied the
Lord that bought thee: But to thy reply that may be does not make mine answer a
guess, but lets thee understand, that the flaming sword is a real thing in
both those senses I named: And with this sword God will confound and destroy
all proud persons and things for ever; And though thou see it not yet, my joy
is, that this sword of the Lord has kept me from the forbidden Tree, and put
me in mind of the new and living way of coming to the Tree of life, which is
by the blood of Jesus: Thus the Law, and the fierceness of the wrath of God,
which cuts me off every way from entering into life through mine own power and
merits, puts me upon the way of the Gospel and free grace, which is, to enter
into life by believing on him, who justifies the ungodly, and so to be saved by
the power and merits of Jesus Christ: And though thou tell me of deceit, guile,
covetousness, hypocrisy, doubtfulnesse, which the sword takes hold of; Yet I
tell thee again, the sword of the Lord in me has cut down the Tree, where
these things grow, and I am risen from their power, and covet daily to find
the power of the Cross, to crucify these things in me more and more, that so
I may be more freed from all these works, which the sword takes hold of, and so
Jacobs portion, even the Lord, is still mine for ever, notwithstanding all thy
ghessing at my pride, covetousness, etc.

Repl. Another great fault thou find with me, is, that I am called of men
Master, which Christ's forbids.

Answ. Sometimes thou art in the meaning, and deniest the Letter, as in the
Cross of Christ; here thou art low in the Letter, but deniest, or else know
not the meaning; and therefore art thou found in the thing and power, of the
name Master, but grudgest another the form, or name outwardly of Master: Thou
say I am called Master, and so I am through man's courtesy without any
affectation of mine: But thou thy self love to be the Master and Father of
another faith, the Christ, the high one, which Christ forbids; though thou art
a poor drop, a worm defiled with errors, blindness, and sins like others of
the sons of men.

Repl. But thou say, I am telling of the 3. principle of the elementary
world, of the strong word, and much more, which I received from the mouth of
the Germane writer I. B. not from the mouth of the Lord.

Answ. As for my using an expression, which sets forth the life of a truth,
what matters it whose the words were: If I had borrowed an answer out of
Behemen, I should soon have heard thee set down the place; which had been
something indeed, though I know it as lawful for me to use another man's words
and speeches, so as I am made one with the thing in mine own spirit, as it was
with Paul, to use the saying of an Heathen Poet.

Repl. But thou tellest me I am telling of the language of Egypt, and in the
same thing I witnessed against, am I found.

Answ. Here thou seem to confess contrary to the mind of thy father, that
I speak a truth, yet to save thy credit, because thou thy self art guilty of
the language of Egypt, thou say, I have got the language of the Israel of
God, but the Egyptian speaks them: Is not this a brave come off? But stay
notwithstanding this fine trick, thou may still be an Egyptian; For the
Egyptian is one, who wars in his heart against all the Church of God, that
grows not up out of his form: And the Egyptian is one, who for uniformities
sake, can endure to hear of no variety of gifts, dispensations, or
administrations of God: And thus thou, and thy sect, are in the proud Egyptian
spirit: I know other forms have too much of the Egyptian too; and this makes
them have bitter envyings and strivings one against another; but the Egyptian
in thee exceeds them all: for thou, Diotrephes-like, love the pre-eminence,
thou must be the top and head of all; and so art breathing out fury and
madness against all others, under what form, or way soever, as if God must
needs forget all to honor thee.

Repl. As for any thing arising, which strikes at my images, idols, groves, and
makes me angry, as thou say:

Answ. Let the Lord arise, and sweep them all clean away, I shall not murmr,
but be glad to see the Lord exalted within and without, and to see all the Sons
of God learn to know one another more in spirit, and in the Lord; less in
flesh and form: Neither is there in me any war at all against any appearance of
God in thee, or any other, but only against the Egyptian that exalts himself
in any. But thou tellest me.

Repl. I preach and pray for greatness.

Answ. And yet I tell thee, if that had been mine aim, I might have been as
great in esteem as other men; But on the contrary, I am content to be despised,
hated, and evil spoken of by all the Egyptians in the world. But,

Repl. I give flattering titles, and use heathenish words of salutation, which
I have no example for in Scripture.

Answ. Something thou must say, because thou art an Egygtian, If thou say thou
to me, or you to me, the Greek has but one word for both, and both is all one
to me, who knows the Kingdom of God stands not in observation; If thou say,
yea, or yes, nay, or no, all is one to me: for Christ aims at nothing but this,
that men should be faithful and plain in all their words and carriage, one
toward another: And if thou pluck off thine hat, or not, all is one to me,
though another it may be cannot bear it: If thou will be like the Horse, or
Mule, without wagging, moving, speaking, for fear of offending thy dark fancy
in being guilty of saluting, then be so: It becomes thy religion well, to be
like the beasts, unreasonable. There is example enough in Scripture for all the
salutations I desire, or use: but thine eye is Divine, and thou take so much
only, as will serve thy turn, and no more: but a little to help thee, though I
cannot flatter thee, read, Genesis 32 4. and 33. 4. to 16. when thou have made
good use of these two Scriptures, to do thee good, I shall show thee more.

Repl. Further, about mine answer to what the language of the wilderness is,
thou pretendest how that I conform my self to the fashions and practices of the
world, contrary unto mine answer, and whether that be so, or no, then biddest
my conscience, and all that know me judge.

Answ. Friend, thou keep much ado about my conscince, feign thou would be
Judge and Master there: But my conscience watches to hear the Lord, not man,
speak; unto him it boweth, not to thy broken idol: And that within me, and all
thy friends that know me, cannot but bear me witness, that through the grace
of God, I am made to walk much contrary unto the world: I do not say I have
gotten a full conquest over all the Relics of the world in me, and yet through
the grace of God, I can see the world under my feet; and I can see the Lord at
this work of crucifying me unto the world, and the world unto me more and more:
And this is the ground of all my glorying in that, wherein I appear contrary
unto the world. Further, thou say I told thee:

Repl. There was a time when I was much troubled about taking of Tithes,
oppressing of people, and about fashions and ways that were lived in, so that
I could not sleep in the night, and that I was minded to take my self to some
honest calling to provide for my family.

Answ. Here thou have served me as thou do the Scriptures, somethings thou
have added, and somethings thou have left out: The truth is, I heard a great
clamor, as I still do, about Tithes, what an oppression and grievous thing it
was, as men pretended: this made me wait to hear, what the Lord would speak
touching this matter; and through waiting, I found this great outcry against
Tithes to be a wile of Satan, to dishearten, and destroy the best of the
Ministry, that in their ruin every carnal form might advance it self, till
all were confounded; and further I learned, that few scrupled Tithes out of
pure conscience and tenderness, but out of mere covetousness and envy: And in
this manifestation I have freedom to take it, and yet I oppress none: and thou
who criest out so much upon Tithes, as if all the world were reformed, if
Tithes were taken away; Oh this unclean filthy thing called Tithes! Friend,
look a little into the Gospel, and thee thou shall see it manifest, that there
is no Person, place, or thing without can defile a man, only that which
defiles is within, and comes from within, Mat. 13. 11, 20. and Act. 10, 12. to
29. There thou may read of Peter's scruple of going unto the Gentiles, that
were legally unclean, and how the Jews in the next chapter scrupled the same,
Act. 11. 2, 3. And yet afterward God makes it clear to them by his spirit in a
vision, that what they scrupled as unclean, he had made clean: therefore friend
be not too hasty and angry, that the unclean thing of Tithes, as thou say,
is not yet taken away: cry not out so greedily, it is swines flesh, it is an
abomination; for thou know not the freedom of the Gospel in outward things,
where the conscience is made clean, neither do thou know, but that which
thou criest out so much against, even Tithes, is made clean in thy brothers
conscience.

Repl. But thy heart is hardened, tenderness lost, thy conscience seared, and
now in the streets of the great City have thou slain the witness.

Answ. Whilst I was in the great City, I know the witness was slain, Christ lay
as one dead and put in his grave to me: but since the Fathet was pleased with a
strong hand to bring me out of Egypt, and to lead me unto Canaan, I find the
witness raised from death to life in me, and he follows me with goodness and
mercy; though Satan and the world with violence and fury: This witness within,
Christ in me, keeps my heart soft, my conscience tender; and he is mine, and I
am his, and with him there is mercy that he may be feared; and he keeps me out
of the great City Sodom, that he may live and reign in me for evermore. But
thou tellest me.

Repl. I have liberty to act unrighteousness: thou art merry in the flesh,
thou can laugh and jeer tender consciences, and scorn such as are not in the
same fleshly liberty which thee, thou can now oppress an whole Parish, and
live by dishonest gain, and make merry with Ranters, feast, drink, hunt, card,
etc.

Answ. There was, and still is within me, more and more that which has, and
does pass sentence upon these and the like unrighteous acts, find the
faithful, and true witness judging, and pleading in me against these cruel
bloody enemies, and what I am guilty of in any of these particulars, thou
come too late to be my judge; there is one in the midst of my spirit, whom
thou know not, he has rebuked and saved me through his grace, and so the
lying spirit in thee is cozened of his prey: as for my jeering tender
consciences; I know what it is to grieve and wound such, and to offend one of
the least of the little ones, that believe in Christ; I know liberty of
conscience is the great interest of all the people of God in the Nation, and a
thing which I cannot, but stand up and plead for according to my light in my
generation: Neither shall all the indignities and injuries that I meet with,
from any in the world, ever make me to plead for bonds, or fetters, or burdens
to be laid, and put upon tender consciences; and in this I speak the truth
before the Lord, I lie not.

Repl. But thou tellest me, I am a Ranter.

Answ. I know blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall never be forgiven unto
men, and that it is impossible for those, who have tasted of the heavenly gift,
as many of the Ranters have, if they fall away, to be renewed again unto
repentance; and that I have abhorred the blasphemous filthy talk and practice
of Ranters, I can speak it with comfort to the praise of God, my Father; and
that there are such amongst us, I cannot remember it in secret, without
thinking what a sad judgment of God it is, for men to be given up to such
strong delusions, to believe lies: such as these are the shame of our Nation,
and the great abuse of our present liberty: And yet let not the highminded
Quaker glory over these poor deluded Ranters, seeing publicans and harlots
shall enter into the kingdom of God, before the lofty Pharisees.

Repl. Thou say further, out of the old bottle I pour out scoffs; and yet
profess Christ in all.

A^sw. Why has Satan filled thine heart with nothing else but lying? How many
scoffs do thou find in my papers I sent thee? Look, see; and how many
times do thou find me scoffing, and yet professing Christ in all? What thou
in the pure Religion, in the strength of the light within, and yet all along at
Satan's work; remember, that if for every idle word, surely for every lie, thou
must give an account at the day of judgment. Thou tellest me:

Repl. Christ is all among them who have put off the old man and his deeds, and
thou quotes a place, Coll. 3. 4. 10, 11. I answer,

Answ. Surely then Christ is not all with thee, who have not put off thine
anger wrath, malice, blasphemy, lying, scoffing, which every page, if not line,
in thy vain paper makes abundantly manifest to thy face against thee; all these
proceeding from the old man in thee makes it plain, that Christ is not all in
thee; and therefore art thou a stranger to the elect of God, to the holy and
beloved seed, who are always putting on bowels of mercies, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness, longsuffering, forbearing and forgiving, even
as Christ has forgiven them in love: But to give thee thy due praise, thou
have spoken one truth: Christ is indeed the glory and fullness where he is
manifested in power to cast out the strong man and his deeds: when I find it
so in thee, I shall yield thou have had a fit of real true trembling: But
instead of looking home, thou art found still at thine old trade, and tellest
me:

Repl. I have not put off the deeds of the old man, when there was some
tenderness in me, and some desires to come out of pride, oppression,
coveteousnesse, all is gone, and I am found among the fleshpots of Egypt, and
had better never to have been born, than to make ship-wrak of that tenderness
once known by me.

Answ. This is but the old lesson over, and over, and over again, like a
Quakers Sermon, and as heathens prayers, full of vain repetitions: And by this
I know what he is to expect, that reveals a secret to a scornful Quaker: Yet
know, I am so tender still, as to abhor pride, oppression, coveteousnesse;
neither do I persecute, or deal unrighteously with any, as many great
pretenders have done with me, and still do at this day: But God has
delivered, and does deliver, and will deliver me from every snare and gin of
unreasonable wicked men; and he it is that keeps me from making shipwrak of
tenderness, faith, and conscience.

Repl. Further thou tellest me what is done in the wilderness, there is the
way of holiness known and walked in, which the unclean walk not in, but the
redeemed, in which is no erring, Isa. 35, 8. Which way is a way of holiness
which I am not in, etc.

Answ. Here Is a good wilderness indeed, but thou have lost thy way thither,
and art found erring and wandering in a wilderness where no water is; and so
art not found drinking in holiness from the Lord, but feeding upon the weeds
of thine own fleshly holiness, exalting thy self, not with the redeemed in the
Lord, but with the imprisoned in a strange land, in thine own observations: And
thou poor worm, who say, I eat upon swines flesh, I feed upon the perishing,
I eat that which dies of it self; all these speeches, together with all thy
paper, savor too much of thy swines flesh, and of thy feeding upon thy swines
flesh, which is thine own will, and self, and form; and therefore art thou
found in the way of the world, clamourous, bitter, cruel, implacable against
all that wander not with thee in thy wilderness of flesh and blood; and now
and then thou make use of a Scripture to cover and hide thy swines flesh,
which thy spirit too much feeds upon; and so no wonder though there be no joy,
or gladness to be seen in thy countenance, seeing thou have no better flesh to
feed upon than swines flesh, which kills the spirit; and so neither thine heart
is merry, nor thy countenance cheerful.

Repl. Further, thou tellest me, I say in Canaan is no judging, and so out of
mine own mouth thou judge me out of Canaan, who in my Queries have again and
again judged thee.

Answ. In my Queries indeed I desire to see the strength and light thou walk
in; neither do I judge any thing in thee, but what falls under the condemnation
of the light and truth of God: and though thou pretendest to a fullness of
light and knowledge, yet I find thee low and dark by thy frivolous answers
which thou give, to what the Soul is; what the two witnesses are, what the
first and second resurrection is; what the day of judgment, heaven, and hell
are; and many other things propounded to thee, which I find thee unable, and
unwilling to make out the truth of; and therefore art thou angry that thy weak
building is so much as questioned; And yet thou know the Apostles counsel is
to us all, that we should be always ready to give answer of the hope that is
in us with meekness and fear, but thou having no hope but in this life, thy
heaven and happiness here, art judged of all men to be most miserable,
according to what the Apostle says, If in this life only we have hope in him,
we are of all men most miserable: And so thou miserable wretch art loath to be
questioned, though thou send questions by the scores to other men.

Repl. But thou see mine intent, thou say, I would not have my deeds of
darkness reproved.

Answ. If thou have received wisdom and power to reprove in the name of the
Lord, do it as sharply and bitterly as thou can: for let the righteous smite
me, it shall be a kindness; let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent Oil
which shall not break mine head: But to thee, I say, have a care, thou take not
the name of God in vain, for the righteous one I do not find in thee
reproving, seeing thou can not do it in the patience and meekness of Jesus
Christ. But thou say,

Repl. Is not that the honor which is given to all the Saints, to execute
judgment upon the Heathen, Psalm. 149. 6, 7, 8, 9. And all that know not God
are Heathen, and he that sins, has neither seen God* nor known God, 1 John 3.
6. That which cleanses man, leads man to see God, The pure in heart see God,
and Canaan was a figure of the spiritual rest, etc.

Answ. Friend, were thou in the meaning as well as in the Letter of these
Scriptures, thine eyes would be in thine own head, not always abroad, like an
Heathen, in the ends of the earth, and so thou would judge, and excute
vengeance upon the Heathen, or carnal man in thy self, and then be in a fit
posture of wisdom to judge the Heathen, or carnal men without, bearing witness
against all their railings and revilings, both in thy words and deeds: But to
look a little upon the places noted by thee. This honor have all the Saints,
to execute the Lords vengeance by the two edged sword of his Spirit upon all
the Heathen: But thou art found to thy dishonor, judging the Sons of God, and
the Daughters of God to be Heathen; and so thy sword is drawn against the Lords
anointed ones, not against the Heathen* And as for the binding of their Kings
with Chains, and their Nobles with fetters of Iron, which shall be the honor
of the Saints to do, I find this Scripture not yet eminently fulfilled in
spirit and power: some outward binding I have seen fulfilled in our own land;
but the firm real strong binding and limiting that shall be by the reigning of
Christ in power, and great glory in his Saints, this shall assuage the malice
and rigor of the Kings of the earth against the Church, and make them stoop
and bend, and be willing to bring all their glory to her, because they shall
see, and say, the Lord is in you of a truth: This day of the Churches power,
through the presence of the Lord in her, in much wisdom, knowledge,
righteousness and love, to bind the Heathen and their Kings, I find dawning,
and the desire of all Nations is not far off: But yet through the Saints
violence and rage, one against another in their several forms and imaginations,
ev^ry one making have to have the Crown and Honor of the day to himself ^^^t
looking so much to the coming of the Lord, as to his own advancing above all
others of his brethren, watching rather upon one another infirmities, than
upon the appearing of the Lord in one another, through this weakness of the
Saints, and too much indulgence to their forms, I find the great day of
binding to be retarded and prolonged, yet the Vision is for an appointed time,
he that shall come will come, and will not tarry: And had we but a little more
faith, patience, and quietness in our spirits, we should soon see the Lord and
his salvation: Therefore stand ye still, and be silent: O all flesh, wait upon
the Lord, and he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy
judgment as the noon day: It is his nature, his power in the Saints, that must
bind Satan, and all the wicked ones of the earth: If man only bind, and kill,
and slay; this works no deliverance, no settlement, no peace, as we see at
this day: But when the Lord shall bind and slay, and put in prison our
enemies, then we shall have rest and joy, and quietness in our habitations:
Therefore, as Bellarmine said, when he came to die, after all his study and
labor to advance free will, and man's merits, that it was the safest way only
to rely upon Christ: so say I after all our vain study and labor, each to draw
Disciples after himself, to make his name and side great and strong, the best
and safest way will be, for every one to rely upon the Lord, and to think
soberly of himself, according as God has given to every man the measure of
truth and faith, and then we shall begin to Judge the Heathen indeed, and not
thus shame our selves before them by our envy, and railing, and evil speaking
one against another.

Repl. Further, thou say, all that know not God are Heathen; and he that
sins has neither seen God, nor known God.

Answ. And so say I, all that know him not in some measure of light, and love
are heathens: and he that is in bondage to corruption, that sins freely and
willingly, he has no true sense, nor saving knowledge of God upon him, or in
him: and yet through infirmity, temptation, and weakness, a Saint, who has a
sweet taste and sense of God, may be found in that which is sinful, though
this man will by no means allow, or approve of sin; As Paul says, the evil
which I do, I allow not.

Repl. And thou say, that which cleanses men, leads man to see God, the
pure in heart see God.

Answ. All this is truth: That which cleanses, and purifieth, and leads to a
sight of God, is one power, one pure spirit, and by cleansing out what is
contrary unto it self, and making it self plain, which is pure, it leads the
soul according to it is discovery into the spiritual rest, where it satiates
and fills it self with the fat^^^e and fullness of God, who is it is center and
rest, of which Canaan was a figure: Were thou in this rest, thou would cease
from tine own works, from the best as well as the worst, as they are thine,
own, and so thou would learn to justify thy self in the Lord, and make him,
and his works, thy rest and joy.

Repl. Thou say Isaiah bare witness against such who sought gain from their
quarters, Isa. 5. 10, 11. as I do, witness my taking Tithe of two Parishes.

Answ. Know friend, that Isaiah witnessed this, when Tithes were commanded and
taken; so that it was not Tithes, but the greediness after gain, that Isaiah
rebukes in the watchmen, calling them greedy Dogs, which can never have enough,
though they were blind, ignorant, dumb, sleeping, dreaming, taking no care to
feed the flock, or instruct the people, yet they were greedy after the wages
and gain: This is that Isaiah condemned of old, not the taking of Tithes
moderately for their maintenance: And this is a thing I am as ready to speak
against as thy self, knowing full well that the blindness, and dumbness, and
laziness, and formalnesse, and covetousness of many of Englands watchmen has
brought all this reproach upon the ministry at this day: Yet all this is no
ground for thee and others to destroy the righteous with the wicked, and to
make the righteous as the wicked, which have been a light to thee formerly,
though thou lie, and shamefully deny it now, to maintain thy pride, and scorn
against the best, as well as the worst of Englands watchmen: When thou can
tax me justly of being greedy after gain, and of being blind, dumb, lazy, as
those were, that Isaiah complains of, then tax me for taking Tithes, as if that
were the end of my ministry: I could tell thee of the dumb meetings of
Quakers, who when they are assembled by scores and hundreds, which they glory
much in, and are all Prophets, Diviners and Teachers as they dream, yet are for
want of vision, half a day together dumb, mute, and silent, and so go all away
as wise as they came, having never a dream to tell, or word to speak, because
they have seen nothing: And are not these dumb meetings of yours silent
discoveries of the hand of the Lord against your great professions of light,
and perfection? When your eyes are opened, you shall see it to be so, and be
ashamed for your envy at the people of God

Repl. Thou say further, Jeremiah cried out against such, who bare rule by
the peoples means, Jer. 5. 30, 31.

Answ. Here thou art found perverting the very letter, putting in peoples,
instead of Priest; surely, this was out of thy great love to the Priests; or
else thy Father, to spare none, has opened thy mouth against both people and
Priests: but this is one of thy moates, or small ones, therefore I Will by it
pass.

Repl Thou go on to say, Jeremiah calls it an horrible and filthy thing; and
none so filthy as I, who take Tithe of two Parishes, and Micah cried out
against such as taught for hire, Mic. 3. 10, 11.

Answ. All this being in a time when Tithes were lawful, as thou have said, I
wonder how thou can bring it in against the lawfulness of Tithes: The
Priests taught for hire, and the Prophets did divine for money; this indeed
concerns all those, who teach for coveteous ends and hire, not any that teach
faithfully what they have received from the Lord, though they go not to warfare
at their own charge, but take Tithes as maintenance for their labor: But all
this I see proceeds from the old root of bitterness in thee, which teaches
thee to apply Scriptures after the manner of the world; against all such who
reprove sin in the gate.

Repl. But Christ, thou say, bare witness against such, who are called of
men Masters:

Answ. And so do I, against all such, Quakers, or others, that would feign be
Masters or Fathers of all other men's faith and light; neither did I ever desire
another to be Master and Father over the conscience, but Jesus Christ the Lord:
For who is Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, but Ministers of the faith of Saints,
not Fathers and Masters of their faith: But thee I see loving the thing Master,
and the thing Father, and therefore all are condemned by thee; that pin not
their faith upon thy weak imaginations, and this was the sin that Christ
condemned in the Priests and Pharisees of old: For further answer, read Mr.
Baxter, who has said enough in this matter, to give full satisfaction to the
wise.

Repl. Further, thou say, Paul called such evil beasts, and liars, who
taught things they ought not, for filthy Lucre, Tit. 1. 10, 11, 12. so am I,
for filthy Lucres sake, holding up the first Priesthood and their wages, etc.

Answ. I know a necessity is laid upon me to preach the Gospel, and this that
I desire to teach in all meetings, where I find people met together, and made
free to hear; and this I am ready to commend upon all occasions to every man's
conscience in the sight of God: And this Gospel I know, itching ears cannot
endure to hear: And thou, who criest out, I teach for filthy Lucre, I bring up
the first Priesthood, and their wages, none so filthy as I, I take Tithe of
two Parishes; to thee I say, thy wisdom has made thee err, and hardened thy
heart against the fear of God: thine eye is put out by the God of this World,
and so like other dark forms, thine envy is poured out chiefly against the
Ministers and their Tithes: and they are all Priests and Tythe-mongers, all so,
and yet not all, that is but the old man in thee that says so, the liar that
never told truth, nor loved any out of himself: he has taken from thee the
understanding heart, and so thou can not see, that here and there is a
Minister that stands up in the gap, that mourns for the Nations pride, and
beseeches men to be reconciled to God, though such an one be usually hated,
persecuted, and that maintenance he has be coveteously kept from him by the
World: And this is the man is most railed at by thy generation, that stick in
the Letter now and then, when it seems to favor them, though in other things
they abhor the Letter, and the meaning too: What Scripture there is for Tithes,
and in what cases a Minister may take it, as from God and man, and yet oppress
none, me thinks they might see, who usually scoff at the Letter, for being
called the word of God, and pretend to the meaning, to the spirit to be the
chief thing in the word, as indeed it is: What Scripture there is for Tithes,
or maintenance, thou shall see afterward, and so for the present I Will let thee
alone to murmr and rail, till the Lord rebuke thee.

Further, in Canaan I said, old things are passed away, and all is become new;
and here thou criest out against me:

Repl. Oh, thou hard-hearted one, how dare thou utter these things, and not
be pricked in thy heart, who live in the old, and the new not known? Is thy
conscience seared with an hot iron? Thou art he, who calls evil good, so the
woe is upon thee, Isa. 5. 20.

Answ. Behold, thou despiser, and wonder, and perish, thou who deniest the Lord
that bought thee, and so art ordained for condemnation; and learn, if thou
can, what this means, I will have mercy, says the Lord, and not sacrifice:
Salvation shall be of grace, not of works, lest man should boast: David shall
be a man after mine own heart, notwithstandinding all his blemishes and errors
which I see him bewailing: I Will accept of the will for the deed, where I find
the will real and true: And thou furious evil mind, know that old things are
passed away, and all things become new there in Gods estimation, where new and
old are fighting one against another: no sooner is this fight begun, but the
Soul presently begins to taste of Canaan, or rest, because it finds the house
of David waxing stronger and stronger^, and the house of Saul weaker and
weaker; and so the elder stoops to the younger, Esau to Jacob, flesh to spirit:
and though it rage furiously, yet its head is broken, its strength decaying,
and its spirit goes out more and more: And here I am wrestling with the beast,
and false Prophet, with all the powers of darkness and Hell; and so my
conscience is not seared, though I say old things are passed away, and all
things become new: If thou look into thine own heart with a single eye, thou will find old things enough there to manifest, thou art not yet at full rest
in Canaan, where thou must meet Giants, mighty enemies to fight with, which
will be as goads and pricks in thy side, to keep thee humble, sober, and
watchful all thy life long; and yet if thou were in the good land, thou
would have rest, though not in fullness here: And so this tedious war in
Canaan, is no bringing up an evil report of the good land, because there the
people of God have more with them, than against them, and so are more than
Conquerours in the Lord, which gives them some rest, and peace, and joy, in the
midst of all their wars; and so cause of singing and triumphing in the God of
their salvation: All this I know is a riddle to thy fancy of perfection in thy
self, and actings, and so the passing away of the old life, and the springing
up of the new is not truly known of thee.

Repl. Thou say, I am ghessing what the veyl is between the holy, and the
holiest; and tellest me, neither in the holy, nor the holiest am I found: for
who own the light that comes from Christ, into the holy it leads them: and in
the holy, who are that is bridled which leads into sin* which in me is at
liberty, as thou say, as my fruits, and the fruits of my Ministry make it
manifest.

Answ. What I declared about the veyl, thou neither understandest, I see, or
art able to gainsay; and therefore after thy wonted manner, I find thee
scoffing: But to thee, I say, the revelation of the Son in me by the Father
has led me into the holy place; where I find the Lord perfecting strength in
weakness, and sweetly delighting in me, and in his own works wrought in me by
himself, in the midst of all mine infirmities: And here I find a dispensation
of light and power from the new man, which bridles the old, and so Satan bound
by a stronger than he, that he is not at liberty in me as before, though thou
strongly take his part: And as concerning my Ministry, taxed by thee, know
that Paul may endeavor, but it is God, who gives the increase: All that I can
do, is to commend the truth and grace of God to every man's conscience, and he
that has an ear to hear, let him hear: And that my Ministry has awakened
some, and showed them their wounds and shame, it matters not whether thou
believe, or not; and that it has been a faithful witness against the many
delusions, and traditions of men, it matters not whether thou believe, or not;
and that it has been a light to some, that since are turned Atheists, Quakers,
etc. it matters not, whether thou believe, or not: Only this concerns thee,
and others, that through your lying, railing, reviling and condemning one, who
loves you all dearly in the Lord, by this as much as in you lies, you have
sought to make void my Ministry, and to make it an offense to those, who are
settled upon their lees; and therefore woe unto thee from whom the offense comes.

Repl. But the light (thou say) which comes from Christ's guides into the
holy, shows the veyl, and in the patience rents it, and lets into the holiest,
whither the High Priest alone enters, even Jesus Christ, and one High Priest
over the house of God, we witness in our measures come, who put an end to
Tithes, etc.

Answ. Your murmuring, impatience, and want of meekness and love to the weak
ones of Christ, is a strong witness, that the light that is in you, is turned
into utter darkness, even darkness that may be felt; Hence your folly and
nakedness is seen of all, and judged of all, even those who have the least
light appearing in them: Further, if the light have truly shined in you, led
you into the holy place, rent the veyl, and led you into the holiest, whither
the forerunner is for us entered: What mean ye then like other earthlings to be
thus exalting, and admiring one another, seeking honor one of another, though
ye deny it to the world? But your drift is fame, you would be in the Heavens,
in the Holiest; nay, above all that is called God, and Worshipped, and this ye
are led into by the light within, and all must believe it, not at all question
it, upon pain of being accursed by you: But stay friends; Hope indeed enters
within the veil, Heb. 6. 17. and this hope keeps the Soul groaning, and
longing, and waiting all the while we are in this earthly Tabernacle, after a
full possession of our inheritance, Romans 8. 23, 24, 25. If thou art in the
highest possession of God, now thine hope is out, for that which is seen and
enjoyed is not hoped for: But stay, let the light of Jesus first enter thee
into the holy place, and there make thee a Priest, which name thou so deridest,
before thou fondly conceit to be in the holiest, and in this holy place thou will learn to despise thy self, and all thine own righteousness: Till Job came
hither, he had a great conceit of his own goodness and worth; but now he
abhorres himself, and so will ye: I know ye put your selves into a posture of
suffering and reviling, yet all this ye may suffer, not for conscience toward
God, but in reference unto the idol that ye have made, and so not for Christ,
but for your selves: And surely so long as so much of thy self lives, that thou
must needs be Christ; not with him, or in him, but he himself; all this while
thou do not suffer thy self to come under the Cross of Christ: Further, know
friend what it means to be saved by hope, to hope for that we see not, and so
with patience to wait for it: Ye know Paul's desire was to be dissolved and to
be with Christ, and he cries out, if in this life only we have hope in him,
we are of all men most miserable; therefore wait the day and time of your
dissolution, Read, 2 Cor. 5. 1. to 10. The life of hope is a sweet life, seeing
the grace came from heaven, looks back into heaven, and never leaves groaning
and longing, till it return into the bosom of the Father, and the earthly house
be changed into the heavenly: Therefore be not overhasty: thou know the
men, that would enter in without God, were slain, therefore be not high-minded,
but fear: It Is a sad thing to be undone by our own works, undone by Religion,
observation, abstinence, as many an Hermit, Monk, and man has been: Be as holy
as thou will in the holy place, in Christ, only glory not in thy formal
holiness: Thou dreamest thou art Christ, and in the holiest, and yet all can
see thee in weakness, darkness, and in infirmities like other men: But I
would not break thy neck, but rebuke thee with patience, though all this will
provoke thee to scorn, and to turn again and rent me: And therefore I Will let
thee alone to be discovered by the light, and day of God.

Repl. Thou go on to spend a little more breath against Tithes, and
Tythepriest, and hirelings, who deny Christ.

Answ. This is no news, therefore I Will let it pass in silence, till we come
more fully to speak of Tithes: But thou say:

Repl. Unto us a reed is given like unto a rod, and the Temple of God we know,
and the Altar, and them that worship therein, and thee to be in the Gentiles
court, I see among the profane:

Answ. Here thou will be measuring, though thou want the rod of strength that
is out of Sion; and so know not how to measure the Temple and the Altar, and
the worship that God sets up in Sion: What is below thee thou may measure,
but what is above thy reason, thou can not see to measure well, till thou art
born into it: Therefore be not wise in thine own conceit, boasting of things
beyond thy measure, seeing not he who commends himself is approved, but whom
the Lord commends.

That I am in the Gentiles Court by nature, I know is true, But that God has
led me out to worship in his Temple, and to sacrifice upon his Altar, according
to the measure of his son in me, this thou can not see, and yet I dare not
commend my self, as thou do, knowing I have nothing but what I have received,
and so must not glory in my self, but in the Lord: But thou say:

Repl. I have slain the witness, which quickened shall be, and kindle my
torment, and none shall quench it.

Answ. The witness that was living in me, is living still, he is not slain and
dead, but alive to reprove me when I wander, and to heal and revive me again
with the sweetness and comeliness of his voice and countenance: And by this
faithful and true witness the false witness is slain, the flood of the
Dragon swallowed up; and though he be quickened in thee, and others to affright
me, yet he torments me not, his fire is quenched by the Lords goodness and
mercy, and so I shall dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.

Repl. But death has passed over me, and reigns over me, thou say:

Answ. Yet can see deliverance from his sting and power in my spirit, though I
know he dwells in my flesh, and reigns there, and so he does in thee: And
notwithstanding thy passing the first and second resurrection, yet there is a
resurrection which yet remains, and a last day too, which thou shall know to
thy torment and woe, who know not the Scripture in this, nor the power of God.

Repl. Thou say further, Them which sin not after the similitude of Adams,
transgression, I know not, nor what it is that death has passed over, and so
am I reasoning and ghessing it may be infants in years, who have death written
in their natures, and thou biddest me, show such a Scripture, that infants have
death written in their natures, else the plagues I must have, Rev. 22. 18.

Answ. What I spoke of Infants, was, and is a clear truth; they sin not as Adam
did, and yet they die; And that they have death written in their natures, I
wonder with what face thou can deny: Does not their daily dying show that
this enemy death lives in their natures? And for Scripture to prove this: what
think thou by David's Child, by Bathsheba, that died? 2 Samuel 12. 18. Was not
death written in this Child's nature? See how wise thou art: But thou go on
to tell me.

Repl. I say it may be Infants in knowledge, and here I am ghessing, which
shows forth another spirit then wrote the Scriptures: and so, thou say,
neither of Infants in year, nor of Infants in knowledge did Paul speak, but
said death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them, etc. Rom 5. 14. But that
them I know not, therefore put my ghessings and meanings to the Scripture.

Answ. That which I spoke concerning Infants in knowledge is a truth too, who
though they have not such knowledge as Adam had, and so their sin be not so
great, because their light is not so great, yet they have a light, which being
sinned against, that sin lets in death upon them; To confute this thou bring
nothing but thy bare word, that it is not so, and so let it go: I could have
told thee, that that Scripture was to be understood of your fruitful
generation, as you call it; and that death reigns over you, even you also that
have not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, and that are not
so bad as Adam, found sinning and eating of the forbidden Tree, yet even you
must dye: This I know you dream is the truth of that Scripture; yet this is but
a guess too, and as little true as mine: Understand it of whom you will, you
must put your own meaning, when you are asked, who is meant by that particle
them, seeing the Scripture does not there dete^mine it: And if your meaning may
go; why not another, that has as much face of truth as yours? But when you
discover your selves, I shall know better what to reply unto. Further, thou
tellest me,

Repl. Once there was some tenderness in me because of sin, some groaning for
deliverance, setting my feet in a way that leads out of Egypt, but a Captain
I chose wheeled about into Egypt, and in the lusts of the flesh I live, and so
my latter end is worse than my beginning.

Answ. Though thou say so, yet know that I have found out sin by sin, and it
was well that God did awaken me, though by sin; It may be thine eyes see not
what this means, though thou art the seer: Further know, though I am vile in
one sense, yet not guilty in the sense of the world, neither acquainted with
many of those things, which they falsely lay unto my charge: where I am guilty,
I have grace in me to trouble me, to humble me, to groan in me for deliverance,
to make me more vile, then thou can make me, and yet to keep me from
returning into Egypt again: but to wait for a full power to sin no more, which
if it might be in thy sense, I should be glad, but in the sense of the
Scriptures, I know it shall be made good, and what that is thou can not learn
but by enjoyment.

Repl. And the baptism in the death of Christ, thou tellest me, I do not
witness, neither a planting into the likeness of death; for the Cross of
Christ thou know not, neither do in it live, by which thing this baptism
into his death is witnessed.

Answ. 1. I find thee still full of condemnation; and yet Christ says he was
not sent to condemn the world, Joh. 3. 17. but that the world through him
might be saved. 2. With me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of
thee, or of man's judgment; yea, I judge not my self, but he that judges me is
the Lord. 3. Thou Hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye, and
then shall thou see clearly to cast out the moat out of thy brothers eye. 4.
Remember the death of Christ, the Cross of Christ when thou passest under thou will find work enough at home* but thou have spared thy self, pitied thy self,
slain the just one that thou might live and reign; thou have cried out, let
him be crucified, that I may live in his stead, and say, I am he: Where the
Cross of Christ has had its power, there the first man is condemned, flesh
withers, the poor Soul is ashamed of his works, and sins: But thou art full,
and rich, and high, and say I am not the man, I never Crucified the Lord of
glory: Judas thou know suspected not himself, and in this Traitor see thy
self, and know thy own spirit. 5. If I am not as I long to be, yet I see the
blood of Christ cleanses me from all my sin, the Cross of Christ makes me not
to spare my self, or sin: I have Jesus, who was dead but is alive, in me making
void all my glorying in flesh and blood; and he is bearing witness to my
Crucifying, and to his resurrection which is my glory: And though thou a man
charge me with folly, yet he the true God declares me just in himself, and he
goes on Conquering and to Conquer, and what he sees amiss in me, he will tame,
subdue, and bring under, and tell thee to thy face, thou art a Satan, is not
this a brand plucked out of the fire: Therefore friend do not thou fancy a
perfect knowledge of the Cross, and yet remain a stranger to the Cross, by
living out of the virtue and power of it, which makes all flesh as grass, and
to wither as the flower of the field: It is Christ in me that is my glory, and
his life in me springs out of his death and mine, and makes void all my glory,
and he by his blood and power sets me free from the condemnation of sin, and
the Law, and he keeps me always in his eye, and he searches my errors and
failings out, to nail them to his Cross. As for that place thou quotest, 1 John 1. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. look upon it better, and take the tenth verse too in thy
mind, and see how thou can have sin and no sin, for so the Apostle says
plainly, in all the Saints there is no sin, and yet there is sin in all,
otherwise we make God a liar, and his word is not in us: Neither is this to
plead for sin, as thou say; for there is a vast difference between saying
such a thing is, and such a thing out to be: That the Saints have sin is a
truth written in Scripture, and in every man's conscience; for there is not a
just man upon earth, that does good and sins not: But that the Saints ought to
have sin, this the Scripture cries ought against, and calls upon us to purge
out more and more: therefore be not always catching and snarling; this is not
a Christian practice: but let thy sin go, thy exalting of thy self go, and it
may be thou may find out the Cross of Christ a little more exactly yet,
and learn better what it is to be Crucified with him, and so may eat of his
flesh, and drink of his blood. Thou tellest me:

Repl. I know not the one baptism, which by the Spirit is witnessed, which
baptizeth into one body. 1 Cor. 12. 13. in this body is no sin, into it no
deceit enters, every sin that is committed, is without the body.

Answ. Thy prating words cannot make void my glorying in the Lord: to thee, I
say, the one spirit I have, which witnesses the one baptism, which is one in
all the Sons of God, bond, or free: The spirit is one, the baptism one, the
body one: but the Members are different, and have all need of one another, and
therefore ought not to murmr, or make a rent, because every one is not an
eye, an hand, a tongue, as thou do, and so sinnest within the body, and
committest fornication with thy self, but a Member, against the rest of the
body, making the body a Monster, even all one Member, not all the Members one
body, that thou thy self might be head, and Members and all: and so thou,
who make a rent from Christ, and a rent from his Members, what do thou,
but make a division in the body, and commit sin within the body, crying out of
one Member, he is a Baptist, of another, he is a Presbyter, of another, he is a
Prie^t: And so thou ownest not every Member in its place, and look not upon
that baptism, which is one in all the Sons of God: But when thine eye is open
to see this thou will own a Member though low and weak, and love a Member
whoever he be, and thou will seek to draw him indeed more into the Unity, to
rejoice more in the Lords works than his own, and yet thou will leave him in
the variety to be useful in his place to other Members of the body: But all
this thy great wisdom comprehends not. And whereas thou make as though every
Member of Christ were free from all spot and sin, because every sin that is
committed is without the body, 1 Cor. 6. 10. By body in that place is meant the
outward Fabric of every man in particular, which ought to be consecrated unto
the Lord in holiness, as well as the spirit; and therefore, says the Apostle,
in the last verse of that Chapter, Glorify God with your bodies, and with your
spirits, which are Gods: This body must be kept clean for the Lord, not defiled
with fornication: fly fornication; every sin that a man does, is without the
body, but he who commits fornication sins against his own body, intimating
that this sin leaves a greater defilement upon the body than other sins, so
that by body there cannot be meant the Church of God, which are all the body of
Christ; and so that place is wrested by thee, to the proving of the spotless
perfection of every Member of Christ; and yet in the Lord I acknowledge every
Member is complete, righteous, holy; but look upon the Member it self, there we
find it liable to all manner of infirmities; yea, to sin too; only the Lord
Christ, the righteous one, the root, he is free from all sin: And therefore
Christ teaches us to pray for forgiveness of sin: This I know will be looked
upon as a low thing, and yet it is a truth of God; and should teach us all to
hunger continually after more of the righteousness of sanctification, and
after a plainer manifestation too, of the righteousness of Christ in our
justification. Thou say:

Repl. I am ghessing what the baptism unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea
should be; and thou say, I tell thee of Metaphorical, that word thou
deniest, and tellest me my shifts are seen, and my darkness found.

Answ. Did ever wretch in the world so plainly confute his words in his
constant practice as thou do, who dreamest of persecution, and yet have
nothing in all thy Paper appearing but vanity, pride, and folly? Surely the
spirit said not in vain; A wise man fears and departs from evil, but the
fool rages and is confident: And the heart of the righteous studieth to
answer, but the mouth of the wicked pours forth evil things: And there is
that makes himself pure, yet his heart is not cleansed from his filthiness.

Look upon all these things in thy self: But to return to thy reply, wherein
instead of answering something, thou talkest of ghessing, and carpest at
Metaphorical: But did thou never read in Scripture a thing like this? Look,
Gal. 4. 24. which things, says the Apostle, are an Allegory: The difference
between these two it may be thy learning may guess; for thou tellest the
people thou art a Scholar, and have been a Priest, and yet never saw a
Metaphor in Scripture: But to go on. Thou tellest me:

Repl. I darken counsel by words without knowledge.

Answ. Whether this be thy practice, or mine, let all men judge; who sometimes
turnest all the Scriptures into an Allegory, and deniest the truth of the
Letter, as in the Cross of Christ, the resurrection, and the like; and yet
sometimes there must be nothing but Letter, when thou see thy self alive in
the Allegory, as about the name Master, Father, Lord, and the like. But see how
thou art presently found in an Allegory, ghessing at the baptism of Moses, and
saying, Moses as a servant in his house was faithful. But thou must be the
Master, not a servant; and this makes thee unfaithful in the house of God,
like a Thief, coming in to steal, and to kill, and destroy: And hence thou
criest out, and liftest up thy voice in the street against all, but such as
wear thy mark, thou art flesh, thou art damned, thou art a witch, a ravenous
beast; there is no pity, nor mercy, nor anointing with Christ's nature appearing
in thee, and all because thou art not content to be servant, but must be Master
of all men's faith.

Repl. But thou say, Moses saw the Egyptians drowned in the Sea, and over
them he sang, which thou do not know.

Answ. Here Is an Allegory indeed, see, the question is, what is the baptism
unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the sea: Answer, Moses saw the Egyptians
drowned in the Sea, and over them he sang: And is not this a learned
Metaphorical answer, coming from a perfect man? But by good guess thou have
spoken a truth, though besides the mark: It is so indeed, Moses saw the
Egyptians drowned in the Sea, and yet there is one Egyptian still alive in thee,
and he prattles on, and says:

Repl. I am in the fruits of the flesh, and act contrary to the light of my
conscience, and so am for condemnation with the light.

Answ. What Is all this to the baptism of Moses: Seeing our answer was denied,
we looked to have had some satisfaction from thee; but all that I hear of is, I
must be condemned with the light: Here thou alterest the phrase of Scripture,
to make void no doubt all other condemnation and Hell, but what is within from
the light: This is good news for the World, and so thy Religion like to prevail
much with the vessels of wrath, fitting for destruction: But I must be
condemned with the light: The phrase is not proper, nor savouring of the light
of God: for it seems as if the light and I should be condemned together; and so
we are by this dark generation: But thy meaning is, the light shall condemn
me, because I act contrary unto it: And yet I desire to stand or fall unto the
light of the Lord, not to the judgment of this wise generation, who put
darkness for light, and light for darkness and so the woe is upon them, Isa.
3. 10.

Repl. But I oppress the just, lay heavy burdens upon them, who out of the
house of bondage would go, the living God to worship; so that a rest there is,
but I and all Magicians, who deceive people with liknesses no further than the
Sea must come, there must I and all my glory Perish.

Answ. Here no doubt are some of the Egyptians mentioned, which I never saw
drowned in me yet: Yet know friend, that I am so far delivered from these
Egyptians, that I cannot oppress either the just, or unjust, it is against my
nature, I cannot lay heavy burdens upon them, and not touch them with one of my
fingers: this is enough for a Pharisee: Neither am I desirous to see any soul
in the house of bondage longer than the appointed time of the Father: All that
ever I aimed at was this, to let people know, that God goes down with his into
Egypt, is with them in their forms and bondage, where they will be and stay,
till the day, and time of their redemption and freedom: But thee I see not
going out of Egypt the living God to worship, but to make thy self a God; so
know, though a rest there be, yet thou, and all murmurers against thy
fellow servants, and contemners of the wise dispensations of God, because he
goes down with his into Egypt, together with all thy Magic, and enchantments,
images, and liknesses of holiness and purity, when the bitter root of pride
remains undestroyed, all these Persons and things must be drowned in thee
before thine entrance into Canaan, or else thou must look to fall either in the
wilderness with the murmurers, or to be drowned in the Sea with the Egyptians:

Repl. Further, thou art telling me, I am imagining what the beast is which
John saw, was like unto a Leopard, saying, that I have read of the Leopard,
that is an exceeding wild beast, which cannot be tamed, very cunning and crafty
in tatching of his prey, and furious and raging, etc.

Answ. For fear thou might find this beast in thy self here thou art
stopping and raging thus in thy wonted fury, like a mad Pharisee, that scorns
to learn, thou beginnest to teach and say:

Repl. Who in the light which never changes dwells, which comes from God, these
see the beast where he is, and what he is, and all his spots discern:

Answ. Here thou have spoken truth, though thou understand it not, so as to
apply it unto thy self; which if thou did, great large spots of the beast
would discover themselves in thee: but being in the darkness of thy Fathers
mind thou can not read thy self; and therefore art thou seeking to discern
the beast abroad in me, and say, in me is his den: And here thou thankest
God, thou art not as other men are; stand by thy self, I am holier than thou,
And so thou come with much delight to see the beast in me, and eatest, and
drinkest, and gluttest thy self with a sight of the beast in me, and nothing
but the beast can thou here see in his Den; thus art thou glorying over
another spots and infirmities, which thou thy self make in thy fancy, and
then art glad to see in thy brother: the beast is too cunning for thee; he lies
hid within thee, and laughes to see thee his vassal and slave: I say no more
than what thou have made manifest; the beast in thee is in his Den: Thy
pride, and scoffing, and railing against all others, are spots, and plain
marks of the beast in thy fleshly heart dwelling: for were thou in the light,
and overcome by it, that would make thee poor in thine own eyes, and to
condemn thy self in those things, which thou condemnest in another; and would
teach thee to own a God, and Christ above thy self: This light of the Lord
ruling in thee would have kept thee in the fear of the Lord, and taught thee to
own the Cross, and sufferings of Christ, as the price of thy redemption, which
thou, like a vile wretch, tramplest under thy feet: This light would have
taught thee to bewail thine own infirmities, and have kept thee low in thine
own eyes, and have made thee own trembling indeed, which thou do in the
letter, and flesh, but not in truth and spirit, and so art given over to strong
delusions, to believe a lie.

Repl. Thou tellest me, I am covetous.

Answ. I am so indeed by nature; but I see the world loves me not, it flies
away, and the Lord teaches me to be crucified to it, and to press toward
himself, as my riches, fullness, and highest treasure.

Repl. Thou tellest me further; That which has led me from the light, has led
me from the Lord, and the same has let the world into mine heart, where the
Sea is flowing, even the salt Sea, thence the beast arises with seven heads.

Answ. The light in which I live, has led me to see the light, and in the
light I see the Lord; and he has ravished mine heart, and caught me up to
himself, as to mine exceeding joy; and though the world were so confounded and
divided, as to leave me alone, yet I am not alone; the father is my friend, and
the son is my companion; And I can return unto my Father and Savior living
with me, who always takes me in, when the world casts me out: And this
quickens me to live more above, where all my treasure is, and less below, or
in the creature, where I find confusion and tribulation. As for the flowing of
the salt Sea, whence the beast arises with seven heads, this I have seen
according to my measure dried up, and the beast with seven heads withering for
want of his native heat and moisture in me: And friend, I beseech thee, read
the meaning of this at home in thy self: read the bitterness in thy self, the
evil eye, that envies, because God is good, the folly and haughtiness of thine
own heart: Here is the salt Sea in which thou art drowned, though thou see it
not, and out of this Sea comes that Monster with seven heads, which destroys
some with flatteries, others with violence and rage, aiming at his own Kingdom
and greatness, whoever perish with him: this beast lies covered under all
thine Hypocrisy, and thou see him not. Further thou say:

Repl. I arm my self with all the wisdom and subtlety of the beast against the
truth, and with many Horns am I pushing at the Lamb.

Answ. This I have done in the days of mine unbelief, when I consulted with
flesh and blood: But since the day of the Lord has begun to dawn in my spirit,
truth has been my companion; I have ventured all for her, and laid my self
open to the violence of all sorts of men for the truths sake: And that I have
suffered no more than I have, considering the malice of carnal men, and formal
men; this I look upon as a notable passage of wisdom and providence in God:
Further, know that this truth in me, which has in some measure acquainted me
with the will and nature of God, my Savior, this teaches me to plead against
the errors and evils, and blasphemies, and idols of all, not against any truth
I see in my meanest brethren: Neither am I with my Horns pushing against the
Lamb; no, the Lamb is my well-beloved, he shall lie all night betwixt my
breasts; he is my fair one; when he withdraws, my Soul faints; when he appears,
my Soul lives, and is exceeding merry. This is he whom I can own in all the
Sons of God, even in those who cannot own the Lamb in me: In all this he is my
witness, though thou know it not. But thou say:

Repl. In me is the earth set, who am drove from God: Genesis 3. 23, 24. And upon
the earth is the Leopards Den, and foure-footed beasts and creeping things.

Answ. When I was in the earth, that indeed drove me from God; but God has
lifted me up into Heaven in some manifestation of light and grace, and here he
keeps me in his own fellowship and presence above the earth; and so I can leave
the Leopards Den full of wild beasts and filthy things for the inhabitans of
the earth: And friend, if thine eye were open, thou might see, how sadly
thou art driven out from God, and what a fool thou art in all thy professing
thy self to be wise, and how this has made thee change the truth of God into
alye, and led thee away to worship thy self, and thine empty companions, who
are poor creatures, more than the Creator, who is blessed for evermore: For
this cause God has given thee up to vile affections, to burn in your lust one
toward another, and to make gods and saviors of one another: and so it is
just with God, seeing ye acknowledge him not above you, to give you over to be
filled with envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity, to be as the world are,
whisperers, backbiters, haters of God, boasters, inventers of evil things,
disobedient to Parents, without natural affection toward Wives, Children,
Parents, Friends, and the Church of God, implacable, men that can be reconciled
to none, but your own form, party, way: In all which, though ye profess, ye
know God, yet by your works ye deny him: These are some of the four-footed
beasts and creeping things that are in the Leopards Den, within, in your
earthly sensual hearts, and the prints and spots of these you will find to your
woe, when God shall bring you to judgment:

Repl. But thou say, I am wild, and untame:

Answ. I am so indeed by nature, but God has subdued my wildness, and made me
according to his grace in me tame, and of a willing mind to receive more of
that light which guides out of the world: And so I cannot despise that which
reproves me inwardly for my too covetous practices; but am ready through my
Fathers grace, to be as the Lillies and the Sparrowes, without care and fear of
food, and raiment in the world: This speech thou will be angry at, yet it is no
matter, seeing thou art always angry at other men's experiences.

Repl. But I scoff at such in whom tenderness grows.

Answ. And yet I tell thee, I scoff at nothing, but the evil beast in thee:
He is so plainly discovered, that if I should give thee flattering Titles, as
some simple ones do, I might fear my Maker would soon take me away: this evil
one I cannot choose but speak against, not against the tenderness of truth that
grows up in any.

Repl. But I am crafty, thou say; and to maintain my self in pride and
fullness, have got the Tithe of two Parishes, and bring in one color after
another to maintain the wages of unrighteousness, so bespotted am I, so acted
by the beast like unto a Leopard.

Answ. Friend, it was not my craft which got me my Tyth of two Parishes,
neither does my craft maintain me in them, I am very unskilful in craft,
guile, hypocrisy: all that deal with me, find me plain and faithful; neither
can I dissemble to deceive, as many do: But stay, have thou not heard of a
providence? Surely this gave me my Tyth of two Parishes; and this wronged none,
when it gave me Tithe; and this providence maintains Tithes for my use, and
tells me, I wrong none, whilst I take it with moderation, not with oppression
and rigor: And this is that, even providence, thou have murmured against in
this business of Tithes; And thou shall know to thy sorrow, that God has
heard thy murmurings against himself, and will bring thee to a due account for
them: For who are we? Your murmurings are not so much against us, as against
the Lord: and that which he gives us, ye have profanely called the wages of
unrighteousness: And therefore he will stop the mouth of the evil beast in
thee.

Repl. Further, thou say, I am telling what the beast is, which all the
world wonders after, saying, the Pope is the beast in an eminent figure.

Answ. ^ain thou would hide thy self, and the beast in thee, and therefore
thou leavest all out in mine answer which discovered the beast, which thou
wandrest after; but look again friend, and read what is there said, and compare
thy spirit with it: and see whether in all thine anointing thy self with the
office and place of Christ, and in all thy departing from God, and living in
thy self below, thou be not guided by the beast: But thou let all this
alone, runnest to the Pope, which indeed I brought in, as the sense of some to
be the beast, but thou hear me speak of another thing to be the beast in
truth; and yet seeing thou have named the Pope, let us see whether the Pope be
not alive in thee. 1. He is infallible; so art thou: 2. He is Christ; so art
thou. 3. He is master and Father of all men's faith; so art thou. 4. He is
spotless, sinlesse, perfect; so art thou. 5. He questions and condemns all
for Heretics, cursed Heretics and Heathen, that wear not his mark either in
their hands, or foreheads; so do thou. 6. He makes a nose of wax of
Scripture; sometimes for the history, sometimes for the mystery; always for
his meaning and interpretation of all; and so do^st thou. 7. He is much for the
natural light, the light which is in every man, which by improvement becomes
saving; so art thou. 8. He is for his own merits; so art thou. 9. He sends up
and down the world his Priests and Friars to convert unto his holy Catholic
Religion; so do thou to convert to thy Religion. And 10. Lastly, to name no
more; a great honor it is to kiss his to; so a great honor it must needs be
to kiss thy feet, to come under the least degree of thy holy spotless orders
and dreams. Surely, methinks by all this it appears that the Pope hat left
his holy Chair, is come from Rome to live neerthee and in thee; and yet thou
dreamest, surely this beast dwells at Rome. But to save thy self;

Repl. Thou tellest me, the beast has his chiefest room in me, and bears rule
in my body, and leads me out into wickedness, pleasures, scorning ways and
customs of the world.

Answ. Friend, that he has done this in me, I deny it not; but that his power
is broken, and that he leads me not out, as formerly, to take pleasure in
unrighteousness, this is that I glory in; and so can sing and triumph in God,
who has given me victory over the beast: And so take the beast for me: for by
thy wrangling and jangling it plainly appears, that thine own conscience tells
thee, thou art under his power; and so thou tatlest on, and say:

Repl. There was a time when I was in trouble and torment, and sleep departed
from me, and in that time was the wounding of the head of the beast in the
first of his colors, but from the sword I fled, and again am healed, and the
some head cured, yet in another a^pearance, and now I am ten times more crafty
for the Kingdom of darkness than before, Rev. 13. 1, 2, 3.

Answ. Thou wretch, how long will thou regard lying vanities, and forsake thine
own mercies? How many lies have thou told about my scrupling Tithes? And yet
thou must be perfect without all sin. All this does but add unto thy heap of
wrath: As touching the reviving of the beast in me, who was wounded, as thou
say; know, that he lies still wounded and condemned in me: and though I deny
not some remnants of him; for if I should, I should be a liar, like thy self;
yet I find to the praise of Gods rich grace, that his sickness is unto death,
his body cannot be cured; but by the Word of the Lord I shall destroy him; and
so in all his appearances he is seen; And though thou plead his cause, like a
man well feed, strongly against me, yet he and all his Angels must to their
place go, where I leave thee with him in thy dark imaginations romping up and
down to perish in his Kingdom, unless the Lord arise mightily for thy
deliverance: But thou tellest me again:

Repl. I am found in the pollutions of the World, in the spots thereof, living
in disobedience to the mind of Jesus.

Answ. I know there is none can say I have made my heart clean, I am pure from
my sin. Though I have not attained unto what I desire, yet I have, through
grace, still the victory in the end: and I am not in the flesh, but in the
spirit according to Gods account, and here I know all things shall work
together for my good; and not withstanding all thy hard speeches, yet mine own
conscience bears me witness, that with my mind I serve Jesus, not my self, or
any other man in the World; and so am not seared.

Repl, But thou tellest me, In the children of disobedience the Prince of
darkness rules, even the beast which all the World wander after.

Answ. And so say I, the whole World lies in wickedness and are obedient to
the Prince of darkness, in fulfilling the desires of the flesh and mind; and
so we are all, till endued with power from on high, and fetched out of this
grave by the voice of the Son of God.

Repl. Thou say further, When my measure I have filled up among the beast of
the field, and the Lamh have gored with my Horns apace, yet shall a band about
my neck be put, and tormented shall I be.

Answ. As for the beasts of the field I leave thee to wander up and down with
them in the field of the World, till the Angel thrust in his sickle into the
earth, and gather the Vine of the earth, and cast it into the great winepresse
of the wrath of God; yet I desire thy life rather than thy death: And still I
say, read thine own lesson over in thine own heart: I know no band about my
neck, but the Lords work and will, this keeps me from goaring the Lamb, this
makes me to own the Lamb still, and this drives me still whither I with Christ
would go, into the sweetness and fullness of God, where I can lie down and
sleep in peace.

In mine answer to another of thy questions, thou tellest me:

Repl. I am telling what the beast is, and the number of his name, whose number
is 666.

Answ. Here I find thee again shifting and scoffing; and the reason is,
because thou were discovered to be in the number of the beast: this the wisdom
of God saw afar of, and gave that answer to thy question as a sword to wound
thee, though thou spare and hide thy self: For look the answer, and compare thy
spirit with it, and see how right thou art in the number of the beast; For art
not thou one who cries out, I am a God that cannot err, yet to the man that
has understanding, though thy party be deluded, in the midst of all thine
imaginary fullness in thy self, thou art but a poor miserable man that lies in
error: this is the number of all thy wisdom, it is but fancy, darkness, it is
not wisdom, and this is the sum of all the wisdom of the beast: But thou art
telling me,

Repl. Here is wisdom among them, who are in it knit, and from on high this
wisdom is, and was before the world was, in it is no sin, guile, or spot.

Answ. Here thou art lifted up on high, to be without sin, guile, or spot, and
yet art blind, crafty, subtle, to say thou have no sin, and so thy sin
remained upon the score; I know the wisdom of God is high, deep,
incomprehensible, and was, ever is, and shall be ever the same, and in this
there is no sin, or spot: But what is all this to make good thy dream of thine
own party of knowing as they are known now, and of being as pure in this
earthly body, as the Saints are in the heavenly; Art thou as wise, and as
spotless as the wisdom of God is? Ask thine own conscience, and stiflle it
not. But go on:

Repl. In this wisdom, and understanding, thou say, learned is the Unity,
out of it the number.

Answ. Well then, out of thine own mouth art thou judged not to look upon, or
be in the Unity, but in the number; and so to make the number, or variety the
cause of dividing from the Unity, where the Unity is appearing: could thou
be looking upon the Unity, and not be telling of the number, thou would
learn to love the Unity in the midst of variety, and not cry out so much upon
the variety, or number, where there is the Unity: But to let thee alone in thy
fancy, though it condemn thy self.

Repl. Thou say, That I, who out of the light am turned, am out of the
Unity, and so in loftiness, in scoffing, pride, cov^tousnesse, fair speeches,
customs of the world.

Answ. And why may not a Quaker be guilty of all these? If but of one in form,
then of all in spirit; And so to apply to thy self this: Art thou not still
lofty, scoffing, jeering, cousening the simple, exalting thy self, idleing up
and down to live upon other men's labors, under a pretense of preaching the
Gospel, which is not the Gospel, but thine own fancy, vision, and blasphemy,
many times against the Tabernacle of God, and them that dwell in Heaven? And
are not these some of the ill; nay, worst customs of the world? And so
according to thy fine talk of the number of the beast, thou art found, even
thou in his spots, living out of the Unity, which is the nature and work of God
thou see in others: In the number of a man, which is the variety of
wickednesses in the world, these thou art found alive in, and making thy self
great too, in thine imagination at the sight of a number, or variety of forms
and failings, thou see many of the precious ones of God in bondage too much
unto:

Repl. Further thou tellest me, My head plots deceit.

Answ. I could wish mine head were a fountain of tears, that I could weep day
and night for all the deceit in the land, for all the abominations that are
done in the midst of this untoward generation: And I can desire freely the Lord
to consume and destroy all the deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness that is
nourished in them that perish, because they believe not the truth, that they
might be saved: Let them be consumed by the brightness, and coming of the
Lord: I have no plots in me against the very worst of men, but can let them
alone from being persecuted outwardly, knowing that it is judgment and misery
enough, for God to send such strong delusions, as that men should believe a lie.

Repl. But my heart is in the earth, thou say:

Answ. In the earth is not my treasure; I find all here vanity and vexation of
spirit: But in the Lord have I righteousness, and strength: and so my treasure
being above, mine heart and affections are also above.

Repl. But my compleatnesse is in darkness.

Answ. Here indeed is the compleatnesse of the world, but the Lord is arising
to discover this delusion, and in him, and his light and grace, is my
compleatnesse, fullness, and glory.

Repl. But to the light which comes from the cornerstone I act contrary, and
fall not upon it, so upon me shall it fall and grind me to powder:

Answ. Had thy building been upon the cornerstone, thou would not in
disobedience have denied him to be thy foundation, but would by this falling
upon him, have been broken all to pieces, and never thus weakly been sodered up
again to act, and work for life in thine own power and merits, and so to be a
Christ, a Savior unto thy self, making thy self whole without the blood of the
Lamb, which takes away the sins of the world: But be sure for this thy
disallowing of the stone which is elect and precious, thou shall stumble and
fall, and be ground to powder for thy disobedience, whereunto also thou art
appointed. As for me, let me alone to live and walk in the light of the Lord,
to be all I am in the grace and righteousness of Christ Jesus: In my self I am
broken indeed, my glory is gone, and I am nothing: But in Christ I am whole,
and well, and need none of mine own power and merits to save me: In him I feed
upon that which is good, upon substance, upon the best, upon fatness, and he
being my foundation without and within, I have an everlasting covenant of
grace, even the sure mercies of David: This I know because he is faithful.

Repl. But thou tellest me, I am out of the Unity in the one spirit in the
number of the beast, the number of a man, who profess the Letter declared from
the life, which life knits the Saints in one peace, and thee shall eternally
torment, who live in vanity, and deniest the way of peace.

Answ. Once more look home to thy self, that thou, even thou be not found in
this number of a beast, of a man, that art complete in thy form, in thy
observations, drawn sometimes from the Letter, and sometimes from thy fancy in
the mystery; and yet neither Letter, or meaning is any more direction to thee,
than will stand with thy dark, mind, and form: Therefore see and know that the
life, the Scripture, the Christ, the peace which thou art in, is not the life
out of the original in the one spirit, but the life, and Christ, and peace of
form, of fancy, of man; and so notwithstanding all thy pretended Unity and
holiness, thou regardest lying, vanity, and art in a weary land without water:
As for me, my endeavor is to keep the Unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace, with all lowliness, and meekness, and long-suffering, forbearing all
my brethren in love: I know the body, the spirit, the calling is one, the Lord,
the faith, the baptism is one, and that there is one God and Father of all,
who is above all, and through all, and in us all: A sense of all these
constrains me to love the Saints in all this oneness; though in their ways
and walkings without they are diverse, yet in the substances of things they are
all one, and of one: And upon this account could I freely and faithfully have
communion with them, preach and pray, and enter into fellowship with them;
though by reason of their too much indulgence to their bodily exercise, and
outward ways of walking, they are for the most part against communion with any
out of their own model and way, and so too much spirit of God, I own it as a
witness and Declaration of the Lords will and mind to man: This I profess not
out of the life and light of the spirit, knowing that that is the living word,
the kernel, the substance, which quickens all the body, and knits the Saints
altogether in that one peace of God: And this spirit declared in the Letter, is
that which keeps me from vanity, and frees me from the Law of sin, death, and
condemnation.

And now to the business of Tithes: Thou says:

Repl. In my corrupt reason I am scraping up reasons to maintain Tithes, but
show no Scripture.

Answ. Here thou art at thine old trade, prating and slighting, but showing
little reason, and yet thou go on to teach, and say:

Repl. To the Sons of Levi was Tyth paid for their service, and the relieving
the fatherless, widows, and strangers.

Ans. And why must not the Ministers of the Gospel have maintenance too for
their service? Does the Gospel afford less than the Law? But to let that
pass: Thou have spoken a piece of truth, to which I add: Thou may find
even Levi himself paid Tithes in Abraham, Heb. 7. 9. and so Tithes were paid
before the Law, and Levi were in being, as to the Letter: so that the payment
of Tithes extended further than to the litteral Tribe of Levi: And if Abraham
and Jacob paid Tithes, as it appears they did, before the Law, Genesis 14. 18,
19, 20. and Genesis 18. 22. surely they did it by a light within, and this light
was their Law; and this is thine too sometimes, though very seldom, especially
when to part with something from thy self; and therefore art thou covetous to
rob others of all their glory in inward things, to advance thy self; and of
their property too in outward things, and so thou art greedy to keep the tenth
of all. But to proceed:

Repl. Thou say, When Christ came, he put an end to that service, and to the
wages due to that service, and that he continued Tithes to the Ministers of the
Gospel by a Law, that thou bid'st me prove by Scripture command, or example.

Answ. That Christ put an end to the Levitical priesthood, that I deny not:
But that Christ put an end to the priesthood so, as to set up no teaching in
the room thereof, that I deny: But what, or who has he set up? Answer,
Ministers not of the Letter, but of the spirit. But are your Ministers such?
Answer, those whom Christ anoints and ordains are such: for the rest I plead
not: But where have you Ministers that are such, if the thing should be
granted, any command, example, or practice for Tithes? Answer, we have the
light within written in the hearts of all Nations, which teaches them to pay
Tithes, or maintenance unto their Priests at this day; this is the light of our
Nation to pay Tithe unto their Ministers: And this is of as much force still,
where it guides and rules, to teach men what to do, as it was of old before
there was a Law for either priest hood, or Tithes: But does this light teach
men to pay Tithes? Answer, It does so, it teaches men to pay Tithes* or
maintenance unto their Ministers; and where this light rules not, there the
Ministers can get no maintenance without an outward Law, especially if he come
in the anointing of the Lords spirit: A Priest of Baal indeed may get Tithe, or
maintenance without a Law; but a Minister of the Gospel can get none without a
Law: and so in pleading against Tithe, or maintenance for men anointed by
Christ to preach, thou declarest thy self a friend of Baal and his Priests: For
do thou not see how all Sects and forms in the Nation, that are separated
from the Ministry are almost all so far blinded in this matter, as to join
with unbelievers, worldlings, and coveteous wretches to keep their Tithes,
especially if the Minister be anointed and called of God? But where is your
light within for Tithes guided by the Scripture? Answer, look, Gal. 6. 6, 7.
and 1 Cor. 9. 5. to 13. And remember what Christ says, the labourer is worthy
of his hire: And he that labors, says Paul, in word and Doctrine is worthy of
double honor: nay it is a hard thing to please Christ, who has called us to
be Soldiers, when we must labor, and be entangled with the affairs of this
life for a maintenance: And who goes to warfare of his own charges? That which
Ministers have I could desire might be with less trouble and care: However
take all these Scriptures, and see whether there be no maintenance or Tithe due
to Gospell-Ministers.

But Christ said, freely ye have received, freely give: Answer, Christ in that
teaches us to do the Lords work willingly, not by constraint, or for filthy
lucre; but of a ready mind, to be as free to communicate and distribute the
heavenly Treasure, as he is to bestow it on us, not aiming at our selves and
gain, but at the advancement of his Kingdom and Gospel in the hearts of men:
And this the Ministers of Christ are desirous to do through his grace. But into
whatsoever house ye enter, eat such things as are set before you, Mat. 10. and
Luke 10. Answer, And so we will, when we are called to journey up and down the
world as the Disciples were to do; but being ordained over a particular place,
we are to feed the people with the word, over which the holy Ghost has made us
Overseers, and to take such things as are consecrated to us.

But Christ bid the Apostles take no Tithes: Answer, And strange it is he
should, seeing they were to go up and down from City to City, and place to
place: Surely, if they had taken Tithes of all, they would have been very rich:
And besides, the world being strangers to all knowledge and profession of
Christ, this would have hindered the advance of the Gospel: Yet Paul told the
Corinthians, that they might be chargeable to them, as other Apostles of
Christ: And yet thou go on, to say:

Repl. O shame of all Parish hirelings, who have a Law to force maintenance
from an whole Parish, and I who call my self a Minister of the Gospel, am not
content with the Gospel wages, and thou bid'st me prove, if ever Minister of
the Gospel pleaded for Leviticall wages.

Answ. No friend, this I go not about to prove; but maintenance is the thing I
prove, and if thou call that Leviticall, thou may, thy tongue is thine own:
Neither would I plead for any thing, if all did covet to walk according to the
light within and without, which teaches that the labourer is worthy of his
hire.

Repl. But Christ blotted out the handwriting of Ordinances, Heb. 7. 10. Col.
2. 20. And so I that am subject to these things am in the world and covetous
practices.

Answ. But see whether thou thy self be not rather in the coveteous practices
of the most wicked of the world, in seeking to keep thy Tithes from the
labourer; who, Christ says, is worthy of his hire: mark that word hire; It may
be, it may open thine eyes, though hirelings in thy account I know the Lord
abhorres, who labor for themselves, not the Lord: Yet take heed how thou
keep the hire from the true labourer, and that against all light and Law,
and this present Scripture, in that place, Heb. 7. 10. The Law of the
Priesthood is changed; And so say I, and Col. 2. 20. We must not be subject to
ceremonial ordinances, as touch not, taste not, handle not, seeing what was
ceremonial God has blotted out, and nailed to the Cross of Christ; and so we
are not to place Religion and holiness and worship in outward things, and
places and Ceremonies, but may be free to that which the Law made outwardly
unclean, as touch not, taste not: And yet in this freedom we are not to be
without Law to God.

Repl. But still thou go on to tell me, I am a Thief, and talkest of the
wages of the first Priesthood, which God did not allot to them, who were to do
the work of the everlasting Priesthood.

Answ. Yet I tell thee, I am no Thief, but one come in by the door, by the Son
of God, to preach his Gospel, according to the measure of the gift of Christ;
And no more wages do I receive than the Gospel allows me in, 1 Cor. 9. 13,
14. And he is a Thief that keeps back the hire of the labourer: and he is a
murderer, that envies and hates his brother: Look to thy self:

Repl. But thou say, I am telling of the Lords giving a man Tithes, as a
portion of the earth, to nourish himself and family:

Answ. And why may not the Lord do this? And is not the earth the Lords and the
fullness thereof? And does he not give it unto whom he pleases? Is not Christ
the Heir of all things? And will thou murmr, and tell the Heir, he has done
wisely in giving away his Tithes from thee? Thou worm, know that Christ is the
wise disposer of all things, and does all exceeding well.

Repl. But thou say, I am not sent of the Lord, I am one of those that teach
things I ought not, for filthy lucres sake.

Answ. Whether thou own me or no, is not much regarded of me, seeing thou
ownest not the Lord himself: That I teach things I ought not, as thou and
others do, is false: what I preach is the Gospel of grace: But thou set up
another Gospel, and so art accursed, though thou would fain he accounted an
Angel. That I teach for gain is but thy simple prate: I am contented with what
I have, Tithes, or no Tithes, if the Lord please: God is my wages, and he pays
me well. Further thou say:

Repl. I plead for Tithes, sometimes as a gift from the Magistrate, sometimes
as a gift from the Lord; and so thou cursest me from running greedily after the
error of Balaam for gifts and rewards, and my God thou deniest, who teaches
me to plead for gifts.

Answ. God and the Magistrate are one in work; that which the Lord gives, he
leaves to the Magistrate to give under him; and that which the Magistrate
disposes of, confirms, maintains, and gives in outward things, that is of the
Lord, or according to the wisdom and providing of God, who has the heart of
the Magistrate in his hand, and turns it which way he pleases; so that the
Magistrate, as a figure of God, is to imitate God in Justice and
righteousness, to look to the Lord, and observe his carriage, and heed his
mind and will, and to carry himself as the Lord does toward men, in wisdom,
justice and righteousness, seeking to maintain peace, liberty, freedom,
property in this unruly world: and so Tithes being a peculiar property, which
the wisdom of God has directed the Magistrate to dispose of, partly to the
Ministers, partly to others; when the Magistrate does this, God does it, which
the envious one cannot see, but cries out blasphemy: And no wonder, though ye
deny the lawfulness of this Act of the Magistrate, who is but the Lords
Steward, seeing ye deny the Master of the house, and would be wiser than
Christ, or man, to have all at your disposing. As for gifts, or rewards out of
the will of God, I desire them not: I know he is my shepherd, I shall not
want; and though thou pray for nothing from him, it seems as though thou
stoodst in no need of his bread, gifts, and providence, yet be sure if God
should withdraw his gifts and favors never so little, thy subsistence, beauty,
strength, life, body and spirit too, would soon mourn, languish, and wither
away for want of the Lords mercies.

Repl. But Christ, thou say, put an end unto Tithes, and is not changeable.

Answ. If Christ put an end unto Tithes more than to any other outward
property, then Tithes must be a peculiar figure of something which was to come;
and yet in all thy wisdom thou could not tell what Tithes was a figure of;
when I put this to thee, thou wast silent, and thy companion with thee, yet
afterward thy friend opened his mouth, and said, that Tithes was a figure of
spiritual good things to be given out by Christ, and when I demanded a
Scripture to maintain that, he pawsed a little, and said, he was Christ, and
what he said was Scripture: Lo, what your wretched blindness and envy has
brought you unto: but to let that alone; Let me demand of thee to show a
Scripture, which has put an end unto Tithes in the Letter: Nay, that has
either forbidden, or commanded any property to all, to be enjoyed, or not
enjoyed of a Christian in outward things: It speaks indeed of forsaking Houses,
Lands, and the like for Christ; of being as the Lillies and the Sparrows: And
we read, Act. 2. 44, 45. of a Community of possessions and goods among the
Saints, which thy companion denied, and said, he was for his property; and why
not another as well as he? Further, the Apostle speaks of using the world, as
if we used it not; so that the Gospel is rather against all property, than
commands any at all: And yet the Saints of God surely may have possessions in
the world; but the Gospel no where commands, or forbids this, or that in
outward things; only we ought to sit loose to the world, to all things as well
as some, and in what state we are in, therewith to be content: And when you are
in this frame, your hearts will be levelled more than they are to all outward
things, and you will plainly see, that God has forbidden rent, as much as he has
forbidden Tithes: And if you have any command for your rent, or any other
property, show it, and I will show you the same command is as much for Tithes;
and if God has put an end to Tithes, he has put the same end to rent, and
has taught us all in the midst of all outward things to be as having nothing,
and yet possessing all things. But thou say:

Repl. God gave not Tithes to his Disciples and Apostles, who labored
painfully in the Word and Doctrine, and so surely he has given it to swarm of
locusts, who live in ungodliness.

Answ. The same say I, God gives nothing to the wicked as a blessing, but as a
curse to them: and yet he has given Tithes to maintain the Ministers of his in
this Nation, as much as he gave his Disciples and Apostles any possessions in
the world; all being at the disposing of the Son, the Heir, to give to whom he
pleases. Further thou say:

Repl. A Minister must be Hospitable; But here thou fallest fowl upon the
charity of the Priests of England, who Judas-like must have their bags filled
and their barnes, with that which others have painfully labored for.

Answ. But what if the Layman, as they are called, take Tithes, must he be a
Judas, a Thief, an Hireling too, because he takes his property of Tithes where
it is, and from others, who have labored to till the ground for him? But yet
this man, who does nothing for his Tithes, and yet takes it, as due by Law, is
not cried out upon usually; only the Minister is reviled for Tithes, or
maintenance, though he labor and take pains diligently in the Office, and
place he is called unto. But why do thou speak of Judas? Did Judas take
Tithes? And fill his bag with Tithes, that Ministers are like Judas in their
Tithes? By this thou will unawares give us an argument for Tithes: But the
Judas and his bag take unto thy self, who wanderest up and down to sell thy
Master for a piece of bread, and betrayest his Gospel, truth and blood into the
hands of sinners, to get thy self a name and fame in the world: And therefore
thou biddest all others stand by, I am holier and wiser than thou, thou art a
Traitor, a Judas, a Thief, and sinner: But I have no sin, I am a Prophet,
Apostle, Minister of the Gospel; Nay, I am Christ, the Lord, who am come to
judge the world: And so with thy light wanton Spirit, which runs a whoring
after thy flesh and self, thou allurest with swelling words of vanity those who
were escaped from them who live in error, again to come and live in error:
And so taking no notice of thine own pride, doing all to be seen of men, and
praised of men, and accounted a Christ and God, though a dark enemy to God and
Christ, I say, taking no notice of thine own pride, thou criest out against
others for cuffs, gaudinesse, rings-hoods, vails, which Christ forbad, thou
say, 1 Timothy 2. 9. And friend, where thou see these things used without
modesty, shamefacednesse and sobriety, which becomes women professing
godliness, there thou may vaunt, and cry out aloud in thy boasting spirit,
that thou art not like other women, and as the Priest of England are in outward
pride, though inwardly thou exceedest them all: But to end this prattle of
Judas and women, thou say, a Minister must be Hospitable: but how, and with
what thou know not, give he must; but wherewith to give he must not have:
All Tithes, maintenance, set wages, gifts, that is Antichristian: All rewards,
either from God, or men, that is Balaam-like, as thy wisdom calls it, and yet
the man must be Hospitable: But let him preach, and trust God for maintenance:
And so say I too; Let Ministers preach the Gospel, be instant in season and
out of season, beseech men to be reconciled to God, not to this, or that form,
custom, tradition, or outward society, but only in the will of God unto God,
and the truth of God, and the people of God in all fellowships scattered up and
down the world: Let Ministers do their duty, and trust God for their
maintenance, who in the midst of all the peoples murmurings against this
grievous burden of Tithes, does still make provision for his Ministers in the
Nation: God, who takes care for Oxen, takes care for those who tread out the
Corn, who break the shell, and dispense out the word aright unto the people,
though the envious hard-hearted world every where repine and murmr at this
provision, which the Lord makes.

Repl. But this, thou say, both is a taking of that which another has
painfully labored for.

Answ. And yet this by wise men is looked upon as no oppression, Tithes being a
peculiar property, that no man can call his own, but he to whom the providence
of God, and the wisdom of the Nation has given them; and though it be out of
another labors, yet all Rent, Customs, Taxes, Use, are the same, pays out
of other men's ventures, labors, pains, and yet the taking of them looked upon
as no such grievous oppression and sin, as the taking of Tithes, though with
much moderation by a Minister: But thou say,

Repl. Let the prisons in England judge of the Priests Hospitality, who cast
the Saints into prison, some prisons have five, some ten, twenty, twenty four
of the Children of God in them.

Answ. This I own not, the putting Saints in prison, especially if it be for
conscience toward God: those who are guilty of this, have a sad account to
make: But yet it is not the suffering, but the cause, that makes the martyr: A
man may suffer much, endure much hardship, grief, bonds; yea, and death too,
and yet not suffer as a Christian with Christ, nor for his sake: and if any
suffer thus, what glory is it? For a man may suffer as a Murderer, as a Thief,
as an evil doer, as a busy body: and that many thus suffer, it is apparent:
And so it behooves you to be well advised for what ye suffer, before ye glory
too much of your sufferings as Saints. But thou come to tell me, to whom my
Hospitality reaches.

Repl. First to mine own back and belly, who live in excess, and scorn such as
do not; then to feast Drunkards, Ranters, and profane persons, and to spend
the time in laughter, mirth, folly, vanity, etc.

Answ. All this is but the devise and vision of a Quakers spirit; as for fine
clothes, and feasts, and carnal merriments, I have seen vanity and madness
in them, and can be as well content without them as the strictest Christian:
Neither has any company, or people at any feast, or meeting been so welcome to
me as the Son of God: As for Ranters and Atheists, and men that under a conceit
of being above ordinances, Ministers, and all worship of God, have lost all
Religion and appearances of grace, take all those to thy self; for these
usually are the people that go to the making up of thy foolish building.
Further thou tellest me:

Repl. My moderation, freedom, and enlargement in matters of Tithes will not
color over my deceit.

Answ. Yet all thy railing, lying, and envy shall not make me forget my
moderation and freedom in this matter, or make me guilty of that deceit, pride,
fullness, excess, vanity, thou layest unto my charge: Neither shall all thy
fury against the Priesthood provoke me to plead for any of the carnal false
Priesthood, who preach for lucre, gifts and rewards, or the like. All that I
aim at in pleading for the Ministry is this, to make this out in thy
conscience, and I know it is evident there already, that God has still a
precious seed in the Ministry: that in our age, and ages before, there have
been, and still are some in the Ministry, that have been, and are precious
lights unto the Saints of God; men that have stood up boldly against the
idolatries, superstitions, inventions, and sins of the Nation in their time,
according unto their measure of grace: These are men whose weaknesses the Lord
covers, and whose spirits he still keeps up to commend the truth to every man's
conscience in the sight of God: These I have seen a strong Angel protecting
and providing for; and all the Ministry fare the better for their sakes: These
are men whom the Father pleads for: And though I find too much folly and
selfishnes in the best of us all; yet look upon any form, or way in the Nation,
and there you may find the same, and see we have all cause to put on patience,
meekness, brotherly kindness, charity, to be subject one to another in love,
and to walk humbly and meekly with our God.

And though ye are a people that are risen up above all and pretend to a light
that is infallible in every particular, and to an estate free from all remnants
of sin, yet I know, and am persuaded by the Lord, that both the light within,
and the light of Scripture makes it out plain to your conscience, that in many
things ye are dark, ignorant, doubtful, selfish, high-minded, carnal, and so
walk as other men: And though I know you will say, the new man sins not, and ye
are dead indeed unto sin, and the blood of Christ, and grace of Christ have
purged away all our unrighteousness, and we are as God is, and as Christ is in
this present world: All these and the like I know are high expressions of the
Saints freedom, dignity, and honor, yet they never make use of these and the
like Scriptures to any other end, or purpose, than to set forth what they were
in Gods account, grace, and favorable acceptance; and to comfort and
encourage one another in the midst of all their weaknesses and infirmities with
the new birth, the new man, the work of God upon the heart within, in which is
all the fullness, and happiness, and compleatnesse of a Christian in this
world: This is the use they made of such Scriptures to highten the grace of
God; and to further their glorying and consolations in the Lord: And yet in
their flesh, they saw no good thing, and in themselves they were conscious of
errors and sins enough to be humbled for, whilst in this body of clay: as we
see in Job, David, Paul, and others of the precious ones of God. And so to
speak a word to thee: Remember from whence thou art fallen; thou art fallen
from thy light within; thou have lost thy tenderness to the Saints of God,
because thy light within is turned into utter darkness: and now in the deep
darkness thou art high in thine own imaginations: Nay, thou art, I am, and
there is none besides thee; and so thou ragest and art furious against every one
that sees thy nakedness and blasphemy. Why, poor vile worm, where art thou?
and what art thou? Thou art like the Egyptians flesh, and not spirit; thou art
a man, and the son of man that shall die, a man full of infirmities and sins,
like all others of the sons of men; Nay, a man of sin in all thy proud
exaltings of thy self; a liar, a false Prophet thou art, who criest out, I am
Christ, the son of the most high; lo here, lo here: In all this have thou
grieved the Spirit of God, sinned away the promise of the Father, made use of
the light within to wrest the Scriptures to thine own destruction: which light
teaches thee to fear the Lord always for thy good, to glory and triumph in
him, as in thy life and joy: This light reproves thy drunken spirit, thy wanton
heart, that is so far in love with thy proud flesh, that thou must needs be
Christ and God: This reproves thy scoffing jeering nature, thy seeking to
destroy the weak ones for whom Christ died: This light shines in thy darnesse,
but thou comprehendest it not: and this tells thee to thy face, thou art
ignorant, brutish, foolish, and know little of the mysteries of God and
Christ, and what thou know does but puff thee up, and make thee forget thy
Maker; and yet loath thou art to be seen and made manifest to thy deluded
party; and therefore thou hate the light of Christ and Gospel of grace, and
unwilling thou art to come to the light, lest thy deeds should be discovered:
and though thou talk of being redeemed from the earth, yet thou know not
the earth wherein thou dwell; thou can not see the earth in thine heart
set, nor how thou thy self art the earth wherein thou live: And here thou art
rich, and wise, and honorable in this earth of flesh and blood, and know
not that this earth must pass away, and all the works that are therein be
burnt up and consumed, because that in it dwells no good thing: Therefore thou
proud wretch that art lifted up to heaven, come down from thy Throne, and see
thy shame, see where thou live, even where Satan's seat is, in that which is
called the the old man, the Serpent, Satan, the accuser: This is thy nature,
thy seat, and habitation where thou dwell: And up and down the World thou
go like thy Father to devour the noble seed of God, that thou alone may
be the seed, the King, the God and all: Therefore be wise for thy self, look
home, turn thine eyes inward; be not always like the fool abroad: Thou have a
great work yet to do; Nay, all thy work yet to begin, which is to deny thy
self: Thou have almost all the weaknesses, blemishes, errors, sins of all the
forms abroad centred in thy self, and therefore lay the Ax to the root of the
Tree, hew down thy self, or rather let the Lord do it for thee; he is wiser and
stronger than thy self, he will search, and prove, and try what wickedness there
is in thee, and lead thee in the way everlasting: Know in all this, I am not
thine enemy; mine aim is at the destruction of Antichrist, and the man of sin
in thee; and fain I would see thee what thou pretendest to be, holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners according to some measure of
Christ, learning to see the Father in the face of Jesus Christ, and then thou will soon fall down at his feet, and say, I am a man, a poor drop of the
bucket, one who cannot in all my search find out the Almighty in his
perfection; he is high, and deep, and incomprehensible, but I am vanity, a
weak, poor, shallow thing, and so I cannot but in admiration of the Lord,
wisdom, and knowledge say, How unsearchable are his judgments and his ways
past finding out: Who has known the mind of the Lord, or been his
Counselor? For of him, and through him, and to him are all things; to whom be
glory for ever and ever.

MAGNUS BYNE.

A REPLY TO LAWSONS ANSWER To 28. Questions.
Wherein his darkness and bitterness are still manisted, by the same Author
MAGNUS BYNE.
Quest. 1. WHence the name arose? and whether you own any such thing as the
trembling and quaking of the body and flesh, which has befallen some at your
meetings? and whether that may not be a delusion?

Ans. The name arose, and is cast upon us by Ismaels brood, a generation of
scorners.

Repl. Ismaels brood are scorners indeed, and this Spirit in thee calls me
Priest, Hireling, etc. and so thou art hereby witnessed to be of that
generation of scorners, but wisdom is justified of her Children.

Answ. Further, the thing quaking we own, and the power of it, as the Saints of
God have always done.

Repl. And why not then the name? seeing names are but shadows of things
themselves, and if the thing be justified by wisdom, the name which is a
manifestation of the thing must needs likewise be justified: but me thinks I
see your guiltiness and knowledge of the thing to be a delusion, that you are
so offended at the name: as for the trembling and quaking which the Scriptures
intimate.

1. It arises from an emptiness of God, a state of division and separation
from his presence in love and light: and so it belongs unto Devils and wicked
men, James 2. 19. the Devils believe and tremple, Isa. 33. 14. the sinners in
Sion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the Hypocrite; and again, the
wicked man shall not feel quietness in his belly, in the fullness of his
sufficiency he shall be in straits, God shall cast the fury of his wrath upon
him; and so they are like the troubled Sea, peacelesse, restless, and where
this fear is there is, torment, Hell, because a sense of wrathfulnesse and
anger began; no taste of perfect love which casts out fear, this trembling is
a sad judgment of God, and a certain forerunner of weeping and gnashing of
teeth for ever: see it threatened, Deuteronomy. 18. 64, 65, 66, 67. the Lord shall give
thee a trembling heart, and thy life shall hang in doubt, and thou shall fear
day and night, at evening would God it were morning, and at morning would God
it were evening, for the fear of thine heart wherewith thou shall fear, and see
the world filled with this fear, Psalm. 14. 5. and 53. 5. there were they in
great fear where no fear was, and the issue of such is everlasting woe, Rev.
21. 8. the fearful and unbelieving shall be cast into the lake of fire.

2. There is a trembling at the coming and appearing of God, in the shining
brightness and terrors of the Law to us: so Israel trembled, feared, and
stood afar off at the giving of the Law, Exodus 20. 18, 19, 20, 21. thus the Law
revealed in the conscience works fear at first, arising out of a spirit of
bondage, with all that are born of the bondwoman Agar, or after the flesh, as
soon as they come to Mount Sinai are possessed with, Romans 8. 15. Gal. 4. 23.
24, 25. and so Paul, when the Law came with power was stricken with death, Romans
7. 9, 10. and at the coming of Christ to declare his sin, he is found trembling,
Act. 9. 6. this trembling of Paul, was a trembling of the immer man, the old
man, which Christ was now come to destroy; this old man, was he in Paul, who
kept Christ under, who persecuted Jesus; this old man, which was Paul's own
will, reason, mind, lust, and made him injurious, blasphemous, and a
persecuter of Christ, this was he whom Christ came to break to pieces, and upon
him falls the trembling; and so Paul's trembling was his striking with inward
horror at the kindling of the Law in him, and the shining of the Majesty
thereof upon him, this made him cry out, who art thou Lord? What will thou have
me to do: as for the flesh and outward body of Paul, that was acted by his
mind and inner man: and therefore Christ did not come so much to make this
tremble, as the root whence this did spring, the fleshly mind, the body of
sin, this must now tremble and come under the Cross: so that this trembling of
Paul, and his being stricken to the ground, and his falling to the earth, can
be no sufficient ground to justify the fleshly trembling and quaking of these
men: For,

1. As Paul was stricken with trembling, so with bliudnesse: but those who have
this trembling, have not likewise the blindness.

2. Paul was sensible, both of trembling and blindness; these are only
sensible of quaking not of blindness.

3. Paul was stricken to the earth, and all that were with him, Act. 26. 14.
but here is one quakes, and the rest are free, and some have no experience of
the thing at all.

4. When Paul trembled, the people that were with him are said to hear a voice,
and to see a light; but at your tremblings there is no such light, or voice.

Lastly, Paul's trembling, let in so much of Christ, that ever afterward, he
was full of love, meekness, patience, moderation toward all, as one sensible
what man was, and this trembling brought such a piercing sight along with it,
that Paul ever afterward saw a body of corruption, a fleshly part in him,
fighting and carrying him forth many times to the Law of sin: but these men's
trembling lets in no such light nor life: but rather madness, fury, murmuring,
condemning all to Hell that come not under the power of their form; as likewise
pride, conceit, and a foolish imagining, a freedom from all remnants of sin and
darkness, a state of fullness and perfection, in the midst of all their
palpable follies and abominations: There surely, Paul's trembling at the
beginning of his conversion, agreeing with these men's trembling in no
circumstance, can be no Warrant, or witness for their fleshly trembling; I
call it a fleshly trembling, because it is a trembling of the outward flesh,
when the inward remains in its full force and power, and rather stronger then
weaker after the trembling is passed over.

3. And lastly, the Scriptures mention a trembling, or fear, which flows from
a sense and taste of what God is, and what we are; and this is a trembling that
is always joined with faith, and love, and joy: and this trembling and fear
belongs unto the adoption, or the true seed of the freewoman; the Sons and
Heir of God; they seeing as Job speaks, what an infinite incomprehensible being
the Lord is, and that he is love it self, and life and power, and goodness it
self unto all his Saints; having a true touch of this upon their spirits, and
likewise of their own low, weak, poor, empty condition in themselves, that all
they have, they have it in the Lord, and from the Lords rich grace and love,
without the least merit of theirs; hence they learn to abhor themselves, and
to tremble before the Lords Majesty; and yet upon another consideration, to
wit, of being taken into Union and fellowship with him, through his son and
grace, they can go unto him in faith, as unto their exceeding joy; this is to
rejoice with trembling, to work out our own salvation with fear and trembling,
to be afraid of God, because of his power and greatness, and so to stand in
awe, and sin not; and yet likewise to rejoice in the Lord and in his grace, to
be afraid of God, because of our own pronenesse unto sin, and yet to go unto
him as to a father with great affection, delight and joy; as those who are kept
by him from the power of sin and evil: This is a trembling which is not for a
fit, and time only, but kept alive in the Soul, during our abode in this house
of clay: whether yours be such a trembling as this, let your own light be
judge; this is the trembling that Job, and David, and the holy men of God
witnessed of old, and do still witness to this very day: but away with thy
fleshly, bodily, litteral trembling, and quivering; this is rather like
Belshazzars trembling, or like a fit of Mahomet, when the falling evil fell
upon him, which he feigned to be the holy Ghost, or like a man possessed with
the Devil; than like the trembling of the Saints of old: I know when God arises
to save a Soul from death, he shakes the earth and the heavens that men have
made, but this is inward, spiritual, and invisible to the bodily eye, like that
of Job, when he said, he has broken me asunder, he has taken me by the neck,
and shaken me to pieces, and set me up for his mark, he cleaves my reins
asunder, he pours out my gall upon the ground, he breaks me with breach
upon breach: What was all this literal, outward, carnal? Surely no, it was
rather the breaking in pieces of all Jobs somethingnesse, and the grinding of
him in spirit to nothing before the Lord; and thus it is in measure with all
his dearest Saints: This is a trembling I own, and have not a word against, and
when ye can witness this your other trembling, will no more be mentioned, or
gloried in at all.

Quest. 2. Whether or no God have not a precious people found in various forms
and ways of worship, where they are waiting on him according to their light,
and several seize?

Answ. The way of God is one, his worship one, his light one, and all that are
in this light are in the one way, one worship, according to their measure, and
by this light are all forms, ways, worships and seize, which vary from
it condemned.

Repl. Where the word is not made flesh to dwell among us, there men, and the
way, form, and worship that men are in, though outwardly never so decked and
adorned in show, is but like an house forsaken, and left to strangers, or like
a poor empty cottage left alone, where nothing inhabits but the Owl, and the
Satyr, and creeping things, but where the word dwells in us, and with us, and
the Lord comes down to sit at Table, and to keep us company, there the men, and
the way, form, and worship they are under; though outwardly never so
contemptible, are an house filled with glory, and kept by the Lord for his
friends, his mother, sister, brother, and this is an house I desire to dwell in
all the days of my life, to behold the fair beauty of the Lord: This house is
one in the spirit, and the way to it one, and the worship in it one, as being
built by the Lord only for his Saints, and set up by his Spirit, that where he
is they may be also: Yet in this house are many mansions, higher and lower
rooms, and Tables spread with meat for Children, fathers, young men: God in
every corner of his house condescending to visit all his family, and to feed
them with food, suitable to that measure they are under: Friend, the whole
creation is an house made for the great King to dwell in, and all the creatures
in this great variety, according to their several capacities have the King
dwelling in them, and with them; even so the Church of God which is a new
Creation, is a Tabernacle pitched by the Lord for himself, and every Member of
this new building in the midst of this great variety of them, has the presence
of the Lord in him, and with him, according to his capacity to receive: Now the
way hither is one, and the light one, and the worship one, as all are brought
hither by regeneration, and have the Lord to be their light, to teach them all
that worship, which is one in spirit and truth: But how then comes the variety
and diversity? I ananswer, it flows from the several workings, operations, and
manifestations of the same Lord; so that in the original things are one, but in
their comings sorth to us, and in us, they are multiplied: Grace in the Soul is
one, one with what it is in Christ, but in the coming of it forth in us is
various, and clothed with diverse names, as faith, hope, love, meekness,
patience, etc. even so light in the Souls of men is one, but in the breaking of
it forth its manifold, and so there is the manifold wisdom of God, and hence
the actings and walkings of the Saints are in a variety, as they are more or
less in a manifestation of the Original, and yet this variety leads up into
the Unity, and teaches all to walk, and live, and follow Christ in the
regeneration: This is all the variety I plead for, which flows from the
various manifestation of the same Christ, and leads up into him as into its
root and Center.

But thou say I plead for the Leopards spots, in pleading for several forms
and ways of worship: Answ. I plead for no form, tradition, or invention of
men, new, or old, neither would I have Christians make any form a wall of
separation to divide between them and others, that are under any manifestation
of grace and love; all that I say, is, there are diversities of gifts,
administrations, and operations, but the same spirit, Lord and God who works
all in all, and is all in all to band and free, and let every one that differs
from another, endeavor to be fully persuaded that it is light, not darkness,
the Lord not the flesh that makes the difference, though the difference be
still in fleshly, or outward things; and so having nothing, but what we have
received, let every one think soberly of himself, according as God has given to
every one a measure, and what men observe, let them do it as unto the Lord, not
man, in honor preferring one another, waiting with patience, and they shall
see all the Towers that men have made, fall to the ground, and broken in pieces
by the stone cut out of the mountain.

Quest. 3. Whether we ought to give Tribute, Custom, Tithes, Rent to those who
have an interest in them by the Laws of the Land where we live, seeing Christ
said, render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, Matthew. 22.

Answ. Yea, let man have the things that are his, and God have the things that
are his, this said Christ, and so say we; and Paul says, render unto all their
dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom is due, Romans 13. 7.
and this say we.

Repl. If thine heart and thy tongue herein agree it is well, thou have
witnessed a good confession; but do thou witness this indeed? Art thou
willing to give Tribute, Custom, Rent to whom it is due? Art thou as Christ was,
and the Apostles were subject to the Magistrates, that are for conscience sake?
Where then is thine honor, where is thy fear to the powers, that be ordained
of God? For there is no power but of God: but seeing thou have yielded to a
duty, i will leave thee in the performance to stand, or fall to thine own Master.

Answ. Further, here thou would have a Cloak for thy Tithe in too Parishes,
which thou have no due unto, he that has due unto nine sheaves, has due unto
the tenth.

Repl. To this I say, I, and all I have are not so much mine own as Gods; they
are more his due than mine, and when he calls for any thing, I am willing to
let it go, and when he gives me any thing, I am willing to make use of it, and
to him I must give account for all, not to thee, as for a Cloak to maintain my
Tithes, I desire no other then the will of God, and what the Scripture allows,
and the Law commands: Thou say, he who has due unto nine sheaves, has due
unto the tenth: Fie friend, what a lying, and to strengthen Robbery and
oppression too; men are prone enough to call another due their own, and to
destroy property, which thou seek by thy lying and murmuring to maintain.

And further, thou say Christ is come, who put an end to that Priesthood,
who was to have the tenth in Israel for their maintenance, and the fatherless
vviddows and strangers, with the same they were to maintain.

Repl. That Christ came to put an end to the first Priesthood, and their
carnal Ordinances I deny not: but about the several Ordinances of Tithes of
old, I see thou art grossly ignorant: Therefore there was a tenth for the poor
in Israel, and a tenth for the Priest and Levite too; and so observe, and thou
shall find.

1. That after a man had received the fruits of the earth, he was to separate
out of it the first fruits: these were to be offered unto the Lord, who gave
them unto the Priest, Numb. 18. 12. Deuteronomy. 26. 2, 3.

2. He was to separate a tenth of the remainder, in the first and second year,
and this was to be given unto the Levites, Numb. 18. 21, 24. this the Hebrews
called the first Tithe.

3. After this he was to separate out of the residue one in ten, and this was
for the owners themselves, and they were to carry it up to Jerusalem, and eat
it there, mentioned Deuteronomy. 14. 23. and 12. 18, 19. this was called the second
Tithe, and was to be in the first and second year.

4. In the third year there was, after the first Tithe, which was for the
Levite, not a second Tithe on that year for the owners, but instead thereof a
second Tyth for the poor, and stranger, and fatherless, Deuteronomy. 14. 28. 29. and
26. 12. Here you see the owners were to separate a first fruit, and a tenth for
the Levite and Priest, and a tenth to make merry with among themselves, in
token of thankfulness and rejoicing before the Lord, and every third year a
tenth for the fatherless, widows, and strangers; and whereas thou say,
that the Priest was to maintain the poor, and fatherless, and stranger out of
his tenth; here thou have spoken more than thou art able to prove: in saying
the Priest was to maintain the poor, and that he was to do it out of his tenths
given to him; prove thou this by Scripture, or confess thy darkness; and yet
I deny not, but the Ministers as well as the people, both under the Law and
Gospel ought to look to the poor, and to separate a part of their estates for
the stranger and widow; and al^ ^^at variety of tenths, offerings, and first
fruits under the Law, were written for our instruction, and should teach us all
to be liberal, and generous minded toward the furtherance of the Lords
service, and the maintenance of people in necessity.

Further, Christ is come thou say, who put an end to the first Priesthood
and their wages.

This I deny not, that Priesthood being dead has no need of wages, and yet
thou can not prove that Tithes were ceremonial, figurative, and abolished the
coming of any substance which they did represent: as for that place, Heb. 7.
12. it proves only the change of the Priesthood, and the ceremonial Law; that
which is moral is still in force, whereof this is one, that we ought to honor
the Lord with our substance, and with the first fruits of all our increase,
Prove. 3. 9. and he that in readiness does not consecrate a first fruits,
Tithe, or part of his increase to the Lords service, as a token of willingness
to consecrate all, as well as a part, if the Lord require it of him; this man
has robbed God in Tithes and offerings, as 't is said of old, Mal. 3. 8. he has
preferred his Mammon before his God, and is guilty of the sin of Ananias, in
keeping back part of the price; and thou, who by way of scorn call the
Ministers of the Gospel Priests, that so thou might have a Cloak to deny
their maintenance, because 't is called Tithes; know, that you are a robber of
God, and thou deniest his light written in all Nations, which teaches them to
pay Tithes, or maintenance unto their Priests, or Ministers, and thou seek
to weaken the hands of the Ministers here, that thou might ride in triumph
upon thy dark form; and so thou seek to make void the Law of God and man, in
keeping those who preach the Gospel, from maintenance for their attendance upon
the Gospel, contrary to the ordination of God, 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. and that power
which all teachers may make use of verse. 12. and the unreasonablenesse of the
thing in itself, verse. 11. and 2 Timothy 2. 4.

But our maintenance ought to come freely, not by way of Tithes, not exacted.
Answer, 'This is the hardness of men's hearts, that it does not freely come,
where 't is most deserved, and so God in wisdom has required it by an outward
Law, in the absence of the inward Law, which men willingly break, out of love
unto the world: and whether the maintenance be by Tithes, or otherwise, 't is
all one; it ought to come from the people, and they owe it as a tribute unto
God, and so where is thy paying tribute and custom to whom 't is due.

Further, thou say, Christ out of his fullness ministers out the heavenly
treas^^^ ^o the necessities of his, Joh. 1. 16. as the first Priesthood
ministered out the earthly treasure to the necessities of the fatherless,
widows, and strangers.

Repl. That Christ gives out of his fullness all grace to his, to relieve them
in all their inward wants, this I acknowledge with thanksgiving: but here thou
seek a Cloak to cover thy nakedness in robbing others of Tithes, and the
more thou seek to cover and hide thy self, the more thy nakedness still
appears; therefore be sober, and see if thou can see thy darkness which may
be felt, thou say the first Priesthood ministered out the earthly treasure
to the necessities of the fatherless, widows, and strangers; here thou make
it the office and work of the Priest to distribute out the Tithes, which thou
call earthly treasure: indeed I read that the Priests lips should preserve
knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth, for he is the messenger of
the Lord of Hosts: and so the Priest was anointed to teach the people, to open
and expound that Doctrine he had received from the Lord; and to offer sacrifice
for the people, to bless and pray for the people, the Priest and Levite were
to attend upon all the Tabernacle and Temple worship; but that it was their
business to distribute out the Tithes unto the poor, this I never read of:
neither have thou any shadow of Scripture for it, neither is there any shadow
of sense, or light in it, that they should leave the service of God to serve
Tables: but I see thy drift, fain thou would make Tithes, the earthly
treasure a figure of Christ and his grace the heavenly treasure, but having
neither Scripture nor reason for what thou say, therefore thou art driven to
say, thou art infallible, thou art Christ, and what thou speak is Scripture,
and so must be believed, see how thine eye is out, and so blind thou art, that
thou can see nothing in all the land of Canaan, nothing in the offerings,
sacrifices, and observations of the Law, to hold forth Christ, and the heavenly
treasure by him, but only the earthly treasure of Tithes, and so the envious
one has filled thine envious mind and eye with strong infatuations.

Further, thou say, I am Antichrist, who uphold that which Christ put an end
unto: Reply, this is no news for Antichrist to call another Antichrist, if they
have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call
them of his household: that Christ put an end to Tithes in his time thou find
to the contrary; for he tells the Scribes and Pharisees that these things ye
ought to have done: Nay, that the morality ceased, and a grieving part of our
substance, according to Gods ordination unto those that attend upon the
preaching of the Gospel, this thou find to the contrary too, 1 Cor. 9. 7. to
15. here then is an approbation, and an ordination, and yet both not sufficient
to satisfy men unreasonable.

Further, after a little more prattle, thou criest out, thou dark mind, in the
time of the first Priesthood, Tyth was not paid, nor received as by any
command from Caesar, or from any man whatsoever, but by commandment from the
Lord, and in this time, who paid not Tithes robbed God, Mal. 3. 8, 9, 10. here
is no telling of Caesar, nor any man, but God himself, whose the earth is, and
the fullness thereof.

Repl. Here thou seek to persuade the Magistrate not to meddle with Tithes,
intimating he had no finger in it under the Law: indeed I know that the most
high rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he pleases: but
by whom does he give out Laws, rule and govern the world, but by his own will
in Magistrates, and so in all ages there has been polity and government in all
Nations, and Magistrates chosen by men according to Gods secret instinct and
direction in the hearts of men, and this choice clothed with Majesty and
Authority from the Lord, to maintain Laws and peace in the earth, and this
power under the Law, was for the punishment of all offenders of the Law, and so
surely for the punishment of those who robbed God in any thing, but what this
robbing is thou can not tell: and that the Magistrate had no hand in
requiring obedience to, and observance of the Laws, statutes and judgments of
God, this lies upon thee to prove, which because thou can not do: therefore
thou must deny the Scripture, and say, all the complaint was to be made to God
in case of injury and oppression under the Law, and so none at all unto the
Magistrate; yet in case of injury the Magistrate is set up, thou see for a
refuge to fly unto in the earth, and whereas thou say, he who paid not
Tithes robbed God, the same may be said of every other command, he who kept it
not, robbed God, and the Magistrate was to require recompense, or to punish for
all this robbery: but thy drift is, fain thou would have the Magistrates
stand for a Cipher, and take no eognizance of all the robbery that is done unto
God in the Nation, of all the blasphemies, and unrighteousnesses of men; men
are not to complain to men but God, and so the powers of the Nation must stand
still, and let all the Laws of God and man be levelled, and every one ride upon
the Throne of his own will; this is the worlds desire indeed, because they love
not to be governed, but all must be governors, and the rule and Law must be
their own will and power; see here where thou art, friend, in the midst of the
vilest and worst of the sons of men, fain thou would have none but God to
meddle with men and with their actions, dreaming, though foolishly, that if
thou could escape the authority and punishment of the Laws and of the
Magistrates, thou could easily escape the authority and punishment of God:
but God sees what every one does in the dark, in the Chamber of his imagery,
and what are we, or what are the Magistrates; your murmurings are not against
us, but against the Lord; he sees all the pining and fretting of every one in
all this untoward generation, and how 't is his government they shake of, and a
King they must have to govern them, like all other Nations, which is their own
dream and will: see where thou art, and remember thou owe no man any thing but
love, no Rent, no Custom, no Tribute, no Tithes; love will teach thee these
things are due, therefore cover not another portion, owe him nothing but love,
for the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof.

Quest. 4. What is that double honor, which is due unto the Elder that rules
well, and what is the Elder, and his ruling well? 1 Timothy 5. 17.

Answ. The Elder that rules well, is he that rules in the authority of God over
his own will, in that spirit which is contrary unto the will of the flesh, and
that spirit is honored of God, and all good men, to whom its due, and double.

Repl. Here Is a Christian Elder, a spiritual Elder, and I like him, and his
ruling well, as one who begins in the spirit, and ends in the spirit: and thus
the Saints are called Elders, Rev. 4. 4. and 5. 5. 8, and these I find
resigning up themselves, and all they have unto the Lord, falling down and
worshipping him that lives for ever, casting their Crowns, and all their
choicest Jewels at his feet, saying, thou art worthy to receive glory, honor,
and power: but besides these, there is a preaching Elder, one anointed to be an
officer and servant of the word of God in the Lords house; and unto this Elder
all both high and low, that will not rebel against Christ, the master must
yield obedience, and this Elder is mentioned, and what his ruling ought to be,
1 Pet. 5. 1. 2, 3. and 1 Timothy 5. 17, 19. and such Titus was to ordain in every
City, Tit. 1. 5. and this Elder is called a Bishop, or Overseer, Tit. 1. 7, 8.
and how he must be qualified we there read, 1 Timothy 3. 1. to 8. and thus its
usual with the Apostle, to call such, who were to rule over the spirits of men,
by the power of the Word Bishops, Overseers, Preachers, Elders: and those were
the rulers well, that labored and took pains in the Word and Doctrine, not
giving heed to fables and Genealogies, which minister questions, doting much
upon their questions, and answers to their doubtful questions, whereof comes
envy, strife, railings, and evil surmisings, the Elders of the Lord must be of
another spirit than this questioning generation, sober, grave, wise, apt to
teach, nourished up in the words of faith, and of good Doctrine, and of good
life; the Elder that thus rules well, though the world own him not, love him
not, rob him, accuse him, condemn him, yet he is worthy of all* due respect and
maintenance: this Elder thou art willingly ignorant of, and no such thing can
thou find in Scripture, because against him, and his maintenance thou art
filled with indignation, as being some stop to thy Kingdom and reign in the
dark world.

Answ. The rest of the answer unto this query is like the former, all
overspread with accusations: telling me I am none of the Elders he has
mentioned, who am covetous, conforming to the world, its ways, fashions,
customs, inventions, abusing my body with cuffs, ribbons, unnecessaries, at
which my high, big, ranting mind may scorn, etc.

Repl. But stay friend, whence comes all this? from the spirit of the Lord, or
from thine own private spirit? do thou in all this rule well, and over thine
own will? What judging and condemning for thou know not what? Where Is thy
ruling well now? what, like the world, observing and scraping up every thing
which thine own fancy makes an abomination, and then charging this upon the
seed of God? Surely thine heart is like a City broken down, and without walls,
and therefore nothing almost comes from it but clamouring, bitterness, and
evil speaking, and what is thine end in all this, but to make thy self
righteous, and another wicked; thou sounding brass that keep a tinckling,
where is thy charity in all this? love covers a multitude of sins, but thou
make a multitude of sins, where they are covered by love, and so thou
condemnest thy self, not to be the Elder that rules over thine own spirit; and
therefore, fie upon all thy profession, thou, who pretendest to be a Lamb, an
holy man of God, and yet still found in Ismaels generation.

Quest. 5. What is that provision every one ought to make for his own family,
seeing he who provides not for them of his own house denies the faith, and is
worse than an infidel.

Answ. That provision every one ought to make for his family, is to fly,
idleness, ranting, and waiting the creatures of God upon his own lusts, and
not to live on the sweat of other men's brows, which, who denies, denies the
faith, and is worse than an infidel.

Repl. Here the Quaker is seen and known, and judged out of his own mouth, as
one who through his lightness denies the faith; learning under a pretense of
preaching to be like the wanton widow, idle, wandering about from house to
house, and not only so, but a tatler also, and a busy body, speaking things
he ought not, neither understanding whence his spirit comes, nor whither it
goes, not laboring at all in the thing that good is; but creeping into silly
peoples affections with his show of wisdom, and humility, and will worship,
clamouring against Magistrates, Ministers, Tithes, Customs; damning men for
wearing Ribbons, Cuffs, Lace, Rings, Pins, Bands, Hoods, Veyls, Points, etc.
and for using the civil expressions of humanity, in pulling off the Hat,
showing some respect, love, honor, duty unto fathers, mothers, masters,
superious, friends, comers and goers, about these and the like ceremonies and
toys, they make a great noise, and win here and there an Athiest, a Ranter, or
some discontented people to feed upon their dregs; and then to feed their
hungry bodies; this is their great business, thus to add unto their fathers
Kingdom by railings, lyings, flatterings, and all that come in are cried up for
Saints, and Children of the Kingdom, but such as receive not their Doctrine and
vanities, and put not into their mouths must be ipso facto, excommunicated for
Dogs, Devils, Beasts, Swine, Belly-Gods, Bulls of Boshan, Whores, Antichrist,
Witches, Sorcerers; behold thy model, and thy spirit, friend, and see thou thy
self in this Looking-glass of thine own making, how wanton thou art waxed in
the midst of all thy framed gravity, refusing thy Savior to be married unto a
delusion, in all which thou have denied the faith, and art worse than a Pagan,
and all that regard thy pride, superstitions, works of superarrogations,
instead of making provision, make destruction for their own families, forsaking
usually Fathers, Wives, Children, Families callings, occupations, and so cloth
themselves with rags, and ruin, and woe.

But thou say robbery for provision the Lord hates, and so say I; all that
use a deceitful way to get provision by, the Lord abhors; but surely, friends,
the Office of a Minister anointed, and called of God is good, for others they
are thy forefathers, strikers and railers: I dare not plead their cause, and
the preaching of the Gospel by men sent of God is no idle employment, and
maintenance from the people to whom we preach is no robbery for provision,
seeing it is a provision due to the Lord out of all men's substance, and so no
deceitful way to provide for our families, and yet the murmurer must still be
wiser than God that made him.

Further, thou say, I run unsent to provide for my family, aiming at lucre*
this is robbery; to which I say, he who sent me is the Lord, by his will and
power am I anointed to preach, and that which he aims at in me, and by me is
to catch men, and to make his word a savor of life, or death, and what he has
reserved, and taken, and kept for my use is no robbery to take, though thou
prate; neither will the Lord lay this to my charge as dishonest gain, as the
accuser does; or tell me, I sell his word for money, which is not bread, as
thou, who know not the word; for the word is life and substance and though
it take not such effect upon many as it ought, they may thank thy father for
it, for he has stolen it away from their hearts; all that I can do is, to
commend it to the conscience, and he that has an ear to hear will hear.

Further, thou say, many infidels will labor painfully for their families,
but I live on the sweat of others men's brows; and what do the Quakers then, who
run up and down without callings, without laboring at all the thing that good
is; wandering up and down to foam out their own shame, making it their work to
sow discord among brethren; living wholly upon the sweat and charge of other
men, deluding the people with their moderation in eating* and drinking, that
they may the better insinuate their ceremonies and delusions, and in all this
they have denied the faith, and are worse than infidels; as for my part, God
has set me in my calling I act in, commands me to keep in it, to preach the
Gospel, to break his bread to the hungry, and to give water to the thirsty, and
in this work of the Lord I find abundance of recreation; being never better
satisfied than when I have occasion to preach the Gospel, and this I shall do
with cheerfulness still, though many mad ignorant folk be offended at
preaching; and many offended at me that I live upon that allowance of Tithes,
which God has sanctified for my use, and given me freedom to take with
thanksgiving.

Quest. 6. What is that Election and Reprobation the Scripture speaks of, and
whether they have relation to persons; or things, or both.

Answ. That Election is Christ Jesus, and all that receive him, wherein the
Election is, in him are Elected, and the rest abide under the power of
darkness where all are Reprobated, who are out of the light in their own
wills, and know not Christ, and to such persons they have Relation.

Repl. Christ indeed is the stone dis-allowed of men, but chosen of God, Elect
and precious; but Christ without his Church does not comprehend all the
Election the Scripture intimates, but Christ together with his Church makes up
the Election of God; and so though all the Members be living in him, and
Elected in him, yet he without them is no complete body, and so no full
Election, and therefore as the Election takes in Christ, so all the Saints of
God: and whereas thou say all that receive him wherein the Election is in
him are Elected; this is true, if thou understand it of the manifestation of
Election to us: so our receiving of Christ declares to us that we are Elected
and adopted of God: but if thou understand it a priori, of the cause and ground
in God of our Election, as if he had therefore Elected us, because he foresaw
such and such would receive Christ, then thy speech savours of an old error;
for this builds Election upon the foresight of merits, faith, and power in man
to receive Christ, and so it destroys the grace of God: for if Election be by
grace, mere grace, then it is not at all upon forseen faith and works,
otherwise grace is no more grace: read Romans 11. 5, 6, 7. And so though we
receive Christ; because we are Elected in him, Ephesians. 1. 4. Yet we are not
therefore Elected, because we do receive him; all being according to the Lords
good pleasure, to the praise of the glory of his grace; and so as it is in the
outward world, there was the image or idea of every thing first, mente divina,
in the divine mind, before it came forth in the creature; not first in the
creature, and then in the mind of God, that could not be, seeing the creature
was not: so in the spiritual world the Church, things were first in God as in
their ground, not first in the creature and then in God; and so the idea of our
Election was first laid up in the Lords mind, counsel, grace, and good
pleasure, not in our acting, believing and receiving Christ his beloved, for
this no man can do, till it be given; and so this building Election upon our
receiving Christ, is a building upon the sand, upon something, no man where it
is not, not upon the Rock, which is the grace and good pleasure of God, and so
it makes void the nature of grace, and our Election; though vain man that
would be wise, and something cannot receive this.

Quest. 7. What is the Covenant of works, and the Covenant of grace? and how ye
were led out of the first, and established in the second?

Answ. The Covenant of works is that which man does from the letter, thereby to
get life, and the Covenant of grace is that written in the heart, where Christ
is the Light and Life and Lawgiver, and by him the Law is fullfilled in us,
who walk no more after the flesh, but after the spirit, and by his light were
we led out of the first, and by his life were we established in the second.

Repl. This being a sober answer, I could wish it were written in thine heart;
and proceeded from the life and power of that Covenant, where all is written
and sealed within: And friend, if it did so, though the Letter would not be
unto thee as the life, yet it would never be slighted by thee, being a witness
unto the life, Joh. 5. 39. much less would so much of the Kingdom be placed in
some of the lesser observations of it, when the weightier are neglected, though
none that live in the Kingdom will account any command of God small: and much
less yet would thou make the commands of God, of none effect by thy
traditions, neglecting the Law of faith, of meekness, of love and peace,
because thy ceremonies and traditions are neglected by others; if you ask
wherein, ask thine own conscience, and let that be thy witness and testimony,
in all which thou art found still walking more after the flesh, then after the
spirit.

Quest. 8. What is the state of sin and wrath, which all men are in and under
by nature; and how ye were led out of this estate?

Answ. The state of sin is a state of condemnation and wrath from God
separated, in which all are by nature, but by that light which is contrary to
nature, are we led out of this estate, for he is given to be a leader, Isai. 55.
4.

Rep. What can poor fallen Adam, or man do, till God comes and quickens him by
a word of promise, given in a spirit of power; for I find the state of nature
is a state of sin, deadness and darkness, as to the things of God, and the life
of God, wherein there is no power to believe, nor light to turn us toward God,
and in this estate there is a departing from God still, through unbelief, and a
wandering in the dark after the desires of the flesh and mind, and so a
separation from God, and a coveting to hide our selves from his presence
amongst the things that are made; because we find nothing due unto us, by
reason of sin and nakedness, but condemnation and wrath: and so we are by
nature children of wrath, till the Lord in mercy, and great love quicken us,
and raise us up through the second Adam, revealed in us to live in him, who is
our light and life, and so the only leader of lost man out of the former state
of sin and wrath; and so he is given to be a Leader and Commander, by being an
inward witness of love to us, and all to free us from the Law of sin, death
and condemnation.

Quest. 9. Whether any in this life are totally freed from the remnants of sin
and darkness, seeing Paul says, now we know but in part; and he prayed for an
increase of knowledge in the Saints, and Peter exhorts to grow in knowledge:
and Paul complains of a body of sin, of a Thorn in the flesh, of the lusting of
the flesh against the spirit, and James said in many things, we offend all, and
John, if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves and the truth is not in
us?

Answ. In the life wherein thou live is no redemption from sin, for that is
it, which cannot bear good fruit.

Repl. To which I say, I know that in me, that is in my flesh dwells no good
thing, for the flesh is flesh still, and sinful still, and cannot bring forth
the fruit of God, which springs from a new birth: but in the life of Christ in
me, or that life which springs from the new birth, there is redemption from
sin, and this is that which brings forth in me fruit to God.

Answ. Further, to the death of the Cross must thou subject and obedient be,
else not know that life and birth which is free from sin.

Repl. What I am, I am through the grace of God; and this grace abounding
toward me, has brought over my flesh that Cross, whereby I am in measure
Crucified, and so have tasted and known that birth which is free from sin.

Answ. The life of the new man, who witnesses is free from sin, Romans 6. 6, 7.
and 18. 22.

Repl. All the freedom from sin which this Scripture mentions I own, knowing
that the body is destroyed and dead, and my Soul as a bird delivered from the
snare.

Answ. Further, the second birth sins not, 1 John 3. 9. and 1 John 5. 18. the
second birth is without guile and spot, Rev. 14. 5. and Christ is manifest to
take away sin, and he that abides in him sins not, 1 John 3. 5, 6.

Repl. All this I own rightly understood; but 't is much besides the question,
for the question is not, whether the new man sin, but whether the man, in whom
this new man is manifested, sin, or not? seeing that which is born of the
spirit is spirit, and that which is born of the flesh is flesh; the spirit
cannot sin, but the flesh can do nothing but sin, Romans 7. 17, to the end, and
Gal. 5. 17. there you may see the two births, the two men, flesh and spirit,
and what their actions are, and yet I own a taking away, both of the guilt and
power of sin, where Christ is manifested in the new birth.

Answ. Further, but thou take Tithes, and so deniest Christ, who takes away
sin.

Repl. By the same argument thou may say to a Magistrate, Soldier,
Landlord, Labourer, thou take custom, pay, rent, wages, therefore thou
deniest Christ, who takes away sin.

Answ. Further, but Christ, thou say, has as much power to cleanse man, as
the first Adam to defile man.

Repl. Christ has more, and greater, Romans 5. 15, to the end: That which defiles
does not come from power properly, but from weakness, or want of power; but
that which cleanses comes from the mighty power of God, and yet though man be
not cleansed, God is not to be blamed, for who art thou reply? shall the
thing formed say unto him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Romans 9.
18, 19, 20, etc.

Answ. Further, I who lived in the ways, customs, fashions, pastimes, and
vain recreations of the world, it is high time for thee to plead for sin in
this life.

Repl. This is but thy clamor, neither do I plead for sin, but for the truth
of God, witnessed both by the Letter, and spirit unto all that are not fools
and blind, and thy denial of sin, Satan and Antichrist to be where they are,
either in power, or part, is the old trick of the evil one to hide himself
where he is, and that too many have drunk in this poison, and say with their
hearts and practice, though not with their tongues, Stand by, I am holier than
thou, thou art a sinner, a Satan, an Antichrist, I am none; that many are under
this sad delusion, it appears by their clamouring, and condemning all that
worship not under their green Tree; and whether thou, and they are not greater
friends to the beast and sin, that dream in your hearts you have no sin, and so
are lifted up, than those who confess they have sin, and so are kept humble,
meek, and low; which of these are the greatest friends to sin, I leave to the
light to judge.

Answ. Further, if all have remnants of sin, when then must man be cleansed,
seeing as the Tree falls, so it lies, and no unclean person, no unclean thing
must enter into the Kingdom, when is the time of cleansing? is there a
purgatory after man be turned into the dust?

Repl. The time of cleansing is here, here we are not in the flesh, but in the
spirit, that we may be comforted, and yet in the flesh as well as in the
spirit, that we may be humbled; God beholds no iniquity in Jacob, and yet Jacob
sees iniquity in himself; all his iniquities are covered, that he may be
blessed, and yet his iniquities sometimes appear, that he may be less than the
least of all his mercies: Friend, there is a purging here, a real, total,
through, eternal purging in Gods account, who reckons Saints by his grace, and
yet whilst the flesh remains, it will hanker after the flesh, and beget such
breathings after self, and things below, that many times the best will see
cause enough to mourn, and to long after a dissolution, when they shall see
their enemies again no more for ever; so that here needs no Purgatory after
this life, sin is here condemned, destroyed, and in part executed, and when the
dissolution comes, 't is bid farewell to all the Saints of God, and left to
inhabit here below, something here of this thou may call a contradiction,
't is so unto the blind, 't is not so unto the wise.

Answ. Further, all who are led by the light of Christ, into his life, as they
come and abide, so are they totally freed from the worlds life, and power of
sin and darkness; and to lead up to this, was the Saints exhortation into the
Unity, out of the woe, into him, who is but one, in whom is all truth and no
sin, nor self, nor deceivings.

Repl. All who are led by the light of Christ, so far as they come and abide in
his life and spirit through his light and leading; so far and no farther are
they freed from the life of worldlings, and the power of sin and darkness, and
the end of the Lords spirit by his exhortations unto others in his messengers
and Saints, was, and is to persuade them more into the Unity of the spirit,
through the bond of peace, that so they might be kept from the woe of sin and
darkness, through a dividing from this spirit, and might learn to live in him,
whose light and life is one in nature, though not in measure in all the sons of
God, and he who walks and lives in Christ, and Christ in him, is so far
delivered from sin, and self, and deceit, into all light and truth, as he walks
and abides less, or more in a sweet manifestation of his life in Christ, so
that Christ manifested is still the standard and measure of all our light and
truth, and redemption from sin and darkness, and if this manifestation were
full and complete in this earthly house, what need the Saints groan, and wait
for a dissolution? 2 Cor. 5. 1. to 10. and for the appearance and coming of
Christ in glory, 1 John 3. 1, 2. and through hope of this, endeavor still
after the Lords purity, verse 3. waiting for a full enojyment and discovery of
their adoption, or of that unto which they are adopted, Romans 8. 23.

Answ. Further, Paul says, we know but in part, we Prophecy, but in part, 1
Cor. 13. 9. and so say I, in the time of Prophecy man sees but in part, and
knows but it part.

Repl. Friend, why do thou here in thine ignorance, like others, to cover
their ignorance, wrest the Scriptures? Paul says, we know in part, and we
Prophecy in part, and thou turnest it thus, In the time of Prophecy indeed
man sees but in part, and knows but in part; Paul does not say in the time of
Prophecy, we know but in part, but according as our Prophecy, or Vision is,
so is our knowledge both but in part, till that which is perfect is come, 1
Cor. 13. 9, 10. and what is that, but the excellent way and spirit of love and
charity, which he speaks of all along in that Chapter, which is called perfect
love, 1 John 4. 12. when this rules the heart, then that which is perfect is
come, that is, that is come which does more perfect us in the sight of man, and
our experiences, then all our Prophesies, tongues, and knowledge, which we had
before, which are all to vanish away, 1 Cor. 13. 8, 10. and so charity is the
most excellent way, this weans us from our childishness, peevishness, and
frowardness one toward another, and declares us to be much in the state of
our manhood and perfection, in loving one another as Christ speaks, Joh. 13.
34, 35. Nay, charity does to the world more witness our perfection than our
faith and hope, 1 Cor. 13. 13. now remains these 3. says the Apostle, faith,
hope and charity, and the greatest of these is charity; Nay, in this we may see
the very face of God, and therefore its a seeing face to face, 1 Cor. 13. 12.
this is the Apostles scope in that Chapter, to set charity up in the top of
all, as that which to us and men does more witness our perfection than any
other grace, and yet before the Lord 't is not our charity, but our faith
justifies, and so upon another account, as faith gives a taste of love and
grace in God toward us, and so begets this charity in us, or causes it to send
forth the smell therefore in our conversations; so faith is the foundation of
grace, as being the root of all our charity, and therefore where charity does
not spring and grow, there is no faith; but where faith is, there charity
springs up, and therefore faith works by love; but now when all is done, and
charity is called the most excellent way, and that which is perfect, yet this
charity is still growing and increasing it self in the Saints, till the whole
body, and evevery Member there of be together with the head Christ in the glory
of the Father, Ephesians. 4. 14, 15, 16. Col. 2. 19. and so Saints must still be
adding to brotherly kindness, charity; and above all things put on charity,
let this grow and abound in ye more and more, this charity reaches farther than
the brotherhood, not to one party, but to all, even to a blessing and praying
for our very enemies, and whether this sweet flower grow up and flourish in thy
generation, let thine own conscience, and let the light in all be judge.

Answ. Further, Prophecy must cease.

Repl. So must faith to, when we come to see him as he is; and yet in this
life, knowledge, Prophecy, faith and hope must in no case be despised.

Answ. Further, when he is come, who finishes transgression, puts an end to sin,
makes reconciliation for iniquity, brings in everlasting righteousness, and
anoints the most holy; Dan. 9. 24. The same seals up the Vision, and Prophecy,
and is the end of Vision and Prophecy.

Repl. He, even he, to the praise of the glory of his grace, who has conquered
the power of the Dragon for me, put an end to his reign in me, made
reconciliation for mine iniquities, brought his everlasting righteousness to
be my clothing, anointed and set up the most holy in me, he is the end of the
Prophecy, or Vision of these things to me: and through his appearing in me
according to my anointing with his spirit, the Vision of him, which I had by
Prophecy is sealed up; and yet I am not to despise Prophecy, or further
teaching upon the account of the spirit and Gospel, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19, 20. As if I
had presently all faith, and knowledge, and charity, which is the dream of
some, to whom I commend these Scriptures, 1 Cor. 14. 22. Ephesians. 4. 12, 13.
Hebr. 10. 25, 26.

Answ. Further, Paul wrote to some who knew perfectly, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 1.

Repl. What did they know perfectly, but that the day of the Lord so comes as a
Thief in the night? What day? the day when those who sleep in Jesus, God will
bring with him, and those who are alive and remain until that notable day of
the Lords coming shall be caught up together with them in the clouds to meet
the Lord in the air, and so shall be ever with the Lord, this is a day, they
had no need to be instructed in, for they knew it perfectly, or were fully
persuaded of it in their own spirits; read the former chapter and the beginning
of this together: and thou who despisest the letter, or truth of this day,
shall know one day, though thou know it not now, the terror of the Lord
against the world on that day.

Answ. Further, a growing in knowledge that we own, and an increasing, for to
this end were the ministers of Christ sent forth, to convince of sin; and that
such as were convinced might grow, till they came to be perfect men, Ephesians. 4. 8,
to 13.

Repl. Here thou seem to yield unto the truth, but still thine own heart
deceives thee with the fond imagination of a perfect man; though Paul plainly
speaks of a growing afterward in this Chapter, even after the new man is born,
or the perfect nature of a man-child is come; and else where he confesses he
has not already attained, but is still pressing toward it, Psalm. 3. 12. to 16.
Where is then thy proportion in knowledge? Had the Saints of God at Ephesus
that were in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 1. 1. need of a further spirit of wisdom and
revelation, that the eyes of their understanding being opened, they might have
a clearer sight and sense of the hope of their calling, and of their riches,
and of the exceeding greatness of Gods power to them, who did believe already,
and art thou so full that thou have no need of a spirit of prayer to be poured
out unto the Lord for an increase of these things in thy self? Did David cry
out, Lord teach me, give me understanding, open mine eyes? and the Church,
Cant. 1. 7. Tell me, O thou, whom my Soulloves, where thou feedest? and have
thou no need of the Lords counsel and teaching? Why have Satan filled thine
heart with fully? Thou have not lied unto men, but unto God; in saying, the
night is all gone, and this knowledge is full.

Answ. Further, Paul in the time of his warfare cried out of a body of sin, and
of a Thorn in the flesh; this was the time of his warfare, when he witnessed no
peace to the earth, but a sword, then, who shall deliver me? says he.

Repl. I know thou can not choose but see, that Paul speaks in that 7. to the
Romans of a warfare within in his own spirit, with Satan and flesh within, not of
a warfare without, with Satan and flesh in the world; and so do thou cover
the truth, which Paul there witnesses; he cries, out, I am carnal, I do that
which I would not; I find a Law, that when I would do good, evil is present
with me; I find a Law, warring in my members, contrary unto the Law of my
mind, and bringing me into captivity unto the Law of sin, which is in my
members; O undone man that I am! etc. Will thou imagine that this was all
warfare with sin without, witnessing no peace, but a sword to the earth; or if
thou mean by earth, for thy words have always a double meaning, the earth
within in the time of his warfare, how can thou see in him a freedom from
this earth, or a freedom from all remnants of sin? the like may be said, of
that Thorn in the flesh, mentioned in the Corinthians, in with is this
remarkable, that it was after his abundance of visions and Revelations, being
caught up into the third heaven, and into Paradise, where he heard unspeakable
words, even after all these enioyments he felt a messenger of Satan buffeting,
(...), he was sent to strike me on the face with his fist, as it were, to
upbraid me with mine inward pride and pronenesse to be exalted above measure;
did Paul witness this, and can thou see no pronenesse in thy self to sin and
pride? Surely, thou art joined to thine idol, and God lets thee alone to
perish for want of vision.

Answ. Further, did Paul cry and groan all the days of his life, and witness
no deliverance? did he always fight, and never overcome?

Repl. Paul never fought, but was still more than a conqueror, by the grace of
God; he had deliverance and victory still through grace; and greatest
deliverance when he was most sensible of his infirmities, and therefore in the
Lord he could Triumph and sing; though in himself he was still nothing, Rom 8.
2. 32. etc. Col. 1. 11, 12, 13. And so may every Saint, who lives in the light,
say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength, in him I have all things,
and so in him will I glory, and though there be a fleshly mind and will
sometimes stirring in me, yet greater is he that is in me, than he that is in
the world; and so he can run his race with patience, wrestle with boldness,
fight with courage; and when he comes to die, cry out with Paul, I am now ready
to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand, I have fought a good
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth there is
laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge
shall give me at that day.

Answer. Further, its true, James says in many things, we offend all, Jam. 3.
3. here James speaks winningly for the seeds sake, for the raising up of the
simplicity.

Repl. Here Is a simplicity raised up in thee indeed by thine own evil heart,
and this thou love, and this hides thy sin and folly, and makes thee wrest
and play with Scripture, and so James must speak winningly for the seeds fake:
what, will thou have James a liar, or an Hypocrite, in telling the people, that
he, and all did in many things offend, and yet have no experience of this in
his own Soul? surely thine eye is out, and darkened by the smoke, and so neither
Paul nor James, nor the raising of one up from the dead will ever persuade thee
to be humbled for thy sottishness, and so Scriptures are of no force at all
with thee: But thou go on and say, that James in the 9. verse. says with
the tongue, we curse men, was James a curser? or was he an offender in many
things? But to reply: James was under the powerof no evil, and yet he declares
a pronenesse in himself, and all flesh to run into sin: and when thine eye is
opened thou will see in thy tongue a fire, a world of iniquity, and how it
defiles thy whole body, and wipes away the glory of all thy profession, and
that this tongue of thine is set on fire of Hell, and therefore thou go on
to hide thy nakedness, and say, James was writing to such, who were getting
the mastery in the flesh, which is for condemnation, Iam. 3. 1; 2.

Repl. And what think thou of thy self? Art not thou getting to be master,
and a great potent Lord in the flesh? damning and judging all that wear not thy
mark, and so art to be judged and condemned thy self, Math. 7. 1, 2.

But Christ, thou say, is the end of condemnation; so of sin, which is for
ccondemnation: to which I say, Christ was the end of the Law for
righteousness, and he is said to be made sin for us, and to come into the world
not to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved, but I
never read that Christ was the end of condemnation, and the end of sin, though
these things I know are overcome when he comes; but thy phrase is new, even
like thy form, which yet must be no form, and in almost all thou say; I see
that Scripture sadly fulfilled in thee, that evil men, and seducers was worse
and worse deceiving, and being deceived.

Answ. Further, 1 Ioh. 1. 8, 9. here John wrote to such, who were not come
through the confession; but to such as confess, he says, Christ cleanses
from all unrighteousness, 1 Ioh. 1. 9. and the blood of Jesus Christ cleansed
from all sin.

Repl. Even before and after the confession, thou may read, there is sin
still to be confessed: before, if we say, we have no sin, we deceive our
selves: after, if we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word
is not in us; here is sin still to be looked upon, otherwise we deceive our
selves, we make him a liar; the truth is not in us, his word is not in us, and
so he, who covers his sins shall not prosper; but who so confesses and
forsakes shall have mercy, and if we confess our sins, God is faithful to
forgive our sins, not to impute, but cover them, and cleanse us from them, by
the pardoning and healing virtue of the blood and spirit of Jesus; this
confession must be real, if we look the cleansing should be real; and this
forgiveness and cleansing is an encouragement to us to make our confession,
and our resolution to sin no more, which resolution being like the confession
in truth, God accepts of it, as 't is written, if there be a willing mind 't
is accepted according to that a man has, not according to that he has not; and
so that Soul sins no more, who does not love sin, peccatum facere, make it, to
delight in it, but it sins unwillingly; it lusts against lust, and would not
for a world be under the dominion of sin; this the Apostle speaks of Romans 6.
11, 12. reckon your selves, says he, to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive
unto God; let not sin reign, etc. and so this is the reasoning of a gracious
heart, shall I continue in sin, that grace may abound? God forbid; if Christ
have suffered for me, and in me, its high time for me to suffer with him, and
to arm my self with the same mind, and this is the dying to sin, and the
sinning no more, when the Soul bears witnesses against it, and walks out of the
reign and power of it, which reign of sin is that, which the Scripture
witnesses against.

Answ. Further, John wrote to such, who were not come through the confession;
to babes, young men, and fathers.

Repl. Then by thine own confession he wrote to all sorts of Christians to make
confession of sin, why then do thou hide, spare, and cover thy sin? What,
neither babe, nor father, nor young man? Where art thou, neither in the world
nor in the Church? Monstrum, horendum! Surely, if ever God awake in thee, he will
despise thine image, and bring thee to Sion by weeping cross; and then he will
remove this stumbling block out of thy way, and show thee this thine opinion is
but an old error, raked out of the dunghill of Hell, sprung up afresh in this
iron age, where the love of many waxes cold; and so thou will learn to tremble,
and prepare thine heart by brokennesse of spirit, for the lofty God to dwell
in, and so he will be merciful unto thine iniquity, and remember thy sin no more.

Answ. Further, John wrote to some, who knew all things, 1 Ioh. 2. 20. and so
were out of the knowledge in part.

Repl. The Unction indeed* reveals the deep things of God; and so gives us an
understanding to know him that is true, by our abode in him, and so teaches all
things that are freely given to us, 1 Cor. 2. 12. all things that the Lord
gives, all things necessary to know, all things that pertain to life and
godliness, credenda, agenda; all things to be believed of us, and done by us;
and that in such a clearness, that the Soul knows 't is not deceived, and so
we are taught to know our election, vocation, justification, sanctification,
regeneration, adoption, etc. we are taught to believe, hope, love, be patient,
penitent, obedient; we are taught to deny our selves, to lose our lives, to let
all go, to come and follow Christ in the new creature, and so we are taught
according to our measure to set our affections above, to live in Heaven, where
all our treasure is; these and the like things the Unction teaches us, still
limited to the things freely given to us and yet there are secreta Dei, the
secrets of the Lord, which man cannot see, and live, the secrets of the
Scriptures, the secrets of nature, the secrets of the times and seasons, which
man knows not, but the father only; can thou see God? God in his glory;
can thou behold the ballancing of the Clouds? the wondrous works of him, who
is perfect in knowledge? poor vain man, who art darkning the counsel of God by
words without knowledge; can thou see the Ordinances of Heaven, or set the
dominion thereof in the earth? can thou by all thy search find out these
things in their perfection? therefore, why do thou vaunt thy self? vain man
would be wise, though man be born like a wild Asses Colt, remember that
knowledge puffs up, but 't is charity edifies, knowledge perverts, but wisdom
keeps: thou have so long fed upon the Tree of knowledge, that thou art glutted
and darkened by it, and even poisoned to death with thy great knowledge; for as
too much light destroys the sight as well as too little, there must be debita
distantia, a due distance; even so knowledge without charity and prudence, to
keep a due distance between God and the creature, presently destroys, and may
as soon be too much as too little, and so as some perish through too little, so
many through too much knowledge: Therefore remember what the spirit says of
the wise Gentiles, professing themselves to be wise, they became fools, Romans 1.
21. and so let no man deceive himself, if any among you seem to be wise, let
him become a fool, that he may be wise, 1 Cor. 3. 18. and if any man think that
he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8. 2.
consider these things, and be not thou wise above what is written, and given,
and revealed unto thee, lest thou perish among the wise Greeks, and Jews, and
the Disputers of this world.

Further, after a little prating and railing, which is very natural to thy
generation; thou answerest more yet to confirm thy perfection, and says, he
that does righteousness is righteous, as he is righteous; to which I say, he
is so, so far as he does righteousness, and righteousness clothes him, even
so far he answers the pattern, and has the righteousness of Christ in him,
walking not after the flesh, but after the spirit.

Answ. Further, thou say, as he is, so are we in this present world, 1 Ioh.
11. 17.

Repl. So far as he is received in us, and dwells in us, so far we are as he is
in this present world, seeing we can be no more than what he is in us, and we
in him, for he is all in all.

Further, know that as there is a similitude, so a great dissimilitude between
Christ and Saints, for both I own, according to what I have seen and heard in
him; as for the similitude or likeness, in brief, take in these particulars.

First, his Father and our Father, his God and our God are one; his spirit and
his anointing, and the spirit and anointing in us are one, even the same in
nature, though not in measure.

Further, his light and life, and our light and life are one in God; and so our
life is hid with Christ in God; then he is a King, Priest, and Prophet, so are
we, according to his springing up in us, made Kings, and Priests, and Prophets
unto God, he has Union and fellowship with the Father, so have we, I in my
Father, and you in me, and I in you, I pray, that these all may be one, as thou
Father art in me, and I in thee, that they may be one in us, and according as
this oneness is manifested, which is our life, so we have fellowship with the
Father, and he with us.

Further, Christ was humble, meek, lowly, patient, holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from sinners, so we according to our grace, have received the same
thing for nature and truth, still that was in Jesus, though our measure be not
the same.

Further, he made it his meat, and drink, to do the will of God, he was
always going about, and doing good, and this is the work of Saints, as we have
opportunity let us be doing good.

Further, he was hated, persecuted, denied, blasphemed, mocked, scourged, a man
of sorrows, and acquainted with grief; so are the sons of God more, or less,
under a taste of all these in this world, being still called to suffer before
their Crown; and though not in the same measure that Christ suffered, yet the
Cross, both within and without is the same; as he was hated, persecuted,
crucified, so are we according as it is given unto us from our heavenly father,
as he was dead to his own will, and alive to his fathers, so are we according
as we have power and life from the father given to us; in all these and the
like there is a similitude between Christ and his Church, they are of his bone
and flesh, one every way, so far as he and his father are pleased to lead them
forth into it; and this was that which Christ prayed for, Joh. 17. 21. 22. and
Paul spoke of Romans 8. 29. and desired to live in, Phil. 3. 8. to 15. and this
John witnessed when he said, as he is, so are we in this world; behold your
likeness, friends, all ye the Lords portion, and challenge as much as ye will,
or can in this matter, so as it flow from light and truth accompanied with
humility, and the fear of the Lord, and ye cannot anger the Lord, his spirit,
nor his son; but withal be not high, proud, lofty; there is a dissimilitude
to, as well as a likeness between Christ and his Church.

First, He Is the father of all, God over all, the fullness of the Godhead
dwells in him bodily: This is no where said of the Saints, though they partake
of the nature of God, and of the fullness of God, according as their being can
receive; yet they are not the father, they are not the Godhead, neither in
fulness nor part; no, friends, away with such blasphemies, this is a
Babylonian that says, I am, and there is none else besides me; a false Prophet
that cries out, I am Christ; an Antichrist that sits in the Temple of God, as
God; away with this conceit, we are creatures still, poor nothings, drops of
the bucket, compared to the incomprehensible Majesty.

Further, Christ was anointed with the Oil of gladness above his fellows,
above measure; but we are anointed in measure, according to the gift of Christ,
we have no more than we receive by the grace of God, I am what I am.

Further, Christ knows our thoughts afar off, and is acquainted with all our
ways, there is not a word in my tongue, but lo, thou know it altogether;
Christ knew from the beginning who should betray him; and he saw the thoughts
and carnal reasonings of the carnal dark world: but what does poor man know,
though the Quaker is bolder then all his forefathers, he knows a man as soon
as ever he sees him, and whether he be a Saint, or a Devil, though the man
discover not himself by word, or action, yet the Quaker knows him, and all that
he may be as Christ is, and yet the Apostle says, what man knows the things of
a man, save the spirit of man, which is in him? 1 Cor. 2. 11. and the Apostles
knew not the Traitor; but they were low then, and so art thou friend in this
thy dream; for Christ says, ye shall know them by their fruit, and ye shall
know my Disciples by their love; so that our knowledge of others is by
observation, fruits, and appearances of things in the outward man, or by
special revelation and discovery from God, otherwise all other men's spirits are
in the dark to us, we have not a vision of their hearts afar off, we know them
not before they are born; we know not the way of God in their spirits, till it
be written upon their foreheads, and so are not as Christ is in this respect.

Further; Christ ^lwayes spoke the truth, was always free from error, never
in the least error, nor in the least deceived: where is the man besides, that
can challenge this unto himself, who can understand his errors? though so far
as we are lighted by the Candle of the Lord, so far we are led out of error
and all delusions, but he is the original truth, and we receive from him, as he
is manifested, so we have the truth, and no farther, for he is the truth; lo,
still a difference which should teach us all to be humble, meek, and low.

Further, Christ created all things, all things were made by him, and without
him was nothing made, that was made; and Christ preserves all things, by him
all things consist, and he upholds all by the word of his power, where is the
man that can appropriate this power unto himself? have thou an arm like God?
can thou make a new body, or quicken an image with a Soul, and make life
appear? can thou retain the spirit of man, or beast, when the Lord commands
it away? I know there are that will attempt miracles, and wonders, but all
vanishes still, nothing is for ever, but what the Lord does, let this teach us
to fear before him, knowing that 't is he, who made us, and not we our selves,
we are his offspring, and by him we have life and motion, and all things.

Further, Yet Christ was the only begotten son of God, the firstborn, his son
by nature, begotten by his power, and brought forth by a Virgin; but we are the
sons of God by grace, if we speak of the Saints, nature does not make us sons,
but the new birth, the regeneration, without which there is no entering into the
Kingdom of God.

Further, Christ he is the husband, we the spouse, and though the husband and
wife be one, yet the head of the woman is the man, I speak of Christ and his
Church, he is the man, the root, the head still; and he is the King, we the
subjects; he the vine, we the branches; he is the Lord and Master, we the
servants; he is the fountain, we the streams; he is the father, we the sons; he is
all in all, we are nothing; in all this I hope I do not lessen the glory of
Christ, the Lord, nor of his Church, his Saints; neither do I sad the Souls of
any, but such as are lifted up to forget their Savior; therefore come away
friends, glory as much as you will and can in your greatness, and glory; there
is a likeness between Christ and Saints, that they be filled with joy, and
rest, and abundance of consolation: yet withal, there is an unlikenesse to;
Christ is infinitely more above us all, than all the men in the world above the
lowest creature, therefore away, away with somethingnesse, self-glorying, this
is enough for the world to be proud, and high-minded; but let all the Lords
people be content to lose their lives, themselves, their excellencies, gifts,
Crowns, throw all down at the feet of the Lamb; saying, thou art worthy, O
Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power, for thou have created all
things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were created; and thou high big
flesh that say thou art as Christ in this present world, without the least
darkness, the least sin; when, thou know not the ground, why he was, and
could not but be without sin; and no man so as he, whilst in this house of
clay; he was a man singular in his generation, who is able to declare it; he
was the Virgins son, without the knowledge of a man; he was the word made
flesh, even that word of promise, which was made to Adam, came and figured, and
brought forth it self in the similitude of sinful flesh, or in the form of
man, out of a woman, without the least influence of man: Thou shall conceive,
says the Angel, in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and call his name Jesus,
he shall be great, and shall be called the son of the highest. How can this be,
says Marie, seeing I know not a man? Then answered the Angel, the holy Ghost
shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest shall over shadow thee;
therefore that holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the son
of God, here was an holy Child, a Child begotten, formed, brought forth
merely by the finger of God. Here was no tincture touch, or influence of man in
this birth, and therefore called the Son of God, the holy thing, holy flesh,
pure flesh, like the flesh of Adam in innocence; nay, more glorious, a body
descended from God, and a body filled with God or God clothed with the veil of
a man's body, and hence there was nothing in this man but God, therefore called
Emanuel; hence there could be no earthly sinful mind, and will begotten in
and with that man; no, he was wholly wrapped up in the Deity, in the will of
the Father; and so the Serpent could have no footing in him, because no
earthlinesse in him to work upon; tempt him he might, but prevail be could not,
because he was not an earthly seed, but an heavenly, and so made in the
likeness of a sinner, yet he knew no sin, he never fed upon that Tree, but the
will of his Father was his food; hence he is called holy, undefiled, the second
Adam, the Lord from heaven, a spiritual heavenly man; so he was in that man
Jesus Christ, so he is in all the Saints of God an heavenly man, a new man,
begotten by the power of the most high, and so is in us that new birth, which
cannot commit sin. But as for thy body, and the bodies of all men in the world,
we are far beneath Christ in our generation, being men, begotten of earthly
seed, in the lust and weakness, and darkness of the first Adam fallen; hence
after his fall he is said to beget a son in his own likeness, after his image,
Genesis 5. 3. Not after the likeness of God, that could not be, since he was
fallen from God, but after his own likeness, his own nature, which was now
fallen to the earth; such as the father was, such the son must be, fleshly,
earthly; hence it comes to pass, that man's, as he grows up, naturally,
enclines to the creatures, lusts and longs after the world, and so the
spirit of his Soul, his mind and will becomes infected with the earth and
flesh, and so he longs after the earthly fruit, and being darkened and estranged
from the life of God, through his carnal longing, hence he always enclines to
himself, to the woman the weaker part, and so hearkens to the voice of flesh,
and goes away from God; and here he commits iniquity with greediness, Ephesians. 4.
17, 18. and so the foundation of sin is laid in man's generation, Psalm. 51. 5.
Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me; and so
the flesh is sins freehold, where he rules and dwells as Paul, Romans 7. 18. I
know that in me, that is, in my flesh dwell's no good thing; I do not take the
flesh for the body only, for that without the Soul is a dead thing, and knows
neither good nor evil; but for the whole first man, or the manhood made up of
body, and Soul, this man as soon as he is born goes astray, Psalm. 58. 3. He
looks to the earth, and so his mind and will becomes infected, he covets, and
he lusts in the dark, and has not; he is angry, and fain he would be alone; he
feeds upon the outbirth, with is like himself, and all to nourish himself, and
strengthen himself, and be something of himself, and yet he is faint and weary;
and when the Lord comes to seat himself, or to arise out of the grave in him
where he lies dead as it were, and to form the heavenly man by his heavenly
seed in this earthly Tabernacle, or manhood of ours: Ah! what renting and
tearing is there before the Soul be willing to receive this new guest, as there
must be a rending of the woman before the Child is born, so a rending of the
Soul before the man-child be born, compared to the sorrows of a woman in
travel; and when this son of the virgin, this new man is born in the mind, and
begins to show himself in us, then he sins not indeed, but the flesh is weak,
and sins still; and so long as the earthly house is, the earthly man is, and
he is for himself, and so vails the heavenly in part still till the earthly be
quite broken by death, and hence Paul desired to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ, not to be Christ, but with Christ, and that not in the body, but out of
the body, which says, he is best of all, Phil. 1. 23. 24. and 2 Cor. 5. 1, to
9. And yet, notwithstanding all this, I know vain man will be wise, though man
be born like a wild Asses colt, Job 11. 12.

Quest. 10. Whether or no there be not a vast difference between the light of
natural conscience and grace, seeing the light of the one is a guide to the
Gentiles and all men, and the light of the other a peculiar guide only unto
the Saints?

Answ. The light of Christ is the only guide to all that follow it, and
besides it, there is no guide to Jew, or Gentile.

Repl. There can indeed be no other light, but what comes from Christ, as no
other life, but what comes from him; for his light is the life of men, and his
life is the light of men, Ioh. 1. 4. In him was life, and the life was the
light of men; and so the light and the life are one in the original, but in
their coming forth to us they are clothed with diverse names, and so as all
flesh is not the same, for there is one kind of flesh of men, another of fish,
another of birds, there are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial,
even so all light and life, which is the glory of a thing is not the same, and
so there is one glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, another of the Stars,
for one Star differs from another Star in glory; and thus it is in the world,
some are wise, some politic, some temperate, some patient, some valiant, and
the like; and this it is in the Church, some Prophets, some Apostles, some
Evangelists, some Pastors, some Teachers, some weak, some strong, some bond,
some free; so that all light it seems is not the same, though it come from the
same root, 't is not the same to us; in it self 't is one and the same, but to
us 't is called natural, spiritual, reason, grace, and so there is the natural
man, and the spiritual man, and each one of these have their light, and that is
the same to it self and in it self; but in the natural man, 't is but reason,
't is but gathering and discerning of things by discourse and arguments from
things that are made, and so the natural man seeks after God in this Creation,
Romans 1. 19. 20. and this light of the natural man is far below the light that
is in the spiritual man, even as far as the light and life that is in beasts is
below the light and life that is in men, and so the natural man receives not
the things of the spirit, neither can he know them, for they are beyond his
principle of light, but the spiritual man discerns all thingh, 1 Cor. 2. 14,
15. And yet the natural man has a light too, I call him the natural man,
because he is first, and to us more manifest; as the Apostle says, that which
is first is natural, afterward that which is spiritual; this first man
according to his principle has a light and life, and that flows from the root
Christ in him which he sees not, for the head of every man is Christ, and in
him all live, and move, and have their being; and this light or Christ shines
in the darkness, but the darkness knows it not and so man has skill and
understanding in things of nature, and as far as this creation teaches him, and
this is his light, and the root which is Christ he sees not, and so is still in
darkness, as to Christ, and the hidden things of God; now all this light, or
reason sets man in a sphere above beasts, which are therefore called
irrational, man rational; and this light, through low and faint, yet teaches
man to feel and groap after a God, and to worship, yet still 't is to the
unknown God: it shines and glimmers in the darkness of the first man fallen,
and as it came from God, so it returns to God, and feels after him in this and
that without, and wearies it self about the knowledge of good and evil, and
many times puts some faint desires in man after God, enough to bear witness of
it self unto man, and to leave him inexcusable; but this light is but an
imperfect, weak, faint light, as I may so call it, not that any thing is so to
God; but to us 't is so, as veiled by our fleshly mind, thoughts, longings, so
it grows weaker, and weary, and in the end goes out and we see it no more; and
so man in the first state has need of a new birth, a new man, that is, spirit
and power from God, a new fountain to break up in him, or rather to have that
awakened which before lay dead, and left us in darkness, man has need of this,
as we see in the case of Paul, and our own experiences: this is he whom we are
to wait for, the coming of Christ, the new man, to visit us with light and
salvation, and when Christ, and grace, and love from the father, springs up in
us, and shows it self to be our light and guide, then the true light is come,
it was but flesh before, but reason, and nature, and law now, 't is the truth,
and it brings grace and truth to us, and now God is come, Christ is come, they
were there before, but now we are awakened, and we see them to be there; and
this coming of Christ in power as to Paul is the coming of light and life
indeed unto our Souls, before this was revealed in Paul, he knew something
indeed of the Law, and the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, but he knew
nothing of the Gospel of the Tree of life, of the truth, as 't is in Jesus, and
of his own wicked false heart; but when Christ was revealed then he leaves off
flesh and blood, and consults with Christ alone, and he makes all things
manifest, and shows him what to do; and thus you see a vast difference between
the light that is in the first man, and the light that is in the second man; I
mean the light that is in us, whilst we are in the state of nature, and the
light that is in us, when we come to be in the state of grace; in the first 't
is but reason, and it tends to the building up of man and self, because 't is
weak, and knows not the Lord in truth, nor the way to him, and 't is only
sufficient to witness there is a God, and so to condemn us, because we run
into sin; but 't is not sufficient by the highest improvement of it to bring us
acquainted with Christ and salvation by him, as we see in the case of Paul; but
as for the light which springs up in us in us through a manifestation, or
revelation of Christ, in and to our Souls, this shows us the father in love,
and brings us reconciled, and leads us to feed and live upon him for evermore,
and so is a bringing of us out of darkness into his mavelous light.

Answ. Thou say Christ is natural to none.

Repl. If thou mean that he is not in nature, as a spark under the ashes, so 't
is false, but if thou mean that the natural man knows him not, so 't is true.

Further, Thou say Christ is not in their conscience, but is a witness
against all natural inclinations, and works acted in the corrupt nature.

Repl. Here thou contradicts thy self, for if Christ witness against natural
works, where does he witness, but in the conscience? and what is the
conscience, but a certain witness within, according unto the spark of Christ
that is in the conscience, or knowledge, unto the evil, or good we do? and so
conscience does either excuse us, or accuse us, according unto our works; and
is not this all the light of Christ that is in the Gentiles? Romans 2. 14, 15.
therefore why do thou say that Christ is not in the Gentiles conscience,
according to some measure of light? and if he be there in light, then this
light is in the conscience.

Answ. Further, who are of Christ partake of the Divine nature, where he is law
and life to them.

Repl. This is true: And those thou say have no Letter, being brought into
that nature: But why then do thou so much trouble the world with the Letter,
when it seems to favor thy ceremonies, traditions, and observationss; if they,
who partake of Christ have no use nor need of Letter?

Answ. Thou say Christ is but one, who is the light of the world, and
lights every man who comes into the world, Jew and Gentile, and in them both
this light is but one.

Repl. And so is thy talk still but one, one in darkness, and comes from one
root and father; proud man exalted, I know Christ is but one, and his light is
one in Jew and Gentile, the same as to himself in the state of nature, that 't
is in the state of grace, only in the first 't is natural, in the last 't is
spiritual, and so its one in the Original, but double in the birth.

Answ. Further: Thou, who art querying of a difference between the light of
natural conscience and grace, prove such a light by Scripture of natural
conscience, or else thou must be plunged.

Repl. Consult that place, Romans 2. 14, 15. Romans 1. 21, 22. when the Gentiles
which have not the Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law; these
having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves, which show the work of the Law
written in their hearts, etc. and because, when they knew God, they did not
glorify him as God; and knowing the judgment of God, etc. here is a doing of
the things of the Law by nature, and the witnessing of the conscience as a
light, either for, or against them; and may not this be called a natural light,
and a light of natural conscience, being a light only in Gentiles, or natural
men? here I have proved what thou biddest me prove, and yet thou in darkness
and nature have sinned away thy light and reason, and so can not see the
light of Scripture, in all this I do not seek to divide the light, but to give
every discovery its due place, and to stir up men to wait for the hearing and
learning of the father.

Quest. 11. What is meant by the Saints judging the world?

Answ. The Scripture means as it speaks, but thy dark mind wants clearing;
when thou know a Saints life, and him come who is the Judge, then thou shall
see the Prince of the Judged, and all his subjects condemned.

Repl. This answer is like thy self, savouring of malice, and darkness both;
and loath thou art to discover, and show a reason of thy faith and hope in this
matter of the Saints judging the world; when thou know him whom thou
speak of, then will thy judgment fall upon the Prince thou speak of, and
all his subjects, not so much upon the Saints of God, and the truths of God.

Quest. 12. Whether your cursing and condemning all that come not under your
light, savor not of pride, and a spirit of Antichrist; seeing Antichrist is
said to be one, who exalts himself? and Christ says, we must not judge that we
be not judged; and Paul bids us speak evil of no man.

Answ. This query thou have made up of lying, and false accusations, 't is not
your practice.

Repl. How dare thou before the face of God and man thus deny thy practice;
so read thy Papers, Sermons, carriage, is there any greater pride than to be
proud of our Gifts, Visions, Revelations, High worth, condemning all for
Whores, Sorcerers, Reprobates, Beasts, Hirelings, Dreamers, Heathens, prating
against all sorts of Christians with malicious words, casting them out of the
Church, and Kingdom of God, forbidding to receive any as brethren, but men of
your own model, form, and way? is not this judging and condemning another?
Where is thy light, thy conscience? what all asleep and gone? to deny thy
constant practice. But this is not cursing:

Ans. In Scripture language, cursing and evil speaking are all one, Exo. 22.
28. thou shall not revil^ the Gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people, which
Paul renders by evil speaking, Acts 23. 4, 5. revilest thou Gods High Priest?
then Paul answered, I wist not brethren that he was the High Priest, for it is
written, Thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people, whether or no,
thou and thy party be not deeply guilty of this, I leave to all to judge, I say
guilty of evil speaking, and evil, and false accusing; condemning all, instead
of speaking evil of none, as if all light and truth were bound up in your
spirits, who wallow in all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness, which springs
up in the man of sin, who exalts himself above all that is called God, and
worshipped, so that he as God sits in the Temple of God; here thou see
Antichrist is very devout, he is in the Temple, and he is there as God; behold
thy figure in this letter, and read it in thine own practice and spirit, and
see whether this savor not of pride, and evil speaking.

Quest. 13. What is the reverence and subjection we owe to Magistrates, and all
higher powers; and whether your carriage toward the present Magistrates be not
unmannerly and uncivil, seeing Paul said, we ought not to speak evil of rulers,
and Jude calls those filthy Dreamers, that despise Dominion, and speak evil of
dignities, and bring railing accusations against them?

Answ. The reverence and subjection we owe to Magistrates and all higher
powers, is, that every Soul is to yield unto the power of God, and where the
Magistrates Soul is subject unto that power, there the sword is not born in
vain, but is a terror to evil doers, and a praise unto them that do well, and
to that power our Souls are subject, and do reverence to such Magistrates, who
God has honored with that power, yet does not our reverence stand in respect
of persons.

Repl. As every Magistrate is clothed with the power of God, and is in that
power a form, or figure of God, therefore called Gods, so every one is to yield
unto that power, though the man that be clothed with it be good, or bad, yet
the power is of God in anger or love unto a people, and so the power must still
be owned, though the man that has it may be evil and wicked: the power is of
God still, I gave them a King in mine anger, though in mine anger, yet he is a
King, and I gave him, and by me Kings reign, and Princes rule; yea, Nobles, and
all the Judges of the earth, and the most high rules in the Kingdom of men,
and gives it to whomsoever he will, though an Hypocrite reign for the sins of
the people, yet his power is of God, and the Saints always have yielded unto
the power, though not to the wickedness in him that had it, as the three
Children, called Nebuchadnezzar; King, be it known unto thee, O King, they
yielded to the power, though not to the golden image, even so Christ yielded to
the power of wicked Pilate, know thou not, says he, that I have power to
crucify thee, and power to release thee; and Jesus answered, thou could
have no power at all against me, unless it were given thee from above, I know
thou have power, and that 't is given thee from above; and Paul says there is
no power, but of God, the powers that be, are ordered, or ordained of God, Romans
13. 1. and so to the powers must men be subject, either in doing, or suffering
the will of God by them; though the power be in Nero, a cruel, bloody, wicked
man, yet 't is given of God; hence Peter honors the King; Servants be subject
to your Masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to
the froward: Let not a Christian therefore think it grievous, that because he is
a Child of God, and a son of the Kingdom, he ought not to be subject to the
Princes of this world; the Jews, because they were the people of God took it
grievously that sometimes the Babylonians reigned over them, sometimes the
Persians, Grecians, Romans, and other Nations, strangers unto God, and many now
adays think it unworthy of a Christian to suffer a Magistrate over them, and
yet the Saints of old, Christ, and the Apostles you see yielded obedience unto
the civil power: if any thing indeed be commanded against the will of God, then
we are to obey God rather than men, as the three Children, Thine image, O King,
we will not fall down and worship; yet still the power must be acknowledged,
and honor, and due respect given unto it; when the Magistrates Soul indeed is
subject to the power of God, and so a terror to evil doers, and a praise to
them that do well, then the obedience from the Saints is usually most free; yet
remembering his sword is the sword of God still, we ought not for conscience
toward man, yet for conscience toward God to be subject to the Magistrates,
because clothed with Gods power, and so to pay tribute, custom, fear, honor
to all the higher powers; whether ye do this, or not, let all that know ye
judge.

Answ. Further, our carriage to the present Magistrates is not unmannerly nor
uncivil.

Repl. But why then do ye show no more respect to them than to other men,
though clothed with the power of God?

Answ. But thou say our carriage was the carriage of the Saints formerly to
Magistrates, which the Heathen could bear.

Repl. The Saints formerly have bowed to the higher powers, but ye no more than
to a beast, or post; and the Saints have owned their names, given them their
Titles, acknowledged their Authority by their appeals to them, given them all
due respect and reverence, though not Divine worship, for that must not be
given, no not to an Angel, Rev. 19. 10. I fell at his feet to worship him,
says John, but see thou do it not, says the Angel, I am thy fellow servant,
worship Jesus: but none of all these things are witnessed by ye, ye bow not, ye
neither give them their names, nor their Titles, as Lawcock said by the Lord
Protector, some say he calls himself Protector, he owned him not, ye scorn to
appeal to them, or give them any respect at all, and so your carriage is still
unmannerly and uncivil, contrary to the carriage of the Saints of old.

Answ. Further, some would have that given unto them which belongs unto God,
and persecute if they have it not; this I own not, neither an having of men's
persons in admiration, because of advantage, neither a bowing of the seed of
God to men's persons; no, friends, worship God, set him up in the top, yet
despise not his image in the power of Magistrates, lest you sin against your
own consciences, and draw down this wrath, dreaming of a dispensation by being
the seed of God, for all your railing accusations; Michael durst not thus use
the Devil, but said, the Lord rebuke thee: but ye can call them at your
pleasure, corrupt Magistrates, men that have lost the fear of God, and all that
own them must needs be Balaam-like, runners after him for rewards; in all this
ye murmur and complain of God himself, and so every way despise dominion, and
speak evil of Dignities, feeding your selves with fancies without fear, drawing
down the sword of those upon your own heads, who under God have given ye
liberty to serve in your own land, and so are the dreamers Jude speaks of.

Quest. 14. Whether your railing and evil speaking be the way of God and the
Gospel, who seeks to win and overcome by love; and what this your light is?

Answ. Our light is the light of Christ, who is the way of God and the Gospel,
who seeks to win and overcome by love, which love whosoever receives not with
the light are condemned, and from him are cursed, though man's cursing we deny.

Repl. Yet how contrary was he, who was the light of the world unto all your
carriage; he did not break a bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax; he did
not lift up his voice, nor cry in the streets, he did not presently cry out to
Publicans and sinners, thou art a Publican, thou art a sinner, but he did eat
and drink with them: he did not tell the Master of the feast in Canaan of
Galilee, thou art a Dog, a Devil, shall I eat with Dogs and Devils, he went
about seeking and saving that which was lost, and always doing good, and so
prevailed by love; and though he called the Pharisees, Serpents, Vipers, the
Devils children, because of their railing, envying, murmuring, and continual
blaspheming of him and his doctrine; yet this is no warrant for thee to apply
these names to the Saints and Disciples of Christ; Christ called Judas a Devil,
did he therefore call the other eleven so? surely not; and so your way in this
is still contrary unto the way of the Lord, and his Gospel.

Quest: 15. What is the Soul of man and the preciousnesse of it, seeing Christ
says it is more worth than all the world?

Answ. The Ministers of Jesus, who come by the will of God, such know the Soul,
and watch for the Soul, Heb. 13. 17. But thy watching is for the fliece, and
art querying what the Soul is which lies in death, and state of condemnation,
so long as it lives, and the false accuser lives: and it the first born knows
not, nor the preciousnesse of it, who prefers the world, and obeyes it before
the light of Christ, and so sels the Soul for the world, as thou do, who
professest him in thy lip-talk, but denies him in practice, ways, and
conversation, thou Christ, says the Soul, is more worth than all the world:

Repl. In all this answer there is not a tittle unto the question; here it
appears, thy perfect knowledge fails thee, and thou have no eye open to see
that which is most near thee, and so art able to make no answer at all unto the
Soul: saving a little to discover thine ignorance in calling the Soul the first
born; here thou guessest that the soul is Christ, for he is the firstborn the
Scripture mentions, and so according to thy blasphemy, Christ it seems may be
damned, and cast into Hell; for so it is said of the Soul, fear him, who is able
to cast body and Soul into Hell: and the Glutton in Hell lift up his eyes in
torment, this must be in Soul, for it is said he was dead, to wit, in body: See
how dark thou art in making no difference between the Soul and Christ, the Soul
indeed is a precious high thing, there is a kind of infiniteness in it, which
all the world cannot satisfy, and therefore the man was a fool, that said,
Soul take thine ease, because thy Barnes are full; and yet notwithstanding this
kind of infiniteness in the Soul, as being restless, till it return to God;
yet it cannot be infiniteness it self, it cannot be the firstborn, for of
whole man it is said, whereof the Soul is the most noble part indeed, what is
man that thou art mindful of him, or the Son of Man that thou regardest him?
thou have made him a little lower than the Angels, Heb. 2. 6, 7. man you see is
inferior unto the Angels, much more inferior unto the Son of God, seeing the
Angels likewise are his inferiors, and therefore when he brings in the first
begotten into the world, he says, Let all the Angels of God worship him, Heb.
1. 6. so then if Angels are inferior to Christ, and men inferior to Angels,
surely the Soul must be far below the firstborn: and farther, though the Soul
be the seat of Christ, and Christ be hid there as treasure in a field, even in
the innermost room of the Soul, yet the Soul cannot comprehend the infinite
Majesty, so Christ in his Divine essence, or being, much less can it be
Christ, who is God over all, blessed for evermore, and though there be indeed a
blessed Union and fellowship between Christ and an holy Soul, yet still there is
a vast difference between the essence, or being of the Soul and Christ, the one
being still a creature, the other the Creator of it; thou might with better
color have called the Soul the light within, and that likewise thou give an
hint of, and this I say has more light in it than the former, seeing Solomon
says, the spirit of man is the Candle of the Lord, searching all the inward
parts of the belly: but yet the Soul comprehends more than this light, and
cannot be this Candle neither, seeing the Candle may go out, but the Soul
remains still I say, the Candle may go out, Prove. 24. 20. the Candle of the
wicked shall be put out, and how often is the Candle of the wicked put out, Job
21. 17. but the Soul of the wicked can never be put out, but their light may.
But what is the Soul then? To make some answer to the question, because it is
mine own.

The Soul is a most noble power, a living being, an essence that quickens the
body, and yet dies not, sleeps not when the body dies and sleeps, but returns
unto God who gave it; this Soul is a little Map of the great world, and makes
man a little world, for in his Soul is comprehended the life of plants, the
sense of beasts, the reason of men and Angels; this Soul quickens and makes man
a living creature, a sensitive creature, a rational creature, being the seat of
life, sense, motion, operation, understanding, reason, and light in man; and
this Soul in the spiritualty of it, the immortality of it, the immensity of it,
not being satisfied without an infinite good, and the rationality of it in the
powers of the mind, reason, judgment, will, memory, fancy, appetite, and
affections in all these, it is a lively figure of God himself; hence man is made
after the image of God, in an appearance according unto his capacity answerable
unto the Divine Majesty, though still infinitely far short of what God is in
his incomprehensible being, who is the life of our life, and Soul of our Soul,
called the father of our spirits; in this Soul of man, or in the spirit, or
mind of it as the highest power, when 't is regenerated and resigned up, lives
the great King manifested, here he dwells as in Mount Sion, here he delights to
be as in his Temple, here he lives, and moves, and walks, and feeds, and takes
pleasure in his own works, and here he begins that life of righteousness, joy,
peace, rest, glory, which shall endure world without end; and in this Soul of
man un-enlightned, and un-renewed; Christ lies hid, and is as one dead, and
unsavory unto the Soul, and so the Soul is in darkness, weakness,
sinfulness, sorrow, fear, bondage, and many times in beginnings of Hell and
saddest woe for evermore; and yet the world and those that perish for ever,
have had many times such glimmerings and such stirrings after God and good
things, such wrestlings between the (...) their own reason, and common light,
and conscience, as being despised and trampled upon, hidden crucified and
smothered in their earthly minds, provoking God thereby to give them over as a
just reward for their unthankfulness; I say, they have had so much light, as
being rebelled against, shall make them inexcuseable before the Lord, at the
sad hour of account and judgment.

Quest. 16. What is the saving and losing of the Soul, and the state of it
after this life?

Answ. Christ said, what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world,
and lose his own Soul, or what shall a man give in exchange for his Soul, Math.
16. 26. the Scripture is plain, would thou have a meaning to it? is the
Scripture a parable to thee? yea, and to all vultures eyes and venomo us beasts.

Repl. Would such an answer as this have pleased thee? would thou not have
cried out aloud, behold what bitterness, what darkness is here? Friend, how
has Satan still filled thine heart with lying vanities, in dreaming of
perfection, and yet art altogether a stranger even to common humanity, much
more to that sweet spirit of love whereby the grace of God is manifested: I
know the Scriptures are a parable to vultures eyes, and venomous beasts, and so
they are to thee, as appears by thy gall and wormwood, thine ignominy and
reproaches thou art pouring out upon thy brother, and that for asking a reason
with much soberness, of the hope that is in thee: I know this is the nature of
those, who say they are Disciples, Prophets, but are not; being found liars, to
cry out, lo here, lo there, come and follow me, behold he is in my secret
Chamber, in my holy form and way, and all that believed not are judged,
condemned, and given over unto the Devil, Pope-like, Antichrist-like: but to
pass to what follows, to see how well thou art acquainted with the saving and
losing of the Soul.

Answ. Further, all that believe in the light of Christ, it leads to the
knowledge of Christ, the redeemer of the Soul, which they that deny the light
cannot see, and so the Soul abides in condemnation; and this is the saving and
losing of their Souls and state of it, after this life.

Repl. By this it appears by thee, that the saving of the Soul is as much in
man's power as the losing of it; and yet Christ says to you, it is given to
know the mysteries of the Kingdom of God, but to them it is not given, Math.
13. 11. and thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have
revealed them unto babes; and the election has obtained the promise, but the
rest are hardened; this is an hard saying, who can bear it, but the true seed,
and yet foolish wise man will teach God what to do; thou have indeed power to
lose thy Soul, but power to save it without grace, and the new birth thou have
none; and thou vain man, who art loath to fell all away, to lose that part of
thy life, and self which lies in the dream of thine own power to believe, and
freedom to embrace grace, as well as to deny them: now thou art in the way to
lose thy life and Soul for evermore; and yet still I say, there is so much power
given the Creature as shall leave him inexcusable: I know he, who believes, is
led to Christ his Redeemer, and the saving of his Soul is by the springing up
of his life and grace in his Soul, who is a well of water springing up into
eternal life; and he who believes not is a stranger to Christ the Redeemer of
his Soul, and this saving and losing is everlasting; but still the power to
believe, and be saved, is of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. by grace are ye saved through
faith, and not of your selves, it is the gift of God; and as for the saving and
losing of the Soul for ever, if it be thy faith, and thou can bear witness
to it, as a truth thou have seen of God, why then do thou hide thy self, and
mince the truth, as if it were not a thing to be owned by the sons of men? the
rest of that answer is spent after the old form, in accusations by the accuser,
thy father.

Quest. 17. What is the difference between the Soul and the spirit, which Paul
prays may be sanctified.

Answ. As the spirit is received, which sanctifies, the difference is brought
into unity, and they are perfected to serve the Lord in one with the whole
heart, and Paul was a Minister of the word, which pierces even to the dividing
asunder of Soul and spirit, Heb. 4. 12.

Repl. Still thou art dark about the soul, or unwilling to discover thy
darkness, and so thou can say nothing, or that which is little unto the
question: when the spirit is received, which sanctifies, thou say the
difference is brought into Unity, and they are perfect in one, yet still to us
there is soul and spirit, and this spirit in us is not the spirit of God which
sanctifies, as thou dreamest, as if the spirit Paul speaks of, were the spirit
of God which sanctifies the soul of man, and so brings the soul into Unity with
it self; no, friend, Paul speaks not of Gods spirit, which is holiness it
self, but of a spirit which needs sanctification, and between this spirit in
man, and the soul of man, it seems there is a difference, and therefore he
prays that both may be sanctified; but this difference thou know not, I
know the soul is a spiritual thing, and cannot be divided into parts and
powers, as being one single entire essence; but unto us there is the
understanding part, the mind, the eye of the soul, the seat of reason and
light, and the will which is the observer of the mind, looking to be taught by
it as a power obedient and willing to act as it directs, counsels, and
commands; and there is the inferior parts, the appetite, desire, affections,
which are as perturbations and motions in the soul, leading it out into love,
joy, anger, peace, fear, or the like; all these as sanctified by the Lords
spirit are brought into this Unity to be all servants unto his mind and will;
and this spirit of the Lord, as 't is received more or less, so it more or
less ends the quarrel between God and us, in the lusting of our spirits and
souls against God, and makes peace, and brings all into Unity, and so is that
word which pierces even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit; this drives
away the ignorance, vanity, weakness, and enmity, which is in the highest, and
purest part of man's soul, his mind, which is usually taken for the spirit,
called the spirit of the mind, Ephesians. 4. 23. and called the eye and light of
man, the spirit of the Lord opens and heals this of all its blemishes and
distempers, and so gives an eye to see, and an heart to understand, by
enlightening the eye of the mind, which is called the spirit, as that which
looks over all, and overrules all in the soul of man: Further, the word or
spirit of God takes away the stubbornness, frowardness, and hardness of the
will, and bows this to follow the light sprung up in the mind, and so heales
that power too, which I look upon as belonging still to the spirit of the Soul:
Further, the Lord likewise rectifies the judgment, and the conscience, and
takes away by degrees all erroneousnesse, wandering, and fear and guilt here
too, and so gives a sound judgment, and a clear conscience, and the Lord takes
away the sottishness, foolishness, sinfulness, and manifold distempers of
the thoughts and imaginations that spring up in the fancy of man; and of the
desires and longing after earthly vanities that spring up in the appetite,
which is an inferior power in the Soul, and of the affections, which are the
motions and goings out of the Soul into love, hatred, delight, sadness,
pleasure, grief, hope, despair, fear, boldness, anger, and the like; all which
as common to man and beasts, more sensible unto us, are usually called the
Soul, and taken for the Soul; I say these inferior faculties which are usually
taken for the Soul, as being the discoverers of the Soul more sensibly unto us
all these these the Lord heales, makes holy and pure for himself by his word,
and so separating things that differ, and uniting all in an oneness with
himself, he makes unity, peace, and harmony in all the higher and lower powers
of the Soul, and so to sum up things, and a little farther to discover this
noble power of the Soul. 1. There Is the mind, that is the seat of light, reason
and understanding. 2. There Is the will, that is the seat of action, obedience,
and doing either good, or evil. 3. There Is the judgment, that is the seat of
discerning and trying things. 4. There Is the conscience, that is the book of all
the good and evil we do. 5. There Is the memory, that is the seat of Arts and
Sciences, of all that we so discern, feel, and know. 6. There Is that which they
call the common sense, as a power which has an influence upon all the outward
senses, and carries as it were from the Soul, seeing, hearing, tasting,
smelling, and touching into all the five senses. 7. There Is the fancy, that is
the seat of all the innumerable thoughts, and imaginations that spring up in
the heart of man, and this is the seat of all the Quakers dreams, and high
thoughts of themselves, and mean thoughts of others, and of many the precious
truths of God. 8. There Is the appetite, and that is the seat of desires,
lustings and longings after things, whether good, or evil: Lastly, there is
likewise the affections which are the movings of the Soul out into love, joy,
gladness, pleasure, and the like, all these lower parts of the Soul, as more
common and easily seen and perceived are usually called the Soul, and the
higher and more noble powers are usually taken for the spirit of the Soul, now
when the Lord comes all these are healed, cured and made well, according as the
Lord is more, or less manifested, and this is the sanctifying of these which
the Apostle speaks of, the bringing of them all into the will and life of God,
and as the Lord is received into the Souls of men, so all these scatterings,
and movings, and workings of the Soul, are all gathered up to give their
attendance upon the presence of the great King.

Quest. 18. What is the Heaven and Hell? the salvation and damnation of
believers and unbelievers, which the Scriptures intimate.

Answ. Heaven and Hell are what the Scriptures declare them to be, which none
can understand, but who are in the light where the entrance is made.

Repl. Still thou art seen not to be in a state of perfection, and so what
Childish answers have we; and no account cnast thou give of Heaven and Hell;
they are what the Scripture declares them to be: surely, friend, if thou have
been in Hell, and gone from thence to Heaven, thou might have said something
more: I know it is sufficient what the Scriptures intimate; but I know thou
ownest no Heaven nor Hell, but what is here within in thy wandering spirit; no
resurrection, judgment, or Hell afterward, but what we have here by the light,
and from the light within, this is thy dream only, thou art loath to discover
thy self, and so hidest the thoughts of thine heart, and say Heaven and Hell
are what the Scripture makes them to be, and so I leave thee in this thine
imaginations to give an account unto God, in that day when the secrets of all
hearts shall be disclosed, and Hell and Heaven begun, here shall be perfected
upon believers and unbelievers for evermore: and what this Heaven and Hell is
take my thoughts, and use them at thy pleasure; Heaven stands in a pure union
and fellowship with, the Father in love, and Hell in a real separation from
this love of the Father in the Son, and the enduring of the wrathful vengeance
of an angry God; both these are begun here in grace, or sin as in the root, and
both shall be perfected hereafter, in the joy, or misery which shall be
everlasting; as the Scripture speaks come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world, and go ye cursed
into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels: Matt. 25. 34, 41.

Quest. 19. What is the first resurrection, and the reigning with Christ a
thousand years of that resurrection, and the binding of Satan all that thousand
years?

Answ. The first resurrection is the resurrection of Christ, wherewith he has
raised us from the death of sin, to live with him to God, in newness of life,
reigning over the lust of the world, the flesh and the Devil:

Repl. All this I own, as the comfort and joy of Saints in all generations, for
when the man-child is born, who is called the new man, the Lord from heaven
then the first resurrection begins and that Soul reigns and lives according to
the measure of Christ in him with Christ a thousand years, this Christ in us,
is the real substantial image of God, that has the perfect nature of a man, the
first day he is born in the Soul; as a Child has the nature of a man, though
not the wisdom, and growth, and strength of a man; so it is in the Soul where
Christ is risen, and born, that is the true man-child, and his growing up in the
new holy life, is the ground of the first resurrection, and as he increases in
the Soul, so the life is manifested, and the resurrection more and more, and so
the Soul can say, now, I know that the life and the resurrection is come,
because the Son of God is come the precious seed of the promise, he who breaks
the head of the Serpent, though the Serpent be still knibling and bruising his
he'l^: and if this were truly witnessed by ye? surely I should not see so
much darkness and bitterness still growing up, and flourishing in ye,
neither could ye thus give your selves to revile, mock, vilify, and send
others of the Children of God in your giddiness unto the Devil, and seek to
deprive them of their credit and reputation in the world, this is but the fruit
of Thorns and Briars, not of the vine, and good Olive Tree; this is but the
Thistle that pricks, but bears not the fruit of the first resurrection.

Further, thou say, Christ by his resurrection has bound Satan; so say I,
for to this purpose was he manifested, that he might destroy the works of the
Devil, and when he appears, then the evil one is put in prison and chains:

Further, thou say, such unruly persons as I, talk of Satan's being bound a
thousand years, but resist and own not that Cross and power which should bind
him for a day:

Repl. The Cross I own, and the power I own, as that only which has bound
Satan in me, though I must not tell thee so: neither is Satan at liberty as in
mine ignorance and unbeleef, neither does he prevail, neither am I without a
stronger than he to divide his spoils, and yet I am to take heed, and not be so
bold as some, who are without fear of any stirrings and temptations from him,
though Paul set him as a Thorn in the flesh; yet they are secure and neglect
their Armor, and so are many times again entangled and overcome.

Further, thou say, the Angel and the key of the bottomless pit, and the
great chain in his hand, I know not, Rev. 20. 1. neither do I, and him I serve,
love that chain.

Repl. The spirit of the Lord surely wrote all this to thy generation, and none
must peep into these mysteries without thy key, for thou art he who opens and
no man shuts, and shuts, and no man opens; as Christ gave his keys to Peter in
his absence, and Peter unto the Pope, or the Pope to thee, and now thy fathers
the false Prophets may go to seek heaven for thee, for thou have the keys, and
none must enter in without thy mark; and so the kingdom of Heaven is shut up,
and the Angel and the key of the bottomless pit, and the great chain in his
hand, none must know but thee and thy generation, and yet what if I should tell
thee, I have seen the Angel, and he by the light within has opened the
bottomless pit, and there I have seen the Quaker and the Pope, and all the
false Prophets shut out of the Kingdom of God, because they love not the great
chain in the hand of the Angel, but to leave thee where I find thee, the chain
I love and own, as that which keeps me from the paths of the destroyer; neither
am I telling as thou say of Satan's binding without me, for this is not mine
interest, but the inward binding, and yet when I see Satan bound in any measure
without me, that I can look upon with joy too, well knowing that there is joy
in heaven at the conversion of one sinner; but I must not cast pearl before
Swine, lest thou turn again and rent me, for the angry brood love not the
Pearl.

Answ. Further, Satan's binding is in the life only learned, not in the
imagination.

Repl. And yet it may be too, but in the imagination, though it seemingly
appear in the life, as we see in a Nun, Monk, Hermit, Pharisee, and the like,
here is a seeming binding of Satan in the life, and yet but an imagination:
therefore take heed, God looks most upon the heart, yet upon the tongue too;
and when Satan's binding is better manifested in thy carriage and tongue; then I
may have better hope to say, thou believe with the heart.

Answ. Further, John saw Satan bound a thousand years since, which thou art
still querying about.

Repl. John, I know, had a Vision of Satan's binding in himself, and a Vision of
all the binding and loosing that was to be in ages to come, and therefore the
Revelation of Jesus in him, was to show unto his servants things which must
shortly come to pass; now I know about this binding and loosing of Satan, and
the living and reigning with Christ a thousand years, called the first
resurrection, there is a great variety of opinions and judgments amongst the
Saints, and in the world, and all the opinions almost look unto things without,
unto some intable observation to the outward eye abroad; making this, and that
the beginning of the thousand years, and the first resurrection, so making the
spiritual Kingdom to spring up with some great outward glory, and to begin with
some observation visible to the outward man, all which methinks suits not with
the nature of a spiritual King and Kingdom, and so seeing men feel after that
without, which was to be fulfilled within, and hearing of the great talk of the
Quakers knowledge, therefore I sent to thee to know, and see thine experience
of this resurrection, and of this binding Satan and reigning with Christ; and
behold I see nothing in all thine answers but vanity, pride, and deep
darkness, so much to that answer; to which I Will add, Blessed, and holy is he
that has part in the first resurrection, that has Christ to be his
resurrection and life, by whom he is fetched out of the grave, and passed from
death into life by a strong hand; this man as he has bowed and given himself to
Christ, so Christ is come down as it were to him to set him upon the Throne of
his glory, and here he sees judgment executed upon the beast and Dragon, and
Satan bound in him all the days of his life, and Christ living and reigning in
him for evermore, this is the first resurrection, over which the second death
has no power, and this is that I commend to all, as the better part which the
Saints in their measure all enjoy, and without which the last resurrection will
be but a sad hour of sorrow, and woe unto the world, and so though the last
resurrection I own, and the day of judgment, yet the first resurrection of
Christ raising us up from the death of sin and darkness, to live with him to
God in newness of life is that which every man and woman ought to look
earnestly after in this world.

And now some may imagine that this spiritual resurrection is not the thing
meant in this 20 Chap. of the Revelations, because 't is said to be a thousand
years, and then to be finished, and Satan to be loosed out of his prison again,
to whom I answer, that the thousand years has respect to the reign of Christ in
the Saints in all ages, during the time of every dispensation of God toward
his people in the world; and so the first resurrection has still been passed
through, and is to be passed through by all the people of God here, and
finished at their departure hence in the Lord, and as this resurrection was
more glorious in John's time, and the first ages of the Church after Christ
than before under the Law, so it shall be more glorious yet than ever before;
called therefore the new Jerusalem, wherein God shall come down and dwell with
men; to wit, more in the fullness and glory of his spirit than in all the
dispensations that have gone before, and the more glorious the resurrection is,
the more the evil shall be bound; and the appearing of this in all ages has
been the binding of Satan, and is that which limits, and puts a stop to this
Kingdom, and so a torment to him before his time, and the more this grows, the
more he shall bound, and so the great binding of Satan shall be, not by a
personal reign of Christ in a body, but by the personal, or more eminent reign
of Christ yet in the fullness of the spirit; this is that which every Saint is
to look at in himself, and not to put off the resurrection from himself to some
other men, or some other time: but to look at his own resurrection, and the
binding of Satan in his own soul, as well as without in others, that he may
reign with Christ here, and hereafter; in the 12. of the Rev. 8. 9. we read of
a war in Heaven, and of a great fight between the Dragon and Michael, but the
Dragon and his Angels prevailed not, but are cast out, and their place is found
no more in Heaven, this is that we are to look at in our selves, for the Church
of God is the Kingdom of God on earth, and where this Kingdom is set up, there
Satan's Kingdom is pulled down, and his time finished; I say, where Christ is
set up in power, 't is so, not where he is only set up in show, for where
things are but in show, there the unclean spirit is said to go out, not to be
driven away by the sun of God, but to feign a going away, and so to return
again, and bring 7 other spirits, that is, more power along with him, and
finding the house swept and garnished, to enter in again and dwell there, and
so to make the last state worse than the first; but when he is castout by the
finger of God, then we have the true Champion on our side, and now the evil one
must leave the house for ever: and further, though the Scriptures speak of a
finishing the thousand years, yet that is meant in reference unto every
dispensation of God to his people here, and their abode with Christ, during
this spiritual reign with them in this body; when Christ reigns with us here,
this is the first resurrection, and when Christ takes us unto himself out of
the body, then this is finished; and this is said to be a thousand years, in
reference to the Saints in all generations: But where is Satan when he is cast
out of the Saints, or out of a particular soul? what is he idle, or lies still?
no, he goes down to the earth, and therefore woe to the inhabiters of the
earth, and of the Sea; for the Devil is come down unto you, having great wrath,
because he has but a short time, Rev. 12. 12. when Satan is cast out of one, he
reigns in another, and the more he is imprisoned in the Church, and kept from
hurting, and tempting them by the strong power of God, the more he is tormented,
and the more he rages in the world, and the more subtle, and cunning, and
powerful he is in the vessels of wrath, and so shall gather them together with
more subtilty, and violence against the holy beloved City, because of the great
glory that shall be poured out on her, that so he, and all his followers may
reap their deserved ruin, and woe, at the coming of Christ, at the great day
of wrath. And so to sum up this, as the reign of Christ draws nigh finishing,
so the reign of Satan; and as the reign of Christ toward the finishing shall
be most glorious, so Satan most furious and crafty in the world, working more
in a mystery, transforming himself into an Angel of light by his goodly outward
shows, and observations; getting into the hearts of men, saying he is God, and
he is Christ, and by this means he shall be more fitted to deceive, and prevail
with Gog and Magog, to gather them together against the Saints, and people of
God every where, being given up as a just punishment from God, for following
their own vain imaginations: I say, the Nations shall be deceived, as a just
judgment of God upon them, and worship the Dragon, and the beast, and the
false Prophet, and in their pride shall think to swallow up all, and then
receive their final overthrow, ruin, and woe, when a fire shall be kindled in
the whole frame of nature, to dissolve the world, and the works therein, and
all the wicked of the earth, high and low, shall say, hide us from the face of
him, who sits upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb.

Quest. 20. What is the last resurrection, and the day of judgment, which the
Scripture speaks of?

Ans. Thou who art ignorant of the first resurrection, art inquiring in thy
busy mind after the last resurrection, which none can know where death
reigns, though the Scriptures declare of it, and so such as you live in your
lusts, and scoff at the Doctrine of Christ, who is the resurrection and the
life, the first and last, Joh 11. 25. Rev. 1. 17. yet know this, that to
judgment thou shall come, for the Lord has appointed a day to judge the world
by the man Jesus Christ, who is the first and the last.

Repl. Here thou show thy self, and in thine heart give no testimony to
the last resurrection, and day of judgment, making as if all were spiritual,
and only in this life, and so thou errest, as they of old, who said, there was
no resurrection, nor Angel, nor spirit, not believing the Scriptures in this,
nor the power of God; to which I add, as the execution of the first, so the
execution of the last is by one Jesus Christ; only the first resurrection is
of the just only, the last of the just and unjust; the first of the Saints of
God, this general of all men, and as my faith in the first, so of the last, is
grounded upon Scripture, Joh. 5. 24. to 30. verily I say unto you, the hour is
coming, and now it is, when they that are in the grave shall hear the voice of
the Son of God, and they that hear shall live, here is the spiritual
resurrection; but it follows, Marvail not at this, for the hour is coming,
wherein all that are in their graves shall hear the voice of Christ, and shall
come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they
that have done evil, unto the resurrection of examination; here is the last
resurrection, wherein all shall arise, either to salvation, or damnation: what
more plain? see Acts 24. 15. there shall be a resurrection, says Paul, both of
the just and unjust; this was Paul's faith and hope, and such as deny this, Paul
disputes against at large, 1 Cor. 13. and tells us, if the Saints should deny
it, they are of all men most miserable, and 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18. there Hymenius
and Phyletus, who said that the resurrection was passed already, are compared
to a Canker, and said to subvert the faith of some; hence Christ speaks of a
last day, and a resurrection at the last day, so Math. 25. 31. to the end, he
describes the manner of it, so Rev. 6. 11, 12. and 20. at the latter end: if
these and the like Scriptures will not persuade men to believe a truth from
God, neither will they be persuaded, though one should be raised from the dead.

Quest. 21. What is the new Jerusalem, which comes down from God out of Heaven,
which is as a Bride adorned for her husband?

Answ. The new Jerusalem is the City of God, the Church of God, which Babylon
and Egypt would devour; now when it appears upon the earth, so all that have
Ships and Treasure in the Sea are gathered against her, who is a Lamb among
the beasts of the field under the defense of the shepherd, who rejoices over
her, as the Bridegroom over the Bride, and the day of marriage is coming, and
come, and the Bride is adorned, and adorning for her husband, who must commit
no adultery with Babylons Merchants, nor lie down to the great men of the
earth, therefore their rage is come up, and Gog and Mdgog is gathered, yet the
spirit of the Lord, our husband, lifts up a standard against them, and out of
this City are all Harlots shut, all covetous persons all that conform to the
world, and all that in its customs and abominations live, all that wastfully
devour the Creatures on their backs, and bellies, all oppressors, all that live
by dishonest gain, all that make a mock at the Doctrine of Christ, etc. read
where thou art, these are Harlots, not Citizens.

Repl. This new Jerusalem comes down from heaven, is not in the earth, or man,
before the Lord pitch up his Tabernacle in man; 't is not merited, or gained by
man's light, or power, 't is wholly out of grace, and by Revelation, as we see
in the case of Paul; 't is grace and pur^ love makes man, the City of the
great King, not any thing in the first birth, Ioh. 3. 3, 5. There must be a
second birth, and this builds the Temple, and makes the Soul the City, and
House, and Church of God; by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of
your selves, it is the gift of God; this grace springs out of the heart of God,
not out of the will of man, and it is grace makes us his workmanship, City, and
dwelling place, and where 't is created that Soul is said to be of God, and
Christ is made unto it wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption; efficiently and formally by working these, and forming these in the
heart of man; and this pure building Babylon and Egypt cannot endure to see,
neither any that make it their business to wander abroad from God, and go down
into the Sea in ships, and this City is the Lilly among the Thorns, planted
under the shadow of the Almighty, where she sits down with great delight and
inward recreation: my Meditation of him shall be sweet; I will sing unto the
Lord as long as I live, and I will go unto him mine exceeding joy: This is she
who rejoices, because the Bridegroom is come, and though she have infirmities,
yet she is washed and washing in the blood of the Lamb, and so the days of her
sorrow and widdow-hood flee away, this is she, who is still adorning, till the
head, and all the Members meet together in the fullness and joy of God; and
this spouse is n^ Adulteres, she loves not the voice, nor love of strangers,
she is not something and great in her self, for she is nothing, but what she is
in her husband, by the grace of God, I am what I am; she cannot worship a
shadow, or form, or idel, as others to get her self a name in the world, she
makes no mention but of one, and to him she bows; and because all this glory
is powered upon her, therefore she is despised of men, hated, persecuted, and
every where evil spoken of; yet blessed, because great is her reward in Heaven:
out if this Cities are all Harlots, all worldlings shut, all Hypocrites,
Backbiters, strikers of their fellow servants, all that make a mock of Christ
of the sufferings, and precious blood of Christ; all that say they are Christ,
lo here, lo there; all that stand upon their toys, ceremonies, vvil-worships,
making the commands of God of none effect by their traditions, see whether, or
no thou have the name of this City written upon the forehead, where so much
railing flows from thy tongue and heart.

Quest. 22. What is the Garden of Eden, out of which Adam was driven, whether
it be the same with Paradise.

Quest. 23. What is the Paradise of God, and the Tree of life in the midst of
it, of which whosoever overcomes shall eat.

Quest. 24. What is the hidden Manna, and the white stone, and the new name
written in the stone, which he that overcomes shall know.

Answ. To these three queries he says, Eden is no Garden known to the world,
where 't is overcome with weeds, and who are driven out of it, is not the same
with Paradise: but who are come to the Tree of life, the old Adam dead, the man
quickened which death passed over, there the Garden is pressed and dressing,
here Eden and Paradise came to be known.

Repl. All this gives no satisfaction to what Eden and Paradise is, though some
truth there be in thy words; for though Eden be every where, where the presence
of God is in Christ, and this presence fills all places, and all things we see,
yet 't is not known unto the world, who are cast out and see Christ no more.
Eden was a figure of heaven, where is no want, but all fullness, all pleasure,
and this heaven is all over within and without unto a child of God, within he
sees the Lord raiguing in his spirit; without he sees the Lord in every
creature; the heavens declare his glory and the firmament shows his handy
work, all creatures are as Jacobs ladder to him with God at the top, these are
the Angels assending and dessending in continual motion, but God who stands at
the top, hidden from the world, but known unto his Saints he is still the same,
and his presence in love and light is the Garden of Eden, and within is
Paradise, joy, singing, and so in the presence of God in love, every place is a
place of joy, every condition, every dispensation heavenly; and here the Soul
has learned to discern between the form and the truth, the out-birth and the
father, he looks unto God, he is the whee^ ^ithin the wheel, and so a gracious
Soul will honor God, who is the (...) being, in every created being, he can
converse with God in all he sees an^ say of every place, creature, condition,
and thing, this is none other, but (...) house of God, and the Gate of Heaven;
into this Garden the righteous (...), and here they are enclosed, and kept by
the Almighties arm, and here they (...) not upon the shadow; but upon the
substance within, they feed not upon the earthly, but upon the heavenly fruit,
the virtue and power of God: And so they live upon God in the Creatures, upon
God in the Scriptures, upon God in every thing, but the man in darkness sees
not God, has not the benefit and comfort of God, and so he is cast out of the
Paradise and joy, and thus you see that Eden, the wicked man knows not, he sees
not the presence of the great King, and so he can not feed upon him, the Weeds
cover God, and among them he hides himself, and there he feeds upon the flesh,
not upon the substance, the Tree of life, this he dares not middle with, being
a guilty sinner, and so if he would enter into the Garden, he can not, there is
a whole principale between, and the Sword is set, and dye he must, and come in
by a Savior, and in him he must be born before the entrance can be made, and
when this is done, and the man of sin in some measure crucified, then the
vilest sinner may go boldly in, because the way is open by regeneration, and
live with God, and know Eden and Paradise. And thou who grutchest another
entrance into this Garden of Eden, into the Lords presence, there to be in joy
and rest by feeding upon the bread of life, it appears that thou art a stranger
unto the Garden, and it is not dressed for thee; and though faign thou would
put forth thine hand, eat, and live for ever; be thine own Judge, and enter
into life through thine own power and crucifying; yet there is an Angel will
keep thy out, till the old man begin to be annihilated, and he, who was dead,
begin to leave in thee, who only prepares the Soul for the Lord, and brings it
into his joy.

Answ. Further, thou say as the Serpent is overcome by the seed of God, the
Tree of life is seen, and fed on, which stands in the midst of the Paradise of
God.

Repl. All this is true, when man is nothing, and is at a loss in himself,
then Christ begins to be seen, and then Christ is sweet, and then he is the
only Tree out of which life grows, and so the Souls feed upon him, who is that
meat which perishes not, sealed by the father.

Further, thou say the Tree of life comes down from heaven, which is the
hidden Manna, and is the new name which none can know, but he that has it.

Repl. The Tree of life thou say comes down from heaven, then he is not
surely in the natural ma^^s thou sometimes dreamest; and if thou have this Tree
in thee, this livi^g Tree in thee; why do thou not declare him, and tell us
how h^^ the Manna, and what the eating is? Thou must answer nothing, and new no
reason of thy faith and hope; but if these things were written in ^^y spirit in
deed, and truth, thou would surely know that one ma^^ end why they are
given, is, that we might declare them.

Furth^^ thou say the hidden Manna, the white stone, the new name, only
such as overcome have fed on; read, and know, Rev. 2. 17. And yet thou in thy
busy mind must needs be enquiring about it, thou, who art in the bondage of
corruption, scraping up Scriptures for sin, and darkness, to remain in man,
whilst he is upon the earth; that art an enemy to Christ, the Tree of life,
who scoffs, at yea, and nay, his doctrine, etc.

Repl. All this surely does not declare what Eden is, or Paradise is, or the
Tree of life, or the hidden Manna, or the white stone, or the new name, unto
all which thou would fain pretend a peculiar interest by thine own
overcoming, and yet can not declare thy self: surely, friend, if thou saw
the Lord, and did indeed abide in his presence, thy foolish nature would not
thus appear still in power, were thou in the light and joy of Paradise, feeding
upon God in thy self, and upon God in every thing that is made, surely thou
could not scoff at any truth of God, and call it a scraping up of
Scriptures, because the Scriptures show man his manifold errors, and
infirmities, and so thou could not deny plain light written in Scripture,
and every man's experience that knows himself.

Did thou know the Tree that the overcomer eats of, surely thou would not
thus lie down to the Serpents power: did thou live in the Lord, and feed upon
the Lord, who is the Paradise and Tree of life both; surely thou would see
God in thy fellow servants, and not smite him, or murmur because the Lord bears
another company besides thy self, for surely there is enough in God for us all.

And did thou know the hidden Manna and eat of it, this would surely sweeten
thine heart, and make thee forget the bitterness that comes through thy lips;
and did thou know the pure image, the divine nature; did thou see this
springing up in thee as a seal of life to thee, surely thine heart would not
thus retain the old hardness, the old language, having nothing written upon
it, but the name of the old man, though the poor old man know it not* or will
not see it; and so to sum up this, and to leave a word, or two with thee.

The Garden of Eden is every where where the Lord is manifested; Paradise is
the fullness and joy that grows up out of this manifestation; the Tree of life
is God in Christ manifested, seen, and know; the eating is the feeding and
living in our spirits upon the ver^^^^, and excellencies as of God, who bids
all his friends eat and drink abundan^^^, and the hidden Manna is the
sweetness, and inward nourishment the sou^ ^inds in God; and the white stone
is the purity and reality of the divine nature in us; and the new name written
upon the stone is the Name of God, the natu^^ mind, will, and judgment of God,
the fulness of God let out according to o^^ measure into our hearts, which
shows to us the things that are freely given to ^s of God, and declares us in
our experiences to be his Sons and Daughters; all these things are one in
substance, and in the root, being but the new man sprung up in us, to bring us
into Paradise and joy; only unto us thereis a variety of operations and
administrations, all which, as we overcome so we are acquainted with:

Quest. 25. What is the bottomless pit, and the smoke that arises from
thence, and the darkning of the Sun and air by the smoke, and the locusts
which came out of the smoke, which John saw?

Answ. When thou art come to the sound of the 5. Angels, then thou will know
and see the bottomless pit, out of which comes all the Sorceries, Witchcrafts
and Enchantments, which deceive the Nations.

Repl. It seems thou have heard the sound of the 5. Angels, and yet have not
seen the Star fallen from Heaven unto the earth, and so have not heard the
right sound; if thou have, declare it; neither have thou seen the bottomless
pit; and so beholdest not the Sorceries, Witch-crafts, and Enchantments which
come from thence; neither the infatuations and strong delusions which God in
wrath has given ye up unto, and all your brethren in all other dark forms and
superstitious vanities; those delusions errors, idols, sins, wickednesses,
abominations, which spring up in such a variety abroad in the Nations have thou
not seen, neither how all these grow up out of one original, the bottomless
pit of the angry, wrathful Kingdom of Lucifer, thy father, who has still been
soaring up to Heaven, but is still cast down unto the earth; and the elect seed
he cannot, he must not deceive totally and finally; and yet ought they always
to be upon their watch, waiting upon their Bridegrom, as knowing their own
pronenesse unto evil: but all ye who are secure, and lofty, and perfect in
your observations and imaginations, that ye have never so much as a wandering
thought prevailing, much less sin appearing either in your lives, or tongues,
even like your forefathers the Ranters, whom ye own not in words, but yet in
spirit; as they are pure holy, undefiled in all things, so are ye; as they are
reconciled to all things, so are ye; and as all that they speak is righteous
altogether, so all that comes from your idle lips; and so ye, as they, are
totally free from all remnants of the old Adam; even ye poor wretches are
thrown down into all the saddest and strongest ^^^usions of the evil one, being
down, as it were, at the bottom of the bot^^^lesse pit, perverting, betraying,
and deceiving your selves and others, with the dream of your high knowledge,
wisdom, righteousness, (...), gifts, high lights, perfect seize, being
found in all the steps (...) the Pharisees, Jews, Priests, Elders, and Rulers
of old, who denied and crucified the Lord of glory. And when ye pretend most
love to Christ within, and his light within, even then ye most deny, and grieve
him, trampling under your feet the Lord that bought ye, making but a mere
notion and trifle of the blood of his Cross; and when ye cry down the
Pharisees and Priests in their titles of masters, fathers, even then ye must
cry up the same spirit in your selves, thus have ye made lies your refuge, and
under vanity are ye hid, and so strongly enchanted and deluded with the smoke
and stinking savor that arises out of the pit, that ye have shut up the
Kingdom of heaven, and none must enter but your selves in the midst of all your
strong infatuations; but the Lord laughs ye to scorn.

And thou, who say all the forms of the Nations are idols, and that all the
Lords people, who worship not with ye are Harlots; and no locusts there are,
but the Priests which have been spread in every Parish of the Nations for
hundreds of years; for so thou say in thine answer, the locusts are the
Priests of the Nations, spread in every Parish for many hundred years: thou who
see no other locusts, thou have not heard the sound of the Angel thou
speak of, which when thou do, thou will hear that the locusts comprehend
more than the Priests, and take in not only wicked, and carnal, and false
teachers among them, but likewise all the wicked, envious, erroneous, false
Teachers, Priests, Prophets and Disciples, as they call themselves in all other
Sects and forms abroad in the Nations, it being the smoke that darkness, the
light of the Sun, and the air, and shuts all discoveries of God out of the
mind and heart, that begets and brings forth these locusts John speaks of; and
happy had it been, and would be, sure, for the Nations, if none but the Priests
of the Parishes had been smothered and darkened with this great smoke, so that
the locusts surely are more than thou art aware of; and the smoke that comes
from the pit, greater than thou art yet acquainted with; and hence thou see
not how thou thy self art found in that which thou condemnest in the Priests,
even in nipping and devouring the tender grass, where 't is growing, and
springing; scoffing at all that worship not in thy Temple too, made with hand,
roaring in the midst of thy Congregations against many of the most precious
Saints of God, seeking in all the power of thy Father to bring all into a
confusion, and to make all the name of Religion a very scorn among all the
Heathen, as 't is at this day. And thou who still pratlest at scoffing at the
Doctrine of Christ, when thou thy self art still scoffing at Christ himself;
seeking to darken his light and glory, sprung up in many precious souls in the
Nation; but into the pit thou and thy brethren again must go, and there be
bound in chains, and reserved against the judgment of the great day; therefore
away with all thy glory, thy form sends out but a nasty smell; the darkest
Priests of the Nations, whom thou so much deridest, can see thine eye blinded
by the God of this world, and put out by the Philistines in thee, and so read
if thou can, but thou know never a letter of the book, and Word of God;
yet look without and within, and it may be thou may discern the smoke, and
where the locusts grow and live; and that they are not many of the Priests
only, but many of the Quakers too, who are still breathing out of the
bottomless pit a numberless number of evil thoughts, murders, errors, evil
speakings, blasphemies, all which defile the man.

Quest. 26. What are the two witnesses, and their prophesying in Sackcloath,
and their standing before the God of the earth?

Answ. One witness thou have within thee, that when thou art in any measure
calm, and quiet in thy mind, lets thee see thy covetous practices, thy lusts
and the uncleanness of thine heart, and the Hypocrisy, and hardness thereof,
and that thy walking is a far off the walking of such, who are indeed Ministers
of the Gospel, and that a light, vain, deceitful mind rules in thee that
hearkens unto; in that stand, lest thou perish in thy corruptions, if thou
mind that which witnesses against thy evil deeds, and unto it yieldest
obedience, that will give thee an hint of the other, and that is swift against
thee.

Repl. All this instead of an answer, is but another buffet of the evil one,
the witness thou speak of is my friend still, and no sooner does Satan
stir, but he is at hand, to bind him, and to stay his mouth; and not the least
covetuousnesse, lust, wickedness do I find arising in me, but he is ready to
rebuke, and to command a calm, that I may hear his voice, and he is first and
last my Savior and witness still, and the sealer up of all my comforts and
joy; the father that loves me has given me the blood and spirit of his son, to
seal up all his promises and favors to me, that by two immutable things, in
which it was impossible for God to lie, I might have strong consolation:
Therefore away, away with all thine accusations and delusions, sooner may
thou turn the frame of the earth and heavens, than alter the fathers mind
concerning me in love, and look for these two witnesses in thy Soul, lest thy
high talk of a light within go out for ever in utter darkness, and thou be
lest unto the destroyer, as one of thy poor brothers almost was, who Satan was
like to starve and burn to death, in body as well as in Soul; but God raised
him up in great love and grace, restored him to his understanding, sense, and
light, and for a memorial to all generations commanded him to publish the foot
out of the snare.

Quest. 27. What is the new creature, wherein the life and power of it stands,
and how ye came acquainted with it in your Souls?

Answ. The new creature is he that is in Christ Jesus, and therein his life and
power stands, and as we came to take up the Cross, and follow the light, we
came to be acquainted with it in our own Souls, and who witness the new
creature, old things are done away, which we find thee loaded withal; and no
coming to the new creature, but in, and through the Cross, which thou know
not, being an enemy unto the Cross, and Ranter-like must talk and tell of
Eden, Paradise, white stone, new name, Tree of life, new creature, new
Jerusalem, hidden Manna.

Repl. Behold still the figure of an unclean spirit, no changeling, like the
mad Cow that gives a good Meal, but plucks it down again with her horn; so thou
now and then speak fair, a few good words we have, but the end still savours
of the evil one, and so like the Pharisee, thou art one who say, but does
not; and a stranger to the new creature, which commands all muttering,
murmuring, accusing, to cease, he is calm, a Lamb, meek, and quiet, peaceable
and gentle, apt to teach, patient, he can suffer no flesh to exalt it self,
that is Antichrist, whom he is come to consume, and he must hold his peace, for
Christ must be all; thou must not sacrifice to thine own net, either thy
righteousness, or thine unrighteousness unto thy self, to merit, as thou
weakly dreamest, by thy Cross, though all must be offered up to him, that he
may reign, and in his reign the life and power of the creature stands; and
whereas I must be a Ranter for talking of high things; and do not thou the
same? talk of the highest things that can be imagined, perfection, fullness,
resurrection, first and last, and art not thou in all this like thy brethren,
who thou call Ranters, they are full, and rich, and have need of nothing,
and know not that they are poor, and miserable, and naked, and have need of all
things, and art not you the same; they have the single eye, they are the seers,
and art not thou the same, thou see all things, thou know all things; they
are sinlesse, spotless, in the midst of all their madness, so thou in the
midst of all thy nakedness, and so thou and they are of one, and in one
father, both given over to strong delusions to believe lies, because ye have
not embraced the truth in the love of it, only with this difference ye are,
they are over-wicked, and ye are over-righteous, and yet both these meet in one
center of flesh and man, and end in one center of sorrow and woe, and so both
the righteous and the wicked are alike abomination, and under condemnation,
when their righteousness as well as their wickedness springs but out of the
first man; hence is that of Solomon, Eccles. 7. 16, 17. be not righteous
overmuch, neither make thy self over-wise, why should thou destroy thy
self? be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou foolish, why should thou dye
before thy time? and so as Job speaks, God shall destroy both the righteous and
the wicked, and where then will thou appear, who gloriest so much in thy Cross?

Quest. 28. What is the ground of your commission and call, to speak and
preach? and how ye came by it, seeing all you speak must needs be Scripture,
and infallible?

Answ. The ground of our commission and call to preach is Christ revealed in
us, and by the will of God, contrary to the will of man, came we into the
Ministry.

Repl. Here according to thine own language thou stealest the Apostles words,
and make use of them to deceive the simple: but thy shifts are seen, and thou
thy self has pulled off the cover, and manifested by all thy carriage that thy
commission comes from another power, even thine own will, thy proud haughty
mind, that take this honor upon thee before thou art anointed of God; and
therefore thou art found to be a striker, brawler, of no good behavior, not
apt to teach, but to scoff and rail, a novice lifted up with pride, a little
knowledge and wisdom thou have received formerly, but it has perverted thee,
puffed thee up, and so 't is taken away, and fallen thou art into the snare,
and condemnation of the Devil, and so all thy preaching which thou art anointed
to, tends to the bringing up an evil report upon the lowest degree of a man,
brotherly and orderly humanity, much more upon the highest, the high profession
of Christianity; so far thou art from the spirit of a Christian, that thou art
not a man; so far from being a man, that thou art below a beast; for the Ox
knows his honor, and the Ass his Masters Crib, but thou regardest not the
Lord nor man; and yet thy father has deluded thee, and told thee thou have a
commission from Christ revealed in thee; but when did Christ, revealed in any,
teach them to preach another Gospel, and to say 't is a great sin to pull off
the hat, and to make any shadow of respect, to honor, fear, or reverence any,
to whom 't is due; nay, not the image of God in fathers, masters, aged people,
and governors, contrary to the Letter and meaning, both of Law and Gospel; and
where did Christ say it was a great sin? nay, the language of Egypt, to say,
you, instead of thou, and yes, instead of yea, to wear Bands, Cuffs, Ribbins,
or the like, so as men did it with gravity; surely Christ has something else to
declare where he anoints to preach: Further, where did Christ command to preach
up the light of nature, instead of the light of grace? as if the poor dark
world had had light sufficient within, and there had been no need of his
coming, or spirit, or Scripture; and where did Christ command to preach up the
power and freedom, and will of man? as if man had all already, and had no need
to be endued with power from an high; and where did Christ command to preach up
our merits, our holiness, our observations, or so much as the blood of our own
sins, to justify us in the sight of God, and to make his merits, and blood,
and Cross a scorn, and derision among the Heathen? where did Christ thus
dishonor himself, to exalt proud flesh and man? where did Christ call the
Scriptures, Letter, Ink, and Paper, not known to any till this generation;
Friend, I know, notwithstanding all this, thou can not see thy shame, but art
like an hungry man that dreams he eats, but when he awakes, his Soul is empty;
so in thy dream thou eatest and thou drinkest, and thou have passed through
all, death, judgment, resurrection, not in part, but in whole, and through
thine own poor, weak light, and power, and skill, thou art gone up out of
Egypt, passed through the wilderness, through the Red Sea, and have seen all
the Egyptians drowned, and have entered into thy full rest in Canaan, and no
more do thou look for that is to come: thus art thou high in thine
imagination, though low enough in thy foundation, even building upon the sand
of thine own will, and though you strike at the very foundations of all
society, humanity, charity, Christianity, endeavoring to lay all desolute, and
even with the ground; yet thou, and thy wandering generation must all have their
Commissions from God, and be infallible, and all that will not believe it must
be Anathema Maranatha; Alas, poor wretches, ye have need of pity, but ye cannot
pity your selves, ye have need of grace, rich mercy, great grace, but ye want
none: I say no more to ye but this, the spirit of the Lord cannot stoop to
proud men's will; therefore remember your Creator betimes, look to the Rock
from whence ye are hewn, pity Abraham your father, and Sarah your mother,
leave off building up the Babel of your own light, power, merits, will, lest ye
be made an hissing, astonishment, and desolation by the Lord of Hosts; return
to your first husband, your first love, that we with you may live with him in
brotherly-kindnesse and charity; seek not to make the breaches wider, but
rather to repair the breaches, and to reconcile people that wander in the dark
unto one another in the Lord; seek the righteousness, joy, and peace of the
Kingdom, which comes down from the father, walk in the light of the Lord, which
will reach you to be as the Lord is unto all men, according to your measure you
receive, and so it may be, lead some more of your feet out of this cunning
snare; and as for me, notwithstanding all your hard speeches, which the evil
one in ye has uttered against me, yet I shall not cease to be your friend
before the Throne of grace, desiring to see, and find your hearts filled with
sorrow and trembling for all your errors, and mystical infatuations, that so
the name of Babylon may not still be written upon your foreheads, who is
called, Mystery, Babylon the great, the Mother of Harlots, and of the
abominations of the earth; but rather the new name, the name of God, of the new
City, the new Jerusalem, which comes down from heaven, that so you may see
your perfection here in the midst of imperfections, and may come to that
perfection hereafter, which is in the midst of the fullness and joy of God.

FINIS.

