AN ANSWER TO The Excellent and Elegant SPEECH MADE BY Sir Thomas Player, The
Worthy Chamberlain of London, To the Right Honble the Lord Mayor, etc. On
Friday the 12th of September, 1679. By H. B. an unworthy Member of the said
City; but could not be heard or understood then.
MY LORD,
I Cannot but wonder at the manner as well as the subject matter of Sir T.P.
his Discourse. As to the manner, I suppose he might have informed your Lordship
and the Court of Aldermen of any danger the City were in, upon any account
whatsoever, without bringing an hundred persons at his heels. I must take the
boldness to tell him, that it looked more like a tumultuous number of
Apprentices doing execution upon Bawdie-houses, than any solid considerate way
of advising good for the City or Kingdom. But I suppose the great Policy of
that, might have Three Considerations: one, to show that he is able to lead up
his men: another, that he is able to make an excellent Speech: or thirdly, that
he, for his great zeal and love to the City and Nation, was solicited by
those persons, out of their great fears and apprehensions of dangers partly
created by himself.

I am very sorry that a Gentleman should have given occasion for any Citizen to
have said so much: but any thing concerning his Highness had been received
better from another hand than his, because of the known Grudge.

Next, as to the subject matter, he seems to be very much offended at the
Citie's being Libelled in the Intelligencer, by saying that the City should
send to congratulate his Highness his return: As if it were such an immortal
stain to the reputation of the City, never to be deleted! I wonder it was
never taken notice of before. Had we congratulated him now, it had not been the
first time. When he returned from Sea, where he hazarded his life for the
maintaining of our Trade, (which we are the gainers by) and had been in the
heat of fight, where several Noblemen were killed about him, we could then
congratulate him, as also did the Nation with a Present. He did not want Honor
or Preferment, to do this for us. But we might have congratulated him, as he
has condescended to be a Member of us.

If his Highness had so much malice in him as to necessitate us to be upon our
Guards in the nature proposed, surely he would never have ventured himself as a
private Seaman, for our service.

Neither can I conceive any such great danger of our Religion, since his
Majesty is living, and well (God be thanked.) His Highness his Title may never
happen. Besides, the Assembly of Parliament, and our Members there, will take
care of us in that point.

We speak well of our King generally, although I am afraid there be some
amongst us that are sorry they cannot speak otherwise, to further their designs
of enslaving us under a parcel of Factious and Ambitious fellows. And I hope
there be yet persons sufficient amongst us (upon discovery of any such
designs) to correct any sort of Faction against the King, Laws, and
Established Government, whether Popish, or any other predominant among us: for
neither the one nor the other (I am assured) consist with the Freedom of the
Subject.

We cry out of Arbitrary Government, and I know not what besides, with which
the Vulgar are amused: whilst we in our Government in the City are the most
guilty of Arbitrariness in the execution of the Laws that we be Judges of, of
any body else. For how many Thousand pounds per annum come into our Purses by a
Knack of choosing Sheriffs, in making choice of persons whose occasions we know
will not permit them to serve that Office; and then, to excuse them, we must
have Four or five hundred pound apiece? with many suchlike Devic^s. And how
many young Citizens have been undone by moneys paid for coming on of our
Liveries; a Tax more considerable than twenty Public Taxes for the support of
the Government? These things, besides a great number more, we have and shall
find will lessen our Trade and Interest; else would not our houses stand
unlet, and our shops be uncustom'd.

When the King had thanked us for our Care in raising the Militia, and making
the City a Garrison, for the preservation of his person; His Majesty told us
he would take care of himself, yet this would not make us lay down our Arms.
Nor do I know by what Law the Lieutenancie there can make us keep them up. It Is
true, the Lieutenancie themselves, or we that are the principal men, value not
the Charge, being little to us, in comparison of what it is to the poor
Tradesmen, who had more need be minding their business, than they or their
servants so employed, to the debauchery of the youth of the City. And many of
those mean persons that are forced to be at this intolerable charge, will be
fit for nothing, but to give assistance in any new Rebellion.

And if you please to peruse the Statutes for settling the Militia, 13 Car. 2.
cap. 6.14 Car. 2. cap. 3.
you will find there how our Trained Bands are to be marshaled: That in case of
Invasion or Insurrection, every Soldier is to be provided of one Months pay;
but no person to be charged further, until the said Months pay be reimbursed
him. And in times of peace, the General Muster and Exercise of Regiments not to
be above once a year. That the Training and Exercising single Companies be not
above four times a year, unless upon special Direction by the King or Privy
Council; and the same not to continue above two days, etc. These Acts were made
with abundance of Consideration for the Liberty of the Subject, that the King
should not lay any extraordinary burden upon our estates, upon any pretense
whatsoever. And I wonder how it has been submitted unto by our pretense of
Authority so long, being absolutely against Law.

It Is impossible for us to thrive in the City, whilst we amuse our selves with
these kind of Fears. Let us trust God and the King with the Government: let us
mend our selves at home, and endeavor to encourage and increase the Trade of
the City. When the King or Government is in danger, we shall hear of it time
enough: or if the King has a mind to make us of his Privy Council, he knows
his own time for it. Certainly the King has more to lose than any of us.

I must refer it to your Lordships consideration, whether we ought to take
notice of this Intelligencer as a Libeller or not; and also whether there be
occasion for any Guards at all, for the considerations aforesaid.

FINIS.

