The Lord Byrons FIRST ARTICLES Presented to Sir William Brereton BEFORE The
Surrender of the City OF CHESTER: Wherein the great Ambition of that party does
appear, And as by the last Articles whereunto he subscribed is to be seen at
large.

LONDON: Printed by John Field, Feb. 10. 1645.

The Lord Byrons first Articles presented to Sir William Brereton.
1. THat my self, all Noblemen, Commanders, Officers, Gentlemen and Soldiers,
of Horse or Foot, that do or have served His Majesty or Parliament in England
or elsewhere; and likewise all persons whatsoever now residing here in this
City of Chester, Castle and Fort thereof, of what Nation, Country or Religion
soever, shall have liberty to march away out of the said City, Castle, and
Fort, with their complete Arms, Colors flying, Drums beating, Trumpets
sounding, their Pistols and Carbines in their hands, Swords drawn, Matches
lighted at both end, Bullets in their mouths, each man a pound of Powder,
Bullet and Match proportionable, in their rank and form, as they used to march
in Batalia, with their Goods, Bag and Baggage, to any of His Majesty's Armies
or Garrisons as I shall desire: And that such of the City Regiment under the
command of Sir Francis Gunnell as are minded to stay in the City, be suffered
so to do, and enjoy their Arms and Goods, and all such privileges as are in
the several Articles proposed for the Citizens.

2. That neither my person, nor the person of any Nobleman, Commander, Officer,
Gentlemen or Soldier, or any other, mine or any of their Servants or Retinues,
be searched, molested or troubled upon any pretense whatsoever, but left with
their liberties to march with their Arms or stay, as seems most convenient to
them.

3. That none of your Army whatsoever shall entice or persuade any Officer or
Soldier under my command from their mind or colors, with any promise of
preferment, or reward or any other inducement.

4. That no person comprised in these Articles shall in their March,
Rendezvous, or Quarters, be stripped, searched or plundered upon any pretense
whatsoever.

5. That I have with me two pieces of brass Canon out of the City, the other
out of the Fort, and one case of Drakes, with their train and equipage, and
Ammunition sufficient to discharge each Canon twelve times, and also ten
Barrels of Powder, with Bullet and Match proportionable.

6. That all Officers and Soldiers of what quality or condition soever they
are, sick or hurt in the Hospital or elsewhere in the Garrison, shall have
liberty to stay till they shall be recovered, and then have Pass and safe
conduct to go to any His Majesty's Armies or Garrisons, or their own houses or
friends, where they may be quiet, as shall be by them or any of them required,
and in the mean time to be provided for and protected by you and have civil
usage.

7. That all military Officers, Gunpowder-makers, and other Workmen whatsoever,
with their Horses, Bag and Baggage, have liberty to march away with me, or to
have Passes to go to any of His Majesty's Armies or Garrisons as shall be
desired.

8. That such a number of Carts, Horses and Boats as I shall require for my
self, Officers and Soldiers, to carry their goods, Arms, and Baggage, be
provided and allowed, and in no case or pretense whatsoever, any of their
Carts, Wayns, Boats, or Port- Mantu^es, or Cloak-bag, or otherwise, be
searched, and that an Officer or Officers be by you appointed to provide Horses
and Boats, and carriages for our Baggage and Train.

9. That any the persons of what condition soever, in any the preceding or
subsequent Articles mentioned, may have liberty to go beyond the Sea, from any
the Ports in the power of the Parliament, at any time within three Months
after the Signing of these Articles, with their Goods, as their occasions shall
require; and that upon demand you grant to all such effectual Passes to that,
purpose.

10. That the Wives and Families of any the Officers and Soldiers marching out
of this City or elsewhere in His Majesty's Service or Prisoner with you, have
liberty to stay in the Town for three months, to dispose of their Goods and
Estates to the best advantage, without any confiscation or prey to be made of
them, and at the end of three months, to have a Convoy and Passes for their
safe travel to such places as they shall require either by Land or Water, and
to carry with them such Moneys and Goo^s as they shall have by them.

11. That the Earl of Liechfields Body attended by his Servants, have a Pass
and safe Convoy to Oxford when it shall be required, to be there Interred; as
also the Earl of Derbies Body, and all such other Bodies which lie in any of
the Churches of the city unterred, may be conveyed by their several Friends, t^
be Interred as shall be by them desired, and safe Convoyes and Passes granted
for that purpose.

12. That the Archbishop of Armagh, his Library and Maddals, may be conveyed to
Conway or elsewhere, and Wagons or Boats at my choice appointed to carry them:
And that the Goods of the Duke of Buckingham committed to the custody and
charge of Alderman Cooper, then Mayor by the special Command of His Majesty;
and all other the Goods of any other person, either Soldier or other, left in
this Garrison for security, may, if they desire it, be conveyed to Conway or
elsewhere, by Land or Water, within three months, without any loss or damage
to be done unto them.

13. That the Fort at Hanbridge built by Command before this present Siege, be
forthwith demolished and thrown down.

14. That upon Agreement and Pacification betwixt King and Parliament, this
City and Castle shall upon demand, by His Majesty or such as he shall appoint,
to be surrendered and delivered unto His Majesty, or any other whom he shall
appoint or authorize to receive the same.

15. That a general Exchange for all prisoners on both sides be agreed upon
and perfected, and of all such for whom no Exchanges can be proposed, may be
ransomed for a months pay.

16. That there be a cessation of Arms and Hostility in the counties of
Northwales for ten days from the time of my marching out, and that you shall
not impose or leavie any Contribution or Taxation^, or permit any free quarter
in the said counties during the time within mentioned, and that I have for that
time an Authentic Pass and Convoy, to travel to His Majesty whithersoever,
with such Gentlemen and Officers, and to return as I shall desire, not
exceeding fifty in number, and to return again into any part of Northwales
without interruption.

17. That a Convoy of 200. horse be allowed for our Guard and safe conduct to
Denbigh, and to have four days allowed to march thither, and the Convoy to
return thence to Chester, and that until the Convoy be returned, all your
Forces and Soldiers of your Army be drawn to Cheshire side, and a good Guard
appointed to hinder them to march over the water.

18. That Hostages (such as I shall accept of) be delivered to the Governor of
Denbigh upon the signing hereof, for the due and punctual performance of these
Articles.

19. That all Citizens, as well Soldiers as others, together with the Noblemen,
Gentlemen, Officers, Clergy, and all other Inhabitants whatsoever, shall enjoy
their lives, liberties and estates, within the City or elsewhere, in as full and
free a manner as heretofore they have done, and that no violence shall be
offered to any person of what degree soever, or any shall be plundered or robbed
upon any pretense whatsoever, or enforced to bear Arms against their wills, and
that Justice according to the known Laws of the Land, and Custom of the city,
be administered to all persons within this city by the Civil Magistrate.

20. That all the Noblemen, Officers, Gentlemen, Citizens, Clergy, and all
others whatsoever now resident in this city, having Houses and Lands in any
part of the Kingdom of England or Dominion of Wales, may from the time of the
signing of these Articles, have free liberty to reside at any of their own
houses, or elsewhere at their choice, and to live without disturbance, and
peaceably and quietly enjoy the whole profits of their estates.

21. That no Oath, Covenant or Protestation whatsoever (except such as are
required by the En^cted Laws of the Land) be imposed upon any Citizen,
Soldier, Nobleman, Gentleman, Clergy, or Inhabitant whatsoever in this city.

22. That if any the Citizens or persons before nominated, shall desire to go
beyond Seas upon their occasions, they shall have liberty to pass to any place
whatsoever, at any time within six months.

23. That the Garrison which shall be placed within this City, consist only of
Cheshire men, and be maintained with Contribution out of that County, and not
by Free-quartering upon the Inhabitants within the City.

24. That the Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffs and free Citizens, as well Soldiers as
others, shall enjoy all their ancient Privileges and Immunities as formerly
they have done, without Breach or Interruption, and shall have freedom of Trade
and Traffic by Land or Sea, at all places, with all persons not in Hostility
against the Parliament. And that none be hereafter questioned upon any act or
thing done or committed heretofore.

25. That no Nobleman, Gentleman, Citizen, Officer, Clergyman, or persons
residing in this City, shall from this time be questioned for any Speech or Act
whatsoever, said or done, or pretended to be said or done, or for execution of
any Commission, Office or Employment, or Command, Military or Civil, since the
beginning of the Wars.

26. That the whole Army should not enter this City, but the Commanders,
Officers, and a certain number of Soldiers to be agreed upon, and those to be
only Cheshire men.

27. That Dee Mills, and Cawsis Waterworks and Tower may be preserved as now
they are, and not demolished nor pulled down, being so useful to this City.

28. That all Citizens, Gentlemen and Inhabitants whatsoever, as well Soldiers
as others, may have the liberty of twelve months to remove and go out of this
City, with their whole Families, Goods, and Estates at their own pleasures, and
for their better removal to have a safe conduct and carriages upon easy rates,
either by Land or Water; and this to be granted at any time, within the term a
foresaid, (if desired).

29. That all those persons whose dwellings are within the city, though now
absent, shall have the benefit of these Articles, as if present in the city.

30. That all manner of persons may have and freely enjoy and use the benefit
of the Laws established for the preservation of their Estates, and the
prosecution of their just actions in course of judicature as formerly.

31. That no Nobleman, Gentlemen, Citizen, or Inhabitant, shall be compelled to
any excessive Taxation for any of their Lands or Goods, but proportionably with
other their Neighbors as formerly.

32. That all our Clergy of or within this city, may return to their Livings,
Houses or Spiritual proportiors, execute their functions in their several
Cures, and Preach the Gospel, and receive all and every their Rites, Dues,
Tithes, and other advantages belonging to them, without any molestation or
disturbance, as formerly they did, before they departed or were expelled from
their several places of abode; and that such of them as have Presentations to
any Living or Spiritual promotions, may not be hindered to have their
restitution to the same.

33. That no Church nor Chapel in the city be defaced, and that all the
Members of the Cathedral Church may enjoy their places or functions, with their
profit hereunto belonging as heretofore; And that all Records, Writing Books,
Goods and Furniture thereof, may be preserved from violation and profane abuse.

34. That Sir Gilbert Haughton, High Sheriff of the county of Lancaster, with
such Noblemen, Gentlemen, Officers and Soldiers, who shall desire it, have
Passes for themselves, their Servants, Horses and Goods to Oxford, or any of
His Majesty's Armies or Garrisons, so soon as they shall require the same,
after the Signing of these Articles.

35. That all Ladies, Gentlewomen, and other women whatsoever, residing within
this City and Garrison, whether named or un-named, of what condition or
Religion soever, have liberty immediately upon the signing of these Articles, to
pass and travel with their Servants, Horses and Goods, to such place or pl^c^s
they desire; and upon their requiring have free Passes and sa^e conduct for
that purpose, or if they think fit and desire it, to have the benefit of the
tenth Article, and to be deemed and used as persons intended thereby, and
comprised therein.

36. That such Merchants within the city, who shall desire to have Passes to
travel into any of the Counties of North Wales about their necessary occasions,
and return to this city at any time within these three months after the
Signing thereof, have liberty so to do, and Passes granted to them for that
purpose.

FINIS.

