A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, January 30. 1692.

By RICHARD BYNNS, Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge, and Chaplain to his
Grace the Duke of Somerset.

In the SAVOY.

Printed by Edw. Jones, for William Crook, at the Sign of the Green Dragon
near Temple-Barr. 1693.

Mr. Bynn's SERMON Before the Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS.

January 30. 1693.

Mercurii primo die Februarii. 1692.
ORdered, That the Thanks of this House be given to Mr. Bynns, Chaplain to his
Grace the Duke of Somerset, for the Sermon by him Preached before this House,
at St. Margarets Westminster, upon the 30th. Day of January last; And that he
be desired to Print the same, and that Mr. Hen. Boil and Sir Orlando Gee, do
acquaint him therewith.

Paul Jodrell. Cl. Dom. Com.

A SERMON Preached before the House of Commons, January 30. 1692.
Isa. 57. The former part of the first Verse. The Righteous Perishes, and no
Man lays it to Heart.
THese Words of the Prophet, are an upbraiding of the Jews, for a Supine
Wretchedness of Temper, in being wholly unconcerned, for the loss of Eminent
Good Men: And indeed, such an Insensibility it is, as draws this Reproach along
with it, to have for it 's Parent, a Profane Dissolute Age, Reigning in a
general Corruption of Manners.

And when Impiety comes to this height once, when Vice and Disorder bear a
general Sway, what wonder is it, if there be no miss of Virtue, no Concern for
the loss of the good Man? The Righteous Perishes, and no Man lays it to
Heart.

These Words may seem in the Opinion of Learned Men, not so much to refer to
the present Times of Isaiah then speaking, as to those future Calamitous Ones,
growing worse and worse, as they still drew nearer the Jews Captivity. And so
we may observe these two things worthy of our Consideration.

First, that in evil Distempered Times, in a National Corruption, when it
pleases God to call the Good Man to himself, to minish the few Faithful from
their Corrupter Brethren, it is a sore Presage of an impending Calamity; from
which as the Mercy of God delivers the Just, so he Reserves the Wicked for it.

The second thing Observable is, that not to advert Timely, not to consider
Rightly, and lay to Heart the Reason of such Providential Dispensation, is a
Stupidity so much the more aggravating, as is the Sin and Offense then mostly
heightened, when the secure Sinner is least touched with a Sense of it.

To begin with the First, viz. the snatching away good Men from an evil
Generation, is the Forerunner of impending Public Calamities.

The Righteous Perishes.

By Perishing here, may be well enough understood, the ordinary way of Dying:
But not so, however, as to Exclude any other Divine Permission of an untimely
violent Death: For so Josiah himself, though next to David the most Righteous in
the Line of the Kings of Judah, fell in the Day of Battle, by the Hand of the
Egyptian too* and yet for all that, was he said to be gathered to his Fathers,
and into his Grave in Peace. And indeed Dying as he 2 Kings 22. 20.
did, in the Love and Favor of God (for his Good Deeds followed him) and
receiving by his Death an Exemption, as it were, from approaching Evils, might
be well enough said to rest in Peace, because delivered by God from beholding
that Ruin, which was intended, though not in his days, to be brought upon the
House of Judah.

Thus though this Righteous Person's Death was Peace to himself, yet was it a
Punishment to the People and Nation, from whom he was taken: For he was taken
from the Evil to come, that Evil of Desolation so much Lamented by the Prophet
Jeremy, when the Line of Destruction was now drawing over the Remnant of Judah
and Jerusalem, as it was before over Samaria, and so the whole Body of the Jews
made Captives in a strange Land.

Thus if Punishments are Respited some time from a People otherwise ripe for
them, for the sake of some chosen Ones, who like Moses, stand in the Gap, and
for a while, divert the fiery Indignation; yet upon their Removal, Destruction
breaks in afresh.

No sooner was the Righteous Lot escaped to that little City of Refuge, which
God had shown him, but it rained down Fire and Brimstone upon Sodom, and it is
Neighboring Cities. Had there been but ten Righteous in all the Plain, at
Abraham's Intercession, the Cities Genesis 19.
had bin spared: But for want of so few a Number, did the Flame Consume them.

It is true indeed, it is not universally to be understood, as if the Righteous
were always exempt from Temporal Punishments in common with the Wicked, so long
as they are in Society with them in this World: For the Relation they bear to a
Community, does involve them often in the Miseries, as well as the Advantages
of a Commonwealth.

For as the Welfare of Public Societies, Humanly speaking, depends mostly upon
the Care and Probity, the Piety, Fitness and Abilities of those that Govern: So
on the other hand, by rebating of those Virtues, does the Declension of the
State ensue. And this the Wise Man assures us (who was the best experienced in
Politics of any) when he says, that Prove. 14. 34.
Righteousness Exalts a Nation, but withal, that Sin is a Reproach to any
People.

Now then, if this latter happens to be uppermost, as where Sin is in vogue,
there must be a Decay of Discipline, a Relaxation of Laws and good Order; and
if the Hands of those that should bind the severals to their Duty, be
themselves weak and hanging down, if the Props and Supporters of Israel be
shaken, and a Licentiousness from whatever Quarter, or however caused, be
suffered to pass upon an ungodly People, for more Exemplary Punishment of
Presumptuous Sins: It cannot be, I say, Ordinarily speaking, in such a crazy
Constitution, in such a Tottering State, but that the Righteous, if there be
any, should Promiscuously suffer with the Wicked.

For Bodies Politic, have their Judgment in this World: There is no
Resurrection of a State, and Consequently it is Doom is by Providence determined
here. And hence for the Iniquity and Disobedience of a People, for want of
executing Judgment and Justice, for Idolatry, Profaneness, Oppression, Murder
and Rebellion, does God Almighty Over-turn Kingdoms, Transplant Nations, as he
did the Jews here, leading their Princes and People, their Priests and Prophets
into Captivity, to be Chastised and Humbled under the Burden of their Sins.

The good Man's Lot is sometimes then to Perish with the Wicked, but the
Perishing of the one and the other, though seeming outwardly the same, yet has
this difference, the one dies in his Sins, and the other Happily makes his
passage to a sure and peaceful Retreat. This Latter is only taken away from the
Evil to come, that so the greater Punishment might pass on the Wicked, as it
certainly must, when the Godly Man fails, when the useful Man is Ps. ^2. 1.
withheld from doing any longer good to a lost People, Infatuated in their
Sins.

It is true, Godliness has the promise of this 2 Timothy 4 8.
Life, and that which is to come; but by Us Christians, this Latter is most to
be Attended to, as giving us a better Light, a clearer Prospect of Rewards and
Punishments, than any other Dispensation did; and therefore we are in Patience
to possess our Souls, not thinking it Luke 21. 19.
a perishing to our Loss, if at some times we are, as we think, too soon
removed from hence.

Neither indeed, was that other Rule of the Mosaic Dispensation, as to outward
Temporal Blessings so generally observed toward the Righteous, as never to
fail them; and yet withal, Reconcilable to it is Promises too, in the reason of
such Holy Men as David, who when they enter into the Sanctuary, and consult God
in his Holy Places, can well enough understand the Perishing of the Righteous,
to be a Sign of God's Displeasure to those from whom they are taken, and not
suffered to live longer with.

Thus it fared with the Holy Men of Old, Priests, Prophets, Kings and Rulers;
many of them as the Apostle speaks, of whom the H^br. 11.
World was not worthy, by their several Violent Deaths, to be removed from some
one Perverse Generation or other, that would not be reclaimed, that so the Evil
intended, might after their Days, be brought upon the Wicked.

Thus the Perishing of the Righteous becomes the Punishment of the Wicked, a
Sign of their approaching Destruction. And no sooner was Josiah removed, but
Wickedness took it is Loose, Idolatry marched barefaced throughout the Land,
the Temple was Defiled, the true Religion and Holy Worship set at naught, and
Iniquity and Profaneness set up by a Law. With good Reason then, the Prophet
takes up with the Lamentation of the Valley of Megiddon, Zech. 12. 11.
the Place where Josiah fell, for soon after did the Wickedness of his
Posterity, bring on that Captivity, which for his Righteousness only, was
delayed before.

And thus I have done with the first Observable, and have shown you, that the
Perishing of the Righteous, is at some times permitted for a punishment of the
Wicked.

The next thing to be observed, is the not laying to Heart, the not considering
rightly of this matter, which was the Stupidity of the Jews, so much blamed in
my Text.

And indeed, this was the most aggravating Sin that could be, not to be moved
by Example, to have no Remorse upon the Judgments of God falling round about
them: Not to Repent upon the Warning given them by present Calamities,
especially, when they saw the Good Man fall too, the Righteous taken away the
Councellor, the able Minister, the useful Helpers withdrawn from a sinking
State.

Could they think that God should suffer the perishing of such, and yet let the
Wickedness of their Hands escape? Should not such Warning make them Reflect
rather, and think their own Hour was a-coming? Or could they think, that God
takes pleasure in Wickedness, at least winks at it, and is altogether such as
are Themselves? No such Thoughts could happen to any one that had yet any live
part, or tender Sense about him: For scarcely is a Man Wicked to an Extremity
at once, he comes to it by Degrees, and receives many a Check, before the Habit
becomes Confirmed and Strengthn'd in him: But when he arrives to this pass
once, that his Wickednesses have gone over his Head, that he is plunged, that
his Reason is sunk, his Conscience overwhelmed, and like the Leviathan in the
Waters, can sport himself in this miry Deep, then is his Disease come to its
Height, he is so much the more Wicked, by how much less he is Sensible of his
Sin.

This is that Security that is proof against all Correction, Deaf to all Advice
and Counsel, Stubbornly bent upon Evil, and that without Remedy, because
insensible of that which should work it is change.

Such a Train of ill Qualities, does this Stupid and Seared Conscience draw
along with it: And just such a gross People were the Jews at this time, so
settled upon their Lees, as the Zeph. 1. 12.
Prophet speaks, so lost to all Morality and Religion, as to doubt at length of
a Providence, and to say in their Heart, the Lord will not do Good, neither
will be do Evil.

And so, no wonder we find this People so fearless of God's Judgments, taking
no warning at impending Calamities, no, not so much as laying to Heart the
perishing of the Righteous, who alone, if any, could have saved them.

The Righteous may Perish for all them, and none of these wretches lay it to
Heart, the Merciful Men may be taken away, and yet none of them consider that
they are taken away from the Evil to come.

And that we may see, these Jews were all of a piece, true Jews still, as
hating to be Reformed, their Character is found the same throughout both
Testaments, and they that stoned the Prophets in the One, are for Crucifying
their Messiah and King in the Other, a perverse Generation, not to be overcome
by Truth or Love, so prevalent over Ingenuous Minds. Oh! Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
says our Savior, when he wept over the unrelenting City, if thou had known
in this thy Day, the things that belong unto thy Peace! And again, how often
would I have gathered thy Children together, as a Hen gathers her Brood under
her Wings, and ye would not! Behold your House is left unto you Desolate. And
yet to see how eagerly they drew this Desolation upon themselves: For it was
for that Blood of the Just One, that their House was to become Desolate, and
how greedily did they covet that very Blood? Shall I Crucify your King? Says
Pilate. He stood aghast at it, yet the popular Cry was, Crucify him, Crucify
him. The Heathen Governor called for Water to wash his Hands of this Guilt, he
was for making himself as innocent as he could. But what say the Rabble, the
Multitude and the Tumultuous? Rather than not have it so, his Blood, say they,
be upon Us and our Children; a heavy Curse, and what sticks to that vagabond
Nation to this Day.

But leave we now this obdurate unthinking People, and let us come nearer home
with an enquiry upon our selves. Certainly we shall find more Relenting here,
and indeed it is but fit we should. For we of this Nation, have had our Turn of
Calamities, we have seen the Oppression of our People, and have had our share
in a Captivity too.

Though what imbitters our Cup is, our Captivity was of our selves, it was not a
Foreign Enemy that did us this Dishonor, but they were Familiars of our own,
with whom we took as we thought sweet Counsels; Men of perverse Spirits arising
from among our selves, that punished us with a Sword out of our own Bowels.

When the Almighty was wont to threaten Destruction to the unrepenting Jews, he
told them, he would hiss for the Fly from Egypt, Isai. 7. 14.
for the Be from Assyria, to speak in the Language of the Prophet: But alas!
We had viler Vermin of our own at home, the Locust and Caterpillar, an Army of
inmate Destroyers laid wast our Land. And if it might be said perhaps that an
open Enemy from without, could not have greatly harmed us, yet will it not be
allowed, I fear, that we had not power of our selves, and that we would not use
that power too, to our own Destruction.

Indeed that power we had, and too sensibly did experience it; if that be our
Glorying, we may Glory; but it is in our Shame, and Confusion of face should
attend us for it.

This very Day reminds us of our Humiliation for those past Transgressions, and
it is by public Authority made a standing Law to our Israel, that once a Year
at least, we should bewail our former Captivity, and Repent us of those deadly
Sins that occasioned such a National Calamity, -- Deliver us from
Blood-guiltiness, O Lord, that of this Day especially, thou that make
Inquisition for Blood: Thou that say Number. 35.
a Land is Defiled with Blood, be Merciful unto this Land of ours, so staind as
it is, not with vulgar ordinary Blood, which yet was too dear to be poured out
like Water, but with that of our Princes and Nobles, and what is most
Astonishing, even that of the Lord's Anointed, our late Slaughtered Sovereign
himself.

And must this Land still Mourn for Blood then? Without an Atonement and a
deep Repentance, it must do so.

But have we not already Repented long enough? May some say, what! Still the
old Saw of a returning Fast? -- Ye Men of Israel, Ye Men of the Sanhedrin, Ye
have given us Laws and Ordinances that are not good. Not good indeed, to those
to whom they are grievous; and so the Statutes of the Almighty himself are not
good to a Rebellious gainsaying People, hardn'd in their Impiety, unrelenting
for their Sins, and impatient of coming to an Acknowledgment of their Faults.

And if there can be found any such amongst us of that unhappy temper, to them
truly the Statutes and Ordinances of this Day are not good: But then it must be
confessed, that it is their own Wickedness, their own Impenitence that makes
'em so.

If the Law of Moses would admit of no Sacrifice for wilful Murder; for who so
sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed, ye shall Genesis 9.
not in any wise take Satisfaction for a Murder, Numb. 35. 31.
says the Law: Is it a great thing then for us, when even the most heinous
Murders (and I think that of this Day must stand by it self alone without
Parallel) find Remission in the Blood of Christ, the cleanser of all Sins
whatever, conjoined with a true Compunction and Sincere Repentance: Is it a
great thing then, I say, since we Christians have a Provision now made, a
Sacrifice ready to offer, to adjoyn our Tears, our Sorrow, our Confession of
what we have done amiss to provoke God's Wrath against Us? Is it a great thing
to melt a little into Tenderness and Compunction, to bend our stubborn Hearts,
to bruise and soften them a little with the Discipline of this Day? What are we
afraid we shall be too Repentant? We shall overdo in Duty? More than Compensate
for our Crime? Forgive this once that excess to us, never was better fault
committed.

But why do I Quaere about the Day, as if we could be Sick of it? Since that
were an Argument against the Sincerity of our Repentance, since it would seem
as though we cared not to remember our old Sins, and not so old neither, since
within Memory of Men still living. Not remember the Murder of this Day? Why,
the Decree is perpetual to that very end, it never should be but Remembered;
and for this Reason I take it, that never the like Fact a second time be done
again.

If then our Repentance does not come up to this, perhaps it were as good as
none, a prevaricating Repentance, a Repentance it self to be Repented of.

No! The Piety and Loyalty of our Senate upon the joyful Turn of our Captivity,
when Peace began to dawn upon us after a dark night of affliction; when our
Ancient Laws and Constitutions began to revive: When Liberty truly so called,
and Religion reformed from Rage and Enthusiasm, regained their former Luster
and Settlement, when the Crown and the Church Established (and may it be ever
so Established!) When Moses and Aaron were in Credit and Authority with a
Repenting People once more: Then it was, I say, that the Piety and Loyalty of
our Senate, many of whom are now present in this Honorable Assembly, as they
concurred in their joyful thanks to the Almighty for his wonderful visiting us
with Blessings, after the time that he had pla^^ed us: So did they lay to Heart
likewise, look back with anguish upon those crying Sins that brought God's
Judgments so heavily down upon this Kingdom, and by as public a Sanction as
the Crimes were public, enacted this Day of Humiliation, for the averting
God's Anger, for imploring God's Mercy and Forgiveness to us of Sacred and
Innocent Blood, that it might not be visited upon 12 Car. 2. l. 30. Manby 's
Collect.
Us or our Posterity.

But I must not forget to distinguish what our Loyal and worthy Patriots have
done already to my Hand: I must not Confound the Innocent with the Guilty. We
were not all of us Sons of Corah, not all Embarked in the Ruin of a Flourishing
Church and Monarchy; not a Quarter part of the Nation (I mean those that knew
what they were a doing) did give their Suffrage or Approbation to that Horrid
Pageantry of Injustice, that Murdering High Court by which our Sovereign fell.

No, the Infamy is given where due, to a part, to a Faction, to some Armed
Traitors, who when they had forced from themselves the King, and then the
Lords, and then the better and honester part of Themselves, sat a Junto by
their own Authority, because they had Power, and thence sprang that Notorious
Ordinance, that Law of King-killing, never before heard of, nor I hope, ever
shall be in this Land again.

And that it was so, I cannot bring better Authority, nor more Pathetick words,
or better Sens'd, then I find in the Act of Attainder of some Guilty Persons of
this Day.

By this Horrid Action (i. e. the Murder of 12 Car. 2.
our Late Sovereign) I Repeat the words of the Act, the Protestant Religion
has received the greatest Wound and Reproach, and the People of England the
most insupportable shame and Infamy, that was possible for the Enemies of God
and (...) the King to bring upon us: Whilst the Fanatic Rage of a few
Miscreants, who were as far from being True Protestants, as they were from
being true Subjects, stands imputed by our Adversaries to the whole Nation.

And did we then give our Adversaries this advantage against us? Did our Sworn
Enemies take occasion from hence of Magnifying themselves against us? Did they
upbraid us for being better Masters in the School of Treachery, than were
themselves?

Nay, did we choose to gratify them so far, as to be doing their own Work for
them? And what they were desirous we should do -- Ay, there, there, so would we
have it, might they say, never better harvest for Popery, ^s. 35. 25.
than now. And it is all one to an Enemy, which way the Design be brought
about, whether by his own Skill, or others being Instrumental for him.

And it is for such reason, as I take it, the 30th. of January stands in our
Calendar a Memorial, and as much a Witness against those Factious
Anti-Monarchical Men, as that other of the 5th of November against that daring
Popish Impiety.

They both aimed at the Public Ruin, though the one happily miscarried in the
Attempt, the other as unhappily took Effect, and it was then their Power of
Darkness. Luke 22. 53.


If Popery be then so highly Detestable; if Arbitrary Power be so justly
odious, why should either of them find room for practice with them, who say
they hate them? If Arbitrary Power be so dangerous in the Prince, why should it
not be deemed so in the Subject? in a popular Junto too?

For Popery is still Popery under what Guise soever it appears, in what place
soever found, and to kill Kings, and to teach Subjects to do so, is as errant
Popery as any in the Court of Rome; as on the other hand to take away Life,
Liberty and Property, without respect to Conscience and Equity, Rule of Law,
and the known Justice of a Nation; is surely, I should think, as Arbitrary a
piece of Tyranny, as any can be found in France.

If we then object these things to our Enemies, 1 Samuel 13. 20.
why do we not keep our selves free from their Contagion? It is true indeed we
may go down, like the Children of Israel to the Philistines 1 Samuel* 13 ^0*
forge to whet our Weapons, and it is a Stratagem well enough, supposing we
attack the Enemy with them: But for shame, let us not bring the deadly Armory
to our own home: Let us take the Enemy at whatever Advantage we can, but have a
care of practicing these Wiles upon our selves: Otherwise we are doing their
own very work for them, we are opening a Breach that they the better may come
in.

Thus when the Roman Army was beleaguering Jerusalem, (at the time of the
Desolation foretold by our Savior) as we learn from Josephus there were a sort
of Zealots in the City, that did them more Service than all their battering
Rams besides; by the help of this Faction it was, that the Jews became a Prey
to the Roman Conquerors: Nay, though they could Repel the Enemy as often as they
pleased to unite themselves, yet upon a Respite, when one would think they
should be taking breath, and preparing for a new Attack, what do they do but
employ that time in Civil Wars among themselves?

Thus the Roman Army by looking on only, if they had not struck a blow, might
have carried the Town, while the Jews were Conquering one another, to make
themselves the easier Booty to their Enemies.

We had our times of Zealotism too, and what the Miseries and Confusions then
were, this very Day is a sad Remembrance of. We can undo our selves it is true,
we have tried it once already: But for God's sake let not the Enemy ever have
Advantage of us by a second Attempt of that Nature, for if ever the Romans do
come to take away our Place and Nation, which God forbid, I wish Joh. 11. 48.
it may not be by the help of Homebred Divisions, by private Animosities,
Secret Jealousies, and particular Interests going contrary to the Public Good.

And I cannot tell how, there never were any Broils where Religion had not it is
share too, be there Reason for it or no, no matter, it makes a noise, and
serves for an excellent pretense to cover Villainy with.

Some have an unruly Zeal, too much, it is too strong for them: Others have as
little or none at all, Some are Religious, even to a Nicety and Scruple: Others
are never so much as troubled with Niceties at all: Some have the power of
Religion, and that is well: Others have the form of it, and they think that is
better, and it may be some others there are that have neither Power nor Form,
and they think it best of all: For these latter upon occasion can serve with
any Zeal or Religion afoot: Can be as Strenuous Assertors, and as violent
opposers as if it were all Truth and good Earnest, when still there is
something of Self, lurking at the bottom, something that does not appear at
present, but may do afterward, that gives the first Spring and Motion to all.

Thus that good-natured thing Religion, that harmless simplicity, that
well-meaning Sincerity, that inoffensive Dove, that Universal Charity that
believes all things, hops all things, thinks no ill its self, and
therefore cannot easily think ill of others, is for that Reason liable to the
abuse of those who by cunning Craftiness lie in wait to deceive, and so the
intention of the Religious, though at first it means well, yet by the Crafty
Manager, often Terminates in a quite different end from what the purpose was.

And so it fared with a great many well-meaning People, in the beginning of our
late unhappy Wars, who never thought things would have come to that pass as
they did, or if they had thought it, would for ever have kept their Scruples in
their own Breast.

A Caution then this is to us (for what has been may be) to have a Care of the
beginning of things, least when we have set them a foot, and have put them out
of our power, we cannot, though we would never so willingly, recall them back.

Rather let us bear with some things though supposedly inconvenient, if there be
no Sin in them, than by an over-fondness of Innovation when it is unseasonable,
Date the beginning of some new Deformity, rather than the mending of what we
suppose Defective.

And think not the worse of me, if I speak the Sense of the Blessed Martyr of
this Day; in wishing you to think well of the Piety and Prudence of those that
have gone before: Those Reformers who as they were duly Qualified, and
Regularly called, had time to Debate Calmly, to weigh Impartially, and settle
orderly Matters of Religion, the Benefit of which we still enjoy, did we know
our Happiness: And when we are well enough (to speak with the least) we should
be very sure of an Advantage, before we venture upon a Change.

Zeal is a good thing it is true, and Commendable, when according to knowledge,
and in a good Matter as the Apostle speaks; Otherwise Gal. 4. 18.
to his sad experience, he knew the Dangerousness of it, and in nothing
repented himself so much. For Zeal if blind, is a sort 1 Timothy 1. ^ 3. 1 Cor.
15. 9.
of Wildfire, that burns madly, and scatters its flame at Random; it sets the
Church on Fire at first, and then the State: And so the Flame that proceeds
from the House of God, Devours at length all the Houses of the Land too.

Zeal then for the Matter of it, must be always good, it must be directed to a
right end, and proceed to that right end by Just and Equal Measures too; for we
must not Rob for God, may I say, neither must we Murder Kings for the sake of
Religion.

Another Qualification of Zeal is, that a Mr. Mede Discourse 52.
Man does not exceed the Bounds of his Vocation. Art thou called to be in this
or that Station? Says the Apostle, abide in thy Vocation 1 Cor. 7.
let not thy Zeal Transport thee beyond the bounds of Duty; God Almighty Loves
to be served Regularly, he is a God of Order, and not Confusion,

No doubt, it was a Zeal in Vzzah, to put ^ Sam. 6, 7.
his Hand to the Ark, to hinder its supposed falling; yet was he smitten with
Death; for this Reason, because his Zeal exceeded his Vocation, in meddling with
what according to a Law of God, was the Business of the Priest alone.

'Twas a Zeal in Saul perhaps, to Sacrifice 1 Samuel 13. 9.
in the Absence of Samuel, but the loss of his Kingdom to his Posterity, taught
him, he had much better have let it alone.

St. Peter's untemper'd Zeal, cost our Lord a Miracle to heal the Damage of it,
and those two Disciples, no doubt in Zeal too, Luk^. 9. 54.
when they were for calling for Fire from Heaven, upon the Samaritans, received
a sufficient Rebuke from our Savior, when he told 'em, ye know not what Spirit
ye are of.

I cannot tell what to say to others, but methinks, I could give my self this
Advice, I my self could learn this Lesson well enough, Office for Gunpowder
Treas^n.
never to stand up for an Armed Gospel, to turn Faith into Faction, and
Religion into Rebellion, as one of the Offices of our Church has it.

From this untempered Zeal, managed by an unlucky Faction, was the Source of
all our late Bloodshed and Rebellion, which brought on the Death of the King,
and the Destruction of an Excellent Monarchy, the true 12 Car. 2.
Protestant Religion had so long Flourished under.

And can we be too watchful of our selves, to prevent the like again? Can we
lay to Heart sufficiently the Mischiefs already done? If we can, we should
learn at so great cost, to be so far wise at least, as never to undo our selves
by the same Methods again; never by Sinning over the same Sins, endanger the
same Reproach and Calamity to Our selves and Nation once more.

If Religion played the Counterfeit once, we should take care it should do so no
more; if pretended Zeal show it self in outrage before, it should know its
boundaries now.

We may give what Names we please to things; yet in their own Nature, they are
what they are, and though we Banish 'em never so, they still recur; Truth will be
Truth, and Error, Error, notwithstanding the ill Treatment of the one at
sometimes, and the Color and Speciousness of the other. Religion must be, what
it is; first pure, and then Peaceable, the Ornament of a Meek and Quiet Spirit,
the best good thing, and most perfective of Man's Nature, and best fitted for
the Welfare of Human Society; as making always for Peace, and things wherewith
we may edify one Romans 14. 19.
another.

If it show it self Turbulent and Disorderly, it is no longer Religion than in
Name, it becomes a Sword in the Hand of the Revengeful, a Trick to amuse with
in the Juglar, and no other than Rage and Madness in the wild Enthasiast; but
all this by accident, and through abuse of the best thing, by Distempered
Passions of Licentious Men; upon which Score it is, our Savior says, he came
not to send Peace upon Earth, but a Sword, but Division and Variance, even of
those of a Man's own Mat. 1^ 34. Luke 1^. ^1
Household: Not directly sure; for there is no such ill in the Nature of
Religion, but through the Corrupt Will and Affections of unruly Men, in which
he foresaw what the event would be.

If the Corruption of the best things then, be thus Dangerous, what Care and
Caution should we use against all such Inlets of Destruction, all such
Appearance of Evil, though Recommended to us by an Angel of Light? Would we then
truly lay to Heart all our bypast Miseries, Oppressions, Tumults and
Desolation, ushered in by this false Light, and pretended Zeal for Religion,
the better to Cloak over a Malicious War? Would we rightly Consider, the Sins
and Wickedness that occasioned the Perishing of so many Righteous of our
Israel, especially Him of this Day, our Late Martyred Sovereign, a Martyr for
the Law, Liberty and Religion truly so; nay a Martyr of the People too, whether
they will or no? Would we do all this? There is no better way of Commending our
Repentance, than by bringing forth Works meet for it; such Works as should show
a thorough Change.

If the Fountains which sent forth bitter Waters before, do now send forth
sweet and wholesome Streams, we have nothing more to fear. If we stear a quite
different Course now, avoiding the Rock of Offense, at which we struck before:
if we leave off our Old Sins: and though we heartily loved 'em once, can now as
Heartily pray in the Language of our Church against Sedition, Privy Conspiracy
and Rebellion: If in stead of Wrath, Hatred, Malice, Evil-speaking, etc. Those
Lusts from whence Wars proceed; We are able to put on Gentleness, St. Jame^ 7.
4.
Meakness, Charity, Long-Suffering, Patience, forbearing one another in Love,
etc. then is our Work of Repentance in a great Measure Accomplished; then are we
said to be Adorned with that peaceable Christian Spirit; to partake of that
Wisdom from above, James 3. 17. 18.
full of Mercy and good Fruits, without Partiality, and without Hypocrisy; the
Fruit of which Righteousness, is sown in Peace of them that make Peace.

If we come thus far, the Remaining part is easy, and flows as a Consequence
from the former Virtues, viz. a Submission where due, a ready Obedience to
Authority, a regard to our Superiors, an awful Reverence to Crowned Heads, a
Dutiful Subjection to their present Majesty's, whom God has set over us, even
in the Race and Lineage still, of that Glorious Martyr, we now Commemorate.

This indeed is laying to Heart our former Sins and Iniquities, when we can
leave of speaking Evil of Dignities, and even in this Our Day at least, cease
to Disturb the Ashes of that Good and Religious Prince, who fell by His
People's Sins. It was our shame, not his, and shall we not then take away that
Reproach from us?

If our Repentance be Hearty, we cannot furely either our selves be still
Reviling of his Memory, or have an Itch and Pleasure in those that do -- but I
must have done.

And for a better Farewell, shall direct 1 Timothy 2.
to one right use of Religion especially, and that is, according to the
Apostolic Canon, to Exhort that Prayers and Supplications may be daily made
for Kings and all that are in Authority, that we may lead peaceable quiet Lives
in all Godliness and Honesty. You see the Reason of the Apostle for this, that
we may lead peaceable Lives in all Godliness and Honesty; Obedience to the
State, has an Influence upon the Church and Religion too. They naturally help
one the other, they either fare well or ill together.

In a Word then, let us Conjoyn what things the Apostle has Conjoined, and why
should we separate them? Let us put together in our practice, what St. Peter
has 1 Pet. 2.
given us together in his Precept, and That is, Let us fear God, and Honor the
King.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 12. l. 12. read we; p. 20. Marg. dele 1 Samuel 13. 20. p. 24. l. 2. read
Change.

Books Printed for W. Crook, at the Green-Dragon without Temple Bar.
DR. Pelling's Practical Discourse on the Sacrament: Octavo.

-- His Sermon before the Queen, March 16. 1691/2. Quarto.

-- His Sermon at the Bishop of Chichester's Primary Visitation, Sept. 28. 1692.

-- His Practical Discourse of Prayer in Octavo, Price one 1 s. Bound.


