A SERMON Preached at St. TRINITY's In Kingston, upon Hull.

TO A SOCIETY There FOR Reformation of Manners, September 20. 1699.

By ROBERT BANKS, A. M. Vicar of St. Trinity's in Hull, and Prebendary of YORK.

LONDON: Printed for A. and I. Churchill. And Thomas Ryles Bookseller in Hull,
1700.

To the Illustrious, His Grace, THOMAS Duke of Leeds, Knight of the most Noble
Order of the Garter, etc.
May it please your Grace,
BEing prevailed with by the Importunity of that Society, at whose Request this
plain Discourse was Preached, to make it Public; out of a charitable belief
that it might do some good; I presume to lay it at your Grace's Feet, not for
any worth in the Composure, but for the sake of its useful Argument, The
Reformation of Men's Manners.

The obtaining of which is a Work so necessary, so desirable and truly
Excellent, that it deserves Encouragement from all great and good Men. And your
Grace having so zealously, and early appeared at the Head of a Number of our
Worthies both in Church and State, who have countenanced and promoted this
Pious and Generous Design; to make the Nation better; I hope your Grace will
not disdain this Mean, but well-intended Endeavors, to advance the same good
End. And this, My Lord, was the true Reason, which induced me to lay hold of
this Opportunity of acknowledging Publicly, how much I am

My LORD, Your GRACE's most Dutiful, most obliged, and most humbly Devoted
Servant and Chaplain, Robert Banks.

PSALM CXIX. cxxxvi. Rivers of Waters run down mine Eyes, because they keep not
thy Law.
Or as the Old Translation used in our Liturgy, reads the Words: Mine Eyes gush
out with Water, because Men keep not thy Law.
THAT is, The great Universal Impiety of Men, is a most Dr. Hammond in Locum.
sad Spectacle, fit to be washed in whole Floods of Tears, and is just matter
of the deepest Humiliation and Lamentation, to all pious Beholders. And indeed
there is scarce any Reflection, which affords matter of greater Grief and
Humiliation to all good and considerate Persons, than seriously to ponder and
lay to Heart, the Principles and Practices of those great Numbers of Men, who
keep not God's Law: For such Men bring infinite dishonor to God, scandal and
mischief to others, and often involve a whole Nation and People in the same Ruin
and Destruction with themselves; for when Societies or great Numbers of Men
combine to do wickedly, Prove. 11. 21.
When Hand thus joins in Hand, the Wicked shall not go unpunished.

And therefore to be suitably affected to such a Face of Affairs, to such an
illbodeing posture of Things, concerns every good Man, as well as it did King
David: Especially Magistrates, and those who are vested with Power and
Authority, for the Punishment of Evilworkers, their Sorrow and Humiliation
because Men keep not God's Law, may be of excellent use, to stir them up,
impartially to restrain or punish all Vice and Immorality, all Atheism and
Blasphemy, and to maintain God's true Religion and Virtue: And the more Zealous
any one is for God's Glory, the greater deference he pays to the Revelation of
his Mind and Will, the deeplier will he be affected with this most deplorable
Case, the faster will his Eyes gush out with Water, because Men keep not Gods
Law.

Rivers of Waters run down mine Eyes, because they keep not thy Law. The full
Sense of which Words, may, I think, be fairly comprehended within the Compass
of this short Proposition or Doctrine,

That the prevailing Impiety and Irreligion of a Nation, is a Spectacle fit to
be washed in whole Floods of Tears; is matter of the deepest Humiliation, and
Lamentation to all good Men, and especially to them who are in Stations of
Eminence and Authority. In my Discourse upon this Proposition, I will endeavor
as plainly as I can, to do these Four Things.

I. I will show, that this is our Case* That Impiety and Irreligion are at this
Time very prevalent amongst us.

II. I will prove, That this ought to be matter of deepest Humiliation and
Trouble of Mind to all good Men, especially to them that are in Stations of
Eminence and Authority.

III. I will hint what Effects our Sorrow and Humiliation for the prevailing
Wickedness of the Land, ought to have upon all good Men, especially upon those
in Authority.

IV. By way of Reflection upon the whole, I will show you, That to engage our
most vigorous endeavors to obtain those Happy Effects, we have the noblest
Encouragement, the greatest Obligations imaginable. And

1. I am to show, That this is our present Case, that Impiety and Irreligion
are at this Time very prevalent among us. This God knows is too obvious a Truth
to need an Elaborate Proof, and our own daily Experience (unless we be wholly
Strangers to the World) may give us a sad and convincing Evidence of it: Nay
it is the Sense of the whole Nation, declared by our Representatives in
Parliament, That Profaneness House of Commons Address to the King, January,
1697.
and Immorality, like a general Contagion, have diffused and spread themselves
throughout the Kingdom, to the great Scandal and Reproach of our Religion, and
Dishonor and Prejudice of the Government: And it is the Observation of very
Wise and Considerate Persons, that never any Age heretofore, that has been
surrounded with so much Light, can equal the Impiety of the Present, in their
bold Commission of the Works of Darkness; for the Modern Debauchees have not
thought it sufficient, barely to put themselves into a State of Enmity with God
by their wicked Works, but they have also combined to add Insolence to their
Diligence in sinning; not only neglecting and violating the Laws of Heaven, but
heaping up horrid contumelies and affronts upon the Majesty of him who dwells
there; as if they had entered into a Confederacy, at once, to abrogate God's
Laws, and dethrone their Maker, and like the old Builders of Babel, thought
that nothing Genesis 11. 6.
now would be restrained from them, which they have imagined to do.

This is the Present Case of those riotous Sinners, who because they will not
be restrained by the Laws of Christianity, do therefore resolve to cast all the
scorn and disgrace they possibly can upon them, for should those Laws maintain
their Reputation, they would contrarily upbraid their contrary Practice, and
for this Reason they have learnt to Dispute themselves out of their Creed, and
to oppose the first Principles of the Oracles of God, least they should be
thought Fools, or Knaves, for Living contrary to them.

And though there have been abominable Immoralities in every Age, yet surely we
in this are fallen into the very Dregs of Time, when the Fundamental Points of
all Religion both Natural, and Revealed, are encountered by the Combined Forces
of Socinians, Deists, and Atheists, who all join (however they otherwise
differ) in a very scurrilous Treatment of the Persons, and Contempt of the
Office of our most Pious Orthodox Clergy, daily publishing to the World, that
our teaching the Truths of the Gospel is but Priestcraft, and our Pressing a
Good Life, but a Trade, that by these base and sinister Methods, they may
through our sides, more effectually wound, and undermine the Religion we
Profess and Defend, and make Men dissolute, and regardless of God, and their
Duty. But thus much may suffice to evince the incontestable Truth of the first
Proposition, that Impiety and Irreligion are at this Time very prevalent
amongst us.

I now proceed to Prove.

2. That this ought to be matter of the deepest Humiliation and Sorrow to all
good Men, and especially to those that are in Stations of Eminence and
Authority; such was David, a Great and Pious Prince in Israel, and therefore
Rivers of Waters ran down his Eyes, because Men kept not Gods Law. For the
greater and better Men are, the more hearty and affectionate concern they must
needs have for the Glory of God, the Honor of Religion, the Welfare of the
World, and the Prosperity of that particular Kingdom or Civil Society of which
themselves are Members; and upon all these Accounts they have just cause to be
afflicted and humbled, for the Confederate, Insolent attempts of Wicked Men, to
disturb or destroy the Tranquillity and Happiness both of Church and State.

1. Such Persons may consider, that the Infidelity and Luxury of a Nation, is
the ready way to provoke God to Unchurch us, and to remove our Candlestick out
of its Place; the Scripture tells us, that when God is most angry, and resolves
to punish a People most severely, he threatens them not so much with Temporal
Losses as with Spiritual Judgments; as to deprive them of their Pastors and
Teachers, to remove their Candlestick, to send a Famine of the Word among them,
and to leave them to themselves, and to their own Way: A Famine of Bread, and
want of Water, are great and heavy Punishments upon any People, but there is
something worse than all this, and that is a Famine of the Word. This
God-himself sets down as the heavier Judgment of the two, Behold, the days
come, says the Lord, that I will send a Famine in the Land, not a famine of
Bread, nor a thirst for Waters, but of hearing the Word of the Lord: And they
shall wander from Sea to Sea, and run to and fro to seek the Word of the Lord,
and shall not find it, Amos 8. 11.

This is a Calamity indeed! greater than all others: When God to punish a
People for their wickedness, takes away the very Means of their becoming
better; and because they spurned at the Light, condemns them to spiritual
Blindness and Darkness. And what is this but to begin Hell upon Earth, and to
take an Antepast of Outer Darkness. and Misery to come?

It is one of the most dreadful and awakening threatenings that God could use to
Excite the The Church of Ephesus.
Asiatick Churches to repent, that if they did not, he would come unto 'em
quickly, and remove their Candlestick out of its place.

And surely, if the loud Oaths, an^ daring Blasphemies of not a few; If the
hypocritical Pretenses of many to Pie^^ and Devotion; If the Cheats and P^^
juries, and Oppressions under which the Nation groans; If the filthy Speeches,
and lewd Actions; If the Drunke^nesses, Adulteries, Whoredoms, and i^moralities
of all sorts, which, some a^ so far from being afraid to commit i^ secret, that
for want of other Witnesses they will Evidence against themselves by declaring
their Sin as Sodom, Isa. 3. ^. In short, If all the Profane Raillery an^ Abuse
which is daily put upon the Scriptures, and every thing that is Sacred*
particularly, the Ridiculing and Exposing the Mysteries of our most Hol^ Faith,
can provoke God to abandon ^ People, to lay them waste, to remov^ his Church
and Gospel from amongs^ them, and to make them the Scorn an^ Derision of those
who are round about then have we just cause to fear an^ tremble, lest God
should pronounce the same Sentence upon us, as he did upon the wi^ked and
ungrateful Jews, Jer. ^* 12. Go ye now (says he) unto my plac^ which was in
Shiloh, where I set my Name at the first, and see what I did to it for the
wickedness of my People Israel: Now because ye have done all these works, says
the Lord, and I spoke unto you, but ye heard not; therefore will I do unto this
House; which is called by my Name, as I have done to Shiloh, and I will cast
you out of my sight as I have cast out all your Brethren. Parallel to which is
that Commination of our Savior, to the same stiff-necked and rebellious
People, therefore I say unto you, the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you,
and given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof, Matthew. 21. 43. This is
what we have great reason to fear, because we so justly deserve it; and indeed,
what Counterpoize can there be to such bold, such daring impieties, but the
Prayers and Tears, and Endeavors of those good Souls, who betake themselves to
the Throne of Grace, to that Infinite Mercy of God which has so long spared
us, when we deserved Punishment; for if God had been extreme to mark what we
have done amiss, we could never have been able to abide it; but we find by
experience, that there is yet Mercy with him that he might be feared: And Oh!
that our deep Humiliation, our hearty Repentance and Reformation, may still
engage God to be propitious to his Church, and to pity his Heritage, that so
iniquity may not be our ruin. But

2. As our prevailing wickedness threatens the Removal of our Candlestick, the
Misery and Desolation of God's Church amongst us; so the abounding Impiety and
Profaneness of any People, does constantly provoke God to inflict severe
Temporal Evils and Punishments upon them, according to the Measure of their
Demerits and Provocations; and for this, all of us, and especially those that
are good, have just cause to be humbled under the mighty hand of God, and to
tremble at the apprehensions of his Judgments, because Men keep not Gods Law.
God's dealings with particular Persons in this Life, ar^ so checkered and
intermixed with variety of good and bad Events, that tho they point out a
Judgment to come, because they give no clear indication of an impartial Justice
distributed here, whi^^ the Judge of all the Earth, who cannot but do right,
will at one time or other execute; yet no Man knows Love or Hatred by all
that is before him: Here God frequently afflicts particular Persons for the
Probation and Exercise of their Virtues, and the Example of others; and
Notorious Sinners often escape their deserved Recompense in this Life, being
reserved to the Day of Judgment to be punished. But it is otherwise as to
Nations, and Public Societies of Men, who, as such, cannot be accounted with
in the World to come (where every man shall receive according to his own Works)
and are therefore rewarded or punished here, according to their National
Virtues or Impieties.

So that when a Kingdom or Country continne to do wickedly, we have abundance
of reason to conclude, that the Providence of God will promote the Misery and
Unhappiness of such a People, and manifest it self, sooner or later, in severe
and remarkable Judgments upon them.

And this is very agreeable to the plain Expressions and Declarations of God's
Will, who has constantly determined to pull down, or build up Nations,
according as they persist in, or turn from their Evil Ways; as may be seen at
large in the 18th chap. of Jeremiah, or elsewhere.

And indeed in all Ages and Places, his Judgments have succeeded the prevailing
Wickedness of a Church or Nation.

In the very Infancy of the World, when the wickedness of man was great, and
all flesh had corrupted his way upon earth, God sent an universal Flood of
Waters, to sweep and wash away its polluted Inhabitants, Genesis 6. 5, 12.

When the Cry of the Sins of Sodom, which were very grievous, came up before
God, he quenched the Flames of their unnatural Lusts, by showring down Flames
of Fire and Brimstone from Heaven to destroy them, Genesis 19. 13, 24.

And when the Wickedness of the Amorites was full, what a Series of terrible
Devastations succeeded for their Extirpation?

But why should I multiply Examples, to prove that which the Records of all
Nations, so demonstratively confirm to us?

To omit all others, our own History will readily instruct us, how often our Land
has changed her Inhabitants, and certainly for the wickedness thereof. Even in
our own Memory, we have had Pestilence, and Fire and Sword amongst us; and we
have lately been engaged abroad in a Tedious and Expensive War, which yet,
blessed be God, is brought to an Happy Conclusion, by an Honorable Peace.

And adored be that Goodness, which has not of late inflicted a Famine upon us
to complete Ezekiel. 14. 21.
his Four sore Judgments. For surely we cannot be so credulous, as to believe,
that any thing withholds him from the Infliction of that, or the severer
repetition of his other Judgments; but his long-suffering Goodness, designed to
lead us to Repentance. For our Sins are so great, that I fear, we may vie with
any Nation in the World: Good Heathens would blush at those Impieties (tho but
to see them acted by others) which they who call themselves Christians, and
shelter themselves under the Name of Protestant, dare commit before all Israel,
and the Sun. Drunkenness, Whoredom and Swearing are reckoned but puny, trivial,
Modish Sins: We are advanced to Crimes of a deeper Dye, to Cursings and
Blasphemies, and a slat Denial, not only of the Revelation of God's Will, but
even of that Invincible Power, that Inflexible Justice that made us, and can
destroy us in a Moment.

And shall not God visit for these things? shall not his Soul be avenged on
such a Nation as this? Jer. 5. 9.

This is what we have all reason to fear, and to be humbled for,
notwithstanding our present Peace and Security, least, even whilst we cry,
Peace! Peace! sudden Destruction should overtake us.

I know it is an unpleasant, thankless Office to forbode Evil to a Man's Native
Country; Nor am I fond of Predictions from Vulgar Prodigies, which mightily
alarm the Common People Yet I may be bold to affirm, (with a Learned Man of
our own Dr. Spencer of Prodigies, etc. Sect. 6. p. 116.
) That when such Prodigies, As Monsters of Vices and Opinions do generally
obtain in a State. When the old Man of Sin is grown too big for the girdle of
Shame or Fear, and the Hand of Public Justice neglects to rub off that Rust,
which is growing upon the Iron Age, then it may be quickly expected that God
should do his own Work himself, assert his own Righteousness, by throwing such
a People into the Fire of some terrible Judgment, to refine and purify it.
Then (in the Language of the Psalmist) it is Time for God to lay to his Hand,
when Men have destroyed his Law, Psalm 119. 126.

This, I say, is what all good Men have Cause to be apprehensive of, from the
abused Patience and Long-suffering of God.

And yet amidst our Fears, we may not cease to Hope, that the many good Souls
who stand in the Gap to ward off the Blow, by their devout Prayers and
Intercessions: whose Eyes, in David's Language, Run down with Water, because
Men keep not Gods Law; that the Pious Resolution of His Majesty, effectually to
discourage Profaneness and Immorality, with what He and our Senators have
excellently done to that Purpose; together with the hearty Endeavors of some
in almost every Rank, and Order of Men amongst us; in whom at this Time there
appears a great Propensity and Disposition, to put a stop to that Inundation of
Wickedness, which threatens a Deluge to our Destruction: Will, by their United
Force, yet prevail with God to be favorable to his Land (so often preserved and
rescued by the Miracles of his Mercy) and to Pity his People.

And O that the Concurrence of these! joined with a Divine Blessing and
Cooperation, may at length effectually prevail; To set bounds to our Errors, by
Truth, to our overflowing Impieties by an universal Reformation of Manners, and
to our Unhappy Divisions (which are such a Pastime to Popery) by that real and
unfeigned Charity, which may teach us to maintain the Unity of the Spirit, in
the Bond of Peace. But this suggests the

3. Particular, which is to show, what Effects the Sorrow and Humiliation of
all good Men, especially of those in Stations of Eminence and Authority,
because Men keep not Gods Law, ought to have upon them.

And we cannot give a better account of this Matter in Reference to those last
mentioned, then by considering what the Psalmists Practice was in the like
Case: For if we can plainly discover what Effects David's Grief and Humiliation,
because of the Wicked that forsook Gods Law, had upon him; we may conclude,
that the same Cause ought to have the same Effect upon every good Man,
especially upon those in Authority, according to their Power and Capacity in
their several Stations.

Now, what David's Resolution upon the Melancholy Apprehensions he had from the
Consederacy of Wicked Men, that kept not Gods Law, was, we find in several
Places of his Psalms, but no where better then in the 101. Psalm, where he
fixes his Pious Purpose, first how to Govern himself, and then his Court and
Kingdom, and that with so much Justice: That the good and virtuous might ever
expect all possible favor from him; but that he would as constantly
discountenance, discourage and punish evil doers of all sorts, according to
their Demerits: and thus he concludes that Psalm, I will early destroy all the
Wicked of the Land, that I may cut off all wicked doers from the City of the
Lord: i. e. As Soon as ever I am peaceably settled on my Throne, I will use Dr.
Hammond in Locum.
my utmost Diligence to reform the whole Nation, especially Jerusalem, the
Place of Gods Peculiar Residence, which ought to be an Example to the rest of
the Kingdom, taking Care that all Offenders be severely punished in the Courts
of Judicature, and if there be no other remedy, cutting off those Putrid
Members, that will otherwise endanger the Infection of the whole Body, having
got incurable Habits of committing Wickedness. And this Effect the Sarrow and
Humiliation of all good Magistrates for the overflowing Impiety of the Nation,
will have upon them, viz. To quicken them in their several Places to punish
Wickedness and Vice, to defend the Truth, and execute Justice. They consider
that it is from our loud Sins, and crying Provocations that our Public
Calamities do proceed, and that for these the heavy displeasure of God is
kindled against us, and will, we know not how speedily be executed upon us: And
this will plainly suggest to them, that they ought not to permit the Sword of
Justice to Rust and Canker in the Scabbard, but by prudently drawing it, to
protect the Innocent, and punish the Guilty. To do which by the Direction of
our excellent Laws, without Fear or Favor, Interest or Partiality, is the
wisest Course an honest Magistrate can take, to secure either a good Conscience
toward God, or a good Reputation among Men; for he that Acts thus, can scarce
possibly procure any Enemies but the Lawless and Disobedient, whose Favor is
as insignificant as their Anger; for as his Sword (which in the Execution of
Justice is guided by the Hand of Heaven, the Judgment being Gods) usually
secures him from the latter; so his Integrity Seals up his Ears, and fortifies
his Heart, against the flatteries and sordid Insinuations of the other.

It Is an Observation confirmed by Experience, that no Nation in the World is so
Jealous of those Laws, which relate to the Liberty and Property of the Subject,
as the English; and most Men think with good Reason, since Beggary and Slavery
are things very unagreeable to humane Nature: But then, why should we not be
equally Jealous for the Honor of those Laws, in the strict Observation
whereof, the Glory of God, the Interest of Religion, the Prosperity of the
Nation, and the Felicity of so many thousand Souls, are concerned?

For shame, let us never more tamely suffer Wickedness to gain not only
Strength, but Impudence, and I had almost said Reputation too; by our
cowardliness and pusilinimity.

But let us all join our Heads, our Hearts and Hands, to disgrace and dash out
of Countenance, the daring Efforts, the outrageous Sallies of Profaneness and
Immorality, that Drunkenness may no longer dare to stagger in our Streets, nor
loud Oaths be belched in our Faces as we go along; that Men may no longer be
permitted to Boast, much less act their bestial Sins like Sodom, nor such lewd
Places of Entertainment any more be suffered in the Land: That Violence be no
more heard in our Streets, that our Officers may be Peace, and our Exacters,
Righteousness; that the Fury of the Oppressor, which is ever ready to destroy,
may be broken; and that we may no longer hear the Cry of the Widow, the
Fatherless, or others oppressed amongst us.

This is what all good Men Pray, and Wish, and Hope for at this favorable
Juncture; and which we all ought vigorously to endeavor in our several
Stations and Capacities. And the rather, because to do this, we have the
fairest Encouragement, the greatest Obligations imaginable: Which is the last
Part of my present Undertaking. I say, to engage our most vigorous Endeavors
to promote and carry on a Happy Reformation of Manners, we have the fairest
Encouragement, the most indispensible Obligations imaginable.

1. And first, for our Encouragement, Let us consider, that God is on our side;
this is his own Cause, for which he has often and signally appeared by the
remarkable Judgments which in all Ages he has Executed upon desperately wicked
Sinners; especially when Hand joins in Hand, and the Multitude o^ Offenders
seems to plead for the Impunity of their Offenses, then he will no^ suffer the
Wicked to go unpunished.

I am sensible, we want not Instance of those, who have given the Nam^ of a
good Cause, to very vile Actions* and who, the better to cheat People in to a
Concurrence with them in the^^ riotous and disorderly Attempts, for the
Reformation of Religion, as the^ pretended; have clothed their gro^^
Immoralities, Treasons and Rebellions in the sanctified Livery, of the Cause o^
God, and Religion.

But though from the very bottom of our Hearts, we detest and abhor such
impious Pretenses and Practices; yet surely no Man can doubt, Whether a Work so
just in its Design, and so honorable and advantageous in its End, as to
endeavor according to the Laws of God and Man, to put a stop to the
overflowing Wickedness of a Nation, to give a check to those Hellish Principles
and Practices, by which God is daily dishonored, Truth and Justice perverted,
Religion and Piety exposed, the Prosperity of the Nation obstructed, and
Multitudes of Souls endangered, be his Cause, and Work, or no? I am sure the
Psalmist calls it Gods Cause, Psalm 74. 23. Arise O God! maintain thine own
Cause; remember how the foolish Man blasphemeth thee daily.

And if we will still hear his glorious Name blasphemed, and all things sacred,
honest or of good Report trampled on, and we stand by as unconcerned
Spectators; we may expect that God will not, like us, Desert, but maintain his
own Cause, take the Matter into his own Hand; and because we would not help to
reclaim the Wicked from their Way, thereby to hinder their Misery and
Destruction; involve us likewise in the same inevitable Ruin with them.

To prevent which, and if possible to engage us further, to carry on the
necessary Work of reforming the profaneness and debauchery of the Age in our
Stations, and according to our Capacities; Let us consider

2. That the Laws both of God and Man, as well as the Countenance and
Encouragement of our Legislators are on our side, to strengthen our Hearts and
Hands in this worthy and generous Undertaking.

We usually say, that ill Manners procure good Laws, which has been as fully
verified in this Nation, I believe, as in any Country under the Canopy of
Heaven: But then, it is very odd, though obvious to Remark, that the profane
and dissolute of this Age and Climate, have strongly attempted to invert the
Maxim, by being guilty of the most profligate Manners, in defiance of the most
excellent Laws both of God and Man. This is a Reproach upon us, which we ought
to endeavor by all possible lawful Means to wipe off for the future, that the
boldness of offenders may no longer offer such avowed affronts to the Laws of
Heaven and Earth; that our prudently-contriv'd English Laws, may no farther be
scandalized for Cobwebs, which catch the little Flies, the diminitive Sinners
only, but suffer the great and bold Transgressors to break thorough.

To prevent which, our Magistrates have power enough from the Laws of the Land,
and an encouragement sufficient from the Laws of God, and Obligation from both;
for both Reason and Revelation tell us, that they are constituted by God, for
the punishment of Evildoers, and for the praise of them that do well; and
assure us, that wicked Men ought to be afraid of Magistrates, because they bear
not the Sword in vain, but are Ministers of God, Revengers to execute Wrath
upon them that do evil.

These are the only proper Expe^^ents to reform or punish those, (...) neither
Advice nor Argument, neither Admonition, nor Fraternal Correption, much less
the despised Censures of the Church, or any of gentler Methods, can reclaim;
for when Sinners grow hard and impudent, when they have put on the Whores
Forehead, and the Brow of Brass, and scorn the weightiest Reproof, and
consequently nothing can hinder either the ill influence of their Example, or
put a Stop to the Current of those Judgments, which their outrageous Impieties
will otherwise pull down upon us, but the strict Execution of our Laws: In this
Case, not only those in Authority are concerned, but also every Man who has
any regard for the Honor of GOD, the Welfare of his Brother, or the Happiness
of the Nation, ought, according to the Design of the Law, and the Reason of the
Thing it self, to inform the Magistrate of those Enormous Offenders and
Offenses which come to his knowledge, that they might be brought to Condign
Punishment.

And this, I take to be the Principal Design of those Societies for the
Reformation of Manners, which are already Formed in diverse Parts of this
Kingdom, as well as in this Place.

And I crave your Patience, whilst I speak a little to this Subject, either for
the Prevention or Cure of Mistake or Prejudice.

And that I may be more succint and Methodical, I will digest what I have to
say upon it, under the following Heads of Consideration, very briefly.

I. I will suppose the Legality of these Societies, i. e. their Agreeableness
to the Constitution of the English Government, as Established, in Church and
State.

II. I Will take Notice of the Advantages that such SOCIETIES have, above the
Power of Single Persons, to give a Cheque to the Combined Force of prevailing
wickedness.

III. I will consider how they ought to be qualified, who enter into, or are
admitted Members of such Societies, And

IV. I will observe, That to render their Design ( The Suppression of
Immorality and Wickedness, according to the Laws) successful, they ought to act
with great Piety and Prudence.

I. I shall suppose the Legality of these SOCIETIES, i. e. Their agreeableness
to the Constitution of the English Government, as Established in Church and
State.

This I do not Undertake from any extraordinary Skill I pretend to have in our
English Laws and Government, which is none of my Province; But from that
Countenance and Encouragement which is given to a late Excellent Account of
these Societies An Account of the Societies for Reformation of Manners. 1699.
* by the concurrent Suffrages of a Considerable Number of Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and a Majority of our Reverend Sages of the Law; who Unanimously
Declare, That the Design of that Good Book (the Principal Scope of which is to
Recommend and Promote these Societies)* is truly Great and Noble; so much for
the Honor of GOD, the Advancement of Piety and Virtue, and the Public Good
both of Church and State, that in their Opinion, it cannot fail of being
approved of by all Good Men: And since (by so great a Cloud of Witnesses of
Unquestionable Skill and Ability in our Laws) it tends to the Public Good both
of Church and State; it must needs be agreeable to the Constitution of our
Government in both. And besides, their Declaration of the Legality of this
Design, they most humbly and heartily pray, That Pious Men of all Ranks and
Qualities, may be Excited by that Good Book, to contribute in their respective
Places and Stations, their best Endeavors toward a National Reformation of
Manners.

But so much, I hope, will suffice for a foundation of my Supposition, That
these Societies are agreeable to the Established Constitution of our English
Government.

II. I am next to take Notice of, The Advantage these Societies have above the
Power of Single Persons, to give a Cheque to the Combined Force of prevailing
Wickedness.

It Is true, The Reformation of Men's Manners, or but to endeavor to make the
World better, is a Work so necessary and truly Excellent, that one would think
it impossible that such a Design should meet with any other Enemies, than such
as are likewise Enemies to all Religion and Virtue: But* then it must likewise
be considered, That the Enemies of Religion are very Numerous, and it is their
daily Work, to Unite for the strengthening Psalm* 64. 5, 6.
of their Party, They encourage themselves in an evil matter (in the Language
of the Psalmist) and search out iniquities.

The Devils, who are the Grand Abettors and Promoters of all Wickedness, act in
Combination; they are Unanimous in their Counsels and Endeavors for the Ruin
of Mankind; for if Satan St. Luke 11. 18.
were divided against Satan, as our Savior argues, how could his Kingdom of
Darkness stand?

In like manner, Vice promotes its Empire, and makes its Advances, by the
United Force and Confederacy of wicked Men.

And therefore it is highly fit and reasonable, That Good Men should Combine
together to countermine the Designs, and to discover and defeat the wicked
Policies of the Enemies of Gods Kingdom. And humanely speaking, there is no
other way to take the Field against them, than by setting Army in array against
Army.

Wicked Men keep then (...) Credit by their Numbers, a^ (...) likely, they
should be dashed (...) out of Countenance, till they see and are convinced,
that they that are against them, are more than they that are with them.

And if ever we hope, with any Success, to encounter the Combined Strength of
the Men that work wickedness, we must animate and encourage one another to the
Work; and it will become every Good Man, especially those in Authority to ask
David's Question, Who will rise up wit^ me against the wicked? Psalm 94. 16.
or, Who will take my part against the Evildoers.

And if we thus Unite our Forces to the Combat, we need not despair of Victory
and Success; For they come against us, as Goliath did 1 Samuel 17. 45.
against David, with a Sword, and with a Spear, and with a Shield; with Carnal
Weapons, with the Wisdom and Policy that is earthly, sensual, devilish; for
their Chieftain is, The Prince of the Power of Darkness; but we come against
them, In the Name of the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel whom they Defy; and
we may be well assured, That by strength shall no man prevail against God, and
that No Weapon formed against Omnipoience shall prosper.

III. I will consider, How they ought to be qualified, who enter into, or are
admitted Members of these Societies; for every Man is not fit for this Work:
What the Apostle says of a Bishop, That he must be one that rules well his own
house, for if a man know not how to rule his 1 Timothy 3. 4.
own house, how shall he take care of the Church of God? is very applicable to
the matter in hand: He that is Intemperate, or Lewd, or Quarrelsome, or in
short, careless of his own Manners, is very unfit to Reform the irregular
Conversations of other persons.

He that complains of the Faults of others, ought to be exceeding careful, that
he himself be innocent.

He that accuses another of any wickedness, should first narrowly look into
himself, lest the Person whom he impeaches, do recriminate, and justly retort
upon him that Proverb, Physician heal thy self.

He is not a Competent Judge, nor a proper Reformer of another Crime, who is
guilty of the like or greater himself.

Thus for Instance, tho a Drunkard be a Person very fit to be reformed, yet he
who is known to be guilty of Trick or Knavery in Commerce, and the way of
Dealing, is no proper Reformer of him.

For as the Example is ridiculous when Vice corrects Sin; so he does but make
wider Wounds and Gashes in his own Mind; who whilst he pretends to Reform
others, his own Conscience flies in his Face, and tells him, as Nathan did
David, Thou art the Man.

Our Business then in this Affair i^, to throw the First Stone at our selves,
and to be far more severe in judging our selves than in Reforming others; and
to pull the heams out of our own eyes, before we pretend to take motes out of
our Brother's; and especially to Reform our Inward Man, our Hearts and
Affections (which are not cognizable by any Magistrate or Society) before we
engage in the weighty Work of an outward Reformation, lest we fall under the
Character of Hypocrites and Unbelievers, and have our portion with them.

Let us then he strictly careful to make our light shine before others; for
this i^ one excellent Method of reclaiming Sinners, to do it by our Exemplary
and unreprovable Conversations.

And therefore, in short, they who enter into, or are admitted Members of any
Society for the Reformations of other men's Manners, ought themselves to be
Persons of Excellent Temper, of Strict Virtue, of Exemplary Lives, and
un-blemished Reputations; this will give Credit and Authority to what they do,
and make the Society which they compose, more useful to the Ends of its
Institution; but this falls within the compass of the next particular.

IV. That to render the Designs of these Societies (the Suppression of
Immorality and Wickedness, according to the Laws) successful, they ought to act
with great Piety and Prudence.

The Apostle gives a very excellent and comprehensive Rule for Christians to
walk by: Let all your things be done 1 Cor. 16. 14
with Charity; and if all our Affairs, even of lesser Moment, ought to be
transacted with a respect had to Charity, which is the great Gospel Duty, and
Bond of Christian Perfection; then we ought much more to act by this Rule, when
we do any thing in order to our Neighbor's Reformation, wherein the Welfare of
his Soul is so nearly concerned.

And therefore, I say, to render their Attempts of this Nature successful,
these Societies ought to act with great Piety and Prudence; the former will
secure their Charity, and the latter will temper and guide their Zeal.

1. Charity will not allow Men to divulge and make those Faul^s public, which
were committed in private; for Charity, which teaches us to cover a Multitude
of Sins, will not permit or warrant us causelessly to blaze abroad any, and
therefore he that i^ a loud Trumpeter, can never be a Charitable Reformer of
his Neighbor's Faults. Solomon's Direction, in this Case, is excellent, Debate
the Cause with thy Brother himself* and discover not a secre^ Prove. 25. 9.
to another. And our Savior's Rule is, Tell thy Brother his faults between
thee and him alone: and if he hear thee, thou have gained thy Brother: which
although it chiefly relate to private Trespasses, yet may frequently be
extended to the Case in hand. For Charity believes all things, and hops all
things, as the Apostle tells us, i. e. makes Men readily disposed to believe
and hope the best; and where there is not apparent Reason and Evidence to the
contrary, it inclines Men to believe all the Good of others, which they have
the least Groundwork for; and consequently, to hope that those faults which
they see them commit, were done through inadvertency, or by surprise, or out of
weakness, and not from a Principle of wilfulness, or habitual Custom.

And indeed, our Designs to Reform Men from their vicious Courses, should be so
managed, that in probability they may be made better, not worse by ^our
Endeavors.

In which Case, a private Monition, ^^naged with Discretion and Charity, ^^
much more likely to reclaim them* than to spread abroad their Faults to their
Disparagement; but when the Fault is public, and cannot be hid, but has given
Scandal to the Church, and ill Example to others, then it ought to be more
severely remarkt upon by those who have Public Characters, and are vested with
Authority so to do.

There is a Contagion in Wickedness, and one ill Example, when Public, may
infect many others; in which case, every Man, who has any Concern for God's
Glory, his Brother's Happiness, or the Public Tranquillity, ought to do, what
he lawfully can, to put a stop to the growth o^ bold and Barefaced Impieties,
that the Actors of them may be brought to condign Punishment.

2. Whether our Neighbor's Faul^ be public or private, Charity will oblige us
to be careful, not to attemp^ his Reformation out of Malice, Hatred or Ill
will; otherwise, instead ^^ discharging a Necessary Duty, we commit a great Sin
our selves, and ta^^ an in-effectual Method to Reform others. But our great Aim
should be, to render the Crime, not the Offender ridiculous, much less to
insult over him when he is fallen, considering that we our selves are men of
like passions, and equally liable to be tempted; but our scope and intention
should be to beat down the strong holds of Sin and Satan, to pluck our Brother
out of the Snare of the Devil, to discourage Vice, to reform his Manners, and
thereby advance God's Kingdom and Glory.

And if we sincerely intend these Generous Ends, we shall do nothing through
Strife or Vainglory. And therefore in the management of this important Duty, as
we ought to express a just Detestation of the Sin, so we must give all possible
Evidence of a sincere Charity to the offending Person; And that this chiefly
was the Motive of the Undertaking, that whilst we lance the Wound, it may be
apparent, that it is in order to the Cure of the Patient.

And as a Pious Regard to the Glory of God, and our Neighbor's Welfare, will
secure Charity: So

2. Prudence will temper and guide Men's Zeal in their Charitable Endeavors to
reform others.

Zeal, is one of those things of an indifferent Nature, neither Good nor Bad in
it self, but may be either, according to the End or Object to which it is
directed.

And as that Zeal which is fixed upon proper Objects, preserved within its due
Limits, and levelled at good Ends, is highly serviceable to the Noblest
Purposes of Religion: So a Mistake in these Qualifications, or a pretense to
them, when nothing less is intended, has been, and may prove of the most
pernicious Consequence to the Peace and Tranquillity of Church and State, as
this Nation has formerly found by woeful Experience.

And for this Reason we ought ever to suffer Prudence to conduct our Zeal, to
render it useful to the best Purposes, God's Glory, our Neighbor's Good, and
our own Eternal Felicity: And if these excellent Ends be our ultimate Design,
we shall be more zealous to amend our own faults, than either to pry into the
Manners of others, or to make our selves over-busei in reforming them* beyond
our proper Sphere and Station.

However, this will make us infinitely careful in the first place, to reform
our selves, that by the Strictness of our Virtue, and the Exemplarity of our
Lives, we may be instrumental to reform others; and if the unalterable
Obstinacy of Sinners, render this ineffectual, we may then, after our private
Endeavors, warrantably inform the Magistrate of those scandalous Criminals
that come to our Cognizance, that their Deeds may receive a deserved
Retribution.

And to do this heartily, and impartially, as we have the noblest
Encouragement, so we have the most indispensible Obligations imaginable; which
is the last thing I have to offer, and so I shall conclude.

And indeed, if we set aside all other Considerations, yet the Argument of
Gratitude to God, for the many signal Mercies and Deliverances he has of late
Mercies and Deliverances he has of late wrought for us, will engage us to use
all possible Care, that we provoke him not again, to inflict heavier Judgments
upon us; will warn us to sin no more presumptuously, least a worse thing come
unto us.

I must confess, it does not always follow, that a People are therefore
reformed and reconciled to God, because he restores Peace within their Walk,
and Plenteousness within their Palaces; because he gives them Beauty for Ashes,
because he turns their Captivity as the Rivers in the South, removes his
Judgments, and pours his Temporal Blessings upon them. No, he often does this
to try, whether those whom his Judgments would not awaken and amend, who grew
hard under the Strokes of his Displeasure, may not be softened* and melted into
Repentance, by the Beams of his restored Mercy, and Loving Kindness: And if
this fail, they have Reason to believe, that it is the last Overture which God
intends to ma^^ them for their Reformation.

God has done Great Things for ^^ already, whereof we rejoice; an^ since his
Judgments could not, his Goodness is more mercifully designed to lead us to
Repentance, and Amendment.

But if neither the sharper, nor the gentler Methods can reclaim us; if we will
yet sin presumptuously, and those who have Authority to repress and punish,
will yet suffer Sin to swagger, and be insolent; or those who can, and ought,
will not inform the Magistrate, that the Impious may receive their deserved
Punishment: In this Case we may expect, that God should assert his own injured
Authority, by cutting us off from being a People, as he once did that
ungovernable Nation the Jews; and make us a Proverb of Reproach, and a hissing
to all the Countries that are round about us. In fine, which is the greatest of
all Infelicities on this side Hell, that he should for ever deprive us of the
blessed Light of the Gospel, and give it to a Nation, that will bring forth the
much better Fruits of it.

And there is but one way in the World to avoid that dismal Catastrophe, and to
secure the Blessing of Peace we now enjoy, with all its happy Effects, to us,
and our Posterity; which is, to become a Virtuous and Religious People. And to
effect this, let us all pray, and endeavor in our several Stations, and as we
have Opportunities and Capacities, that Virtue and Goodness may daily gain
ground and flourish, and all Wickedness and Vice may sneak, and look out of
Countenance, 'till, like a guilty Shade, it dwindle and vanish away.

And now what remains, but that we should all steadfastly resolve this Day, to
follow aster those things which make for the Continuance of our Peace, and
which so visibly conduce to promote our Temporal and Eternal Interest.

This is the way to show our selves good Christians, good Subjects, and such as
are really concerned for the Welfare of our Native Country, and most Holy
Religion.

This, if we do, God will then go on to strengthen and stablish what he has
wrought for us, and will make our late Mercies and Deliverances, Pledges of our
greater future Happiness.

The good God make us all so wise, as to mind the Things which belong to the
Temporal Peace and Prosperity of the Nation, and the Eternal Happiness and
Salvation of every one of our Souls, before they be hidden from our Eyes: Which
he of his infinite Mercy grant, for Jesus Christ's sake: To whom, with the
Father, and the Holy Ghost, Three Persons, and One God, be given of us, all
Angels, all Men, and all Creatures, all possible Honor and Glory, Praise, and
Thanksgiving, Fear, Adoration, and Obedience, now, and for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

