Sir JOHN BYRONS RELATION TO THE SECRETARY OF THE LAST WESTERN ACTION.

BETWEEN The Lord WILLMOTT and Sir William Waller.

On Thirsday, July 13. 1643.

With a List of both their Forces, and of their Losses.



Printed at York by Stephen Bulkley, 1643.

By special Command.

Sir John Byrons Relation to the Secretary of the last: Western Action.
Sir
UPon the occasion of Lieutenant Colonel Butlers coming to Oxford, whom I
shall desire your Honor to present to His Majesty, as one that carried
himself very bravely in this Action, and took three Corners of the Rebels,
which we sent with the rest of the Colors to Oxford, I shall make bold
summarily to relate to you the carriage of this Business, which deserves to be
acknowledged with as much thankfulness to God as any thing that ever was done
in this Kingdom. According to His Majesty's Command, we appeared before the
Devices on Thursday about three a Clock in the Afternoon, with all our Horse,
which were not above 17. or 1800. at the most, being much lessened in the long
March, and many of them so tired, that they were not able to come up; we shot
off out Ordinance from an high Hill that overlookes the Town, to let them know,
that we were there for their assistance; at the same time waller appeared with
his whole Army upon an opposite Hill within less then two Miles of U; he made
a very great show, diverse of the Country People being called thither to that
purpose. But really I believe his Horse were far more then ours in number,
and his Foot, beside the Country People 2500. all of them as completely armed
as ever Troops were. It was resolved that we should immediately march toward
them, and my Lord Willmott very discreetly ordered it, That only his Brigade
and mine should charge, (which both together made not above 1200. Horse,) and
that the other Troops (because they had lately taken an affright, and had been
put to the worse by Wallers Men) should only stand as a Reserve, and not be
employed till it should please God to renew their Courage with our Success: as
we marched toward the Rebels, they sent down some Troops toward Us, which
were gallantly encountered by Sergeant Major Paul Smith (who led our Forlorn
Hope, consisting of 300. commanded Men) and forced them to turn their Backs.
Sir Arthur Hasterigge seconded these with his Formidable Regiment of Lolsters,
I mean his Curaffiers whom the Lieutenant General intermyned with his
Brigade, and forced them to retreat, not so, but that they rallied themselves
again and charged the second time, but with worse success; for then my Brigade
being drawn up to second my Lord Willmott, they all ran away that could, and
from that time Sir Arthur Hasterigge appeared no more in the Battle; upon this
Waller drew his whole Army down the Hill, and advanced with his own Brigade of
Horse, with two Pieces of Cannon before it, and two great Bodies of Foot on the
left Flank of it, these it fell to my share to charge with my Brigade, my Lord
Willmott in the mean time rallying his men together to second me if occasion
should be. Ad I marched toward them up the Hill, their Cannon pl^l'd upon me
at a very near distance, but with very small loss, killing but two in
Colonel Sanayes Regiment; The Musketeers all this while played upon our Flank,
and hurt and killed some; and another Regyment of their Horse was watching an
opportunity to charge us either in the Rear or in the Flank, but were
hindered by Lord Craford. By this time we were come very near to Wallers
Brigade, and the command I gave my men was, that not a Man should discharge a
Pistol till the Enemy had spent all his shot, which was punctually observed,
so that first they gave us a Volly of their Carbins, then of their Pistolls,
and then we fell in with them, and gave them ours in their teeth, yet they
would not quit their ground but stood pushing for it a pretty space, till it
pleased God, (I think) to put new Spirit into our tired Horse as well as into
our men, so that though it were up the Hill, and that a steep one, we overbore
them, and with that violence, that we forced them to fall foul upon other
Reserves of Horse that stood behind to second them, and so swept their whole
Body of Horse out of the Field, and left their Foot naked, and pursued them
near three Miles over the Downs in Bristoll way till they came to a
precipice, where their Fear made them so valiant that they gallop't down as
if it had been plain ground, and many of them brake both their own and their
Horses necks. In my return from the chase, I took two pieces of their Cannon,
and diverse Wagons laden with Ammunition, and then rallied together our
scattered Troops, which were as much broken as the Enemy, by reason of their
hot pursuit, in the mean time my Lord Willmott charged their Foot with the
Horse he had with him, but could not break them, and in the charge Dudley
Smith was stain, and Lieutenant Colonel Weston, hurt and many others, but
when they saw my Horse rallyed together again before them, and the Lieutenant
General continuing still in the Rear of them, and that the Cornish Foot began
to sally out of the Town, they thought it not fit to stay any longer, they
began first gently to march off, their Officers marching before them, amongst
which (as I have been told since) Sir William Waller himself was, and Popham;
With that I advanced toward them with those Troops I had rallyed, and shot at
them with the Cannon I had formerly taken, their Officers thought it not fit to
stay any longer, but such as had Horses rid away as fast as they could, and too
fast for Us to overtake them, and the rest blew up their Powder, and threw down
their Arms and betook themselves to their heels, Our Horse fell in amongst
them, and killed 600. of them, and hurt many more, and took 800. Prisoners,
and all their Colors, and this was the success of their great Conquererer.

The Victory on our side as entire as possiblely can be imagined, their Horse
and Foot being totally routed, and all their Cannon being 7 Brass Pieces
taken, and all their Ammunition. Sir, I beseech you excuse this scribbling from
one that is,

July 14. 1643. Sir, Your Honors most humble Servant John Byron

A List of the Kings Forces, and Sir William Wallers.
Sir William Wallers strength.
Regiments of Foot five, 2500 Men. Regiments of Horse six, 2500 One Regiment of
Dragoons 0500 Cannon of Brass, 0007
The Kings Strength.
The Kings Horse 1500 Two small Pieces of Brass Ordinance. All their Army
absolutely Defeated. Killed upon the Place 600 Prisoners 800 Colors of Foot
taken 028 Colors of Horse taken 008 Brass pieces taken 007 All their
Ammunition, Baggage, and most of their Arms.
Redelivered of ours that were Prisoners with them 113. and Mistress Parsons

Of ours Killed very few, of note only Dudly Smith; But many Officers and
Gentlemen hurt.

FINIS.

