A GLIMPSE of GOD: Or, A Treatise proving, That there is a GOD. Discovering the
Grounds of Atheism. With Arguments of diverse sorts against Atheists. Showing
also, the Unity of the Godhead, and the Trinity of the Persons; as likewise,
what God is in himself, and and what he is to us; with particular Discourses on
some of God's Attributes, viz. the Simplicity, Eternity, Incomprehensibility,
Omnipresence, Omniscience, Immutability, Omnipotency, Life, and Immortality of
God: Scholastically and Practically handled. By that Eminent and Judicious
Divine, Mr. THOMAS BYRDALL, Late Minister of the Word, and Preacher at Walsall
in the County of Stafford.

Nil cum majori periculo ignoratur quam Deus: Inquisitione Dei opus est animo
religioso and cauto: Religioso, ne manibus illotis ad tanta mysteria temere
accedamus: cauto, ne vel nostris vel aliorum cogitationibus innitamur. Muscul.
loc. com. LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwel for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Sign of the
Three Crowns at the lower end of Cheap Side, over against the great Conduit.
1665.

To the Right Worshipful Sir Thomas Wilbraham of Woodhey in the County of
Chester, Baronet; and to the Virtuous Lady Elizabeth Wilbraham, his Wife.
Right Worshipful,
THeology is that heavenly and sure Wisdom, revealed by the Holy Ghost in the
Scripture, touching the knowledge of God, and of our selves, whereby we are
taught the way to Eternal Life. The design of this Treatise, is concerning God,
to show,

1. That He is. 2. What He is.
1. That God is: First, and most generally, God makes himself known by his
Works, whereby his glory appears to the whole world. So the very Philosophers
knew the Majesty of the Invisible Rom 1 20.
God, viz. by the Creation; in which are two things: 1. the Greatness of the
work: for by what Engines could the Creatures raise so great a building? 2. The
artificial sitting of things together, shows it was some great Artificer that
made it: the Majesty of God appears in the ordering and disposing of the
whole Universe, which in Greek is called (...), and in Latin, Mundus, for the
orderly disposing the parts, and the harmony thereof. It is reported, that
Archimedes made a Sphere, wherein all the world was framed, and the frame
thereof described, with the orderly course of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, the
^bbing and flowing of the Sea, etc. Now as no man that saw this, would doubt
but that it was an Artificer that made it, much less reason is there to call
into question, whether the substantial world (whereof this was a shadow) was
not made by a wise God of heaven and earth.

2. This may be further confirmed from Providence; (...), providenti^, the word
in Greek and Latin, betokens God's care concerning the whole world* and every
part of it: The word in the Hebrew comes from H^sgiah, which signifies,
subtiliter videre, vel despicere, an accurate sight, or looking down upon
things.

Now when we see the effects of Providence, the former and latter rain, summer
and winter and all the creatures provided for, the course of things maintained,
and every thing done in due order* this argues there is a God, whose governing
hand holds all together. God is the first universal Cause, and all creatures
depend upon him as the secondary causes, who cannot work without help from the
first and universal cause.

3. Because in the subordination of efficient causes, there cannot be processus
in infinitum.

4. The works of unreasonable creatures, being many of them done according to
reason, show that they are guided by some higher intelligence; even as the
Arrow that knows not the mark, is directed to it by the Archer. Hence it is
said, that Opus Naturae est opus intelligentiae.

5. Because the sense of the Deity is imprinted upon every mans's heart and
conscience, which imports an universal Cause by which it was imprinted. And
albeit Cicer. d. Nature. De^r. lib. 1. Lactant. instit. Ca^. 10 l^b. 3
many things were feigned in the Religion of the Heathen, yet this could not;
for this is the ground and root of all other: for unless it be settled in men's
minds, that there is a God, in vain are men exhorted to this or that way of
worshipping: for, from this persuasion, that there is a God, Emergit omnis ad
religionem propensio; and unless this be certainly believed, all the mysteries
of our Religion and Salvation will be no better, nor more certain, than old
wives fables; for hereupon they all depend.

Now as this Treatise will evidently show you, That God is; so likewise, What
God is. Indeed God cannot be defined, because of his Immensity; for, as Moses,
we see his back-parts only: but he may be described.

God is one in Essence, three in Persons, Jehovah E^ohim* or a Spirit having
being of himself, full of all perfection, incapable of all defects.

1. He is one God, but three Persens; which is said only of him, and of no
creature; therefore it is well to be put in, as a note to distinguish him from
us.

But here it may be objected, That if the Father be God, and the Son (begotten
of the Father) be God also, then there are more Gods than one? I answer, that
God the Father begets God the Son, yet they are not two Gods, but one God;
the meaning is, God the Father did not beget another God, but another Person.
In the Three Persons, there is neither prius, nor posterius, being all
Coeternal, by nature and time; yet in regard of order, the Father is first
named, the Son in the second, and the Holy Ghost in the last place; and in this
regard, sometime the first work, viz. the work of Creation, is attributed to
the Father, the work of Redemption to the Son, the work of Sanctification to
the Holy Ghost, though they be all common and communicable: Nor does this
distinction any whit hinder the simple and indivisible unity, for the Son is
one with the Father, because he consists of the same Spirit, and the Spirit
is not diverse from the Father and Propter u^ tatem naturae totus Pater in
F^l^o and Spi^it^^, totus Spiritus S. in Pa^^e and F^lio. Aug de (...)e.
Fatemur q^od Pater est in Filio, and Fil^us in Patre, and D^us in Deo non p^r
duplcem conv^nie^t i^^m gener^m conj^nct^o^^m* n^c p^r insi^am (...) sed per
naturae unitam simil ^udinem. H^lar It was a (...) si (...) of Lombard,
concerning some curious questions about t^^ Trin^ty, Ego nesc^o, non requi^^,
sed consolabor ^e ta^^en, (...) n^sci^nt, Angeli non ^ud^ve(...), Propheta ^^n
(...) Apostol^s non interrog(...), (...) ipse non (...) c^ss^t (...) L^mb.
(...).
the Son, because he is the Spirit of the Father and the Son, the whole nature
is in every person: John 14. 30. I am in the Father, and the Father in me,
says Christ. St. Augustine says, that by these terms, which note a
distinction, is signified a difference in relation, not in substance, wherein
they are one; and therefore he says elsewhere, Filius ad se Deus vocatur, ad
Patrem Filius; the Son in respect of himself, is called God; in respect of the
Father, he is called Son; in respect of substance, they have the same
beginning, in relation the Father is the beginning of the Son. I conclude this,
with that saying of the forementioned Father, Non possum unum cogitare, quin
trium fulgore circumfundor, nec tria possum discernere, quin subito ad unum
referor. I cannot think upon the Unity, but I am every way confounded with the
brightness of the Trinity; neither can I discern the Trinity, but I am suddenly
brought back to the Unity.

Now this one God is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit and truth, John
4. 24. He has being from himself, to distinguish him from all other creatures,
who have a communicative being; he is full of all perfections, whereas every
creature has some perfection in him which another has not, he has simply all
which may be had: Moreover, the best perfections of the creatures, do fall
short of his perfections, both because they are infinite, and incapable of any
defects; the creatures be they never so exact, yet are they capable of defects;
as a glass in a man's hand, though it be not broken, yet it is weak, and subject
to be broken.

Now God (as to his Nature) he is simple, there is no composition of parts in
him, neither does he come into composition with his creatures: He is infinite
in duration, which is his Eternity; infinite in Essence, which is his
Immensity; his presence is infinite, filling all places in heaven and earth.
God who is everywhere, and in every thing, does wholly hear, wholly see, wholly
effect every thing, says Hilary; he is infinite in knowledge, understanding
all things by his own Essence; he is his own knowledge, understanding all
things together, uno ictu and actu, and not successively, as the Schools speak;
he is semper idem, always the same, his Essence and Nature is unchangeable;
other Essences or Substances, have accidents by which they are changed more or
less, but no such thing can befall God, therefore he only is immutable; he is
spiritual and incorpor^al, and therefore cannot be seen with mortal eyes; he is
Almighty, able to do whatsoever he pleases, and his power both in its own
nature, and the objects on which it works, is infinite and unmeasurable. I
shall not insist upon these things, because the ensuing Treatise will furnish
you with particular apt Discourses upon God and his Attributes.

Now Right Worshipful, and much Honored Sir, I humbly dedicate this first Part
of the description of God and his Attributes, unto your Self, and worthy Lady:
To you, Sir, above all others, I commend the Patronage of this Treatise, as
being now Patron of that place where the Worthy and Learned Author (presented
thereunto by your Renowned Grandfather, Sir Richard Wilbraham) exercised his
Ministry with good success for diverse years, to whom also your Worship was (as
I have been informed) a good Mecaenas. The scope of this Treatise will lead you
to the knowledge of God, the unity of the Divine Essence, and the Trinity of
the Persons subsisting in the Divine Essence. We cannot worship God aright,
without some knowledge of this glorious and incomprehensible Truth, because the
Trinity of Persons, God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, are
both the object of our worship, and of our faith. This is life eternal, to know
thee to be the only true God, and him whom thou have sent, Christ Jesus, Joh.
17. 3. We are baptized in the Name of the Three Persons, which lays an
indispensable necessity upon all Christians to know them in some measure.

There is a fourfold knowledge, or rather four Properties or Qualifications of
the knowledge of God.

1. A mere notional, or speculative knowledge of God, a knowledge which is only
in the brain, and reaches not the heart; like the Moon, which gives light,
but no warrnth to inferior bodies. A man may (as St. Paul speaks) have all
this knowledge, and yet his knowledge may profit him nothing; this makes men
great Scholars, but not good Christians, and some great Scholars are but Dunces
in Christianity. The deepest Philosopher that ever was (saving the reverence of
the Schools) is but a Sot to the simplest Christian that has the saving
knowledge of God in Christ; yet we are all to labor after this speculative
knowledge, for we cannot come to saving knowledge without a natural
apprehension: Speculation is previous to practice, but mere Speculation will
not serve our turn.

2. There is a practical and ob^diential knowledge which is required of us:
practice is the end of knowledge: hereby we know that we know him, if we keep
his Commandments, 1 John 2. 3. And indeed knowledge without obedience may be
termed ignorance of God, and Christ says, that such knowledge will greaten a
man's torments in hell; he that knows, and does not his masters will, shall be
beaten with many stripes, Luke 12. 47. A practical knowing Christian is a more
knowing man, than he that has all knowledge without practice; some Divines give
this definition of Divinity. Theologia est ars been vivendi; Divinity is the
art of holy living: he is a Divine Preacher that lives holily, he is a Divine
Christian that lives obediently.

3. An affectionate knowledge of God, and the things of God is requisite to a
Christian: if the star of knowledge does not guide our affections to Christ, to
love him, to desire him, this knowledge is nothing: Christian knowledge is love
and delight in the person known to us, it is as the husband knows his wife, the
father his child, and one friend knows another, loving and delighting in
them. It Is a common rule: Verba sensus and intellectus in scriptura semper
implicant affectum. Words of understanding and sense imply affection. God
himself is said to know us and our ways, when he loves and approves of our
persons and ways, and he is said not to know us, when he loves us not: in like
manner we then know God, when we love him, and we cannot but love him, if we
truly know him.

4. An experimental knowledge of God, a scientia gustus, as the Schoolmen term
it, a knowledge of taste, sapida scientia, a savoury knowledge of spiritual
truths. O taste and see that the Lord is good. Ps. 34. 8. The more you taste of
Gods goodness in your hearts, the more will you love him, and delight in him,
your souls will then relish nothing but God, the sweetness of all creatures,
pleasures, profits, will be unsavory to your souls; of all Christians those
are the most knowing, that have tasted of sins bitterness, and Christ's
sweetness: he that has once tasted of honey, does more perfectly know the
sweetness of it, than he that has read a thousand books of the sweetness of
it, but never tasted it. That Christian that has tasted how gracious God in
Christ is to him, and how bitter sin is, knows both better, than that Minister
that has only read a thousand books or that Christian that has only heard a
thousand Sermons of both. When we preach of the sweetness of God and his
ordinances to men that never had any experimental knowledge, we do but commend
dainty meats to dead pallates, and commend the Sun to men that are blind;
knowledge in the soul is both the eye, and light, if the light that is in a man
be darkness, how great is that darkness? Why do the Generality of the world
take fancy for faith, presumption and conceit for faith? is it not because
they want this light of saving knowledge to discern the right hand of faith,
from the left hand of fancy and presumption? now craving pardon for this my
boldness, my prayer for you to God shall be that you may not be barren, nor
unfruitful in the knowledge of God; and now when the World is blew with envy,
green in malice, and withered in goodness, and when many great persons provide
delitiously for their bellies, gloriously for their backs, and poorly for their
souls; you may always be doing good, laying up in store for yo^^ selves a good
foundation against the time to come, and laying hold of eternal life, that when
others shall be found among the foolish virgins, with their sic dicentes, so
saying, you may be found among the good servants with your sic facientes, so
doing. I humbly take my leave and rest.

Much honored Sir and Madam, Your Worships most humble Servant in the Gospel.
W. GEARING.
May. 1. 1665.
A Discourse showing that there is a God; with Arguments against Atheism of
diverse sorts.
HEB. 11. 6: But without Faith it is impossible to please God: for he that
comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him.
CHAP. I.
Sect. 1.
THese words have reference to the foregoing: Enoch was translated from this
earthly vale of misery into a full possession of heavenly happiness before he
was translated he had communion and fellowship with God; and now he enjoys
eternal fellowship with his God, without interruption for a moment, because he
had this Testimony, that he pleased God; hence I observe,

That there is no heavenly happiness to be expected after death, without
pleasing God on earth. Heaven is an holy place, and will not admit rebels.
Abraham's bosom is no lodging-place for unbelieving miscreants. How came Enoch
to please God? the Apostle shows in this verse; it was by faith: Without
faith it is impossible to please him. By faith, I understand a Justifying
faith, a fiduciall recumbency upon God in Christ.

By pleasing God, two things are understood.

1. Approbation: By faith, Enoch was approved of God; or, Enoch did approve
himself before God.

2 That he was justified, accepted of as a righteous person; his faith made his
person acceptable, and his obedience well-pleasing: the gift sanctifies not
the altar, but the Altar the gift; the gold is therefore precious, because it
is the gold of the Temple: the same may be spoken of our persons and of our
works: our good works make not our person good, but our person makes our works
good; it is by faith our works are denominated good: A thousand duties and
glorious works will no more benefit an unbelieving person, then crowns of gold
and diamonds and Garlands of roses a filthy putrefying Carcass: all moral
perfections, how glorious and gracious soever to outward appearance, yet are
(as St. Augustine calls them) Splendida peccata, glittering sins, speaking of
moral virtues in the unbelieving Heathens: you may learn hence these three
things.

1. Whatsoever graces are in men, yet faith is the grace which makes them the
delight of Gods eyes; the Apostle names not one grace in Enoch, but his faith:
Faith is the rich diamond in the ring of grace, it is the rose of Sharon in a
garland of Lillies.

2. All unbelieving men, what glorious virtues soever are in them, yet cannot,
nor shall obtain salvation: the knowledge of God from the creature was too dark
a lant-horn, to guide the Philosophers feet in the way of etern^l peace and
salvation: It Is no better then an ignis fatuus, which leads men into the p^t of
destruction: it is only the light of the Gospel, which (like the star that
guided the wise men to Christ) must bring us to Christ, and so to salvation.

3. The best works and duties of unregenerate men please not God: for want of
faith, God throws them away as execrable things; he will not touch them,
because they are unclean.

Sect. 2.
Now in the next words the Apostle shows* what Faith is; here are two things.

1. Here is Credere Deum: a man must first be persuaded, that there is a God,
or, that God is.

2. Credere in Deum; a believing in Credere Deum.
God, or a reposing of confidence in God, as a bountiful rewarder of all them
that seek him: Or thus; there are two things Credere in Deum.
required in all that look to be made partakers of eternal and glorious
communion with God in heaven:

1. There must be certa notitia very Dei, a true and right knowledge of the true
God.

2. There must be fiducia, a trust and Fiducia Ass^ns^s in int^llectu, ^t
co^sensus in volu^tate
confidence in God: There must be assensus in intellectu, and consensus in
voluntate; the Mind must apprehend God, and the Will must embrace God; this is
true faith which makes a man to please God: for what is faith; but a fiduciall
knowledge of God, or a knowledge of God in Christ with application? But I will
further open these three Phrases, and shall enquire.

1. What is this coming to God. 1. By coming to God, some understand believing
in God: faith is called a coming to God in Christ. No man can come unto me, (
i. e.) no man can believe in me, unless the Father draw him, or raise him up
to believe.

2. By Coming is rather meant a fruition of God; as the chief goodness and
happiness for in the following words he speaks of believing, A man must first
believe that God is, and that he is a bountiful rewarder of such, before he
will come unto him.

2. We are to enquire the meaning of that phrase; Must believe that he is. I
answer: He must believe either that Bez. annot in loc.
there is a God, or else, as Beza has it, that God is true and faithful in his
free and gracious promises.

3. What is meant by the other phrase: And a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him? I answer (...). It is Beza's observation, that there is mutual
relation betvveen (...) and (...), praemium and ultroneam promissionem, a free
reward or gift, and a free gracious promise; and not inter mercedem and merita,
between a reward and merits.

These words do much set out the nature of faith, as in these particulars.

1. Faith makes a man to see his wants and misery; otherwise it would not send
him a begging; it makes a man to see that he is without God, without Christ,
and so without all hopes and promises of eternal salvation; therefore it sets
men on work to seek God in Christ diligently, to be unsatiable and restless
after Christ; God must be my God in Christ, or else I am in a reprobate
condition.

2. Faith emptieth a man of all confidence in himself, and in the creatures,
all are miserable comforters, broken reeds and cisterns, not a drop of
Spiritual comfort and heavenly hope is found in any thing. A man will never go
out of himself to God in Christ, till he is knocked off from carnal confidences;
the winds and waves must first beat him down, before he will lay his foundation
upon the Rock.

3. Faith shows that God is a gracious and bountiful Rewarder of all them
that put their trust in him, and assures the trembling brokenhearted Sinner,
that God will be his God, if he come unto him.

CHAP. II.
Sect. 1.
NOw having thus laid open the words, I will address my self to my intended
subject; and the words that I will insist upon shall be these -- Must believe
that God is; or, that there is a God.

This is the first fundamental point of religion: A man knows and believes
nothing, unless he first knows that there is a God: Can you believe the pardon
of Sins, your salvation, your immortal glory, unless first you are persuaded
there is a God? now because evermore there have been Atheists, and there is
abundance of Atheism in our hearts, I will prove that there is a God, and this
shall be the point,

That there is a God. For this name or title of God; we must first know, it is
nomen potestatis, and commune, non proprietatis, a name of power and
jurisdiction, and it is common, not of propriety.

1. It is common to the three Persons because it denotes the divine Essence,
which is one and the same in all the three persons,

2. It is common in this respect, because extensive, or abusive, it is given to
the creatures.

3. It Is given to Angels who are called Elohim, Dij, Gods. Psalm. 8. 6.

4. It Is given to men Psalm. 82. I have said, Ye are Gods, but ye shall die like
men. And the reason is, because Angels and Magistrates are partakers of some
divine excellencies.

There is a twofold kind of Arguments to prove there is a God: 1. Scriptural,
from the word of God, which is his own divine testimony of himself, that he is,
and the solum objectum fidei, the only object of faith.

2. There are Rational Arguments drawn from the creatures* and other things,
which demonstrate there is a God; now because the Atheist that either thinks
there is no God or doubts whether there be a God, will as well deny the
Scripture to be the Word of God, as deny God himself; I will deal only in the
latter kind of Arguments; and in these I will not meddle* with the sublime
Philosophical and Scholastical reasons, by which they demonstrate there is a
God, but bring the most familiar arguments, easy to be understood, and
sufficient to convince; and it best beseems catecheticall discourse to instruct
the ignorant.

Sect. 2.
The first argument I bring is from Arg. 1
the Creation of the world, which plainly testifies, that there is a God: none
but a God can make such a curious fabric as the world. The Scripture much
insisteth upon it, to convince men there is a God: Moses wrote the book of
Genesis for this end to prove that there is a God, that did in the beginning
create heaven and earth, and all the creatures in both. So Paul, Romans 1. 20.
tells us, that the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal
power and Godhead. These Visible creatures do manifest the invisible things of
God, his wisdom, omnipotency, eternity, goodness, is seen in the creatures;
so that an Ath^ist, or any man cannot open his eyes, and look either upward or
downward, or any way, but he may see a thousand preachers that there is a God:
yea, the most despicable creatures are Doctores Theologiae: The very buzzing of
a little fly, did make Pliny to confess the power of God.

In this one argument I shall use diverse arguments; as

1. The creatures did not make themselves; Plin. naturhist.
therefore there was a Creator of them, and that is God: they did not make
themselves for these two reasons: for, 1. Then there would be no vile, base,
despicable creatures in the world: if a worm had the making of it self, it
would not have made it self a worm, but a more noble and more glorious
creature: no; it is God, the omnipotent potter, that took out an handful of
clay, out of the confused chaos, and made vessels, some creatures of honor,
some of dishonor, according to the pleasure of his good will.

2. Had the creatures made themselves, there had not been such an orderly
subordination, and subjection of creatures to each other, and of all Creatures
unto man. That the earth should bring forth grass and herbs, grass should serve
the beasts, and beasts serve men, none but a God must work this subordination
of creatures.

3. If the creature should make it self, then it should be before it self, and
after it self; for the cause of a thing is before it is effect.

4. In the generation of man; the Father that beggetteth, does not know what he
begets; and the mother that conceives, does not know what she contriveth;
therefore it is God that frames us, and the sex, in our mother's womb.

2. This world and the creatures were not made by chance, therefore by a God:
should thou go into a Wilderness, where is neither man nor beast, and behold
there a stately House, thou wou^dest say; surely some man made it: should you
find a Triangle made in the sands, as Aristippus did, you would say, some body
made it: but here is the argument.

The comely and most beautiful order and harmony that is among the creatures,
shows that chance did not make them, which is a mother of confusion; but the
wisdom of God made all things in weight and measure. Pythagoras beholding a
curious picture in a frame, said, Video Apellis manum hanc fecisse, I see the
hand of Apelles has done this: we cannot look upon the beautiful frame of the
world, but we must acknowledge it the admirable work of the most wise God.
Interroga pulchritudinem Coeli, and erit confessio Dei; Interroga
pulchritudinem Terrae, and erit confessio Dei; Interroga pulchritudinem Aeris
and Maris, and erit confessio Dei.

Neither were the creatures made by nature: but by Nature two things are
understood, either Natura naturans, and that is God: or Natura naturata, which
is nothing else but the course of things: This could not create.

1. Because we see some things which come not from nature; as, heroical
virtues in men.

2. If by nature; then the natural courses of things should not be hindered; but
they have been hindered; therefore all things were made by a supreme Essence.

3. There are innumerable creatures in the world; there is a diversity of their
natures, and contrariety of creature against creature: yet that there is such
an harmonious concord between them, argues there is a God that governs and
overrules all. What a difference is there between the heavens, and the earth,
and seas? and if the creatures in their kinds, fish, foul, beasts, creeping
things, and all make but one World, there is an hand that plays upon this
Instrument, which makes the strings of diverse notes to make such an harmony as
they do.

In a word! The whole world of creatures are a world of demonstrative arguments
to prove there is a God: such as these.

1. The consideration how all creatures in the world, the upper and lower,
serve to one main end; sc. the good of man.

2. The constant course of the creatures: the sun knows his going down, Psa.
104. 19. The sun arises and the sun goes down, and hastes to the place where
he arose. Eccl. 1. 5. The sun is said freely to run his course, or (which is
all one) to rejoice to run it, Psalm. 19. 5. The wind goes toward the south and
turns about unto the north; it whirleth about continually, and the wind
returns again according to his circuits; All the rivers run into the sea, yet
the sea is not full; unto the place from whence the rivers come, thither they
return again, Eccl. 1. 6, 7.

3. The variety of seasons, as spring, summer, harvest, winter: Seed time and
harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter, day and nighr cease not, Genesis 8. 22.
With these various seasons we are also to consider the particular passages in
them, as rains and showrs and the fruitfulness of the seasons: Can any Jer.
of the vanities of the Gentiles give rain? it is in vain to cry O Baal hear
us: The continual preservation and maintenance of the world; and the ordination
of each several kind of creatures to their particular end; these things do
sufficiently prove that there is a God. Many more arguments of this nature
might be brought, but I will conclude this argument with that speech of Hugo
Cardinalis. Hugo. Card.
There is (says he) a threefold voice of every creature to every man.

1. There is Vox famulantis: they tell thee, they are thy servants; the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, tell thee, they are thy servants: they are restless, and move
every day to give thee light the clouds tell thee that they are carried about
upon the wings of the wind to water the earth for thee: the earth tells thee,
that she is plowed up, and brings forth corn and grass for thee: the beasts
tell thee, that they are for thy use and serve.

2. There is vox admonentis, admonishing and instructing us of our duty to God
that we should love that God; glorify that God as God* praise that God that
has made them for our use, service and comfort.

3. There is vox comminantis: the creatures do threaten the Atheists, and all
abominable disobedient wretches unto their God, to be their destructions, and
instruments of horrible vengeance to them: The fire threatens to burn the
Atheists, and those that will not honor God, but rebel against him; the water
threatens to drown them; the earth to swallow them up and to devour them.

Sect. 3.
The second argument shall be this: Arg. 2.
All nations in the world did and do acknowledge a deity: it makes nothing for
the Atheist that they worshipped many Gods, as the Host of heaven, Beasts,
Herbs; yea some a red clout hanging upon a pole. Yet in that they had always
something which they worshipped in a religious manner, and called in their own
language, God; i^ is argument sufficient, that all nation did acknowledge there
is a God.

Yea, every man does acknowledge there is a God: for those that are reckoned and
esteemed of for most professed Atheists, yet it is more then probable, that they
do not altogether deny a God, but only deny that God Aquinas.
takes any care in governing the lower and inferior matters in the world: So
Aquinas thinks.

Others again say, that, professed Atheists did not, nor ever could, deny there
was a God, but did endeavor to extinguish the knowledge of God in them.

Or, as others optative: they did wish in their hearts that there were no God
at all; and therefore gave themselves over to act all wickedness against the
knowledge of God, that so they might extinguish that shining knowledge of God in
their hearts, but could never.

S. Augustine says of Atheists; that albeit there be some, who think or would
persuade themselves that there is no God, yet the most vile and desperate wretch
that ever lived, would not say, There was no God: They that made it their work
to study Atheism, could never extinguish the knowledge, that there is a God.

Sect. 4.
Because I had rather deal with wicked Atheists themselves, I will argue from
Atheists themselves that there is a God,

1 From that discerning judgment of Arg. 1.
good and evil in every man: all men do, and can discern evil from good, and
say, Such an act is evil and unreasonable, such an act is good: which would not
be, if there were not a God which is the supreme Lawgiver, who writes his laws
upon the hearts of men, by which they judge of good and evil.

If this distinction of good from evil were from men; then what man did appoint
to be good (though evil in it self) should be good, and what man did determine
to be evil (though good in it sel^) should be evil: then the adulte^er would
have his uncleanness to be no sin* the drunkard would have^ is drunkenness to
be no sin; the murderer wou^d have murder to be no sin: men would not have any
vices that they themselves are addicted unto, to be sin: But we pl^inly see,
that men who are addicted to base lusts, ever condemn them for vices, both in
themselves and others.

So again; other common notions of the law, engraven upon the consciences of
all men, prove there is a God, as, that God is to be worshipped, that parents
are to be honored, and such like; these show that there is an universal cause
stamping these upon men's hearts, which cause is God.

A second argument is taken from A^g. 2
their own conscience: by this Ath^ists may be convinced there is a God: O
Atheist! why does t^y conscience terrify thee, when thou do ev^l, gripe thee
with fearful accusations, condemn thee, bring old sins to thy remembrance, and
witness them against thee, if it be not because it is Gods Vicegerent in thy
soul? The wicked flees when no man pursues him. Prove. 28. 1, Why do thou
fle^? there is no avenger of blood behind thee; there is no man nigh, yea it
may be there is no man that knows the evil thou have committed, and of which
thy conscience accuses thee, and for which it terrifieth thee with damna^le
horrors. If there be no God, what need have you then to tr^mble and fear? if
there be no judge, who will one day bring thee before his tribunal to give an
account, and to doom thee to the lowest hell, why do thou tremble and quake?
the reason is, conscience even in Atheists does pursue them, and tells them,
that the just, sin* revenging God will one day bring them to judgment for those
things which no man knows, but their own false and accusing hearts; and then
no marvel, if such who are professed Atheists do tremble and are horribly
afraid: if there were no God, it is no matter for all the accusations of thine
own conscience.

3 Because the wicked and the Atheists Arg. 3.
themselves will make some striving and reluctance against gross notorious
secret Sins; They have sometimes suitable objects that serve their turn; a very
fit opportunity to act their Sin, strong temptations; and (which is not the
least motive) secrecy, no mortal eye behold's them; yet even then their hearts
will smite them in the very temptation, and reason the case with them before
they commit the sin. Now from whence com^th that opposition and reasoning? why
should you fear the shame of the world? no eye beholds you in secret, in the
dark; if you can keep your own counsel, why should you fear punishment? Sins
that are unknown go unpunished: therefore it must needs come from God, who
stirs up Conscience within them in the temptation, like the Angel to
withstand Balaam in his designs, and from an apprehension that there is a God,
that does see in secret their abominable acts, and will punish them for their
sins. Ar^ 4.


4. The fear of shame and of punishment is a demonstrative argument, to prove
the notion of a God in our hearts: Shame was the first punishment God inflicted
upon Adam for his Rebellion, and it is inflicted upon his posterity; that
suppose a man were in a wilderness, far remote from every creature; let him act
sin, he would presently be ashamed there, as if many men did know it. That doom
of Pashur (whom the Lord called Magormissabib, Jer. 20. 4, 5.
and threatened to make a terror to himself) is the judgment of many Atheists;
they are terrors to themselves, even Magor-missabib, fear round about: every
object they see, is an object of fear to them, so they are very Shames to
themselves. What more plainly demonstrates to wicked men there is a God, then
this secret shame, terror, and reluctance?

4 Because in their sicknesses, calamities, Arg 4*
distresses, the most wicked Atheists will pray, and then call upon the name of
that God whom they neglect at other times: God is not in all their thoughts
before, but they live as they list; now let me demand of thee, O Atheist, why
do thou pray, and call upon God in the time of thy trouble and misery, if
the^e be no God? In the storm that Jonas was in, all the Mariners betook
themselves to prayer; every man called upon his God; and Jonas was awaked ^ut
of his sleep by them to call upon his God also: The Ship-master comes to him,
saying, What meanest thou, J^n 1 6.
O sleeper? arise call upon thy God, if so be that God will think of us, that
we perish not: all men in distress will p^ay; the most Atheistical drunkard,
swearer, blasphemer, he that neglects Prayer at other times, public, priva^e,
and scorneth at those that frequently use it and give themselves not over to
work all wickedness with greediness; yet in the time of his distress, such a
one will be religious, very devout, and not only pray himself, but also call
to others to pray for him: so that Even Atheists themselves are clear
demonstrations, that there is a God, and the most irreligious persons
accknowledge a religion. Arg, 5.


5 This also may be a manifest argument to prove there is a God from Atheists
themselves; because, even they who in their lifetime did deny a God, have
confessed and approved him in their deaths; their own accusation of themselves
upon their death beds, fearfully crying out upon their abominable and cursed
bypast lives. Why O Atheist! do thou then complain of thy drunkenness,
swearing, adultery, and cursed profaneness, if thou did not apprehend that
there is a God? If there be no God, there is no fear of Hell after death, nor
of Judgment after death -- So again; their hideous roaring, and horrible
quaking at the serious apprehensions of their approaching Death, which make's
standers by even to tremble because of them. Zeno truly said, To hear and see
an Atheist dye, Im(...)m audire animam ess^^turum mag is prob^t Deum esse quam
Doctores omnes. Zeno.
will more demonstrate that there is a God, then all the learned can by their
Arguments.

Now why do Atheists tremble, if there be no God? then death would be an
annihilation of their Being: then no need of trembling and raving if there be
no God; then no Judge to appear before, no burning Prison to torment the
Wicked: But here is the ground of their trembling; the most professed Atheists
have their serious thoughts that there is a God, that they are to appear before
him, that there is an Hell, and an Heaven, that their Souls are immortal, and
that now their immortal Souls are tumbling into everlasting woe and destruction.

Again, God has manifested himself to Be, by the death of Atheists, by some
fearful and exemplary judgment upon them, as upon that Assyrian, who bragged
at a Feast, that he did never offer Sacrifice to a God, and was eaten up of
Lice: So Lucian going to supper abroad, left his Hounds fast when he went, and
as he returned home having railed against God and his Word, his Dogs fell mad,
met him, and tore him to pieces. That Epitaph which was written upon
Sennacheribs tomb, may be upon every Atheist's! (...). Herodot.
He that looks upon us, let him believe there is a God, and learn to fear him.
The dreadful judgments executed upon Atheists, should be like the handwriting
on the wall against Belshazzar, a matter of trembling, and persuasion there is
a God; or, like Nebuchadnezzars judgment, should force them to acknowledge
there is a God.

There is a Devil therefore there is a God. A^g. ult.
Those horrid and blasphemous injections concerning God argue there is a Devil,
and so a God: because the injections are against a Deity? even that one
injection, whether there be a God or no: these horrid disputations of
Atheistical hearts may to any understanding prove the^e is a God: It Is a
diametrical opposition to meditate or think there is a God, and to to think
whether God is.

CHAP. III.
THe use of this point is first for conviction of Atheists: but oh tha^ they
were convinced, that doubtless there is a God! never was there a miracle
wrought to convince an Atheist, because any creature is sufficient; he cannot
op^n his eyes any way, but he may s^e a world of arguments to convince him:
What! can thou behold the works o^ God (which none can do ^ut G^d) and be an
Atheist? What an Athiest? when as thy inward conscience by her gripes will tell
thee there is a G^d? What an Atheist? and yet in sickn^sse and trouble call
upon God? if there be any among us that will not now acknowledge there is a God,
yet when death comes, they shall then find and approve that there is a God:
and if there be any here that will not be convinced, let him alone, God shall
put him to School to the D^vil, and he will learn him this lesson that there is
a God

Now I will show the several sorts of Atheists, and the grounds of Atheism.

1. Some such there have been (and oh that there were none of that generation
left) who profess outwardly there is no God ^t all: Such a one was Sueton in
Calig.
Caligula the Emperor, and yet in time of Thunder and Tempest* and such
fearful passages, did tremble as no man more; and would many a time hide
himself in a Vault, as Histories relate.

2. There are David's fools, who Psalm. 41 ^1.
durst not for the shame of the World outwardly say, there is no God: yet in
their hearts either wish there were no God at all, or would persuade themselves
there is no God at all, or (to use David's phrase) Say in their hearts Senec^
there is no God. Seneca has a remarkable speech of these two sorts:
Mentiuntur qui dicunt, se non sentire Deum esse: nam etsi tibi affirm^nt
interdi^, noctu tamen dubitant. They lie, says he who say, they perceive not
^here is a God; for although they affirm it to thee in the day time, yet by
night they doubt of it.

3. Every wicked man is an Atheist; what boasts soever they make of their
knowledge of God, their abominable works do deny God, Tit. 1. 16. The
transgression of the wicked says within my heart, that there is no fear of God
before his eyes, Psalm. 36. 1. The drunkenness of the Drunkard is a denial of
God; if the drunkard were persuaded there were a God, he would not give himself
up to such swinish brutishness; the like may be said to those that delight in
secret sins.

4. Such as deny God in any thing through their gross Atheistical thoughts of
God.

1. Such as shut up God in Heaven, as a blind and ignorant God, not knowing, or
not regarding what is done here below, they imagine him a forgetful God, or a
God that sees not. The Psalmist gives us the lauguage of such men Psalm. 73.
11. They say, how does God know, and is there knowledge in the most high? So
they deny God's Omnipresency and God's Omnisciency; which to think, is as it
were, to un-God God.

2. Such as conceive God to be made all of mercy, and no justice, as the
ignorant think; or all made of justice, and no mercy, as all despairing persons
do.

CHAP. IV. Shows the grounds of Atheism.
IN the next place I shall lay down the grounds of Atheism.

1. The first is, that natural blindness and ignorance of God that is in our
hearts: Atheism is one branch that sprouts from that cursed root of bitterness
in us: when David tells us, that the fool has said in his heart there is no
God, Psalm. 14. 1. it follows in ver. 2. The Lord looked down from heaven to
see if there were any that did understand and seek God: there is a natural
Atheism in all, which faith and saving knowledge expels: it is through
ignorance that carnal men have such gross conceits of God.

2. A second ground is, their sensual desires of satisfying their base lusts:
because men give themselves up to sensuality, and to work all manner of
wickedness, and would not be crossed in their courses, but would have an
uncontrollable liberty; hence they persuade, or (at least) would persuade
themselves, there is no God.

3. It Is through the just Judgment of God upon ungodly men, that they are
given over to such thoughts that there is no God; for when men shall labor to
quench the light of Nature; and, although the invisible God be visible in his
works, yet will not they acknowledge him, but even wilfully study to be
Atheists, God bereaves them of the thoughts and notions of God, and inflicts
upon them a reprobate mind, that they shall not retain him in their thoughts.

4. The impunity of wicked men makes Atheists: because they sin, and go
unpunished, sin against God, and against Heaven, and no wrath and vengeance is
revealed from Heaven upon them; hence they flatter themselves with Atheistical
thoughts, either that there is no God, or that God is blind, and either sees
not, or regard's not, what is done here below: Psalm. 50. 21.
or else they think that God is altogether such a one as themselves; not
considering there is a day of the revelatiof the righteous judgment of God
coming upon them, when vengeance shall be paid; and not considering the drops
of Divine vengeance that have already fallen upon some Atheistical persons
like to themselves.

5. A seared and hardened Conscience is another cause of practical Atheism:
because they feel no workings of conscience, no gripes, nor accusations of
conscience, no fears nor terrors as others, but live in the habitual practice
of notorious sins, public and private, and conscience is dead within them in
regard of it is operations; hence it is, that fools say in their heart, that
there is no God: and so because God and Conscience let them alone, they throw
the rains upon their necks, do live most abominably, and fill up the measure of
their sins, and treasure up wrath against the day of wrath; God abhorrs them,
and gives them up to their lusts, and rese^ves them for wrath, and wrath for
them: this is their punishment for the present, and it will be most bitter
hereafter, and when they shall feel the power of his Almighty wrath, and are
blaspherning under it, then shall they acknowledge that there is a God.

CHAP. V.
THis should cause every one of us to humble our selves for those cursed seeds
of Atheism that are in all our hearts, and cause us to oppose Atheism as one of
the most detestable sins that is among us: we should hate and oppose it.

1. As a sin that is most against* the light of Nature; every creature, the
least Gnat and Fly, and the meanest Worm, will confound a man that dispute's
whether there be a God.

2. We should set our selves against this sin, as that which is most of all
opposite to God, against the very being of God himself, because it denies his
glorious Being: every Atheist does as much as he can to destroy God, to un-God
him, to throw him out of his Throne, to pull him out of Heaven.

3. We should oppose Atheism, as it is a mother of all profaneness, and
abominable licentiousness; for when men shall shake off the fear of a God,
they will then fear to commit no sin; they will drink down iniquity like water,
no abomination shall come amiss to them: When the Apostle gives us in a whole
bed-roll of sins; There is none that understands and seeks after God; They
are altogether gone out of the way, and become unprofitable; their throat is an
open. Sepulcher, etc) Whose mouth is full of Cursing and Bitterness. Their feet
are swift to shed blood; destruction and misery are in their ways, and the way
of peace they have not known; he lays down this as the ground of all; There is
no fear of God before their eye, Romans 3. 11. to 18. Where the fear of a God is
not, there all manner of profaneness will abound.

4. Atheism is such a sin, as is not found in Hell: for the very Devils do
believe and tremble, Jam. 2. 19. they know there is a God, acknowledge him to
Be: Atheism is not to be found in Hell. Fuller's p(...). State.


On Earth are Atheists many;
In Hell there is not any.
He that now denies there is a God is more vile then a Devil; indeed they that
will not now be convinced by the works of God, the torments of Hell will make
them to acknowledge a God.

CHAP. VI.
IF there be a God (your consciences Use.
do prove to your faces that there is a God; he is clearly seen in his works,
and you all profess you believe there is a God) then that God is to be
worshipped: show me thy belief that there is a God by thy Worshipping and
serving him: otherwise thou art worse then the most barbarous Infidells, who
Wo^shipped that which they acknowledged for their God. What, are there worse
Atheists found among us, then among barbarous Infidells? I tremble to speak it;
that it is so, is most certain: there are no worse Atheists, then those that
know and assent there is a God, yet in Words and Works deny him.

Tell me, O Atheist! Why did God make thee? what, to serve thy lusts, to serve
this World, to serve men, to serve Devils? every Child will answer, God made me
to serve him. Shall God be frustrated of his end? will you rob God of his
service, of his Day, of his Worship, of his honor and glory? why does God give
men up to their hearts lusts here, and hereafter to eternal vengeance, but
because they saw the invisible Godhead in his visible works, and did not
glorify him as God, Romans 1. 23. An unclean Adulterer, and an Atheistical
Drunkard do worse, they change the incorruptible God into a base lust.

Moreover; if there be a God, here is terror for the Wicked, comfort for the
Righteous.

1. Terror for the wicked* However you spend your days in the fulfilling of
your base lusts, and jeer at such as give not up themselves to work Wickedness
as you do; and though you live a while as if there were no God, yet know, it
shall be ill with you because there is a God; for he will be avenged on all the
Wicked of the Earth, and rain down fire and brimstone from Heaven upon all such
rebellious miscreants, that they shall be forced to say; Verily there is a God
that judges in the Heavens: if there be a God; then know for certain, there is
an Hell of horror and darkness for all ungodly Atheists

2. Here Is comfort for the Godly; all ye that now fear God, bele^ve in him,
honor and obey him; know ye, it shall be well with you: howev^r it fare with
you for the present, it shall be well with you in the end, maugre all the
malice of men and Devils: walk on boldly in your uprightness, although you
meet with Wolves and Lions in the way of holiness, you shall be rewarded,
because there is a God that loves righteousness. If there be a righteous God,
then verily there is a reward in store for righteous men; and a time coming
when the wicked shall be turned into Hell, with them all that forget God; then
shall all Atheists admire them whom they abhorred, and glorify that God, whom
in works they now deny.

A Discourse of The Unity of the Godhead.
1 CO^. 8. 4, 5, 6. We know that an Idol is nothing in the world, and that
there is no other God but one. For though there be that are called gods,
whether in heaven or in earth* as there be Gods many, and Lords many:) But to
us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and
one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.


CHAP. I.
THe occasion of these words was a Case of Conscience among the Christians in
the Church of Corinth, concerning things offered to Idols, Whether it were
lawful for any to eat the flesh which was offered in sacrifice to them, and to
be present a^ such Feasts? S. Paul answers the Case, and resolves the doubt
in this and the two following Chapters; but more especially in this, and in the
end of the tenth Chapter.

In this Chapter he lays down two main grounds of Christianity:

1. Concerning Charity; That Christians ought to walk according to the great
Rule of Charity, which aims at the good of the weak Bre^hren, and not according
to their private and greater measure of knowledge: Knowledge puffs ^p, ^ills us
with pride; but Charity edifieth the weaker Brethren.

2. He shows what God is, and what a^ Idol is; That God is but one, and all
Idol gods are nothing; in these Verses. In the words ye may see four things:

1. A Negation of Idols to be gods, verse. 4.

2. A Concession of the Worlds Idolatrous Judgment about God, ver. 5.

3. A main fundamental Position acknowledged by all Believers, and by all, that
there is but one God.

4. A Description of this one God, verse. 6. Now for the plain opening of the
Words.

We know that an Idol is nothing, etc.

We know] that is, We evidently (...).
know, and are fully persuaded, that an Idol is nothing: An Idol is said to be
nothing, in these respects; Nothing is taken two ways,

1. Negative, negatively; when it is a denial of it to be any thing at all in
rerum natura: So an Idol is not said to be nothing, for it is something: the
carved stocks and stones, the host of heaven, as the Sun, Moon, and Stars, the
sublunary creatures, as Men, etc. are true natural things exposed to our view.

2. Nothing is taken privative privatively, which is a denial of that which it
is taken or conceived to be, o^ to represent: So an Idol is nothing.

Or else, an Idol is said to be nothing in these respects;

1. Though an Idol be something for matter and form, yet it has nothing of the
nature of a God in it; therefore the Hebrew word (...) which signifies an Idol,
is (according to some) quasi, non est Deus, it is not God; it has not power
and strength to help and comfort, or to do any good or evil: they are good for
nothing, they will not help in distress, they cannot save nor destroy: Eyes
have they, but they see not; ears, but they hear not; hands, but handle not:
They that made them are like unto them.

2. It Is nothing, in opposition to that which is true and real, the very same
thing we conceive it to be: but an Idol is an empty, foolish, vain fiction; so
the word (...) signifies vanum, a vain thing, mendacium, a lying thing, a lie,
as Isa. 4. and Idols are called vanities by the Prophet Jeremiah: both are
spoken of Idol Gods.

3. It Is nothing: The Apostle here speaks of Idols by way of contempt, an Idol
is nothing; it is not taken adjective, but substantive; it is nihil, id est,
res nihili, nothing, that is, a thing of no worth at all: a thing good for
nothing; and in this sense they are likewise called Vanities, because they are
for no purpose at all.

4. An Idol is nothing by way of representation: an Idol does not represent God
to us; an Idol is not the resemblance, image, shape, or figure of the true God
to us, therefore it is nothing: therefore it is unlawful to make any Image of
God, because expressly forbidden: therefore Papists are gross Idolaters, in
making the image of God like to an old man, because called the Ancient of
days; it is impossible to make a representation of God, because God is
invisible.

5. It Is nothing, because an Idol can do nothing: Can any of the Vanities of
the Gentiles cause rain? Jer. 14. 22. it is spoken of Idols. And God upbraids
them by the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 44. verse. 9, etc. And Elijah mock^ the
Priests of Baal, that cut themselves with Knives and Lancers, crying ou^ from
morning until noon, O Baal* hear us: but when there was no voice, nor any that
answered, Elijah derided them and said, Cry aloud, for he is a God; either he
is talking, or he is pursuing* or he is in a journey, or paradventure he
sleeps, and must be awaked. 1 Reg. 17. 27.

In the World:] By it we are to understand the whole Universe in heaven and
earth: that is, all the Idols which are figures or shapes of heavenly or
earthly things are nothing.

Ver. 5.] In this verse the Apostle prevents by a Concession, what they might
object to him: The Gentiles acknowledge many Gods in heaven and in earth, how
can there be but one God?

It Is most true, says the Apostle; There be many that are called Gods, and
were worshipped as Gods: as in heaven they worshipped sun, moon, and stars; in
earth men, as Jupiter, Saturn, their Images; in the Sea, Neptune; under the
earth, Rhadamanthus and Proserpina: but all these are nothing; they are the
vanities of the Gentiles; these many Gods and Lords cannot make up one God or
Lord; they are all seigned Gods.

Ver. 6. But unto us there is but one God] here the Apostle explodes the
Heathenish fables of the many Gods* and shows that Christianity does
acknowledge, and Christians do believe and profess but one God: let the heathen
make to themselves as many Gods as the world has creatures in it, yet we
acknowledge but one God. Here the Apostle set^ forth God with three Epithets.

1. He is the Father: whether it be taken essentially, for the first Person, or
(...) for the Three persons, still it denotes but one God.

2. He is said to be the efficient cause of all things; of whom are all things.

3. He is the last end of all things, and we in him. Hence I note,

That there is but one God. CHAP. II.
CHristians and Christian Religion acknowledge but one only God* Hear, O Israel,
the Lord our God is o^ Lord. Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Is there a God beside me? yea there is
no God; I know not any. Isa. 44. 8. I am the Lord and there is none else, there
is no God beside me. Remember the former things of old, for I am God and there
is none else, I am God and there is none like me. Isa. 46. 9. The first
Commandment runs thus; Thou shall have no other Gods before me. And this is
life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom thou have sent. Joh. 17. 3.

In the handling of this, I will do these things; first I will show how God is
said to be One; then give the grounds of Polytheism, or how it came to pass,
that men did imagine more Gods then one; and then make Application.

A thing is said to be One diverse ways.

1. Aggregatione, as, many stones make but one heap, many parts make but one
whole thing, one body; so God is not one, because there are not a multitude of
Gods to make one.

2. A thing is one consensu, by consent; as many persons may be as one by their
mutual consent, as three witnesses testifying one thing; so God is not one.

3. A thing may be said to be one genere or specie, as the Logicians have it;
man is one kind of living creatures: so Peter or Paul is but one in number, or
one individually contained under the specifical kind of Man; though Peter be
one individual person, yet there be more men beside him; so God is not one.

4. A thing is said to be one essentia, or natura, or numero; as that it has
no parts, nor genus nor species to be contained under: so God is said to be
one, He is one by nature and essence; as that he is but one in number, or
rather ante numerum; though there be three persons by number yet there is but
one only God ratione essentia* so Luther speaking of the Trinity, said it is
unissima Trinitas, or, this God is one, not unitate (...) and (...). because
this would take away the plurality of Persons: now God is not one, unitate
hypostatica, by a personal unity, but God is one only, unitate (...) non
unitate (...), by unity of Essence, not unity of Person.

5. God is said to be one, (...), that is the only God, and none beside him;
he is one per remotionem plurium, he excludes all other Gods, there is no God
in heaven or in earth, but this one only God, John 17. 3.

That there is but one only God, Arg. 1.
these arguments are able to evince.

Because there can be but one most perfect Being; therefore of necessity but
one God, who is essentially and originally perfect, the very fountain of all
good, and the perfection of all created beings: God is solus omnia, therefore
most perfect, therefore but There Is none good but God vere, perfect sum;
simpliciter.
one God, who is infinitely wise, infinitely good, infinitely powerful,
infinitely holy; there is none good but God, truly, perfectly, chiefly, simply.

If there should be more Gods then one, then there should be a distribution of
excellencies, there would be some perfection in one God which is not in the
other; so each of them would be imperfect, neither should be God, because each
imperfect; for there is no imperfection in the Godhead; an imperfect God is no
God.

Because that which has Being from Arg. 2.
himself, and is an absolute independent Being, can be but one; now God has an
absolute independent Being from himself* therefore he calls himself Jehovah:
which implies two things for our purpose, sc. that he has being from himself,
and gives being to all other things: In him we live, and move, and have our
being, Act. 17. and of him are all things.

Now that there is, and can be but one Being from himself, this reason may
evince, because otherwise there would be progressus in infinitum: if God's
Being be from another, then that which gave God his being should be God, and
that had his being from another, and so you may reason infinitely; so it is
absurd both in Divinity and Philosophy.

There can be but one first Cause, Arg 3
and one first mover, and one last end of all things; therefore but one God,
who is the first cause of all things, and the last end of all things, Romans 11.
36.

There can be but one infinite Being, one Almighty Being, one Omnipresent Arg.
4.
being; therefore but one God, who is only Infinite, Omnipo^ent, and only
every where, Cujus centrum est ubique and circumferentia nusquam, as T^ismegist^
Trismegistus speaks of God. There can be but one Infinite; for if there were
two distinct Infinite Beings, then there would be something in one which is not
in another, then where there is any thing wanting, that is not Infinite, and so
no God. There can be but one Omnipresent Being, as Athenagoras argues well; if
there be more Gods, where are they, seeing the one only true God is every
where.

The fifth Argument is from the Arg. 5.
Gentiles, who though they Worshipped ^any Gods, yet still did acknowledge
there was but one true God.

Because the Divine nature is indivisible, A^g. 6.
cannot be divided into parts: it is indivisible, because God is one
simpliciter, unum simplicissimum, one most simple thing, admitting no parts nor
number: if the Divine Nature were divisible into parts, then were it not one
simple, but a compound entity.

CHAP. III. Shows the grounds how it came to pass* men made so many Gods
besides God.
NOw the grounds whence it cam^ to pass, that men made so many God's, besides
the true God, were Jon. 1 6.
these.

1. One Reason was, the great benefits which sometimes they receive^ from men,
who were eminent in some Heroical virtues, the blinded Gentiles would
therefore honor and reverence them as Gods.

2. The creatures that were useful were worshipped as gods (because of their
usefulness) by those deluded Heathens: thus the people of Judah when they fell
to Idolatry burnt incense (as they termed it) to the Queen of heaven, poured
out drink offerings to her, and made her cakes to Worship her, Jerem. 44. for,
say they to the Prophet, When we did thus, then had we plenty of victuals, and
were well, and saw no evil, ver. 17. Therefore the Egyptians would worship
Fire, Cattle, Onyons, Dogs, etc. and the Persians would worship the Sun, Moon,
and Stars.

3. From a conceit that Devils did all mischief to them, therefore they would
worship even Devils themselves to pacify them.

4. The Devil himself did earnestly labor to blind the eyes of the Heathen by
foretelling things to come, which begot in them an opinion of a Deity;
therefore they did offer sacrifice to them, and would go to their Oracles to
demand future things, which gave them an ambiguous answer.

5. Sometimes they would frame a God according to their own lusts and wicked
conditions, as, those that were given to lust and adultery made Venus their
Goddess; they that were given to theft made Mercury their God, they that were
given to murder and war made Mars their God.

6. The Apostle gives the true reason of all, sc. God's judgment upon them,
giving them up to a blind mind, and vain imaginations, for their contempt of
the true and only God, R^m. 1. 21. 22, 23. Because that when they knew God*
they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened* professing themselves wise,
they became fools, and changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an image
made like corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping
things; therefore God gave them up to their own hearts lusts; and so they
changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the Creature
more then the Creat(...); who is blessed for ever, Amen. ver. 25. This is the
reason why God gives men up to idolatry in these days, 2* These. 2. 10, 11. The
Apostle having described the coming of the man o^ Sin to be after the working
of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and with all
deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness, in them that perish, because they
received not the love of the truth that they might b^ saved; he then tells us,
that for this cause God shall send them a strong delusion, that they should
believe a lie: when men shall resist the revealed truth of the only true God,
he gives them up to believe lies.

7. Another ground why they made more Gods then one, was the very ground and
argument of the Manichees, affirming there were two pri^ciples or beginnings of
things; a summum bonum, and a summum malum: a summum bonum from whence sprang
all good; a summum malum, from whence issued forth all evil. Their argument and
reason is from the contrary effects of things, and the contrary works that are
done; there are diverse and very contrary effects to one another. Now two things
will give full answer hereunto.

The diversity and contrariety of effects Arg. i.
argu^s not a contrariety and diversity of causes; one thing may be the
principle, from which issues diverse contrary effects: as for instance, As the
Sun is one and the same cause, and yet works diversely upon diverse subjects,
his presence causes light, his absence darkness; it hardens clay, soften's
wax; the Sun is the cause of the great heat in the Summer, and of the cold in
the Winter, it ripeneth and rotteth fruit; it ^awneth the Blackmore's skin, it
does not do so to another Nation: If contrary effects should argue contrary
causes, then there should be two Suns; if one Sun can by his light and heat
produce contrary effects, why not one God form light and darkness, create good
and evil?

Again; our own souls are notable instances: We see, one and the same soul
works diversely; as, to will, and not will; it perceives various things, it
understands diverse things, it move's the body from place to place, it rests
the body. If one creature can produce various and diverse things, then much more
God; we may as well argue that there are two contrary souls in man, as argue*
there be two Gods from diverse operations and effects.

There is no sum malum principium, Arg. 2.
as there is sum bonum, because God, who is sum bonus, good in the highest
manner, can and does disperse, order, and govern the greatest evil, according
as he will: for either it is Sin that is sum malum, or the Devil: now both
Sin and Devils are all subject to Gods government; which would not be, if there
were a sum malum principium, as there is sum bonum, because then there
would be an equal power in both; that the chiefest evil would never endure the
chiefest good, but would strongly oppose it.

CHAP. IV.
IT is needless for me to confute Use. 1.
the Heathens, who worshipped many Gods in heaven and earth; most kind of
creatures were Gods to some nation or other; I know there are no such persons
here among us; we are Christians and all say, I believe in God, so we profess
but one God: It were needless for me any further to confute the old heresy of
the Manichees, which heresy St. Augustine Aug. in Haeres, c. 1. 7, 8. c. 6 22.
and. 46.
held before his conversion, because I believe there are none here that hold
that wretched Tenet.

There are other Heretics, called Tritheitae, who held there were three Gods,
and that upon this ground, because there were three Persons, and each person is
very God: this error arises from the ignorance of this, in that they consider
not, that though the three Persons are truly distinct, yet are they but one and
the self same glorious Being and Essence: I hope there is none that hears me,
that thinks the three persons in holy Trinity, to be three gods really
distinct.

Now because the Heathen have worshipped many gods, and because many errors
have sprung from thence; I will draw these useful Considerations from the
Premises.

1. We may see in them the most horrible pollution of nature by the fall of
Adam, the strong and strange pronenesse of man's heart naturally to idolatry,
and to make many Gods. How can we but wonder to consider, how reasonable Man
should be so besotted, blinded and stupefied, as to fall down before stocks and
stones, beasts and clouts, and worship them for gods? Hence God compares them
to Oxen and Asses, yea makes them more brutish, Isa. 1. 3.

2. We may see hence the full necessity of having the holy Scriptures, which
are Gods own Testimony of himself, as he is, and how many gods there are, or
rather that there is but one God, the only living and true God: Then what a
mercy is it, to have the scriptures read and diligently preached among us? Why
did the Gentiles like blind Sodomites, go feeling and groping after God (as
they for Lot's door*) if happily they might find him, and therefore took
creature's for God; but because they had not the light of the Word to discover
the one glorious God to them? So how comes it to pass that Papists are kept
under spiritual darkness, and in an idolatrous worship: this is one reason,
because they are kept from reading the Scriptures in the mother tongue. The
Psalmist makes the word of God to be the greatest blessing, Psalm. 147. 19. 20.
He shows his word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel; he
has not dealt so with any nation, and as for his Judgments they have not known
them.

3. Take heed of foolish reasonings about the Godhead, I mean about the Unity
of the Godhead, and of thy foolish conceits, how three persons can be but one
God; these foolish reasonings were the ground of the heresy of the Tritheites,
as, How can three persons being very God, make one God? The best answer unto
all such thoughts about the unity of the Godhead, is, to hold to the holy
Scriptures: God in his word has given this testimony, that there is but one
God; I will believe no more Gods, because God has said, There is but one God:
I will acknowledge no more; His own testimony is the very ground why I will
believe and acknowledge but one God. Take this for a rule, when once a man
departs from the word of God, he exposes himself to an hundred errors: What
the German Proverb is concerning a Lie, is true of all errors, Nothing is more
fruitful, one error begets another.

CHAP. V.
FRom hence I gather, that Christ Use 2.
is God, equ^l with the Father, contrary to the Arrians of old, and Socinians
of late, who maintain, that Christ is God, but yet diverse, and not of the same
substance with the Father; for Christ must either be the same with the Father,
or else there must of necessity be more Gods then one: Now if Christ be God,
and diverse from the Father, then the Father and the Son; be two real distinct
Gods, which is blasphemously false: It Is true, what learned Zanchy says; A man
makes Zanch. de trib. Elohim*
more Gods, intra Deum, as well as extra Deum: Intra Deum, as the Arrians and
Photinians of old, and the Socinians unto this day.

If there be but one God, and we acknowledge Use 3.
but one God, then, as God is to have all worship, so only God is to be
worshipped. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve,
Matt. 4. 10. There is the Act, that is to give Divine worship unto (...) quae
quantum ad religionem attinet, non nisi uni et soli Deo debetur. Isidor. lib.
11. Aug. cont* Faust. Manic. lib. 20.
God; and the object is both exclusive and inclusive: God must be worshipped
and served, and no other but he only; A place if well weighed, that would
scatter all Popish shifting distinctions, concerning Divine Worship given to
Creatures, as to Angels, Saints, and Images; as the common distinctions of
(...) and (...) to God, (...) to the Creature: and to this may be added their
hyperdulia to the Virgin Mary: But we find that (...) and (...) are
promiscuously used for service to God and the creature; therefore it is a mere
verbal distinction, because they signify one and the same.

No distinction will excuse the Papists from Idolatry: and, as they give Divine
worship to others, rather then to God, they make more Gods then one. Their own
prayers put up to the Virgin Mary, testify against them, that they make her a
God, praying to her for grace and mercy: yea, their putting up prayers to any
other Saint, does deify that Saint, because prayer is an act of divine worship;
It Is a prayer of theirs, Sancte Petre, miserere mei, aperi mihi aditum Coeli,
St. Peter have mercy upon me, open to me the gate of heaven. They say, they
pray to God through the mediation of Saints, which is a wrong to Christ's
intercession; and it is evident, they pray to Saints, not only as
Intercessores, as Intercessours, but as beneficiorum d^tores, as givers of
benefits, and bestowers of blessings, which is God's property.

If the Virgin Mary were upon Earth, and did know what divine worship is given
to her, and how the Papists pray to her as to a God, she would with all zealous
indignation say unto them; Worship God, I can do you no good; so would all the
Saints and Angels say, Worship the only true God; We can of our selves do
neither hurt nor good; and, could Images speak, they would deride their
Worshippers; Oh what fools are these men to leave the true God, and pray to us,
that can neither hear, nor see, much less can any way help them?

There is great reason, why only God is to be Worshipped.

1. Because there is but one that is Raas. 1.
the Author of our Being and well-being: that, is the very ground of the
Scoolmen, why God is to be Worshipped, because he is Author Creationis and
Beatitudinis nostrae: our Being is from God alone, not from Angels, Saints,
Images, or any creature: from God alone is all our Happiness, Isa. 45. 22.
Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the Earth. And God gives this as
the reason, for I am God, and there is none else; whosoever sets up a graven
Image, and prays unto it, he prays unto a god that cannot save, ver. 20.
Look unto all the creatures, and this is the voice of all; We are no Sanctuary
for you, we cannot help you; Angels, Saints, etc. and therefore worship God
alone, who alone save's and damneth, who alone gives us all things richly to
enjoy: yea God make's it his great work to do thee and me good, therefore
should we Worship him.

Because God is the only excellent Reas. 2.
Object; all divine excellencies are only in him, and to him all honor, power,
glory, and great Majesty do belong, therefore all Worship; because excellency
is the ground of all Worship; the more Excellency, the more Worship is due; and
to him that is most Excellent, most Worship is due; as to a Prince more civil
honor is due then to any Nobleman: God is the only true God whom we profess,
and acknowledge; the Law, the Prophets, and the Apostles preach no other God to
be Worshipped, but the only true God.

CHAP. VI.
THis may give us an Use of admonition Use. 4.
or caution, that we do not set up more gods then one in our hoarts: A man may
profess but one God, and give outward Worship to that one God, yet may set up
many Idols in his heart* Though thou art neither Atheist, nor* Heathen, nor
Papist, yet thou may commit gross Idolatry.

There are two sorts of Idols, and two sorts of Idolatry: there are outward
Idols, as Statue's and Images of men, of Angels and Saints, of the Sun, Moon
and Stars; and there be inward Idols, a man's lusts; the creatures set up in
the heart, to which men give divine Worship, Ezekiel. 14. 3. When certain of the
elders of Israel came to the Prophet Ezechiel and sat before him; the word of
the Lord came to him, saying; Son of man, these men have set up their Idols in
their heart, and put the stumbling block of their iniquity before their face.
Therefore Covetousness is said to be Idolatry, Col. 3 5. Ephesians. 5. 5
and a covetous man is an Idolater: and of all kind of Idolatry this is the
worst, for a man to prostitute himself to his base lusts, for a worldling to
fall down, and worship his gold and silver, to se^ve the unrighteous Mammon,
for a god; for a Drunkard to adore his swinish brutishness; this kind of
filthy* Idolatry is more true then strange.

I will show when men make more gods then one in their hearts.

1. When men shall have an higher esteem of the creatures more than of God,
make more account of their gold, silver, and lands, then of God; Gaderen* like
prefer their Hoggs before Christ, dung and dross before the true gain: it is
no Solecism to say of some men that they set an higher price upon their lusts,
upon their pleasures, then they do on God; for the Apostle says of some, that
they are lovers of pleasure, more then lovers of God, 2 Timothy 3 4. In like
manner, may it be truly said of too many, that they love their gain, their
ease, their credit, their preferments more then God; whatsoever their corrupt
heart delights in, they prefer above God; they take more care to provide for
their backs and bellies then to Worship God, God shall lose his Worship rather
then their bellies shall want any of their delicious fare.

2. When men shall fear a creature more then God, and hazard the displeasure of
God, rather then displease men, fall down and worship Darius for fear of his
Lions, obey man by disobeying God, God himself gives a check to this servile
fear. Who art thou? that thou should be afraid of a man that shall die, and
of the Son of man which shall be made as grass? and forgettest the Lord thy
Maker, that has stretched forth the Heavens, and laid the foundations of the
Earth, and have feared continually every day because of the fury of the
oppressor, Isa. 51. 13.

3. When men shall put more trust and confidence in the creatures then in God,
as covetous men trust in uncertain (...) and all creatures; Whatsoever you do,
1 Cor. 10. 31
whether ye eat or drink, do all to the glory of God. Dishonor him not in
eating, as the people of Israel did, when they required meat for their lust,
Psalm. 78. 19. Labor to please him in all things; imitate the rivers, who
receive waters from the sea, and send all their waters into the sea again: none
may challenge the glory of any thing he has or does to himself; the glory must
not rest upon him that has any good, but must be returned to him that gave it.

3. Then expect from this one God all the good that you need, all comfort in
time of sorrow, all plenty in time of want, all refuge and safety in time of
danger; expect every good thing, grace and eternal glory from him.

As the Psalmist speaks of promotion, it comes neither from the East nor from
the West, nor from the North, nor from the South; so I may say of Salvation;
look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the earth, Isa. 45. 22, as says
the Lord: hear ye, what the Great God of heaven cries to us out of heaven, look
over the earth, and see whether ther^ be a God like unto me. Saint Augustine
says, that every creature cries out to man, Ego non sum Deus, I am no God, I
cannot save you, I cannot help you, I cannot comfort you; honors, riches,
friends, all say, we cannot save you, therefore expect Salvation from Him who
is the only true God, and author of all blessedness.

A Discourse of the Three Persons in the Sacred Trinity.
1. John 5. 7. For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one.
CHAP. 1.
THe coherence of these words is this: The Apostle St. John sets forth the
excellency of two main graces, Love and Faith, in respect of the object of
both: God is the prime object of Love, and Christ the sole object and matter of
justifying Faith, from whence salvation is only to be expected, and so Faith
apprehends him as the Author and finisher of our salvation.

Now that our Faith may rest upon Christ alone for salvation, the Apostle
brings heaven and earth to witness the same, whose testimony are without all
possible exception; God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost do give
this testimony, that Christ is the only begotten Son of God, and that life
Eternal is in his Son; these three do bear record in heaven: and in earth the
Spirit, the Water, and the Blood. The Spirit] that is the sanctifying efficacy
of God's Spirit, purging and renewing our hearts. Water] put here for remission
of Sins, typified by the legal purifications, and now sealed to us in Baptism:
and Blood] put here for the infinite expiatory price of our Redemption from
Sin; all these testify that salvation is only from Jesus Christ.

The mention of the three Heavenly Witnesses are in the Text; the three
Witnesses on earth are mentioned, ver. 8. Now to open the words of my Text.

There be three that bear record, (...), do witness or give testimony: The
testimony or record is expressed, ver. 11. that life eternal is freely given
to us of God, in his only begotten Son: This is the record that God has given
to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son; to him must all the ends of
the earth look for salvation.

In heaven] These words are left Beza in loc.
out in seven ancient Copies, as the learned Beza observes; but yet they are
to be retained, that these three in heaven may answer the three in earth; and
Jerome thinks, they were left out Hieron.
more through malice, then error. It Is said in Heaven] (...), bebecause in
heaven the glorious God displaies the full brightness of his glory, there he
reigns like a Glorious King.

1 The Father] here is taken (...), for the first Person of the Trinity: God is
the Eternal Father of his Eternal Son Jesus Christ, by an Eternal generation;
he is the Father of all the Elect in Christ; the Father of all men by Creation.

He bears record of Christ: Take one Testimony for all, Matthew. 3. 17. This
(Jesus Christ whom John Baptist did baptize before your eyes) is my
well-beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.

2. The second witness is the Word] that is, the eternal Son of God: The Son
of God has many titles in the Scripture, and this is one, he is called The
Word: many of the Ancients endeavor to give reasons of this title; but among
all I will give but this one: he is called the Word.

The reason is, because Jesus Christ is the main subject of the Oracles of God,
and of the whole Word: Moses, the Prophets, and Apostles do all preach Christ:
our Savior himself says of Moses, that he wrote of him. Joh. 5. 45. To him
also gave all the Prophets Witness: Search the Scriptures says Christ (of the
writings of the Prophets) they are they which testifiy of me, John 5. 39. the
Apostles all preached Christ also; Thus Paul to King Agrippa; Having obtained
help of God, says he, I continue unto this day, witnessing both to small and
great saying no other things, then those which the Prophets and Moses did say
should come; That Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first that
should rise from the dead, and should show light unto the people, and to the
Gentiles, Acts 26. 22, 23. Christ is the main subject of the Scriptures; hence
Count Anhalt said of A worthy saying of the Count Anhalt on the Scriptures.
the Scriptures, They were the swaddling bands of the holy Child Jesus, who is
found in every page.

Now Christ bears record of himself: his testimony of himself are his own words
and Miracles; how has he testified to the World, that he came to call Sinners
to repentance, to seek and save that which is lost, and whosoever believes on
him should have, or, has life everlasting.

3. The third witness is the Holy Ghost] the third person in the Trinity,
called so ab officio, because he sanctifies God's Elect, and works all
spiritual graces and motions in them.

He bears record of Jesus Christ. Mat. 3. 16. as soon as he was baptized the
heavens were opened to him, and the Spirit of God descended like a Dove, and
lighted upon him. Act. 2. by his Apparition of fiery cloven tongues upon his
Apostles; then the blessed Trinity proclaims Jesus Christ the only Savior,
and from him we must by faith expect life eternal.

And these three are one.] There is a double exposition of these words (...),
That is, (...), ad unum sunt: they agree in one, as if they were one and the
same witness: so Calvin and Beza expound it.

Or else this: These three are one respectu essentiae, in respect of their
essence; these three persons that bear record in heaven, are but one in
essence. From these words I will briefly and soberly handle the doctrine
concerning the glorious and undivided Trinity.

CHAP. II.
HEnce I note; that in the Unity Observe.
of the Divine Essence there is a Plurality of persons: or, There are three
persons, but one God. For proof hereof; whereas it is said Genesis 1. 1. that In
the beginning the Lord made heaven and earth; Some gather the mystery of the
Trinity from these words Elohim Bara. Elohim is in the plural number denoting
the Trinity of persons; and Bara, which signifies created is the singular
number to denote the unity of essence: Many arguments are brought to prove the
Trinity from these words, as first, It were incongruous to put a word of the
plural before a verb of the singular number. 2. Because whom Moses, calls here
Elohim, he afterward calls Jehovah, which is the name of the Trinity. 3.
Because Moses was not ignorant of the Trinity; would not silence it.

But others, though they approve of this as a pious and probable collection,
yet upon better arguments think the Mystery of the Trinity cannot be collected
from these words: their reasons are these.

1. Because Elohim being put indefinitely, may signify four or five persons as
well as three, less or more; so there may be occasion given of making more or
less persons, as well as three.

2. Because if Elohim signify the Trinity here, it should signify the Trinity
in all other places of Scripture, but it does not; and the placing of of it in
the plural number with the verb in the singular is usual in Scriprure without a
Mystery, as Genes. 9. 15. Exodus 2. 3. Jos. 24. 19. Some say, it is put in the
plural number propter reverentiae amplitudinem, because the Majesty, power,
wisdom, goodness of God is manifested in the creation.

Others would gather it from those words of Moses, Genesis 1. 26. And God said,
Let Us make man in our Image, after Our likeness,

Others again, gather the Mystery of the Trinity from the unanimous cry of the
Seraphims, Isa. 6. 3. they cry Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty; therefore
(say they) the word [ holy] is trebled in relation to the Trinity, to the three
Persons. But these are not plain and evident proofs of the Trinity. Holy, holy,
holy, is trebled here, principally for these reasons:

1. To show that the Angels do continually praise God.

2. To show that the Seraphims do praise God with all vehemence and fervency.

3. To show the infinite Perfection of his holiness, that the tongues of
Seraphims and Angels cannot express his holiness.

There are more plain proofs of the plurality of persons in the Godhead. Mat.
3. there is a clear revelation of the Trinity: the Father speaks from heaven;
the Son is incarnate, and is baptized; the holy Ghost descends in the shape
of a Dove. Moreover, Mat. 28. 19. the Commission that our Savior gives to his
disciples runs thus: Go teach all nations, Baptizing them in the name of the
Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, baptizing them, tanquam in nomen
unius very Dei. It plainly shows, that there are three persons in the Deity,
and that these are but one God. To be baptized into the name, is, to be bound
to believe and obey, and worship this one God, the Trinity in the Unity, Joh.
15. 26. These three are one. John 17. 22.

CHAP. III.
THe further explication of this mysterious Doctrine of the blessed Trinity
shall be by Questions. Quest. 1.


The first question shall be about the terms used both by ancient and modern
Divines; Whether, seeing the Scripture has no such terms as Divine Essence or
Being] Person] or Trinity] they are then well used by Divines?

Though these terms are not literally Sol.
epxressed in any place of Scripture yet in it there is something fully
equivalent to them, and so are rightly used by Divines; as, to instance in all
three,

1. For Essence and Being: the word (...), Essence or Being has an equivalent
phrase from that speech of God to Moses when he names himself, I AM, Exodus 3.
14. and Revel. 1. 8. where he is cal^ed (...), which is, it has the same
identity with Divine Essence or Being; so then that term may be used.

2. For Person, (...) there is a plain place for t^is, Heb. 1. 3. where Christ
is said to be (...), The express Image of his Person. It is true! Some would
have it translated, the express Image of his Substance, rather then of his
Person: but this cannot be; because there can be no impresse of the Fathers
substance in the Son, because the same ^ssence is in both: and then there would
be a multiplication of the Divine Essence, therefore it is rightly translated
the express image of his Person.

3. As for the word (...) Trinity: Nomen ab Arithmeticis, ad Theologos
traductum.
there is no such term in Scripture, but my Text will afford an equivalent
term; there are three that bear record in heaven: this will warrant the lawful
use of the term, Trinity:

In the second place may it be demanded, Quest. 2
What is a person? Solu.


I answer, in general: A person is a Substance subsisting by it self,
individual, and incommunicable: but this is rather a suppositum, then a
persona: therefore they add, Intelligent, living, and active or doing] so Men,
so Angels are persons: other creatures singularia, supposita individua; not
personae.

So then a Person is thus defined: A Person desi^ed.
It is a substance subsisting by it self, indivisible, incommunicable,
understanding, living and working.

Now for the Persons in the Godhead they are thus described: The Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, are subsisting in the Divine Essence, undiviced,
incommnicable, intelligent, by their properties distinguished among themselves,
but not divided from each other: or, in brief, thus; A Person, in the Godhead,
is the Divine Essence, distinguished by his proper manner of subsisting. To
illustrate it; consider, that the Father is the Divine Essence subsisting by
himself, understanding, willing; distinguished from the Son and Holy Ghost, by
his proper manner of subsisting, or by his Personal property: As, the Father's
Personal property is, To be of himself, and beget; The Personal property of the
Son is, to be of the Father: And the Personal property of the Holy Ghost is, to
be from the Father and the Son: So that the Son is the Divine Essence
subsisting by himself, undivided, incommunicable, understanding, willing;
distinguished from the Father and the Holy Ghost by his Personal property.

What is the Father, the Son, and Qu^st 3.
the Holy Ghost?

The Father is Deus ingenitus* sed Sol.
generans, God, not begotten but begetting: The Son is God begotten, not
begetting; the Holy Ghost God neither begetting, nor begotten, but proceeding.

How do the Persons differ? Quest. 4.


They differ from the Essence, as Sol. ^
modus rei a re ipsa, as the manner of a thing from the thing it self: for a
person is essentia divina modisicata, or, limited with a certain manner of
subsisting.

Now, would you understand how they differ among themselves; you must know,
they do not differ in nature or being, for the same nature and being is in all:
in the Deity there is not aliud and aliud, but alius and alius, the whole
divine nature in each particular Person.

They differ these three ways.

1. Respectu ordinis; in regard of Order: the Father is before the Son and
Holy Ghost, not in time and in dignity, for they are all C^-eternal and
Coequal; but, in order, the Father is before the son, the Father and the Son
before the Holy Ghost.

2. They differ in operationibus ad intra, where the personal properties* or
actions in the Father differ from the Son, because the Father begets, the
Son is begotten.

3. In operationibus ad extra: The Father works of himself, by the Son; the
Son, of the Father by the Holy Ghost: hence Creation is first attributed to the
Father, Redemption and dispensation to the Son, Sanctification to the
Holy Ghost; so that the same work is the work of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, but there is not the same manner of working.

CHAP. IIII.
I Will now set down some Rules, which will much help us for the understanding
of this Mystery.

1. The divine Nature is not a fourth thing distinguished from the three
Persons, but is the same with the three.

2. Hence each person is very God, because the Divine Essence is the same in
each Person.

3. Hence you may see that there is but one God, although there be Three
Persons; because they are one with the Essence, which is God.

4. Hence you may see, that all the Attributes given to the Essence, belong to
every Person; the Father Almighty, the Son Almighty, etc. There is but one Will
in them, one Understanding, because there is but one Essence.

5. Hence all their works ad extra sunt indivisa, all their works outwardly are
undivided, because the Three Persons are undivided in Essence. Creation, and
Providence in One, are the actions of all Three.

6. Hence the Son and the Holy Ghost are God by themselves, not by the Father.
Some say, that the Essence is communicated from the Father to the Son, and from
both to the Holy Ghost; and so they are not (...) God of themselves: but I say,
Filius accepit Persona de Persona, non Deus de Deo.
filiationem, non deitatem, the Son received his filiation, not the Deity from
the Father.

7. Hence the three Persons are (...), of the same nature, Coequal, Coeternal,
not one before another in Essence, as the Eunomians falsely held. Not one before
another, for in God there is neither Prius nor posterius; not one excelling
another in Grace and Dignity, as the Arrians blasphemously held; but they are
Coequal in their Divine perfections and Attributes, because but one nature or
Essence in all.

8. Hence they are one in another, the Father is in the Son, the Son in the
Father, and both in the Holy Ghost; they are still glorifying and delighting
one in another.

9. These three Persons in the Divine Essence are not confused, or separated,
or imaginary, but are really subsisting and distinguished.

CHAP. V.
BUt here, it may be objected; That Object.
one thing should be three without multiplication implies a contradiction.

I answer; In finite things it does: Sol.
but God is infinite, and so is not capable of number or parts, and of
multiplication: we see the nature of man is multiplied according to the
multiplication of men, because it is finite, and so plurificabilis; but the
Deity is infinite, and so not multiplicabilis.

There are two reasons given, why, though there be three Persons, yet there is
but one God.

Because there is but one infinite Nature Reas. 1.
in the three Persons.

Because these three Persons are altogether Reas. 2.
inseparable. You will say perhaps, there is but one humane nature in all men:
but here lies the difference; though there is but one humanenature in men, yet
men are separated from each other, but the three Persons in the holy Trinity,
as they have but one infinite nature, so they are altogether inseparable.

CHAP. VI.
THis should teach us to hate that Use 1.
abominable Idolatry of such as make a representative Image of the Trinity:
Such an Idol is nothing; it cannot possibly represent God, because he is
invisible, and he is infinite; no man can make a representation of Him; it is
horribly unlawful, because expressly forbidden in the second Commandment:
besides, it is an infinite wrong to our infinite God, that sinful Man should
offer to represent his infinite nature, within the narrow compass of a Picture
or Statue.

Here we may admire the infinite Use 2.
Love of God to Mankind, in that the glorious Trinity from Eternity delighted
in themselves, and glorified each other; so they could have done to Eternity,
without Men or Angels: God the Father delighted with infinite joy in God the
Son, and God the Holy Ghost; they all delighted in each, and each in all: Yet
such is the condescension of this Glorious Trin^ty, that he has set his
infinite and unchangeable love upon us, and his delight is with the Children of
Men.

The Love of the Trinity appears in two special things.

1. The Love of the Father, the first Person in the Trinity, appears, in that
he is become our Almighty and Eternal Father in Christ. He could have rest
satisfied in his only begotten Son Jesus Christ: Yet behold his love! he says
to all Believers, Ye are all my beloved in Christ; I am well pleased with you
in my only beloved Son.

2. The Love of God the Son appears in these three things. 1. In that being
equal with God, very God would become very Man, by his assumption of our
nature, like unto us in all things, sin only excepted, for our salvation. 2.
In that he is our Almighty and Eternal Savior, to save us from the eternal
wrath of God to come. 3. In that being the only begotten Son of God, he is
contented to have us the sons of God; and being the Heir of all things, to have
us to be Coheirs with him. Magna benevolentia Bernard.
est, Unicus natus est, and noluit manner unus, says Bernard. He goes to his
Father in this manner; Father, I, that am thine only begotten Son, am
contented to be made the son of Man, that the sons of men may become the sons
of God.

3. The Love of the Holy Ghost appears, in that he is become our sanctifier,
the Almighty and Eternal Comforter of all the godly: What comfort shall or can
they want, who have an infinite Comforter?

Their Love also appears in their joynt-actions in two things.

1. In that they will make all Believers one with them, according to the Prayer
of our Savior for all the Faithful, Joh. 17. 21. That they all may be one, as
thou, O Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us; and
the glory which thou gave me, I have given them, that they may be one, even
as we are one; I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one.
Verse. 22, 23. That they may be one in the participation of glory and happiness
with the Trinity: the glorious Trinity do pour forth all good things upon the
Elect; he excepteth not his own glory and happiness and the happiness of God the
Father, is the fruition of God the Son and Holy Ghost: So shall the happiness
of all believers be the full Vision and Fruition of this glorious God, they
shall delight in God to all Eternity.

2. In that this glorious Trinity will be the reward of all them that
diligently see God; What he said to Abraham, he says to every Child of his, I
am your shield, and your exceeding great reward. For the present, the Almighty
Trinity is a Shield to protect, defend, save, comfort; and hereafter the
glorious Trinity will be their infinite and eternal Reward.

CHAP. VII.
BEhold here the incomparable and Use 3.
unconceiveable happiness and privilege of Believers, how mean, despicable,
and troublesome soever their condition in the world be. Every Believer has an
eternal interest in this glorious Trinity. The Eternal Father is their Eternal
Father, and he will show forth his Almighty Power to save, protect, and defend
them, and w^ll bless them with all good: the Eternal Son is their Eternal
Savior, Brother and Coheir: the Eternal Spirit is their Eternal Comforter and
Sanctifier. This glorious Trinity do put forth their Eternal Attributes to work
their eternal good: the infinite Power, the infinite Mercy, the infinite
Wisdom, the infinite Goodness of this glorious Trinity, works their good; and
they shall be all happy, if these three glorious Persons can make them so.

It was the answer of David to Readiness servants, Is it a small thing to be son
in law to a King? Implying it to be an high honor and dignity to be the son of
a King: the same may be spoken of every Believer; it is no small hononr and
dignity for such poor creatures as Believers are, to be the Sons of God the
Father, Brethren and Coheirs with the Eternal Son of God, and to have the
infinite blessed Spirit to be their Comforter.

Take heed then, O ye wicked of the earth, how ye do harm the Saints of God;
their Father, their Savior, their Comforter, will judge and avenge their
wrongs: you cannot long wrong and oppress them, because God is their Father;
Sin and Devils cannot damn them, because the Eternal Son of God is their
Savior; you see they can rejoice in tribulation, because the Holy Ghost is
their Comforter.

Seeing these glorious Persons do Use 4.
delight in, and love each other, and glorify one another; let it admonish us,
that do profess three Persons and one God, to give all honor and worship to
this Trinity in unity; to put all our delight in glorifying this one God, with
one mind and heart, and with all our hearts and souls. If God the Father be
called Father by you, then hear what the Apostle exhorts you to; see that you
pass the time of your soj^urning here in fear; he is an holy Father, be ye
holy, as he is holy: If you call the Eternal Son of God your brother, your
Savior, then strive after a conformity to his Image: if you call the Spirit of
God your comforter, then take heed of grieving your comforter, by quenching and
rebelling against his blessed motions: let your hearts be for God, let him have
all your love, your desires, your esteem, and rest fully satisfied in him.

From the whole verse thus explained; we may draw two considerable uses.

1. We may behold a strong ground Use.
of confidence and faith in Christ, we have it in that this glorious Trinity
with one consent bare this record, that in Christ the son of God is life
eternal: God the Father testifies this to all, that life eternal is from his
Son: God the Son gives the same testimony, I Am the life, and whosoever
believes on me, has life eternal: And God the Holy Ghost gives this
testimony; therefore you that look for life eternal, receive Christ, for in him
eternal life is found; and you may be assured of it, the glorious Trinity has
spoken the word, therefore be confident.

2. It shows to us the horrid nature of the sin of unbelief, not only in that
it is a full rejection of whole Christ, but also it make's the glorious Trinity
a liar. 1 John 5. 10. God has given this Testimony that pardon of Sin,
righteousness, Life Eternal is in Jesus Christ, if thou believe not, do
thou not make God a liar?

A Discourse showing, What GOD is.
Exodus 6. 3. And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the
name of God Almighty; but by my name Jehovah was I not known to them.
CHAP. I.
HAving already proved there is a God, and but one God, and in the Divivine
Essence that there are Three Persons, I am now to show what God is, and here I
can show no more then he has revealed to us, even his back parts, his titles,
and his names: As for his Essence never shall Angels or men know with a
comprehensive knowledge; we come to the knowlede of God four ways.

1. Per viam negationis: by way of of negation: He is not this or that
therefore this. S. Paul labors to convince the idolatrous Athenians, out of
some of their own Poets, that we are the offspring of God, and for that reason
we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold or silver, or stone
engraven by Art, or man's device, but God was he that made the World and all
things therein, Lord of heaven and earth, and not dwelling in Temples made with
hands; who is not Worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing,
seeing he gives to all life, and breath, and all things, Acts, 17. 24, 25. 29.

2 Per viam eminenti^; by way of In perfectionibu^ datur supr^mum in qu^est
status.
Eminency: There are creatures Eminent in some one or other perfection, but God
is most Eminent: There is wisdom, power, strength, justice, goodness,
holiness in the Scriptures, but God is most wise, powerful, just, good; and
therefore it is usual with Scripture, speaking of excellent creatures to call
them Gods things: Mountains are called the Mountains of God, Numb. 10. 33. The
tall Cedars are called God's Cedars, Psalm. 80. 11. Sometimes the Scripture
compounds names with the name of God, as Ariel, the strong Lion of God,
teaching us, that when we behold any excellency in the creature, we should lift
up our minds, tanquam per scalam, to the Infinite Excellencies that are in God.

3. We know God Per remotionem, by removing all imperfections and defects from
God; as when we say God is Infinite, Immortal, Immutable, we remove all
defects from God: he is most wise, there is no shadow of folly in him, he is
most good, there is no shadow of evil in him.

4. Per viam causationis, by his Efficiency; this shows that there is a God;
the other three show what God is, Et qualis Deus, what manner of God he is.

The Scripture make's known God to us all those ways, but especially by his
titles or names, and by his Attributes: Concerning God's titles which show his
Nature to us, I will show them here, and his Atributes hereafter.

That his titles and names declare what God is, this text is plain for it, and
nomen rei est notificatio rei, And I appeared, etc.

For the coherence of the words briefly this is to be considered.

Moses being sent to deliver Israel out of Egypt, was an occasion of their
sorer labor, for Pharaoh and his merciless servants did redouble their tasks
and slavery: The children of Israel were much grieved at it, and with a
murmuring reproof did sharply rebuke Moses and Aaron, as appears, Exodus 5.
20, 21. Saying to them, the Lord look upon you, and judge, because you have
made our savor to be abhorred in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his
servants, to put a sword in their hand to slay us. Now in ver. 22, and 23.
Moses made his and their condition known to the Lord, how the People were more
vexed then formerly; Moses said to the Lord, Wherefore have thou so evil
entreated this People? Why is it that thou have sent me? for since I came to
Pharaoh to speak in thy name, he has done evil to this People, neither have
thou delivered thy People at all. In this Chapter God answers Moses in two
things.

1. That Pharaoh should be compelled to let Israel go: The Lord said to Moses,
now shall thou see what I will do to Pharaoh, for with a strong hand shall he
let them go, and with a strong hand shall he drive them out of his Land, ver. 1.

2. For confirmation of Moses faith, and to calm the murmuring spirits of the
distressed Israelites, God declares what a God he is, and has been to their
Fathers of old, and what a God he will be to them, ver. 2, 3. And God spoke
unto Moses, and said unto him; I am the Lord; And I appeared unto Abraham, unto
Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name of God Almighty, but by my name Jehovah was
I not known to them,

Here it may be demanded how is it Quest.
said, that God did not make himself known to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, by his
n^me Jehovah?

Nomen, the name Jehovah was Sol. 1.
known to A^raham, Isaac; and Jacob, but not mysterium nominis, the mystery of
the Name, this was revealed to Moses from God, and from Moses to the People: It
is meant of the perform^nce of his great promises made to Abraham: God did
promise to give the land of Canaan to Abraham's Seed for an inheritance, which
promise was not performed to him, but to his Seed after him: So that this is
the meaning: God appeared to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, El Shaddai, God
Almighty, in protecting, delivering and rewarding them, but by his name Jehovah
he was not known to them, God did not perform his promise made to Abraham, unto
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, but unto their Seed and posterity after them.

CHAP. II.
HEnce I observe, that God makes Observe.
himself known what a God he is to his people by his name and titles: Gods
names are agreeable to his nature, and divine properties, as he has a being
from himself, and gives being to all, so he is Jehovah, and called I AM; as his
nature is omnipotent, so he is called El, Elohim, and Elohah, powerful; as he
is All-sufficient, so he is called Shaddai.

In the handling of his glorious names; I will first, give to you all his
names, and the meaning of them; secondly, I will insist principally upon the
name Jehovah, because it is his most essential name.

The Hebrews have reckoned up many names of God, and all of them express God to
us.

1. The first, is here in the Text, El Shaddai, God almighty; I shall speak
nothing of the derivation of this word Shaddai in this place, because I intend
to speak more largely of it hereafter; it intimates that God is All-sufficient,
he wants nothing, but is infinitely blessed with the infinite perfections of
his glorious being: by this name God makes himself* known to be
self-sufficient, all-sufficient, absoutely perfect.

If God be All-sufficient, then shall Use.
that man want nothing that has God for his God, he that loses all for God,
shall find all in God. When Hannah complained for want of children, Elkanah
said unto her, Am not I better to thee then ten sons? why weepest thou? So the
Lord says, I am God All-sufficient, and am not I better then all riches,
honors, lands and friends? I am more sufficient to reward thee, then millions
of worlds, of creatures can do.

2. The second name by which God expresses his nature, is Elohim and Eloha;
this name denote's the power and strength of God, to denote unto us, that God
is strong and powerful.

If God be Elohim, a strong powerful Use 1.
God, then he can do great and difficult matters for his Church and people.

2. If God be strong and powerful, then it is in vain to oppose him, to rebel,
to rage against him and his Church; God is too strong for all enemies, too
powerful for all the powers of hell.

3. If God has named himself Elohim, strong and powerful, then fear not thou
worm Jacob; though the Church be as worms in the esteem of their enemies, yet
they need not fear, because God is their strong and powerful God.

3. The third name of God by which he makes himself known is Adonai, Dominus,
Lord; some derive the Word from a Word in the Hebrew, that signifies judicare
to judge, because God is Judge of all the world. Others derive it from a word
which signifies Basis, (...)
a foundation, intimating that God is the upholder of all things; as the
foundation of an house is the support of the whole building, so God is the
upholder of the world, he upholdeth all things by the word of his power.

If God has named himself Lord, Use.
and that because he upholdeth all things, we may infer this comfort for the
Church, he will uphold Jerusalem in all dangerous times and troubles, his
Church is more dear to him than the World, and his people than all other
creatures which he does uphold.

2. Then acknowledge him to be Lord, by paying service to him, by obeying him;
obey him and he will uphold you: how did he uphold Daniel in the midst of a Den
of Lions, because he obeyed him?

4. Another name by which God has expressed himself, is the Creator, the Maker
of heaven ^ne earth. Isa. 45. 11. 12. This sets forth God as the Author and
^ountain of all our Being out of nothing.

5. Another name is, the high and lofty one, Isa. 57. 15. called so, respectu
loci and dignitatis, in respect of place and dignity; the highest heaven is his
lofty throne on which he sits to judge the world: therefore God is called
altissimus, Luke 1. the highest.

If God be the high and lofty one, Use 1.
then let the great ones tremble before him, and that because God is higher
then they Eccl. 5.

2. This shows who it is, that brings the proud ones in their proud attempts
against his people down with shame and dishonor, sc. the high and lofty one
who is above them in all things wherein they deal most proudly.

3. See the love of God to broken hearts, in that the high and lofty one that
inhabiteth eternity, who dwells in the high and holy place, will vouchsafe to
dwell with him that is of an humble and contrite spirit, to revive the spirit
of the humble, and to revive the spirit of the contrite ones. Isa. 57. 15.

6. Another name is, Jehovah Tsebaoth, the Lord God of Hosts, his name is
called by the name of The Lord of Hosts, that dwells between the Cherubims.
2. Sam. 6. 2. He is called the Lord of Hosts for two reasons.

1. To show that he is the sole commander of all creatures in heaven and in
earth: The Angels, they are his Host: A multitude of the heavenly Host, Luke 2.
12. The Sun, Moon, and all the Stars are called his Hosts: all creatures in the
World are the Lord's Host's.

2. To show that God is instar exercituum omnium, instead of all Hosts and
Armies.

Then be ye all exhorted to be on Use 1.
God's side, for his side is the strongest and will be the conquering side; he
will give an Eternal overthrow to all his enemies.

2. Then let the Enemies of God be horribly afraid, because every day they walk
in the midst of God's Armies: take heed you scoffers at Religion, ye
persecutours of his Righteous Isaac's; Take heed ye Drunkards, how ye provoke
God to anger; For if he give a commission to any of his Armies, and command the
least creature in his Hosts to fall upon you, ye are destroyed for ever.

7. God names himself (...) the Holy One, the Holy One of Israel, Psalm. 71. 22.

If God be Holy: then he cannot Use. 1.
endure any Sin; he must needs hate Sin, and Sinners. Thou art of purer eyes
then to behold evil, and can not look on iniquity. Habak. 1. 13. Thou art not
a God, that have pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with thee:
the foolish shall not stand in thy sight, and thou hate all workers of
iniquity, Psalm. 5. 4, 5.

2. Labor to be Holy, as he is Holy: As he which has called you is Holy, so
be ye Holy in all manner of Conversation; Because it is written, Be ye Holy,
for I am Holy, 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. God is free from all vice. There are three
other names, whereby God has made himself known and they are called his
Essential names, because they do denote (...)
his being and all from one root, havah, or hadiah, esse, to be:

The first is Exodus 3. 14. Eheje I am that I am, or I will be what I will be,
some make this name to be Gods extraordinary name; That of our Savior, Rev. 1.
8. (I am he which is, and which was, and which is to come,) is the
Interpretation of this name. Damascene says, this name Damasc.
contains all things in it, like a vast and infinite Ocean, without bounds.

The reason why God names himself, I am that I am, or, I will be that I will
be, is because he is the Being of Beings, subsisting by himself, as if he
should say; I am my Being, I am my Essence; my Existence differs not from my
Essence, because I am that I am: and as I am, so I will be to all Eternity, the
same yesterday, to day, and for ever; there is no shadow of change, no
variableness at all in Me.

The second Name is Jah: Sing unto God, sing praises to his Name, extol him
that rides upon the Heavens by his name Jah, and rejoice before (...)
him, Psalm. 68. 4. Now this name Jah; is but the contract of Jehovah, Jah nihil
est aliud quam nomen (...) decurtatum; quod Ebraice doctissimi viri judicant,
idque per s^ncopen, qua aliquid e medio dictionis eximitur* contractio autem
syncopica apud Ebraeos si^ri soleat reducta vo^ali consonantis sequentis ad
antecedentem, ut cum hac in unam vocem coalescat: ^nde e^iam sequi vocales
illas esse nomini (...) proprias, and camets ter^^am esse camque propriam
Tetragrammati vocalem, Rivet. exercit. 14. in Genes.
and signifies the same, or (...), he is*

The last name, is here in the Text (...) Jehovah: this is his memorial to all
generations. Jehovah Eloha Abraham, the Lord God of Abraham, Exodus 3. 15. This
name was used always when the Priest blessed the people, Number. 6. 24, 25* 26.
The Lord, or Jehovah bless thee, and keep thee. Jehovah make his face to shine
upon thee, and be gracious to thee: Jehovah lift up his countenance upon thee,
and give thee peace; It was thrice repeated. And this Name they were commanded
to swear by: Thou shall fear Jehovah thy God, and swear by his Name, Deuteronomy. 6.
13. The Jews had many gross conceits of this name, and fearing to use it, say
for it Adonai; scarce any but the Priest used it; they call it, Nomen Dei
Zanch. de ^ib. Eloham. lib. 1. cap. 12.
ineffabile: but this name Jehovah is not unspeakable in regard of the Name;
but in regard of the Essence of God set forth by it, as Zanchy notes.

The Jews observe, that in God's Name Jehovah the Trinity is implied: Je
signifies the Present-tense, Ho the Praeter-perfect tense, Vah the Future; and
S. John alludes to this name, Rev. 1. 8. Which was, which is, and is to come.
The Jews also observe, that in this name Jehovah, all the Hebrew letters are
literae quiescentes, that denote rest, implying, that in God and from God is
all our rest: every godly man is like Noah's Dove; he can find no rest nor
satisfaction in any creature but in God; God is the godly man's Ark of rest and
safety.

CHAP. III.
HEre I will do two things: First, I will show what this Name implies, and
then draw some observations from it.

1. It implies his Eternity, which is excellently interpreted, Rev. 1. 8. I am
Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the ending, says the Lord, which is, and
which was, and which is to come.

2. It implies, that God has Being from himself, and subsisteth alone by
himself, that he is absolutely an independent Being; he only is (...)

3. That he is ens entium, the efficient Being of all things; he gives to all
creatures their Being, to Angels their spiritual and intellectual being, and to
men their being: In him we live, move, and have our being* Act. 17. 28.

4 It denotes, that God is most true, constant, and faithful in his promises,
as here in the Text: Your Fathers knew me by the Name Almighty, or, El Shaddai;
that I am a God Allsufficient: that I am a rich God by giving them riches, a
strong God by protecting and defending them, and helping them in their straits
and extremities: It Is true! I did promise to deliver them out of the land of
Egypt, to give them the land of Canaan for their possession, to take them for
my peculiar people from among the nations, but they saw not the fulfilling of
these promises as now you that are their seed shall see: for you shall see that
I am a God constant and faithful in all my promises made to your Fathers, for I
will make them good to you because I am Jehovah.

CHAP. IV.
THe points that I would draw from hence, and handle, shall be only these two.

1. That the Lord Jehovah does only Obser. 1.
subsist of himself, and all things subsist by him.

2. That the Lord will make good all his promises, because he is Jehova^. For
the first: God only subsisteth, to speak properly; no creature can say, I AM,
absolutely; no creature can say, I will be; but only God can say, I am Alpha
and Omega, the beginning and the ending, which Was, and which Is, and is to
come.

I will show the difference between God's subsistence and ours. The difference
lies in these things that follow.

God's subsistence is eternal: Thou Differ. 1.
art God from everlasting to everlasting; Psalm. 90. 2. Before the mountains
were brought forth, or ever the Earth and the World were formed, God had a
subsistence; and he can subsist if all the world were dissolved again into
nothing: our subsistence is in time: Angels and men that shall live to
eternity, yet are not from eternity: all other su^sistent beings shall be
turned into nothing.

God subsisteth independently: he Differ. 2.
depends upon no second causes, nor former causes: he is All-sufficient, his
own essence is his own happiness: but creatures depend on secondary causes;
Angels and men and all other creatures depend on him, it is he that continues
all created beings in their being; in him we live, move, and have our being; if
he command, Return ye children of men into dust, he turns them to
destruction, and they are swallowed up of the grave; if he say, come again, all
things shall stand and live before him.

God subsisteth immutably: My Differ. 3.
name, says he, is, I AM, that is, I am the same from eternity to eternity:
the same yesterday, to day, and for ever; there is not so much as a shadow of
change in God.

There is no increase or decay in God; but he is as holy, as just, as powerful,
as merciful, as perfect and blessed as ever he was: he is God merciful from
everlasting to everlasting: now the subsistence of the creature is mutable: We
know there was a mutation among Angels; some of them kept not their first
estate, but left their own habitation: Jude v. 6. Man also is a very mutable
creature, he is subject to many changes: we see how all sublunary creatures
continue not at one stay; but like the Moon, sometimes they are in the
increase, sometimes in the full, sometimes in the decrease: some creatures (as
Angels) become immutable by participation: God keeps and preserves them in
their immutable condition: God can put an end to all the perfections in the
creatures, and then change them again.

God subsisteth immediately by himself, Differ. 4.
without means: we do subsist by means, and by his blessing upon the means, we
must eat, drink, sleep, or we cannot long subsist, and have a Being in the
world:

The Reason is, because the Lord Jehovah has being from himself, therefore he
subsisteth by himself, and not by any other, yea he was from eternity, because
from no cause; therefore independently and immutably, because from no first
cause: but we subsist in time, dependently and mutably, because we depend on
him as the first cause; and therefore as God will, so we subsist, or not
subsist. According to the presence of the sun so is the light continued in the
air; if the Sun withdraws his light, then darkness covers the earth, because
light in the air subsisteth by the presence of the sun: so because our life,
health, strength, and all the comforts we do enjoy, do depend on God, and
subsist by him; according to his presence they stand; if he withdraw they soon
fall: when the sea flows, the rivers swell, when the seas ebb the rivers
fall: so it is with creatures, according to the presence or absence of God.

CHAP. V.
THis discovers the folly of all such, Use 1.
as set their hearts upon any thing but God; that set their hearts upon riches,
which cannot subsist, but take to themselves wings, and fly away as an Eagle
toward heaven, Prove. 23. 5. And as Birds do fly from this tree to that tree,
so do riches from this house to that house, from this man to that man. It
likewise shows the folly of those that set their hearts upon pleasures, which
are transient, and perish in the very use; and of those that make flesh their
arm, put confidence in friends, or in the favors of men, seeing none of these
subsist of themselves, but on a sudden perish. We see that men do not subsist
always; sometime their wealth decays, sometime their favor and love
decays, sometime their beauty decays: surely, then all those that depend
upon them, do decay with them: all outward things are but sandy foundations for
us to build all our hopes and comforts upon: look over all the creatures, and
see what creature can say, I am that I am, I will be what I will be: Riches,
honors, pleasures, preferments, friends cannot say so: and therefore it is the
greatest folly in the world, to set up the creatures that cannot subsist, and
to neglect God: There is a curse pronounced against all those that trust in an
arm of flesh, and do idolize and deifie creatures, and neglect God.

This may exhort you to trust in the Use 2.
Lord Jehovah, who only is, and subsisteth by himself, who has said, He will
never leave thee, nor forsake thee. Now consider these Motives.

1. The Lord Jehovah can give being, and does give being to all things; he can
create peace, comforts, mercies, health, strength, friends, grace, and every
good thing: he can command loving kindness, he can command comfort and
deliverance to Jacob; when he speaks the word, all things shall subsist
according to thy desire: so then, let thy condition be what it will, if God be
thy confidence, he can proportion all things to thy condition: Art thou in
want? he can make plenty subsist. Art thou poor? he can make riches subsist.
Art thou friendless? he can make friends to subsist again? Art thou in terrors
fears and doubts? God can make pardon, grace, and full assurance of faith to
subsist.

2 Because God Jehovah, as he subsists and gives being, so he can continue the
being and subsistence of all mercies, as far and as long as they shall make for
thy good: he can make thy health to subsist, thy riches to subsist, thy
strength, thy friends, thy life it self to subsist, all comforts inward and
outward, spiritual and temporal to subsist: for it is God that bears up the
world and all the creatures, and according to his will and pleasure, so shall
thy comforts subsist.

3. When outward things decay, God will subsist, God will subsist immutably,
when there is a change of conditions falls out (as all outward things are
perishing, unconstant, and mutable) Jehovah says, I the Lord change not: when
riches decay, God says, I Jehovah am riches, etc. I AM, that is my name; so
that all decays are made up in Gods subsistence, whose name is, I am, I will be.

4. When all things shall come to naught, friends, riches, health, strength,
life and all, and shall subsist no longer in thy self; then God will subsist,
and make thee to subsist in eternal glory, then will he say, I am that I am,
thy reward to eternity, thy happiness to eternity, thy eternal comforter, thy
eternal God.

This shows the happiness of all Use 3.
Gods servants, because God does ever subsist to direct them in all their ways,
to protect them in all their dangers, to comfort them in all their
tribulations, and abundantly to reward them, though they run through a thousand
changes, yet the Lord subsisteth the same to them, and carries them through as
upon Eagles wings: let a christians condition change, yet God will never leave
him nor forsake him.

Then extol the name of this great Use 4.
Jehovah. Psalm. 68. 4. that is, acknowledge that God only is (...), is of
himself, and subsisteth by himself; that God only is: Riches are not. Prove.
23. 5. honors, pleasures are not; but God only is; by him thou do subsist.

CHAP. VI.
A Second point I draw from this (that the Lord is Jehovah) shall be this.

That the Lord will make good all Observe.
his promises to his Church and people, because he is Jehovah. It Is said, that
now to them he will be made known by his name Jehovah; that he is a God giving
being to his promises, commanding a full and due accomplishment of them. In the
handling this point, I will do these four things. 1. I shall show the meaning
of being made known by the name Jehovah. Then 2. I will prove the point by
Scripture, then by reason. 3. I will give the Rules concerning Gods fulfilling
of promises; 4. Then make Application.

1. My name Jehovah implies these things in reference to his promises.

1. That I the Lord am faithful in my promises, will not deceive those that put
their trust in me: Let men believe what my mouth has spoken, and my power
shall make my word to come to pass.

2. That I the Lord am true in my Use 1.
promises: God is not as man, or as the son of man, he cannot lie; promise one
thing, and mean another; but what the Lord promises, he decrees to do. Gods
actions shall be, and are as good as his words: Has the Lord promised
deliverance from all trouble, pardon of sins, peace of Conscience, grace and
glory, every good thing? you shall see him true in all, failing in none, but
all shall be made good to his Church and people.

3. That I the Lord am constant in my promises. Has the Lord promised this or
that mercy to his Church and people? he will never repent of his promises: Men
often waver after promises made; he will not waver, nor breed suspicion in our
hearts: the Lord will firmly stand to his word. I the Lord have made promises
of mercy to my people; the word is gone out of my mouth, I will never go back
from my word, all the mercies and good things promised shall accompany my word.
The Lord has said of his name Jehovah, This is my name for ever, and this is
my memorial unto all generations, Exodus 3. 15. A memorial, of what things? It
is a memorial of Gods faithfulness, truth and constancy in his promises, that
all succeeding generations shall see and acknowledge God to be faithful, true,
and constant in keeping promises, in full and due accomplishment of them, I
will ever be known to my Church and people by the name Jehovah.

CHAP. VII.
Sect. 1.
NOw for proof of the Point, first by Scripture.

The Lord glories in this title, a God keeping Covenant: what! does bind
himself by promise in a Covenant? he will not fail in one condition on his
part, he is circumstantially punctual. Behold what he speaks of his
Faithfulness in keeping Covenant, Jer. 31. 35, 36. Thus says the Lord, which
gives the Sun for a light by day, and the ordinances of the Moon, and of the
Stars for a light by night; which divides the Sea, when the waves thereof
roar, the Lord of Hosts is his name: If those ordinances depart from before me,
says the Lord, then the seed of Israel also shall cease from being a Nation
before me for ever: That look as the ordinances of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, of
Day and Night remain firm, unalterable; so shall his Promises and Covenant made
to his Church and People, be as firm and unalterable. And v. 37. he adds, If
Heaven above can be measured, and the foundation of the Earth searched out
beneath, I will also cast off all the seed of Israel, for all that they have
done, says the Lord. As he proves the immutability of his Covenant and
Promises, from the immutability of the natural ordinances; so here he proves
it from an impossible thing: As it is impossible to measure Heaven, to search
the Earth to its center; so it is impossible, that ever the Cov^nant between
God and his People should be broken. All the ways of the Lord are mercy and
truth, Psalm. 25. 10. These two are coupled together, because God truly
performs what he promises to his People, sc. his mercies; his promises of
pardon of sins, sanctification, life eternal, direction of his people in the
way to eternal life, this is his way of mercy: His way of truth, is, to fulfill
these promises, to command these loving kindnesses to come to all his people,
this is his way of truth. Now these are called the ways of Jehovah; because it
is Gods constant and faithful course, truly to per^orm his promises of Mercy.
S. Paul tells us, 2 Timothy 2. 13. If we believe not, yet he abides faithful, he
cannot deny himself. Though men should mistrust the fidelity of his Word, and
give no credit to him, yet God abides faithful and constant in his Promises, he
cannot lie, he will not deny himself. Now God will perform all his promises,
because his Name is Jehovah. It is observed by Zanchy, that as often as God in
his Prophets does promise any great Mercy, or threaten any grievous Judgment,
he makes mention of this Name Jehovah; I am the Lord, or Jehovah.

Take some instances for all: Jer. 31. 31, 32, 33, 34. a place full of federal
Promises to his Church, concerning his putting his Law into their inward parts,
and writing it on their hearts, of enlightening their minds, and pardoning the
sins of his people, and such like; there he mentions this name diverse time:
Thus says the Lord, or Jehovah: Thus says Jehovah, I will make a new Covenant
with them: Thus says Jehovah, I will put my Law in their inward parts, etc.
Thus says Jehovah, I will forgive their iniquities, etc. to show that he will
make good his promises; they shall surely be pardoned, they shall be
sanctified, they shall obey me. The fifth Chapter of Ezekiel is full of severe
threatenings of fearful Judgments; and that those threatenings shall be
accomplished, the wicked shall see him as true and faithful in his Judgments
and vengeance, as in Mercy and Peace. It is said, verse. 13. They shall know
that I am Jehovah, that I am a God who will give and command a being to my
threatenings as well as to my Promises; that I will create evil for the
destruction of godless wretches, as create good for the peace, safety, and
salvation of them that fear me.

Sect. 2.
Having proved the Point by Scripture, I will also prove it by reason.

Because all the promises made to Reas. 1.
his church and people, are the very expressions of his efficacious will, to
show them mercy, to supply their wants with desirable comforts: what the Lord
efficaciously wills and intends, shall undoubtedly come to pass.

All the works of God are but the effects of his will: It Is said, God said let
there be light, and there was light: let the earth bring forth herbs, let the
trees bring forth fruit, according to their kind, and they did so: Gods saying
is nothing else but his efficacious willing of the things, and as he willed
things, so they came to pas so his promises in the covenant of grace are
nothing else but his will to pardon, to sanctify, to comfort, to deliver to
give grace and glory: let mercy embrace such a soul; let pardon be assured to
such a sinner, let such lusts be mortifyed, let such deliverance betide such a
person, and all comes to pass, because he wills the things, his promises are
the expressions of his will. It Is an observable phrase used in Scripture
command deliverance for Jacob, and command loving kindness, to show to his
people the efficacy of his will in making good his promises: he has promised
deliverance, loving kindness, let it be to such a soul.

2. Because God is as able as he is willing: his name is Jehovah; it is the
Lord that gives Being to all that have being, therefore he is able to give
being to his promises as to his creatures, to give a being to promised mercy,
to promised pardon, to promised grace and glory, and whatsoever good he has
promised. See what arguments God uses to encourage his people to ask of him
things to come. Isa. 45. 12. I have made the earth, and created men upon it: I,
even my hands have stretched out the heavens, and all their host have I
commanded; he created man and all creatures, therefore he can create all good
which he has promised to his Church: therefore put God in mind of his promises
to his Church, and importunately urge him with his promises. Say to him, Lord
thou have commanded man to keep his promise, to be faithful of his word, thou
have promised this and that mercy, thou can not deny thy self, being most
faithful, command this and that mercy. The Prophet Malachy speaking of the
creation of wom^n. Malac. 2. 15. says, did not he make one? yet had he the
residue of the Spirit, that is, he made but one woman for Adam; he could have
made more, because of his abundance of Spirit: the Lord has abundance of
spirit, he has made good his promises to others, and can make them good to all
that shall trust in him.

3. Because Gods performing his promises to his Church and people is God's
memorial, it is an everlasting memorial of him to all generations: succeeding
generations come to know what God is, by his performance of promises, God is
known by his name Jehovah, his mindfulness of his Covenant and promises makes
us mindful of God. As God performing his promise of remission of sins, makes
men in all ages to know that he is Jehovah, that pardons iniquity,
transgressions and sins, and they from their own experience will make God known
to be a God pardoning iniquity: so the accomplishment of promises of
deliverance, promises of comfort in trouble accomplished, promises of the
things of this life, and and of the life that is to come accomplished, makes
him known to be faithful and constant in his promises, that he is a God that
cannot lie, nor deny himself, but abides faithful to all generations.

CHAP. VIII.
Sect. 1.
IN the third place, I willlay down the Rules concerning God's performing of
his promises; and in the first place I must premise these distinctions.

1. That there are promises which concern Church in general, and there are
promises which concern the members of the Church, each particular godly man,
there are promises made to Jerusalem and promises made to the daughters of
Jerusalem.

2. There are promises of temporal good things* and promises of spiritual good
things, of spiritual blessings.

3. There are promises of grace it self, and mercy it self, and there are
promises of the measure of grace.

The observable rules are these.

The promises to the Church in general are prophetical promises, they are
prophecies as well as promises: so the accomplishment of them is to be prayed
for, it shall be in Gods appointed time.

The Jews prayed for the coming of the Messiah, long before his coming, yet
he came not in the flesh till the fullness of the determinate time came: no
question but the seed of Jacob prayed for the possession of Canaan, yet no
possession till the years were expired, wherein God promised to give them
Canaan: The Church in many ages has prayed for the subversion of the Kingdom
of Antichrist, yet Babylon the great is not fallen: the Church has likewise
prayed for the conversion of the Jews, and the bringing in of the fullness of
the Gentiles, yet the one is not converted, neither is the fullness of the
other brought in: yet the Lord Jehovah will make good these and such like
promises in his own time, then shall the blessings of the promises, and the
prayers of all Saints fall into the Churches lap. We must pray, and we may
expect the accomplishment of the promises in due time, because we have the
promises and the prophecies: but it is curiosity to calculate a set time, as to
say positively, that in such a year Antichrist shall be overthrown; we are
ignorant of the times and seasons when God will accomplish his promises to his
Church, they are not clearly revealed unto us.

Sect. 2.
Now as touching those Promises that concern each particular member of the
Church: First, concerning Promises about Grace, and spiritual Mercies, we are
to observe these Rules.

1. That God will make good his Rule 1.
Promises to all Believers, concerning pardon of sin, sanctification, adoption,
perseverance, life eternal; and a Believer may be confident, that God will
bestow these things undoubtedly upon him: by this name Jehovah he will be made
known to all, and for these things thou may absolutely pray.

2. That God will give such a measure of grace, of comfort, and assistance, as
he knowerh to be fit for thee, not such and such a measure of grace and
assistance as thou think needful. Your heavenly Father knows what grace,
what comfort, what assistance you most need: Be sure, what the Lord Jehovah
does fot thee, it is for the best.

3. That the Lord performs his Promises in his own time, not in times that we
prescribe to him; Heb. 4. 16. He will give grace and mercy in a time of need,
(...), in opportunum auxilium, for a seasonable aid. It is said, 2 Cor. 6. 2.
In a time accepted have I heard thee, and in the day of salvation have I
succored thee. Therefore blessed is the man that waits always; when Gods
time begins to dawn, then mercy shall shine forth. The Israelites did endure a
long and sore bondage in Egypt, did groan heavily; yet Moses came not to
deliver them, till the appointed time came.

4. When God's determinate time is come, then he will be made known by his Name
Jehovah: the Lord is very punctual in the observation of moments, days, and
years: as the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt was at the end of 430. years
determined before, and then Moses came: at the fullness of time Christ came in
the flesh: so in the fullness of time, pardon of sin, peace of conscience,
comfort and deliverance shall come, or whatsoever it be thou stand in need
of. When we would have things done in our time, the Lord answers us, as Christ
did his Mother, complaining there was no Wine; Woman, what have I to do with
thee? mine hour is not yet come. Joh. 2. 4. When his hour was come, then he
turned Water into Wine: So, when thou art in affliction, thou prayest, Lord,
comfort now, send deliverance now, send assurance now; our Savior answers,
My time is not yet come; when that is come, then will I turn thy Water into
Wine, then be it unto thee according to thy faith.

5. Now the Rule for temporal Promises is; though godliness has an interest,
title and claim to all the Promises of this life, yet the Lord performs not
all the promises of this life to all that are Godly; but gives to all that
which is good for them* Now the goodness of an outward thing lies not in the
nature of a mercy, as in the convenience and fitness of the mercy to thy heart.

Though godly men can lay claim to all Promises, yet all godly men have not fit
hearts for all Promises. As for instance; Every godly man has the promises of
Riches, of Honors, of Long-life; but every godly man has not an heart fit for
Riches or Honors: Should God give them Riches, they would perhaps wax proud,
careless, loose, wanton, and their hearts, being puffed up, would make them
kick and spurn against God; therefore God in his wisdom debarreth them from
Riches. When godly men put temporal promises in suit in the Court of Request,
God answers them as our Savior answered the Mother of Zebedee's children,
that desi^ed, that her two sons might sit, one at his right hand, the other at
his left hand in his Kingdom; Ye know not what ye ask; can ye be baptized with
the baptism that I am baptized with? So ye may ask for Honors and Riches, but
ye know not what ye ask, says our Savior; can ye be poor? can ye be
contented? can ye be meek and lowly? can ye endure tribulation and persecution
for righteousness sake?

CHAP. IX.
NOw I proceed to make Application of the Point.

The first Use shall be for terror to Use 1.
all such as go on in their sins, hearing what the just and faithful God does
threaten. The Lord Jehovah is as true, faithful and constant in his
threatenings, as in his promises: what he has spoken, shall undoubtedly fall
upon the generation of the ungodly; he will be made known to the wicked by his
name Jehovah, in the full execution of his threatenings, as in the full
performance of his promises to the godly, and both in due time.

As in Heaven, all the Saints will put their seals to the Lord's truth and
faithfulness in his promises: so in Hell, all the damned will put to their
seals, that God is true in his threatenings. Lay your ears a while to the gates
of Hell, and hearken to the howling outcries that the damned Drunkards make,
crying out to those that were their potcompanions, that are yet upon the face
of the earth: Oh ye swinish Drunkards that are yet living, believe what your
faithful Ministers say unto you from God; it is most true what you have been
told, that no Drunkard shall inherit the Kingdom of God; God has made himself
known to us to be Jehovah, and faithful in his threatenings to us poor
creatures. Attend to the howling of the damned in Hell, and may ye not hear
them cry out to you; Hearken, ye proud wretches; will ye, proud creatures, see
that God resists the proud? oh look upon us that are turned into hell for our
pride; we see we feel now the cursed fruits of our pride. Then will the
adulterer and the lustful wanton cry out to their companions here upon earth,
that went with them to harlots Houses; Oh we burned in lust, and now we suffer
the vengeance of eternal fire; the Lord has now made good his threatenings
against us. Consider what God speaks of his threatenings in Ezekiel. 5. 13. 15.
Then shall mine anger be accomplished, and I will cause my fury to rest upon
them, and I will be comforted: and they shall know that I the Lord, (or
Jehovah) have spoken it in my zeal, when I have accomplished my fury in them:
so it shall be a reproach, and a taunt; an instruction, and an astonishment
unto the nations that are round about thee, when I shall execute judgments in
thee in anger, and in fury, and in furious rebukes, then he confirms it thus:
I Jehovah have spoken it.

Thre^ things I will commend to the consideration of all persons concerning
Gods threatenings.

1. Consider seriously; the Lord who threatens thee, he is not a man that he
will repent; he cannot lie; but what his mouth has uttered, shall come to pas
if he has threatened damnation to thee O impenitent sinner, damnation shall be
thy portion; if God has spoken against such a Nation, People, or Person, that
they shall be plucked up and destroyed, it shall certainly come to pass, except
they repent.

2. Consider how God has threatened, and also executed judgment acco^ding to
his thre^tnings upon the wo^ld: the old world was drowned according to his
threatenings, by his name Jehovah he was made known unto them: He has
infl^cted his judgments upon the Church, the vequintessence of the whole world:
Jerusalem was threatened, Jerusalem was accordingly plagued: he has inflicted
Judgments according to his threatenings upon his own children, the very
quintessence of his Church: David a man after Gods own heart, felt the force of
his threatenings: And as for particular persons; let drunkards look upon
Belshazzer, let Adulterers look upon Zimry, let all profane persons look upon
Esau, let Worldlings consider Judas, and as our Savior said to the Jews,
speaking of the death of those men, upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell, except
ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish: so say I to all Drunkards, and all
profane persons, Except ye repent ye shall likewise perish; because God is
Jehovah, true and faithful in all his threatenings.

3. Consider thine own sins, and what God has threatened against thee; if thou
persistest in thy Sins; Art thou a drunkard? consider what God has spoken
against this sin, and go home and tremble, lest the Lord Jehovah bring that
evil upon you: has God said, that all the wicked shall be turned into hell?
then let all wicked, wretches fear and tremble, lest God indeed turn them into
hell; for he is the Lord Jehovah.

CHAP. X.
Will God make good all his Use 1.
promises to his church and people, because he is Jehovah? then if ever you
desire the accomplishment of Gods promises, see that you get into Christ, for
the Lord is only made known by his name Jehovah to such as are in Christ: all
the promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen. 2. Cor. 1. 20. In Christ
they are all Amen, so be it: Has God promised deliverance, comfort, assurance,
grace glory? whatsoever his promises be, they are all in Christ yea and Amen:
let pardon be given to him that is in Christ, let comfort and assurance be
given to him that is in Christ, etc. For God is Jehovah that makes all the
promises, Christ is the meritorious cause of all the promises, he purchased
both the making and the performance of them: Christ is the ratifier of all the
promises, he confirms them to us, his blood is the blood of the Covenant:
Christ is the treasurer of all God's promises, all are kept and locked up
within the breasts of Christ, and none shall have any but from him: Christ is
the fulfiller of all the promises; therefore if you expect grace, peace,
assurance, pardon, as they are promised, see that ye be first in Christ by
faith, faith is as instrumentally necessary, as Christ is meritoriously
necessary: The Lord Jehovah answers every believer that pleads promises; Be
it unto thee according to thy faith: Do thou ask for pardon? do thou
believe, is Jehovah's answer? if so then be it unto thee as thou will: A wicked
man, out of Christ, may as soon pluck a star out of the firmament, as the
performance of one promise to himself.

CHAP. XI.
THis point speaks comfort to all Use 3.
that are believers, what greater comfort can be to such, than to have an
interest in such a God, who is not only All-sufficient, but also Jehovah, and
so can and will make good all his promises: Read over the book of God, and pick
out all the promises that are, and apply these salves to every sore of thine:
God has promised thee mercy and good according to thy condition; he will make
good his promises to thee as far as they are good for thee: be confident thou
shall have any good thou need in Gods due time: I have seen, I have seen the
affliction of my people, says God to Moses, then he sent him to fetch them out
of the house of bondage, so God takes notice of all thy afflictions inward and
outward and accordingly in due time he will command deliverance, comfort or
whatsoever is good for thee.

That you may get comfort by the promises, observe these rules.

1. Be sure to lay up all kinds of promises, we are liable to s^veral wants,
straits, dangers, miseries; God has fitted suitable promises, as it is said of
the Virgin Mary, that she did lay up his words in her heart; so do thou the
promises against needful times: A promise in thy heart in time of need, is like
a friend in the Court, will stand thee in precious stead.

2. Acquaint thy heart with the nature of the promises. 1. Labor strongly to
apprehend the truth and faithfulness of the Lord Jehovah in his promises, that
they are yea and Amen, he will undoubtedly perform what he has spoken, he will
never go back from his word. 2. Labor to understand their goodness, let thy
thoughts dwell upon the promise, till thou have found out the riddle, digg into
the bowels of a promise, as thou would digg into the bowels of the earth for
silver: Ignorance or weak apprehensions of the truth of the promises of Gods
all sufficiency and faithfulness, is the ground of distrustful, wavering and
unbelieving thoughts: Ignorance of the good things in the promises is the
ground of the not applying of the promises. 3. Labor to know to what special
condition the promise is made, so thou may rightly apply promises to thy
spiritual maladies, the right salve to thy sore.

3. When thou art acquainted with the nature of the promises, then set faith a
work, rely upon God who is Jehovah, for the accomplishing of the promises to
thee, do thou hold fast by the promise, and hold God to his word; say to him as
Jacob did, when he wrestled with him, I will not let thee go till thou have
blessed me; I will never let thee go, till thou have made good this or that
promise to me.

4. Labor to get a quiet and still frame of heart to wait for the
accomplishment of the Promises: This is to live by Faith in a Promise, to walk
by Faith; for God will not by and by make good his Promises, but for exercise
of Faith, he defers execution of them. David would often call upon himself to
wait upon the Lord, Wait on the Lord, O my soul; and would check himself for
tumultuous and distrustful thoughts; Why art thou cast down, O my soul? why art
thou disquieted within me? wait on God: for the Lord Jehovah will certainly in
his appointed time make good his promises to thee: if thou can live by Faith,
delays will not be tedious; He that believes will not make haste, Isa. 28. 16.

If the Lord will make his Promises good, because he is Jehovah; then Use 4.
answer all distrustful and unbelieving temptations with this, God is Jehovah.
A Believer shall find many strong temptations to unbelief: As about the
Promises of Justification, this temptation may arise; Can the Lord pardon such
a vile sinner as I am? It Is true, I read how he is a God pardoning sinners, but
will he pardon me? Yes, God can pardon thee, because he is Jehovah, and will
make good all his Promises. So in temptations against perseverance: I fear
(says a poor soul) I shall prove an Apostate, and fall away; and the Devil
will be ready to second it: Answer it by this, The Lord Jehovah has promised
to put his fear in my heart, that I shall not depart from him, Jer. 32. 40. and
he being Jehovah, can make me to persevere and hold out to the end.

General Rules for the better understanding, What God is.
Exodus 3. 14. And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM.
CHAP. I.
HAving briefly gone over the glorious Titles and Names of God, I will proceed
to a plain handling of his glorious Attributes and properties. Before I come to
particulars, I must lay down some general Rules for the better understanding of
the nature of God.

1. The Attributes or Properties show to us, what God is in himself; declare
him to be most Wise, most Holy, Good, Perfect, Infinite, Eternal, etc.

2. These Divine Excellencies are called Attributes, because the Scripture
ascribes them to God; acknowledges Him to be Infinite, Eternal, Omnipotent,
Omnipresent, etc.

3. Gods Attributes are not accidental Qualities in Him; Goodness, Wisdom,
Infiniteness, Omnipotency, are his very Essence, not Accidents, as in
creatures; Wisdom, Goodness. Holiness, Power, are qualities in creatures, as
in Men and Angels.

Neither are they in God as (...) naturales, natural faculties:
Underderstanding and Will is in Man and Angels.

Neither are they in God as Affections and Passions: Love is in God, Hatred is
in God, Joy is in God, not as they are in his creatures, affections, or
passions.

But all the Attributes are really the same with his Essence; therefore they
are spoken of God in abstracto, God is love, God is Mercy, God is Goodness, God
is Justice, etc.

4. Though there are many Properties attributed to God, yet all these
Properties are not really distinguished from each other, but they are all one
and the same Essence: As when we say, God is infinite, God is merciful, God is
powerful, etc. we are not to conceive, that his Mercy is really distinct from
his Justice, his Wisdom, really distinct from his Power; but as they are the
same with the Divine Essence, so they are with each other. As the Divine
Essence is omnipotent, infinite, eternal, perfect, etc. Some Divines express
this by a piece of Gold: a piece of Twenty shillings does not contain in it
twenty several distinct pieces of Silver; but it is one and the same piece which
contains so many pieces in worth and value. So that the multitude of Attributes
in God, is not in respect of so many glorious Excellencies really distinguished
among themselves in God, but only in respect of our manner of conceiving.

Our understandings are unable, and too weak to apprehend all his glorious
excellencies: By one act of conceiving we cannot conceive God to be infinite,
omnipotent, holy, just, good by one act, but by diverse acts.

Then again, there is not one Attribute so large, as to comprehend or express
his incomprehensible and inexpressible Being: Therefore this we say, the divine
Properties are not so many really distinct Virtues in God; but they are that
Unica Essentia ad omnia sufficiens, one only Essence, which is most merciful,
most perfect, most holy, most powerful.

5. All God's Attributes are equally and most unchangeably perfect in him,
although we are not able to conceive an equality of them: God is as just as he
is merciful, God is as merciful as just; God is infinite in Power, in Wisdom,
in Goodness, in Holiness.

One Reason is, Because they are Reas.
the same with the Divine Essence, which is infinite. Then God is incommutably
just, merciful, holy, good; Non recipient majus and minus: God is always the
same God, and always most holy, most merciful, most good, most powerful.

2. Because he is infinite. A thing actually infinite cannot decrease nor
increase; then he could not be infinite. What unspeakable comfort is this to
the godly broken hearts, that the Lord is as gracious, as merciful now as ever,
and so to eternity! what unspeakable terror to the wicked, that God is as just
now as ever, and so to eternity.

6. There is no contrariety in Gods Attributes: His Mercy is not contrary to
his Justice, nor his Justice to his Mercy: Although there be Love and Hatred in
God, yet none are contrary, quia ipsa misericordia in Deo est justitia, because
the very Mercy of God is his Justice.

The Attributes are diverse in respect of their objects, not in respect of
themselees: Mercy has respect to the creature in misery, and Justice has
respect to the sinfulness of the creature.

1. There can be no contrariety in God's Attributes; because contraries Reas.
work the mutual destruction of each other; as heat destroys cold, light expels
darkness, fire quenches water.

2. Because two contraries cannot be in one subject in the highest degree; one
and the same thing cannot be firey hot, and icy-cold: Now all God's properties
are in summo gradu; God is sum just us, just in the highest manner, and sum
misericors, merciful in the highest degree.

7. The Attributes of God are spoken of God both in concreto and abstracto, in
the concrete, and in the abstract: God is Justice it self, Mercy it self,
Goodness it self, Wisdom it self, Holiness it self; God is love, says the
Apostle; it is in the abstract: Then in the concrete, God is just, wise, holy,
good, perfect. They are spoken of God in the abstract, to show that he is
essentially holy, good, etc. and spoken in the concrete, and subjective, to
show that God is good to his creatures, and that he does truly exist.

For the distinction of his Attributes, observe but this one.

There are incommunicable Attributes, and communicable, per participationem and
analogiam. His incommunicable Attributes are his Infiniteness, his Eternity,
his Simplicity, which no creature is capable of. His communicable Attributes
are his Justice, Mercy, Holiness, Power, Goodness, etc. which are in the
creatures, as in Man and Angels, by way of resemblance and likeness.

They are in God, after an infinite eminency and perfection; in creatures by
participation, as a drop in respect of the vast Ocean; are as light in a spark,
in respect of the light of the Sun.

CHAP. II. Of the Simplicity of God.
THese are the General Rules concerning his Attributes or Properties: I will
now proceed to the handling of each particular Attribute; and the first
Attribute shall be the Simplicity, or simpleness of God's nature, which is one
of the incomunicable Attributes of God, of which no creature is, or can be
partaker, but only by way of a small resemblance.

True it is, the word Simplicity, as applied to God, is not used in Scripture;
yet the sense is found, as in this Text, wherein God names himself, I am that
I am; which notes, that God is simply of himself, and by himself most perfect;
that whatsoever is ^^i quid in D^o est, D^us est.
in God, is God.

I need not to stand upon the coherence of the words: Moses was commanded to
fetch captived Israel out of Egypt, and before he would go, he desired God to
tell him his Name, what he should say unto them, to persuade them to follow
him; here God commanded him to tell them, that, I am that I am, has sent him;
which name imports, that God is simply that he is; and the Septuagint
translate it, ^XX. Into. ^^.
(...), I am the Being, plainly noting to us, the Simplicity of God. Hence I
note,

That God is most simple. Observe.
In the handling of this Attribute, this shall be my method: First, to show
what is meant by God's Simplicity; then prove it by Scripture and Reason; then
apply it.

1. Simpleness or Simplicity is taken three ways.

1. For want of discretion or wisdom: So men void of wit or common capacity,
are said to be simple, Prove. 1. 4. Solomon shows what the use of his Proverbs
was, namely, to give subtilty to the simple. Prove. 9. 15. A foolish woman is
clamorous, she is simple, and knows nothing: She calls to passengers, Whosoever
is simple, let him turn in hither. They are called simple, because they want
spiritual wisdom and discretion; and till Go^'s Spirit anoint their eyes, they
do not or cannot discern what is truly good, what is truly evil.

2. Simpleness or simplicity, is taken for sincerity and uprigh^ness: Simple
men in this sense are taken for plainhearted men, void of hypocrisy,
dissembling, and wicked plots and devices. Psalm. 116. 6. The Lord preserves
the simple, that is, the upright in heart, the sincere persons, Romans 16. 19.
This simplicity the Lord approves of, and it is called by the Hebrews (...)
uprightness: Thus God commanded Abraham to be simple, Walk before me, and be
upright, or simple; Genesis 17. 1.
shun all hypocrisy and dissimulation with men: To be without guile and fraud
is simplicity; uptight dealing is simplicity.

3. Simplicity, is taken in opposition to mixture and composition: Thus refined
Gold is pure and simple Gold, it is not mixed with dross: Water is simple, but
mix it with Wine, it is compounded of several kinds. Simplicity, as it is
attibuted to God, it is opposed to mixture and composition: There is no
composition or mixture in God, but he is a pure Essence.

There are diverse kinds of composition, there is not the least shadow of any
one of them in God. There is a Composition

Physical, Logical, Metaphysical.
1. A Physical Composition is to be F^ materi^ and sorma.
compounded of Matter and Form; as Man is compounded of Soul and Body, the Body
compounded of the fou^ Elements. This were gross, to conceive such a
composition in God.

2. There is a composition; of a Ex g^nere e^ d^ff^rentia.
a kind, and a restraining difference, as man is compounded of a living
creature and reasonable, this also is gross to conceive of God.

3. There is a composition ex essentia Ex actu e^ so(...) a.
and existentia, ex actu and potentia, of being and existence, or of an actual
being, or of a possible being: this com^osition is in the most simple
creatures, as in Angels whose essence and existence differ; who had once no
actual being; but a being in a power, termed obedientiall, before they were
created: now God's existence and essence is one and the same; and God is purus
actus; he is eternal, he did actually exist from all eternity, There is a
composition of a subject and accident, as the wall and the color in the wall:
this composition is likewise in Angels; they are compounded of substance and
accidents; and so the souls of men are, which are comparatively simple
creatures, as the power, goodness, holiness, wisdom in Angels, are created
qualities in them, they are not the essence and being of an Angel: now there is
no such composition in God: his properties are his essence: Gods holiness is
not a quality, but his very being and nature: so that when we say, God is most
simple, we mean, that God is void of all composition and mixture.

CHAP. III.
NOw to prove the simplicity of God; it is said, John 4. 14. God is a Spirit:
where to take men off from resting in ritual worshipping him, he shows, how
God will be worshipped of us, in spirit and truth, and his reason is, because
God is a spirit: So are Angels, so are the souls of men Spirits: but God is
most spiritual, beyond all created spirits, there is no composition in God, as
in created spirits. God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. 1. Joh. 1.
5. he is all light, all mercy, and pure mercy he is all justice, and pure
justice; he is all love and pure love: he is all holiness, without the least
spot of defilement; he is all power, and without the least degree of weakness;
he is all wisdom, and without the least degree of folly; God is simple, holy,
wise, good, perfect: so when God is said to be life it self, it imports his
simplicity.

1. One Reason is, because if God Reas.
were not purely simple, void of all composition, then he could not be from
eternity, because whatsoever is compounded, is made of something, which in time
is before it, all compounds are after the component; but God is eternal: Before
me there was no God, says the Lord. Isa. 43. 10.

2. If God be a compounded being; then the parts of which he consists must be
before him, at least before in order of nature, if not in time: so God should
not be eternal and immutable, but may be resolved into nothing.

3. If God were compounded, then he could not be ens primum, ens a se, and ens
per seipsum; not ens primum, because the efficient would before him; not ens a
se, because then he had being from the efficient, not per se, by himself.

4. Because God is most perfect; therefore most simple: the more perfection,
the more simplicity: God being most perfect, must of necessity be most simple.

5. God admits no diversity or composition in himself, nor in the persons, nor
in their operations: not in himself, because God is his own essence: not in the
persons, because the whole and the same essence, is in all three persons: not
in their operations or works, because the same essence, which is the principle
of all Divine actions is the same in all.

Before I make use, I will deduce these corollaries from Gods simplicity. 1.
There is but one God, because there can be but one most simple being which is
God.

2. Then Quicquid in Deo est, Deus est: Whatsoever is in God is God, Deus est
(...) totaliter totum; for if there be any thing in God, which is not God, then
he should not be most simple, but compounded of his being and that which is of
him, but it is not God.

3. Then whatsoever is spoken of God, is not accidentally, but essentially
spoken of him: mercy is spoken of God essentially; his very essence is power,
mercy, justice, All Sufficiency.

CHAP. IIII.
IF God be most simple; then whatsoever Use 1.
God gives, promises, or threatens, he is sincere in all. Jam. 1. 5. God
gives to all men liberally; says our translation, but the greek word (...) is
sincerely and uprightly. without any fraud or dissimulation: so the Lord is
most upright, and sincere and simple in all his promises, and likewise in all
his threatenings. Has the Lord promised to give such and such mercies, a
believer may be confident he shall have them, God will not deceive him, he will
not prom^se one thing and give another, but what he has spoken: be thou
upright toward him, he will sincerely make good his word: God never did nor can
deceive any that put their trust in him.

So again, he is sincere in all his threatenings, he will execute upon the
ungodly what he denounced against them. Does he threaten damnation to an
impenitent wretch, then there damnation slumbers not: men through ignorance and
self love think that God is not* and will not be so severe and terrible, as his
word sets him forth to be: but deceive not your selves, God is sincere, and if
he speak the word, God is sincere, and if he speak the word, it shall come to
pass*

2. Seeing God is most simple, Use 2.
hence it is, that he approves of all sincere hearts, and accepts of all
duties where he sees sincerity: he passes by many imperfections of his
servants, because he sees they pray, they hear, they give alms, and whatsoever
they do, they do all in sincerity of heart unto him: he has promised to be a
shield and sun to them who walk uprightly. Psalm. 84. 11. A shield to preserve
those that are sincere and simple in heart, a sun to comfort and refresh them.

And indeed it is all the comfort of the Godly, that whatsoever they do to God
and for God, is in simplicity of heart. 2 Cor. 1. 12. Our rejoicing is this,
the testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, etc.
We have had our conversation in the World. Though many imperfections and
infirmities may adhere to the best duties of upright men, yet if conscience
testify to thee, thou do them in simplicity and sincerity of heart, here is
thy rejoicing: uprightness breeds boldness and heavenly joy.

Hence it is that he abhors all hypocrites, in whose heart and performances
there is abundance of fraud and guil; who have (as the Psalmist speaks) an
heart and an heart, a double heart, because such persons are most opposite and
contrary to his most simple nature; therefore he throws away all duties of
hypocrites (how glorious soever they are to outward show, to public view) as
so many abominations, as hateful things in his sight, for want of simplicity
and sincerity of heart, which he looks into. When we go to duty, the Lord
speaks as Jehu to Jehonadab, is thy heart right, plain and simple as mine is?
then give thee mine hand, then pray and I will hear thee, then I will accept of
all that thou do: but if thy heart be false, double, full of fraud and guile,
then bring no more vain oblations, your incense, your prayers are an
a^omination to me, who am a most simple God, upright, sincere.

Sincerity is the life and soul of all our works, without which (how beautiful
soever our works are in the eyes of men) they are stinking and abominable in
the eyes of God; as loathsome in God's eyes, as stinking and putrefying
carcasses are in ours: many splendid performances does God reject, when not
done with a perfect heart.

3. Seeing God is most simple, let Use 3.
us strive after simplicity and singleness of heart: our simplicity is our
sincerity and singleness of heart; it is our perfection, it is our conformity to
God.

What is it to do things in simplicity Quest.
of heart?

An heart is said to be simple, when Sol.
it proposes one object or end to it self; and a double heart, when it
proposes a double end or object; as when a man proposes God and himself for
his ends, God's glory and his own credit, and esteem among men; to give alms,
to pray, preach, hear, to aim at himself and God together; such an one is an
hypocrite, and God abhors his works: But singleness of heart proposes none
but God for his end and object only; I will do such and such good works, says
a sincere soul, in obedience to God's command, that God may be glorified, and I
rejoice in my performances as in that which is well-pleasing to him.

To this purpose consider these Motives.

1. It Is the highest perfection of our works and persons, that we are sincere:
There is no possibility for us to attain to a perfection of degrees, but to
sincerity in this life.

2. The more single in heart and sincere thou art in all duties, the more do
thou grow in a conformity to God, who is most simple.

3. Sincerity and simplicity (like love) covers abundance of infirmities and
imperfections in our performances: Though Satan should feed thee with a
thousand suggestions in thy duties, yet if Conscience shall give thee this
testimony, that thou did them in simplicity of heart, thou have matter of
rejoicing.

4. It is the highest perfection of glorified Saints in Heaven, to be simple
and sincere; for though neither Angels nor Saints shall have simple beings, yet
then and there they shall be without the mixture of all hypocrisy and guile;
they shall be perfectly holy, pure, upright, they shall delight wholly in God,
and purely love him.

Admire God's simplicity, and give Use 4.
him the glory of this most glorious Property of his, that he is so pure, that
there is not in his nature the least mixture of pollution, nor the least
tincture of defilement; he is so holy, that he is holiness only, and totaliter
sanctus, wholly, and altogether holy.

A Discourse of the Eternity of God.
Deuteronomy. 33. 27. The eternal God is thy Refuge.
CHAP. I.
THis Chapter (as ye may see by the Contents) contains three things.

1. The Majesty of the God of Israel, from the first to the sixth verse.

2, The Blessings of the twelve Tribes of Israel, from verse. 6. to v. 26.

Then 3. from the 26. to the end, he shows the Excellency of Israel above all
Nations; this belongs to all the twelve Tribes, and not to any one in
particular above the other.

Their Excellency lies in these things.

1. That God is the God of Israel, verse. 26. he is called the God of Jes^run.

2. That God is for their help and R^^uge: Other Nations had their imagined
tutelar gods, which could not help nor protect them; but the true and only God
was Israel's Protector; there is no Protector like to him. From this, two
excellent blessings follow;

1. Victory over their Enemies, because God is their help and refuge, and his
everlasting arms uphold them: The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are
the everlasting arms, and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee, and
say, Destroy them. 2. Besides their safety, the Heaven from above should drop
down blessings upon them, and the Earth should yield plenty to them, because
God is their God: Israel then shall dwell in safety alone: the fountain of
Jacob s^^ll be upon a land of corn and wine, also his heaven shall drop down
dew. Verse. 28.

Then Moses breaks forth into a gratulatory exclamation: Happy art thou, O
Israel! who is like unto thee? verse. 29. No Nation so happy as Israel, because
God (to whom no God is like) is their God: The Eternal God is thy Refuge.

CHAP. II.
THe Point that I will handle from these words, is this;

That God is an Eternal God. Observe.


Here I will show first, what Eternity is; then prove the Point by Scripture
and Reason; then make Use of it.

Eternity is taken three ways.

1. Proprie, properly: So it notes to be without beginning and end; so God
only is Eternal.

2. Improprie: So it notes to have a beginning, but no ending; so Angels, so
the Souls of Men are eternal.

3. Abusive: So some things are said to be eternal, which have had a beginning,
and shall also have an end; they are called Eternal, in respect of their long
continuance and duration; so Circumcision, and other Mosaical Ceremonies, were
called Eternal or everlasting; and the Land of Canaan was called an everlasting
possession, that is, they should continue for a long time.

I am to speak of that which is properly and absolutely Eternal: That is
therefore properly and absolutely Eternal, which has no beginning of his
being, nor end; that is, without succession, always the same.

Three things are required in absolute Eternity.

1. That it has no beginning of his being.

2. That there is no succession or alteration in that being, nothing before nor
after, but is always the same; therefore Eternity is called, Nunc permanens, or
continuans; it is the same from Eternity to Eternity.

3. That it has no End of his being.

Here you may see a vast difference The differences between Time and Eternity.
between Time and Eternity.

1. Time has a beginning and ending; Time shall be no more.

2. In Time there is prius and posterius, past, present, and to come; but in
Eternity, there is not praeteritio, nor futuritio, neither praeterition, nor
futurition sed nunc semper stans.

3. Time compared to Eternity, is but a drop to the vast Ocean, or as a grain
of Sand to the whole circumference of Heaven, or as a moment in respect of
millions of millions of Ages: or else, Time is but as a momentany space in the
midst of Eternity. There is an Everlasting from which Time issued, there is an
Everlasting into which Time shall be swallowed up.

It Is true, when we speak or think of Eternity, we rather look forward than
backward; but we must look backward to Eternity before Time, as well as forward
to Eternity after Time.

CHAP. III.
NOw that God is thus Eternal, that he has no beginning of being or ending,
and in him is no succession, but he is the same yesterday, to day, and for
ever, shall be proved by Scripture and by Reason. First, by Scripture: Psalm.
90. 2. From everlasting to everlasting thou art God. In respect of his eternity
before time he is called the Ancient of days. Dan. 7. 9. and he is said to be
everlasting, and to be a King of old. Psalm. 74. 12. This shows he had no
beginning. In respect of his eternity after time, he is called the everlasting
God. Romans 16. 26. An everlasting King, 1 Timothy 1. 17. That there is no
succession or priority or posteriority in God, but is from everlasting to
everlasting the same, we may see, Psalm. 102. 26. 27. The heavens shall perish,
but thou shall endure, yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment, and as a
vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed, but thou art the
same, and thy years shall have no end: therefore his mercy is said to be
everlasting, Psalm. 100. 5. he is merciful from eternity, and so to eternity:
his kingdom is everlasting, his strength everlasting, his glory to be
everlasting, denoting there is no succession or variation in God, but he is
eternally the same. The Reasons of this point follow.

1. That which gave Being to all Reas. 1.
that ever has, had, or shall have Being, is eternal, without beginning or
ending: now God gave being to all that has being: who made the worlds, even
from the highest heaven to the lowest hell, with all creatures contained in
them, Heb. 11. 3. By him were made the ages or worlds; the word imports that
both time and (...).
ages were made by him, as well as the creatures that have their continuance,
some a longer duration, others a shorter. Hence God is called King of ages, 1 Timothy 1. 17. because all times and ages of the world are subject to him: and he
is said to be before the worlds were made: Christ speaks of himself, and says,
The Prove 8. 22. ad. 30. ver.
Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old, I was
set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was: when there
were no depths I was brought forth, when there were no fountains abounding with
water: before the hills were settled, before the mountains, was I brought forth:
while as yet he had not made the earth, nor the fields, nor the highest part of
the dust of the earth; when he prepared the heavens, I was there, etc. Then was
I by him, as one brought up with him, and I was daily his delight, rejoicing
always before him, Rejoicing in the habitable parts of the earth, and my
delights were with the sons of men: here you may see that God was before the
world was made, and that all the world was made by him.

2. He that had glory and honor before the world was, and whose decrees and
purposes were before the world was, is eternal; but God had glory before the
world was. John 17. 5. Christ prays thus unto his Father, Father, glorify
thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the
world was. His decrees and purposes likewise were before the world began. 2 Timothy 1. 9. It is said that his own purpose and grace was given in Christ Jesus
before the world began: the election of men to glory was before the world.

3. He that had being from himself, is without beginning and ending: but God
Jehovah had being from himself, and not from any other, for had he being from
another, he could not be Jehovah, ens primum, ens absolute independens.

4. He that only gives eternal rewards is eternal, quod efficit tale, magis
tale: he that makes eternal things must be more eternal: the Lord only gives
eternal rewards, life eternal to believers, death eternal to impenitent
unbelieving sinners; only God has the keys that opens the everlasting doors of
eternal life to set open for all his saints; he has the keys of everlasting
damnation, and thither shall unbelieving miscreants enter.

CHAP. IV.
IF God be eternal, then he only is Use 1.
the true God whom we worship, because he only is eternal; as Rabshakeh in his
boast cries out; where are the Gods of Zepharvaim, Henah and Ivah? all the gods
of the nations perished like the dung on the earth, but God abides for ever,
he will never desert and forsake those that worship him in Spirit and truth,
but as he here promises Israel, so he does to all his servants; the eternal
God will be their refuge, their habitation.

2. If God be eternal, then all those make an ill bargain, that for the love of
some base lust lose an eternal God, who prefer the fruition of pleasures and
profits before him: What shall it profit a man to win the whole world and lose
his own soul? the same and more may be spoken to such persons; what shall it
profit a man to win a thousand worlds, and to lose an eternal and immortal God?
The day is coming when all wretched worldlings shall cry out as Israel did at
the sacrifice of Elijah; The Lord God he is God, the Lord God he is God? Baal
is not God: so riches are not an eternal God, honors are not an eternal God,
pleasures are not an eternal God, but God only is eternal: oh that I could now
say, the eternal God is mine! It will be most just in that day for God to cast
thee into eternal torments for rejecting him in this moment of thy life.

3. Then surely they are blessed, who have the eternal God for their resuge,
for their portion: happy are the people that are in such a case, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 144. ult. speaking of outward prosperity, who have barns and
fields full of corn, strong and fruitful cattle; Esau's blessing, the ^atnesse
of the earth: but they rather are blessed that have the Lord to be their God,
who have the Lord for their portion, who have the dew of heaven, which is
Jacobs blessing: yea the very eternal God of heaven. All earthly treasures
which the word so greedily seeks after, and on which wicked worldlings set
their hearts, will at one time or other take their wings and flee away, and
will be seen no more, but the eternal God never forsakes those who take him for
their refuge and portion; he is e^ernal strength in the Lord Jehovah is
everlasting strength, Isa. 26. 4. He gives eternal comforts, eternal honors,
eternal riches, eternal pleasures, Psalm. 16. ult. Eternal glory, and if he be
once thine, he is thine to Eternity.

4. Since God is eternal: learn hence what ground we have to put all trust and
confidence in him; trust ye in the Lord for ever, Psalm. 26. 4. There is no
trust to the favor of creatures, to man, the greatest of men, because their
breath is in their nostrils, the doors are always open; man's breath goes
forth, he returns to his earth. Psalm. 146. 4. but God lives for ever: He is
an eternal refuge, therefore thou may trust to him always in all dangers:
His strength is eternal, therefore thou may trust him in thy greatest
weaknesses; his mercy endures for ever, therefore thou should never
despair, but trust in his mercy for ever and ever, Psalm. 52. 8. All in God is
eternal; his Word, his Faithfulness, his Truth, he keeps truth for ever,
Psalm. 146. 6.

5. This should encourage us to undergo momentany crosses, losses, disgraces,
troubles, for God, when God calls us to it, because he is eternal. Suppose thou
endurest the loss of riches, they are but momentany, God will be eternal
riches: If thou endurest momentany disgrace and dishonor, God will give thee
eternal honor and glory: I reckon, (says S. Paul) that all the afflictions of
this present time, are not worthy to be compared with that glory that shall be
revealed, Romans 8. 18. much less worthy are they to be compared with the eternal
God of glory.

6. Here is an Use of Terror to wicked men, who impenitently live and die in
their sins: for, if God be eternal, then your damnation, your curse and sorrows
in Hell shall be eternal: The fire in hell is eternal fire, because the eternal
God made it, and will preserve it to eternity; therefore your damnation to that
fire (O sinners) is eternal, because God is an eternal Judge, and his sentence
and punishment shall be eternal, Isa. 30. 33. Tophet is ordained of old, etc.
he has made it deep and large, the pile thereof is fire and much wood; the
breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone does kindle it.

CHAP. V.
IN the next place, consider, if God be eternal, then is he a King eternal, and
his dominion is for ever. This may appear,

1. From the continuance of his government and dominion, even from the
foundations of the world. Earthly Kingdoms have had, and have their waxings
and wanes, their increase and decrease, their glorious exaltations, and their
heavy downfalls, and ruinous desolations: but the Kingdom of God is the same,
yesterday, to day, and for ever. All creatures are under his dominion, and in
subjection to his commands now, as at first; there is no decay in his
government nor in creatures obedience, but still his will is fulfilled.

2. By his continual protection of his Church and People from generation to
generation; his Church never wanted Enemies, vowing the ruin and desolation of
her, from her foundation; it has been in all Ages like a Candle set upon the
top of an high Hill, the blustering winds of malice, opposition, and
persecution, pussing, blowing, and storming against it; yet the Eternal King
has preserved it, that they could never blow it ou^. There is a whole Hell of
Devils, and a World of wicked Men, whose hearts Satan has filled with malice
against the Church; yet the gates of Hell could never prevail against it.

3. Because God to day and yesterday binds the Consciences of men, and so for
ever: Conscience is God's Vicegerent, and Lord Deputy in the hearts of men;
that Government endures, his Laws do still bind the Conscience: Men's
Consciences are terrified for the breach of his Laws; it is none but he can
speak peace, or continue terror.

4. His Kingdom is for ever: for at the destruction of the world, he will
reign as absolute King in Heaven, and over Hell. In Heaven a glorious King,
over Hell a just and terrible King; honoring his Subjects with Crowns of
immortal glory, and punishing the Rebels with Chains of utter darkness he will
tread down his Enemies, and they shall be trodden down into the pi^ of
everlasting confusion.

But it may be said, Albeit God be Object.
an eternal King, yet the Enemies do sometimes prevail against the Church, how
then does he continually protect it?

1. It is true, they may and do prevail Sol.
over part of the Church, but not over the whole, and never shall prevail; they
may destroy the suburbs of this holy City, but never shall they raze Jerusalem
down to the ground.

2. They may and do sometimes prevail over persons, not over the the cause,
which is the Truth of God, and his ^eligion: the bodies of God's Saints have
been cast into the streets like mire, by the Antichristian party; but the
Truths of God, which they professed, shall be preserved as a Jewel in a Cab^net.

3. The sufferings of the Saints are their spiritual warfare against the
Enemies of Christ's Kingdom. Consider this* the Saints are never conquered,
though they suffer the spoiling of there goods, the loss of their lives and
liberties. While the ship is in a storm, we cannot say, it is cast away; but
when it is split upon a rock, and men and goods are sunk in the Sea: So it is
with Christians; while they are in storms they are not cast away, but when they
make shipwreck of Faith. Oh, the dominion and power of God over the Enemies
malice, and a Christians heart, that he is not cast away in such storms!

CHAP. VI.
NOw as God's dominion and power, so likewise his glory is eternal. 1 Timothy 1.
17. the Apostle ascribes it to him. Here I will give general Reasons for all.

1. Because as God is from everlasting Reas. 1.
to everlasting, Psalm. 90. 2. so whatsoever is in God, is from everlasting to
everlasting; his dominion, his power and glory, all his prerogatives and
properties are from everlasting to everlasting; if his mercy enduseth for ever,
then his glory will endure for ever: so his justice, his power, and all his
divine excellencies, being but the divine nature and essence, endure for ever;
his glory then must endure for ever. God is glorified in Heaven by his Saints,
because his mercy endures for ever; he is likewise glorified in Hell, because
his justice endures for ever.

2. Because God is absolutely independing Reas. 2.
above all things whatsoever, therefore his dominion, power and glory, and all
his divine excellencies are from eternity to eternity. What is the reason that
all the excellencies in the Creatures are not from eternity? it is because they
are depending, and all came from an external cause. Why are the Creatures and
created excellencies mutable and fading? It is because they depend upon that
external cause, and according to his withdrawing, or putting forth his
influence, so the creatures do flourish or wither: But God's dominion, power,
and glory are originally from himself, and not derivatively from an external
cause: therefore without beginning, because he had none* and shall have no end,
because there is none can put an end to his power and dominion.

It Is by this eternal King that all earthly Kings do reign; and from him they
receive honor, dominion, power, and riches, and therefore at his pleasure they
shall cast down their Crowns and Scepters before him: but God reigns by
himself, and has his dominion, power, and glory in himself, and from himself,
therefore it is from eternity to eternity.

In the last place, the thoughts of this should wonderfully quicken us up to
get an interest in this eternal and omnipotent King of glorious state. Why do
ye spend your days in the pursuit of perishing vanities? Suppose you had a
Kingdom in this world, all the treasures, riches, strength, and all the glory
of an earthly Kingdom; it is somewhat that would perhaps make your hearts to
overflow with joy and pride, yet it is nothing in comparison of an interest in
God. An earthly Kingdom is not for ever; earthly Princes die like ordinary
men, then all their earthly honors, pleasures, treasures and riches die with
them: the World it self had a beginning, and so shall have an end, then shall
all the glory of the world pass away: but God is for ever, his Kingdom, power
and glory are eternal; therefore in getting an eternal God, you shall obtain an
eternal Kingdom, and eternal glory.

Be you Judges, whether it be not better to be godly, how miserable soever for
the present, and to be glorious and happy in the enjoying of an eternal God for
ever; or to be rich, potent, and glorious in this present world, and to be
destroyed from the presence of God for ever. Lay to heart these things: Thy
time is drawing nigh, when all thy worldly pomp, power, riches, honor, credit,
esteem among the Rich in the world will be at an end; if you neglect a diligent
seeking after an eternal good, what will ye do when your power and glory, and
esteem, and riches shall fail, and you have no interest in this God of eternal
power and glory? Woe unto you, when you shall be thrown out of the world, shut
out of the Kingdom of God, and be both thrown and trodden down for enemies into
the burning prison, to suffer the everlasting vengeance of the eternal King of
glory.

A Discourse of Gods Infiniteness, and Incomprehensibility.
1 Kings 8. 27. But will God indeed dwell on the earth? Behold the heaven, and
heaven of heavens cannot contain thee, etc.
CHAP. I.
THese words are part of the preface of Solomon's prayer, which he made at the
dedication of the Temple, in which he sets out the incomparable excellency of
God ver. 23. And he said, Lord God of Israel, there is no God like to thee in
heaven above or earth beneath, who keep Covenant and mercy with thy
servants, that walk before thee with all their heart. Secondly, he sets forth
the admirable faithfulness of God in keeping covenant, and performing promises.
ver. 24. 25. Who have kept with thy servant David that thou promised'st him,
thou spakest also wiih thy mouth, and have fulfilled it with thy hand, as it is
this day; therefore now O Lord God of Israel, keep with thy servant David my
father that thou promisedst him, etc.

In this verse he sets forth the incomprehensibleness and infiniteness of his
Majesty. I shall a little explain the words, before I handle the attribute from
them.

But will God indeed dwell on the earth?] God is said to dwell in heaven, per
praesentiam gloriae, by the presence of his glory, because in heaven he sets
out the fullness of his glory to the view of Angels and Saints.

He dwells in his Saints per praesentiam gratiae, by his grace in their
hearts.

He dweleth in his ordinances: so he is said to dwell at Jerusalem, because in
and by his ordinances, he communicates himself to his people.

He dweleth every where by his essence and power in heaven, earth, hell.

These words show that God dwells not in earth, and much less in that Temple
circumscriptive, as if so limited in one place, as that he is no where else, as
bodily things are; for here Solomon shows, that God's essence is infinite and
incomprehensible.

Behold the heaven and the heaven of heavens, etc. the highest heavens are of a
most vast circumference and capacity; and yet the heaven of heavens cannot
comprehend the infinite essence of God: so that his argument is a majori ad
minus, from the greater to the les if the highest and largest heavens cannot
contain God, much less this house which he had built, which is of a far less
capacity than the earth.

CHAP. II. Observe.

HEnce I note: that God is an infinite, and incomprehensible being; here in the
first place I will briefly show what it is to be infinite; for d^stinction of
infiniteness take one for all. There is a fourfold infiniteness.

1. An Infiniteness in respect of quantity; as if there should be a body that
has infinite dimensions, of infinite breadth, length and depth, God is not
thus infinite, because he is not a body; neither is there any infinite body:
the heaven of heavens are of a vast circumference, and the greatest of all
bodies, yet it has its bounds and limits,

2. There is that which is infinite in respect of number; so the sands on the
sea are said to be infinite because innumerable; the stars in the heaven be
innumerable, yet be they not truly infinite, because there can be as many more
stars and sands: neither way God is said to be infinite, because God is but one.

3. There is an infinite in respect of qualities inherent; so no creature is
infinite, because there cannot be infinite virtues in finite natures, as all
created natures are: so God is not properly said to be infinite, because in God
there are no qualities, and virtues, but improperly: God is said to be infinite
in qualities, as they denote his pure essence, infinite in power, infinite in
goodness, infinite in mercy: all in God is infinite, because they are his very
nature.

4. There is an infinite in respect of Being, Nature, or substance, to have an
immeasurable, incomprehensible and unlimitted being or nature; so God and only
God is infinite, who only is incomprehensible and unlimited: therefore he is
said to be ubique and nusquam, every where and no where: he is no where
circumscriptive limited and bounded, ubique repletive, every where filling all
things* God comprehends all, and is comprehended of nothing, his center is
every where, his circumference no where.

When we say God is infinite, we mean he is a spirit of infinite extension:
when we say he is extended, it is meant secundum totalitem, not secundum
parts, he is wholly extended, not part by part, therefore he is of infinite
extension.

CHAP. III.
NOw that God is infinite and incomprehensible, may appear by removing all
bounds and limits of Being: Creatures are bounded and limited with these
bounds, with

Time. Place. Efficacy. Their own Beings.
1. Creatures ar finite, and limited with their Essential Terms, as the
Ang^lical nature is: but God has no Essential Terms limiting and bounding him;
his Essence is an unlimited Essence.

2. All creatures are bounded with Time: The Angels and Souls of Men, who have
a being to eternity; yet had no being of duration when they were created: but
God is infinite in duration, he is not bounded with beginning nor end, but from
everlasting to everlasting he is God.

3. Place is another bound or limit to creatures: Angels that are in Heaven,
are not at the same time upon Earth. We see how every creature that is in this
place, is so bounded, that he is not in another. And this is one strong
Argument against Taansubstantiation: Christ's Body is not physically or
naturally in the Bread and Wine, but only sacramentally, because being a body,
he is (as all bodies) in a place circumscriptively: but no place sets bounds to
God; he is every where, he fills heaven and earth; the heaven, and the heaven
of heavens cannot contain him.

4. A thing is limited and bounded in respect of it is efficacy and operation.
Angels are powerful, mighty in power, yet their power is limited. Nihil agit
ultra sphaeram activitatis; Nothing can go beyond his power. The Schoolmen,
speaking of Angels in place, say, they are in loco definitive, that is, by
applying their actions to this, and not to that place: the Sun throws out his
light and heat at a great distance, yet it is bounded. Now God is infinite in
respect of efficacy, and as he is. Is there any thing too hard for me, says
the Lord? Whatsoever is possible, he can bring to pas his power is boundless,
his mercy is boundless, not only in respect of duration, but also in respect
of operation; so that God is infinite in respect of Essence, therefore
incomprehensible; infinite in respect duration, therefore eternal.

5. Intelligentia: Great things may be comprehended in the understanding of
Angels and Men, but God surpasses our understandings: It is impossible Magnus
denotat duo: magnitudinem extensionis, and magnitudinem cujustibet perfectionis
sapientiae, etc.
for Men and Angels to conceive the greatness of God: The Angels shall be
prying and prying to eternity, yet never shall they see God fully, perfectly,
and comprehensively. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, his
greatness is unsearchable, Psalm. 145. 3. When God is said to be Great, it
always notes his Infinitenes Great, beyond all conception of Angels and Men;
could they conceive his greatness, God were not Infinite.

It Is possible to search out the depth of the Sea, of the Earth, of the height
of Heaven: but God is a bottomless Ocean of Majesty and perfection; it is
impossible to reach the height, and to fathom the depth of God's Majesty; you
cannot come near him, whom no man has seen, nor can see, visione
comprehensiva, 1 Timothy 6. 16. his infinite Majesty will find the Angels and
Saints work to eternity to find him out, to comprehend him; and when they have
done what they can, they cannot comprehend him. Do not I fill heaven and earth,
says the Lord? Jer. 23. 24. The heaven is my throne, the earth is my
footstool; where is the house that ye build unto me, and where is the place of
my rest? Isa. 66. 1. Thus Zophar speaks to Job, Can thou by searching find
out God? can thou find out the Almighty to perfection? It is high as heaven,
what can thou do? deeper then hell, what can thou know? the measure thereof
is longer then the earth, and broader then the sea. Job 11. 7, 8, 9.

CHAP. IV.
I Shall now lay down several Reasons to prove that God is infinite and
incomprehensible.

1. If God were not incomprehensible, Reas. 1.
then there may be something which is extra Deum, beyond, or above, or without
God, which has not his being in God: but these places of Scripture manifest,
nothing can be above or beyound God. Psalm. 139. 7. ad 12. shows, that there
is no fleeing from God's presence, and that no creature can be where God is
not; Job 11. He is higher then the heavens, etc.

2. If God were not infinite and incomprehensible, Reas. 2.
then there would be something that is an adequate measure of his greatness: If
there be any such measure of his greatness, then it should be the Heaven of
heavens, which is of the largest capacity, seeing it contains within it is
compass, the whole created world; but this is not the measure; for behold, the
heaven of heavens cannot contain him: he is higher than the heavens, deeper
than the earth,

3. If God were not infinite, but Reas. 3.
finite, then it is possible, that God might move from place to place, as finite
bodies may.

4. If God were not infinite, then Reas. 4.
it is possible for us to conceive something may be greater than God; but it is
impossible for the understanding of Men or Angels to conceive a thing may be
greater than God: See in what manner the Prophet prays to God, and then tell
me, whether we can conceive any thing greater than he? Jer. 32. 17, 18, 19. Ah
Lord God, behold thou have made the heaven and the earth by thy great power,
and stretched-out arm, and there is nothing too hard for thee. Thou show
loving kindness to thousands, etc. The great, the mighty God, the Lord of hosts
is his name: Great in counsel, and mighty in working. For thine eyes are open
upon all the ways of the sons of men, to give every one according to his ways,
and according to the fruit of his doings. He is called, the blessed and only
Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; Who only has immortality,
dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto; whom no man has seen,
nor can see; to whom be honor, and power everlasting, Amen. 1 Timothy 6. 15, 16.

Now these three things may fully evince, that God is infinite and
incomprehensible.

1. Because God is absolutely and eminently perfect; not so much as a negative
imperfection is in God: All perfections are his essence, or rather his essence
is all perfections; all infinite power, infinite mercy, infinite justice,
infinite wisdom; therefore he is called, Pelagus essentiae, a sea of being,
(...).

We may behold great perfection in the creatures; Angels are great in power,
great in wisdom: but all the perfections that are in creatures, are but as a
drop of a bucket in comparison of the main Ocean, they are as nothing.

2. God is infinitely powerful, therefore infinite in his ess^nce: that he is
infinite in power, witness his Creation of the world; there is an act and work
proper only to infinite power, witness the upholding the whole world by the
word of his power.

3. From his great Creatures which he has made, we may apprehend the
I^finiteness of God. Quod efficit tale, est magis tale; ex pede Herculem. The
Earth and Water are a vast and great globe; the Heaven (especially the Heaven
of Heavens) is of a most vast and inconceiveable circumference; the very Sun,
and but one Star in the Heavens, is far greater then the World is; now if God
has made such great things, he must needs be infinite; see what the Scripture
speaks of the great creatures in comparison of God, Isa. 40. 10. Who has
measured the waters in the hollow of his hand? and meted out heaven with a
span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the
mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance? Behold the Nations are as a
drop of a Bucket, and accounted as the small dust of the balance, behold be
takes up the Isles as a very little thing; All Nations before him are as
nothing, they are counted to him less then nothing and vanity ver. 15. 17.

CHAP. V.
IF God be infinite, hence you may Use 1.
learn what an evil sin is; that it is an infinite evil, because it is
committed against an infinite God. We measure sin by the act, and not by the
object: the act is transient, it passes away, an idle word, a vain thought; a
vain thought, as a vain thought, is little; and so we are apt to think the sin
little, because we measure it according to the act* not by the object against
whom it is committed. Men make nothing of an Oath, of a Lie, of being drunk,
even such gross sins as these are, because they measure them by the act: but
this is but a wrong Rule to measure your actions by; you must measure sin by
the object against whom it is committed, which is God, and so every sin is an
infinite evil. Thy idle words are infinite evils, because sin^ against God;
much more thy blasphemies. Words spoken against the King, and a small wrong
done to his person, is Crimen laesae Majestatis, is high tre^son; but wor^s
spoken against an ordinary man are not so; because it is the King against whom
they are spoken, makes them treasonable, and brings death and destruction to
him that speaks them. Hence it is, that God will punish every sin with an
infinite punishment, in respect of duration: those sins of which thou make no
reckoning, the infinite God will inflict wrath upon thy soul for them. Thou
make no matter of thy idle words, and vain thoughts; oh know, that God will
punish thy idle words, and vain thoughts, with infinite wrath. Psalm. ^0. 11.
Who knows the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear so is thy
wrath.

Here is an Use of singular Comfort Use 2.
to all brokenhearted sinners: God's mercies are infinite* his mercy is
incomprehensible. You think your sins are greater then can be pardoned; yet
though thy sins be great and numberless, God's mercies are infinitely more
infinite. Thou can not out* vie God's mercies: Lay down as many sins as thou
can at st^ke, God will lay down infinite multi^udes of mercies. Turn thou
from thy wicked ways, and believe, and prove whether the Lord will not pour
down mercies, that there shall not be room enough to receive them; God will
abundantly pardon: For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways
my ways, says the Lord; For as the Heavens are higher then the earth, so are
my ways higher then your ways, and my thoughts then your thoughts. As if God
should say; your thoughts are, that you are the most notorious sinners, that
are, that your sins are unpardonable; you think with your selves, is it
possible, that such a sinner should find mercy? Will God be gracious to such a
vile wretch as I am? Thou have says God, too shallow thoughts concerning me:
my thoughts are not like thine; thy thoughts of my way of mercy are but finite
poor conceits, but my thoughts of love and mercy to broken hearted sinners that
humble themselves unfeignedly, are (like my self) infinite: I have infinite
thoughts of mercy toward you, I have infinite thoughts of mercy for you; for as
the heaven is higher then the earth, so are my ways higher then your ways, and
my thoughts higher then your thoughts. Isa. 57. 7. 8. 9. When men do think
their sins unpardonable, what do they they but make God finite? his mercies
finite, his mercies comprehensible?

3. If God be an infinite majesty; Use 3.
this may serve as an use of instruction to us.

1. Then it concerns us, to behave our selves with all humility and reverence
when we draw nigh to God: by how much greater a prince is, the more reverence
we show to him: God is great, infinite majesty, therefore worthy of all fear,
submission, and reverence* the Angels in heaven cover their faces standing in
His presence. Isa. 6. Beholding his infinite and most glorious majesty, and
their own nothing, this is Solomon's exhortation to all that pray, to consider
what a God he is to whom they pray, Eccles. 5. 2. Be not rash with thy mouth,
etc. For God is in heaven, and thou upon earth: God is a glorious infinite
majesty, thou a poor, vile worm, therefore fear and tremble before him: when he
beholds men behaving themselves irreverently, irreligiously in his worship,
he curses the man and his service. Mal. 1. 14.

2. It instructs us, what a most noble service Gods service; is; the greater
the Person is, the more noble is his service; it is far more noble to serve
Kings than to be a keeper of sheep; God is a great King, an infinite majesty,
infinitely exceeding all the Majesty and state of earthly Kings; to serve him
then, and to be his favorite, is far more noble than to serve Kings and
Emperors: Theodosius thanked God more that he was a Christian, than an
Emperor; there is no title in comparison of this, to be the servant of the
great and infinite God. Great personages can give great gifts to their
servants; but God will give infinite, eternal rewards to all his faithful
servants, not the half of his Kingdom, but his kingdom to his servants.

4. If God be infinite; it further Use 4.
teaches us three things.

1. That this great God should have all our affections pitch upon him, rooted
and established in him; he is worthy of all possible love, possible fear,
possible joy: we may over-love all things except God, we may over-love our own
selves, our wives, our children, the creatures, and sin greatly in loving them,
but we cannot over-love God: he is incomprehensible in respect of our love to
him, as well as in our conceiving of him: God is worthy of more love, than your
hearts are capaple of love. The Angels and blessed Saints burn with Love, and
shall burn with love to him to all eternity, and yet they shall never love him
enough: God is infinitely good, infinitely glorious, and therefore deserves
infinite love; and indeed none love God with a comprehensive love but himself.
If ye were the sons of a Father who is infinitely wise, infinitely powerful,
infinitely blessed and glorious, how would your natural love be toward him;
such a one is the Lord our God.

2. It teaches us whether we should go for satisfaction, even to God who i^
infinite, and therefore can satisfy the vast desires of man: We see finite
things cannot satisfy; we spend ou^ thoughts and strength to seek satisfaction
in the creatures, and all in vain, because they are vanity, finite things
cannot satisfy our infinite desires. It Is God that is infinite, that fills
Heaven, he can fill our hearts with all desirable and possible good: The whole
soul will be satisfied with God; he will fill the understanding with knowledge,
as he is infinite in wisdom; he will fill the will and affections with good, as
he is infinitely good: The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with
hearing, nor the heart with desiring, because when a man has seen and heard
many things, God will satisfy both ear, eye and heart, Psalm. 17. 15.

3. It shows the wretched madness of most men, who spend all their thoughts,
time, affections and labor about poor finite transitory things, as worldly
Glory, Honors, Riches, etc. and neglect God, and embrace these shadows, these
dreams, before an infinite God, in whom is infinite Glory, Honor, Riches; who
is an infinite treasure of all perfections: If God be thy portion, then have
thou infinite Honors, Riches, because thou have an infinite God; if thou
enjoyest the world, and have a world of Honors, of Riches, and all worldly
Goods, and have no interest in God, nor right to him; thou art infinitely poor,
wretched and miserable. It is St. Augustins Meditation, Should I hear God say
to a man, here are Riches for thee, there are Honors for thee, live every day
as merry as the Sunshine, but nunquam videbis faciem meam, thou shall never see
my face, I should say, much good may the World do such a man, I should not envy
him. A godly man on a Dunghill, is better than Ahashuerosh in all his Glory:
Paul and Silas did sing in the Dungeon, because they had God there; when
Belshazzer (wanting him) did tremble in his Palace in the midst of his mirth
and music.

If God be an infinite God, then let Use 5.
this great God be thy confidence; he is infinite in power, trust to him, he is
able to do what is possible to be done for thy good, he can do more than thou
can a^k or think. He is infinitely wise, therefore can order, dispose all
things aright, though for the present they go cross to thy hopes and desires,
yet in the event they shall be for thy good: He is infinitely good; trust to
him in thy wants, he can fill thy heart with good, thy Barns, thy Purse with
good.

God being a great God, must be Use 6.
greatly praised, it is the Psalmists own use, Psalm. 145. 3. Great is the Lord,
and greatly to he praised. We use to praise great things that are good and
excellent; we use to praise and commend wise powerful things; the Lord is great
and infinite in power, wisdom, goodness, give him the glory of his greatness:
whatsoever excellencies are in the creatu^e, consider how all are eminently,
infinitely in God; the World is great, but God is greater.

A Discourse of Gods Omnipresence.
Jer. 23. 23, 24. Am I a God at hand, says the Lord, and not a God afar off?
Can any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see him? Do not I fill
Heaven and earth, says the Lord?
CHAP. I.
I Proceed from God's Infiniteness, to his Ubiquity or Omnipresence, which well
follows from his Immensity and Infinitenes for if Gods Essence be infinite,
bounded with no place, then God must needs be essentially present everywhere.

In these words, the Prophet confuteth that gross and Atheistical conceit both
of Hypocrites and wicked men: That God takes notice of things that are done
near him, but not of things afar off; of things done in public view, not in
secret; he may behold Absalom committing wickedness on the housetop before the
Sun, but beholds not what men in their secret closets, and in dark places do
act; they think God can no more behold them in the dark, than men can do. The
Prophet, or God by him testifies to these Atheists, that he is a God afar off,
as well as at hand; he beholds and sees what is done in the earth, as well as
what is done in the Heavens; and is as present to thee, when thou think thy
self afar off from him, as when thou wast more nigh.

Suppose thou hidest thy self in secret places, thinking that thou may hide
thy self and actions from his sight, it is in vain: Go, sly, hide thy self
under Mountains, or ar deep as the center of the earth, or wrap thy self up in
Clouds, yet the Lord is present, and beholds thee, and will judge and damn thee
for thy secret sins. Here God gives a reason why he is a God afar off, as well
as at hand, and sees what men do in every secret place, because he fills
Heaven and earth, he is in all places.

CHAP. II.
HEnce I Note, That God is everywhere Observe.
present: This point I will first prove by Scripture, Psalm. 139. from 7. to the
13. verse. In the foregoing verse he shows, how God knew his down-sitting,
and up-rising, and all his thoughts, all his words, all his actions; not a
thought, word or action, but God knew them altogether; God besets us behind,
before, on each side, he compasses us about, therefore he sees all. Whither
shall I go from thy Spirit? that is, from Gods knowledge, and understanding of
his ways: If I ascend into Heaven, thou art there; that is, the place of thy
special residence: If I make my Bed in Hell.] Hell is taken for the Grave: If I
should be buried as deep as the center of the earth, behold there thou art,
Ver. 3. If I take the mings of the Morning.] He alludes to the swift spreading
of the light of the Sun, which at daybreak, in a moment spreads from East to
West: If I should in a moment fly from one part of the World to another, yet I
could not fly from thy presence: If men think the darkness shall cover them,
the Night shines as the day; darkness and light are both alike. Thou have
possessed my reins.] Thou can not fly away from God, God has possession of
thee, God is more present to thee, than thy own soul is. Though they dig into
Hell, thence shall mine hand take them; though they climb up to Heaven, thence
will I bring them down; and though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I
will search and take them out thence; and though they be hid from my sight in
the bottom of the Sea etc. Am^s 9. 2, 3. It shows there is no escaping of
Gods judgment, when he comes forthtvisit the iniquities of rebellious persons.
God is said not to be far from every one of us, for in him we live and move,
and have our being: In him, Tanquam domicilio nos capiente, undique ambiente;
God is thorough and thorough every one of us, we are in him, and he in us, Acts
17. 27, 28.

The World is in God, as a little Sponge in the v^st Sea; the Ocean compasses
it round about, and does penetrate every part of the Sponge; or as a little
Glass in the light of the Sun* the light is within it, and without it, pierces
through every part of it, and it is diffused round about it: Thus God is within
every creature; is more present to the creature, than the creature is to it
self; he is within thy spirit, thy soul, and each particle of every thing; thy
soul is more present to thee than: thy body. God is more present to thee than
thine own soul.

CHAP. III.
IN the handling of this Attribute, I will show what Gods Omnipresence is in
diverse particulars; then answer some Objections or Questions, and so make use
of the point.

A thing is said to be in place three ways.

1. Circumscriptive; so all bodies are in place, circumscribed with local
terms, so lim^te^ in this place, as they cannot be in another place at* the
same time; one part of the body is beyond another and each part has its
cer^ain dimensions.

2. Definitiv^; so Angels are in place, who have not one part of their being
beyond another, as bodies have ^ but in respect of their being and operation
are in this o^ that place, as they cannot be at the same time in another place.

3. Repl^tiv^^ filling every place, o^ possessing all places real and
imaginary, ye^* beyond all imaginary places: So God is in place, filling
Heaven, ^^^th, Hell, all imaginary places, and beyond all imaginary places.
Take these Propositions.

1. God is in all places at once; bodie^ P^op. 1.
may remove from place to place, Angels may remove from place to place, from
Heaven to Earth, from Earth to Heaven again, from this place to another place:
but God is in all places at once; he fills Heaven and Earth, and Hell at once,
and is immovable, he does not move from place to place. Wicked men may run
from one part of the world to the other, climb up to Heaven, hide themselves in
the bottom of the Sea, but cannot go from him* God is in all these places at
once.

2. God is wholly everywhere; Prop. 2.
whole God is in Heaven; whole God in earth; when we say God is everywhere, we
must not conceive* that part of God is here, and part of God in another place;
part in Heaven, part in earth, part in every creature; but all God, or whole
God is in Heaven, is in earth, is everywhere: neither must we conceive that
God* is more in this place, more in that place; a greater part of God in the
greater part of the World, and a lesser part of God in the lesser part of the
World: but as the Philosophers say of the Soul of man, that it is tota in toto,
and tota in qualibe^ part, it is all in all, and all in every part; so whole
God is in Heaven, and in earth, and whole God is in every part, he is totaliter
totus, in every place. 3. Though God ^e every where, and Prop. 3.
in every creature; yet God is not part of the creatu^e, nor is he defiled with
the filthy creatures: though God be present tot^e wicked, and in the wicked,
yet not defiled with them: but God subsisteth in h^s glorious purity* separated
from all. God is conjunct^ ssimu^ and remotissimus* praesentissimus and
segregatissimus: He is most near, as a man cannot be nearer to himself, than
God is to him, yet God is infinitely remote from the creature, in respect of
defilement from them, and being part of them.

CHAP. IV.
AGain, God is present three ways.

1. Per Potentiam, by his Power, upholding, governing, preserving all things:
In him we live, move, and have our being; ^e^ause he is present, he gives life
to every living thing, motion to every moving thing, and prese^veth every thing
in their being: God works everywhere, having all creatures in subjection to
him.

2. God is everywhere, per inspectionem, in respect of his knowledge: All
things are naked, and bare before him: God beholds all things, actions,
persons, thoughts, speeches, gestures, yea every creature at all times
everywhere by one single view, and not one thing after another successively as
we do: He beholds all things; thy secret thoughts and intents, thy hidden
purposes, and the n^mble and qu^ck motions of thy heart are as clear and n^ked,
and visible to God, as the Moon in the clear Sky is to our eyes, and far more
manifest and open to him.

3. God is everywhere present, per Essentiam, by his Ess^nce: His Essence fills
Heaven and Earth; he is essentially present to every Creature, and in every
Creature: The two former ways may be without an ^^ima^e presence, as the Sun
is many thousand Miles distant from the earth, yet in respect of his light and
heat, is present to the earth: A man may behold things afar off: but now God is
indistantially present in every place; he is not a God afar off from any place,
creature or person* but is intimately and essentially present in every place,
in every creature, in every person: so that when we say, God is every where
present, we mean the Divine Essence is totally present in every place, and in
every Creature at once.

CHAP. V.
THere is good reason why God Reas. 1.
should be in every place.

1. God being an infinite, great, and incomprehensible God, no place can
possibly comprehend him, then must he needs be present everywhere; for either
God is nusquam, or alicubi, or ubiqu^: No where, in some certain place, or
everywhere: You cannot say he is nowhere, for then there is no God; You cannot
say he is in some certain place, for then he should ^e a finite God, limited
and circumscribed with local terms; therefore he must be ubiqu^, every where,
filling all places a^ once; an infinite Being must needs be every where. And in
this God does infinitely excel all creatures whatsoever; the Air is every
where, but yet only in it is own region; the Waters of the Sea are every where
in the depth, but yet wirhin it is bounds; the light of the Sun is of creatures
most diffusive, and extended over the whole Hemisphere, yet the diffusion of it
is bounded, the solid Earth is the bounds of it; but God is in Heaven, Earth,
Hell, in all places, beyond all imagination, at once, fully, and unlimitedly.

2. Because every man, and whatsoever Reas. 2.
every man does think, speak, or do, is in the presence of God, is before God;
therefore God is omnipresent. How is it possible, that all the godly should
walk before him at once, and do all that they do in his presence, if God were
not omnipresent, present with them, and beholding them? Enoch, Abraham, David,
did walk before him, and all the godly do walk before him. So, as to the wicked
themselves, all that they do, think, or speak, is before him. And this shows,
that God is infinitely present in every man, and to every man; yea, he is more
near to us than our selves are, because he knows the thoughts of man what
they are: all thy proud thoughts, ^ll thy adulterous thoughts are before him,
and not a word droppeth from thy tongue, but he hears it altogether.

The Lord is said to see in secret: all thy secret filthiness acted in the
darkest corners, dens, caves, and holes, deserts and wildernesses, the Lord
beholds. Imagine the Adulterer had his Dalilah with him, as deep as the
center of the earth, yet all would be acted before the Lord. Seeing then thou
can not do any thing any where, at any time, but it is before God, he must
needs be omnipresent. Darkness is as bright as noon to him; therefore in vain
does the Adulterer wait for the twilight; the hidden and secret holes are as
open to him as the tops of houses and mountains; therefore in vain do men hide
their lewdness from God: Thou can go no where and sin, but it is in the
presence of a glorious God.

CHAP. VI.
BEfore I make Application, it will be needful to answer some Questions about
God's omnipresence.

1. If God be every where present, Quest. 1.
how is it said, that God is in heaven? as we say in the Preface of the Lord's
Prayer, Our Father which art in Heaven. And Psalm. 115. 3. Our God is in heaven.
These seem to denote, that God is only in heaven.

I answer, First, in respect of his Sol. 1.
Divine Essence, God is as much in Earth, in Hell, every where, as he is in
Heaven; God is totus ubique, whole God is every where.

2. God is said to be in heaven, (...) by way of eminency and excellency, in
two respects.

1. Because in heaven he lays open and displayeth the full brightness of all
his glorious perfections to the view of glorified Saints and Angels: there they
behold him face to face, and stand continually in his blessed presence, in
which presence there is fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.
11. The beholding of God's Majesty in heaven, is the eternal happiness, life,
glory of his elect.

In Earth God does not show the brightness of his glory; the most that we
behold of God, is but his backparts; some beams of his Divine glory in his Word
and Ordinances, in his Creatures: and as for hell, his presence is terrible to
the damned, he displayeth his full wrath and vengeance to them; they see not a
glimpse of his glory, his face and his favor is eternally hidden from them.
That Is the meaning of that place in 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. where it is said of the
wicked, that they shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord; that is, from the presence of his favor, love, mercy,
goodness, glory, in which is fullness of joy and life for evermore, God is
present in heaven, present in hell: his presence in heaven is joyous, as the
presence of a King to a Favorite; his presence in hell i^ most terrible, as
the presence of a King to a Traitor.

2. God is said to be in Heaven, to show the vastness of his dominion over all
things in heaven, in earth, and under the earth. Heaven is the Royal Throne of
his Kingdom, his ^ear, his Palace, his Court of Residence, Psalm. 103. 19. The
Lord has prepared his throne in the heavens. Thus says the Lord, The heaven
is my thron^, Isa. 66. 1. The earth in comparison of heaven is his footstool.
Hence it is, that God is said to dwell in heaven, to sit in heaven, to reign in
heaven.

2. If God be every where present, Quest. 2.
ho^ is it then that God is said to dwell in his Sain^s, but for the wicked, he
knows them afar off?

I answe^, God is essentially and indistanti^lly Sol.
present to the wicked, as well as to, and in the godly; God is the preserver
of both in their beings; in him both the godly and the wicked live, mov^, and
have their b^ing: But God is said to dw^ll in the godly by the presence of his
grace, by the presence of his comfortable favor, and in respect of his rule
and government of their heart; the hearts of his Saints are his Throne, Palace,
Seat, and House, as Heaven; therefore every godly man's heart is an heaven, Et
Deus in illo coelo. 2 Cor 6. 16. he is said to dwell in them, and walk in them.
But so he is not present to the wicked; they are vo^d of all grace, their
hearts are very dens, and prisons, and very hells of sin, the throne of Satan
the Prince of the Air, by whom they are ruled, and led captive at his pleasure,
Ephesians. 2. 2.

It is said of Stephen that his heart was full of the holy Ghost, but of
Ananias it is said, that Satan had filled his heart. Act. 5. A wicked man is
full of the devil, and in this respect God is said to know the wicked afar off,
he looks on them, and all that they do as hateful abominations. They are said
to be without Christ, and without God in this world: So th^ugh God be present*
to the wicked, and in the wicked, yet he dwells not in them: the presence of
his essence notes not God's dwelling, but his dwelling is the efficacious work
of his sanctifying and quickening spirit, his supping with his Saints.

3. If God be every where present, Quest. 3.
then how is it said, that God departs from us, and comes unto us?

God does not depart and come Sol*
in respect of his essence, but in respect of his efficacy or working: God is
said to draw nigh to his servants; when he gives them the sense of his gracious
presence, the comfortable sense of his favor, and quickening their hearts to
run the way of Gods commandments, and vouchsa^ing his p^esence with them in
duties* God departs from his servants, when he withdraws the presence of his
^avour, the sen^^ of his grace, and the quickening ve^^ud of his spirit, upon
which follows ^^s^^al ^ears, horror, and sadness of heart, and then their
^^uls (like Pharaoh's wheels) drive heavily in du^^^s: when God thus dea^eth
with his servants; he is said to hide himself, and to cast them out of his
presence.

Again God is said to draw nigh to the wicked, when he knocks at the doors of
their souls by the motions of his spi^^t for entrance, or when he breaks open
the door, and comes in, and casts out Satan and changes their heart.

And he is said to depart from the wicked, when his Spirit cease to strive
with them any longer, and leaves them in their hardness, and and blindness,
^o be blinded and hardened more, and gives them up to their lusts, and to
Satan, and to be ruled and swayed by them.

4. How is it said that Cain went Quest. 4.
out from the presence of the Lord, seeing God is present every where?

There is a double presence of God; Sol^.
his Universal presence; his special presence; his universal presence, the
presence of hi^ essence Cain could not, nor can any man ^^y from* but as to his
special presence among his sai^^s, and in his ordinan^es, so Cain went from
God's presence ^^ when he left society with Adam, he forsook the presence of
God in the Assembly of his Saints, he forsook the Church and worship of God,
the place where he dwells: thus every man that absents himself from the
communion of Saints in public worship, goes out from the presence of the
Lord: As often as any one purposely absenteth himself from the hearing of the
word, and the public worship, he goes from the presence of God; hence the
public worship and the coming to the ordinances are called our appearing
before God. Psalm. 84. 7. this is called the face of God, an^ the beauty of the
Lord, Psalm. 27 4.

CHAP. VII.
1. THis shows the sottish Atheism Use 1.
of many wicked persons, who if they can sin in secret from the sight of mortal
men, promise themselves security and safety from punishment, persuading
themselves that the immortal eye of the holy God, who cannot endure to behold
sin, can no more see them in thee dark or in secret, than the mortal eyes of
man. Oh tremble rather, for here is matter of terror to such; your sins and
your persons are always before God; he sees thy secret sins acted in thy
bosom; thy heartpride, thy heart covetousness, thy heart-adultery, thy
heart-murther, as well as the outward act: he sees thy filthy thoughts, as well
as thy filthy actions, and hears every word spoken by thee.

Thy sins committed in the dark at midnight, are all open to him, as thy sins
committed at noon day in the face of the sun: thy sins acted in the most secret
place that can be found, are open before him, as well as Absolo^s* adultery
acted on the house top: as it is said of Nimrod, he was a mighty hunter before
the Lord, so of the secret Adulterer, the speculative adulterer, he is a mighty
adulterer before the Lord: so of the secret drunkard, he is a mighty drunkard
before the Lord: therefore in vain do men dig deep to hide their counsels from
him; in vain does the Adulteress wipe her mouth, and say she has done no
evil; seeing all that men or women think, speak or do in public, in secret, at
midnight, and at noon, is before the Lord, who is more than a thousand
eyewitnesses, more then if thou should act sin upon a public Stage in open
market.

Then, if thy sins be acted before God, never imagine thou art free from
vengeance; thy person is always before the sin-revenging God, who will not
acquit the guilty; but be sure O sinner, his vengeance will pursue thee and
overtake thee, and never leave till it has destroyed thee with an everlasting
destruction: as the Prophet speaks of an impossibility of escaping his
presence; the like may be said of his wrath; neither shall the wicked fly from
his wrath: though the wicked be hid from his fight in the bottom of the Sea,
thence the Lord says, he will command the Serpent, and it shall bite them: and
though they go into captivity before their enemies, thence he says, he will
command the sword, and it shall slay them. Amos. 9. 3. 4* God will command this
and that Plague to destroy them: he that fills Heaven and earth with his
Essence, is able to fill all sinful places with his wrath.

2. The consideration of Gods Omnipresence, Use 2.
should be a Curb to restrain and keep us back from committing sin; we cannot
sin but in his presence: if it were possible for thee to find out a place where
God is not, then and there thou might take liberty to sin, and there thou
may commit folly securely: but dic ubi non est Deus? said the Philosopher to
one, who asked, Where is God? Tell me, says he, where God is not?

It was a Philosophers advice to some, That if they would keep themselves from
Vanity and Folly, they should always imagine some severe Cato were beholding
them; he had well said, if he had counseled them to have set God always
before their eyes.

What preserved Joseph from yielding to the adulterous Temptations of his
unchaste Mistress, having a fair opportunity to act in secret? How shall I do
this wickedness, and sin against God? Genesis 39. 9. As if he had said, Though my
Master and all his Servants behold us not, yet God whom I fear and serve,
beholds me, how shall I sin in his presence? If we did reason thus with our
selves, we should vanquish temptations; and though we have the fairest
opportunities to commit sin, yet we should stand in awe of him, and not sin.

Why do wicked men take liberty to sin? It Is because the fear of God is not
before their eyes. The Adulterer considers not, that he is sinning before God,
and doing of that in his presence, which he durst not do* before a child: Why
do men harbor such unclean thoughts in their hearts, and make their very
hearts the Bawd, Whoremonger and Brothel-house, it is because they consider
not, they act this filthiness before the Lord. A young man being importuned by
a Whore to lie with her, told her, he would, if she would go with him to a
place where he should Cas^ian. Collat.
lead her; she asked whether he would go? he said, to the Marketplace; she
replied, there every one will see us: Then said he, go into the most secret
place thou can find out, and God will see us. You that take liberty to commit
secret sins, who, if you can keep your selves from the sight of men, regard not
what wickedness you act in the presence of God, let me tell you, That secret
sinners are as notorious and desperate Atheists, as the most shameless
Drunkard, and open-mouthed blasphemer: To this purpose I desire you seriously
to consider these things.

1. No sin is secret, or can be acted in secret, because in the presence of
God, who is more than a million of Witnesses. What sins are more secret than
our wanton thoughts, our proud or worldly thoughts, than our vain thoughts; yet
even these God knows altogether, not a thought, but is present before him:
Thou have possessed my reins, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 139. 13. God has
possession of our hearts, they are all naked before him.

2. There Is no secret sin, but God will bring forth to public Judgment: There
is a day when God shall judge the secrets of all men by Jesus Christ, according
to the Gospel, Romans 2. 16. Secret sinners think their secrecy will keep them
from open shame, and public punishment; no, God will judge thee for thy secret
sins before men and Angels: They are apt to bless God they were honest with
their bodies, but God will tell thee thou had not an honest heart, whiles
thou actedst such secret sins, and therefore he will condemn thee: What will be
the shame of all those at that great day, but the ripping up of their secret
sins? What will the Lord then say? You thought th^se men to be holy men,
because you saw nothing but what was commendable in their outward Conversation,
but yet in my presence they took liberty to be drunk, to be adulterous, proud,
covetous, etc. That chaste man, as you thought him, was in his heart a most
vile Adulterer, Sodomite, incestuous wretch, as any damned Sodomite: That sober
man, as you took him to be, was in his heart a vile profane Drunkard, as any
damned Drunkard: They have acted these things in the presence of me their God,
which they durst not act in the presence of man: I was made no more reckoning
of by them, than as a blind God, a careless, regardless God; rather an approver
of them in their sins, than an hater of them.

CHAP. VIII.
3. HEnce we may learn the infinite Use 3.
patience and forbearance of God; how patient he is, seeing all sin is acted in
his presence, and yet the Lord breaks not forth into fury, to consume the
ungodly in a moment? O consider how many thousands of drunkards are reeling and
spewing before Gods face from day to day! How many millions of Swearers, do
daily blaspheme the dreadful and glorious Name of the Lord our God! How many
thousand shameless Adulterers, delight in chambering and wantonness! Lay to
heart, how the whole world of ungodly men, do daily act their Villainies before
the face of God! He upholds the World, feeds, cloatheth, fills the world with
mercies; whereas he might bring a flood to drown the World, or rain down fire
and brimstone to destroy the World in a moment: Could a man endure this? If God
were man, then you Drunkards had been damned before now; but surely God is not
man, therefore ye are not consumed.

Can a father always bear with a prodigal son, that shall go to Taverns and
Alehouses, and waste his means, and run in debt, and he often pay all, and no
sooner is the debt paid, but he runs further into debt again? Or can a father
endure to see his child lie and tumble in the midst of a dirty hole, though he
take him out, w^sh his clothes, and put on him clean vestures, yet he again
runs into the place, and there souls them before his fathers face: Thus do
wretched men before God, they wallow in sinful abominations; wicked men tumble
and plunge themselves in the mire of* sin before the face of God, and yet the
Lord breaks not forth into fury. What King would endure to hear a Shimei
always railing against him to his face? yet God suffers the Swearer, the
Blasphemer, the Scorner to abuse him to his face. What King would endure Rebels
and Traitors to act Treason continually, when it is in his power to take away
their lives presently? yet God does patiently bear with many millions of men,
that rebel daily against his Laws and Government, who could in a moment turn
all the ungodly into hell; this is strong conviction, that God is infinitely
patient and long-suffering.

4. If God be Omnipresent, it should Use 4.
instruct us in diverse things.

1. It should teach us to be conscious of private duties, as well as public;
of prayer in our Closets, the door being shut upon us, as of prayer in the open
Congregation: God is present to us, and with us in our private Closets, as in
the public house of prayer.

2. To be the same in our private duties, as in our public services; as
reverent, as fervent, as devout and heavenly in the corner, as on the housetop,
because all is done in the presence of God, who abhors public fervency, and
open devotion, when he sees private profaneness, and secret coldness and
remissness.

3. It should teach us to be square in all our aims, and intentions in our
duties: Outward pretenses are no cloak to hide rotten aims from God; all
Hypocrites show extreme folly, when they think with Adam, to hide themselves
among Trees, and to cover themselves with fig leaves from the presence of the
Lord, none (to speak properly) are Hypoc^ites before God; Hypocrisy is many
times godliness in man's eye, but open profaneness in the sight of God. When you
do duties, God looks to your heart and rei^s, to the integrity of your
hearts: Thy spirit and soul, is as naked in Gods eyes, as thy most glorious
performances, all the rottenness and filth of painted Sepulchers are still in
the Nostrils of God.

4. It should teach us to come with preparedness to duties, because we go into
the presence of an holy God, Eccles. 5. 1. The Bride puts on her robes to meet
her Bridegroom; the King looks upon his guests to see if they come with
wedding garments: I will be sanctified by all them that draw nigh unto me, Lev.
10. 3.

5. It shows us that we may pray to God in any place: I will that men pray
everywhere, lifting up holy hands, etc. 1 Timothy 2. 8. We need not tie God to any
place, but in all places, and at all times, we may and must lift up pure hands,
because God is always everywhere present: Then need we not to direct our
prayers to any Saint or Angel, what need such Will Worship? when as God that
hears our prayers, is always nigh to all that call upon him. There is as
great a distance between us and the glorified Saints, as the highest Heaven is
from the earth; we may cry to them from morning to evening, and be no more
comforted, than Baal's Priests were, when they cried from Morning until Noon, O
Baal hear us.

CHAP. IX.
THe next Use shall be of Exhortation Use 5. 5.
to diverse things.

1. To walk continually in uprightness, and sincere affection, as in the
presence of God: How do Angels live? how do glorified Saints live? how holy,
how pure, how heavenly are they, because they stand continually before God?
Therefore I say to you, as God to Abraham, Be thou perfect; though we cannot
attain to Angelica^ perfection, yet labor to walk in perfection of sincerity,
because God besets thee behind and before, and observes thy uprising, and
down-lying.

2. To keep a strict watch over our hearts: Keep thy heart above all keeping,
because God has possession of thy heart: Look to thy thoughts, intentions and
purposes: What shall thy heart be a Den, a Sty, a Thorow-fare for vain
thoughts, proud thoughts, unclean thoughts? Beloved Hearers! Are ye not ashamed
to speak openly what your hearts do meditate upon? and are ye not ashamed then
to lodge such thoughts in Gods presence, who is and will be a Witness and a
Judge of your thoughts? A vain mind is a very Atheistical mind; he that is
proud in his thoughts, Adulterous in his thoughts, is a very Atheist in his
mind: God does in effect say to every sinner, I am God, and know your thoughts,
and will judge your thoughts; I can see the world in thy thoughts; I can see
pleasures* profits, vanities in thy thoughts; I can see thy Whores, thy cups,
thy companions in thy thoughts, but God is not in all thy thoughts: God is most
present, and yet he is a stranger to thee.

3. Be careful to approve your selves to God in an holy Conversation; though
the World scoff at you, account you as Hypocrites, for Humorists, yet be
zealous for God, let the World judge as they please: Say as David to Michal, It
is before the Lord, I will be holy I will be zealous.

4. It should encourage us to be abundant in private duties: What! though the
World behold you not praying, giving Alms, you have God beholding you in
secret, who is more than a world of eyewitnesses? not an holy thought of God
(then which nothing can be more private) shall go unrewarded: Behold who is
coming to give his sincere servants public rewards of glory for private
service; let Pharisees have their loud Trumpets to sound forth their Alms, God
will be thy Trumpetter to speak forth thy private duties, that Heaven, Earth
and Hell shall ring of it, Angels and Saints, Devils and wicked men shall hear
what thou did for God, how uprightly thou did serve him, and walkedst in
sincerity before him.

6. If God be Omnipresent, then Use 6.
here is matter of singular comfort to the godly in all afflictions; he is and
will be a present help to thee in all places, in all troubles; why should ye be
terrified with fears of evil, when as God is present? Art thou a close
Prisoner, and in Bonds for Christ's sake, God is present with thee in Prison?
Nunquam minus solus quam cum solus: A close Prisoner of Jesus Christ may say,
he is never less alone, than when alone: When thy Father and Mother shall
forsake thee, or cannot, or will not own thee, help thee, and be present with
thee, God is then present. Do evil men plot thy destruction, or thy trouble,
they cannot harm thee, because God is present? If thou should run through St.
Paul's troubles, all kind of troubles in all places, God says to thee, as Ruth
to Naomi, Where thou go, thither will I go; where thou dwell, Isa. 42. 1,
2
there will I dwell, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. Fear not, O
Israel, for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name, thou art
mine: When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and through
the rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou walk through the fire
thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. David was
resolved against all fears of man, and of all evil, Psalm. 118. 6, 7. The Lord
is on my side, I will not fear what man can do unto me; the Lord takes my part
with them that help me, therefore shall I see my desire upon mine enemy. A
midst thine enemies, thou shall have his presence of protection; in thy
troubles thou shall have the presence of his supporting comforts; in thy
temptations the presence of his grace; in thy death the presence of his Spirit,
the presence of his comforts and joyous favor; and after death thou shall
enjoy the presence of his glory, in which there is fullness of joy, and life for
evermore.

A Discourse of Gods Omniscience.
Psalm. 94. 8, 9, 10. Understand, O ye brutish among the people, and ye fools,
when will ye be wise? He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? He that
formed the eye, shall he not see? He that chastises the Heathen, shall not he
correct? He that teaches man knowledge, shall not he know?
CHAP. I.
FRom God's Omnipresence, I proceed to his Omniscience: for seeing all things
are done in his presence, he cannot but know all things, he being intimately
and indistantially present to every creature, and in every creature, he must
necessarily know the creatures, and all their actions, inward, outward, in all
circumstances. Now for the coherence and opening of these words.

In the two first Verses, the Psalmist makes earnest request to God, to whom
all vengeance belongs, that being Ju^ge of the world, he would lift up his
iron rod of vengeance, and break to piec^s the proud of the earth. In the five
following Verses, he describes the wicked, upon whom he prays divine vengeance
may fall.

1. They were proud and insolent, boasting of their own heart's desire,
triumphing in their ungodly courses. v. 4, 5

2. They were such, who for a long season, had abused the patience of God:
therefore the Prophet cries out, How long, Lord, shall the wicked thus triumph?
They grow the more wicked and insolent, because thou Lord take not vengeance;
long impunity breed's impenitency and impudency; Therefore how long, Lord,
shall the wicked triumph? how long shall they utter and speak hard things, etc.

3. They are such as tyranically and barbarously abuse the people of God, l^ke
wild Bores in the Lord's Vineyard, treading down his people like mire in the
streets, miserably affl^cting and persecuting them: They break in pieces thy
people, O Lord, and afflict thine heritage; They slay the widow and the
stranger, and murder the fatherless, Verse. 5, 6. where he amplifieth their
barbarous cruelty, in that they spare none; unto the destitute widows, the poor
fatherless children, the helpless and friendless strangers, to whom all
compassion should be shown, they show cruelty.

In the seventh verse, is the depth and height of their impiety, the fountain
of all their impudency and cruelty and ungodliness, viz. they persuade
themselves, that God beholds them not, and what they do in earth: They say, the
Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it. Hence they run
into all wickedness with greediness, and resolve so to do; because they think
God knows not them, nor their mischievous doings, and so they shall escape
divine vengeance.

Now in the Text, the Psalmist upbraids them for that Atheism, and tells them,
that God takes notice of all their wickedness he understands and knows all
that they do, and will take vengeance on them.

Understand, O ye brutish among the people.] By brutish some understand the
ordinary common people of the world: But it is rather meant of those men,
whether high or low, noble or base, rich or poor, that are Enemies to God's
people, and yet think God sees them not acting their wickedness he says of
such, they are no better then brute creatures, they know God no more than the
Horse, or the brutish Ass.

Understand] that is, know, and take this for an undoubted truth, that the Lord
sees and knows what ye do. Now see how he does illustrate and prove it.

He that planted the ear, shall not he hear?] He that gives man the hearing
ear, he much more must hear [himself;] there is for all your words, your hard,
proud, and ungodly speeches.

He that formed the eye, shall not he see?] He that gives man the seeing eye,
shall not he much more see? there is for all your actions.

He that chastises the heathen, shall not ^he correct?] He that has taken
vengeance upon others, that has drowned the World, burnt up Cities with fire
and brimstone, shall not he take vengeance upon such proud, insolent wretches
as ye are?

He that teaches man knowledge, shall not he know?] i. e. He that has given
to man an understanding faculty, whereby he is able to know and perceive
things, shall not he much more know what is done? the Lord knows your vain
thoughts, verse. 11. much more your outward actions.

CHAP. II.
SO then from these words [ hear,] [see] and [ know] I purpose to handle the
glorious perfection of God's Wisdom and Knowledge. Thence I observe,

That God is an all-knowing and wise Observe.
God. You see here, how God knows all our words, actions, and thoughts; for
proof of the Point, read Job 28. 23, 24. God sees and knows all things far
and near, all that is under the heavens, as well as above the heavens: All
things are naked, and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do, Heb.
4. 13. that is, all things are known of him perfectly and evidently, the (...)
with (...) all things that are, with the causes and reasons of things. Act. 15.
18. Known unto God from the beginning of the world are all his works. I shall
fu^ther prove the Point in the explication of God's Omniscience, which I will
plainly thus describe.

God's knowledge, is that glorious Descript.
Attribute whereby he perfectly knows all things whatsoever. Here I will show
^hree things; 1. Some Distinctions of God's Knowledge; 2. The Object of his
Knowledge; 3. The manner and Properties of this his Knowledge.

As to the distinctions of Gods knowledge.

1. There is scientia simplicis intelligentiae, which is the knowledge of things
that were, are, or shall be, or may be, though actually it shall never come to
pass: whatsoever his power can do, he knows many things he can do, which he
will not do, these he perfectly knows.

2. There is scientia Visionis, which is God's knowledge of all things, that
were, are, or shall be, because they are necessary, free or contingent: This
knowledge in respect of things to come, is called praescience or foreknowledg,
but in respect of things past and present it is called knowledge. There is this
difference between Gods knowledge and foreknowledg of things.

1. His knowledge, is general of all things whatsoever; his foreknowledg, is of
things to come.

2. His knowledge, is of objects internal and extrinsecal; his fore knowledge, is
only of extrinsecall objects.

3. Knowledge is properly in God, fore knowledge is improperly in him, because
it is in respect of things themselves, and in respect of us.

Again, Gods knowledge, is

General. Special.
General; so he knows all things whatsoever; every creature, the causes and
Eminenter novit omnia in s^ip so ut in causa, an t^cedenter in rebus s^cundis,
praesenter in s^i^sis: infallibiliter novit omnia p^opter insinitatem and
immutahilitatem essentiae.
reasons of all in himself, in themselves, in their causes with their
circumstances: he knows all things in himself, as in the first cause eminently,
antecedently in second causes, at present in the things themselves: he knows
all things by reason of the infiniteness and immutability of his essence, so he
knows them infallibly.

His knowledge is also special: and so it is of the elect and reprobate of what
Men or Angels do think: This again is twofold, either general, of all Men and
Angels; or special: so he is said only to know his elect, which is a knowledge
with special love and approbation of their persons and actions, Psalm. 1. 6. The
Lord knows the way of the righteous, that is with a knowledge of approbation.

CHAP. III. Of the Objects of Gods knowledge.
NOw for the Objects of God's knowledge: In a word! omnescibile, whatsoever can
be known he knows, but I will rank the objects of his knowledge into these
three heads.

1. He knows all things that are past, as if they were now present: Psa. 90. 8.
All thy sins secret and public, long ago committed are before God, as if they
were now in acting, thy adultery, thy oaths, thy drunkenness committed 10. or
20. years agone: Thou have set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in
the light of thy countenance.

2. God knows all creatures, all things present: here I shall speak
especially of his knowledge in reference to man. 1. He knows all our works,
there is nothing thou can do, or do, whether in the light or in the dark,
in closets or in the house tops; but he knows it. Rev. 3. 1. Thus says he that
has the seven spirits of God, and the seven stars, to the Angel of the Church*
in Sardis, I know thy works, etc. I know what manner of works they are.

2. The Lord knows our hearts; he knows the sinfulness of the heart, he knows
the deceitfulness of the heart, he knows what abominations are in the heart.
The heart of man is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who
can know it? he answers, I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, even
to give every man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his
doings. Jerem. 17. 9. 10. The Lord knows all the errors and sins which thou
did act in thy heart; who can understand* his error. says David cleanse thou
me from the secret faults. Psalm. 19. 12. They are a people that do err in
their hearts, says the Lord. Psalm. 95. 10. God knows all the thoughts of our
hearts, how momentany, sudden and transient soever they be; though they come
in, and go out again in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, yet he knows and
observes them all: The Lord knows the thoughts of man, that they are vanity.
Psalm. 94. 11. Job. acknowledges this to God. I know that thou can do every
thing, and that no thought is withheld from thee. Job. 42. 2. He knows all
the imaginations of man's heart. God saw that the wickedness of man was great
upon earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only
evil continually, Genesis 6. 5. The Lord likewise knows all the purposes and
intentions, and counsels of the heart; he knows what your aims are in all
your undertakings; whether you intend his glory, or your own self interest, his
word is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. Heb. 4. 12. When
the Jews came with questions to Christ, as if they desired to be informed by
him, our Savior knowing their thoughts, knew that they came to entrap him.

3. The Lord knows all the words that we speak. There is not a word in my
tongue, but lo, Oh Lord, thou know it altogether. Psalm. 139. 4. The Lord
knows every idle word that you speak, and will one day bring you to an account
for it, Matt. 12. He has likewise a book of remembrance to set down every good
word, that they that fear the Lord speak one to another. Malach. 3. 16.

3. God knows all things to come; Thou understandest my thoughts afar off,
says David, Psalm. 139. 2 When God sent Moses to Pharaoh, he tells him: I am
sure, that the King of Egypt will not let you go, no not by a mighty hand; and
I will stretch out my hand, and smite Egypt with all my wonders, which I will
do in the midst thereof, and after that he will let you go. Exodus 3. 19. 20. so
he speaks of the Israelites, I know their imaginations which they go about,
even now before I have brought them into the land which I swear. Deuteronomy. 31. 21.

CHAP. IV. Of the Properties of God's Knowledge.
NOw concerning the Properties of God's Knowledge, we are to understand that,

1. God beholds all things uno intuitu, by one simple act, not by diverse, as
Angels and Men do; he knows all things intuitive, not discursive, or
successive, as a man may see many particular objects at once that lie before
him: but God sees infinite objects intuitively at once, and therefore all
things are said to be before him, even things past, and things to come: there
is no praeterition nor futurition in God's Knowledge (to speak properly) for all
things are present before him.

2. God knows all things most perfectly and evidently, not in part, or
obscurely, as men do: but he knows all things fully and exactly; his knowledge
is a perfect knowledge, that cannot be increased or diminished. God most
perfectly knows himself* he also most perfectly knows all other things
besides himself: His understanding is infinite, Psalm. 147. 5. he knows things
actually infinite.

3. God knows all things distinctly, not confusedly or universally, but he
knows every particular and individual whatsoever; and by this distinct and
proper knowledge he knows singular things to come, even contingent: for to
him, their first cause, they are necessary things; in respect of second causes,
contingent: and by this distinct knowledge of his, he knows all the
circumstances of all our words and actions, with all the aggravations of them,
as to persons, time, place, etc. The Lord distinctly knows the persons of all
his chosen people. The foundation of the Lord stands sure, having this seal,
The Lord knows who are his. 2 Timothy 2. 19. I am the good shepherd, and know my
sheep, says our Savior, Joh. 10. 14. he knows all their names. So the Lord
to Moses, Thou have found grace in my sight, and I know thee by name, Exodus 33.
17. he knows the number even of the very hairs of their heads, they are all
numbered by him, Luke 12. 7.

4. God knows all things necessarily, immutably, and infallibly. God is his
own knowledge, he understands all things therefore necessarily, and
infallibly, neither can the knowledge of God be any more deceived than his will;
this knowledge of God is semper eadem, always the same, not subject to any
change or alteration: There be many devices in man's heart, but the counsel of
the Lord that shall stand* Prove. 19. 21.

CHAP. V. Reasons to prove God's Omniscience.
THere are many Reasons may be given to prove God is Omniscient.

1. Because God created all things; Reas. 1.
therefore no creature is hid from him, but is open and naked before him,
because all are the works of his hands. Now the Rule is this, Agentes cum
consilio, those Agents that do work with counsel, do know all their works; and
what Agent works with counsel, if the most wise God does not? He makes all
things with most deliberate and wise counsel: so then for the things
themselves, God does fully know them, making them by his knowledge and wise
counsel; he knows thee likewise, unless thou will deny thy self to be his
Creature.

2. Because there is no action which Reas. 2.
any creature does, but God cooperates and concurreth with and in the action:
God enableth natural causes to produce natural actions; contingent causes to
produce contingent actions; free and voluntary agents to produce free and
voluntary actions: You cannot think a thought, you cannot speak a word, you
cannot do an action without God: It Is the Lord enableth you to lie down, to
rise up; or whatsoever any man does, the Lord enables him to do it; yea, no
wicked man can commit sin, act sin, either in secret, or in public, if God
did not uphold him in the act; every action, as it is an action, is from God,
but the sinfulness or obliquity of it is from the Devil, or our selves: the
Drunkard could not go to an Alehouse, nor the Adulterer to the house of the
strange woman, if God did not uphold them in their actions and motions; in Him,
the worst sinner lives, moves, and has his being, even in the worst action
that he goes about: Therefore God must needs know all, because God does not
concur with the creature ignorantly or rashly, but with knowledge and counsel.

3. God must necessarily know all Reas. 3.
things, because there is nothing done but what God did fore know, and from
eternity decree should come to pass: All his decrees are acts of the
Understanding and Will of God; but God did decree what should be: God knows
he can make a thousand Worlds, and many thousand Creatures more than he has
made, only God decrees to make but so many, who took an handful of clay out of
the infinite mass, and made this world: So there is no action of any creature,
but God has decreed it, as it is an action; therefore he must needs foreknow
it. There is not a thought in thy mind, nor a word in thy tongue, nor an action
of thy hand, but comes within the compass of God's decree; therefore he is said
to know our thoughts afar off: and the same may be said concerning his knowledge
of our words and actions, yea, every circumstance of all thy actions, what
words, or what thoughts, at such a time, of such an object; therefore he must
needs know all things altogether.

4. God does order, guide, direct, Reas. 4.
all creatures, and their actions, to some determinate end; therefore he must
needs know all things, otherwise he could not guide and direct them: He guides
and governs all the inanimate creatures, and all the brutish creatures to
their proper particular ends: Yea, when the World seems to be all out of
order, the course of nature to be in a confusion, God wisely guides tumults
and confusions to a good end. God does order, guide, and direct the sins of
wicked men, therefore he must needs know all their sins; he prefixeth a time
how long they shall sin; the number of their sins, the measure of their sins;
therefore he must needs know all their sins, he could not otherwise guide,
direct, limit, permit, restrain them; wicked men cannot sin when they please,
nor do what they list.

5. Because God's understanding is Reas. 5.
infinite, intensive and extensive: His understanding is his own Essence,
therefore he must know infinite objects, which could not be if he did not know
all things, every particular individual object that is or can be. Whither shall
I go from thy Spirit, says David? Psalm. 139. 7. that is, from Gods
understanding; so Spirit is taken there: I can go no where, but God will know
where I am, what I do, think or speak; in Heaven, in Hell, at the uttermost
part of the earth, in dark or lightsom places; Gods Spirit is there, he
understands and knows what thou and I do.

6. Again we may draw a Reason from two Instances.

1. That God knows what every man does in public or secret, may appear by
the griping accusations of our own Consciences, bringing to mind our old
transgressions, acted a great while since, and it may be forgotten for a long
time, yet Conscience has brought them to mind: Now who make Conscience to
consider* and to call to mind bypast transgressions, but God who is greater
than our Consciences, and knows all things, and presen^s these to the eye of
our Consciences? And what is the language of our Conscience, but God will judge
thee for these things?

2. Again, God manifests the knowledge of all our counsels, plots, and secret
devices, because he often turns the malicious counsels of Devilish
Achitophels, into their own shame and destruction: It Is God that knows the
thoughts of men to be vanity, and turns their thoughts into vanity, their
wisdom into folly, their mischievous plots into their own downfall and
destruction; he takes the wise in their own craft. God did reveal to David,
what the men of Keilah would do to him, and how Saul would follow him to
Keilah, and so disappointed them; this is a most pregnant Argument of Gods
Omnisciency: When wicked men sit and take counsel together, against the Lord,
and his Anointed, God sits in Heaven, and laughs them to scorn.

7. Because without knowledge of Reas. 7.
all particulars of our thoughts, words and actions, with all their
circumstances, God, who is the just Judge of all the world, cannot give
righteous judgment. God has said, That he will judge every man according to
his works, which he cannot, did not he know the actions of men good and evil,
with all their circumstances: Verily, says our Savior, Men shall give an
account of every idle word, then God must know every word altogether that we
speak. In the last day God will judge the secrets of men's hearts; how can he
judge thee for thy secret thoughts and intents, and aims, if the Lord did not
know thy thoughts, every particular action of thy mind, though they pass away
in thy mind in a moment? Gods judgment is infallible; if he did not know all;
he may be deceived, and we might hide many things from God. Gods judgment is
true; did not he know all things, he would not know how to judge men either to
eternal death, or eternal life. Gods judgment shall be perfectly proportionable
to the good or evil actions of men: How can he render proportionable vengeance
to wicked men, and render to every man according to his works, if he did not
know all particulars. Gods judgment will be public in respect of bringing to
light all secret wickednesses, and all secret duties; and this he could not do,
did not he know all things?

CHAP. VI.
Sect. 1.
1. THe first Use of this Point, is for Use 1.
Terror to the wicked, whose atheistical hearts license them to commit sin
upon this blasphemous conceit: Tush, God knows not what we do; God regards, and
sees us not: Well! He that made the eye, and gives to thee a seeing eye, he
sees thee; there is for all thy actions. He that gave man the hearing ear, he
hears every word; there is for all thy words. He that gives to man the
knowing heart, he knows all; there is for all thy thoughts: Therefore rejoice
thou Atheist, and let thy heart cheer th^e; be filthy still in thy thoughts and
affections; be thou unjust still in thy words and actions but yet know the Lord
knows all, and for these things will bring thee to Judgm^n^.

Mark what God will one day say to the wicked, and all Hypocrites, Depart from
me ye wicked, I kniw you not, ye workers of iniquity. You may see God is said
to know, and not to know the wicked: He knows that they are workers of
iniquity, and knows all their works: He knows the Drunkard, and his
drunkenness, etc. He knows their persons, and their actions, so as to hate
them. He knows them so, as to bring them to judgment for all their works of
iniquity. He knows them so, as to take vengeance on them, and to destroy them
from his blessed presence; but yet God knows them not so, as to approve of
their persons or courses, so as to show them the least love, the least favor
or mercy. God will say to them, I know you not so, as to have any communion
with you; to eternity you shall never know me, nor I you; better it were to be
stricken through with a thousand Thunderbolts, than to hear God say, Depart, I
know you not. So God retaliates wicked men in their own Coin. The profane
Drunkard says to God, Tush, thou God know us not, or see us not: And the
Lord in answer says, Tush, thou Drunkard, I know thee not, therefore depart
from me. Depart from us, says the wicked man, we desire not, or love not the
knowledge of thy ways; the Lord answers them, Depart from me, I desire not thy
company in my Kingdom. When God shall thus doom them, the wicked themselves
shall admire Gods knowledge of them, and their ways; when he shall bring to
mind their transgressions, then they shall be forced to say to their shame and
confusion, Verily there is not, and cannot be a thought in my mind, but thou
Lord know it altogether.

2. The second Use is of Reproof, Use 2.
to those that excuse or hide their sins; or like the Harlot, Prove. 7. Wipe
their mouths, and say they have done no evil, when she had committed Adultery.
All excuses, and whatsoever men use to justify themselves, are mere vanity,
because God knows thy ways altogether, and will condemn thee, yea with a severe
condemn^tion, and that because thou do justify thy self.

Some men conceive themselves to be innocent, because the darkness cove^s them
and their sins; but God is light, and light will discover the ugly deeds of
d^rkness to the shame and damnation. Some men justify themselves because of
s^crefie, they act sin in their thoughts, and God will condemn them in public
view: Job says* How should man be just with God, if he will contend with him
he cannot answer him one of a thousand? Job 9. 2, 3. He will b^ing forth a
thousand sins to condemn hi^. Job would not justify himself: If I justify my
self, mine own mouth shall condemn me; if I say I am perfect, it shall also
pr^ve me perverse, ver. 30, 31. If I wash my self with Snow-water, and make my
hands never so clean, yet shall thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine own
clothes shall abhor me. Though thou wash thy self with Snow-water, and to
public view, thou have a Snow-like innocence; yet God will plunge thee in a
Ditch, thou will be as vile and loathsome in Gods eyes, as if thou were
vvallovving in a miry Ditch.

Sect. 2.
3. The third Use may serve for Use 3.
Exhortation, to humble our selves before God, not to hide or extenuate any
sin, but lay open our selves to the utmost by acknovvledging all to him who is
greater than our hearts, and knovvs all.

1. It is a foolish conceit, to think we inform God by our Self-accusations
and confessions; God knevv all before, and therefore Self-acc^s^tion and
confession, is for our own abasement, and the magnifying of Gods grace, to
justify him in all; this is, and must be the end of all our confessions: It is
impossible for any one to make a particular confession of all his sins, yet God
knovvs all, both the unknown errous, and the confessed transgr^ssions.

2. It is as fond likewise to fear to confess sins, for fear of shame and
sorrovv issuing from it; because God knovving what sins we are guilty of, can
shame and sadden us, if we confess them not: God can set our sins in order
before us, if we foolishly cast them behind our backs. Oh what shame of face,
and horror of spirit will seize upon all those who hide their sins, when
God that knovvs all, shall vvitness to their faces, that these things they have
done: When God shall say, You thought that I was an ignorant God, that I savv
not, neither regarded what you did in your bodies: Lo all ye Angels and
Saints, these sins did this man commit, let him deny one sin among a thousand
if he can, his own Conscience is my Witness I will appeal to himself, and let
the wicked man speak whether he be not guilty of all the sins that I now lay
to his charge: Therefore Brethren, Humble your selves for your secret sins,
before the great day come, when God shall judge the secrets of your hearts: If
ye will not humble your selves before God, the just God w^ll humble you to the
lowest Hell: If you will not confess what God knows, and your own Conscience
with him, God will witness all your sins to your faces, before Angels, Men and
Devils.

Sect. 3.
4. Does the Lord know all things Use 4.
perfectly and infallibly, the secret thoughts, intents and purposes of all our
hearts? Then let us be admonished of these following things.

1. Let us take heed of acting private sins, for God knows what thou art doing:
He whose eyes are fiery flaming eyes, sees what thou do in the darkest
corner: If I say, surely the darkness shall cover me, even the night shall be
light about me; yea, the darkness hides not from thee, but the night shines
as the day; the darkness and the light are both alike to thee, Psalm. 139. 11,
12. There is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; nor hid, that shall
not be known, L^k. 12. 2. Yea, there is no sin done covertly and closely, but
the Lord knows it.

2. Be sure to walk uprightly; and whatsoever ye do, do all for God for upright
ends; for Gods eye of approbation is not upon our duties and works, so much as
i^ is upon the sincerity and perfectness of our hearts; he discerns the
secret intents of our hearts, Hebr. 4. 13. Fair pretenses, (like Jacoh's
disguise) may make men to hope well, and to judge well of men; and as Isaac
blessed Jacob instead of Esau; so may men bless God for your gifts, parts,
dut^es, and bless you too; but the Lord knows all your pretenses to be but
vain, and looks thorough them upon your hearts.

It is a frequent phrase used of the Kings of Judah, They did what was right in
the sight of the Lord, yet the Lord regarded neither them, nor their right
actions, because they did not right actions with an upright and perfect heart.
Men may pray, and do other duties which are right in Gods eye, but it is the
heart, the uprightness and perfection of it, that makes the work or duty
gracious; so that the Lord knows with what hearts men do duties, confess his
Name, profess Religion, etc.

3. Seeing God knows all, hears all, sees all; then so think, speak and do all,
as before one whose eye is upon all thy ways, thoughts and actions. Would any
proud, unchaste or wicked thoughts be harbored by us, did we consider that God
understood them afar off? I may invert that speech of the Apostle to servants,
exhorting them not to serve their Masters with eye-service; implying, they
should be faithful and diligent in their absence, as well as in their Masters
presence; but walk ye, speak, think, do all with eyeservice unto God, always
considering that God hears thee, God sees thee, God knows thy very thoughts.
It were good if that Motto were written upon thy Bed, thy Couch, in thy Shop,
over thy Table, in thy closet, or wheresoever thou art.

Cave, Deus videt omnia.
O mortal Man beware,
God sees all things that are.
Sect. 4.
5. This may serve as an an Use of* Encouragement Use 5.
to the Godly, to go on in well-doing, to be fruitful and abundant in every
good work, because God sees and knows all, and will one day acknowledge all
that thou do to thy praise and unspeakable comfort; as God said to the Church
of Ephesus, Rev 2. 2. I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy patience, and
how thou can not bear them which are evil, etc. The same will he say to all
that are Godly, I know thy works, and what thou do for me, and to me and
mine, I know all thy secret prayers, sighs, tears and gro^ns; I know all thy
words which thou ^ast spoken: Gods knowledge is oftentimes put for his love,
approbation and ^elight; thy Prayers are my del^g^t, thy holy Discourses my
del^g^t; yea, one day God will openly a^k^owledge all thy good works: Mat. 25.
35. I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink;
I was a stranger, and ye took me in; Naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and
ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto me. Yea, God will recompense
all thy gracious works with glory: Small expressions of thy love which thou
made little account of, will God recompense in that great day; a Cup of cold
water, the Widows Mite shall have a great reward.

6. This may likewise afford singular Use 6.
comfort to the Godly in all their afflictions, in diverse particulars.

1. In that God knows thee, O Christian, by name, as he did Moses; he will own
thee in every condition, in thy meanest and most afflicted condition: When the
World is ashamed of thee, and thine own familiar Friends dare not to
acknowledge thee, he will acknovvledge thee: It Is no small matter for a King to
own and acknovvledge a man in his miseries.

2. Here Is comfort in that God knows all thy wrongs, troubles, wants straits,
temptations, ^ffict^ons: when Israel was sorely opp^essed by the Egyptians: the
Lord said unto Moses, I have surely seen the affliction of my people which are
in Egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their taskmasters, for I know
their sorrows, and I am come down, to deliver them out of the hand of the
Egyptians Exodus 3. 7, 8. So God says to his people in affliction; I see how it
is with thee: do not think thou art forgotten, or cast out of sight, when men
are casting stones at thee, I see what they do, and what thou do suffer
amongst them.

3. Here Is special comfort to the godly, because when they are walking in their
innocence, thinking no evil to the wicked* but praying for their good, yet then
wicked men are plotting mischief to ruin them, and digg deep to hide their
pernicious counsels against the Righteous: then the Lord knows all their
thoughts, intents, and devilish purposes, and can frustrate, and often does
disappoint them: he sits in heaven, and laughs them to scorn, and brings
their consulted designs upon their own head.

4. Here Is comfort: because when the Godly are entrapped in the snares of the
wicked at any time, and to present sense no hope of deliverance is manifest,
yea, they know not how it is possible for them to escape, yet let them not be
discouraged, for God knows how, when, and by what means to deliver his own
servants. 2 Pet. 2. 9. You are perhaps like righteous Lot, vexed from day to
day, not only with the filthy conversation of the wicked, but also by the
malicious machinations of the ungodly to bring you to ruin, yet despair not,
but comfort your selves in God, who knows how to deliver all that put their
trust in him.

7. Hence be encouraged in God in all conditions; not only because he knows
your conditions, but also because he knows how to carry you out in all
conditions, to his glory and to your comfort. There be three times wherein we
have need of Gods wisdom to help us, lest we be overborn.

1. Times of afflictions: when these come thick upon thee, thou know not what
to do; God by these teaches thy heart knowledge, that these are his hand and
providence, and their message is to teach thee to repent, to pray more
fervently, to walk more humbly and closely with God.

2. Times of tentation, not only of trial, but when thou art dogged with sinful
tentations; God k^ows how to turn poison into Physic, and our sorest maladies
into curing medicines; he can turn sinful tentations to a great and spiritu^l
advantage, and cause us thereby to be the more fruitful.

3. Times of straits and wants: then the Lord knows how to help and satisfy
us: Your heavenly Father knows what things you stand in need of. Mat. 6. 32.
And your God will supply all your wants.

Finally, when you cannot see the reason of things, Gods ways being above your
reach, let this be your determination, God is wise, and knows what he does, and
all he does is most just: and cry out with Paul; oh the depths of his wisdom,
how unsearchable are his judgments; and his ways past finding out? and give to
the only wise God the glory of his wisdom, and of all his actions.

A Discourse of Gods immutability.
Malach. 3. 6. I am the Lord, I change not.
CHAP. I.
THis Chapter is a Prophecy of Christ's coming in the flesh^, and to judgment,
whose coming ^s most desirable to the Godly, but to the wicked most terrible.

In the first verse he says. Behold I send my Messenger.] that is, John
Baptist, the forerunner of Christ: And the Lord whom ye seek. that is Christ,
after whom the Godly did pant and breath? Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly. Even
the Messenger of the covenant] scil. Christ, because in him God has reconciled
the world unto himself, and in him has made a covenant of sure and everlasting
peace with his elect. -- Whom ye delight in] Christ was, is, and shall be the
only joy and delight of all his chosen.

In the 2, 3, 4. Verses he shows the effect of his coming. The Prophet puts
forth a question: Who shall abide his coming? he gives the reason, because
Christ is a refining and purging fire to purge the godly, who are here compared
to Gold, that can abide the fire: Christ will be a consuming and devouring
fire, to burn and devour all the wicked, that are not purged; the wicked are
dross which consumes when the Gold is purified; when the Godly shall shine
like stars in the firmament, the wicked shall burn like fi^ebrands in hell
fire: Christ will be the glorious Savior, and the terrible Judge. In verse 5.
he tells the wicked, in what manner Christ will come near unto them. I will
come near to you judgment.] you think I am a God afar off; but I will be near
you, when I come to judgment: I will be a swift witness against you*] I will
be a witness and a Judge against you, yea a swift one: you think I am slack in
coming, but I shall come to you sooner than you are aware of: there are six
sorts of persons he threatens to come against, sc. the sorcerers, the
adulterers, the false swearers, those that oppress the hireling in his wages,
the widow and the fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger from his right,
and those that fear not God; he brings in this in the last place, because the
want of God's fear is the cause of all wickedness, and boldness in the practice
of sin.

Now for the confirmation of the certainty of this P^ophecy of his promises and
threatenings, he draws an argument from God's attribute; scil. his
immutability, for I am God, and change not, etc. as if God had said: Be
persuaded, that what I here promise to the Godly, and threaten to the wicked,
shall undoubtedly come to pass, because I am God that change not, I am always
the same, and so is my word always the same, my promises are immutable, my
threatenings are immutable; that the rebellious sons of Israel are not consumed,
it is not through your deserts: but for my promise-sake, made to your fathers,
which stands firm and sure: I am now and always gracious, merciful,
long-suffering; therefore you sons of Jacob are not consumed; you have provoked
me to punish and to destroy you with temporal and eternal destruction; I might
have forsaken you as you have forsaken me, and caused my mercy to have departed
from you, and that long ere now, as you have departed from me: I might have
destroyed your fathers in many foregoing generations, because they and you are
departed from me, broken your covenant, cast me your God off from you; but I
have not cast you away, and consumed you with my curses, because I am the Lord
and change not.

CHAP. II.
THe point here to be considered, Observe.
is, That God is unchangeable. The Apostle proves this. Jam. 1. 17. Saying,
that with God there is no variableness nor shadow of turning; there he shows
that God is the most indificient and unchangeable fountain and giver of every
good thing; he is still the same in the communication of his goodness: God is
good, and has done good, and manifested his bounty to men in all generations
that are past; he is still as good and bountiful, and does do good, especially
to such as are upright in heart; he is always the same, there is no
variableness, no diminution, yea, there is not so much as a shadow of change
in him: far more free from any appearance of change, than the sun from
darkness, or shadow of darkness: Heaven, Earth all creatures are liable to
change they shall all be turned in and out, but God is the same Psalm. 102. 26,
27, 28. Thou art God from Eternity to Eternity. Psalm. 90. 2. So that phrase, I
AM THAT I AM, shows the unchangeablenesse of God.

In the prosecution of this, I will show, what God's unchangeablenesse is;
wherein he is unchangeable, the reasons of the point^, and answer some
questions or objections, which seem to make against his unchangeablenesse, then
make use of it

To be absolutely and simply unchangeable, requires these Properties.

1. There must be no beginning: For all beginnings argue a change from a not
being to a being; as when a creature is created, there is a change from a not
being to a being: So in generation, that which was not a child, becomes a
child; so in alteration: Now the Lord has no beginning of his being, he is
from everlasting.

2. There must be no dissolution, corruption, or alteration: Creatures are
therefore changeable, because the most noble of all are liable to annihilation.
God can turn Angels into nothing, the sons of men into destruction; heaven and
earth shall wax old like a garment: but now there can be no dissolution,
corruption, or annihilation in God; Thou art God to everlasting.

3. There must be no addition, nor diminution, nor increase, nor decrease; as
we see in all creatures, they may be more perfect then they are; they that are
glorified, may and do increase in knowledge. Creatures may become also less
then they are, as among the Angels, some of glorious Angels became ugly Devils;
of happy Angels, miserable Devils; of pure Angels, unclean Spirits. So men may
decrease and increase in knowledge and wisdom, in all excellencies inward and
outward: Righteous man is now become sinful; he that knew much, is become
ignorant. So all Creatures are liable to alteration, either to become better or
worse. But God is so perfect, that he cannot be better or worse than he is; so
good, that he cannot be better; so wise, that he cannot be more wise; so holy,
that he cannot be more holy; he cannot increase in wisdom and holiness, etc.
And though the Lord deriveth and communicates his bounty and goodness to the
Creatures, yet there is no diminution of it: we see many thousand Stars derive
their light from the Sun, yet the light of the Sun is no way diminished.

CHAP. III.
MOreover, God is Immutable or unchangeable all these ways.

1. God is unchangeable in his Being: He is the same Being from everlasting to
everlasting: I am that I am, I am the same Being now what I am; Before Abraham
was I am, says our Savior, Joh. 8. 58. So God may say, Before Adam was, I am;
before the foundations of the world, were I am: and when the foundations of the
world shall be no more, God is the same Being.

2. God is unchangeable in all his glorious Perfections, and Properties or
Attributes: his Almighty Power is unchangeable; his infinite Wisdom is
unchangeable; his Goodness, Mercy, Justice, All Sufficiency are unchangeable;
therefore his Love is said to be an everlasting love; his mercy endures for
ever, his goodness endures continually.

3. God is unchangeable in his Decrees: Whatsoever God has decreed, shall come
to pas accordingly all things shall be, and fall out. His Decree of Election is
unalterable, 2 Timothy 2. 19. The foundation of the Lord stands sure; that is,
his Election stands sure, compared to a foundation for the immutable firmness
of it. Pilate could say, What I have written, I have written; he would not
alter the inscription on the Cross upon the Jews entreaty: God much more can
say, What I have written in my Book of Life, shall be written; what I have
blotted out of my Book, I will have never to be altered. His Decrees are called
his Counsels; The counsels of the Lord stand for ever, the thoughts of his
heart to all generations. Psalm. 33. 11.

4. God is unchangeable in his Promises and Threatenings: What good things he
has promised to give to his chosen, all shall be made good; what evil he has
threatened to bring upon the impenitently wicked, all shall come to pass. Balaam
said, God is not a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that he
should repent, Numb. 23. 19. God is not a man, that he should lie, that is,
promise and not perform, falsify, or go back from his word; threaten, and not
put his threatenings in execution.

5. God is immutable in all his Affections: in his Love, in his Hatred; Whom he
loves, he loves to the end; he loves his Elect from everlasting to
everlasting: Whom he hates, he hates to the end; the Damned are the immortal
objects of his eternal hatred.

6. God is immutable in all his saving Gifts. Romans 11. 29. The gifts and
calling of God are without repentance. When God pardons, justifies,
sanstifieth, calls, reconcileth any soul to himself, he never repents of so
doing to any man, but what he does shall stand inviolate.

CHAP. IV.
MAny Reasons may be given to evidence to us, that God is unchangeable.

1. God is (...), he is the Lord Jehovah, Reas. 1.
has being from himself, and not from any other cause: He is absolutely
independent, and depends upon no other: All creatures have received their
being from him, and depend upon him; therefore God only is immutable, and all
Creatures are changeable, and continue not in one stay: For the ground of
change is, to have being, or any perfection from another, and always to be at
the will and disposing of him from whom they have what they have; as a Subjects
honors and dignities are received from his Prince's favor, and are at the
will and disposing of his Prince; if he withdraw the influence of his favor,
his dignities wither, and are taken from him. Thus all Creatures receiving
their being from God, are at God's disposing: if he speak the word, Let a
Creature be made thus and thus, it is so; if he say, Let that Creature be
turned into destruction, it is destroyed: If God withdraw the influence of his
favor and supportance from the Creatures, they cannot subsist for a moment,
but suffer a pitiful change; but now, God depending upon no superior cause,
not liable to the will, pleasure, disposing of a supreme power, abides the
same for ever, without the least shadow of change.

2. God is Immutable, because he Reas. 2.
is most simple, void of all composition: he is purus actus, a pure act; there
is no passive power in him. All Creatures are therefore mutable, because there
is some composition in them. Man is obnoxious to dissolution, because
compounded of a body and soul; his body liable to alteration and corruption,
because it is compounded of the elements. Even the Angels themselves, and the
Souls of Men, which are the most simple, yet are compounded, ^x actu and
potentia, ex subjecto and accidente; therefore are they liable both to
alteration, as we see in Devils; and also to annihilation, for God can turn
them into nothing again. But now in God there is no mixture, no composition;
but whatsoever is in God, is God, is his Essence, therefore no alteration, or
mutation can be in him.

3. Because God comprehends in Reas. 3.
him all fullness of perfection; he is infinitely perfect, therefore he is
immutable. There is a double alteration which the Creature is liable unto;
there is

Alteratio perfectiva,
Alteratio corruptiva.
A perfective alteration,
A destructive alteration.
A Creature may alter from good to bad, from bad to worse; so from bad to good,
from good to better: There is no creature but is capable of more perfections
then they have: Angels, though they have great perfections, yet may be more
gradually perfect: but God being infinitely perfect, admits of no diminution
nor increase; being infinitely wise, he cannot be wiser; being infinitely good,
he cannot be better: for if God should thus change, then were he imperfect, and
were not infinite: Now to say, that there may be a decrease of his perfections,
then should God become imperfect; and if God should lose some of his
perfections, he might lose more, then God should be no God.

4. God is unchangeable in his Decrees, Reas. 4.
Promises, and Threatenings, of which I touched before.

1. In his Decrees, because God is omniscient; so he foresees all
inconveniences, to prevent error or mistake; he cannot err, because he
infallibly foreknows all. Men may alter their Decrees, because they are
ignorant, and cannot foresee inconveniences to prevent errors: but God foresees
all, without the least error; therefore what he decrees shall stand firm.

2. Because God is omnipotent, therefore he can overcome all impediments that
may hinder and frustrate the execution of his Decrees. Men are hindered in their
decrees by some overpowering impediment, but who can resist the omnipotent will
of God?

He is unchangeable in his Promises and threatenings, because he is able and
faithful, true and just; therefore will not, nor cannot deny himself.

CHAP. V. Objections about God's Immutability answered.
NOw let us clear some Questions, or Objections touching God's unchangeableness.

If God be immutable, how is he Object. 1.
then said to repent? It is said, that he repented that he made man on the
earth, Genesis 6. 6. And upon the repentance of the Ninivites, it is said, God
repented of the evil that he had said he would do unto them, and did it not.
Jon. 3. 10.

Repentance is spoken of God for our Sol. 1.
understandings sake; when the Scripture says, That God did repent of this or
that thing, it speaks of God after the manner of men for our learning.

2. God is said to repent; not as if there were a change of mind in God, as
when men repent; but when there is a change wrought in the creature, their
change is his repentance. The destruction of the old World, is Gods repenting
of making man upon the earth. The removing of plagues and curses (the evils
which he inflicts upon us) is Gods repentance of the evils he inflicteth: So
the preventing of evils threatened, his bidding the Angel to put up his Sword
drawn forth to destroy Jerusalem, is Gods repentance of the evil: So then there
is a double change, subjectiva, or in agente* objectiva, or in patiente: The
change is altogether in the creature, the object and patient, not in God the
agent.

If God be Immutable, how then is Object. 2.
it said, That God is sometime angry with his people? and that sometimes he is
said to rejoice over them. Now he smiles upon them, and kisseth his Spouse;
anon he withdraws himself, and frowns upon her; this argues a change of
affections.

We must distinguish between Gods Sol. 1.
love to us, and joy over us; and our apprehension of his love and joy, between
his affection, and the sense of his affection to us. Gods love is immutable,
there is no decay in it; but there may be a decay and want of apprehension in us.

2. The change is in us, not in God; our loose walking, or our falling into
some sin, is the cause of our want of the apprehension of his favor: Shall we
say that the fire heateth not, or that the Sun shines not, when we stand behind
a Wall in the shade? We say that God changes, when as we remove further from
God, and set up a sin, like a partition Wall, between our souls, and the light
of his countenance: So that as the Lord in another sense spoke to Israel, O
Israel, thy destruction is of thy self, Hos. 13. 9. But in me is thy help: May
be spoken to all Christians, that have not their former quickening and ravishing
apprehensions of Gods favor in Christ; Oh thou mourning and disconsolate soul!
thy sorrow, thy spiritual darkness is from thy self; in me is thy comfort, and
in my favor is light, without shadow of change* yet we are apt to conceive a
mutation in God. As men in a Boat, do think the Trees and Banks on the shore do
move, when the motion is in the Boat, and there is none in them: so we are apt
to conceive a mutation in the immutable God, when the change is in us.

How is God immutable in his Word, Object. 3.
Promises and Threatenings, when he threatens evil to persons, and infl^cts it
not; promises mercy, and performs it not? As when he threatened* Hezekiah, that
he should dye, and not live, Isa. 38. and to destroy Nineveh within 40 days,
and did not; and bade Moses to let him alone, that he might consume the people.

Consider, that in Promises or Threatenings, Sol. 1.
though sometime the condition be not expressed, yet it is always implied. I^
God did promise or threaten absolutely without any condition, if he fulfilled
not, he were mutable, and should deny himself; but seeing he promises upon
condition, if not performed on our part, there is no change in God, he remains
faithful to his Word: Do thou what he commands, God will make good what he
promises.

2. If it be a temporal Promise, we must consider whether it be good for us:
God does consider it; and if it be not good for thee, he gives thee another
comfort instead of that; yet he is immutable, because temporal promises have
this condition implied, If they be good.

3. So again for Threatenings; they were with a condition of Repentance: If men
repent not, he will shoot out the Arrows of his indignation; but if the wicked
shall humble themselves, and turn from their wicked ways, they shall live.
Nineveh had been destroyed, had not Nineveh repented. Israel had been consumed,
had not Moses made intercession: So Hezekiah humbled himself before the Lord,
and prayed; so that still the change is in us, not in God; he abides faithful
in his promises and threatenings: Repent, and God will repent of the evil; but
he that walks contrary to God, God will walk contrary to him.

Gods Promises are mutable, so are Object. 4.
his Threatenings, because they depend upon a mutable condition in men; as men
are, so God makes good both.

It Is true, in respect of man's nature, Sol.
will, judgment and sense, man's Repentance or Impenitency (the condition of the
promise) is annexed to a mutable thing; but neither his promises nor
threatenings depend on us, but upon Gods immutable Decree: God makes good his
promises to such to whom he Decrees, to give Repentance, Faith, and new
Obedience; he executes his threatenings on such who are in his just judgment
given up to Impenitency.

CHAP. VI. Some Corollaries drawn from this point of God's Unchangeableness.
BEfore I make Application, I will draw some Inferences or Corollaries from
this Doctrine.

1. If God be immutable, then all Coroll. 1.
things are in God from Eternity most perfectly. God is so ^ull of all good
from Eternity, that to Eternity it is impossible there should be any access of
more good in him. God is so immutably firmly good, that a diminution of his
goodness is likewise impossible in a whole Eternity.

2. If God be immutable; then Coroll. 2.
though God make the World, and destroy the World, and turns things upside
down, that nothing continues in one stay; he governs the World, punishes the
wicked, blesses the righteous, and brings forth innumerable events, yet God
abides the same; and whatsoever falls out, comes to pass according to his
immutable Decree.

3. If God be immutable, then Coroll. 3.
though the whole World should be turned into nothing, all the Angels and men
that ever were or shall be, should be excluded from his glorious presence, and
be turned into destruction, yet God would be immutably happy and glorious; he
being infinitely good, the whole good of the creature in comparison of him is
nothing.

CHAP. VII. The Uses of this Doctrine of God's Unchangeableness.
1. HEre is an Use of Admonition Use 1.
and Terror to wicked men, in three things.

1. Has God inflicted wrath upon wicked men in foregoing Ages? Has God damned
unclean Sodomites, judged Whoremongers and Adulterers, destroyed Drunkards in
the very act, as Belshazzar, and turned the Covetous into Hell? Then be
admonished and tremble, lest the like condemnation betide thee for the like
sins; for God is immutably holy, and hates sin in thee as in them immutably; he
is just, and will inflict the like vengeance upon present impenitent sinners,
as upon former: as our Savior said to the Jews, Think ye, that the Galileans,
whose blood Pilate mingled with the blood of the Sacrifices, Luke 13.
were greater sinners than you? I tell you nay, except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish. Has God cast other sinners into Hell for their wickedness,
think ye they were greater sinners than you? I tell you nay, except ye repent,
ye shall all likewise perish: For God is immutable in his hatred of sin, and in
his threatenings against it.

2. It should admonish and instruct the wicked of the necessity of Repentance;
either you must change, or God must change, but God changes not; therefore
either the profane Swearer, the beastly Drunkard must change their courses, or
be damned: Except they repent, they must likewise perish.

3. It shows the misery of the Damned: God hates them, and his hatred is
immutable; they are the ever living objects of his wrath, and of his hatred: If
there were any probability or possibility of the alteration of their woeful
condition, the Damned might have some hope to be happy, and to get out of that
fire: but the Damned being utterly rejected of God, become immutably
impenitent; being immutably sinful, they are immutably miserable.

Sect. 2.
2. If God be immutable, then see Use 2.
here the vast difference between God and all creatures, he only is
unchangeable. Look upon our selves, we are in daily change; to day we are in
health, to morrow sick; to day perhaps we shine like Stars with outward
Prosperity, anon covered with dismal Adversity. We change often in our purposes
and resolutions; to day we resolve that this we will do, to morrow we are off
the hinges: we are variable in our affections; to day we rejoice, anon we mourn
and weep; we are constant in nothing but inconstancy. Look upon Friends, how
inconstant are they in love, kindness, help and assistance* to day they love,
to morrow they hate; to day very helpful, to morrow miserable comforters: Jobs
Friends became his Adversaries.

Look upon your states and conditions, nothing continues in one stay, all
sublunary things, like the Moon, suffer their changes; but now God is
absolutely unchangeable, and is the same to Eternity; and if God be thine once,
he is thine to Eternity: Let health be changed into sickness, riche^ into
poverty, abundance into want, joy into sorrow, love of Friends into hatred, God
will be thy unchangeable health, riches, comfort, friend, thy unchangeable God.
The Lord speaks thus to us. Ye sons of Jacob, take me for your portion, I
change not: Look over the World, do not ye see that riches change, but I change
not; I am a rich God, and will make you immutably rich; your states change,
your lands and possessions go from one to another, but I the Lord am an
immutable inheritance and possession. Your friends change; your wives,
husbands, children, kindred, your nearest and dearest relations are unconstant
and mutable, like Weather-cocks, every blast turns them about; but I the Lord
am an unchangeable Father, an immutable husband, a constant friend; and when
thy natural change by death comes, when all things must and shall change (for
all together with life must and shall take their wings, and flee away with you)
God then abides the same for ever; why will not then the sons of Jacob take
him for their God?

Sect. 3.
3. We may learn hence the folly, Use 3.
absurdity, and unreasonableness of all Backsliders, that in a storm shake off
the unchangeable God, in departing from his ways. Let me reason with Apostates
for God, tell me what you find in your God; that you leave him and his ways?
What is God become a barren Wilderness, a dry Heath, an exhausted Fountain?
What is God less good, less gracious, less merciful? Or what is God become like
man, a Liar, an unfaithful Friend, unfaithful in his promises, and will not do
what he has spoken? Is his countenance changed toward thee, as Haman observed
in Ahasuerosh? Can thou lay any, or all these to Gods charge? Why then do
thou leave him, and change thy Master? Take the world, and thy lusts, and serve
them, are these things better than God? Is the world more durable than God?
then do thou make God a perishing God: Speak what thou find in God, I know
thou can not belie so good a God. Oh what hellish and damned madness
possesses thy brains, that thou art thus changed? Why changest thou thy zeal
and forwardness in holy Duties, to coldness and deadness in Duties? Why art
thou now so backward to the performance of them? Why have thou changed thy
outward professed Holiness, into Looseness, Dissoluteness and Profaneness,
wretched Apostate! Let me tell thee, thou changest the better for the worse,
and this is thy unhappy portion, that thou fallest from the mercies of God,
into the hands and vengeance of the same Unchangeable God.

Sect. 4.
4. If the Lord be Immutable, then Use 4.
if Christians find a change of comforts into sorrows, of light into darkness,
of spiritual agility into spiritual deadness, let them blame themselves for
these and the like changes: For sure the hand of Joab is in these matters.
There is something in Israel is the cause that God goes not forth with their
Armies, as the Scripture speaks, When Israel fell before the men of Ai. O
Christian, there is some change in thy course, or in thy heart, that thou do
find such a c^^n^e of the sensible apprehensions of Gods love and favor to
thee: If thou art unconstant in the strictness of thy course and conversation,
and give thy corrupt self, and carnal heart some ease, some liberty, and
growest somewhat loose in thy behavior toward God, no marvel if in thy
apprehensions God seems as one that has forgotten to be gracious and merciful,
and unmindful of his old loving kindness God is the same, but thy unconstant
walking with God, occasioneth such a change in thy soul.

It is with Christians, as the Papists superstitiously feign of souls in
Purgatory; sometime they say they are so scorched, that to cool themselves,
they leap out of fire, into lakes of cold water; then they freeze with cold,
and from thence leap into the fire again; this is a Popish fable, we may
moralize it thus; sometimes while we are in this world, we are in one state and
condition, sometime in another, and are changed into diverse extremes. There are
these two special causes of Christians changes in spirituals.

1. Uneven, unconstant walking with God, and before God, causes an uneven and
unconstant apprehension of his love and favor; though he abide the same for
ever; when thou walk close with God, keep thy heart close to his ways, and
thou shall always behold the light of his countenance, and joy in it; but when
thou do walk loosely and securely, thy loose walking causes dimness, or no
sense and sight of his love and favor; thou fallest into a disconsolate
condition.

2. Some intervening lust or sin, causes a change of thy sense, and
apprehension of Gods favor. The Sun always shines, there is no darkness yet
when the earth is betwe^n us and the Sun, as at Midnight, or else the foggy
vapors arise out of the earth, and are condensed in some cloud, they hide the
light of the Sun: So God is immutable, and with him there is no shadow of
change, but when the World, or some foggy lust shall intervene, and stand
between God and us, then a Christian sits in dismal darkness, beholds not the
face of his gracious Father in Christ: And now the immutable Lord permits, and
suffers such a change in thee, that thou may find out that change of thy
heart or conversation, or the accursed thing within thee; or, as we see when
clouds cover the Sun, they are either dispelled with blasting winds, or
dissolved into rain, before we enjoy the warm beams of the Sun; so must
Christians either dissolve these foggy mists into tears of Repentance toward
God, or God by some stormy affliction drives them away, that they may behold
the light of his countenance again.

Sect. 5.
5. This may serve for Exhortation: Use 5.
If God be Immutable, then repose all thy confidence in God; trust him now and
always; for as he has been, and is to thee, so he will be to thee unto
Eternity. Has God been gracious to thee in bypast conditions? Has he
delivered thee out of former Tribulations? Trust God for the present, and for
the future: Has he not said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. The
reason is, because he changes not; he has been, and is now an immutable
Buckler, Fortress, Tower, Rock of Defense; former experiences should embolden
thee the more to depend upon him, in present or in future states and
conditions, because he is a God that changes not: Are the like fears,
difficulties, dangers upon thee now, remember the Lord is the same who changes
not, and he will give the like comforts, support, deliverance, as formerly he
did?

David did find a change of his conditions, but never found a change in God;
but when he made him his trust, he found God always his Deliverer and
C^mforter: Not only our experience, but whatsoever we find Recorded what God
has done for other Saints, may strengthen our trust in God. Put thou thy trust
in God, and he will do for thee as great things, because he is the same God.
Did he deliver Lot, he can deliver thee? Has God pardoned others, he can
pardon thee? and will do it, if thou repentest. There is no shadow of change in
God, but he is immutably merciful and gracious. Brethren, take the Bible, read
over the several passages of Gods Wisdom, Grace, Mercy, Power, Goodness to his
Children, and know whatsoever is written, is written for your learning and
comfort, make ye the like use of God, who is always the same, and changes
not: There is no condition can befall thee, but in this Paradise thou may
find an healing Herb, apply thou the same promises to thy self.

Sect. 6.
6. If God be unchangeable in his Use 6.
Decrees, Promises and Gifts, what Comfort does it speak to all the Godly? for
being once made holy, you are immutably holy, and shall be immutably happy.
Gods Immutability, is the Jachin and Boaz, the firm and inconcussible Pillars
of our salvation; never shall a child of God fall away finally from God,
because his Eternal Election is an immutable Decree, ordaining thee to
holiness, to glory; his promises are unchangeable, Has God spoken the word, it
is the word of an immutable God, that has said, Him that comes unto me, I
will in no wise cast off, Joh. 6. 37. Fear not, God will never cast thee off:
Has God said, That he will put his fear into thy heart, that thou shall never
depart from him? Fear not falling away, though a thousand Devils suggest to
thee, that thou will prove an Apostate, and wilt before death depart from God.
Fear not, I say, thou jealous Christian, God has promised that thou shall
never depart from him. All the Devils in Hell, all the glory and miseries in
the world, all the lusts in thy heart shall never pull thee off from Gods hand,
for every child of God is a precious Signet on Gods right hand. Gods promises
are immutable, therefore thy state of grace is unchangeable: The gifts and
calling of God are without repentance. Art thou called from a state of Nature
to Grace, from sin to Christ, thou art immutably called? Art thou justified,
thou art immutably justified? Ye that are godly, take comfort in this, ye are
eternally, immutably gracious and holy, and shall be immutably glorious and
happy; though death change thee, yet the Lord our God changes not; and at the
Resurrection day, thy corruption shall be changed into an immutable state of
immortality how unhappy, poor, miserable, despicable soever you are for the
present, ye shall be changed into an immutable state of happiness, because the
Lord our God is unchangeable.

Lastly, If God be immutable, and Use 7.
change not, then endeavor to be like unto your God; our constancy, is our
likeness to God's Immutability.

1. Be constant in thy Affections to God, maintain a burning love to him,
maintain a vehement desire after him; God likes not ebbs and flows in our
Affections, he regards not blazing Affections, like Strawfires, that are
quickly in, and quickly out. He loves thee to the end, John 13. 1. Do thou love
him to the end; he rejoices over thee to the end, do thou rejoice in the Lord
always, Phil. 4. 4.

2. Be constant and immutable in your Promises, Covenants, Resolutions and
Purposes which ye make to God: Oh never deny thy self, and lie to thy God, in
promising to be His, and then fall off, and serve thy lusts, far be it from
thee.

3. Be constant and immutable in all thy Duties, and in a course of holiness
Pray continually, rejoice evermore, in every thing give thanks. Hear the Word
upon every occ^sion, walk all the days of thy life in the fear of God; all
things to thee are Mercy and Truth, let all thy ways be Sincerity and
Righteousness. God will make thee immutably happy and glorious, if thou will be
constant to him; as the old men said to Rehoboam, concerning the Tribes of
Israel, Be thou theirs to day, and they will be thine for ever. So say I to
thee, Be thou the Lords to day, and he will be thine for ever.

A Discourse of God's Invisibility.
1 Timothy 1. 17. Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, etc. be honor
and glory for ever and ever, Amen.
CHAP. I.
SAint Paul having in the foregoing part of this chapter, laid down the
s^p^rabundant grace of God in Christ, in making him of a persecutor to become a
nursing father of the Church; of one that was injurious to the saints, to be
most loving and tenderly affected to them, of a blasphemer to be an excellent
preacher of the Gospel, and in receiving him into special favor that was the
chiefest of sinners (such are the the miraculous effects of God's superabundant
grace in Christ) here his zeal, love and thankfulness to God breaks forth into
fervent praising of God, giving him the honor due unto his name.

Now to the King eternal -- invisible etc. be honor and glory for ever and
ever Amen.

As if he should say; seeing God has evidently manifested to me his goodness,
grace, and mercy in my conversion; let him have all the honor and glory for
ever and ever. And lest his conversion should seem strange, he shows who was
the Author of it.

It Is God that has converted me, who is an eternal King, who can do all
things, with whom nothing is impossible; the eternal King can raise children
out of stones, can make the greatest sinner the greatest Saint.

It Is an immortal God, who ever lives, and can give life to the dead, he that
can make the earth to yield up her dead, he can make the graves of sin likewise
to give up their dead, this immortal God raised up me from this death of sin.

It is an Invisible God; man cannot see him, nor his way of working; his works
are visible, but the manner of his working is Invisible: that Paul was a
convert is as clear as the sun shinneth but the manner of Gods working in his
conversion was invisible, it was above the ken of a carnal eye.

It is a wise God who sweetly orders, wisely brings to pass his counsels,
therefore it is not impossible with God to convert the greatest sinners. Here
you see are four attributes given to God.

1. King everlasting. (...), King of Ages, so called for two reasons. 1.
Because he is the maker of time, of all ages and generations, (...), is taken
sometimes for times created, Tit. 1. 2. Secondly, Because he is King eternal,
not only ante temporis durationem, sed etiam omnem cogitationem, As St.
Augustine in his book of confessions acknowledges. August. Co^fess.


2. He is called King Immortal, (...); sometimes this word denotes
incorruptible, pure and sincere, and without corruption, but here i^ excludes
end of time or being, o else it signifies God that can not die.

3. He is called invisible, God that cannot be seen, and of this attribute I am
to speak.

CHAP. II.
HEnce I note that God is an invisible Observe.
King, or God is invisible: Gods Invisibility is that divine perfection,
whereby his nature being so spiritual, cannot be seen, by any bodily eye. The
Scripture sufficiently proves this attribute of God, his glory, that is his
essence is invisible. When Moses prayed, Lord I beseech thee, show me thy
glory; God answered him, thou can not see my face, for Heb. 11. 27.
there shall no man see me and live. Ex. 33. 18. 20. The invisible things of
God, viz. his power, wisdom, goodness, are seen only in the v^sible creatures
which he has made, Romans 1. 20. but the face and essence of God cannot be seen;
for to be invisible, is to be of such a nature as cannot be seen by any mortal
eye.

A thing may be said to be invisible, to a man's eye diverse ways.

1. When there is something between he object and the eye, the object being
visible in it self; thus the sun which is, primum visible, the chiefest visible
thing, being set, cannot be seen; or when a Cloud is between us and it: so we
cannot see a picture when a curtain is drawn over it: in this sense God is not
invisible, for there is nothing between God and us, for in him we live, move
and have our being; we are in God; nothing can stand between God and us.

2. A thing is said to be invisible in respect of the indistance of the object,
so we cannot discern it: put your hand upon your eye or any thing, you cannot
see it, in respect of the neernesse of it, neither also in this respect is God
said to be invisible.

3. In respect of the distance of the object from the eye, when the object is
too remote from us, we cannot see i^, though it be a mountain, because the
sight is terminated and bounded, beyond which the eye cannot exceed or ken: and
in this sense God is not invisible, for he is near every one of us, that were
it possible for bodily hands of flesh to touch and feel a spirit, we might
touch and feel him. Act. 17.

4. A thing is said to be invisible, when the medium is not rightly disposed;
as in the dark we can see nothing, because the air is not light, which is the
medium or mean of seeing, in that sense the Schoolmen say God is invisible,
because there is lumen gloriae a light of glory required to behold God; and so
God as he has revealed himself in his word is invisible to sinners, because
they are in darkness, and there is a thick vail of ignorante drawn over their
eyes, that they cannot see God in his word of grace.

5. An object is invisible, through the glorious perfection of it, when there
is not a proportion between the eye and the object; so the glorious Sun d^zleth
the eyes, that we cannot look upon it: So God is inv^sible, therefore he is
styled light inaccessible, unto which no mortal eye can approach. A thing is
said to be invisible, in resp^ct of the nature or essence of it, being
spiritual and incorporeal; and in this sense God is invisible, who is a Spirit,
more spiritual than Angels; incorporeal, though the Scripture attributes to
God eyes, hands, mouth, nose, etc. it speaks of him to us after the manner of
men; but it sets forth the invisible things of God, by the visible parts of
man's body, as by the eye Gods Omnisciency, and his provident care, etc.

CHAP. III. Reasons to prove God's Invisibility.
THe Reasons to prove this Doctrine, are these.

1. Because if God were visible, then Reas. 1.
we should see nothing in the world but God, because God being Omnipresent,
immense and infinite, and so filling heaven and earth with his presence, then
should we see nothing else but God, his immense Essence would exclude all other
visible objects.

2. Because if God were visible, then Reas. 2.
God should be corporeal, and not a Spirit, because there is nothing subject to
bodily senses, but what is corporeal. This was our Saviors Argument to confirm
his staggering Disciples, after his Resurrection, That he was truly the Christ
that was crucified, and risen again, because they might feel and see him, for a
spirit had not flesh and bones as he had, Luke 24. as if he had said, Were I a
spirit, you could not feel me, because spirits are not subject to sensible
qualities. Now God being a spirit, and ^ot corporeal, we cannot see him with
these eyes.

3. We know there are many creatures Reas. 3.
that are invisible, therefore much more must God the Creator of them be
invisible. The wind, whose blustering gusts we feel, whose sound we hear, yet
we cannot see, nor do we know whence it comes, nor whither it goes, as our
Savior tells us, John 3. 8. The Air is invisible; the soul of man is
invisible, we cannot see the essence of it, while the soul is in the body, we
see it not, when the soul at death departs from the body, we see it not: The
Angels and Devils are invisible, the Angels that protect and preserve us, the
Devils that tempt us are invisible, these we see not, therefore God is
invisible; therefore if an Heathen should upbraid us, you worship a God whom
you see not, where is your God? show him to us, that we may see him. We may
answer him, Therefore we worship the true God, for the true God is invisible; a
God that is visible, is not the true God; those visible stocks and stones which
ye worship, are not gods: They cannot do evil, neither is it in them also to do
good; but the invisible God he is the true God, the living God, and an
everlasting King, Jer. 10. 10.

Here ^t may be demanded, whether Quest. 1.
God be visible in Heaven?

1. We shall in Heaven behold Sol. 1.
Christ in his Humanity, God man with these bodily eyes, as Job speaks, I know
that my Redeemer lives; and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet
in my flesh shall I see God, whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall
behold, and not another, though my reins be consumed within me, Job 19. 25, 26,
27. Behold he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also
which pierced him, R^v. 1. 7.

2. We shall see God, that is, we shall see his glory with the eye of the body
to our intimate satisfaction, though we shall not see the Divine Essence.
Philip makes this request to Christ, Lord show us the Father, and it suffices
us, John 14. 8. The Saints in Heaven shall see so much of God, as shall
satisfy them.

3. With the eye of the mind we shall see God more clearly; our intellectual
sight of God shall be much clearer than now it is, our understanding and mental
sight of him shall be infinitely beyond what now we are able to conceive of him.

4. In heaven we cannot see God comprehensively, as much as he is to be known;
thus no man has seen him, nor can see him, 1 Timothy 6. 16. Men and Angels shall
never be able fully to comprehend him.

Seeing God is invisible, is it lawful Quest. 2.
for us to frame conceits of God, or to frame an image of God in our minds, to
help us in our devotion?

1. It is unlawful, because against Sol. 1.
the second Commandment; which forbids not only all corporeal, but also mental
representations of God.

2. It is impossible to make an image of God, because we never saw him: No man
has seen God at any time, Joh. 1. 18. Christ tells the Jews (speaking of his
Father) Ye have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape, Joh.
5. 37. Moses tells the Israelites (a people very prone to Idolatry) The Lord
spoke to you out of the midst of the fire; ye heard the voice of the words, but
saw no similitude, or vision, only ye heard a voice. Deuteronomy. 4. 12.

3. God is a Spirit, and no man is able to make an image or representation of a
spirit: all such mental conceits of God, are idolatrous.

How then may we conceive of God Quest. 3.
in Prayer?

We are so to conceive of him, as he Sol.
has revealed himself in his Word; that h^ is a Spirit, most wise, most just,
most holy, most powerful, etc.

CHAP. IV.
Sect. 1.
THis condemns the idolatrous Use 1.
custom of the Papists, who make visible representations, pictures, and images
of the invisible God; they picture God the Father like an old man, because he
is called, the Ancient of days; they make blasphemous pictures of the
invisible and glorious Trinity, as three heads on one body: Monstrous
blasphemy! Not to meddle with their fond arguments and trifling distinctions,
by which they would just^fie themselves in this practice; as that they are
Helps to Devotion, etc. But I may say, they are rather Hindrances to Devotion,
than Helps; pulling the mind down from God to the Creature made; for the mind
will be apt to follow the eye. They say, they make them not objects of their
devotion, but motives to stir up and quicken their devotion: But whatsoever
they can say, they cannot answer this one prohibition of God, Thou shall not
make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in
heaven, etc. Exodus 20. 3. a Command which God often repeateth, because the Lord
knows man is naturally prone to Idolatry, and that sensual men are prone to a
sensual worship of a sensible Deity: Therefore the Papists have taken a wise
course to uphold their idolatrous worship, by expunging the second Commandment
out of the Decalogue; but let them look how they can be able to undergo that
severe curse, Rev. 22 19. threatened against those that shall diminish any of
the words or Commandments of God.

2. Seeing God is invisible, this Use 2.
should admonish us to take heed of any mental conceits of God in our minds and
representations of him in our fancies. When we go to prayer otherwise than what
his Word allows, viz. that we go to one, who is most gracious, merciful, etc.
we may be idolatrous in respect of our thoughts and conceits, as well as in
worshipping Pictures and Images: and what are these conceits, but gods of our
own making and framing? Conceits of God in our minds beside the Word of God,
(which many apprehend to be good) come from these two fountains:

1. Partly from our corrupt natures; there is a bitter root of Idolatry and
Superstition in every man's nature; these conceits are blossoms and buds of
this cursed root; so many Adders bred and crawling out of this dunghill, and we
are greatly to humble our souls for them, as for other sins.

2. These fantastical conceits that we have of the invisible God, are likewise
of the Devil's suggestion; who if he cannot bring us to downright Idolatry, to
worship Pictures, yet he will suggest false resemblances of God to our minds,
and so to make us commit mental Idolatry. Therefore concerning these conceits
of God, who is invisible, and the resemblances of him in our minds, I will say
th^se two things.

1. If we harbor such conceits of God, though we think to do it to quicken our
devotion, and to keep our hearts in awe of God, during the duty we perform to
him; yet know, they are breaches of the second Commandment, which forbids
mental resemblances, as well as visible by Pictures or graven Images, and
resolve to offend God so no more.

2. Seeing it is exceeding hard for us to abstain from sinful thoughts,
conceits, and mental resemblances of God, and that the Devil will ever be
suggesting them; if you strive against them, and do hate them, as you hate an
idolatrous image of the divine invisible Essence, then they are the Devil's
sins, and your burdens; God will then cure you of this infirmity, and not
condemn Use 3.
you for it.

Sect. 2.
3. Is God invisible, then be admonished from hence, not to conceive that God
cannot see us, because we cannot see him; as children shutting or blinding
their own eyes, think that no body else sees them: So the wicked, because they
see not God, are ready to say, Tush, God sees us not: they break in pieces thy
people, O Lord, and afflict thine heritage: they slay the widow and the
stranger, and murder the fatherles yet they say, the Lord shall not see,
neither shall the God of Jacob regard it. Psalm. 94. 6, 7. But this inv^sible
God has an all-seeing eye to behold what we do; he sees all our secret
thoughts, he searches and tries our ways, he sees all our hypocrisies,
filthiness, and all our unfruitful works of darkness. All the wicked shall one
day know to their shame and horror, that he saw them when they saw no^ him:
when he shall lay open all their wickedness: he will say to the wicked man,
These things thou have done; I the Judge of all the world am an eyewitness of
these things, and will testify against thee.

Therefore think not, ye Atheists, that ye can sin securely, that no eye sees
you; and that ye may take liberty to sin, when you are in places where no
mortal eye can behold you; the immortal, all-seeing, and every where piercing
eye of God beholds you.

4. Labor to live and walk as if you Use 4.
saw him that is invisible: When you are alone, then walk circumspectly,
because the invisible God beholds you; Say to thy self, Shall I, being alone,
sin this or that sin to which I am tempted? the invisible God beholds me; and
if he see me, it is more then if all Angels and Men did look upon me in the
act. What though I may take away a Babylonish garment, a golden wedge, and
there may be all possible secrecy offered me, yet I will not touch it, because
the invisible God sees me, and sure he will find me out, and make my sin find
me out. I have set God always before mine eyes, says David, and this kept him
in his uprightness. Though God be invisible, yet walk thou so, as having God
before thine eyes, as if thou did continually see him. So it is said of
Moses, Heb. 11. 27. By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the
King, for he endured, as seeing him that is invisible. He did not fear the
wrath of Pharaoh King of Egypt, he durst not abide in Egypt, he was contented
to endure his share, as seeing him who is invisible; he feared the wrath of the
invisible God more than the wrath of visible Pharaoh.

5. If God be invisible, then doubtless Use 5.
there are glorious things prepared for the godly, which are yet invisible. The
best things of Christianity are invisible; the sincerity and truth of grace is
hidden from the world, Your life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3. 3. your
life of grace, your life of comfort, and your life of glory too. The Saints
themselves are a mystery, the world knows them not. 1 John 3. 1. But the
reward which God has in store for his people is much more invisible; God has
prepared such things for his people, as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor
has entered into the heart of man to conceive: Therefore a Christian with an
eye of Faith should look, not to the things that are seen, which are temporal;
but to the things which are not seen, that are eternal, 2 Cor. 4. ult.

Sect. 3.
6. This may justify the godly man's Use 6.
self-denial, and willing parting with the visible things of this world: All
visible delights, honors, and advantages, they are content to part with all;
all miseries visible they patiently undergo, which the world counts madness here
is the Reason, They live by Faith, and not by Sense; have hopes of better and
invisible things, invisible Riches, invisible Joys and Pleasures; they see
invisible treasures of happiness, and in the hopes of these, they can part with
all visible things: They see invisible torments treading on the heels of
visible pleasures, therefore they regard not the visible pleasures of sin,
which are but for a season: Therefore the godly are happy, because they have
hopes of invisible happiness and the hope of those excellent and invisible
things does blast the glory of all visible excellencies, and quench the flame
of all visible miseries.

7. Here Is comfort to the godly in Use 7
two things.

1. Against invisible Enemies; the Devil is an invisible enemy, and by secret
ways, such as we see not, seeks to destroy our immortal sou^s; but this may
comfort them, that they have an invisible God to confound the invisible
stratagems of invisible Devils.

2. Against all afflictions whatsoever. 1. Because God has invisible ways to
work out our deliverance and salvation for us: God's working is invisible,
though his works are manifest and visible. 2. He has invisible comforts to
revive the hearts of his people, when their hearts are ready to faint within
them. He has also Promises of invisible rewards wherewith to succor them.

Lastly, Though God be invisible, Use 8.
yet we may come to the sight of his glory, to our unspeakable joy, and endless
comfort. Will ye see God hereafter, then labor for pure hearts; pure eyes
shall see God, and a pure heart shall enjoy him: Without holiness, no man shall
enjoy God, nor see him in his glory. As light is necessary to enable us to
behold things here which are visible; so is holiness necessary for the man that
will behold him that is invisible: What is that blackness of darkness which
eternally hinders the damned from seeing God, but the woeful impurity and
uncleanness of their hearts and lives?

A Discourse of God's Perfection.
Matthew. 5. 43. Be ye therefore perfect, as your Father which is in heaven is
perfect.
CHAP. I.
OUr Savior having given the true and full sense of the Law, and refuted the
gross Interpretations and errors of the Phar^sees, in the close of the Chapter
sets down Rules of Behavior toward our Enemies; which he urges from God's
own dealing, he is kind to the unkind, good to the evil, and waters the
unjust with showers of his blessing; theu let your love be extended to all, to
thy Enemy as well as to thy Brother. Are the mouths of thine Enemies full of
cursings? do thou bless even such. Do thine Enemies seek thy ^uine? do thou
seek their good: Let thy Prayers ascend to the throne of grace, for such as
persecute thee, and bring thee before Rulers for Christ's N^m^. This is God's
way, his glory, his perfection; and where we see such effects of love in any
man, we may say that God is in that man of a truth, one made partaker of the
divine nature, he so well resembles God.

My Text is an extraordinary conclusion* pressing us to imitate God, whom we
call father,

Be ye therefore perfect, etc. Erasm. in loc.
For explication: Erasmus render's the Greek word (...) in the future tense; ye
shall be perfect. But among the Hebrews, the future of the indicative is often
taken for the Imperative mood: Beza making it an Hebraism. translateth
imperatively. Be ye perfect; ^ez Annot.
and gives this sense of it; by loving your enemies you declare and make it
evident, that you are perfect, and the children of God -- or, Be ye perfect,
Strive after perfection, A Christian is said to be perfect three ways.

1. Conatu, by endeavoring after perfection, St. Paul acknowledged, that he
was not al^eady perfect, but says he, I follow after perfection. Phil. 3. 12.
And to the Hebrews he says, let us go on unto perfection, Heb. 6. 1.

2. Affectu; by breathing and panting after perfection; a Christians being
sensible of imperfection, makes him to breath after perfection, he desires to
be perfectly holy.

3. Inchoative or seminaliter; he has in him the seeds of all grace as a Child
has all the parts of a man, Perfectio p^rtium. Perfectio graduum.
though he has not the growth of a man: a Christian has all the graces of the
Spirit in him, though he has not all the degrees of them; he has a perfection
of parts, not of degrees; the one a Christian has, the other he strives after.
But how must we be perfect? it is thus laid down.

As your father which is in heaven is perfect. As.] Is not nota a qualitatis, a
note of equality, to be equally perfect as God, but not a similitudinis, a note
of resemblance, to be like unto God. A candle is aque lucida, though not equal
to the sun in light.

The word (...) translated perfect, (...) perductum est.
according to the Grammar, does not properly pertain to him. (...) is that
which has an imperfect beginning, and is now brought to perfection: God never
had beginning, God was not made, therefore as Zanchy well observes, the Hebrew
word which signi, (...)
fieth perfection (which most of all suiteth with Gods perfection) comes from
a word which signifies universal, for Gods perfection is nothing else but a
fullness of all excellencies.

CHAP. II.
HEnce I note; that God is most Observe.
perfect; for explication whereof, I shall first show what perfection is, then
how God is perfect.

A thing is said to be perfect two ways.

1. When of imperfect, it is made perfect: thus the whole world of a rude and
imperfect Chaos, was made admirably perfect, so God cannot be said to be
perfect.

2. A thing is said to be perfect, when there is nothing wanting to the
complement and perfection of its nature: thus a man is perfect, when there is
nothing wanting, to the complement and perfection of his nature; thus God is
perfect, who has all, and wants nothing, This is the description of it.

Gods Perfection is that glorious God's Perfection described.
and Divine Property, by which he has an infinite fullness of all perfection,
without any defect or imperfection. A thing is said to be perfect privative,
when it wants nothing, which pertains to the nature of it, so are all things
perfect in their kind, yet there is a negative imperfection, for each creature
may be better; Angels have this negative imperfection, now in God as there is
no imperfection, so he is fully and absoutely perfect. Or briefly: Gods
perfection is his infinite fullness of all excellencies pertaining to the
perfection of his divine nature, he wants nothing, neither can any thing be
added to him.

In God there is an all-fullnesse of all kinds, degrees, and extents of being
and excellencies: this is employed in that name by which he charge Moses to
reveal him to the children of Israel, I am has sent me to you, I am is my
name, Exodus 3. 14. I am all things, I am wisdom, I am power, I am mercy, I am
goodness, I am grace and glory: I am riches, honors, beauty, blessedness, etc.
Hence the Scripture calls God by the name of every thing, a sun, a shield, a
rock, a tower, etc. It implies three things.

1. That all execellencies are in God, all wisdom, all power, all goodness,
grace, glory, majesty, beauty, riches, honors, holiness, whatsoever is a
perfection or excellency, is in God.

2. That all these perfections are in God in a most eminent and infinite
manner, he is most eminently and infinitely holy, wise, good, powerful, etc.

3. There can be no addition to, nor diminution from his perfection; he is so
holy, that he cannot be more holy, nor can he be less holy than he is.
Moreover,

1. God is perfect in his Essence, having a most bl^ssed, absolute, and
independent being; his Nature is perfect.

2. God is perfect in his Attributes, perfectly Almighty, perfectly Omniscien^,
perfectly Omnipresent, etc.

3. In his Works: He is the Rock, his work is perfect etc. Deuteronomy. 32. 4. His
works of Creation, Providence, Justific^t^on, Sanctification, Glorification are
perfect.

But to show how God is perfect, I may the better do it in these following
conclusions

1. God has not his perfection from another, but from himself; for before any
thing was, he was absolutely perfect; therefore from himself, he is primum
bonum, the first good, therefore the first perfection; but all creatures have
their perfection in him as the Fountain, as the Sun has light from it self,
and the Stars from him; as the Sea has water from it self, and all the Rivers
their water from the Sea: What have thou, O man, which thou have not received
from God? whatsoever excellency any one has, it came from God.

2. Gods perfection is a boundless and unlimited perfection; for having it from
himself, he has none to set bounds or limits to him, but his own self, who is
infinite and unlimited. The perfection of the most excellent creatures is
limited, that measure of perfection it has which God vouchsafes to it; the
Angels themselves have no other, and can have no greater perfection than God
bestows.

3. Divine perfection is but one simple and entire form or being, though God be
perfectly holy, wise, just, etc. yet all is but one and the same simple being.
These perfections are not diverse habits and qualities in God; the perfections
of creatures are various and distinct habits and qualities, as wisdom,
goodness, holiness, power, which are all distinct in them. Zanchy fitly
expresses it; the Sea is but one and entire body of water, thus God is a Sea
of perfection; but Rivers are so many distinct things, though they come from
the Sea, and run into the Sea, and do partake of the nature of the Soil through
which they run, thus are the perfections that are in the creatures.

4. God is so perfect, that he cannot be more perfect, nor less, because all
his p^r^ection is from himself, but the creatures may be more perfect; Angels
may increase in power, wisdom, knowledge, and creatures may become less
perfect, as the Angels, that of blessed, holy Angels, became cursed, unholy;
and miserable Devils.

5. God is purely perfect, there is not the least mixture of imperfection in
God, either privative, or negative; Creatures have some mixtures, Angels have a
negative imperfection.

6. God is immutably perfect, there is no possibility for God to lose any
degree of his perfection: Creatures, (though perfect) are in a possibility of
losing their perfection, as Angels did, and as Adam did; the elect Angels are
now preserved in their state of perfection by the power of God.

7. God is indeficiently perfect: God continually communicates his
communicable perfections to his creatures, which are innumerable, yet is there
not the least dimution of his own perfections; all excellencies are derived
from him, as light from the Sun. God is as full of excellency, as if there were
not one creature partaking of his excellencies.

CHAP. III.
THus having opened the nature of God's perfection, I proceed to prove it by
Scripture, and by Reason. First, as for Scripture, the Apostle tells us, 1 John
1. 5. That God is light, and in him is no darkness at all; he is most pure and
perfect light; he is essentially light, and perfectly light, essentially and
perfectly holy; and St. John is not contented to have said, He is light, but
adds, In him there is no darkness there is not the least want, defect or
imperfection in God, not so much as the least shadow of imperfection in him.
God says, Genesis 17. 1. I am God all-sufficient, and Gods sufficiency is nothing
else but his perfection: I am God, who have perfect power and wisdom. etc.

The Reasons of the point are these.

1. Because there is no want of any Reas. 1.
good in him, therefore he is most perfect; want is an imperfection; there is
no want of riches, of honor, of wisdom, of power in God. There is nulla
perfectionis privatio, no privation of perfection; Nulla negatio, no Negation
of Perfection in God, as Divines speak; whatsoever perfection is in God, is
most fully in him. Dyonisius says, God is (...), so perfect, that nothing can
be conceived so perfectly great, glorious, good, wise; but God is infinitely
most great, good, wise, glorious, etc.

2. Because all perfections in creatures Reas. 2.
are from God, therefore he is most perfect; every good and perfect gift comes
down from the Father of lights, therefore he has every good gift in him. What
have thou, but what thou have received from God, wisdom from God, strength from
God, etc. therefore he that gives to all wisdom, has all wisdom in himself
without any want.

3. Because as he gives perfection to Reas. 3.
all creatures, so he gives without spending any of his perfection; though he
gives much, yet he has not the less, but is as perfect, as if no creature had
any perfection from him. This argues that a man has a vast estate, when he
has sufficient for himself, and to give to others; but this argues that God is
exceeding, and rich after another manner than men are; for let the richest m^n
give to many, he has so much the l^sse; but when God gives, he has nothing
the less: Though Heaven and earth, and every creature be full of his
perfections, communicated from him to them, yet God has not the less,
therefore certainly he is most perfect. All creatures are so many thousand
thousand vessels of his perfections, yet God is still a boundless and
bottomless Sea of perfection, so then God is,

(...) (...) (...)
4. Because God is not infinite, if not Reas. 4.
perfect; for were there are any shadow of imperfection, or any defect in him,
then some perfection may be further added to him, and if so, then were he not
infinite.

5. Because otherwise he could not be Reas. 5.
infinitely blessed, and perfectly blessed; if so be God were not perfect in
all his glorious perfections; to perfect blessedness, is required perfect a
aggregatio omnium bonorum, a perfect aggregation of all good things; the least
imperfection detracteth from his blessedness.

CHAP. IV. Objections against God's Perfections answered.
BUt here it may be objected, How Object. 1.
can God be said to be most perfect of himself, when he made all things for
himself? Prove. 16. 4.

Things are made for a threefold end Sol.
to him that makes them.

1. To be auxiliary or helpful to him: Thus the Artificer makes Tools for helps
to him in his calling. Thus Kings gather Forces for helps to them. Thus the
Israelites gathered Manna to help them in their penury. In this sense God made
nothing for himself, as needing the help of any creature; though God be the
Lord of Hosts, yet he needs not the powers of his creatures, of all the Troops
in Heaven and earth to help him, God is perfectly all-sufficient without these.

2. To augment and increase the power, greatness and happiness of man. Men get
more Riches, to make themselves more great, and outwardly happy. Kings multiply
Men and Horses, to make themselves more Potent, and to enlarge their Dominions,
to make themselves greater Monarchs; all creatures, the more they have, the
more perfect they wax; but now God did not make all things, or any thing to
increase his greatness, or power, or happiness. The reason is because God was
perfectly happy, great and glorious, before there was a creature made, and is
so, if no creatures were, from everlasting to everlasting thou art God.

3. God made all things for himself, merely that he might lay open himself, and
communicate his goodness and perfection to the creatures. God that is
perfectly good, made all, that he might bestow his goodness upon all, his
wisdom to some, his power to others, this notes the perfection of Gods
goodness: Bonum est sui diffusivum; it is the nature of good, to be diffusive
of goodness. The Stars were not made for the Sun, as if the Sun had need of
their light; but they are made, that the Sun might communicate light unto them,
and make them shine; so the creatures were not made for God, as If he had need
of them; but he has made them, to communicate his goodness to them.

4. God made them for the manifestation of his own glory by the creatures: We
come to acknowledge the divine perfections which are in God, by beholding the
scattered perfections in creatures; for we must fly to imperfect things, to
admire the perfection of God. Suppose we had never seen the Sun, but only the
bright Stars, and knew that there is a Sun, from whom they borrowed all their
light, how glorious should we conceive the Sun to be? Thus it is with God; we
see the twinkling perfections in the creatures, but not the glorious perfection
of God; but now we know, that all these come from God: how perfect is that God
that made creatures so perfect? And this is to glorify God.

If Creatures do not glorify God, Object. 2*
then God is not perfect, for glory pertains to perfection: therefore when
creatures give glory to him, they add some perfection to him; when they do not
glorify him, he wants some perfection.

God's glory is to be considered two Sol.
ways, as the Schoolmen observe;

Ad intra, Ad extra.
1. Ad intra: As glory denotes his divine perfections in himself; God himself
delighting in the beholding his own glorious perfections; so God's glory is
most perfect, it cannot increase nor decrease, it is always the same.

2. Ad extra; as it implies the creatures acknowledging of these perfections in
God: If the creatures do, or do not glorify him, by acknowledging ^im, yet he
is not imperfectly glorious; for the creatures acknowledgment does not add, and
the creatures not glorifying does not diminish his glory. The creature by
glorify^ng him does but only manifest and testify what is in God: As for
example; a man that is wise, witty, or learned, if we praise him, we add not to
his learning; if we do not praise him, we diminish not his learning; our praise
is but a testification of it; praise him, or not praise him, he remains wise
and learned: So it is with God; whether we glorify, or not glorify him, he
remains perfect. The Sun were a glorious creature in it self, were there no
eye to behold it it, no tongue to speak of it.

If God be perfect, so as that he wants Object. 3.
nothing, why then does he require our worship and service?

I answer: Not that he needs our Sol. 1.
service: Other Lords need the service of their servants; the greatest Princes
in the world, need the service of their Subjects; but God does not; he is
perfectly happy, if we did not serve him. If thou sinnest, what do thou
against him? or if thy transgressions be multiplied, what do thou unto him?
If thou be righteous, what give thou him? or what receives he at thy hand?
Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art, and thy righteousness may profit the
son of man. Job 35. 6, 7, 8. If we sin, we hurt him not, we only make our
selves miserable. Do ye provoke me to anger? no wretches! it is to the
confusion of your own faces. If we be righteous, he is not ben^fited by us; he
needs not our prayers, our obedience, our faith, only we are blessed in so
doing: Our serving of God is our perfection, and the more holy we are, the more
we grow up in perfection and resemblance of our heavenly Father.

2. God requires our service in way of justice, because we are bound to serve
him who is our Lord.

3. God requires our service, not for his own benefit, because being perfect,
he needs it not; but for our own happy benefit and profit: Our disobedience
is our greatest imperfection, and the procuring cause of all our misery; our
obedience to him is our perfection, and an an^ecedent condition of our perfect
glory and happiness.

CHAP. V. Practical Inferences from the consideration of God's Perfection.
HEnce see, that it is of mere grace Infer. 1.
that any are saved. What if all the sons of men had been for ever cast into
the pit of perdition, it had been nothing to God; as when the old world was
drowned, what was it to God? his perfection was not diminished, when they all
perished. Dispute not why so few are saved; wonder rather that any are saved,
seeing God was infinitely perfect in himself, when no man or creature had any
being, and will be perfect, if all had been lost: He needs neither men nor
Angels to praise him; therefore every one that is saved may say, Lord, we are
saved, not because thou did need us, or our services, or praises, but because
thou art gracious to whom thou will be gracious.

2. This should wean us, and all our Infer. 2.
thoughts and affections, from all creatures, which are full of imperfections;
at best, they have but a diminutive or derivative perfection: and place them
upon God, who is an infinitely perfect good. What need we to set our hearts on
drops of perfection, when we may have the incomprehensible and ^athomless sea
of perfection?

CHAP. VI.
THis informs us, why God throws Use 1.
away, and loatheth the duties, sacrifices, and performances of the wicked,
viz. because they are done with rotten, unsound, and wicked hearts. He being a
Spirit, a perfect God, looks at those that serve him with perfect hearts, and
where the heart is found or imperfect. He regards no more the wicked man's
praying, than he does the blessing of an Idol; yea, he hates his most glorious
duties, as wilful murder, Malac. 1. 8. It was a great sin in the time of the
Law, to offer up the lame, and the blind of the flock to God, who required the
best of the herd, and of the flock for sacrifice: It is no less an evil, to
offer up lame or blind prayers, or any act of lame or blind obedience. What
makes your duties so lame, so blind, but your rotten and imperfect hearts? Your
imperfect hearts, make your duties and persous abominable. It is said of
Amaziah King of Judah, that he did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord, but not with a perfect heart, 2 Chronicles. 25. 2. the good duties of the
wicked, are sins to them; both they and their services are rejected: This will
cut the unsound heart to the quick, when he shall hear Christ say to him; It is
true, these and these good works thou have done, these duties and such like
thou have performed; but yet he will say to them, as sometime he did to the
Angel of the Church in Sardis, I have not found thy works perfect before God,
Rev. 3. 2. therefore all thy works are but lost labor.

2. If God be a most perfect God, this Use 2.
infinite perfection of God should make us the more to humble our selves before
God, to be low and base in our own eyes, and that in diverse Respects.

1. In respect of our great imperfections: God is light, we are darkness; God
is Almighty, we Impotent; God is Eternal, we Mortal; God is Good, we Evil; God
is Holy, we Impure; God only Wise, we Foolish; we are very Beasts before him;
God has all perfections, we all imperfections in us.

2. In respect of the very graces in us, the consideration of Gods infinite
perfections, should make us be base and low in our own eyes, though we were
full of the graces of Gods Spirit, because our very perfections have much
imperfection in them; our faith is mingled with much unbelief, our repentance
with impenitency, our patience with impatience, and our obedience with much
disobedience: If the most perfect God should observe the imperfections of our
perfections, the defects of our graces, the ungodliness of our very godliness,
(as I may so speak) who then could stand before him? yea, had we our created
perfection, and were as perfect as Adam in innocence, yet still we should be
base in our own eyes, looking to Gods infinite perfections. The glorious
Angels, who are the most perfect creatures, yet cover their faces standing
before God, as being unworthy to behold the infinite perfections of so glorious
a God.

3. Be humbled in respect of all your Services and duties, that ye do to God,
and for God, and that in three respects.

1. In that all we do, is but little in comparison of what God requires at our
hands: We do not bring in that full Tale of bricks, of prayers, of duties, of
works which God requires at our hands, and which we are bound to perform to
our God. He that does most, is very deficient; therefore we should be humbled,
considering what perfection God requires at our hands.

2. In respect of the manifold imperfections that adhere to all our services
and duties: As we said but now of graces, so of duties, if God should mark the
imperfections of them, woe unto us, woe unto us for our praying and hearing,
etc. woe unto us for our duties and services; considering what perfection of
duties the perfect God requires, how God commands us to pray, to hear his
Word, to meditate upon it, to examine our selves, than he that prays and
hears, and meditateth most and best, may be in his own eyes, as if he had not
prayed, nor heard, nor done any thing at all.

3. In this respect, that he does all that he can do, yet is he an unprofitable
servant, because God being most perfect, is no whit the better, and more
perfect by all our duties, by all our obedience all our goodness,
righteousness and performances extend not to him; therefore never pride your
selves in your duties, but go on in a course of obedience, and be humbled still.

4. How should we be base and low in our own eyes before this perfect God,
considering his infinite perfection of holiness, righteousness, purity, and
then look back upon our sins, our pride, filthiness, and all manner of
imperfections: There is an infinite disproportion between us as creatures, and
God as Creator; but the consideration of the vast disproportion between a most
pure and perfect, most holy God, and such impure creatures as we are, the
thoughts hereof should make us ashamed, and make us base in our eyes, and to
walk humbly with our God.

CHAP. VII.
IS God most perfect, from whom Use 3.
all eminent perfections in us are derived? then you that have received better
perfections from God, than your Brethren, learn hence these duties.

1. Do not despise them who are not endued with such excellencies as you are:
Has God given to thee a wiser heart, a better judgment, a fuller purse, a more
lovely body, than to many others? do not proudly glory in these things, and do
not so puff up thy self, as that he that wants them, seems vile in thine
eyes: This was the advice of St. Paul to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4 6, 7. These
things (says he) I have in a figure transferred to my self, and to Apollo for
your ^akes, that ye might learn in us not to think of men* above that which is
written, that no one of you be puffed up for one against another. Paul and
Apollo were two eminent men in the Church, yet were both stewards of the
manifold gifts and graces of God; though the gifts of Ministers be heavenly,
yet they are earthly vessels: So then whatsoever gifts are in you, learn by us
to think of your selves and others, not above that which is written, and be not
puffed up for one against another: The reason follows, For who makes thee to
differ from another? and what eminent perfection have thou which thou have not
received? Did not God the Author of all perfections, distinguish thee from
others? who made thee a vessel of honor? did thou not receive all from God,
who gives to whom he pleases, and gave thee such and such perfections, and
not to another? it is but a vanity and ridiculous Folly in Stewards to be proud
of their Lords riches.

2. Let God have the praise of all thy perfections, let not men magnify thee,
but magnify God in thee. They glorified God in me, says Paul. Let men
glorify God in thy wisdom, who is most wise, and gave thee a wise heart; and
glorify God in thy knowledge, who is Omniscient, and gave thee knowledge, Thus
Paul, that vessel of grace, It is no more I, but the grace of God in me: That
he was so eminently diligent in preaching the Gospel, and that his preaching
was so powerful, this was not from me, but from the grace of God in me, it was
God that did all by me.

3. Seek all Perfection from God: It is madness for a man to burn Candle light,
when he may have daylight, as much as he can desire; and to fetch water from a
Bucket, when he has a Fountain near him; and as great madness it is for men to
seek perfections from any, but from God; he alone can make you perfect in every
thing. Do thou lack wisdom, ask it of God, who is perfectly wise? Art thou
weak, and do thou lack strength and power, ask it of God, who is perfectly
Omnipotent? whatsoever it be thou want, see but thy need, and go to him from
whom every good and perfect gift comes.

CHAP. VIII.
HERE is also an Use of Comfort Use 4.
to the Godly, who groan under their manifold Imperfections: Consider what a
God you have, whose infinite Perfections, are Comforts against your
Imperfections; you are weak, but your God is perfectly strong, perfectly
Omnipotent: You are Fools, and unwise, but your God is perfectly wise; you are
unrighteous, your Savior is perfectly righteous; your obedience is imperfect,
but his obedience is perfect; all your graces are imperfect, his graces are
perfect for you; all your duties are full of imperfections, but Christ
perfec^eth them; We are complete in him, Colos. 2. 10. Separate a Christian
from Christ, he is imperfect, but in him he is complete; all our graces and
duties are complete in him, and God looks upon us as we are in Christ;
therefore did St. Paul labor to be found in him, because his own
righteousness was imperfect, and Christ's righteousness was a most perfect
righteousness, Phil. 3. 9.

2. Here Is comfort also in this respect, because the same God who has begun
good work in you, will perfect the same Phil. 1. 6. All Gods words are perfect:
he lef^ not off creating, till he had perfected the work of creation; and
Christ ceased not till he had finished the work of Redemption: so has God
begun the work of Sanctification in thee, he will never leave till he has
perfected the work of grace in thee, he will perfect the work of Faith, the
work of Repentance and of every grace in thee: every grain of mustard seed
shall become a tree: thy whole lump shall be leavened. The work of
Sanctification is compared to the rising of the sun. Pro. 4. 18. when the day
once begins to dawn, it still increases, till it come to high noon: so when
once the light of the sun of righteousness begins to dawn upon thy soul, it
shall increase more and more in thy soul, unto higher degrees of perfection.

3. Here is further comfort in that God being perfect, will do away all your
imperfections, and make you perfectly holy, happy and glorious, now we know God
in part, there is a time when we shall know him perfectly, perfectly love him,
joy in him, and we shall perfectly enjoy him who is all perfection. All
imperfections shall be done away; all bodily imperfections: this imperfection
of mortality shall be swallowed up of immortallity; our death shall be
swallowed up of life. All imperfect graces shall be done away; as sorrow for
sin [he will wipe away all tears from our eyes] Repentence, patience, etc. and
some Divines think that faith it self is a grace not requisite in glorified
Saints, seeing all promises are resolved into vision: then all imperfect graces
shall be made perfect, that there shall be as great a distance between a Saint
in this life, and a saint in his perfect glory, as between Solomon in the womb,
and Solomon in all royal glory.

CHAP. X. An Use of Exhortation to diverse Duties.
Sect. 1.
SEeing God is perfect, then be exhorted Use 5.
to imitate God in his perfection, and to serve God with a perfect heart, which
is the thing he so much requires; the service that is only well-pleasing,
crowned with perfect reward; and without this kind of perfection, all glorious
duties are no other, in God's account, than the cursed works of darkness. The
Exhortation is to a double Duty.

1. To be perfect as God is perfect: We may be, we must be perfect as God is
perfect. We cannot be equally perfect as God; we must strive after a perfection
of resemblance, although we cannot possibly attain to a perfection of equality,
created nature being incapable thereof.

Now here I will show how we may be perfect, as God is perfect; and then show,
what it is to serve God with a perfect heart. Now first, That we may be perfect
as God is perfect;

1. Let us lahour to get all grace to exist in us; As God's perfection is the
fullness of all excellencies required to the nature of God; so is a Christians
perfection, an having of all grace requisite to a child of God; as perfection
of parts is requisire to make a man perfect. Were there a defect but of one
excellency in God, he were imperfect: were there but one member in a body
defective, it were an imperfect body; so the want of one grace makes an
imperfect Saint: therefore the Apostle Peter exhorts to add to faith, virtue;
and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance,
patience; and to patience, godliness and to godliness, brotherlykindnes and to
brotherly kindness, charity, 2 Pet. 2. 5, 6. And St. Paul exhorts us to be
filled with the Spirit, wherein there is no excess, Ephesians. 5. 18. It is
impossible for a man to be too holy, too gracious. Covetous men add ground to
ground, house to house, field to field, when they resolve to be rich; thus
Saints should add one virtue to another, if they will be perfect as God is
perfect.

2. We must grow in these acquired graces; the more we grow in them, the more
we come near God in perfection; the more holy we grow, the nearer we come to
him that is perfectly holy; as a growing child comes near the stature and
perfection of a man. He is not in any wise perfect, that grows not more
perfect: A dead child grows not, painted trees grow not, and so will never
come to perfection: Thy holiness is but a dead holiness, thy faith but a dead
or painted faith, if it grow not: Gods perfections are eminent in him; we must
strive to be eminent as he is; this was St. Paul's endeavor. The perfection of
Saints in this life is to be sensible of imperfections, and to desire more
perfection. Take it my brethren, for a sure rule, that the work of grace was
never begun in that heart, where God does not by dgrees perfect the work; for
he is perfect in all his works; perfect in the work of Sanctification of his
elect, as in the Creation of them.

3. We should extend the work of grace in us as far as possibly we can. Let
patience have its perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting
nothing, Jam. 1. 4. Let patience have its perfect work in all afflictions, and
to all men. There are two Graces, wherein we should resemble God in our
perfections.

First, The one is in love to our enemies; the sun of our love must shine upon
them; so does God's perfect love, and in so doing ye shall be like your
heavenly Father.

Secondly, In mercifulnes in the works of mercy to the distressed, yea even to
enemies themselves; Luke 6. 38. And in so doing ye shall be like your heavenly
Father: So that from those places we may see what it is to be petfect as God is
perfect. A merciful man, whose mercy runs round the circumference, is perfect
as God is perfect; a loving man, that can pray for, bless, pardon, even his
enemies, is perfect as God is perfect.

SECT. 2.
NOw I come briefly to the next branch of the Exhortation.

Is God perfect? then serve him with a perfect heart. God speaks to us, as
David to Solomon; And now Solomon my Son, serve God with a perfect heart, and
with a willing mind, 1 Chronicles. 28. 6. Thus God speaks to every one of us, Thou
my son, the son of my grace, the son of my love, of my mercy, serve thou me
with a perfect heart. Now what it is to serve God with a perfect heart, these
three things will show.

1. To serve God with thy whole heart, with all thy mind, will and affections;
The whole soul must be taken up with God in his service; lift up thy heart to
God as well as thine eyes; bow thy heart as well as thy knees; do all thy
duties with thy whole heart; a divided, a distracted heart, is an imperfect
heart.

2. To set up pure aims and ends in thy heart in all services done to God: A
sincere heart, is a perfect heart; to serve God with such an heart, is to serve
him with a perfect heart: Then do we serve God sincerely, when we seek to
advance God in all that we do; we seek that God may be glorified, and so in all
acts of obedience. Jehu's heart was not perfect, because he did not seek God in
doing the will of God: A man may serve himself in doing God's will.

3. To have in thy heart a full respect to all Gods commandments; when it is in
thy heart to do all God's Commandments with all thy heart; to be wanting in no
duty, in no act of obedience, this is to be perfect; Such a man as this, is a
man after God's own heart. Some give this reason why David is said to be a a
man after God's own heart, viz. because he was so zealous for God: Others,
because he was so full of praises. But this is the Holy Ghosts reason, Acts 13.
22. David is called a man God's after own heart, because, he fulfilled all Gods
will, to do all which God commands. We say the eye is perfectly drawn in a
picture, when it equally looks upon all in the same room; So that is a perfect
heart which equally looks to all Commandments of God. Now to stir you up to
serve God with a perfect heart, consider these Motives:

Motive 1. Where perfection of heart is, there the weakect performances are
accepted; the Widows Luke 21. 2, 3.
two mites were better accepted, then the great largesses of the rich; the
infirmities of the Saints, in their faithful services, because done with a
perfect heart. Job had bitter temptations, and murmrings, and many impatient
fits, yet all were forgotten; for what says the holy Ghost? have ye not heard
of the patience of Job? Jam. 5. 11.

2. God will surely protect such; they are his jewels; the Lord highly prizeth
them, and would have all the world take notice of such men: God even boasts
of such men. Job 1. 1. the Lord says of Joh, that he was a man that was
perfect and upright; he speaks it in the commendation of his perfectness.

Use 6. Is God perfect? the very consideration of God's perfection, may teach
us what a woeful creature a wicked man is: Hell is not more contrary to Heaven,
and the blackness of darkness to the brightest shine, then a wicked man is
opposite to God: The Lord is perfectly full of all divine excellencies and
perfections: A wicked man is full of all hideous deformities and imperfections:
God is perfectly pure; the wicked are perfectly impure; God perfectly holy and
righteous; the wicked perfectly unholy, and full of all unrighteousness. You
that call God Father (as there is no wicked man but calls God Father) if he
be your Father, where is your perfection of likeness, of resemblance to him?
What? to be a swinish drunkard, is this to be perfect as God is perfect? What?
to be unclean and filthy, is this Gods perfection? the most pure and perfect
God disclaims you all, and looks upon you as Bastards, and not as Sons, and
gives you up to your Father the Devil; You are perfect as the Devil your Father
is perfect, perfectly wicked, perfectly blasphemous, perfectly hating holiness,
hating it with a perfect hatred: And God will make the impenitent to be like
the devil, perfectly cursed, and perfectly miserable as the Devil is.

A discourse concerning Gods Omnipotency.
Genesis 17. 1. I am the Almighty God; Walk before me, and be thou perfect.
CHAP. I.
I Proceed to another of Gods glorious attributes; viz. his Power or
Omnipotency, whereby he is able to do whatsoever is possible, whatsoever
pleases him; but before I handle it, I will first open the Text.

God (as we may see in the foregoing Chapters) had vouchsafed to speak to
Abraham four times: First, In Chaldea, Genesis 12. 1. when he bade him to leave
his Country and Kindred, promising to bless him, and of him to make a great
Nation. S^condly, he appeared to him in Sichem, in the land of Canaan, Chap.
12. 7. promising him that land for his inheritance. Thirdly, At Bethel, after
Lots departure from him, Genesis 13. 14. There he promises him a numbe^less
posterity. Fourthly, At Hebron, Genesis 15. 13. Now in this Chapter is Gods
appearing to Abraham the ^ifth time; and for the time when God appeared to him,
it is here set down, when Abraham was ninety nine years old; the place where is
concealed; It is thought to have been in Hebron; it is very probable that this
apparition of God was visible, because Abraham being struck with a reverential
fear of God, fell on his face, Chap. 17. 3. At this time God does renew the
Covenant, and his promises made with Abraham long before; and for confirmation
hereof, God did ordain ^ircumcision to be a sign and seal of the Covenant to
all generations.

For the description of the Covenant, it is first in general; Secondly, more
specially described. The general description is in the Text; This is the very
sum of the Covenant; it shows the interchangeable on mutual bargain, Covenant
or promise between God and Abraham. The Covenant on Gods part is, I am God
Almighty: The Covenant on Abraham's part is, Walk before me and be thou perfect.
Now for the opening of the words.

I am the Almighty God.

I am (...) here are two names of God, El, which denotes the power and
strength of God, I am a strong, powerful God; I make all things, and uphold all
things by the word of my power: and Shaddai, this has two significations; it
is translated Almighty, or Omnipotent, from the word (...) destruere, to
destroy, because God is a strong God to destroy his enemies; the strongest
creatures are not able to stand before him, if his wrath be kindled but a
little; or it signifies his Alsufficiency; I am God alsufficient: either from
(...) mamma, signifying a Dugg, because God fills every living thing with
every good thing; or else from (...) and (...) qui est sufficiens, who is
self-sufficient, and all-sufficient; he needs nothing to make him happy, and
he is able to make all others happy.

The Septuagint leaves out the Epithet Almighty, and re^deth the words, Ego
sum Deus tuus, I am thy God.

I am the Almighty God.

This does not only set forth what God is in himself, but what God is to
Abraham, and to all the faithful seed; I am thine Almighty God, I am Almighty
to save thee, Almighty to destroy thine enemies: This title, or Epithet,
calls for three things from all that enter into Covenant with God.

1. To reverence and worship his glorious and Almighty Majesty; Abraham in
token of his reverence and adoration, presently fell upon his face.

2. To trust in him, as if God had said, Know for certain, what I covenan^ to
do, I will do, for I am Almighty; there is no good so great but I can and will
give it to you; there is no evil so great and terrible, but I can and will
remove and keep off from the people that are in Covenant with me.

3. I am God Almighty: Therefore fear to provoke me to anger; it is in vain for
proud miscreants to rise up in Rebellion against me, for I am an Almighty God,
I can and shall easily destroy you.

This is the Covenant on Gods part, which is promissory; Now the Covenant on
Abraham's part is obligatory, binding Abraham and all the faithful, to walk
before God in uprighteousness. The people in covenant with God, are bound to
perform two things.

1. To walk before God: This phrase imports this: sc. what the constant course
of people in Covenant with God is: for walking in Scripture denotes the whole
course and progress of a man's life from step to step, till he comes to the end
of his life; and it concerns faith and manners, to walk before God, or with
God. It is to believe in God, to put all thy trust in him, to depend upon God
only, to serve him only, to obey him according to his will.

Or, in a word, walking before God, or with God, imports these two things.

1. To embrace the promises by faith.

2. To do all duties and acts of obedience which God requires.

And be thou perfect.

Here is modus ambulandi, the modification of a Christian course, that we walk
before God sincerely and uprightly, without hypocrisy and dissimulation; to
have a due respect to all Gods Commandments, to be conscientious of all duties
little and great, and not to fail in any.

I shall now speak of the first interpretation, I am the Almighty God; and
shall first treat of these words absolutely; not as they are Gods promise what
he will be to all that are in Covenant with him.

CHAP. II.
GOd is an Almighty God: Here Observe.
you have his own testimony, what a God he is, who knows his own strength and
power; I am God Almighty; So when he appeared to Jacob, Genesis 45. 11. I am God
Almighty, Rev. 1. 8. he is called, (...), the Almighty: I know some distinguish
these two words, (...), and (...), the one signifies that power whereby he
does all things, the other whereby he upholdeth and governs all things that
he makes: so some render this word omnitenens, quia omnia tenet. Thus the
Angels say of God, holy, holy, holy, Lord, the God Almighty: there are two
Articles (...), to show that nothing is Almighty but God only.

In the handling of this Attribute, I will first show what God's Power and
Omnipotency is; There are two words that signify power, (...) and (...),
potentia and potestas: they are thus distinguished; (...), or potestas, is
taken for authority, right, or jurisdiction, as a King has over his Subjects,
a Master over his servant, Matthew. 28. 18. All power is given me, says Christ,
(...), omnis potestas, authoritas, or jus, is given to me. (...), or potentia,
is that perfection whereby one is able to do any thing; and of this I shall
discourse. There is duplex potentia, a double power.

Potentia activa,
Potentia passiva:
An active power,
A passive power.
There is a passive power, which receives or suffers from an Agent, but
acts not: this is not in God, who is purus actus, a pure act: God is not
obnoxious to any alteration or mutation; there is nothing but an active power
in God. So then God is said to be potent, powerful, because he can do, and will
do whatsoever he pleases: and Omnipotens, Almighty, because he can do
whatsoever is possible to be done. This Omnipotency is twofold.

First, their is Absoluta Omnipotentia; God's absolute Omnipotency: He is
absolutely and perfectly Almighty; he can do whatsoever his infinite
understanding conceives may be done; he can make thousands of worlds if he
please, he can make infinite more creatures then there are. St. Paul says, Ephesians.
2. 20. God can do more abundantly then we can ask or think: It is impossible
for the understandings of men and Angels to conceive what God can do; he is
able to do more abundantly then the vast thoughts and conceits of Angels can
comprehend: And of this Omnipotency the Scripture speaks, when it calls God
the Almighty.

Secondly, There is Potentia Dei actualis, or ordinaria, as the Schools term
it; the actual or ordinary power of God; but more properly called his actual
Omnipotency, which is this: not only that God can do more then he will; but
that God effectually, perfectly and really does whatsoever he wills to be
done. And it is Zanchi's observation, That when soever the Prophets join Gods
power to his promises, it always denotes Gods actual Omnipotency; because God
will really and truly make good his promises. So that this now is the short
description of God's Omnipotency; It is the most glorious perfection
Description of Gods Omnipotency.
of God, whereby he does whatsoever he will, and can do whatsoever is possible
to be done.

CHAP. III.
BUt we shall the better behold the nature of Omnipotency in these following
things. There are these things required in Almightiness, or to be Almighty.

1. That he can effect whatsoever is possible to be done: So that Omne
possibile est objectum Omnipotentiae; every thing possible is an object of
Omnipotency. Mark 10. 27. All things are possible with God. So Luke 1. 37.
There is nothing that the heart can conceive, or the tongue express, but God
can do: So Jer. 32. 27. Behold I am the Lord, the God of all flesh: Is there
any thing too hard for me? Tell me, what thing is there that I cannot do? I
know not any thing that is hard to do but I can do it.

2. That he can do all things facillime, very easily. God Almighty can do all
things most easily; what more easy then to command a thing to be done? if he
speak the word it is done instantly: If he does but say, Let there be light,
let a world be created, let Heaven and Earth, let Sun Moon and Stars be made,
and they are made instantly according to his word. Consider what a great work
the whole world is, with all the creatures contained in it; the Almighty God
did but give forth a word of command, and they were all made. By the word of
the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the hosts of them, by the breath of his
month: he spoke, and it was done, he commanded and it stood fast, Psa. 33. 6,
9. so God can command mercies, comforts, and all are done accordingly, what
more easy way of doing? this shows that God is Omnipotent.

3. That he can do all things irresistibiliter, without resistance, let,
hinderance, opposition, and difficulty: this the Lord Almighty does: there is
no power can make resistance, there is no power can hinder him; he can remove
Mountains, dash Rocks to pieces, puff and blow away all creatures; Omnipotency
infinitely surpasses all power, all is subject to this omnipotency; Angels in
Heaven, Devils in Hell, Men on Earth, and all creatures, he says to the deep
be dry, Is. 44. 27. he commands the earth and it opens her mouth, Number. 16.
30, 31.

4. To be Almighty, is to do whatsoever he pleases, and to be able to do more
then he will: this only God can do whatsoever he pleases, Psa. 115. 3. yea,
God can do more then he will do, Mat. 3. 9. God can turn stones into men, into
beleiving Children, and dunghills into stars.

CHAP. IV. Reasons to prove Gods Omnipotency.
THat God is Omnipotent, may appear by diverse Reasons.

Reason. 1. It is evident from the Creation of the World; to create the least
creature is an act of Omnipotency, incommunicable to any creature. Angels are
mighty in power, yet cannot they create the least contemptible worm; if to
create, demonstrates an Almighty power, then much more the creation of this
vaste world, with all creatures within it, shows God to be Omnipotent; lift
up your eyes to Heaven, cast them upon the earth, behold all creatures in it,
and all are the work of his fingers, Psa. 8. 3. As Nebuchadnezzar in his pride
boasted; ( Is not this great Babel that I have built, for the house of my
Kingdom, by the might of my power, and honor of my Majesty?) may much better
be spoken by the Lord of the world; Is not this great Heaven above, this great
Earth below, that which I have builded, which I have created by the might of my
power, and for the honor of my Majesty? Expede Herculem, you may guess at the
giant like stature of Hercules, by the length of his foot: you may see what an
Almighty God I am, by the world which I have made, which in comparison of my
Almighty power, is but as a drop of a Bucket to the vast Ocean.

2. As the creation, so the upholding and preservation of the whole world,
shows his Almighty power; the same power is required to uphold, which is to
make it: he made the world by the word of his power, so he upholds all things
by the word of his power, Heb. 1. 3. therefore the conservation of the world
is, Creatio continuata, a continued creation: and the word (...), Omnipotent,
imports him that upholdeth, guides, and governs all things; if the same
hand did not uphold this glorious fabric, it would in a moment be turned into
its first nothing.

Reas. 3. That the strong and mighty creatures are all subject to him, ruled
and ordered by him, are at his beck, and cannot but execute his will, argues
his Almighty power. The Angels are great in power; the good Angels fly from
Heaven to do his will, if he commands. The principalities and powers of Hell
cannot stir an inch, but at his pleasure; if he says to the deep, be dry, the
Seas are dry; if he says to the Earth, open, it opens its mouth; if he
commands the Mountains to remove, they are gone; if he smites the Rocks, they
become dust; if millions of Men should oppose him, he can destroy them in a
moment: As the men of Bethshemesh cried out, who is able to stand before the
mighty God of Heaven? so the world of creatures may cry, it is not this world,
nor a thousand more can stand before this mighty God.

Reas. 4. If all the power of all creatures in Heaven, Earth, and Hell could
meet in one creature, yet all would be but as a drop in comparison of Gods
Almighty power, yet there is much power in the creatures, all is derived from
him, even the great power of the Angels: Now he that has given to thousands of
creatures great power, he is much more powerful who is the Almighty God; if
Angels be great in power, if beasts be so powerful, if Rocks and Mountains be
so strong, what is God the giver of this power? if drops of power be so great,
what is the Sea?

Reas. 5. Gods power is infinite, therefore Omnipotent, natura sua, in his
nature; because his Omnipotency is his very essence, infinite in respect of his
nature, by which he does whatsoever he does; his action is never so great, but
it can be greater, more intended, infinite in respect of the objects; there can
be no end of his works; he can make infinite more creatures then he has made;
A Limner or Painter that can draw one Picture, can make more, he that can
fancy a Palace, and according to the idea of it in his mind can build it, can
build more: God that has made one World, can with as much ease create many
more.

Reas. 6. As Gods understanding, knowledge, or wisdom is, so is his power;
whatsoever Gods infinite understanding can conceive to be done, that can his
power do: A Painter can outwardly draw what he inwardly imagines: So says the
Apostle, God can do more abundantly for us then we can ask or think, Ephesians. 3.
20. It is impossible for us to conceive what God can do.

CHAP. V. Diverse Questions about Gods Omnipotency Answered.
QUest. 1. But here it may be demanded, whether God can do things which by
nature are impossible?

Sol. There are two kinds of impossibilities; either things that are impossible
to nature; As,

1. Things that are contrary, or above the ordinary course of nature, as that
the fire should not burn, that Iron should swim, the sun stand still; these God
can do, and has done; though these things be contrary to the natural course of
creatures, yet they are not repuguant to the nature of creatures.

2. There are things impossible by nature, that is, repugnant to the very
being, and nature of the creature; these things God cannot do, not prop^er
defectum potentiae, as if there were want of power in God, but because the
being and nature of the creature is incapable of it.

As for instance in things that imply a contradiction: that a thing should be
and not be at the same instant; or that a man should not be a living creature;
or for one and the same body to be in diverse places at one instant; these
things God cannot do, not for want of power in God, as if he were not
Omnipotent; but because it is repugnant to the very being and nature of the
thing it self: It is repugnant to the nature of man to be no living creature,
to a body to be in more places at once.

Quest. 2. If God be omnipotent, how is it said, he cannot lie, he cannot deny
himself, with such like phrases?

Sol. That God cannot lie, cannot deny himself, cannot change, or sin, these
things argue the perfection of his power, that he is Omnipotent; for these
things argue defect, not power; and not to do these things which are contrary
to his nature, argues his glorious and absolute perfection; that the Sun has
no darkness, or (as it is) cannot be dark and be a Sun, argues the excellency
and perfection of that creature; so when we say, God cannot lie, cannot deny
himself, cannot repent or change, argues his great perfection. God cannot
disenable himself, and do any thing that will not stand with his own glory.

These three things will answer all Objections against his Omnipotency.

1. God cannot do what is contrary to the being of a creature, or repugnant to
the nature of a creature, as such a creature.

2. God cannot do such things as should imply any defect in him.

3. In Scripture, his cannot do such and such things, is taken for his will
not; he will not do such or such a thing, as Genesis 19. 22. Haste thee to Zoar,
says God to Lot, escape thither, for I cannot do any thing, till thou come
there; that is, I will do nothing till thou come thither, because I will
deliver thee from this destruction of fire.

Quest. 3. Seeing God is Omnipotent, Why was he six days in making the world?
he could have made it in a moment.

Sol. Besides other reasons, let this suffice, it was his pleasure to be six
days in making the world; his will is reason enough of his actions.

Quest. 4. Why does God use the ministry of Angels and other creatures, being
Omnipotent? he needs not their help.

Sol. Among other reasons let this suffice; God does not employ them, as if he
needed them in his working, but because he will have his creatures do his
service: that a servant does his Masters work, argues not weakness in his
Master: the ministry of Angels and men argues no defect of power in God.

CHAP. VI.
SECT. 1.
IF God be Omnipotent, then you Use 1.
that are wicked be ye admonished;

1. To take heed of walking any longer in the stubbornness of your own hearts
against God, cease to provoke him to anger; for according to his power so is
his wrath; if ye will walk contrary to him, he will walk contrary to you,
clothed with almighty wrath. And if his power and wrath be against you, then
all the Angels, Devils and creatures in heaven and earth are against you; all
the plagues, curses and vengeance that God can inflict upon you, that the earth
affords, that hell affords, are against you: Therefore if ye will walk contrary
to God, prepare ye to meet the Almighty God in most horrible and almighty
wrath. But tell me O sinner! have thou the strength of stones to bear his
wrath? such strength is too weak: God can break the rocks and pound them to
powder, much more thy stubborn heart; If he touch the mountains they will
smoke; much more when he shall inflict full strokes of vengeance upon thy soul
and body.

What says the Apostle? Do we provoke the Lord to anger? are we stronger then
he? Can ye stubborn sinners grapple with the terrible wrath of the Almighty
God? or can ye overcome him, when ye shall meet him clothed with almighty
vengeance? if ye can, you can do more then all the Devils in hell can do, for
they tremble at the power of his wrath.

2. Let the stout-hearted and stubborn sinners be admonished to humble
themselves before this Almighty God, and fear to sin any more against him: Go
and break your hearts, and humble your souls deeply, and make your peace with
Almighty God, before the decree bring forth his irresistible wrath. Our most
conquering contention, and wrestling with God, is our serious humiliation under
the mighty hand of God. Brethren, either your hearts must be broken with the
sense of sin, or else the Almighty God will break you all to pieces, like a
potters vessel, with his iron rod; either you must cast your selves down before
him, or God in his wrath will cast you into the lowest hell, Isa. 27. 4, 5. But
you will say, how shall we do it? What said the Leaper to Christ, Lord if thou will thou can make me clean: Go ye to Christ and say, Lord, if thou will thou
can humble my proud heart; Lord, if thou will thou can break my stubborn
heart; Lord, if thou will thou can soften this hardened heart of mine; Lord,
if thou will thou can smite this rook of mine, and rivers of tears shall gush
out. I see it is an hard matter for such proud stubborn hearts to be humbled
but nothing is impossible for thee.

SECT. 2.
THe second Use is a use of terror Use 2.
to the professed enemies of God's Church and people.

1. God will show forth his almighty power and wrath against his Churches
enemies to their utter destruction; however the Nimrods, the mighty hunters
before the Lord, may set themselves in their pride, fury and malice against his
people, yet these lofty mountains shall be made plain, and these Anakims, these
great Nimrods shall be driven away by his Almighty wrath as the chaff before
the wind. The Lord who is King of his Church is most wise, and therefore can
frustrate and bring to nothing all their devices; he is Almighty, therefore can
destroy them with a sudden destruction.

Use 2. Here is comfort to God's people, Be not afraid thou worm Jacob: for
the Almighty God that has all power, all might, all strength, is thy shield,
buckler, tower; God is on thy right hand, and left hand, before thee, behind
thee, to uphold, preserve, defend and save thee. If God be with us who can be
against us? if God be with you, who is he that can harm you? let all the furies
of hell with their malice and madness set upon you, yet Vmbra Dei plus valet,
quam mill gladii hominum, mill sagittae, mill exercitus: The shadow of Gods
protection will be more available for your help, then a thousand swords and
darts of men, then a thousand Armies are able to do you hurt.

Use 4. Then be exhorted to pray with confidence at all times, and daily to
depend upon Almighty God: So long as there is a possibility that the thing may
be done, though small or no probability in respect of the outward secondary
causes and means appear, yet pray; because every thing is possible to Almighty
God, and he will put forth his Almighty power to do what shall make for his
glory and thy good. Despair of no mercy whatsoever, Ephesians. 3. 20. God can do
abundantly above what ye can ask or think; God can do great matters, give great
mercies, he can give great deliverances, remove great evils, confound the
crafty, overcome the mighty; therefore pray still; you cannot ask so great
things as God can do for you; you cannot think of so great things as God can
do; yet the mind can conceive greater things then the tongue can utter; ask and
think as great things as you can, yet God can do, and give more abundantly.

Despair likewise of no person, despair not of the conversion of thy wife, and
children, and friends, after whose salvation thy soul longs, pray for them
and continue in so doing; because all things are possible to God, he can break
hearts he can change hearts, convert the stubborn, humble the proud; he can
draw a Camel through a needles eye.

Be exhorted likewise to depend always upon the Almighty God, let him be thy
stay, trust and confidence in the greatest streights difficulties,
perplexlties, or in what condition soever. What! are means weak? its no matter,
God is Almighty, and can bring mighty things to pass by small means. Do means
go cross? it is no matter; God is Almighty, and can make contraries to work thy
happiness. Do means fail? God is Almighty, and can do any thing without means:
All things are possible to him that beleiveth, that depends on the Lord the
Almighty God.

Use 5. If God be Almighty; then be ye lifted up ye heads that hang down, and
be strong ye feeble knees; Gods almighty power is matter of great comfort. Art
thou weak? be not cast down, but hope in God and he can strengthen thee to do
all things. Art thou faint? be not cast down, God Almighty can renew thy
strength, that thou shall run and not be weary, walk, and not be faint, Isa.
40. 31. Art thou afraid thou shall not hold out, but fall back from God? the
almighty power of God shall keep thee through faith unto salvation. Gods
almighty power is a Christians strong hold and garrison. Art thou afraid of
tentations? Gods almighty power is sufficient to bear thee up and out of the
most fearful tentations. Have thou a dead heart? God's almighty spirit will
quicken thee: Fear no affliction, for God's almighty power shall make thee more
then a conqueror in all these. Fear not death nor the grave; for Gods almighty
power can raise thee from the dust, and make thy body glorious, like unto the
glorious body of Christ.

A discourse of the Life and Immortality of God.
Hebr. 3. 12. Take heed brethern, lest there he in any of you an evil heart of
unbeleif, in departing from the living God.
CHAP. I.
THe Author of this Epistle, doubtless was St. Paul: the chief subject of it is
Christ; A secondary drift and scope of it, is to deter such as make profession
of the faith of Christ from backsliding and departing from Christ, as appears
by this Chapter, and by the fourth and tenth Chapters. In his speaking of
Christ he sets him forth two ways.

1. In his absolute and personal excellency; in the beginning of the first
Chapter.

2. In his comparative excellency; being compared with Angels, Prophets, and
Priests, and Levitical Sacrifices, he shows how Christ infinitely transcends
all these. He shows how far he excels all the glorious Angels in the first
Chapter, and that in diverse particulars.

1. He is the natural Son of God.

2. He is the heir of all things.

3. He is the Creator and Lord of Angels, him all the glorious Angels worship
and adore.

Then he shows Christ's transcendent excellency above all Prophets; he
instanceth in Moses, the first and Prince of Prophets, here in this third
Chapter, setting forth the excellency of Moses in an high manner, that he might
the better declare the transcendent excellency of Christ above him.

The thing chiefly commended in Moses, was his faithfulness in Gods House (by
house, understand not a material, but a spiritual house) his Church. Now Christ
excelled Moses in two things.

1. Christ was the Son of God; Moses a Servant.

2. Christ was builder and Master of the House; Moses was part of this house.

Now in the following Verses, the Apostle strongly infers, that Christ is
more excellent then Angels and Moses. We ought to give more heed to the word
spoken by him, then to the word spoken by Angels or by Moses; and this he
presses from the danger of unbeleif, after men have heard and received the
Gospel of Christ. Those that did not believe Moses, were not suffered to enter
into Canaan, but perished in the Wilderness Now the Apostle tells the Hebrews,
that as God dealt with their forefathers for their unbelief, so will he deal
with all unbeleivers, they shall never enter into his glorious rest, but shall
perish eternally.

My Text is a serious admonition to all, to beware of unbeleif, seeing it shuts
men out of heavenly rest, and throws them headlong into hellish torments.
Wherefore] Calv. in loc.
for so Calvin thinks, is to be referred to this twelfth verse, all the
foregoing words being a Parenthesis; take heed, lest there be in any of you,
etc.

In the words there are these three things considerable.

1. A dangerous disease, to which those that make profession of Christ are
subject, viz. Apostasy from Christ, who is here styled a living God.

2. The cause of that dangerous disease, is an evil heart of unbeleif, it is an
hebraism, put for an evil unbeleiving heart, where the Apostle does describe
unbeleif by an elegant paranomasia. (...), unbeleif is Apostasy.

3. The cure and remedy both of the root and disease; Take heed, (...), look
about you, look circumspectly, above all things take heed of an unbeleiving
heart, for in time of trial it will make you to fall off from God. There are
these four points observable from these words.

1. That an unbeleiving heart, is Observe.
the evil heart.

2. That an unbeleiving heart, is the cause of Apostasy from God.

3. Christians must specially watch and keep their own hearts.

4. That our God is a living God.

CHAP. II.
MY purpose is only to handle the last point, viz. that attribute of the life
of God; That God from whom unbeleivers back-slide is a living God.

The life of God is taken two ways in Scripture.

1. For that life whereby God lives Vita Dei dicitur, vel qua vivit in nobis
qui regenerati sumus.
in his Saints, or a Saints godly life, ^ph. 4. 18. The Apostle setting forth
the state of unregenerate persons, men addicted to their lusts, says, They are
alienated from the life of God; that is, have no acquaintance with the holy,
heavenly and spiritual life, this life is here called the life of God; and Gal.
2. 20. it is called the life of Christ; I live; yet not I, but Christ lives in
me; this life is also called the life of the spirit, and beleivers are also
said to live in the spirit, Gal. 5. 25. But this life I am not to speak of.

2. It Is taken for that essential Vel qua ipse vivit in sese.
life of God, or that life which God lives himself, and in himself, and which
is very God himself. In him was life, says John of Christ, as God, John 1. 4.
that is, essentia vivens ab aeterno in aeternum, that living essence who lives
for ever and ever, giving life to all others; and this I am to speak of: As the
life of God is taken two ways, so again living God is taken two ways in
Scripture.

1. Either it is opposed unto dead and false gods, 1 These. 1. 9. Ye turned from
idols, which cannot hear, speak, or do any thing for you, to the living and
true God; Or,

2. Living God, implies that God is a powerful, lively, and effectual God, Heb.
10. 31. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, most
powerful, able to destroy body and soul; or, who eternally lives to take
eternal vengeance on your immortal souls. This being premised, I will briefly
show, what the life of God is. Thus it is described.

It is Gods own divine being, Descr.
who of himself does all things, and is the Author of all life in his creatures.

Or thus, It is the divine being, who of himself, understands, wills, and
loves infinitely, and is the fountain of all life, being, and motion in all
his creatures, both bodily and spiritual. Let me give it in parts.

1. It is the divine being, so it is Anima, vivere, and operationes vitae.
distinguished from the life of creatures, for in their life are three things;
the soul, by which it lives; the life it self; and the actions of life,
distinguished in the creatures; but in God, the essence, life, and the actions
of life, are one and the same; his life is nothing else but his very being,
hence he is called that life, and life eternal, and the living God.

2. Who of himself does all things, or of himself understands, wills, and
loves all things, and in this he is distinguished from the life of creatures,
for they live in another; live, move, and have their being in God; but he most
independently lives of himself, understands and wills of himself, therefore
called Jehovah, who has being from himself.

3. He is the Author of all life in his Creatures, in him they live; if he
withdraw himself, Creatures are turned into destruction: if he say, Return
again ye sons of men; they live, Psa. 90. 3. of dry bones he makes living men,
and of living men he makes dry bones. It Is said, he breathed the spirit of life
into Adam, and he takes away man's breath again. Some Divines make a fivefold
life of men.

1. The life of nature, and this God is the Author of, he made man a living
soul; In him was life, and that life was the light of men, Joh. 1. 4.

2. The life of grace; and it is God alone that quickens men that are dead in
trespasses and sins, to live the life of godliness, Ephesians. 2. 1.

3. The life of comfort; Sorrow is called death, Psa. 116. 8. Thou have
delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, etc. What is the eternal
death of the damned, but eternal sorrow? sorrow is called the vale of death;
Now it is the Lord that speaks peace, and creates joy to disconsolate spirits;
Vita nihil aliud est, quam actio cum delectatione, as some define it: and what
is the life of Angels and Saints, but unspeakable and endless joy in God?

4. Resurrection of dead men to life; God only by his almighty power, can
command the graves to yield up their dead, and make each soul to possess its
own body, after a long divorce made by death. God alone brings these two old
friends together, which at first were loath to part, and then shall never part
again, but shall then live with God for ever, or else dye a living death with
Devils in Hell.

5. A life of glory, which he alone gives to all the godly; Christ says of his
sheep, Joh. 10. 28. I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish.

CHAP. III. Of the Properties of the life of God, with reasons to prove him to
be a living God.
NOw I shall explicate Gods life further in the properties of it.

1. It is a most perfect and blessed life; because there is nothing wanting to
make his life most perfect, he living of himself, independing.

2. It is an immutable life; there is no change nor alteration of his life; man
is up and down, sometimes brought as low as death anon revived, and walks again
in the land of the living; Gods life is always the most happy, glorious and
delightsom life.

3. It is an immortal and eternal life, it has no beginning, neither is it
capable of dying; God cannot cease to be.

Now I shall prove that God is a living God by Scripture and Reason. For
Scripture, read Deuteronomy. 32. 40. I lift up my hand to heaven, and say I live for
ever. This lifting up the hand was either a sign of swearing, or a gesture used
by such as took an oath, Genesis 14. 22. as Abram said to the King of Sodom, I
have lifted up my hand to the Lord, the most high God, the possessor of heaven
and earth. Sometimes it was a sign to make the hearers more attentive; Thus
says the Lord, Behold I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and set up my
standard to the people, etc. Isa. 49. 22. Both ways it may be taken here,
though in the former properly; for there Moses brings in God swearing, I say, I
live for ever; God speaks like a living God. I say, says God, None but he can
say so: Should creatures be so impudent as to say, I say I live, God will make
them appear to be but dead dogs. God says, I live for ever; admit creatures
may say we live; yet herein is the living God discerned, I live for ever:
Before the world was, I lived, and when the world shall have an end, I live,
Psalm. 42. 2. David calls him the living God. Now the Reasons of it are these.

Reas. 1. Because whatsoever is a perfection in the creature, is most eminent
in God. Of all natural perfection life is the principal, it is better then
beauty, strength, wisdom, nothing is more dear then life: Skin for skin, and
all that a man has will he give for his life. A living Dog is better then a
dead Lion, Eccles. 9. 4. One living Soldier is better then an huge Army of
dead Soldiers; a living beggar is better then a rich Nobleman. Now if life be
such a perfection, then surely God is living, and his life is most perfect, and
most eminent: If God were a dead God, he should want the greatest perfection;
then many living creatures would be better then God himself; he is no God, if
he be not a living God.

Reas. 2. From the actions of God, we may evidently argue him to be a living
God; he knows all things, he wills all things, he makes all things; he is a God
that hears our prayers, and grants the very desires of our hearts, gives
the very things we beg, which he could not do, were he not a living God. What
makes him the only true God? but because he is a living God. The false gods,
the Idols, the vanities of the Gentiles, have eyes, and see not; ears, and
hear not; hands, and work not. Baal could not hear his Priests crying aloud to
him, O Baal hear us; therefore they are no gods: But God has eyes to see all
things, yea the secrets of men's hearts; ears to hear the desires and groans of
the poor and dictressed; therefore he only is the true and living God.

Reas. 3. All our life is from him, therefore he is a living God; therefore
Christ is called The author of life, Acts 3. With thee is the fountain of life,
Psalm. 36. 9. Life natural, spiritual, eternal is from God as the fountain;
therefore he is called life, not only because he is life essentialiter,
essentially; but also effective, effectually. And by the Platonists he is
called (...); The soul of the world; he quickens and governs the whole world,
and has all the lives of his creatures in his hands, I kill, I make alive, I
save, I destroy, Deuteronomy. 32. 39.

CHAP. IV. Of the Immortality of God.
NOw because the Immortality of God (though it be a distinct Attribute) falls
under, and in with the life of God; I will annex a brief discourse of the
nature of it, and so make application of the life and immortallity of God
together. God is a living God, and this life of God is not subject to death,
wherefore he is called immortal. Now I shall give a brief description of Gods
Immortality.

It is that perfection of God, Des^r.
whereby his life cannot be separated from him by death. God cannot cease to
live; God cannot dye, 1 Timothy 1. 16. The Reasons of it are these.

Reas. 1. Because God is most simple, void of all composition of body and soul:
or a principle of life, and life it self being the same in God, his own essence
is his life. Only things which are compounded, are subject to dissolution: Man
being compounded of soul and body is obnoxious to a separation by death; where
there is no union, there is no separation; where there can be no separation of
parts there can be no death or mortality.

Quest. But are not Angels and the souls of men immortal, who are not subject
to death? therefore not God only.

Sol. 1. It is true, Angels and the souls of men are immortal, but they are
subject to annihilation, which God is not: Angels and souls of men may cease to
be, but God cannot cease to be.

2. Angels and the Souls of men are immortal dependently; God conserveth them
in their being, they are kept by the power of God; but God is immortal
absolutely and independently.

3. Angels and souls of men are immortal per participationem, by participation;
God makes them partakers of his immortality.

4. There is an analogical mortality in Angels and the souls of men, though
they cannot cease to live, yet they may cease to be happy, and to live
miserably to eternity. The damnation of the Apostate Angels is a kind of death;
so the damned souls suffer a kind of death: Damnation is called in Scripture
the second death; it were better that such souls did perish as the souls of
beasts; and when they cease to live this natural life in the body, that they
did cease to be.

CHAP. V. Uses drawn from the life of God.
IF God be the living God, then Use 1.
he is the only true God, to be feared of all, and to be worshipped.

1. To be feared, because he only can kill and make alive, he alone preserves
men from destruction, and turns men into destruction. The vanities of the
Gentiles can neither do good nor hurt, neither save nor destroy; they have
hands but cannot strike a man into destruction, nor pluck a man from
destruction. When Daniel was cast into the den of lions, the living God
preserved him from death; when his accusers were thrown in, their Idols and
golden images could not preserve them, but the living God destroyed them: See
what a good use Darius, an heathen King made of it, and what a charge he
gives; Dan. 6. 26. I make a decree, that in every dominion of my Kingdom, men
tremble and fear before the God of Daniel; the reason follows, for he is the
living God; the Images whom we adore for God, are dead things; how does he
prove that God is a living God? verse. 27. he delivers, and rescueth, etc.
therefore fear and tremble before him; the gods whom we serve, can neither
deliver, nor rescue, nor work signs and wonders; the like argument Christ uses
to persuade us to fear God, because being a living God, he can destroy both
body and soul.

2. He is the only true God to be worshipped, because a living God, and
therefore can hear, help, and save all such as worship him in spirit and truth;
men show no greater madness in the world, nor do more un-man themselves, then
in worshipping dead stocks and stones, who have carved hands, but are dead hands
and cannot save; have carved ears, but are dead and cannot hear; such were the
gods of the Heathen; and to adore dead stocks, was the fruit of their blind
Religion; and the Papists that pretend to know the true God are no less
sottish; what is their Bread-Worship, Altar-Worship, Crucifix-Worship, but a
robbing of the living God of his glory, and giving it to dead senseless
creatures?

Use 2. Is God a living God? then commit your lives to him in welldoing; trust
the eternal living God with your mortal lives, and fear not the rage and malice
of evil men, for they cannot take away your lives from you, unless God permit
them; not an hair shall fall from your head without his knowledge, then much
less shall a drop of your blood fall, much less a limb shall be cut off from
your bodies; much less shall they take away your lives from you, if the living
God will keep them and preserve them; See David's practice in a time when his
enraged Enemies consulted to take away his life from him; They devised to take
away my life, but I trusted in thee O Lord; I said, thou art my God, my times
are in thy hand, deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, etc. Psalm 31. 13,
14, 15. all our times are in the hands of the living God; our time of life, the
continuance and length of it; our time of death, the manner, moment, and
instrument of it, all is in the hands of the living God; thy life and death are
not in thine enemies hands, they cannot take away thy life at their pleasure;
wherefore commit thy life to God, and fear not the rage of enemies. Should we
at any time forsake God to please men, for the preservation of life, and betake
our selves to sinful shifts, it may fall out to us, as Christ foretold; He that
saves his life shall lose it, and he that loses his life for Christ's sake
shall save it, even this natural life, or the eternal life of the immortal
soul. Therefore if ye will have us to dye, let us not be much troubled, but be
ready to give up our lives into the hands of the living God, and if he will
have us dye, we can but dye; as the Leapers said at the gate of Samaria, the
living God can give us a better life, and if the Lord will, he can deliver us
from death. The three Children were more regardful of their duty to God, then
of their lives, Dan. 3. 16, 17, 18. this was the sum, whether God would deliver
them, or not deliver them, they were not anxiously careful, they were careful
to serve God, but careless about the saving of their lives: Better it were that
the fiery Furnace should consume their lives, then that the fire of Hell should
consume their souls.

Use 3. Hence there is good ground we should place all our confidence in God,
and in no creatures whatsoever, because they are all dead perishing vanities;
if we may confide in any creature, then may we put confidence in Princes,
because they are great and powerful, they are Gods on earth, and can afford the
best aid and help to men in distres yet consider that in Psa. 146. 3, 4, 5. Put
not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help.
Princes, though they are great in power, yet they are the Sons of men, and
obnoxious to the common condition of mankind; they are vain, mortal, they dye
and perish, and when they dye all their thoughts perish; all the purposes,
plots, designs and intentions of Princes to do men good, dye with them, and
their favorites are left to shift for themselves. Then the Psalmist, Verse. 5.
breaks forth into admiration of such a man, who makes God his help, his aid,
his confidence and hope; he is a living God, he cannot dye, he is a great God,
and his greatness is a living greatness and none of all Gods thoughts perish,
but they endure from one generation to another; if we must not put confidence
in Princes, then much less are we to trust in uncertain riches, in uncertain
honors, in in Houses and Lands, for these are all dead things, and more vain,
and less able to help then man; when riches are gone and perish, the living God
will and can aid us; all the creatures are by fits, but so many dead dogs
before the living God.

Use 4. ^s God a living God, and the fountain of all life and motion? then we
should not despair of any, though they through corrupt lusts do even stink in
the nostrils of the godly, yet the living God can breath the spirit of life
upon them, and make a dead sinner become a living soul to God, a dead drunkard,
and a dead worldling, buried under a dunghill, become a living soul to God; it is
no superstition for you that live the life of God, to pray for such dead, for a
living husband to pray for his dead wife, a living father to pray for his dead
children; so when God shall bring a Minister, as he did the Prophet Ezekiel
into a valley of dead bones, of dead sinners, and say unto him, Prophecy: O ye
dead sinners, hear ye the word of the Lord, and while we are prophesying, God
should cause the breath of life, bones and sinews to come upon these dry bones,
should we then despair of the quickening of any dead soul? we are to mourn over
the dead, but not as men without hope of their better and more glorious life
and condition; the living God can yet make them live the life of God; we should
do therefore for sinful men, as David did for his sick Child, while it was
living, he humbled his soul, laid on the ground, fasted and prayed for the
child's recovery; while there was hope, he would not give over praying; so while
there is hope of a man's resurrection from death to life, of his conversion from
sin to God, be not wanting in all means, for in so doing you may save a soul.

This likewise may teach the godly in all their dead and dull tempers of heart,
whether to go for life and motion, sc. to the living God, in whom, as all
naturally live, move, and have their being; so the Saints in him have their
spiritual being, life and motion. Thus David prays nine times, in Psa. 119.
that God would quicken him; as who should say, my heart is dead, my prayers are
dead and lazy, I have no heart to any good; but thou who art the living God
can quicken me, and revive me, and enlarge my heart, and make me to run the
way of thy commandments. Therefore in all your deadest frames be more frequent
in prayer, do not give over because thou find not thy heart so fervent. It
is reported of that holy Martyr Mr. Bradford, that when he went about any duty,
he would never give over, till he found some reviving from God; if he confessed
his sins, he would confess till he found his heart melting and mourning; if he
prayed for pardon, he would still beg for pardon, till he found his heart
somewhat eased of his sins; in praying for grace, he would never give over till
he found his heart warmed in prayer; go then and do likewise, in all thy dead
frames, importune the living God till he does revive thy spirit.

Use 5. This should comfort the godly against the fear of death, and the
forerunners of death; ye are for the present the Sons of the living God, ye are
come to the City of the living God, what need you to fear to dye, seeing God
will give you life eternal? ye are the living stones of the Temple of the
living God, and he can raise your dead bodies, when mouldered into dust, and
make both soul and body live gloriously and eternally? when a godly man dies,
eternal life swalloweth him up; did ever man fear to go to bed, to put on
better apparel; shall we be afraid to die, to put on glory, immortality, and
eternal life?

Use 6. Take heed of sinning against God, because he lives to take vengeance
upon stubborn Rebels; he is a living God, and takes exact notice what sinners
do, and lives for ever to torment the wicked to eternity. The wicked need not
fear eternal death, if they did sin against a dead God; but God who is life
eternal, will doom them to eternal death.

Use 7. Here see the folly of Apostates, in departing from a living God to
embrace dead creatures, that forsake the fountain of living waters, and run to
a pool that one warm day will dry up; as Mephibosheth said to David, proferring
him kindness for Jonathan his fathers sake: What is thy servant, that thou
should look upon such a dead dog as: I am? So do creatures say to Apostates,
What are we thy servants, that that thou should take thy heart and eye from
off a living God, and look upon such dead dogs as honors, riches, and
preferments are? or rather speak to them, as David to Saul, 1 Samuel 24. 14.
after whom is the King of Israel come out? after whom do thou pursue, after a
dead dog, after a flea? do thou pursue after a vile and base creature? and
cast off a most blessed God, the fountain of all glory and happiness. O ye
Apostates, seeing you forsake a living God, ye shall die the death; God lives
for ever to see sore execution done upon you, this shall be your dying life in
Hell, to bemoan your departure from the living God.

CHAP. VI. Uses drawn from Gods Immortality.
IS God an immortal God? then Use 1.
hence behold the infinite love of Christ, who being immortal, yet would become
subject to death; an immortal God, become a mortal man for our salvation* Romans
5. 8.

2 Seeing God is immortal, hence we may see what a beam of divine perfection we
lost by the fall of Adam; we were made immortal, but our sin makes us mortal,
and liable to all mortal and sore diseases; we lose a double immortality
because of sin, the immortality of our bodies; and which is worse, in some
sense, we lose the immortality of our souls; Sin brings eternal death; will ye
still go in sin? has it not done enough to you, in making you obnoxious to
death, but will ye bring upon you the eternal death of your immortal souls?

3. This likewise should allay the fears of death in us, God being immortal, we
also shall be immortal; these mortal bodies shall put on immortality.

4. See that ye fear God more then men, the wrath of God more then the rage of
men; because man is but mortal, and their rage and fury is but mortal; when
their breath goes forth their rage cease; but as God is immortal, so is his
wrath an immortal wrath, as he will never cease to be, so the fire of his wrath
shall never be quenched.

FINIS.

