THE RIVAL KINGS: OR THE LOVES OF Oroondates and Statira, A TRAGAEDY. Acted at
the THEATER-ROYAL:

Written by Mr. BANKS.

Divesne Prisco natus ab Inacho,
Nil interest, an Pauper, and infima
De gente sub dio moreris,
Victima nil miserantis Orci --
Horat. Lib. 2. Ode 3. LONDON, Printed for L. C. in Goat Court on
Lud-Gate-Hill, 1677.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LADY Katherine Herbert.
MADAM,
NEver till this time could I suspect that it was an easier thing for me to be
the Author of a Play, than to write this Dedication to my mind; but now I
confess, so awful is my Patroness, and so humble and zealous my pretensions
in this kind, that unless I could bring an offering that might far surpass
whatever has went before it, I should think it too mean for your acceptance;
and for the reason that having been allowed, and passed the sufferages of the
most curious Critics in the Theater, I should be the more unfortunate to be at
last Shipwrack'd in the Haven, by an opinion of my Dedication, whereof some of
the leading Wits in these times have been censured; how hard is it then for a
young Writer to please this delicate Age, wherein every year the Wits study the
fashion of Language to refine, and alter it, as they do their Clothes; and
true it is, that it is another thing to write the sense and speeches of Heroes
that are dead, and make 'em speak as we please, governed by our fancy, then it
is to reach the minds of those illustrious Persons that Poetry is ^orc'd to
choose to be above its Judges, the Patrons of Wit: For in our Plays you read
your own Characters, and they are at best but what we have gathered from you,
who daily act among yourselves in conversation, (in a lighter Orb) what none of
the greatest, and indeed barbarous Courts could ever attain to; and good Poets
are at the best but like bad Painters, that only show you the shadows of your
selves, grossly daubed, without imitating the least spark of the bright
original* With what reverence and caution then ought I to approach you, Madam,
whose Nobility and Virtue are in the Sanctuary of so divine a shape, that it is
an excuse for all that see you to give their Souls no liberty to speak or think
profanely of you, but justly to be confined to admiration, and the whole World
will say as well as I, that all that it has heard of Angels, are to be seen in
you, and likethem too, you are adorned with so heavenly a Spring of Youth, as
if you were to blossom to Eternity, or as if you were indeed the secret
Goddess of Divine Nature discloss'd, that every year makes Vegetables grow,
and all the Living receive a hidden and diffusive pleasure from her influence.
You are the greatest blessing the Almighty has designed to that incomparable
Person your Father as a Reward for his Justice and Loyalty in that most eminent
Place, wherein Heaven, and the wisest Prince has set him, as the richest and
most adorning Jewel of his Crown, and a continual and faithful Steward to this
Nation, and no doubt, for its preservation and welfare, all England as well as
my self, does pray, that he may long live the worthy and indeared Servant of
such a grateful and Royal Master. To you, Madam, therefore, before I conclude,
I am to beg a protection for this worthless Poem, the product of some
melancholy hours, and not of my business: And if perhaps I have in this my
first undertaking, like a raw and unpractic'd Magician in his Art, raised to my
self the envy of some malicious and troublesome Spirits, which I have not the
skill nor courage to lay, I have therefore wisely invoked you for my Deity:
for neither Critics nor Devils, I am sure, can presume to hurt me in that
Circle, which your Name has guarded and made sacred. Let the modesty of the
Stilemake an atonement for the meannesse of the Language, and if your thoroughly
discerning judgment, and beauteous Eyes, like the Sun, discover motes and
spots in what you read, you have clemency and goodness in abundance to forgive
them, and impute 'em to the inartificial dress of a Virgin Muse; in my next
she may appear more curious. I bring in my behalf too the Conqueror of the
World, to lay before your feet, the greatest Man that ever was, who, were he
living, would become a Rival to his dear Ephestion, and behold in your Person,
as well the sweet, serene, and obliging Innocence of Parisatis, as the more
lofty and Imperial Graces of his Statira. This great Man, Madam, the Author of
the famous Cassandra thought never to be equaled, but in the person of the
most exquisite of Lovers, him therefore he has raised in the Character of
Oroondates, to be a Rival to the mighty Alexander in the Romance, and here I
have brought him to be so in you, and the rather, because I prefer him to the
likeness of the young, hopeful, and gallant Partner of your self, which I pray
he may never cease to be, but early anticipate the extraordinary expectations
of Mankind, and crown you with greater happiness then Fame and Fancy have yet
created in the minds of the most Heroic Lovers. This, and whatever increases
your felicity shall be the perpetual wishes of, Madam,

Your most Humble and Obedient Servant JOHN BANKS.

PROLOGVE.
FOrget how you were served last time, and pray
Be kind this once --
TO a modest Prologue and a modest Play,
Dreading your anger poor deluded Tray
Has slipped his Collar, and is run away.
Jo. Haynes himself, that showed us this dog trick
Has left us all of our displeasure sick.
To the Ladies now the Author by me speaks,
A just admirer of your gallant Sex;
He is your Poet, and a Lover too,
For chiefly he designed this Play for you;
If you can find but in it Love or Wit,
He vows he can out love what he has writ:
Bids me remember e're you be displeased,
How with Cassandra's famed Romance ye were pleased;
How many nights 't has kept you long awake,
Nay and have wept for Oroondates sake.
When so good natured to him, but in thought,
Be but so kind where he himself has brought.
For your new Poet next I must implore;
Dash not his hopes of this on any score;
For if you do --
He is so modest he will write no more.
Disperse the storms with your fair smiles and eyes,
That from the rage of Blustering Critics rise;
And as the Tempest gathers in the Pit
Let the bright Boxes beams then scatter it,
Persons Represented.
Alexander the Great Ephestion a Youth extremely beloved by him. Great Captains.
Lysimachus Cassander Phillip
Oroondates King of Scythia. Araxis his Confident. Bagistanes a Persian left
Governor of Babylon by Alexander. Darius Daughters.
Statira Parisatis
Melanthe, Woman to Statira. Women and Attendants. Anbassadours. Priests.
Guards. Captains.
The Scene Babylon. THe Reader is desired to take notice of, and pardon the
Errata's of the Printer in this Play, the reason was that the Author going into
the Country, and leaving no other than a foul Copy in the Stationers hands did
order every Sheet to be sent down to him to correct before it went further in
the Press, which was promised to be done.

Page 2. l. 1. r. treason. l. 28. r. stream. p. 3. l. 34. r. one. p. 4. l. 2.
r. f^te. l. ^lt. swoone. p. 8. l. 36. r. have. p. 11. l. 24. r. wondering. p.
16. l. 35. r. ^el. p. 17. l. 2. r. relume. p, 10. l. 7. lonely. l. 12. Spheres.
l. 26. me. p. 20. l. 11. Cassandra. l. 22. just flying. l. 24. say. p. 25. l.
7. had. p. 26. l. 19. adorn. l. 23. unbridle. l. 26. cosnjeal'd. l. 27. large.
p. 27. l. 8. O. p. 28. l. 7. bird. l. 22. he. l. 32. debts. p. 30. l. 13. pour.
p, 32. l. 23. Sir* 2. l. of the Act concern. p. 33. l. 25. nightly. p. 35. l.
4. and. l. 33, bodies. l. 36. Stars, for the r. in the. p. 36. l. 2 1 like. p.
39. l. ulr. sunk. p. 40. l. 15. and. l. 44. pry. p. 41. l. 31. dares. p. 42. l.
16. forsakes. p. 43. l. 34. Cydnus. p, 45. l. 19. they will not. p. 48. l. 38.
thou. p. 50. l. 5. one. l. 43. proud. p. 51. l. 16. for two r. the. l. 36. us.
p. 52. l. 20. through.

THE RIVAL KINGS
Actus Primus, Scaena Prima.
Enter as newly arrived Lysimachus, Cassander, Officers, and attendance, in
State. Lys. FROM Ganges, and beyond Nyle's secret Bed,
Strange conquered Nations have Euphrates spread,
By Heavens eternal Power, ordained to meet
In the Worlds center, and it is Royal Seat.
From other Parts whilst succors bend their course,
You bring from Greece, the Foot to reinforce,
And I from Thrace, five thousand Winged Horse.
So the great Sea maintains it is swelling Pride
By lesser streams, that thither daily glide;
All things contribute to this mighty King,
To Alexander flowing, leave their Spring,
And Aids from the remotest Places bring.

Cas. We but appear like Day break after Night,
Where e're He comes, he fills the Sky with light.
So the base Moon does often Eclipse the Sun,
And shade that Beauty, whence her light begun.
He sends us forth, like Nylus in a Flood,
To drown the World, and Court him with the good.

Lys. Filled with success, he is luxurious grown,
And gluts with Blood, his cruel wanton Throne.
The News you tell me of Phylotas Death,
If true, who after him can hope for breath?
Is It possible! Repeat it yet again --
Ye Gods! The Son of bold Parmenio slain!

Cas. This News, the Great Parmenio as a Friend,
TO Antipater my Father did commend:
His fault was, he did Dymnus Treasure hide,
So that for that he never believed he Died.

Lys. Of Dymnus fond conspiracy, I Have heard,
But never thought Phylotas so deserved.

Cas. Had that been sought, Phylotas might have stood,
Till his known Innocence had saved his Blood;
But what bold Creature in the Forest dare
With the stout Lion in his Hunting share?
His Generals, Friends, and all Obnoxious stand,
To be picked out for Death at his Command;
But for my Sufferings, more than Death I grieve;
In my lost Fame, he buried me alive:
You and the World did witness my disgrace,
When that base blow he struck me on the Face,
I wish that I had Died in Clytus place;
I Travel with the Weight --

Lys. Cassander hold --
You were too blame, and Clytus was too bold.

Cas. Have done Lysimachus, there is a smothered shame,
When thus fomented breaks into a flame;
I had a Thunderbolt as well withstood,
And cherished lightning in my vital blood.

Enter to them Bagistanes. Bag. Fresh News overtake the former on the way,
And all confirm the King will come to day.
Shrill joyful Clamours, which the Clouds involve,
Pierce through the Air, and over our Heads dissolve,
And near Euphrates, all their Trumpets sound,
Slide down the Streams, and from our Walls rebound.

Lys. The News is great, and welcome that we hear.

Bag. But over our Sun does a thick Cloud appear,
That makes his glorious body shine less clear.
As often in multitudes of Shouts ascend
A loud and goodly noise, till at the end,
Some single voice behind, does flagging lie,
And Robs the whole, of it is full harmony. --

Lys. I interrupt you -- Is the King in health --?

Bag. He is, but he has lost his greatest wealth,
A treasure, that the Gods did envy him.

Lys. If that be all, he will be rich again.

Bag. Ah, but this loss, he never will redeem. --
The General of the World, Parmenio's slain.

Lys. Parmenio dead! --

Cas. What slain! By what bold man?

Bag. By that bold Man, that only dares, and can.

Lys. Does Alexander thus transplant, to save
His fading Laurels on Parmenio's Grave?
We'rt thou the Son of Philip, not of Jove,
Thou had not thrown away this Token of his Love,
Nor had thy self of so much Power bereft,
With thy right Arm to have cut off thy left.

Cas. A man so great, that in his Fathers time,
Winning too many Battles was his Crime.

Bag. His trusty slave, who by this Act is freed.
Is hither come, that saw Parmenio bleed,
In his own Garden, where he used to breath
Pure Air for Life, he trod the paths of Death.
Four of the Guard the General thus salute,
Hail mighty Captain, and of most repute;
The Monarch of the World, these Letters sends
To great Parmenio, his best of Friends.
The good Old man, so much o'rejoy'd to see
His Masters Love, received them on his Knee.
Sealed with his Blood, which he unkowing Tort:
Giving the Murderers sign to let out more:
Those but supplied their Masters will in part,
The rest they did ingrave upon his Heart,
Which with a dagger from his breast they drein'd,
And all with Blood the Treacherous paper stained,
The Ink, the color of that black design,
Blushed that it did in such a Treason join:
Thus the bold Lion taken by surprise,
Was like a Lamb offered to sacrifice.

Cas. Why do ye Gods of Man's misfortunes boast?
And make us Heroes at our own lives cost.
The extremest height in which we hope to live
Is but of Honors breath an empty Sound,
Or like a Star, on sudden shoot we give,
Then fall an empty Vapor on the Ground.
Ungrateful Alexander, has now repaid
Those many Fights, never won but by his Aid.

Lys. Forbear Cassander, you over reach your Sense,
Whom the Gods own, pay him obedience.
How blessed were Thousands such as Thee and I,
To be his steps to mount on Victory!
You might, but Bagistanes not have known,
When Philip to augment the Gods was gone,
The Grecian Cities did with Joy depend,
That with his life their bondage shoul'd have end,
And to the Oracle of Delphos send;
Where in a rage the auspitious God replied,
Urge not to know, what is to your Fates denied;
A greater far than Philip yet remains,
Whose godlike arm shall hold the World in Chains.

Cass. Were he a God he should have kept his Seat,
Not grieve the World with his immortal weight.
He from the Gods is like a Fury hurld,
To glut their anger on the ravished World:

Lys. Cease, You neglect the duty of your place. --
Haste, and draw out the Horse I brought from Thrace,
And Macedonian foot, which you obey,
And with your armed Ranks enclose the way,
Guard every path, where the Worlds Favorite comes.
Fly high your standards, and provoke your drums.^
Exit. Cassander But e're you go I Will to your bre^st impart
A Story of which no Mortal bears a part
But that bright Excellence of all my heart.
to Bagist. You know my Princess to whose charms I owe
The purest love, In The strangest manner too;
A birth so strange beyond the reach of Fame.

Bag. I long to hear, that I may know her name.

Lys. In the last fight in which the stronger side
The World arraigned, and in that Battle tried;
When Victory half ^^utted with the dead,
Whett^d her Rage again on those that fled:
Aloft she led us where she laid her Brood,
Over hills of Heroes, and through Seas of blood;
At last, as proud that she had seized the Prey,
Flew still before us, and proclaimed the day.

Bag. Too well I knew, what that days Act can boast,
The Fame you won, and what Darius lost.

Lys. The Battle done, by Alexander sent,
I to Darius rich Pavilion went.
Who like a Merchant in a storm of Sea,
To save his Life had thrown his Crown away,
And all his riches both of love and power,
Strewn in the way to stop the Conqueror.
But oh misfortune! I too early came,
And found the Tent abandoned in a flame,
Gazed on by Beauties, that with mournful Cries,
Called Parisatis! O ye Gods! She dies!
I heard no more, but like a whirlwind brushed
The flakes away, and through the Flames I rushed,
Where I beheld this Goddess on the floor,
Yielding to flames, that did her eyes adore,
In a dark swoond, and yet her form so bright,
Her glorious beauty dazel'd all the light.
I took this sacred burden in one arm,
And with the other scattered every harm;
The Fire recoiled, and hung upon the wall,
Bowing its conquered head, and down did fall:
Like the bright Taper, it did soon decay,
That lost its splendour at the sight of day.

Bag. What then you Gods, did you of her decree?

Lys. Ask not of her, but what became of me?
Thus, big with all the treasure of the Earth,
I blessed her Mother with her second Birth.
Surprised at this, she then with joy did weep,
And called her senses back from deadly sleep;
As from behind a Cloud the Sun displayes,
And kills the sight with unexpected rays,
So from this cloud of death her Spirits stole,
And through her eyes they shot into my Soul.
My Passions tale, I had not time to say,
Nor she her sense of gratitude to pay.
For Alexander, like a storm did come,
And bore me off, when I was never at home.
The rest you know --
When he Statira to himself has joined,
She for his loved Ephestion is designed:
Judge then, when such a Rival I pursue,
If I have not need of such a Friend as you.

Enter to them Parisatis and Melanthe: attended. Bag. You shall command me,
while I have a heart --

Lys. See where she comes that makes my Manhood start,
The fairest object in the World, I fear.

Par. Lysnnachus, with Bagistanes here!
[aside. The News is great, that says our glorious Sun
This day lights in the King of Macedon. --
My Sister, Bagistanes, thinks it fit,
You Would see her e're you Alexander meet.

Bag. I Will haste, and pay my duty at her feet.
[ Exit Bagistanes.
Par. I am surprised; I know not what to say,
I Am loath to go, and yet I should not stay.
[Aside. Forgive me, Sir, to whom I so much owe,
My blushes hide the gratitude I Would show,
Y're welcome and with joy my bosom fill,
But w^lcome to Darius Daughter still.

[Offers to go off. Lys. Stay, Noble Princess, stay, my life to save;
I have no merits* but to be your slave;
[Kneels. Thus I entreat, and I could do no more,
If you your Fathers Crown, and Titles wore.
Thus as a Saint does to the Altar bow.

Par. Rise, Gallant Soldier, and I Will hear you now.
Since you Lysimachus so much have done,
I cannot but some gentle pity own,
And yet 'twere better, I that death had died,
Than in my Fathers ruin to divide. --
Talk any thing, but let me beg you then,
Talk not of Love, when I must chide again.

Lys. How doubly wretched was my Love that time,
Which up to you did on your ruin climb;
Then showed you that which you had died to shun,
How we Darius Crown and Kingdoms won.
What more to plague me could my Fate have done!
Well may you then that fatal love despise,
That saved your life for Alexanders prize.

Par. Lysimachus, I blame not what you did,
But I could wish you would your Passion hide.
Could I Darius life but call again,
With all the Pomp and glory of his Reign,
I would your love before a Kings posses,
And with a Crown creat your happiness;
But of a Prisoner never this require,
She Would make you happier than you could aspire;
And since the Gods have so restrained my hand,
In Alexanders chains I more demand,
Than if all Persia were at my command.

Lys. The Crown you mean you wont go far to take;
'Twill be brought to you for Ephestion's sake.
When Alexander all the World shall lead,
A Present to Statira's Nuptial Bed,
He Will scorn in single happiness to live,
But will her Sister to Ephestion give;
And then to make your happiness the more,
He will all Persia to your wish restore.

Par. His proffered Kingdoms I should then despise,
And scorn to take them, though at any Price;
The Worlds too little to be given to me,
Unless presented, as my mind is, free.
Though with that offering I a God should lose,
A blessing so imposed I would refuse.

Lys. If not a God, he is of such flesh and blood
Would tempt a Goddess to be soft and good,
Adorned like Summer, and so blushing gay,
In Agril youth, with Cheeks like blooming May.
All the day long he will bless you with his sight,
And like the Hony-Suckle breath at night.

Par. This beauteous Animal, so like the Spring
Will soon, like that, decay, and Winter bring --
I should be loath he should my hopes beguile,
And tarry with me but a Summers while,
Let Gods possess his heavenly beauty then;
We Women only were ordained for men.

Lys. You Have said enough to show your noble mind;
Yet greatest Courages may be confined.
What will you do in that unlucky hour
Of this Man's Love, and Alexanders Power?
When you are lifted up to such a hight,
I show so little almost out of sight.

Par. Now you are too blame Lysimacus. For know,
That Parisatis, though she be so low,
Yet every thing's too mean for her desire,
And then her self she cannot be lifted higher.
I never shall from my constant temper fly,
Unless to loose the knot your jealousy would tie. --
Begone, begone, -- I Will hear no more to day;
I think too well of you to let you stay:
Seek not for Love, where he in private lies.
For he has wings, and then away he flies. --
Haste, meet the Conqueror. --

Lys. I go, I go --
And all obedience to your will I Will show.
[ Exit Lysimachus.
Par. Chide me, Melanthe, Art not thou afraid,
That I to show my thanks too much have said;
And yet my forward gratitude I chide,
For fear a Love should under it lie hid.
At this admired example thou were by,
When others fled, and with me chose to die.

Mel. Had you but seen with what a gust'e came*
How like a God he chased away the flame;
You would have thought him after all was lost,
Darius Genius, or his happy Ghost.

Par. Yet he was forced, by honor carried on,
Which e're destroyed ten thousand would have done.
To some great Spirits Fortune is unkind,
To hide occasions they would gladly find;
My safety by the Powers above was meant,
He first in the way, was on the errand sent.
[Enter to them Araxis. Good Gods! Is it Araxs I behold!
How came you hither? How were ye so bold?

Ar^x. Ask not, since I am Oroondates slave,
The greatest Lover, and of men most brave:
What is there, but a man like him can do,
Inspired with Love, and so much valor too?
Roused with the Noise that Alexander brings,
Away his fears like drowzy thoughts he flings;
Awake Araxis says he; let us haste,
And pay this visit, which may be our last.
The Worlds my Rival, and with glittering show,
Does at Statira's Feet in triumph bow.
We 'rose, and soon deceived the Watchful throng,
Saying we did to some Ambassador belong;
Then to the Garden hurried by his flame,
I, and the Prince, the best of Lovers came;
He like a Noble Deer that long had pined
In Sandy Plains, but could no Water find;
Till seeing a wanton stream through Meadows play,
Over Gaps, and hedges thither makes his way:
Thus never a Fountain sat this Lover down,
The which Statira's Window seemed to Crown:
Blessed stream, sai's he (and then his Tears ran over,
Like drops of Pearl upon the Crystal shore)
If my Statira of thy saltness hears,
Ah tell her, it was Oroondates tears. --
[Enter to them Oroondates. See where this wretched Lover comes. --

Par. It Is he! --
I am amazed at what you told, and what I see.

Oroon. The Sun approaches, and a plot has laid
To cover Oroondates with his shade,
And when his glories with your beauties join,
You and Statira in his Court shall shine.
Not see me first! I have the cause admired,
And have the reason of the Gods required:
Ah whither is my angry Queen retired?

Par. Oh stay not; Alexanders Trumpets found,
aste Oroondates, it is forbidden Ground.

Oroon. Let Cowards tremble at his mighty voice;
My brain's too steady to be turned with noise:
No earth is hurtful that she is pleased to grace;
I Would run to meet her though in any place;
On any ground where Alexander trod,
And dare behold him, were he twice a God.

Par. Brave man, whose fault is, that thy soul's too great,
That scorning fear, neglects it is mortal seat,
And whilst your lofty spirit soars too high,
Views not the Precepice beneath your eye.
Look back, from this unhappy place remove;
Haste, and preserve the greatest stock of Love,

Oroon. I cannot till she does my burden light;
My Loves so great, I stagger with the weight.

Par. You stay too long, and do your fate suborn.

Oroon. I have no fate; no threatening but her scorn.

Par. Shoul'd I but let Statira know ye'are here,
You would be threatened by the scorn you fear;
To save your Life, she would with Love debate,
And rather be unkind to you, then to your fate.

Oroon. Ah gentle half of my much better part,
She cannot end my Life with greater smart:
To wrack me thus! 'twere better I should try
Ten thousand deaths, than always thus to dye:
If she will not see me now the Sky is clear,
What will she do when thickening Clouds appear?
When Alexander Thunders with his Drums*
Where will she find me when that Torrent comes?

Par. The Guards are set, and Bagistanes gone;
She cannot now be seen with you alone.
If she obey the dictates of her mind,
She soon will see you in a garb that is kind: --
Go best of men, I dare no more be seen.

[offers to go off. Oroon. Stay charming Sister of my beauteous Queen --
If you go to her, tell her, I am driven
By Alexander from my blessed Heaven,
And to the bottom of despair decline;
We too can never in one Horizon shine;
There like the Sun, I Will lay me down at Night,
And drown in sorrows all my past delight. --
Tell her, some God, whiles slumber seals her Eyes,
How pitifully Oroondates, lies;
That in kind feeling of the Tears I shed,
She come like Thetis to my watery Bed.

Par. All this, and more, my Tears from Yours shall plead:

[Exeunt Parisatis and Melanthe. Oroon. The Gods renoun your Charitable deed.
Araxis, come, my hopes of this days Fate,
The business of my Life and Soul create.

Arax. Let Us watch it then, and mingle with the show;
Hid in the Crowd, we unperceived may go.

Oroon. Look down; O mighty Love; behold thy flame
Swallowed, and burri'd in the Conquerours Name:
In vain thou shoot'st, and aim'st at faithful hearts,
When he sustains, and shivers all thy Darts:
While his Ambition does new worlds run over,
He Will bind thy fury, and revenge thy power.

[Exeunt (...). Finis Actus Primi.
Actus Secundus, Scaena Prima.
Alexander, Ephestion Lysimachus, Cassander, Philip, Bagistanes, and Captains
in great State. Alex. THUS ^ar with Thirst of fame we have descried.
The modest World that would her secrets hide,
And track'd her where she to the Ocean ran.
Diving her head under the spacious Main,
Till a remoter World she rise again.
Thither in hollow Trees with Wings we flew,
And left old Countries to discover New;
Nations by Nature taught, and distant so,
Beyond the reach of any mortal Fo;
Dwelling in Tents, unused to civil power,
And having naught to enrich a Conqueror,
Fly where their stock of Land can never be spent,
Finding no End of their vast Continent,
Leaving behind them for the Victors gains,
Famine, and Plagues, Rewards for fruitless pains.

Lys. The Gods, Great Alexander, thought it fit
The vanquished World should to your Arms submit,
When in a dream they did Olympia show,
She to a God did her conception owe.
This Fame told loudly to the amazed Earth,
What they should look from such a wondrous birth.

Cas. First haughty Greece, which Philip never could Yoke,
Her Proudest Cities Necks bends to your Stroke:
Then all that side Euphrates join with them
To gain for you the Persian Diadem;
This with three Battles from Darius won,
Was but one step to Mount your mighty Throne.
Then with such speed on Conquests Wings we got,
Rise with the Sun, and met it where it ^ate;
Nothing to hinder us, but by the way
We took bold Tire, that is built upon the Sea;
And Mountains big with Woods we tumbled down,
That frighted N^ptune from his Royal Town.

Phil. We sought fierce Nations, nourished up with damps,
Whom Rocks of Ice immured in frozen Camps;
With shouts we made the trembling Earth to sweat.
Loosing the Shackles from it is tender Feet,
Which soon Rebelled, and us did onward lead
To catch those Fish that on the Land did breed.

Lys. From thence we passed to the Suns beloved Soil,
To utmost India, and those Nations foyl,
Till we were stopped by Heaven, and Natures ties.
Huge Furniture, and Arms of mighty size
We scattered here and there to take all Eyes,
And make the World to come believe, and show
The Souls were great that did those Bodies owe.

Cas. Great Son of Philip, do not then begin
Vain and imaginary Worlds to win;
All that there is, is subject to your sway;
Bless then in Peace, Sir, this your early day.
The Gods to you at thirty years have given,
More then the greatest Heroes boast in Heaven.

Ephesians. Forget not, Sir, the time you were so bold,
When clad in Armor made of shining Gold,
As on the Oxydracon's Wall you fought,
Thence like a Star into the Town you shot;
And awed the People with a Godlike Frown;
Who thought from Heaven, that Mars himself leaped down.
At awful distance stood the wandering Crowd,
Let fall their Arms, and called thee God aloud.

Phil. Live then, great Sir, to dissipate our fears,
And Chronicle your self a thousand years.
No more in vain your precious minutes shed,
Tempting the Fates to think you are Mortal bred

Capt. Great Son of Jove --

Alex. Confusion seize thy tongue --
I Will hear no more of such a Syren's Song.
To Clytus death I owe a deadly shame;
Swelled with a Sound, and poisoned with a Name
I hurt my self, and madly was to blame.
What can not thou Ephestion bear a part,
And share of dangers where thou sharest a heart.
Shall a few Creatures whom we found abroad
In Beds of Snow, which with our breath we thawed?
And feathered Indians, who before they bled,
Like flocks of Birds before our Eagles fled;
Small Trophies there we got, or here can get;
Shall this suffice to gain the Name of great;
Stain to our Armies, we have no Conquest won,
If we do lie at ease at Babylon,
And shrink at Glory e're we put it on.

Ephesians. I Will on, while your Example I behold
With wonder, which shall like a fixed Star
Direct my wandering Youth, till I am Old,
And guide my soul in peace, and Arms in War.

Alex. Millions of pleasures on Euphrates lie,
Swelling her Banks with plagues of luxury;
They more than all the dangers you withstood
Will dant your Courages, and chill your blood.
You see her gilded Towers, and Turrets pride,
But they come short of beauties that they hide.

Ephesians. Beauty I Have heard, the Gods did first ordain
To cherish Valor and reward it is pain:
This hea'ven-born Creature for your entrance stays
To deck with plumes of love your gilded Bays.

Cass. The Armies all must on your Center more;
This time is sacred both to you and love;
When you lie down it is fit that war should cea^e,
And treat you with an universal peace:

Bag. Thus humbly I my mighty charge resign,
[Bag. (...) Darius Empire, and his Royal Line.
Retire, great Sir, and all your hopes possess,
Adorn your Conquests with loves happiness.
The blessed Statira does her self prepare,
To weave you Chaplets of her Golden hair,

Alex. Tell her I wait, and only for her stay
To Crown the Triumph of this happy day.
[exit Bag: Now my Ephestion, guard thy tender Breast;
I Will show thee half wherewith my soul is blessed.

Ephesians. What need I shun whereof I am possessed?
In Athens late you nip'd my forward growth.
And from my tender studies broke my Youth;
Then called me to you from my Country far
To wait upon you, and to teach me War.
In Battles toiles, when you the day had spent,
You Would take me to you private in your Tent;
There, as to shelter in some silent grove,
You Would shut me in, and tell me tales of Love.
Your charming tongue did open my breast so wide,
Love shot in shafts, on which himself did ride:
When on Statira's Picture you would look,
Fair Parisatis form from you I took.

Alex. What I then told thee did but breed desire,
Which her bright Eyes will kindle into fire:
Thou but indur'dst the skirmish of a Fight.
I touched thy Breast, but she will kill thee quite:

Ephesians. Would she would come: I long to be thus slain;
For ought that I know, it is a pleasant pain:
Yet if to be in love, so mortal be,
What makes so many happy, that we see?

Alex. Such are, whom love a kind acceptance shows,
Your Fate by chance may make you one of those --
Behold how these fair Goddesses appear!

Ephesians. O Gods! But which is she that I must fear?

Enter to them Statira, Parisatis, Women, Bagistanes and attendants at one
door, and Oroondates, and Araxis, at another door, at some distance. Oroo. Here
we will stand, and dare the worst of fate,
[to Ar. aside. She cannot find us in this throng of state,

Alex. So Venus looked, so Venus smote from far*
The Iron bosom of the God of War;
So look's the Sun, so the spring sweetly smiles,
When the cold deadly Winter it beguiles;
Thus welcome is the day into his sight,
Whomany years was banished from the light.
Let me presume to touch this sacred hand,
As Mariners, when they the Port have gained,
Do bless the shore, and kiss the welcome Land.
My Crimes of War have made me guilty come
To choose from you a soft, and gentle doom.

Sta. Hold Alexander, tempt me not in Vain; --
Behold the blood that does your Ensigns stain.
Is not this Persia? did not all this State,
Before 'twas yours, on great Darius wait?
Is not the sweet and clear Araxis Flood
Choked with dead Bodies, poisoned with their blood?
Crowned with this purple horror on thy head,
Do I not blush to see thee look so red?

Alex. When first your Country felt my angry Arms,
They straight were pleased at fair Statira's charms,
And soon were sorry for the blood they spilt,
And sought abroad to wash away the Guilt.
That for one Kingdom from Darius torn,
I Will (...) an hundred to your scorn.

Sta. Those never can come from petty Macedon;
Thou bring'st and giv'st me, what is not thy own;
And all your borrowed glory but appears
Decked with the Flaggs pulled from my Fathers h^rse.

Alex. What have I done, ye Gods? To see you frown,
Is more to me, than you to loose a Crown.

Sta. No fatal Monarch, still your Crimes pursue*
You are their darling, cannot commit a fact,
They have Darius punished, and not you,
And scourge the world for all the wrongs you act.

Ephesians. Ah gentle Goddess, be not angry now;
Disperse the storm that hangs upon your brow,
Which over your beauty such disturbance seems,
As winds create on smooth and Crystal streams.
Vouchsafe that I your sister may adore,
And give a heart that was designed before;
But let me beg you would not be severe,
And in her frowns, as you in Beauties share.

Alex. Still I presume unhappy, to be kind,
That Parisatis for my Friend designed --
Let it be said the least of all my faults,
To give Ephestion to your kindest thoughts --
[ presents Ephesians. to Par. More then a Crown he on his head shall bring,
He is my Favorite, more than twice a King.

Par. I must believe the Man you are pleased to grace,
May well deserve within my breast a pla^e.

Lys. O Gods! What discord was there in that Voice!
She seems to me as if she liked the choice.

[aside, Sta. You are Ambitious to dispose of Fate,
And King for Love, and Love for Kings create;
So as you have sliced, and given the world in parts,
You Would take upon you to dispose of hearts;
That you new Empires to the old might gain,
You Would rule ore love, as you over kingdoms reign.

Alex. It Is an Ambition that from you I take,
To become great, and only for your sake.
I Will dedicate to Love my lasting Toyls,
And crowd his gilded Temples with rich spoils;
His Altars shall with blood of Kings run over,
And their lost Crowns, and Scepters fill his Store.

Sta. You give so much, your self seems but the less;
You hide your Merits in this gaudy dress:
Love never will stoop to any thing, but Love;
The world may flatter me, but 'twill not move;
Love is too rich a jewel to be bought,
'Twill only be in 'its own likeness sought.

Alex. Those Ornaments to Love are justly due,
Who gave them as rewards for loving you;
As he that wins the Prize at public Plays
Offers his God the Garland of his Bays.

Sta. You seek your Love in great and horrid forms,
As Sun shine days are met by dreadful storms;
Your ravenous Eagles in the Field increase,
Like Birds of prey, to rob this Dove of peace;

Alex. I Will scatter this Contagion, whilst it flies,
Like Clouds of Insects driven before your Eyes:
I will my self of power, and Arms divest,
And Love shall then in peace, and glory rest.
All that Darius held, I will restore,
And leave my self, without your favor poor;
I Will give you all that is in my power to give,
Yet after all, let Alexander live.

Sta. Ah Monarch! Thou can never end this strife,
Till thou restor'st me to a Fathers life;
His Kingdoms I shall never wish to have,
And build my throne upon a Fathers Grave:
Had not those Trophies on his Death began,
I Would think the world has not a braver Man.

Oroo. O Gods Araxis, did you hear!

Alex. That you may see, how much his Death I grieve,
I Will Crown his head, as if he were alive,
And in the richest seat of B^bylon;
The world shall to his Golden Statue run,
And pay more homage, then they do the Sun

Sta. Desist that kindness; for it is only meant
To make thy pride his fatal Monument,
And let the world perceive by such a show,
That a great God did to thy Fortune bow.
Why does (...) with such Ambition burn?
Cannot (...) serve thy turn?
(...) his silent Urne.

Alex. All powers on Earth are subject still to Fate;
Empires, as well as Men have sudden date.
The Gods looked down that held the Fate of Kings,
And bad me one, and Armed me with their stings,
'Twas they, not I, your Fathers death decreed,
And they ordained I should in all succeed.

Sta. The Gods have used thee but for punishment,
And soon will end those plagnes themselves have sent.
The Gods thou make the Authors of-thy pride,
Who never consented, that thou shoud'st divide,
And snatch the hushand from his woeful Bride,
Then tare the Orphans from their parents Eyes.
Which never can grace, but blush at Victories.
To us thou shewst the Earth, yet hold the Rains,
Darius Daughters are not pleased in gaudy Chains
No Alexander, yet too low thou art,
Mounted on all the world, to reach my heart.

Oroo, Great God of Love thou have thy pity shown,
[aside Exeunt Statira, Parisatis, and women, and Oroondates following at
distance. Manent Alexander and the rest. Araxis, wait you here --

Ephesians. Will you be gone? --

Alex. Persia had stood, had its ^ame Heroes been
But blessed with so much spirit as this Queen. --
Well, now, Ephestion, have you found it true,
Women are worse than Armies to subdue?
The ^kye is not so fair, nor down so soft,
But their hard hearts, are on the Anvile wrought.

Ephesians. But Parisatis sure, is all divine,
And cannot Sir, to cru^lty incline;
Yet I am sad, but it is not that I fear
Her tender soul, but that she loves elsewhere.

Alex. You must not think she will at first obleige;
Women, like Towns, hold out a longer siege.

Enter one of the Captains. Capt. The world does to great Alexander send
All Nations proud to be your slaves contend:
Ambassadors from all parts, presents bring,
Begging you would be, or else create their King.
Amongst the rest proud Scythia stoopes in time,
The greatest Empire in the Northern Clime:
For since the Battle from Darius won,
That gallant Oroondates has been gone,
They Offer you his rich, and mighty Throne,

Ara. Ah fatal News! --

[aside Alex. That Prince if he be slain --
There Is not a Braver Hero does remain,
And I with sorrow must his Empire gain.

Exeunt. Manet Araxis solus. Ara. Go Oroondates now, and find thy death;
Thou have no place, no Earth, no Air to breath,
But what is Alexanders; nay what is more,
He holds thy Love, and Fortune in his power.
Where shall we wander now? where be possessed
That we may live from care, and love at rest.
Reenter to them Oroondates. He is returned, for pity I Will refrain
To till the news that will increase his pain.

Oroo. Araxis come, le'ts undermine our Foes,
And follow Alexander where he goes;
Let Us watch his looks, and Countermine his sight,
Till on Statira's Cheeks our Eyes do fight,

[ Oroo. offers to go off. Ara. Stay Oroondates, are you in a dream?
Beware the Gulf, you are led to by the stream.
Unless invissible, you cannot pass!
For Jealousy through all things sees, like Glass.
Let Us straight return; it is dangerous staying here,
Your Carriage did suspitiously appear;
For Alexander saw when you went out,
And hater you he turned his Jealousy Eyes about.

Oroo. I have no soul, no Eyes, no thing that is sense;
They all have left me with that excellence.
I find my self like one of life bere^t,
And nothing but a solid Carcass left.
I Will find her through the dark, and let her know it,
TO rel^ive my Body, as a light that is out.

Ara. Now it is almost near retreat of day,
Whose handmaid evening looks so fresh, and gay,
It Will make Statira to the walks repair,
And with her sweeter Breath perfume the Air.
Thither we'll go, by the secret way we came;
There you may find, but here you will lose your aim.

Oroo. I Will find my Rival wrapped in his delight,
Who as the Globe, often hides the Suns fair light
Stands betwixt me and my Statira's sight.
I Will grow above him till I'have discry'd,
Over his huge Bulk the treasure he wou^d hide.
Why should I fear this-Monster of a Name?
Wherefore Araxis? Am not I the same,
Who striding over the heaps his slaughter filled,
Sustein'd his mighty Arm upon my shield?
Then straight returned a more substantial blow,
That made his head with shameful weakness bow,
And blushed for grief, till he did understand,
It was no shame, from Oroondates hand.

Ara. The State retreats from the Kings private Room: --
One of the Princesses does this way come --
Retire into the Garden Sir, before we are seen.

Oroo. Not stay! -- I Will speak t'her, if it be my Queen*
Enter to them Statira, Melanthe attended So leaves of flowers, shut up in
showers of Rain,
Open their bosoms with the Sun again.

Sta. Bless me ye Gods! It Is Oroondates sure!
What passions does my trembling heart endure!
Why Oroondates, will you not obey?
See, see, Melanthe who does come this way.
Are you that haughty stranger then, who late,
Among the throng did on the Conqueror wait?
How durst you be so bold? Urged by what thought?
Was It Jealousy, or Love your Person brought?

Oroon. Ah glorious Creature; Blessed of all thy Sex,
Urge not imputed Crimes my Soul to vex --
[Kneels. I Will tell thee, Dear, more soft, more sweet by far,
Than breath of Incense, or than morning Air,
Winged with my Love, and hurried by despair,
I broak through all the stops, that Fate could rea^;
Who can Love you, and be a slave to fear!

Sta. Rise Oroondates. Alexander sees;
The Gods do frown, and he on Earth decrees;
Like flaming horrur over the World'e Darts,
And pries into the secret Lovers hearts;
That blazing Comet in the Sky beware,
Who threatens me with Love, and you with War.

Oroon. He cannot gentle Creature, do us harm;
True Love's Power that all the Gods will charm,
And winged Furies of the Air disarm.
While our united hearts with joys are Crowned.
No Fiend shall tread the sacred Lovers Ground.
Let him look down, this Meteor that is so high,
To see our Loves with all it is luster vie,
And drop with wonder from it is borrowed Sky.

Sta. The Gods to us (...), yet the more unkind.
Where shall we then those pleasant minutes find,
And seek out Love, while we do lie confined?
Unless in pity he to us resort,
And meet us here in Alexanders Court.
The Watchful Dragon here disturbs our peace,
More strict, than that which kept the Golden Fleece.

Oroon. Since else you are lost to O^o^ndates quite,
I Will break your Chains, and with the Monster fight:
I only armed with Love, if you but say
Through all his Devilish Guards will force my way;
Defy this Atlas, if he durst be bold,
And lay at stake the Heaven that he does hold --
Say but the word, and I Will at once ^^move
The Scourge of Empires, and the plague of Love.

Sta. No Oroondates, cease this vain design,
He 's at his highest, and will soon decline.
The Gods in time, in pity of our tears,
Will rid the World and us of all it is fears,

Oroon. Never let us tarry, for in all that (...).
Our Love might reach, and up to Heaven might climb*
Let us not waste one moment of our Joys,
More worth than Crowns, and all such Worldly toys,
Nor wait so long for Alexanders death,
But straight get out of this unlucky Path,
And turn our Eyes as from some Desert climb,
And never wish to look the second time.
Hence we will repair to some blessed lovely Isle,
On whose fair Breast, both Heaven and Nature smile,
Far from the gaudy Train of dismal Sat;
And we our selves will King and Queen creat,
And each to other shall a Subject be,
Living on Earth, like Sphere in Harmony.

Sta. There at our Joys will none with envy burn,
Nor Alexander were he there, return;
He soon the weary hunted World would spare,
And find enough to glut Ambition there. --
But Oh thou excellent man! I talk, while you
Neglect your safety, and my honor too;
I feel it strive within me: for by turns,
My honor blushes, and your danger mourns --
Dear Oroondates, spare your farther talk;
See me to morrow in the Cyprus walk.

Oroon. Go my propitious Goddess, thou that art
The Heavenly excellence of all my heart; --
Take but one look, thou (...) of Deities,
And carry't from thee in thy Diamond Eyes,
That when the Conqu'rour comes to beg a Grace,
Bend thy dark brow, and shoot it in his Face.

Sta. Thou best of Men, all Joys about thee dwell.

Oroon. Thou Soul of Love, and all that is good, Farew^ll.

[Exeu^t severally. Finis Actus Secundi,
Actus Tertius, Scaena Prima.
Parisatis. Melanthe, as in the Garden. Ephestion enters at a distance. Ephesians.
SEE where she Rests, or is it not I descry
Some dazzling Constellation from the Sky!
Sure it is the rich Vermillion that does grace
The evening Sun sent to adorn this place,
Or Venus self has left her Heavenly abode;
To Sleep on Earth with some immortal God --
Hark, how the Air with Gentle murmur Steals,
To catch the Odor on her Lips, that dwells,
More sweet than Breath, sent from the Couslips Bed,
Or fragrant Banks with purple Violets spread.

A Song to be Sung by Oroondates unseen in the Garden.
IN vain dear Cassander in vain you employ,
Your precepts of Virtue my Love to destroy,
In thinking your breath, can allay my desire,
You cool but my hopes, and blow more the fire,
Though hopeless of favor, and slighted I were,
I could Love, while I live, condemned to despair.
But why do I wish for impossible things,
Such happiness fit for the greatest of Kings,
For to me are denied all blessings within,
But to pass by her door and afraid to go in,
Or if her by chance at a distance, I see?
My Soul at my Mouth is flying instant from me.
But when I come near her, I look and I gaze,
And somewhat would have, but am still in amaze.
When as with my courage, new breath I infuse,
Just ready to say, what I fear I should lose,
The thing that I thought on a sudden retires,
And my speech in a sigh on her bosom expires.
[Enter Lysimachus at the other^ Lys. A voice! To whom should this address
belong
O Gods! There Is Parisatis listening to the Song!
Ephestion too! O my prophetique Soul!
What shall I do to keep my senses whole!

Ephesians. It Is done -- this was I fear some Rivals voice. --
Lysimachus the man! Is he her choice!

Mel. It Is Oroondates sure, amongst the Trees;

Par. Cease wretched Lover, cease thy sad complaint;
Whilst no kind friend thy banished person sees,
With mournful tunes thou do thy sorrows paint.

Lys. See how'e sets his amorous looks this while!
I Will overtake, and stab him in that smile.
I Will break that case, his tempting beauties fill,
And all his precious balm of life will spill.
I shall turn mad to let my rage grow higher; --
I will be patient, and unseen retire.

Par. I hear some coming; let us no longer stay.

[Exit. Lysimachus, Parisatis and Mel. offer to go off. Ephesians. See, she retires,
and he does lead the way.
Look back, O beauteous daughter of the spring,
Whose divine presence, whiles these walks she treads
Makes cheerful Birds with welcome Carrols sing,
And drooping flowers hold up their grateful heads.

Par. What beauti's this of which Ephestion tells?
Can she augment the Joys with which he swells,
That holds a richer, and more blessed repose,
In Alexanders bosom where he grows.

Ephesians. In Alexanders Laurels I have laid
My head so long; that I forsake his shade,
To dwell in your more comfortable sight,
Whose brighter beams create a fresh delight,

Par. I have no beauty, Sir, that I can boast,
Such as I had is all in sorrows lost,
Like forward spring, kept back by winters frost.
The Sun that gilded over with cheerful rays.
My early morn, and promised happy days,
By fatal Alexander is undone,
And quite eclip'st before it reached to noon.

Ephesians. What Miracle is this! For who is he,
That cannot grant, what you would wish to be?
Where was deaf Heaven, when you did bend to prayers!
How could the Gods, but choose to lend their ears!
One balmy sigh, and pearly tear's worth more,
Then all the incense, sacrifice of Gore,
That they have had, ten thousand years before.

Par. You over vallue me; all will not do;
I still am wretched, and more lost than you.
The Gods are just, although they never will
Refrain, but punish Parisatis still.

[Par. sighs. Ephesians. Ah! why do you sigh, and waste that precious breath,
When the least word can charm the power of death.
Why draw you up, and fill your breast with groans?
Then let 'em out withal your soul at once:
Where will this Messenger of grief depart?
That bears upon his wings your gentle heart --
Ah do not stir -- I tremble to come nigh,
[ Par. offers to be gone. And on your brightness gaze with such an eye
As mortals look with wonder up on high.

Par. I am no Deity, yet will not endure
To be approached, but with a flame as pure.
You say you love, yet for the time you live,
Expect no more from me, than Heaven can give.

Ephesians. Not to look thus; and sigh -- how blessed were I,
Only to gaze upon you, till I dye;
That with my Love my Soul might then expire,
And both mount upwards, like gay sparks of Fir^;
Where I Will your seat amongst the Gods prepare,
And pine, and taste no Heaven, till you come there.

Par. Still noble Youth, you cannot reach your bliss,
With Love, as Heavenly as your person is.
There Is nothing to deceive you, I would hide;
Another has surprised my dearest thought,
I am his Prisoner, and by honor tied;
With richest gratitude my Love is bought;
I have no room for such another guest --

Ep^. The Gods forbid! -- I dare not hear the rest --
May not my hopes a fairer prospect view?
Yet cursed am I, and what you say is true.
That fatal Oracle has sent me home,
For ever damned, to undergo your doom.
What shall I do? To whom shall I complain?
To Alexander? That were too, in vain.
You, and Statira, both contrive his end,
She stabs him in his person, you in's Friend.

Par. Admire no more in what you call my charms,
Shun 'em young Prince, their all but painted harms.
Be happi'r then, and give your Love elsewhere,
None that can Love will be to you severe:
I boast not of the Chains I make you were.

Ephesians. Ah do not think my s^edfast Love can shake;
You can as well the Vows you made forsake;
Your banished Man all his life long shall wait,
Let others seem to Love, and stop at hate,
I Love not you at such an easy rate.
If e're you call me home, there will be found,
Fixed on my breast, your sad immortal wound.

Par. I dare not hear -- you wound my tender breast.

[offers to go off. Ephesians. You shall be pitiful, and hear the rest --
See I conjure -- My tears begin to flow,
Thus fixed, while I shed all my moisture so,
Like Nyobe, I could a Statue grow.
I guess my Rival, that your thoughts endure --
But let me doubt still, rather than be sure.

Par. What tempted by the Object, you repeat,
Your heart in time of absence may forget --
I haste for pity, to remove the cause.

[offers to be gone. Ephesians. Pity forbids, but this my ruin draws.
If once a day, you don't your presence give,
I have considered, and I cannot live;
Let me for ever then be doomed to burn,
Seeing your kindness to my Rival turn,
And whiles The Ocean of your Love he bears,
I thirst in vain, and quench it with my tears;

Par. If it be so, then think no more of me;
How can you choose but hate this cruel she?

Ephesians. No, I Will retire into the shades below,
Dressed with a Willow Garland of despair;
Where all are blessed, I Will live in solemn woe,
And with kind wishes Crown each happy pair.
Often as a spirit I Will return on Earth,
But take no horrid form that shall affright,
But soft as evening Air or mornings Birth,
In beauteous Dreams I Will study your delight:
Then in the morning, watching while you wake,
Before your Eyes like gleams of light I Will run;
With breath of Amber I perfumes will make,
And dart in Glories with the rising Sun.

Par. If you say more I must in pity drown.

[Exit Parisatis attended. Ephesians. So the quick Sun; soon as his light is shown,
Leaving the World in darkness does go down.
Go my divided Soul --

Enter Lysimachus, and calls back Eph^stion, who was going out at the other
door. Lys. Ephestion stay --
You have commands from Alexander to obey.

Ephesians. Why do you hinder me, and bid me stand?
I know it was not by my Kings Command --
I fear Lys^^achus, you envious are.

Lys. It Is kindness bids Ephestion to beware;
And as a Friend, I wish you to retreat,
And see your danger e're it be too late; --
You tread a maze of a beauty to your fate.
This passage leads to death's eternal bands!
Preventless ruin at your entrance stands.

Ephesians. What fate is this, you threaten with your breath,
Nothing so fair as she can lead to death,
There is no fear, no horror where she comes;
Like Heavenly light, she scatters Hell bred fumes:
Still where she goes, all deadly Forms she ties,
And melting dangers drop before her eyes.

Lys. You are too young, I see, and cannot find
The vast intreigue, of fatal women kind.
Deceitful beauty, dressed i^ golden smiles
Like flattering lightning, quick, and silent burns,
As poison pleasant to the taste beguiles,
So soon as drank, to deadly ruin turns.

Ephesians. You speak indeed; as if you felt it so,
But she has been to me the softest Foe.
Her soul appears all glorious as her face,
A shining Jewel in a Crystal case.

Lys. It Is a false Light, that shows like Heavenly Fire.
Leading misguided youth, so far astray,
That straight in horrid darkness't does retire;
And leaves him then where dangers fill the way.
A false disease, no cunning Herb can cure,
A treacherous plague, worse then a Callenture,
That to the Seamen seems delightful meads,
Or tempting walks, bestrow'd with curious Flowers,
Then head long him into the Ocean leads,
Where the next wave his giddy life devours.

Ephesians. You shall not rail on Beauty I adore;
It Is an offense, and I will hear no more.

Lys. You shall in ignorance no longer rove;
Know then it is Parisatis that I Love.

Ephesians. I see your kindness now; she is the shelf,
You bid me shun, on which you would spilt your self:
Now I perceive, when Alexander chose
You out before the rest, to go for Thrace,
Why you rejoy^'d, and triumphed at the cause;
Only to be first happy in my place.
'Twas Parisatis then that made you fly
With wings of Love, and not of loyalty.

Lys. 'Twas in defense of Love: can he be blamed,
That sues for aid, when there is War proclaimed;
When you and Alexander lots did cast
For all my hopes, 'twas time for me to haste.

Ephesians. You Are come too late, and you resist in vain,
What Heaven, and Alexander both ordain,

Lys. I first this Jewel in my heart did wear;
You never had seen't, but spied it shining there*
Then when you knew, that I did Love before,
You have unjustly robbed me of my store:
I hid her like a Treasure in the ground,
Which you unkindly have dug up, and found;
Like one who all his life have toiled for wealth,
Spoiled in a moment; and undone by stealth.

Ephesians. Because you were born first, and first had sight,
Must I in darkness live, and never see light,
Must he that missed, and saw the Sun not rise,
Never hereafter see it in the Skies?
You may come short, unless you mend your pace;
Who last sets out, may soonest win the race,

Lys. Take heed; ill fate persues thee in the Chase:
I, in the midst of thy Carreer, will stay,
And stand like a Colossus in thy way.
Though you with charms of youth, and beauty see
This glorious Sun shall be too quick for thee.
Or if it been't; I like a storm will rise,
And in Eclipse convey it from thy Eyes.

Ephesians. What then, you think, that I can be afraid? --
I fear you not, though you my youth upbraid;
Though you with ods of years, and strength assail,
Young as I am, I can, and will prevail;
Full of the Deity, I am above
Thy reach, and walk enchanted by my Love;
Safe in his Magic Circle round my heart;
Who bears Loves wounds, can fear no other smart.

Lys. No more, when next thou see her, thou shall die,
Although that minute, you for refuge fly
To Alexanders arms for Sanctuary.

Ephesians. Think thou, whom Alexander loves, to fright?
No, then, to let you see, that I dare fight? --
I Love her dearly; by the Gods I do;
I Love her -- Yes, and will, in spite of you.
Now I Will go to her, and if I mustd ye,
It shall be there, in death of ecstasy;
Upon her breast, as in a trance I Will roll,
Drowning in sweets, that fill the precious bowl
And on her Lips, leave my departing Soul.

[offers to go out. Lys. Come back again -- What shall I do? -- I will --
But thou presumest on Alexander still^
I Will to my self this satisfaction give.
Though after thee, I know I must not live.

As they begin to fight, enter Oroondates, and Araxis, at distance, which makes
Lysimachus and Ephestion go out, and defer fighting. Lys. Draw Sir --

Ephesians. Behold, we cannot end our strife --

Lys. Cursed chance! This but prolongs thy sickly life.

[Exeunt Lys. and Ephesians. Manent Oroon. and Ara^is. Oroon. Ha! Lets retire; we
cannot be alone,

Arax. One is Lysimichus -- See, they are gone.

Oroon. Of all the Grecian Captains, I Have been told,
That he excells in Virtue, and is bold.
Whoes the other? --

Arax. I know not what ^e's called;
Both gracious with the King; but I admire,
They seemed surprised, and did from us retire.

Oroon. This is the place, and this the blessed hour. --
Leave me a while upon the longed for shore; --
Leave me. --

Arax. See Sir, as when a storm is over --
Now you are arrived, it scatters, and it clears,
And she like Ven^^ on the sand appears.
[Exit. Araxis
Enter to them Statira, Parisatis, Melanthe, and attendants. Oroon. Now is the
light just fallen from the Skies.
And blushes like the morn adorns those eyes.

Sta. Ah Oroondates, grasp me not not so hand,

Oroon. Deny me not this innocent reward,
[kisses her Hand. As the kind Sun does to a frozen boat,
Bridle the poor Bark into a float
Then gently bathing over it is melting sides,
It lifts it self above the swelling tides!
All those thick Joys that lay concealed below,
Swell over the brink, and their long bounds over flow.

Sta. Ah Oroondates, I have news to tell
Will sink your Soul, and chain the Powers of Hell.

Oroon. Think not Statira, that my breast can own
A passion for the lo^ing of my Throne,
Thou brighter Jewel than the Scythian Crown.
Be thou but constant, as thou now art kind,
I shall a lasting Throne of greatness find,
More Riches, then in all the World there shines,
In Diamond quarries, or in Golden mines:
There is no wealth, but what abounds in thee,
Thou sweetest Soul, thou true Felicity.

Re-enter to them Araxis, in (...) Ar^x. I haste, and yet I fear I come too
slow;
Like a huge Torrent that does overflow;
The King is here, and has surprised you now.

Sta. What shall we do? --

Oroon. Heedless Araxis thou --

Par. Go you, leave Oroondates here with me.

Oroon. There is no shape that virtue fears to see: --
Here I will stand in thy defense of Love,
Like Jove himself, and dare this Son of Jove.

Sta. Go, go, you put my soul upon the wrack! --
Fly this unhappy ground --

Enter to them Alexander, Cassander, Phillip, Bagistanes and Attendants.
Guards. Alex. Stay Sir; come back. --
What art, that dare such saucy, Courtship show?
And bend to the shrine, where I presume to bow.

Sta. Retire Sir from the King; I Will undertake. --

Alex. By all the Gods, he stirs not for your sake.

Oroon. Do not for me to the least doubt resign;
Naught, but your fears can shake a heart like mine.

Alex. Tell me great Jove, who could suspect to see
So false a soul, in such a shape as she?
Where sacred Virtue will thou show thy face,
When such as she looks with deceitful grace,
Methoughts I saw her high Illustrious mind
Sat only with severity inshrin'd,
And thought her like a stream, whose modest tide
Does in Meanders from the Mountains glide;
Yet every where the bottom is so clear,
Through all its Crystal golden sands appear --
Convey away this upstart of my heart. --
Yet I will know thee first -- Say, what thou art?

Oroo. I turn to tell thee, that it was not fear;
When you have known me, you will confess I dare.
I never was questioned, and denied my name, --
Do you not know me then, nor who I am?

Sta. You Are mad, and would your self in vain disclose:
For Alexander none, but Princes knows.

Alex. You urge the more; I Will know him e're'e goes

Oroo. Behold; have you not seen this face in War?

Alex. I think I might, then tell me who you are.

Sta. I Will tell you who he is, let him be gone; --
His person cannot merit to be known.

Oroo. It Is Oroondates that you see again.

Alex. What Oroondates, that we heard was ^^ain!

Oroo. Yes Alexander, that unhappy Man,
Whose Crown, and Empire to your fortunes ran,
With base submission, which your Arms nere won, not can.

Alex. If you so much your single valor prize,
How came you hither, in a tame disguise?
And shun my presence, like the Birds of Night,
Which used to darkness dare's not see the light.
Dealing unlike a Prince, in dark designs,
And like a Coward, works and undermines.

Oroo. Thus I would show, did thou not hide my face*
Stand from before me in this blessed place.
Then bate the ods thy Mistress fortune gained
And this fair Queen in judgment of us stand.
Though like a flaming Beacon thou do fright
Tame Nations, Id'e look up, and shine as bright.

Alex. Then you can boast of what she me denied
And showed her scorn, I took for noble pride.

Sta. If thou art gallant, Alexander, know,
That I so much to Oroondates owe,
Your self would think I cannot less bestow.
If more than Friend, Darius life to save,
The hazard of his Crown, and fortune gave,
And this is all the pity I have shown;
A mean reward for losing of a Crown,
Tigers, and Monsters would forsake their kind,
And melt, where so much gratitude they find.

Alex. Women when pleased their eager loves to show,
Swift with the stream of inclination go,
But if against that Tide, they move but slow.
You Are over just, where fancy shows the way,
But leave your debt of honor still to pay.
Who can resist the Torrent of your wills,
That run more fierce, and cross than Fortunes wheels?
Wretched is he whose love maintains your pride,
More then the slave that to the Galli's tied,
Who sweates, and labors, all for stripes and scorn.

Sta. Your mind is tossed; over Seas of passion borne.
Know that my soul, scorning the Pomp of life,
Made me refuse to be the greatest wife,
And mount that Throne, my Fathers ruin built,
Making me guilty of the blood you spilt.
My virtue aimed and shot the mark more high,
Holding me here when I might safely fly;
And rather chose your Chains, then let my soul
By flight be stained with a reproach so foul.

Oroo. Your cruel virtue, so severe inclined,
Has been to me and to your self unkind.

Alex. Flatter thy self, but thou shall never find
One Jealous coward thought defame my mind,
My fortune like the Ocean that indures
Contrary winds, and all less streams devours,
Can never be Jealous, or afraid of yours.

Oroo. That fortune never had gained the Scythian State,
Had Oroondates but suspected fate;
Kings by false subjects are at first adored,
As fickle Nations court the rising Sun,
Blessed with the sweet delight it does afford,
Till it has gained i'ts highest State at noon,
Then they forsake; and from its warmth they run.

Alex. I did from conquest of your Crown retreat,
Too little, to make Alexander great;
Scared with the height, to which my name did swell,
And stunned with noise of all my Arms, it fell.
I court no ^awning Kingdoms to obtain;
The world it self does to my Fortune chain,
That says I shall a stand of greatness be,
Where Nations flow, as Channels to the Sea.
Nobler Ambition does my fancy move;
I like the gallant Eagle soar above,
And stoop to nothing, but the lure of love.
You do my Rival then your self create.

Oroo. Witness ye Gods, I glory more in that,
Than all the world can give, or the smiles of fate.
I will not change the bliss that name can bring,
To be as great as thou, to be in heaven a King.
Nor quit the hopes my lingering love shall gain,
That like a Saint indures with zealous pain,
Till heaven he gets through storms of sighs and tears like rain.

Alex. That heaven which you with such fair hopes pursue,
You may behold, but never to be enjoyed by you:
Yet, though my Rival, I will ease your grief,
And to the worst of pains will give releif; --
I Will part your sight, which else must needs destroy,
Seeing that heaven; which you can never enjoy. --
Go where thou will, but never see her more.

Sta. Go Oroondates, whom, the Gods restore.

Oroo. Go Oroondates! -- Gods can you consent,
That I should dye for you in Banishment!
I do not fear thee, and I will not stir;
No, were thou more then death a Conqueror;
I in the worlds behalf will stand alone,
And pull back all the spoils that deck thy Throne --
Tear me to Atoms pull my Eyes out quite,
Thou may as well part water and divide the light,
As think my soul can live out of her sight.

Alex. Thou shall, and live to see me only blessed,
Crowned with her Love, enthroned within her Breast. --
Our joys shall so Majestickly appear,
That thou shall tremble, and not dare come near,
But hide thy face, for envy, and for fear.

Oroo. Not dare come near! -- Beware that fatal time,
When I shall surely snatch thee in thy prime:
This Cloud thou fear, shall then disolve in Rain,
And pours upon thee like a Hurry-Cane. --
I tell thee, King, that I durst reach thy heart,
Big with the horrid world, as now thou art:
Had thou the plague before, and Hell behind,
I in the midst would thy dread Carcass find;
Nay were it mortal, where thou send'st thy breath,
My furious haste should blunt thy threatening death.

Alex. Live thou to threaten whom the Gods defend? --
Convey him straight to his eternal end --
Death shall reward the valor you pretend.

Sta. Hold Alexander, hold, -- He shall not go;
I never did beg of you, nor will I now;
Yet I dare boldly say, he shall not die,
Unless his life with loss of mine you buy.
The life I brought in danger to be slain,
I am obliged in honor to maintain.

Alex. Gods. Did I ever yet resolve in vain!
Where be thy Conqu^sts now that filled the world,
That by a woman here, thy resolution's hurld?
It shall be said that Alexander once was lost,
And in a laboring Sea of love was tossed;
I will submit to be thy slave, O Love,
To please my self, as did my Father Jove --
Cassander, -- I will but his doom enlarge --
Let Oroondates be your strictest Charge.

Oroo. Gods. How I hate this life you would res^ore,
That nor my freedome's justly in your power;
Thy honor cannot let me be betrayed,
I was thy Prisoner once, and ransom paid.

Alex. If thou were so, 'twas when thou were (...)
Thou Art Oroondates now, and claim'st a Crown. --
Convey him hence -- It is my last decree.

Oroo, They dare not do it, no, not thy Guards, nor thee.

Sta. Bear Oroondates, what the Gods ordain;
If you resist, you will merit my disdain.
Both heaven, and Love will for our safeties join: --
Are Chains so grevious in the sight of mine?

Alex. Sure such a spirit did from heaven descend.
So great and true, we know not where 'twill bend.

Exeunt Statira in anger, and Alexander attended, follows her. Manent
Oroondates, Cassander, Araxis, Guards. Cass. Methinks your looks such gallant
rage do show
As sits upon an angry Lions brow:
Your lofty mind above the world is born,
And pays its Idle rage with noble scorn.
Retire, -- and till I call, approach not near --
[to the Guard Let me be heard, Sir, with your private ear.

[to Oroondates Oroo. His presence Sir with mine you may endure:
[meaning Araxis. For all my secrets, in his Breast are sure.

Cass. Fortune has set a man upon her wheel,
That never sees, how it goes downward still.
More then Prometheus plagues from Hell'e brings,
And heaps and lays them on the Necks of Kings.
Look up thou more than Man and all divine,
Bearing the honor of the Ars^acean Line
Upon thy highest top, spread like a Lofty Pine:
With all thy Scythian Glories dart upon,
And shrink the world again to Macedon.

Oroo. Wherefore this great Civillity to me? --
Your words have meaning too I cannot see.

Cass. Look up, and never do the Cause inquire,
But quench this Flame that sets the world on Fire;
To rid the Earth of Alexanders life,
To ease Mankind of universal strife,
Your Crown restore, and bless you with a wife.

Oroo. Were I released, and from his Fetters freed,
And had the possibility of such a deed;
Though to be more th^n he by such an Act,
I Would fly the horror of so base a fact;
I Would kill him, but I would not by surprise;
It should be then when most secure 'e lies,
When all his Guards are watching of his Eyes,
In The Face of Jove and in the clearest day;
When heaven that saw't, should nothing have to say.

Cass. In rules of virtue you are too sublime;
Why should it be to kill him such a Crime?
Would you not crush that viper if you could,
That threatens with his sting your dearest blood;
That fatal Man that stabbs your soul in her;
In The discipline of virtue, I Would go far,
But fair Statira's Love I would prefer.

Oroo. Convey me straight into the darkest hole;
Let me live ever like a dungeon Mole.
Rather than see the light with such a soul;
But thou that showest me this ignoble way,
Art sent by him that would my life betray.

Cass. No by the Gods, from him it was not meant:
I Have tried, and found you hard to honor bent:
I see your soul, and nothing else designed,
But my true breast a harbor for your mind,
Where you might rest your heart serene, and free
From tempests and your self in safety see,
Your Godlike mind at such a prize I rate,
That, though I pity, and deplore your Fate,
I cannot but admire, and imitate.
Accept the freedom that your soul does wear,
And I the fault of your escape will bear.

Oroo. Thou tryest my mind, and yet do think I fear.
Go on, let me the ruggedst usage feel;
Thou have one used to such misfortune still,
That always holds the Vessel that they fill
With patient steady hands, that never spill --
So when I can, your kindness I Will restore.

[Exit Oroo. with Guards Cass. My words are thrown, like dust upon the shore.
This Treason then my self will bear alone
Under whose mighty weight the Fates do groan
Sweating in clouds of horror the evening Sun
Shall see the greatest deed that e're was done.
[Exit Cassander.
Finis Actus Tertii.
Actus Quartus, Scaena Prima.
Cassander, and Phillip severally. Cass. reading a Letter, Phil. WWhat news
Cassander, have you heard from home?

Cass. News, Phillip, that concerns the mightyest doom;
A sovereigne Balm for the sick world is come.
A certain trick for Phillips mad brained Son,
T'unravel all that Fate for him has done;
Such News, that heaven by me alone commends,
And to the world it is precious freedom sends.
The Gods have fate; (...)
They Will change their great (...)
My aged Father pours in (...)
Fresh blood, and has begotten me again

Phil. The King I left enraged, and in a Flame
At Letters too that from my Father came.

Cass. Let him be so, as long as it is his last;
It is decre'd he cannot burn too (...)
See here the greatest, and most powerful (...) mind,
Pulled from the very heart, and root of Hell,
Hatched in design from Aristotle's skull
To whom the subtil'st Feind of Hell is dull;
Thou never coud'st find the flowing of the sea,
But this shall be of greater fame to thee.
Never let that disturb thy (...),
That can an Ebb for the worlds Torrent find.

[Phillip takes and r^ads the Letter^ Phil. Antipater our Father does impart
A secret found by Aristotle's Art;
A Juice so fierce, and subtil^, that no Case,
Nothing can hold it, whence that will not pa^s*
But the cold hoof of a scorned heavy (...).
This deadly poison now from Greece is brought,
To give to Alexander in a draught.

Cass. Near high Olympus'e Crowned with lofty Wood,
Under its shade, where mighty (...)*
That never sees Sun by day, nor (...) by night,
But with it is bending Front still (...) at the light;
In whose damp Beds, where grow immortal stings,
Clouds of dark spirits descend, and (...) their wings;
Then over the world with molting Feathers fly,
And (...) plagues, that breed Mortality.
From thence this mighty Tutor took a weed,
And did thereof this deadly drink compound,
That to his heart who ^^inks, it flies with speed,
And in his death no sign of poyson's Fo^nd!

Phil. Can the Fates suffer that so base a thing
Conspire the death of the worlds mighty King!
In this thou art in thy misfort^ne (...);
All things deny to bear it (...),
But the most Coward, and ignoble Beast.
But when; when shall be done this mighty (...)*

Cass. No longer then this day it is decreed.

Phil. You bear the Cup, and you may (...)*

Cass. By heaven the thought does my (...)
This night I Will do it, in his proud (...),
And send him to his (...).
Oh how I burn, and how my Cheeks still glow!
Since like a patient Boy I took that blow.

Phil. I wish we were of Oroondates sure.

Cass. Virtu's his guard, and holds him too secure;
Only we two must all the brunt endure.
Lysimachus I fear will not be won,
And others too, who will be glad when't's done,
And stand amongst the foremost for their sh^re;
But for our own proportion, first let us care;
You have your Armies won, and soon shall gain*
Syria and over all the East shall reign,
And I by right, Antipaters first Son
Shall him suceed, over (...), and Macedon.

Enter to them Bagistanes. Bag. The King in have does for your prisoner call*
Such laboring Tempests toss his mighty soul,
That we, as when from heaven (...) Thunder hear,
Crouch, and a blasting storm of lightning fear.
H'as for the Ambass^dours of (...) sent;
The Go^s yet only know what is his intent.

Cass. I Will instantly his gallant Rival bring --
Phillip make haste, and in my (...) place
The Macedonian Guards about the King.

Exeunt Cassander and Phillip (...) Manet Bagistanes. Enter to him Statira
attended. Sta. What change now wears the worlds inconstant Face^
What can its Masters mighty mind displace?
Why glories he in the fetters of the brave
That to thevanquish'd world is more a slave^
Ah Bagistanes, all my hopes^ still blast;
All my delights before enjoyment (...),
My envious star deny me but a (...)
The King does now for Oroondates send,
His rage in pomp does mighty (...) attend;
He means to sit in Triumph on his end.

Bag. You only now can Guard his innocence;
The Gods you serve have armed you with (...)*
Beauty like yours can never want the power
To break the heart of this great (...)*
Go, interpole e're Oroondates dies*
Revert the blow with' Glories of you^ (...)*
Whole Armies have been often broke in (...),
And wounded by the Sun with too much light;
This cloud but while you come, may overcast,
But can no longer over your Beauty last.
Enter to them Oroondates, Araxis, and guards. See where the Noble generous
Prince appears;
How like a lofty ship up in a storm 'ebears.
I go to see how the Kings passion cleeres.
[ Exit Bagistanes*
Oroo. What heaven is this I meet with in the way?
Nothing can prove unfortunate to day.
Thou light, thou better Genius of my soul;
Goddess of life, that does my Fate control;
The kindest Gods have sent thee from above,
With their divinest power to rescue Love.

Sta. You Oroondates are your own reward;
It Is your own virtue does it is person guard;
^fall I have can your protection bear,
You need not doubt to find your safety here.

(...) Brightness, and heaven are dwelling in that Breast,
(...) but a God should with that seat be blessed,
Thou soft Elisium of eternal rest.
When first my heart was on Loves Altar laid,
So pure, and sacred, heaven the offering made,
And in acceptance of i'ts chaste desire,
Burned and consumed it all with heavenly fire^
The flame has purified my breast so fine,
You may behold my weeping soul within.

Sta. My soul in vain looks through it is mortal Cage,
And spying yours, does mourn to disingage,
Wishing to fly from Alexander's rage.
Where shall they meet these spirits so allied?
As two pent Birds that one another spied,
We feign would fly, forgetting that we are tied.
What heavy Cloggs the envious Body prove,
To break the heart of our aspiring Love?
Could we now lay these Earthly Robes, but by,
Like darting star, we'd shoot, and stick the sky,
And with the highest brightest Planets show,
And dwell where Alexander never shall go,
There we would reign, and let him reign below.

Oroo. We Will chain this flesh, and our proud (...),
Letting our souls out of their windows fly.
Our Loves like souls their prisons shall despise,
And meet each other flowing from our Eyes.
There they shall mingle; (...),
As Lymbecks draw, shall (...) them with delight;
Our humble Bodies in the rear shall stand,
Like two drawn Armies, ready at command;
That when our souls, their cheifs, in parley join,
They shall (...), or repine.

Sta. Hold Oroondates cease this killing strife;
Give me my soul (...);
Against thy self thou ^ yest these forward hands,
That would make Alexander stoop at their commands:
Lost and undone, if I do longer stay,
My ravished senses all will fly away,
They through my Eyes will their swi^t passage break
And leave my tongue (...)

Re-enter to them Cassander. Cass. The mighty King of all the world possessed,
With all things, but the fair Stati^^,
Calls for the Prince, and to this place draws near;
Like the gay seasons that adorn the year.

Sta I Will frown, if he but dares to disobey,
And blast him with a winters (...) day.

Exit Statira attended. Oroo. Thus as a Curtain (...).
She Has Snatched my sight, and I must (...) this night.
It is ordained that I blessed sun:
In deepest shadows then I Will lay me down,
And never more shall see the (...)
Statira then, thy (...);
Thy Be^nties, and my (...)
Over my grave thou wile more (...) rise.

The Seen draws, and as on After is (...) Alexander, Ephestion, Statira,
Parhatis, Ly^machus, Phillip, Bagistanes, Scythian Ambassadmis, (...) and other
attendants in great State, Priests, Statue (...) Hamon, Alexander comes upon
the Stage, reasing (...). Alex. Cassau^^er --

Cass. Sir Ic^meat your Command --
With joy approach, and (...) attention stand,

Alex. Read these for from Alexander they came,
That dares protest Olympi^ is to blame.
He much against her government complains,
Says he is wronged, whilst she would take the pains
There is the like from Aristotle too,
That writes what false Antipater has said, is true;
But I Will let Aristotle know one tear
From my dear Mothers Eyes can wash her clear,
And drown a thousand thoughts that are severe.
What ail the Priests! They tremble, and look pale,
And all in fears forsake the sacred Rail. --
Give me the Bowl, and the Gods drink prepare.

Pre. The mighty Jove's offended at our prayer:
We had done all, we thought, that Heaven could prise,
Yet to the alknowing God there did arise
Something displeasing in our sacrifice,
We killed a lusty slave, and of his blood,
The altar, and the sacred fire bestrow'd,
With richest Gumes, and foreign spices made,
That would the ransom of a King have paid.
Just in that moment which our thoughts inspire,
A cloud with thunder did from Heaven retire
And quenched, and scattered all the holy fire;
A horrid darkness filled the Temple round,
And of faint Groves was heard a dreadful sound.

Alex. T'attone the Gods with all our power we will strive,
I have a Nobler sacrifice to give,
And vow this hour the offering to make

[Alex. looking toward Oroon. Oroo. Where is this sacrifice that you bespeak?
Is all this Cerimony for my sake?
Think thou to fright me with this bloody deed,
To be the sacrifice that here must bleed?

Sta. The Gods protect the King from such a thought.

Oroo. Is mine the life that thy false Priests have bought?
With show of piety to cover fa^e,
And treat the Gods (...) bloody Scenes they hate.
Swift veng^ance have they for this Act in store.
And after I am dead, they will thunder more.

Alex. I find that thou with grovelling sense do move,
And can not understand the Son of Jove:
The Gods that Alex^nder made, did lend
A soul too great for thee to comprehend. --
Your self shall be the Judge of your own case;
Were I (...) yours, and you in Alexanders place?
Were Oroondates next the Gods above,
And I a slave in^rench'd upon his Love;
What Mercy, or what Justice would you shower
On such a ^ne you held within your power?

Oroo. (...) I the Monarch of the world thou art,
I de look beneath me with a G^dlike heart;
Not rob the humblest shepherds of their sleeps,
Whom harmless Love in careless ^lumbers keeps;
Were thou my slave and were condemned this hour,
I would thy Love and would thy throne restore,
And give thee past thy power of wishing more;
That thy vast spirit should into wonder shrink --
I Would do; what thou have not a soul to think.

Alex. Brave as thou art, thou can not yet come nigh;
Thou shall not have a thought to wish so high,
But I will reach it, and above it fly --
Madam --
I Have sent for Oroondates with design,
That he may see how far above you shine,
And with your sacred virtue rule his fate, and mine.

Oroo. Having so bright an Object thou must do
What to her Beauty, and thy fame is due.

Alex. I will not have my love prescribed by you;
Yet I Will be both to Love and honor true. --
The sacred power of fair Statira's charms
Has priviledg'd your person here from harms:
Recourse to Love has washed away your guilt,
It shall not be said that I so roughly dealt,
To see your Blood in her protection spilt --
Take that from me which none but I would spare,
Your life,
Your freedom too, as unconfined as Air. --
Ambassadors of Sythia, you are free; --
Give Oroondates what you gave to me.
With life and freedom I restore your Throne,
And with that sacrifice the Gods atone.
And for this victime on the Altar killed*
If they are not pleased with blood already spilled,
They shall with thousands offered in the field,

Sta. You have deserved, great Sir, and give us cause
To think the world most happy in your laws;
This Act beyond the Glass of time shall run,
This gallant Act as clear as is the Sun,
Which none but Alexander could have done.
It does my thanks and admiration raise; --
So great, it is undervalu'd by my praise.

Oroo. Though in this public Act you have deserved,
Virtu's not lost that has not been observed;
The Sun whose light sometimes we cannot see,
Yet rules the world by secret Sympathy: --
I would appear, but am eclipsed by you. --
If thou art Noble (...) our hopes pursue.

Alex. What would thou have? What is there yet to do?

Sta. Nothing, for you beyond just hopes aspire,
And to do more is past the Gods desire.

[Preist gives Cassander the bowl, he offer^, it Alexander on his knees. Cass.
The greatest God that you the world has given,
To rule on Earth, as he does rule in heaven,
That God who does all other Gods control.
Drinks to his Son in this Immortal Bowl.
Let heav'^ look down with most auspicious Eyes,
Whiles Jove's imperial Son does sacrifice.

Alex. takes the C^p, (...) bows to the Alta^. Alex. Accept, great Jove's, the
Son whom thou have crowned,
Who was the first thy secret Temple found,
Seated beyond the world in holy Ground.
Past barren Lybia, and it is dearest Lands,
Through hot parched Grounds, and over burning sands --
As the first ^ru^tes of all thou gav'st to me,
I sacrifice the world again to thee,
(...) drink this Cup of Immortality,

Whiles Alexander drinks, the Statue of Jupiter Hamon falls down, with thunder,
and lightning and kills the Priests. Alex. lets fall the Bowl. Alex. Ye. Gods
what is wanting in such vows as these,
That can the soul of Jupiter displease?
I Will send in haste for the most cunning Spies
To search the Oracle of the Deities*
But I Will through fate this dreadful Riddle find.
And know why Jove can be to me unkind.

Cass. We are be^rai'd by these base Prodigies,
The Language of the tell-tale Deities;
Philip stand firm --
I Will bear the guilt of all, least thou should sink,
And take the rest of the most fatal drink --
I charge ethee stay me not --

[exit, Phillip offers to hold (...) Ephesians. Ah Sir, re^ire from this most horrid
sight;
I wish you had not sacrifi^'d to night:
A dream last night disturbed my quiet rest;
Me thought I (leaning on your noble Breast)
Was in a moment snatched, and dispossessed:
A flaming Chariot did from heaven appear,
And took you in, wh^lest I looked up with fear,
And saw you shine a Constellation there:
The Chariot gone that filled the place so bright,
I (...) no Ground and ^nk in Darkness quite.

Alex. Let not such fears thy gentle thoug^t^ divide;
This clream fortels thou (...) chariotride,
With lovely Parisatis by thy side.
This way we will appeal the angry Jove,
And qu^nch his rage with sacrifice of love^ --
[to Oroondates To morrow Rival if thou dare be bold,
Mine and Ephestions marriage to behold,
Then in this place the solemn Rites we will hold.

Oroo. That sight would cancel all that is due from me,
And from this generous Act would set me free,
When you take back the life that you did give,
And in ten thousand Deaths would make me live,

Alex. Then your own time for your departure take;
All shall be granted for Statira's sake;
But for her self, thou may behold her here;
But henceforth, as a Star, above thy Sphere,
Where she shall reign the Queen of all the world.

Oroo. First let my Soul be to the Furies hurld.

Ly^. Still in this Circle do thou safe remain.

to Ephession. [Exeunt Alexander leading Statira, Ephestion and (...) striving
both to lead Parisatis. Manent Oroondates, Araxis, and Scythian Ambassadors.
Oroo: She Is gone for ever, all my hopes are vain;
I Am backwards dashed upon the Sea again;
The wealth I thought I had, I did not hold;
As Misers dream, and think they grasp their Gold;
So the tired wretch with swimming looking round,
Prepares his feet in hopes to touch the Ground,
But finding none he straight is sunk, and drowned.

Ara. It Were fit you talked of some thing that procures
A grateful peace with your Ambassadors.

Oroo. These are the furies of the peoples Brain,
That dare to sit upon a Monarchs reign;
Not all the fire, nor all the feinds of Hell
Can Act the rage that in Plebeians dwell;
When they are mad and know not what it is for,
Like winds they bustle, and (...) Waves they roar;
On those above 'em look with Envies stings,
And mad because they cannot all be Kings:

Ara. At Kings they let their gorged stomachs fly,
Belching out treason, sprung from (...),
Behold with censures still (...),
As base Astronomers look up and prey
Into the Glorious Planets of the sky.

Oroo. Mercy the curse of Monarchs in this age,
That breeds this plague, that should be quelled by rage; --
I Will like a Lion shake my angry Locks
And fright the Souls out of this Coward Herd,
And make them put their Necks into their Yoaks --

Amb. Great Prince --

Oroo. Be gone -- You shall have your reward --
You thought me dead, or else from power debarred; --
I Will send you home with Chains upon your feet,
With that reward you shall your Masters greet.

[Exeunt Amb. bowing Ara. What shall we do Sir? shall we go or sta
To morrow is the great, and fatal day,
That takes your Love, more than your life away

Oroo. I Will stay, and dare the worst till it be past,
Till Love in spite has thrown his utmost cast;
Then as the Body of on sense bereft,
Increases in the other senses left,
Honor shall side and help the weaker part,
And rouse with Noble deeds my sinking heart.
I Will follow Arms till my loud Fame shall prov^
As great a Rival to him, as my Love:
His Jealo^s soul shall fly to find me out,
Through all Loves Charms that fence his heart about.

Reenter to them Lysimachus. Lys. When shall this breast be free from Jealous
pain?
Ye Gods! Am I prevented once again?

Oroo. My Eyes deceive me, if it be not true,
You are Lysimachus, to whom all worth is due.

Lys. The brave, and valiant Oroondates you,
Whose mighty mind above the fates aspire;
Heaven cannot lend a grace to mount it higher;
The greatest Lover, and the bravest Man,
That dare do more than Alexander can.

Oroo. You make me blush at what I cannot deserve^
Such praise my modesty must not observe.

Lys. Cease Oroondates; mark the threatening shower
That hangs over us -- To morrow brings the hour,
When both our Loves shall feel Tyrannick power.
Besides your self, there is one wretched more,
Who Parisatis does in vain adore;
Yet there is a glimpse of hope my fate procures,
Which I will follow, that is not in yours:
Statira never can hope to be your wife,
Without attempt on Alexander's life:
The Gods protect the greatest King from harms;
But had Ephestion Parisatis hand,
Though bound by Hymenyal sacred Charms;
Without the aw of Duty or command,
I Would snatch him out of hers, and Alexander's Arms.
Reenter to them Ephestion. Look where this loved Ephestion does appear.

Oroo. Let him not see that we are talking here.

Lys. This moment is an Age while you retire.

Exeunt Oroondates, and Araxis. Ephesians. Lysimachus, I come at your desire;
I read your looks and understand your sign,
And hope you did not misinterpret mine;
Though you have called me from my only bliss,
And greatest pleasure that on Earth there is.

Lys. For all that I can say, it is decreed,
That you will run on, and Love with fatal speed.

Ephesians. To morrow e're the Sun forsake the Morn,
A bride shall be by Parisatis worn,
And thou a poor neglected Rival burn.
The Gods with music of the sphere* shall move,
And fill the Temple with delights above,
To usher Alexander's, and Ephestion's Love.

Lys. Tw'ere fit before, that you your self went there,
And did in time this Heavenly Masque prepare;
'Twill ease the Gods of an important care
Dare thou defend thy false, and treacherous flame?

Ephesians. Against the Stars in Parisatis name.

Lys. Those Stars are angry, and, thy life conspire;
Therefore desist, and from her Love retire:
Feed not thy youth with such a vain design;
For by the Gods, she never shall be thine.

Ephesians. The Gods are pleased and will in time fulfill,
What they'v decreed in Alexander's will;
But you are Mad; I Will give you leave to talk.

Lys. Follow me then into the Cyprus walk.

Ephesians. Go on; I fear not all thy strength, and ods.

Lys. Nor I, were thou the Minion of the Gods.

Ephesians. I follow thee -- May Parisatis charms
Crown but my Love, as Love shall Crown my Arms.

[ Exeunt Omnes Finis Actus Quarti.
Actus Quintus, Scaena Prima.
Alexander discovered in torment, Statira, Bagistanes, And Captains. Alex. O
There it went, and struck through every part;
The hand that from my Bosom pulled a Dart
Never felt me tremble with the sudain smart;
But this like lightening parches every vein,
And lends to death a thousand spears in pain.
What have I done ye Gods that you give over?
Was I so great that I could be no more?
Great Jove, did my vast name so ponderous stand,
Not to be fixed by thy immortal hand?
Ephestion -- Ah the Torment that I feel;
The world turns guiddy and begins to reel,
(...) on one side, and shows its fatal keel

Sta. Heaven keep the thought of treason from your mind;
The Gods be to your noble life more kind;
I wish by Methres I had bin your wife,
Rather than you should think I hate your life^

Alex. Far be my soul from such a thought possessed,
That Sin should dwell in your Illustrious breast.

Sta. Ah may you find more worlds, and them subdue,
If you can be so kind to think me true.

Alex. Most generous Princess, by the Gods I do:
All that besides a God can feel, I Will bear,
And think no mortal man such treason dare;
If such a Monster on the Earth were bred,
Through all my pangs of Death, I Would look him dead.
I Would pull back life, and would that strength recall,
Which held the world, and on his head would let it fall.

Bag. Send for Physicians Sir, to give you ease,
That will consult, and find out your disease.

Alex. That were to storm my life with greater force;
Physicians were invented for a Curse,
To plague Mankind, and make diseases worse.

Phil. Who knows; but your distemper is the same,
When after bathing in cold Cydims blood,
No sooner you out of the water came,
But such un^sual pains did (...) your Blood.

Alex. ^h there it hit me with a fatal blow;
That when I Would hold of life, it made me bow,
Loosing my hands and faintly let it go --
Ephestion -- Where Is Ephestion? -- Run, straight, fly;
Shall I not see Ephestion ere I die?
What have you done with him? Go fetch him straight; --
Do You stand? -- Go fetch him e're it be too late.
[Exit one of the Captains, Alex. turns to Statir a weeping Strange tickling
pains through all my senses creep,
With joy in Anguish bred, to see you weep. --
O save those tears you shed, each precious drop,
The wealth thereof a sinking State would prop.

Sta. Weak, and defenseless my poor grief appears;
Could I but with these Floods your pains disperse;
I Would melt my heart, and weep it out in tears, --

Alex. My dear Ephestion I shall never find!

Sta. How fares that heart, the greatest of Mankind?

Alex. As he whose spirit does contemn his fate,
Bearing a heavy burden on his Back,
Stretches, and rises with the mighty weight:
Such strength brave minds from their misfortunes take. --
Madam, the time will come that I Will ly low;
This lofty towering Pinnacle must bow,
And you will be rid of this great Man that made a show;
As a bright Star, the darling of the sky,
That you behold so glorious, and so high,
Drops on a sudain from your wondering Eye.

Sta. Oh say not so, unless you take me too,
Or stay you here and let me die for you.

Alex. I will not die: You Will see that I can rise,
Bles^ by your hand, and guided by your Eyes --
[Alex. rises up supported by Statira. Ephestion come, we will new worlds
obtain,
Let loose the old and hunt it over again.

Enter to them Ephestion wounded, led in by Parisatis, and a Captain. Ephestion
and Parisatis sit down on one side of Alexander, and Statira on the other Ephesians.
O bear me quickly; do not let me stay --
But if you stir you take my life away.
[to Par. Offering to unband him. Break wretched heart, It Is time for thee to
end --
Ephestion's dearest soul; Ephestion's Friend;
[throwes himself on Alex. What ails the joy of Men, and Gods above?
Speak dearest of my heart, dearer than Love.

Alex. He Is ^aint, and pale, and his poor heart does bleed --
It streams -- O Gods! Who did this bloody deed?
Traitors of Hell, you have showed your utmost wrath. --
Ephestion! soul, there is treason on us both.
I can the Author of My death forgive;
But he that killed Ephestion shall not live.
That God who reigned auspitious at my birth,
[Offers to rise Lend me the strength, with which I held the Earth;
Cassander, and my Bands of Macedon,
I Will fetch my self, and kill' em every one.

Ephesians. Ah sit you still, and rest this Noble heart;
You than my wounds do give a greater smart.
Lysimachus I urged this wound to make,
And we both fought for Parisatis sake.

Alex. Lives'e ye Gods? Go fetch him instantly;
Let me the pleasure have to see him die,
Then let my soul with satisfaction fly, --
Now, now a thousand daggers pierce my skull:
Restless, as on a Bed of spikes I ^oll.
Yet I will bear it, by the Gods I can;
I Will live to have you all condemned and slain,
If they will grant Ephestion's health again.

Ephesians. Ah mind not mine, whiles you neglect your own;
Long may you live, and Guide us like the Sun,
And we shine by your light, as does the Moon.
Leave not the world to be by fate betrayed,
And us to dwell in everlasting shade.
Ah Parisatis! --
Let not my Rival show the King his face;
But keep him ever in that blessed space,
Safe in the circled Arms of your embrace;
The Gods should not have forced me from that place
Had I been there --

Par. I Will pull him from my Breast, --
And you shall dwell my soul's Eternal Guest.

Alex. Statira! Oh Ephestion, how I burn!

Sta. Ye Gods! Now all my griefs again return!
I did not think there could be yet a cross,
That I could mourn after Darius loss.

Ephesians. Ah Parisatis! --
It is in vain, the pity you impart;
My death admits of Rivals by no Art. --
Give me your hand -- The Gods are so severe,
[to Par* To grant life hence; but then to snatch it here.
[to Alex* Look down O heav^n and your own Actions mourn;
Relieve the greatest Man that e're was born.
Thou great, thou only excellently good,
Here Is Love, and friendship swallowed in a Flood,
And drowned in storms of sighs, and tears of blood
O the last drop that trickles from my heart!
I wish ye Gods, 'twere Nectar to his smart.

[fainting Alex. He Is gone -- ^ee too the furious and rebellious Sun,
Slave to the many Battails I have won,
Has in this very moment broke his chain,
And in revenge shot all his fire into my Brain.
The Gallant Eagle too, that over my head,
So often in sign of Victory has fled,
Shook with the terror of my fate, lies dead.
I Will search Jove's Lap, where brighter Eagles are, --
It Is a great way -- I Will mount on yonder Star. --
See Madam, see, above the blew paved sky,
Do you not see my dear Ephestion fly?

Ephesians. Lo dearest Son of Phillip, here am I:
I Will rob once more this treasure of my health.
And safely in his bosom lodge the wealth,
Stealing to him insensibly this kiss,
And in his breast will transmigrate the bliss.
[Eph. kisses Paris. hand, then turns to Alex. See thou beloved thy (...) Boy,
Brings the last fruits of his expiring joy.
Think who thou art, thou Royal Son of Jove;
Revive that heart, that does Ephestion Love;
See I can never from this Center move.

Al^x. Ah my Ephestion, art thou yet alive!
What saucy Spirit told me thou were dead?

Ephesians. I will not dye if thou will cease to grieve,
But live to see more Crowns adorn your head:
May never such Love their frozen spirits warm,
That did the God-like Alexander harm.
How fares my heart? ^ow favors i'ts disease?

Alex. Believe me Boy that I am all over ease;
The thoughts of this does ev'en deaths horror please.
I will Lysimachus his Pardon give,
And will do any thing, if thou will live:
Thou art my darling hopes; if thou art slain,
When I am dead, who shall the world maintain?
Or who for these fair Queens, Darius loss regain?

Enter to them Lysimachus threatening the Guards, who keep off. Lys. Be gone --
Who does not instantly depart,
By all the Gods, this dagger's in his heart.
I need no Guards to call my duty home;
Faster I Will fly than you can make me come.
Ah Sir believe me I my life despise;
Think you I Will live to see death close your Eyes?
Down at your feet your faithful Subject lies,
Whose life for you's an humble sacrifice.
I did Ephestion wound, and that I did,
I beg that I may suffer for the deed.

[Lys. kneels Par. Thou mighty soul, look with a gracious Eye;
[Sta. and Par. kneels Ah pardon him, and be a God more high, --
See who it is kneels, Statira it is and I.

Sta. Breath life, thou great, and only God-like man.

Alex. Spare him that style, who nothing does nor can.
My mind indeed, that struggles with my fate,
But holds my shattered purposes too late,
Shows I am Alexander yet, but no more great.

Ephesians. By all the dearest Love that dwelt in us,
Forgive, forgive the brave Lysimachus.

Alex. And do thou beg his fatal life's reprieve. --
[to Ephesians. Rise then, and thanks to poor Ephestion give.

[to Lys. Lys. Still I am cursed and have no right to breath,
Nor wish to live till you are free from death;
Thou more Illustrious than the God of war,
Dark as in hell we all benighted are,
To see thee drop down from us like a falling Star.

Enter to them Cassander supported by two of the Guards. Cass, Quick, quickly
bear me e're --
I sink into the Concaves of the Earth.

Ephesians. What horrid scene of death is this? What birth
Has the base world in this one day of fate brought forth?

Alex. Thou look as if this Tale thou would unfold,
Be brief Cassander, thou were ever bold.

Cass. I by the fury of thy fate am hurled,
And sent to fetch thee to another world.
Does not the Ambition start, to here it sai'd,
New wreathes of Conquests shall adorn thy head;
Laurels that time never kills, nor envy fades,
But flourish thick in everlasting shades,
It Is past thy own proud heart to be again --
By Jove, great Alexander thou art slain;
Thou can not l^ve an hour --

Ephesians. Forbid O heaven! --

Sta. And the all mighty Sun. --

Ephesians. Unsay what thou have said. --

Alex. Let him go on. --

Cass. Had thou a thousand lives to guard thy soul,
In Hercules his cup thou have lost 'em all,
And drowned thy self in that immortal bowl.
This in revenge of blood the Gods have done,
Much for the world, but more for Macedon,
For Clytus, brave Parmenio, and his Son.

Ephesians. Where was this treason damned in Hell begot?

Alex. Live, and discover who was in the plot.

Cass. It Is he whose name shall never be forgot,
But live, when by this deed his does expire
That did Diana's Temple set on fire;
With grief, that he did touch this man of heaven,
To whom rich Nature all her stock has given,
Consulting those above, who joined to fit
Thy soul for all things admirably great;
Till so injust, and fallen to that degree,
Thou most ingratfully a God would be,
And Phillip for thy Father did disown,
Lifting to heaven thy humble Macedon;
Killed thy best ^erinds that all thy faults would show,
And none but to cursed ^^atterers would bow;
Ravished the widows tears, and virgins smiles,
And all the wealth of nature turned to spoils;
Led by a whore, to gratify thy lust,
Did turn the famed Persepolis to dust.

Lys. Ah let me send him to eternal night.

Alex. Still let him rail; I Will hear him with delight,
And dare death, and the villains utmost spite.

Cass. Thou like a Plague were through all Nations sent,
Till the kind Gods in pity now relent,
And throw away their wrathful instrument.
I killed thee, and do glorying in it die,
To have it said hereafter, this did I,
Nor would the Credit often for life exchange;
For I have done it in the worlds revenge:
And this could never be too dearly bought,
Therefore my self has pledged thee in a larger draught.

Alex. Base dog, thou in thy latest breath do ly;
I scorn to die the death that you shall die. --
Bring him to me, to put him out of doubt,
Crush him, till he shall spue his poison out;
Then kill him -- No. but be a killing still,
An Age, till I from heaven descend, and tell,
What new found plagues shall scourge his soul in Hell.

Ephesians. Ah where is the place from whence our souls do meet,
I Will suck the poison out, and call it sweet.

[Whiles the Guards offer to seize Cass. he makes a motion to stab himself.
Cass. It is in vain; for though my life be short,
I Will hasten it, and o'pe another port.

Alex. Guide my remaining strength, this darted Rod --
Thus aimed I, and thus struck I like a God,

[Alex. throws a dart, and kills Cassander. Cass. Thou have but spurred my
life that else was free;
This is the only stroke I cared to see,
And is the last I e're shall take from thee.
Prepare ye Gods, and make us mighty Room.
For Alexander, and his fate are come.

[Cassander dies. Ephesians. How clouded over with guilt his soul does stye,
Like gloomy night, and darkens all the sky

Alex. The Villain has said true; I must depart.
I sensibly perceive the poisonous smart
Burns in my Brain; and feeds upon my heart;
The cursed Juice will not it self confine,
But in a moment more will break the mine.

Ephesians. Your words like death through all my veins disperse;
You kill me quite at what you do rehearse.
If you but talk of dying, I Will make have
And shun that sight; I cannot be the last;
You shake the Glass that else does run too fast.
I Will tear these Wounds, and spoil the surgeons art,
And kill my self, er'e you from me depart.
Can you so cruel be, such thoughts to own,
To leave your dear Ephestion here alo^e?
Leave, let me go -- To stay this threatening harm,
And save the widowed world, the Gods will arm.

Alex. Ah spare more words, that speed thy parting breath;
Thy Love augments the danger of thy death:
Look up Ephestion, see who is by thy side;
Fate cannot either of our souls divide;
Our lives together in one chain are tied.

Ephesians. I will, I will, even my last look afford;
As long as I can live, I Will keep my word;
But die I must, and then I Will mount all prayer;
If there is a God will lend a feeling ^are,
I Will charm the deity, till I can gain
Immortal pity to assuage your pain.
The dark, and secret book of Fate I Will read,
And know what of the world's great King's decreed.

Alex. Now I begin to sur^eit with the drink.

Ephesians. Is there no aid? O speak, oh do, O think. --
^hill death shall quickly freeze up all my veins,
Like ^cecles I Will drop upon thy scorching pains --
Come close thou dear -- Thus gently as we twine,
When I am dead, lay my cold breast to thine,
And there, in spite of all thy fire, I Will freeze,
As snow upon the burning Aetna lies.

[Eph. begins to faint Alex. Stay precious Boy, another look restore;
Spare but my happiness on moment more --
Ah it is not I, it is thou that art unkind;
And cru^l too, to leave me here behind --
Stay my souls soul, there is some hope remains;
These floods of grief have quenched my scorching pains;
I am not sick, my senses all are free,
And feel no burning, but with Love of thee.

Ephesians. Ah let me go before it be too late
For heaven to punish thy unlucky fate --
Happy Lysmach^s, my Rival be,
In her, but him you must not envy me,

Alex. A thousand Adders bask within my sk^l,
With heat engender, all my Brains are full --
Where is Ephestion? Have you let him go? --
O for a world; a world made up of snow
How I could plunge, till I did melt it down,
And make more havoc than the scorching Sun.

Sta. Ah say you are well or make him so believe.
For it is in search of you his senses grieve.

Alex. See, see the Battles Join -- Beat, beat the Drumes,
Bucephaelus enraged he champs and foames;
Darius with his hooked Charri^s comes. --
Where Is old Parmenio? Let more Trumpets sound;
How his proud horse does beat the fearful ground!
Haste, haste -- Ephestion's routed in the wing, --
Now, now they have enclosed him in a Ring --
Hark how they shout, and clap their hands for joy,
The Gods have ravished my beloved Boy!

Ephesians. Look dearest Alexander, yet I live --
This is a greater stroke than death can give.

Lys. Ah Royal Sir, stay till you have decreed,
Who over the mighty world shall you succeed.

Alex. A deadly frost has pierced my senses through;
O! I am fall'^ int'an Abyss of snow
Something like cold dew-drops about my heart does move
Warm me Ephestion, warm me with thy Love.
The worthy^st man amongst you shall be King;
To him that ownes that title give this Ring.
Yet somewhat else there is I Am prone to do;
That is Statira, to be just to you --
Be you of all your fathers Crowns possessed,
And be you too with Oroondates blessed. --

Sta. Ah hold, with kindness now you wound me more,
Than all your presecution did before;
Witness ye Gods, to whom my soul is known,
With how much sorrow I embrace my own.

Ephesians. Now ends his roughness in a calm delight;
As western winde^ are often laid at night:
Thus ^ilent falls the sweetest of mankind,
Softer than blossoms carried by the wind!

Alex. Now let us mount, and then for ever join,
Like two twin-starres, that do together shine,
Still guiding over the world our heavenly parts;
Whilst I rule Monarchs, thou shall govern hearts.

Ephesians. Come Alexander then, if we must go,
Let Us Reign above, and make a glorious show.
[Eph. kisses Par. hand, then turns to Alex. Farewell thou dearest Love -- Come
dearest friend; --
Thus like too Cherubims we will both ascend;
Whiles guarded so, by friendship, and by Love,
We go prepared to meet the joys above.

Alex. Why will thou die? with thee's all sweetness gone;
More rare than Persia offers to i'ts Sun
The Violets perfumed, and purple crest,
Or Phoenix burning it 'its spicey nest,
Breath not so sweet anodour, as thy Breast.

Ephesians. Now, now my spirit before my Ey-sight sweepes --
Let us begin our Journey on our Lips.

[they kiss. Alex. This kiss in which thy latest Breath does fleet,
No dew that falls from heaven is half so sweet --
Stay, stay -- I will not let thee get the start --
Take all with thee, each Atome of my heart --
Now, now I have thee just before my Ey; --
Ephestion, now --

Ephesians. Now let us together fly --

[both die Phil. Now I am sure that the great deed is done,
I Will haste and tell the news in Macedon.
[exit
Par. He Is gone --

Sta. He Is gone, the life-spring of as all --
A heavenly Legion waits his soul in view.
What miseries shall all mankind b^fall!

Lys. Nature should melt it self into a dew,
And the whole world into disorder fall.
And mourn in Chaos at thy funeral.

Stat. He is not dead, or I am not alive --
It cannot be --

Lys. Cease Madam, cease to gr^eve --

Bag. What (...) we do? Ah, what is to be done?

Lys. Call all the Captains, call'em every one;
Tell 'em the worlds, and their great Master's gone.
[Exit Bagisianes* Bear forth Cassander's Body --
Which limb from limb wild horses having tore,
Then let his scattered joints the Dogs devour.
[Cassander's Body is carried forth Enter to them Oroondates, and Araxis, Ah
Oroondates you are come too late --
Behold the sad great Miracle of fate.

Oroo. Too soon I fear to such a dismal sight,
The news whereof did my firm soul a fright;
What, is he dead? By heaven he is not sure!
Thus looked he, the same awful visage wore,
When he dispersed with wonder Love, and power. --
See too, the richest fruit of Natures pride,
And mourning Love lies bleeding by his side. --
How do the Gods like Children with us play!
First show the world in splendor, fine, and gay,
Then on a sudden snatch the gaudy Toy away.
This who like Heaven pierced thunder most divine,
And lightened where the Sun durst never shine.
That dived though all the secrets of the Earth;
Saw more than ever yet did humane Birth,
Does fall in the Crowd, and undistinguished pass;
Leaving but fame, that such a man there was.
Ay my Statira! weep no more divine;
I did not think such showers could cloud thy shine,
And dark the day, when I should call thee mine,
Instead of Alexander, heaven does lend
Lysimachus, our brave, and noble Friend.

Sta. Who would not shrink at such a day of doom?

Lys. Spare Love a while, and when the Captains come,
We Will straight to Council; then if I have power,
To Parisatis I will Per^ia's Crown restore
To give to whom she please --

Par. If this be true --
I with my self, will give it back to you.

Lys. You when you please, shall then to Scythia go,
And bright Statira your loved Queen indow.

Oroo. Now I will call thee Brother --

Lys. But how dear --
[looking on the Bodye^ We purchase pleasure, almost with despair. --

Re-enter to them Bagistanes with the Captains, making a full stage. See
Valiant, soldiers; look with wonder there. Omnes. O horror! Plagues! Revenge!
--

Cap. H'as such a dread --
We dare not look upon him now he is dead,
But as on Gods with reverent surprise,
And pay our Adorations from our Eyes.

Cap. We hear Antipater has late rebelled;
And as all Greece his King, has took the field.

Cap. Now all will out -- Phillip they say is fled,
And had a hand in this most horrid deed.

Lys. I knew Cassander could not this have done,
Had not the Father joined in treason with the son. --
Straight in the Hall erect a golden Throne;
There seat the King all glorious as the sun,
A Scepter in his hand, and on his head a Crown.
That Throne in which he did commands disperse
Through the tamed world, and awed the Universe.
Proclaim a loud to heavens high Arch, that there,
The Deputies of all the world appear,
Whilst we in Council sit, agreed in power,
To name this mighty man a Successor;
Then we will arm for just revenge, and Fame^
And conquer still in Alexander's Name.

[(...) FINIS
EPILOGVE.
YOur looks already have begun to name,
Which was the most, we, or the Play too blame:
With faults of ours good natures may dispense,
But justly tax the Poets want of Sense.
That after your loved Alexander dare
Bring this with all your likings to compare,
A Play with Scenes and Acting so admired,
As if the Souls they played had them inspired.
So it is with her that has an ugly face,
Proud of false charms, and her affected grace,
Sits by some cried up Beauty of the Town,
And imitates each glance that is not her own,
And when some Gallan^ from the Pit does bow,
O how she snatches it and court'sies low!
The careless Beauty then sits by the while,
Kills with a frown and raises with a smile; --
Yet this excuse upon the Authors score,
This though come last, was writ a year before.
Lik^t as you please the great Dons of our House,
Themselves would fain have had the Play from us,
But frankly and generously our A^thor stakes
His purse and credit rather for our sakes.
Be but so kind as ^e to us has been,
In hopes to further merit he will begin
And save the trembling Soul that waits within.
To the Ladies, to you Wits he now does call,
For like a drowning man he catches at you all.
Spare him this once, and save him now perplexed,
And he will turn Bully Poet by the next.
FINIS.

