THE ART of METALS, In which is Declared the manner OF THEIR GENERATION, AND
THE CONCOMITANTS Of Them.

In Two Books.

Written in Spanish by Albaro Alonso Barba, Master of Art, Curate of St.
Bernards Parish in the Imperial City of Potosi, in the Kingdom of Peru in the
West Indies, in the Year, 1640.

Translated in the Year, 1669. By the R. H. Edward Earl of Sandwich.

London: Printed for S. Mearne, Stationer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
1674.

THE PREFACE.
Gentle Reader,
THou have now in thy hands a Jewel so esteemed in Spain and the Indies, that
there they sell even all they have (and the Kingdom of Heaven to boot) to
purchase it; for having this they think that therewith they shall have all
things (in this world, I mean) given unto them: And in that Country, I must
tell you, it will go a great way toward the purchase of the other. Indeed there
are some in all Nations that will sell that they have not, nor ever shall have;
but this was a Jewel so rare that few had it to sell, for it was concealed like
the great Arcanum, the Philosophers Stone, and only traditionally delivered to
the Adepti, but it falling into the hands of this true Nobleman of England, he
not envying the rest of Mankind so great a Benefit, nor being willing so great
a Treasure should be wrapped up in a Napkin, he honored and enriched our
Language with it, being contented that all our Lord the Kings People should be
Philosophers. Concerning him I have nothing to say, he having written his own
History in such indelible Characters of Gallantry and Honor, that neither Sea
nor Earth can contain them: And as he had few or none before him whom he could
imitate, so I fear he has left but few behind that will care to follow his
generous Example.

The manner how Metals and other substances that accompany Them are engendered.
CHAP. 1. Of the Companions of Metals, and first of the Earth, and the several
Colors thereof.
ALL the inanimate things within the bowels of the Earth are reducible into one
of These Four Kinds of mixtures, viz.

Either Metals, Stones, Earth or Juices.


Nature produces* These mingled one with the other, and because the art of
separating of Metals cannot be put in practice without understanding the
nature of the other three, (as will hereafter appear) therefore I shall treat
of These a little.

By the word Earth I do not mean that pure and simple Element, whereof the
Philosopers say all mixed sublunary bodies are composed.

Neither do I mean that which is so gross as it remains mixed with Metal,
Vitriol, or other Juices.

But I mean such an Earthy substance as neither melts in the fire, nor
dissolves in the water, as Metals and Juices do, nor is so Compacted or hard
as are Stones.

Some report Aristotle to have been of Opinion, that the pure Elementary Earth
was void of Color. Strabo affirms it to be white, because Ashes are of that
Color, but the Miner may rest secure, that Dig he never so deep, he shall not
meet with any such pure Element of Earth to make new experiments by, because it
is not in the world by reason of the perpetual mixture of the Elements one with
the other.

The Color of the purest Earth that has been found, Cardona would have to be,
a very dark Gray: In the other sorts of Earth we see how rich nature has
adorned the world with variety of Colors, caused by difference of Exhalation,
as Theoprastus says, or by difference of heat, as Aristotle says, and both
truly; for if under Earth, that has not its natural and proper color, there
be found Metals, it is certain, that the exhalations from Those Metals has
discolored the ground; and if there be no Metal found there, then the
discoloring proceeds from the consuming power of the Suns heat. Besides the
discoloring that comes by reason of exhalation carries a glistering and
shining along with it, and the discoloring from the Suns over-concoction only,
is obscure or Iron-colour'd, or Black.

From what is already said, considerable conjecturs may be made for the finding
out of Mines in the Bowels of the Earth, by the Color of the Ground and
Cliffs, or by the Tilth ploughed up upon the Mountains, as daily experience
has shown all over the Dominions of Spain.

CHAP. 2. Of the diverse Smells of the Earth, and the reason thereof.
THe works of Nature in producing variety of Smells of Earth, is also worthy of
admiration.

Ordinarily the Earth smells well upon the fall of the first rains after the
heat of Summer is past: The Dry time having baked together the moderate
humidity that was in the Earth, (which is the cause from whence all good smells
proceed) and the first rains dissolving that again (which being exhaled by
moderate heat) makes the good scent which we perceive. Some sorts of Earthen
vessels also have this privilege, as that of Estremos in Portugal, and of Nata
(in Panama) which are highly esteemed in Europe for that quality. In the famous
City of Malacca (in the East Indies) they say there is a sort of Earthen
vessels that smells admirably, in so great abundance, that it is little
esteemed, and they make all their most servile sort of ware of it. And in some
Mines good smelling Earth has been met withal, although most commonly that
kind of Earth is of an ill scent. Agricola relates, that when Henry Prince of
Saxony was in Mariemburg, there came so sweet a smell out of the Mine, which
they called St. Sebastian, that the Prince admired thereat, and said, that he
thought he was in Calivet, (that famous Country of the Indies, which for its
rare smells and other excellencies has been thought by judicious men to be the
Paradise wherein Adam of old, and the Fathers now enjoy God upon Earth) The
Metal that comes out of the Mines (which they call Palos) is of a good smell,
if they light not upon some bastard Mineral, that accompanies, and has infected
it: and this good smell is a great sign of the richness of the stones of that
Mine, and of the Earth which they get, there called Lampos. This experiment is
ordinary in Lead or Tin Mines; and it is usual for the Miners to judge of their
Oar, by the smell, as well as by the taste. Other sorts of Metal for the most
part have an ill smell, either because of their own natural distemper, or by
reason of their being generally mixed with Brimston, Copperas, or other
malignant juices.

Some do think, that over and above what has been said, there is some matter
in the Bowels of the Earth so stinking and abominable, that it does correspond
with the Ordure of Animals: the truth is, that there be places in the Earth
that instantly kill, with a Pestilential smell. And setting aside the stories
of this kind, both ancient and modern in remote Countries. I shall relate two
examples, where I my self was present, which was at the discovery of the rich
Country of San Christoval delos Lipes; at that time in a beautiful high hill,
that together with others encompasses the dwelling of the Miners, two
Galleguares found a Mine, which at first they called after their own names, but
ever since (to this present) it is called (from its effects) The stinking Mine.
At first they got out of it very rich Oar ( Tacana) between white Chalk: and as
they began to sink deeper, they were forced to give over, by reason of a most
abominable ill smell they met withal, which killed several of the Miners
Indians: and so it lay unwrought for four or five years; after which time
another Miner (I being then in the Country) undertook to proceed in the working
of it, thinking that having layn still so long after its first opening, the ill
quality would have been evaporated; but that experiment cost the lives of two
Indians more, whereupon they forbore the work, and have done so unto this day.
The which I have not so much wondered at, as to see with my eyes the Ground
opened in several other parts of that Mountain, at a great distance from the
forementioned Mine, and in digging scarce a yard deep, such a stink came out of
the ground, as forced the laborers to give over; and as I passed by those Pits
a few days after, I saw diverse Birds and Serpents dead in them, having been
entoxicated by that poisonous smell: On the other side of this forbidden Hill
(until Divine Providence make way for the Mining of the same) are built
dwelling houses, and a Mill to Grind Metals withal, adjoining unto a Marish
Ground, which in every place where they dug to lay the shallow foundations
of those buildings, the same smell breaks out, as has been already described;
and it comes out of the ground boiling like unto a Cellar full of Wine on the
Must; exceeding troublesome and noisome unto us, though we were standing by in
the open air.

In the famous Country of Mines, Verenguela de Pacages, in which the Indians
procured a Patent to dig, before that of Potosi was in use, because its veins
were esteemed much richer than Potosi, and upon trial were found to be so; and
the Oar gotten there inferior to none in the Indies. In the hill of that
Country called Sancta Juanna, a Miner followed a very rich and plentiful vein
of Silver, and intending to discover more of the like, he determined to break a
hole into an old Vault An usual practice among the Miners in that Country.
, and set two Indians upon the work, who after a few blows discovered a
vacuity, out of which came so Pestilential a stink, that killed the two Indians
presently, and almost stifled others that were at a distance from them in the
Mine, who nevertheless ran out, and told their Master what had happened. He
made haste to the Mine, hoping to save the Indians, but at first entrance into
the ground, upon the stairs by which they went down into the Mine, he fell down
dead, and his body remained there, no body daring to go down, and take it away
to bury it.

In another Mine in the same mountain, in the bottom of it, I saw a thick
exhalation or poisonous vapor gush forth, making a terrible noise, and was of
quality bad enough to kill one that would stay long in that Mine; putting out
the Candles, when we held them to it, which is a certain sign of the malignity
of the air, as has been found by the constant experience of all Miners, and
therefore deserves to be the more taken notice of.

CHAP. 3. How to know the Condition of the Earth by the Taste.
THe Artist in the knowledge of Metals, before he gives his judgment, leaves
no experiment untried, that may be considerable for his information. And
therefore uses his Taste, which discovers the pureness of Metals, as well as
smelling does.

Pure Earth has no manner of taste; and that Earth which is mixed with
Minerals commonly has a bad taste; because scarce any Mineral but is a dust,
and they be all dry, when as the very first principle of sweetness or good
taste is humidity.

Now since the Earth which has such a mixture in it is greatly disposed also
to contain metals of like condition; The curious Miner ought to make trial by
tasting, holding it for a certain truth, that metals of Gold and Silver, and
others, are found as often in the form of Earth (which in the Spanish Miners
language is called Lampos) as in Stones or Oar.

The taste of the Earth is gotten well by infusing it in curious water,
especially if you set it upon the fire, and let it boil once or twice, and then
cool again, whereby may be discerned the mixture or juice which it contains:
and one that would improve this experiment may separate the water from the
infusion, substantially and visibly, as shall be shown in its place, when we
come to treat of the Preparation of Metals, to make them beneficial.

CHAP. 4. Of the Names and Uses of some sorts of Earth.
IN the books of Physic some kinds of Earth are very famous, for the effects
which they have upon man's body; and it is not unnecessary that the Miner has
the knowledge to distinguish them when they come in his way.

1. Lemnian-Earth (so called from the Island Lemnos, where it is found) is very
red, and much like unto red Oaker or red Lead, but it has this notable
difference, that it will not color ones fingers in touching it, as do the
others. It is esteemed as rich as Gold, and sold so weight for weight; one
cause of the dearness of it is the scarcity of it in the world; and another is,
because they dig it only on one day in the year, being superstitiously
persuaded, that that Earth of this kind only has virtue in it, that is dug
upon the 6/16 of August. It is a rare Antidote against any kind of poison or
Pestilence.

2. That Earth which is commonly called Bol Armeniac, (from the vulgar opinion,
that it is found only in Armenia) is very like the Lemnian-Earth aforesaid,
only it is not red, but palish, white or sallow-coloured. There is excellent
good of it, and in great plenty in the West-Indian Mines, and particularly in
the rich mountain of Potosi: and in those of Oruro diverse are of opinion, that
this common Bol is that which Diascorides calls la Rubrica Synopica: and that
the Oriental Bol Armeniac is the true Lemnian-Earth.

3. There be two sorts of Eritrian-Earth, one pure white, the other of an
ash color, and this last is the better, and is known by rubbing it upon
polished Copper, where it will leave a tincture of violet color. It has
virtue to stench blood, and to cool and heal green wounds.

4. The Earth of Samia is light white Earth, and will stick to ones tongue, if
you touch it with it.

It is brittle, and yet will melt.

There is another sort of it called Aster, that is close and hard as a stone.

Both of them have the Eritrian virtue in them; viz. to be excellent Antidotes
against poison, or the biting of Serpents.

5. The Earth called Chia is white, inclining to ash color, much like that of
Samia, and has the same virtues; and over and above that, it takes wrinkles
out of the face, and gives a good complexion.

6. Selinusion-Earth has the same quality as the last aforementioned. The best
kind of it is that which glisters much, is white and brittle, and soonest
dissolves in water.

7. Cimolian-Earth is white, (although there be a sort of it that enclines unto
purple.) The best is that which is most greasy, and is very cold in ones hand.

It dissolves imposthumes, and little swellings, and in case of a burn it will
keep the flesh from blistering.

8. The Poigite is almost of the same color as the Eritrian, but is found in
bigger lumps: it cools and refreshes the hand that touches it, and if one lick
it, it will stick much unto the tongue. Its virtues are those of Cimolian-Earth.

9. The Melian-Earth is of an ash color like Eritrian, but it feels rough, and
makes a noise between the fingers like a Pomice-stone: it has the virtue of
Alum, (but very weak, as one may perceive by the taste) for it will make the
tongue something dry: it cleanses the body, gives a good complexion, and will
cure the Itch.

10. Of that Earth which is called Ampelites, the blackest is the best. Ground
with Oil it easily dissolves, and has a cooling and loosening virtue: also it
is used to color hair withal; it is wholly bituminous as Jeat is also.

Cardanus amongst his curiosities makes mention of another kind of Earth,
anciently called Britanica; (from the Country where it is found) they were fain
to dig very deep Mines to come at it. It was white, and after they had
separated the Plate it contained, they manured their Tilth-fields with the
Earth, which were put in heart thereby for 100. years after.

11. Out of Islands in the south Sea, not far from the City of Arica, they
fetch Earth that does the same effect as the last aforementioned. It is called
Guano, (i. e. Dung) not because it is the Dung of Sea-fowls (as many would have
it understood) but because of its admirable virtue in making ploughed ground
fertile. It is light and spungy. And that which is brought from the Island of
Iqueyque is of a dark gray color, like unto Tobacco ground small. Although
from other Islands nearer Arica, they get a white Earth inclining to a sallow,
of the same virtue. It instantly colors water whereinto it is put, as if it
were the best leigh, and smells very strong. The qualities and virtues of this,
and of many other simples of the new world, are a large field for ingenious
persons to discourse Philosophically upon, when they shall bend their minds
more to the searching out of truth than riches.

CHAP. 5. Of Juices, and first of Alum.
THe compositions within the bowels of the Earth are such as either will melt,
or will not melt.

Those that will not melt are hard, and called Stones; or being soft and easily
crumbling into very small parts, are called Earth.

Those that will melt, are either such as after they run (by the force of the
fire) become solid and malleable; and those are Metals; or else such as do not
obtain those qualities, and those are they that are called Juices.

From the mixture of the aforesaid four kinds of compositions are made eleven
other sorts of Minerals, and no more.

Those who are hardened by cold, ungive again by heat, as Sulphur; but such as
are condensed by heat are dissolved again by cold, and water, viz. Alum,
Copperas, Salt, etc.

1. Those that write of simple medicaments speak of diverse sorts of Alum, but
the true Alum is that which is called Rock-Allum, whereof some is white and
transparent as glass, and other some inclining to a red, and this has the best
virtue, and is mightily restringent; and therefore called by the Greeks
Estypteria.

According to the opinion of Galen; lib. 4. of the quality of simples: it
should be of a cold quality, because all astringent things are so, and
prescribes therefore Rupecissa as cold in the second degree to be infused in
the quintessence of Raymundus. But Dioscorides, and many others make it to be
of a hot quality by its effects; but this is not a convenient place to examine
the reasons of it.

2. The Alum which is called Escayola, is not a Juice, but the same with the
Earth of Samia, which the ancients called Aster.

3. Neither is the Alum seissile, or de pluma, a Juice, (which is yet taken
for such in Apothecaries shops) but is the Stone called Amianto; and it is not
astringent to taste, nor consumes in the fire, although it be kept there very
long, which are the particular qualities of an Amianto.

4. The Alum Catino is made of the Ashes of the herb Anthide or Sosa, (
Barilla, or the herb they make glass of) whereof there is great abundance in
the plains of Oruro, and in several places of the river Langa-Sollo.

5. The Salt which is made of the Lees of Wine, or of the Calcinings of the
Lees until they become white, is likewise called Alum.

the West Indies abound in Alum, as they do also in all sorts of Minerals. In
the Mines of the Lipes, near unto Coloha, the head Town of that Country, I
found a vein of Alum; I have seen another in the hot Baths of Ventilla, in the
high way between Oruro and Chayante; and there I saw the true Seissile-Allum,
(or de pluma) with all the qualities described by Dioscorides. This same sort
of Alum also is brought to Potosi, from another Mine near to Porco Aylo: and
in many other parts there is of the same; and there might of it be made in the
City of Potosi, if they would but boil the waters de la Quebrada, or Guayco de
Santiago, which are almost all Alum.

CHAP. 6. Of Copperas.
THe Copperas is a Mineral substance very like unto Alum, and oftentimes they
are found incorporated together.

The manner of separating them, is to put the leigh that is drawn off from the
Stone or Earth, which contains the Mineral, into boiling Urine, and the
Copperas will divide from the Alum, and fall to the bottom, the Alum
remaining swiming on the top. The Copperas is sharp and biting to the taste,
and of an astringent quality; for which reason diverse do attribute unto it the
properties of Sulphur, Iron, and Copper; the virtue of Alum, the subtilness of
Saltpeter, and the dryness of Salt.

Some Alchimists have written, as if the hidden virtues of the Philosophers
Stone were contained in this Mineral, whose Latin name is ( Vitriolum) and they
form a saying to that purpose, beginning every word with one of the letters of
it, viz. Visitabis Interiora Terrae, Rectificando, Invenies Lapidem Veram
Medicinam. Raymundus says, that it is very near of kindred to Gold, and has
the same original and principle; and it may be that is the reason why sone
affirm, that it is a sign of a Mine of Gold, although the experience in these
Provinces does not correspond therewith. It is ordinarily found with Copper,
and in great abundance with the Black metal, which also participates much of
it, and thence takes the ill smell it has in working.

It is a very fine sort of Copperas which the Spaniards call Copaquiras; and
the best and purest of all is that they call Piedra Lipas, from the Mine of it
found in that Province, although a few years ago a very plentiful Mine of it
has been discovered in the Province of Acatama, which is of a greenish color,
and that of Lipa is blew. There is also whitish and yellow Copperas, which the
Painters use; and different colors of it have caused several names to be given
it: of this Mineral are those the Spaniards call Mysi Sori Calohitis, and
Melanteria.

There is dispute enough about its temperament and qualities, as well as about
that of Alum. Some not allowing it to be hot in the third degree, will yet
allow it to be so in the fourth: and others on the contrary, are of the opinion
of Juan de Rupecissa, (who I think follows Raymundus) that it is cold in the
third degree.

It is admirable to see its effect in Aquafortis, (in which all Metals like
Salt, dissolve and are turned into water) and an ocular demonstration of the
possibility of the transmutation of Metals one into another; for with Copperas
dissolved in Aquafortis, (without any other artifice) Iron, Lead and Tin
become fine Copper: and Silver will lose of its value, and be turned into
Copper also with a little help of another metal very easy to be gotten.

By the force of a most violent heat they extract Oil from the Copperas, which
is called Vitriol, of wonderful virtue.

They make two sorts of artificial Copperas, blew and green, of a mixture of
Iron, Copper and Brimston put in the fire together.

Hereafter shall be declared, how and what mischief Copperas has caused in the
working of metals, a thing hitherto not taken notice of.

CHAP. 7. Of Salt.
SAlt is no less necessary than commonly known in the world. And that which is
Mineral has the same virtue as that which is made of the Seawater, or of the
waters of brackish Lakes or Springs. The only difference is, that the
Mineral-Salt is more thick and solid, whence it comes to pass to be more
astringent, and not so easily dissolved in water as the made Salt is.

The Provinces of the West Indies as much abound in Salt as they do in Metals;
and a piece of the Sea between the Lipes coagulated into Christalline-Salt; as
also the Salt Pits called Garci Mendoca are none of the most inconsiderable
wonders of this new world: Those Pits are called Garci Mendoza, for their
bigness, because they be forty leagues long, and (where narrowest) sixteen
broad: and also because that sometimes in the middle of that space are
discovered, as it were, Wells that have no bottom, and great overgrown Fishes
are seen in them. It is very dangerous traveling over this space of ground,
for fear of losing ones eyesight, because the great glistering of the
Sunbeams, upon that place of Crystal, puts out ones eyes, unless they be
defended with black Tiffany. There is danger of life also in that journey; it
having happened, that going over that place, the traveller and his horse, and
all have been swallowed up, leaving no manner of mark behind of either of them.

In the Lipes, four leagues from the Mines of St. Christopher de Achocolla,
there is a small Lake upon the top of a little hill, in a Country they call
Tumaquisa; in the middle of which Lake the water boils, and leaps up, sometimes
more, sometimes less; making a frightful noise. Out of curiosity I went to see
it, and found the noise and motion of it so terrible, that with reason there be
very few that dare come near the mouth thereof: the water is thick to that
degree, that it looks more like dirt than water: there is one small gutter
where it runs over, and that water issued forth becomes red Salt, as it runs
along in little channels. This is a mighty strong Salt, and has twice the
virtue of common Salt in the working of Metals.

It has also been found to be an excellent remedy for the Dysentery; perchance
it has in it a mixture of the red Alum, that gives it both color and spirit.
Hard by this Lake runs a vein of Piedra Judaica; and the Country thereabouts is
full of mines of Copper.

A league and a half from Julloma, in the Province of Pacages, there be many
Salt Springs, that as they gush out of the ground, in a short time become pure
white Salt, (without the help of any art) and they increase into heaps of Salt,
until the winter rains dissolve and sweep them away. In the same Province near
unto Caquingora, there be more Salt Pits like unto the former; and the like
there is in several other places. In these parts also is found in great
abundance of the Mine or Rock-Salt, which is massy and transparent; looking
like the purest Crystal. Julloma has in it plentiful veins of this kind of
Salt. Many years ago the Inhabitants of Curaguara de Carangas have enriched
themselves by digging of Rock-Salt; and of later years they have discovered
veins of it near the River of Langa Collo; but the Salt-mines of Yocalla (which
God has created near unto the rich mountain and City of Potosi, that nothing
might be wanting that was necessary for the working of its Oar) yields such
abundance of Salt as is incredible; whereof is daily spent in the melting of
Metals at the least 1500 Quintales, and this consumption has lasted for many
years.

Besides the common virtues of Salt, which every body knows, Arnaldo de Villa
nova (in his Treatise for the preserving of youthfulness) says, that Rock-Salt
is beyond any thing in the world for that purpose: He calls it the Mineral
Elixir, and prescribes, that it be prepared with things that do not weaken it,
or alter its properties; but he does not name the ingredients, nor the manner
of doing it. Juan Beguino in his Tyrocinio Chymico teaches how to extract Oil
out of it of an extraordinary great virtue; and he says, that whatsoever is
preserved in that liquor shall be kept from putrefaction for many ages: and he
believes that this was it that preserved the body of the beautiful maid, (which
Rafael Volaterano speaks of) that was found in the time of Pope Alexander the
Sixth, in an ancient tomb so fresh, as if she had but just newly died, when as
it appeared by the Epitaph, that she had been buried there 1500 years before.

CHAP. 8. Of Salt Ammoniac, and other Salts.
AMong all the Salts that Nature alone produces the scarcest, but of greatest
virtue, is the Salt-Ammoniac; they call it vulgarly Ammoniac, and from that
name conclude, that it comes from Armenia, but that is not the true name of it,
but Ammoniac, which in Greek signifies, Salt of the sand: and underneath the
sand (of the Sea shore, I suppose) it is found congealed in little pieces by
its internal heat, and the continual burning of the Sun, baked so much, that it
is made the bitterest to taste of all kind of Salt. Goldsmiths use it more than
the Physicians. It is one of those they call the four spirits, because the fire
will convert them into smoke, and so they fly away: the other three are, 1.
Quicksilver, 2. Sulphur, 3. Saltpeter.


It has a particular property to cleanse and color Gold, and is put into the
composition of that Aquafortis that dissolves it.

At this day we have little knowledge of the true Nitre, which was anciently
made of the water of the river Nilus; although Albertus Magnus says, that in
Goselaria there was a mountain that contained a very rich Mine of Copper; and
the water that issued out at the bottom of it, being dried, became Nitre. We
know little also of Aphonitro, which is but as it were the froth of Nitre.

Borax (which is called by the Spaniards Chrysolica and Atincar) is an
artificial sort of Nitre, made of Urines stirred togethet in the heat of the
Sun, in a Copper Pan, with a Ladle of the same, until it thicken and coagulate,
although others make it of Salt-Ammoniac and Alum.

Nitre is bitterer than Salt, but less Salt. Saltpeter is the mean between them
two, and consists of very dry and subtle parts, it grows in the walls of old
Houses, and in Stables, Cow houses, Hog-sties, and Dove-coats: it will grow
again in the same Earth it was taken out of, if that Earth, be thrown in heaps
and spared, and taken care of; or if ordinary Earth be cast up into heaps, and
watered with brackish water, after some years it will give a great increase, as
profitable as crops of Grain.

The use of it in making of Gunpowder and Aquafortis is very well known. It is
used also in the melting of Metals, as shall be shown hereafter.

CHAP. 9. Of Juices, which the Spaniards call Betunes.
THe Betune is one of the things that does most damage of all unto Metals,
especially in the melting of them, because it burns them, and makes them become
dross, if they be not cleared of the Betune before they be put into a fierce
fire: There be twelve sorts of Betune, viz. Asphalto, Pissasphalto, Naptal la
Piedra, Gagete, Azabache, Ampelites, Maltha, Piedra Thracia, Carbones de Mina
Ambar de Cuentas Ambar Olorosa, Alcanfor.


But few of these sorts are found mixed with Metals.

All Betunes are the oyliness or fat of the Earth; and although some are of
opinion, that Alcanphor is the weeping or Gum of the Tree Capar, in the Island
of Zebat, and the Amber of another Herb called Polco, (in Spanish) whereunto
it is commonly found sticking. And to the smelling Amber they ascribe for its
original a great Fish in the Sea like a Whale, because there is great
resemblance between it and sperma Ceti. Nevertheless that does not hinder, that
such substances also may like sweat, as it were, issue forth of the Earth; and
make these Juices called Betunes.

Asphalto is found in the Lake of Sodom (or the dead Sea) in Judea, whereinto
runs the river Jordan, three leagues from the City of Jericho. It is nothing
else but an oily froth that swims on the surface of the water of that Lake,
agitated and driven by the winds and waves ashore, and there condenses and
hardens. It is like unto Pitch, but harder, and of a better color. Before God
overthrew those wicked Cities of Sodom, Gomorrha, Admah and Seboim, that
fertile valley had little of this Betune in it, as may be collected from Genesis
Chap. 14.

These are found also in many other places and Provinces, some whereof use them
to make Candles with, instead of Oil; and although in Peru they have not been
curious in further search then how best to work their Oar of Gold and Silver,
yet by the plenty of them that the Indians bring, it is known that there are of
them in the Cordillera de la Chiriguanes, in the frontiers of Lomnia, although
they have little access to them, because they be in the power of the Indians,
that maintain war against the Spaniard.

The Pissasphalto is a natural composition of Asphalto and Paz, and so the
color of it declares; and for want of the true natural Pissasphalto, they
counterfeit it of those two materials.

La Napthe is a sulphurous liquor, sometimes white, and sometimes black also,
and is that which is called Oil of Peter, of admirable virtue to cure old
pains, proceeding from cold causes: It will draw fire to it (as the Loadstone
does Iron) with that force, that it will take fire at a great distance from the
flame, as has been confirmed by the miserable experience of the Conde de
Hercules de Icontrarii, of the Country of Ferara, who having a Well in his
ground, the water whereof was mixed with Petreol; and by some breaches or
cracks in the Well, much of this water ran to waste; commanded it to be
repaired; the Laborer that was let down into the bottom of the Well desired a
Candle, the better to see his work, which was furnished him in a Lanthorn, and
immediately through the holes of the Lanthorn the Napthe sucked the flame into
it self, and set fire on the whole Well, which discharged it self instantly
like a great piece of Cannon, and blew the poor man into pieces, and took off
an arm of a Tree that hung over the Well. The Conde himself told the story to
Matiolo, who reports it in his Dioscorides.

Asphalto and Pissasphalto melt in the fire as Pitch or Wax, and by that they
are distinguished from the Piedra Gagate, or Ascabache, and also from Pit-coal,
which burns and consumes it self away like Tea, or any other sort of wood. As
yet I have not heard whether there be any Betunes in these Provinces, although
I persuade my self there be, if they were sought for.

CHAP. 10. Of Sulphur and Antimony.
SUlphur is a Mineral the most universally known of any. It is made of an
Earthy unctuous substance, and very hot, to that degree, that it is esteemed to
be nearest of kin to the Element of fire, of any compounded substance. The
Chemists call it, the Masculine seed, and Natures first agent in all
generation: and they say, that the difference between one thing and another,
arises from the diverse preparations and mixtures of Sulphur and Quicksilver. It
has happened to an Apothecary, that going about to make a salve compounded of
those two materials; he has found the result to be a Plate of fine silver.
After many considerations of this substance, Thophrastus Paracelsus proceeds to
contemplate the wonders produced by Sulphur, and says, that God by an especial
providence has concealed those mysteries; and that it is an evident
confutation of those, who oppose the transmutation of Metals; for this Mineral
does effect it: and he teaches a way to make an Oil, called in Spanish (Epatica
Sulphuris) which turns Silver into Gold. And Heliana, the Author of a book,
called ( La Disquisition) teaches the same thing with raw Sulphur, to show the
possibility of it, although it be in very little quantity. The smoke of it
helps to fix the Quicksilver, and turn it into Plate, whereof there be many
eyewitnesses in these Provinces. And this Sulphur distilled in a Glass-Still,
makes the Oil of Sulphur, of such rare and admirable virtue, especially for the
French Pox, taking three or four drops thereof every morning for a week
together in some liquor proper to convey it in. It is good to cure the
difficulty of Urine, and the pains of the Gout, and many other things, as you
may see in Diodorus Euchiente, and diverse other authors. There is abundance of
Brimston in the Province of the Lipes, and in the confines of the Pacages, and
in la Puna de Tacora, or los Altos de Arica, and in many other parts besides,
it is found incorporated with Metals in the richest Mines of Peru.

The Antimony, or Stibium, which some Miners call by the name of Alcahole; and
others (particularly in Oruro) call it Macacote; it is a Mineral very like unto
that they call Sorocha, or Lead, that is very porous; it shines very much, and
is brittle; some of it is of a reddish yellow color, and some there is more
inclining to white, and very finely grained, as Steel shows where it is broken.

It is made of a very corrupt, and imperfect mixture of Brimston and
Quicksilver, and seems to be an abortion of Nature, and the Embrio, which would
become metal, if it was not taken out before its time.

Porta Vegino, and others do teach a way to draw out of this a kind of
Quicksilver, which they call Regalo; but it is inclining to red, and has not so
lively a motion, as the ordinary Quicksilver. By Aquafortis also Brimston
(whereof it is compounded) is gotten from it in its proper form of a green
color, and burns as ordinary Brimston does.

Basillius Valentinus in his Triumphal Chariot of Antimony, having spoken of
many of its excellencies, afterward teaches how to make of it a Fire-stone,
(as he calls it) which will turn other metals into Gold. Paracelsus writes
much also to the same effect; and other Chemists with a continued voice do
speak of an oil, which is gotten from Antimony for the same purpose: but from a
more certain and necessary experience does Matiolus commend his ointmet, for
the curing of old Ulcers, and for other medicinal uses.

Stibium has a drying and astringent virtue, and the preparation (which theyc
all) Hiacint is held to be a very strong purge, and a provoker to vomit. This
Alcahol is very commonly found comprehended in the Silver-Oar, and particularly
in that which in Peru is called the black Oar; nevertheless in many parts it is
found in a body by its self. It does a great deal of mischif in the working of
Metals, as the Betune and Brimston does, and therefore must carefully be
gotten out beforehand, as shall be showed hereafter.

CHAP. 11. Of Marcasita, Orpiment, and Sandaraca.
MArcasita is also called Pyrites, which signify a stone of fire, because
being struck with Steel, it yields fire in greater abundance, than any other
Mineral: some will have it to be begotten of an undigested vapor, others that
it is composed of a courser sort of Brimstone, or Betune, and stone; it grows
in all sorts of Mines, but especially where there is Copper, and the black
Silver Oar, whereof it does much participate, and perhaps that is the reason,
why Dioscorides says, that the Marcasita is a kind of Copper: and
notwithstanding Albertus and others do think the Marcasita contains no Metal
in it; yet experience has taught the contrary; for the farmers of the Mines of
Monserrat en los Chichas, when they began to dig those Veins, they found the
Oar to contain as much Silver as it did of Marcasita: and in this mountain of
Potosi, and others, there is a fine sort of this Marcasita, which is found
incorporated with the black Silver Oar, and is a certain sign of its richness;
there be as many kinds of Marcasitas, as there are of Metals, whose colors
they represent; the most common sort looks like Gold; being put in the fire, it
smells like Brimston, and flames much, which is a sign it is compounded, as has
been said before.

Gold, Silver, and Copper are usually found contained in it: it is a great
hinderance to the melting that Oar where it is incorporated, dividing the
Quicksilver into very small particles, as shall be showed hereafter, together
with the proper remedies for it.

Orpiment and Sandaraca are of the same nature, and virtue, and are only made
to differ by their greater or lesser concoction in the bowels of the Earth.
Sandaraca being nothing else, but Orpiment well concocted, and by consequence
thereof, heightened in virtue, as is demonstrated by putting Orpiment into a
Fining pot, and setting it on the fire, whereby after a convenient concoction,
it will become red, and of as lively a color, as the most perfect natural
Sandaraca. Where Orpiment is found, it is a certain sign of a Mine of Gold,
wheref also it always contains some seed or little particle; as Pliny reports,
in the time of the Emperor Caligula, that he did then extract some Gold out of
it: since that time, it has not been attempted, because the cost does much
exceed the benefit.

The best sort of Orpiment is that, which is of a shining Gold color, that is
not fast compacted, and easily breaks into scales, (as it were) the most
perfect Sandaraca is that which is reddest, purest, and the most brittle, of
the color of Cinabrio, (an Indian word, of a Gold color) and it has a strong
smell of Sulphur, whereby, as also by its other qualities, and medicinal
virtues it is distinguished from Sandix, which is of the same color, and is
made of Albayalde well burnt in the fire, which some also improperly call
Sandaraca; these are poison, by reason of their strong corroding, and burning
quality, not only upon the bodies of Animals, but upon Metals also, in like
manner as antimony, or Brimston, or other dry Minerals; for by reason of their
oily parts, they take fire, and being mingled with Metal, they burn and
consume the moisture thereof whereby the metal moulders away, and is lost:
There be other Juices, that are scarcer, and not commonly known, as they report
of one, that is found in the Mine of Ancbergo, which is white and hard, and
poisons the cattle that taste it: and it maybe, of this kind was that vein
which persons of good credit have told me was found in the Province of
Conchucos, in the Archbishopric of Lyma, with which the inhabitants of that
Country used to kill those they had a mind to be rid of; to prevent which
wicked practice, the holy Archbishop de los Reyes, Don Soribio Alonso de
Magrobejo, commanded the Mine to be stopped up.

CHAP. 12. Of the Generation of Stones.
IT is most certain, that there is some very active principle or virtue that
operates in the generation of Stones, as well as upon the rest of the matter of
the Universe, that is subject to generation and corruption; but the difficulty
lies in knowing what that principle is, because it operates in no determinate
place, but sometimes Stones are made in the air, in the clouds, in the earth,
in the water, and in the bodies of Animals.

Avicena and Albertus think the matter, whereof Stones are made, to be a
mixture of Earth and Water; and if the greater part be Water, it has the name
of liquor; but if the greater part of it be Earth, then it is called dirt or
clay.

That clay which is fit to make Stones of, must be tough, and slimy, such as
Bricks, Pots, and other Earthen vessels are made of; for if it be not such, as
soon as the fire has consumed the moisture of the dirt, it will not hang
together, but crumble into earth, and dust: it is also necessary, that the
liquor, which is to be converted into Stone be very slimy; the experience
whereof we find in our own bodies; the Physicians being generally of an
opinion, that the Stone is begotten in the reins and bladder of slimy tough
humors, baked hard by the heat of the body: this opinion touching petrifying
liquors, is confirmed past all question, by the experiment of that famous water
in this Kingdom of Peru, near unto Guancavelica; which they take and put into
moulds of what form and bigness they please, and expose it to the Sun, for a
few days, whereby it is made perfect Stone, and they build their houses with
it: all the cattle that drink it dye; and from what has been said before, it is
not hard to conjecture the reason.

In a mountain called Pacocava, a league from the Mines of Verenguela de
Pajages, there be Springs of this liquor, (the color whereof is whitish,
inclining to yellow) that as it runs along, condenses into very hard and
weighty Stone, of different shapes. Moreover any porous substance that can suck
this kind of liquor into it, is apt to be turned into Stone; and of those I
have seen Trees, and Limbs and Bones of Beasts turned into hard Stone. In the
City de Plata I have seen sticks of wood taken out of that great River, (of the
same name) so much of which as had remained covered with the water, being
converted into very fine Stone: I saw also the Teeth and Bones of Giants, that
were dug up in Tarija turned into heavy and hard Stone.

Stones have their substantial forms, which makes them differ specifically; yet
because we cannot come to the knowledge of them; in our definitions we are fain
by way of Periphrasis to make use of accidents and properties. Every several
form of the Stones is accompanied with particular virtues, as remarkable as
those of Animals or Plants, and proportioned to the length of time Nature takes
in its generation; but because Plants and Animals are to have so different
dispositions, and to produce such various and admirable effects, they cannot be
of so uniform, and well mingled a temperament as the Stones are, nor is their
soft and gentle substance capable to endure so much force; as neither is the
hardness of the Stones fitted for the producing variety of several shapes, and
therefore in them are found no leaves, flowers, fruits, hands nor feet, as in
Plants and Animals, though they have a greater virtue of another kind.

CHAP. 13. Of the Differences of Stones one from another.
ALL sorts of Stones are reducible under some of these five following species.

1. If they be small, very scarce, and very hard of substance, and have luster,
they be called precious Stones.

2. If they be of great magnitude, (although they be rare and have luster) they
are some kind of Marble.

3. If in breaking they fall into splinters or scales, they are a sort of
Flints.

4. If they be of a small grain, they be Pebles.

5. Those that have none of the abovesaid qualifications, are Rocks or
ordinary Stones.

But the Miners for the better distinction of the sorts of Stone, wherein
Metals are engendered, use peculiar names for them; for example, a kind of
Stone like Peble, which contains Gold, Silver, or any orher Metal they call
Guijos, which breeds a richer vein of Metal than any other Stone.

Cachi, another sort of Stone white like Alablaster, soft and easy to break in
pieces, is all this Country called Salt. Much Lead is engendered in this kind of
Stone, in the veins of ( Metales pacos) which is the name the Miners here give
unto their Silver Oar.

Chumpi (which is so called, because it is of a gray color) is a Stone of the
kind of Esmeril mixed with Iron; it shines a little, and is very hard to work,
because it resists the fire much. It is found in Potosi and Chocaya, and other
places, with the black Metals and Rosicleres.

Lamacrudria is that Stone which is close compacted, and solid, and shows not
the least grain nor porousness when you break it, and is of a yellow color,
and sometimes high colored, as bloodred.

Almaclaneta is the name they give another kind of Stone, which is very solid
and weighty, of a dark color, always found in the company of rich Metals,
which are engendered in it, when it comes to be corrupted and rotten; as in like
manner is done in the Gouijos. It grows upon the Flints of the Gold Mines, and
those of Copper and Silver.

Amolaclera (or Whetstone) is that ordinary Stone, which is commonly made use
of for that purpose, and so known to every body. Diverse rich Metals grow upon
it, but most commonly ( los Cobriscos.)

The veins of Silver are rare and inconsiderable, that are found in Pitcoal;
although it be a more proper bed for Gold.

Other Stones that grow in Mines, or cleave unto the Metal, they call Ciques,
(and also Caxas) which are rough and uneven, but not very hard, nor very
spongy, and commonly have nothing of Metal in them, although in some rich
Mines they are infected with some little, by the vicinity of the Oar.

The Stones of Potosi, called Vilaciques, have been, and are very famous, for
the abundance of Silver gotten out of them; and are one of the ingredients that
make this Province, without comparison. Vila signifies blood, (in Peru) or any
red thing; and for the streaks of red this Stone has in it, they call it
Vileciques.

CHAP. 14. Of Precious Stones.
PRecious Stones are either transparent, as the Diamant is, or obscure, as the
Onix, or between both, as the Sandonyx and the Jasper. It is the water which is
the principal cause of clearness, and the Earth of the opacity of them. So that
the reason why they excel one the other in luster and transparency, is from the
variety of humors congealed together to compose them, which are some of them
more pure and clear than others.

White Stones are made of a humor almost like water, and so are more cle^r and
transparent; such is the Chri^^^^ and the (Iris) so called, because being held
opposite to the Sunbeams, it much resembles the Rainbow.

The Diamant is engendered of a less clear humor, than the Crystal or Iris and
so is more obscure than either of them. The same variety may be observed in all
precious Stones of what color soever they be; whether composed of Juices or
humors that be green as the Emerald, and the Prasma, or of blew, as Saphir, the
Caiano, and some sort of Jasper, or red, as the Ruby, or purple, as the Jacynth
and Amatist, or Gold-colour, as the Chrysolites and Topaz, or of mingled
colors, as the Opalos.

In like manner it is to be imagined, that the other sorts of Stones that are
not transparent, are engendered of a mixture of black and thick humors; an
instance whereof we see in water, which though it be naturally white and clear,
yet mingled with Ink or such like liquor, it loses its transparency, though
not the luster of its superficies.

The different colors of the juices or humors aforesaid, arises from the
various mixture of black and white matter, whereof the Stones are engendered:
Although Raymundus and many others attribute it more immediately to the variety
of Metals, of whose purest liquors precious Stones are engendered, in the heart
of other hard Stones, whither that liquor has penetrated, and thereby much
refined it self. And that in estimation, precious Stones hold in proportion to
the Metals of which they are engendered, as the Ruby to Gold, the Diamant to
Silver, the Emerald to Copper, and the rest in like manner. In his Compendium
of Transmutation, dedicated to Robert King of England, he does particularly
teach the way of making artificial precious Stones (by a mixture of the waters
of diverse Metals) as beautiful, and of the same virtue as the natural ones
are. A knowledge (over and above other excellent qualities of that rare person)
which seems to outgo humane capacity. But it is the easier to be believed,
because we see Esmalts made of diverse colors, by a composition of Minerals
ground to powder and glass, and false Stones made in the same manner.

Transparent precious Stones have many faults in them, which by reason of their
clearness are sooner discovered by the eye, than those in common Stones; as
spots appear the most in the finest garments; and it is rare to find a Stone
that has not some defect or other; either spots, or hair, cloud, shadow, salt,
or other thing subject to be engendered in them, because the humor of which it
is made is not all of one color. A shadow arises from the humors being more
obscure in that part. A cloud coms from the humors being too white in that
part. Hairs, which are oftenest found in the Saphir: and salt which
particularly hurts the Opalos, as Lead does the Emerald, are impediments of
different colors from the true color of the Stone in which they are.

CHAP. 15. Whether there be precious Stones in the Kingdom of Peru.
HItherto the industry of the people of these Provinces has been principally
applied in the search after Gold and Silver, and they have neglected the
enquiry after precious Stones, although there have been and are many notable
indications, that this flourishing Kingdom wants not this prerogative also.

there is a constant report, and I my self have heard it in the Country of the
Lipes, that in the adjoining Province of Atacama, there have been found
excellent Diamonds; and that in exchange for a little Cocus, worth not above
two Reals, an Indian old woman sold a handful of rough Diamonds, which in Spain
were worth many Ducats. It is a Country full of beautiful Stones to see to, and
therefore may very well be supposed to have riches in it.

There be store of Amatists in a wood called by that name, which stands hard by
the Mines of Esmeruco. And in the rich Mine of St. Elizabeth of new Potosi,
there be found rich and well grown Amatists among the Silver Oar. There are of
the same kind of precious Stones in Paraguay and Buenos Airs; they are
engendered in ( Papas Lanadas) one or two fathom under ground, in a very hard
and heavy Flint Stone, which they call a Coco, because like the Coco-nut; it is
about the bigness of ones head. The Amatist within will be as big about as two
fingers, naturally coagulated into shapes like fine lace, and is more or less
mature and perfect, according to the condition it was in when the Coco burst,
which it does of its own accord, and then makes a report like a piece of
Ordinance, and makes the Earth near it tremble for a good while; and that just
over it to break and open; by which tokens men go to the place, and dig for the
Coco, which they find split into two or three or more pieces. This is a thing
well known, and common in these parts of the world. Near unto the place called
Aqua Caliente, (for the hot water that there gushes out) in the way between
Potosi and the Lipes, there is a ( Pampa) full of a pure transparent
Chrystalline Stone, formed by nature into several angles that meet in one
point: I always picked up some of them when I went that way; admiring their
beauty; for exposing them to the Sunbeams, they looked all like so many several
Suns. The largest that I saw of them was about the bigness of ones Thumb.

Of this sort, although much smaller, yet there be abundance in the Countries
of Callapa and Julloma: in the Province of Pacages I gathered some also
naturally cut like Rose-Diamonds, as big as large Pease; and washing the sand,
I often observed amongst it little small points of the color of Gold, and
transparent, like unto the best Topaz; and others of that sort as big as
Barley-corns, which if they were bigger, would be of great esteem, and no doubt
but such might be found, if hearty industry were employed thereabout.

The Stones of the Mine of Camata, in the Province of Larecaxa, do vi in beauty
with the Diamond, and are worn in Bracelets and Rings in this Kingdom.

In the great Head land of Arica, between the Rocks within the Port, there is a
Mine, whence they get Stones transparent as Diamonds, and very near as hard,
whereof also they make Jewels.

The best Turqueyes are found in Atacama: I have seen one in the Lipes, as big
as a twelve-pence English. The Indians of this Country esteem it great bravery
to have Necklaces and Bracelets of small Turqueyes curiously composed. The men
wear great ones of this kind about their necks, like Gold chains. They wear
such chains also of green Stones; and the officers of their Armies esteem them
most of all, and account them the best ransom a prisoner can give them.

Pearls also are gotten in the coasts of Atacama, and in the Mexillones, which
are taken out of Oysters, and brought hither to sell: it is very ordinary to
find Pearls in the dressing or eating of the Oysters.

I have little knowledge of the fertility of the lower Countries in these
kinds, because they have little or no commerce here. Besides my chief intention
is to give your Lordship information of the Mines of the Provinces subject to
your own Jurisdiction, and that I have seen in person. Nevertheless at the time
of the first Conquest of these Countries, there were found many and very large
Emeralds in the hands of the Natives, as appears by the Histories thereof.

CHAP. 16. Of other sorts of Stones.
IT does very little import the owners of Mines (for whose sake principally, by
your Lordships command, I have written this Treatise) to discourse more
particularly of other Stones, although the common sort of Stones, because they
are so, are little enquired into or understood; and when in Mines they meet
with some Stones of rare color and transparency: their beauty would invite the
Miners esteem, if the covetousness after Gold and Silver, which they seek for,
did not blind their eyes and understandings, so that they cannot attend to look
after them. But because I have given an account of all Minerals together; and
that Marbles are of next estimation unto precious Stones: it is but justice to
treat a little of those Marbles we find in these Provinces, which I believe
equal to any that we read of in story.

The Province of Atacama above all others best deserves to be curiously
enquired into, by able and experienced Artists; for it produces Stones of such
various colors, and beautiful gloss, and luster, that only the great quantity,
and abundance of them hinders them from being reckoned among the precious
Stones.

This whole Kingdom is full of curious Altars made of these Stones; and very
many of them have been carried into Europe; and they have not been wrought for
any other purposes; yet either for want of Stone-cutters to work them, or
because most of us in these parts have in our eye to return home again into
Spain with great estates, and care not for perpetuating our fame in these
parts, by sumptuous buildings; for which these sort of Stones were very fit
materials.

There is a Stone in this Imperiality, worthy for its variety, luster, and
greatness, to be presented to the view of the King our Sovereign Lord. It is
six Palms in length, and one Palm six Inches less in breadth, and two fingers
thick: it is in form like a Planck or large Table; it is full of delicate
clouds, made by the composition of its colors: there be some red, and shining
transparently, others more obscure, as black, yellow, green and white: upon the
blackest spot in all the Stone is resembled snow, as it were falling upon it,
or milk, according as the white happens to be mixed with shadow.

In the Mines of Verenguela de Pacagues, there be other Stones, not inferior in
the nobleness of their substance and luster, to those of Atacama, although they
have not that variety of colors. They be white as Alablaster, and transparent;
and because that color is not equally distributed, it causes, as it were,
clouds, which gives much gracefulness and beauty to the Stone: no liquor will
sink into them, they be so hard, like unto natural Crystal. The Font in the
Church of Julloma is a very large one, and yet is made of one of these Stones.
And though it be six fingers in thickness, yet you may see plainly through the
sides of it the light of a Candle stuck up in the middle. In the Jesuits
college, at the City of Paz, there is a famous Waterpot of this Stone, through
whose sides you may see the water rise as it is poured in, just as if it were
through transparent Glass.

CHAP. 17. Of some accidents happening to Stones, and the Causes of them.
BEsides shining and transparency, which as has been said, is found in diverse
Stones, and in the common sort of Stones is not found; there be also other
accidents that accompany them, viz. Hardness and Softness.

Hardness is so essential to all precious Stones, that they be not held for
such, upon whom the File will make any impression. If the matter of which the
Stone is compounded be tough, and dried by a violent fire, till the moisture be
consumed, it causes hardness, because it contracts and condenses the matter
within it self. If the matter have little or no toughness, then the moisture
being easily dried away by heat, and the earthy part burnt, there will remain a
Stone soft and brittle, Also the Ambient cold will condense matter and make it
hard, as we see in Stones congealed thereby, the which will dissolve again by
the fire, and the congealed humor relax and run: Stones that want moisture
enough to glue their terrestrial parts together, when they be put into the fire
they break into small pieces: and those which are driest of all do resolve into
dust or lime by the fire.

Some Stones are porous, others massy and well put together. The first arises
from the unequal and ill mixture of the wet and dry parts whereof it is
compounded, so that the heat exhaling the moisture, where no earthy, substance
was mingled with it, leaves a hollow place, or pores, which make spongy Stones.
As for the opposite reason, we see the contrary effect in massy Stones. Stones
are found of various figures, and causing as much admiration as most things in
nature. Perchance it may come from the various mixture, colors, and veins of
Stones; as you may see in their clouds and spots represented towers, sheep, and
other Animals and figures. And in Lead poured out upon water, often happens the
like. The story is famous of the Agates of King Pirrhus, that represented
Apollo and the nine Muses as lively as the best Painter could draw them: and
Cardanus says, he had one of that kind that was a true and exact picture of the
Emperor Galba.

They say, that in the house of Wisdom at Constantinople, there is a Marble
Stone, that by the very natural veins of the Stone, has the picture of St.
John the Baptist, with his clothing of Camels skin expressed to the life,
excepting one of his feet, which is imperfect.

It is a sign that nature has not wrought by chance, but by particular study,
and to some mysterious end, when in the same species of Stones are found the
same marks and figures, like those in the fields of Verona, which Leon Baptista
reports to have seen; and that they have painted upon them the image of the
Chair of Solomon. And another black Stone, which being broken at one end, has
painted in it exactly, and to the life, the picture of a Serpent; and that it
has the virtue to draw Serpents unto it. Albertus Magnus affirms to have seen
500 Serpents gotten upon a Stone of that kind, which was presented unto him.

When we meet with Stones, that represent Animals, or the limbs of them, or
Plants, or other things not by superficial draught or coloring, but in bulk
and substance: I believe it may arise from some petrifying liquor, which that
matter has sucked into its pores, and thereby is become all Stone, and so
thinks Avicene: but although sometimes this may be the cause thereof, yet
methinks it cannot reasonably be supposed to be so always.

At the foot of the Mountains Misnenses, near unto the Lake of Alsacia, Stones
are very commonly found that have embossed upon their superficies, the images
of Frogs and Fishes in fine Copper. Anciently they called a sort of Stone
Conchites, which were in all their lineaments very like unto the Cockles of the
Sea; and they thought that those fish shells lying a long time in soil, where
much Stones were begotten, the petrifying liquor entering into the pores of the
shell converted it into Stone: and they ground this opinion upon the certainty
that the Sea in old time has overflown the whole Territory of the City of
Magara, where only these sort of Stones are found. But of later times all
color of reason is taken away from the forementioned conceit, by the wonderful
veins of Stone, some gray, some Iron colored, and some yellow, which are found
in the high way, as one goes from Potosi to Oronesta down the Hill. There they
gather Stones that have in them impressions of diverse sorts of figures, so much
to the life, that nothing but the author of nature it self could possibly have
produced such a piece of workmanship. I have some of these Stones by me, in
which you may see Cockles of all sorts, great, middle-sized, and small ones.
Some of them lying upwards, and some downwards, with the smallest lineaments of
those shells drawn in great perfection; and this place is in the heart of all
the Country, and the most double mountainous land therein, where it were
madness to imagine that ever the Sea had prevailed, and left Cockles only in
this one part of it. There be also amongst these Stones the perfect resemblance
of Toads and Butterflies, and stranger figurs, which though I have heard from
credible witnesses, yet I forbear to mention, and not to over-burden the belief
of the Reader. Over against this wonderful vein of land, on the other side of
the valley of Oroncota, stands that famous piece of land they call Pucara,
(which signifies in their language, fortress) it is a place the best fortified
by nature of any now known in the world, being situate very high, seven leagues
in compass, and all surrounded with high and inaccessible hills, only on the
one side there is a small avenue after having past a very difficult ascent. In
its spacious fields, on the top, there be many fine brooks of water, wood,
pasture-ground, commons and wastes, very commodious for the support of humane
life.

CHAP. 18. Of the Generation of Metals.
IT is no wonder, that learned men differ so much in their opinions, about the
matter whereof Metals are engendered, because the Author of Nature seems to
have created them in that obscurity, and depth, and to have immured them with
hard Rocks, on purpose, to hide their causes, and to give check to the ambition
of Man.

The Philosophers, who pretend to know the causes of things, besides the first
matter, (which is the first principle, not only of Metals, but of all other
bodies in the world) assign another matter remote also, which is a certain
moist and unctuous exhalation, together with a portion of thick and tough
Earth, from which, being mingled together, there results a matter, whereof not
only Metals, but also Stones are made: for if the dryness prevail, Stones are
begotten, but if the unctuous humidity be predominant, then Metals are
begotten; Plato, Aristotle, and their followers are of this opinion.

From the abundance of this pure, and shining moisture; made solid, proceeds
the luster of Metals, in whom, of all the Elements, water is experimentally
known, to be most predominant, and therefore they run, and are dissolved by the
fire.

From the various temperament, and purity of the aforesaid matter, comes the
diverse kinds of Metals, the most pure and fine of all which and (as it would
seem) Nature's principal intention, is Gold.

Many, to avoid difficult disputes of this nature, do hold with the vulgar;
that at the Creation of the world God Almighty made the veins of Metals in the
same condition, as we now find them at this day; herein doing nature a great
affront, by denying her (without reason) a productive virtue in this matter,
which is allowed unto her in all other sublunary things; moreover, that
experience in diverse places has manifested the contrary: A clear example
whereof we have in Ilva, an Island adjoining unto Tuscany, full of Iron Mines,
which when they have dug as hollow, and as deep as they can, the circumjacent
Earth falls in, and fills them up again; and in the space of ten or fifteen
years at most, they work those Mines again, and thence draw out abundance of
Metal, which that new Earth has been converted into: many do think that the
same happens in the rich hill of Potosi; at the least all of us know, that the
Stones, which diverse years ago we have left behind us, thinking there was not
Plate enough in them to make it worth our labor, we now bring home, and find
abundance of Plate in them, which can be attributed to nothing, but to the
perpetual generation of Silver.

The Alchymists (a name grown odious by reason of the multitude of ignorant
pretenders to that Art) with more profound and practical Philosophy have
anatomized the mixtures of nature, and reduced them from their first
principles; and concerning the matter of Metals, do discourse in the manner
following: The Sun (say they) and all the Stars with their light, proper, or
borrowed, continually going round the Earth, does heat the same, and with their
subtle Rays, penetrate through its veins; and we see things long burnt in the
fire are converted into other terene substances, as Wood and Stones into Lime
and Ashes: so in like manner this Earth calcined by the Celestial bodies,
mingled and boiled with water, changes it self into another kind of species,
that contains in it self something of the substance of Salt and Alum; every
day we see the same effects in the lees made of Lime, Ashes, Sweat and Urine,
all which by boiling, get the taste of Salt. This first matter, or foundation
of the generation of Metals is Vitriol, which is easier to believe, since we
see that all of them by art, may be reduced thereunto, and the manner of
reducing some of them shall be declared hereafter.

This Vitriol by the heat of subterranean fire, and attraction of the heavenly,
sends forth two fumes or vapors; the one earthy, subtle, and unctuous, and
something digested, which the Philosophers call Sulphur, because it has the
qualities thereof: the other vapor is moist, waterish, slimy, and mingled with
very fine Earth; and this is the next matter, whereof Quicksilver is made. If
these two vaporous exhalations do find a free and wide passage out of the
Earth, then being carried up into the Region of the Air, they are converted
into Comets, Clouds, Snow, Hail, Thunder, and other things that appear there.

But if the aforesaid exhalations chance to be included between hard Rocks, in
strait and narrow places, whence it cannot get out, or the place be already
full of Minerals, the said vapors will thicken, and be turned into those they
call half Minerals.

If these fumes penetrating the Rocks, do not meet with a kind of clarified
Brimston, that shines like Silver, and is something like unto the Fire-stone,
which the Spaniards call Marcasita, (without which no Metal can be engendered)
they will stain the Rocks with several sorts of colors, if these vapors
ascending, and endeavoring to get out meet with any Stones so hard, as they
cannot penetrate them, then they are converted into perpetual Springs of water;
the like effect whereof we see in every common Still; but if when they pass
through the Rocks they meet with, those two Juices, namely the Fire-stone, or
Brimstone clarified and consolidated, as has been said a little before, then
it dissolves the said Juices, mixing it self with them, and after boiling
together a convenient time, it thickens and hardens in the Mine; this is the
Doctrine of Bracesco in his comment upon Getro; but the greatest number of
Alchymists do affirm the immediate matter of Metals to be Quicksilver and
Sulphur, and that from the different proportion of their mixture, and greater
or lesser purification, results the difference that is found in Metals.

CHAP. 19. The Opinion that Quicksilver and Sulphur are the matter whereof
Metals are made, is defended.
THose that think nothing can be effected that comes not within the compass of
their own capacity, a presumption very unworthy of learned men, and much
diminishing their credit (who are possessed therewith) from reasons that
neither convince nor are of any force to deny, hold, that it is not possible by
art to change one sort of Metal into another. It is not proper in this place
to examine all the arguments of that kind, although the great connection they
have with the right knowledge of Metals, whereof we treat, makes it necessary
to handle some of them, and to make the weakness of their foundation plainly to
appear.

They say, that the Alchymists are ignorant of the manner whereby Nature
Creates and brings Metals to perfection; and that it is erroneous to say they
are compounded of Quicksilver and Brimston, because if it were so, there would
be found in the Mines of Gold and Silver, and of other Metals several
indications and pieces of those Juices; whereas common experience shows the
contrary; for answer thereunto, the first part of that reason imports little;
for though it be granted, it infers no more, but that those Alchymists that
went about those transmutations, proceeded mechanically, and without good
knowledge in the art; but nevertheless it remains possible that such
transmutations may be made.

The second part of the forementioned reason shows plainly the great rashness
wherewith they affirm that which they know very little of; for there is nothing
more experimentally known concerning Metals, then their ordinary mixture with
Brimston; and the abundance of Brimston in Minerals is an especial good sign of
the richness; a sufficient example whereof is the rose-coloured Oar of the
famous mountain of Sancta Isabella of new Potosi, in the rich Province of the
Lipes, which is almost all Plate, and engendered amongst such abundance of
Brimston, that the cavities, and hollow places in the Rocks are presently all
on fire, if a lighted candle touch them.

All those Oars which they call Soroches Mulatos, and Negrilios, and all such
as do touch upon Antimony, or the Fire-stone, are certainly known to abound in
Sulphur, (or Brimston) as shall be declared hereafter.

In the very same manner is Quicksilver found incorporated with the Metals,
although it be less taken notice of, because it is indiscernable in the Oar, as
it comes out of the ground, and when it is put in the fire the Quicksilver
fumes away, and leaves no smell behind it, as the Sulphur does, but its effects
are too well experimented in the destruction of those that labor in the fumes
where Oar is melted: and a few years ago we have been undeceived in this matter
by the Oar of Chalatiri, (which is four leagues from the City, the most
celebrated, and rich one in the world, Potosi) which being melted down, left in
the furance a bar of Silver, and also a great deal of Quicksilver, which they
picked out of those ashes that were coolest, the plenty of Quicksilver there
did expose it self to view; and afterward taking more pains to work it in the
ordinary manner, it produced as much Quicksilver as the richest Stones of
Guancavilica, where it is possible there may be much Relics of Plate in the
great heaps of Oar, which hitherto they have refined; and I do not know whether
some curious person has not already by accident found it so, when that that is
already said, shall not be held sufficient to clear this point, it will bear no
weight in the proof, that Metals are not compounded of Quicksilver and
Brimston, to say that these two ingredients are not met withal in the Mines;
for as parts of the composition of Metals they have already lost their proper
forms, and are past into the nature of that Oar which is made up of them. But
the most skilful artists inquiring further into the secrets of Nature, do again
extract from all sorts of Metal Quicksilver, whereof they say, they are most
visibly and palpably compounded. I forbear to set down the manner to avoid the
occasioning of Chemical experiments, which do more harm than good. In like
manner common Quicksilver is turned into fine Plate, which is a certain proof
of the possibility and truth of what has been said before, whereof there are so
many eye witnesses in these Provinces, that it were a madness to disbelieve
them all.

CHAP. 20. Of the efficient and formal causes of Metals.
BEsides the Heavens, which as an universal cause, concurs in the Generation of
all things, and particularly of Metal; some other nearer efficient cause is
necessary, that having received virtue from the Planets, may work upon the
proper matter of Metals; for the qualities of the Elements alone are not
sufficient, nor are appointed to produce any compounded body, but only so far
as they are governed by some other particular virtue, as is manifestly seen in
living creatures. This next cause then, or Mineral virtue, or Spirit, serves it
self of the Elementary qualities, especially of heat and cold, for its
instruments in the generation of Metals; the heat mixeth uniformly the earthy
and humid parts together, which is the matter whereof Metals are made, then it
boils, digests, and thickens that matter, and the cold coagulates and hardens
it, and so it has put on the form of Metal, and is more or less perfect,
according to the present disposition of that matter when the Mineral spirit
began to actuate it: hereupon is grounded the opinion of Callisthenes, Albertus
Magnus, and others, who say there is only one kind of perfect Metal, which is
Gold; and that all the others we call so are but the principles or gradations
unto that: wherefore they conceive it feasible by art to reduce them to
perfection, and turn them into Gold: they that oppose the possibility thereof,
place the force of their arguments in proving that the several species of
Metals are complete in themselves, and distinct one from another; and
therefore that a transition of one to the other is impossible. But their reason
convinces not, and if it were granted, the inference would not follow; for we
see like transmutations, and far more difficult performed both by art and
nature. By art Wasps and Beetles are made of the dung of Animals; and of the
Plant Alvaca rightly placed and ordered Scorpions are produced. Also it is
notoriously known, that in Scotland pieces of old Ships, and of fruit that
falls into the Sea turn into living Ducks; and there is no comparison between
the distance of things Inanimate to Animals, and that of one Metal to another.
Besides many other things that may be brought to this purpose, it has already
been said, how some waters turn Sticks into Stones: And in the nourishment of
all living Creatures, there is a continual transmutation: and in Metals it is
evidenced by the Stone Lipis, (or Copperas, blue or green) which (as has been
said) being dissolved in water without any other artifice turns Lead, Tin, or
Iron into fine Copper. And although it may be argued with probability, that
Metals do differ specifically one from another, because the definition of
Metal agrees to every one of them, as well as unto Gold, for the particular
properties that agree to every one of them. And for that we see them permanent,
and without any sign, as if nature did endeavor to change one form into
another, or heighten them into Gold; and for many other reasons that might be
alleged; nevertheless the contrary opinion of Calistenes and Albertus are very
probable; for it is not concluding that two things differ in specie, because
the same definition agrees to both of them, unless the essential difference
that constitutes them such be shown therein. As if one assert a Man and a Lion
to be Animals, he cannot truly infer from thence, that they are of different
species. For so Peter and Paul would be distinct in specie, if it were not for
the differences of rational and irrational that limit the genus. So although
the definition of Metal do agree unto Lead and Silver, as well as unto Gold,
one cannot thence rightly infer that they differ specifically, because the one
may be perfect as Gold, and the other imperfect as all the other within the
same species of Metal, as a child is in respect of a man, though both have the
same essential definition; the child may grow up to perfection; and become a
man. The different proporties of Metals also does something stumble one, since
they are accidents that accompany its imperfection, and so are capable of being
removed: and the permanency which they seem to have in their kind, proceeds 1.
either from the slowness of their growth, or melioration, which comes not
within the compass of humane observation; when even the growth of Vegetables is
inobservable, though after a great space of time we can discern them to be
increased. Or 2. from the covetousness of mankind, that digs the Metals out of
the bowels of the Earth before they be come to their full maturity.

CHAP. 21. Diverse accidents of Metals.
BEing dissolved and returning to be coagulated again, is one of the accidents
of Metals, though it be found in other things also, yet in Metals it is after
a particular manner; the cause of this accident is the moisture, whereof it is
composed, the which as it is hardened by cold, so it is dissolved by the heat
of the fire, with more or less difficulty, according to the different
proportion, and strong or weak mixture of it with the Earthy substance. Tin has
very much moisture in it, and is very ill mingled with Earthy substance, and
from this last comes the crackling and noise it makes between the teeth, when
one bites it; and from both proceeds its facility to melt sooner than all other
Metals: next unto it Lead melts easier than Silver, which has need of a
stronger fire, because its Earthy and humid parts are well and strongly
compacted together, notwithstanding the humid does a little exceed. Gold
because it has a better mixture of its parts, and Sulphur fixed in its
composition, or its earthy part, the purest that can be is harder to melt than
Silver. Iron because the earthy part is gross and impure, and exceeds the
humid, and their mixture also being ill and unequal, it burns and consumes as
often as it is heat in the fire, and will not melt of it self without
extraordinary great violence. Copper some do think to be a Metal very near of
kin to Iron, and although it has a greater proportion of moisture in it, it is
slower in melting, because its earthy part is very adust and burnt.

The luster and shining of all Metals proceeds, as it were, from one and the
same cause; for when their superficies is made plain, and smooth, or burnished,
look how much the more pure and subtle the watery part of the Metal is, so
much the more luster they give. Gold excels all other Metals in this, as well
as in many other particulars, and next it Silver. White is a color common to
diverse Metals, although Silver be most perfectly so, I cannot imagine with
what sort of eyes Cardanus looked, when it appeared to him to be black; the
cause of whitness is the moisture being terminated by the dry, fine and well
digested earthy part; for if it were dirty, impure, combust, it would produce a
blacker and duskeyer color, and according to the difference of the earthy
parts of Metals herein, so do their color come out more or less white. Gold
is yellow, or red, which color proceeds from the tincture that the Sulphur
very much boiled gives unto the Quicksilver, or moist parts, whereof it is
composed, as we see in all sorts of Leigh, Urine, and other liquors boild upon
strong fires, that they have a red color infused from the earthy substance,
wherewith they are mingled; the color of Copper proceeds from the same
principle, although by reason of the impurity, combustion, and ill mixture of
its parts, it does not arrive at the color of Gold, much less to its richness
and other noble qualities.

Generally Metals neither taste nor smell well, because of their Sulphurious
quality, although Gold smells and tastes well, by reason of its most excellent
temperature; or at the least, it neither smells nor tastes, ill, from the same
cause also Metals soil and black ones hands, or any other thing that touches
them: but herein also Gold must be excepted, because of its incomparable
purity: another propriety of Metals is to be ductile or malleable, which
proceeds from the moisture, being enclosed in the dry parts, which upon the
stroke of the hammor gives way, and changes place, from whence proceeds the
enlarging of the Metal. Of all Metals, Gold is the most ductile, next Silver,
then fine Copper, Iron, Tin, Lead, etc. Metals burn and are consumed in the
fire from unctuous Sulphur, or Earthy parts; as on the contrary, those parts
they have of moisture or Quicksilver does defend and preserve them from it: the
parts of Gold and Silver are so pure and strongly compacted together, so that
the Earthy part defends the moist from evaporating, and the moisture protects
the Earthy part from burning, and so they endure the fire without any
diminution or corruption. Other Metals waste in the fire for want of
perfection and compactedness of the parts whereof they are composed.

CHAP. 22. Of the number of Metals, and the Places wherein they are Engendered.
THose who are vainly curious attributing unto the Stars and Planets particular
influence and dominion over all sublunary things, do appropriate the production
of precious Stones to the superintendency of the fixed Stars, who seem to
imitate them, not only in their brightness and luster wherewith they twinkle;
but principally in the purity and permanency of their substance; as on the
contrary, for the instability and alteration of form in Metals, being
sometimes liquid, other times coagulated, they assign them to the particular
government of the Planets, (who from the variety of their motions are called
wandering Stars) moreover they assign the number, names, and colors of the
Planets unto Metals, calling Gold, the Sun; Silver, the Moon; Copper, Venus;
Iron, Mars; Lead, Saturn; Quicksilver, Mercury; although because this last is
not a Metal, some instead thereof call Electrum Mercury, (which is a natural
mixture of Gold and Silver) which was heretofore esteemed the most precious of
all Metals; but this subordination and application is uncertain, as is also
the conceit that Metals are but seven in number; whereas it is very probable,
that in the bowels of the Earth there be more sorts than we yet know. A few
years ago in the mountains of Sudnos in Bohemia, was found a Metal which they
call Bissamuto, which is a Metal between Tin and Lead, and yet distinct from
them both: there are but few that know of it, and it is very possible more
Metals also may have escaped the notice of the generality. And if one should
admit the subordination, and resemblance between Metals and the Planets,
modern experience, by excellent Teliscopes has discovered, that they are more
than seven. Gallileo de Galiles has written a Treatise of the Satelites of
Jupiter, where one may find curious observations of the number and motion of
those new Planets.

Reason and experience teaches, that the most proper place for the generation
of Metals is the veins of the Earth, which do run through its great body as
principal receptacles of its permanent humidity, proportionable to its solidity
and hardness, as blood is in the bodies of Animals. The Rocks between which
Metals commonly are engendered, which they call Caxas, (or Chest) serve for
Conduits, where subterraneal and Celestial heat meet and unite the one with the
other, stirring up vapors, mingling and purifying the matter of which Metals
are made, without giving it time to divert and dissipate into several places;
that which communicates between Chest and Chest is called a Vein; and that
which time has moulder'd off, or the Rains carried away from the matter that
fills it, is found scattered up and down the mountains broken, and tumbled away
by themselves, which are the Stones of Metal; those that understand this art
best believe that the Gold that is found in the Sands of Rivers has the like
Original, that it is not engendered in the Sand, as diverse will have it, but in
veins of the Earth carried from thence by rains unto the Brooks; yet be this
how it will, (although what has been said is the more natural and ordinary way
of proceeding) oftentimes it happens, that in some parts or bits of land they
find that which is called Creoderos, where Metals are engendered out of Veins
by the disposition of matter, and the powerfulness of the Mineral virtue which
there meet together.

CHAP. 23. The manner how to find out the Veins of Metals.
THe Veins of Metals are discovered either by art or fortune. Violent currents
of water wash off the first coat of the Earth, and so leave the veins of Metal
naked to the eye, if there be any there: great storms of wind many times tear
Trees up by the roots, and with them some Stones of the Metal of that place:
the same effect also has the falling of pieces of Cliffs and Rocks caused
either by thunder-time, or great rains, and wash away the cement that should
hold them together. Oftentimes rich veins of Metal have been discovered by the
Plough, whereof Justin makes mention of Gold that was found in Spain. In my own
ground, a quarter of a league from Chuquiscaca, ploughing upon the ridge of a
hill, I discovered a vein of Soroches, and it is very probable that the like
happens in diverse other parts of these Provinces, which are so fertile of
Minerals; and that the ignorance of the Plough-men has been the cause they
have not profited by the riches which fortune has put into their hands.
Lucretio in elegant Verses has set forth, how that the mountains being set on
fire, either on purpose, or by chance, discovered the nature of Metals unto
the world, melting them, and making them to run out of the Rocks wherein they
lay concealed, into the form that now they are known. By the same accident also
have been, and may be hereafter, because of discovering the veins of Metals,
which the Histories of Spain confirm unto us in the burning of the Perenean
mountains; and much lesser violences than those have been sufficient, when
fortune has had a mind to distribute Riches to her favorites. A man riding a
horseback over the Country in Gosolaria, by the soil broken with the small
force of his horses feet, discovered a very rich Mine, as Agricola reports. An
Indian servant of mine pulling up by the roots some bushes of Tola, a sort of
wood, ordinary in this Country, together with the roots plucked up a rich Stone
of Metal, which was Silver, white, and in dust; this was half a league from
the Mines of St. Christopher de Achacalle; he brought me home the Stone,
whereby I discovered the vein of Silver, and showed the place unto the Officers
of the Mines.

When the rich Mines of Tuno, in the Province of Carangas, began to be famous
for the riches, abundance of Soldiers flocked down thither; some of them being
very poor, fortuning to have no share in the Veins that were already
discovered, and conferring together how they should get their living, says one
of them; if God please, here we shall get enough to maintain us; together with
which he kicked the ground with his foot, and under that small deal of Earth,
which so slight a blow could turn up, they saw a piece of white silver, which
they took up, with incredible admiration, and therewith supplied their present
occasions, without any further labor, (the piece of Silver being about the
bigness of Botijuela) and afterward the vein of Silver in dust, Botijuela is a
Spanish vessel, which contains about a Gallon.
which was found underneath that Stone (or rather pure Silver) yielded much
riches both to them and others. That mine is called the Poor man's Mine, and is
the richest of all that were in that famous farm. The Mine of St. Christophers
in the Lipes was also found out by chance: amongst the Rocks thereof breed
great store of Biscaches, a little creature about the bigness of a Hare, (game
very ordinary, and of good nourishment in these parts) one of these being
killed with a Gun, the man that shot her, found her dead upon a rich [
farellon] of Silver, and called this Vein, Neustra Seniora de la Candelaria
discubredora, afterward they registered diverse other Mines, which made that
Farm so deservedly famous, as that abundance of Spaniards resorted thither, and
that it is reckoned the third best Mine in all the Indies, namely, next unto
Potosi and Oruro.

CHAP. 24. Besides those Veins of Metal, which do discover themselves, or are
found by chance, as has been said before, there be others procured by the Art
and Industry of Man.
THe color of the superficial Earth is no small indication, whether or no
there be Metal in the bowels of it, as has been said in the first Chapter of
this Treatise, and has been found by experience in all the Mines hitherto
discovered in this Kingdom, the superficial Earth of them being of a far
different aspect from other Earth, even to the sight of those who are very
little versed in this matter. There is no certain infallible rule by the color
of the Earth, to judge what kind of Metal it contains, that being only to be
known by experience and ensaying, as we see in Gold, which is ordinarily found
in red Earth, or yellow tinctured with red, like unto a hard burnt Brick:
nevertheless in the Mines of Oruro and Chianta the Veins of it are found in
white Chalk; in these Provinces the Earth of other Minerals most commonly is
reddish, of the color of Wheat, after the pattern of Potosi, (their first
copy) of the same color is that of Seapi, Perira, and others in the Lipes,
which produce Copper; and although sometimes the Earth is found of gray, green,
and red color; yet generally it is of the color of Wheat. The very same kind
of Earth likewise is found in the Lead Mines; so that the true knowledge of
what species the Metal is depends upon the ensaying of the Oar.

The veins of Metal are found sometimes above ground in great Stones, which
being broken, the Miner discerns that they contain Metal and ensays them, and
sinks his Mine there, if he finds encouragement, and that it is like to be
profitable; but if the veins be covered, they hunt them out, after this manner,
viz. taking in their hands a sort of Mattock, which has a Steel point at one
end to dig withal, and a blunt head at the other end to break Stones withal;
they go to the hollows of the mountains, where the downfall of the rains
descends, or to some other part of the skirts of the mountains, and there
observe what Stones they meet withal, and break in pieces those that seem to
have any Metal in them: whereof they find many times both midling sort of
Stones, and small ones also of Metal. Then they consider the situation of that
place, and whence those Stones can tumble, which of necessity must be from
higher ground, and follow the track of these Stones up the hill, as long as
they can find any of them, and when they are gotten so high, that no more of
these Stones appear, it is a certain sign, that there or thereabouts begins the
Vein, there then they break Earth, and run their Mines according as the veins
of Metal, which they meet withal guide them.

The gushing out of water in the sides of the hills are very good signs, that
the veins of Metal are near, because commonly they are the conduit-pipes of
them.

When Trees, Bushes, and other Plants, and Weeds of the same sort, are found to
run along in rows, as if they were planted by a line, oftentimes it proves,
that a vein of Metal runs underneath them.

The Plants that grow over the veins of Metals, are not of so great a growth,
nor so strong a color, as others of that kind, because the exhalations, which
come from the veins blast them and hinder their perfection; for the same reason
also, the morning dew, and the snow which falls is gone sooner from those
mountains that have Mines, than from those that have none, and from the place
where the veins run, sooner than from other places of the same mountain.

CHAP. 25. Of the several sorts of Veins, and how to find them out.
ALthough the word Vein be a general term given to all places, that contain
Metal, yet in the particular speech of the Miners it is applied to those Veins
that run down perpendicularly, or slooping; (which is more usual) from the
Horizon, and those veins which run parallel in the ground, without any
considerable depression from the Horizon, they call Manto, (a word which
signifies a cloak or blanket, which the women in Spain throw over their heads
and shoulders.) Both these sorts of veins are usually found, although most
commonly the Mines that are wrought are those that run downwards; those veins
which are found seldomest of all, are those the Spaniards call Sombreros (which
in their language signifies a Hat) or a heaped Mine, which is where Metal is
found in a lump together, in what quantity or distance soever, from which no
veins run, either downward or sideways.

In what vertical plain the veins of Metals generally run, has been curiously
observed by all the Miners of Europe, as being certain signs of the greater or
lesser riches, and abundance of the Mine, esteeming principally those veins
that run from East to West, or thereabouts, in the northern part of the
mountain; next they esteemed those best (in the northern part of the mountain)
that run North and South, or thereabouts. They gave the third place of
estimation to those veins which run North and South, on the Eastern side of the
mountains, and valued those little or nothing at all which ran the contrary
way. Whether the veins do run East or West, is easily seen by the grain of the
Stones in the joining of the Stones together, or chests that contain the
Metal, because that runs toward the part where the Mine ends; a thing easy
to be observed in the pieces of the Rocks that are found above the superficies
of the Earth; and those within the bowels of it, run after the same manner:
other such like signs they give us, whereby to know those Brooks or Rivers that
have Gold in them, but with less reason, because the Gold is not engendered
there, but in the veins of the mountains, from whence time and the downfalls of
water have worn it away; but without disparaging the judgment of those that
have thought as abovesaid, and have written to that purpose; I say that for the
most part in the Mines of Europe, and of these parts, experience has showed
the contrary, which I foresee they will answer, by saying, that oftentimes an
effect is produced contrary to expectation, and that these have their
exceptions as well as other rules; nevertheless if it be lawful for us in this
other world, and opposite Climate, to make new rules from the experiences in
the rich Mines of Potosi; I should assign the first place of riches, and
abundance to those veins that run North and South upon the northernside of the
mountain; which point of the Compass, with a very little declination Westward,
the four principal Mines of this mountain observe; namely, the Mine of Centeno,
which was the Descubridora; the Rich mine; the Tin mine; and the mine of
Mendieta: the second place I should give to them, that run North and South, on
the South side of the hills. A point of the Compass parallel, whereunto run the
best veins of the second famous Mine of this Kingdom, which has its name from
the famous City of St. Philip of Austria called Oruro, which in the richness of
its veins, abundance of Metals, depth of its Mines, and great concourse of
inhabitants, deservedly stands in competition with the grandeur of Potosi.

In diverse places very rich veins of Metal run East and West, and also to
several other points of the Compass; so that the best rule to go by in this
matter, is to follow the Metal, as it discovers it self, and as long as one
gains thereby, or at least saves himself, it is worth the following on, because
being sure to lose nothing one has, the vein will lead him to great riches;
and if the vein be large, and have any signs of Gold or Silver in it, although
for the present it does not quit the cost, men go on courageously in the
working of it, having such certain hopes of gaining great profit; this has
been confirmed by experience in all the Mines of these Provinces; a fresh
instance whereof we have in the rich Mine of Chocaia, (where for the
instruction and encouragement of Miners) after having followed its veins forty
years, with very little profit, at length they have met with the extravagant
riches, which all of us in this Kingdom have heard and seen. If the veins of
Metal be very small they must be extreme rich to be worth the following: if
the Metal be found clinging about Stones, and likewise in the hollows of those
Stones, it be found in grains like corns of Gunpowder, (being that which the
Spaniards call Plomo) and is Silver unrefin'd, although these grains be but
few, and the rest of the Metal have no Silver in it, nevertheless it is a sign
of the riches of the vein, when it meets with more moisture. As it fell out in
that great Mine of St. Christopher of the Lipes, which they call the Poor man's
Treasure, if as they dig forwards they meet with more abundance of those
grains, de Plomo, it is a sign that the rich Oar is very near. To find
Chrisocola, Herrumbre, Oropimente or Sandaraca in the Mines, or iron-colour'd
earth, next to the Stones that enclose the Oar, or Fullers-earth between those
Stones, are very good tokens of the richness of the Mine; it is no ill sign
also to meet with dry Earth, if it be yellow, red, black, or any other
extraordinary color, and it is the better when there is some show of Lead mixed
with it: Chalky-ground is very promising, and Agricola does judge it a good
sign to meet with Sand in the Mines, if it be exeeding fine, and very ill to
meet with Earth full of little Flints, if it hold long, without changing into
another soil.

CHAP. 26. Of Metals in particular, and first of Gold.
THe most perfect of all Inanimate bodies, and the most esteemed of all Metals
is Gold, universally known, and coveted by all people. It is made of the same
matter, and in the same manner as other Metals are, (as has been already
shown) but of parts so pure and perfect, and so well compacted togther by
decoction, that its substance is, as it were, incorruptible, being out of the
power of any of the Elements to be corrupted or destroyed. The fire that
consumes all other Metals, only makes Gold more pure: The air and water
diminish not its luster, nor can Earth make it rust or waste. By the nobleness
of its substance, it has most deservedly obtained that estimation, which the
world gives it, and the natural virtue which flows from the admirable equality
of its composition, is the best medicine against melancholy, and the greatest
cordial to the hearts of men, which perpetually run after this avaritious
Metal, as the Needle does after the Loadstone. The qualities that it has in
common with other Metals, have been briefly touched in Chapter 21. The virtue
ascribed to Aurum potabile to preserve a body perpetually in youthfulness,
without infirmity; together with the receipt of making thereof, depends upon
the credit of those Authors, who have written concerning the same. Many writers
upon this subject relate the names of diverse Countries, Mountains, and Rivers,
famous for the production of Gold, but my design is not to be over-large; and
therefore I not only forbear to translate what other men have written, but also
to treat of the greatest part of the Mines in this new world, even those of
diverse of the Provinces of Peru; and only apply my self to give your Lordship a
short account of those which are found in the Royal audiencia de los Charcas,
the government whereof is worthily committed unto the care of your Lordship.
Every body knows the name of Carabaya for being a Country stored with plenty of
the finest Gold, (as fine as the finest Gold of Arabia) it is of the ley of 23
Corrats, and three grains; and although an incredible quantity thereof has
been, and daily is gotten thence, yet now they begin to work again a-fresh, and
follow the veins of it under ground, whereas hitherunto they have only gathered
up the fragments of it, which were washed off by the rains. The Province of
Larecaja borders upon Carabaya, and abounds with Gold, which in diverse Brooks
of that Country, is found in form and color like unto small shot, which being
melted, and its outward coat and mixture consumed away, becomes of a red
color; he that found this first did not know it to be Gold, until a friend of
his, unto whom I discovered it, told him so.

Next unto Larecaja joins Tipuane, a Country inhabited by savage Indians, with
whom we have had wars, and made incursions upon them, ever since the building
of the City de la Paz, where I was present, and is now above twenty years ago:
this Country is so largely reported to be rich in Gold, that it were
incredible, unless so many eyewitnesses had affirmed it: the proper name of
this City de la Paz, is Chaquiyapu, which we corruptly call Chuquiabo, which in
the language of this Country, is as much as to say Chacra, or the Farm of Gold;
it has abundance of Mines in it, that were wrought in the time of the Ingas;
it is a soil generally known to be fertile of Metals; and in the time of the
rains the Boys often pick up Gold in the streets in small bits, like the
kernels of apples, especially in that street that goes down to the River, by
the convent of the Predicadores; and in the valley of Coroico, and others,
which they call andes de Chuquiabo, in the cliffs of the Rocks Gold is found of
a gray color on the outside, like unto Lead. The Silver Mines of the famous
Town of St. Philip of Austria, Oruro, are encompassed round about with other
hills, in which there are many rich veins of pure Gold, which have been wrought
heretofore; at present there is only one wrought, and that by my persuasion:
upon the ridge of that mountain, that runs over the Silver-mills, which they
call de las Sepolturas, the Oar whereof being well ground to powder, and
ensayed by Quicksilver, yields a considerable profit, they have not followed
any more of the veins, for want of industry, their common trade being getting
of Silver, (or which I rather believe) because in those veins they have already
wrought, they have not gotten so much Gold as they expected; although that
ought not to discourage them, because it may reasonably be supposed, that where
so many veins of Gold are, there be some of them very rich, if they have the
good fortune to light upon them, the same which daily experience has showed in
the Mines of Silver.

The bounds of Chayanta are full of veins of Gold, and have some ancient Mines
already sunk in them, and in the Sands of its River, which is called, el Rio
grande, kernels of Gold are found, and in the River of Tinquepaya, seven
leagues from this City of Potosi, they have found Gold also.

In the Confines of Paccha, Chuquichuqui, and Presto, near unto the City of
Chuquisaca, there be many Caves, out of which they have gotten some show of
Gold: the like also is found from the River Sopachuy, up unto the Chiriguanes,
where it is held for certain, that there be rich Mines of Gold, which the
Indians have this year offered to discover unto us.

The River of St. Juan, which runs at the bottom of the Province of the
Chiquas, where it joins with the Calchaguies, is very full of Gold; in
Esmoraca, and Chillio, of the same Province the ancient Gold Mines are yet to
be seen: there is one hill of the Lipes, which is near unto Colcha, which has
Gold in it: there is a Mine also three leagues from this Town, in a place they
call Abitanis, which in the Lipean language is as much as to say the Mine of
Gold. I believe for a certain also, that there is Gold in the Province of
Atacama, because of the abundance of fine Lapis Lazuli, which is found there,
in which Gold is engendered.

CHAP. 27. Of Silver, and the Mines thereof.
SIlver is the most perfect of all Metals, except Gold, whereunto it comes so
near, as to want nothing but the color; and therefore those that most of all
oppose the opinion of the transmutation of Metals one into another, do yet
hold it possible to turn Silver into Gold, because the color only being
wanting, the fire, and artificial concoctions can supply that, whereof there be
many experiments: from the good mixture, and fineness of its parts, proceeds
its enduring the fire with very little waste, as also its being tough and
malleable, and endures the drawing out into very thin leaves, and small wyre;
if it were not a common trade to do it, it would not be believed to be
possible, that an ounce of Silver should be drawn out into 1400 yards of wyre;
and it is yet more admirable, that all that shall be made gilt wyre, with only
six grains of Gold; so that although Silver can be extended to admiration, yet
Gold is a hundred times more ductile than it; one ounce of Gold suffering its
self to be beaten to that thinness, as to overspread ten Hanegadas of land.

In the Mines oftentimes Silver is found white, and pure, and like, as it were,
wyre woven one within the other between the Rocks, which the Spaniards call
Metal Machacada, such as is found in that Mine they call the Turks, in the
Province of Carangas: in Choquepina a Mine of the Ingas, two leagues from
Berenguela, in the Province of the Pacages: in the mountain that I discovered
and registered, half a league from the works of St. Christopher, in the Province
of the Lipes: in Yaco, of the Province of the Charcas: (which in the middle of
its Oar yields rich Copper) there was found last year a Stone coated over with
white Silver, the Metal contained within, being yellow, like unto the color
of a Lion. And in the rich Mine of Chocaya, in the Province of the Chichas, in
the richest Stones of that Oar they have found much Silver, like wyre woven
together as aforesaid; and in all the Mines of these Provinces, at some time or
other Stones have been found, made into Silver wyre as aforesaid, and wedges of
pure Silver; but no other Mine has produed the like unto that of St.
Christophers in Oruro, which besides the leaves of fine Silver, that are found
between the Stones, produces fine Silver also in small dust mingled with the
mould, or earth, that is dug there, which may be gotten together without any
more trouble than washing, in the same manner as they use the Gold that is
found in sand; but most commonly in all Mines Silver is found incorporated with
the Stones, and is scarce discernable, nor to be known, but by men of good
experience. In the circuit of the Charcas, there is such abundance of Silver
Mines, that they alone, if there were no other in the world, were sufficient to
fill it with riches: in the middle of this jurisdiction stands the wonderful
mountains of Potosi, of whose treasure all Nations of the world have liberally
participated; the excellencies whereof, and of that imperail City, whereunto it
has given the name, do so much surmount any other thing in the old, or new
world, that they very well deserve a particular history to eternize their fame:
it is surrounded (for the most part) with abundance of rich Mines, that of
Porco is the famous Mine of the Ingas, and the first, out of which the
Spaniards dug any Silver; those very ancient Mines of Andacava are admired by
all Miners for their vast depth, and admirable contrivance, and plenty of Oar,
which is such as promises continual employment, for half the Indians of this
Kingdom. Those of Tobacco Nunio are near unto a Lake called by the same name,
have such wonderful and costly engines appertaining to them, that the building
of them has consumed a great part of the treasure of this Kingdom: that Lake
contains so much water, as would make a running river all the year long, with
which there goes day and night a hundred Silver Mills, which grind the Oar
which is gotten from its own banks. Within the bounds of Potosi also are the
Mines of Guariguare, Caricari, Piquiza, la vera Cruz, Sipoto, and many others.

In the Lipes there be Farms of Mines of greater fame, namly that of St. Isabel
of new Potosi, the name whereof does not more predicate its beauty, than does
the amenity of the mountain, and the richness of the Oar that is found there.
La Trinidad is a wonderful rich Mine, there be also the Mines of Esmoruco, el
Bonete, (which they call so, because the top of the mountain is like a Bonnet.)

Xanquegua, the new world which has been discovered in my time, yields very
rich veins of Metal; namely, Abilcha, todos Santos, Osloque, St. Christoval,
de Achocalia, Sabalcha, Montes claros, and many others. In the Chicas are St.
Vincent, Tatasi, Monserrat, Esmoraca, Tasna, Sbina, Chorolque, old and new
Chocaya, which to the shame and astonishment of the Miners, has been now last
of all found out, and is one of the richest in all Peru.

CHAP. 28. Continuing the discourse of the last Chapter, touching the Mines of
Silver.
THe Province of the Charcas, besides the rich mountain of Potosi, (which alone
was sufficient to eternize its name) and the other Mines aforesaid, that are
round about it has also the Mines of Yaco, (or the mountain of miracles) those
of St. Pedro de buena vista, and those of Malcocota: there is Silver Oar also
found near unto Cayanta, and also in Paccha, and Tarabuco, not far from
Chuquisaca, and in other places. Within the Jurisdiction of Panna, stand the
three great mountains, St. Christoval, Pie de Gallo, and la Flamenca, which
together make up those Mines, which they call of Oruro, that famous Town, which
is near unto them. In the neighborhood of Oruro also are the Mines of Avicaya,
Berenguela, Cicacica, la Hoya, y Colloquiri, which although it is a Mine of
Tin, yet now and then in following the veins thereof they meet with rich Oar of
Silver, which they call Lipta: In the Province of the Pacages is the rich Mine
of Berenguela, with the mountains of Santa, Juana, Tampaya, and others, and in
the bounds of the City de la Paz, there are the Mines of Choquepina, Pacocava,
Tiaguanaco, and diverse others; briefly all these Provinces are nothing but a
continued Mine, and notwithstanding so great a number of Mines are opened at
this day, yet it is certain, that there be many more known unto the Indians,
which they craftily have concealed from us till this present.

There is a certain tradition in this Country of an incomparable rich Mine
belonging to the Village of Chaqui, four leagues from this Imperial City,
although at present the sight of it is not known, diverse Indians having killed
themselves out of obstinacy, that they might not discover it.

There goes no less fame of the Mine, which they call de los Encomenderos in
the Province of the Lipes, which name was given it diverse years ago by the
Indians, who getting a great quantity of Silver out of that Mine, gave that
Treasure unto two Spaniards, whom they dispatched away into Spain, as their
Agents, (they were two brothers of the surname of Tapias) whereupon this rich
Province was incorporated into the Crown. Whilst I was Curate of this place, I
spoke with many of the Country people, that told me, they had helped to load,
and conduct that riches unto the Port of Arica, where it was put on Shipboard:
it is agreed on all hands, that the abovesaid report is true, although at
present that Mine remains undiscovered, which I do not at all wonder at, when I
consider, that all the Mines that are wrought in that Province have been found
out, and first taken say of, by the Spaniards themselves, without lighting upon
any one ancient work of the Indians; whereof no doubt there were formerly very
rich ones, as appears by the choice Stones, and pieces of Oar, which Indians
have given me, without discovering whence they had them: and the very streets
of the Town, when I was Curate there, were full of small grains of rich Oar,
which I swept up, and made profit of it. In the plains of Julloma in the
Pacages, the Indians anciently have wrought Mines, which at this day remain
undiscovered. It has been a vast quantity of small pieces of Plate, which they
call Corriente, that the Spaniards have bought up, among this people, and I my
self have gotten there some of the remainders of that sort of Silver: these
grounds, together with the color and beauty of the mountains, makes one
rationally to suspect that Country to be fertile of rich Metal: but it is more
certain, that there are rich Mines in the Parish of Caquingora, in the same
Province of the Pacages, because I have seen Stones of rich Oar picked out of
the paving of their streets, and the walls of their houses. The same report
goes also of diverse of the neighbor Towns and a constant fame, that in the
time of the Ingas, each of the parties had their particular Mines

CHAP. 29. Of Copper, and the Mines thereof.
THe Sulphurous parts do predominate in the composition of Copper, and from
their distempered heat rises the fiery color of that Metal; when it is melted
it smells more of Brimston than any other Metal; and because it is over-burnt
in its composition, therefore it is less subject to injury or corruption, by
the air, earth, or water; as for the same reason, Coals are not subject to such
like accidents: they use Copper about engines of long duration, because it
never rusteth as Steel and Iron does; and for the same reason it was highly
esteemed by the Ancients, who made the bolts and nails of their Ships, their
weapons, and other instruments of this Metal, which also we found in use among
the Natives of this Kingdom.

Copper is engendered in mineral Stones of diverse colors, although ever the
most predominant color is blew or green: it is engendered in the same places
with Gold and Silver, and oftentimes in following a vein of pure Copper they
have met with a nest of the finest Gold; but it is more familiar to have its
veins change into Silver; and those veins of Copper that make any show above
ground, commonly prove very rich as they are dug deeper, and consequently are
more moist. The Mine of Osloque in the Lipes, was at the top in a manner all
Copper; and every spades depth as they dug downwards the Oar grew more rich in
Silver, until it came to be pure Silver, at the bottom of the Mine, where the
water increasing to a man's height hindered them from prosecuting its farther
riches: what has been said is a token of the affinity between the matter of
composition of these Metals, and that the greater or lesser purification is
the only difference between them.

There are many Mines of Copper in these Provinces, and the bottoms of all the
Mine whereout Silver has been taken, have been found to yield great store of
it, which for the color sake they call Negrillo: so that how many Silver Mines
there are, so many Mines there be whence Copper may be gotten also; besides
there be Mines of Copper only from the very superficies of the Earth downwards;
there be diverse ridges of hills about Potosi, that are full of these kind of
Mines, although most of the Copper that is wrought in this Town has been
gotten from the Farm de las Laganillas, and now is gotten from that of Yura. In
the Lipes there is a very great old work of Copper in the mountain Scapi, two
leagues from Chuyca: there is another also, wherein there is Copper-mettal like
wyre woven. A league from Sabalcha, in the high way to Colcha; and
notwithstanding it is found in many parts of this Province, yet no where is the
success so prosperous, as in the mountain of Pereira and its confines, until
you come to Guatacondo.

In Atachama there are very large veins of Copper, some of them run unto the
Sea side, and tumble down the cliffs in great massy lumps of this Metal. In
the Chicas, where the soil is not taken up with Silver, it is full of Copper
mines; and not far from Esmoraca, they get of this Metal, woven like wyre, (or
Machacado, as the Spaniards call it) there is also very rich Copper in
Oroncota, and in the top of the mountains of Tarabuco many Pits and
Copper-works of the ancients are to be seen. It is found likewise in all the
rest of the Charcas, particularly in the confines of Maoha, Copoata, and
Chayanta; and in Paria near unto Oruro. And in the Province of Carangas, the
hills adjoining to the Silver mine, called el Turco, are full of Copper. Near
unto Curaguara de Palages, there be many ancient works of the Indians, whence
they get Copper Machacado, (or like wire woven together.) In the high way
between Potosi and Julloma, one sees many veins of Copper. Also a league from
Callapa, in the road that goes to the City Paz, one crosses some large veins of
it. Not far from Caquingora there be diverse stately works, and much Copper
Machacado upon a white chalk. Within less than half a league from Julloma, near
unto the high way that goes to Calacoto, in hills of dry clay, I found branches
or small veins of pure Copper, like unto fine Gold, whereof I got a great
quantity of that which was scattered about above ground. There is of this
metal Machacado in Choquepina, near unto Berenguela de Pacages; and several
works and virgin veins in the high way from Calacoto to Potosi, half a league
before one arrives there, and in like manner over all the rest of this Province.

CHAP. 30. Of Iron.
IRon, although it is not the most precious, yet it is the most necessary of
all Metals for the use of man; notwithstanding it may be disputed, whether the
good or hurt it has done in the world, be the greater; nature has made it so
hard, by putting over much earthy parts or fixed Sulphur in its composition,
although it has also a sufficient portion of humidity, or Quicksilver, so that
in the first place it will not melt without a very violent heat; and in the
next place, being struck with a Hammer, it does not break into small pieces, as
hard Stones do, but receives impression, thereby dilating and extending it
self. It is a Metal cold, and dry, but more porous than others, and therefore
weighs less, and is more subject to rust, and decay in the wet: especially in
Salt Water, which penetrates most: it wastes in the fire also every time it is
heat, falling off in scales, because it wants humidity proportionable to its
earthiness. If when it is red hot it be quenched in cold water, it will become
very brittle, because the heat being pent up in the heart of the Iron by the
ambient cold, does there prey upon, and consume part of the natural moisture,
which made it tough, and malleable.

These fertile Provinces of all other sorts of Metal are not destitute of this
also, though none employ their labors to seek it out, or work it; because here
is such abundance of Silver, about which they are industrious to greater
profit, and in truck for it, they buy abundance of that excellent Iron of
Biscay: this proceeding is not to be wondered at, when one considers the
abundance of Copperas, Alum, Quicksilver, and other Minerals, which is yearly
brought from Spain to these Indies, where the same commodities may be gotten in
such abundance, as were sufficient to supply, not only the occasions of these
Kingdoms, but also of Spain its self, and of all the world beside.

In the valley of Oroncota, there is a great deal of Iron, the people of the
Country, being encouraged by the looks of the place, and fair appearance of the
Oar they found, followed a large vein of Metal, hoping that it was Silver, and
brought me some of the Oar to ensay it, the which I did, and undeceived them,
by telling them it was Iron: the same has happened in other veins at the rise
of the River Plicomayo, five leagus from the City de la Plata, although that
Oar has some Copper mingled with it, and is not pure Iron as that of Oroncota
is.

Adjoining to the Ancoraymes, a Town in the Province of Omasuyo, there be noble
Mines wrought formerly by the Ingas, of so great fame, that it is very well
worth ones making a journey purposely to see them: the Oar is very heavy, and
hard, and of a dark color, although there be found together with it much Oar,
that sparkles and shines. If you rub pieces of the dark Oar together, it
produces a very fine blood color, like that of the Hemmotites, to whose
species undoubtedly it belongs, and is full of Iron, as I have proved by many
ensays; it is possible the Indians followed veins of richer Metal in these
Mines, which hitherto we have not met withal, or because Iron was not in use
amongst them: they dug this Oar to fit it to their Guns, Stone-bows, and
Slings; it being not inferior in weight or hardness to our Iron bullets, they
did make use of these in their wars, and called them Higuayes.

In Oruro, hard by the Silver Mine of Santa Brigida, in the hollow between the
hills, there is a vein of Iron, of which out of curiosity, and for example
only, when I was in that Town, I saw several Iron Keys made: the Metal which
they call Chumbri, taken out of the Mine of Chocaya in this mountain of Potosi,
and others, have much Iron in them: and doubtless there is abundance of Iron in
many other parts of this Kingdom, although the people do not regard, or seek
after it, nor do the Miners in their ordinary ensays meddle with any thing, but
the knowledge of Gold and Silver.

CHAP. 31. Of Lead.
LEad is a very common, and known Metal, there is no Silver Mine, where much
of it is not found; and there is scarcely any other Oar but has some mixture of
Lead in it. Nature has qualified it with abundance of humidity, that it might
be serviceable in the melting of Gold, and Silver, which without the help of
Lead burn away, and consume in the fire, before they arrive to their full
perfection. By reason of its moisture it does easily evaporate in the fire, and
melts; carrying along with it whatsoever is not Gold or Silver, and therefore
its self is very easy to be refined: it is likest unto Gold in weight, and
unto Silver in color, being melted togther with them. It not only facilitates
the founding, and refines them, but separates the Copper from them, as shall
hereafter in its place be shown; and therefore is the most necessary of all
things, in the art of founding of Metals, the whiteness of it shows the
abundance of humidity, or impure Quicksilver, whereof it is composed, which the
Chemists in several manner of ways do easily separate from it.

It neither diminishes nor corrupts by the air or water like Iron, but rather
increases both in weight and quantity, as very good Authors do affirm,
notwithstanding others do say, that sheets of Lead exposed to the weather do
waste and consume, and have been the ruin of many goodly buildings covered
therewith. It is rarely found mingled with Gold, most commonly with Silver, and
sometimes with Copper. The Oar in which Lead is engendered is called in this
Country Soroches, which for the most part is black, full of holes, and
sparkling; other pieces of it they call Muertos, because it does not sparkle,
nor is spungy; others they call Oques, which in the language of this Country is
as much as to say Fraylescos, because it is of the color of a Friars coat:
there has been no Silver Mine discovered in all this Kingdom, wherein some
Lead has not been found, in which regared it is needless to enumerate the
several places that afford this Metal, although most of the Mines in the
Chicas have abounded therein, and therefore it is that they have founded so
much Metal in this Province. The Mines of Andacava are Lead and Silver also,
but because that Oar is not proper to be separated by Quicksilver, and there is
not wood enough near the place to melt it down; this Mine, which in my opinion
is one of the richest in all the Indies, continues hitherunto yielding but a
very small profit. Below the mountain of Potosi, as far as its shadow reaches
in that part called Desibicos, there be many veins of Lead, with a very little
Silver mixed in it; the like also there is within the shadow of St. Christoval
de Oruro.

CHAP. 32. Of Tin.
THe Metal which we call Tin, diverse call white Lead; particularly they give
it this name, that separate Silver, and Copper, in which operation some Tin
comes forth, as shall be said in its place, which is known by its whiteness,
and the noise it makes when one either bites or breaks it. Common Tin is
begotten from the same principles as Lead is, but more fine and better
purified, whence it becomes more hard and white, although from the ill mixture
of its substance it is said to stutter, and make a noise as has been said: it
is the poison of Metals, and makes them brittle that have the least mixture of
it, because its incorporation with any Metal alters the equal temper it had
before, and impedes its ductibility; only it does not infect Lead in this
manner, because the exceeding great softness and humidity thereof penetrates
into, and incorporates with the ill tempered substance of the Tin, so that
united together, they remain ductile and malleable. The veins of Tin are not
found in every place that one has a mind to; and yet these rich Provinces are
not wholly destitute of them; there is a Farm of Mines named de Colquiri, not
far from the hill of St. Philip de Austria de Oruro, which is famous for the
abundance and excellency of the Tin, that has been gotten there, wherewith
they have furnished all this Kingdom, in following the veins whereof, as has
been advertised before, many times they have met with rich parcels of Silver.
Near unto Chayanta in the Charcas, there is another Mine, whence a few years
ago they got abundance of Tin. Not far from Carabuco, a Village on the bank of
the great Lake Chucuito, on that side toward the Province of Larecaja there be
Tin Mines also, which the Indians wrought in the time of the Ingas, and the
Spaniards continue to work still; those veins are very large, and rich in Tin,
and many times amongst it they meet with Silver; but all of it is mixed with
Copper, which makes the Tin more sightly and durable: the fame of these rich
veins gave me the curiosity to see them, being desirous that no Mines of these
Provinces should escape my knowledge and experience. In the mountain of Pie de
Gallo de Oruro, there is much Tin, although few know it, and all neglect the
working of it because they find not the Silver there which they expect. One of
the four principal veins of this famous mountain of Potosi is called the Tin
Mine, because of the abundance of Tin that was at first found upon the
superficies of the Earth, and in digging deeper it all turned into Silver. And
in the fields belonging to the parish of St. Bernard, where I officiate, a
quarter of a league off, or a little more, there be rich veins of Tin, which
upon my discovery, your Lordship went in person to visit, whereby, as by other
of your noble proceedings, you have given great encouragement to those that are
industrious in the working of Mines, which has so eminently increased the
Royal revenue, and the riches of the people.

CHAP. 33. Of Quicksilver.
QUicksilver is a Mineral very well known, of a liquid substance, and fluid
like water; it is naturally viscous, very subtle, and abounds in humidity,
whence it obtains the qualities of being very heavy, and shining bright, and of
being very cold, as it is generally thought, notwithstanding some do affirm it
to be very hot, by reason of the subtle effects and penetrating quality that it
has, whereby it runs through, not only flesh, but the hardest bones; and also
because sublimated Mercury (which substantially is nothing else but
Quicksilver, though altered by the mixture of those Minerals wherewith it is
boiled and sublimated, and in like manner is reducible again to Quicksilver) is
notoriously known to be poison, and hot in the first degree; but leaving the
determination of this to those that deal in simples, it is certain, that there
is so great an affinity between the nature of Quicksilver, and that of other
Metals, that though it be none of them, yet it is convertible into any of
them, because as most Philosophers hold, it is one of the principles of which
they all are compounded, and most easily unites and incorporates with them; and
moreover its very substance is transmutable into true Metal, enduring the
trials of the fire and hammer, as well as those that come out of the Mine.
Raymundus teaches several ways how to turn it into Gold and Silver, in a book
called La Disquisicion Eliana, there is taught a very perfect way how to make
Lead of Quicksilver; and if one should suspect the credit of books, in these
Provinces there be many eye witnesses, that have Plate by them, which they have
refined with their own hands by a Copel of Quicksilver, cured according to a
receipt given unto them; the which experiments take away all scruple of the
possibility of its transmutation. There was very little use or consumption of
Quicksilver before the beginning of this new Silver age in the world, then they
only wasted it in Mercury sublimate, Cinabrio, or Vermillion, and the powders
made thereof called Precipitate, which are also called in Spain the powders of
Juanes de Vigo, which have been used to such mischievous purposes, that the
world was said to have too much of them, although in bulk and quantity then
they had but little, but since it has been used to collect the Silver together
out of Oar, which is ground small, (an invention which the Ancients had
scarcely arrived to, and practiced it but very little) it is incredible, how
great a quantity is consumed by the Founders of Metals of this Kingdom: for if
the abundance of Silver that has gone out of this Kingdom, has filled the
world with riches and admiration; by it may be estimated the consumption and
loss of Quicksilver, which after a most extravagant expense thereof at first,
being now by good experience regulated within terms of moderation, is found to
be equal in weight to the Silver extracted; and very seldom that the wast is so
little. They began to register the Quicksilver that came to Potosi upon the
Kings account, in the year 1574; and from that time till 1640, there had been
received of it upwards of 204600 Quintals, besides a vast quantity irregularly
brought in upon other accounts: to supply the excessive expense of this
Mineral, God Almighty provided the famous Mine of Guancabellica, and in these
Provinces subject to the Charcas, (of whose Minerals I have desired
particularly to inform your Lordship) there can be no want of this Mineral
amidst the great plenty it has of all others; there are Quicksilver Mines in
Challatiri, four leagues from this Imperial City; there be also of the same
near unto Guarina: in the Province of Omasuyo, and not far from Moromoro, a
Village of the Indians, six leagues from the City Chuquisaca; a few years ago
the Indians brought Stones very rich with Quicksilver, which by the violent
death (as was suspected) of the man that proffered to discover the Mine, has
remained concealed unto this present.

CHAP. 34. Of Artificial Metals and Mettalliques.
ART also produces Metals and Mettalliques, and in their fabric aims at, and
imitates the perfections of Nature. From a mixture of Tin and Copper is made
Brass for Bells, and for pieces of Ordnance, and for other uses. They put a
pound of Tin from four to eight lib. of Copper, according as the occasion
requires. The Indians understood this composition, and made use of it for their
instruments of force, and for their Arms, as we do of Steel or tempered Iron,
which they knew nothing of.

Latten is made of small pieces of Copper put into large Crusiples, covered
with powder of Jalamina, (which is a Semi-mineral of a yellow color; there is
of it near the Mine called the Turc, in the Province of Carangas, and also near
unto Pitantora in the Charcas) upon the powder of Jalamina they strew powder of
beaten Glass to cover it, and keep in the respiration, and then they put fire
to it, which alters the color of the Copper, and makes an increase of Metal
of eight lib. in the hundred weight.

For Looking-glasses they make several compositions, although the best is of
two parts Silver, and one of Lead. Moreover they make by art, Cinabrio, Mercury
sublimate, Precipitate, Psorico, Esmalte, Escoria, Diaphryges, Cadmia,
Pompholix, Spodos, Flor de Cobre, Suescama, Cardenillo, Vermicular, Stommoma,
Herrumbre, Ascul, Albayalde, Sandix, Ochra, Greta, Purpurena, and Glass.

Cinabrio is compounded of one part Sulphur, and two parts Quicksilver, well
boiled, and sublimated together in Glass viols, or in Earthen vessels that are
glazed. Mercury sublimate is compounded of half Quicksilver, half Copperas,
ground together extraordinary fine, and sprinkling a little strong Vinegar upon
it as it grinds, that it may the better incorporate, then sublimate it in Glass
viols, as aforesaid; it is also made with Alum, and many times they mingle a
little Salt with it.

Dissolve Quicksilver in Aquafortis, then set it upon a gentle fire, and let
the humidity evaporate, and the Quicksilver will remain hard as a Stone, then
grind it very small, and set it again upon the fire in a Crusiple, (or vessel
of Copper, if it can be gotten) and keep stirring the Quicksilver, until it be
of a very lively red color, and then take it off the fire for service, and
this is called Precipitate.

Psorico is made of two parts of Calchitis, and one of Greta, ground and
mingled together with a little strong Vinegar, set it in a Muckhil for forty
days together, then take it out, and in a broken piece of a pot toste it over
the fire till it be very red.

The best Esmalte is made of Alum, Copperas, and Saltpeter; it is susceptible
of all colors, as Glass is.

Escoria is that which works out of the Metal when it runs, and swims upon
the top of it like fat, (which we call dross.)

That which remains in the botton of the Furnace, when they melt Copper is
called Diaphryges.

Cadmia (although there be of it natural) is also that which sticks to the
walls of the Furnaces, principally wherein Copper is melted, of which they call
Bodrite, that which is like unto Cobas; and Stracita, that which is like unto
Potsheard; and Placite, that which looks like Bark or Shavings.

Pompholix is a mealy substance, and looks like Wool, as it sticks to the
walls, but dissolves as soon as ones fingers touch it. It grows upon the walls
as they melt Metal. They vulgarly call it Atutia.

Spodo is very little different from the Pompholix, only that it is more
impure. It is found upon the walls where they refine Metal.

Flower of Copper is made by pouring cold water upon the plates of Copper, as
they come red hot out of the Furnace, which with the fume raise up little small
grains, which they sweep off into a little Iron Fireshovel, and so preserve it.

La Escama del Cobre is that which falls off from the Metal when it is
hammered and beaten, and that which in like manner falls off from Iron is
called Stommoma, (although this Greek name rather signifies Steel.)

Cardenillo is made by stopping viols of Vinegar with stopples of Copper, and
letting it stand ten or twelve days before it is used.

If instead of Copper aforesaid, they use stopples of Iron, it makes Herrumbre.

Vermicular is very like to Cardenillo; take one part of Whitewine Vinegar, and
two parts of stinking Urine, and pour it into a Copper Basin or Mortar, and
stir it about with a Pestle of the same, until it grow thick, then put a twenty
fourth part of Salt and Alum to it, set it in the Sun, until it coagulate and
dry, and it will turn into the form of little worms, from whence it derives the
name.

El Azul (or Blew) is made by covering a vessel of strong Vinegar (wherein a
little Almojatre has been dissolved) with fine sheets of Quicksilvered
Plantada, full of small holes, and putting it into a hot Muckhil, and after
twenty days standing, there rake out the Ascul for use.

If in the former case one puts Lead over the Vinegar, it makes Albayalde.

Put Albayalde in a Spoon or Iron vessel upon kindled Embers, and stir it until
it looks very red, and then it is Sandix.

Ochra is yellow, it is made of Lead burnt until it come to that color.

Greta is made in the refining of Gold and Silver, whereof hereafter.

Purpurina is of the color of Gold, but of little endurance, and lasts not
long. Take four or five parts of Tin, and as much Quicksilver, one part of
Almojatre, and another of Sulphur, and grind them, mingle them in a Glass viol,
and distill them, and the substance that remains in the bottom is the Purpurina.

In the last place comes the most curious production of Art, and that is the
making of Glass. Take two parts of transparent Sand, or powder of Stones, which
dissolve in the fire; one part of Nitre, or Saltpeter, or Salt of Sosa (which
they call the herb of Glass) clear and purify it with the mixture of a little
powder of a Loadstone.

Another receipt. Take two parts of Ashes, and one of the Sand aforesaid, with
the powder of Loadstone, and give it a fitting heat in the Furnace.

CHAP. 35. Of the Colors of all Minerals generally.
THat those who want experience may the more easily know the Minerals that come
to their hands, and that by their eyesight (the truest informer of all the
senses) they may know what they meet with in the bottom of Mines, I shall
reduce all sorts of Minerals unto Colors, as to a Genus most familiarly known;
some sorts of Greta, (or Fullers-earth) Alum, Amianto, the Arabic Stone, the
Meliti, the Gallatiti, (or the Milk Stone) Alablaster, the Diomond, Silver,
Quicksilver, Tin, and Marble are white of color; la tierra Pingiti, Jeat,
Sori, Melanteria are black; of an ash color are the Eritrian, and the Melian
earth; of blew is the Saphir, the Ciano, the Turkey Stone, the Lapis Laculo, and
el Cibairo; of green color is the Emerald, the Prasma, the Chrisocola, or
Atincar, some sort of Greta, and Vitriol, or Copperas: of the yellow color is
Gold, the Ochra, the Chrisopacio, the Chrisolite, and Orpiment; of red the
Ruby, the Granatte, the Balax, the Cornelian, the Sandaraca, Corral, la Piedra,
Seissile, the Hematite, or Blood Stone, Copper, Minio, (or Vermillion) the
Lemnian earth, and Almagre; of purple color is the Jacint, and Amathist; of a
clear blew the Jasper called Boria; of a greenish blew the Cardenillo, and the
Armenian Stone, or Cibairo are of this color; (and so the Painters call the
Color which they make of this Stone, a verdured blew) of a white inclining to
a red is the Afrodesiaca; of a red that is whitish is the Xanto; between black
and red is the Batrachiti; of a black inclining to purple is the Alabandico; of
a yellowish white is the Topas.

There be Minerals of any one single color, either black or white, or mixed
together, as the Agates. The Apsito has red veins dispersed upon a black
field, and contrariwise the Nasomonite has black veins upon a red field. The
Heliotrope in his fine green substance has veins of the purest blood; and in
Saphires and lapis Lazuli are seen very resplendent Gold. Two veins, one white,
and the other red, run quite through the substance of the Egitilla.

The Eupatalo is of four colors, namely, Blew, fiery Red, Vermillion, Pippin
color.

The Orea also is wont to be found of so many colors, namely, red, green,
white, and black.

CHAP. 36. Of the Faculties or Virtues of Minerals.
I Shall finish this Treatise with a brief relation of the medicinal Virtues
that are found in Minerals, more than what has been already mentioned, that
those that possess them may know how to benefit by them when the occasion
serves. Some Minerals work by their occult essential properties, (or specifical
form) others by the mediation of their Elementary qualities, contrary to those
of the disease. Of the first sort some are opposite unto poison, and others to
other sorts of infirmities; and of those that resist poison some cure the
Plague, as the Emerald, the Lemnian and the Armenian earth; others are good
against one sort of poison only, as the Sapphire drunk inwardly is against the
biting of Scorpions. Sulphur, Nitre, and Copperas are good against the venomous
mushroms: Salt used plaisterwise, is good against the biting of Vipers and
Scorpions, drunk inwardly is good against the poison of Opium and Toadstools.
Of those that cure by occult quality, some stop the blood from passing to a
particular part of the body, as the Hematite; others corroborate and fortify
the stomach, when they are hung upon it by help of a string going about the
neck, as does the true Jasper: others tied to the left arm restrain abortion,
as does the Eagle-stone, which the Greeks call Aetites, and if it be bound upon
the left muscle, it produces the quite contrary effect, as also does the
Jasper: others purge gross humors; as does the Loadstone; others melancholy, as
the Stone- Armenia, or Cibairo; others provoke to vomit, as does the aforesaid
Armenia, Chrysocola, Copperas and Precipitate.

Amongst those that work by their Elementary qualities, (although generally all
Minerals are drying) some heat the body, as do Alum, Copperas, Calchitis,
Misi, Sori, Melanteria and Cardenillo; others cool it, as to the
Eritrian-earth, Stibium, (or Antimony) Albayalde and Greta, or Lithargirio.
Others with the second qualities which they possess, soften hardness, as does
the Agate, because it participates so much of the Betune; others contrariwise
will harden soft parts, as does the hard Lead and Estibium: some open the pores
of the skin, as Nitre and the scum thereof: others shut the pores, as does the
Samian-earth, and all other Earth that is slimy and tough. Some dissolve Warts,
and Biles, and Kernels in the body, as the Piedra, Molar, and the Marcasita;
others heal wounds, as the Calchitis, the Misi, and Alum: others corrode the
flesh, as does the powder of the Stone Asia, and Copperas, and Cardenillo: some
make the flesh putrify, as Quicklime, Orpiment, Sandaraca, and Chrysocola.
Mercury sublimate, Orpiment, Sandaraca, and Quicklime are poison, because they
corrode and putrify the bowels; so also is Mortar, Albayalde, and Talco
calcined, because obstructing the passage of the spirits, they choke one.

FINIS.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE ART of METALS, Wherein is Taught the Common Way OF
REFINING SILVER BY QUICKSILVER^

WITH Some New Rules added for the better performance of the same.

Written in Spanish by Albaro Alonso Barba, Master of Art, Curate of St.
Bernards Parish in the Imperial City of Potosi, in the Kingdom of Peru in the
West Indies, in the Year, 1640.

Translated in the Year, 1669. By the R. H. Edward Earl of Sandwich.

London, Printed for S. Mearne, Bookbinder to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1674.

The Second Book of the Art of Metals.
CHAP. I. That no man ought to be employed to Refine Metals, but he that has
been examined and Licensed by Authority.
THe abundance of Minerals, wherewith God has enriched almost all the
Provinces of this new world (serving himself thereof as a Medium, to other high
designs of his Divine Providence) has been so great, that it is scarce
possible to be believed. The Mountain and Imperial City of Potosi, having
already yielded, between four and five hundred Millions of Pieces of Eight, a
quantity sufficient to make such another hill of Silver; it is hard to form a
conception equal unto so exorbitant a heap of Riches; but the better to help
our imagination therein, know that, if the ground were covered with Pieces of
Eight, laid as close to one another, as is possible, they would take up the
space of sixty Leagues square, allowing five and twenty Pieces of Eight to a
Vare of Spain (a Vare of Spain is 33. English Inches) and five thousand Vares
to a Spanish League. This glut of Riches, has been the reason why they have
not applied the care that was requisite, to prevent loss and waste in the
Refining of Oar, which speaking with moderation, has been the loss of many
Millions, both for want of giving it due Law, the nature, and difference
whereof, they did not understand; and so proceeded by chance, and without good
ground, neither knew they well, what quantity of Plate the Oar would yield. And
lastly, they destroyed unnecessarily abundance of Quicksilver, whereof has
been already consumed in this Imperial City, more than 234600 Quintals; I know
not whether this neglect speaks greatness of mind in the inhabitants of this
Kingdom, that they despise to pick up Crumbs, which nevertheless were sufficient
to satisfy the hunger of many Kingdoms of the other world; or whether it
condemns the carelessness of so wise and well governed a Commonwealth, that
they have not used all possible means to put a stop to so unnecessary a
Prodigality. The first and fundamental remedy whereof, is in my opinion, that
the Metals be Refined by one that understands the Art, and is Authorized
thereunto by Public License, after strict examination of his sufficiency,
which is required before the admission unto diverse callings in the
Commonwealth, without comparison of much less importance than this is. The
Masters of Refining Works have taken no Care at all in this matter, because how
negligently soever they Refine their own Oar, they lose nothing, but have all
the Silver, either in the Plates, or amongst the Dross; and that which they
Refine for others, yields more profit to these Refiners, the worse it is
wrought, because more remains with them in the Dross; but both these are ill
reasons to proceed upon, because the making full profit of their own, must cost
a double labor, and the ill Refining other men's, redounds to a Public
prejudice.

CHAP. II. What quantities, and what kind of knowledge a Refiner ought to have.
IT is a very great Trust that is put into the Refiners, the whole Riches which
this most prosperous Country produces, being put into their hands without
account, or any obligation of the quantity they are to return; their word and
honesty only, without reply, or appeal from their sentence, is the only
security of the truth, of what the Oar has yielded; and it had need be a
strong security, when the violent incitation of private interest is to deceive.
He therefore that lives continually amongst these occasions, had need be well
furnished with the honor of a Christian, lest having his fingers perpetually
kneading in the paste, a good deal do not stick unto them; there ought to be a
great deal of circumspection in choosing this Officer, for no mischief that
hinders the Refining of Oar, or extravagant consumption, or loss of
Quicksilver, can occasion so great prejudice as a Refiner of a wicked
Conscience.

Neither yet is it alone sufficient, that his Manners be good, if he want the
knowledge necessary to the Art of Refining. He ought to know all sorts of
Metals, their qualities and differences, which of them are most proper for
Quicksilver, and which for Melting, if there be convenience for it. He should
know the diseases also that infect Metals, and the way of clearing them; the
accidents of Quicksilver, and the ordinary way of Refining in great and in
little; and in no case let him be admitted for a Refiner, that does not well
understand how to make the lesser Ensay by the Fire, of Oar that is ground to
powder, before the Metal be incorporated together, that so he may know
certainly how much Silver ought to be gotten out of that Oar; and he should
never give over making trials, until he has obtained it. The want of this one
care has cost this Kingdom abundance of Money, and is of great prejudice to it,
even at this day; two experiments whereof I shall relate, which have passed
through my hands, that you may the better estimate the importance of this
advice: A few years ago, when I lived in the Province of the Lipes, in a Parish
which they call Xauquegua, a Miner had wrought a Vein, out of which he drew a
quantity of very Rich Metal, although he knew it not; he Ensayed it by
Quicksilver, and found it to contain four or five Pieces of Eight the Quintal,
and at that rate Refined it all by the great; at length they deserted the Mine
for being of little profit: Afterward an Indian carried me to the place, I
found Metal in the Moulds that were drawn out, and also in the Vein which had
not been much wrought, I Ensayed it by the fire, and found it to contain 900
Pieces of Eight the Quintal, although by the ordinary way of Quicksilver it
yielded but four or five; I discovered this Vein to the Magistrates, calling it
by the name of Nuestra Senora de Begomia; they built a Mill presently near it,
and abundance of Miners flocked thereupon, and have gotten thence a great
quantity of Silver.

In the Mountain of Santa Juana, out of the Mine of Berenguela de Pacages, they
got a Metal like unto Soroches, which by the ordinary Ensay with Quicksilver,
appeared scarce to have any Silver at all in it; whereupon the Miners utterly
deserted it, until a Priest a Friend of mine, sent me some pieces thereof unto
Oruro, which I Ensayed, and found them to contain 60 Pieces of Eight the
Quintal; by my advice he dug a great quantity of that Metal, being laughed at
by the Neighbors whilst he was at work to so little purpose (as they thought)
but afterward much more envied by them for the great riches he had gotten.

CHAP. III. Of the knowledge of Metals, and the differences there are of them.
IT is almost impossible to teach those, that have not been acquainted with
Metals, how to know them by the sight, because there is so great diversity of
them; that there is scarce any stone in one Mine, that resembles stones of the
same Metal in another Mine; no nor oftentimes of the same Mine it self.
Nevertheless the Miners reduce these differences unto three general heads,
which the Spaniards call, 1. Pacos, 2. Mulatos, and 3. Negrillos. Paco in the
general language of this Country, is as much as to say of a Red color, and
such more or less are the Stones, which they call Metal Paco, although in
Berengula de Pacages, they call the Green Metals of Copper by the same name,
which also in these Provinces they give to Metal of any color, in
contra-distinction to Metals, that shine like Steel or Glass, and another sort
which they call Negrillos. Mulatos is a color between the Pacos and Negrillos;
and in the Mines, Metal of that color is produced in the same order; it is of
a Brown color, and ordinarily accompanied with some of the Margagita; there is
less of this Metal, than of the two other sorts. The Negrillos have been
discovered by, and take their name from their color, although all Black
Metals are not comprehended under that name. La Tacana a rich Metal, and
usually Black, although there be of it Gray and Ash-colored, which they call
Lipta belongs to the Metals Pacos, as also does the Lead (for so they call the
Silver Oar) which oftentimes is Black, Gray, Ash-colored, Green, White, and
Orange Tawny, which they call Suco; and this last year in the Mountain of
Potosi, there was found of it, of a bright lively Cinnamon color, or very fine
Vermilion, a thing which has not been seen in any other Mine. The Soroches
might constitute a fourth order of Metals, but I agree with the opinion of
others, that would have them ranked under the name of Negrillos, to which also
belongs the Rosicler, the richest Metal that nature has produced in the form
of a Stone; it is shining and brittle, and the powder of it beaten finer with
any hard thing, is of the color of pure blood, it is very like unto Cinabrio,
or that Vermilion which is made of Quicksilver and Sulphur, which gives a good
hint for the finding out of diverse other greater secrets. Cochico is also of
the same kind a very rich Metal Massy, but neither so brittle nor spungy as
the Rosicler is, but it is more full of Lead, and is not so easily beaten to
powder, nor gives so perfect a blood color.

Soroches, Tacana, Polvorilla, Rosicler, Cochico, and Negrillos, are
distinguished one from another, in the manner following.

The Soroches are black, or Ash-colored, either shining, or without any luster
(which they call dead Oar of Lead) and commonly contains some Silver.

The Tacana is Silver Oar close compacted, of a Black color, without any
shining at all.

Polvorilla is Tacana; not congealed, nor stony, but is rich in that Oar they
call Pacos, but in the Negrillos, not so much, by reason of the mixture of
Copper, that it has.

The Rosicler and Cochico is Silver Oar with that same Varnish, which hides its
own proper color, and shines, whereby it differs from the Tacana. That which
predominates in the Negrillos, is Copper, either actual, or else Vertual in the
Copperas, wherewith it abounds; it always contains Silver more or less, and is
usually accompanied with the Margagita.

The Black Metal which feels like Lead, and is smooth (which makes as it were
Leaves of Trees or Feathers) contains a great deal of Alcohol, or Antimony
(which in some parts they call Macacote) and but little Silver. Those Negrillos
which have luster like polished Steel, or Looking-glass, and are therefore
called Espejado and Acerado, are the richer the nearer they approach unto the
Rosicler and Cochico.

CHAP. IV. Of the sorting of Oar, and the proper manner of Refining each of
them.
THe skill of extracting all the Silver, out of any Oar, begins to be exercised
in the picking and sorting of the Oar together; the want of care in sorting Oar
from Stones, that have no Oar in them, as also the Oar of one sort of Metal
from another, has occasioned much damage; the least inconvenience has been in
the use of Quicksilver, a quantity whereof is lost together with grinding, and
other charges about that which is no Metal; the greater inconvenience has
been, where there was Metal, the failing to get out all the Silver, because
they have jumbled together Oar of several sorts, and used but one manner of
Refining, whereas those Metals require a different way of handling and time.
To Ensay that Metal by Quicksilver, that requires the fire, is to destroy it;
to put that Metal in the Furnace, which is not to run, is to endamage the
Metal, and to get no profit at all; and although the several Oars be properly
assigned, some to the Quicksilver, and some to the fire, yet they have their
differences of being easier or harder to be Refined according as they concur,
or differ in the remedy, that is necessary to be used for that purpose. The
Oar, which they call Pacos, that shines or sparkles not at all, is proper for
Quicksilver. The Tacana also may be refined by Quicksilver, but because it is
so very rich Oar, lest it should not be clean extracted, but part of it remain
in the Dross, it is better to melt it in a bath of Lead. That Oar which
containing Silver in it, yet they call by the name of Lead Oar, if it be over
gross, will neither grind well, nor cleave fast to the Quicksilver, and is best
to be melted together with the Tacana.

The most proper way of dealing with the Oar, they call Machacado, is the
Hammer, the Soroches need the fire, the Rosocler and Cochico are to be melted
like the Tacana; the Negrillos require both fire and Quicksilver, for they
prepare all the Oar of that kind by the fire, for the Quicksilver by that means
collecting the Silver, either burnt, or boiled, as shall be showed hereafter.

CHAP. V. How to know the ill qualities that infect the Oar, and how to purge
them away.
OF various and very different qualities are the substances that Nature has
produced in the Veins, that contain the Oars of Metals, whether they be
Abortions which the covetousness of Mankind occasions by tearing the Oar out of
the bowels of the Earth before its full time, which otherwise would come to be
Metal in perfection, or whether it be excrementious superfluities of the
generation of all sorts of Metals; they be usually called Semi-minerals and
are Salts, Alum, Copperas, Sulphur, Orpiment, Sandaraca, Antimony, or Alcohol,
Brimstone, both White and black, and Margagita.

Scarce any Oar is gotten that does not participate of one or more of these ill
companions, all of then being hindrances to the extracting Silver out of the
Oar, whether it be by the Fire or Quicksilver; those that partake of Copperas,
of which sort are those they call Copaquiras, are mortal enemies of
Quicksilver, which they consume and scatter, and that ill condition is
heightened, if Salt be mingled with it, which makes it penetrate more violently,
and suddenly; the learned Raimundus knew this antipathy very well, and has
left it discovered to us in writing; and those that deal in Metals daily have
it in their hands, and yet take no notice of it; this is that, which eats up
the Quicksilver, and dissipates the Caxomes of Metal, and has occasioned so
great an expense of Metals, namely, Iron, Lead, Tinn, and Lime. Whosoever has
a mind to make experiment hereof, let him mix a little Quicksilver with
Copperas well ground, and water, and he shall see in an instant all the
Quicksilver dissolved and lost; especially if he put a little Salt to the
former composition. This will be no wonder to those that know Mercury to be
Quicksilver, and that the great change in its substance, is caused by Copperas
and Salt, wherewith it is mingled, and then sublimated in the heat of the Fire;
this is the greatest poison to the refination by Quicksilver; although
sometimes it is useful, and serves like Treacle to those sorts of Oar, which
have use of it, as shall be showed in it is place hereafter.

This inconvenience is found out, and remedied, with very much ease; grind a
little Oar, and put some fair water to it, heat it the more the better, stir it
well, and then let it stand a while, then pour out the clear water into another
vessel, leaving the Sedement behind undisturbed, prove it by the taste, and you
shall well judge what mixture it has, by it is dry or sour taste; and
whosoever desires an occular demonstration of this, let him set the aforesaid
water upon a gentle Fire, simpering until the moisture be consumed, and he
shall see with his eyes; in that which remains at the bottom, either Alum or
Copperas. Bathe the Oar in the manner abovesaid, so often as shall be
necessary, until the water, that comes from it be sweet, and without taste, or
that stirring it with a bright piece of Iron, it does not stain it with the
color of Copper, and then that Oar is perfectly cleansed and secure, not to
hurt the Quicksilver, when it is put unto it.

Although Sulphur, Betun, and Antimony do oftentimes discover themselves unto
the sight, yet a better way of finding them out, is by the smell, which comes
from the Oar, when it is well burnt in the Fire; but for fuller satisfaction
herein, they may be discovered and cleared from the Oar in the manner following.

Grind the Oar somewhat gross, and put it in an earthen Pipkin that is not
glazed, that has a great many small holes in the bottom of it, and stop the
mouth of it close, then fit a Vessel of water round about it, in such manner as
they do, when they clear the Pine Apples from Quicksilver, and put fire under
the same Basin of Water, wherein all the smoke that goes out of those little
holes will settle, and there you shall see congealed and swimming upon the top
of the Water, the Sulphur, Antimony or Betun, each in his proper form. When the
Oar will smoke no longer, it is a certain sign that it is clear of those
impediments, which although they be not direct enemies to Quicksilver in raw
Oar, yet the Varnish which they give to the silver, hinders the Quicksilver
from laying hold of it, and uniting it together; and by the brittleness and
asperity like Glass which those Oars have that participate of the impediments
aforsaid, they cut and divide the Quicksilver when they are stirred together
into small White pins heads as it were, which the Spaniards call Lis. It is
necessary to burn this sort of Oar, although it be good to melt them first
before they put them into the fierce Fire, because without that preparation the
Silver will all be turned into dross.

The Margagita that is in Oar, discovers it self but too plainly to the eye by
its weight and sharp glassie quality, it divides the Quicksilver into small
Lis; when they stir them together, those ill qualities are taken away by the
Fire, if you burn it therein until its gloss and shining be gone, it does most
hurt unto that Oar which they melt, the abundance of Sulphur whereof it is
compounded making a great scum upon the face of the Liquor, which much stifleth
the fundition.

CHAP. VI. Of the Grinding of the Oars of Metal.
THe Grinding of Oar is a preparation absolutely necessary for the getting out
of it, the Silver, or Gold that it contains by Quicksilver, and the fineness of
the Meal is a principal means of shortening the work and clear extraction of
the Plate: one fault amongst many, which the blockishness of this Country has
committed, has been to make the meal very gross, or to leave many lumps
therein; there needs no great pains to prove that the Quicksilver attracts or
incorporates with it self that Silver which it immediately touches; so that the
Metal which is in middle of any lump remains in the same condition it came out
of the Mine, and has more or less loss in it, according to the richness of the
Original Oar, and according to the richness or coursness of the Meal. I have
made diverse trials of Grinding those lumps over again, and find that in them
remains, when least, the sixth part of what is in the Oar when it is first
taken out of the Mine, which is very considerable in a whole years work, and
incredible in the great quantity of Metals that have been already gotten.
Agricola after having taught the way of Grinding and sifting of Metals which
they now practice in the Mills, teaches a way how to reduce it to extraordinary
fine Flower in a kind of horse Mill with Stones like Mill stones: he thought
this pains to be necessary, although to an end different from that refining
which we now practice, wherein it is clearly and indispenseably necessary. I
learned the manner of doing this from one that had gotten a great deal of money
by Grinding the lumps over again, although he did not take out all the Plate,
because he ground them in an ordinary Mill, whose Hammers could not beat it so
small as it ought to be, for the lumps either slipped away from under the
Hammer, or being uneven one defended the other from the stroke; to have good
Sives, and care in lifting them up is of great importance to this matter, but
not a full remedy, after the washing of the Oar, especially if it were of rich
Metal is the best gathering up of lumps to regrind. If they burn the lumps,
they will yield more Flour, because some of the lumps will calcine and be
smoother, and others will swell and grow more spungy, whereby the blow of the
Hammer will have better effect upon them. I do use another way of preparation
by boiling, as shall be showed hereafter, which I do hold more proper to be
used in all refination by Quicksilver; put the Oar ground and searsed into a
skillet in like manner (as if it were already incorporated with Quicksilver,
and ready for washing) then pour a sufficient quantity of water upon it,
stirring it with a Ladle or hand-mill, whereby all the fine will swim a top,
and the gross and ill ground will sink to the bottom; take away the fine with a
ladle, put it in the melting pot and boil it, grind the grosser part again in a
Mill or a Mortar until it become all meal; If I desire to make a Xoves of the
fine sort after the ordinary manner of refining, I must mingle some pure sand
therewith, that it may swell and want the Inconveniences which that kind of
Oar uses to be accompanied withal.

CHAP. VII. Touching the Burning of Oar.
THe Burning of Oar is useful for two purposes, viz. 1. That it may Grind the
better. 2. That it may be in better disposition for the Quicksilver to lay hold
of, and incorporate it self with the Silver that is in it. The reason of the
first is plain, and the experience of the latter, since they order all the
Negrillos or blacker Oar in that manner, but generally not understanding the
reason thereof. And certainly in all the art of refining nothing is practiced
so much by guess or chance, and without knowing the ground of it, as this is.
Refiners will say, they burn the Oar to clear it of ill qualities, not
apprehending that thence it will follow that by fire enough they should quite
cleanse and purify it, whereas the contrary is found by experience, and that
according as they burn it more, the worse conditioned is the Oar, and needs the
help of some other material to prevent, that all the Silver and Quicksilver
too, that is in it, be not lost.

There is but one enemy naturally opposite unto Quicksilver (as has been said
already) and that is the Copperas, and the fire is not only useless for the
vanquishing that, but on the contrary it multiplies and increases it; and if
the Oar have no Copperas in it when it is put into the fire, the fire will
beget and produce it, as may easily be seen by experiment. In the Burning of
Negrillos (or black Oar) in which the fire increases the Copperas so much, that
it is necessary to use other materials in the burning of it to repair that
damage, although if they had thoroughly understood this matter, they might have
cheaper and easier done it, by washing the Oar (as I have said before) until
it were cleared of all the Copperas; The ignorance of which remedy has been
the occasion of great waste and loss.

Other diseases of Oar do not directly injure the Quicksilver, only by the
Varnish and Glassie quality which they give, they hinder the Plate and
Quicksilver from incorporating and making a Mass together; and therefore the
rule in this case is to burn the Oar so long until it change color and lose
the luster and sparkling that it had. To know the Oar that of necessity must be
burnt (if it be to be Refined by Quicksilver) the luster and shining aforesaid
is a certain sign. The fire will not prejudice that Oar they call Pacos, and if
it have any mixture of the aforesaid impediments, it must of necessity be burnt.

CHAP. VIII. Touching the damage that results from the burning of Oar.
MEn having hitherto proceeded by chance as it were, and without certain
knowledge of the quantity of Silver contained in a piece of Oar have judged him
the best Refiner that has gotten most Silver by one operation, leaving it
doubtful whether any more or no were to be gotten out of the Oar, especially in
the Negrillos and Oars that cannot be excused from burning. This doubt has been
greater, there being less certainty here where there ought to be much the
greater; and from hence men have found no less inconvenience by mistaking on
the one hand, than on the other; wherefore this manner of preparation has been
esteemed, as dangerous as profitable. With skill and curiosity one may observe
many wonders of Nature in the burning of Oar, the parts of Iron and Brimstone,
which commonly accompany the Oar, when they come to the fire are converted into
Vitriol or Green Copperas; this afterward is turned into fine Copper; again,
the Copper calcined, dissolves in water like salt, the which strained and
evaporated by a gentle heat coagulates into another kind of Vitriol or blew
Copperas, like unto that which they call the stone Lipes, and is of admirable
Virtue for the turning of almost all Metals into Copper, the purity of Silver
it self does not excuse it from being subject to such a metamorphosis, for if
the Oar have in it any Alum, Copperas, Saltpeter, or Nitre by the help of the
fire, they will calcine the Silver so, that it will dissolve in water, and not
be laid hold on by Quicksilver without using some new Artifice, and even Salt
alone as it grows incorporated in the Oar, or mingled with it in the fire is
capable of producing the same effect as shall appear evidently in the following
experiments.

CHAP. IX. Experiments which prove the damage by the burning of Oar if they be
not known and remedied.
GRind a piece of Oar that has Copper or Iron in it, and by the direction of
the fifth Chapter of this Book, try if there be any Copperas in it, and if
there be, clear the Oar of it by washing of it, and after it is dry burn it
well, and put it into water again, and you shall see much Copperas anew
produced by the fire; the Refiners daily do this with their hands, although
they take no notice of it; and although this experiment be sufficient to
satisfy every body, yet for greater confirmation of this secret to grind Oar
of Copper or Iron, and melt it into thin Plates, and grind some Sulphur, and in
a Crusiple or Earthen pot unglaz'd, put a lare of that Sulphur, and upon that
lay one of the Plates, and proceed in that order as far as you think fit, stop
the mouth of it well, that it give no vent; and after it is dry, put it between
red hot Coals in such manner as they encompass it round about, but do not touch
it; after the Crusiple is sufficiently hot, put the fire nearer to it, and at
last make the fire fierce; but not so much as to melt the Plates; then take it
out and the Plates will look black and be brittle, grind them very fine, and
put the fourth part of their weight of beaten Sulphur, together with them into
a piece of broken pot or earthen Basin upon Embers, heat them so as you heat an
Ensay of the black Oar, stirring them continually until the Sulphur have left
smoking, and the oftener you repeat this the better; last of all being well
beaten and hot, or else the water hot, and after a little time boil the water,
and if it colors bright Iron of a Copper color, that the water evaporate by a
gentle fire, until it begins to be covered with a kind of Cream, then take it
off and set it a cooling, and it will congeal into most beautiful transparent
Copperas, Green if the Plates were of Iron, or blew if the Plates were of
Copper.

Dissolve this Copperas or Stone Lipis in water, and put Steel or Iron to it,
and it turns into most pure Copper, smooth, and soft as gold after it is new
melted. If one melt Lead or Tin, and pour it in small drops upon the face of
that water, the whole superficies will be turned into Copper, and the oftener it
is repeated, the greater quantity of the Lead will be transformed until no
Lead remain.

Tin is very easily turned into brass. I was the first which in the Province of
the Lipis found out and published these secrets. Also Silver is turned into
Copper if it be made very fine, and with much Salt (an experiment which ought
to be as highly esteemed by the Refiners, as the turning Copper into Silver)
Aqua fortis is a common thing, if it were not, its virtue would be held
miraculous, it turns Silver into Water, and calcines it into dust; it is made
of Copperas or Alum and Saltpeter, the Spirits that fly from any of these
substances, when Oar that contains them is cast into the furnace, works the
same effects: with beaten Brick and Salt especially of the rock is made a
Cement, wherewith they separate Silver from Gold; these two attract the Silver
to themselves and with the heat of the fire only calcine it; in the burning of
Oar they have the same effect; the Silver being calcined in either of the
aforesaid manners if it be put into water dissolves in it like Salt, and the
Water looks white as milk, and will spot ones hands or nails if you touch it,
notable signs of Aqua fortis in Silver, whereunto Refiners ought to have great
regard, that it destroy not their Silver; these inconveniences there are in
the burning of Metals, besides another which anon shall be discovered, and
though the proper way of avoiding them is casting or melting the Oar which
renders useful, not only that Metal which is precious, but also the baser
sort, as shall be shown in its place, nevertheless because all places do not
afford conveniences for melting down Oar, nor all Oars contain Metals rich
enough to pay the cost, let the aforesaid inconveniences when they happen be
remedied according to the rules which shall be set down hereafter, although it
be impossible to prepare Oar without burning so as to yield that quantity of
Plate it did by Quicksilver, as shall be shown where the refination by boiling
is treated of.

CHAP. X. Whether the Oar ought to be burnt in the stone or in the meal.
THey use to burn Oar in the Stone or in the Meal, and burning it in the Meal,
they better understand the nature of the Oar, for taking care to stir it well
about, and mix it equally in the Furnace, taking out a small quantity, and
putting Quicksilver and Salt thereunto in a short space of time; by the
disposition of the Quicksilver you shall quickly know what the Oar is, whether
it begin to grow like Lead or no, and whether the Lead be gross or fine, or
whether there be need of more materials or no, or whether to continue, or stop
the burning of it, according as every Refiner by his own experience has found
to succeed best with it out of that Oar which is burnt in the stone, cannot be
chosen this equality, because the force of the fire cannot be equally
communicated to stones in a diverse situation and of different bigness; for it
is clear that the small stones are sooner heat than the greater, and those that
are in the Center of the Furnace, sooner than those that touch the sides; but
this manner of burning is subject to least damage, besides that it facilitates
the grinding of the Oar.

It is a great error to burn Oar already grownd by reverberation, because the
fierceness of the fire; burn the Sulphur or Betun which it contains, and suffer
it not to discharge it self by little and little, but obliges it to mingle it
self with the Silver, and altogether to turn it into dross; moreover the force
of the flame raises up the settled parts of the Silver when they stir the Oar,
and turning it into smoke, blows it out of the Furnace. The most secure way of
burning Oar already grownd, is to do it by a Tostadillo (or preserving Pan)
made in the fashion of a Furnace, as shall be directed hereafter, and because
the Meal is wont by the fire to gather into little lumps, or else to grow
spungy and gross, it is convenient to grind it over again, before it be
incorporated, the best way of all as has been said were to burn it in the
stone, because it facilitates and saves a great part of the grinding, and
avoids the inconvenience of the fine Silver flying away in the smoke, and where
the Oar is incorporated in hard Peble and Flint, which are very untractable
stones, it is necessary to burn them. Other sorts of Oar ought not to be burnt
alone, but in Meal with the mixture which shall be prescribed according to the
ill qualities wherewith they are affected.

CHAP. XI. Of Materials to be mixed with Oar, when they burn it.
IT is no extraordinary, but a common thing for Iron to be engendered in the
Gold and Silver Oar, and the Oar, that is so affected, is most difficult for
burning or fundition either; it may be discovered by the slowness of the heat's
penetration into it, and also by a Loadstone, passing it over the Oar, after it
is well burnt, and grownd, which will snatch up the Iron, if there be any, and
more or less of it, according to the quantity mixed with the Oar. This kind of
Oar after it is grownd, ought to be mixed with Sulphur, or which is better with
the Meal of Oar that has Sulphur, or Antimony in it, and in such proportion as
the quantity of Iron in the Oar requires: when they are mingled, heat them upon
the Tostadillo until that taking out some of the Meal, and Ensaying it
according to custom; the Oar is found to be well conditioned. Sulphur is the
destruction of all Metals, gold only excepted; it hurts Tin less than other
Metals, and Iron most of all, and that is the reason why the Sulphur, and Iron
combating with, and destroying each other in the Furnace, the Silver is left
alone by its self. In like manner is Oar cured, that contains Sulphur or
Antimony, being mingled and burnt with the Oar, or dross of Iron after it is
well grownd.

That Oar which contains Orpiment, or Sandarca, ought to be burnt which
Soroches, which is Oar of Lead and Sulphur; that which contains Betun black or
white must be burnt with dross of Iron, and powder of white stones, whereof
they make Lime: Besides what has been already said, the diseases of Oar may be
known by putting a little of it grownd somewhat gross upon a red hot plate of
Iron, observing well what fume it makes, which if it be white or black,
participates of Betunes of that Color, if it were yellow of Orpiment, if red
of Sandaraca, if it be yellow in the middle, and green on the out sides, of
Sulphur, and likewise the earth that is drawn out of the Mines, together with
the Oar, will oftentimes send forth fumes of the like kind of colors.

CHAP. XII. What the Refiner must do before he incorporates the Caxon.
THe Refiner thoroughly understanding what has been said before, the Oar being
well grown'd and cearsed with that curiosity and circumspection which is
necessary (so that it need not be picked) Before he does go about to
incorporate the Caxon, and before he burns the Meal, if there were need
thereof, let him set apart three or four pound of the Flower well mingled, and
stirring it together again afresh, take a small quantity, and make two Ensays
thereof by melting in such manner, as shall be showed hereafter; whereby he
shall certainly know what Silver the Caxon contains, and how much he may expect
to get out of it. Laying down this ground, that the Oar is of that they call
Pacos, and needs not burning, nor contains Copperas, nor Coppaquiras, take out
some in the manner abovesaid, and Ensay a pound of it by Quicksilver, but first
pour upon the Oar a good deal of fair water, more than is ordinarily necessary,
and let it stand a while, and if there arise a scum, or cream, that is gross,
or oily, scum it off, and let that water run out, and repeat the same with
fresh water, so often, until no such scum arise, then take out so much water
as is superfluous, and put Salt and Quicksilver to it, and without any other
material proceed in repeating, to cast in those too, marking well the operation
of the Quicksilver, whether by accident it meets with more Quicksilver; whether
it turns little or much to Lead, whether it dissolvs or remains entire; if it
fastens upon the Oar without the help of any Material, it is a sign, that the
Oar does attract it to it self, repeat the operation so, until you find that
the force of the Silver, and the repetition does wast the Quicksilver, which if
it do the work is excellent, and will produce the Silver in dust as small as
Pin-dust, which must be gotten together by searsing, and the remainder which is
mingled with Quicksilver must be gotten by washing, and so you shall have all
that the Oar contained, agreeable to the experiment, which was made by melting.
The Oar of Berenguela de Pacages is of the quality before mentioned, a great
deal whereof was spoiled at first, by working it with materials, supposing it
impossible there should be Oar, which did not stand in need thereof; now adays
they Refine with only Salt and Quicksilver, and get the same quantity of
Silver, as they did by melting, which is all that the Oar contains; this Oar is
called Cobrico, if the Ensay does show Lead, for so they call it, when the
Quicksilver loses its own bright color, and looks like Lead, then other
materials are requisite to cleanse it, that it may the better take hold of, and
gather the Silver together; those materials that have this virtue are Iron
dissolved, Lead or Tin, and Lime slacked, or unslacked for some resemblance it
has to Metal; any Oar may be Refined with the help of any one of these
materials, although that seems to b^ best, which is nearest of kindred to the
mixture of the Oar. If the dust of the Silver and color of the Quicksilver be
dusky and blackish, then Iron is most proper for it, for that which looks like
Lead, Lead it self is best to that which is clear; Tin is the best for
Quicksilver that looks as if it were guilt and has Copper in it; Lime is the
best this material which is most convenient they throw in by a little and a
little at a time by measure and weight, until the Quicksilver look clear, and
lay hold on the Silver, and by this they make the account by the great, how
much materials they are to put into a Caxon or Chest, according to the number
of kintals it contains.

If the Quicksilver be changed into white powder or Ashes, and often passing it
again through the Oar, do not make it finer, it proceeds from the weight and
solidity of the Oar, the proper accidents of those they call Soroches and
Magagitaes, and those other Oars that sparkle and have need of burning, as have
been said before. Hard stones that have no Silver in them cause the same
accidents in Quicksilver, wherefore looking upon it reduced to white powder as
aforesaid, if you do not discern either black Oar or Margagita amongst it,
there was no Silver contained in that Oar which was Ensaid, and is good for
nothing.

If in the lesser Ensay the Quicksilver be bright and entire, and falls to
work, laying hold on the Silver, there is no need of using any other material,
all Ensays are made with a very little Quicksilver, that there may be room to
use any other materials, if there be occasion for it, if not that more
Quicksilver may be added, and so the work of Refining is performed with greater
brevity and security, as shall be showed hereafter; and let not the Refiner
cease making experiments, until the lesser Ensay which he makes by
Quicksilver, correspond with that which he makes by melting, and let him
proceed respectively in the greater Refining of the Caxones.

CHAP. XIII. Continuing the Rules of the last Chapter, touching Oar that has
need of burning.
IF the Oar have need of burning, as has been said before, and the Ensays by
melting made, and the Refiner assured of the quantity of Plate the Oar
contains, let him burn it, observing the rules of what he is to mix with it
according to the bigness of the work, and the convenience he has to perform it
in, but in no case let him burn any Oar with Salt; besides that it helps to
calcine the Silver, it gives a stronger force to those ill fumes which are in
the Oar to penetrate into and spoil the Silver. One cannot well tell the set
number of hours, wherein one ought to let Oar continue in the fire, but the
sure rule to know when the Oar is well conditioned, is by Ensaying some of the
burnt Meal; when if the Quicksilver remain entire and clear, and Silver
sticking about it like driven Snow, then it is burnt enough, and the fire
continued, will certainly produce this effect if the Oar be mingled with due
materials, and in a just quantity; in order to which, as also in the Oars they
call Pacos, let them make lesser Ensays to know what quantity of Materials are
to be put into the Furnace with every Kintal of Oar, but because these Ensays
are seldom made as they should be, let the following rules be observed.

When the Oar in the Furance leaves smelling ill, it is a sign that it has
discharged it self of all the Sulphur and Antimony that is in it; when that Oar
charged with Betun, and at the first coming into the Furnace, throwing out a
thick and black smoke by degrees, sends forth a thinner and whiter fume; it
shows that inconvenience to be cured.

When Oar changes color, losing the sparkling that it had, and of Negrillo
becoming Paco, it is a certain sign that it is well disposed for the
Quicksilver, although in this there be exceeding great latitude.

That Oar which contains Copperas, if it be to be put in the fire, must first
be cleansed by washing in Meal, as has been said, otherwise when it comes in
the Furnace, it will become very red as may be seen if one burn Copperas alone
in the fire.

When Ensaying a little of the Meal burnt, the Quicksilver begins to look like
Lead, it is a sign that by the heat of the fire the Copper or Iron which the
Metal contains (together with the mixture of Sulphur) the Antimony or
Margagita are turning into Copperas, and that the faster, the longer the fire
continues.

Take a pound of the Meal out of the Furnace, whilst it is hot put it into a
Vessel, and pour water upon it three or four fingers deep, then stir it a while
and let it settle, then if the water turn white, or stain ones Nails, or change
the color of the Taggs of points put thereinto, it is a sign that the Silver
calcineth and dissolves in the water like Salt; save this water in a glass
vessel, and pour more upon the Oar two or three times, or as often as is
necessary, till it do not turn white; and all the Silver that was calcined,
will be gotten out of the Oar; let the water evaporate by a gentle fire, and
all the Plate will settle in the bottom, and become fit for use by melting.

If the water into which the hot Oar was put, give no signs of the Silver being
calcined, dip polished Iron into it, and if it come out colored like Copper,
there is much Copperas in the Metal; wherefore wash the Metal in the manner
as has been taught, until it be cleared of the Copperas, and change not the
color of Iron; save the waters of this operation, for they are very useful in
the Refining Oar that have need of it, and if you should take out and melt the
Sedement that is in the bottom of that water, fine Copper will be produced
thereby, or Silver if any such have been calcined.

Ensay the Oar so disposed in little by Quicksilver, as has been said of the
Oars Pacos, until by experience you have found out the way how to Refine in
greater quantity, so that you may get as much Silver as you know that Oar
contains by Ensays of melting in the fire. Let no body condemn these for
tedious and unnecessary curiosities, for there is nothing more profitable and
important in these matters, nor less commonly known; and by the care and pains
of a few days the Refiner will be acquainted with the sorts and qualities of
Oar that come to his hand, and know how to proceed with them without wearying
himself with making Ensayes; but for all that have been said, the Oar never
comes to be perfectly Refined, until the Silver little or much that it
contained be purified and whitned in the Meal, and it is not impossible to put
it in that estate. Since the Oars Pacos of Lead may be reduced thereunto only
by burning, and the Negrillos and others also that have Sulphur in them which
stains and blackes the Silver, although it must be a long time in the fire
before it comes to this, and both one sort of Oar, and the other must have
boylings and liquors often passed through them, which do cleanse and whiten the
Silver, such as Millo, Alum, Salt and others, the Oar being in this condition,
needs no other material but Quicksilver, which in less than four days time will
gather together all the Silver, and be very little consumed it self, because
the short time of operation, the absence of ill qualities and the seldom times
repassing it through the Oar, will not regrind, or disperse it to powder, which
is the principal reason of the loss of Quicksilver, as shall be showed
hereafter.

CHAP. XIV. Of the nature of Quicksilver.
DEferring until another occasion, which it may be in due time will offer it
self to treat purposely of Quicksilver, and some excrements thereof, of no less
profit than curiosity; for the present, I shall only say with that Phaenix of
Science in his intellective Art, which all do follow, who treat of the hidden
Philosophy of Metals, that Nature has made this body of so uniform a
substance, and of parts so perfectly united, that even the fire his greatest
enemy, as the vulgar think, is not powerful enough by dividing to corrupt, and
destory it as it visibly does all other Metals and bodies in the world, except
Gold and Silver. The Quicksilver retains its whole entire substance in the
fire, if it be prepared on purpose for it, which many persons know how to do,
or else all of it will fly quite away in the form of smoke, and meeting with
any body that refreshes it; it will condense therein in its own proper form
without being diminished one hair, either in weight or quantity; neither also
do the ill qualities that are ordinarily found in Oar corrupt Quicksilver in
Veins wherein it is begotten, nor in the Chests wherein they refine, for
although Copperas do dissolve it in that manner that it seems to be consumed,
and being sublimated in Copperas, and common Salt, it is transformed and turned
into that which we call Mercury, that one would think it were totally destroyed
and turned into another species yet it is not so, but all those accidents have
their remedies, and it is neither impossible nor very difficult to quicken it
again, and unite it, and in its place I shall show how this is to be done.

CHAP. XV. Touching the causes and differences, of that which is called Lis.
QUicksilver dissolved, and divided into very subtle parts, is commonly called
by the Refiners Lis, which shows its self like an eye-brow, in the matter
Purunnia when the Oar is Ensayed; and from it the experienced Refiners take
their indication of the quality of the Oar and condition of the Caxomes; it is
caused by the often passing of it through the Oar (a thing inexcusable in the
ordinary way of refining) although it has no ill quality at all, but if it
has Coperas in it, it will grind the Quicksilver in great extremity, as has
been said. If Quicksilver be without any foraign impression upon it, and be
dissolved into Lis, which is white, it is called Lis of Quicksilver; Lis of
other materials, is called that which is made by Quicksilver of Tin or Lead,
and Lis of Silver is the fine, and subtle parts of Silver, made by the
repassing of the Quicksilver through the Oar, but not as yet joined or
incorporated with it; which when it is, they call by the name of Pella (which
signifies a Ball or Pellet) Quicksilver is susceptible of diverse colors, which
appears in the Lises according to the different matter which accompanies that
Silver Oar into which it is thrown; these colors are reduced into three
Genuses as it were, which comprehend under them several other Species.

Those three are Clear. Lead Colored. Spotted.


The Quicksilver looks clear, either when the Oar has no Silver at all in it,
or when the Silver it contains is fine without any Alloy or mixture; in that
case the Quicksilver will attract, and cloth it self with the dust of fine
Silver, without losing the liveliness of its color; which when it changes,
they call it Leaden, for its likness unto the color of that Metal, although
it always is accompanied with signs that the Oar contains Silver, unless it be
that the Lead, for so they call it, proceed from false principles, and those
have a manifest cause, although little taken notice of, as well as the other
proceedings in Refining, which hitherunto have been governed by chance. It is
Copperas alone (the mortal enemy of Quicksilver) which gives it the false
color of Lead, in like manner as it does to other Metals the color of
Copper; the other Lead color is a certain sign of Silver, because ordinarily
it is made in raw Oar, that is mixed with diverse other bad things, the which
attracting to it self the Quicksilver; the Quicksilver lays hold of, and
carries away both the Metal, and also its bad companions, who give it that
strange color; this is the ground of what is treated of in the twelfth Chapter
of this Book, and the reason of that assertion, that the black or obscure Lis,
or color of Quicksilver proceeds from Oar that is mixed with Iron; if the
Quicksilver have a deep Lead color, then it has Lead its self in its company,
if it be something more clear, then it has Tin, and if it look as if it were
guilt a little, Copper. Whether the Lis be of Quicksilver, Silver, or of other
materials is easy to be discerned, for the Lis of Quicksilver is very fine,
white, but wanting quickness, and when it falls together with the water into
the Tray, it does not run up and down, but remains as if it stuck to the
bottom, and if you rub it with your finger, it will unite into lumps of
Quicksilver. The Lis of Silver shines, and is like Pindust, or finer according
to the richness of the Oar, when they let the water out from the Oar, it runs
about the bottom of the Tray, and if you rub it with your finger, it will
gather together into Pellets; the Lis of other materials is as it were a middle
thing between the other two, and being reduced into a body by rubbing it with
ones finger, it unites it self with the touched Quicksilver.

CHAP. XVI. Whether it be fitting at first to put in all the Quicksilver, and
other materials at once or no.
THe Oar being in good disposition, and the Refiner by the foregoing rules
being assured how much Silver the Caxon contains, and what proportion of
Quicksilver and other Materials is necessary to be put in, that when it comes
to be washed, it may yield three parts of Silver Pellets, and one of
Quicksilver, it may be doubted whether all the Quicksilver and materials
aforesaid, should be put into the incorporating vessel at once, or no; and the
most part, if not all the Artists of this Country did use to do it at once;
until about twenty years ago, when I came to live in the Province of the
Lipes, I persuaded them to the contrary according to rules, which I had learnt
in such like operations, out of Raimundus Lullus, which do evidently agree with
the ordinary course of Nature, that brings to perfection all thing by a slow
and gentle growth, and not suddenly nor violently. A very little fire is
sufficient to burn the whole world, if the combustible matter were put into it
by little and little, proportionable to the force of the fire; but if all that
matter, or an overgreat proportion of it should be laid upon the fire at once,
it would choke it, and put it out: the natural heat of Animals is subject to
the same inconvenience, and the same happens proportionally unto the Chests of
Metals, besides that by experience it is found, that the extraordinary cold of
much Quicksilver, does accidentally bind up the Oar, and hinder the Refine, as
on the contrary any heat hastens it; moreover if because they have judged ill
of the remedy to be put into the Chest, the Caxon despair, and the Quicksilver
dissolve, the remedy will be the easier, the less loose the Caxon. And if there
be need of using Tin or Lead, which cannot be applied without Quicksilver, that
will be added with less danger, the Quicksilver being in already. The same
damage or greater follows when they exceed in the quantity of Materials, they
put into the Oar which has need thereof, because it dulls and deadens the
Quicksilver, so that it will lay hold on no Silver at all, and can very hardly
ever be reduced into that condition it ought to be. After many days spent in
repassing the Quicksilver, and dressing of the Oar, let the Caxon be
incorporated and washed with a third part of Quicksilver at the most, and at
first put in half the Tin or Lead, that is requisite to be spent, for so the
Quicksilver will the better lay hold of the Plate, and draw it out presently
before the Materials are consumed, which they call Aplomar, whereby will be
avoided the danger of the dry Plate, which like froth swims upon the water that
comes out, and is the occasion of much mischief. If the Caxon stand in need
thereof, proceed to put in more Quicksilver, and other Materials, always
diminishing the quantities proportionally in such manner, that it may go dry
and not wet, for so there will be no occasion for much Lis, and the Pellets
themselves will serve to get out the rest of the Silver, whereby the refining
will be soonest and most securely performed; if it be needful to Refine with
Lime, the rule already prescribed for Materials will not serve, but the Lime
must be put in all at once, and with it repass the Caxon very well two or three
days before you put in the Quicksilver, taking especial care that you do not
put in too much of it, because it is the great hinderance that the Quicksilver
does not lay hold of the greater Plate, and it is more hard to correct than
other materials.

CHAP. XVII. Of the often repassing the Quick silver through the Oar and the
effects thereof.
THe chief and principal end of letting it soak through, is to divide the
Quicksilver into several bodies; that it may every where lay hold of the Plate,
also with that motion it is heat, and better disposed for the work; and last of
all by that frication the Plate is cleansed and purified (which is that they
call wasting the Materials) all of them, things most necessary and important,
although they cause an unpardonable damage, that has been the loss of many
Millions in the wasting and consumption of Quicksilver, for the repassings have
been the foundation of this inconvenience, by squeezing the Quicksilver through
the grosser and finer parts of the Meal into such little Atoms (which they
call Lis) that scarce have weight or dimension, which when they wash, the Caxon
does not fall down into the Tub at the bottom, but being over-drowned and
mingled with the Lamas or mud of the Meal, it stays and is cast away with them;
this inconvenience may be prevented by two cautions, the one is, that the first
and second day after the incorporating of the Meal of Oar in the Caxon, they
give not above two gentle repassings, so that the Quicksilver may be divided,
but not into too small parcels, because before it has gotten a good body of
Silver, it is subject to part it self over finely. The second is as abovesaid,
that they put in the other materials dry, and not wetted with Quicksilver,
putting them in by little and little when most it be in the proportion, one
part of Quicksilver to two of Pellets. Let no body deceive themselves, that
although the Meal in the Caxon contain other Materials sufficient, if it be
much bathed with Quicksilver that it shall be secured from the former
inconvenience; for contrariwise it will rather be subject to a greater
prejudice, for of necessity the repassings will make Lis, and if it happen by
some accident as it very well may, that the Materials be quite consumed instead
of the Lis made of them will remain only Lis of Quicksilver. In the Lis of
Plate there is not that danger, that by the often repassings the Silver should
be wasted or consumed, rather it is thereby better refined, and better
embraces and uniteth it self with the Quicksilver.

CHAP. XVIII. Of diverse accidents, which happen in the way of Refining by
Quicksilver, and their remedies.
IN the progress of this kind of Refining, diverse accidents are met withal in
the Caxones (or chest full of Oar grownd to be Refined) all which are
discovered only by the Quicksilver, which as in a glass represents the good or
ill disposition of the Metal, which in themselves by reason of the fineness of
the Meal into which they are grownd, and a mixture of earth in the Oar, cannot
be discerned.

If the Quicksilver be very much charged above what it ought with materials,
that is to say, Lead, Tin, Iron, or Lime (which the Spaniards call Quicksilver
Tocado) it will not appear round but flatted, or rather prolonged like little
Worms, and if you stir it about the Tray without water, it will make drops with
little tails, and stick to the sides of the Tray; and when it is of this
condition it is a sign that it is killed, and its virtue obstructed from laying
hold of the Silver; this evil is remedied by much repassing, not without great
cost and expense of time; the quickest and most efficacious remedy is Copperas,
or the water thereof, which I have showed how to make and to keep in the 13.
Chapter of this Book, put it into the Caxones at the same time as you do the
Quicksilver, and other Refining Materials more or less, according as there is
occasion, and you shall instantly see the effect of it; the reason whereof is
plain, for (as has been said) Copperas dissolved in water converts the baser
Metals into true Copper; so that the quality of cold which they had before,
and wherewith they choked the Quicksilver, being turned into heat (the
property of Copper) it is the cause of reviving the Quicksilver: From hence is
grounded the practice of putting Copper grownd small into the Caxon, which is
found very profitable for the purpose aforesaid; hence also it comes to pass,
that all Oar of Copper although it be rich is not proper to clear Quicksilver
with, or to be used in the Refining to make it Aplomar, unless it have a great
deal of Verdigrease or Copperas. The same account may be given of the Virtue
that is found in those they call Magistrates, which they use in the Refining to
qualify the Caxones with heat, and to make them Aplomar, the which effect is
produced from the burnt Copperas that is in it, as may be seen in their
composition, which for better satisfaction I shall here set down.

Burn Oar or Copper, and grind it well, then with an equal quantity of Salt
knead it into a body together, and having made it into loaves burn it again.

Others do mingle but one part of Salt, with two parts of Copper Oar, which
they make up into a body and burn, and to one Kintall of that beaten to powder,
they add half a pound of filings of Latin.

Another Magistral is made of Lamas.

Relabes and Salt, an equal portion of either soundly burnt together.

Another is made of that Oar wherewith they Refine the Relabes and Salt put
together in equal portions.

Another sort may be made of Copper Oar, Relabes, Meal of that Oar which is to
be Refined, dross of Iron and Salt, all put together in equal portions and
burnt in loaves.

Another is made of three parts of the Lamas burnt, and one part of Salt. Every
one inventing such like compositions or proportions, according to his own
fantasy, and experience: the foundation of all these Magistrales being the
Copperas which the fire produces in them, as may be seen and separated from
them, by whosoever shall please to go about it according to the rules that have
been already delivered, which seems to confirm that which Pliny says, treating
of Copper, namely that it is begotten of stones burnt.

These Magistrales are to be used with the same carefulness as has been
already said of the materials, namely they are to be made trial of before the
incorporating of the Caxon, that by these lesser Ensays it may be known what
proportion is fit to be put into the Caxon, according to the number of Kintals
it shall contain, for if the proportion do exceed, another great inconvenience
will be produced thereby, namely that which follows.

CHAP. XIX. In prosecution of the Chapter foregoing.
AN Accident contrary to that mentioned in the former Chapter, and an occasion
of great waste of Quicksilver, is of the color of Lead, that is to say, when
it is affected with no other material of inconvenience, but only that
discolouration, and the damage is the greater, if the discoloring has
proceeded from Copperas, and that there be much Quicksilver divided, and
running loose about. Quicksilver squeezed out of the lumps is very round and
lively; if it be divided, the parts of it, although never so small, do not run
into a Cylindrical figure, but into a Spherical, this mischief is cured by the
contrary materials, which as has been said before cleave unto the Quicksilver,
nevertheless the Medicine, which by its particular qualities, attraction, and
natural sympathy cure this evil is Iron, which reunits the Quicksilver, and
gathers it together into a body after it was dissolved, corrupted, and in a
manner turned into another substance by the Copperas, which shall be treated of
more at large hereafter, when we speak of washing the Caxones.

No certain rule can be given, what quantity of materials to put into the
Caxones, that have failed in the operation, because the mischief and the causes
thereof are not always the same, but this general rule must be observed, that
they do not repass the Caxon with Quicksilver, till they have first Ensayed a
small quantity thereof, and thereby have understood what is necessary. After
that let them take a third or a fourth part of the Caxon, and mingle that with
the whole proportion of the Materials, and stir it well together, till it be
very well mixed, and incorporated one with another, then mix this with the rest
of the Caxon, stir them very well together, for after this manner the Medicine
will be best, and with most equality distributed in the Caxon, especially if
the Medicine to be put in be very small in quantity. Have a care to use the
means, that is requisite to avoid falling into the first inconvenience of
overcharging the Quicksilver, and remedy the second mischief with all possible
speed, because otherwise the Copperas will transform the Quicksilver in such
manner, as if it were quite eaten up and consumed. When Ensaying the Caxon the
Quicksilver is found in the bottom of the Purummia Vessel divide it in small
grains not run together in a lump, it is a sign the Refination is imperfect,
and that some little hairyness, or crisping encompasseth the Pellets of
Quicksilver, and hinders them uniting; the want of materials is commonly the
cause of this, or else the overmuch allay of other Metals, which as well as
the Plate attracts the Quicksilver it self. Repasses, the Relabillo burnt by
reason of its sharp cutting quality is profitable to cleanse the Quicksilver:
some put in ashes, but the most proper and natural remedy for it, is that which
they call Millo or Alum, which makes the Silver white, and is very ordinarily
to be had in great abundance amongst the Mines here at Potosi, and in Guaico de
Santiago there is a Spring that runs continually with this Alum water.

When the Caxon has not been repassed equally, or not served with as much
Quicksilver as is necessary, or in some places does not unite it self with
other parts of the Quicksilver, that had gotten Plate already, the cause
thereof is that they call dry Plate: In Ensays you shall see it swim upon the
Relabes crisped like froth, and if it be not scimmed off, and saved before the
cleansing the Caxon, it will swim at the top, and run away with the Lamas to
the great detriment of him that owes the Oar; if the Quicksilver dry, having
nevertheless materials sufficient with it, it is no inconvenience at all,
because it will unite one with another the better, or else that part which the
material possessed being wasted away, the other moist parts remain in the
Quicksilver to unite it self with the rest of the Pellets; that dry Plate which
wants materials, cannot safely be gathered together by loose Quicksilver,
until the Caxon be ready for cleansing; the proper remedy for this is to
repass the Caxon with Pellet of Silver, not over small, so shall the dry Plate
be collected together, and the greatest part of the Lis also, if there were any
there.

CHAP. XX. How to know whether or no the Caxon be ready for washing.
THere can no certain time be prefixed, wherein one is obliged to wash the
Caxones. It Is maturity is hastened by frequent repassings by the outward heat
of the Air, and the inward heat of the Copper or Copperas, and other things of
that kind of virtue, and such as clear and purify the Silver; a principal
cause whereof is the burning of Metals. On the contrary, the work of Refining
is prolonged and slackened by fewer repassings, if the Air be cold or Frost, if
the Caxon be over foul, that the Quicksilver loses it is clearness in passing
through: but letting pass these, and other accidents, let us come to the point
of gathering out the clear Silver mixed with Quicksilver, leaving the earth
behind, which is called washing the Caxon, whereunto no small experience is
necessary, for if the Caxon be not ripe for washing, that plate which the
Quicksilver has not laid hold on, is likely to be utterly lost, or if it be
not, it must be grownd over again, so that at least one loses much time and
labor, and Silver too in the repassings, besides other hazzards.

The rules hitherto delivered for the discovery of the disposition of the Caxon
are subject to very great error: such as it is appearing so well to sight as if
there were need of no more Quicksilver; to find the Lis of the Plate all
gathered together and finished, and that of the Quicksilver beginning to come;
the substance of the Plate, and Quicksilver being clear, and gilded as it were
with other signs, all of which do not secure the judgment from being erroneous,
because these may be produced by other accidents besides the maturity of the
Caxon. The only sure and infallible sign is to see whether the Quicksilver has
gotten all the Plate, which it ought to do according to the proportion showed
by the lesser Ensay of fire, which was made at the beginning, and if it has
not arrived to that, although it has many more good signs than has been
already mentioned; wash not the Caxon, but take more small Ensays thereof,
whereby you shall easily prove what Plate it contains, and what remedy is
necessary to bring it to full perfection, which when it is attained, and the
refined substance alone contains the aforesaid proportion of Quicksilver and
Pellet, strew some Quicksilver loose upon it, and therewith gently repass it
two or three times in such manner as it may go into the Copper better bathed,
in the proportion of three parts Pellet, and two of Quicksilver, or at least
two of Pellet and one of Quicksilver; then gather up some of the Lis that
remains, and put it to the dry Plate, and to the whole Mass of Pellet, whereby
they will be more weighty, and sink better to the bottom of the Caldron, and
will rise and wast less in the boiling; throw Quicksilver also loose into the
Caldron (which they call a Bath) when it begins to be liquid, incorporate
therewith that which the Caxon contained, and it will help to unite it the
better, and the more Quicksilver there was, the fewer inequalities like Oyster
shells will be produced.

CHAP. XXI. That the washing of the Caxones causes the loss and waste of
Quicksilver.
ALL the inconveniences that are and have been found in the waste of
Quicksilver, which they term either loss or consumption of it, are caused by
the washing the Caxons; until then nothing has been lost, however one may be
deceived in Judging by the view even in occasions, that have sometimes happened
and may happen again, that they find neither Quicksilver nor Pellet of
incorporated Metal in the Caxon; for accidents alone as has been said, cannot
alter the Quicksilver so as to corrupt and destroy its substance; in the Caxon
it is howsoever more or less disposed to get out inperceptibly with the water
or with the Lamas. The immediate cause of this mischief is when the Quicksilver
is made over thin without body or weight as it were, so that it has nothing to
sink it to the bottom of the Caldron, and with the stirring the Caxon when they
wash it, it mixeth it self with the dreggs and dirt, and goes along with them,
and there wants more or less of the Quicksilver they put in at first, according
to their better or worse stirring the Caxon and quantity of Lis. It has been a
great error in those, that because for so many years the best Refiners in these
Kingdoms have wasted at the least so much Quicksilver, as they have gotten
Plate, therefore the Quicksilver is really and truly consumed in the operation,
not animadverting the evidence to the contrary, which continually passes
through their hands, namly in the Lamas and relics of the Caxon where the
Quicksilver has oftentimes stayed behind, accompanied with a considerable
quantity of Plate, which the owners of Oar have experimented to their great
damage, and the buyers and Refiners of the relics of the Caxon to their great
profit and advantage. Others speaking Philosophically say, the cause of the
consumption of the Quicksilver proceeds from the contention and combat, which
it has with contrary qualities before it can lay hold on the Plate, and that
thereby it is debilitated and consumed; these men say something to the purpose
if they could demonstrate the contrary qualities that are between Quicksilver
and other Metals, between whom there is rather a great sympathy and agreement,
Quicksilver being the principal whereof all other Metals are made, and also of
the Minerals that ordinarily do accompany them, but if these men cannot prove
the cause, neither will the effect which they suppose, namely the destruction
of Quicksilver follow, and there is certain experience to the contrary, and
hereafter shall be showed a way how to recover all the Quicksilver, even out of
the Caxon, that is most spoiled in operation, and so most difficult to do it in.

CHAP. XXII. The true causes of the loss of Quicksilver, and their remedies.
THe repassings are the remote cause of wasting of the Quicksilver, which is
thereby strained and divided into very small parts which they call Lis, and
although into whatsoever Oar, Earth or Sand you throw Quicksilver, and repass
it, you shall find the effect aforesaid, yet it is most of all experimented in
those Oars which are called Soroches, which by their weight and glassie
quality, do more easily cut asunder, and divide the Quicksilver into minute
parts.

Copperas is of its own nature a violent cause of extenuating the Quicksilver,
as has been often said, and has been the cause of the wast of the greatest
part of the Quicksilver that has been destroyed. There be other causes, which
accompany and assist the two former in working this ill effect, one is the
Salt, which they use in Refining, and wherewith they wash the Caxones, which
every body knows thickens water, whereby not only the small Lis of Quicksilver,
but also heavier things swim and cannot sink to the bottom.

The Lamas which is mingled with the water, and troubles it in the Caldron
thicknes it, and does yet more resist the sinking of the Quicksilver which
stays and is thrown away together with it.

Lastly, the motion of the instrument wherewith they stir the Caxon when they
wash it by condensing the force of the causes aforesaid, hinders the Lis from
sinking, and crowdeth it up to the top. The ordinary repassings in this way of
Refining cannot be wholly excused in this matter, but if the rules already
taught, be carefully observed, the damage will be the less: likewise already
has been showed the way to clear Oar from the Copperas, and to clear the
Margagitas from their heavy and glassie qualities. Salt may be gotten out of
the Caxones two several ways, and preserved for use to the saving of many
Ducats a year, now commonly spent in that commodity; put the Oar into Caxones
made smooth and round on the inside without corners or Angles as is often used,
let them stand a little slooping, only so much as is necessary, that all the
water may run to one part of it, where there must be a hole for it to run out
at in convenient season, but ordinarily kept stopped. When the Caxon is ready
for washing, fill it with abundance of water, opening and stirring about the
Oar with the hove, that the water may penetrate through it the better, and
having done so a pretty while, open the hole, and let the water out into a
Vessel provided on purpose to receive it, where it will either congeal into
Salt, or remain in liquor as it is, will be serviceable for the operation of
other Caxones; repeat this two or three times until the water that comes out
does not taste brackish. If the Caxon was to have been washed in three Caldrons
wash it in six, whereby the water will come out twice as clear, and with very
little Mud, or Sediment.

The Pestel wherewith they stir the Caxon, must not be used always in the same
hand, because the cricles going constantly parallel, the small parts of the
Quicksilver, and the dry Plate go along together with them, and never encounter
one another to unite themselves into a bigger body that they may sink to the
bottom, wherefore after five or six turns with the right hand, take as many
more of the left, and so proceed; and because this cannot so conveniently be
done in the ordinary washing places, put into the Caldron a thing like a broad
Peel, which opposite to the course and motion of the pestel may disturb the
march of the Quicksilver and dry Plate, and cause all the content of the Vessel
to meet and unite, excepting that which is at the bottom whereof there is no
necessity, because of the bath which it is to suffer. Cover the Vessel with
Plates of Copper, or Iron Quicksilvered, to which side soever of the Vessel the
Lis comes, it may stick thereunto, when the Caxon is washed the Lis is easily
gotten together, by sweeping the sides of the Vessel with a piece of shoo
leather, a piece of a hat, or a piece of cloth.

CHAP. XXIII. To make the Pine Apples, and to clear them of the Quicksilver.
HAving taken the Plate and Quicksilver together out of the Caldron, and
straining it through two course clothes wetted, to make them the thicker,
having beaten it also with a Battledoor to squeeze as much Quicksilver through
the clothes as is possible, make Pine Apples of the dry Pellets in moulds
fitted for that purpose, which are called Pine Apples from their similitude to
that fruit by reason of their Pyramidal figure, and of those Pines that have
been reasonably well strained, the fifth part will be Silver, so that one
Hundred pound of Pellets will produce twenty pound weight of Silver. The Pines
that are made of richer Oar arise to less profit than those that are made of
poorer, because the Plate in the richer Oar is more course and spungy, than
that which is contained in the poorer. In the straining of the Quicksilver
though never so carefully, some small parts of the Silver will go along with
it, and the more in quantity by how much the more moisture there was in the
Pellets when they began to strain them, the like whereof is seen in water mixed
with clay, which although it be strained with never so much care, will not look
clear and pure but muddy and troubled by reason of its mixture with the dirt,
and the great quantity of water there was, the more dirt strains through along
with it; letting it stand quietly a while it will settle and gather it self
together, and leave the water clear. In like manner, in the Vessels wherein
they preserve the Quicksilver after they have done refining, and made the Pine
Apples, after a few days the Pellets of Silver will settle and gather into a
body together. In the refining work of Saint Catherines in the Lipes out of the
Vessel, wherein they kept their Quicksilver, I saw as much Plate gotten of the
kind aforesaid, as would have made a good great Pine Apple.

If the Quicksilver be heated it becomes thinner, and will carry away more
Silver in the straining, also when the Pellets are strained, that are gotten by
boiling although it be done with very much care, yet Plate will pass along with
the Quicksilver, and if you will let it stand a days time to cool and settle,
and strain it again, you will get more Pellets of Silver.

The loss in clearing the Oar again from the Quicksilver has been great and
irrecoverable, as may be guessed from the experiment thereof in this Imperial
City at this present, when the Trading in Metals runs but low, and yet
communibus annis above thirty thousand pieces of Eight are wasted by the
expense of Quicksilver, how vast a sum then has been spent by Quicksilver in
the many other very rich Mines belonging to this Kingdom; this inconvenience
has proceeded from want of care in seeing that the Canones and Caperucas
(which are the names of the Vessels they use in the recovering the Quicksilver)
be made of very good stuff, and shut curiously close in the Place where they
join together. The clay whereof usually they are made is very spungy and full
of Pores, so that the water soaks through and sweats out at them; then it is no
wonder that the Quicksilver attenuated by the violence of the fire (which
widens the Pores of the Vessel also) evaporates through the same, and is
exhaled and lost: to say that any part of the Quicksilver is destroyed or
perishes by the heat of the fire is only the imagination of those that
understand not the uniformity of its substance, as has been showed before.
Make the Caperucas and Canones of such stuff as you make the Crusiples, and
that inconvenience will cease, and the Vessels will last for ever (because they
are so mightily condensed and resist the fire) unless some accidental blow or
knock do break them. In that noble Town of Saint Phillipi of Austria, Oruro,
famous for abundance of Mines both of Gold and Silver, on the top of a little
hill which stands above the Church of the Ranqueria, there is a little vein of
white earth, whereof they make Vessels for use, which after they are baked
become so close and firm that they are not inferior to the best China. I was
the first that made trial, and published the usefulness of it for the making
of Crusiples with very good success to those that had need of them, and I do
not doubt but there is such kind of Earth about this City of Potosi, where
nothing has been found wanting that any wise belonged to the obtaining or
refining of that abundance of riches, which nature has bestowed upon it;
although hitherunto much business, and a short time of abode here, has
hindered me from finding of it out. But where such kind of earth is wanting,
mingle the Clay whereof you make these Vessels, the better with the scum or
dross of Iron grownd very fine, and make it up and bake it very well, and there
shall not be so much Quicksilver lost in the use of them as is by those now in
common use. The Canones must be glazed on the inside, the Caperucas not,
because the violent heat will melt the glasing, and make it run.

CHAP. XXIV. Other safer ways of clearing the Pine Apples from Quicksilver.
THe best Vessels for this purpose are made of Iron or Copper beaten to the
thickness of a piece of Eight, or somewhat thinner, and for more security, that
the Vessels may the better endure the fire, they cover the Copper Vessel with a
coat of good earthen ware on the outside; not many years ago, some people began
to use these Copper Vessels cased with earthen ware, and left them off again,
because they understood not the nature of them, nor how to use them. The like
happened in the Province of the Chickas, who cased their refining Vessels as
abovesaid, because they heard that in their neighborhood in the Lipes, I was
working after that manner. The cause of these mistakes shall be showed in the
discourse which follows.

The shortest, best, and most secure way of clearing the Pine Apples from
Quicksilver is in this manner; make a deep Vessel of Iron wider at the top than
at the bottom, containing more or less according to the quantity of Metal
intended to be cleared at one time, set it upon a Trevet of strong Earthen
were, or of Iron cased with Earth in a Furnace of sufficient bigness to put
Wood or Coals under it, as occasion shall require at a mouth made for that
purpose; the rest of the Furnace both the top, bottom, and sides is to be very
close; excepting one little hole at the top where it shall be found most
convenient to give respiration; dispose the Vessel aforesaid in such manner as
they do that which they call the Cannon in the ordinary way of using
Quicksilver; so that it may look out above the top of the Furnace one large
fingers breadth or two, that it may the better join with another Vessel to be
put a top of it, which may serve instead of the Caperuca; put the Pellet (or
Mettle aforesaid) well kneaded together in Cakes of what form you please into
the Vessel, and lest the Plate should melt and stick to the Iron Vessel, let it
have a thin coat on the inside of Earthen ware; or such as Crusibles are made
of, cover this Vessel with a large Limbeck head made of hammered Iron, or
Copper, or of very good Earthen ware well glazed, and out of it draw a long
Pipe a little sloping, the cavity whereof in the narrowest Place, namely the
extremity, let be no lesser, than the bigness of ones little finger, let the
joining of the Limbeck with the Vessel below it, be stopped very close with
galt, then in a secure place that does not feel the heat of the Furnace, let
there be placed a great Vessel of stone or of other matter full of cold water,
whereinto let the nose of the Limbeck enter two fingers breadth, blow up the
fire in the Furnace from which the Quicksilver flying in the form of vapor to
the top of the Limbeck, the coolness whereof presently reduces it into a body
again, which runs down through the Nose into the Vessel of water aforsaid, the
Limbeck should now and then be cooled on the outside with wet clothes, and the
water into which the Quicksilver falls as it becomes warm should have more
fresh water added to it.

A. The deep Vessel of Iron, or Copper. B. The head of the Limbeck. C. The Nose
of it. D. A Trevet. E. A Basin or Vessel of water to receive the Quicksilver
in. F. The Furnace. G. The Mouth of it. H. The hole to draw out the ashes at.
Lib* 2 page 88.


I. A hole open at the top of the Furnace, whereat the deep Iron Vessel looks
out a little, and is joined to the Limbeck.

K. Is a Chimney to let out smoke and give respiration to the fire.

Here place the Pictures and the Verses.

The trouble and hazard of keeping them close in the joint with clay or galt,
may be excused by making of the place where they shut one upon the other a
handful and a half higher, or if to that size of them, that is now in use they
put at the bottom on the outside, and fill it of two fingers broad; so that the
lower Vessel may come up very close upon it, and cannot enter further into it,
a little lower than the Caperucas come, are placed the Candlestick foot, as
they call it, whereupon they set the Plate and the Pine Apple; the Candlestick
foot comes up about four fingers higher than the mouth of the lower Vessel,
which they call the Cannon in the which on the one side four or six fingers
lower than the fire used to be, enters in a small Pipe of cold water at a hole
made for that purpose in the Cannon without disturbing the Caperuca at all,
because it is not to go in strait, but with a little liberty; over against this
hole there is such another, out of which runs as much water as enters in at the
former, whereby the Canon is always kept full, and the water in good temper to
receive the Quicksilver without any prejudice.

If one separates the Quicksilver by the Limbeck, they may do the same thing,
clapping a ring of Copper of two fingers breadth, and other two fingers deep to
the mouth of the lower Vessel; so that the other Vessel may easily be let in
and out, wherein the Quicksilver is to be saved. Into this Circle the Limbeck
must be fitted, and to prevent its being blown off with the force of the vapor
of the Quicksilver, the Limbeck must be kept down with weight on the top of it,
or tying it to some other fixed thing, or making a ring on the top of the
Limbeck pass a bar of Iron through it, both ends whereof afterward remaining
fixed in two walls built on each side of it for that purpose.

FINIS.

