Vercingetorixa: OR, The GERMANE PRINCESS Reduced to An English Habit.

By F. B. Gent.

Why Vercingetorix we give
Unto this Book for Name,
Know, German Princess does derive
As By-blow from the same.
LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCLXIII.

To his good Friend Mr. F. B. Upon his Germane Princess.
IN Stories new, and Stories old,
Many Romances have been told:
One sings the Fame of Cleopatra,
Cassandra, or of Biles atra
Writes Satyrs, while in humor jolly
Another chants the praise of Folly.
Well sure they did, in mine opinion,
Each to his Muse to choose a Minion:
But thou have such a Subject got,
As time foregoing show could not:
A Princess in a strange Disguise,
That leads the world with such surprise,
That Story of her with desire
Has been expected Horse to hire.
And since it is done, no more we'll say,
Our Thanks shall all thy Labor pay;
Acknowledging all former Tricks-a
Surpass't by Vercingetorixa.
T. M.

J. C. to the Author.
NOw that an Exile I am made,
And am eclipsed as Moon in shade,
Whilst Pamphleters my Case do cry,
Pray, Sir, will you the Princess buy?
With her kind Husband, Man of Might,
Who Is neither now a Lord nor Knight,
But is the same as heretofore,
When bound to Post of Scriveners Door;
And so in Ryme the Wits do cry me,
Whilst I do weep sans Princess by me;
And now as wandering Knight am bound
To ambulate the vast Globe round;
Whilst you amongst all have done the right
To me J. C. no Lord nor night.
And now to you I send my thanks,
All that is left of Dowre in Banks,
For making Verse to speak true Story.
Of me when in my hopes and glory.
J. C.

Dean Dunstable in laudem Authoris.
PRaise thee I would, as Worth requires,
And offer Wood to make great Fires,
For joy that Dame is out of Newgate,
And is in Codpiece put by New-mate.
In Rhyme I never could do good,
Unless of that like Robbin Hood,
Or Hopkins and his Neighbor Sternhold,
Chaunted by me in getting Tayl-hold.
With Hat in hand I render thanks
For bringing in my May Pole Shanks:
For I in Pie had reading Finger,
But lost conjunction by their Linger;
And closing Mouth lay snug in House,
Watching for Jobb as Cat for Mouse.
But I have done, thy Wit shall fly
In and beyond my Deanery;
Never forgetting how Tale-Priest
Did humbly bow, and Garment kissed.
W. S. Dean Dunstable, a Deska Capellanus.

Skydder a Brawle, to the Author.
AS Phoenix pearcht in spicie Nest,
Perfuming thee to be burnt Breast;
Expecting when bright Sol will burn
The Bird, and her to Ashes turn:
So I expected have thy Rimes,
To satisfy the longing Times
And my Desires: thy Book shall lie
Pil'd up with my Welsh Poetry;
And fame of Princess, Harp shall sing,
Played by Ap-Rise on Cats-Gut string,
To British Bards, my self being one
That shall the fate of Princess moan:
And now I thank thy painful Pen
For bringing Princess into Ken.
But when at large, my Rimes shall run
As swift as Horses of the Sun,
Or Goat on Mountain grazing hie,
Well coucht in Skydders Poetry.
The Martial Doctor to the Author.
YOu that have done the Lady right
In Story true of City-Knight,
Who now is vanished as the dust
Of Coffee made of burnt-bread-crust,
Who like Gonzales with his Ganders,
Or Thomas Coreat now he wanders
With threadbare Cloak on the Ryalta,
Like to the Gadding Jew of Malta;
Or like St. Hugh with his Bones at's back,
And Tinker with his Trull and Pack,
Lamenting much his fact mishap,
And Lady-Princess unkind Clap:
Or whether he with anger blushing
Be gone to meet his Wealth at Flushing,
We Will not dispute, but let it pass,
Whether he be transformed to Ass;
And only speak of thy rare worth,
Which takes pains for to set forth
(Since scribbling Pens have kept a pother,
By telling Lies all Truth to smother)
The Story whole, and do indite
With Fancy nimbler then Joe Wright,
Your Wit being just of the same stander
With his that droll'd at young Leander;
And much I fear will spoil our Physic,
Since thou alone can cure the Tissick,
With Rimes that cause in us such laughter,
'Twill break Impostures sine plaster;
And with the mirth of thy sweet Quill,
Do quite undo both Purge and Pill.
Then courage, Friend, and do not sneak
And fear what men of thee do speak:
But let those Scoffers who do spite
Thy jolly Muse, themselves go write;
Which being compared, the world must then
Allow thine far the brisker Pen.
To my worthy Friend the Author upon his GERMANE PRINCESS.
ONce a great Workman by his cunning Art
Did shape an Image like to a broke his heart,
Had not Dame Juno gratified his skill
In making it a woman to his will.
Another painted Grapes so to the life,
That it put all the Birds into a strife
Who first should taste of them. But to speak all,
Thy Pen has given their Pencil a fair fall;
And merely with two colors, white and black,
Have laid their Pallas flat upon her back.
All which I apprehend now from thy Muse,
Is that she should through all the world infuse
Such a belief, that thou art the Contriver
Of all this Plot. I durst lay a whole Stiver
It will be said, The Princess did but Act,
And that thou were the Author of the Fact;
Since thou have limn'd so to the life this Dame,
Whoere does see this draught must needs proclaim
Of all men none could come so near the matter
As thou have done. You know I cannot flatter,
And thus conclude, There Is nothing wanting there
But her false Dialect, Yaw, yaw, min here.
P. B.

VERCINGETORIXA: OR, The Germane Princess reduced to an English Habit.
NOw every one has verdict spent
On Princess in the Gate House pent,
And Scriveners Boy (pretending Templar)
A Book has writ very exemplar,
Which he does style Vindicative,
And strives his Folly to retrive;
Rails against Wives, Cheats, Wits and Arts,
Bawds, Pimps, Trepans, and Whores in Carts,
When in good sooth by Venus Glass,
Before espoused one clapped her --
And that he knew; ( but Love is blind)
And Princess would not out of mind.
But hold ( Sir Prologue) now let us enter,
And speak of Story true the Adventure.
When time was come that scribbling Cit
Must walk abroad to try his Wit
Amongst Peripateticke Ladies,
And kiss his hand to Cheapside Babies,
His Clothes were brusht, Cloak laid in print,
And off was cleanly rubbed the Lint:
His Joints were Oiled as if for Match,
And on his Cheeks was sable Patch;
A Mark to know his Lordship by:
His Shoes were of the Gresham Dye.
So goes to Friend, Who made a good Bargain, had he received the benefit.
and in a word,
Does quickly borrow Silver Sword;
And when put on, pray tell who can
Where he or it was proper man.
B'ing thus Accoutred, out he goes
In places clean, keeps dirt from Toes;
And over Shoulders looks to see
Who eyes his City-Gravity:
At last unto the Exchange-Tavern,
Where Sack is kept in a dark Cavern,
The Youth comes in, and calls the Skinker
To show a Room to good Sack-drinker.
But as on Dunghill Cock does strut,
And proudly throws with Heels up Dirt;
So does he walk with Yeomans grace,
Or Poultry-Sergeant carrying Mace,
Till out of Window he was spide
By One, that after was his Bride.
It was a Princess in disguise,
With amorous Looks and piercing Eyes,
That lay there secret and most sullen,
And lately had escaped from Cullen:
As rich as Croesus, and as fair
As any well-drest Flanders Mare,
And was to England come to wed
A City-Chick of the first Head,
Because she would no longer tarry,
And Germane Lord consent to marry:
But as bright Cynthia with Endymion
In Love did burn and weep with Onyon;
Or Cupid with his Golden Dart
Venus wounded to the heart,
The Princess down in France did fall,
And in Teutonick 'gan to yall.
The Alarm given, the Servants straight
Upon the Princess 'gan to wait;
And Lady Vintner did advance
To bring the Princess out of France.
But opening of her Eyes, she cride
For Youth she out of Window spide;
And said, That now her Fate was done,
And straight into strange Passions run.
The Chamber then was cleared of all,
And Mistress owed as General:
In private then they did converse,
And Mistress prayed Her to rehearse
The' occasion of her sudden change,
And noise which reached to the Exchange.
With doleful Looks and weeping Eyes,
Half uttered Words, and quaking Thighs,
She told her that in Germany
A man well read in things of the Sky,
(As British Merlin, Doctor Faustus,
Or Lilly, Trigge or John Acostus)
Her Fate had told, that she should Wed
With English Youth, and with him Bed;
And in a Glass showed her by face
Him that her Highness Love should grace.
The same she out of Window saw
Before she fell. At this the Maw
Of Vintners Wife began to rise,
Bidding her Highness wipe her Eyes,
And be content; for she would bring
The Gallant up her Offering.
With that she went unto the Lad,
Who sat alone in Room most sad,
Thinking and chewing the Adventer,
At last Barre-Lady she did enter.
Sir Knight, quoth she, pray cheer thy looks,
And mope no more like Don on Books;
But be as high as Lord or Yeomen,
And now begin to study Women:
For lovely Looks and gentle Grace,
Has deeply wounded Princess face:
(I mean a Lady bred full high,
That has escaped from Germany)
And hither's come to lie in private,
And is resolved you to drive at:
For she was told by wise Magician,
(Well read in Arts, and great Physician)
That little man with chitty face
Her Highness should in Wedlock grace;
And You are He, as she does say,
That to the Church must lead the way.
Jewels she has, as Sanguine Ruby,
Onyx and Sapphire with a blew dye;
Diamond and Topaz, with the Opal,
Emerald and Agate, Turquez: take all:
What shall I say? Sh'ath Gems in plenty:
Pray enter on her; Room is empty.
As Peacock in a Summer-day
Does swell and brustle in his Gay
And painted Dress, and picks his Plumes,
But looking on his Feet he fumes;
So Gentle Sir arose from's Stool,
And looked as wise as Tom the Fool;
And having set his Wig in print,
Careen'd his Cloak, and given hint
To Damsel for some Water clear
For Face and Hands, and hind his Ear:
On Shoes Cole-black he cast his Eye;
But when the Dirt he did espy,
And saw the gloss of's shoon be dirted,
Good God! how is Worship fumed and snorted,
And raved against Mayors, Cities Shreeve,
The Scavenger and under-Reeve,
For keeping Streets in such a pickle,
Enough to hinder Conventicle.
But Maid with Dish-clout thither came,
And wiped his Shoes; so ended blame.
Have you behold the graver Fry
When to a Dinner they do hie?
How formally they walk at leisure,
And very tenderly keep measure?
When but for shame with Zealous Tears
They Would fly about the Custards Ears,
And out of order put the Feast,
Like Knavish Boy on skittish Beast:
So walked our Spark in steps upright,
While Lady-Mistress ushered Light:
But by the roll of's greedy Eye,
He longed for Principality.
When Feet into the Room he put,
A Leg he made to Princess Scut;
And kneeling on his bended Knee,
The Tears did fall like drops from Tree,
And said, What Is, Lady, your Behest
To Servant newly come from Desk?
Say, gentle Dame, for by St. Jervase
My Pen and Ink shall do you service:
For I can write in Prose and Verse,
And can your Creatness well rehearse;
And have fans help of Writ or Patrin,
Acquired some ends of broken Latin,
And this by study very hardy;
And now believe I am not tardy.
Your Highness I desire to tell me,
Whether good fortune has befell me;
And whether Observe he was well acquainted with Ignoramus.
Dull-man here on Knee
Shall of your Grace be seized in Fee.
The words this Wight had scarcely sed,
When She in's Bosom threw her Head,
And bid the weeping Lover rise,
And with her Clout to wipe his Eyes.
Then up he stood tall as Bevis,
Or little Dwarf dressed up for Mevis;
And did a wait Reply of Princess
While Heart in Belly kicks and winces;
Quoth She --
Sweet Ganymede, for 'twixt you there is no odds,
You Are fit to carry Trenchers to the Gods,
And sit in Juno's Lap like Child in Cradle,
Or be a Groom to Phoebus horse in Stable:
From foreign soil I come, crept out of Cloister,
And thee have found like Orient Pearl in Oyster.
Do but consent, this Gem I mean to put
Into my Heart, like Pudding made in Gut:
For Lands or Livings, or Bags full of Money,
Or Warrens stored with Cole-black Coney;
Or Coach that rattles in the street,
With set of Horses very meet,
I ask thee not, or test by Letter
Of Pounds laid into City-Checquer;
Or where thy moping doting Grandame
Will leave thee Bags to spend at randame;
Or whether father purging Amber
Has Bags pil'd up in Money-chamber:
Of these no wants I have, my DEAR,
For I have thousands by the year,
Which thou shall spend, by old King Harry,
If Princess thou wilt consent to marry.
Just like the City-Excrementer,
(The Office-Emptier to the Venture)
When long Pole in the house he puts,
And fathoms not; Oh how he struts,
Reckoning the Quantity and Gain
To be conveyed in Carts, not Wain:
So greedy Knight when Tale had heard,
He licked his Lips, and wiped Or place where he would have had one.
his Beard;
And having blessed his happy Fate
That brought him such a vast Estate,
Beyond the reach of City-wit,
Or learned Body Politic,
Like Statue made in Ginger-bread,
He neither moved his Corpse or Head;
But stood like Bull bedight in Fair,
Or Monkey set up in a Chair:
And after pause, and pause was fit,
He fumbl'd out his Schoolboy wit;
And in a style most humble wise,
(Having like Pole-cat star'd in Eyes)
He said, Most lovely witty German,
Fairer then Negro, strong as Carman,
I do consent, and from this Toe
To Ivory Belly I will go;
And enter will thy Arched Cloister,
That gapes for Liquor like an Oyster;
Where I will labor like a Brewer,
Or he that cleanses common Sewer.
The answer of the worthy Squire,
Set Lady-Princess all on fire:
To Knight without delay she run,
And hugged him as the Child does Bun;
But whether Livery or Seizin
Was taken then, (as was good reason)
I cannot tell, but sure I am
London agreed with Amsterdam.
But I had almost quite forgot
Her Pedigree as broad as Scot,
Long as Cadwallader the fierce,
(That eats more Cheese then Barley Mess)
Or Low Dutch Hogan, called Van Rutter,
With Breech of Bacon, Face of Butter:
Then she in private told young Lord
Of great descent in one bare word,
That she was pigged very high,
As from the Toe to top of Thigh,
Called Vulva, from de Vulva born,
As As it is elegantly expressed by the Author of Hero and Leander.
from the Oak drops the Acorn;
And could compute from Eve the Spinster,
When Adam first advanced against her:
But being in haste, pursued by foe
That trac^d her on the Petitoe,
Her Pedigree drawn out in Vellam
By Germane Herald, yelep'd Skellum,
Amongst other things of worth unknown,
Was into friends kind Clutches thrown,
Till News was given of her arrival,
And that she wedded Knight Corrival;
Her Goods and Plate full rich embost,
Should all be stripped for English Coast.
Silence, my Princess, quoth this Knight;
For by the Sable Shades of Night
I Am satisfied as well as He
That stuffs his Guts on Apple Tree;
And hasten will our Matrimonials
By Office Faculty's Testimonials.
B'ing over full with joy he farted;
And having kissed her Lips, he parted.
Then came grave Justice sage and wise,
That used at Sessions to advise,
Sprung from the Race of Cambrian King,
Who sweeter far then Bard could sing
Skyddur -- A Brawle surnamed the Great
Andrake, renowned for Martial feat.
Madam, quoth he, welcome on Shore
Of Albions Isle: I Will praise thee more
Then blithest Bard that ere was drunk
With any A Simile much used by him.
Heliconian Punk:
I Will make thy Name live when expired,
As Phoenix born from Nest b'ing fired.
Then lowting low on bended Knee,
As if adoring Deity,
With holy Zeal and Sack inspired,
Her Health he drank; and being fired
In lofty Tones and Verse Prophetic,
With Ditty sweet, and not Pathetick,
Her praise he chants, and did fore-bode
Great Race should come from Sable Pode.
With that he rose, and gave the Liquor
To Princess Goll, who began to smicker,
Taking carouse: it shall go hard,
She said, but that I will, Dear Bard,
Thee much advance for thy sweet Rimes,
Maugre the Poets of the times:
Thou shall have Riches, and wears Bays,
And Laureat be to sing my praise.
Like Butchers Dog in Garden Paris,
That mows down Bears as Sythes do Harvest,
And having fore contented Eyes,
Carried away the worthy Prize,
In streets he walks close to the Wall,
And snarls at's Fellows great and small:
So pufft-up Youth by Princess graced,
Looked big as Bull with Bull-Dogs traced;
And puffing swelling Sir, appeared
As big as Morgans mighty Beard:
For every one he met on's way,
Although his Friends, yet would not stay;
But like a Beggar born in Cot,
When Wealth and Riches he has got,
Where ere he comes makes a great pother,
And will not know Father or Mother:
So Blade does strut upon his high Pins
Like Artist great well skilled in Nine-pins;
Telling them now they must forbear
With foolish Tales to trouble Ear,
For he was many Stories higher
Since last with them, and now a Squire;
The best in all the English Court
Beneath him was for to consort:
Emp'rors, Kings, Princes, Lords and Earls,
Should his Companions be, not Karles.
At length he came to Daddies House,
And set him down as still as Mouse;
And Cocking Bever, looked on Sword
That did return him never a word:
Quoth he, Note, that Knights errant of Yore used to make suchlike Speeches to
their Swords or Horses: as you may see several in the Reverend Legends of Don
Quixot.
Bright Blade made of good steel,
If thou my pangs of Love did feel.
Thou Would out of Scabberd draw thy Mettle,
And make more noise then Drum called Kettle:
But now I think on it, keep thy edge,
Princess to guard through Ditch and Hedge;
And when ocasion does require,
Be thou her Guardian and her Squire.
When Mother heard her Infant tartle,
And to discourse Love is always childish.
like Child with Rattle,
To him She came, charging the Youth
To tell her all in sober sooth;
For that She feared he was Take heed of Fascination.
ore-lookt
By evil Eyes, or by some rookt
Into belief of strange adventure,
Which had occasioned this distemper.
To satisfy his Mams desire,
And expectation of his Sire,
He did begin, and bypast Story
Repeated over like learned Jack Dory:
And prayed his Parents by their leave
To keep't as close as Knife in Whereby you may note, he intended to be a
Courtier.
Sheath.
Observe that Frenzy runs in a blood.
As he that by strange fury led
With strange Chymaera's in his head,
Supposed himself to be a Member
In Commons house in times most tender,
Crept into seat, and took his place,
And boldly looked on Lenthals Mace,
At length discovered for a Stray
That had leapt into Brethrens way,
And was yeleped Vintner Master,
That took the House for Common Pasture;
Voted he was for his offense
Unto the Pound, so carried thence:
So Parents hearing Sons Relation,
Were both surpised in the like fashion;
Their thoughts being naught but Lord and Madam,
Never thinking on poor delving Adam:
But time may make them chew the Cud,
And value Vokes in house of Mud.
Quoth Mother to her aged Husband,
Rejoice with me, and put on clean Band;
For John our Son by Salmons Jowles,
Will rear up House as high as Powles;
And make us all by his Adventers
Get more them One that traded very much in that Commodity, in Purchasing of
the Kings Lands.
Vrlyn by Debenters.
Quoth aged Sire, My Dear, enough;
Pray send for Martial Friend in Buff,
And bid him bring with him his Cutter,
And Pocket Pistol: do not mutter,
But hasten to him; for by my Whiskers
More he shall get by this then Note, that his Friends professed Physic.
Glisters,
Or riding up and down the street,
Striking of fire with Horses feet.
Bid him from me leave Turkish Id est, Coffee.
Julep,
And drink Canary sweet as Tulip.
For such a Man of mighty Spirit,
Undaunted Courage beyond merit,
Our Son must have if 's heart should fail,
To undermine Princesses Tail.
At length the Gallant being come,
And Strangers all put out of room,
The old Man he assumed the Chair,
By him his Lady, (foul, not fair)
Of one side young Lord sits with Hat on,
On to other Friend with Iron Cap on.
A fit Allusion.
Have you beheld the close Committee
When Oliver trepanned the City,
How Gravely they in Council sat,
Like Puss when set to catch a Rat?
So after silence and great leisure,
The Daddy did unfold the treasure
Of Fortune, Beauty, and Descent
Of Lady-Princess to be shent,
And snatched away by Ink and Pen,
Like Chick by Kite from wary Hen.
When Friend had heard the full Relation
Of Princess come from foreign Nation,
And judging it a thing full desperate
That Lady should be made his Copes-mate;
And in respect of highborn Lineage,
And fortunes fair besides within age,
Adjure he did the Youth with fear
To forbear handling Ladies Gear:
But being resolved in Pate so addle
To win the Horse, or loose the Saddle,
He answer framed in terms most haughty,
To gentle friend that was not loughty.
Sir, If my Lady-Princess love me
As I do her, who can reprove me?
I am a man, it is true, of the Quill,
And use Blank Bonds to sit and fill;
Of late there has been many such examples.
But what of that? Crispine the Cobbler
Was loved of Princess, and did down-jobble her:
And many more I can relate
That have crept into the same state;
As these late times can testify.
Been Generals, made Governors of Islands,
Lords of great Castles steep as High-lands:
And who can tell but I may be
Vicegerent in High Germany,
And have my Squadrons dressed in Buff,
With Pistol, Sword, and Sable Muff?
When Friend saw Youth as fully bent
As Cutting Dick when is money's spent,
That stands at corner of Hide-Park,
Robbing both Poor and Rich in the dark,
He did forbear to reason further,
As much as Rabby against self-murder;
And said, My Lord, pray no more words,
Unless of Cheescakes, Cream and Curds,
To be devoured on Wedding Day,
When you are fine as Green The best (...) may borrow.
Poppay.
But by the way, to clear all doubts,
A Simile fit enough for the subject.
As Maiden washes Infants Clouts,
And prevent stain on ancient house,
Worser then Beast on Cloak called Lowse,
As it too truly f^ll out.
Lest Lady of the ancient Manor,
Called Bloomsberry, where lives no Tanner
Should dress her self in Princely shape,
And you deceive like Jack-an-Ape:
Therefore --
Would he had taken the counsel.
Take my advice, and be not slow,
But straight unto the Tower go;
See beast there Couchant called Lion,
That fawns on Princes when cast eye on;
Whereby you will know if Princely born,
Or else his stern he will whisk in scorn.
Quoth he, --
No more of that, fair friend of Steel
Such Trial, DEAR, must never feel:
For I do know she is Princess stalk,
As sure as Dames know Grays-Inne walk;
And further to confirm the truth
Of my believe, conceive me, Youth,
She Will not consent, or me admit
With her to play at Game The same that Peter's played with the Butchers wife.
Treytrip,
Till her great Riches do come over,
And Land within the Port of Dover.
Besides, in penance once she went,
And met fierce Beast that was unpent;
Who humbly kneeled as Friend, not Foe
And all ore-lickt her sweaty Toe.
So ended Gallants high Discourse,
Being resolved to run his course;
As is the Dog when set at Bear,
Or Groom attempting Ladies Ware.
Quoth he to's Friend, Sir, I cannot tarry,
For Princess I must forthwith marry:
Be close as night, firm as the ground,
The more's the pity he made not sure on it.
(For Gag receive two hundred pound)
But not till money comes to London,
Then I am made, or else I Am undone.
But till I come to her Estate,
Be our Companion, and our Mate:
For I resolve when we take Court,
And great Men to us do resort,
Thy little Legs shall strut in Hall,
And thou be called our General.
Be Captain of our Guard of Horse,
Of Troopers tall, fiercer then Moss:
Shall use our Court, Goods, Plate and Money,
And Princess too, excepting Coney.
When friend had heard this proffer great,
And how the Knight did him entreat,
And offered all even to his Jerkin,
Excepting lovely Princess Merkin,
He was full glad that by the end
He had taken such a real Friend:
And thanks to him he then did utter
He was always too modest.
In manner smooth like new-made Butter:
Like Presbyterian, Independent,
When both resolved to have an end on it,
They in their Canting Hymns did sing,
And hand in hand did murder King:
So Daddy, Mammy, Friend and Knight,
In Judgment one did all unite;
And did agree without long tarry,
That Knight should Lady-Princess marry.
But as the Council was adjourning,
The Lady-sister entered mourning;
Acquainting them that foreign Knight,
It has always been the custom of Knight-Errants to go in quest after their
Doxeys.
With cole-black hair, and eyes like spright,
Had at the house enquiry made
For Germane Princess, and like Blade,
Like some of our Modern Hectors.
Or Gallant a la mode did swear,
That heart from body he would tear
Of him that durst crack Princess Nut,
Or dare with her to go to Rut:
And wheresoe'er he found the Man
Should dare to usher Princess hand,
His Arms he would cut off to the bones,
And whisk out Laboring-Dog-Prick- Stones:
Withal he would give two hundred pound
Princess to see on English ground,
That he might carry her to Cullen
With greater Joy then Anne from Bullen.
Have you beheld a Millers Coat,
The white Beard of a Rammish Goat?
A New Thin, Cheese, or Harry Groat,
Or New-turn'd Milk, (that is very naught?)
So pale and thin looked Princess servant
When he had heard the fierce Knights errant;
Believing that his Hangers by
For bold attempt should surely die.
The House was all in Chitty Chatty,
And Heart of Knight went Pity Patty:
At length arose the little Captain
To Corpse de Guard, before mad Chieftain.
Courage, Sir Knight, quoth he, be bold,
And quit not Princess strong tayl-hold:
For by my flaming Sword of Steel,
This Brave shall Doughty Mettle feel:
Bid Lackey-Boy go call a Coach,
While I the Knave on Spit do broach.
The Coach being come, and Boot put down
And Lackey tayling Princess Gown,
Knight put her in as well as able,
And drove to house of Dean Dunsiable,
As tall as Meg Westminster Lass,
And of the make of Caiaphas;
Where he agreed to take a Room
For her, and him the good Bridegroom.
But had you seen the Mimick Gesture
Of Reading Priest in his long Vesture,
How humbly he did scrape and bow,
And lickt his Lips, (like Calf by Cow)
With Hat held under arm like Bag-pipe,
Stood he upright like man in Moonlight;
Acquainting in his Gesture featly,
That he could marry them most neatly;
And Churches more could have then Hearers
For to assist such Love-Pickeerers:
And having asked advice of Priest
(First charging him for to be hiss't)
Whether 'twas lawful, fit or just
That Scrivener should at Princess thrust;
Pray think what said the Priest hereat;
Indeed he spoke the words of Pilate,
Saying, I find no fault therein;
For Copulation is no sin:
For by such Jobs as these I Am richer
Then twelve Apostles, or St. Peter.
At last the Gallants took their farewell
Of Priest in Coat Canonical:
Having 'forehand paid dirt for Lodging,
For he and she to play hodge-dodge in,
If not prevented by Tongue-blabber,
Or Information of Dutch Swabber.
But being returned again to London,
Enquiring out what Spies had then done,
They found there fresh pursuits by Letters
To look out Princess though in fetters,
With promise fresh to give more Money
To him should tell where lay Dear Honey.
At this the Knight was sore affrighted,
And star'd like Beast anew bedighted,
Knowing not whither he should go
To shun pursuit of cruel Fo.
The Council being called again,
And sat as close as sheep in Pen,
It was resolved at pale Knights instance
For to prevent a further mischance,
That married they should be in Church,
And lie no more like Dogs at Lurch.
As Loyal-suff'ring Cavaleers
Were lugg'd about like Pigs by the ears,
By people then, and yet called Saints,
Upon pretense of great Complaints,
And brought to Haberdashers Hall,
Where with Contracts they did 'um mall;
And Moyer with his Ferret-Eyes
As red as Low Dutch Ladies Thighs,
Would with one blow of Wooden Hammer
Conclude, sequester, and not stammer:
So aged Sire with Fist fast clutched,
Gave Table blow, and wise Son mutched,
And bid him get him to the Church,
While he went home on Wooden Crutch.
In Smithfield lives a Divine
That loves a Cup of brisk old Wine;
And, though Canonical, can tope
As well as he that plucks the Rope;
And loves flesh better then fish,
And eats of many a good man's dish;
Pretending a Prerogative
In this to be Dispensative:
To him; the Knight, the Princess friend,
And elder Brother at the end,
Was come along to see the Wedding,
And be eyewitness to their Bedding;
And joyful news to Dad to carry,
And words to hear, I John take Mary.
When Priest had set his face in fashion,
He finished words of Copulation:
Which being done, they fell a grinning
As loud as Wench let loose from spinning;
And Parson too began to snear
When eye he cast toward Princess Gear.
But License man in black had not;
Haste and the fear had it forgot:
But they must do as Dick with Besse,
Go to it and work de been esse,
Till License was got feal'd before 'um,
They might go to it, though of the Quorum
Justice were by, they had satisfaction,
And being resolved for amorous action,
They drove away to place called Barnet,
And with them took their Parson Garnet:
Where being come, they fell a eating,
And hungry Priest threw Wine and meat in,
Like Miser at a City-feast,
That eats ten Meals in one at least.
At length their Guts being stufft with food,
And all being set on merry mood,
The Parson he took off his Girdle.
That binds his Coat as With does Hurdle,
And did begin to dance and caper
Like Poppet made up with brown Paper:
Princess began a Germane Dance,
And friend in Buff like Mars did prance:
The Lord did dance in order meet,
And Elder Brother on's bare feet;
An ancient Custom where young Cit
Before his Elder -- does hit.
At length the Couple went to Bed,
And Cap was put on young Lords head;
The Posset too of Sack was eaten,
And Stock in thrown too, (all besweaten)
Which Ceremonies being ended,
And that days work by all commended,
The Parson, Brother, and his Friend,
Bid him, Good advice in a fierce Assault.
Ride soft to's Journeys end;
And Germane Shins forbear to rub,
Lest fwallow'd in her Butter tub:
Wishing them sport at very heart,
They left the Lord at Princess Mart.
The famous Couple thus at rest,
And closely linkt as Birds in Nest,
Friends did return, and fell to Toping,
While Lord his Princess was a Groping:
And elder Brother of the Lord
Being with Liquor over-goar'd,
Went and lay down upon his Bed
To rest his drowsy drunken head,
While Captain and the worthy Parson
So plied their Cups, they could see scarce one.
The Man of Mars told John of Leyden
That he must down to fair young Maiden,
And Conjure down the evil Spirit
That Coney hunts as does the Ferrit.
So down he went, and in a Bed
Close on the sides and over head,
He found the Kitchin-Damsel sleeping,
But having waked her, he did peep in.
As subtle Fox, that crafty Beast,
When head gets in, brings on the rest;
So he his body did get in,
And played with A very ancient Game, and much in use.
two Bowls and Nine-pin:
And when the Game was fairly done,
Straight to the Parson he did come,
And gave to him account of all
That in his Journey did befall;
Defiring him in favor much
Not to acquaint the holy Church:
But Parson blamed unkind Companion
That he should mount his Demi-Cannon
Against Maiden-fort, and let him not
At hairy Sconce to have one shot.
When morning-light begant' appear,
And day was noised by Chaunticlear,
The friends and Parson went to Room
Where lay the Bride and the Bridegroom;
And as they entered Princess smiled,
But Knight did look as Owl par boy l'd,
And like to Bulrush hanged his head,
Being more fit for Grave then Bed.
The friends did pity Knight so little
Belike he came out of the Princess Stove much like to Cornelius his Tub.
When they saw him in sweating pickle;
Then Martial Doctor stepped to Knight;
And praid him shortly to recite
His last nights labor with the Dame,
And where the Mare held up her Mane.
At this young Lord began to weep,
And Doctor praid counsel to keep,
For that his Princess with hot force
Had spoiled quite his Watercourse. An unkind Bedfellow

No more, quoth Doctor Steel-Cap then,
There Is Cure for you as other men:
In four days time I Will cure your Tool,
And make it found as Oaken Stool;
Therefore arise, show signs of mirth,
And pay respect to Royal Birth.
Having received this good advice,
He put on Garments in a trice;
Yet Blame him not, for he came from, hot service.
walked like one late all befir'd,
Or like a Horse that is newly tired:
At length being-full of Country-air,
Back to the Town they did repair;
Where being come to Fathers Court,
Their friends in Clusters did resort,
To kiss the Hand of Princely Dame,
Merely for love of Royal Name,
Whilst Lord was clearing of the way,
And access to his Princess gay;
Telling them Proverb very old,
By others to him long-since told,
That after high attempts and pother,
He might safelyer have cunnde a Ship then her.
He had got the Steerage of her Ruther;
And now-that maugre all her friends,
Of Princely Dame he had his ends.
A Banquet then was well dressed out
To entertain the City-Rout;
Wine too was given to them in Glasses,
And drink they did, and bray like Asses,
While Lady-Princess looked as mute
As does the Privy Lovers Lute.
The Banquet ended, friends departed
You may conceive not heavy-hearted,
And mounted were in Streets I ween,
As Bergerack was in Moon-machine.
When house was cleared of all but friends,
On Princess there was further ends
Intended to be done in instance,
Married to be again with License,
For to prevent the Lawyers bawl
In Court Ecclesiastical:
The which was done, and then old Sur
With Instrument well drawn sans blur,
Reciting Princess Earth in hand,
And Personal Goods about to land,
Desired the same might be made over
To Lord his Son, and her great Lover.
To this he hoped she would not be shy,
Being to prevent Mortality:
Sir, quoth the Princess, I Will consult
My Pillow, and give you result:
But till I die I think not fit
To part with 'State or Wealth one bit:
Besides, your Son's to me but light wood,
And have not received Honor of Knighthood;
Though in regard of my high Birth
He Is called Lord, with Caps to the Earth:
And judge, pray Sir, when friends arrive,
And see their Princess Scriveners Wife,
Will It not disparage high descent,
As Garters in Rump-Parliament?
Like Child rebuked crying for Knife,
Stood Father without Soul or Life;
Or without Fodder Cow in pound,
Or Ape in chain with whip scourged round.
At length he spoke to Princess face
With homespun Language, Cobblers grace:
May't please your Highness; Daughter, I
No harm did think most verily.
Quoth she, Pray, Sir, no more of this,
We do forgive what is amiss; A Princely Pardon.

And for to satisfy your Will,
Time and his Love shall it fulfill.
At this, Old Eighty Eightwas glad,
And straight acquainted Lord-like Lad,
And of Discourse for future Good,
And how his Lady was all Wood:
But said, they ended in pure Love,
As time to him would shortly prove.
Being thus satisfide at large,
As City-Dames in husbands Barge,
With Tommy, Willy, James and Jack,
While good men cry, Pray, what do you lack?
The Father with content fetched down
In Bags full stuffed many a Crown:
Bid him to treat her like her self,
And let her not to want for Pelf,
Or Garments new the best in fashion,
Or Hide-Park-air for recreation;
And to attire his Lordships Body
With Silks and Sattins very hoddy*
And Lodgings new in Strand to take,
And Preparations great to make,
To entertain his Royal Kindred,
Which now his little Palace hindered.
The Lord with Money in his hand
Did trip it neatly to the Strand,
And house by house enquiry made
Of Lodging void for Princely Blade:
At length he took up Princess Stall
In Durham-yard at Golden Ball;
And thither she in trice was brought
As safe as Cheese in Apple-Loft:
And in good sooth she did appear
Like Sol in his bright Hemisphear,
With Gold and Silver all bedight,
And in a Case of Gold, the Knight
Well shaped by Painter of Signe-post,
Like Antic in gilt VVood embost,
Hung by her side when entered Lodging,
To show she would caught a City-Gudgeon:
Where being lodged, on the next day
The Tradesmen set in good array,
Did humbly crave his Lordship straight
For License on his Corpse to wait:
One to serve Shoes, another Linen;
Stockins a third by Loom or Spinning:
A fourth to fit his Pate with Bevers;
A fifth with Swords as sharp as Clevers:
A sixth to make his Periwigs;
A seventh to teach the newest Jigs:
An eighth his Garments for to make;
A ninth to cure the pain Tooth-ake:
A tenth Sweet-powder for to bring,
For Hair and Beard, and Ladies Thing:
A 'leventh and twelfth to furnish Meat,
As Flesh or Fish, old Ling or Neat.
Gentlemen, quoth this worthy Knight,
To me this is a pleasant sight,
And sweeter far then Hampshire-Honey,
In places sold for store of Money:
For I rejoice to see my Servants
For to attend and run on Errants;
And as Dame Fortune gave to me,
So I to you, as you shall see.
Your places take, which is no hard thing
He scorned to sell places; a custom now very a la mode.
To be admitted without Farthing.
Next day the Knight did want a Gown
To dress him in, not Russet brown,
Or scribbling Coat more rude then Freezes
That Is homely made of The Fleeces of Wool taken off from Scabbed Sheep, 31
Edw. 3. Cap 5.
Villain Fleeces,
But Indian-Dress of Pink and Green,
Fellow to that on Great Back seen;
Which being on, he looked as stout
As Gem well fastened in Hogs Snout;
And did contemn his truest friends
That did assist him in his ends,
And slight he did the Art of 's Pen,
And all converse with vulgar men;
And Captain True-Friend was laid by,
And slighted with a scornful eye:
The Owner of the Silver Sword,
Of Weapon could hear never a word:
These the Lord hated by pure Argent,
As much as broken Cit a Sergeant;
And at Bo-peep with them did play,
As great men use to do by their Duns.
At home to morrow, not this day:
Sometime employed in great Concerns,
When he was cutting Princess Kerns:
At other times dispatching Orders
To's Stewards on the German Borders,
Requiring an account of Wealth,
And of his Cousin-Princes health.
But while in Puff-Paste Lord does strut,
And studies only Back and Gut,
Dame Fortune wheeled her tail about,
And turned his Lordship to a Lowt:
For Shooemaker by a Petition
In Court did humbly pray admission
To serve them with both Boots and Shoon,
As well to ride as for to run:
But Princess seeing the Address
Of bold Sir Hugh, she 'gan to guess
His Errand thither, telling Lord
He Calve-skins cut upon her word;
And that she could not fancy him
Amongst all the Race of Cobling Men.
The answer of the Princely Spouse,
Hugh and his Bones did forthwith rouse;
For he did kindle like a Taper,
And looked as pale as any Paper;
And having vindication made
Of Paring-Knife and Awle, (sharp Blade)
Goodness of Leather, Wax and Thread,
And able Workman called Ned,
He packt up Tools, and went his way
With stiffned Whiskers, Beard of Whay,
Contriving in his Horny Pate
Malice against the Lords Bed-mate.
The next day Lord went to Hide-Park,
With him his Princess, (light not dark)
For she did shine as bright as Sun,
But Lord did look as sad as The common Hangman.
Dun,
When but one Hector does appear
To help expense of following year,
Though they were treated in the Park
By Ladies great* and many a Spark;
Giving right hand to Royal Madam,
And great respect which much did glad' um.
But coming home unto their Court,
Sir Hugh to Lord did straight resort;
Told him he could relate sad Story
Would make him weep in all his Glory,
And curse the time that ever he
His Hawke at Hobby did let flee:
Enough to put him into Lax,
Not to be staid by Cobblers Wax.
The Knight did wonder what he meant,
And praid him to declare intent
Of his address: for he did make
His Teeth to chatter, Knees to shake,
Why then, quoth he, your Lady gay
Is Kentish breed, and Crowders Spray;
And married is to a Shoemaker
That is no Cobbler or Translator:
And has to boot (take it not in Dudgeon)
Another Husband called a Surgeon;
And you in order make the third,
For Princess is not worth a --
This made the Lord to fume and fret*
And water drop like Sable Jet:
For he did whine and howl like Dog
When at his Tail is Wooden Clog;
And sad mishap did often recount
Of this to-be-imagin'd Count.
Have you beheld the Jack-an-Apes
With Bears and Dogs, his constant Mates,
When Horse was set upon by Dogs,
Being resolved to pluck off ^ugs*
Of little Gentleman in Coat,
How gallantly with them he fought?
Sometimes the Horse was down, and he
Was brought upon his little Knee;
Then up again he would get to Grupper,
And with his Jaws begin to mutter;
Thence to the head, and so to side,
And could not at one place abide:
At length being tired as well as able,
Crept to his Noose, and shut the Saddle.
So good Mas John 'twixt hope and fear,
Was entertained with the like Cheer*
And I dare say by his fierce screeches,
He A Story so well known, it need not be told again.
Atkiniz'd his Wedding-Breeches.
The Lackey-Boy was sent away
To Father and to Mother; Nay,
His Sister too, the good Match-maker,
Of Story true must be Partaker*
Who being come, the Lord did tell
His sad mischance, which made 'em yell,
And to exclaim against Germane Lady
That had abused poor little Baby.
At last they went into Bedchamber,
Where Princess lay like Dog in Manger,
Till aged Sire did her importune
The truth to tell, if such a fortune,
Or where she was a Germane Princess,
Or who had taken her by the Inches
Before Son did enter Lower Quarters,
Or who wore Senior Cobblers Garters
When he did marry her in Church,
And who she lamed and brought to Crutch;
And who it was besides did scrub her,
And what the Surgeon was did probe her.
This fierce assault did make the Lady
To stand as mute at Joynted Baby,
And was surpised to hear the Gabble
Of this connext and joined Rabble,
By which the women thought her guilty,
With hand and knee they hilty-tilty
Most shamefully did her assault,
Which made her Royal Back to halt,
Whilst antedated Lord stood by,
And like Boy whipped did snob and cry:
At last Old Man as fierce as Hector,
Having more of Henbane then of Nectar,
Laid hands upon the Ladies Garments,
Jewels and Rings, and her Attirements,
And Gouty Shank was held aloff,
And new Silk-Stockins plucked off:
In fine, they stripped her to her Smock,
So fine, you might have seen her Nock.
Then much despised by bawling Litter,
Which made before their Chops to twitter.
When all Indignities were over,
In German Vest they did her cover,
With Justacore and a Night-Rayle,
And Pettycoat all black to the ^ayle,
The same reserved by Ships master,
When she escaped from foreign Cloister,
Thence brought before Godfrey not of Bullion,
For this did use her like a Scullion;
And so by Beadle fell and Hostile,
He sent her to the Gate House Bastille:
Where being come, the Gates flew open
For to receive Dutch Fro Van Slopen,
As great Companion come to dwell
In Prison close much like to Hell.
The noise of Princess close restraint,
Sent persons great to hear her Plaint:
But when they heard her to discourse,
They netled were like Pampered Horse;
And did applaud her high-bred Parts,
Not to be equaliz'd at Marts,
Or Ladies some with face like Maple,
That spend their time in tittle-tattle,
With great respect they did her treat,
And sent in Money, Wine and Meat,
And Bribes to Keeper to be civil,
As he that Candle holds to Devil:
Where I will leave her to her Fate,
Still great, though in confined estate:
And for her high-conceited Lord,
When Reputation he had scor'd
On Tick and borrow, then he went
To Chamber where he Body pent,
Believing German Knight would call
His Lordship to account for all
His base abusing Princely Dame,
And using her with so much shame:
And Parents full with shame and ire,
Did mope and dote like Cats by fire.
But stay, my Muse, now hand is in,
Ore Boots and Shoes; thou wilt never lin,
Though thou be grown as dull and weary
As Sculler at the Laboring Ferry:
So cease at present, and let end,
For this time working feet befriend,
Till second part in Canto quaint,
Shall write of Princess close restraint;
How long in prison she did stay,
And who for Liberty made way;
How she was brought before Learned Bench,
And treated like her self, (not Wench)
And how she in most learned guise
Defense did make, (to those are wise)
Pleading her Cause like fluent Cato,
Or Advocate with a bald Pate-o;
And was with great applause acquitted,
And Father, Son, and all outwitted.
This shall be sung in the next Part,
As second course to cheer your heart.
The Princess to her Lord: a Farewell.
THere was a time when Skinker Perkin
Leapt into Prince from a Freeze Jerkin:
Time also was, as't has been sed,
When Friar Bacon's brazen Head
Spoke monstrous things; but We do tell
Of stranger things that have befell,
How pretty Monkey in disguise
Held A Name she much used to call her Lord by.
Pescod in her Mouth as prize.
Oh fatal time! how could thou be
So cruel in thy Managery?
More fierce then erst thou wast to Fellow,
Who though in rage with Drink more mellow,
Did all his forepast Fancies deem
Of Drunken brain the passing steem.
Oh my sweet Pescod, prithee think
Like him, that all thy hopes was drink.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 2. lin. 8. read Check. l. 14. r. properer. p. 3. l. 17. r. Trance. l. 22.
r. Trance. p. 4. l. 2. r. awed. p. 11. l. 10. r. shipped. p. 23. l. 9. r. dust.


