THE SPEECHES AND PRAYERS Of JOHN BARKSTEAD, JOHN OKEY, and MILES CORBET.


Together with severa passages at the time of their Execution at TYIBURN, the
nineteenth of April, 1662.

With some due and sober ANIMADVERSIONS On the said SPEECHES.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Brook at the Angel in Cornhill, and Edward
Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little- Britain, 1662.

To the Reader.
THis is to assure thee, that first there is not a syllable to the best of the
writers skill that took these Speeches at the place of Execution, either added
or deminished in the transcript, either in favor or injury to the Dead;
secondly, that as they are faithfully communicated, so are they methodically
digested for the better understanding and greater ease of the Reader, with the
intervenient discourses and passages; and thirdly, that they do not carry in
them any dangerous or treasonable reflects upon the Govirnment, that might
prejudice them publsihing, and give cause to their friends if they had not been
brought to light, to suppose there were some notable things in them which the
Times would not endure. It is wished that the disaffected people would comport
themselves so in their lives as these men seem to instruct them here at their
their deaths. Therefore for the use and benefit sake which may redound to the
Nation hereby, it is thought good to produce them to light and conserve the
only memories of these men, famous for their Time and Places. For further
satisfaction there are also added some sober Notes and Animadversions on the
said Speeches, which are together, here offered to thy perusal. Farewell.

SPEECHES AND PRAYERS OF John Barkstead, John Okey, and Miles Corbet.
Upon April 19. 1662. being the day appointed for the Execution of John
Barkstead, John Okey, and Miles Corbet, who were drawn on three several Hurdles
from the Tower to Tyburn, Barkstead was first brought to the the place of
Execution, then Okey, and then Miles Corbet, who mounted a Cart which was
prepared for them to stand in whilst they spoke to the people.

The first that ascended the Cart was Barkstead, as soon as he was in he lifted
up his eyes to Heaven, and said, Blessed be God (the Executioner having put the
Rope about his neck, and fastened it to the Gallows) he then sat down upon the
side of the Cart: After a little space, the Sheriff said, Colonel Barkstead, I
am commanded not to suffer you to speak any thing in justification of that
horrid Act for which you come here to suffer.

Barkstead. I cannot speak much, by reason of the weakness of my body; I desire
to get as much refreshment as I can before I speak.

Some while after my Lord of Newport looking upon the Prisoner, and smiling at
him, said, F^r well Colonel Barkstead, farewell.

B. You are a Gentleman I am sure, I bless God I can say Death is not terrible
to me, and that is only through Jesus Christ.

Executioner. You may go on with your prayers.

B I desire to see my Brethren.

Sher. Sir, are you sorry for the Fact for which you are brought here to suffer?

B. J shall be sorry for every thing that is a sin, when the Lord sets home
that to me, J shall be sorry before God and men; this must be from God alone.
Then he drank a little Cordial, and said, J bless God J have a better Comforter
than this.

Then a gentleman said, Sir, you had me once a prisoner.

B. Then I hope I used you civilly, if I have not, I beg forgiveness, as freely
as I forgive all men: I bless God I have an assurance through Jesus Christ to
be happy. One standing by said, I Sir, that may be within half an hour.

Barkstead being asked by a person of quality, whether he were not troubled,
answered,

B. Sir, I bless God I have no more trouble at this minute upon my spirit, then
I had upon my weddingday.

The other two Prisoners being taken out of the Sledges, and brought into the
Cart, Okey presently embraced Barkstead, and kissed him, and being about to
speak, one of the Sheriffs said to him, Sir, I must not permit you to speak
any thing in justification of that horrid Act for which you are brought here to
suffer.

Okey. Sir, I must not lie for God, much less for you: J hope you will give me
leave to speak what lies upon my Conscience, if asked whether guilty or not
guilty.

Sher. Are you sorry?

Okey. J hope J may speak what lies upon my Conscience.

Soon after Colonel Okey standing up in the Cart, Showing a great deal of
modesty and resolution in his department.
and looking upon the people, spoke as follows.

Okey. Mr. Sheriffs and Gentlemen, the Providence of God has brought me hither
to suffer; J shall not trouble you with that which J look upon me as
superfluous, which is to tell you my Family, which of all the Families in
Israel is one of the least, and I the least of that Family: It is not unknown
to many here, who hear me this day, how I was called forth to serve God and my
Country, upon the service of the King and Parliament: I served them faithfully
to the best of my knowledge: I bless God, when I was called to the work, I was
persuaded it was for the glory of God, and good of his people; and had I had as
many lives as hairs on my head, I would have adventured them in that Cause. I
have nothing upon me as to that; I am satisfied as to the Cause: As the Parents
of him that was born blind, being asked how he came to his sight, said, He is
of age, let him speak for himself; so say I.

That which I have been adjudged for, is the death of the late King; I think
most of you know I was none of the Council that contrived it; neither did I
know any thing till I saw my Name inserted in a Paper: I sat but once or
twice; but for malice or envy I never had any, but prayed for him to the last
hour: What aims others had, time did discover; I have nothing upon my Spirit
for that: I have many hundred times, not only since I went out of England
(which is about two years) but many times bebefore begged, that if I had any
mali^e or hatred in my heart, that God would make me sensible of it, and I
would confess it to God, and before you all. What other men aimed at, I can say
nothing to that; there were some, as it did appear, had self ends; I never got
any thing by i, I was advanced to the Dignity of a Colonel before that: I thank
the Lord I have no trouble upon me for that.

A great disturbance being amongst the People he ceased speaking for a while,
then the Sherriffs said to him, Sir you may go on.

Okey.
As I told you before, so I say again, there is no guilt upon my spirit, which
makes me the more comfortable at this hour: I take this as the just and
righteous hand of God for my unworthy walking, for my not being more zealous
for God and his People, and for many other Iniquities, for which I desire to
adjudge my self, and acquit the Lord. I thank God I have peace within, through
the riches of his Grace, that has dyed for me. (applying himself to the
Sheriffs) you see we have had many troubles, and much blood has been shed, and
there was a vacancy as to a Single Person a great while, how it then was time
showed. The Nation earnestly desired him who now Reigns, which I wish with my
Soul may reign gloriously for ever: And now the Nation has that mercy so
greatly desired, I wish they may make a right improvement of it, and walk in
some measure answerable to so great a Mercy.

I would beg this as the last boon of a dying man, that as they have received a
mercy so exceeding great, they would walk worthy of it, by a fruitful
improvement, and for you Gentlemen (turning to the Life Guard) and others, I
beg that you would Pray more and Swear less: were you beyond Sea as I lately
have been, and saw and heard what report England has, notwithstanding they
have received the mercy they so much longed for, it would make your hair stand
on end, and your Hearts to tremble to think what would be the issue; if it be
true that Profaneness is grown to such a height, (as I hear it is) this Nation
cannot stand three years to an end; I desire it may flourish an hundred fold
more then ever it did, As England has had more Glory and Honor than any other
Nation, so I desire that Peace and Plenty may abound, that every man may study
in his place to fear God, and Honor the King, and to walk in some measure
answerable to those mercies they now enjoy, that having the mercy they so much
desired, every man may walk worthy of the Gospel, that Righteousness and Peace
may flourish in the midst of them.

I would not offend you, therefore I shall forbear to say what otherwise I
would.

For the Indictment I would have abhorred it, if there had not been a face of
Authority, I have Peace as to that, and to all other my sins through the rich
Grace of God.

The cause we took up the sword for, was for Righteousness, Justice and Equity.
I am afraid the blood that has been shed, has not those returns for which the
War was begun. I leave this to all my Brethren, that they would wait in their
places, and see the Salvation of God, rather then deliver themselves by any
indirect means. If his Majesty had given me my life, or had I come in with the
rest of the Members I would have lived quietly, and rather suffered, then done
any thing against the known Law, I would rather have suffered then taken
indirect ways, If it may stand for Gods Glory He will deliver his People: The
way to be delivered is to wait and see the Salvation of God: I declare this, I
am for Magistracy and Ministry, notwithstanding it has been reported
otherwise, I shall conclude all with this, that it is my hearty desire, that
Justice and Judgment may run through our Streets as a mighty stream, and that
God would scatter them that delight in war.

Miles Corbet.
I hope I shall not speak any thing that may give any just offense, (one
standing by said, speak a loud; the Prisoner replied, would God I could) We are
now dying men, and I declare in the presence of the great God to whom we are
now going, that I desire to speak without feate as touching that, that we are
come to suffer for, both in levying the War, and that particularly for which
we suffer.

Had it not been done by Authority it had been abominable. The Authority it was
done by was the Parliament: I desire not to dispute that Authority seeing it may
give offense, yet the Nation was governed by it; other Nations owned it, the
word is upon my heart, men may judge, and they may make it no Law, God is our
judge, and he will judge this Cause, and our case. God is a Lawmakers, he is
our King and he will save us, he will judge the Cause of his people, and I hope
the minds of sober men will wait for that day. (Then applying himself to the
Sheriffs) Mr. Sheriffs concerning that which was laid upon us that we are
against Magistracy and Ministry, I desire to declare it to be our judgments
that we are for both, I desire his Majesty that now is as he rules from God,
may rule for God, be a countenancer of those that do well, and a
discountenancer of those that do ill, and countenance the true Religion, and
the professors of it; there have Sects and Heresies risen in our days, but God
has appeared against them; much light has broken forth in this Nation, and
does break forth, Religi-is more professed here, then in any other Nation besides.

My desire and prayer is, that the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
may have a free course in this Nation, and may be glorified by the lives of men.

For the particular way, that I have walked in, and which I declare in my
judgment, and believe in my Conscience to be the nearest to the word of God,
is the Congregational way.

We are taking our leaves of you, we shall see your faces no more, I beg upon
the knees of my soul, that as you profess Religion you would walk worthy of the
same profession.

When I hear of that profaneness that does abound, I tremble to think what
will become of England.

The Lord stop the progress of Popery, and Superstition, that we may love the
Gospel, and the true professors thereof more and more, that God may love us,
and we one another more.

For my own part if there were any here whom I knew I had wronged I would ask
them pardon, if I knew them.

I have been in all the Parliaments in the late Kings Reign, being called
thither, I thought it my Duty to Act, for God and my Country according to my
Conscience.

When I was first called to serve in Parliament, I had an Estate, I spent it
in the service of the Parliament.

For this for which we are to Dye, I was no contriver of it; when the business
was motioned, I spoke against it, but being past in Parliament I thought it my
Duty to obey.

I never did sit in that which was called the High Court of Justice but once, I
do not come hither to Justify that, neither would I speak that which may
offend others.

I never bought any Kings or Bishops Lands, I thought I had enough, at least I
was content with it, that I might serve God and my Country was that I aimed at,

It is the honor of Protestants to be obedient to known Laws, I have little to
say more, only as I came a long I observed the tongues of some to be against
me, I pray God forgive them.

Others expressed their Love to my Soul, I hope God will hear their Prayers. In
the peace of our Nation we are to rejoice, private interests should give way to
public.

I desire from my very soul to forgive every man. (I desire if I have wronged
any man that they will forgive me) particularly the Court that past Sentence
upon me, I forgive them, both Judge and Jury, I think they did acording to
their places. I commend you all to God. Farewell.

Corbet having ended his speech Coll. Okey spoke further.

Okey.
Gentlemen as God has given us of this Nation such Ministers as neither are
nor have been in any other Nation (that I know or have read of) I cannot but
beg of God that ye may all walk worthy of them.

I was sixteen years in the Army I do not know whose Ox or whose Ass I took
away (whom I have wronged) if I have wronged any I heartily beg theer
forgiveness, not knowing whom I have wronged, if any one has wronged me I do
the same, particularly my Chaplain who pursued my life to the Death, I forgive
both Judge and Jury, and all others, and those of Holland who did that which
they engaged not to do, I pray that our Blood may not be laid to any ones
charge.

Barkstead.
Mr. Sheriff, I would not willingly speak any thing that should give offense,
my weakness being such that I cannot speak much, but were I able, I should but
speak over again what my Brethren have spoken before. As to the Cause (I hope I
may speak it without offense) God has owned it, I confess I engaged very far
in it, being chosen by them to Matters of great Trust, I bless God I was
Faithful to them whom I Served.

Before I came hither I begged of God that he would pardon all my Sins, which
through Mercy and Grace I trust he has done, otherwise I could not have stood
here with so much Comfort as I do: where God speaks Peace, none can speak War
or trouble.

I conceive it is not proper to give an account of my faith, otherwise I would;
only in the general I declared, the way I have walked in, and which I own, is
the Congregational way, in which I have found much Comfort. I would be glad
that they which walk in that way, and all others would walk more answerable to
that great Gospel mercy, I do not know any place in the World where it is so
perfect as in England, would to God we had hearts to walk worthy of that Mercy.

As to the Government as it now is, I have, and will so long as I have breath
pray for it, and that the Lord would give the King a wise and understanding
heart to Reign for God, and that he may Reign in glory hereafter.

As to the people my desire is that God would make them all of one mind, that
is the work of the Lord, and in his time he will do it: I speak the rather of
this because there has formerly been something done by me for which I am sorry.
I do desire that all that fear the Lord, would love God, and one another more
The work of the people of God in this day is to sit still, for the Lord will do
his own work in his own time; we have had experience of it, I must own it.

I am sorry my strength will not suffer me to speak more as to this, my
weakness has been long upon me as many know. (Then looking upward he said)
Thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory O Lord. Thou have been giving
the Kingdoms of the Earth to Jesus Christ, he shall Reign: His Majesty to
Reign under him is no dishonor, it is my desire that they all would live
peaceably under him.

As for that for which we come to suffer, I can say, I was no Contriver of it,
within nor without; at that time I was many miles from the place, and did not
know of it until I saw my Name in a Paper, I being put in by the Authority that
then was, which then was looked upon as a good Authority: What I did, I did
without any malice. I did pray for him from my very soul.

OKEY.
It is no^ only our Judgments now, but was our Practice beyond the Sea's, to
shun even our own Countrymen; because we would not have any thing to do with
any affairs in England, I may say as S. Paul in another case; They neither
found us in the Temple disputing, neither raising up the People, neither in the
Synagogues, nor in the City; We meddled not with the Government.

CORBET.
Having done speaking to Men, we desire to speak to our God, he must help us,
and give us his own Spirit; it is no easy matter to pray, we may easily say
Prayers, but to pray by the Spirit is a hard work, we must have strength from
God to do it.

CORBET'S Prayer.
OH Lord our God, our dear and heavenly Father, thou that art the great and
mighty God, the God of glory; all the Nations of the Earth are unto thee as the
drop of the Bucket, and as the small dust of the Balance; Oh Lord what are we,
sinful dust and ashes? Look upon us in our Lord Jesus the great Mediator, we
desire to come to thee in the name of that blessed Redeemer, we pray thee
accept of us through him; Oh that we may come to the Throne of Grace, and
obtain mercy with thee, and find grace and help in this time of need. Truly
Lord, it is a day of misery to thy poor worms; we are despised of men, we are
condemned of men, as being not worthy to live upon the Earth; thou may also
justly condemn us, and then woe would be to us: But, Oh Lord! forgiveness
belongs to thee, mercy belongs to thee, we acknowledge our iniquities before
thee; against Thee, Thee only have we sinned; our iniquities are gone over our
head^, they are a burden too heavy for us to bear. We desire to bewail our
Gospel sins, our barrenness under the means of grace, our unthankfulness for
those glorious appearances of thy self in these Nations: Oh, we have held thy
truth in unr^ghteousness, we desire to be^ail our sins against right, and love,
and mercy: though we have professed the Gospel of Christ, where ^ath been that
love to it which ought to have been? ^here has been that fruitfulness that
should have ^^en amongst us? We desire to be humbled for our ^amily-sins, our
personal sins, the sins of our callings, ^^at thou God calledst us unto.

Oh our God! thou art just and righteous in all thy ^hastisements; we desire to
humble our selves, and ^^cover our faces with shame here in thy presence: ^o
unto us because we have sinned against thee: Are ^ere not mercies with thee
that thou may be feared? ^^h the sins of every one of us* and particularly,
the multitude of the sins of thy poor worm that sp^^^s to thee! Yet Lord, was
not Jesus Christ made si^^? Where si^^, there is shame, death and a curse. H^^^
not he born our sins, and our sh^m^, and carried our sorrow? Thy poor Worms are
a shame in the eyes of men; Jesus Christ he was despised and rejected of men;
he suffered the bitterness of death, he poured out his soul to death; it
pleased thee to put him t^ death: He has born our sins, (oh Lord) the chaste
sement of our peace was upon him: We desire thou would lay our sins upon him
the only true Scapegoat: We desire through his blood we may be pardoned; for
by one offering he is able to save all that come to him. We desire to lay hold
of his Merit, and of that full satisfaction he has made to thy Justice for
sinners: He that knew no sin, was made sin, he dyed that we might live. Oh
accept of his satisfaction for us; and as he is risen and ascended up to thy
right hand, and even lives to make intercession for us, that was the Blood o^
God, God-Man; he died, that we might live; he bore thy wrath, that we might be
delivered from wrath. Oh God, thou God of Mercy, show mercy to the Souls of thy
poor creatures, for thy Mercies sake, and to the Souls of all this great
Assembly: Christ he died but once, yet he ever lives to make intercession for
sinners. O there, there is comfort for poor sinners, that the great Mediator
him thou hear always, O now, now, now; and accept of us; we make our
request known to thee; it is pardoning mercy we seek; we believe, Lord help our
unbelief. O come and sprinkle our souls with his precious blood, that we may
stand before thee in his Righteousness: Thou have made him our righteousness, O
cover us with the Robe of his Righteousness, that we be not found in our own
Righteousness, that we may be presented before thee as having neither spot nor
wrinkle. Thou have made him our King, come and tread his Enemies under his
F^e^; he has condemned sin, he took the likeness of sinful flesh, and in that
likeness condemned sin in the flesh: O that through him we might stand
righteous in thy sight. Thou have set before us the hopes of eternal life,
which thou have promised to give to all those that love thee: Thou have said,
we shall reign with thee; we fly to thee in this day of our distress: Oh that
we might have strong consolation. Seeing thou have confirmed thy promise with
thy oath, O make good that to all of us; say to us, We are thine, though we are
despised Worms: Lord, do thou speak peace to us, and we shall have peace. Thou
alone give true peace; this is only given by our dear Lord Jesus himself. O
come and comfort our hearts with thy love; Lord, let thy Banner over us be
Love; thou do not despise the afflictions of the afflicted. We bless thy Name
for that we are able to bear witness of thy faithfulness, mercy and goodness,
before this great Congregation, and this great City. Thou have been good to us,
do not leave us; Thy poor Worms are now to go through a great storm, O that we
may find thy strength enabling us in this great Work. O that we may find Death
a passage to Life: When our Souls are coming to thee, give thy Angels charge
over us; Let fresh-springs come from Jesus Christ at this time, if it seem good
to thee. Let us hear those joyful tidings, saying, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you: Though some despise us, we desire
to bless thy Name that we are not despised of thee; Lord pardon their sins.
There is a Crown of Life laid up for those that fear thee. We desire to love
thee for thy Chastisements. Let our cry pierce the Heavens. We come in hopes of
the appearance of Jesus Christ: He that shall come, will come, and will not
tarry; Lord Jesus come quickly. Thy Servant Stephen saw the Heavens opened, and
Jesus Christ sitting at thy right hand; though we cannot see thee with our
bodily eyes, oh that we could see thee by the eye of faith; we pray thee let
not that fail. O that thou would strengthen us withs all Might in this hour,
without thy strength our heartr and our flesh will fail us. Thou art the God of
ous strength, come and save us; let thine everlasting armn be under us. We pray
thee Lord, let us see thee ir mercy, do not correct us in wrath: We are unde.
the wrath of men, good Lord do thou forgive them Lay no more upon thy poor
Worms then thou will enable them to bear: Our Forerunner is gone before us, O
that we may follow him; accept of us in him.

The Lord bless this Nation; continue thy gospel; thy gospel is the glory of
this Nation, let thy people glorify that gospel; and do thou prevent those
heavy Judgments that hang over it. Pardon the great sin of the profanation of
thy day, which is so general throughout the Nation. Continue thy gospel in
power and purity: The Lord forgive the sins of those that bear thy Name. Thy
wrath is ki^^e^ (...) us, but do not thou destroy us, Heal our backslidings,
give a spirit of love to them, that they may love one another: Take away the
enmity that is between Ephraim and Judah: Let thy people be of one mind and of
one heart. Prevent the growth of Popery and Superstition. Show mercy to the
Kings Majesty, whom thou have set over us; O that he may rule for thee, as he
rules from thee, that his Throne may be established in Judgment. The Lord
bless all thy faithful Ministers, and continue them to thy people, increase
their gifts and graces.

And now O Lord we commit our selves to thee; we are coming, Lord meet us; take
us into thy arms. What ever else thou know needful* and necessary for us,
thy Church, and all the Israel of God, we beg in the Name, and for the sake of
Jesus Christ.

OKEY'S Prayer.
MOst Holy, Glorious, and Eternal Lord God, who art the blessed Maker of all
things, who art from everlasting to everlasting, blessed for evermore; thou art
worthy to be praised from the rising of the Sun, to the going down thereof;
thou art clothed with Honor and Majesty as with a Garment; thou art the
Fountain of all good, the Wellspring of Life and Happiness: We bless thy Name
that thou have been pleased to give us this opportunity once more to pour out
our souls before thee, before we go hence and be no more seen. For Christ's
sake (thou that have put a price into our hands) give us hearts to improve it;
enable us to pour out our souls before thee at this time: Draw nigh to in, that
we may draw nigh to thee. O Lord! we pray thee for Christ's sake give us the
Spirit of Wisdom, Understanding and Knowledge, whereby we may be enabled to
come to thee; in the Name of Jesus Christ we beg a supply of all our wants,
humbly beseeching thee for his sake to show mercy to us: Do not remember
against us what we have done against thee: We pray thee for Jesus Christ his
sake blot out our iniquities, let none of our nakedness appear; cover us with
the Robes of his Righteousness; speak peace to our souls. O seal to us the
assurance of the pardon of all our sins; O seal to us the assurance that thou
love us, and then it shall go well with us. Pour upon us t^y holy Spirit, that
he may teach us how to pray acceptably. Let us see our Names written in the
Lambs book of Life: O wash us in his Blood, which is able to take take away
all our Sins of what nature or kind soever. O Lord we beseech thee receive us
into thy everlasting Arms of Mercy. O that thou would let us see by the eye
of Faith Heaven opened, and the Lord upon his Throne, and Jesus Christ at thy
right hand, and his holy Angels ready to receive our Souls. We beseech thee be
with us: it is but a little time that we are to be here, O leave us not; show
us mercy only in and upon the account of Jesus Christ. With us bless thine all
the World over, think upon these Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, O
that they may live in thy sight, that England may be a happy, peaceable and
quiet Nation; give the Nation of England a heart to walk answerable to the
Gospel which they have so long enjoyed, that it may be a Nation fruitful in
all good works, and more zealous than ever it has been yet; remove the
judgments felt, prevent the judgments feared. To this end we beseech thee
bless Him whom thou have set over us, we beg that he may live in thy sight,
and Reign here for thee, and Reign hereafter with thee: O Lord make Him a
Friend to thy Friends, let Him see that His Interest lies there. Bless the
Great Council of the Land, the Lord guide them and direct them, that they may
do nothing against thy Truth. The Lord bless the faithful Ministers of the
Word, O that thou would double thy Spirit upon them, and let not thy Judgment
come upon this Nation, that the Godly faithful Ministers should be driven or
removed out of it; O do not bring a famine of thy Word whatever Judgment thou
bring upon this Nation. We humbly beg that Popery may not return hither
again. We beg for thy Names sake that thou would look in mercy upon this
great City, and as thou have made them famous for Religion, and owning the
Professors thereof, the Lord grant that they may not decline, but increase more
and more therein, the Lord give them the Blessings of the Right Hand and of the
Left, that they may dwell together in Love, Unity and Peace. The Lord look upon
any that is near and dear to us, our dear Relations, we leave them with thee,
Lord do thou take care of them, and provide for them, according to that good
Promise which thou have made. Now we beseech thee Lord accept of us and our
Services, pardon the sins of our holy things, our wandering and starting aside
from thee: accept, of us, and do us good, and receive us into the arms of thy
mercy. This and whatever else thou see in thy Wisdom to be good for us, we
beg in the name, and for the sake of Jesus Christ, to whom be honor and glory
and praise both now and for evermore. Amen.

After he had done he gave the Sheriffs thanks for their Civilities to them.

BARKSTEADS Prayer.
O Eternal and ever blessed Lord God, thou who sit upon the highest
Heavens, and have the Heavens for thy Throne, and Earth for thy Footstool, we
are here by thy Providence brought to this place, in which we bless thee, and
for which we bless thy name: we bless thy name that thou have kept us
hitherto, that thou have preserved us thus long, that thou have given us peace
and pardon: (forgive to us the iniquities of our holy things) that thou have
enabled us to own thee. Remember the Nation where we live, the Lord bless the
Kings Majesty, and make him to Rule for thee, to the Comfort of all that fear
thy Name. Look in mercy upon all that fear thy name, make them of one mind and
of one heart; Let them seek peace and pursue it. Advance the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ that is coming, and will come. Carry forth the Spirits of thy People to
honor thee more, and love one another more. Remember the Relations of thy poor
Creatures, Do good to them that we leave, we leave them in the assurance of
the Faithfulness of the promise, Thou ^ast said, Leave your Fatherless
Children to me, and I will keep them alive, and provide for them, and let your
Widows trust in me.

We desire that thou, would pardon all that have done us wrong, we freely
and fully forgive them, and beg that thou would do so too, whether in
ENGLAND, or elsewhere. Show kindness to those who have showed kindness to us.
Look in Mercy upon the Magistrates here present, pardon the Sins of him who is
appointed our Executioner, he that is to wash his Hands in our Blood, lay not
our Blood to his charge, nor to any ones else. We leave our Selves with thee,
we bless thee for thy Mercies to us at this Hour, that Death is not terrible to
us, that thy poor Creatures can in truth say, There is no trouble of Soul upon
us. We beg further supplies from thee, that we may be enabled those few
minutes we have to live, that thou would still be with us, and this we beg
for Jesus Christ's sake, Amen

After their Speeches and Prayers ended, the Executioner cleared the Cart of
the rest of the people who were gotten in, and pulled down their several Caps
over their Eyes, and upon the lifting up their hands the Cart was drawn away,
and, which was wondered at, without any shout at all.

They all hung near about a quarter of an hour; the first that was Cut down was
Colonel Barkstead, who was quartered according to the Sentence, the other two
hanging all the while.

The next Cut down was Col. Okey, Miles Corbett hanging still, who after
Colonel Okey was Quartered had the like Execution done upon him, according to
the Sentence.

Their several Quarters were brought back to Newgate about 5, a Clock in the
afternoon to be Boiled.

THus ended they, with an apparent Zeal for the Prosperity of their Nation
which themselves so mainly opposed, out of cajole to the People, whose
detestation and hatred they were for that very Cause: If they build again the
things they destroyed, what are they? And now when there was no need of their
devotion, while all along they have lifted up and stretched out their Arms to
violence, they lift up their voices in prayer, that they may be heard of men.
For where is one word of repentance for all the mischief and bloodshed they have
caused? It is insensible to believe these fine Ejaculations for Piety, while
there appears no sense of any public sin. Indeed Col. Okey said in Scripture
language Whose Ass or Ox have I taken? But he reckoned without his Host; whom
has not he by assisting the Rebellion plundered and undone? So far are they
from making amends, or acknowledging their public injustice in spoils and
rapines of his Majesty's good Subjects, that they expostulate even concerning
private injuries. -- Such as devour Widows Houses and make long Prayers, But
let the Vae pass. One thing also is very observable; they agree almost to a
word in speeches and prayer as to the sense, and dye of the Congregational
persuasion, yet before this time at Constant and irreconcilable feud each of
the 3. to other: like Pilate and Herod they will join and unite in this Crime
against the King, though severed all along before and persevere unanimous in
that. In sum, Posterity will never believe men could die at this rate, who have
seen and occasioned so much misery to this Nation by that only fatal Treason
against the Kings Life; if any Machiavel of them can ascribe any other Cause
for our late Confusions, somewhat might be said in the behalf of this
obstinacy: but when they themselves confess the ill consequences thereof (and
the effect best shows the Cause) and yet slubber over and hide their iniquity,
what shall any rational man think of the estate of these men; but leaving that
to the supreme Judgment, let us Consider what they have said, a little nearer,
and we shall find the Imposture.

It is an unwelcome undertaking to any man, to dispute with Dead men's words,
because it approaches the vanity of fighting with shadows, and from whence no
result or agreement can be expected, or satisfaction given or received; and
besides, it may be an imputation of in humanity: But because in these
foregoing Papers, there is nothing new, and nothing more to be looked from of
any of those people, (for it is evident they are agreed in their Opinions, at
their Execution, as they were at the Sentence of his Majesty;) This was thought
not only requisite, nor uncharitable to the memory of these men, but a bounden
duty to the Justice of the Laws, as well as to the Divine Vengeance, who
signally triumphs in these men's ends, to show to the world the most parrallel
Example of Achitophel, in that the Counsels of these men against the King, and
for their own safety, like their words here following, are of no faith,
security, or credit.

Some Due and Sober ANIMADVERSIONS ON THESE SPEECHES.
IT is not the meaning of this Postill, or observations of these persons
Speeches, to make dirt of their dust, by aspersing them or laying to their
charge any more, then what their own Confession has implicitly declared: but
to solve those riddles and ambiguity of Expression, which is used throughout
these dying and their funeral Orations.

Whether it be the fate of these men, as it was of those of Babel, to be
confounded in their language as they here ta their Death, which will be evident
by the ensuing Notes; or to be divided in their minds, as before the King's
most miraculous Restitution was most apparent; or, to be joined together in
their end persisting in the same hardness of heart and strange scelerate
combination of not expressly acknowledging their guilt concerning the King;
let the Reader judge by what has already passed in their History of Life and
Death, and what is added thereunto in the death of these men.

For just as the war began with a riddle so in these Bou^tefe us, and great
abbettors of it does it expire. Nay, the very doubtful Oracle of the Times for
King and Parliment, is here brought into credit again; and according to that
equivocation the whole drift of their Speeches is guided; that Satan may show
and assert the Scripture to his advandage, that Rebellion is worse than
witchcraft.

Not any person of those Regicides has yet come to the point, when the whole
world has proclaimed it the greatest villainy in the world nay, when
themselves, especially these, had here by circumlocution and about-ways said as
much, (witness that of Corbats -- It is the Honor of Protestants to be
obedient to the known Laws) as amounts to it. But either through the extreme
wickedness and impiet^ of the fact, of which for their pre^en^ed S^^ctit^ they
must not acknowl^^ge themselves as ^f themselves guilty, (as Hypocrime is one
of the Devil's longest possessions) or else, out of infatuation and just
judgment of God upon them, that as they have so desperately and wilfully
sinned, they should as foolishly persist in it, it so happens that none have
given that Glory to God and justice to the world, as to acknowledge any thing
in that heinous matter save their pretended ignorance, and that too, by way of
excuse to men, who are subject to frailty, and therefore with whom it may pass
for a plea, but not to the avenger of blood, whom they have thought to illude
with the same defense.

If this appears not to all men from the precedent, and this late Execution of
the same Accomplices in that Guilt, more particularly in this last, the
Animadvertor thinks, that the crime has a Curse upon it like that of Cains, to
wander still in uncertainty, to be a reprobate flagitiousness which yet none
must or can wound or strike, though still it be as odious as ever.

For herein, in these Speeches, as first of Colonel Okey, we shall find words
able to Condemn a Parliament partaker, but for the very first years guilt of
the War, they are these, I leave this to all my Brethren that they would wait
in their places, and see the Salvation of God rather than deliver themselves by
any indirect means. -- If his Majesty had given me my life, or had I come in
with the rest of the members, I would have lived quietly, and rather suffered
any thing, then done any thing against the known LAW, -- I would have rather
have suffered then taken any indirect ways. Will not the world wonder to hear
such words? If these Speeches should be Printed in Foreign Countries, they
would never be able to distinguish or understand the meaning.

The known Law of England is not like their Good Old Cause that varied every
day, and was tuned by I know not what instruments: Every man knew his Duty and
Station by that, and nothing but Poverty and Pride instructed men to forsake
them. Out of his own mouth, this is enough, where the Law is quoted to as much
benefit to him and his Party, as the Devil once did the Scripture.

That they agree in this mistaken (though well applied) point, (I will not here
cite all Colonel Okey's passages to this matter, but reserve them till anon)
See Master Corbet, -- Many Sects and Heresies have risen in our days, and God
has appeared against them. -- I desire his Majesty that now rules as he rules
from God, so he may rule for God. -- When the business [the King's Murder] was
mentioned, I spoke against it. What Contradictions are here? He appears to be
and approves himself of the Congregational way, that allows those Sects, and
prospered by them, and thinks so to rise again. He acknowledges the King
rules from God, not from the people, yet grieveth not that he murdered his
most God-like Father. He confesses a scruple, nay his aversness, at the first
mentioning of this murder in the House or Juncto of Commons, yet is not sorry
at all after the bloody perpetration. See Colonel Berkstead. -- As to the Cause
God has owned it -- As to the Government as now it is, I have and shall as
long as I have breath pray for it. -- I was no Contriver in the murder of the
King. Seriously such absurdities as these are would become no crime but this,
for should an ordinary malefactor have said so, they would have judged him fit
only for Bedlam. First the Good Cause is justified, that is the Major, God has
owned it, as it was the Canting term in all their successes, and which Needham
the great Friend of this Person has used in every Pamphlet. That Is not yet
done with, they will adhere to that still, there is no pity to be had from any,
but such as were Accomplices in that. Next, as to the Government he has, and
shall as long as he lives pray for it. The time is not set when he begun, it is
determined when it shall end: And now he will pray as long as he lives; But why
not this before, or else why now? This Government was the same which he
endeavored to extirpate, and our late blessed Sovereign's virtues and goodness
as great (pardon this just Comparison) as any Prince's living. What new
incongruous strange kindness and affection is this of a sudden? Reader be not
partial, These words are his own, not foysted in, or disjoynted from the entire
sense preceding, as upon the review you will find.

And then for a Corollary or Conclusion, He was no contriver of the King's
Death. This is a tacit confession of his guilt, because he would so ward the
imputation of it; he seems to disallow it, in saying he Contrived it not, he
appears to have liked it in that he sealed it. It Is the same thing when a piece
of work passes through many hands, and is finished by another, for that man to
say he meddled not with it: yet certainly Col. Berkstead, a man of that Toust,
as he says here of himself, could not but know what was a doing from the time
of that Contrivance, as he terms it; if he consented not to the first
beginnings: which may well be presumed from those endearments and neerness of
Cromwell, and he afterward: which may mind the Reader of a passage betwixt
them; One Time some Gentlemen coming about business to this Colonel, then
Lieutenant of the Tower, and having stayed in Expectation of an Answer, which
they were Promised: He at last came out in have and told them, that now he
could not tarry by any means for that the Protector had sent for him, with
this word, that he would not stir one foot from the place where he stood till
he came to him. Besides may other mutual kindnesses betwixt them, of which
there may be occasion to speak hereafter.

It is time now to consider these persons and their Speeches more particularly;
wherein not to follow the order of their Sledges or their precedence in their
way thither, and because Col. Okey both for the priority and length of of his
Speech which comprehends most of what the other said does require it, we will
consider him first, with this protestation, that the Animadverter (with many
more serious persons) is sorry the Col. has given this only occasion to rake
in his ashes, for that he will not deny him his p^rsonal worth, which ^^deed
for true valor was very eminent. But all those Jewels are buried in a
Dunghill, where a Hens foot not this Pen must scrape for them.

It is observable in him, that he came nearer the purpose then any of the rest,
did confess, from whence the designing of the Subversion of the Government came,
and what was the original of the Kings death, viz. some men's Aims to make
themselves great; but whether this was not from some grudge to them, being the
same with Harrison's defense, that he had snared nothing by the Revolution, is
thought no great a question. For consider him from the rise of the War, of so
mean and despicable a Fortune, and so unfit to reform any thing but his own
condition by his Sword, and no way remarkable for any Zeal, save that of money,
but for that, that he was bred 16. years in the Discipline of our purer times,
when such Expressions and Countenances of Religion and Piety, were as necessary
as a Colonels Pay: he had never been so thoroughly versed in the Concerns of
gainful Godliness. And it will and must seem a Paradox to all knowing-men, for
persons to become truly devout in an Army, which certainly, for Perjuries,
Sacrilege, Disloyalty, and Hypocrisies, was the most notorious in all ages.

This is mentioned the rather, because he so vehemently declaims against the
vices of these times, and presses the practice of, and living up of the
Gospel; and very notable is that place therein, which he has cited for his
justification of his rebelling against the King. His words with those are
these, -- I am justified to the Cause, as the Parents of him that was born
blind, being asked how his sight came, said, he is of age, let him speak for
himself; so say I. For here is another miracle, his eyes are now opened too, he
begins to see near at hand, he sees Trees and Men, but so blind was he before,
that he could see nothing. He now sees the King is to be prayed for, and he
confesses he has done it a good while, but he could not see afar off to
prevent (I will not say) everlasting Darkness, by a dutiful submission to his
late Majesty.

It Is to be confessed and deplored that the Sins of the Times are great, and so
much the worse, that they are justly censured and taxed by such men as these,
whom the reprehended condemn as the most perdite sort of people in the world.
Yet notwithstanding it was a very remarkable and something revengeful kind of
censure in that time and assembly; and the after words, that England with such
sins could not stand 3 years, was a kind of an Angry Prophetical menace, and
did seem to interpret that he would have it so; but for his 3 Years prophecy of
Desolation, we may reckon them with the 3 days of Harrison's Resurrection, and
our late posterity may read them 300. years hence, with old mother Shipton and
Father Merlin.

He seems indeed very ingenuous in one place, and as clear, where he says
these words, You see we have had many troubles, etc. and there was a vacancy to
a single Person a great while, and then the Nation earnestly desired Him who
now reigns, and I wish he may reign gloriously for ever. Again he says, I am
afraid the blood that has been shed has not those Returns for which the War
was begun; and in another place advises all men to be obedient and submit to
the King; and lastly prays God to scatter them that delight in War; In which
good words and prayer we also will conclude with him, as more desirous and
concerned in that Harmony of Peace, leaving the discord of his other words,
which are quite contrary to these, (as Saul was mad when the Music ceased) to
such, who like Quakers delight in, and can relish nothing but absurdities.

Next let us glean after Miles Corbet; one that also pretends no malice, and a
sort of ignorance to the Kings Death, and yet says be had been a Parliament
man in all the Parliaments of the late King: where by reason thereof; he must
have often took the Oath of Alleigance; could not but be well versed in the
dispute of the Prerogative, which he knew was asserted and maintained by the
Laws; and likewise knew the Constitution of Parliaments, and what Power and
Jurisdiction each Estate had, he acknowledges the mercy of his Majesty's
Restitution to his people, and that private Interests should give way to
public; yet he comes to the vomit again, owns a Juncto of the Commons for a
lawful Authority, says he will not justify the Kings death, and yet clans in
a Salvo and Reservation to please his party -- because he will not offend
others. So that in effect he said nothing, and leaves a good inuendo to the
Faction, to think he would have spoke our, if he might have been permitted. But
Consider a little further, for all his great show of Piety and you shall find
him another man. This is that Corbet which was Chearman to the Committee of
Examinations, the great Pryer into the Lanses of the Government, and the Ruins
of the Kingdom, besides, many hundred Families, without any more ado then a
close illegal order from that Committee were quite undone. Examination serving
for Trial, Sentence, and Execution, yet Mr. Corbet has legally underwent them
all, being tried by a due course of Law, as he himself acknowledged. This is
(if we said no more) he that murdered the best and most virtuous Prince in
Europe, and who afterward so tyrannously oppressed the people in Ireland: who
have spent so ma^y groans for themselves, that they cannot spare him an Oh
hone: And that you may perfectly know what sort of Christian he was, it is he
whose most known name was Corbet the Jew.

This almost spent discourse will bestow its last effort upon languishing
Baxter, a kind of Prodigy of Fortune, yet a great admirer of Providence, though
he rever talked less of it then here. His Bottel was his prompter, and he was
wise to hear the others speak before him, for else he might have said nothing
at all but that he was sick and could not; however it amounts to very little
more, being a mere Crambe or repetition of what they spoke. He insisted mainly
upon his Comfort, it is supposed he meant his Cordial, and the Spirit of Life,
not of Grace, for that never appeared in any of his actions, they were so
impious and unjust, especially to the bails for the Kings Friends. He used the
same unmethodical way as Witches do when they pray backward, not to say to the
same purpose, and his Language was as significant to charm his Congregational
Brethren. This man has such a load upon him for his baseness, that it is in
vain to charge him with any thing more, and therefore he ought not to be
vouchsafed an Answer to this unquestionable and transcendent guilt against the
King, whose blood he mingled with every penny and Preferment he got.

In conclusion, it may be presumed they knew not what to say; as their Crime
wanted precedent, so it wants a Plea or defense, and therefore they have
recourse to any thing which stuffed out with the old specious shows of Piety,
they think still shall deceive the World.

FINIS.

