A Necessary Vindication Of the Doctrine of PREDESTINATION, Formerly asserted.

TOGETHER, With a full Abstersion of all Calumnies, cast upon the late
Correptory Correction, by one who highly pretends to Philanthropie, whilst he
does most inhumanely and barbarously traduce his Neighbor, as also most
Reformed Authors.

By William Barlee, Rector of Brock-hole in Northamptonshire.

August. de orig. animae L. 2. C. 2. Valde sunt noxia prava diserta* quia
hominibus minus eruditis, eo quod diserta sint, videantur esse vera. Idem Sermon.
ad fratres in Eremo. Propter nos, Conscientia nostra sufficit nobis: propter
vos, fama nostra non pollui sed polleri debet in vobis. Tenete quod dico, atque
distinguite. Duae sunt res, Conscientia and Fama: Conscientia necessaria est
tibi Fama proximo tuo. Qui fidens Conscientiae suae negligit Famam suam,
crudelis est: maxim in loco isto positus, de quo d^cit Apostolus, scri^ens ad
d^scipulum suum: Circa omn^s teipsum bonorum operum praebe exemplum. LONDON,
Printed for George Sawbridge, at the Bible on Ludgate Hill, 1658.

To the very Reverend, my much Honored Friend, John Conant, D. D. Dr. of the
Chair in Oxford, and the most worthy Rector of Exeter College there.
SIR,
I Have thus long purposely forborne to give you particular thanks for your most
respective encouraging Letters, with which you were pleased to grace me,
whilst I was laboring in this my work, because I thought it to be my bounden
duty for to do it, by offering in a more open way, the whole of it unto you, so
soon as ever it should be finished. You stooped exceedingly low, when you
thought any of my former labors, extremely vilified by some, worth your
perusal; but much lower, when you could find any thing in them worth your
Commendation. It is easy to be discerned, that the altitude of your parts and
place, which latter is not so much an honor to you, as it is honored by you,
have not made you supercilious, against those of a far lower form, both in
gifts and station. Most modest Sir, let him without your indignation say it,
and be believed in it, (who yet was never so sordidly unhappy, and trusts,
never shall be, as for self ends to be a Spaniel to the gallantest of men) that
I hardly know any mere individual alive upon the face of the Earth, unto whom,
under God, I would more desire to approve all my Travai^s, or by whom I would
more willingly be censured for any of my miscarriages about them, than by your
self; and that because of those transcendent excellencies of vast Learning, of
unfaigned piety, of graceful gravity, mixed with sweet moderation, which every
one who knows you, will bless God for appearing to be in you, far sooner than
with any the least ostentation, you will own them to be in your self. Upon this
account and score alone it is, that I make it my humble and earnest request
unto you, that you would take full liberty, most freely and boldly to censure,
whatsoever you shall in this, or in any former work, find enormiously peccant
against either the grounds of true learning, or against the holiness, or
goodness of the cause defended by me, or so much as (all circumstances duly
pondered and cast up) against the parts, place, or person of my Adversary. The
more severe Critic you shall prove against me, in case of my demerits, the
more I will promise perpetual thankfulness unto you, and, upon a clear
discovery, amendment of all faults, to the utmost of what my Antagonist, by way
of satisfaction, can wish for from my hands. Indeed by the exuberancies of my
passions against him here and there, (and, as yet I think, not without just
cause) it may easily be discerned, that I am not much transported with that
vulgarly taking Opinion, that now adays English Heretics are only to be
killed with kindness; but if any but from a too obvious and facile a mistake of
my style, shall so far mistake the Temper of my affections toward any thing
that is commendable and extremely gallant (as many things are) in the parts of
my Adversary, he puts a foul Sophism upon himself, and miserably mistakes me. I
should be full sorrowful, if any should value more what is prayse-worthy in him
then my self or any be more solicitous of every thing he ought to set a prise
upon, as upon his soul, his fame, his very outward safety* than my self. All my
grief about him (the Lord he knows I speak truth ^n it) is, that being what he
is as to d^vers rare excellencies, he should in the employing of them, be so
little Christ's and in him Ours. Let him but once, I will not say by a number
of holy ^alis cumsit utinam noster esset.
humble, learned unbiassed Orthodox Divines, but even by one such, be declared
to be free from being a back-friend to true Religion, in the purity and power
of it, to be no studious Calumniator of the greatest Luminaries in the Church,
to be no underminer of necessary Reformation, and then I will promise him to
make (if need be), upon my knees, an open penance, for all the wrongs, which it
shall appear I have done him. Till then, I must think it no unreasonable thing,
to beg of strangers, that they would allow me to know my Adversary near hand,
better then others can do at a distance, and to call to my mind, what I have
long since learned, Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, sed magis amica veritas. I
am sorry, that in this 2d reply by his fierce appearing against almost all sorts
of Reformers, ancient and modern, he has enforced me more largely to appear
against him in my Apologetical first part of the work, than at first I had
projected. If the present age do not, I wish after ages never may feel, how
necessary it was, for me so to do. Sure I am, some very Learned and good men,
have thought it worth their pains elaborately to lay open the designs of such
as are of his party, and whose steps he is ambitious to follow, in the loading
of the best Reformers, with foul Calumnies. If any be otherwise minded, by an
easy Transition from the first part, Hippol. Fronto contra commentat. H.
Grotii. Sam. Maresius contra eundem multis voluminibus.
to the second (which are therefore purposely kept distinct) they may relieve
themselves from any thing, the present use whereof, they may not know.

In the second part of this my work, which is purely Doctrinal, I trust you
will find some care taken in the management of the truth, in the making good of
all former Charges brought in against the Adversary, in the answering of any
thing considerably material and Argumentative.

If all be not done so exactly as I could have wished it, or as the Gravity of
the Cause does require, I cannot be blamed for want of endeavors to do it, but
for want of skill and power. In magnis and voluisse sat est. It may be enough
for such an one as my self to have discovered, and some way to have broken the
forces of my Adversary, and to leave a more perfect Conquest over him, to some
greater Champions in the Church, by whose stronger Doctorall Arms, the
Adversary, notwithstanding the height of his Spirit, may be willing to
acknow^edge himself to be beaten, which God grant. I hope, what I have done,
will not be altogether unwelcome to you, because for the main of it, I am sure
I present you with nothing, but what you have much more learnedly asserted your
self, upon several public occasions, and what you will own to have been the
known Tenants of your most renowned Predecessors, ever since the Reformation of
our English Church. Dr. Holland, D. John Reinolds, Dr. Abbots, D. Prideaux


Now that the God not only of all efficacious, omnipotent, wonder-working
grace, but of all love and peace too, would be pleased at last, to make up all
our woeful differences; which are wide as the Sea, and who can stop them? That
he would be entreated by the Lovers of truth and peace, to remove out of the
way, all those stumbling blocks of Advantages, which men unhappily learned, do
stumble at, and which, (as a great man once wisely observed,) make it far more
easy to them, to oppose Religion, Velleroy in his Councellor.
then for others to defend it. For Religion having in it something which is
above the capacity of man's understanding, it is no difficult thing to
contradict such a belief, by humane reason. Would to God we might once be of
one heart and way, in the great matters of our God, that God's people might
attain to more edification, with less din, and great noise of disputes. No
good man knowing you, doubts, but you do strenuously labor in all your
Disputations against error, for to bring matters to this. If, Sir, you will be
pleased to pardon this my so bold and unusual address unto you, upon this so
solemn an occasion, I hope by the strength of that grace of my blessed Lord and
Savior, which in some weak measure, I have defended, to labor for after
times, more in the Confutation of all Pelagianism and Arminianism, by the best,
the most gracious and Christian Mediums, Rarius de dogma^ibus Christus
disseruit; saepius, imo vero ubique and semper de vivendi sinceritate. Chrysostom.
in Matthew. 20. Hom. 65,
Practice, Prayers, and Tears. The Lord his blessing be ever upon your pious
pains; He long continue you to be what you are, a glory and Ornament to the
Church, to the Chair, and your House. Thus prays he, who hopes to continue,

Brock-hole, August 24. 1657. Your ever most obliged Friend, and Servant, WILL:
BARLEE.

A Postscript.
I Had no sooner sent away this Dedicatory, for the reasons expressed in it, to
the Son in Law; but that very afternoon, a Neighboring Divine acqua^nted me,
(which till then, I was altogether ignorant of) of my Adversaries public
appearing against his most Reverend Father in Law, in a Book which he calls,
The Divine Purity defended; as if any of his Adversaries had opposed that, who
believe nothing so strongly as they do believe, that God is holiness and purity
it self, and holy in all his ways and works, and that there is no iniquity in
him. Truly at first, it was some more then ordinary grief to me, that so great
a man, and so cordial a friend, as Doctor Reinolds has been to me, (and that
as I take it, for no other reason, but that he reckons me among Christ's
friends) should in the midst of his most blessed employments, meet with so much
troublesome interruption, for any thing he has written in my behalf, from so
insolent a wrangler. Really, I can find no lenitive for this sorrow, but what I
fetch from the Sanctuary, viz. from the hopes which I have, that he whose way
is often to work by contraries, and to bring light out of darkness, will do me,
will (which is a 2 Cor. 4. 6
great deal better) do his Church much good by it. Upon occasion of this so
masculine an opposition of so good and so noted a Divine, it may possibly be
believed by the most;

First, That how modestly soever Mr. T. P. did, at his first setting forth,
appear to some less acquainted with him to be in his Correct Copy, that the
height of his Spirit (as well then known to me as it is now) did then design,
that that Copy should be as a Gantlet thrown down to the ablest Divines of the
Nation, though at first necessary to be taken up by me, who shall ever have
reason to profess my self to be the meanest amongst those whom God has called
to be faithful. Primum in intention, est ultimum in executione. Who sees not
now that his Correct Copy, and the things by which he has since supported it,
are just such Commodities, as ere while in our Neighbor Country, were the
first and second Remonstrantia Remonstrantium?

2. Probably some now, who have but too unhappily symbolized with my Adversary,
about my Style and Temper, may be convinced of their mistake, and be pleased to
read me more, and censure me less. And truly, unless they can be persuaded to
read all on both sides; and withal, to weigh all Circumstances as were
fitting, I could heartily wish they would leave all unread, Pauca respicientes
faci^e pronuntiant, sed non pronuntiant faelicissime.

Thirdly, If Reverend Doctor Reinolds (in words handled less irreverently then
my self, but in very deeds full out as irreverently and want only) or any, far
meaner than himself, shall judge it fitting to stoop so low, as to return any
thing more to the last Scriblings of my Adversary. First, I hope it will be no
matter of grief unto them* for to find, that in my first, and in this latter
labor of mine, I have according to my poor power, given them some no
inconsiderable hints which possibly may somewhat lessen their pains. Secondly,
I shall not in the least fashion, be sollicitous, how they will use my name or
fame, which I set at a rate, ten thousand times lower then I do the truths
which I have endeavored, pro meo posse, to defend: and of which I am
confident, none appearing for Dr. Reinolds, will be the betrayers. I am as
confident, as confidence it self almost can make me, that that will never be
verified in them, which Luther in his days complained of in some, Luther.
that Nunquam periclitatur Religio nisi inter Reverendissimos. Thirdly, I will
upon my honest word, assure any body, that I shall be hugely well pleased, that
any who shall take up the pen next against Mr. T. P. would write less sharply,
if he judge that the Austin did use to say of Pelagius, that Diabolus ab ipso
cupiebat ornari.
fittest way to ga^n upon the gallant parts of the man, that (if God please)
they may at least become serviceable to the Church. None shall be more joyful
to have the Lord, rather than the Devil, adorned by his fine, would to God they
were gracious, abilities.

Fourthly, I take it to be a most Signal and Remarkable Providence, that just
at this time, the Book of Dr. Kendall, which I make mention of in this, part 2.
p. 138. is come forth in answer to Fur Praedestinatus the first: Every learned
Reader (say my adversary Dr. Kendal, Fur pro Tribunali.
what he please to the contrary,) will easily be able to discern, that with
some very slight immutations, that Book contains a full Answer to most what
Mr. T. P. alias fur Praedestinatus, the second, has against Reformers making
God the Author of sin. However, there will yet I trust, be some use of my
Book, both for that, First, Dr. Kendall's being in Latin, can only be for the
use of Scholars, but mine being in English, may serve the common man too.
Secondly, no occasion was vouchsafed to that Reverend Doctor, to touch upon
many things which I have taken much pains about.

Sixthly, I do even skip for joy, that those to whose turn it will fall next to
deal against my Adversary, will not (I would not for 500 l. they should be so
put to it with Transcribers, Printers, and Correctors, as I have been) least
Mr. T. P. make bold to play upon them, as well as he does upon me Divine purity
defended.
, for sad Greek, ruful Latin, incongruities even of English, etc. I trust, I
shall yet (do Mr. T. P. what he can to the contrary) meet with some ingenuous
Readers, who for the very same Reasons which I mentioned in the Praeface to the
Catalogue of Errors, in my Corrept. Correct. will yet again pity me, and not
punish me, for these, or any other Typographical errors, which every ordinary
man will be able to amend.

FINIS.
To the Candid Christtan Reader.
WHen I Consider into what hands these writings of Mine fell after they were
out of my hand and power, I wonder not at the Long stop which was made at the
press, nor at the Multiplication of errors there. But now having Reviewed all
with my own eyes, if thou will but be pleased to pardon the unsuall but
necessary Length of this Catalogue, drawn up for to prevent mistakes, I dare
assure thee that thou will meet with very few errors any way disturbing the
sense. But as to the neglecting, as sometimes of Signs of Interrogation and
Admiration, or as but to often omitting the Italick Character, and such like
small matters, I think them not worth the while to trouble this list with them.
They may be let alone for some Joculary Adversary idly abusing his Leisure to
make his games of.

Well-yard Nov. 9th. Thine in the defense of Christ Grace, William Barlee.

Errata.
First part of the Book.
In Dr. Barnard's Letter's, p. 8. l. 6. for with, r. which. p. 2. l. 30. for in
me, r. me in. p. 4. l. 10. after License, r. to abuse me, p. 10. l. 25. for
Grown, r. Gown. p. 11. l. 3. for merely r. nearly. p. 16. l. 6. for his r.
this. and such like faults often. p. ^1. l. 11. insert the after to, for there
r. here, l. 27. after sung r. not, l. 30. for Clepsamminum r. Clepsammium. l.
33. for brought r. bought. p. 27. l. 8. r. the Heb. thus.

(...)

l. 21. dele hand. p. 28. l. 26. for convina r. confina, l. ult. for
no^oriously r. notoriously, p. 29. for the mistaken Hebrew and Greek see the
texts of Scripture, p. 30. l. 12. for the t. he. p. 31. l. 1. for as r. a, p.
14. l. 4. after half-witted r. as he says. p. 36. l. 27. t* (...) and after
it. r. (...) l. 30. r. opinion a street p. 38. l. 29. for of that r. that of l.
30. insert, they preach, p. 40. l. 1. 2. 3. for (...). p. 24. after according
r. to p. 45. l. 5. for (...). r. (...), 46 l. 1. for which r. ^hipt, l. 2. in
Marg. r. Athenis, p. 53. l. 4. a fine for put r. but. p. 54. l. 1. for (...) r.
(...). l. 31. in Marg. for non mihi r. non nisi. ^. 55. l. 7. a fine, for any
r. nay. p. 57. l. 26. fer assure r. sure. p. 60. l. 14. after protest^ntes r.
ADVOCAT: p. 56. l. 3. r. and not till then. p. ^1. l. 6. a fine for quicking r.
quickening. p. 77. l. 9. for drinted r. printed.

In the second part of the Book.
P. 1. 14. for observed r. repeated. l. 15. for eight r. either. l. 24. r. seu
Dr. perplexorum. p. 10. l. 8. a fine, r. Arrian writes l. 14. for vitae r.
vivae. p. 11. l. 19. for have r. having. p. 12. l. 4. and 5. r. Supercilious p.
25. l, 8. for ^aenaus r. paenam. p. 28. marg. l. 10. for prosero r. profecto.
p. 30. l. 2. dele ^r others. l. 15. for had r. held. p. 36. l. 17. for adopted
r. adapted. p. 38. l. 9. r. a man whom we may suspect. p. 40. l. 24. r. thus,
Adam (who, as he says, had without sin, and before sin, an inclination to
sin.) p. 4. l. 73. fine, r. Iprensis. p. 49. l. 5. r. the Heb. thus (...). p.
52, l. 3. a fine for Levar r. fevar. l. 21. for from r. for. p. 55. l. 3. in
Marg. a fine, for vero r. verum p. 56. l. 1. 1. in Marg. for r. Salvian r.
Salmur, l. 5. a fine for hinc r. hi ne, p. 57. l. 4. a fine dele non Ibid. l.
2. for Deus r. Deum. l. 5. for permission. r. permissor. p. 60. l. 2. marg. r.
Tilen. p. 66. in marg. for orripiat r. corripiat. p. 67. l. ult. for had r.
has, p. 63. l. 3. for master-rowle. r. muster-rowle p. 77. l. 7. for service
r. crevice, p. 83. l. 5. a fine for difficili ^. difficilis. p. 85. l. 3. in
Marg. for qua. r. quae p. 87. l. 2. for rejected r. revinced. l. 11. for least
r. last. p. 98. l. 6. for expounds r. expands p. 101. l. 8. a fine, r. for if
not also of all, etc. p, 103. l. 8. ^ fine, for more r. mere. l. 6. a fine for
which r. with. p. 104. l. 21. for Substractum r. Substratum. l. 23. afrer more,
insert of which I shall, p. ^26. l. 8, for a halpenny r. one lb. ibid. for 150.
r. 100. p. 127. 14. for promise r. premise. p. 132. l. 1. after proposed r. p.
102. p. 145. l. 8. a fine for hab^ r. habens.

Let this Quarter Sheet immediately follow the Postscript.

A Letter written to me by Doctor Bernard, Preacher to the Honorable society
of Gray's-Inn, London; in answer to some passages in Mr. Piercys Philanthrophy,
affirming a change of opinion in the late Archbishop of Armagh a little before
his death, in some points controverted between us.
Worthy Sir,
I Am much your debtor for those undeserved respects to me in your Letter being
altogether unknown. But more especially for those large expressions of your
affection to the late Archbishop of Armagh, and the readiness to clear him
from some aspersions publicly cast upon him by one Mr. Thomas Pierce in his
answer to a book of yours. Two Eminent men of each University, before I heard
from you, had sent unto me for their private satisfaction. And now upon your
Letter and directions I have viewed the several passages tending that way,
Chap. 1. Sect. 3. 5. Chap. 3. Sect. 17. 7. Chap. 4. Sect. 13. which in sum I
find amounts to this, viz. That the late Primate of Armagh was, though a late,
yet a serious Convert. And affirmed, a little, or not long, before his death to
several persons, that he utterly rejected all those opinions of Calvin. That
there were evident marks of a Change in him. That a little before his death he
professed an utter dislike to all the whole Doctrine of Geneva, in those
affairs, etc. First, It Is possib^e Mr. Peirces enformers might mistake the
Doctrine for the Discipline of Geneva, or Calvin, which by some in their
Sermons has been advanced accordingly: or, if it were of the Doctrine, he has
taken a great latitu^e in saying all the opinions, the whole doctrine. And the
Restriction, viz. in those affairs, is somewhat obscure, being introduced
occasionally upon the speech of one or two of them. It had been better to have
named the several points he means, from which howsoever, as to Calvin or
Geneva, how could he be said to revolt, when in terminis he did not profess
the defense of either. It being the Doctrine of St. Augustine which has been
confirmed by him.

Whatever these points were, if this be Mr. Pierces meaning, that a little
before his death he should Verbally retract what he had pub^ished in his Works,
I am assured (though it be hard to prove a Negative) there was no such matter,
but that he was con^tant in them to his end. When he was last in London,
continuing here about seven weeks together, I took a Lodging in the same house,
and was perpetually with him, taking then the opportunity of a further speaking
with him of most of the passages of his life, as of the several Books he had
wrote, the Subjects of them, the occasion of their writing, when some such
points (as Mr. Pierce possibly may mean) came into discourse. And then the^e
was not the least change in him. And it is to be presumed, in that last Act of
winding up his whole life* if there had been any, he would have then mentioned
it, and this was but about, five weeks (which is a little or not long) before
his death. And I have lately spoken with a Minister, who was at Ryegate but a
fort night before, and then speaking with him of diverse of these points,
assures me of his constancy in his Judgment according to what he had formerly
written; And it has been confirmed by some honorable and intelligent persons
who spoke with him a few days before his death, and in particular desiring his
judgment of the Arminian Tenets, he showed his u^^er dislike and rejection of
them; so that I believe Mr. Pierce has nor bin well advised in publishing this
his Information.

And it is no new thing to ha^^ books as well as opinions laid to his charge
which he knew not: It was presumed in his life, and so the less wonder if it
be practiced ^^^er his death. There is a book entitled a Method of Meditation
which was printed ^n his n^me Anno 1651. An^ though by his Commands to me, it
was then publicly declared to be none of his, yet since his death (this year,
1657) it is reprinted, and notwith^^^nding the renewing of that declaration by
the same way ^herein I found him abused, it is s^^ll sold under his name to ^he
great dishonor of him.

The passage which Mr. Pierce is most clear in, is Chap. 1. Sect. 15. when
speaking of Universal grace and redemption, he says, the most Learned
Anti-Arminians have been feine ^^ assert it, as well as Arminius. Among us, the
late Bishop of Armagh, etc.

First, he should have done well to have named where he has asserted it in any
of his works, Next, what or who compelled him, that he was feine to do it; and
if by that speech as well as Arminius he means (according to common
construction) as full or in the same terms as Arminius; it will be the hardest
proof of the three: whom he scarce ever names in his works, his aim being
against Pelagius and his disciples. Unless that passage in his Pelagian
history may be so applied (wrapped up under the title of Britanniae
Antiquitates, Pelagius being a Britain, which he intended to have taken out and
printed as a Treatise by it self) where he having given us at large the bold
and rugged language with which Julian, one of Pelagius his followers, in
defense of his doctrine greets the most mild and meek Father St. Augustine he
adds this, (Chap. 11. p. 312.) Cuius idcirco verba haec, describenda putavi; ut
in hoc speculo contemplaretur lector, consimiles nostrorum temporum ardeliones,
Thrasoni huic adeo, geminos, ut in eos, hujus spiritus quasi per Pythagoricam
quandam (...), immigrasse videatur: I know not how he can call him an
Anti-Arminian, unless he confess them to be Pelagians.

Secondly, In this particular concerning universal Redemption I have cause to
believe there was not any charge in him from what his judgment was many years
agone: and if he were not totally according to Calvin, must it therefore be
argued, he was wholly for Arminius? might there not be a mean wherein he might
tread more safely according to the Ancient doctrine of the Church? And indeed,
to deal clearly with you, his judgment in this point was in a middle way
different both from yours, and Mr. Pierce's which if it might not expose him to
both your pens and censures, but be a reconciliation between you (the latter of
which I see little hope of) I might be moved the more willingly to declare it.
I do the rather mention this, because, As Mr. Pierce says, you call it the
chief head of Arminianism, So he says, it is that with which other opinions in
debate must stand or fall: And Chap. 3. p. 15. excuses his prolixity on it,
because if this error be once disclaimed by the adversary, all the rest will
tumble of their own accord.

In a word, I am sorry to find that heat between you, which being Ministers and
Neighbors, is the more unseemly. I shall advise you in your reply to endeavor
rather to he^l up the breach, than make it wider, the fruits of the spirit
appearing much in meekness, and gent^eness, etc and laying ande all verbal
animosities and per^onall reflections camely to fall upon the m^tter. And ^o I
commend you and your labors to Gods b^essing and direction, and rest,

Your very assured friend, N. Bernard
Graies Inn, March, 11. 1656.
A Second Letter, written unto me by the said Doctor Bernard, in answer to a
part of ^ostscript at the conclus^on of a book ^f Mr. Pierce, viz. a Correct
Copy, of some no^es of Gods decrees, etc. Wherein the former erroneous report
raised upon the late Archbishop of Armagh being more la^gely affirmed, is here
more fully cleared and vindicated.
SIR,
I have lately received from you another book of Mr. Pierces, which I saw not
before, viz. A Correct Copy of some notes of Gods decrees, etc. In the
postscript of which I find a lar^er confirmation of what had been affirmed by
him, in relation to the late Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of Ireland:
which, at your de^^re, I cannot re^use to return you my sense of al^o.

The Author is a Stranger to me, but appears to be a man of very exce^^ent
p^rts and abilities, and I am sorry he has been moved to employ them in this
particular in a continued confident declaring the change of opinion in so
Learned and pious a Prelate (as himself worthily styles him,) to whom for ought
I know he was a stranger, and adding that what he has before affirmed to be
upon a just ground and mature deliberation, and yet I find no other foundation
upon which this is built, than the report of others. The frequent experimental
failing of which, when it comes to the proof, has wrought it out of
reputation, with prudent men to depend upon. That which I find in the
conclusion of his Po^tscript, I must begin with, wherein he does de^ermine,
viz. That whosoever shall appear to hold the Negative, that my Lord primate of
Armagh did not declare his rejection of these opinions which I resist and which
himself formerly embraced, will wrong the memory of the Bishop. As I do not
(according to his caveat) take upon me to prove a Negative, so I do not
understand the ground of this definitive Sentence, upon whomsoever shall adhere
to it. I am sure his meaning is not, because he does resist them; and less
show is there, because the primate had formerly embraced them, for a
changeableness in doctrine carries in it self, a show of dishonor, that with
him there should be yea and nay: surely there must be somewhat of gross
corruption, or dangerous consequence formerly taught and professed by this good
Primate, that should incur this censure upon any person that does not believe
he did retract and reject them before his death, viz. that he shall wrong his
memory. And it is too early a conclusive, while they are yet in dispute between
you, and the matter not heard on the Primates side; Which I expected not from a
person so ingenuous, as I read Mr. Pierce to be. And howsoever the whole
implies that the Primate had wronged himself, if not his hearers and readers,
in preaching and writeing of untruths so long; but much more if he had dyed
without retracting them; and that the injury done to him, is already decreed to
lie upon that person that shall affirm otherwise of him in either: yet this
must not deter or discourage me in this service of his vindication, leaving
it to the judgment of others which may be thought less injurious, the averring
his constancy or inconstancy in matters of such weight and moment. I shall be
contented he do enjoy his opinion, if he will not censure me for not forsaking
my own, viz. that I think I should wrong him and my self, at least do neither
right, if I should silently let this belief of him pass without putting it to
a stand, by producing those probabilities which have prevailed with me to the
contrary.

That which Mr. Pierce professes, viz. that he published it to the Immortal
honor of that great Prelate, does not well suit with the expressions in the
next breath, calling it an error which had possessed him, and intimating it to be
a retractation of his aberrations, or a poenitency of his sins, which he having
no sense of, or not expressing it till then, be must have contracted a great
guilt all his life, both in preaching and writing to the subversion possibly of
many. This if he had found himself guilty of, a verbal retractation would not
have sufficed but he should have given satisfaction also by his pen. His
judgment having been by that transmitted beyond the seas, which one Sermon in a
Church in London, or opening his mind to a few in private, could not have
expiated: neither would so good a man as he, have losted in it, but with St.
Augustine humbly have revoked his error in that way also; but I believe none of
those pretended witnesses of his change will say that he gave them that
promise, or that they did so much as request it of him, though they had time
enough to have wrote unto him, if omitted in the conference. And certainly Mr.
Pierce, (to u^e his own expression) had in singleness of affection done ^im
more right and honor, i^ he had left him wholly to his works; which do
sufficiently testify of him, rather than thus to b^ing him upon the Stage after
his death, and give sentence on him only upon hearsay: There being no necessity
in this dispute to have so much as named him. Neither can I think those, any
Cordial friends of the Bishops (as he styles them) who have been the occasion
of putting him upon it. And I do remember that the last time he was in London;
he did express a suspicion of some that came to visit him, that they would by
wresting his words make some such use of them as now appears: who proposed
discourses of the like subjects to him, and whereupon he did to us confirm at
full that which had been his judgment of them formerly. For that of Mr. Piercys
offer of proof by some learned and grave Divines who had conference with the
Bishop, and will (as he says) be glad to attest the same under their hands: As
I know not what cause there should be of gladness or forwardness in this
Testimony; So when they shall meet with contrary attestations by the like of
their own profession, it makes me sad, to foresee what a fire this may possibly
kindle among us, (to the rejoicing of those of the Church of Rome) which I have
no mind to burn my fingers in, only I stick firmly to my persuasion in my
former Letter confirmed there by several probable Testimonies, that there was
no such change as is pretended in him near his death. And if this of Mr.
Piercyes affirmation should prove to be the raising of a false report, (which
he ingenuously confesses to be so great an evil, and does so hate and
condemn, whether through ignorance or credulity): this must be of the first
magnitude, when it has for its object so eminent and pious a person, whose
praise being throughout the Churches, and in special, for those his labou^s
tending to those Subjects, which has been useful and acceptable to them, the
whole reformed Church are concerned in it.

I find him still punctually observing his former expression, viz. rejecting
all the doctrines of Geneva in which besides the latitude, there is this
ambiguity whether it be meant according to Calvin or Beza; for both were of
Geneva; between whom in some of these points there was the like difference as
between Mr. Perkins and Bishop Abbot, with us, viz. in the Superlapsarian
opinion with Beza was for, but Calvin held it otherwise. It had been better, to
have named the particu^ers, than thus to cloud them in the Generals.

The only point which he names here, is, That the Primat embraced the doctrine
of universal redemption, and says, in that he does as good as say all, He
does not assert it from his own knowledge, but says he has it from many most
unquestionable persons which had it poured into their ears, by the Primates own
mouth. If it were in a Sermon of his at a Church in London, the last he
preached in that City, and many months before his death, (which I am informed
by others is the sense of it) I was present at it, and with me there was no new
thing observed to have been uttered by him differing from what his judgment was
many years agone, since I had the happiness to be known unto him. It may be
some of these persons produced for witnesses being strangers to him and taking
him to be of the other extremity might apprehend it as a retractation, but they
were much mistaken in it; If they heard him affirming, That by the death of
Christ all men receive this benefit that they are savabiles, or put into a
capacity and possibility of sa^vation, That terms of peace are procured for
all mankind, That all men's sins are become pardonable, mercy attainable, (in
which state those of the Ange^icall nature which fell, are not), That there is
some distinction to be made between his satisfaction (rightly understood) and
his intercession, according to that of our Savior, I pray for these, I pray
not for the world, etc. It is possible, for ought I know, some such expressions
might be his then. But that by this Universal Redemption should be understood
such an Universal grace, that the same measure of it without any distinction
should equally and alike be conferred and applied to Judas, which was to Peter;
and that the only difference was the free will of Peter in accepting, without
any further cause of thanks to God for his grace in inclining him accordingly,
etc. This I suppose will not be attested to have been professed by him, either
in this or any other Sermon, or private conference with him. And in this
present enlargement, I would not be understood to interpose my self in the
controversy, or to affix thus much upon Mr. Piercyes Judgment, but only to
aver that the Primate at his last in this particular differed not from what
he had declared formerly.

That which he says, is the sum of what he had said, viz. That the reverend
Primate did conform his judgment to all the fathers of the Church for the
first four Centuries after Christ, This he might aver without any relation to
these points in controversy, it being the term, or thereabouts, which he
accepts of in his answer to the Jesuit Malones Challenge in the justifying or
condemning those twelve points of controversy, between us and the Church of
Rome, of which one concerning Freewill is of this fraeternity. What the
Primates judgment was of that, is sufficiently declared there, and he continued
in the same without any change the last time I saw him, by the discourse I had
then with him of it: and St. Augustine (unless we be over strict) may be
admitted within that compass, (being accounted by the Primate, at the time
when he was consecrated a Bishop, to be but in, Anno 410. as Prosper reckons
his death, but in 433. being then of age, 76. Before whose time these points
were never discussed by the Fathers at large singly nor determined by them
jointly in any Council, which Pelagius gave the first occasion of: and it is
known that the doctrine of St. Augustine against him is inclined unto, and
defended by the Primate in his works, And, to say no more, the Articles of
Religion, Agreed upon by the Archbishops and Bisheps and the rest of the
Clergy of Ireland, in the Convocation holden at Dublin, Anno 1615. which fully
determine and declare all those points accordingly, he had then the honor to
be appointed by the Synod as a principal person to draw them up. Now the last
time that I saw him (which was after that pretended Testimony of the witnesses
of his change either in public or private) he did fully confirm and commend
that to me to be heeded and observed by me as the summary of his judgment in
those and other subjects, of which I have said somewhat more, elsewhere.

That of Mr. Piercyes drawing in more to bear him company, viz. King James,
Bishop Andrews, Melancthon, in their ch^nges also for the better, as he is
pleased to determine, does not concern me to take notice of: only if he have
found it under their hands, as their last will and Testament in their works,
he shall but Charitably err (to use his own words) if he should be mistaken;
but no such matter appears here, is to the Primate.

In a word, I cannot but profess my restect to Mr. Pierce both for his own
worth, as the great esteem which in this postscript (morethen in his former
book) he ^ath expressed of this Eminent Primate and can easily believe he would
account it a reputation to his opinion, that his might patronize it, by the
great esteem had of him in all parts of the reformed Church both for his
learning and piety; and I have so much Charity as to believe that this error is
more to be imputed to his informers then himself, and if I were known to him I
would advise him not to infist any farther in it, it being by these several
circumstances so improbable; but according to his own ingenuous offer to make
an ample satisfaction, and what he has so highly extolled in the Primate to
have been his glory and honor in preferring truth before error, in that his
suppo^ed imaginary retractation, I may without offense return the application
to himself, which with all prudent men will be much more his own commendation,
and though according to his profession he be innocent as to any voluntary
injury, thinking he did God and him good service, yet it being a wrong in it
self, will deserve some Apology.

And indeed it will be hard for any prudent impartial man to believe that what
the Primate* upon mature deliberation and long study for so many years had
professed in the Pulpit, and at the press, he should be so soon shaken in mind
as without any convincing force of argument from any other, that is known, at
once to renounce all he had formerly said, and draw a cross line over all he
had wrote; and that in a Sermon, not made of purpose for that end, (which had
been very requisite, and which must have been of too narrow a limitt in
relation to so many Subjects here intimated) but only as on the bye; I say when
his works wherein he is clearly seen and largely declared, with a cloud of
ear witnesses for many yeats both in public and private confirming his
constancy in them, through the diverse changes of the times to his last, shall
be produced and laid in one balance; And a few witnesses of some few passages
at one Sermon, who in a crowd might be mistaken, and the apter to be so, by the
interest of their own opinion, put into the other; will not all unbiassed
persons cast the Errata into the latter. I shall conclude with a coorse
complement to your self,; that I have not thus appeared for your sake, to whom
I am a stranger, nor out of any opposition to Mr. Pierce who appears to me to
be a person of value, but only out of my duty and high account, I must ever
have of the memory of that judicious holy and eminent Primate, and so I commit
you to Gods protection and direction, and rest,

Your assured friend, N. Bernard.
Graies Inn, June, 10. 1657.
A Short INTRODUCTION DEBATING The Reasons of this Second undertaking.
SECT. I.
I Cannot justly determine how long my feircely active Neighbor and Antagonist
was, (to use his own Phrase) Advertisement to the Reader. page 2.
somewhat like Buridans ass, a ballancing himself, whether (as he has it too)
Epist. Dedication. page 7.
I was for my late Correptory Correction published against him, to be punished
by his venerable, and awful Silence, or as (at last he concluded) by his more
Magisterial, and smarting Tongue-lash: wherein he has according to his wont
and natural Genius, so superlatively Hyperbo^ized, as that the least jerke of
the tip of his Tongue, is much sharper then all the Correptory Rodds, which
toward his amendment I had bestowed upon him before; he does not so much
Chastise me with Whips, as with Stinging Scorpions, his very little nimble ta^t
fingers are much more heavy then all my Loins: yet, as for my self, if I may
but as well be believed as I am sure I shall speak truth, I have almost this
two months day been at a hard debate with my self, whether I should at all take
my self concerned the second time to take up a pen against his continued
Satyrisms, and Sarcasms, rather then serious disputes imprinted against me: and
even yet I should be apt to conclude in the Negative, were it not for the
importunity of some, unto whom it is fit I should yield, who will have me
concluded in the affirmative.

First, Verily, though I cannot but be, and I hope, by Gods grace, to continue
in it to the end, a very vehement Assertor (according to my poor power) of Gods
omnipotent Soveraignity and grace; yet I cannot be persuaded that that blessed
cause which for above these twelve hundred years has, from Austine downwards
in all Countries, had so many invincible Champions, who have crushed the Heads
of all Dragons, and Leviathans (who have sharpened their Tongues, ^e^s, and wits
against it,) and who have made it every where to go forth conquering and to
conquet, I say I cannot believe that this cause does any thing lowdly call for
any more of the best Contributions which I am able to afford toward the
support of it.

Secondly, Nay nor yet, (how ill soever my ill Neighbor may take it) can I be
so far out of conceit with my own Christianity, Schollership, Humanity, (in any
of which my Antagonist will not allow me the least Scruple or dram) as to think
any of them to be in any terrible Agony, though he has most industriously, and
if it were in him, unto all Posterity represented me as a most ugly, dreadful,
dark Monster, in the Phrase of the Poet, as a

Virg^l.
Monstrum, horendum, inform, ingens cui Lumen ademptum. Blessed be God for
ever for his grace, who for well nigh these fourteen years has not suffered me
in this very Country amongst many disce^ning gra^ious Christians, amongst
diverse most venerab^e and Eminent Scholars, to behave my self so
Unchristianly, Ignorantly, or Rudely, as that it is any way probable to be
believed by any of them, that I am any thing near so o^ious, as he would have
the world believe me to be.

Virgil.
Non sum adeo informis, nuper in melittore vidi. Thirdly, Yea nor am I able to
be so credu^ous that those most Illustrious Luminaries of our Church, who have
been pleased to grace my Labors with their unexpected Encomi^ms: and who by
their Gracious Lord and Masters adorning of them, have as fixed Stars shined in
the Firmament of Gods Church before such time as their Bespatterer was brought
forth in Divi Luminis Auras, saw the Light of the Sun, or at least was allowed
so much as to be a Smatterer in Divinity, or (as now he appears to all the
Christian Reformed world) a very Erra Pater in it. Verily, I do not believe
that their Splendid names, and well sounding fames, need any vindication of
mine, who are abo^e all his Calumnies, and in Christ's and the Churches
dipty^hs, will have to all posterity their names written fairly, although he
be so impudent as in effect to proclaim it to the world, that they are but
black Souls in white Sheets, whi^^t he writes Ad^^^^ise^ent to the ^^ader.
^^^dida d^ ^^gris, and de c^dentibus (...).
that they have done a kind of public penance by making it known unto the
Wor^^, wha^ k^nd o^ things they do approve. Thus good is our Painter at (...)
Whites into Blacks, and Blacks into Whites.

Praeteriens Co^vos, vexat Censura Colum^es. Fourthly, Nay nor lastly can I
entertain any considerab^e hopes that I shall be in a Capacity to reclaim
those who have been misled by him, and who (as may be feared) may be, for want
of Elegancy in my Style, and because of downright plainness in all my
Ministerial Proceedings, as adverse from reading of me as some want on
Ital^an^ are said to be, Bishop, Jewels Apolog. Ecces. Anglic.
from reading of the sacred Scriptures, lest it should mar the neatness of
their Style. All these things considered, I might well have been allowed to
have enjoined Silence to my self, and to have reti^ed to my wonted Rest.

However, because there be diverse whose Judgments I cannot but revere, who are
of opinion; First that Gods Truth, Counsels, Ways, and People ought by their
friends to be as often defended, as by their virulent Foes they be any thing
fiercely, craftily, and wittily opposed. Secondly, That the high flown spirit
of our fresh in^ulting Thraso ought by all means to be taken down, who Hor
tensius ^oster sufflaminandus est Cic.
though he hardly strike stroke, but by his sharp Tongue, and Teeth; yet in the
Beginning, Progress, and Conclusion of his Book, does most insolently boast,
quasi devicisset omnes Manichaeos, as if he had beaten all Manichees out of the
field, (as abusively he affects to Style Reformed Protestants differing from
him in Judgment Correct. Cap. 1. Edit. primo. page 55.
. Thirdly, That I ought not to be so neglectful of the credit of my
ministerial Office, or of my name and fame, as by my total Silence, (though I
am most content to be looked on as a minimus Fratrum, and as the least of all
those whom God counting faithful had put into the Ministry) as it were, to
give him a License; as if Conscien^e did tell me that I do deserve it, to be by
him at his pleasure trampled upon as salt who have lost all Savor, and am fit
for nothing but to be cast upon a Dunghill. Fourthly, That it does not concern
Ministers Tacit Annal. 2. Non est viri fortis, d^sperare de Repubili^a.
in this last, and worst of ages, to de^pond altogether of the Conviction, or
even con^ersion, of those who for the present (to use Austins Phrase) are not
only aversi a vera fide, but adversi verae fidei, averse from the true faith,
but adverse to it, by way of masculine opposition. The Aug. Lib. 4. ad Bonifac.
Cap. 9. Quid ergo pe^imus nisi ut fiant ex nolentibus volentes, ex
repugnantibus consentientes, ex oppugnantibus amantes?
Lord calls at the Last as well as at the first hour, and has often turned
even Saul's into Paul's. Upon these and other Grounds, I shall once more put my
self to the Toil of disquieting my self by writing.

-- Agricolis redit labor actus in orbem. We are Gods Husbandmen, and their
work is never done. I humbly beseech the God of all Grace and the Giver of
every good and perfect gift, that in the defense of his Grace which is his own,
I may be so mightily assisted, and wisely directed in the mannagment of this
great work that if through my exceeding great weakness, as is the Judgment of
diverse good men, I did give too much way to my passions at first, whilst I had,
(Pro. 26. 5.) in mine eye, but wandered somewhat from it by not hitting upon the
golden mean I may be more successful in my second Attempt, in following the
Counsel given in the foregoing verse. 4th. lest the Church and the world
complain of me, as well as of my Adversary.

That

Terra malos homines jam procreat atque pusillos, The Earth now a days brings
forth little and naughty men. Or turn that into a Necessary, which at worst is
but a Topicall fallible Maxim. Homines brevis Staturae sunt cholerici. Little
men are still fretfull, and choleric. SECT. II.
Now seeing I am called out to threshing again, I who (in this kind,) care not
how little work I have to do, (^or that I am extreme averse from the very Act
of writing, fairly, and so slowly,) I am very glad that my adversary has left
me no imaginable work beyond these four things. First, The Apologizing for my
former vehemence of Passion, and acrimony of Style. Secondly, The wiping off of
all considerable Aspersions from mine own name, Ministry, etc. and for the
performing the like good office for my special friends; as well as for all my
Neighbors round about me, and almost for all the Charets and horsemen of
Reformed Israel, whether considered single or in their Synodick Combinations,
or Associations: all who are by our Conceited Conqueror Triumphed over.
Thirdly, The enervating of the force of any thing which looks like new force,
either as relating to his whole Book, or referring to whole Chapters, or else
to any material Sections. Fourthly, The giving in reasons why I must and will
shift my hands from an endless Sophistical wrangler, unless he speed^ly
betake himself to the contracted Fist of fair reasoning, rather than the
extended Palm of his Rhetorications.

Ecce Rhodus, Ecce Saltus. CHAP. I. Assigning the Reasons of former Vehemence
of affection, and acrimony of Style.
SECT. I.
IT is most easy for me, who ought to be best acquainted with my own
disposition, and frailties (the rather because I have not wanted hints from my
very best friends, unto whom I do here most solemnly give thanks for them) for
to believe that in my passions against so dangerous an Enemy as my self and the
Church has met with, to have been somewhat overheated. He that knowing what I
know of him, and seeing, and feeling what I continually am forced to see and
feell, having made a very competent discovery of him, not by secret search, but
by his discourses, Letters, behavior, etc. Let him cast the first Stone at me,
whenever he shall meet with the like, and behave himself more modestly. In
the mean while, as for the But say as Dr. Twisse did, Lib. 1. vindic. p. 22.
Col. 2. Edit. 4. Si cui quid hic peccatum videbitur, si quid intumuit pietas,
si quid slagrantius actum est, ignoscat. 1 Samuel 17. 29.
main of my demeanor toward my Adversary (for as to some Extravagancies I can
be content neither to defend my self nor to be defended by any) let him believe
that I have in my way, and measure, all circumstances cast up, that to say for
my self which David had to his Eldest Brother Eliab, contesting with him, what
have I now done? Is there not a cause? Pray first, Against the false doctrines
and Leven of the Pharisees, against their demure, but indeed Hypocritical, and
superstitious piety, e^pecially when they opposed the power of true Piety by
their g^osse yet diminishing Glosses, Math. 5. and the necessity of his imputed
righteousness, by establishing their own Legal, inhaerent; was not our Psalm.
118. 12. Math. 21. 42. Luke 20. 17.
Savior suffi^iently zealous! And did not all the Apostles, but especially one
of the Chief of them, Gal. Romans Phil. 3. 2.
Saint Paul in almost all his Epistles imitate our Savior in this? And if
Arminian Doctrines, and their followers, and this Author, (how much soever he
may make a Sembl^nce to the contrary) be not well nigh as deeply guilty as the
Pharisees were, I can be content that my adversary should not by sixteen most
ridiculous Sophi^^icall Arguments, Philanthropy from p. 12. to 16.
but (if he were any ways able) by 66. serious and sound ones, prove me to be
an Arminian. Secondly, Do I at any time rise higher against him and his party,
than he does openly against the Orthodox, whom he Styles modest, immodest
Correct Copy. p. 23.
blasphemers; some of wdom are for the Ligonem Ligonem, Nunquam perichtatur
Religio, nisi inter R^verendissimos (Luther.)
of Gods being the Author of sin, whom he calls pernicious Haereticks,
Manichees, Helvidians, Carpocratians, ^urks, Stoics, and what not? to say
nothing of his private cruel causeless Epistolary Provocations. Thirdly, As
we have reason, so do we not think we do well when with some more then ordinary
vehemence we oppose even Low spirited P^ebei^n, Mechanic Sectaries,
maintaining the same opinions with our Author, though in a less bewitching
and in^naring way, and shall we be so partial as to think we are to u^e alesse
vehemence against those who are called to he Angels of Light, und yet prove
Angels of Darkness; Acts 20. 29. 30.
against those who are called to be Apostles, and yet (to use Bernards Pharse)
become Apostats, who are called to be Pastors, and yet indeed are Wolfs? Are
not these latter; at long run, like to do the Church of God much more and
lasting mischief, then if there were so many thousand Legions of mustered
Lightheaded and Light-heeled Munsterian Sectaries? Fourthly, Have I not, to
mine, and to his competent Judges (if he were not Superci^iously scornful of
them) offered Dedic. Epist. p. 9.
to do open penance for my Passions if they prove against me either
Scurrility, or Calumny? This latter indeed Mr. T. P. Philanthrop. Chap. 2.
vehemently asserts, and supposes (as he does every evil thing of me), but
never proves. Fifthly, Is this Laodicean Luke warm age (wherein as Africa of
old Africa semper aliquid apportet novi monstri.
so our England now does almost nothing else but produce new Monsters of Errors
and Haeresies) so full of heats, and zeal against seducers, and Grand Impostors
of all sorts, as that he who thinks it his duty, against all discouragements
whatsoever earnestly to oppose their opinions, practices, and Designs, to be
unreasonably blamed for so doing? If I have been able to observe any thing, two
things have brought us to that most woeful pass, that we are at, in all
Ecclesiastical matters; viz. some men's haire-brained fury, falsely called
zeal, destitute of all prudence and useful yea necessary Moderation, and again
other men's soft milky faint-hearted coldness, disguised under the pleasing
terms of prudence, fairness, peace, moderation, etc. If I show my self to be
against both Extremes as well as against one, I am sure none of Christ's
Cordial friends have any great reason to blame me. The age is not so full of
Orthodox cordial Zelots. Sixthly, Of all men in the world, (as by this time I
think it may almost appear to all the world, suppose me as guilty as can be in
my excesses Terent. Nec si ego dignus, etc.
of Passion, Style, and temper) yet Mr. T. P. of all others had least reason
for to lash me so severely for them. It is an ill world when herring-men
complain of Fishermen. Clodius accusat moechos, Catalina Cethegum. The greater
Delinquent punishes the smaller.

SECT. II.
All this notwithstanding, if any of my Reverend worthy Christian Brethren
shall (not so much say, as upon the serious pondering of all Circumstances
clear it to me) that I have deserved the hundred part of that blame, of that
scorn, and contempt, which upon supposition of my Delinquency, he casts not
only upon my person but my cause; I will promise to have thousands of thanks in
store for him. I will turn my Cheeks to such convincing Blows of theirs, nay
promise to account them as excellent soft healing oil, which may mend my heart
and manners but will never Psalm. 141. 5.
break my head.

SECT. III.
But as for my Adversary, though he vehemently plead Epist. Dedic.
that I ought to recant, to accept of his proffered Pardons, I am not yet
convinced by all his Gilded Rhetori^k that there is any reason for me to
accept of them from him; or the party which he is the Coriphaeus unto,
otherwi^e than in the words of Salvian Peto quid^m ven^am, quta irascimini, sed
non possum d^ce^e malum esse quod feci. Epist 4. ad Hyp. Et idem Lib. 4. de
Gubr^. Dei. Ego de nullo d co nisi de eo, qui in se id quod dico, esse
cognoscit. Si enim extra Conscientiam suam sunt quae dico, nequaquam ad
injuriam ejus spectant, cuncta quae dico, si autem in se esse novit quae
loquor, non de mea sibi hoc lingua diciaestimet, sed a conscientia sua.
I crave pardon, not because I have offended, but because you be offended. I
cannot say, it is evil that I have done, etc. I am sure he and his followers
do upon the matter ^ow me immortal thanks for some playfulnesse in my Style
now and then; for had it not been for this advantage which he did most
cheerfully lay hold of, neither I nor can many a wiser body tell what shift he
would have made to have composed so merry a Play-Book, for the behoof of his
Joviall Proselytes against their merry time. It was by them justly expected
that he, as being the far abler Jester, and right in his Element when he is at
it, should afford them other-guesse sport than I had done. Upon occasion
therefore of some of my Ludicrals, as upon occasion of the trippings of my
Printers, etc. which whiles he is most facetiously jeasting at, his Printer
trips in the like kind, Chap. 4. p. 66. he plays upon me before his Lords, and
Ladies, or rather with them, by dipping and betting Chap. 4. p. 66. as much as
ever the Philistines did upon Sampson; or, if you will, because I did now, and
then, adventure to strike this facetious and most dextrous Roscius with his own
playfull weapon, he lays the faster hold on that weapon, he plucks it out of
my hand, and falls as fiercely upon me as the man in whom the evil spirit was,
he leaps on me, overcomes me, and prevails against me, and makes me fly naked,
and wounded. Alas for me, I have now Caution enough, how I come into his
Ludicrall Circle again. Acts 19. 16.


CHAP. II. Containing an answer to all Considerable personal Miscellany
Matters.
SECT. I.
IT is plain to all not willing wilfully to blind their eyes, that Mr. T. P.
throughout his Philanthrophy does most inhumanely, and barbarously fall upon
the Names, Fames, Labors of the Greatest and best of all Reformers, as if he
had affected before all the world to make it evident how well he resembles
those Spanish Bulls, which a Spanish writer talks of, Jvan. Mar. spectac. c.
19.
who when they are let loose, fall sometimes furiously upon their drivers,
sometimes on the spectators, anon upon the passengers, etc. Even so most
violently Mr. T. P. makes his first assault upon me, who judge not my self
worthy to be named the same day, with those other whom he does most shamefully
abuse and traduce. I am indeed with him the ugly and unpardonable Monster, who
must needs be torn to pieces not by his Bulls horn, but by the sharp keen teeth
of his Rhetoric, but to be fully revenged on me he will not spare to make his
next assault upon the most Reverend pious and Learned aged Prefacers: the
third, upon the Neighboring Lecturers of Northampton, and Daventry: his fourth
upon the Eminentes^ Cha^iots, and Horsemen of Reformed Israel whether
foreign, or domestique such as Calvin, Rivet, Walaeus Vedelius, Amyraldus,
Bishop Usher, Hall, Davenant, King James. The fifth Upon whole Synods of them
at Dort, or Westminister; in a word upon almost all the Protestant Name, and
Glory.

. 2. And yet (which a man would exceedingly stand amazed at, who is not
acquainted with him) though he intended to make most cruel sport, he makes his
first entrance upon his Theater, in his Grave Philosophical Socratick Grown,
Epist. Deditate page 4.
and there reads Lectures of Morality, nay of Christianity, as if he intended
to be a Mirror of Patience, Moderation, Mercy, forgetfulness of all wrongs,
forgiveness, charity, etc. insomuch as he is not afraid to bestow some
Correptory Correction, upon his Cryptick Patron, The Person of honor and
integrity, for sharpening of his pen, a little against me the only deadly
public foe which he has alive, Philanthrop.
As he says, page 4.
(I think truly he does this most justly, be cause he would forestall him in
his own proper work, or be jealous of him that he was not like to Correct me
more sharply, yet more elegantly then himself). Thus frequent it is for men to
flatter before they stabb.

Tuta frequensque via est sub amici fallere nomen.. 3. But the Jest in all
this, is; just so soon as he had ended his grave Talk, before he had quite
laid his assumed Gown, or Vizard aside, he closes up his Oversevere Oration,
with a most facetious stinging, Peroration, about fourfooted Graecians hung
upon a beam, Dedicat. Epist. page 9.
and thus he ends his first Act, and Scene.

Horat.

Spectatum admissi risum teneatis Amici?
Mulier formosa superne, Desinit in piscem!
. 4. However, put he himself into what poisture he pleases for the abusing of
far better men then himself, it is most fitting that he should not escape
without some serious Check which I had thought distinctly to have given him
according to the several Rancks, and Orders mentioned by me p. 10. but for
Brevities sake (which I shall extremely affect in all the ensuing work,) I
give it him thus more immethodically, according as I find abuses against my
self or other dispersed up, and down, throughout his Satyricall Volume.

(First, Epist. Dedic. l. 7.). (5.). Mr. Wasp. I possible may Deserve that name
(habet and musca splenem) because I have adventured to deal with one of the
three Great Master Wasps of this Nation, who, I from my Soul do beseech God
that they may not prove I will not say more stinging then Wasps, but than the
sharpest hornets that ever were, against that very Church, which bred them and
brought them forth, and which they pretend to be of, whilst they undermine the
soundest doctrines that ever were taught in it. We had need to be warned
against them.

Deventum est ad Triarios. 2. Epist. Dedicat. p. 6. l. 1. 2. That I am in a
State of damdation, that I am merely allied to the Jesuits and Socinians.
Answ. first, Neither in p. 43. or in p. 174. of my Correptory Correction is
there any such Phrase to be found, as that of the State of Damnation, page 43.
I say, but Hypothetically, you are like to be looked on as some of the Planets
spoken of Jud^ v. 13. if you repent not the sooner, etc. And p. 174. I do
express not my opinion of him, but my fears (and that upon a very solemn
occasion which I would besee^h the Reader comparing of us both there, to look
after) whilst I say, I much fear that no man could write thus, but one well
nigh in the same Condition with Simon Magus. Let him give me leave to be
jealous over him with a Godly jealously. Secondly, I charge him not with
Jesuitism but in points Controverted, (viz.) of Predetermination, Free Will,
etc. My words are p. 15. in your Doctrines about this matter: now I was never
able to find but that since Judicious pious Reverend Mr. Perkins was by his
great Mr. Jacobus Arminius Arminius contra Perkins. p. 109. Ed^tan 8 Ludum
Batav. 1612. Jesuitarum in Theologicis his^e Controversiis judicium,
Dominicanorum judicio praefereudum esse clamat Grevin chovius, etc. Soilicet
nemirum credibile est Jesuitarum ^dia in Protestants, multo quam caeterorum
Pontificiorum temperatiora esse fide Gr^vinchovii DT wisse Li^. 2. vindic. p.
20. Col. 1.
provoked to answer Jesuit Bellarmines Criminations against the Orthodox, as
maintaining God to be the Author of Sin, but that all his followers out of him,
and other Jesuits have been most forward to make use of their objections
against us. Secondly, Nay he himself must needs confess this, if knowing but
what his own tenants are, he would but resolve us out of his 4th. Chap. p. 34.
Correp. Correct. Chap. 4. p. 34.
whether in the matters Controverted betwixt us, he hold not more with the
Jesuits of the Church of Rome, then with the Dominicans, etc. in the same
Church. Thirdly, To my best remembrance in all my book, I do not charge him
with directly assertive, but only with Consequentiall Constructive
Socinianisme, Corrept. Correct. p. 85. 178. and 157.
but how much farther I might without Calumny have promoted this accusation I
will leave to the intelligent Reader to Judge, if I had pressed what he
delivers in his uncorrect Copy, about the very Trinity, and which I am
confident enough no body durst have pinned upon him had he not given it under
his own hand p. 2. that unto the Authority of the Fathers we owe the Canon of
the Scriptures, and our belief of three Subsistences in one Subctance; and to
the same sense, though not in the same words in his Philanthrophy Philanth. p.
104. Chap. 3. Ibid Chap. p. 88. how will be able to prove the Trinity of the
persons in the unity of the Godhead?
when he says, that those who have overthrown the Authority of Tradition, and
of the Universal Church (which those have never done whom he would accuse of
it,) are utterly unqualified to prove the Baptism of Infants, the Sunday
Sabbath, the very Canon of Scripture, the Apostolicalnesse of the Creed, or
their Pretensions to the Ministry. Fourthly, possibly since his taking into his
bosom the Viperous Socinian Books of S. Castalio, and S. Episcopius, Philanth.
Chap. 3. p. 148. Chap. 4. 14.
I may have a much fitter opportunity to show how justly he may be suspected of
Socinianism.

Thirdly, Ibid. l. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. making me liable not only to
sequestration, but death it self (for you know that Servetus was burnt at
Geneva* for less then being a Socinian) and what would be done to the Papist
that should hold a Parsonage here in England?

Answ. Because here he charge deep: Si accus^sse suffecerit, quis erit
innocens? and for that it has a deeper reach then every body is aware of, Let
the Courteous Reader be entreated to give way that I answer it more fully, than
I shall any other by-matters from the main Controversy about Gods Decrees, etc.
First I trust some men of note and power in our Country will be ready (if need
be) to bear me witness, how tender I have been not only of his life, but of
his very Livelihood which he does enjoy, and long may he enjoy. Secondly, When
I confess he ought to be punished, Corrept. correct. p. 157.
and I trow he thinks I did that very sufficiently in my Correptory Correction
yet I say expressly that I would not have him burnt, as he was angry Servetus
was (as he says by Mr. Calvin Epist. ult.) Thirdly, Does he not much rather
expose my Diminutive Livelihood; (which yet to me I bless God for it, is
modicum sed bonum) unto danger, whilst he tells all the world, and so the late
erected Commissioners for ejecting Ignorant and Scandalous Ministers, that I am
a Sr. John Lack Latin; Philanth. p. 99. 106. etc.
That I preach those out of their patience, whom before he had recommended to
me for the power of Godliness, and now openly recommends to the World, p. 57.
as Persons of Quality and Judgment, and not only of an umblamable, but of a
most imitable converse, fearing God, and hating Covetousness etc. Fourthly, he
will never be able to prove that Calv^n had any further procuring hand (his
Phrase is procurante id Calvino in the Margin) than by discovering Servetus his
Monstrous Heresies and Blasphemies unto the Christian Magistrate, and
acquainting them upon that occasion what was their duties to do with such a
horrid Blasphemer, so desperately pertinacious as he was; And for his
negotiation in this matter he had the solemn thanks of the eminentest Christian
Protestant Churches of any considerable note in those times, As that of the
He^^^tians. Calv. Epist. p. 155. Tigurines. Idem. Ibid. Epist. ^^^ob. 1552.
B^rnates Epist. 1553. Scaphusians Epist. October. 1553. ^^sileans Epist. ad
Senatum Gere vens. October. 1553.
and which those softer Protestants liked, whom Mr. T. P. will only seem to be
ravished with, as Bucer, Calv. Sulcero. Epist. p. 154. Is (viz. Servetus) est
de quo sid lis Christi Minister et sa^ctae memoriae D. Bucerus; cum alioqui
mansueto esset ingenio, pro sugg^s^^ d^nuntiavit degnum esse qui avulsis
visceribus Discerperetur Bullingerus Calv. Si ergo h^^c rependeret amplissimus
Senatus, quod blasphemo nebuloni debetur, totus orbis cerneret Genev^nses
blasphemos odisse haereticos, qui vere sunt pertinaces haeretici, Gladio
Justitiae persequi and Glo^^am M^jestatis D^vinae vindicare, Melanchron. Epist.
Octo. 14. 1554. Post Serveti comb^stionem legi Scrip um tuum, in quo resut isti
^uculenter horrendas Serveti blasphemias, ac filio Dei gratias ago qui suit
(...) hujus tui agonis. Tibi quoque Ecclesia, and nunc and ad p^steros
gratudinem debet et d^b^bi^: Tuo Judicio porsus assentior. ^ffirmo etiam
V^stros Magistratus just fecisse quod hominem blasphemum reordine judicata
interf^ce^unt.
Bullinger, and his Melanchton. Fifthly, To the worlds end he will never be
able to make it good that Servetus was burnt for less then being a Socinian:
unless he will maintain that such a compound of Heresies and Blasphemies, and
devilish spite in the venting of them all as Servetus was, (who did nothing
else but belch out most execrable Blasphemies against the Trinity, the Deity of
Christ, ^^silienses Epist. October. 18. 155^. Servetus non simplicem, sed ex
multis impietatibus consiae am haereticorum Larvam profi^etur, puta Arrii,
Marcionis, Sabellii, Photini, Manichaei, Pelagii, et Cae^erorum, etc. Christus
ill^ est, ^^ signum Contradictions, cui nec essentiam Divinitatis, ^eque
H^^^stasi^ nec carnis nostrae veritatem, neque animam humanam relinquat etc.
Servetus Hispanus T. ^itate^ aetern^m Dei, triceps monst^um et Ce^herum quendam
Tripartitum, den^q, imag^n^^i^s D^os, illus^^^cs, ac tres spiritus daemoniorum
appellitat, aeternam Dei Majestatem, nesan^e and ho^^ibi^iter blasphemat.
Tigurin Epist. 1553.
not fit to be named but in a Language which most people understand not, was
less Erroneous then F. Socinus who maintained indeed diverse of the same
opinions with Servetus, but in a far more refined sense, and qualified way.
Fifthly, In this passage he does sufficiently insinuate how true he is to that
cruel Grotian design of extirpating all Calvinistick Protestants, as they be
called Riveti Dialys. Grotian Discuss. G^oti^^ nob^s (id est P^otestanti^^^)
been voluiss^, nec fuisse, quantum potuit in nostros persecu^ionu^ incentorem
and i^^^ndi^rium n^mo cr^det sanus qui postrema illius scripta lege^it, in qui
us omnibus pacem oss^^t, ut no^is sol^^ b^ll^m indicatur.
for maintaining (as they give out) them to hold, God to be the Author of sin,
that their Creed is full of the Principles of Rebellion against Kings and all
who are in Authority, for that they would have pertinacious Haereticks to be
punished by the Civil Christian Magistrate; in the mean while they are for
giving free allo^ance in their Grotian Church and Republic to all sorts of
Christians Quocunque tandem nomine Christianos, so they be but free from the
grosser sort of moral Scandals. That I suspect not this vainly that Mr. T. P.
is of this, Grotian Caball, for the promoting of this Lamb like Design for,
sooth, I will be Judged by his Jumbling of Presbyterians, Quakers, Anabaptists,
and Witches together. Philanthrop. p. 8. by his, first, quoting it out of Mr.
Hooker, but where he says not; nor as I think will he ever be able to show,
that such as he calls Presbyterians Philanth. Chap. 14. p. 10.
as he knows most of them he calls Calvinists to be, (might do well enough to
live in a wilderness, but not in a Kingdom or Commonwealth,) for, looking
upon others differing from them in their opinions (that is their mistakes) as
Heathens, and so to be used as vessels of wrath. Secondly, whilst he expresses
so much tenderness to the execrable dust of Servetus, he does not express any
the least resentment of the immoderate severity of the English Bishops in Queen
Elizabeth her days Philanth. Chap. 4. p. 15.
for procuring the execution of Penry at Tiburne for but publishing Libells
against the Church Government, a person sure how erroneous soever otherwise,
not upon that account alone (and other then errors on this hand I know none
that he was ever accused of) to be deemed by the one thousand part so deserving
of Death as a blasphemer of the Trinity a maintainer of the souls mortality,
etc. See at large the Articles proved against him by the Geneve Ministers.
O^e^a Miscellan. Calvin. Genevae in Fol. p. ^07. and inde etc.
However God forbid, God forbid, and I hope ever to pray it, from my very soul
that any Presbyterians or any other good Christians of any other Denomination
amongst us should because of these angry expressions of Mr. T. P. sharpen any
white the more the sword of justice against him. They I trust have not so
learned Christ. Sixthly, If he do but know in what age he lives in, and be not
altogether a Stranger in Israel as to the public state of present affairs
amongst us, seems he not by writing what he does. Phila. Chap. 1. p. 8. Chap.
3. p. 72. Chap. 4. p. 15. etc. even to be enamoured with his own Sequestration?
for either he pr^ctiseth in his public ministry those many pretty Liturgicall
knacks, which he does so zealously plead for, or he does not? If the first, he
knows at what Peril he does it; if the latter, he proclaims himself a
timorous unconscionable Coward to all the world. The Lord he show Mr. T. P. a
way how to leap out of his Snare: and this the Lord knows is all the harm I
wish him. Seventhly, Let him ask mutatus Polemo whether Jesuits in England are
in more danger for holding Livings now adays then they were, in the days of
Yoar?

Fourthly, Of the same page to the eight last lines thereof, and to what he
has in the Margin there, about the miscarriage of my former papers, about my
9. Months Labors, Epist. Dedicat.
with those which are publicly exstant about the Assistance of the Presbytery,
etc.

Sol. In all which he does most miserably mistake himself, and I doubt in
diverse of them most wilfully. First, My first Papers against his uncorrected
copy (as he calls it) never miscarried which yet are in my Desk; and never were
intended for Publication, but in case of extreme provocation. Secondly, his
Corret Copy came not into my hands till the midst of April 1655. and my
Correptory Correction, was drawn up against it, as he may see, Corrept.
Correct. p. 232. Lin. ult.
Sept. 26. 1655. I did purposely set it down for his use, Advertis. to the
Reader, p. 1.
toward the preventing of the use which he here makes of my delays in
thrusting my labors into the Press, which, as diverse can tell, I did for
reasons for the which he ought to thank me, not to flout me. Thirdly, If I had
been about a work of 30. Sheets as he confesses, Horat. nonum prematur in
annum.
not 9. Months but 9. Years, some would have applauded my discretion for it.
Fourthly, If he look into his Letter which he had under my hand and seal, he
will find that what I say about the Common Consent of the Presbytery, cannot be
understood of their helping of me in the Composing of a Book for me, but of
their advising of me whether a Book were necessary to be wrote against him? but
if I had understood it of the former, I needed not have been ashamed of it, but
should have therein followed the grave Council of no less then the whole
Gallican Church. Ecclesiastic* Discipline of the Churches of France published
in English (1640.) Chap. 1. about the O^dination of Ministers, Cannon. 13.
Fi^thly, That de facto none of my Reverend Brethren had any hand, or head, in
the Composing of my Book* if it please him, he shall, when he will, have it
attested under as many hands as ever Briareus is said to have had. 6. If I had
conferred with any about the drawing up of my Book, with whom was it more
likely for me to have done it, than with my great friends and Encomiasts as he
calls them. Page 122.
And can he believe that they and a Clubb of wits besides, of which Page 122.
elsewhere he talks at Random, would have made, and advised, in the putting
forth of a Book, not to deserve (as he bragges) Resistance from him
Advertisement to the Reader. p. 7.
to be so much as (...), but to be below a Confutation. Oh the most in^upe^ab^e
Conqueror Mr. T. P. What others may think I cannot tell, but of one so
conceited of himself, I should be apt to conceive (to use his own expression)
that such intimations are apt to Render him as odious as any Antichrist.
Seaventhly, He withal his goodly works Correct Copy, sinner impleaded,
Philanthropy, all put forth in less then a twelvemonth.
makes surely more haste then good speed, they are far more sharp at their
Teeth then in their Eyes, they do not acutum cernere but mordere. Epist.
Dedicat in text and Margin. p. 8. About what he has of my fictions against
him, of taking up things upon bare report and simple hearesay, about what I
charge him with, Corrept Correct 39. concerning his being above sin, and
concerning the denial of the Lawfullnesse of second Marriages, p. 73. of
Ministers, etc.

Answ. That I may at once quit my self from the Aspersion of having indulged to
any vain Credulity against him, I must first once for all Protest before God
and men, that I know but three things in all my book, which I did so much as
seem to give credit to against him, and which yet I did not take up upon bare
hearesay etc. The first is, that which here he has and which again he makes a
great stir about, Philanthrop. Chap. 3. p. 81. 82. 83. 2 The second, is that
about the 600. Copies mentioned by him Chap. 3. p. 54. 55. The third is, about
the Dialogue of two Ladies about Artificial beauty mentioned from p. 150. to
552. of Chap. 3. Secondly I say in reference to the first. First* If my Reader
will be pleased once more to turn to my Correptory Correction, p. 39. he will
find that I used my utmost care and di^igence to inform my self of the truth of
it, and I farther back it there, with a probable argument from what he has in
his Uncorrect Copy. The Minister from whose mouth I took up both the Reports,
about his maintaining himself to he above sin, and about his Denial of the
Lawfullnesse of second Marriages of Ministers, is not a man of mean note in the
Ministry, nor far off, with whom since this last Book of his came forth, I
have diverse times conferred about these Reports, and he professes that upon
any just occasion he will justify them to his face; and stands amazed at his
impudent denial, of what he then said to him; Me thinks therefore his
Marginall finger p. 81. is but like that of the Naughty one who bespeaks his
own impudence with his fingers, Prove. 6. 13.

Secondly, I cannot but believe, had he not Publicly brought in a large Plea,
for the Innocence of Infants Chap. 4. p. 25, 26, 27. but that the same front of
his would bear him out in the denial of what a person of true honor and
integrity told me, as having heard it too from his own mouth, that he called a
Waggish Lad of about four years old an Innocent, free from sin, who yet I trow
has by this time committed some kind of Actual sins.

Thirdly, If his Public and Domestic Confessions of which he speaks do all
sound a contradiction to, or a Cordial Retractation of what he formerly said
to my Reverend Brother, I am heartily glad of it, for the good of his Soul, and
long I wish he may with St. John 1 John 1. 8. 9.
continue in that sound and humble acknowledgment of his sins: but I fear me
he may quickly revert to his former presumptuous sayings, if he embrace too
fast the Tenants of his new friend S. Castalio, Philanthrop. Chap. 3. p. 148.
149.
who has written a whole Book about the Perfection of Christians, and their
immunity from sin here upon the face of the Earth S. Castal. de obedientia deo
praestanda. p. 295. ed^t. in 12. Ares dorsii. 1578.
.

Totus orbis exercet histrioniam. Thirdly, As to the second about the 600
Copies mentioned Chap. 3. p. 54. Answ. First, Either my memory is intolerable
false to me, or so many were the Number of Copies with W. C. told me of.
Secondly, If since, fear of frowns, or hopes of favor, make him deny his words
I cannot help it. Thirdly, As yet he acknowledges that within the time
mentioned by me, Correct Copy, p. 1. about 200. were divended; too many in all
reason for the use of a private friend. Fourthly, p. 55. he does so hug
himself with the conceit of the quick spreading of his Books, as that he
apprehends not that I had done him any great wrong, but honored him rather by
publishing that saying of W. C. Thirdly, As for that of the Ladies Dialogue
mentioned Chap. 4. p. 150. 151. Answ. First, A most Conscionable able divine,
who I think makes as much Conscience of not telling, or believing lies as any
man (in England), had by three Arguments which he produced, almost brought me
into a belief of the truth of what I say about it, Corrept Correct. p. 155. and
therefore I did set it as a Memorandum down not in the Text, but in the Margin
of my Book, from whence I cannot tell why the Printers took it in to the Text.
Secondly, Before I did send my Copy to the Press suspecting the passage
somewhat too leight, I did draw a deleatur over it, but it seems not so full
an one but that the Printers did Read somewhat of that which was in the Margin,
and put it into the Text, with an expression, viz. that of mentioned before, by
which unto all Intelligent Readers they have made it evident (seeing no such
thing is any where else directly or indirectly in Text or Margin mentioned in
my Book) that what they expressed there, should have been suppressed. Thirdly,
If my papers sent up to the Stationer about the ERRATA, were over-viewed, I
little doubt but that it will be found, that I gave express order to blot out
that passage, which yet they did not, as they did not diverse others for fear of
multiplfying the Catalogue of Errors which I am very certain I ordered the
rectification of. 4. So soon as any Copies came printed to my hands, I did
every where Correct that Passage, as may be seen in most Copies sold in this
Country.

Thirdly, If I were too blame to believe any of these Bare hearesayes against
him, I wonder* how he will any way excuse himself for Crediting and Publishing
many Threes of Palpable untruths against me, for some of which I fear me, he
has scarce so much as hearesayes to bear him out in them. I Will only briefly
touch upon some few of them as they suddenly come to my Pen out of his Book,
without so much as mentioning a world more of such Light, and Frivolious Stuff
not fit to be graced with any serious Answers.

First, he averrs with confidence. First Philantth. p. 46. and more largely to
the same purpose Chap. 3. p. 122. 123.
That in my first Letter it appears, that this (viz.) of his Chief Parishioners
being of his Congregation, was the Ground of all his Correptory Correction.
Answ. First, Yet elsewhere speaking of this ^
he professes only to guess that this was the only ground of his Correptory
Correction from me. Secondly, It is notoriously false that this was the only
ground, or, in my thoughts, any Ground at all, of my first writing against his
private papers, which were scattered up and down the Country and confuted by
me, long before the Parishoners he speaks of, had any being in this place.
Thirdly, Yet suppose that his filching of my Parishoners from me had been one
of the Chief Grounds of my writing against him, what fault had there been in
this for me to be jealous over them with a Godly jealousy, that by him they
might not be leavened with Arminianism, Socinianism, Pontificianism in part? I
hope in Gods good time they may have Grace to forgive me this wrong. Secondly,
He enlarges himself Correptory Correction p. 56. 57. 72.
in the justifying of his Schismatic practices against my Parish, where he
first tells the world that I frighted my chiefest Auditors out of my fold, who
thereupon came to his, by way of Refuge; I preached them out of their patience,
I wearied them with my railing, they come to him no less p. 72.
then two Miles Summer and Winter. Secondly, He be like as knowing them better
than ever I did, highly commends their Qualities and Conversations as being of
a most imitable p. 57.
converse fearing God and hating Covetousness, etc. Answ. First, Though in all
this, which for the Carrying on his vile designs he cannot but know how much
advantage he gives me by way of Retaliation to do him a mischief, if at least
he believe a word (which I think he does not) of what elsewhere he writes
Philanthrop, chap. 1. p. 3.
that it is in my power to do him many a shrewd turn. Secondly, And though
every body would have reason to believe, that it were as proper for me to
vindicate my proceedings among my Parishioners as for him to traduce them at
his plea^ure, who is Pastor of another Parish. A great Prelate of this Land
thought he spoke reason, when upon an occasion he asked, What has Patriarch
Sibbs to do in my diocese? Yet Thirdly, that it may appear that I am in
Perfect Charity with my deluded, and abused Neighbors, and because I love not
to rubb up all old sores in a place where the first original of our
differences are very well known, I will only crave leave in my own defense,
with truth and modesty, yet with some kind of Pleasantness to say; First, That
before they came to place, there were there people of as great Quality, and to
speak within Compass, of as good Judgment and understanding, imitable
converse, fearing God, and hating covetousness, who did most cheerfully comply
with the Ministry here, nay who then, and since have upon all occasions
expressed their good resentment of the pains which was taken with them.
Secondly, They cannot without wronging their own souls, as well as my Ministry,
say Page 25.
that they were my Text as well as my Auditors, spoken to, and against, from
the very same pulpit as their fawning Tertullus pleads for them, unless
possibly, and yet not out of design neither, they call that Preaching against
them, when those sins are preached against, which not my Tongue but their
Conscience might tell them that they or some of theirs were guilty of. Nor can
they say that they were preached out of their Patience, if at least they were
after a Psalm Read, and a Staff. 2. or 3. sung, impatient to hear my Sermon,
with prayers before and after, of but just an hour long, as near as I could by
an hour Glass guess it, who for diverse late years do ad clepsamminum dicere.
Thirdly, As for their Caroching in the Winter to him as well as in the Summer
through thick and thin I can say nothing, but that I have long since heard,
that far fetched and dear brought is meat for Ladies: if they had been pleased
to stay at home, their Spiritual food might have cost them less, been as
wholesome, though not so gaudy, and they have been as fatt, and well liking as
to any spiritual improvement, but their mind to them their Kingdom is.
Thirdly, That, Philanth. p. 7.
I confessed to very many, it must cost me a round sum of money to get my Book
to be printed. Answ. First, I who in my Native Country had never any the least
occasion to commit any thing to the press, might suspect some such matter, and
speak of it to some few of my friends. Secondly, One who was acquainted with
the ways of Printers did a little scare me about a sum of money; yet as ill
as he thinks me be friended, my very friends in this Country (would I have
made use of their offers,) would gladly, for the printing of the Book, have
defrayed much more then was demanded. Thirdly, After the money matter was any
way talked of, I did as many can witness, out of pure respect to this Budget
or Vineyard, forbear the Committing of my Book to the Press. Fourthly, When
upon an insolent provocation from my Antagonist and the earnest Instigation of
good men, I did but signify my Peremptory Resolutions to get my book to be
printed, though Stationers have reason enough to be shie of Printing of Books
upon arguments worn threadbare by often writing, yet I had no less than two
Letters from two prime Stationers, and that before the book went out of my
Study, that they would freely Print it, and now sure I am the printing thereof
will cost me nothing but what I did Voluntary gratify my choice friends with,
and a very small matter which I flung away upon a few Workmen at the Press.
Fourthly, Philanth. page 56.
That I rayled against him to all sorts of people, that I cursed him to some,
and preached him down in my two Lecture Sermons. Answ. First, The first is
impossible because I converse with but very few, besides those who are of my
own Cloth and profession. Secondly, I dare say that those few others with whom
I have had any discourse about him, if they will but speak truth, can tell that
in their hearing, even to the offense of some of them, they have heard me much
oftener commend the Gallantnesse of his parts, than to pour out any thing
against him, which (without the greatest Calumny) can be termed railing.
Secondly, The second about Cursing of him to some, is much more impossible to
be proved. Answ. First, For although I know not who those some may be, yet I am
sure I may lay down my life upon it, that for above this thirty years, never
did Rash oaths or cursing come out of the doors of my Lips; yea, I am sure of
it, since that time in my greatest haste and heats, I did never protest so
high, as by my faith, by my troth, or by my Truly. Secondly, I have and shall
daily pray for him, as this I am sure he wants, and that will be far from
Cursing of him. As to the third my preaching against him at Lectures. Answ.
First, I will not deny but that I have not only twice but oftener preached
against the matters which he and other Arminians hold, and that the rather
because as it appears by their Books and Pamphlets, they do once more raise up
great Storms and Tempests against our English Church, and that from all
Quarters.

Virg: Vna Eurusque Notusque ruunt, creberque procellis Africus. And if he will
needs interpret this to be preaching against him, let him so, if he please; but
then with reason he cannot say what he does elsewhere, that he has no more
then one public Enemy appearing against him, I trust he has yet in the very
Ministry Many hundreds, who very often Preach against him. Fifthly; Philanth.
in the Conclusion. Chap. 4.. 6.
he says that when he considers how many men were employed in the Cor-Rection
of every Sheet of my Book, besides the ordinary Correct. and with how absolute
a Liberty they were impowored, he cannot but look on my Apology, as the
deepest instance of my Invention. Answ. This is so pa^pably false, absurd and
foolish, that I wonder who they were, who were so Momish, if he did not
forgetnese things out of his own heart, as to put such stuff into his head;
for, first it is but too well known to me, and my Stationer, that no man living
putting any thing to the Press had fewer of any considerable understanding in
divinity to overlook the several Sheets after they were once sent up to the
Press. Secondly, Though I named two Divines of Note in the City whom I
requested my Stationer in case of need to repair unto, when about the
difficulty of the hands his workmen should be at a stand, yet that, to my great
prejudice, was never done. Thirdly, I had never Sheet sent unto me for to
Correct here in the Country, but when the Workmen had wrought it off, and
because they never came to me but on the Saturdayes in the afternoon, and were
by Ten a Clock on the Moonday Morning next after, to be sent back again, I
could never have the overviewing of them, but when I had no less then two
Sermons, and a Catechism Lecture to attend to, as well as to the Cor-Recting of
my Papers. Fourthly, By what he drops here, and may be gathered if need were by
diverse others Passages of his Book, it appears, that for furnishing of himself
with a Collection of Tales against me, he has by his Silver hook, hooked in
very Printer's Boys to be his Hictorians, or rather Legendaryes; them has he
bribed to let him have the Hansel of my Papers, before they were so much as
sent to me, and yet forsooth elsewhere we are very demurely told, how loath he
was to follow me into the Press, how long like Buridans Ass, Advertis. p. 2.
he was deliberating what he should do with me.

Simia ect simia, etiamsi aurea gestat insignia. Fifthly, If the Apology which
I made in the Conclusion of my Book were the deepest Instance of my Invention,
I am sure my Invention was shallow enough: never shall I deserve a place in
Polydore Virgil, de Inventoribus rerum; and without all peradventure his
Judgment was as blunt, as my Invention was trifling, to spend ^o large a
Chapter as his Third is, which by far is the Greatest in his Book, to discover
and confute my Extraordinary Invention, thus magno conatu magnas agit nugas.
The sixth, and last in which I will instance (for I am weary in Confuting such
froathy false stuff) is, that I was at Cost to get my Publication, Philanthr.
p, Antepenult.
to be published in the ordinary News Book. Answ. A thing so notoriously false
as that, had he not told me this in Print, and that by a mere accident one of
the Ministers at Table said, that he had seen my name in a Diurnall, to this
very day I could not have known of any such thing, as that my name, and Book
was put into the News Book (2ly.) But truly as I am told it, by one of his
friends, it is foelix infortunium, a happy unhappiness, that not long after
his name, and his Philanthropy appeared in an ordinary weekly News-Book, though
I was assured by the same hand, that he gave express order that it should not
be done: as I would not have failed to have done, had I known any to have been
bigg with any such matter.

And thus by this taste of Tales Collected against me, it will be easy in the
rest to guess what a Tom tell-Truth, our Mr. T. P. is like to prove.

An ADVERTISEMENT To the READER.
SECTION. I.
FIrst, L. 3. I found a Volume of about 30. Sheets, etc. Answ. First, By his
frequent mentioning of these 30. Sheets, which I will not say 30. times, but I
am sure he does very often Complain of, Philan^h. Chap. 1. p. 1.
it is plain they do very much stick in his Stomach. Secondly, How they could
well be sewer; by way of answer to his 74. quarto pages, I think no body can
well tell, all that being done, which I give an account of, in my Epist.
Dedicatory Cor-Rect. Epist. Dedic^t. p. 8.
. Thirdly, He has made a shift to equal me very nigh in the number of Sheets,
and yet has chiefly meddled with my Playfulnesse, or my Passions; in his
Phrase, with my Style and Temper, omitting to touch upon the 20th. part, as any
body may see; of all that which was in me Substantial, and Argumentative.

SECT. II.
Secondly, page 2. l. 2. with Margin, The several men of this Combination it
is his own expression of himself, in his p. 48. Answ. First, He is there as
every where else excellently good at carping at words and Syllables even as
Claudius was at Catching at flies Suet. in Claudio.
. Secondly, I trow there is no more harm in the bare word of Combination, than
there is in the word Association. Thirdly, The least dram of Charity if it had
been in him toward me, would have enabled him, if he had thought it
ill-sounding, to have interpreted it by what I have in the Close of my
Postscript dedicatory out of Cyprian de Confederatione Deificae Disciplinae,
and of that other in moving within the mere Orb of an Ecclesiastical sphere.

SECT. III.
Postscript. circa finem.
Thirdly, Ibid. Advertisement l. 8. A very thin Scholar.

Answ. First, I am thinn enough in all reason, yet for thickness almost able
to compare with him, who will needs call himself the Lean Cleric. of the
Country, Philanthr. Chap. 2. 44. with Cor-Rept. Correct. p. 20.
when I wrote the Beau-Cleric. Secondly, Unto this Objection frequently
inculcated upon a very malevolent design of rendering my Labors useless, I
had thought to have said nothing; yet now must say something for the
countermining of his Plots. 3ly. I find it still to be the great business of
Arminians, and profane persons thus to depretiate their Adversaries that all
Wisdom and Learning may seem to be monopolized by them. Thus Arminius wants
Learning, and accuratenesse in Mr. Perkins Armin. Contra Perkins. p. 19. 119.
49.
. Bolton before his Conversion speaks of him as of a passing mean Scholar Mr.
Bagshaw History of his life and death Sect. 6.
. P. Bertius when no meaner men then L. Trelcatius and Fr. Junius appeared
against Arminius tr^gically complains of their want of Learning. De Sanctorum.
persever. and Apostas. Epist. dedicat. 2. Video collapsam esse veram illam
docendi and differendi Co^suetudinem: quidvis hodie dixisse refutasse est non
aestimantur rerum ponder, a sed tituli solum librorum leguntur.
. Diatrib. de Amiss. Great. p. 3. de disputatoribus hodiernis optat, ut aut
eruditi essent, aut se non eruditos esse: scirent, verum nunc contra comparatum
est, and quo quisque ab omni ^rudita Doctrina, and varia Lectione, impara^ior,
eo m^jori cum supercilio, and confidentius de Gravissimis quibusque
quaestionibus judicium sihi arregat. Prov^n^unt Oratore's novi, stul^i,
Adolescentuli*
Drunken dick Thomson, a man bewitched with the Conceit of his own parts as
much as any Babylonian intoxicated by the Cup of the Whore, does the like, and
that very Tragically. Fourthly, Though possibly my Adversary may by much have
got the Start of me and probably be so well conceited of himself that in the
way of Schollership he has sped as well as ever any of Raimun'd Sebond's
Scholars did, for whom their Master undertakes n his Theolog. naturalis in
Prologo.
to make them Perfect Divines in a Month, and that without knowledge to prepare
them, so much as the Knowledge of Grammar, and yet that they should not be
proud of it neither. I say however this may be, I cannot be so hardly
opinionated against my self but that after some pains I may have attained to
some little something. I remember to have Learned (and that perchan^e before
Mr. T. P. had got so much in Latin, from the Jewish Rabbis these sentences.

(...)

And if I after much pains taking have got nothing, I must needs cry out,
reddat mihi minam Diogenes, I have reason to complain that from the 18th. year
of my age to this very hour, Men of the greatest note for Learning and Piety
have much abused me, and themselves, in giving large Attestations to my
Schollariship, when they have not been solicited unto it by any thing but
their own forwardness. Fifthly, But suppose me as very a Dunce as he would
represent me to the world to be, how much more Venial is it for me unwarily to
break Priscians head, than for him, as I have showed, to break St. Paul's hand,
who, as no mean Scholar has it, was ignorant of the Greek Grammar Paulum
nescivisse Gracam Grammaticam ab Hieronymo observatum affirma: Erasmus, in
Apol. Hieronym. adversus Ruffin.
Sixthly it would cause some mirth in any body to observe by what Mediums he
labors to prove this Charge against me. Let the Courteous Reader be pleased to
give me leave curtly to run over the chief of them, and for the rest Valiant
quantum valere possunt, I think they will signify but little.

First, Chap. 3. p. 34. He thought Demon had bin of the newter Gender, by
virtue of Graecula, vel in on, vel in um. Answ. First, Not to take Sanctuary
from Divinity, wherein it will not be determined whether Demon be mas faemina
or neutrum. Secondly, If it had pleased him to have turned to p. 46. l. 11, in
Margin, according to my Emendations in Catalogo Erratorum Cor-Rept. Cor-Rect.
p. 46.
he might have found it printed r^ght, Daemonium Meridianum for to that was my
allusion in the preface. Thirdly, It is well known to my Stationers and
Printers that the Sheets of my Dedicatories came to me last, and that that
sheet in which Demon Meridianum was printed came not to me, before I received
from them diverse Dozens of books completely wrought off, and bound up.
Fourthly, I can now easily discern, why he kept such close Intelligence with
Printers Boys, and why he was so peremptory not to admit of a Cor-Rect Copy,
by my order sent unto him under my own hand, viz. because ^e would not deprive
himself of the sport which he intended to make with the Sphalmata Typographica.
Philanthrop. Chap. 3. p. 60.
Secondly, He used the word Topicall Cor-R^pt. Cor-Rect. p. 6.
because it seemed a fine word, not because he understood it. Answ. Yet the
very bare reading of the next words following that expression, will Convince
his Impudence in his Assertion. In them I say, What they can produce would be
as Demonstrative as any in Euclides Elements.

Thirdly, But instead of all instances I would beseech the Reader to turn to
what he has against me in his Chap. 3. p. 99. Philanthr. p. 99. Cor-Rect.
Copy, p. 49. Cor-Rept. Cor-Rect. p. 192.
and compare it well with what he writes in his Cor-Rect Copy, and what my
return is in my Cor-Reptory Cor-Rect. and then let him tell me what he thinks
of his Disingenuity, and unconscionablenesse, there to make a hard shift to
make me a false Latinist; he must first most necessarily deny his own Italian
Proverb quoted by him Troppo Convina la virtue col vitio, to be Italian, and
maintain it to be Latin, whilst he replies to me, that he cannot but avow he
wishes too he had wrote in Latin, for sure then he would not have be^n so
tedious in his Cor-Reptory Cor-Rection. Thirdly, He Cor-Rect Copy, p. 48.
is forced to make a piece of false Latin, in turning Ni, as it is rightly
written in my Corrept. p. 90. in Margin. into his In Marginis angustia
prohibuisset, Fourthly, He calls upon Readers to judge with him, whether multa
and admodum rara be not false Latin, or false Sense, who if any body should
present him with a Cabinet full of many and rare Gemms would not think there
were false Latin, or Non sense in Gemmis istis tam multis quam raris. Fifthly,
He adds his Marginall finger to it, which what it signifies in that place
against me, I think no body can tell, unless it were his frontlesse front, and
scornful spirit. He with an especially tells his Reader a Notoriously lie,
(pardon the phra^e) both in Text and Margin; that I take Derelictos, r^ther
than Defectio to have been the Substan^ive, at least the Antecedent, to cujus
the Relative, where the ocular inspection of my text e^inceth the contrary to
every man, not willing to be blinded. My words are, Cor-Rept. Cor-Rect. p. 197.
Malorum, (viz.) Angelorum Defectio arguit fu^sse derelictos cujus [supple,
derelictionis non defectionis] non potest alia adduci causa quam reprobatio,
and pray does not here the Relative Cujus relate to the Substantive
Derelictionis and not to Derelictos? Fou^thly, 4. 27, 28, 29. He is as
Rhetorical as he is able, as it appears by the pleasure which he takes in
Clinches. Such as Notes of no good note courted at Court, (...), and face etc.
with other such elegancies and Rhetorications, which some little Children of
six years old, ^ave not been able to endure. Answ. First, Sure he forgets his
name sake, and no meaner man then a so called Reverend Father in God, who for
clinches in the most famous Auditories in Oxford, and at Westminster, was
exceedingly famous in this kind. Some men's Paradise is a pare of dice, All
Houses are become Ale houses, Divines become Dry Vines, What was it so in the
days of Noah? ah Noe. Secondly, Diverse of these like-^ounding Phrases were
hardly so much as thought on by me when I wrote them down. Thirdly, If all in
this kind must be cried down; and I am sure I had not many of them, then in
diverse places, the Holy Scriptures must be blamed, where Isaiah 5. 7. no less
then twice, in one verse we have

Esa. 5. 7. (...) Esa. 28. 10. (...) Amos 5. 8. (...) such kind of allusions in
words which cannot be expressed in the English; And so likewise in the New
Testament, in diverse places. Romans 1. 29. (...) v. 31. (...), Math. 21. 41.
(...) Romans 12. 3. (...). Mark 7. 16. (...), 2 Cor. 6. 8. (...), v. 9. (...). v.
10. (...), 2 Cor. 4 8. (...). And I hope wi^er ^olke than Children of six years
old may be able to endure these expression^.

Fourthly, To the chief matters objected against my very Reverend, and Learned
friends, the Encomiasts, as he call^ them, Advertisement to the R^ader, p. 4.
who were p^ea^ed to speak well of my Book. Them he abuses either all 1.
Conjunctim together: 2. or two of them divisim, singly by themselves. Against
them all, he has to say, That, They have bewrayed their Affections, if not
their Judgments, by way of Prolusion to Mr. Barlee, and have done a kind of
public penance, by making it known to the world, what things they do approve
of, etc. Answ. First, All the world who are acquainted with those Learned and
good Divines know them so well, as never to be likely to believe, that out of
mere respect to me, and my Book, they would have recommended to the world, and
the Church, and that at such a time, the work of an impotent Scribler as the
says Philanth. Dedic. Epist.
which deserves only to dye in silence, and to prevent ill smells to be quietly
buried in silence, to sleep upon a stall, Chap. 3. p. 55.
etc. I say all men acquainted with them, and their Behavior will as soon
believe, that they would rather have suffered their hands to have been cut off
from their wrists, than to have been accessory to any such foul crime so
contrary to the Churches welfare, and their own Credits. Secondly, I trust
they will never have cause to do penance for bearing witness to the Truth,
which for so many years they have preached, or for strengthening the hands of
their poor Friend, and Fellow Laborer who never had, nor can be phansied to
pretend a power over them to make them speak in his behalf, any thing, but
what they judged most meet and seasonable. Secondly, Ibid. That in all which
they have spoken, they have not adventured one syllable, against any one
Argument in my Book, but only have told their several Tales after their
manners of expression showing whom they are for and whom they are against, etc.
Answ. First, It is not the proper work of Encomiasts, to answer Arguments,
answered to their hands but to speak their thoughts concerning the solutions of
Arguments by him whom they commend. Secondly, yet two of these great Divines
have so fully spoken to the chief Arguments in his Book, that could I have
known before hand that they would so concisely have answered his whole
Pamphlet, either I would have returned no answer at all to it, or have done it
much more Compendiously. Is it indeed no Syllable of Answer to all his
arguments, to show that he foulely Mistakes the Questions Controversal all
along? That his Objections are merely Pelagian, Jesuiticall, Soc^nian,
Bolsecian, and such as become any body, but, as so called Protestant of the
Church of England, Se Dr. Reynolds Epistle, per totum.
? Secondly, Had not they before I was so much as by name known to them,
sufficiently in their SERMONS, and writings declared to the world whom they are
for, and whom they are against, as to need by setting of their hands to so
worthless a Scrible (as he thinks mine to be) to purge themselves from a Crime
(which they were never so much as by any suspected of) of not adhering fast
enough to the good, true, and Christian party which they were of? Object. Chap.
1. p. 11. I, but neither Mr. B. nor his Prefacers have named any one passage in
my Book, which they can tolerably pretend to be Pelagian, or Semipelagian, but
only have framed an accusation in General, etc. Answ. First, This is
notoriously false concerning Mr. B. if any body will but be pleased attentively
to heed his Text, or Margin throughout almost his whole Book, but especially if
he do but any thing heedfully peruse what I have at large set down in my
Parallel of his opinions with the Pelagians and Semi-pelagians, or Massilians.
Chap. 5. Cor-Rept. Cor-Rect. from p. 201. to 206. Secondly, It is not the work
of General Prefacers to descend to Particulars, yet while Dr. Reynolds has
fully showed that he scarce u^eth an Argument which is not taken out of the
Pelagian or Sm^ipelagian School, as any body may see who reads but the
Cor-Rect Copy, and that Drs. Epistle together, he will be abundantly convinced
of the impudence and falsenesse of this Assertion. Secondly, But besides these
abuses which he puts upon them all Jointly, he has something against two of
them in (several) viz. First against incomparable, Dr. Reynolds, and sage Mr.
White field. Against the former, can any man think him the less abusive
against him because he says; First, p. 2. (a) that he does seriously respect
Advertis. to the Reader, p. 2.
him for his Gravity, Learning, and Comparative moderation? Believes Mr. T. P.
this to be a competent Plaster for breaking of his head, together with that of
his brethrens as we have seen? Dolus an virtus quis ab host requirat?
Secondly, Are not his Comparative, and so Diminutive Commendations of him
absolute Disparagements to him? Thirdly, Since he has made a foul shi^t
Philanthr. Chap. 1. p. 11. to hook in that holy and gracious, as well as most
Learned Divine, amongst those who make God to be the Author of sin, (and
speaking of him, and others, he wishes that their expressions were no worse
then so too): and since, elsewhere he has told the world, Sinner Impleaded, p.
^48.
that his opinions, to be sure, of those he approves of, are cruel and
Sanguinarian, that if that too be true of him as he says it is, that God is
the Author of sin, then in the like sort he declares his opinion of him Ibid.
p. 241.
. That there is no God would be the very worst Tenent in all the world, were it
not worse to conclude him the cause of sin, as he there and every where else
maintains that absolute Praedestinarians do. I say, after these foul affronts
put upon him, and other Di^ines at home and abroad, whom he does Reverence,
love, and honor, though now he should fawningly tell him that though he be
Adver^is. to the ^eade^, p. 5.
an Anti-Remonstrant yet he knows him to be a learned pious man, and upon whom
he never meant to fasten any ill names, but really pays him every whit as much
Reverence, as if he were of his opinion, or he of his. Can he from hence
forward think him so vainly Credulous as to believe a word of that he says?
Nay, can he do otherwise then believe, but since he has so Whipped, and Stripped
all, or most of his Neighbors Country Divines, whom, (such has been been his
humility) he has much loved and re^pected, that he will not rather think
himself disgraced then honored by his Oratoriall Quil? and that henceforth it
will be really a disparagement for any Godly Orthodox Divine to have his good
word, and his favorable opinion. Fourthly, I think the Dr. would have taken it
far better, if he had Compared him and me, not to Mezentius his Couples, whose
cruelty it was to yoke the Living with the dead, but rather with Aeneas, and
Ascanius, who strive in my poor measure, and pace to walk after him, but do I
what I can to the Contrary it will be Impari passu. Secondly, As for what with
a viru^ent spirit, with height of proud scorn and fu^ious indignation he does
in measures pressed down and running over slanderously power forth against Mr.
White-field, Advertise^^nt to the Reader, p. 5. 6. and Chap. 1. p. 11.
. Answ. I am sure if any Reverence had been left in him to Gray hairs found in
the way of Righteousness to profoundness of Learning, to hol^nesse of an
exactly Religious Conversation he would have trembled at the thoughts of
affronting of a man of his worth, and note in the Christian Church. First, He
must be styled the Poetical old man. Answ. And yet, First, He shows not
wherein his fictions do lie; unless it were for making of observations upon he
knows not what manuscript of page 6.
his, which yet chap. 3. 5
he is forced to confess, was a Copy of his private manuscript, and when he
has not, after all his Prevarications about this business been able to show
how, or by whom, or why any should have wronged his private Manuscripts.
Secondly, If Mr. Whit-field yet retain (as he does) any true skill in any Good
Poetry he should, for that, not have Despised him, but have honored him the
more, seeing his own Learning is mainly Oratoriall, and Poetical. Of which
kind of Learning if he be once stripped, he will be found much more to supplere
locum Idiotae, than most of his Neighbors, so shamefully for want of Learning,
reviled by him. Secondly, Ibid p. 6.
He runs parallel with Don Quixot, who valiantly confuted the Barbers Basin
under the notion of an Helmet. Answ. First, As witty a one as our Great wit is
taken to be, in multiplying of jests; yet I find, that to help himself out, he
is forced to use Repetition, (for fear his stock should fail him) of the same
merry jiggs with which he is much pleased, and hopes to pleasure as vain men
as himself. This is now at lea^^ the second Time, and that upon one and the
same occasion, that I have met with Epist. secunda vel tertia.
this Toyish fancy of his. Secondly, If there were any fighting with a Barbers
Basin, then he himself as valiant a man as Mr. T. P. is, was the Barber and the
Wearer of the Basin instead of a Helmet, for after many wranglings about his
Uncorrect Copy, or if you will foul Basin, I find him Chap. 3. p. 58.
to allow of my saying when he says, that from Chap. 3. p. 32. unto the very
end, (which is above half my Book) my Book is almost verbatim, the very same
with my first renounced papers. Thirdly, He is ambitious to have it thought
that I am altogether such an one as himself. Answ. First, Ibid. p. 6.
Questionless there is no such matter. I am confident he would not for a
thousand worlds be like him in Opinions or Conditions. Secondly, I beseech God
it may be Mr. T. P's. happiness to obtain Repentance unto life that he may be
truly Ambitious to be so good a man, as good Mr. Whit-field, has long, to all
that know him, been known to be. Fourthly, speaking of the Presbyterians in
England who are far enough from being half w^tted, Had I been wi^^ing to
charge them it should have been with greater crimes. Answ. First, He means as
is plain by what he expressed concerning them elsewhere Philanthropy, Chap. 4.
p. 10.
that he takes them to me more Knaves, then Fools. Second^y, But what higher
Crimes than that of Blasphemy against God, does he think himself able to prove
against them? Is it of their maintaining a Lawfulness, as the case may be, to
excommunicate Kings, a more heinous Crime in his Judgment then the former? Sure
it cannot be in the Judgment of those who think they must honor God first, and
then the King next. Fifthly, He suspects him to be the Reverend Divine whom Mr.
Barlee quotes without a name, to put color upon that matchless fiction
mentioned by him. Chap. 3.. 21. First, Neither (as has been showed) is that a
Fiction, and then less, a Matchless one. Secondly, Nor if it were, was he at
all the Coiner, or so much as the Reporter of it. Sixthly, I once took off the
veil from off his eyes, and made him see very clearly that upright Job was not
a Jew. Answ. It were indeed a great wonder if a man whose Light is Darkness in
most Divine matters, should yet be able to enlighten him, who, before he had so
much as a head, or eye, in it had been under God isntrumental in the
Enlightening of many who sat in Darkness and in the shadow of death. Secondly,
If Mr. Whit-field at any time had maintained Job, to have been of the Nation of
the Jews, he mig^t in diverse places on Job have quoted the Chaldee Paraphrase
for it As also the Arabic in the very close of the whole. Wallaeus contra
Corvin. Job, omnium scriptorum consensu ex Arahami posteris suit oriundus, qui
nepotes suos vivus instituit. Genesis 18. 19. and Cui se Deus ipse non occul^e,
sed ut Prophetae extraordinaria and aperta apparitione, revelavit, antequam
Israelitae in terra Canaan a Reliquis nationibus fuerunt separati, Edit. in
quarto p. 174. 175.
. Thirdly, but I am assured from Mr. Wh^t*field himself that the disputes
betwixt them were not at all Genealogical but purely Theological: for, Mr.
Pierce maintaining the salvation of such as Socrates Plato Aristides, etc.
amongst the others Mr. T. P. instanced in Job as being saved without the Pale
of the Church, Mr. Whit-field replied to him, though Job might not be of the
Jewish Nation, he was yet of the true Religion, of the Religion of the then
Jews. And pray now in the Judgment of all the Christian Church, who sees best,
whether Mr. Whit-field, or Mr. Pierce? Seventhly, Chap. 3. p. 31. speaking of
him again, he says, it is not hard to conjecture why the mentioning of his
name was left out in my frontispiece. Answ. First, If I may lawfully u^e his
Phrase, somewhere he has as bad Luck as ever any Hariolator had, for it was
against my liking that any of the Divines names should be so posted up, as they
are, in the frontispiece of my Book. Secondly, If therein those who did it,
used any discretion; I suppose they did not omit his name because of the
slightness of it, as Mr. T. P. would seem to imply, but because Mr.
Whit-field spoke to a Manuscript, not extant in print, and so spoke not in
Commendation of the Book which I published.

CHAP. I.. I. p. 2. I am well assured by Intelligent and practical persons,
that very few will buy his book, who are not prodigal of their money, and that
fewer will read it who are not prodigal of their time. Answ. First, If he did
but believe his own Intelligencers, why does he take so much pains in
answering of a thing so certainly in the world to be so much neglected?
Secondly, I will not tell the world how easy it is with him to gain the credit
of being practical, and Intelligent, nor what those terms according to his
practice, do signify in his practical School, but I am able enough to prove
what false Prophets they have proved to him: for whatsoever become of the
multitude of the buyers of my Book, in an age excessively covetous, and very
little bookish, I am sure it has met with very many as well benevolent, as
malevolent Readers, and of the first sort some of the greatest Eminency for
Learning, and Piety, who when I little expected it, have in Letters expressed
their good resentment of my Labors; and thankfulness for my pains.
Secondly, Yet I must needs acknowledge that if witty jests, fowl Calumnies,
stinging Jeares, were ever able to deterr Readers from buying of my Book or
valuing of it, I dare say, from this day forward I shall have very few either
Buyers or Readers, and I must needs say it, if insolent Magisteriall Dictates
are able to Confute me, I am as fully Confuted as, ever was Bellarmine,
Philanthr. Chap. 4. p. 18.
by the Scottish preacher (I know of old he loves to play upon Scottish
Preachers) when as he tells the story of the Epitome of a Confutation of him.
Bellarmine says thus, But I say the Contrary, where is he now? Ibid. p. 3. It
will not be amiss to tell him, what Cor-Reptory Cor-Rection means in this
Authors acceptance of the phrase, viz. it is the singing an (...), before a
fight. A way of Conquest by mere contempt, and this he illustra^es, (p. 3. 4.)
by variety of Instances of his own fictions to please his Readers.

Terent.

Populo ut placerent quas fecisset fabulas. Answ. Belike he knows the
signification of this phrase, better then the Author of it, from whose mint it
came. Philanthr. Chap. 3. p. 4.
In the first expression. Cor-Reptory, he thoug^t only to allude to the title
of one of Austins books, De CoR-Reptione and Gratia, in the other to that of
Mr. T. Ps. own book called a Cor-Rect Copy, etc. I joined these two expressions
into one Title, because as he truly though imperfectly relates, I had sent word
by a Neighboring Minister, that seeing he had a mind to be whipped, he should be
whipped, or Corrected. And because it is not u^uall to divorce Chiding or
Cor-Reption from whipping, or Correction, which Iam sure so great a wanton did
extremely want and deserve* I joined Correption and Correction together (...)
Correption in the Hebrew, as well as (...) Correction gives wisdom. Secondl^,
he who had ended his Prove.
Correct Copy with a h^^sher (...)* when he says Cor-Rect Copy, p. 74.
Opinion astree, is a fault etc. might therefor well allow me to begin my
Title with some kind of an (...), less insolent by far than his own. Thirdly,
In all likelihood had he but had the good hap of preventing me in the using of
this expression, and but affixed it to the Title of this his Book against me,
he would have much applauded himself in the invention, because it would have
made good that things and names do mostly agree, as it would have surely done
with this most whipping and flagelliferous book of his.

Convenient rebus nomina saepe suis. Fourthly, He that el^e where is angry with
Dr. Twisse for not using Schoo^e terms in the signification of ordinary
Dictionaryes, may be well asked in what Lexicon or Nomenclator he finds the
word Correction to signify all these triumphing matters he Ibid. (p. 4.)
speaks of? Reformed my little book; as he and others would Religion. Answ.
First, His ^ittle book what it wanted in bulk it had in malice, and poisonous
Mischief, and therefore I took the more pains to confute and detect both
these. Secondly, This goodly Orthodox Protestant of the Church of England, as
he calls himself, Ror-Rect Copy Dedicat, Epist. p. 4.
had once before accused me, and another trusty old Trojan with me for being
like Pausanias, or Herostratus, who wou^d get our selves a name rather for
burning, than for building up the holy Temple of our English Church: but for
that he. First, had his answer formerly with which he ought to have rested
himself contented, or have confuted it Ror-Rept. Ror-Rect. p. 7.
. Secondly, Unto which let me add that if either he, my self, or any of our
way, could have had their wish about the Reformation of our Church in England,
it should not have been concluded on only by one single Westmonasterian
Assembly, who yet have advi^ed most excellently toward it (if we had but grace
to follow their advice) but if such a Council could by any means have been
procured, by an Oecumenicall Council of the Protestant Reformed Churches. An
opinion which I was confirmed in, by an excellent Treatise put forth (as was
supposed by many) by the most venerable Arch-Bish^p Dr. Usher, 1641.
And in this case I could from my soul wish that without Hypocritical
Jugglings, M. T. P. would at last determine, whether such a Council would have
conspired in the exstirpation, or in the Settlement of the true Protestant
Religion? he seems to hold this Question in the Affirmative, by what elsewhere
he requires as necessary for the making up a true Ecclesiastical Authority for
a Ministerial determination of Controversies in Religion. Philanthr. Chap. 3.
p. 104. unto which he does there require the Authori^y of T^adition, and the
universal Church not so much as excepting the present Roman Church.


To what he has about my Sympresbyters. Chap. 3. p. 17. 18. p. 69. p. 121.
Chap. 4. 12.

Answ. First, Let it be observed in the General, and we shall not need to be
minded of it again, when 20. such like passages come to our hands in his Book;
that he loves to make much work by frequent repetitions, of those Passages
which he thinks are any way able to make his opposite party odious; these
things as sweet morsells he rowles under his Tongue.

Decies repetita placebunt. Secondly, He hudles up a world of matter upon this
occasion, wherein he does express; First, his matchless and incomparable
Solicitude, least he should be accounted a Presbyter of the Country
Association: for this end he does assure us Philanth. p. 69.
; First, That several persons of the Presbytery can bear him witness that he
has avowed an abhorrence to the doing or saying of any one thing, which might
betray him into the danger of being thought a Presbyterian, etc. Answ. Alas for
him! that he should expend so many very Significant words upon a matter so
unquestionable! Does he think any who knows him, to have been so simple, as not
to have believed this without his avowing of it? Beshrew them, who were at any
time so credulous, as to believe the contrary of him. Secondly, Oh but that he
would be pleased to take half a the pains to purge himself from Arminianism,
Socinianisme, Dimidiate Pontificianism, how would my Sym-Presbyters have jumped
at the very glad tidings thereof* Secondly, He dares profess Philanth. p. 121.
Chap. 3.
oh horrible? that as he never was of that Lecture, speaking either of that of
Northampton, or of that Daynt^y so (W. W.) by the grace of God, he never will
be. Answ. First, Those who believe that by ^he grace of God which they pray for
whenever they Preach there, and which they hope they do in some measure
attain unto, stand amazed to think by virtue of what kind of grace this Votary
came to this Resolution, and well may they think it may be by virtue of that
grace which in his sense he will needs call special Philanthr. Chap. 3. p. 83.
Phil. 2. 12.
but they hope they shall never believe it is by virtue of the true special
Christian Grace, which gives us to will and to do according to his good will
and pleasu^e. Secondly, Though presently after, he ta^kes not only of feeding
of the flock, but of defending them from the Woolfe too; Answ. Yet if he had
come in among^t them without mending his opinion, and manners, they would have
kno^n of no other Woolfe amongst them beside himse^f. Ve^us Lupus in fabula.

Se^ondly, Philanthr. p. 18. Chap. 3.
some, after his cunning Custom, he claws, and flat^ers, whilst he calls them
the better sort of persons, for whom he dare be an Advocate, though publicly
stigmatized by me, as if they were men of my paste, and Patronizers of my
Project, who abhor the blackness of my Design, and that weakness with which
it it managed. Answ. First, He intending these things only to raise up some
jealousy in me that we have false Brethren among us, I will be so charitable
as to turn Sceptick until some other reasons than his bare say so be brought
in whom I have found often to be good at the Lichfeildian Eloquium, make me to
be of a Contrary belief. Se^ondly, If any of them (as he feignes) think
themselves to have been publicly Stigmatized by me I may well wonder that they
yet never told me of it, when as they had opportunity enough for it: nor can I
think any of them so devoid of ingenuity, but in case of such a great wrong
they would sooner have challenged me, then in hugger-mugger have gone to him to
have turned Complainants against me. Thirdly, But in case there should be any
truth in what he talks there, how proves he that they are either the better or
the Major party? Fourthly, As for the Blackness of my design, or weakness to
manage it, the design being now so publicly known, I suppose is to have other
more Competent Judges than him and my self: and therefore without saying more
in my own behalf, I will leave it to them to Judge righteous Judgment.

Thirdly, He is not afraid to say Philanthr. Chap. 4. 10. and Chap. 3. p. 18.
that I imply them to have been Apostates from all the rest of the 39.
Articles, whilst I say, that they adhered yet to one part of them, that they
have receded from their former subscriptions, that they are Schismatic in
some po^nts, though not in all. Answ. By his over severe Criticisms in a way of
his own mere conjectures, he lays by far too great a weight upon the very
little particle, yet as being by odds too thin a wyar to support so great a
weight of Accusation as he hangs upon it, (...) Lat. (...)
For, First, I dedicated my papers as well though not so much to the Juniors,
as to the Seniors of those Presbyteries, who never at their Ordination did so
much as subscribe either Nodum in sci^po quaerere. Angl. To seek a Needle in a
Bo^tle of hay.
to the Dogmaticall, or to the Rituall part of the 39. Articles as they lie in
the Letter, yet possibly they may have subscribed to as good, as full, and as
ample ones as they, viz. to those in the confession of faith agreed upon in the
late Assemby, of Westminster: and if for the intimation of difference in their
different forms of Subscription I used the particle, yet in reference to the
Seniors, why must it be quarrelled with? Secondly, Mr. T. P. pretends greatly
to adhere to the Dogmaticall as well as to the rituall part of those Articles.
Now a question arises amongst us, not whether the latter were true of him, but
whether the former: Was it not most rational in me to appeal toward the
decision of it, to those Presbyters, who love them more than himself, and may
be supposed to have understood the sense of them as well as he, and who diverse
of them subscribed them before there was any such thing in the world as Mr. T.
P? Fourthly, Diverse of those Presbyters, may possibly at the time of their
Ordination have been required by their Diocesans only to have Subscribed those
Articles according the sense expressed by Queen Elizabeth in the Statute of
Elizabeth 13nth. as to truth of Doctrine and of the Administration of the
Sacraments, This was the way which many a pious Bish^p went: I am sur^ which
Bishop Davenant (by w^om I was o^dained) used in his diocese.
without urging of that subscription which other Ceremonial Prela^es stood
upon, viz. to what was enjoined by the Canons in the year, 1603. and which
stand blasted in the Records of the Parliament, 1610. for their illegality, as
having by Mr. T. P's. own true Confession, Chap. 4. p. 1. no other Authority to
confirm them then Bishop Whitgifts Contrivance* and agreed upon with the
License of Orthodox (King James) in the Synod held at London, 1603. and
commanded to be ob^erved under the great Seal of England, without the
Concurrence of Parliament, nay against it. Fi^thly, If the worst come to the
worst my Sympresbyters, and Patrons can only be proved, (I believe upon good
grounds) to have receded from the rituall part of the Articles of the Church in
a time when these Rites had given much offense to the weak, and when by an
Authority over them they were taken away from them; but yet in the midst of all
temptations and Storms which they have out-stood to the contrary, they hold to
the Capital fundamental head-Articles of the faith, and so they continue to
be the stayed Dogmaticall Substantial Sons of the Church, Whereas Mr. T. P. as
has been cleared Crr-Rep. Cor-K^ct. p. 14. 92, 93.
and may be yet further, receding from diverse of the former, continues only in
an unceremoniall age of the Church, a Circumstantiall Rituall Son of the
Church: the former Grave Seniors continue in love with the Churches fair
doctrinall attire; his same demure Junior continues in his veneration of the
Gay hemme, lace, and fringe of her Garment. Egregiam vero landem, and spolia
ampla! Chap. 3.. 7. p. 32. he will not (as he says) complain that I have
freely imposed on me the names of Rusticus Coridon, and of a poor Sympre^byter;
and again, a mere Pigmee. Answ. The first I imposed not on my self, as any body
may see, who will but be pleased to turn to the place, but was such as I knew
he was most likely to impose upon me, for which I do now thank him as the world
goes, who to requite him can well be content that he should be styled
Sacellanus Aulicus, whilst I, poor I, continue to be Sacellanus Rusticus: and I
hope to grow as well in the Country, as he shall be ab^e to do in that his
Chaplains place at Court. Secondly, In the other two Terms, of poor
Sympresbyter, and Pigmee, I am glad he allows me some humility yet, when I
make my addresses to my Graver Brethe^en and Compare my self with them, though
elsewhere he would have men believe that I am more proud than any Pope.
Thirdly, I will not Complain that he has past his own doom upon himself;
Philanthr. p. 35.
for whilst he calls himself Sorcerer, he does in Congruity thereunto believe,
that I and my brethren would Judge it meet that such a one should by
Presbyterian Censures be given up to the Devil. Answ. First, It is well that
here he will take me right, and not as elsewhere Dedicat. Epist. p. 6.
that I judge him worthy by Political Censurers (to die the death of Servetus.)
Secondly, Against the time that ever we may be so blessed as to enjoy
Presbyterian Censures, I will leave it, to wise men to judge whether we all may
not in some sense call him Sorcerer, as well as does himself? First, Is not
this his Book like to be as a Circes Cupp, a very enchanted one to many in
City, Town, and Country? Secondly, Does he stick to rank^ome of the best of
men, di^guised under the name Presbyterian, with the worst of men Quakers,
Anabaptists, Witches Philanthr. Chap. 1. p. 8.
? When as yet, Answ. First, He should knew the Term Presbytery, and so from
then^e Presbyterian, to be a Scripturall Term. 1 Timothy 4. 14.
Secondly, He cannot be Ignorant that the Bishops he every where so much pleads
for, were no other than Primi Presbyterorum, and in ancient times were to do
nothing, sine Presbiterorum Concilio. Hieronym. Epist. Thordyk. Forbesii
Jrenicon. Reduction of Episcopacy to the form of the ancient Synodicall
Government: by Archbishop Usher, lately put forth by Dr. Barnrad 1656.
Thirdly, He should have used his good friends the Anabaptists and Qu^kers
better, than to have numbered t^em with Witches; for ex^epting the quarrel they
may have to the Gown, Philanthr. Chap. 2. p. 44.
which he says he preaches in, they approve of his new doctrines marvellously
well. For the former let him ask his Neighbor, Mr. Morley; and for the latter
let him peruse James Naylor, and others of his set and Sect, in their Book^ put
^orth against the Scots Ministers about the Universality of Gods love, and let
him not believe, it is a mere report that he has been cried up by the Quakers
of this Country. So great a Courtier should not thus have proved discourteous
to his friends. Thirdly, Does he not in his Sinner Impleaded* in his own Court
Sinner Impleaded 332. 333. 334. etc.
strenuously plead against the Solifidians, by whom he understands, not the
Antinomians, but the Common Protestant, maintain Justification by works, as
well as Faith? and so does he not, in the phrase of the Apostle, upon this very
occasion, bewitch the people, Gal. 3. 1. and deserve to be ranked amongst the
(...), or Witches spoken of by the same Apostle, 2. Tim. 3. 13. Thus, before he
is aware of it, has he under his own hand justified one of the very worst of
expressions which he quarrels at me for using against him Philanthr. Chap. 4.
34.
. The Lord he grant Mr. T. P. repentance that he may avoid all divine
Cen^urers, seeing that he is never in this Church like to be overtaken by
purely Ecclesiastical ones; any other I would be loath to see him fall under.

Chap. 3. p. 32. 33. 34. He draws up a dreadful long charge against me of
confessing my sins, with a peccavi fateor, and yet of suffering a wilful
Relapse, of wallowing like a sow in the mire, all which will be evidenced, if
the Reader will but compare the ninth page of my Epistles with the fifteenth
and sixteenth. A man that should swear never to swear, and (without
provocation) confirm this promise with some great oath, would make a competent
mirror for Mr. B. to see himself in. Answ. First, To be sure we have a great
outcry, even an hue and cry to all Bystanders and Neighbors, as if some
horrid inexpiable crime had been committed, yet let them upon this noise but be
persuaded to look out, and they shall see nothing but the insufferable
insolence of a Clamourous brazen faced person, such as here Mr. T. P.
proclaims himself to be.

Horat.

Quid dignum tanto tulit hic promissor hiatu? For. First: Where do I any where
make any absolute promise that I will crave pardon for any faults committed
against him? Is not what I promise in the very place which he would have all
men to look on, p. 3. Dedic. only with an, if any of their society shall
convince me of Scurrility, or Calumny? Secondly, Are all Apologies on suspicion
of guilt in the Apologists, Confessions of Crimes, or not as often flat
denyalls of them, or at least very great Extenuations of them? Thirdly, Do I
plead myself Guilty because some not only of the people; but even of my
Sympresbyters may, (p. 9.) I do not Cor-Rept. Cor-Rect. p. 9.
say do judge me faulty? but do not I rather say, when proverbially I tell them
that every one can tell how to tame a shrew, but he that has her, that if they
did but know the man as well as I then did, and I am sure they all do now, they
would be of another mind. Fourthly, Are all angry, hasty, say overwarm, nay
fiery expressions against a man, whom perchanc^ a wiser posterity may say is
publico malo natus, to be looked upon as matters of my deepest penance, as
heinous as he represents them, because he can find himself no other work to
cavil at? Fifthly, Pray what is now become of his Protestation which very
early he entered Epist. Dedit. p. 1.
that my precious soul was dearer to him then his eyes? So charitable is my
meek Lamb-like man, as that in my behalf he spends almost a Sheet of paper in
pleading for my pardon, yet here he represents me as a most Desperate
impardonable sinner against God, and him, and the Church! O Tempora o mores,
sic sunt res humanae! Cic. Chap. 2. p. 43. 44. having rankt him and my faction,
with Julian the Apostate in the consummation of all his Blasphemies, he
immeditately prays, The Lord be merciful unto us. Answ. First, When he reads
me, and very often when he would seem to transcribe me he goes about it not
only as if he had lost his conscience but his very eyes too. I had used the
word his faction, a matter of eight lines before, and say that he will needs
appear in the Van of it, and this I deliver in the plural number, unto whom,
but then justly comparing him rather than his faction to Julian the Apostata
Cor-Rep. Cor-Rect. p. 50.
: for all men know that multitudes do not Apostatize to Arminianism, but are
bred, and brought up in it, as Mr. T. P. was not, if we may believe him, I then
conclude with my prayer for him you, in the singular not for them or us, as he
writes it in the plural, as if I had taken in him, and all his faction with
Julian and all, into my prayer. Secondly. I am well known not to allow of
praying for the dead, or of praying to the Saints departed in any case, and
then less of praying for such a Caitiffe as Julian was: but it will much
concern him to enquire who that Minister was, who vehemently pleaded, four or
five years ago, for the lawfullnesse of praying for the dead, and unto Saints,
at a Gentleman's table, who contended against it, and complained heavily to me
of it. Chap. 2. 44. How does it follow that I am a Jesuit, because I am lean,
or have been beyond Sea? That I am an Arminian because he is the Trim Clerk of
the Country? and superlatively fine Mr. T. P. and in my proper element of
Courting my Noble Patron, etc. Answ. First, Where do I say in plain English
that he is a Jesuit? Secondly, Or where do I any where use such lame
Consequences of proving of him guilty of some Doctrinall Jesuitism because he
is lean, or has been beyond Sea? which would be a Couple of Excellent
Arguments to prove me a Jesuit. Thirdly, Such a ridiculous arguing from his
Bandfirings (as he well says) to his Book, must ever, and anon be brought in
(and I do give warning of it here, once for all,) not because he does, in his
conscience, believe that I do so much as make any show of arguing so, but
because he knows Pythagoras-like his (...), will make it credible amongst his
party before it be confuted, and in the mean while it makes them good sport.
Fourthly, When I have any such expressions about his Courtship, finicalnesse,
etc. any who will but trust their own eyes on my book, may see that other
guess occasions were by him given me to use them, and what I argue from them,
Chap. 2. 48. For what imaginable Reason should he use always, to f^ll up forty
and two pages against my Portall (as he calls it) which is not quite five
leaves, before he come to the purpose. Answ. First, That reason I told him p.
11. Dedic. That it was for the gratifying of some of less Leisure, and I may
add now, of much playfulnesse too, which used to hinder such Gallants from
reading beyond the Portalls of any Books, and their answers; whereunto unless
they be tol'd on by somewhat of Mirth, and Cheerfulness, they be ready to
swear they be weary of overmuch reading. Secondly, I found him in his Portal^s
as rational as any where, and abundance the mo^e insinuating, and thought
therefor fit there to break the snare in a more popular way, where it was most
apt to catch unwary souls. Thirdly, If, as he says, Ibid. Lin. 12. all that I
say against his Portalls is but pure invective* what meant he upon a mere, and
a most notoriously false supposition which he vents elsewhere Philanthr.
that my strength lay in my answer to Praefaces, and not in my answers to the
body of his book, to spend by way of answer above 22. Sheets to a mere
Invective, and not to re^erve to himself full fix purely argumentative, against
the body of my Book? Would not a man who at any time measured the Altitude of
the spirit he every where pretends to, have thought this infinitely beneath
him? Wou^d not a man have thought that his first two Sheets of Paper most
smartly and even to a miracle prodigiously Satyricall, beyond all possibility
of imitation, might have served by way of answer, that he might have the more
full lash at my arguments after that ^e had sufficiently which my Style, and
Temper. Chap. 2. p. 51. I have enabled him to say, (nemo mihi per hos annos,
nisi qui Grotio, qui Jacksonio (...), inimicus) I do therefore say nemo because
to the best of my remembrance I cannot say I have an enemy, who is not an enemy
to Grotius, and to every other pers^n whom I extremely honor, and admire,
etc. paulo post, speaking of me, he adds that he has but one enemy he knows
of, above board in all the world. Men of judgment, do already say of those
Authors, Vossius, Grotius, Ca^tellio, what Quintilian of Cicero, that a man may
have known to have profited by his very Delectation in such men's writings.
Answ. First, If he have but as many enemies as Grotius has (not for his
incomparable Learning,) in which respect Scaliger said very well of him, as of
D. Heynsius when they were but Youths, that they were Duo Prodigia ingeniorum,
I Meursius in Athe^is. B^tav.
but for his unparalled praevarications in Religion, and Cruel Spite against
Protestants in his latter years Vide Simplicii Venni. judicium de Grotio mortuo
D. Andraei Riveti Dialys. contra Discussor. Grotii front. etc. The sum of all
his Design is summed up in his own words in my Cor-Rept. Cor-Rect. p. 126.
I trow both beyond Seas, and in our very England, he has thousands of able
Protestants, who will oppose this Grotianizing. Secondly, If it be a mark of
Learning, and Integrity, and a sign of Proficiency for men to delight in his
writings, and of those of his admirers, it is a dreadful sign of the
Dementations, of many great wits.

Nullum magnum Ingenium sine mixtura Dementiae, and of their inclinations to
Socinianism, Popery, wicked carnal policy. Thirdly, Were here a fit place for
it, I durst by Gods Grace undertake to prove that there is no Christian
Clergyman (give me leave inoffensively to use the Term now) under the Cope of
Heaven, be he Pontifician, Episcopal Presbyterian, or so much as
Congregationall, but they have reason to be an enemy to him, and his writings
for betraying all Ecclesiastical power and jurisdiction into the hands of
mere Laics. As it is known he has done in his book, de jure Magistra^us
circa sacra. Where Chap. ^4. 17. 18, 19.
Fourthly, As Let Mr. T. P. tell us how he likes of his pleading for Lay Elders.
for Dr. Jackon I may, and for Castalio I hope to have a sit place to peak of
him. And truly miserable is England, if such men's writings are become as
pleasing to the dainty wits amongst us, as ever Titus Vespasian was Sueton. in
Vespasian.
who was styled Deliciae humani generis. And yet I verily believe that to be
true which a great Oxonian Stationer told me above ten years ago, that by
printing and selling of Heterodox, Socinian, Arminian, and Popish books, they
get ten times more than by any that is Orthodox. So wil^ing is England now a
days to be deceived; yet let not Orthodox persons in a rage, let this pass
uncontrolled and ^ay with a Popish Bishop.

Quando quidem hic populus vult decipi, decipiatur. Principiis obsta* etc. P.
59. The Correptory Corrector makes a lamentable confession, that he has need
to cast about for topical arguments to prove me the father of the first Papers.
Answ. First, What Dares not armed Oratory, and in this sense Armata nequitia
do? Do I say in that place which he quotes Corrept. Correct. p. 6. 20. 21.
that I had need to cast about me for Topicall arguments, or do I not rather
say the contrary, that I should not need to cast about me for Topicall
Arguments. Secondly, A little before I had given him no less then five
arguments, unto which he makes not so much as an attempt toward an Answer, and
which in a matter of this nature (viz.) of a fact which I did not see done, are
something more then topicall, of merely probable, and then I say of them that
if some men, whom I could mention by Name and Surname if need were, would but
speak out, I could produce those which would be absolutely demonstrative.
Secondly; He has in his forepart of his very P. 47. confessed the Copy he
speaks of, to be his, and if his life lay upon it, cannot in any Material
thing (unless some slight mistakes of words, or some false pointing, or the
like must be accounted in this case to be material) contradict it, and yet the
Correptory Corrector does make a lamentable Confession, for confessing but the
same thing which the father of those papers does!

P. 60. p. 13. 14. Let him give some dishonest reasons, since he confesses, p.
5. he can give no honest reasons, Line 8. 9. why I denied all false Copies to
me mine, in as much as they were false.

Answ. First, No body ever did, or ought to blame him for denying false Copies
to be his so far forth as they were false, which I am well assured if I should
name the hands through which they went before they came to me, can only be so
in Litterall matters, not in Theological, or in truly Substantial. Secondly,
I spoke of dishonest reasons, which as every body may see who will but look on
the place, (which if he can be able to hinder, very few shall do) must be
understood not of such as should be dishonest for me to produce, but of him to
be guilty of, and they be some such as these. First, he professes, Correct.
Copy in paraenesi.
that if he could have lighted upon his former Papers he would have Committed
them to the fire, and durst he have burned them for their honesty? Secondly, It
is Dishonest to deny that to be his, which, as I say and can prove, two divines
saw under his hands, and which he himself by his faultring-denyalls is easily
discerned to confess. Thirdly, It is dishonest in one paper mainly, and
principally to dispute against absolute Election, and in another coming from
the same Author chiefly, if not only, to dispute against Absolute Reprobation:
and when he had done so to maintain that these two papers are one and the same
papers for substance, which is fal^e, whereas indeed they be two distinct
papers composed by one and the same Author, upon the several parts of
Praedestination Election, and Reprobation. Fou^thly, It is dishonest in the
Correct Copy, p. 13. to turn that expressian of the half witted Rabble of
Praedestinarians into another of Absolute Reprobatarians, and then
reproachfully to call Mr. Whitfield for reading it as he did, right, according
to the first Copy, the poetical old man. Fifthly, It is dishonest in his open
Correct Copy, wholly to leave out that signal passage against special
discriminating grace quoted by me out of the first private Copy Corrept.
Correct. p. 31. for that in p. 56. as more largely in his Philanthropy, p. 83.
84. etc. he intended to Gull the world, and Delude the Church, with some goods
word of special grace.

Chap. 3. p. 61. First, It will appear that Mr. Barlee had accused his own dear
Brethren, of what he judged to be heinous in five respects, he gave their
practice so black a Character behind their backs, as he durst not own before
their faces; so well has he rewarded his three special benefactors, etc.

Idem. Chap. 4. p. 13. l. 3. with 7. 8. where he calls them Grave Incumbents,
only as if he distinguished betwixt right, and possession. Answ. First, In this
and the immediately preceding passage (quoted by him, l. 3. etc.) wherein I say
as I am an Ecclesiastic, a Christian, a Gentleman, etc. he discovers himself
to be a monster of Ingratitude; for having written a most tedious Letter to me,
wherein he accused me that I aimed not at the confuting of his Book, but at the
depriving him of his Budget, Vineyard, or Lyving; for the giving unto him, the
utmost security that it was possible for me to do, that I aimed at no such
matter, I sent him my Protestation against it, in the words which he
expresses: (though he may do well to remember that in the same Letter, a
little before the words which he quotes out of it, I said that though I
disliked modum sequestrandi now a days used, yet I was not against the outing
of unworthy Ecclesiastics) that against his Book, and Doctrines I would do
every thing which became a Minister and Scholar to do in a mere Ministerial
and Scholasticall way. And must this Loving security (the all I have, or can
have to give) be interpreted to reflect so disgracefully upon my self and
friends as that it must in Capital Letters, (I think for to signify that he
is aerei, and saxei frontis homo) be made the vainglorious Conclusion of a
vapouring Book Chap 4. lin. ultim. and penultim. Secondly, I never heard that
any of my three friends had their finger in the pie of sequestring of others,
though some of them have lived upon sequestrations, when Incumbents have been
cast out by others, and therefore what I said was nothing to their practice,
especially when I neither spoke nor thought of them, when I wrote what I did.
Fourthly, If he will needs have all those to be branded with a black Character
of reproach who have, or do live upon Sequestrations, does he not then rather
blast than commend the fame, and name of his friend, whom he cries up so high,
Phil. Chap. 3. p. 58.
for learning, candor, charity, moderation, when it is well known to all that
know Mr. T. P. that he accounts all those Robbers, and Thieves, who live upon
sequestrations. Fifthly, How can I, in the place quoted out of me by him,
speaking of grave Incumbents, distinguish, or so much as seem to hint a
distinction betwixt right and possession, when as I proffer to stand as to the
present matters debated betwixt us, to the Ministerial decision of any ten of
the gravest Incumbents who have been least upon their Tropicks in these
Tropicall times, and that must needs be before Sequestrations were in practice,
which in the way which I am not so well satisfied with, has only been in
practice during these Tropicall times?

Chap. 3. p. 24. That I did not dare to mention the Confession of faith,
Catechisms, etc. of the late Westmonasteriall assembly p. 24. Here the Corrept
Corrector gives us a specimen of his Logic. Because I did not name his
Authors, I did not dare to name them, p. 32. How should it lie in my way to
name Confessions, or Catechisms, which I never saw and seldom heard of, etc.
Answer. First, How long will the Beauclerick of the Country, when his eye is on
my book resolve, not so much as to read true English, ut clericus?

Is it not plain by the Text and Context, Antecedent, and Consequent, that I
speak not those words of him but of my self, who having mentioned many other
things against him, known by him to be Authentic in the Church of England, I
subjoyne these words; not so much as to dare to mention, etc. because I would
not press him with things which he was most likely to refuse to have his
Doctrines of the Church of England tried by. Secondly, I thank him for granting
those Westmonasteriall Authors to make for me, I hope I shall not be ashamed of
them, nor a shame to them, pray God he never affect worse books. Thirdly, From
my soul I am sorry he should so undervalue the most excellent Labors of the
most Learned and Pious Assembly, as not in such a disputing age as this is, to
vouchsafe so much as an eye to look on, or an open ear to hearken out, what
they had concluded in their pithy decisions of most of the Controversies
agitated in our times. Who so blind as those who will not see, or so deaf as
those who will not hear? Fourthly, What a youthful leight trick is it, in so
Juvenall a Divine, so scornfully to speak of the pains of so many of his
Seniors; in Comparison to the meanest of whom he is in Theology, but a mere
dwarf, and then by head and ears bring in a saying of Dr. Cheynells, as if the
Dr. had been minded to jeere both himself, and the Assembly he was of? Chap. 3.
74. That (in my p. 35.) I have a Charitable wish that the Absolute
Reprobatarians should be shipped over for Turkey, p. 23. Answ. First, It is plain
in my p. 27. I do rather allude to his words than quoted them directly.
Secondly, what he did not then so fully express, he has in effect done more
fully in this his Philanthr. Chap. 4. 10. where he says of Presbyterians, who
most, if not all, in his opinion are absolute Reprobatarians, that they might
do well to live in a wilderness, and that place I judge might prove worse to
them, were he but to assign it to them, than shipping for Turkey.

Chap. 3. 101. Hear o Heaven, and give ear o Earth! Every measure of Gods
grace which is not irrestible is called (goodly) by a gibe* and is said by a
blasphemy to have (Mischievous qualifications) p. 42. and in margin. Ibid. So
in this p. 217. he calls the very power of resisting Gods grace (which is not
an act of resisting, and so not guilty, and which God himself was willing we
should have a wretched, miserable, lying sinful power, and with such kind of
stuff he runns on from p. 101. to p. 103. Answ. He having words and wit at
will, it is easy for him upon every slig^t occasion to be an Hyper-Tragedian.
But first, what the least appearance is there, of Dr. TWisse Against Mr. Hoard,
p. 242. 243.
my blaspheming any measure of Gods grace, whilst as it is plain if any body
list but to turn to p. 41. of Corrept Corrector. I do put oppose his Idol
fancy of grace, which as I shall show elsewhere, when all, comes to all, is
nothing else but pure nature, nay nature impure by Arminian Orators decked with
the Titulary Robes of grace, of special grace, for the declining of Envy. This
(...), this vizard of grace so called may well be Gibed at, and yet grace be
untouched, Vide fuse C. Jansen. Tom. 3. Chap. and ali^i, ubi probat omnes ferme
Scholasticos veteres ex Augustino docuisse potestatem peccandi nec esse
Libertatem, vel partem Libertatis Imo. Tom. 3. Chap. 2. Strenne ex Augustino
probat hanc sententiam esse nidum erroris Pelagiani, Cujus erat haec
constantissima definitio Libertatis (ut patet ex Augustine. Lib. 1. operis
imperfecti) Libertas arbitrii in admitendi peccati, and abstinendi a peccato,
possibitate Consistit. Pelagius in fidei sui Libello, ex propria, and ejus
sequentium sententia, Nos dicimus hominem semper, and peccare, and non peccare
posse, ut semper nos Liberi Confiteamur esse aribitrii.
Dr. Twisse as I have heard him speak it a 100. times over, was wont to say
that as the Jews did set a Crown of Thorns upon Christ's sacred head, so the
Arminians put a Crown of Scorns upon his Grace, by calling that so which is
not worthy to be called so He says well, qui Gratiam negat, prout in verbo Dei
patefacta est, is mihi videtur dicendus esse Gratiam Dei denegare, nec astruere
gratiam Dei dicendus est, qui non mihi fictitiam and commentitiam de cerebro
suo natam depraedicat Lib. 1. Vind. p. 298.
. Secondly, I look when by this Author, not only Learned Gracious Pemble, whom
I had quoted in the Marg. of p. 217. quoted by him, shall be put into his
Catalogue of modest, and immodest blasphemers, but when he will put in St.
Austin also, for as audacious expressions on this very occasion See p. preced.
. Thirdly, I hope elsewhere to prove viz. against what he. Chap. 4. p. 24.
that if God was willing, and that by a will of approbation and affection
before the Fall, that man should have a power to sin, the same thing which
elsewhere he calls an inclination to sin it is unavoydable, but that he must
make God to be the Author of sin. To grant Adam a mere Creature, to have had a
Possibility to sin, is one thing; to grant him a power, faculty or inclination
to sin, is quite another thing. Thus do unadvised persons often fall into those
very snares, which they would seem most to shun.

Chap. 3. p. 71. Bishop Hall commended Origin for a good Interpreter, as Mr. B.
confesses in his p. 123.

Answ. Notoriously false; for in that very place I say the quite contrary, when
I said that Bishop Hall said of Origin wittily, when he would needs understand
that place, Math. 19. 12. about Castration literally, desinebat esse Vir, sed
non malus interpres, he ceased, viz. by Castrating of himself to be a man, but
he ceased not to be a bad Interpreter. Is this in Mr. P. T's. translation a
good Interpreter. Had I but unwarily committed any oversight like unto this way
of Translating Latin, must not I have been told by him, that it would as he
says against me, Philahth. p. 109.
be the best of my plea to say that, I do not understand Latin,? Which because
I do profess I neither do nor dare say of him, I would wish him to apply that
to himself, which he does to me, viz. that he is a wilful Impostor, putting
his trust in his Readers ignorance, or wanting Leisure to examine the truth of
his Citations Ibid.
.

Chap. 3. p. 104. Mr. B. in all his Articles of his new Creed is as peremptory
as a Pope. Nor can I find him confessing, that he ever erred or was mistaken in
all his life.

Answ. First, He has no where yet proved that I have any New Articles
belonging to my Creed. Secondly, I can, (if need be) show many New Articles of
Creed made by the Tridentine Council, of which I dare be bold to say he will
at any time speak more favorably then he will of any Articles agreed on in the
Synod of Dort. Philanhrop. Chap. 4. p. 14. in Margin.
T^irdly, I had no just occasion to speak of mine own Errors, but I had very
just occasion to oppose his. Fourthly, Yet in the very entrance of that part of
my book which he, and every body else takes to be the sharp^st part of it, he
might have both in Text and Margin, Corrept. Correct. p. 10.
observed that I begin with a Confession; I am too conscious of my own
frrailtyes which are great and many. Fifthly, Ibid. p. 11.
I neither am nor appear to be any thing so Peremptory as himself, whilst, for
all my doctrines I offer my self to be tried by any ten of my Senior
Sympresbyters of any worth, or note, and in my Dedicat. lay my Book at my
Bretherens feet, whilst my Adversary declines any Scorns all such ways of
Trial. Our Pope is above all Counsels, unless they be Papal.

Chap. 3. p. 129.. 34. Yea he charge me, with the greater and lesser Atheism,
yea further, not only that my opinions tend to it, but that I am absolutely for
Corrept. Correct. p. 55 and 117. 118.
Atheism Ma^or and Minor, according to the Method of my proceedings. Answ.
First, If any man can but be prevailed with to look on the places cited by him,
they will find no such matter, only in the 55. page of my Correptory by way of
arguing ab absurdo, sed pari, he will find that I ^ay that according to the
Method of his Proceedings, used against Calvin, and Dr. Twisse, he might as
well be charged with Atheism, Major and Minor; Now as every body will conclude
that I think Calvin and Twisse wronged by this way of reasoning against them,
so that if any body for the purpose aforesaid should tread in his steps, and
accuse him of Atheism, major and minor, he might also justly exclaim against
the wrong done him. And is this positively to accuse him of Atheism, major and
minor? Secondly, Before I shall have done with him about the Apotheosis which
he puts upon sin, Philanthr. Chap. 3. p. 112. 113. and Chap. 4. p. 27.
whilst he makes it a positive Act, independent from Gods causality, about the
inclination unto sin which God himself put into Adams sinlesse nature, I shall
argumentatively, but no otherwise then so, go nigh, if not full out, to prove
his reasonings to be guilty, if not of the Major yet at least of Minor
Atheism; Atheism in the issue, though not in his express Assertion.

Some Notorious falsehoods of Mr. T. P s. likely to have been overseen, and
therefore inserted here somewhat out of their place. Chap. 3. p. 58. l. 5. he
says jeeringly. First, That I threaten him with a thing past, in p. 5. of my
Corrept.

Answ. First, It is evident, again by the Text, and Context, where I use the
word threatening, that I cannot understand it at all of his threatening of me,
but of my threatening of him, of that very thing which I wrote to him, Feb. 25.
1655. and which the Reader shall find set down in the very Margin of p. 4. and
5. These and such like kind of expressions in my Letters, and in my words were
by him accounted my Threatenings of him, and which every where he pretends to
have occasioned the unwilling necessity of putting himself in print. Corrept.
Correct. p. 1. Philanthr. Chap. 3. p. 5^.
Secondly, His Conscience can abundantly tell him, that if the words your
threatening could in that place be understood not as they be of a kind of
threatening from me of him; but of a threatening of his against me, then I ^ay
his Conscience can tell him that he did sufficiently threaten me in a
Voluminous Sarcastick Letter Brington. May 18. 16. 55.
with I cannot tell what Statute against Forgery, and Libells, of bearing false
witness, that when I am certain I was most bu^y in answering of his Correct
Copy, he was tempted to believe what he was told, and that by persons very
considerable, that whilst I shot at his Book* my chief aim was at his
Budget, etc.

Thirdly, Chap. 2. p. 52. Corrept. Correct. p. 45. I publikly threatened to show
him no mercy. Ibid. Paulo post. That in many places of my book, I allot him his
portion in the bottomless Lake of fire and brimstone, etc. Answ. Both most
notorious falsehoods. The first because p. 45. of my Corrept. speaking of this
cruel abusing the names of others, I only subjoyn, that it may be like enough
to procure some harsh usage of him from others, he that will show no mercy to
others, has small reason to look for it from others. I speak as any body may
see not a word of my self, but of others. The second about fire and brimstone
is much worse than the former, first because I am most certain that neither in
words, nor in sense, is there any such passage in all my book. Secondly, He
offers not either in this Inventory from p. 38. to 43. or in any other part of
his book, to set down any one passage out of me, to this purpose; which could
he have done, I am assure he wou^d not have sp^red me in this kind. Thirdly, He
himself is forced to acknowledge Philanth. p. 43. 44.
that I pray for him, that he may obtain mercy, which sure he cannot believe I
use to pray for those whole port^on I allo^t (as if I could believe that to be
in my power to do) in the bottomless pit of fire, and brimstone. Fourthly, If
it had pleased him, he might have read my express profession to the contrary,
Corrept. Correct. p. 191. Wha^* Any body be so foul mouthed, as to censure not
only Mr. T. Ps. foul opinions to hell, but his person too? Whatever become of
your Tenants, I shall ever pray for your Person, that you may never descend
into that place of torments, from whence there is no Redemption: but when in
this or in any other way I do seriously express my Charitative respect to him,
he does scornfully tell me that I feed him with Gingerbread Philanthr. Chap. 2.
p. 41. 43.
3ly. Chap. 2. p. 51.. 8. I confess that I was never half so good as himself,
p. 6. Answ. First any body may see that in that place Corrept. Correct.
I give him the pre-eminence above me not as to piety and morals as here he
represents me, but as to Copiam et elegantiam verborum wherein say I, to give
you but your due, you are a very Magister artis. Secondly, If in the former
sense I had preferred him above my self, he ought to have commended, and not to
have jeered me for so doing, as there he does.

Fourthly, Chap. 3. p. 82. and 152. That I call my self faithful chosen and
true, p. 10. and that I presume (by consequence) that I have grace
irresistible, p. 35.

Answ. First, There is not a word of my self in the singlular number, but in
the plural number. I say I cannot tell p. 10. how any of the brethren, who are
faithful chosen and true, Rev. 19. 11. should vote on your side, etc.

Secondly, Yet say, that in an humble modest way, with fear mixed with holy joy,
I had spoken so of my self what crime had I committed more then Job did Job.
19. 25.
, then Paul did 2. Tim. 1. 12. Aug. Lib. 6. contr. Jul. 3. Chap. 17. qua Gratia
liberatus sum a reatu omnium peccatorum, vel quae nascendo traxeram, vel quae
male vivendo contraxeram, qua gratia liberor, ut scio, ne intrem in
tentationem, a concupiscentia mea abstractus et illectus, atque ut exaudiar
dicens cum consortibus meis, Dimi^^^e nobis debita nostra: qua gratia
liberabor, ut spero, in aeternum, ubi jam nulla lex in membris repugnet legi
mentis meae.
. Thirdly, I am sure Bishop Jewel makes a tart reply upon Harding for
upbrayding him with saying that God was his God, whilst against Papisticall
uncertainty, the Bishop pleaded for Christian assurance of Salvation in
Believers Antapologia Juelli.
.

Fifthly, Chap. 1. p. 14. Let Mr. B. be a Calvinist, an Aerian, or what he
will, I have vowed for my part, not to be any thing but a Christian, Chap. 1.
p. 17. well may he be of the Consistory of Geneva, or of the Kirk of Scotland,
but as a most learned Doctor has lately told us from the press, he, and such
as he is, are as much of the Church of England, as the Irish are Eng^ish; To
the like purpose he writes p. 115. where he makes all Anti-Hierarchists
Ecclesiastical Levellers, (as he calls them,) the true Parents of all the
Levellers in the Civil state, Chap. 3. p 149. Chapter 1. Chap. 4. 16. Chap. 3. 78.
etc.

Answ. First, It has been no unusual thing for mere formalists amongst us,
who are ready to meet Rome more then half way, when they are at a loss as to
the objecting of real crimes against their Adversaries, then to fly to these
fictitious Airy, rather then Aerian ones, of Calvinisme, Genevisme, Scotisme;
for which they have been justly and soundly rebuked from time to time, by the
more grave and truly pious sort of Hierarchists, and Conformitants in the
Church of England, as he may be pleased to see in part if he list* but to
peruse the 50. page of my Correptory Corrector in the Margin; and as I shall
declare more fully upon a fitter occasion. These venerable Divines had never so
much of superstition in them, as to conclude men's good affections to the Church
of England, by their devotion to the mere Ceremonial part of it Bishop. Carl.
on. against Montacute, p. 8. Bishop Usher, Se^mon before the house of Commons
1620.
. Secondly, Unless he can be able to prove Aerius to have been guilty of
Arrianisme, which some did object against him, but never solidly proved him
guilty of, he're never be able to prove Aerius to have been generally Condemned
for Haeresie: though possibly Bishops then having an Authoritative Station in
the Church, which for late years they have not had amongst us, he may have been
judged guilty of Schism, for disturbing the then settled order of the Church.
And for the clearing of it that his opinions about, or against Bishops, was not
counted Haeresy; let him be willing to be convinced if not by le^rned L.
Danaeus L. Danaeus Commentar. in Librum D. Augustini de haeresibus, Chap. 53
Nam neque Theodoretus in Haeretic. fol. 4. Libris, nec tota Historia
Ecclesiastica Aerianorum tanquam haereticorum meminit etsi ante Socratem
Sozomenum Evagrium vixit Aerius, nempe sub Valentiniano primo Imperatore, and
Damaso Episcopo Romano circa annum a Christo passo 340. and Temporibus
Epiphanii ut ipse scribit quae tamen Eustathianos Contemporaneos Aerii
Adversarios saepe commemorat inter haereticos, ad^o ut a paucis Aerii sententia
damn^ta videri possit.
because he was one of his hated Genevenses, yet at least by his own beloved G.
Cassander, G. Cassander, Lib. Consult art. 14. Sic citante Ep. Morton Apol.
Lib. 1. Cap. 34. An Episcopatus inter Ordines Ecclesiasticos ponendus sit,
inter Theologos and Canonistas, non con^enit: convenit autem inter omnes in
Apostolorum aetate, inter Episcopos and Presbyteros nullum discrimen faisse,
sed postmodum Schismatis evitandi* causa Episcopum Presbyteris esse
p^aepositum, etc.
. By judicious Bishop Morton Bishop Morton Apolog. quo supra, p. 118. Adversus
Bellar. lib. 4. de Ecces. mil. c. 9. in princip. Aerius Haereticus ordinis
differentiam negabat esse Jure divino: idem protestants advocat quod idem
forte sanctus Hiero ^ymus nec aliud alii patres asseverarunt, hoc Scholae
vest^ae Doctor primarius non ita pridem facile largi^batur. Michael Medina.
Lib. 1. de sacr. orig. affirmat non modo sanctum Hieronymum idem in hoc cum
Aerianis sensisse; ver^m etiam Ambrosium, Augustinum, S^dulium, Primasium,
Chrysostomum, Theodoretum, Oecume^ium, Theophylactum etc.
by that stupendous Antiquary, Archbishop Usher I Armachanus de Britanic.
Ecclesiarum Antiq. p. 800. etc. Ante Majorem scripsit Johannes Fordonus ante
Palladii^ adventum habebant Scoti fidei doctores ac sacramentorum ministratores
presbyteros solummed ovel Monachos, ritum sequentes Eccelesiae primitivae, quod
postremum ab iis accepisse videtur, qui dixerant, quod in prima primitiva
Ecclesia (notetur distinctio) commune erat officium Episcoporum and sacerdotum,
and nomina erant communia and officium commune, sed in secunda primitiva
Ecclesia caeperunt distingui and nomina and officia. Joh. Balaeus ait Palladium
a Coelestino missium ut sacerdotalem ordinem inter Scotos Romano ritu
institueret, and habebant inquit ante Scoti suos Episcopos, ac Ministros, ex
verbi Divini ministerio plebium Suff^agiis Electos, prout Asianorum more fieri
apud Britannos videbant, sed haec Romany ut magis ceremoniosis atque Asianorum
osoribus minus placebant. Hactenus. D. Armachanus.
3ly. That most Learned Dr. he speaks of I believe (if he quote him right) as
to his affection to Protestants to have been such another as himself, or else
he would never have been so desperately unadvised, as to maintain that English
men in their own native Country, maintaining actual communion in doctrine and
worship, and in diverse matters of Church Government too, even when it was at
worst amongst us, as all mere Non conformists were known still to have done,
are no more to be accounted members of the Church of England, for the bare want
of some Ceremonial Conformity, than Irish men are taken to be English.

Fourthly, If he be pleased to advise wi^h some of the Mr. Levellers of our
times, about the Correspondence which has been betwixt them, and those which
he Scornfully calls Aerians Gevevenses, Scotists, etc. I suppose he may rectify
his uncivil opinion about their being the parents of all the Levellers in the
civil state. Chap. 1. p. 20. If Mr. B. is lawfully ordained he did subscribe
to three eminent Articles, etc. Chap. 3. p. 104. whilst their dictates against
the Hierarchy stand unrevoked, they are utterly unqualified to prove their
pretensions to the Ministry. Answ. First, I hope to be able to prove the
lawfullnesse of my Ordination to the Ministry which was by Dr. Davenant of
Salibury, though he never put me to subscribe to what is enjoined by the Canons
of the year 1603. but contented himself to take of me, the Oath of the Kings
not the Queens supremacy, and to see my hand subscribed to the 39. Articles.
But how he will prove the lawfulness of his own Ordination since by law the
Bishops have been put down I for my part cannot tell. He must have had it from
them in Cryptis, or beyond the Seas. Secondly, I should think my Ordination by
mere Presbyters to have been as lawful as by a Bishop and his Sympresbyters;
for I never yet could find that of Bishop Mortons to be solidy confuted, That
Presbyter aeque potest ordinare Presbyterum, atque, Episcopus Episcopum; A
Presbyter may as well ordain a Presbyter as a Bishop a Bishop. Thirdly, Lo
here again what a goodly Protestant Mr. T. P. is, who with one dash of his pen
unministers for want of Canonical Conformity perchance many thousands
Presbyters better deserving than himself: all the^e belike with him are but
pretended Ministers, who, First, were ordained before the year 1603. when that
the Canons had not so much as any pretended standing in our Church. Secondly,
All those who since those Canons were ordained by the less rigorous sort of
Bishops who in their diocesses, never urged that subscription. Thirdly, All
those, who since the fall of Bishops have been ordained by Presbyters in any
part of the Kingdom. Fourthly, Not to say now that he nullifies the
ministerial Ordinations of most of the Transmarine protestant Presbyters, who
have no such Bishops as he pleads for to ordain them, nor care they to have
them. And yet all this while I durst be bold to averr it, he would not for his
ears call a Romish mass Priest a pretender to the Ministry. Protestants
doubtless are very greatly beholding to Mr. T. P* Chap 3. p. 62. That I (in my
24th. page) have tartly, and sarcastically gibed against Mr. Calvin p. 14.
Chap. 3. p. 120. Grotius observes that the followers of Calvin were fierce, and
cruel* etc. Chap. 3. p. 26. Mr. Calvin confessed in an Epistle to Bucer, that
he did labor with impatience, his untamed beast; and yet so far was he from
mending, that the mild Grotius observes he rather grew worse and worse; And
th^^ ^alvins Disciples and imitators are such themselves in disposition, as
they make God to be in their Imaginations, toward the greater part of mankind.
Answ. Though I hope to be far from deifying or idolizing Mr. Calvin, whom I
know to have been a man liable to errors, and passions as my self; yet because
by head and shoulders, as to gift and graces, he was taller than most of his
B^etheren, and toward the Carrying on the Work of Reformation in the Church,
his Lord and Master did use him as one of his chief and principal Workmen who
needs not be ashamed, it is most necessary that something be said against what
is powered out here, that his honor may not be wholly laid in the dust. First
then, I trow he Gibed him when as he Sarcastically says Correct Copy, p. 24.
of him that his expression of the horrible Decretum frighted him into his
wits; when sure either some buggs words of Mr. Calvin's, or possibly a word
easily to be qualified, as I have done in my Corrept. p. 14. was never likely
to have so formidable an operation upon so great a wit, as Mr. T. P. takes
himself to be. Secondly, If perchance he did not Gibe him in that place he did
sure worse then Gibe him elsewhere, when as Correct Copy p. 9. 10. he ranks
him amongst modest, or Immodest blasphemers; and when up and down in his first
book Correct Copy, p. 30. 43, 50. etc.
and in all his writings he lays hold of every slight occasion to be a
sporting at him. Thirdly, Lest Mr. T. P. glory too much in it, this trick of
Traducing Calvin upon every trifling occasion he has in common with the Worst
of Papists, Jesuits, with the Phanatick Swenckfeildians, Libertrines,
Anabaptists of his age, and with all the wild fry of Sectaries in our own Age,
and Land. Fourthly, It argues some truth, and strength of grace for a man as
Calvin was to be con^tantly fighting and laboring against his untamed beast,
Impatience. It Is a great sign of ingenuity that he makes confession of it to
his bosom friends as no doubt he did with Paul cry out against it. Romans 7. 24.
Oh wretched man that I am, etc. Our T. P. and his admired Grotius with him show
themselves devoid of all Christian ingenuity in their unsealing this Candid
confession to his prejudice; ^or this trick by my consent I Will never choose him
to be my Confessor. ^ifthly, Whosoever will but reading Calv^ns Epistles
consider the variety, multiplicity, and crowds of his weig^ty businesses, the
condition of the enemies he met withal in Gods work from the right hand and
left, the miserable Temporal advantages which all his pious Labors procured
him in the World, no man will greatly wonder that at sometimes he was
impat^ent, but most candid judges will rather wonder that he was not at all
times like with Jonas to run away from this so sore, but so thankles a work as
he was employed in. Sixthly, What monstrous uncharitable Censurers are, H.
Grotius and his Imitator T. P. to measure the dispositions of all Mr. Calvin's
Imi^ators and disciples, (as he calls them) and that for the reason he speaks
of, by that of Mr. Calvin's; for first, suppose Calvin as dogged as he
represents him to be for style, and Temper, (and I think I may well g^ory in it
that he repre^ents me no worse) is it not oftentimes seen that they who are one
with their Tutors and Teachers in opinion, do very much vary from them in
disposition, and manners? Secondly, Must they needs Imagine God to be cruel to
the most part of mankind and then (O horib^e) become like him who do but
maintain what experience evinceth to be true, that God does not alike gratify
a I with his especial grace and glory? Was Christ so, Math. 11. 26? Was Paul
so, Romans 9. 11. etc. and v. 1. 2. though they did certainly know that the Major
part of their Nation were never to receive grace, or glory? Seventh^y, Calvin,
and his followers were nothing so fierce against their adversaries as they are
by graceless persons reported to be, when as it is well known that when Luther
had used Mr. Calvin extreme roughly in words, his saying did use to be of him.
Etiamsi diabolum me Lutherus vocaret, appellarem ego illum Dei servum: and when
as by this time all the world may know that all the Tre^ties for peace and
Accommodation betw^xt Lutherans and Calvinists did still break off by the
Lutherans, not by the Calvinists means. Eighthly. Might not as well professed
Papists be produced to rail at Protestants, might he not as well have quoted
Eckius, Sadolet, Turrianus against Calvin, as that prodigious enemy of his, H.
Grotius, who after the betraying of his own Native Country, from which he was
ju^tly perpetually exiled, made it his business (as I have opened it
elsewhere) Corrept. Correct. p. 178.
to be a Judas against the Protestants? And for that purpose amongst others
gratifies their Adversaries with a book De Antichristo, mentioned by Mr. T. P.
Philanthr. Chapter 4. p. 149. wherein he makes the Apocalypse to expire with
Trajanes Reign, denies the Pope to be Apocalypticall Antichrist, etc. Which how
Mr. T. P. will be able to reconcile with Orthodox King James his Learned
explication of the 17. Chap. of the Revelat. I will leave to wise men to judge
of Apolog. pro. Juramento fid^litatis Edit. Lat.
Chap. 4. p. 14. Text, and Margin. It it Certified by a most Learned, and Pious
person of that Synod, that things were carried at Dort some what worse then at
Trent it self, rather by violence then reason. Their arguments were all Iron,
their Syllogisms no other then stocks et fetters, the Praetor made the Major
proposition, the Lictor was the minor, and the Prison was the Conclusion. Answ.
First, It is easy to be believed that Mr. T. P. likes better of the proceedings
at Trent, then of those at Dort; but that these latter were worse then the
former, no man will admit into his belief, who will but compare the
Commentaries of that Candid Historian, I Sleydan concerning the one, and the
public Acts of the Synod of Dort and praeface to them concerning the other.
Secondly, The most learned and pious person of that Synod there, commended, is
no other then that wicked Lying Socinian Antitrinitarian, Cretian, S.
Episcopius, who was cited as a grand delinquent by the venerable Synod to give
an account of his new and false doctrine which he had divulged out of the
Chair at Leyden. So that here we have the Malefactors raylings quoted against
his proper judge, Eo quoque est impudentior victus accusator, quod sit and
Judicis Calumniator. August. adversus Cresc. Grammat. Lib. 3.
and that out of a Book which Mr. T. P. could not but know to have been
confuted fully and learnedly by Dr. Vedelius against whom it was written Dr.
Vedelius Arcanorum Arminiasmi part quarta in quarto 1634. Ludg. Batavorum.
. Thirdly Episcopius his conscience could have told him, as the Acts of that
Synod have told all the world, that from first to last in the Synod there was
no m^ntion made of Pretors, and Lictors until such time as they had most
wantonly and sawcily trifled with the Synod, by whom they would not be limited
no not so much as in the Method of proceedings; in so much as not only all
their own Provincial Divines, but all Foreign Divines did most unamimously
cry shame of them, Acta Synod Dordar. Sessione 42. 29. Decembris. See Bishop
Davenants. Animadversions. p. 51. 52. 53. 54. etc. And yet in this Book as if
it had never been meddled with Mr. T. P. most insolently trimmphs Chap. 3. p.
126.
and then and not did the Deputies of the Lords States General, confine the
Remonstrant Divines to attend that Synod within the limits of the City of Dort,
where during its continuance their charges of all sorts were all defraved, and
from whence even after the Sentence of Condemnation passed against them by the
Synod; they were dismissed to their several homes with liberty and peace. Nota
Loquor. Fourthly, Suppose the Remonstrants had at that Synod met with much
harder usage then they did, they ought to have looked upon it as a just
Recompense of Reward upon them, for their much more rigid usage of the Contra
Remonstrants, all the while that their Lord and Master Barnaveild sat at the
Stern. Fifthly, Mr. T. P. who is old enough to have heard of the Iron
Arguments of the High Commissions, and other Ecclesiastical Courts, still
concluding in the Clinck, Gatehowse, or Fleet whensoe^er his dear Masters the
Bishops had the Non conformists before them, need not to travail so far as
Dort for instances of unreasonable severity in determining Church affairs.

Chap. 4. p. 7. If King James were learned (as he was) he was the likelier to
be Orthodox (as Mr. B. confesses): then woe to Mr. B. and all his gang, for
that King was a perfect hater of the Presbyterian way, to which he gave the
blackest Characters that could be given to a Sect, and foretold what things
should be expected from that tribe. Answ. First, It had been well for King
James, and all his Posterity, if he had continued to follow the Counsel of his
own Court-Preacher Robert Rollock Sero sapiunt Phryges.
whom as Dr. Jackson oftentimes told Dr. Twisse he did use to fear next under
the Almighty, for his usual saying was, when he had Committed any thing amiss,
how shall's answer this to God, and Rollock? and he did advise him, as he would
not fall into inextricable-streights first or last to continue a fast friend
unto the Godly: Epist. Dedicat. in prophetiam Dan^elis.
upon which account probably he was a great friend for a while to the so called
Puritans in England, as appeared by his intercession for the releasement of Mr.
Cartwright, Mr. Travers, and others imprisoned for Ceremonial Inconformity
toward the latter end of Queen Elizabeth her Reign. Secondly, Yet those harsh
expressions of King James at which no question Mr. T. P. points, viz. that he
would sooner commit himself to Thieves, and highway Robbers, etc. than to
Puritans, etc. if King James, (as it it fitting) may but be allowed to be his
own Interpreter, must nor, as they be there by Mr. T. P, be understood to be
spoken against all Presbyterians, disliking the multifarious flaunt of the
Quondam. Hierarchicall platform of Government; but of the Family of love, the
worser sort of the then Anabaptists, the true successors to the ancient
Novations, or Catharoi Puritans F^^ proof of his I am sorry that I have not
the English Copy of the Praeface to (...) lying by me, and therefore am forced
to use a Latin one, as I find it transcribed by Dr. Rivet in his Jesuita
vapulans, who makes use of it upon the very like occasion against a professed
Jesuit, Chap. 13. Sect. 17. Agnoscit Puritanorum nomen proprie, and praecipue
vilis simae, illi Anaba^tistarum Sectae accomodari, quam Familiam Amoris vulgo
nuncupant, propterea quod hi solos sese ab omni peccato quasi puros aestimare
solent, se solos* esse veram Ecclesiam, etc. De hac praecipue Secta intelligi
velle quae de puritanis loquitur, etc. Addit, quod ibi not andum, Jam vero ex
altera part profiteor, protestorque per eam nominis mei aestimationem, quam
apud omnes bonos illaesam servare cupio, me de omnibus uni^ersim
praedicatoribus minime sen^^sse, ne de illis quidem, quibus simplex illa
Ecclesiae nostrae forma magis placet, quam multiplices illa Anglicanae
Caeremoniae; quibus persuasum est Episcopos illos Papalem quandam ^lere
potestatem, aliaq, ejus generis exteriora, Pontificiorum errorum esse insignia:
minime gentium. Imo tantum abest, ut in istis rebus, quas indifferentes saepe
putavi contentiosus esse velim ut fine discrimine utriusque opinionis
sectatores graves dico and doctos viros, amem and magni faciam, etc.
. And what is this to pro^e his hatred against all Presbyterians, unto whom he
was once so great a friend, even after his coming into England, as that Mr.
Forbes an ancient Reverend Scottish Divine who for above 30. years had been
Preacher unto the English Company of Merchants at Delph, told me in the
pre^en^e of Dr. Ames, and Mr. Hooker, that I might report it for a certainty
that he saw it under King James his own hand to the Presbytery of Edingborough,
that he would labor to reduce the Church Government of England to that of
Scotland, rather than conform that, to England's.

Chap. 4 p. 10.. 8. I see King James was a wise as well as a Learned and
Orthodox man. And so was he of the lower house, who told Mr. Speaker in his
speech. Anno Dom. 1640. That if they were listened to who would extirpate
Episcopacy (speaking of the Presbyterians) they would instead of

CHAP. III. Containing some General observations against his whole book,
showing the absurdity and inconsequence of the arguments which belong to his
four Chapters; and overthrowing every thing which is argumentative in his
chiefest Sections, which have not abundantly been spoken unto before in the
Correptory Correction.
NOw that I am, by Gods help, got thus far, I am sure. 1.
it would be easy to persuade most Intelligent and ingenuous Readers, that I
have dispatched the far greatest part of General observations on the whole
book,
my work, if they would but be pleased any thing seriously to peruse my
Correctory Corrept; where, to the most material and argumentative things here
again in his Philanthro. observed, they will find eight full solutions; or else
that said, from whence it might be easy for them to pick out an Answer to any
new thing served in. It is tedious to me to roll over the same stone again,
Sisyphus-like, Eundem lapidem volvere revolvere.

Occidit miseros Crambe repetita Magistros. But because the age does not abound
with over much ingenuity, toward the professors of the truth, and lest that
out new Dr's. Proselytes should give out their great Master to be an
Irrefragable, more nebuchim, and perplexorum, I will once more put my self to
the pains of doing three things in this third Chapter. First I will give in
some general observations which undo his whole book: 2ly. I shall in reference
to each of his Chapters, show the Illogicalnesse, of that which is stamen and
tramen as Warp and Woofe to the whole. Thirdly I shall deliver-in some thing,
upon the several Sections, which by any Judicious eye may be looked on, as
most material.

SECT. I.

1. General Observations.

1. AS to the first, I think, first the di^ine Pro^idence is not a little
observab^e in the Title which he gi^es to his book which he calls* The DI^INE
Ph^lanthropie defended; And that is but 1. just ^o ^^ch, had it been expressed
in p^aine English, as, Gods LOVE to MANKIND DEFEND^D, which was the very Title
of an Arminian book, far more Rhetorical and L^g^call then any, Mr. T. P. can
tell how to make, some yea^es ^ince compo^ed by M. Hoard, and Mr. Mason, and
answered by no less, then three most eminent Divines, viz. by 1. Dr. Davenant
late Bishop of Salisbury, in his Animadversions upon that book, Anno 1641. By
2. Dr. Tw^sse in Folio wri^ter, to my knowledge, long before that of the
Bishop's, but not published, till the year 1653. By 3. Dr. Moses Amprald in
France, Contra Anonymum Anglum, Anno 1631. Wherein he de^ends Calvin's opinion
about absolute Reprobation, from any o^ which three published books Mr. T. P.
might have ^etched An^wers to any thing which he has, in any of the pamphlets
which he has published, and neither have troubled the World nor the Church,
with his Correct Copy his Sinner Impleaded in his own Court, or with thi^ his
Satirical Philanthropy. Ridetur, Chorda qui Semper oberrat eadem.

2ly. As the former Author of Gods love to mankind, upholds in his Title an
odious suggestion against the Adversaries to his book, as if they maintained,
God, not at all to be a Lover of all mankind in the sen^e spoken of Math. 5.
45. Act. 14. 16. 17. and 17. 27. 28. 1 Timothy 4. 10. because they do not
maintain Him to be a Lover of all alike, as to the saving graces, flowing from
Election, the (...), spoken of Romans 11. 29. and Romans 8. 28. Aquin. did, 23.
art 1. ad 1. Deus omnes homines diligit, and etiam omnes Creaturas, in quantum
omnibus vult aliquod bonum: non tamen quodcunque bonum vult omnibus. In quantum
igitur quibusdam non vult hoc bonum, quod est vita aeterna, dicitur eos odio
habere vel Reprobare.
even so does this our Author promote what lies in him the same suggestion.
Thirdly, he does early discover what a prevaricator, we are like to find him to
be in the Pleas, which he makes for special grace Philanthrop. Chap. 3. 83. 84
etc: When as there in his inviting Title, he tells all the world that he
intends to plead for no other Love of God, then what is in him, common to all
mank^nd.

Ominosum cespitare in vestibulo. OBSER. 2. He profes^ed in his Animadversions
to the Reader, p. 4. to have been under a necessity of spending whole Sections
upon things extr^nsecall to Gods decrees: and that therefore he has attempted
to requite his Reader and himself, by making of a Table of those things which
are most material and pertinent to the several questions in debate. Answ. 1.
And by this solemn profession, he has, before he is a ware of it, honestly
confessed that this his new Philanthropy is for the main of it, but a new
Eccentrical thing, wandering from the main Question, which as his own CORRECT
Copy says (in the very Title page) was concerning Gods DECREES, especially of
REPROBATION: what needs he be much disputed with who declines the chief thing
in question? 2. I thank him heartily for his ingenuous Table, of things most
material; for it has been of good use to me; but yet, in plain English, I must
needs tell him I do much wonder at his never failing impudence, for putting it
into his Table and Text, that Railing is not warranted by Scripture Table verb
Railing
, that practical Christians are no ill things v. Practical.
, as if they were any matter of debate or question to me! How wretchedly
without any the least regard to conscience, he does wrest my words as if I held
the contrary to these things, may be seen, Philanthropy. Chap. 4. p. 10. and p.
13. unto which I will give no other Answer then this, that if any Godly
Christian will but look over what I writ, and what he writes upon this
occasion, they will much sooner bewail it with me, that by such kind of
scribbling he does make it evident that he is become a Master Railer, and so an
ill thing, because no practical Christian, rather then they will believe that
Imaintaine the lawfullnesse of Railing, or that it is no ill thing to be no
practical Christian.

OBSERVE AT. 3. Though by Mr. Whitefield and my self Mr. Whitefields Epist. p.
1, 2, 3. C^^Rept Correct. p. 76. 96. 113. 137. 138. etc.
he had been told of diverse useful dist^nctions, betwixt Gods decree and the
execution of it, the Decree of the end and means, the decree of Gods Counc^l
and Commandment, the difference betwixt an absolute and a cond^tional
necessity, yet either he takes at all no notice of them or he takes no
tolerable care of confuting of them, but runs out in his fo^mer mistakes which
he was so often told of, whilst he ever and ^non confounds the Councils and the
Commandments of God together, the reasons of the execution for the reasons of
the Decrees puts Salvation for Election, etc.

Observe. 4th. He professedly only deals against the first 9. sheets of my book
Philanthr. Chap. 44. p. 66.
and even there (as any body may see) deals rather with the more personal and
immaterial matters, than with those which are most truly Argumentat^ve. He is
altogether a Mute as to any opposition which he makes against the stating of
the Question about the absoluteness of Gods decrees, as held either by us now
a days, or by the Orthodox Catholics of old, CoRRept. CoRRec. a p. 112. ad
115. Iterun a p. 137 ad 145. ab 194. and 197. etc. and inde ad finem usq.
Libri. ab 151. ad 193. etc. cummultis aliis.
he brings in nothing for the vindicating of his Decachorde of Arguments
CoRRept. Copy CoRRec. p. 141.
or for to clear his mistakes about the points of Orig^nall sin, free will,
Resistibility of grace, falling away from grace more Speculative prescience,
which made up by far the greatest part of his own CoRRect Copy, and of my
Correctory against it, and yet he must needs give out his book to be a
satisfactory Answer to all that had been said against him.

Observat. 5th. Wheresoever he recedes from Arminius, as in many things he
does, it is still for the worse, toward rank Pelagianism and Socinianism. Ex.
gr. 1. Armin^us and his followers, as I have showed (c) elsewhere did only (at
least, at first) presuppose the praevision of faith, before Election: but Mr.
T. P. every where presupposes perseverance in the faith, and in all sorts of
good works, Philanthr. p. 7.
2. Arminius is out in making his ipsum (...) Credere to be that which is
imputed unto us, for righteousness; but he is worse out, who does not so much
as believe that, but will have all our works and good deeds to be as well the
matter of our Justification, as Faith, Philanthr. p. 12. and 22. Sinner
impleaded, p. 333.
nullifying altogether the imputed righteousness of Christ CoRRept. CoRRec. p.
159.
. Arminius was for Gods efficacious permission of sin CoRRept. Correc. p. 85.
etc.
for sin's only having a deficient cause; but our good Author is fiercely
against these things. I may afterward possib^y have a just occa^ion to
instance in many more things.

OBSERVE. 6. When as any body* but in any tolerable fashion, acquainted with
Pel^gianism and Semi-pelagianism may as easily perceive his whole CORRECT Copy
to have a tenden^y toward them; nay even to begin and end in them, and that
nothing was more fully and punctually pro^ed, in almost every other leaf of my
Corrept Correct. Yet, Philanthr. Chap. 1. p. 11. he is not ashamed to make a
public Challenge to the ablest of my abettors, to transcr^be any one period
from any part of his Book, wherein they will affirm Pelagianism does lie: with
how much more modes^y might he have answered, as the Arminians, when
Pelagianism was objected to Censura Censurae.
them, (a) Quid tum? Pelagius recte sentit.

OBSERVE. 7. When he cannot tell how to find himself any imaginable rational
work against me, he sets himself to the making of 7. or 8. Arguments for the
proving of me to be a Pelagian, and a Massilian, Philanthrop. from p. 7. to 12.
and to the making of 16. more for the proving of me to be an Arminian Ibid.
from p. 12. to 17.
.

OBSERVE. 8. Whenever he is most desperately at a loss, for answering of an
Argument, then he Jears and Scoffs most confidently, Ex. gr. when he knows not
in the World, how rationally, to put off that known, and allowed maxim of
Doctor Twisse, that Quod primum est, in intention est ultimum Chap. 3. p. 67.
in executione, What is first in intention, is last in execution, then he tells
us, by way of jear, that had he used that Maxim in such an ignorant manner,
when he was a raw Soph^ster, he had been h^ssed out of the Schools; yea, when
the end of his Journey is France, he first intends to take Ship at Dover,
before he think upon France.

OBSERVE. 9. If any were so simple as to be ruled by him, he would put a
necessity upon his Adversary, to make a large Volume in the interpreting of,
and vin^icating from bla^phemy, the expressions of most of the eminentest
Reformers in the Church, such as Calvin, Dr. Twisse, Piscator, Beza, and a
World more, Philanth. a p. 132. ad 139 ^^ per to^um, Caput Quartum.
when as for the most part, those very Authors in other parts of their
Writings; nay, often a little before, or after the words quoted by him, clear
themselves; and when (as we shall see more, when we come to them) their known
opinions are quite contrary to what he would wring out of their words.

OBSERVE. 10. As in his Correct Copy before Corrept. Correct. p. 172.
, so in this his Philanthropy now when he should quote Scriptures, for Gods
Praedestination, he still brings those which only speak of his Promises,
Commands, etc. and wholly declines, to work upon the 9th to the Romans, or at
least slubbers over Chap. 4. p. 39. Correct Copy p. 40. when as yet he cannot
be ignorant, that we never take our selves to be beaten by Scripture, till by
dint of Arguments, we shall be forced out of that our strong hold.

I have done with the first, and now come to the second thing promised.

. 2.

Showing the Illogicalness of the main Arguments belonging to his 4. Chapters.

It in my Correptory Correction* I took care of any thing* it was this, that
the Book might be fully correspondent to the Tit^e-page. And this I believe,
for any thing that as yet has been said against it, to have been so fully
done, as that I will not so far question the slipperiness of the memory of any
attentive Readers, or obtund his attention, or doubt of his very eyesight, as
before such an one, once to question, whether both in Text, and in broad
Margins, Pelagian^sme, Massilianisme, Arminianisme, Contradiction to Scripture,
and to the Church of England, has not been fully proved against mine
Adversary. I am sure in this his Philanthropy, he has not as yet answered to
at least the fortieth part of the particulars, which have made it evident, that
most of his Arguments, and manner of allegations of Texts, are Pelagion,
Massilian, Arminian, etc.

And Ergo, if there be any concluding Ergo, in all this vast Chapter, which
runs o^t into no less then 36. Pages, it must be drawn from these, or some
such like praemises.

He who stoutly flourishes against a Title Page, without dispro^ing any of the
main particulars, bro^ght for the proo^ thereof in the Book, he overthrowes the
who^e Book.

But that does Mr. T. P. throughout this whole first Chapter, from p. 1. to 36.

Ergo, Mr. Barlee his Book is beaten.

Secondly, Througho^t all his second Chapter, he carries on another grand
Argument against me, full out as inconsequential as the former. First he draws
up a formidable Catalogue, of all my high, and possibly, here and there,
overhasty expressions against him. Philanthr. from p. 47. to 43.
2. At pleasure, without any further proof, he is p^eased to call them all
Scurrilous, Calumniating, or, blasphemous. 3. He plays very fiercely upon my
style and temper, which yet he represents to be no worse then that of Mr.
Calvin's, Philanth. p. 120. p. 126.
and of my dear Authors and Masters, as he calls them, and whom he exposes to
open shame in his Catalogue, from p. 133. to 139. As many of them as I have
seen and read under Christ, I will be content to acknowledge to have been my
Masters. Ingenuum est agnoscere, per quos profeceris. I will only except
against monstrous Leviathan Hobbs; and the Book which he calls, Comfort for
Believers, a Book ordered by the late Parliament to be burned Phil. p. 136.
: these I di own from ever having been my Masters. And whosoever will be ruled
by me, they shall as soon own the Devil to be their Masters, as any of those
Books: and I wish my adversary would but undertake to promise as much in the
behalf of some of his Proselytes, who are but too great approvers of Hobs his
Lev^athan.

2. And then after this Game, he draws up his five Conclusibles, from p. 44. to
50. as conclusible as this Argument is, from whence they be all to be inferred.

Mr. Barlees style is not so elegant, as M. P. would have it, nor his temper
any thing so mild as that of Cassandrus, or Ed. Phil. 126.
mild Grotius his is: Ergo, he answers not my Book, or at least my five
Conclusibles held against him; but the first is true: Ergo.

3. That which must needs be the force of the great Wheel, or Argument, which
gives motion to all the third Chapter, and runs through all the Sections of it,
from p. 54. to 152. must needs be one like unto this. Though I do suppose,
rather then prove Mr. B. Calumnies and falsifications to be his third way of
his Confutations; yet by so doing, I overthrow his Book. But the former I do
suppose, and that very stoutly, as the Answers to the particulars have, and
shall yet make it further evident, Ergo.

4. And so for the fourth Chapter, the chief part of which is spent in
torturing and racking some speeches of Calvin, Twisse, Zwinglius, for the
proving them against their express Protestations to the contrary, to maintain
God to be the Author of sin, the utmost of what can ever be concluded out of
them, will come but to this upshot at long run.

The expressions of Mr. Calvin, Doctor Twisse, Zwinglius, etc. about Gods
Efficacious permission of sin, may possibly in some things, be too high, in
some things not so well apprehended, or interpreted by Mr. Barlee, who could
not reach to the meaning of the Authors so well as themselves, or who thought
not fit to spend too much time, in clearing the sense of such places, which the
Authors themselves do abundantly clear in other places of their Writings.
Ergo, Mr. T. P. has proved it against them, that they are the Authors of
blasphemy, or that there is no such thing, as absolute reprobation, etc.

But the first is true, Ergo.

. 3.

3ly, I come now to those particular Argumentative matters which are of any
moment throughout the several parcels of his book: and here, in his Epist.
Dedicat. first he begins with Philosophical matter, P. 11. lin. 9. 10. What
use do you make of your Philosophy, and that Government of the will which we
are wont to talk of, p. 4. We may learn so much Christianity among the
Stoics, as not to make our selves unhappy by our not being Master of another
man's Tongue.

Answ. 1. Boeth^an Philosophy made this man turn first from Calvinisme, as
he will needs call it, from Christianity, as indeed it is, unto Armin^anisme
CoRRect Copy, p. 48.
; and ever since as it appears by his public writings it is humane and moral
Philosophy which he feeds upon and is nourished with See the first and chiefest
part of his sinner Impleaded
2. humb^e and mortified Christians use to have many sad and mournful
discourses with their like, about the unrulinesse of their wills, their
Impotency, yea Impossibility, to govern those unruly things at all, without
the special powerful operation of Christ's grace Ioh. 15. 5. but proud
spirited people use to boast of their powers to govern their wills as Austin of
old ob^erved Dicere solet humana superbia, Dicere solet humana Superbia si
scissem fecissem, ideo non seci, quia nescivi. de great, and arbitr. c. 2.
etc: My good friend was resolved not to heed what Lecture I had formerly read
him out of Austin CoRRept. CoRRect. p. 35. 36. in Marg.
. 3ly. Athough I will not deny but that much good use may be made of humane
Philosophy, as to the snibbing for a while, rat^er then the mortifying of some
boisterous passions, yet in their next Philosophical Dialogue, I would fain
have them to determine; first whether any Christianity properly so called, can
be learned from those who had none at all of it, as the Stoics had never a
deal of it. 2ly. Whether those without some limitation can so much as be
called virtuous, who could only be so as to the dull matter of virtues, but
knew nothing of any right principles of virtues, of any right ends, of any
right manner of performing of them, when as yet Austin according to Scripture
has long since well determined, that non officiis sed finibus sunt metiendae
virtutes, Virtues must be described by their ends, not by their Offices. 3ly.
whether that the more Heathens Philosophers did place their happiness in moral
virtues, they were not the more proud, and the further off from Christ, and the
nearer to the deifying of themselves, to whom they did use to ascribe their own
virtues; propter unicam ambitionem, caeteras omnes colebant virtutes, Omne
etenim probitatis opus, nisi semine vitae Exoritur fidei, peccatum est, inque
erratum, Vertitur, et Sterilis cumulat sibi gloria poenam.
Ambition and selfe-admiration, made them to follow all other virtues Prosper
Carmen. de ingratis. Cicero was used to boast that he did thank God for his
riches and honors, but not for his virtues. Senec. Ep. ^7. Bonam men^em
stultum est optare, cum possis a ^e impe^rare Austin. Lib. 5. de Civ. dei c.
20. Eorum virtus, si tamen ulla est, alio modo quodam humanae subditur laudi;
neque enim qui sibi placet homo nonest, etc: idem in Psalm. 121. ut non
superbiat, in virtutibus proficiendo, quid debet facere? levet oculos suos ad
illum qui habitat in coelo, non se attendat; sed qui sibi placei, stulto homini
placet, quia ipse stultus est, qui sibi placet, solus securus placet qui Deo
placet.
. Had these things in their conferences been thoroughly scanned, possibly the
first thing in this book to have been recommended unto us, would not have been
Stoical Philosophy; and elsewhere we should not have been told that these
Stoics aemulated St. Paul in his writings about the combat betwixt the Flesh
and the Spirit, with which never mere Heathen or mere natural man was ever in
Paul's sense acquainted Sinner impleaded, p. 38. A^i^n writes as if be had
transcribed out of the seventh Chapter to the Romans. Austin contra, Lib. 1.
Retract, Cap. 23. ex opere posthumo, Lib. 1. contra Julian. Quis non videat
Judaei Apostolum induxisse personam, nondum sub Christi gratia instituti,
dicentis, Miser ego homo, etc: Itane vero Judaeus est, nondumque Christianus
est, qui dicit, Dei gratia me liberavit per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum* Et
pau^o post. Postremo cor delectatur lege Dei secundum interiorem hominem, etc:
et tu contra clarissimam veritatem oculos claudis, gemitumque ejus exponis, non
ut omnibus patet, sed ut tibi placet, etc.
.

2ly. He says ibid, p. 5. lin, 2, 3, 4* 5, 6, and in Margin. that he is no
more a Herotick, for being said by Mr. Barlee to lay snares for the worthy
Gentlemen of the Country, whereby to bring them into boggs and precipices, than
God himself is a seducer for being said by Mr. Barlee to tempt men unto sin,
p. 79. he says he is not at leisure fully to open in what sense, etc. He
says, that God does stir up wicked men to acts, as acts which to the actors
are and will be unjust. As if God could stir up David to pollute Bathsheba
without stirring him up to his adultery; or else, that Adultery becomes no sin.

Answ. 1. As to what may seem weighty and material in this objection, enough
(by Gods blessing) is like to be spoken to it, when I shall come professedly to
speak about Gods efficac^ous permission of sin: In the interim, it will suffice
to observe, first that to my best remembrance, I never called him Heretic: if
he have a mind to call himself so, I will not gainsay it; for indeed I think
him guilty of much heretical pravity.

2ly. I could never so-fashion think the Almighty to draw men into the Snares
of sin, as I believe Mr. T. P. does: he does it by his persuasive Oratory, by
his gilded fine poisoned Letters and Papers, by his mis-representing of their
Orthodox guides; but the holy one of Israel persuades not to sin; yea by his
Laws, Promises, Threats, judgments disswades from it, non infundit malitiam
sed non impertit gratiam, Romans 9. 10. He gives grace to whom the will, and
hardens whom he pleases, by denying them grace, and giving them up to their
own hearts lusts, Romans 1. 20.

3ly. Any one who reads me and heeds me in any of the places which he directs
them unto in the Text or Margin of my Correptory, will easily see how for the
clearing of God, from have any efficiency in sin, as such, I do every where
carefully distinguish these three things. 1. The materiale substratum peccati,
the material part of sin (as I may so say) which is either the doing, or the
leaving undone some positive natural or Moral act. 2ly. The formal part of
sin, which gives it its being, such as it has, and that is it which the
Scripture calls (...), Ier. 3. 4. 3ly. The Governing, Ruling and overruling the
sin and the sinner; the first and the last I make God to be the Sovereign
Author of, in whom we live move and having our being, Act. 17. and who brings
light out of darkness, good out of evil Apolog. Lib 1. c. 25. Dr. Morton.
Episcop. Dunelmens. fuse a page 90. ad 97 edit. London in 8.
. But as for the second which alone is properly sin, I every where deny God
to have any other hand in it, then that of a voluntary, unconstrained
perm^ssion, which so long as the world stands, can never in the Lord be proved
to be sinful. Hugo de S. Vic. Lib. 1. de Sacrament, cap. 12. part 4. Deus cum
faci^ bonum and permittit malum, apparet voluntas ejus quoniam esse vult quod
facit, and quod permittit est dei voluntas operatio ejus, and permissio ejus.
4ly. If as I say Corrept. p. 79. that I was not at leisure in reference to
James 1. 13. 14. fully to open in what sense God may some way seem, I speak
Cautelously, and yet not be, the Author of sin, etc: he should not have been
so uncharitable or so irrational as to insinuate, as here he does, that I would
have done it in a way which would have aspersed the Almighty with man's sin:
that might be done as some of the ancient and modern Enchi-rid. ad Laur. cap.
13. and 14. Omnis natura, etiamsi vitiosa est, in quantum natura est, bona est,
in quantum vitiosa est, mala est and rursum ma la omnino sine bonis, and nisi
in bonis esse non possunt qu imvis bona sine ma lis esse possint. Valentianus
ini Aquin, q 9. 19. p. 43. E^titatem pravae actionis omnes fatemur cadere in
voluntatem divinam cum fit; and esse a Deo tanquam a causa universali,
concurrente cum voluntate humana.
interpreters both Pont fician and Protestant have done, and yet neither the
text be really contradicted, nor God be made a Seducer. 2ly. He should not have
been so superstitious as to have overlooked that which p. 79. upon this
occasion I directed him unto, out of Dr. Twisse. 3ly. He should not have such
an overweening conceit of himself, and of his Authority in the Church, as to
have thought that his bare Repetition of several sayings of mine, without any
the least show of confutation, when as yet they be wary enough, and commonly
enough received, would be a sufficient demonstration that they prove me to
maintain God to be a seducer, or the Author of sin, contrary to my express
words and meaning, as the Lord knows and will judge who is the Judge of all,
and the searcher of all men's hearts and trier of all men's reins. 5ly. He that
cannot or will not tell how God may be said to excite men to the Act of
Adultery, which to the Adulterer so excited is sin though not to God, neither
will he tell how God without sin does stir up men to the Act of lying with
their lawful Wives (for it is adutrumque but ejusdem generis excitatio, and
concursus) unless he makes himself guilty of something of sinful
concupiscence which always more or less since the Fall cleaves to the Act.
Would he peruse Austin his writings de nuptiis and concupiscentia, they would
inform him better Austin diverse times instanceth in Gods making stolen Corn to
grow.
.

. 1.

2ly. To what he has in the book it self, in any material Section of his, and
here first to the charge of Post-destination. chap. 1.. 2. from p. 4. to 7th,
he hopes to acquit himself of this by saying first, that it is another cast of
my invention. And yet (Answer. 1) I believe I am not the first by a hundred,
who in opposition to Pelagian and Arminian Spirits, have used this expression
Instead of a great many m^ who might easily be produced see Bishop Davenant
Animadvers. p. Ames. Antisynd p. 25. in Coronide Artic. p. 4. Edit. Londinens.
p. 4. Rivet* disp. 4. These. 6.
2. Yea seeing by what he pleads for in these pages it is evident that God
concluded upon nothing concerning man's Aeternall condition, before he did at
least in signorationis foresee all that man would do or leave undone from his
first to his last breath, I might with a venerable Author Dr. Ames Autisynod,
p. 25.
with much more reason have styled him a submortuarian, and because he allows
of final falling away from grace in some elected to it, have called him an
Apostatarian: (for that according to him the object of Election may be an
Apostate Phil. Chap. 4. p. 18.
) than he with any color, by way of distinction from their brethren, have
termed others Sublapsarians. 2ly. He says that a decree before the Creation of
the World is as much and as purely a Praedestination, although conditional, as
his absolute decree can be supposed to be, and that the word praescience does
sufficiently enforce.

Answ. 1. The impossibility of this I have already largely proved in my corrept
Correct CORREPT, Correct from p. 139. to 143. etc.
unto which he makes not any the least shadow of a reply. 2ly. It is against
all common sense to aver that that is as purely a praedestination which
puts praedestination into the power of the praedestinated as that which puts
it only in the power of the praedestinating. The former, as is evident, is his
Heterodoxal opinion, the latter is only ours. 3ly. It is as senseless to say
that praescience (especially as he discourses of it in his Boethian discourse,
Correct Copy p. 48. 49.) does infer a praedestination; when as praescience of
a thing future must needs praesuppose a praedestination or a praedetermination
of it.

3ly. He says that my term of Post-destination, will fall foul upon all my
venerable Masters of the Sublapsarian ways; which does infer a decree, not
altogether irrespective, etc: Answ. 1. The transferring of a Crime to others is
no ablation of it from himself. 2ly. There is nothing so manifest but that in
this business there is a wide difference, even a (...) and Immane quantum,
betwixt those whom he terms Sublapsarians and himself, First I know none of
them all, who stand much upon these Terms of sub, Supra or Con, when they come
to speak about the ordering of Gods decrees, Dav. Animadversions, p. 24 17. 58.
and 27. etc, passim. A. Rivet. disp. 3. These. 12. Ames Antisynod, cap. 1. p. 5.
Dr. Twisse in omnibus Scriptis saepe.
nay they profess them to be of no great moment, yea to be but mere Logical
or Metaphysicall speculations. They hold with Tho. of Aquin, that, as in
reference to the dealbation, it is not a material business whether, that which
is whitened, were, before black, pale, or red: so, as to the reason of
praedestinat^on, they think not material, whether a man be predestined to
life eternal, from a state of misery, or no: Part 1. qu. 23. Art. 1. Motus non
accipit speciem a termino a quo, sed a termino ad quem: nihil enim refert
quantum ad rationem dealbationis utrum ille qui dealbatur suerit niger ^ut
pallidus, aut rubeus; and similiter nihil resert ad rationem praedestinationis,
utrum aliquis praedestinetur in vitam aeternam, a statu miscriae vel non.
. 3ly, They object, All persons predestined, to the Almighty predestinating
to be in an Aequal condition, not as differenced by any qualifications of Worse
or Better, Romans 9. 11.

4ly, They utterly deny all formal objects Ames Anti-synod, p. 5. Tem^re vel
dolose sit mentio objecti formalis. Tale objectum non agnoscimus.
(though they grant mere material ones) they deny all external motive
meritorious causes of Election or Reprobation, which is not the case of my
Adversary.

5ly. There is none of them all who grant not the Decrees of Creation and
Permission of sin, to precede the praevision of Creation and Sin: whether as
belonging to the decrees of more Common Providence, or unto the decree of
praedestination in special, is not a material dispute, whilst they be both
granted to be aeternall, Dr. Twisse, Lib. 1. p. 87. Ed^t. in 4o.

6ly, There is nothing so clear, but if that were but yielded unto, the mere
sublapsarians, wherein as I have largely showed in my Corrept Correct, p. 137.
138. etc: p. 184, the substance of the controversy is consisting betwixt them
and their Adversaries, (and unto which as to any Replies my Mr. T. P. is
altogether mute when it most concerned him to have been Vocal) they would not
as they say siccum interduere care of a bulrush what became of the business of
sub or Supralapsarianism. It is well known that the ablest amongst them, as Fr.
Junius, Piscator, and others, think that if the various acts belonging to
praedestination be distinguished, there may be place both for the men of the
upper way and for men of the lower way, Francisc. Junius d^sputat. 10.

7ly. He should not so Ir^nically have spoken of my venerable Masters (as he
terms them) the Sublapsarians, unless with all he had intended to have
derided his venerable Master Arminius, whom he styles the famous professor of
Divinity in the University of Leyden, Philan. p. 14. Chap. 1. for he is often
but too ambi^ions to be accounted a Sublapsarian Doctor Twisse, Lib. 1. cap.
55. Arm^nius ipse interdum acriter pugnat pro massa Corrupta tanquam
re^robationi praestruenda, atqu^ in ^o speciem facit, tanquam cum quibusdam ex
nostris Theologis Consentientis, etc.
, and would to God he had never been worse.

8ly. I think he graceth me very much in calling many of those my venerable
Masters, whom he styles Sublapsarians; yet he must give me leave to take the
same liberty in differing now and then from my Masters, which he thinks
reasonable to take to himself. My great and sole absolute Master, Jesus,
Christ, bears me witness in the Testimony of a good Conscience, though my
Adversary suspects the contrary of me, most uncharitably, Chap. 1. p. 14. that
nullius juravi ego in verba magistri, si ille excipiatur, I am not sworn to the
words of any of my Masters but my Lord Christ's: and full easy it would have
been for my Adversary, to have known both from my close following of D. Twisse
and from what I say expressly, Corrept. Correct. p. 177. my words are, The way
of the otherwise Orthodox, Sublapsarians, that if I must needs be differenced
from others, I must rather be styled a Supra-lapsarian, then a Sub-lapsarian, I
am clearly in my judgment for the Coordination of the Decrees of Creation of
the permission of original and actual sins, etc. in reference to Gods supreme
ends of Praedestination, rather than for the subordinating and dividing of
them. And indeed, if I may but be allowed to speak my mind freely, though I
acknowledge the ends of the Reverend men of the lower way to have been very
pious, viz.

1. To avoid curiosity. 2. To facilitate matters to our weak intellects Rivet.
disputat. 3 These. 14. ex Calvino Non Solum quaestio haec abstrusa est, ac in
penitiore Dei Sanctuarii adyto condita, sed quia otiosa Curiositas alenda non
est, cujus illa nimis alta speculatio alumna and nutrix est, ergo in illo primo
proposito haerendum esse non censet. Addit ergo alteram partem, quod ex damnata
Adae S^bole, Deus quos visum est, elegit; quos vult reprobat, quae inquit sicut
ad fidem alendam long aptior est, ita majore cum fructu tractatur: in hac
igitur Doctrina, quae humanae naturae corruptionem and reatum in se contin^^,
libentius se insistere, sicuti non solum ad pietatem potius conducit; sed magis
etiam videtur Theologica.
. 3. To allay the tum^^tuous spirits of their Antagonists;
yet Salva^ pace tantorum virorum, they have not in any of these been
succesful; especially, not in the last of all, as appears by the restlesness
of our common Adversaries. My Courtlike Neighbor does therefore behave himself
p. 5. but very rudely against me, whilst he conjureth up a rustic, laboring
at the Plough, to puzzle me with his Demands about things, which according to
my Tenants, no way concern me to answer; for if, as I think, in reference to
Praedestination, the decrees of permitting original and all actual sins be
Coordinate, and make but one Decree, not diverse de mediis, there is at all no
place for the Ploughmans Question, who may do well to apply himself to his
Plough again, and leave these high matters of Divinity to some body else; and
yet if this Learned Corydon, and the subtle Sophister, his Prompter, can but
have patience a while, they shall find, that their Question is not irresolvable.

8. Both the Supra, and Sublapsarians, can be content to allow of respective
decrees; Doctor Twisse Lib. 2. p. 24. Col. 2. Certe omnis voluntas est
respect^va sicut and scientia: nam ut scientia est, Scibilis scientia; ita
etiam voluntas, est rei volibilis, voluntas. Dicitur autem absoluta, etc. for
so all the decrees of God, which are inward acts relating to objects, and ad
alterum, must needs be, yet they utterly deny all conditional Decrees, properly
so calle^ Ruiz. de volunt disp. 20. Sect. 1. Volitioues pure Conditionales sunt
ali nae a Sapientia and prudentia Dei. A. Rivet disp. 4. These. 4. loquens de
absoluto De cre^o, Quod non intelligendum, quatenus absolutum distinguitur
Contra respectivum: de eo enim non Controvertitur, neque de absoluto a
subjecto, etc. neque de absoluto a mediis in sua executione: sed de absoluto,
quod vocant, a causa.
, which are not grounded on absolute or unconditionate ones.

Fourthly, He grows insolent, as if he had carried all, clear before him, when
he asks p. 5. Where then lies the difference betwixt them of the Consistory,
and us, who are of the Church? God (say they) decreed to reprobate the greatest
part of Mankind, in consideration of no other then original sin. But say we of
the Church of England, (and the famous Moulin of France) it was in
consideration of all the sins that were future; not only of original, but
actual also.

Answ. 1. If this Author, after the Arminian fashion, would not constantly
confound the Decree of Preterition, or negative Reprobation, (which in God is
an Act of his absolute Sovereign will) with the Decree of positive
Condemnation, which is an Act of his judicial power, and vindicative justice;
neither Sublapsarians, nor Supralapsarians, would contradict him, in saying,
that God Reprobates no man, nor adjudgeth no man of years to Hell, for mere
original sin.

2. A very great part of my Corrept. Correct. in answer to this Dechachorde of
Arguments, ev^n from p. 136. to 182. (unto which, as yet, there has appeared
no answer) spending it self in confutation of all that which he produces for
the proving of his opinion, in the sense wherein he takes it, it might seem
very superfluous labor in me, to oppose any thing more against this
over-confident assertion set down there. But because he establishes this as a
main Column, or Jacin, upon which this his 2d work is to rest, and that he is
not afraid to quote his Mother the Church of England for it, as well as
Monsieur Moulin of France it may not be amiss to all that I have said before,
to add these few things, by way of answer to both those particulars. And first,
to the first of the Church of England.

Answ. 1. The opinion here set down, and as he sets it down, may possibly have
been the opinion of the late Court, or Consistory of England; (for Consistories
we had, as well as they at Geneva, though of another make) but it was never the
judgment of our Mother the Church of England, in any of her Authorized
Articles. If we may judge of her opinion, either 1. By her awful, and I
believe, studied silence in the seventeenth Article about Predestination: where
was the proper place for her to have ^poke her mind out. 2. If from what she
says there, about Pred^stination, or Election, we may by just proportion or
Analogy, guess what her meaning must needs be, about the contrary Decree of
Reprobation viz. that as the former is the everlasting purpose of God to
prepare Grace and Glory for his People, whom he has chosen in Christ out of
Mankind: so the opposite Decree of Reprobation, is nothing else but a Decree of
denying those saving Graces prepared for the Elect, unto those who are left in
the state of Curse and Damnation. And if so (as is most likely) our good
Mothers opinion, is directly opposite to that of Mr. T. P. and his late
Arminian, broken, Consistory of England.

3. Or if the best of the most venerable Fathers in the Church, who before our
Author was born, and who did a thousand times better understand what the
Doctrine of their Mother Church was, then our (...), when compared to them, may
be heard speak for our common Mother, they will give in their verdict against
him. I have formerly named many of them to him, and might name many more, viz.
Corrept. Correct. p. 194. Matthew Eborac, Jacob Armach, John Whitegift Cantuar,
Robert Abbots, Jos. Exon, Tho. Dunelm, etc. but for the present, let it suffice
to set down the judgment of them all, from under the hand of that most
judicious Divine, Dr. Davenant, late Bishop of Salisbury, who has wrote a
who^e Book against this opinion, in which he speaks thus. Dav. Animadvers. p.
6, 7. and 55. etc.

The wisdom of our Church of England, in the 17th Article, lays down the
Doctrine of Predestination, and does not so much as in one word, meddle with
the point of Reprobation; leaving men to conceive* that the one is the bare
negation, or denial of that special favor and benefit which is freely
intended, and mercifully bestowed in the other. Would to God the Children of
this Church, (let Mr. T. P. if he be but a Member of the Church of England heed
this) had imitated the wisdom of their Mother, and had not taken a quite
contrary course, balking the Doctrine of Predestination, and breaking in
abruptly upon the Doctrine of Reprobation.

2. And truly it will not sink into my head, how the Church of England who for
matters purely Doctrinal, may, ever since her first Reformation compare with,
if not out ^y any Christian Protestant Church in the World, should light upon
such an opinion as is 1. Most Antiscriptural, Romans 9. 11. 18. 20. 21. turning,
as I have showed elsewhere, Corrept. Correct. p. 28. the Apostles (...), or
Abyss, into a most easy fordable shallow.

2. It is both indeed, and in Term^nis Pelagian, and Semi-Pelagian, who founded
the decrees, both of Election and Reprobation, upon good or bad works Aug. de
praedestinat. Sanct. L. 1. c. 18 Praesc^^bat ergo a^^ P^lagius qui futuri
essent sancti, and et id^o eos ante mundi constitutionem in ipsa sua prae
scientia ^^ a tales futuros esse praescivit, elegit. Prosper* in Epist. ad Aug.
Pene omnium par invenitur and una sententia, quae propositum and
praedestina^ionem Dei secundum praescientiam receperunt
.

3. It is most Illogical, and absurd. 1. It is against Mr. T. P's. own Logic,
when he says Philanth, Chap. 3. p. 64. that he had never so little Logic* as
to say, that any thing in man (which is the Object) could be the cause of Gods
decree; and yet here he makes God himself in Reprobation, egredi extra se, to
fetch from man's Original and Actual sins, which were foreseen to fall out in
time, the Cause, and, as he holds it, the very meritorious Cause, for such is
that which he pleads for, all along Philanthr. Chap. 3. p. 66, 67. p. 111, 112,
113. inducing the Almighty to take up his decree of Reprobation, or eternal
praeterition.

2. Ac^ording to this Divinity, permission of sin, for which men are damned,
ex^aecation and obduration, and final perseverance in sin, are not according to
the common Tenent both of Pontifician Penottus says the learned Bishop of
Salisbury, would fain^ d^ny negative Reprobation, yet is drive^ to confess,
L^b. 7. cap. 17. that, Doctors commuite^ admittunt reprobationem negativam,
doc^n^que communiter ob^u^at^onem s^u ^^rmisionem manendi in peccato usque ad
mortem, ^ffectum ess^ h^^us R^p^^ba^^onis. And the definition from Tho: Aquinas
by none contradicted, evinceth as much. Est autem Reprobatio dec^etum
permi^endi peccatum and damnationem inferendi pro peccato, Suarez de Auxiliis,
c. 2. c. 5. p. 17^. Si ^ermo sit de non electione, verum est, causam illius
esse solam Dei voluntatem, nulla expecta^a causa exparte hominis.
and Protenant Divines, to be look^d upon as con^equent results of Reprobation
(I do not say, they be proper Effects, or Fruits of it) but as Antecedent
Causes, and procurers of that Decree.

3ly. If sin original or actual foreseen, be the cause of the decree of
Reprobation (for the only question is about the Aeternall immanent act of God
Reprobating) then because God could not but from all Aeternity foresee that if
the elect did but live to years, they would be guilty of Original and actual
sin, and Ergo according to him all men should have been Reprobated, for there
is not a man that l^ves and sins not, 1 King. 8. 46. Out of an unclean who can
give that which is clean. Job. 14. 4.

4ly. Without any the least reason assigned for it, God Reprobares Angels one
way, and men another way; for there is nothing so plain as that the foresight
of the Angels Original or actual sins did not praecede their Reprobation. But
the Scripture speaks alike of both, Jude 4, 6.

5ly. It is a doctrine Loathsome to the wiser and best sort of Divines, in the
very Church of Rome, as Mr. Perkins has proved at large out of many School
Doctors Citante D. Twisse, Lib. 2. p. 18. 19. in quarto Greg. Armini. Petrus de
Alliaco. Marsilius Franciscus Major Bannes, Ferrarensis. And instead of all
take this argument.
unto which more might be added Out of Bonaventure, in parteprima distinct, 41.
quastione 1. Omne meritum antecedit illud cujus est meritum: sed Praedestinatio
and Rep^obatio praecedunt nostrum esse, Ergo non cadunt sub nost^o merito.
Item, omne meritum aliquomodo est causa ejus quod meretur, sed pr^destinatio
and Reprobatio sunt aeterna, merita vero sunt temporalia. Ergo temporale est
causa De^reti, quod est impos^ibile.
and observeable it is that even of late Iunsenius has wrote no less then two
whole books against it, viz. Lib. 9. and 10. Tom. 3.
: And has the Church of England for such a doctrine as this is a wider swallow
then that of the Chuch of Rome?

1. And let this serve for Answer to what he says about the Church of England.
2. As for the next thing which he has about Mr. Moulin of France, first he
might have rested satisfied with what I told him about this. Corrept correct,
p. 129. 130. 3ly. I much wonder at it, how so great a Presbyterian and
Anti-Arminian as for the main Mr. P. Moulin was known to be should be so high,
in Mr. T. P's. favor? I perceive when it may serve his turn, a man of the
consistory shall be looked upon as a good Churchman with him. 3ly. If he be so
much taken with Mr. Moulin his discourses about Reprobation, why is he not as
much taken with his Anti-Arminian discourses in the point of Election? Loves he
rather to patronize Reprobate then Elect persons. 4ly. Why does not he, or his
party, answer Dr. Twisse his answer to Mr. Moulins arguments about Reprobation,
before he commend his performances so high?

5ly. Out of the mouth of a Clown he studies to pose me with a very long-tailed
question, which takes up the better part of two pages, p. 5. 6. and yet he is
upon it again, p. 66. taken from Gods Eternal omniscience, praescience, o^^n
potence, etc: unto which because I have already showed, that the Question lies
not upon me to answer, let him content himself with this brief resolution.

Answ. 1. He shows himself to be guilty of a foul Antiscriptural Romans 5. 12.
, and Pelagian Valensis part a. q. 105. memb. 1. p. 296. secundum Augustinum
concedimus quod non punitur parvulus pro culpa patris, sed pro culpa sua
proprie loquendo. Non enim dicit Apostolus quod solum Adam peccavit, sed dicit
quod omnes peccaverunt in Adam. Erat enim in Adamo non solum voluntas unius
singularis personae, sed voluntas universalis naturae. Adamo cadente o justitia
o^iginali, ^^^idit etiam quaelibet voluntas posterorum. Ca et enim voluntas
cujuslibet illa recti tudine quam habuiss^t, si Adam stetisset. Vide in eandem
sententiam ipsum Mald^rum, in gra. 2. qu. 8^. art. 1. page 260.
error, when he says, That man's original sin was actually committed by none
but Adam and Eve, before Reprobates were born: which if so, I think he cannot
tell that original sin should be at all our own, if in no sense it have been
committed by any other persons then Adam and Eve.

The ground of his error is, because all along he takes original sin, to be
nothing else but the Imputation of Adams first transgression, and never
considers it; either as our act in Adams loins, so as Levi is said to pay
Tithes in Abraham's Loins, Heb. 7. 9. or as it is a propagation of personal
filth from thence, cleaving to our natures, Job 14. 4. Psalm. 51. 5. Heb.

2. But as for the thing it self, wherein he would charge us with the denying
Gods omniscience and praevision for a while at least, let him know, first, that
neither Supra lapsarians, nor Sublapsarians, as he calls them, do question, but
that God did from all eternity, know and foreknow, and that unico intuitu, by
one individual act, all his own works, and all men's works too, Act. 15. 18.
without all moments, and (if I may so say) jumps of succession from one to
another, from the first to the second, etc.

2ly. But as for us poor crazie mortals, if we have no mind to continue in
puris tenebris ignorantiae, to be wholly left in the Clouds of darkness, we for
the helping of our Childish Intellects, must needs distinguish of all things so
known by God, and we must needs think of some order amongst that infinite
number of things which all are at once the objects of Gods Omniscience and
Praescience.

3ly. The best distinction, which we can possibly light upon, is, whereby we
distinguish all things eternally, fore-known, either as merely possible to be,
or as such things as shall have an actual being, or futurition: and then next,
whereby we distinguish moral good things, from moral bad and evil things.

4. We say in Congruity hereunto, that all things merely possible to be, are
foreknown by the Lords Omniscience of his own Omn potence, if he would be
pleased to set it on work: and Scientia simplicis Intelligentia.
thus the Lord knows thousands of things more, then ever shall have any actual
being, and which he knows can have no being beyond a mere possible one, unless
he determine them to be. But as for the things* which the Lord knows, and
foreknows will have a certain futurition, he foreknows them all, by virtue of
his own will and Counsel, whereby from all eternity he Scientia visionis.
determines their futurition, and without which, he could not know that they
should certainly be, unless we should be so frantic and so wicked, as to
maintain, that Creatures from all eternity before their being were foreseen, to
determine both; what their beings would be, and what their actions.

5ly. As for future moral good things, especially such as accompany Salvation
such as are effectual vocation, justification, sanctification, etc. he
eternally foresaw they would be in his Own, because he did from eternity,
resolve or decree to bestow them graciously upon his own, 1 Timothy 3. 9. But as
for future moral evil things, whether original or actual sins, God foreknew
them all in the same moment of eternity, because even then he did by his
permissive and ordinative will, determine, that they should fall out, Act. 2.
23. and 4. 28. Carthus. Lib. 1. disc. 40. qu. 3. p. 580. q. 3. p. 580. vide
Aquin. Part. 1. qu. 23. Art. 3. Bonum subjacet providentiae divinae tanquam
ordinatum and causatum ab ea; ideo praedestinatio est causa Gratiae and
Gloriae: sed quoniam malum culpae non subjacet providentiae Divinae ut intentum
and causatum, sed solum tanquam praescitum and ordinatum, hinc reprobatio est.


The sum then is, we do not first in any moment of time, deny Gods Omniscience
and Praescience, only we make them not as to the determinate futurition of any
thing (as we conceive matters) antecedent to Gods Decrees; but either
Concomitant, or at most in the same moments of time and nature subordinate.

2ly. We do not, as the learned Bishop of Salisbury well observes, deny
praescience in the matter of Praedestination, of either good or bad actions,
only we deny an Arminian praescience, Solum praescientia culpae non paenae.
Davant p. 25. 45. sed praecipue. p. 153.
of such actions foreseen in men, as caused or preceded the different decrees
of God, in electing some men mercifully unto salvation, and leaving others
through their own default, to plunge themselves into eternal damnation.

We grant, it is not only untrue, but unpossible, that God should decree the
salvation of any man, without the foresight of those acts, viz. of faith,
perseverance, etc. We deny not the foresight of faith and perseverance in the
Catholic sense (and the like sure in point of Reprobation, may be said of
persevering in infidelity), that is, of effects and Consequents of divine
Praedestination or Election; but in the Arminian sense, that is, as of
antecedent motives, reasons, causes, or conditions foreseen in men, and drawing
after them the Decree of Predestination.

Whether this determination of his long Question will please him, yea or no, I
know not: if he like it not, as learned enough, let him take heed, lest he meet
not with one which is more rash, but not so so^^nd Consilium Dei velle nosse
multorum est, nosse autem vel paucis^imorum hominum vel omnino nullorum.
A^gust. lib. 2. opier. Imp. Contra Jut. f. 346.
. I may justly fear how much soever as yet he will seem to be for an eternal
Praescience of all things; yet if he do but go on to hugg his beloved, S.
Episcopius, (f) as he has begun to do, Mr. T. P. his principles will quickly
prompt him much better to like of that which Episcopius sets down Episcopius
disp. 4. These. 10. Et si non negemus Deo scientiam futurorum attribui posse,
imprimis quia eam Scriptura Deo tribuere passim videtur, tamen an necessarium
sc^^u sit, ad hoc ut Deus colatur ejusmodi scientiam D^o competere examinari
permi^^imus. An cognoscat Deus possibilia, an infinita, absolu^e necessarium
scitu non credimus.
. Though we do not deny but that the Science of future contingent things may be
attributed to God, especially, because the Scripture does up and down, seem to
ascribe it to God, yet whether it be necessary to be known, for this end, that
God may be worshipped, that such a knowledge does belong to God, we permit it
to be examined, Whether God know possible things, infinite things, we do not
believe to be absolutely necessary to be known.

6th. He says, p. 6. That I do betray a third fort of weakness, etc. for that,
as he says, I know that he does as much as any, assert eternal
Praedestination, only I prove it against him, to be respective of final
impenitence in all that shall be damned.

Answ. 1. How I could so much as divine, that he should assert eternal
Praedestination, I cannot tell, when as the face and true Genius of his
opinion, looks quite another way, and when but once (if once) he had in his
Correct Copy so much as mentioned the word Eternal, and that only in the
matter of praescience, and not in the matter of Predestination, or
Predetermination, which are acts of Gods will, as the former is of his
knowledge.

2. It is not to him, or to any man in the World, conceiveable or explicable,
how an eternal immanent Act of Gods Counsel should be founded upon the temporal
Act of the free will of a versatile Creature; and yet such is the Act of final
impenitence, elicited by the wicked free will of a Reprobate, or of him that
shall be damned.

3dly, He expresses himself, that he may the more easily deceive unwary souls,
in too mild a manner, when he says, that the Decree of Reprobation, has
respect unto final impenitence, as if by that term, in show harmless, he did
only understand, that it were nudum antecedens wh^reas it is plain by all the
Discourses elsewhere, against the distinction of positive and Negative
Reprobation, he understands by respect, a meritorious Cause such as abaeterno
moves the will of God to make his Decree of Reprobation: And the like fallacy,
lurks in the same word Respective, which he by and by applies to the Decree of
Election, and which requires Faith Repentance, and Perseverance to the end, in
all of ripe age, which some where Sinner impleaded.
he calls the Important Conditions of Election, and by which, as one of his
beloved Remonstrants Vic. Grevin chov. Contra Ames. p. 24.
, (whom he has reason as much, to hugg as he does his Associate S. Episcopius
Philanthr. Chap. 4. p. 14.
, well expresses Mr. T. P. his true sense, Voluntas judicis a condition
postulata et praestita movetur ad praemium aneglecta aut repudiat^ ad poen^us
idque contendit conveniens esse naturae legum ac conditionum praescriptarum i.
e. by which the will of the judge is moved to confer a Reward, or infer a
punishment by virtue of a Condition required and performed, and that in
congruity to the nature of Laws and Conditions prescribed.

4ly. Why should I have any the least reason to suspect that Mr. T P. by virtue
of any of his principles, which are all but borrowed from Arminius, or from men
of that stamp should be any better able to maintain Eternal Reprobation, and
then not eternal Election neither, and then not sure Eternal predest^nation,
than his Reverend Father Arminius himself, who professes it J. Armin. in
Examine. Perkin^ de ^lectione Sect. 14. Certum autem est hominem actu reprobum
dici non posse, in quo Deus Decretum Reprobationis nullo adhuc interno actu
coepit exequi. Ibid. Primus actu^ externus in hominem vel circa hominem re ipsa
jam existentem facit illum actu reprobum.
to be certain that a man cannot be said to be actually reprobated, on whom God
did not by any internal act begin to execute the decree of Reprobation, which
sure he did not, or could not execute but in time: for it implies a manifest
contradiction.

5ly. Yet if it were any way possible for to found the Eternal decrees of God
upon the foreseen acts of the Creature, yet could he by virtue of this his
praedestination grounded on and dependent on Praescience gain nothing,
according to his own manner of reasoning in all his Decachorde of Reasons
produced in his CORRECT Copy p. 34. ad 42.
for the avoiding of all those foul absurdities and blasphemies which he
labors to asperse Gods Absolute Eternal decrees with, as they are maintained
by us, but they will all, if his arguments be of any force against Eternal
praedestination grounded on deliberate praedeterm^nation, rise up as much
against Eternal pred^stination grounded on praescience: they introduce a like
infall^b^l^ty in both, a like coaction (as they call it) on the will, and like
frustration of Admonitions, Exhortations Aug. de dono perseveran^. Lib. 2. c.
15. Ajunt (viz Semipelag^ani) neminem ^osse Corrept^onis stimulis excitar, si
d^catur in conventu Ecclesiae, Itase habet de praedestinatione definita
sententia voluntatis D^^, etc: Ista dum dicunt, ita nos a confitenda Dei
gratia, id est, quae non secundum merita nostra datur and a confitenda secundum
eam praedestinatione Sanctorum deterrere non debet sicut non deterremur ^
confit^nda praescientia Dei, si quis de illo populo sic loquatur, ut dicat sive
nunc recte vivatis sive non, tales vos eritis quales vos Deus fu^uros esse
praescivit.
.

And therefore I doubt not but if he would but seriously in any sense preach
Eternal praedestination, he would lose most of his customers, his forsooth
tender Proselytes who with his learned P. Bertius P. Bertius praefat. dedicat.
ad Examen. I. Arminii contra Pe^kins. unum quemque nost^um invariabilem vitae
atque mortis Aeternae (...) una cum ipso ortu in lucem hanc nobiscum adferre,
atque adeo ad hoc nasci, hancque diversitatem aliquomodo ad universi
perfectionem facere.
are offended at nothing so much as that God from eternity should have
predetermined men's everlasting conditions, for Aeternal life or death, and not
have left it in utramque partem to man's free will, to be fabros fortunae suae,
to be Carvers of their own fortunes.

Seventhly and lastly he says of the decree of Election, p. 7. that it is
Respective of Faith and Repentance, and perseverance to the end, in all of ripe
age who shall be saved: and for such as die infants before they can actually
Believe or Repent, Gods Eternal predestination or purpose of Electing them
unto bl^sse, was also respective of the^r being in Christ: and this he tells us
the Church of England has taught us out of the Scriptures.

Answ. So much having been spoken against what he brought about Reprobation,
little need to be said about what we have here concerning Election, the rather
because he returns at all no Answer to what I produce against it in my
CORREPT. Correct, p. 228. and where I dispute against his St. Andrean way of
ordering of Gods decrees p. 206. ad 209. Only let me say first that I cannot
tell whether his former opinion about Reprobation were more destructive to Gods
Soveraignity, than this is most portentously A. Rvet says well disp. 4. These.
6. according to this opinion, In dubio haeret Deus, donec ex ipso effectu
videat quinam fint in illa side perseveraturi, sub cu^us nomine poeniten^iam
and bona opera comprehendunt (uti facit Dr. T. P.) Quod atheismi rudimentum a
Socino haustum, multi nunc pleno poculo, populis bibendum propinant, quo
nescimus, an aliquid a Christianismi incunabulis ad haec usque tempora,
perniciosum magis suggestum sit; in quo, praeter impietatem in Deum, tota^
Justificationis gratuitae rationem, cum impurioribus Scholasticis convellunt.
and after a Soc^nian ^ashion destructive to the nature, power, efficacy and
peculiarity of Gods grace; for, say he what he will in words to the contrary,
that he believes Faith and Repentance to be the gifts of God, that Gods grace
makes us to differ, Philanth. etc: whi^st this opinion of his stands and is
maintained by him they are but delusory words to catch the simple withal, for
first it is impossible that Faith or any other saving grace should be the
fruits of Election, when as here they be made to be the Antecedents to it, and
the important conditions of it (his own Phrase). We cannot be chosen unto
Faith, etc: in which sense faith is said to be the faith of Gods elect, Tit. 1.
1. if we be cho^en in respect unto it, or for it, 1 Cor. 7. 25.

2ly, We do rather, yea altogether choose our selves, rather then that God can
be said to choose us: he only chooses upon what condition we shall be Elected;
but we upon choosing of his conditions proposed unto us, determine him to
choose or Elect us, and that interpretative is all one as to choos our selves.

3ly. How shy soever elsewhere he will seem to be of the word merit in the
cause of Election, yet if faith may but be allowed to be a good work, which
sure is one of the best, especially when as here he proposes it as accompanied
with Repentance from dead works* and attended with perseverance to the end,
which comprehends all good works imaginable to be performed by any Christian; I
say, if this may but be granted he does directly maintain Elect^on according
to the praev^sion of works expressly against the holy Scripture Romans 9. and 8.
30. and Act. 13. 48. Ephesians. 1. 11. and. 3. 4. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3. 2 Timothy 1. 9 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. etc.
pious Antiquity Augustine, de praedestinat. Sanctor. cap. 17. Haec est
immobilis veritas praedestinationis and gratiae. Nam quid est quod ait
Apostolus, Sicut elegit nos in ipso, ante mundi constitutionem, quod prof^ro si
propterea d^ctum est, quia praescivit deus credituros, non quia, facturus erat
ipse credentes, contra istam praescientiam loquitur Filius dicens. Non vos me
elegistis, sed ego ^legi vos: Electi sunt it aque ante mundi constitutionem ea
praed^stinatione, in qua Deus sua futura opera praescivit.
who by merits understood nothing else but good works: and thus he is a down
right Pelagian, in the very first and chief point of it, Quod gratia (imo ipse
sons gratiae qualis est electio) conferatur ex operibusbonis.
.

4ly. It overthrowes all assurance of our Salvation or of our perseverance,
which according to this divinity no man can be sure of, until he have in Faith
and Repentance persevered unto the End, i. e. when we are saved and have
persevered to the end, then we be sure of them. Poor Christian consolation
this! and yet, Phil. chap. 3. Mr. T. P. talks of a special grace of
perseverance to every one that continues and abides to the end.

2ly. This opinion is so far from being the opinion of the Church of England,
as that the bare reading of her 17th Article, is a sufficient confutation of
it. Nay in the defense of it he is not only forsaken of all Transmarine
Reformed Authors such as his famous Monsieur Moulin of France, ( P. Moulin
ana^om. Arminian, cap. 1^, 20, 21, etc:
) but of his own Dr. Overall, if we may believe Dr. Davenant Who, animadvers.
p. 10. quots his words thus. Nostra Ecclesia conjungit particulare decretum
absolutum, non ex praescientia humanae fid^i aut voluntatis dependens, sed ex
proposito divinae voluntatis and gratiae de hi^ quos deus elegit in Christo
liberandis, cum general^ and conditionata voluntate, seu generale promissione,
etc.
and I am pretty confident he will not be able to produce any one considerable
good known Author of the Church of England, who will or can speak any thing for
him.

3ly. As for what he has about Infants

Answ. 1. He does without all color of reason maintain two different ways of
Election; one for Children or Infants; another for men of ripe age: where as
Austin very often proves by the arguments of baptized Infants election, that no
man's Election is ex fide praevisa, of faith foreseen.

2ly. If that be true, which elsewhere he maintains, that no Children are
damned for Original sin alone, Sinner impleaded, p. 147 148.
then he must needs holds that there is at all no Election of Children. An
universal assumption of them all to glory there may be, but if none be left,
there can be at all no Election of them.

4ly. As for what he says that the Artic. Eccles. Angl. 2. 7. 15. 31. proves
that no Children have forfeited their interest in the propitiation of Christ
for the sins of the whole world, as well original as actual sins, and for all
sins of all men as well Actual as Original.

Answ. 1. As to the business of Infants, I hope elsewhere to come to a full
reckoning with him.

2ly. The second and seventh Articles spending themselves about quite other
matters cannot possibly speak any thing to serve his turn: the 15. and 31.
using only the general Scripture phrase of Christ's being a propitiatory
sacrifice for the sins of the whole world, which may be very fairly explained
by that which follows in the 31. Article, that there is no other satisfaction
for sin, but that alone, viz: that of Christ's alone they rather make against
him then for him: and as soon shall Dr. Taylour, Answer to a Letter of the L.
Bishop of Rochester.
a man I fear me but too much for his novell opinions in our Authors book,
prove Artic. 9th. to make nothing against Original sin, nay to prove that
there is no such sin, as he shall be able to prove any thing against the
Orthodox, out of those Articles.

. 2. To any considerable matters which he has about Pelagianisme
Massilianisme, Arminianisme, the sense of antiquity ( Austins writings p. 74.
ad 78.
) about special grace, upon all which he inlargeth himself, cap. 1.. 3. p. 7.
8. 9. 10. 11. ad 17.. 5. a page 25. ad 31.. 20. p. 80. 84. 85.

Answ. That neither reverend Dr. Reynolds (at all times and particularly at
this most excellently employed) nor any body else may by an unseasonable and
unreasonable declamator and challenger of them, p. 11. Phil. be interrupted in
their more serious studies. I shall think it reasonable for the stopping up,
(if it may be) for ever of his clamorous mouth, (though I have done it already
up and down my Corrept. Correct.) to draw up a Parallel betwixt the opinions of
the Pelagians, and Massilians, or Sem^pelagians and those of Mr. T. P's. A
task I confess not necessary to be undertaken in respect of the more
eminently learned, who upon the sleightest pe^usall of his books, or others
cannot but know him to be extremely guilty; but very useful, ad Oculum, to the
very eye, to be demonstrated for the behoof of younger Scholars, and the more
vulgar Readers. This being once fully cleared, viz. that (against all his
frontless denialls) he is both a Pelagian and a Massilian, no body will
question whether he be an Arminian or no, or think it reasonable, that I should
enlarge my self, to answer what he has about the sense of Antiquity, about
Austins Writings, about special grace: the true sen^e of which, he is so
confident, that he has obtained, when he says of it* Chap. 3. p. 83.. 22.
that it is properly special because it serves (ad speciales actus and hab^tus)
to every habit, or act, or thought of good, that is done by man, or required of
him, (which yet may be had true of any special habit, not properly gracious,
viz. that of moral virtue) as it was in Gallio, Julius, or other Heathens,
that of Bezaliel, and Hiram, for their special Temple-works, that of the spirit
of Kingship in Saul, of fortitude in Sampson, etc.

I say, he is so confident, this to be the true notion, and this only to be the
true notion of special Grace, as that he does most insolently triumph over me,
as if, Philanthr. Chap. 3. p. 84. my notion of special Grace, were more the
Child of my ignorance, then others were; that I have not probably yet learnt
what is the genuine acception of special grace. And yet I take it, (as any body
may see, who reads my Book) in no other sen^e then the Apostle did* and St.
Austin did, who call that Grace special, which is first a fruit of Election and
Predestination unto life, Romans 8. 28. 30 Aug. de Corrept. and great. c. 9.
Quicunque in Dei providentissima dispositione praesciti, praedestinati, vocati,
Justificati, Glorificati sunt, non dico etiam nondum renati, sed etian nondum
nati, filii D^i sunt.
.

2. By virtue of which, such Graces are conferred upon them, as God never
repents the bestowing of on them, Romans 11. 29. 2 Cor. 7. 10.

3. That whereby they are discriminated from all others, unto whom the like
Grace is not conferred. 1 Cor. 4. 7. Aug. Epis^ 105. ad Sex^. Presbyt. N^c.
omnium est fides qui audiunt verba, sed quibus Deus partitur mensuram fidei,
sicut nec omnia germinant, quae plantantur, aut rigantur, sed quibus D^us dat
incrementum: Cur autem ille credat, ille non cred^t, cum ambo idem andiunt, and
si mir^c^lum in eorum conspectum fi^t ambo idem vident, altitudo est divitia^um
sapientiae and scientia Dei, cujus insc^utabilia judicia, and apud quem non est
iniquitas.
Let me but once for all (which I am sure i^, viz. easy for me to do) prove
him a Pelagian and a M^ssilian, every understanding body will then presently
conc^ude, that his sense of Antiquity can never be right, that he can have no
good opinion of Austins Writings, that it will be (^ay he what he will to the
contrary) impossible for him to maintain special grace in any true Christian
Catholic sense.

. 1. Then in this extreme short Parallel (which were most easy to be enlarged)
I prove his downright Pelagianisme in the chiefest and most considerable
head-points thereof.

First, See my Corrept. Correct. p. 154. in margin.
The Pelagians denied the sin of our natures, commonly called original sin, to
be any sin at all, and that because it was involuntary. And what can he in
truth maintain otherwise, who first in all his Writings, confounds Adams first
sin with our Original.

Secondly, Who every where di^tinguisheth that sin, from our sin, as being in
no sense committed by our wills Corrept. Correct. Ibid. p. 154.
.

Third^y, Philanthrop. p. 8. He will by no means allow me to profess that
saying of Austins, that there is no sin but what is voluntary, to have been
abu^ed by the Pelagians, to the denial of original sin, when as Austin himself
tells us, that it was an Objection which the Pelagians used against him August.
contra Julian Pelag. Lib. 2. Lib. 1. operis Imper^ect. f 37
and which he does therefore so explain, as that it may do them no service, or
him no hurt Lib. 1. Retract. Cap. 13. Potest videri falsa haec definitio: sed
si diligenter excutiatur invenietur esse verissima. Peccatum quippe illud
intelligendum est, quod tantum modo peccatum est, non quod est poena peccati.
etc. Illud quod in parvulis dic^^ur O^iginale peccatum, cum adhuc non ut an^^^
Libero arbitrio voluntatis, non absurd vocatur etiam voluntarium, quia ex
prima hominis mal^ voluntate contractum, factum est quodammodo haereditarium.
.

2. The Pelagians maintained all Infants dying in their Infancy to be saved
Aug. in Libris de peccat. merit. and Remissione. Salutem vitamque aeternam
habituri sunt infantes, quontam nulltus peccati v^ncul^ obstricti sunt.
so does Mr. T. P. strenuously in his Sinner Impleaded p. 147. Chap. 3. No
truth shines clearer to me than this, that no man ever has, or ever shall
suffer eternal death, for no other sin than that of Adam, it being actually his
sin, and but originally ours. To the same purpose in two several Chapters.

3. They held all Infants to be innocent, to be harmless, and without sin Aug.
Lib. 1. operis imperfect. contra Julian. f. 61. Parvulus infucata primaevitate
felicior bonum simplicitatis suae vitare non potuit, lib. de not. and great. c.
21. Sani sunt propter quos medicum quaeritis.
: so does Mr. T. P. who having in his Correct Copy, called them all Babes of
Grace, p. 67. is in his Philanthrop. Chap. 1. p. 7. and Chap. 4. 25, 26, 27.
etc. extreme sharp with me for maintaining them to be sinful, and guilty before
God, which his Conscience told him well enough, that I could not understand of
any other than of original filth, who was never so mad, as not to believe
Infants to be free from actual sin, and comparatively to be innocent, when
compared with such as himself, or my self.

4. They introduced concupiscence and inclinations unto sin into Paradise, and
that before the Fall, without which, they think the Protoplasts could not have
fallen Aug. Lib. 6. Contr. Jul. c. 18. Concupiscentia mala qualitas non est,
etc. This opinion of theirs, Austin does largely confute in diverse parts of his
works. Enchirid. Cap. 13. de Genesi ad literam Lib. 2. De Civitate Dei Lib. 13.
Cap. 10. And maintains an assertion quite contrary to it, viz. Concupiscentia
carnis and peccatum est, quia in^st illi ^n^b^dientia contra domina^um mentis;
and poena peccati est, quia reddita est meritis inobedientis; and causa peccati
est, defectione consentientis, vel contagione nascentis. Contra Julian Lib. 5
Cap 3.
: And even just so does Mr. T. P. and that for the very same Reasons; see him
at large, Philanth. Chap. 4. p. 24, 25.

5. They placed the wills liberty, even after the fall, in an absolute
indifferency unto good or evil: without which, they maintained the Essence of
man's liberty to be lost Lib. 1. operis impersect. Julian. definit. Libertas, in
admittendi peccati, and abst^ne^di a p^ccato possibilitate consistere ut
liberum habeat alterutrum velle and in suopte jure, utram sug^ere^tiae partem
sequeretur id est; vel ardua asperaque virtutum, vel d^mersa and pal^stria
vol^ptatun^.
, and so does Mr. T. P. in his Correct Copy p. 64, 65. insomuch, as he says,
that he dares be no more inquisitive, why God made man with such a freedom of
willing, or nilling, than, why he made the hand with those two muscles, whereof
the one does move to the tak^ng of a thing and the other to the throwing of it
away.

6. They (at least at first) maintained Grace to be given according to works
Prosper ad Demetriad. G^atiam contendebant secundum merita hominum dari. p. 134.
: they allowed of no other Grace, than a mere Doctrinal or minis^erial one Aug.
de great. Christi C. 41. loquens ex Pelagianorum sententiae, Adjuvat (inquiunt)
nos per Doctrinam et revelationem suam; dum cord^s nostri oculos aperit, dum
nobis, ne praesentibus occupemur, futura demonstrat, dunt Diaboli pandit
insidias, dum nos multiformi and in^ffabili dono Gratiae coelestis illuminat.
And it is extremely to be observed, that when our Mr. T. P. had longer
hetor^cated about the forces of such kind of external Auxiliaries of grace,
then at length concludes his long winded D^scourse, with this saying, Sinner
impleaded. p. 366. This is the utmost of what is meant by Gods drawing, or
constraining any man to obedience.
: they liked of no praevenient Grace, which did infallibly determine the will,
voluntatem secum rapere, as one speaks, before the will has determined it
self. That Mr. T. P. does, and must by virtue of his principles, maintain all
these opinions, I shall have occasion to show elsewhere; for whosoever is
necessitated to defend the first, which is the worst of them, he will never be
able to forsake the rest, but so long as he upholds his opinion of Election, ex
fide praevisa, and that for the support of it, he maintains Correct Copy, p.
69. that God executes his Decrees in the same way that he decreed them: and
therefore as faith and perseverance were the conditions of Election, which yet
is the Fountain of all grace, before all time, then certainly, vocation and
faith, and other graces, cannot be given without some Conditions in time, and
what can they be, but for some good works of ours? And does he not boldly
enough express in very many places of his Sinner impleaded especially, where he
says, p. Without our willingness to be drawn, all Gods drawing will do no good.

7. Heathen Philosophers and their performances, were highly magnified by them
See about this, Jansenii Lib. Quart. Tom, Secundi per totum: Of these Pelagius
used to say, that Solis Libertatis ingenitae virtutibus and misericordes crebro
and suob^ii inveniuntur; and licet a fide alieni, abundant virtutibus. Aug.
Lib. 4. adver. S. Julian.
; even as they are by Mr. T. P. who books down Socrates for a substantial
Christian. Sinner impleaded. p. 12. who tells us, how admirable his Arrian, and
others (as if they had been imitators of St. Paul) write about the Conflict
betwixt the flesh and the Spirit, Ibid. p. 38.

These things considered, a mere stranger to him, would wonder he should dare
to write it over the second time, after some just Correptory Correction given
him for it Corrept. Correct. p. 39. that he never had any temptation to
Pelagianism, of which he has a great deal the more, for the good conceit which
he has of his natural Antipathy against Pelagian sin, which, of any other in
the World, is most suitable to corrupt and proud nature.

But no man in his right wits will wonder, first, either that Chap. 1. p. 9.
Phil. he should tell us, that Pelagius was Orthodox for the main, he means for
the Articles of the Apostles Creed, though by a very just consequence
somewhere, Austin proves it against him, that he denies the very first Article
of a Christians Creed, whereby he believes God to be the Maker of Heaven and
Earth; and therein, to do whatsoever is pleasing to him.

And secondly, (as I have showed elsewhere) as little will he wonder, that
seeing as yet Mr. T. P. lives among Christians (as well as his Dogmatical
Grandsires the Pelagians did) that with them, and with as much heat and
vehemence as they, he do now and th^n give some such excellent words to grace,
Besides what I have already set down. Corrept. Correct. p. It is most
observable what Austin has, de great. Contr. Pelag. and Caelest cap. 7.
multiformem and ineffabilem gratiae illuminationem agnoscit: and cap. 2.
admodum speciose pronunciat Anathema qui sentit, vel docet, gratiam Deo, qua
Christus venit in hunc mundum peccatores salvos facere, non esse necessariam,
and qui hanc conantur auferre poenas sortiuntur aeternas.
which would be sufficient to end the Controversy, if their mouths and their
hearts would but keep pace together. And thus to his gross and downright
Pelagianism. Now as to his finer-spun Semipelagianism, or

. 2. Massilianism.

I write it again, and I will bide by what I said, that to any intelligent
Reader, it is as plain, that he is guilty of it, as that his nose is in his
face. And I shall prove him deeply drenched with it.

1. By the Identity of his and their chief opinions, about the matters
controverted. 2. By the Identity of both their Objections against the Orthodox.
3. By the ridiculous shifts which he uses for the clearing of himself from
Pelagianism, Massilianism, or Arminianism.
. 1. For the first: First, the Massilians did believe Predestination, or
Election, to be founded on foreseen Faith and Works, Pelag. in c. 9. ad Roman.
Quos praevidi^ conformes futuros in vita, voluit ut conformes fierent in
Gloria. Et apud Aug. dilucidis verbis asserunt Pelagiani Lib. de praedestinat.
Sanctor. c. 18. praesciebat ergo Deus, qui futuri essent Sancti, and ideo eos
ante mundi constitutionem in sua praescientia elegit etc.
and this is an Article of Mr. T. P's. Creed, Phil. 7. They be both agreed in
that which is the Foundation-stone of all Pelagianisme Pelag. in c. 9. ad
Roman. Quos praevidi^ conformes futuros in vita, voluit ut conformes fierent in
Gloria. Et apud Aug. dilucidis verbis asserunt Pelagiani Lib. de praedestinat.
Sanctor. c. 18. praesciebat ergo Deus, qui futuri essent Sancti, and ideo eos
ante mundi constitutionem in sua praescientia elegit etc.
; and the very Trojan-Horse, from whence all their other mischievous opinions
do sally out.

2. They both believe there must be something in the parties Elected, to
difference them from parties not Elected The very error which Austin was in,
before he retracted it. Lib. 1. Retract. in c. 23. and which Mr. T. P.
espouseth after Retractation, Correct. Copy. p. 70. and 71.
.

3. Both parties in the matter of Predestination, are only for Conditional
Decrees against all absolute.

4. They be both for a general and an universal desire and will in God, to save
all men quantum ^n se. So the Massilians Prosper. in Epist. ad Augustine.
Quantum ad D^um pertinet, omnious esse paratam vi^am aeternam.
so Mr. T. P. Correct Copy, p. 20. Philanthr. Chap. 1. p. 21.

5. They plead both strenuously for Universal Redemption, They maintained, that
it followed out of Austins principles, O^ject. 9. Gallorum and prima
Vincentiana. Quod Dominus Noster Jesus Christus non pro omnium hominum salute
and Redemptione sit passus.
that a man may well wonder what was become of our Authors wits, memory or
Conscience, when he is not ashamed to tell the Christian World. Phil. Chap. p.
9. that it was a part of Pelagius his Heresy to deny universal Redemption; and
for this he quotes Aug. Epist. 106. whereas yet there is nothing so plain as
that 1. the Pelagians and Semi-Pelagians, or Massilians, did most peremptorily
maintain Universal Redemption in the full latitude of it.

2. They did most stiffly reject Austins Interpretations of 1 Timothy 2. 4. and
other places which they did use to produce for Universal Redemption Hilar. ad
Augustine. ^nd^ est, quod illius sententiae expositionem, non eam quae a ^e est
d^prompta suscipiant, ^d est, ut non omnes homines salvos fieri velit, and non
eos tantum qui ad Sanctorum numerum pertinchunt, sed omnes omnino, ut nullus
habeatur exceptus ut ait Prosper Carmin. de ingratis.
.

3. I dare be bold to say, that in all the Epistle 106. of Austin, there is
nothing which looks this way; but that rather Pelag^us in the Council of
Palestine, was forced to renounce something that is quite contrary to Universal
Redemption, as viz. first, that Adams sin did not hurt him alone, but all
Mankind Eam Gratiae formam inducunt, qua Cunctos vocet illa quidem, invitetque
nec ullum praeteriens, studeat communem asser^ salutem omnibus, and totum
peccato absolvere mundum. Massilienses, apud Prosper. in Epist. ad Augustine.
Dei auxilium commendantes sive per naturalem, sive per scriptam legem, etc.
homines universaliter vocari statuunt.
.

2. That some Infants dying in their Infancy, were damned, even (as then the
Tenent of the Church was) all Infants dying before Baptism.

6. Both parties do grant Grace sufficient to all; to those without the Church,
as well as to those within the Church: insomuch as that our good Author tells
us Sinner Impleaded, 273. that the damned in Hell might have kept themselves
out of Hell, by that assistance of grace which God had given them.

7. They be both against all efficaciously working and praedeterminating Grace,
which is not liable to be accepted of or refused at the pleasure of man's
versatile free will Hilar. ad Augustine. Tam fortem homini a peccato relictam
esse voluntatem, qua vel contemnere quis valeat, vel obedire. Et inserius
dicunt; Caeterum quicquid libet donatum sit praedestina is, id posse and
amittere and retinere propria voluntate. Cassian. Col. 13. Mane^ in homine
liberum semper Arbitrium, quod Gratiam Dei possit vel negligere, vel amare.
Vital^s apud. August Epist. 107. Quo si velimus ^iat opus; si autem nolimus,
nihil in nobis operationem Dei valere f^ciamus.
. And therefore they do both devise: First, a certain kind of Congruous grace
which at certain Critical times and seasons, (to use the phrase of our Correct
Copy) is adopted to insinuate it self into the will, when the will is in a fit
posture for the recei^ing of it. Secondly, A grace (whatever in words they may
sometimes for the declining of envy say to the contrary) which is attendant on
the will, rather then preventing the motions of it; not subduing, or conquering
the will by effectual praedetermination to it self but rather being subject to
the will, and by the will made use of, for special purposes, as our Author
talks, Phil. Chap. 1. p. 83.

Thirdly, No other grace for sub^^ance, than what was granted to Adam in
innocence before his fall. Thus from Adams fall from the Grace which he had Mr.
T. P. argues for the total and final fall of S^ints since the first fall.
Correct Copy, p. 65. who yet by Christ have received a grace of another nature,
then ever Adam had before his fall, as I have showed, Corrept. Correct. p. 220.

Fourthly. They by consequence, must needs both overturn all special or
discriminating grace, as plainly as ever Mr. T. P. did, when he uttered those
words, which out of a true Manuscript of his, I transcribed in my Corrept.
Correct. p. 31. that when two are equally called, Which words he never borrowed
from famous P. Moulin of France, but which possibly, he may have borrowed from
Molina, the Jesuit, or from Lessius Lib. de great. ^fficat. Quod ex duebus
similiter vocatis alter oblatam Gratiam acc^ptet, alter respuat, recte dici
potest, ex Sola liber ate provenite: non quod is qui acceptat sold liberate
sua acceptet sed quia ex sola liberate illud discrimen oritur. Ex Lib. de
praedest and Repr^bat. ^uod hic sequatur and perseveret, Causa vera ac propria
est liber as arbitri^ au^ilio div^no inst^uct^.
whereof the one converts himself, the other miscarries, it is not God, but man
that puts the difference. Now that Mr. T. P. is as deeply guilty as ever any
Massilian was of su^pending all the operations of grace upon the mot^ons and
Elect^ons of man's free w^ll, let no^ my Collections but his own Signal words
scattered up and down in his Sinner impleaded, determine p. 250. God indeed
does persuade us to what is good (and that very strongly) but so as to leave it
to our election p. 257. When we are working according to Gods Impulsions, we
have the liberty to work against them, p. 296. he does most clearly teach us
what the force is of that praeven^ent subsequent exciting special Grace, which
in words he does to extol, p. 83. when as he tells us, that by the first helps
of Grace, we can desire him if we will. By virtue of the second* we can obey
him if we will. And by virtue of the third, if we will we can persevere in him.
And what jumps just with that of the Pelagians, whose Maxim it was, Aug. L^b.
5. Contra Pelag. Cap. ultim, Hominem sufficere ingenitis sibi motibus dare
leges. 297. All the Courtesy (if I may so call it) which God requires at our
hands, is that we w^ll open, when he knocks, etc. 297. 7. Our virtue is almost
as natural to us as our passion. 298. Our task is no harder then to choose the
good. And goodness (we know) is the proper object of our Appetite, p. 364.
Though it is wholly from him, that we are able to go to him, yet he expects we
should be willing that he should make us kind So the M^ssilians H^la^. Epist.
ad Aug. Ad hoc tantum libe^a^^ ass^^ebant voluntatem ut vellet aut noll^t
admittere medicinam. Qui in Ara^ sic^na Synodo Anath mate percussi sunt Conc.
Arausic. c. 4. Si quis ut a peccato purgemur, voluntatem nostram D^um expectare
contendit, and resist^t ipsi Spiritui sancto. The true Grace of Jesus Christ is
quite of another strain. Prosper Carmen. deing atis.
, p. 365. And to wind up all in his own words, This is just such a Grace as C.
J^^senius obbraids the worst of J^suites, which C. Jans^n. Tom. 3. p. 108.
negare non possant came esse talem, juxta sententiam suam, quam Deus relinquat
in libero voluntatis arb^^r^o: quam per liber^m arb^trium deferere possit: esse
adjutorium, quod ille ^ui datur deserat cum v^l^t, and in ^o permane^t si
v^l^t: quo sit ut habeat homo justitiam si velit, sed si velit etiam
deser^t^^^r qu^d possit perman^re si velit etc.
At ve o omnipotens hominem cum Gratia salv^t,
Ipsa suum consummat ^pus: cui tempus ^ge^di
S^m^er adest, quae gesta vel^^: non moribus illi
Fit mor, non causis anceps suspenditur ^ullis.
Ibid. p. 365. Gods love constrains us indeed (as S. Paul speaks) but with so
easy a violence, that without our willingness to draw, all his drawing will do
no good. He does not physically, but only morally constrain us, so as to leave
us the use of all our facult^es; and more especially, of our wills. I may then,
I think, be safely allowed to conclude, that there is an Identity of Opinions
betwixt Mr. T. P. and the Massilians: and withal, it will be most fitting,
that Christian Readers should learn from C. Jansenius, that stupendous
defender of true Christian Grace, (unto whom my self, nay the whole Christian
World, I believe even so long as there will be a World, will be beholding for
the greatest and stateliest Monument that ever was written against Pelagianism)
how pernicious Massilian Doctrine is; for then, as he infers well, Si arbitrium
hominis post lapsum ita liberum est, ut cum primi hominis et Angelorum stantium
Auxilio sine quo non posset adhuc Credere, sperare, facere mandata, et
pers^verare, si velit and non Deus in ipso per Auxilium quo operetur ut velit
in quascunque sese facies verterit, L^ssius, Nolina, Vasquez, and quotquot ista
opinione praeoccupati sunt, nunquam efficient quin invicte Augustinus illaturus
sit, Ergo Liberi arbitrii vires integrae sunt; Ergo contra Arausicanum Liberum
arbitrium non est amissum; ergo peccatum originale non violavit Libertatem;
Ergo non est peccatum originale, quia per illud solum natura humana universim
labefactata est; ergo Christus gratis mortuus est, quia per naturam est est
Justitia: Ergo non est mortuus, ergo non est incarnatus. Ecce quo nos ducat
Catena illa perditionis, ex quocun que Dogmate Pelagiano, vel extrema ^c tenui
fibra dogmatis religetur. C. Jansen. in suo Pa^allelo Tom. 3. p. 1111.
Liberty of will is not lost, Ergo, Original sin has not violated Liberty:
Ergo, there is no original sin; for by that alone, humane nature is
universally debilitated; Ergo, Christ died in vain, for righteousness is by
nature: Ergo, he died not; Ergo, he is not inearnated. Behold, whither the
Chain of perd^tion, by what small fiber soever of any kind of Pelagian Doctrine
it be but tied, draws! And as Doctor Tailor, man may suspect but too high in
Mr. T. P's. Books) has already swallowed most of the former sequels in his
Book against Original sin; even so I may fear, that at last they may both
swallow the latter sequel too. The Lord be merciful unto them.

. 3. The same Objections.

As for the Identity of the same Objections against the Orthodox, Reverend, and
Learned Doctor Reynolds, has in his Learned Letter said very much to this
(unto which I remit him): this also has been abundantly cleared by my self, as
up and down my whole Corrept. So by way of answer to his Decachorde of
Arguments, Corrept. from p. 156. and inde. So that it will not be needful to
draw over the same Saw again: for else it would be most easy to prove* that
his object^ng of Stoical fate, Faustus Rheg. Lib. 1. Inter gratiae vocabulum
absconditum est fa^ale decretum.
of Man^chaisme, Prosper ad Ruffin. Tantae pietatis viro (viz. Augustino)
paganorum and Manichaeorum adscribitur impietas.
Coaction, or insorcing of the will Faustus Augustinum interemptorem Liberi
Arbitrii, quia in alterutram partem omnia ex praedestinatione statuta and
definita esse pronuntiat. Lib. 1. c. 4.
, making God the Author of sin Quod haec sit volunt as Dei quod magna pars
Christianorum Salva esse nec velit nec possit, object. 12. Gallor. Quod velit
Deus, ut magna pars Christianorum a fide apostaret.
, maintaining, that he makes men only to damn them Object. Vincent. apud
Prosperum Quod Deus Majorem partem generis humani ad hoc creet, ut illam perdat
in aeternum.
* of blunting the edge of all Ministerial Christian Exhortations and Corrept.
August. Lib. de dono persev. c. 15. Neminem inquiunt posse correptionis
stimulis excitari, si dicatur, Ita se habet de praedestinatione definita
sententia.
of making men listless in the practice of holy duties, Removeri industriam,
tollique virtutes, si Dei consti ut^o humanas praeveniat voluntates, Prosper ad
Aug.
of driving men either to despair or p^aesumption Faust. Lib. 1. c. 11.
Illustres vi^i per quietem, and socordiam coronantur.
, of objecting Fathers, whether Latin or Greek who lived before Austin Faust.
Lib 1. de Lib. Arbitrio. Quis non d^speret q^e^ prasini^io violenta damnavit,
obstinationem suam vetustate d^fendunt. Prosper. ad Aug.
, and so before the Controversies were up: I say, but for the avoiding of
needless Repetitions, it were easy voluminously to prove, that all his
Objections against us, are fetched out of Massilian Armouries, before Mr. T. P.
was able to say any thing, for, or against Praedestination.

This being thus dispatched, I trust he will not put me upon any task, of
proving his Arminianism, which any body who having read Mr. T. P's. Book, and
who has but heard any thing of the Quinq-Articularian Controversy, will
easily do without my help, and be able to tell him, that by the like scornful
Jeare, by which he labors to lessen his Arminian Guilt, Chap. 1. p. 12. when
he says, The vulgar sort do take Arminius to have been some foul Monster,
though they never yet learnt whether that Monster were fish or flesh, or front
what part of Africa the thing was brought, any man might be enabled to put off
the foulest Crimes which they can be convinced of. The vulgar have as little
acquaintance with Ebjon, Cerinthus, Arrius, or with Socinus Vorstius, of late,
as with Arminius, and ergo belike it may be lawful for any proud wanton wits,
to vent their Doctrines among them.

. 3. His ridiculous shifts.

3ly. I proceed to the third thing mentioned, to his ridiculous shifts, for
avoiding of the charge of Pelagianism, and Massilianism, Arminianism.
Ridiculous shifts did I say? I said true, but I mean to his crafty
Insinuations, to his more Intelligent Proselytes, of what he most cordially
likes and evidenceth by his so idle a dislike, which he testifies in his
seeming leaving of them.

First, pro forma, (for the avoiding of clamours which might disturb his
Cryptick Interest) he powers forth some hug-words, some very hard words against
them, when p. 8. he says, I might as well have called him (a Presbyterian, or
a Quaker, an Anabaptist, or a Witch) as either a whole, or a half Pelagian.
Quid verba audiam facta cum videam? It is hard by words to sense off deeds.

Secondly, p. 10. he gives us a large account of the Antidotes which he took
against Pelagianism, etc. errors as he says, which he never had so much as any
inclination to, nor so much perchance as his fore-father Adam had without sin,
and before sin, unto all sin, Phil. Chap. 4. 24. out of the Canons of the great
Council of Carthage, Prosper ad Demetraden, the Araus^can Canons which if any
body will but be pleased to peruse after him, especially those of the Arausican
Synod, as they are verbatim set down by J. Latius. Lib. 2. de Semi-Pelagianis.
Cap. 12. it will be easy for him to perceive how much Mr. T. P. did read
without heeding, and how sick the man is still of Pelagianism and
Semi-Pelagianism, notwithstanding all the brags of his Sanity.

Thirdly, He highly commends all the three parties which he forsooth recedes
from I. Pelagius, p. 9. for being Orthodox as to the main, he means as to the
Articles of the Apostles Creed; And yet if Pelagius his Doctrines may but be
judged of, by those fragments and Transcripts of his Writings which are
represented to us by Hieronym. or by Austin, never was Mr. T. P's. dear Saint
Socrates, St. Hierocles, and a number more (whom he may do well to remember, he
defended once against me and some others at Dayntree, at dinner, to be Sainted
in Heaven) more substantial Heathens then Pelagius was, in the first (...) (if
he will allow me so to English it) the first face and public representation of
his Doctrine De his, vide fuse, J. Lat. lib. de Pelag.
.

2. The Semi-Pelagians, or Massilians he commends, p. 9. Ibid. for being men of
admirable life, and of such Authority in the Church, for their sanctity of
life, that very few durst contradict them. And who I trow will be so simple, as
to think that Mr. T. P. in the repute of many so like them, will in any
material matters, recede from them? It were not fit we should be so
uncharitable.

3. J^cobus Arminius is counted fit to be preferred above Mr. Calvin, for
admiring of soft Melanchthon: he is to him the famous professor of Divinity in
the University of Leyden, in nothing culpable but for being (as he thinks) a
Presbyterian in the matter of D^sc^pline, but else so far excelling the
Divines of that Sect, in exactness of Learning as well as life, that we may
say, he became Melancthon's Convert.

V^bem quam d^cunt Romam (said the fellow), Meliboee, putavi
Stultus ego, huic nostrae sim^lem, etc. Virg.

Sic can^bus catulos similes, sic matribus hoedos,
Noram, sic parvis componere magna soleb^m.
Verum haec tantum alias inter caput extulit urbes, etc.
Belike all the luster of Learning and true sanctity in L. Danaeus, in both the
Trelcatio's, in Fr. Junius, Gomarus, his predecessors in that Chair, were all
but mere ^immerical darkness, when compared with the superexcellent rad^ancy of
I. Arminius Cui par est nihil, est nih^l secundum. Dii immortales (ait ille)
homo homini quid interest?

Thir^ly, He spends full nine pages, from p. 8. to 17. to prove me to be with
him like some Simeon or Levi, guilty of Pelagianism, Massilianism, Arminianism.

Answ. And yet first in none of all his many trim Arguments does he prove any
thing against me, or any that hold with me, that looks that way; only he
huddles up together a great many common things which I may seem to hold in
common with them, which no wise man ever accounted to be Pelagian, Massilian,
or Arminian; were the things which I did, and have since objected against him,
no nearer to Pelagianism, etc. Let him believe that some folks have eyes to
distinguish betwixt things that differ.

3. Suppose he had proved me never so guilty, well might that have evinced me
to have been an unfit person to object these Crimes to him.

Turpe est Doctori, etc. but how would my concurrence with him in these evils,
have proved him an innocent, unless he would Poe^ically have concluded it by a
Solamen miseris socios habuisse fideles.

4. But if any yet will after all his Arguments, think me a whit the more
accessory to Pelagianism* etc. I will promise that man, that I will pray for
him; but he shall have my honest word for it, that I will never dispute against
him.

5. Because among 16. Arguments from p. 12. to 17. he posts up two in the
forefront, as pretty ones as any are in all his pack, it is not amiss to
bestow a little Corrept. Correct. upon them, and then to give the ingenuous
Reader leave to bestow as much more upon all the rest of their like, as they do
deserve, p. 12. then he says, First, That J. Arminius, was plainly a
Presbyterian, and so is Mr. Barlee so am not I.

Answ. 1. Arminius was so very a Presbyterian, over the left shoulder, as they
say, as that principally by his means, not only many Presbyters were put down,
but even Presbyterion ipsum, the Presbytery it self was for many years together
clapped under hatches, and by Proclamation of his great ruling hoogh mogend^,
it was become at least scandalum magnatum, so much as to mention the names of
the Deputies of Synod, Classes, or Consistories About this, see at large,
praefat. ad Synod. Dordracen.
.

2. Unless with a wild fry of a Company of frantic Sectaries, he will conclude
Presbyterians and Pontificians to be Brethren; it is well known, that among his
Disciples, with whom he durst be bold, he would call Belg: de Paus syne
broeder, the Pope his Brother Guil. vam. Roggen in Libr. Belgico.
, and I never yet heard of Presbyterian, who cried Brother Pope; bu^ I know
more of them, who cry out upon the Pope. Ibid. p. 12. Next he taught and
believed* that the (...) does justify, so I suppose does Mr. Barlee, so do not
I.

Answ. 1. He might have supposed the quite contrary of me, i^ he would but have
read my words, which I set down to the contrary, Corrept. Correct. p. 20.

2. He is not so Orthodox as Arminius ordinarily was thought to be; for M^. T.
P. requires works, as we^l as faith, to Justification Sinner impleaded, p. 332,
333, etc.
.

Fourthly, Whilst for declining of Envy, he would ever and anon ^eem highly to
value St. Austins W^itings; yet to any intelligent Reader, he does as
manifes^ly deba^e them, as almost any Pelagian, or Massilian could do, and that
more waye^ then one.

First, W^i^est as I have showed at large already, Corrept. Correct. p. 126.
Correct. Copy. p. 28.
127. and ^. he would have some shadow of Reason from his H. Grotius, to be
preferred above the Judgment of several Ecumenical Councils the former
judging him most unfit to umpire in the Pelag^an Controversies: the other
judging him, among mere men, ^ince the Apostles, most fitting.

Secondly, Whilst trumpeting out the same Grotius his praises, p. 28. calling
him the wonder of this age; hi^ magnum ingenium indeed has proved a Prod^g^um
to the Church. Uti ol^m Origenis ingenium fuit Ecclesiae Sacramentum. Much more
of the next for his profoundness of Judgment as well as Learning, he tells us,
that Austins Writings a^e not reconc^leable to himself: and yet Mr. T. P. may
by this time know, that that stupendiously indust^ious, C. Jansenius Ep^sc.
Sprensis has so fully done that in no less then thr^e great Volumes; but
especially in his second and third, as that no body need, or will henceforward
question the facility of this, but obstinate Jesuitical Re^ractories.

Thirdly, there is nothing so familiar with Mr. T. P. as to retract Austins
Retractations, and to maintain, that his first Writings are to be preferred
above his latter, that about the matters in debate betwixt him and the
Pelagians, he and they must be judged by the Fathers before him, who all, as I
have told him, say little or nothing, and could say as little as may be in
these matters Pbil. 76. 78. etc. p. 10. etc. alibi.
. Ante Pelagium exortum seourius loquebantur Patres.

Fourthly, To an Objection of mine set down in my Corrept. Correct. p. 186. of
his mistaking of Pelagius his words, which he had set down instead of Austins,
Correct Copy, p. 44. and against which saying, Austin disputes in no less then
a whole Chapter, and beyond it, he Answers not a wise word, but passes it
wholly over in silence.

Fifthly, Phil. p. 8. he delivers it peremptorily, that St. Austin was a
Bishop, when he wrote to Simplician.

Answ. 1. Bellarmine, as great an Antiquary as Mr. T. P. delivers the contrary,
viz. that he wrote to him whilst he was a Novice, Lib. 2. de great. and Lib.
Arbitr^o Cap. 15. S. August. cum scripsit Libros ad Simplicianum adhuc juvenis
erat neque multa invenerat in hac difficillima quaestione, quae postea majori
diligentia investigavit.

2. Austin speaking of this Writing himself, says indeed, that it was wrote
initio Episcopatus sui; but withal, he says, that it was done, antequam
Pelagiana haeresis appareret; indeed in the beginning of his Ep^scopacy, but
before the apparition of the Pelagian Heresy August. de bono persever. Cap. 21.
.

3. Let it have been wrote when it will, there is nothing so manifest, but that
as I have proved Corrept. Correct. p. 186. and could do, if need were, by many
more proofs, Austin has retracted several places of what he wrote, ad
Simplicianum. But so much the fitter for Mr. T. P's. palate, who learns out of
Austin, ordine retrogrado, by going backwards.

Tres mihi convivae prope dissentire videntur
Poscentes vario multum diversa Palato,
. 4.

After all this, is any body likely to be moved by what he sets down, Chap. 3.
Phil. 83? where he sets the best leg forward, in commendation of special
Grace: A trick, which for any thing I know to the contrary, he may have learned
from the often-named Dogmatical Predecessors of his, whose way it was ever to
give Grace good words, when they were any thing hard put to it by t^eir
adversaries; See Corrept. Correct. p. 38. Hill. ad August se abominari and
damnari testabantur Massilienses, si quis quicquam virium in aliquo remansisse,
quoad sanitatem progredi posset, existimaret.
for else, who that has read any of his other Writings, or what he has up and
down in this, p. 19. p. 22. etc. especially p. 19. and 22. can without
infatuation believe, that there is any more agreement betwixt the s^eming good
words which he gives here, and the real bad meanings which he does express
elsewhere, then there is betwixt Harp and Harrow?

First, Here we have Jesus Christ, and all other Graces in Him, all given by
God, by a certain, absolute gracious Decree: all if we may believe him, and can
understand things not to be understood, sallying out of the Conditional Decree
of Predestination, founded upon praescience of what we should believe, or
disbelieve, pract^se or leave unpractised; but this is nothing, but to peak
Daggers, and desperate Contradictions. The true opening of this grand Mystery
any way looking toward a reconciliation of these otherwise irreconcileables,
is that he must say with his Brethren the J. Armin. Exposit. on Romans 9. Acta
Synod. Remonstrant. Artic. 1. Deus constituere voluit Mediatorem, qui pro
peccatoribus omnibus moreretur and sic Jus acquireret ad salutem and vitam
c^rta lege isdem conferrendi. Decrevit Deus; ut omnes illi qui in illum
Redemptorem crederent, and credentes ad finem perseverarent, servarentur; alii
vero damnarentur.
Arminians, either first, that Gods decree of giving Jesus Christ, and all
other graces in him was absolute, because it was by virtue of his Counsel and
Will alone, upon what Conditions, whether of legal obedience, or of
Evangelical faith and obedience, he would bestow all Graces. Or 2ly, rather, as
Mr. T. P. in a true genuine manuscript of his expresses himself, Gods Decree
is absolute, because p. 6. of the Ms. He chose us to be all visible members of
his Church, by an absolute Election, he absolutely and of free Grace, called us
to the means of salvation. I will leave it to any good Christian Conscience to
judge, whether that deserve to be called an absolute certain gracious Decree,
whereby the means of Grace are indeed made certain, etc. but the Grace to be
obtained by those means is left uncertain; for so he says in the very next
words of that M. S. he chose few of those visible members to be mystical
members of his Church by conditional Election.

Secondly, Here we have (as he says) pleading for special Grace, properly
Grace, because gratu^tous and free, etc. whereas elsewhere, as, we have
abundantly seen,

First, all is suspended upon the motions of man's free will. That must be the
Concausa, the social cause with ^race, if not as in true reckoning it will be
found to be at last, the Primum mobile, the first mover, p. 19. It is the
liberty of the Will, and the Cooperation of Grace, as the Sword of God and
Gideon.

2. Elsewhere, as at large he di^putes it out Sinner impleaded p. 251. etc. If
it did not lie in the believers power to live like an Infidel, (which we find
by daily and sad experience) and in the power of an Infidel (by the assistance
of Grace) to turn bel^ever; the f^rmer could not be punished for Apost^cy, nor
the latter for obduration.
, and as by his quoting here of Math. 13. 12. habenti dabitur, according to his
and the Arminian way of understanding that noted Scripture; all this free
special Grace depends upon m^ns good husbanding of his Talent, which all ^en
have received, by rec^iving of their natures; for so do both they, and the
Massilians explain this matter Prosper excerpt. a Gensen. Ideo ipsos fidem ad
Deum retulisse, quia ab ipsa sit creata natura, cui rationabilem inserui^
voluntatem, per quam unusquisque and credere and non credere in sua habeat
potestate. Sic Massil. in Epist. Hilar. ad August. Nec de hac fide posse dici:
quid habes quod non accepisti! Cum in eadem natura remanserit licet vitiata,
quae prius sana ac perfecta donata sit. Et in alio ibid. Loco: Consequens put
ant exhibendam ab co fidem, cujus natura id voluntate Conditoris conc^ssum est.
. It is with them for^ooth, special Grace, gratuitous etc. for the first, God
freely bestows a power on nature, to obtain Grace when it will Prosper
excerpt. a Gensen. Ideo ipsos fidem ad Deum retulisse, quia ab ipsa sit creata
natura, cui rationabilem inserui^ voluntatem, per quam unusquisque and credere
and non credere in sua habeat potestate. Sic Massil. in Epist. Hilar. ad
August. Nec de hac fide posse dici: quid habes quod non accepisti! Cum in eadem
natura remanserit licet vitiata, quae prius sana ac perfecta donata sit. Et in
alio ibid. Loco: Consequens put ant exhibendam ab co fidem, cujus natura id
voluntate Conditoris conc^ssum est.
.

2. For that God since the fall, did either leave in, or put i^to all men's
natures, certain powers of complying with grace, when that should but gently
mo^e, stir up, and breathe upon those powers Prosper excerpt. a Gensen. Ideo
ipsos fidem ad Deum retulisse, quia ab ipsa sit creata natura, cui rationabilem
inserui^ voluntatem, per quam unusquisque and credere and non credere in sua
habeat potestate. Sic Massil. in Epist. Hilar. ad August. Nec de hac fide posse
dici: quid habes quod non accepisti! Cum in eadem natura remanserit licet
vitiata, quae prius sana ac perfecta donata sit. Et in alio ibid. Loco:
Consequens put ant exhibendam ab co fidem, cujus natura id voluntate Conditoris
conc^ssum est.
.

. 2. He must not think to evade these palpable crossing shins, which himself,
either first by saying, that it is God that makes the difference, as well as
God that chooses, and this he repeats often; for 1. Besides that it is
unintelligible, and unexplicable how that Decree should give us our difference
of being in Christ, etc. which supposes the difference of being in Christ,
persevering in Faith, and all Grace to the end, etc. be ore the Decree of
Election be made, Phil. p. 7. Correct. Copy. p. 69.

2. He in Congruity to his principles hitherto held out, will not be able to
understand it, but that God makes the difference, not by virtue of Gods giving
that gift of grace, but by virtue of our receiving of it. And then it is not
he, but we, that make the difference, though by some power given unto us by him.

Or else secondly, by speaking against me, something more chubbidly, that it
does argue a strange shortness of discourse, if Mr. B. does mean, that because
Mr. T. P. does maintain an universality of Grace, that therefore he does
maintain an Equality: whereas he should know, that gradus non variat speciem,
More or less, will never be able to alter the kind of Grace. If the Elect for
kind and substance receive no other Grace, than the Reprobates, (as C. Jansen.
In parallelo ad Tom. 3. Pulsa ista gratia quantumcunque magna in voluntate,
nunquam in aeternum sequetur actio voluntatis, nisi voluntas ultro ei det
manus, atque ad agendum se determinando velit. Ips^ igitur non gratia est illa
causa quae facit. facere, etc. Sed quae potentiam voluntatis ex actu primo in
secundum extrahendo, ex non agente agentem facit. Gratia vero instar habitus
accomodando sese nutui voluntatis, instar pedissequae, sine qua non fieret,
imperatricem suam sequitur. Itaque quemad modum si qui^ calamo aureo scribat
nequaquam auro vel calamo; sed scriptoris voluntati scriptio attribui debet:
ita, si quis per talem Gratiam credit sperat aut diligit, non tali Gratiae, sed
voluntatis nutui tribui debent, etc. plura saepe alibi in eandem sententiam.
had well observed) let the degrees thereof, have as vast a di^proportion, as
one has to a thousand, yet it will never appear to be the special
discriminating Grace of Christ.

. 3. And all this before he is well aware of it, Mr. T. P. upon the place, or
very near it, does unwarily grant us, Ita sorex prodit se proprio indicio.

First, Whilst that speaking of perseverance, a special Grace indeed, if he
had but the right notion of it, he says of it, that it is a special Grace of
perseverance to every one that does continue and abide to the end; which is
most true, but nothing to the purpose of special Grace, because it will hold
true of any body as well as of the Elect, if he do but persevere.

Secondly, Whilst p. 48.. 23. he says, that he cannot endure to be of their
leven, who do arrogate a Savior wholly, and only to themselves, no body
advised him to that degree of supercilious arrogance; but if he would but
acknowledge, that by virtue of a peculiar gracious Decree, and by virtue of the
Collation of some peculiar Graces, which can only be had from the sufferings of
Christ for the Elect alone, they did receive such Graces, as none besides
themselves do, or can do by virtue of their free wills; all that dispute about
special Grace would be at an end, which else does, and must remain. And to shut
up all this Discourse is it possible for any body to believe, that if Mr. T.
P's. notions of special Grace, were any thing Orthodox, and sound he could or
would so wholly oppose those who do agree in the same notions with him, and
who do as much as himself oppose all force and Coact^on of the will properly so
called, as working on it as upon a block, or a brute Engine? as I am sure that
my self do, and all my venerable Masters, with whom he upbraids me.

. 3.

. 3. To what he has for the proving of himself to be a genuine Son of the
Church of England, in his Sect. 4. from p. 17. to 21.

Answ. for the proving of this, he holds on in his wonted course; for first, to
all that which I had produced from the Articles of the Church of England, to
the current received Expositions of her chief Doctors, etc. Set down by me
Corrept. Correct. p. 18. and 93, 94, etc.
he returns nothing but a jeere, viz. p. 10. l. 7, 8. that I am emboldened with
the suffrage of such as are of my opinions, (or rather, of such whose opinions
I am of.) Well! let him take it which way he will, I am sure, 1. They were no
mean, or obscure names in the Reformed Church of England, no uncertain (...)
but men of the greatest Eccles. 12. 11.
renown in the Congregation, very Masters of the Assembly. 2. By whom, when I
gather suffrages for my opinion, should I be emboldened, but by men who are of
my opinion? should I prove it by men who are against me? p. 17, 18, 20. He
bespatters, al^as slanders his own Mothers Sons, his Brethren; yea many of them
old enough, and wise enough to be his Fathers; for their being no members of
the Church of England: and that because forsooth, they have turned from the
Rituals of our Mother Church, and that just at such a time, when as by men of
renown, when a storm was up, they were justly thrown overboard, as
Commodities, which ever since the Reformation were by some of her severer Sons
Travers, Cart wright, Brightman, Parker, Ames, etc.
, yea Fathers too, Bishop Elmar, Bishop Cowper, Arch-B^shop Grindal, Dr.
Humphrey, etc.
as I could show, (if need) were accounted proprio nomine noxiae, and by most
of her wise and mildest ones, were at best but reputed to be tolerabiles
ineptias, All the men of Mr. Sprints Cassandrian way. See his English
Cassander. Dr. Burges his Plea for Ceremonies, etc.
tolerable fopperies, to use Calvin's Epistold quadam ad Ducem Summer set.
Protect. Regis Edvardi 6. (f)
phrase about them.

Thirdly, He huddles up a Company of Authorities, p. 19. taken from the
Catechism, public Liturgy, and several Articles, among the 39. Articles of the
Church, etc. but he shows not how they make for him, but leaves it only for
every man to collect it as he can; and this he does only upon the credit of
one, and but one Dr. Overall (who before in the chief point, upon which all
turns has been proved to make against him) and of one Mr. Playfer his Analysis
of the seventeenth Article, and of an odd kind of writing, which Chap. 3. 96,
97. he calls an Hist. Narration of the judgment of the most learned and godly
English Bishops, holy Martyrs, and others.

Unto all which it may serve turn in short, to say, first, that the 4.
Articles, the 2d, 7th, 15th, and 31. which he produces for Universal
Redemption, speak nothing at all for it, in the sense wherein he maintains it.
The phrase of Christ's dying for all the sins of the whole world, which is
dropped once and but once, Artic. 31. will never evince this, as has been
showed already (f) and shall be showed more hereafter.

2. The 10th Article which he quotes for the Liberty of the wills Cooperation
with Grace, he understanding it, as we have heard out of him, as he does, of
the wills Cooperation with Grace, before the Grace of Regeneration received,
it makes as much for him, as that which is directly against him. The Article
says, We have no power to do good works, pleasant and acceptable to God,
without the Grace of God preventing us, that we may have a good will, and
working with us, when N. 6. not before we have this good will. The 16th Article
being, as it is plain, made against the old Novatians, or Catharists, and the
then Anabaptists, who revived their errors, which was, that a Child of God
after Grace received, could not fall into any enormous sin, it makes nothing at
all for that final and total Apostasy of Saints, which he maintains Phil.
Chap. 4. p. 13.
; for the Article as it is for the falls of Saints, so it pleads too in the
next words for their rising again, by the Grace of God, we may rise again, and
amend our lives.

2. If he would have a more elaborate and particular Answer to these trifling
Objections, he may do well to fetch it from Reverend Dr. Twisse in his
Confutation of Dr. Jacksons vanities, who there does it profoundly and soundly,
as well as very merrily and facetiously Discovery of Dr. Jacksons Vanities, p.
507. per totum ferme Cap. 15.
.

Horat. Omne pulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci.

3. If Mr. Playfer by his accura^e Analysis should attempt out of the 17th
Article to extract Mr. T. Ps. conditional Election, founded on praescience of
faith and perseverance, which by that Article, are plain enough made gracious
consequents and fruits of Election, and not antecedent conditions to it, I
should dare (and so will many more with me) to call that his Analysis not an
accurate Analysis or Resolution of the 17th Article, but rather a professed
Dialysis or dissolution and dissipation of that Article.

4. As for the Historical Narration which he talks of;

1. If my memory fail not many years ago, I remember to have read an Arminian
piece under that Title.

But 2. By what Mr. T. P. relates out of him, p. 97. about Pelagius his
Opinion, it seems to have been drawn up by some sorry Goose-qu^l, who was
altogether a stranger to Pelagius his opinions, which in the point of Universal
Redemption, was just the same with his own, and of that of Mr. T. P's. as has
already been proved in this Book, and elsewhere Corrept. Correct. p. 131. in
margin. ex Fausto Rhegin. Lib. 1. de great. and Lib. arbitrio.
.

4. But once at last to put it past all doubt, that he belongs to any Church,
rather then to the Church of England, I shall once for all leave it to the free
debates, and Resolutions of all true hearted Protestants, whether Fathers or
Sons in the Church of England, or of any other true Reformed Protestant
Catholic in all Christendom, in the ^ear of God, to determine to what Church
he belongs? who first professes to dislike the Doctrines of Martin Luther,
Zuinglius, p. 19. and p. 13. John Calvin, etc. when as no sort of Protestants
oppose them all three: and when as it is well known, they were all three with
great applause, magnified by all the Arch Bishops, which ever our English
Church had Vide Cranmeri Epistolas ad Calvin. Edmundi Grindalliad Bezam. Jac.
Lectii dedicat. operum Did. Sadeclis Archiepisc. Whitegifto, etc.
, unless it were by the very last of all; nay, when for the very Doctrines
which T. P. opposes, they gained a great Testimony from those without, I mean
from the better sort of the Church of Rome, in the very Council of Trent,
though these Doctrines of theirs were much opposed by the sordid flattering
Claw backs of the Court of Rome Histor. Council. Trident. Lat. Edit. Francofurt.
Anno 1621. agens de praedestinatione absoluta ex sententia Zuinglianorum. Prior
certe sententia (viz. in Praedestinatione and Reprobatione nullas esse parts
hominis sed, solius divinae voluntatis) magnum complexa Mysterium and arcanum,
mentem hominis humiliabat, atque hinc, deformitatem peccati, illinc gratiae
Divinae excellentiam intuentem, abjecta protinus sui fiducia in Deo plane
defigebat. Altera vero magis plausibilis, popularis, speciosa, and augendo
mentis humanae fastui accommodatior, hocipso and gratior erat fratribus artem
potiu^ praedicandi, quam accuratam Theologiae professionem semper professis;
and Aulicis (N. 6.) probabilior videbatur, quippe consentanea rationibus
politici^; habuit quoque Episcopos Bito^^inensem and Salpensem satis acres
propugnatores. Ac profecto, qui eam p^opugnabant, quod rationibus mere humanis
niterentur, alias plus poterant: ubi vero ad Scripturae Testimonia ventum,
causa facile cadebant
.

2. Who inveighs against Protestants, Papist-like vide D. Morton. nostrum
Episc. Dunelmens. Antidoto advers. Eccles. Rom, de merito proprie dicto p. cap.
20. p. 206. 207. and p. 211, compared with Sinner Impleaded, p. 332. etc.
, under the name of Solifidians, for maintaining Justification by faith in
Christ alone, though withal he knows, that they maintain faith justifying not
to be a dead, but a living faith.

3. Who (as we have seen) slights the Articles of Lambeth, the Articles of the
Church of Ireland, which both were drawn up, by as known, and as able Fathers
of the Church of England, as since the Reformation it was ever yet graced with.

4. Who goes about, whenever he has any occasion to mention the Articles of
his pretended Mother Church,

1. To put this notorious Gull and Cheat upon the Church, that in despite of
all her public Monuments to the contrary, well gathered together by the
singular industry of learned Mr. Pryn, in his Anti-Arminianisme, she must (as
we have seen) declare her self Pelagian, Massilian, and somewhat worse then
Arminian, or she must be no longer a foster Mother to Mr. T. P.

2. He every where puts such senses upon her Articles, as none but a more than
half Popish Montacute, or a full Popish D. Davenport, alias Francisc. de S.
Clara, in his Glosses upon the 39. Articles, durst ever put upon them.

5. Who so behaves himself against his Brethren, who only differ from the old
rites, which the Church not long since had, as from his wicked branding of
them, to deserve himself to be branded, and marked with a very black Coal; and
that by those who otherwise liked the Hierarchy, and the rites belonging to it
marvelously well, I might transcribe many of them, but at this time, I shall
content my self, to cite only one noted one, who shall tell Mr. T. P. of his
faults in Lat^ne, (a Language which he understands I am sure, marvelous well,
though he will not allow me to do so, Phil. Chap. 3. p. 106.) I will not
English these passages, because it may not be so proper, for all the people to
see how Mr. T. P. is whipped, by Learned Rev. and witty Dr. Featly.

First, in Oratione quam Primitias appellat. Sed non libenter audio Bolsecas
quosdam Reformatos, Levardentios Anglicanos Spiritu Ignatiano debacchantes in
Sacros Calvini manes, qui in hoc unico argumento facundi, neque concionari, nec
dicture, nec scribere, nec jocari (Joculariter plerunque hac praestant omnia)
aut quicquam possunt, nisi Calvinum lancinent, aut essingant sibi puritanum.
Obsoletae jampridem sunt ista Jesuitarum naeniae and mimi apud eos exauctorati:
vos autem locustarum hoc virus lingere, and in Ecclesiam Dei evomere, prodire
in templum, domum Dei vivi, tanquam in scenam, and Histrionum more scurram
agere Jesuitam, sub persona Ministri Dei, O Dementiam! O piaculum! Nemo sit
apud nos aut tam ineptus, ut in omnia Calvini verba jurare velit, neque tam
ingratus ut dicere pudeat, quibus Magistris in Christo profecerit.

2. In his Pedo-Pastorali, seu Concione habita ad clerum Oxoniae, 8th Aprilis,
1615.

. 4. Fortiter and alacriter occurrite, ne ad horam quidem cedite, nulli liceat
impune per Calvini aut Bezae aut Anglo-genevensium, aut quorumcunque aliorum
later a religionem quam profitemur vulnerare, ne sit integrum cuiquam dente
Theonino optime Erasm. Adag.
de Ecclesia and Academia meritorum famam arrodere: Coplas conjungite, animos
consociate, bonorum praesid a mun te, malorum sive infectorum sive suspectorum,
sive profligatorum, and perd^torum conatus reprimite, cuniculos detegite, etc.

Idem Ibid.

Siccine res habet qui ex subrancidis Pontificiorum, aut Lutheranorum
adversariis centonem possunt in Calvinum, Bezam, P. Martyrem, Piscatorem,
aliosque Orthodoxos contexere, ij soli Ambrosia alendi sunt; reliquos vero ex
Academia sive Doctores sive Pastores, suo in genere suspiciendos faenum esse
oportet?

Idem Ibidem.

Postremum (malorum pastorum) genus est eorum qui oves Christi pascunt, sed
ci^o insalubri, quo magis in ficiantur quam reficiuntur Christi oves agnique,
little d^co qui floribus and fructibus paradisi aut noxias Herbas admiscent, aut
floribus Adonidis aspergunt; Cujusmodi sunt ista dogmata, vires Liberi arbitrii
ab Adami lapsu ad bonum spirituale fractas ac debilitatas, non penitus
profligatas, and amissas: labem originis nemini unquam fraudi fuisse;
unumquemque enim scelus luere proprium, Gratiam novo faedere promissam, omnibus
expositam esse, nec cuiquam unquam defuisse nisi qui ei defuerit: imputatam
Christi Justitiam absque inhaerente, non plus prodesse quam indusium candidum
Aethiopi superinductum: Fiduciam salutis propriae a praesumptione parum aut
nihil differ: Genevates and Presbyterianos infestiores Ecclesiae hosts
[esse] quam Pontificios.

And now let any say to what Church Mr. T. P. belongs.

. 4.

. 4. To what he has up and down his. 5. from p. 21. to 27. against my abusing
of Scripture, for the proving of God to be the Fountain, or Cause of sin;

. 1 Although I know my self throughout this his whole Book, no where to be more
wretchedly and unconscionably, (against his own soul and Conscience) abused by
him than within the compass of the Pages cited within this Paragraph, which
are as contrary to what I wrote, as any Reader may know (and as he should have
known) who will but peruse what I wrote, Corrept. Correct. from p. 44. to 82.)
as light is to darkness, and Heaven to Hell; yet because I must elsewhere
thoroughly handle this matter, and I hope prove that whilst he does oppo^e my
pretended blasphemies, he does fall upon most desperate real ones, which are
next door to downright Atheism, I must beseech the Reader in this place, and
for this time, to content himself, which observing these few things, which most
wise men would go nigh to think to be enough to overthrow the Major part by
far, of all the rest of the things which upon this score he objects against me
Phil. Cap. 3. and 4.
and my Masters and Oracles, as in scorn he calls them.

First, I no where say, either in express terms, or in any equipollent; hat
God (as in his Margin, p. 21. he blusheth not to tell the World, my opinion to
be) is the Fountain or Cause of sin: my opinion is so contrary to it, that I
wish Miriades of Anathematisms to light upon him who holds it, be he who he
will be, if he repent not the sooner.

Secondly, The only colorable ground of his not weak but wilful
misrepresentation of me in this malicious fashion is, because against my clear
meaning and express words very often, he will needs believe, that I understand
all those Scriptures, (which I quote Corrept. Correct. p. 56. and diverse more,
which D. Reynolds had quored in his Epistle, p. 5. in a mere literal sense:
when as yet first in my Corrept. Correct. p. 69. 70. I had expressly told him,
that that saying of mine, out of D. Ames, Sensus Scripturae est tantum unicus
isque Grammaticus holds not always, but only then, when the Letter is not
plainly metaphorical, typical, or contrary to other more plain places, and the
clear Analogy of faith? And sure I take it to be against the two latter for to
maintain God to be the Author of sin, or (as he most maliciously and hatefully
expresses me) the Fountain or cause of sin.

2. It is plain to any who does but list to take notice, how I explain the
places formerly mentioned, whenever I touch upon them, that I do not take the
most of them in a mere Grammatical and literal sense; but in a figurative: for
whereas God according to the Letter of many of those Texts, seems to be made a
moral cause of sin as sin, I do every where make it eviden^, that I do only
believe God to be a natural Cause of the mere act of sin, Dominicus a Soto de
Not. and Great. lib. 1. cap. 18. Quamvis permulti sint quibus non sit explicatu
facile, quo modo in odio Dei, quod internam habet and indivisam malignitatem,
posset Deus causam esse entitatis, culpae vero non item, non tamen est ita
intellectu difficile. In moralibus inquit ille prorsus est vero, judicaturque,
causa qui lege, open, consilio, favore, vel persuasu movet quempiam, sive ad
bonum sive ad malum: At que his modis and rationibus universos Deus movet ad
bonum and honestum, neminem autem ad malum.
without which it is impossible, that any sin can be committed) but that he is
only a mere accidental Cause of the obliquity of the act of sin, wherein alone
the formality of sin is consisting, and from whence alone sin's denomination
ought to be taken.

Thirdly, I had just reason for bestowing some sound Correptory Correction on
him, and by many Arguments from Corrept. Correct. p. 84. to 86. to correct him
for his receding too far from the literal sense of the fore-quoted Scriptures,
whilst, as may be seen in his 14, 15, and 16. pages of his Correct Copy, and
set down out of it, by me Corrept. Correct. p. 83. (unto all which he is as
mute as a Fish) he will not have them to allow of God's so much as permitting
sin, but in an equitable sense, and that is as it signifies, not to hinder by
main force, and that he disposes and orders them to the best advantage. And yet
never first, will he, or any body else, by the help of his Melancthon, and I
cannot tell who besides, whom he mentions p. 26. be ever able to prove, that
the Scripture-phrases of hardening of men's hearts, of giving them over to their
own hearts lusts, of blinding their eyes, etc. as they are paenal acts of the
Almighty, can by so soft interpretations be put off.

Secondly, Nothing has been so usual to the men of his way, I mean the
Arminians, as under color of receding a little from the Letter of several
Texts, which in Romans 9. 11. 18. Phil. 2. 13. Heb. 8. 10. and 10. 16. and
elsewhere, make against them, to overthrow all at once, both the Letter, and
the true meaning of the Scriptures. And some reason I had, to be jealous of Mr.
T. P. this way.

Fourthly, Though I have in many places of my Correptory already showed (and
shall be forced again elsewhere to do) in what sense I maintain God
efficaciously to permit sin, viz. only in such a sense as renders God free from
all guilt of sin, is no way destructive to sinful man's Liberty, when he sins,
and so makes him the only Delinquent; yet I shall think it fitting, once for
all in the margin, These. Salvian. de providentia Dei in mal. page 186. Praeter
nudam permissionem esse aliquam Dei efficaciam in perpetratione mali,
contendunt alii, alii negant acerrime: Illine quid Divina providentia
subtrahant, aut eam in rerum humanarum procuratione negligentius versari
dicant, quam admirabilem Dei sapientiam decet; hinc Deo labem aliquam aspergant
quasi esset auctor peccati: utrique metuentes ne in scopulum aliquem incurrant.
Certe uti natura Dei a peccato abhorret summopere alienos nos esse ab ea
sententia quae Deum peccati causam statuit, juxta oportet. Verum haud facile
quicquam Deo indignius dici potest, quam ut vel conniventibus oculis omnia
temere ferri patiatur vel omnia inspectare dicatur quidem, veruntamen brachiis
quasi complicatis otiose torpere putetur, quasi eo sese abdicarit imperio, quod
in Creaturarum ratione praeditarum facultates obtinet a natura. Neque enim
consentaneum est, ut imperium illud peccato Diaboli and hominum perdiderit,
neque ut id amplius exercere non possit immunis a labe. Equidem non negaverim
aliquibus in locis Scripturae Sacrae verba quae efficientiam Deo tribuere in eo
genere videntur sic esse interpretanda, ut facere dicatur quod non impedit,
quia solus id impedire potest; veluti cum indurare hominum cerda dicitur quia
non emollit; ut Hebraice vivificare dicitur is, qui non occidit: Quae est
alicubi Augustini sententia. At ut taceamus negationem illam actionis, qua sola
indurationem impedire valuit, esse ab aliquo Justo Judicio, plurima loca sunt
in quibus Scriptura magis emphatice loquitur, quam ut ad solam permissionem
revocari possint. Scilicet cum Deus magnopere Iratus Davidi, fore denunciat, ut
quod flagitium clanculum admisit, id in aperta luce, adeoque in conspectu
Solis, vindicet, putandumne est eum nihil aliud sibi velle, quam ut Absalomi
nesarios co^atus non reprimat, sinatque furere intemperante^* Aut cum Joseph
negat alius quam Dei ipsius opera factum esse ut in Aegyptum descenderet, nihil
ne significat, praeterquam, quod non impedivit quominus venderetur? Sonant sane
illa verba aliquid amplius. Istud vero quod nihil neque Judaei neque Judas in
proditione and crucifixione Christi f^cerunt, quam quod Dei confilium atque
manus factum iri decreverat, non nisi admodum frigide and dilute (and sic tamen
T. P. p. 9. and alibi passim) de nuda permissione explicari potest. Aug. Lib.
de praedestinat: and Gratia cap. 4. 2 Samuel 12. 11. Genesis 45. 8. Act. 4. 28. Huc
accedit quod si Deus in eo genere efficit, vitari quidem non possit quin mala
perpetrentur: haud enim aliter Creatura corrupta in peccatum ruit, quam ut aqua
sponte natura fluit atque dilabitur. At nihil necesse erit hoc malum potius
quam illud accidere ubi nulla causa superior ac potentior erit, quae vel
Diaboli vel ingenii humani motus natura sua vagos ad hoc vel illud inflectat:
sic neque Deus quod ab aeterno decrevit certo dare poterit effectum, neque adeo
rerum eventus satis certo prospicere, ut qui pendeant ex rebus quas non habeat
in potestate. Quod natura Dei and Scripturae adversatur docenti Deum omnia
(...). Quorum verborum ea vis est modo ut significent, omnia quae Deus facit,
fieri secundum propositum ipsius. Essetne hoc dignum quod ab Apostolo diceretur
tanto conatu? sed etiam omnia quae fiunt fieri ab eo secundum idem propositum.
Quod de consilio mere permissivo dici non potest. Ephesians. 1. 11. Efficacitas
tamen illa cujus modi sit a nemine mortalium vel plene comprehenditur, vel
verbis explicatur. Nec si quis in eo Argumento paulo durius aut inconsideratius
locutus est dum modo non aliter de Deo quam de unico omnis boni authore and
acerrimo mali vindice sentiat calumniandus est aut trahendus in invidiam.
Itaque qui scimus quam sit homo (...), facile condonamus Bellarmino aliisque
quod dicunt Deum non torquere hominum men^es ad malum, incitare ad peccatum,
aliaque ejusmodi: Qua aequitate si omnes uterentur uti par est, clari^viri non
proscinderentur a plerisque ut solent illiberalibus convitiis, quasi Deus
auctorem peccati facerent, a quo scelere abhorruerunt, ut qui maxim. Bellar.
citat. great. l. 2. c. 3.
to set down my sense in Dr. Amyrald his Latin, which my Adversary has the
more reason to value, because he quotes him, as if he were one of his party,
Phil. p. 15. The sum of what he says, is, that 2 Samuel 12. 11. Genesis 45. 8. Act.
4. 28. and Scriptures like to them, cannot be understood of a bare permission,
that it is most Atheistical to make God a mere speculator of men's sins, and an
involuntary p^rmission; to bespatter men with maintaining God to be the Author
of sin, because they cannot fully clear it to carnal reason, how God without
sin, can voluntarily decree the permission and being of sin.

. 2 p. 22.

. 1. My sense is plainly this, that God sincerely does desire the health and
welfare of all Mankind, I mean their obedience, Repentance, renovation of life,
perseverance in well doing in this present World, and glorification in the
World to come; that he hates nothing which he has made; nothing but sin which
he has not made, that when he commands he is sincerely willing to be obeyed,
and therefore gives a passive power to receive his grace, and by that an
active power to perform such obedience as he will mercifully accept; but he
forces no man, necessitateth no man, by grace irresistible, to be eternally
happy, do what he can to the contrary, any more then he forces, or
necessitateth any man, by any irrespective unconditional Decree, to be
eternally miserable, do what he can to be otherwise.

Answ. 3. Elsewhere, as viz. Correct Copy p. 6. 55, 56. Philanthrop. 85. etc.
Our Mr. T. P. walks in a Cloud all the while that he talks much of Grace, even
of special Grace, and the workings thereof, by which good words and phrases, I
fear he has deceived not a few, haudaliter, as if he had kept very close
Correspondence with the fellow, who said Modern Policy taken from Machiavel,
etc.
(and probably not without reason in that sense, that that wag speaks it) O the
rich income and glorious result of Hypocrisy! This, this must be diligently
studied and practiced,

-- Da Justum Sanctumque videri
Noctem peccatis, and fraudibus objice nubem.
But now at last, all upon a sudden, (and I think truly, ^here is a great and
good providence in it) our good Author speaks his sense plainly? and therefore
I think there is all the reason in the World, we should very attentively give
heed to what he says. As for me, I think without the least wronging of him, I
may make these following, 1. General, and then 2. Particular notes upon his
fair and plain Text.

. 2.

For the first, as all the Phrases which he produces concerning Christ's
Redemption, must, according to him, be understood of all, and every rational
humane Creature, that ever was, or shall be, nemine excepto, (Mr. T. P. in this
case, at no hand likes of any exception) Nunquid, inquit Augustinus, per haec
dona quae omnibus communia sunt hominibus, discernuntur hominos ab hominibus?
minime gentium. De praedest Sanctor. Lib. 5. Chap. 3. p. 84.) even so must all
be here, of what he talks concerning Gods sincere desire of the health and
welfare of all Mankind, as of their Repentance, obedience, etc. None must be
excepted out of this All, and what is now become of his special Grace?

Secondly, It may not want some mystery, as plain as he would be thought there
to be, which I suppose, may be unfolded by him, when he is disposed to be
somewhat plainer than as yet he is, why he makes at all no mention of Gods
willing men's Faith, as well as he does of his willing their Obedience,
Repentance, Renovation, etc. Is it because with the Socinians and others, he
thinks there is no difference betwixt faith, and the obedience thereof, so that
they are very fit to be confounded together (b)?

Thirdly, If God sincerely will, or does desire the obedience, (a) Confess.
Remonstrant. Cap. 10. These. 1. and passim per tota capitae.. 12. etc.
Repentance, glorification, etc. i. e. in a word, Grace and Glory, and all good
things to all, I pray, what has the Lord himself more to will, or more to
give, by virtue of the special Grace, he speaks of p. 83. unto his Elect, and
peculiar people? Can he wish them any more, or better things then Grace and
Glory? 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4, 5, etc. 2 Pet. 1. 4. 8, 10, 11.

Fourthly, If God does desire all these good and great things sincerely to all
promiscuously, does he desire, that they should be bestowed upon them
absolutely or conditionally? If absolutely, how comes all do not obey, repent,
all be not renovated, or glorified; for who has, or ever shall resist Gods
will, or desire, Romans 9. 19. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in Heaven
and in Earth, in the Seas, and all deep places, Psalm. 135. 6. and yet as
neither fides est, omnium Faith belongs not to all; 2 These. 3. 2.
so neither Obedience, Repentance, Renovation* etc. If only conditionally,
'pray, without the foulest Pelagian^sme, that ever was spoken, upon what
condition do we receive the first grace of Faith, Repentance, Renovation? Is it
upon condition, that we believe, obey, repent, or improve our good talents, and
possibilities well Corvinus contra Tibern. p. 442. Internum hoc auxilium tale
est, ut sufficiens sit ad fidem and conversionem in iis quibus Evangelium cl^re
p^aedicatur, nisi sibi ipsis desint, reipsa efficiendam.
?

Fifthly, Is not all the Grace and Glory that God wills to men here, made
subject to the passive powers, and active powers, promiscuously given to all
men, which are by no means, or in any sense irresistible, rather than that any
grace of God in his Elect, does subdue the will to it self, by subduing all
proud thoughts, and wicked Imaginations, which might lift up themselves against
the obedience of Christ? 2 Cor. 10. 4.

. 2. But a little more particularly, to paraphrase upon these words, which to
use his own phrase just before them, are as full of mental Reservations, and
other tricks, as they can hold, notwithstanding the profession which he makes
of speaking of his plain sense, and as plain as his sense is to all discerning
people Plaut. in Captivis. Dolinon doli sunt nisi astu colas. Sed malum maximum
si id palam pervenit.
.

First, Then it is true, that God does sincerely desire the health and welfare,
etc. of all those of mankind, to whom he proposes the Gospel of our Lord and
Savior, if by sincere desire it were enough for him to understand that God,
without any the least fraud and caption, (which he and his party often object
against us) does will, i. e. enjoin or command, that all to whom the Gospel is
preached, should ex officio, believe, repent, be renovated, etc. that the
preaching of the Gospel, is the only external apt means, for to bring men to
Faith, Repentance, etc. Romans 10. 17.

Secondly, That if they do so, they shall certainly be glorified, be they who
they will be; and that God does sincerely will i. e. approve, or like of this,
when it is done, then God after a sort, may be said to desire, or will what he
speaks of: But if by these phrases, he will needs understand no less, then
what he must do, (if he will oppose the sense of his Adversaries) that God does
sincerely desire, i. e. that God has really purposed or decreed, to work these
Graces in all men, to the utmost that is in his power for to do, let him get
some strong Pelagians with him to believe it See Corrept. Correct. Deus vult
quantum est in se.
: we poor Orthodox people, hope never to give any credit to it: who cannot
possibly, understand, how God can be said sincerely to desire i. e. to decree,
or appoint the Obedience, Repentance, etc. of all, or of any of those, unto
whom he does not so much as in a ministerial way, reveal the mysteries of
salvation, spoken of 1 Timothy 3. 16. which yet now are absolutely necessary
distinctly to be believed, Psalm. 19. and 147.

2. To such as Pharaoh, whose heart he hardened, 3. To such as totally and
finally be delivers up to believe lies, that they may be damned, 2 These. 2. 10.
11. 4. To all such as he leaves only to the use of their free wills, under
sufficient means of grace and salvation, without giving them that efficacious
grace which he and his Arminians with him, do sometimes talk of, under the
notion of Congruous grace, working at critical times and seasons; and without
which, God knows, that not a man of them shall ever be saved, or converted Dr.
Twiss. may well ask him Lib. 1. vindic. p. 210. Quo Color offirmari potest,
Deum habere desiderium aliquod ejus salvandi, cui se non daturum Gratiam
efficacem qua crederet, ab aeterno decrevit?
.

2. It is as true in some sense, what he says next, That God hates nothing
which he has made, nothing but sin which he has not made, if he would
understand it only so, that God hareth nothing of what he made for that very
reason, because he made it, or as he made it; for so all things were very good,
Genesis 1. 26. Eccles. 7. 29. but if his meaning be, that God does not hate some
of the persons which he has made, viz. so far as never to have resolved to
bestow saving grace, or glory upon them, which he resolved to bestow upon some
others: he first, contradicts the Apostle Paul, as directly as any man can,
Romans 9. 13. 18.

Secondly, If that would but hold true, which afterward he does strenuously
plead for, that sin, as sin, has not only a deficient, but also Philan. 1
Chap. 3. p. 112, 113; etc.
an efficient cause, and so must needs be some positive entity, then either God
must needs hate something of what he made, or else there must be a world of
positive entities, i. e. of true Creatures, which God never was the Creator, or
maker of.

Thirdly, He says, That God gives a passive power to receive his Grace, and
by that an active power, to perform such obedience as he will mercifully accept.

First, By this he cannot mean such a remote passive power, (which none of his
Adversaries deny) by which every reasonable humane Creature, even since the
fall, is eo nomine, because it is reasonable capable of Grace and Glory, so
long as he is a viator upon Earth, if God of his rich and free mercy be pleased
to bestow them upon him, Prosper ad object. 6. Vincent. Hoc inter malos homines
distat and daemones, quod hominibus etiam valde malis super sit, si Deus
misereatur, reconciliatio; daemonibus autem nulla est in aeternum servata
conversio, this would imply no contradiction at all, but by what he says of
the active power, to perform such obedience, as God will accept, it is plain,
as well as from diverse places of his other works mentioned before, that he does
understand such a Proclivity, to the accepting of grace, to be put into every
man's nature; by virtue whereof, he is enabled, whenever he wills, and
lists, and whenever he is but by common Ministerial Grace, or the like,
excited thereunto, to perform acceptable obedience, and so to procure special
Grace for himself.

Secondly, If he were but ripe for the expressing of his mind fully to the
World, by acceptable obedience, he would tell us, that he does not at all
understand any imputed obedience, or righteousness of Jesus Christ, but only a
certain Evangelical inhaerent, though lame righteousness of our own Corrept.
Correct. p. 159.
; and this may fairly be collected from his scoffs against Solifidians.

Fourthly, For what he closes his opinion with, against compulsion,
necessitation, irresistible Grace.

First, He keeps but in the beaten old Road of his Masters Sinner Impleaded,
332. 333.
the Pelagians, and Semi-pelagians Aug. Lib. 1. ad Bonif. c. 18. Hominem Dei
opus defendimus; de se loquuntur Pelagiani nec ex illius potentia vel in malum
vel in bonum invitum aliquem cogi: sed prepria voluntate aut bonum facere aut
malum. Has ipsas Querelas, de labefactata per tractum Dei Liberate Pelagiani
ingeminant, quando sub adversantium nomine sibi dicit Augustine. Tract. 29. in
Johan Quid hic dicimus fratres? Si trahimur ad Christum, ergo inviti credimus;
ergo violentia adhibetur, non voluntas excitatur, etc. Idem Lib. 2. ad Bonifac.
c. 5. sub nomine Gratiae ita fatum asserunt Catholici ut dicant, quia nisi
invito and reluctanti homini inspir averit boni and ipsius imperfecti
cupiditatem, nec a malo declinare nec bonum posset accipere.
, to whom nothing was so usual, as to fill their mouths with such Objections
as these, against the Orthodox.

Secondly, By the Phrases of compelling, enforcing, etc. it is manifest, that
he understands all those efficacious Victorious all Conquering works of Grace,
by which the will is in respect of Gods gracious Decree, Certainly, and in that
sense necessarily, determinated to will, and to do according to Gods good will
and pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. 1 Timothy 1. Corrept. Correct. p. 215, 216, 217, etc.


. 6. p. 23.

When God reveals his great unwillingness that men should sin, they say it is
but a sign that men ought not to sin, whereas his secret will (which alone is
properly his will, is, says Dr. Twisse) that men should sin of necessity, do
what they can to the contrary, which is as much as to say, (that voluntas
signi, is but signum voluntatis, non voluntas ex part rei, nay worse,) that
voluntas signi, is but the will of not willing what he wills, and of willing
what he wills not with his secret will.

Answ. 1. All this wild discourse, which he repeats, I cannot tell how often,
is but built upon that notorious and long since exploded false principle, that
nothing can be necessary, in respect of Gods Decree, and yet be contingent, and
vo^unta^y too, in respect of man's will, and of his way of acting what he does,
be it good or evil. The falsehood of which apprehension, both Scripture P.
164. Mat. 18. 7. Luke 17. 1. 1 Cor. 11. 19.
and his Melancthon (whom he so highly magnifies Phil. Chap. 1. p. 14.
Chytraeus refert. Lib. de vit. aeterna. Tit. de corpore Christi Glorioso.
Philippum Melanchthonem saepe retulisse haec verba, Demus Deum aliquid posse,
quod nos fateamur, investigar non posse, sicut de inextricabili Quaestione fati
and contingentiae, Praeceptorem nostrum Philippum Melanchthonem memini saepe
sui Praeceptoris Francisci Stadiani Doctoris Philosophiaein Schola Tabingensi
sermonem recitare, qui utrumque se scire dixerat Deum omnia praescire and
determinare, and tamen esse contingentiam; sed quomodo haec concilianda essent,
ut cuilibet contentioso satisfaceret, non pror sus prospicere
might easily have convinced him of.

2. I wonder what Gods great unwillingness that men ought not to sin, when
expressed in a vehement prohibition of sin, should signify any more than that
it is men's duty not to sin, or that they ought not to sin? If he can tell me
what a bare prohibition is apt to signify more, or is ordinarily appointed to
signify more

Erit mihi magnus Apollo. Thirdly, I will most willingly leave to any judicious
Christian soul, to determine then, that when the will of Gods Decree, which
refers to what shall, de facto, fall out, or come to pass, is compared with
the will of Gods Praecept or Proh^bition, which refers to what men de Jure, of
right and ex officio, of duty ought to do, or to leave undone, whether the
first will of God, in this Comparative sense, and in this only, be not much
more properly to be called his will, then the latter is A thing which even that
great Arminian Arn. Corvinus was forced to grant. Anton. Walaeus contra Corvin.
Cap. 4. P. 140. Decretum Dei vocari (...) voluntatem Dei, legem vero minus
proprie ipse quoque certo respectu concedis: nempe quia decretum est ipsissima
voluntatis Dei interna and ultima determinatio, Lex vero ejus potius effectus
and documentum, etc.
; for else I am sure, Dr. Twisse is no where against calling Gods praeceptive
will his will, and that in a proper sense, though not in so full a sense, as
the will of Gods Decree is to be reputed, and called, his will. Let him be
heard speaking for himself in plain English, in his Book against Dr. Tilenus
Synod of Dort and Arles, p. 54.

We say, even Gods Commandment notes the will of God also in proper speech, to
wit, what shall be our duty to do; for undoubtedly, whatsoever God commands us,
it is his will in proper speech, that it shall be our duty to do it. But by the
will of God in distinction from that will which is signified by his
Commandment, we understand his purpose to have this, or that, to be brought to
pass, etc.

Fourthly, none but a man of so cracked a Conscience, as he in all his Writings,
but especially in this his last Book, has discovered himself to be, would or
durst have said, that according to Dr. Twisse, men should sin of necessity, do
what they can to the contrary: when as all who have but (to use his own Phrase)
tipped into any of Dr. Twisse his Writings, can tell with me, that perchance
five hundred times over, in several parts of his Books, he teaches us, that as
Gods will is to all things, which fall out necessarily, the Fountain and
Original of all that necessity; so that very same will and Decree of God is in
like sort, the Fountain and Original of all contigency, voluntariness, or
liberty in things which are acted by the free will of the Creature, Dr. Twisse
Lib. 2. p. 40. Col. 2. Saepissime has profert Sententias. Damus Deum esse
causam particularem uniusucujusque actu; Damus esse agens liberum, etiam omnis
Libertatis fontem, quippe quod non modo necessaria fi^nt necessario, sed and
contingentia omnia contingenter eveniant, ejus voluntatis efficaciae tribuen
dum censemus cum Aquinate.
how often says he, that voluntas non potest cogi, ne a Deo quidem ipso, that
the will neither is, nor can be compelled to good or evil, no not by God
himself, and that because such compulsion would imply a contradiction?

Fifthly, As hard a Catachresis as in his tender and delicate ears, it may be
for Dr. Twisse to say, that voluntas signi is not properly Gods will, yet it is
nothing near so hard a Catachresis, as that is of Arminius (d), of himself, and
all his faction, or to maintain, Phil. Chap. 1. 21. that God really and
sincerely desires the eternal welfare of all sinners, and yet intends to deny
to a world of them, that efficacious Grace without which the Lord knows it to
be impossible, that any should be converted or saved Let him in many places
learn this from Dr. Twisse. Lib. 1. P. 224. etc. Passim. A^minius ipse fatetur,
Deum statuisse certo decreto quibusdam fidem and paenitentiam non dare, quos
tamen negare non potest a Deo per praedicationem Evangelicam ad fidem and
resipiscentiam instigari, quare Deus insimulandius erit hypocrise^s, ex ipsius
sententia aeque atque ex nostra. Idem Ibid Quare quanquam Gratiam credendi
efficacem tribuere recuset Deus, tamen speciem d^siderantis habet, ut crederent
homines sine omni simula^ione, juxta Arminium.
.

Sixthly, If he would have been any thing valiant, he should not so often like
an Adder in the way, Genesis 49. 17. be nibling at the heels of this useful
distinction of voluntas signi, praecepti, etc. and of voluntas Decreti,
beneplaciti, etc. but he should, if he could have done it, have broken the head
of it, which yet it still lifts up, in Dr. Twisse his Writings, in Mr.
Whitefields Epist. p. 2. 3, 4, etc. Corrept. Correct. p. 76. p. 151, 152, 153,
etc.
, and in diverse places of the Corrept. Correct. Si quis corripit ne pereat, cur
non orripiat nec plus pereat* Aug. de Corrept. and great.
.

Seventhly and lastly, unless any man whilst he is upon the face of the Earth,
could for certain be able to say, and make it good, that he were absolutely
reprobated, I wonder, with what sense he can be able to say, that Gods
preceptive will, or his voluntas signi, is but Gods will of his not willing,
when as yet suppose a man could be certain of his Reprobation, as a Child of
God may be of his Election; yet even to such a one, Gods praeceptive will would
signify these things;

First, That it is his duty to believe and repent.

Secondly, That God would like of his so doing, if he do it.

Thirdly, That if he do but Gods will in some measure, whilst he is here, his
torments even in Hell shall be the fewer.

. 2. As for the rest which follows in this Chap. 4. about my abuse of
Scripture, it first has, as to any thing that may seem difficult in it, been
answered already.

Secondly, He might well have cried out upon me, for abusing of Scripture, if I
should have so fowly and absurdly misinterpreted any Scriptures, as he does two
most noted ones, that of Act. 2. 2. with 4. 27, 28. that other of 2 Samuel 12. 7.
8. Of the former he is not ashamed to say Sinner Impleaded, p. 258, 259.
that God determined the thing (viz. the crucifying of Christ) should be done,
but not that they should do it: whereas first the words of the Text are
expressly, that they by wicked hands did crucify and slay Christ, according to
the determinate Counsel and foreknowledge of God; And if we would know who
those they were, who so did take and kill, and crucify Christ? The Text, Acts
4. 27, 28. answers as punctually as any thing can be. Of a truth, against thy
holy Child Jesus, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and people
of Israel, were gathered together, for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy
Counsel determined before to be done

Secondly, His interpretation is directly against that of St. Austins Judas
electus est ad fundendum sanguinem Christi. August. Lib. des Corrept. and Great.
Illos debemus electos intelligere per misericordiam, illum per judicium
.

Thirdly, Were it true, it could not at all serve his turn for the clearing of
God from being the Author of sin; for if that which is notoriously false, but
which he every where supposed to be true, were indeed so, that God cannot in
any sense be said to decree, or to will sin, but he becomes the Author of sin,
the Lord (according to his way of reasoning) would become so by whomsoever, or
whenever God should have determined the Crucifixion of Christ to be effected
by the naughty wills of men; for good they could not be, who would offer to
slay the Prince of life. About the second, he is bold to say, Philanth. p. 48.
Chap. 4.
that it were much better to think, that David erred in his Conjecture, then to
speak irreverently, or indecently of God Almighty. As if first he had proved,
that David, who at that time, was in as meek, sound, and calm a temter, as ever
he was in, in all his life, had spoken irreverently, or indecently, in what he
said, or at that time of God Almighty.

Secondly, as if David in cold blood, would afterward have enjoined his Son
Solomon, to way-lay Shimeis life, and that only for delivering an unpleasing
Message to David which, he had as much warrant for, as Samuel (they be his own
words) had done before him.

Thirdly, As if his sapless senseless subitane Comments on this Scripture, were
to be preferred above St. Austins, and above the stream of all sorts of
Interpreters. Mr. T. P's. (...) had not yet obtained that credit in the Church.

. 7. A short Answer to his whole Chapter 2. from p. 37. to 53.

To all this Master-rowl, or Catalogue of Scurrilities, or Calumnies, as he ad
libitum, terms my expressions Phil. 4 5.
, which he scrapes together from several parts of my Book, more need not to be
said, but what has been said already, only beyond what is exactly needful, ex
super abundanti, it may not be amiss.

First, To entreat the ingenuous Reader, that he would but be pleased to turn
to my Correptory Correct, according to the direction which Mr. T. P. affords
him, and then with me he will be easily able to observe, that diverse of the
expressions which here he represents, and Tragically exagitates, are,

1. Either not by me spoken at all, but forged by himself to make me odious. 2.
Or not so spoken, as he makes show of. 3. Or as fitly spoken, as any thing
could well be, against such an adversary as he is. 4. Or allayed with Reasons,
discovering the necessity of the harshest expressions. 5. Or at utmost
requiring but few Grains of allowance, to make them passable. It was Ergo, not
fullness of matter, but want of it, which makes him raise all the dust he does
in this Chapter.
Secondly, It may not be amiss to request, even himself seriously to consider,
what his expressions against me have bin both in his Letters, and in this
latter signal public writing; and then if at least he has any thing of front
or Candor left him, he will acknowledge, that if in the ebullitions of my
Passions and Expressions suitable unto them, I have any where exceeded against
him, he has quit scores with me, and returned me like for like, may he say, so
as to say,

-- Jam sumus ergo pares? Nay, He should acknowledge, that he has so far
outstripped me as the most artificial and Elegant scold ever did the most
pewling Smatterer in a Tongue-Combate. Laurea tu dignus!

. 8. An Answer to any thing that is Dogmatically material in his 3d Chapter to
his Sect. 6. p. 61.

. 1. THat I make God to be worse than the Devil himself, p. 10. quoting my 24.
page, where he knows as well as I, that there are no such words in all my page.

2. That what I say of Gods being (...) is only inferred from that Doctrine
which I resist, and he defends.

Answ. 1. I do not say absolutely, that he says so, but that upon supposition
of an absolute Decree, (which elsewhere, I prove, must needs be so Correp^.
Correct. 139, 140, 141.
, he is not ashamed so to speak, both in his p. 24. and in his p. 41. and 13.
Correct Copy: and that he thus speaks by way of inference, he dares not here
deny.

Second^y, He takes no notice of what I have diverse times told him P. 64. 70.
p. 72. 182. etc.
, that whilst he makes no proofs, that either in Terminis, his Adversaries do
speak thus, or that by any lawful Consequences, they must speak thus, These
blasphemous speeches are rather his, who utters them, than his Adversaries, who
abhor the thoughts of them more than he does.

1. In what a lamentable case is my Declamator, if he be now observed to say,
p. 115. That punishment must needs be decreed before the permission of sin. And
p. 87, That God is the determiner, not only of all things and actions, but of
their several modalities too, etc.

Answ. 1. If any body will but be pleased to turn to the words of my Corrept.
p. 115. 116. He will there find that, with Dr. Twisse, I do conclude the
Decrees of Gods permitting of sin, and of his damning for sin, not to be
subordinate, but coordinate, insomuch, as that I say, no rational Creature,
either noble, or ignoble, did ever in time suffer so much, as to the cutting of
his finger, but for sin; nor did God ever entertain any thoughts that he should
suffer for any thing else.

Secondly, it may be in the same place as plainly seen that what I speak of
punishments, being decreed before the permission of sin, is only spoken by way
of opposition to the (...) in Divinity, with which, p. 23. of his Correct Copy,
he had made himself so merry, and upon the supposition of some that damnation
of the Creature, is the supreme end of Gods intention, which upon the place I
dispute against.

3. If any body will but yield to what I say, p. 86. and 87. (and if he yield
not to it, and to the Authority by which I back it in the Margin, he is worse
than distracted) that God does not only determine all things and actions, but
their several modalities too, as to the manner of their being, whether as
necessary contingent or voluntary, then he will not show himself a lamentable
Declamator (it were pity so egregious an Orator, as himself is known to be,
should so sowly stumble) but, which is worse, he will prove himself to be a
most woeful Calumniator, whilst he would insinuate, that by holding this
principle, I must needs maintain God to be the Author of sin, whereas any
learned and sober Reader will easily conclude, that I must needs maintain the
contrary, viz. that if God determined modalities, as well as things, that then
he did determine, that sin should be by him permitted to fall out by the
contingent voluntary sinful will of the Creature, but not at all by the sinful
will of the Creator.

. 9. To his. 2. p. 56. which I had almost forgotten.

That I allow no other will to God, then a Hypothetical one, p. 4. yet he
knows on the contrary, that he neither does, nor can show any one passage in
my notes, where I deny, that God Almighty has as well an absolute, as a
conditional will.

Answ. First, I spoke that only by the by in that place, and therefore no great
matter should have been made of it.

2. By any understanding man, I must needs be understood to speak it in
reference to the Decrees of Election and Reprobation, which every body knows,
that ever has read him, he maintains only to be conditional, and not at all to
be absolute, so that if here, or as again he does Chap. 4. p. 2. he should talk
of never so many absolute Decrees of God, yet every body would see that he does
vagari extra oleas, speak nothing to the main purpose.

3. It is most observable, that where he speaks most distinctly, about Gods
absolute Decrees, as he does Philanth. Chap. 4. p. 2. he sets not down any one
absolute Decree, by which the Lord determined to give Faith or Repentance unto
any; but that he is absolute in this that he will proceed by the Rule of
rewarding, if we will obey, and of punishing if we will not.

4. By what he does, even in this Section, refer us unto in Correct Copy, p.
49. and p. 52. and by what he disputes up and down about Gods antecedent and
consequent will, there is nothing so plain, but that Gods absolute will, which
he and his Arminians with him call his Consequent will, is grounded upon his
Hypothetical; and, so if a man could tell how to believe it, his will is but
hypothetically absolute.

5. Chap. 4. p. 2. He grants Gods Decree of Creation to have been absolute; but
he will no where grant, God, when he decreed to create Man to have resolved,
for what end he would make him. God and Nature use to make nothing in vain; but
according to this man's goodly Divinity, God decreed to make one of the chiefest
of his Creatures, before he had resolved upon the Cui bone. He is extremely
angry with Calvin, Correct Copy, p. 24. for having said, that God foreknew,
what end man should have, before he made him, and d^d therefore foreknow it,
because by his decree he had so ordained it. The words which Mr. T. P. finds
fault with, are these, Lib. 3. Instit. Cap. 23.. 7. Decretum quidem horribile
fateor, infieiari tamen nemo potest, quin praesciverit Deus quem exitum esset
habiturus homo, antequam ipsum conderet; and ideo praesciverat, quia Decreto
suo sic ordinaverat.


. 10. To his 9th Section, p. 62, 63.

. 1. That (in my seventy page) I give out Faith and Infidelity to be the causes
of Election and Reprobation, p. 15. Still my amazement grows more and more,
that any man, even in print, should speak so clearly against his knowledge, and
contradict his own eyes, and the eyes of as many, as ever have or shall read
me; for there is not any such word in all that page, which he cites, or in any
other which he cites not. In the page which he cites, I say, that Christ is
the means, the meritorious cause, and head of our Election, etc.

Answ. Doubtless, our Author is frequently disposed to pretend amazement at my
doings, and yet, without all peradventure, when he never shakes, or shivers at
all.

Cum frigidus nullus obstruit praecordia sanguis. He does it without once
changing color; for else 1. when I did but say, that he gives out Faith, and I
might rather have said, good works of all sorts, to be the cause of Election
(for them in all his writings, he rather delights to name than Faith) he could
have had no reason of complaining. I specified not what kind of causes he took
them to be, I only said, he took them to be causes. And I trow, he will grant
me, that Causa sine qua non, or conditio sine qua non, which even, p. 39.
whilst he disputes against me, he grants Faith and good works, to be of
Election; are in their kind to be reputed Causes.

2. Whilst in the very next lines to the words, which I have transcribed, he
does out of. 55. of his Correct Copy, quote it, that good works are required as
a necessary condition, though very unworthy to be the cause of our Election.

3. I will leave it to understanding Readers to judge, whether this necessary
condition which here he talks of, amount not to somewhat more then a bare
antecedent, or a mere Causa sine qua non? The rather, because in other places,
he calls it the important co^^^tion, without which, Election cannot be had.
Nay, that which p. 70. of his Correct Copy, (the very page which I had quoted
against him) makes the difference betwixt the Elect and Reprobate, and that
because (as there he speaks, as well as elsewhere) those, who are in Christ by
faith, are better then those, who are out of Christ by infidelity, who
therefore are chosen, when as others are left: yea, that, without which it
would be unjust for God to elect any man, Correct Copy, p. 71. Justification
precedeth Election, because no man is elected, unless he differ from him that
is rejected. p. 69. Correct Copy, whatsoever is justly decreed, may be justly
executed, as it is decreed. If he decreed to save any without regard, or
respect of their being such, he might actually save them without respect to
their being such So that ^e needed not so thrasonically to have boasted of his
logical skill against me, (whom he looks upon, and represents p. 63. as a mere
ignaro in these matters) to distinguish p. 63. betwixt the Cause propter quam
res est, for which a thing is; and the necessary condition, (sine qua non est)
without which it is not; whilst in his own mentioned expressions, he does
sufficiently confound them.

3. Though he do very often times gull us, as p. 70. Correct Copy, Philanthrop.
Chap. p. 80. with good words, that God makes the difference, and crowns his own
gifts in us, etc. yet how will it be possible for him to put any good sense
upon these words, who every where teaches, that these previous dispositions
are precedent to Election, that we are not cho^en to Faith and good works, and
perseverance in them, but that we are by Gods choosing, foreseen to have them?
He likewise maintains Correct Copy, p. 69. That God no otherwise executes his
Decrees, then he made them: and ergo, if in our first and eternal Election
there were respect had to our faith, good works, and perseverance in them, then
su^e, when in time he does call us effectually, Romans 8. 28. (which most Divines
use to call our temporal Election, from 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27.) he does in like sort
chu^e us for our Faith, good works, perseverance, etc. and all this sure will
make them to be somewhat more then Causa sine qua non, or conditio sine qua
non, even such things as being performed according to what the Judge requires,
do move his will to bestow Election as a reward upon us, as I have told him,
that one of his dear Remonstrants speaks Nic. Grevinchov. contra Ames p. 24.
Contendo naturae legum ac conditionum praescriptarum omnino conveniens esse, ut
voluntas Judicis a condition postulata and praestita moveatur ad praemium.
Just as the Massilians of old, Prosper in Resp. ad 8. dubium Genuens. Ipsa
Electorum Praedestinatio non est nisi retributio. Et evidenter, Faustus. Lib.
2. Cap. 3. Praescientia gerenda praenoscit, post modum praedestinatio
retribuenda praescribit. Illa praevidet merita; haec praeordinat praemia:
praescientia ad potentiam, praedestinatio ad justitiam pertinet. Philanthr. p.
66. Reprobation is said to be an act of Justice, and good works, etc. are the
important condition, without which Election will not be had.
.

4ly. Who that observes how often in the Correct Copy, and elsewhere, Mr. T. P.
does consound the Decree of Election, with the Decree of Salvation, will
believe that Mr. T. P. makes Faith and obedience, etc. only to be necessary
pr^cedents unto life and Salvation, and that he does not also take them to be
Causes of Salvation, if not directly meritorious; yet in some more then
ordinary way, procuring and causing Salvation? Mind the drift of his Discourse,
against the Solifidians, Sinner Impleaded, from p. 332. to 337.

5ly. If he will maintain, that there is any the least Analogy betwixt his
Doctrines of Election and Reprobation, then as every where he maintains sin to
be the meritorious Cause of Reprobation, what reason has he to deny that Faith
and obedience are the meritorious Causes of Election, which is opposite to
Reprobation?

6ly. Who can believe, that all in haste Mr. T. P. will in heart differ,
whatsoever in words he may seem to do, from what he does (after his fashion)
most solemnly quote out of Prosper, Austin, Melancthon Phil. Chap. 3. p. 77
Saints whom for his own turn he will elsewhere, be thought to adore, who (as
he says) did all agree, That Gods Predestination was according to
foreknowledge, so as he made some Vessels of honor, and some of dishonor,
even for this cause, because he foresaw their several ends, of what wills they
would be, and what would be their actions, under the assistance and help of
grace? Mark, that Prosper in these words, speaks neither his own, or Austins
sense, but that of the Massilians, or Semi-Pelagians. Is there any thing in the
genius of any of Mr. T. P's. singular Doctrines, which should move him to enter
a dissent from these sayings?

. 2. As for what he adds of Christ's being the means, and the meritorious cause
of our Election.

Answ. There might be some reason to take some more then ordinary notice of it,

1. If he had made it his business, as well to have proved it, as after
Arminius and others, to have dictated it.

2. If he would have thought it worth the while, to have confuted any of Dr.
Twisse his large Discourses against it, unto which I had about it, referred him
in my Corrept. Correct. p. 227. D. Twiss vindic. Lib. de electione. Digress. 1.
and 2da etc. a p. 151. ad 178.


3. If it were not apparently absurd to talk of means of Election, Election
being by virtue of one entire absolute eternal Decree of God, which comprehends
in it, both end and means.

4. Were it not so, that Jesus Christ himself, considered as Mediator, were not
himself predestined, and elected to be the head of the Elect, and so no
Elector, or means of Election, Romans 3. 25.

. 3. p. 64. 1. 11, 12. I had never so little Logic as to say, that any thing
in man (which is the Object) could be the cause of Gods Decree, but that man is
the cause of his sin, and of his punishment.

Answ. 1. Why then has he hitherto every where so fiercely pleaded for
conditional Decrees of Reprobation, grounded on, or at least occasioned by sin,
as the conditio sine qua non, the necessary, the important condition, which in
this case is tantamount' with a cause of the Decree.

2. Why did he but just now tell us, p. 63. That Christ is the meritorious
cause of Election, and what is Election, but Gods eternal, internal immanent
Decree, appointing some to obtain grace and glory.

3. Does he not know, that if he were candid in this acknowledgement, that then
all Disputes betwixt him and the men he contends against, would be ended? who
none of them all doubt; but sin is the cause of the Execution of the Decree of
Reprobation though it be not the cause of the Decree it self? that Man is the
cause of his sin, and of his punishment too, as here he himself does speak?
That though Christ be not the meritorious cause of Election, yet he is the
meritorious cause of Salvation, and of all those spiritual blessings which we
are chosen, or elected to? Dr. Ames no Arminian sure, cites this out of
Bellarmine, with approbation, save that he says, Tollantur merita, and nihil
erit reprehensione dignum in hac distinctione prout a Bell usurpatur. Ames
Anti-Synod. Dordrac. Cap. 1. p. 15. Bellarmin's distinction in de Great. et Lib.
Arbitr. Lib. 2. Cap. 14. Electio aeterna duobus modis considerari potest, uno
modo ut est intentio dandi gloriam, alie modo ut est dispositio executionis,
and quasi exequutio in mente divina. Nam priori modo, Electio est mere
gratuita, and nullam praerequirit praevisionem operum bonorum: Posteriori modo,
praeexigit praevisionem meritorum. Non enim vitam aeternam sub ratione praemii,
Deus dare disposuit, nisi eis quos been operaturos esse praevidit. Gloria in
genere causae finalis prior est bouis operibus, in genere autem causae
effisientis, priora sunt bona Opera quam Gloria.


4. Need he once more be showed how that by this saying, he has given his
Correct Copy, and now this pretty Philanthropy of his, a fair fall upon their
backs, Corrept. Correct. p. 144 145. The force of truth is often such, as that
it wrings a Confession from its otherwise most stubborn opposers.

. 8. 64.

. 3. In his p. 121. he says, he knows not any one, either of the ancient or
modern Orthodox Writers, who will not readily yield, that God did not
absolutely decree the Reprobation positive of any Creature; but upon
praescience, and supposition of wilful Rebellion, and impenitence, I will now
take him at his word he is as perfect an Arminian, as I have ever heard speak,
or else he confesses he is not Orthodox. In these few words, he has ruined
himself and his cause, for ever, unless he will say, that he is my Convert, and
the best of his Book a long impertinence, he cannot escape by any service, etc.
Mr. T. P. goes on tryumphing over me, more or less, to p. 68.

Answ. 1. It has used to be said, that Lapsus linguae non est error mentis;
the trip of a man's tongue is no error of his mind. Claudius that dull and lasie
Emperor, catched not more at flies, then this Gentleman does at unwary
syllables; yet he has not so much as discovered, wherein the stumbles or
trippings of my Phrases lie. By what I do in that very, p. 121. oppo^e in him*
which did confound Reprobation and damnation, and much more, by what Corrept.
Correct. p. 113. and elsewhere, I had distinctly set down my meaning, was
sufficiently expressed, viz. that considering two things in Gods Decrees,

First, actum volentis Dei, the act of Gods Decree, or the intention in it self
considered.

Secondly, rem decretam, the thing decreed, or the will to execute that Decree,
that the former is not grounded upon Praescience of any wilful Rebellion, but
that the latter is, of which alone, as is plain, I speak in my Text, p. 121.
and my meaning is much the same with that which, but just now, I expressed out
of Ames, and Bellarmine.

2. If the saying of this can make me as very an Arminian, as ever he heard
speak, I dare be bold to say, that as great AntiArminians as ever I heard of,
or ever set pen to paper, have spoken as much. I shall not need at large, to
quote Doctor Davenant, Dr. Walaeus, Dr. Rivet, Dr. Walaeus Contra Corvin. in
Quarto, p. 30. and 152. Bishop Davn. Animadvers. p. 42, 43, and 111. imo
passim. A. Rivet Disputat. quinta de Reprobatione These. 8, 9. etc. Paulus
Ferius a professed Supralapsarian. Schol Orth. Cap. 28. Voluit quidem Deus non
bealificare Judam, sine ullo respectu peccati, tamen non habuit voluntatem
infligendi poenam, nisi propter peccata, quae in eo praevidit.
nay, all the Sublapsarians, who speak full out as high as this comes to, and
yet never commenced Arminian Doctors; but let me only, in the Margin, refer him
to multitudes of places, out of Dr. Twisse Doctor Twisse. vind^c. Lib. 1. p.
100. Certissimum est nobis Deum decrevisse, ut non nisi nolentes, atque impii
perderentur: verum and hoc subjungimus, hinc tantum sequi impietatem causam
esse perditionis, non autem decreti sive constitutionis divinae. In eandem
sententiam saepissime, p. 332. Col. 2. Lib. 2. p. 11. col. 2. Epist. Dedic. ad
Reg. Bohem. p. 4. Lib. 1. 83. 99. and I dare be bold to say, in a 100. places
more, etc.
, and for the behoof of the English Reader, I shall transcribe some few signal
passages out of Dr. Twisse, in his Answer to the Synod of Dort and Arles,
reduced to practice: And very hard it will be for Mr. T. P. to prove Dr. Twisse
to be an Arminian; and yet to his sayings, he must consent, if he will not
prove himself to say, that any thing in man which is the Object, can be the
cause of Gods Decree, p. 64.

Dr. Twisse Synod of Dort and Arles, p. 10, 11.

God did decree to damn no man, but for sin, is the unanimous consent of all
our Divines, etc. And accordingly, Tilenus himself, when he was on our side,
took exception against Arminius, his stating the Decree of Predestination and
Reprobation, according to our Opinion, to proceed, citra omnem considerationem
resipiscentiae and sidei in illis, ant impentitentiae and infidelitatis in
hisce, i. e. without all consideration of Repentance and Faith in those, or of
impenitence and infidelity in these. And this, that Rev. Dr. further proves, p.
11. out of Piscator, and out of the Contra-Remonstrants, in the Conference at
the Hague, etc. So opposing his Adversary, p. 38. and 39. he had these words.

Secondly, He aggravates it by the circumstance of the least consideration of
sin, which we are said to deny to have place in Reprobation; whereas Divine
consideration has no degrees at all, whereby it may be capable of greater or
less, (a fair answer to what Mr. T. P. has, p. 6.) Sin has degrees in man,
but Divine consideration has no degrees at all.

To come nearer to the point, and to discover their juggling, in stating our
Tenet most calumniously. Consider, I pray do any of our Divines maintain, that
God did ordain to dimn any man but for sin? (and by positive Reprobation in my
p. 121. I meant nothing, or could mean nothing but damnation). It is apparent,
they do not; all acknowledging, that like as God does damn no man but for sin,
so does he ordain to damn no man but for sin. And a little after, to add one
thing more, not for their sin which they sinnedin Adam only, but for those very
actual sins and transgressions which they are guilty of. And if any thing can
be spoken yet more plainly in the same Book, p. 40, 41. having spoken of
Election, he speaks thus about the decree of Reprobation. The like distinction
is considerable on the part of Reprobation, which also is the will of God in a
certain kind; I say, we must distinguish in this Decree, the act of Gods
decreeing, and the things decreed by him. And these things are of a different
nature, and so different, that look what alone is the cause of the act, that
alone is the cause of one thing decreed by it, but not so of the other. As for
example, the things denied by Reprobation are,

1. The denial of Grace.

2. The denial of glory, together, with the inflicting of damnation. As
touching the first of these, look what is the cause of Reprobation, as touching
the act of God reprobating, that and that alone is the cause of the denial of
Grace, viz. that of Faith and Repentance, to wit, the mere pleasure of God: But
as touching the denial of glory, and inflicting of damnation. God does not
proceed according to the mere pleasure of his will, but according to a Law,
which is this, whosoever believes not shall be damned. And albeit, God made
that Law according to the mere pleasure of his will, yet no wise man will say,
that God denies glory, and inflicteth damnation on men, according to the mere
pleasure of his will; the case being clear, that God denies the one, and
inflicts the other merely for their sins, who are thus dealt withal.

Thus far that great Arminian Maule, Dr. Twisse, unto all which as a signal
conclusion, let that noted place be added, Vind c. Lib. 2. p. 75. Nunquam mihi
contigit incidere in quempiam e nostris asserentem, impios Creatos esse ad
gloriam Divinae Justitiae in eorum suppliciis demonstrandam ob dcretum Dei, sed
signanter, hoc fieri passim profitentur ob peccata ipsorum impiorum non quod
peccata impiorum dicant esse causam creationis, sed quod peccata hominum, tam
in executione quam in intention Dei constituant causam damnationis ipsorum,
etc.

. 4. As for what he subjoynes next p. 65. against the distinction betwixt
Reprobation, Positive and Negative, there is no real difference betwixt not
choosing and refusing, or betwixt not saving, and damning, in Gods Decree* etc.

Answ. 1. I trust Mr. T. P. notwithstanding all the many Proselytes, which he
glories his Correct Copy to have gained him, Phil. Chap. 3. p. 55.
is not become so absolute a Dictator in the Church, as to be able by some few
scrats of his pen to overthrow a distinction, so solemnly, and so long
received, as I could show, if need were, at large, this to have bin by Austin,
by multitudes of Schoolmen, one of which is not afraid to question any man's
prudence, who shall deny so plain a thing Pennot. Lib. 7.. 10. Quis tam
imprudens qui dicat voluntatem excludendi efficaciter aliquem a fine, and
voluntatem permittendi illum pro sua liberate deficere a fine non esse
voluntates distinctas?
by his beloved Arminius himself, or by all sorts of Neotericks.

Secondly, Though in Gods decrees, who is purus putus actus, there be no
multiplicity of acts, one succeeding the other, as in men; yet ex part rei,
and to us poor mortals, there must needs, as to the matter, be conceived as
great a distinction betwixt these two, as there would be betwixt an Earthly
Judges, leaving a Prisoner in Goal, or not preferring of him at Court, and his
adjudging of him to the Gallows for his fellonie.

. 5. As for the tedious Dilemma with which in the same page 65. he would fain
gravel me upon occasion of what I had wrote, p. 197. in defense of Calvin.

A. 1. Any wise body will easily perceive, that none but a very absurd man
would have put it, seeing in that place, I have no occasion at all, nor do not
make any the least use of the distinction betwixt Reprobation positive, and
Reprobation negative, only I have occasion to distinguish Gods eternal
Reprobation, from the first Adams and the Angels temporal Apostasy. And of the
first, I say with Calvin, that Gods secret will was the sole cause; but of the
latter, that Adam and the Angels sinful wil^s were the cause. See Calvin, de
praedest. p. 711.

2. Any body, if he will but turn to what I wrote, Corrept. Correct. p. 195,
196. in defense of Calvin, will easily discover Mr. T. P's. unreasonable
thriftiness, in sparing to give any Answer to no less then four of my Replies
against what he had said against Calvin, and in nibling only a little at the
fifth, by the intrusion of a most unseasonable Dilemma; for the making whereof
here, there was no other occasion given him, then what he was pleased to take
from his own working wormish fancy.

3. Seeing Mr. Calvin, whenever he has occasion to speak of Gods Decree of
leaving Angels, or the first Adam to themselves, so as not to have decreed them
that efficacious Grace, by which they would certainly have preserved themselves
from falling, and did only afford them that sufficient Grace, by which they
might have stood, if they had so willed; the Lord gave them only posse stare
vel non peccare si vellent, he gave them ability to have stood* if they would,
but he did not give them voluntatem standi quod potuerunt, a will to stand,
according to what they were able; I say, Calvin never speaks of these matters,
but with serious profession See him in and about the place quoted, Correct
Copy, p. 50. out of his 4th Sect of the 23. Chapter of his Institutions; but
especially, let that Signal passage be marked, which he sets down, Lib. de
aeterna Dei praedestinatione, p. 711. Edit. Genev, 1612. Quomodo Dei
praescientia, and Decreto statutum fuerit quod de homine futurum erat: neque
tamen in Culpae societatem trahendus sit Deus, quasi transgressionis vel author
sit, vel approbator: quam long altius humanae mentis, perspicacia esse palam
sit, ne ignorantiam nostram fateri pudeat. Imo, ne quem ex fidelibus fateri
nescire pigeat, quod Dominus Lucis sua inaccessae fulgore abforbet. Primum,
nihil aliis, nisi ex animi mei sensu, praescribo. Testis enim mihi erit
Dominus, cui conscientia mea subscribit, sic me hae^ stupenda ejus judicia
quotidie meditari, ut nulla plus aliquid sciendi curiositas sollicitet, nulla
mihi de incomparabisi ejus Justitia obrepat sinistra suspicio, etc.
, that he is amazed at the depths of Gods Counsels and proceedings, and
therefore it would have been no wonder, if my self defending him, should have
put forth something not so satisfactory to humane reason.

. 9. Answer.

To his intolerably long talkative Sect. 23. set down by him from p. 84. to p.
98. in defense of Universal Redemption, and against the error of Christ's dying
for the Elect only.

Answ. But for my good Neighbor's saying, Chap. 1. p. 15. that with the Opinion
of Universal Grace and Redemption, all others in debate must stand or fall,
which he repeats a second time, p. 93. of this very sect when he says, that it
is the main hinge, upon which all turns, and does depend, I for my part would
most closly have adhered to my promise of avowed silence, set down most
solemnly, Corrept. Correct. p. 110. for I am sure he brings nothing new upon
this Argument; nay, takes a most provident course of answering little or
nothing to all, or most of the Scriptures which he had formerly objected
against me, and with which he flourishes once more, p. 85, 86. and which I had
distinctly given Answers to, in Corrept. Correct. from p. 100. to 108. over and
above what I had said against his various mistakes upon this point, p. 130,
131. 160. etc. passim alibi: yet, lest any body should justly be discontented,
I shall subjoyn some general Observations, in opposition to this whole Section.
Its no way fitting, that General Grace and Redemption, here pleaded for, should
be graced with too many special, or particular Answers.

First then, p. 84. our Gentleman yet still against what I had said, pretends,
that he maintains Special Grace, when as by what we have oftentimes heard
formerly this special Grace flows from a Conditional general Decree, and as in
this Section we are told at large from an Universal Redemption, which he alone
pleads for; having never as yet, nor any way being able by the Genius of his
Tenants, to show us what special Graces, Christ by his death has deserved more
for the Elect than for the Reprobates, and all that are or shall be damned in
Hell. He cannot p. 84. be of their eleaven, who do arrogate a Savior wholly and
only to themselves; and yet he full well knows, that none are ^o presumptuous,
as not to allow Christ as well to be the Savior of all the Elect of God, who
ever were, or shall be existent upon Earth, as of themselves.

Secondly, What Answers to his formerly alleged Scriptures, and here again
r^peated, p. 85, 86, he did wholly despair to overthrow by d^nt of Argument, he
attempts to do by intolerable Clamours, Facile est Augustinum vincere, non
veritate sed clamore.
and as impudent assertions, as ever dropped from the pen of the most
profl^gate Writer. To instance, first he says, p. 85. that the limitations and
restr^ctions which I put upon some General Scriptures quoted formerly by him,
are as contrary to Scripture, as any thing could be invented by the wit of
Julian or Helvidius.

Answ. And thus besides his making of Helvidius as great an Antiscripturist, as
was Apostate Julian, whereas his Heresy was only to be an Anti-Marita, L.
Danaeus de haeresibus* p. 151 cum p. 303.
he ranks with his own certain knowledge, (for I had formerly alleged them)
Austin, Prosper, (my Corrept. says falsely, Ambrose, p. 131. Corrept. Correct.
p. 131, 132. But more distinctly. see Austin Enchirid: ad Laurent: Cap. 103. de
Corrept. and Great. Cap. 14. see fuller and larger Testimonies of the Church of
Lions, set down by C. Jansen. Tom. 3. Lib. 3. p. 384. in Libro de tenend.
Script. veritat. in auctario biblioth. S. S. Patrum. Tom. 3. Cyrill. Alexandr.
when against special Redemption, which he had pleaded for, he had objected that
place, 1 John 2. 2. the very place in which Mr. T. P. p. 86. and Correct Copy,
p. 38. places his chief confidence, he answers Lib. 11. cap. 8. p. 967. hujus
objectionis Solutio, non est explicatu difficili. Quia enim B. Johannes Judaeus
erat, and ex Judaeis, ne qui forsan existimarent Dominum pro Israel *it is tantum
Advocatum esse apud Patrem, pro aliis vero gentibus, quae per orbem un^versum
sparsae sunt non item, quamvis fide erga ipsum conspicuae futurae essent, and
brevi ad agnitionem Salutis per Christum vocandae, necessario dicit non pro
s^lis Israelitis.
the Church of Smyrna, the Church of Lions, unto which, let me now add Cyrillus
Alexandrinus, and others (as the Valentine Council, Cap. 4. Propter nimium
errorem qui de hac causa exortus est, ita ut quidam sicut illorum scripta
indicant, etiam pro illis impiis, qui a mundi exordio usque ad passionem Domini
in sua impietate mortui, and aeterna damnatione puniti sunt, effusum definiant;
illud nobis simpliciter and fideliter tenendum ac docendum placet, juxta
Evangelicam and Apostolicam veritatem, quod pro illis hoc datum precium
teneamus, quibus ipse Dominus noster dixit: Sicut Moses exaltavit serpentem in
deserto, ita exaltari oportet filium hominis, ut omnis qui credit in ipso, non
pereat sed habeat vitam aeternam,) amongst pernicious Heretics as bad as
Julian, or Helvidius: other Restrictions did I put none upon these Scriptures,
then what they do, and prove out of the Scriptures.

Secondly, He dares vent it p. 86. that if we will not take the mentioned
Scriptures in that vast Latitude which he pleads for we might as well deny an
Universal Creation of all things, which is not asserted to us, by so great a
variety of plain expressions, as an Universal Redemption is found to be.

Answ. 1. There might be some place for this bold aspersion.

1. When as any good Christian shall think it as necessary to put it to the
Question, whether God must not needs be granted to be the Creator of all
things, visible, and invisible, because that in him, we live, and move, and
have our being, Act. 17. 28. and for that it would imply a manifest
contradiction, if it should be otherwise, (nay, introduce Atheism) as he would
question whether there be the like necessity of asse^ting Christ to be the
Redeemer of all, whether Elect or Reprobate, believers or unbelievers?

2. What if the syllabical expressions in the word All, the whole world, etc.
be as loud sounding in the matter of Redemption, as in the matter of Creation,
will it follow, that in reference to the former, for the matters sake, far
different from that of Creation, no use must be made of that Rule of Austins,
that Scripture Phrases must be interpreted, according to the nature of the
matter which is expressed by them August Epist. 59. Scripturae mos est ita
loqui de part, tanquam de toto: quam Divinae Scripturae consuetudinem per omne
Corpus Literarum ejus creberrime sparsam, quisquis diligenter adverterit, multa
dissolvit qua inter se videntur contraria.
? Does not himself acknowledge that of 2 Timothy 2. 4. one of his main Scriptures,
there were no less then 4. several Interpretations, Correct Copy, p. Of which
not one of them, I am well assured, makes one whit for his extravagant
Universality See the several Interpretations fully set down by C. Jansen, Tom.
3. Lib. 3 Cap. 20, 21.
. But did he ever hear of any one Christian, so far distracted, as to contract
Universal Phrases in the matter of Creation.

Thirdly, Ought not the Comments of no less than two Angels from Heaven, Math.
1. 21. Rev. 5. 9. sway with us in this matter, for the contraction of the sense
of some Phrases which seem to speak for an All, and every individual of that
all, taken in the utmost Latitude imaginable, for a sme of all sorts and kinds,
whether Jews or Gentiles, high or low, rich or poor, one with another:
Especially, when as first there be no less, nay, far more Scriptures, which
handling the matter of Redemption, purposely confine it to some in special, not
to all at random, without the least discrimination.

1. As for example, when it is said, that Christ's blood was shed for many,
Math. 26. 28. That he was (...), a ransom for many, Mark 10. 45. Isa. 53. 12.
viz. for those whom the Father had given him, Joh. 17. 9. 19. for his Sheep.
Joh. 10. 15. Heb. 13. 20. for his People, Heb. 2. 17. for the Children of God,
Joh. 11. 51, 52. for the Church, Act. 20. 28. for his Body, Ephesians. 5. 23. for
Gods Israel, or Jacob, Romans 11. 26. and all this in conclusion, is but for the
Elect of God, Romans 8. 33, 34. his friends, Joh. 15. 13. And for the avoiding of
these, and many more such Scriptures, will he say either,

1. That the Scriptures interfere with themselves?

2. Or that in these last mentioned, the word, the exceptive particle only, is
wanting? If he say the first, he is the Helvidian Antiscripturist he told us
of, Phil. Chap. 3. 85.

3. If the latter, his plea is just as good as that of the Papists denying
justification by faith alone, though the word only be not found in Romans 3. 28.
Or it is just as good as that of a profane man's would be, who being exhorted to
love his Wife only with a conjugal love, should reply, that the word only was
no where annexed to the command of loving of his Wife.

Secondly, When as very frequently in the Scriptures upon other and smaller
occasions, the words All, the World, all the World, (with the empty sound of
which p. 86. he keeps such a coyl) are as much confined to an All Determinate,
as to the indeterminate All, he pleads for: peru^e John 21. 25. 1 John 5. 19.
(...). Rev. 13. 3. (...). All the Earth* as we have it, Act. 19. 28. Act. 11.
28. Act. 4. 21. and 10. 12. and 19. 10. Ioh. 12. 32. Phil. 2. 21. Math. 9. 35.
and 3. 5. Isa. 40. 5. Joel 2. 28. Rev. 14. 6. nor can I tell in how many places
more. And when^oever he shall be able to produce as many restrictive Phrases in
the matter of Creation, then it will be time enough for to believe Universal
Redemption, as maintained by him.

Thirdly, He pleads p. 86, 87. that if his broad sense of the forementioned
Scriptures be not yielded to, then the plainest Scriptures would become the
hardest, then God would be charged with mental Reservations, and then we should
tell the people, that he does not speak as he means, but that his meaning is
contrary to what he speaks.

Answ. For this there might be some sense.

1. If some metaphorical and tropical expressions, were not by rational men, as
apt to be understood as more proper ones.

2. If, all, the World, a World full, even in common and vulgar expressions,
did not very ordinarily signify a great many things, or men, or some of all
sorts, as well as they signify all and every individual thing, without the
least exception.

3. If it were not proper enough for the Holy Ghost, in any matter, to use what
phrases he liked best, for the exercising of our industry, I take those to be
intolerably bold, who would teach their Maker to speak plainly, because they be
resolved to be lazy.

4. If a World of Divines, both Ancient and modern, as well as my poor self,
Corrept. Correct. 161, 162, 163. had not rejected it, that in the general
proposal of the Gospel to every Creature, Mark 16. 15. there is not, or cannot
possibly lurk any mental Reservation, or insincerity, how particular soever
Gods Decrees, or special Redemption may be.

Tertio principaliter. Thirdly, In reference to this whole Section, after all
the pudder he makes, with his Universal Redemption, and the fair hopes that
some men might be put into, that all men should be saved by it, or have their
sins pardoned by it, it does at least but shrink into Christ's salvation for
all, Phi. p. 85. Marg: into a passive power, or bare possibility of being
saved, or a capability of being saved by Christ's merits. Angry, full angry he
is with us, that we will not so much as allow of this.

Answ. Yet it would have becomne him very well, to have known,

First, That none of his Adversaries do deny the offer of Christ, unto all,
unto whom the Gospel is, and by Commission ought to be preached, Math. 28. 19.

Secondly, They do not only say, that it is possible, by virtue of Christ's
merits, for all men to be saved, in case of true Faith and Repentance Dav.
Animadvers. 257. imo D. Twisse. Lib. 2. vindic. p. 2. De utilitate mortis
Christi, ex Decreto Dei redundante hominibus ad gloriam sive salutem sic
statuimus: nempe decrev^sse Deum, ut Christi mortis beneficium nemini, nisi
crediderit, rursus, modo crediderint, universis and singulis cederet in
adeptionem salutis. An aliter instituunt A^m^niani? prorsus non solent. De
utilitate vero mortis Christi, ex Decreto Dei redundante hominibus ad gratiam,
hoc est, ad fidem and resipiscentiam, sic censemus. Non decrevit Deus ut
Christi* mortis utilitas cederet omnibus in adeptionem Gratiae efficacis, qua
Crederent and Resipiscerent. At non omnium est fides, etc.
; but that in that case, they shall certainly be saved, by virtue of Christ's
death.

Thirdly, It will never be possible for him, or the stoutest of his party, to
prove Christ to be only a Potential, and not an actual Savior, unles they will
undertake to prove and make it good.

1. That it was not within the compass of Gods absolute power, if he had been
pleased to make use of it, to have provided for man's Salvation, some other
ways, than by the satisfaction of Christ.

Secondly, That Christ potentially procuring man's Salvation and Redemption, by
which alone, no man was ever yet, or ever shall be saved, but man actually and
efficaciously procuring his own; Man, of the two, does much more for himself,
in point of Salvation or Redemption, then Christ, (who to all his, is a
Savior, (...), Heb. 7. 25. unto the very utmost does for him.

Fourthly, It is a most insufferable injury done to Christ's merits, to suspend
the efficacy of them, upon man's free will, so as not to be ashamed to assert,
p. 87. that it is Christ's intention to save them all without exception, if by
the wickedness of their wills, they did not frustrate his intention, as the
greater part of men do, by not accepting his offer, and not performing the
cond^tions on which his offer is made.

Answ. 1. Belike now, (if he speak of Christ the Sons intention as Mediator, as
I am confident he does and must, as before, Phil. Chap. 1. p. 22. he had done
of God the Fathers) Christ, notwithstanding all his extreme sufferings must be
beholding to man's weak, slippery uncertain free will, whether he shall see the
Travel of his soul, have a seed to serve him, have a body, a spouse, a
purchased Inheritance, etc. All this is frustrable if man so please.

2. Belike its now no more a part of Christ's sufferings by his merits, to
procure us a will not to frustrate his merciful intentions to us, and so to
make us partakers of the blessed fruits of his sufferings.

Thirdly, All upon a sudden, the Lord blessed for ever must be made Impotent,
Lib. 1. Contra Julian. operis Imperf. f. 133. Absit ut impediatur ab homine
omnipotentis and cuncta scientis intentio. Parum de ne tanta cogitant vel ei
excogitandae non sufficient, qui putant Deum omnipotentem aliquid velle, and
homine infirmo impediente, non posse. In Enchiride. c. 5. Tunc in clarissima
luce videbitur, quam certa and immutabilis voluntas Dei, quam multa possit and
non velit, nihil autem velit and non possit, quamque sit verum quod in Psalmo
canitur: Deus noster in coelo and in terra quicquid voluit fecit. Quod ut^que
non est verum, si aliquid voluit, and non fecit; and, quod est indignius, ideo
non fecit, quoniam ne fieret quod volebat omnipotens, voluntas hominis
impedivit.
unhappy, changeable, seriously to will, i. e. to purpose, or properly to
decree to effect that which alas he knows will never be; but wherein he must
be frustrated by man's will, stronger then his, and which therefore, he will not
will, when man for not willing on Earth, what God once willed, shall be sent to
Hell, and when no good man shall so much as will damned men's salvation A. Rivet
Disp. 7. These. 25. Si talis volunt as proprie, and, ut loquuntur formaliter
esset in Deo, ut perpetua foret, esset necessarium, proinde Deum semper velle
hominum salutem: id autem fieri non potest, cum ne p^i quidem homines post hanc
vitam sint eam volituri, propter status sui perfectionem, cum Angelis communem,
qua etiam fit ut nec pro reprobis orent, nec super damnatis ulla commiseratione
moveantur, sed pure and perfect in eorum punitione laudent Dei Justitiam, etc.
Austin Enchirid, Cap. 103. Quomodocunque vero illo aut alio modo hi aut similes
loci (1 Timothy 2.) intelligi possint; ita tamen intelligantur, ut credere non
cogamur aliquid omnipotent em Deum fieri voluisse, factumque non esse, qui sine
ullis ambiguitatibus, si in caelo and in terra, sicut and veritas cantat, omnia
quae voluit fecit, profecto facere noluit quodcunque non fecit.
.

Thirdly, If such be Christ's intention, even as here he acknow^edgeth to the
greater part of perishing men, then that abominable absurdity which most
ridiculously p. 88. he would fain put upon us, that Christ is the Savior only
of Reprobates, will by just consequence fall only upon himself; for we, who
from the place which there he quotes, 1 John 2. 2. taking the word All, and the
whole World, for all sorts of men, whether Jews or Gentiles, dispersed in the
World, who ever have, do, or shall believe, by virtue of their Election, we
grant the word to signify, not only the major part of such, but even every
such an individual one; whereas he pleading, that Christ dyed for all, without
any the least exception; and whereas he does grant to that, by far the major
part of such do perish, and shall be damned for ever; it will invincibly
follow, that if Christ died not only for Reprobates, he died for far more
Reprobates then Elect; yea, all his sufferings notwithstanding, he might only
have died for Reprobates.

Fourthly, Though here as before, p. 22. he would make us believe, that God
has an intention to save all that perish, yet how this should be possible, no
man can imagine, when as,

1. God in the means of Grace, does not so much as make an offer of Salvation
to all, Psalm. 147. 19, 20. Act. 14. 16. and 17. 30.

2. When as his Rev. Father Arminius could have taught him, and Mr. T. P.
Sinner Impleaded, in the Table means of salvation, no man living can say he
wants, p. 295. 296, 297.
seems to have learned his Lesson pretty well from him, God affords only
suff^cient Grace to those who perish, but not efficient. Either then men may be
saved, without the means of Grace, the annuntiation of the Gospel, or (which
must needs be their opinion) men by their free will may turn sufficient grace
into effectual grace, when they list, or God without palpable absurdity, cannot
be said to intend salvation to them all Mr. T. P. may do well to see a large
discourse about this in Dr. Amirald, the very man he boasts to be of his
side, Defens. Calvin. de Reprobat. p. 198, 199. and inde. Innocentius tertius,
Sanguis Christi pro Solis praedesti natis effusus est, quantum ad efficientiam,
sed pro cunctis hominibus effusus est quantum ad sufficientiam. Thom. Aquin.
super 5. Caput Apocalypseos. De passione Domini, inquit, loqui est dupliciter:
aut secundum sufficientiam, and sic passio redemit omnes. Omnibus enim red
mendis and salvandis sufficiens est, etiamsi plures essent mundi, ut dicit
Anselmus Lib. 2. Cap. 14.
.

Fifthly, All his tedious discourse which he begins, p. 93. and at length
concludes thus, p. 94. from all this together, it is as clear as noonday, that
they who deny him to be the Savior of all the World intentionally, cannot say
with any reason that he is so much as sufficiently the Savior of them, whom he
eternally decreed he would not save, etc.

Answ. 1. I say, all this Discourse is grounded upon a mistake of the usual
di^tinction received in the Schools, and which in his Margin p. 93. he relates
well out of Dr. Overal, viz. of Christ's death, either as sufficient for all, or
efficacious only for some: the first member of this distinction about the
sufficiency of Christ's death, is not by the Authors of it ( Innocentius
tertius Sanguis Christi, etc.) as it is known, opposed to Intentionaliter, as
he reports it, but to efficaciter as they use it.

2. Both he and his Dr. Overal with him, p. 93. are out, if they suppose them,
who do manage this distinction best, See Mr. Perkins. Dr. Twisse, and others,
distinctly opening the sense of this distinction, D. Twisse Lib. 1.. 21. 22. p.
252. 254. Hujus pretii soluti virtus and efficacia (inquit Rev. Perkins) tum
quoad meritum and quoad operationem, infinita est, and tamen distingui debet:
est enim vel potentialis vel actualis. Efficacia potentialis est, qua (...), in
se sufficiat pro redimendis Singulorum, absque exceptione, peccatis* etiamsi
essent mill mundi hominum* verum si spectemus efficaciam illam actualem, (...)
illud quoad consilium Dei, and quoad eventum, pro Electis tantum and
praedestinatis est solutum. Dr. Twisse Ibid. p. 254. Christum mortuum esse pro
omnibus non est idem, quod Christi mortem sufficientem esse pro omnibus* Illud
enim negaret Perkinsius, and nos una negaremus; hoc affirmaret, and nos una
secum affirmantes haberet: idque nulla sub condition, ne voluntatis quidem
Divinae, licet contrarium Perkinsio, sed sine omni candore imputat Arminius,
etc.
to take the ground of the sufficiency of Christ's merits, to arise from his
Hypothetical will of saving all without any difference, whereas they take the
sufficiency of his death for all, even of a thousand Worlds, if there could be
so many, and without which it could be sufficient for none, to arise from the
Dignity of Christ's person, as he is God and man: so that they maintain the
death of Christ to be absolutely sufficient for all, and not only to be so upon
supposition.

In a word, they say not, when they deliver their mind accurately, that Christ's
death, as a price sufficient, was actually offered up to the Father for all;
but that his death is in its own nature of such worth, as to be able to save
all, and that it will efficaciously save all, who are by Faith made partakers
of it.

Thirdly, Christ's Eternal Decree, (which to make the matter the more odious to
carnal undiscerning people, some few lines before, he calls his irreversible
Decree, whereby he was not able to resist himself) is at all no bar to the
sufficiency of Christ's merits for saving all: it is only a voluntary Bar of
his own making, which renders him not unable, but for Reasons best known to
himself, not willing i. e. not decreeing to save all.

Fourthly, If P. Bertius, Shield-bearer to Arminius himself, may be believed,
we need not much contend for the distinction of Sufficienter and Efficaciter,
because it is not properly of Divine, but humane Tradition, which was the
reason why Arminius would not prosecute it Exam. Armin. Perkins. praedest. p.
99.
.

Sixthly, and lastly, from what has been said in my Corrept. Correct. as well
as in this writing, to other Scriptures, parallel to that of 2 Cor. 5. 14. it
will be easy to discover what must be said to all that extravagant Discourse,
upon which Mr. T. P. spends no less then 4. whole pages, Chap. 4. from p. 28.
to 32. for after all said, and all done, pro or con, it will be most clear to
any attentive Reader, who will either seriously mind that Text with its
context, or consult with the best Interpreters;

1. That the Apostle in his proposition 2 Cor. 5. 14. speaks of an all such as
himself, who were constrained by the love of Christ, (and sure such are not,
the all Mr. T. P. pleads for) and therefore that the all in the Minor, v. 15.
must needs be taken as it was in the Major.

2. That the death the Apostle speaks of, v. 14. is not a natural death, as Mr.
T. P. would have it, p. 30. but it is a moral death, viz. such a one, by which
in Christ our head, we did as it were all die, no otherwise then as if we had
died and satisfied for our selves, and procured for our selves a virtue to dye
unto sin, and no more: as the Apostle speaks, v. 15. to live not unto our
selves, but unto him which died for us, etc.

3. He will find that v. 14, 15, 17. the Apostle makes a tacit Antithesis,
which elsewhere he had done most explicitly, Romans 5. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. etc. 1
Cor. 15. 21, 22. betwixt the first and second Adam, who are by him made to be
two different Roots, whereof the first after his fall, derives nothing else but
death and sin, to his natural Off*spring; but the second derives to his
spiritual Offspring, life and righteousness Vide J. Camer. De Ecclesia, p.
105. 107. Ut Adamus Auctor generis nostri est secundu^ carnem, homo terrenus
terrenorum: ita Christus auctor generis nostri est secundum spiritum, homo
Coelestis Coelestium. Attamen diversa ratione. Fusius idem p. 127. ejusd.
Libri. Quam sit haec nostri cum Christo un^^ efficax, vel inde facile colligi
potest, quod quae Christus in nostri Gratiam pertulerit, ea eodem apud deum
loco sint, ac si nobis tam gravis poena incubuisset. Hoc vero est quod
Apostolus significavit disertis verbis, 2 Cor. 5. Si unus, inquit, pro omnibus
mortuus est, omnes mortui sumus. Ita Christus dum poena quae fuit maledicta
defungitur, totum ChristiCorpus ea poena defunctum est, etc. vide etiam in hanc
sententiam. D. Augustine. De pec. and merit. Lib. 1. Cap. 8.
. This being most plain, it would be s^perfluous labor, to spend more time and
paper in giving more particular Answers to his Luxuriant Discourses: the
rather, because most, if not all the particulars have upon some occasion or
other been sufficiently crushed already. And thus I am at last come to an end
of that, with which if he say true, p. 15. all other Opinions in debate, must
stand or fall, and upon which, the h^nge of all does turn, p. 93. Habemus
confitentem reum, according to his own Confession: then if what I have said
against him, will hold water, as I trust in God it will, all the rest of his
Book is turned off the hinges, and is truncus iners, et terrae inutile pondus.
I shall therefore with all the brevity that I can, dispatch what remains.

. 10. To his. 27. about Scripture, Tradition, Right Reason, from p. 103. to 107.

Ans.. 1. But that we have met with an Orator, who de quolibet Themate, if need
be, can out-wit, and out-speak too, Ovid versifying upon a flea; Dan. Heinsius
rhetoricating in Commendation of a Lowse, before a Lousy Senate; Erasmus Ovid.
de ^^lice; Orat. Dan. Heinsiis, de pediculo; ad mendicorum Patres Conscriptos.
Erasmi Encomium Moriae.
his applauding of Folly; and a learned, but a known Arminian, P. Cunaeus his
not jocularly but seriously crying up an Apostate Julian, P. Cunaus, praef. in
Divi Caesaris (ut Ethnice vocat) Juliani laudem. ad Syndic. Leidensium.
we should not have had the expenseful waste of almost four pages upon that so
slight a mention of Tria sunt omnia, in my Corrept. Correct. p. 43. 44. which
yet was not done upon a slight occasion; but because he had said, p. 2. of his
uncorrect Copy, (as he is pleased to style it) that unto the Authority of the
Fathers, we owe the Canon of the Scriptures, and our belief of three
subsistences, in one substance, much the same to what he says, Philanth. p.
104.

. 2. Unto all this long Discourse, then, he ought to satisfy himself with this
concise Answer,

1. That every one who is but in any tolerable measure acquainted with the old
Pelagian, or the late Arminian Divinity, are full well acquainted, that it
bottoms far more upon that, which men falsely call Right Reason, then either
upon Scripture or Tradition, which made Pelagius of old, appeal from Divines,
and Poscere Auditorium Philosophicum, as pretending at first, what afterward
his Proselytes did, (as witnesses Bradwardine Tho: Bradward. Praefat. Sicut
Antiqui Pelagiani ventoso nomine, scientiarum saecularium inflati consistorium,
Theologicum contemnentes, Philosophicum flagitabant: ita and moderni. Audivi
namque quosdam Advocatos Pelagii, licet multum provectos, in sacris apicibus,
affirmantes Pelagium nusquam potuisse convinci per naturalem and Philosophicam
rationem, sed vix arguebatur utcunque per quasdam auctoritates Theologicas
satis nudas, maxim autem per authoritatem Ecclesiae, quae satrapis non
placebat.
that they were beaten by some Authorities of seeming Scriptures and Tradition,
but could never be beaten by reason.

And as for that of Tradition, it is well known, that Austin confutes the sum
of Pelagius; and consequently, of Arminius, and T. P. their Divinity, which is,
that salvation is derived to men ex font volendi, flows from the Fountain of
their free wills, by that which was commonly received among the Ancients, that
Quem vult Deus Religiosum facit, that is, in the Apostles Phrase, God gives
Grace to whom he wills, Romans 9. 18. I hope Mr. T. P. will not fault my
Translation, unless he will say, that a man may become Religious without Gods
efficacious wonder-working Grace.

2. That Mr. T. P. by his frequent wresting of good Scriptures, his slighting
of old Austin, his producing of a Decachord of sorry Reasons, by his
Philosophical Boethian Discourse, no way grounded upon ancient Scriptures or
Tradition, had given a substantial Specimen, a full proof, not of placing p.
104. Right Reason before Scripture, as to point of order in his Book, (a thing
which I was never so simple as to charge him with) but which is far worse, of
setting up that thing which he calls Right Reason higher in his heart; and
therein, as Heretics of old, making their brains their Bible Tertullian. Toll
haereticis quae cum Ethnicis sapiunt ut de solis Scripturis quaestiones suas
sistant, and stare non poterunt.
.

3. As for what he quotes, or rather mis-quotes out of Rev. Ball his
Pulpit-Patron, Part. 2. p. 197.. 7. (by the Printers I suppose, rather than his
own mistake) and which he says, seems to him, to be one of the very best
Arguments in all that Book.

Answ. 1. It is somewhat a wonder to me, that his famous professor of Divinity,
Jacob Arminius, in the University of Leyd^n, Philan. p. 14. should about such
kind of expressions, as Mr. Ball uses in the place quoted, differ so really
from his, otherwise most Genuine Son Mr. T. P. J. Arminius Exam. praedest.
Perkin. in octavo. p. 8. Vitio tibi verti non potest quod antiquorum
Theologorum sententias adducis, praesertim ista, quam ponis, cautione
observata. Nam et ipsi Patres diversis Interpretationibus obnoxii sunt, and
quidem tanto magis quam Scriptores (...), quanto minore minusque perspicua
veritatis cognitione praediti fuerunt, and minus accurate and commode sensa
mentis suae enuntiare potuerunt. Quod dum cogito, nescio an consuluerint
Ecclesiae, qui hoc seculo Patrum sententias in negotio Religionis sibi
usurpandas auctoritatis causa putaverunt.
. He had diverse times said upon occasion of the debated Controversies, non
stamus Augustino, and a very slight estimate he sets upon the Concurrent
Testimonies of the Fathers.

2. Mr. Ball, as its plain by the words of that place, as well as by the
Argument of the whole Book, speaking about Ecclesiastical Affairs, not in
reference to the Docenda in Ecclesia, to Doctrinal Church matters, but in
reference to Disciplinary and Practical, the saying makes nothing for his turn.
And sure I am, were he in the points debated betwixt us, but of that Authors
Judgment, a speedy end would quickly be set to all the Controversies betwixt
me and my unkind Neighbor.

3. As for the facetious sport which he makes, Phil. 105, 106. with what in the
Margin of Corrept. Correct. p. 44. was quoted out of Castalio, and his
Prefacer, or an Alter Castalio.

Answ. 1. There is nothing so plain to him, who has but a mind to see, that
whilst both of them say, according to what I represent, p. 44. that in the
matters debated about Predestination, Election, Free will, the common man does
judge better by his reason, (which in that place can be no other then his
natural Mother-wit) and his senses, viz. his five senses, than some literate
men, meaning, as Mr. T. P. interprets the matter, p. 106. than Calvin, and all
who hold with him: in so saying, they must both of them needs oppose, both the
ancient and modern Church, who ever thought these matters too high for natural
reason, or the five senses.

2. That the Plerique, or the most, in Felic. Turp. his Text should, even
whilst he is a reproving me, not to understand the Latin Tongue, p. 106. be
translated by only a few, I do not conceive, proceeds in him from want of
Latin, but either out of inadvertency, or it may be, for any thing I know to
the contrary, from want of honesty.

5ly. and lastly, Although neither my self, nor any opiniated as I am in the
debateable matters need, we are confident, to be afraid of any thing which can
be produced against out cause, from any valuable Tradition, or truly so called
Right Reason; yet would to God Mr. T. P. would persuade himself and his
faction, seriously to peruse what John Dallaeus, quoted, as making for him by
himself, p. 15. has wrote about the use of Fathers, in reference to the
Controversies of our times: and if they would but mind John Vedeli^, his
Rationale Theologicum, and so keep within the bounds of truly Right Reason, I
make no question, but these following, and diverse other Scriptures, Romans 8. 30,
31. and 9. 6. 11. Act. 15. 18. 2 Timothy 2. 19. Ephesians. 2. 10. Isa. 59. 21. Joh.
13. 1. and 17. 9. Heb. 13. 21. Phil. 2. 13. 2 Cor. 3. 5. Phil. 1. 6. Ephesians. 2.
8. 2 These. 2. 13. and just consequences drawn from them, would quickly
determine the main matters in debate betwixt us: If therefore he, or any of his
confident and most daring bragging party, will needs be appearing again, let
them not fetch such terrible Cirquedroes (as they do), from the Ancient
Fathers, before Austin, and all after the Canonical Writers, and from some
crasie Reasons, which they urge against plain Scriptures, which serve for
little, but for the tyring of Writers, Readers and Printers, and I durst give
them my word for it, they shall meet with Answers to any thing they can say,
out of Holy Divine Writ, though I should resolve to string up my pen, and
verbum non amplius addere. Let them try their valor, and pelt us with no
stones, but what are taken from the Valleys of the Sanctuary, and we will not
by Gods Grace, turn tail to the stoutest of our Antagonists, or fear that the
head of our cause, will ever be broken by them.

. 11.

To his voluminous but monstrous. 28. About the Eternal Cause of punishment,
sins positive entity, its having an Efficient Cause, etc. on which later, he
expounds himself from p. 110. to 121. but Contracts himself Chap. 4. p. 20, 21.
33.

. 1.

Answ. 1. As to the Title stuck up in the front of this. 28. p. 108, 109. and
again, in the Rear of it, from p. 118. to 121. our quarrel about it, would
quickly be at an end, if by eternal punishment he would understand damnation of
a finally sinful Creature, and by the sole cause of it, he would likewise with
the Divines, Bishop Hall, and Bishop Davenant, which he quotes p. 107.
understand the sole meritorious Cause of its execution; but if, as may be
justly suspected, he do by the cause of punishment, eternal, understand the
cause of Gods internal and eternal Decree of punishing men for their sins: then
first, he speaks monstrously, and absurdly, whilst he would make Sin, which
sure is no older then man, nay not so old, and so not existing but in time, to
be the cause of Gods eternal Decree. August. Nihil majus voluntate Dei; non
ergo causa ejus quaerenda est. Ench. ad Laur. c. 96.

2. He would make sin eternally foreseen, but only potentially then existing to
be more efficacious and causal, then when it actually exists in time; for this
latter can only be the cause of Gods executing his decree of damnation; but the
former is the cause of his purposing or intend^ng of it. A greater thing it is,
to be the cause of Gods purpose, then to be the cause of the execution of that
purpose.

3. He spills all that Logic, p. 64. which he does pretend to, when he says,
that he had never so little Logic, as to say, That any thing in man could be
the cause of Gods Decree.

4. He must conclude, That it was necessary for all us mortals to be damned,
because from eternity the Lord could not but foresee, that we should all be
either Originally, or actually sinful.

. 2. Though p. 107. he do stoutly deny, that his Chap. 3. wherein he grants,
that every Reprobate is praedetermined to eternal punishment, is at any
Daggers drawing, with his almost whole Chap. 2. where he strenuously disputes,
that God determines none to punishment; yet 1. the thing is most evident; for
in his p. 17. Chap. 2. of his Correct Copy, he says expressly, without any the
least color of limitation of that his saying, that man himself is the sole
efficient cause of his eternal punishment; and again, p. 21. that there can be
no greater blasphemy, then to bring Gods providence into the pedigree of death.

Secondly, As for the only Salve which he has for this sore, Phil. p. 107.
viz. that I leave out the term respectively, which he brings in lagging
Correct Copy, p. 32.

First, He should have brought it in sooner, if he would have had me to have
taken some more than ordinary notice of it, and not have been so impudent, as
to write, that he never said in his life, that God determines none to
punishment, there mak^ng a stop, as M. B. does; when as in his Chap. 2. he
says nothing else without any stop.

2. He should upon provocation, have showed which I put him upon, p. 135. of my
Corrept. Correct, how the conditionality, or absoluteness of it, alters the
case; especially, as to sin's being the condition of Gods eternal Decree, when
as neither that, or any other Conditions, could ever be without Gods either
decreeing to effect them in time, or voluntary permitting that in time they
should be wrought by others.

. 3. As for his vilifying of my Logic, which he spends full two pages more
upon, p. 108, 109. and ushers in with this loud sounding, I might almost say,
loud lying expression, that I will be tampering in matters, to which in all
likelihood and appearance, I was never trained up.

First, Possibly since my training up in that Art, I may have lost more
learning, then yet it appears that ever he had, or was master of.

Secondly, That forsooth our great Logician may appear a very great School-man
too, p. 108. he quotes out of Biel, Soncinas, Scot, Gabriel, what any fresh man
of a months standing in either University, would and could as judiciously have
quoted out of his greasy Jack-Seton, Ramus, Schibler, Crucius, Elementa
Burgersdicii, or any the most vulgar Logician.

3. If it be an Adaequate definition of a Cause in general, that it is that
cujus vi res est, then sure it cannot be very inadaequate to the efficient
cause, which has as much, if not more of causality in it, in reference to the
effect, than any other cause can have, which all derive their causality from
the first efficient Cause.

4. It savours of no great Logic or Metaphysics either, that in all his whole
Discourse, he seems not yet to have learned, that there is a vast difference
betwixt a Physical real working cause of any thing, which I did therefore
(...), by way of eminency, call the Efficient Cause, and a morally metaphorical
working, or Efficient Cause, which in distinction from the former, I did
therefore call the meritorious Cause of punishment. I never denied man to be
the meritorious efficient Cause of his punishment; but I maintained God to be
the chief Author of his punishment as the Decreer of it, and the inflicter of
it, which his Chap. 2. Correct Copy plainly denies.

5. Dr. Twisse sure may be allowed to have bin trained up to some Logic and
Metaphysics, and not to have been the meanest Proficient in either: yet there
be upon several occasions diverse places, wherein he commits as great Solacisms
in Logic as my self, when he distinguishes betwixt the Efficient and
meritorious Cause. But perchance, I ought to remember, that the greater
Logician and Metaphysician, Mr. T. P. owes the Doctor a reckoning, for using a
Logical Maxim, Philan. Chap. 3. p. 67. after so ignorant a manner, as if he
(learned Mr. T. P. Aquila non Captat muscas!) Doctor Twisse. Lib. Vindic. p.
273. Sit remissio pecatorum, etiam Sancti Spiritus effectio, sed in genere
causae efficientis, quod tamen nihil obstat, quominus statuatur remissionem
peccatorum esse propriam mortis Christi effectionem in genere causae
meritoriae. Sit Paulo post etc. Quemadmod. in eandem ferme sententiam Lib. 1.
p. 26. Irrogatio paenarum pendet a Deo tanquam a causa efficiente Physica; sed
quis dubitat pendere etiam a peccatis creaturarum, tanquam a causis
efficientibus moralibus; alioqui neque Salus nostra pendere dicetur a Christo,
quaterus est causa ejus meritoria. Lib. 2. p. 62. de hoc ipso argumento. Licet
peccatum qua peccatum duntaxat a creatura sit, hoc tamen nihil impedit quo
minus Deus concurrat ad actum peccati, idque determinando Creaturae voluntatem
ad agendum etc. Ruina exitii and paenae ex Creatura est tanquam a causa
meritoria, a Deo vero tanquam a causa efficiente.
had but so used it, when he was but a raw Sophister he had been hissed out of
the Schools, and no doubt the Doctor shall be well paid the next time, Mr. T.
P. comes from France, unto which belike he did at first go as his Journies end,
before his thoughts did so much as run upon that Country, till he took shipping
at Dover.

. 4.

. 4. But I must travail from this to what follows next at large, about sins
having a proper efficient Cause, and a true positive entity, p. 110, 111. Chap.
4. 20, 21. 33. In the handling of which, I think it will abundantly be made
evident, that he is forsaken by all sound Divinity; and Divines as well as of
all true Logic and Philosophy, if not to all common honesty, in the
misrepresenting the known Judgment of his adversaries. In which, that we may
proceed the more distinctly, (not only because the matter is to admiration and
astonishment, by all confessed to be most abstruse to the most quick piercing
eyes (b); but also because it is the last rotten gilded Pillar, upon which all
the rest in this gaudy flourishing Pamphlet does rest) I will walk in this
method;

First, I Will represent what was that which he takes as an occasion for all this
Discourse Salvian. de Gubernat. Dei Lib. 3. Si quis ad omnes humanae rationis
quaestiunculas responsum expectet, audiat Salvian. Possum quidem rationabiliter
and satis constanter d^cere, Nescio secretum, and consilium divinitatis ignoro.
Sufficit mihi ad causae hujus probationem dicti Caelestis oraculum. Deus a se
omnia dicit aspici, omnia regi, omnia judicari. Si scire vis quid tenendum sit,
habes literas sacras. Perfecta ratio est, hoc te^ere quod legeris. Qua causa
autem Deus haec de quibus loquimur ita faciat, nolo a me requiras. Homo sum,
non intelligo secreta Dei, investigare non audeo, and ideo etiam attentare
formido: quia and hoc ipsum genus Sacrilegae temeritatis est, si plus scire
cupias quam sinaris. Sufficiat tibi, quod Deus a se agi ac dispensari cuncta
testatur. August. in Psalm. 148. Si nos non intelligimus quid quare fiat, demus
hoc providentiae ipsius, quia non sit sine causa, and non blasphemabimus. Quum
enim caeperimus disputare d^ operibus Dei* quare hoc quare illud: and non
debuit sic facere, male fecit hoc, ubi est laus Dei? perd^disti Halle-luia.
Omnia sic considera quo modo placeas Deo, and lauds artificem. Quia si
intrares in officinam forte fabri ferrarii, non auderes reprehendere folles,
incudes, malleos. Da imperitum hominem nescientem quid quare fit: and omnia
reprehendit. Sed si non habeat peritiam artificis, and habent saltem
considerationem hominis, quid sibi dicit? non sine causa hoc loco folles positi
sunt. Artifex novit quare, et si ego non novi. In officina non audet vituperare
fabrum, and audet reprehendere in hoc mundo Deum!
.

Secondly, I Will show what the Opinion of the best reformed Churches, and of her
most eminent Doctors, is, in this matter; and particularly, what Dr. Twisse
understands by Efficax decretum, in the matter of sins permission.

Thirdly, Evidence how horridly wicked, ab^urd and foolish M. T. P's. Opinion
is, which in this Section and elsewhere, he does maintain.

Fourthly, I will, by Gods help, take off the Objections which make him so
insolent and scornful against the Orthodox.

. 1.

About the occasion taken for his Scriblings, from p. 110. and up and down
elsewhere, about Gods agency in or about sin, the positiveness, or
privativeness of it, its efficacious permission, etc.

All this long talk which fills up by far more than half of all that which is
upon any just account argumentative in this his Philanthropy, was occasioned by
what Correct Copy, p. 14. he talks of Gods permitting of sin only in that which
he calls an equitable sense. Against which his sense, after the representation
of some of his wonted Arts, I had given him in, variety of Arguments, Corrept.
Correct, p. 84 85. unto all which he does wisely, and like a good Husband, very
frugally answer nothing, only in this his Philanthrop. Chap. 3. p. 127. least
he should be thought to be for a mere notional and speculative permission of
sin, he gravely tells us, that God (besides his permitting of our sins) does
dispose and order them to the best advantage which shows that he is not for
such an idle permission, (as I forge) but for a permission designed for wise
and just ends.

Answ. But in the mean while, he takes no notice,

First, Of what I said against this his seemingly fair concession, Corrept.
Correct. p. 85. that herein he allows God only an after-game, when cursed men
have played out their play, to make the best of a bad bargam: for that disposal
of sin follows after the Commission of it.

Secondly, He never thinks how frequently tanquam anus ad Armillam, as an old
Wife to her Crutch, he reverts to his more Theorick perm^ssion.

First, When he says, Phil. Chap. 1. p. 26. that we are not compelled (which
thus far we all grant) but only permitted by God to sin, which we all deny
really, as to the only, which here he inserts, and which himself does verbally
deny in the forequoted p. 127.

Secondly, When speaking of Gods punishing sin, which sin, the highest point of
Gods Agency, about sin with we maintain, he shrinks all this Chap. 4. 61. into
Gods sufferance and permission, by not hindering from sinning, by leaving men to
their wilful selves. See this Pelagian sense fully confuted by August. Lib, 5.
Contra Julian. Pelag. per totum caput Quintum, especially in these words. Quid
est autem quod d^cis, cum desideriis suis traditi dicuntur, relicti per divinam
patientiam; intelligendi sunt non per potentiam in peccata compulsi, quasi non
simul posuerit haec duo idem Apostolus and patientiam and potentiam, ubi ait,
sicut autem volens Deus ostendere iram, and demonstrare potentiam suam,
pertulit in multa patientia vasa irae quae perfecta sunt in perditionem: Romans
9. etc.

Thirdly, Whilst he minds us often, for fear we should forget it, that
permission, although active in sound, is passive in signification, Chap. 4. p.
33.

Answ. First, This possibly may hold for the most part, as to humane
permission, but never will as to Divine. To men permitting sin, it is enough
when they have done their best to reclaim men from it, to leave them to
themselves, but not so as to God, who can, if he list, and when he list,
reclaim them from sin, who upholds them whilst they do sin, who concurres with
them in the materiale substractum of their sins, who confines and sets
boundaries to their sins, and does many things more. I shall have occasion to
speak more in the progress, and yet all this, without any the least guilt of
sin.

Secondly, He had need to be a stronger Orator then he is, before he shall ever
be able to persuade any Divine, or but sober Christian, that most of those
places quoted by Reverend Doctor Reynolds, Epist. p. 5. or by my self, Corrept.
Correct. p. 56. unto which many more might be added, if they should not prove
enough, will be put off by such sorry glosses of Gods only permitting of them,
and ordering of all to his best advantage. Glosses rightly Pelagian August.
Lib. 5. Contra Jul. Pelag. c. 3. propter hoc tradidit illos Deus in passiones
ignominae. Andes propter hoc and quaeris inaniter, quomodo intelligendus sit
tradere Deus, multum laborans, ut ostendas eum tradere deserendo. Curavit
Apostolus dicere quanta poena sit a Deo tradi passionibus ignominiae sive
deserendo, sive alio quocunque vel explicabili vel inexplicabili modo quo facit
haec sum bonus, and ineffabiliter Justus. Et tum fuse probat Deum obdurare
non solum per patientiam uti voluit A. Pelagianus sed etiam per potentiam, quod
probat Augustinus.
, but extremely unchristian. Yet if by what he says of Gods permitting of sin,
and ordering of all to his best advantage, he would but understand it (as it is
plain, he will not p. 11.) of such a willing permissive design of God, as
cannot, shall not be frustrated, this grant of his would very much serve to
determine this whole Controversy. If God design it, then sure he wills it; he
determines not indeed sins effection by himself; but its permission to be acted
by others.

. 2. The Judgment of Reformed Churches, and eminent Doctors therein.

As to the second, the Judgment of the best Reformed Churches, and some chief
Doctors therein, I need to say but two things, First, That all the Reformed
Churches, who in the Harmony of their Confessions, upon the Article of
Providence, make it their business, to say any thing to these matters, they
both grant more then comes within the verge of Mr. T. P. his permission of sin,
and yet withal, strenuously deny God to be the Author of sin. Let the
studious Reader be entreated to peruse Artic. 8. Confession. Gallic. in Harmon.
Confess. p. 101. Artic. 13. Confess. Belgic. p. 168, 169. Palate. Confess. Ibid. p.
200. Belgic. Contra Remonst. Secundo edita Latin Lugduni Batavor. 1617.
Catholicus consensus patrum, Harmoniae Confessionum subjunctus Artic. 3. a p.
80. ad 90. The sum and sense of all which, the late Reverend, piously learned
Assembly at Westminster, has for the behoof of the English Reader, set down
thus. Assemblies Confession of Faith, Chap. 5.

Artic. 4. Of Providence.

THe Almighty power, unsearchable wisdom, and infinite goodness of God, so far
m^nifest themselves in his Providence, that it extends it self, even to the
first Fall, and all other sins of Angels and men; and that not by a bare
permission, but such as has joined with it, a most wise and powerful bounding,
and otherwise ordering and governing of them, in a manifold dispensation, to
his own holy ends: yet so, as the sinfulness thereof proceeds only from the
Creature, and not from God, who being most holy and righteous, neither is, nor
can be, the Author or approver of sin.

Secondly, I shall need only to instance in three most eminent Doctors in the
Reformed Church, who fully concur with their Mother the Protestant Church, and
yet are mostly quarrelled against by Mr. T. P. and his Associates; and these
three shall be Calvin, Beza, and Dr. Twisse.

First, Mr. Calvin does most copiously set down his Judgment in this matter,
Lib. 1. Institut. Cap. 16, 17, 18. Lib. 2. Cap. 4. and in his Writings against
the Libertines, against Pighius and others all which larger: Di^courses of his,
(often by many carped at, but yet by none solidly confuted) are well Epitomized
by diverse which I have met with, let the learned Reader see Calvin's Epitomist,
John Piscat. Aphoris. Doctr. Christian. Loc. 6. These. 3* 4. L. Trelcat.
Institut. Scholast. Lib. 1. p. 50. Non infundendo malitiam, sed subtrahendo
gratiam. Aug. ad Sixtum Epist. 105. but especially by Dr. Sutton in his
Lectures on Romans 11. put forth London 1632. from p. 153. etc. under these heads,

First, Of Gods withdrawing of his Divine help, not by infusing of malice, but
by withdrawing grace.

Secondly, By delivering of man into the power of Satan, 1 King. 22, 22.

Thirdly, Of Divine permission, when God suffers Satan and wicked men to run
into sin, but without his furtherance, as Psalm. 81. 12. Act. 14. 16.

Fourthly, The determination of sin, when God will not suffer the wicked to go
on in sin, so far as they desire.

Fifthly, A reducing of the ends to the Rule of Justice. The bringing of some
good out of evil. As also by the late Judicious Bishop of Salisbury Doctor
Davenant, in his Animadversions, p. 162, 163. unto six heads, unto which he
subjoynes these memorable words; All these may in a good sense be called
operative Decrees, or volitions of God, and not barely permissive: in all these
which are conversant about the sins of men, there is a positive will of God,
which does not only permit men to work their sinful actions; but above, and in
those sinful actions, has his own good and holy work. And this is that
Energetical will which Calvin and Beza attribute unto God in men's sinful
actions, which their very Adversaries are forced to acknowledge; and for this,
he quotes, on the place, Ruiz. de Scientia Dei, p. 219. Penottus Lib. 8. c.
22.. 2. Idem Lib. 5. c. 9. p. 255. upon all which, he concludes learnedly thus;
So that the Question is not, whether God have only a permissive Decree about
sinful actions; for most grant he has also an operative Decree: but all the
difficulty is, in what manner and measure, and by what means this Decree has
its work upon the will. Calvin and Beza then might well tax all who grant only
a permissive Decree, concerning the events of sin, and deny an operative; and
truly avouch, that many places in Scripture, cannot be understood of a bare
permission, but of necessity, they import some kind of effectual operation.

2. In like sort, Theod. Beza in his Refutation of Calumnies against his
Doctrine, vented by one of Mr. T. P' s. Saintlike Martyrs Philanth. c. 3. p.
148, 149.
, who was expelled Geneva, for his wanton abusing of the most eminent Reformed
Divines, for his denying the Canticle to be any part of Gods word, and for
other as heinous crimes, reckoned up by my once most Learned Schoolmaster Math.
Sladus contra Vorstium Disceptat. part altera, p. 17. 11. as that first he was
a great Admirer of Servetus his Writings, and of those of Barnard Ochin; two,
much admired by Vorstius, that great blasphemer, p. 4. and 19. Octavo. A
notor^ous Pelagian, p. 92. vide Castalion plura apud Theod. Bezam in vita
Calvini and apud Melch^or. Adam. It Is easy herehence to guess what Saints Mr.
T. P. does worship.
, has these words in the refutation of the second Calumny. God (says he) aims
at one thing, viz. (in the permission of sin) at his own glory, for which he
does also make the wicked, as Solomon says; but the perverse will of Satan
and wicked men propose another end. Thus it comes to pass, that in one work
God is just but Satan and wicked men are unjust. And this he does illustrate
by the fall of Adam, and then he goes on. The Original of Vice is to be sought,
in the Spontaneous motion of Instruments. But you will say, they could not
resist the will of God, that is, his Decree. I confess it, but as they could
not, so neither would they. But they could not otherw^se will. I confess it, as
to the event, and Energy, yet the will of Adam was not forced; yea he did
assent unto sin, not only by a Spontaneous, but by a free motion, when as his
(...) faculty or power was not yet mancipated unto the servitude of sin. But
you will say, these things do not yet satisfy me. I confess that also; but who
art thou who wilt acknowledge no Justice or Wisdom in God, but for which thou
art able to perceive a reason?

3. In like sort, Dr. Tw^sse in all his Writings, almost every where, much to
the same purpose. I will quote but some few passages out of his stupendiously
learned Vindiciae Great. and out of that which I use to call the Epi^ome of all
his works, his Answer to the Synod of Dort, and Arles, reduced to practice. By
which every one will easily be able to perceive how childishly, and yet most
maliciously that learned and now blessed Doctor, is abused by Mr. T. P. as p.
111. of the Section we are upon. So I cannot tell in how many parts of this his
Ph^lanthropy besides. He has notwithstanding the redundancies of his
superlative wit, a special delight in repetitions; when he thinks he has
gotten any thing by the end, which he hopes, will make the Doctor odious.

Vindic. Great. Lib. 1. Sect. 12. p. 140. (The very passage shamefully wrested
by Mr. T. P. p. 111.) The who^e passage Englished is thus. Doctor Twisse, Lib.
1. Vindic. Edit. in quarto, p. 140 Col. 2.
We confess God to will that sin should exist by that will which uses to be
called voluntas been placiti the will of his good pleasure, opposite to the
voluntas Signi, the will of the sign; we also confess that Will to be
efficacious; but the last consequence, if by an efficacious will therefore by
an efficient, we do utterly deny as inconsequent; for Gods will is no less
efficacious, that sin should be wrought by permission, than that good should be
done, by effecting of it. In both the will of God is efficacious, but in the
one it is only permissive, but in the other effective. Even according to
Arminius, it is true Contra Perkins. Crim. 3. Sect. 1. p. 162
, that God would have Achab to fill up the measure of his sins. Not by the sign
of his will, or by his approbation; (for he did not command him to fulfill it,
or when he had fulfilled it, did he approve it:) therefore by his will of good
pleasure See this volunt as beneplaciti expounded by acute Dr. Ames, Medul.
Lib. 1. Cap. 7. These. 33. Benepl^citum in Scripturis quidem usitatissime
designat benevolentiam Dei, qua bonum Salutare su^s vult ac decernit; quia
tamen omne consilium been Deo placet, idcirco recte adhibetur a Theologis
ad^mne consilium explicandum etiam secundum Scripturam Matthew. 11. 26.
, therefore by his efficacious: what then? does it therefore follow, that God
did make him to sin? Arminius likewise knows, that from Divine permission, sin
does follow infallibly, from whence it is, that by permission alone, the will
of God is no less efficacious, than by a positive effection.

Here now its plain, that the efficacity Dr. Twisse speaks of (contrary to what
Mr. T. P. p. 111. and elsewhere often would have us believe) relates to the
evil event falling out, but not to Gods will to effect it, or to the manner of
his willing of it. It is therefore most ridiculous, that Mr. T. P. should
require, that such a great School-mans Terms, as Dr. Twisse was known to be,
should be interpreted by School-boyes Dictionaries, Phil. p. 112. It is true,
that Dr. Twisse does often allow of that saying of the deepest of the
Schoolmen, our Thomas Bradwardin Doctor Twisse, Lib. 2. vindic. p. 67.
Circa quodcunque est Dei permissio, Circa idem est volitio actualis, About
whatsoever permission is conversant, about that there is an actual volition,
which he does very justly in the way, wherein he explains himself, as he does,
Lib. 2. p. 70. (and I dare be bold to say in above 100. places more) and yet he
assigns many differences betwixt Gods working of good, and permitting evil, as
when he says, A good will is from God, as it is a will, and as it is good. As a
will, by way of a general influence of providence: as good, by the influx of
special grace. But an ill will is only from God, as a will; but by no means, as
it is evil. Nor is God to be said to work sin, though he does the act of sin,
which now a days no learned Pontifician of any account will deny.

Anon after, And truly we confess with Calvin, that God wills sins to be, or to
fall out, the Lord permitting of it; (for nothing falls out, but what the
Omnipotent wills to fall out, according to Austin, either he doing of it, or
permitting of it to be done by others); but as yet Bellarm^ne (against him the
Doctor is disputing) has not showed, where Calvin says it, that evils, or
sins fall out by Gods decree, which yet if he had been found to say, he is not
to be thought otherwise to have willed the understanding of it, then that evils
are done, God in time, according to his eternal Decree, permitting of them. We
say not, that sins are to be attributed to God: But, that the acts of sin are
to be attributed to God, Aquinas does dispute, nor do Pontificians now adays
gainsay.

But let the Doctor speak his own English, in the brief summary of all his
works, in his Considerations upon Tilenus, reducing the Synod of Dort and
Arles, to practice, p. 72, 73. Of wickedness we say with Austin, that none can
be the Author of it, by way of an eff^cient cause, the cause thereof being
only a deficient cause. Now man may thus be the Author of it, to wit, either
in doing what he ought not to do, or leaving undone what he ought to do; but
this cannot possibly be incident unto God; namely, that he should, either do
what he ought not to do, or leave undone what he ought to do; and, if to
determine, that the crucifying of the Son of God, be to be the Author of the
wickedness committed, in the crucifying of the Son of God, the Scripture in
testifying this, makes God the Author of wickedness, by the learning of this
Divine. That the act which is sinful, and the sinfulness thereof, are to be
distinguished, and that God is the cause of the one, and only the permitter of
the other, is not our Doctrine only, but of Arminius also. A while after, The
sinful act is the cause of damnation, as wrought freely by men, and though the
sinfulness be only from man, yet the act is not, but as well from God, as from
man, as all sides now adays confess, even Arminius himself; but this Author
so carries himself, (just as Mr. T. P. does, though not so plainly as he) as
if he would deny the act it self to be from God, not by any strength of
Argument, but merely by a loose Discourse, and I have a long time looked, that
they should come to this; but withal, I look they should bring reason with
them, and not in a base manner (this Authour-like) to beg the Question. And
this may serve to the second thing proposed. I proceed to the third, viz.

. 3.

To give in some Reasons against Mr. T. P's. most dreadful opinion about sin's,
qua such, having a positive Entity, and a true proper Efficient Cause; for
about nothing else is there any question.

And here I profess in the first place, I cannot but adore, and tremble, at the
consideration of the dreadful judicial hand of God, highly up against this
Author, that whilst he is making of it his business, by slanderous malicious
frantic Inconsequences, to make those to maintain God to be the Author of
sin, who abhor the very thoughts of falling into such an error, and who by
Gods grace tremble more at the thoughts of committing sin, then many of his
party, if not himself, at the open acting thereof, that for the avoiding of
what he will needs fancy, (contrary to the Rules of all Christianity and
humanity) his adversaries opinion to be (in despite of all their open
professions to the contrary) I say that he should, just in the very act of
doing this, say a thousand times more for Gods being the Author of sin, by
true and just consequences Sceleratum est in verbis alicujus velle haeresim
quaerere, cum noris sensum illius esse Sanum. Hieronym.
, than ever by all his wicked Arts, and flaunting Rhetoric to boor, he will
ever be able to prove his Adversaries to have said toward it. This sure is a
just hand of God upon him: would to God he would lay it to heart, lest that be
verified on him, that

Quem perdere vult Deus, hunc dementat. Secondly, and more particularly, the
horrible nature of this Opinion, that sin as sin, in respect of its obliquity,
has a positive Entity, etc. will appear by these following Arguments.

First, If sin as sin, be a Positive Entity, then it is a thing in it self,
good; for every Positive thing, is good. We have had it before out of Austins
Enchirid. Omnis natura, etiamsi vitiosa est, in quantum natura est, bona est;
in quantum vitiosa est, mala est.
It is to all Scholars well known; that unum verum bonum, convertuntur.

Secondly, Nay, which is a thousand times worse, it is God; for as a very
learned pious friend of mine, wrote to me not long since, Mr. H. Hick. of his
own College.
very well, whatever positive thing is not from God, is God, there being no
medium betwixt Deus and Creatura. In truth, every positive thing must be
Creator, or Creature. And who now is the Manichee maintaining an Independent
evil principle? Albertus magnus in Petrum Lombard. Sentent. 2. Disp. 37.
Moderni viderunt quod perfectius est agere, quam esse: viderunt quod id quod
non est a se, nec potest a se manner in esse, multo minus potest agere a
seipso; and cum actus malus secundum conversionem ad materiam sit simpliciter
actus egrediens, a potentia activa perfecta secundum naturam; ideo concluserunt
quod non egreditur ab eo nisi secundum quod movetur a causa prima, alioqui
sequeretur duo principia esse.


Thirdly, If Mr. T. P. like not of this latter, then he must inevitably
maintain, if he will but stick to his Thesis.

First, That God is the Author of sin. Or else he must speedily renounce the
very first Article of his Christian Creed, and say, that God did not make
Heaven and Earth, and all real things, visible and invisible therein, that in
him Act. 17. 28. we do not live, move, and have our being, that every good and
perfect gift is in its kind, is not from God, James 1. 17.

2. He must hold, that there be thousands and millions, yea, thousands of
thousands, myriades of myriades of actions in the World, which are not wrought
by God, are independent from him, and stand not at all in ne^d of his Concurse.
A Tenent which the boldest Jesuit in the World would tremble to admit into his
Creed Suarez. De Concursu, motione, and Auxiliis Dei. Lib. 2. Pro prio and
reali influxu concurret Deus ad actus Liberi arbitri ut reales actus sunt,
etiam si saepissime and intrinsece mali sint, nam cum hi actus sint vere res
and effectus reales, necesse est ut saltem illam dependentiam a Deo habeant
quae omnibus causarum secundarum effectibus Generalis and omnino necessaria est.
.

Thirdly, It will follow, that the more sinful acts any commits, the more, he
is a Creator, and a kind of an (...), a God of himself.

Fourthly, Do he what he can to the contrary, in spite of him, it will follow,
that God since the fall never did, or does concur with any the best action that
ever the holiest Saint, being a mere man, did act; for unto the best of their
holiest performances, as they come from them something of sinful infirmity,
does ever cleave. Their very Righteousnesses, in some respect, are as filthy
rags.

Fifthly, It will overturn all Divine Praescience of sins, and, as I once told
him in my Corrept. Correct, p. 142. Qui tollit praescientiam tollit Deum, Deity
it self is overturned, if praescience. And how can that be foreknown by God,
which is in no sense praedetermined by him, in which he has at all no hand:
and yet it is Ens positivum.

Sixthly and lastly, It is an Opinion first most contrary to holy Scripture,
which when it speaks most properly of sin, it speaks of it as of a Privative,
not as of a Positive thing, under the notions of vanity, emptiness, darkness,
Anomy, no Profit, no good, no knowledge, etc.

2. To Austin, who most strenuously pleads, that sin has no cause Efficient,
but only Deficient August. Lib. 12. De Civitat. Dei. Cap. 7. The Discourse is
most remarkable, and answers to many of Mr. T. P's. objections. Nemo quaerat
efficientem causam malae voluntatis. Non enim est efficiens, sed deficiens,
quia nec illa effectio est sed defectio; deficere namque ab eo quod sum est
ad id quod minus est, hoc est incipere habere voluntatem malam. Causas porro
defectionum istarum cum efficientes non sint, ut dixi, sed deficientes, velle
invenire, tale est, ac si quisquam velit videre tenebras, vel aut audire
silentium, quod tamen utrumque nobis notum est, neque illud nisi per oculos,
neque hoc nisi per aures, non sane, in specie sed in speciei privatione. Nemo
ergo ex me scire quaerat, quod me nescire scio, nisi forte ut nescire discat,
quod scire, non posse sciendum est.
.

3. (As were easy to be proved) To Schoolmen of all sides and parties.

4. To his honored and beloved Father, Jac. Arminius himself, so that as my
forementioned cordial friend, whom I mentioned but a while ago, wrote well to
me, when he told me both learnedly and wittily, that Mr. T. P. is the first who
gave sin this (...). Mr. T. P's. Invention is extraordinary. I think I may
therefore now well conclude this third thing, in the words which our Author
uses against me, (only professing a dislike to the word unfortunate Te facimus
fortuna Deam coeloque locamus, etc. is fitter for an Ovid, then for a
Christian. Austin disputes notably against it in his books, de Civit. Dei Lib.
4. c. 18. Lib. 5. Cap. 1. etc. Austin puts himself to a penance, for having
named it Retractat. Lib. 1. Cap. 1. Poenitet me nominasse fortunam, cum vide am
homines habere in pessima consuetudine ut ubi dici debuit, Hoc Deus voluit,
dicere, Hoc voluit fortuna. Sic Cap. 2. Lib. 1. Retract.
. Not only Charity, but good Nature, forbids the farther prosecution of so
unfortunate a Writer, whose great store of unskilfulness may to help excuse him.

. 4.

As for the fourth thing proposed, the Solution of Objections produced in
defense of his own Opinion, and in opposition to ours, spits and dashes of
Answers, will serve against them, the strength and force of them being already
broken by what has been thus far said.

Object. 1. p. 110. Where there is no efficient, there is no effect, that is to
say, There is nothing.

Answ. 1. In this, and in all the rest of his Object^ons, does he not clearly
contradict himself Sinner Impleaded, p. 178.
, when of sin he says elsewhere, that it was no part of Gods Creation, which
is most true, but how then comes sin to have a Positive Entity? Is not every
Positive Entity a Creature? he goes on, We find it not among the works of his
(...), set down or comprised in the first Chapter of Genesis. He indeed made
the Heaven and the Earth, but it was Wisdom. Chap. 1. 14.
to that end, that they might have their being. Ergo, then God gave being to
every positive being or thing, but he gave no being to sin, Ergo, sin as such,
has no positive being, as here he pleads.

2. It Is pitiful, when a man shall so flurt and flounce against his Neighbor,
for want of Logic and Metaphysics, and yet have so little of either, as not
to be able to distinguish betwixt a negative non ens, or nullity, and betwixt a
privative in subjecto Capabili, as betwixt a blind man and no man, a poor man
and no body. And in this to ^o he is but too like Pelagius, who concluded,
because sin was no substance, Ergo, it could not corrupt the soul, Pelag. apud
Aug. Lib. de not. and great. c. 19. Ante omnia quaerendum puto (inqu^t) quid sit
peccatum, substantia aliqua, an omnino substantia carens nomen, quo non res,
non existentia, non corpus aliquod, sed perperam facti actus exprimitur. Et
adjungit: credo ita est, and si ita est, quomodo potuit humanam debilitare vel
mutare naturam, quod substantia caret? finely agreed, Pelagius questions, if
sin be not a substance, how it can defile the soul: and Mr. T. P. asks how it
can damn the soul? and that here-hence Austin concludes, Cap. 21. Ibid. that
the very name of Jesus is extinguished, ut omnino frustra putetur, Vocabis
nomen ejus Jesum. Quomodo enim Salvum faciet, ubi nulla est agritudo? peccata
quippe substantiae non sunt, and secundum istum vitiare non possunt. His
Theological Consolator -- Boethius, who hartned him so much in his Apostatizing
from Calvinisme Correct Copy, p. 48, 49, etc. Sinner Impleaded. Boethius de
Consolat. Philosoph. Lib. 4. Quidquid a bono deficit, esse desistit: quo fit,
ut mali desinant esse quod fuerant. Sed fuisse homines adhuc, ipsa humani
corporis species ostentat; quare versi in malitiam, humanam quoque amisere
naturam, etc.
though he did only afford them Philosophical Consolation, when this Boethius,
(as T. P. also somewhere) maintains at large, that bad and vicious men, are not
so much as men, does he mean that they be pure nothings, Hob-goblings,
Chimaeraes, men in the Moon, or in some new Atlantis, or Utopia?

3. He has had time and wit enough to have learned, that though sin be nothing
positive, yet it is something privative, and is sounded, always in that which
is really something, as in a subject, act, etc. Malum habitat in al^eno fundo
Augustine. in Enchirid. Cap. 14. Si bonum non esset in quo malum esset, prorsus
nec malum esse potuisset: quia non modo ubi consisteret, sed unde oriretur
corruption non haberet, nisi esset quod corrumperetur.
. It is therefore horrid for him to subjoyn, that according to us, men are
eternally punished, for just nothing in the World, when as he knows, that we
all say, that men are punished for just nothing that is good, naturally or
morally; but for that which morally is stark-staring naught, viz. for their
(...), or Transgression of Gods Law.

Object. 2. p. 110. If wicked man is no more then the deficient cause of sin,
he is not so much the cause of it, as God himself, in their account, who say He
absolutely wills, that sin should fall out. Corrept. Correct, p. 78, 79, 73.
196. 54.

Answ. 1. God neither is, nor possible can be the deficient cause of sin,
because it is absolutely impossible, that he should in agendo deficere, be
deficient in his actions J. mer. P. lect. de Eccles. p. 80. Si quid fit boni,
Deo efficiente id fit, nempe author omnis boni est, effecitque in suis and
velle and perficere: Si quid mali fit, non fit deficiente, sed non faciente
Deo. Nam de ficere certe vel culpam, vel imperfectionem causae denotat, quorum
neutrum in Deum cadere potest.
; whereas man is both the efficient Cause, though not the supreme of the act of
sin, and he is the sole deficient, and in that respect, the sole cause of what
is properly sinful.

2. As for the Argument he brings from Gods absolute willing that sin shall
fall out, id est, the event of sin; (for that I do only understand in the
expressions which he mentions,) I had need to meet with Readers of extreme
false memories, and of most disingenuous hearts, as not willing to turn to the
very places which he objects, if I should suspect them to stand in need of more
than has been said in my Corrept. and in this defense of it. The sum of all
which, amounts but to that Dilemma, which for my Adversaries use, I have set
down out of Austin, in the Margin August. Enchirid. ad Laurent. Cap. 100. Deus
permittit (ait ille) peccatum volens aut invitus: non certe invitus, quia id
esset cum tristitia, and sic majorem haberet: si volens permittet, perm^ssio
est genus quoddam voluntatis. Contra Jul. Pelag. Lib. 5. Nos certe si cos in
quos nobis potestas est, ante oculos nostros perpetrare scelera permittamus;
rei cum ipsis erimus. Quam vero inn^merabilia ille permittit fieri ante oculos
suos: qua utique si noluisset nulla ratione permitteret.
, and unto which I am confident, no living man shall ever meet with any solid
answer from its greatest Anti-Augustinian opposers.

3. Man in all his actings, is, and ought to be under some known revealed Law,
Deuteronomy. 29. 29. God is tied to no such Laws, whose holy will is the only Law of
his proceedings.

4. If God should have no agency in and about the acts of sin, we were to
discharge him of all Sovereign power and gubernation of all things. He were
wholly to cease from all action about the most of actions, which are committed
in the World.

5. Man in sinning, uses not to separate the act, from the sinfulness adhering
to it; nor is it his place to bring light out of darkness, to sin, that good
may come thereof, as it is proper to God, efficaciously to permit sins, yet
without sin, for glorious ends, Genesis 50. 20. Isa. 10. 5, 6, etc.

Object 3. p. 112.

If this point be so abstruse, that Mr. B. does not understand it, Why does he
talk that into the universe of Readers, which is arrant Gibbrish to himself?
but if it is not so abstruse, who does he talk of, and on, affirming and
denying the very same thing? Ex. gr. in his p. 79. he says, the sinning
Creature is the sole efficient cause of his sin: yet in his p. 55. he said,
that sin has no efficient cause. Again, p. 79. he says, that sin's very
being, is consisting in deficiency.

Answ. 1. The abstruse point of Divine permission of sin, need not to be arrant
Gibbrish to Mr. B. and yet for the profundity of it, may be but a little
understood by him. But if Mr. T. P. J^b 4. 12.
do so perfectly understand it, as to find no abstruseness in it, he
understands (Horresco referens) more than Christ, considered as mere man upon
Earth, did, Matthew. 11. 26. more than his holy deep Apostle St. Paul, Romans 11.
33. more then the Psalmist 77. 19. more then the deepest Doctors that ever had
the handling of it. Which of them with Austin says not, Lib. 5. advers.
Julian. Pelagian. Quis non ista Judicia contremiscat, quibus agit. Deus in
cordibus etiam malorum hominum quicquid vult, reddens tamen eis secundum merita
ipsorum? Idem, tractatu in Johannem, Non ergo fratres ad hanc penetrandam
altudinem ad hanc abyssum discutiendam, and inscrutabilia perscrutanda
expectatio vestrae caritatis impingat. Agnosco modulum meum, sentire m^hi
videor etiam modulum vestrum. Altius est hoc incrementis meis, and fortius
viribus meis, puto quia and vestris etc. Si quis autem istam quaestionem
liquidius ac melius norit se posse exponere, absit ut non sim paratior discere
quam docere.

2. When Mr. B. says, Corrept. Correct, p. 79. that the sinning Creature is
the sole efficient Cause of his sin, he quite forgets to subjoyn the very next
words, If there can be an efficient Cause of that whose very being is
consisting in a defic^ency.

3. Sin being such a complicated unhappy thing as it is, always made up of an
act, and its obliquity; Mr. B. might well say, in different respects, that sin
has a true efficient Cause, and yet has only when he speaks most properly of
sin (as sin,) a deficient Cause, which yet in this moral matter, is tantamount
to an efficient Cause, as to the Sinner. Defectus est causa secunda in Aquin.
Lib. 3. advers. Gent.

Object. 4. p. 113. He is for a necessity of infallibility, as well as of
Coaction.

Answ. Neither he, nor Doctor Twisse, whom in these matters he hopes he shall
never be ashamed to have followed very much, allows not at all of any
necessitation, or coaction of man's will, which they hold, See Dr. Twisse,
vindic. Lib. 2. p. 22. 27, 28. and 30. Sed quid dico motionem Dei, qua voluntas
humana movetur immediate, non semper esse per viam compulsionis? cum potius in
confesso sit voluntatem ipsam cogi non posse, neque compulsionem pati. Thom.
Aquin. Lib. 3. advers. Gentiles, Cap. 72. Divina Providentia non excludit
contingentiam in rebus, nec eis imponit necessitatem: quia non excludit, causas
secundas. Ex causis autem Proximis effectus dicuntur necessarii vel
contingentes, non ex Remotis Causis.
cannot be forced by God himself, they allow only of a necessity of
infallibility, which by his principles, Mr. T. P. nor any of his party, will
ever be able to maintain.

Object. 5. If the Cause of sin is only deficient, not efficient, what will
become of the difference betwixt sins of omission, and sins of commission, p.
113.

Answ. 1. It will be as easy to conceive, how that distribution will hold, as
it is easy to conceive, that Mr. T. P's. Horse is ou^, or is in an error as
well, when he goes too fast, as when he goes too slow. He may have heard of a
Fellow, who complained, That his Horse did stand still faster then another man's
could go, on Salisbury Plain. Vide Dr. Twisse, Answer to Dr. Jacksons vanities.
Dr. Ames medulla. Lib. 1. Cap. 14.. 12.


2. He is miserably out, if he think the distribution betwixt sins of Omission
and Commission, to be a distribution of things different in their kinds, when
as they do only differ in their modes of acting; for in every moral Omission,
there is a voluntary Commission, more or less, and vice versa, and so both
ways there is a defect of what should be.

Object. 6. Which in Mr. T. P's, multifarious repetition of one and the same
thing, is his 7th and 8th, p. 114. as if he wete rolling Sisyphus his cold
stone. How many Privations are there (says he) of which God himself is the
first and chiefest Cause? The darkness of the night, is a privation of light,
which yet was one of the famous works of his Creation, Genesis 1. 4, 5. The Stone
and the Strangury, the Fever and the Pestilence, are not only Privative of
health* and pleasure, but they are constitutive of sickness, and torment.

Answ. 1. But will he allow of no difference betwixt Privations Physical and
moral, Thom: Bradward. Lib. 1. Cap. 1. p. 65. Nonne secundum omnes vere
Philosophantes, omne malum, scilicet pura malitia and peccatum, non est res
aliqua positiva, sed privatio vel carentia rei bonae, aut cujuspiam bonitatis;
Privatio autem in Subjecto apto plene tolli non potest, nisi per plenam
positionem habitus quem privabat; non enim ibi potest medium inveniri. Joh.
Cameron defens. contra. Epistol. Cujusdam, viri docti, p. 166. Tenebrae nil ut
loquuntur in Scholis habent positivi; Qu^d enim aliud tenebrae sunt quam lucis
privatio?
betwixt Privations which are only Poenal in a moral sense, as the Fever,
Pestilence, etc. and Privations culpable? Did ever man fancy that God, by
creating, or effecting these things, could become culpable; but would not every
one conclude, that he would so, if he were the proper Efficient Cause of sin,
as such?

Secondly, By the help of all the Philosophy and Divinity that he has in his
store, it will be hard for him to show how God is the cause of the Privations
which he mentions, otherwise then by not affording or withdrawing light,
health, ease, etc. Let that judicious, both Divine and Philosopher, the often
mentioned Bishop of Salisbury, be heard determining this point in his
Animadvers. p. 267. As for this distinction, the same which Mr. T. P's. p. 115.
and in the same case, of Negative and Positive Causing; it is obscure and
improper. The Air has heat and light, from the Positive Cause of the
Sunbeams; darkness, fogginess, coldness follows upon the Negation of the
Sunbeams; and yet neither the Sun, nor his beams, nor the retractions of his
beams, are the true and proper causes of coldness, or darkness in the Air. The
Reason himself has touched upon, because those dispositions, or qualities in
the Air, issue not from the Sun, per subordinationem effecti ad eausam, but out
of the nature of the Air only: That is a cause Per quam res est id quod est.
Thus the Sun is the true cause that the Air is hot and light. If by virtue
flowing from the absent Sun, it be made dark, then might we call the Sun a
cause of darkness. In proportion, we say the same of God, If from his decree of
non-election, there flow any darkness or pravity into man's will, or any
crookedness, and sinfulness into his actions, there were some color in terming
him a negative cause of man's sin: but this shall he never be able to
demonstrate.

Object. 7. In Mr. T. P. his p. 115. the 9th. Every privation, praesupposeth a
habit, which every sin cannot do, because a man may be covetous, or cruel, who
never was liberal, or compassionate.

Answ. And so in every sin committed, by any sinner, it cannot but be gran^ed
that he has, or at least in his first Parents, once had an habit to forbear
all sin, which it is yet his duty to have, and his defect to want, Eccles. 7.
29.

Object. 8. In him, his tenth, p. 115. is for the most part of it readily
granted him viz. That the Agent that is morally deficient, and in that
circumstance fails, and transgresses the Law, does yet effect and produce
the act^on which is so deficient and irregular.

Answ. 1. It has been oftentimes showed him, that man is the true and proper
cause of every sinful act, considered as an act, though he is not the only
cause of it, in genere entis physici, as it is a natural thing; but he, and he
alone, is the only cause of its Irregulation, by way not of proper efficiency,
but by way of most proper deficiency, in genere entis moralis, in the way of a
moral evil.

2. But how here-hence any of those loose consequences should follow, which he
mentions, p. 116. viz. That then God is not the Author of death. (The very
thing which he stourly pleads for, Chap. 2. of his Correct Copy, p. 21.) 2. or,
that he is the Author of sin, or of both or of neither, 3. or that the sinner
himself, is not the Author of sin, neither Man nor Devil; I say, I may suppose
no man sees, nor can he show, how these Sequels depend upon his own last
praemisses granted by me; and therefore I need no further to trouble others
about Calv. Contra Libertinos.
them. These be but desultations, a gallo ad ^sinum, skips as we use to say,
from the Cock to the Bull. I therefore leave these bulls, to stand for Bulls.

. 12.

To his Sect. 31. from p. 123. to 127. about his ramping and raging against the
names of Mr. Calvin and Doctor Twisse.

Answ. 1. Those men are as well calumniated, and so raged against, who have a
false sense fastened upon their words, as those be, who have false words devised
against them, or else our Saviors Evangelists knew not how to define a
Calumny, John 2. 19. 20, 21. with Matthew. 26. 61. and as little did David, Psalm.
52. 2, 3. with 2 Samuel 22. 9.

2. Unto the Worlds end, he will never be able to prove, that most impudent
assertion of his, p. 123. That he said no more of Doctor Twisse, and Mr.
Calvin, than Doctor Twisse himself has said, not only of Mr. Calvin, but of
all the rest of his own party, who place the Object of Predestination in massa
corrupta viz. that p. 124. he as a Supralapsarian should argue against the
Sublapsarians, as inferring God, by their way, to be of necessity the Author
of sin;

For first, To all those who ever have read Dr. Twisse, it is well known, that
he does very often ingenuously confess, that he was once a Sublapsarian Vindic.
Lib. 1. Saepissime.
, and yet then did not he believe, that God was the Author of sin.

2. Since from the lower way, he clambered up to the upper way, he diverse times
professes, that the differences betwixt the Supralapsarians, and
Sublapsarians, are only Logical, and me^aphysical, and not at all, or not
considerably Theological Lib. 1. p. 52. and alibi passim. Ingredimur
speculationem, de ordine decretorum divinorum, multo magis difficilem, meo
jud^cio, quam praesenti instituto necessariam. Neque enim nos in Arminio
reprehendimus, quod Creationem and Lapsum praestruxerit decreto
praedestinationis, sed quod sidem and infidelitatem. Sic p. 319. Col. 2.
.

3. Since he left the lower way, he has taken a world of p^ins, I think to
admirable purpose, for the reconciling of both parties Ibid. from p. 55. to 92.
which I am sure he would never have done, had he believed what Mr. T. P. does,
that they all do, and must maintain, that God is the Author of sin.

Yea fourthly, Most volum^nously since his betaking of himself to
Supralapsarianism, (give me leave now so to speak) he has spent above a 100.
of Pages in folio, to clear the Sublapsarians from all such crimes Answer to
Mr. Hoard, in his second part, from p. 128. to 299.
(even as Dr. Davenant, about the same time had done, much what, the same
Christian Office, for the Supralapsarians Doctor Davenants Animadversions
against the same Mr. Hoard, from p. 84. to 198. Psalm. 133. 2. behold, how good
and pleasant a thing it is, notwithstanding the seeming differences betwixt
these two great Doctors* to see Brethren to dwell together in unity.
though himself a Sublapsarian) in his Defense of the Synod of Dort and Arles,
both which, were for the Sublapsarian way, he stoutly See Doctor Twisse, in
defense of those Synods, an English pithy Book in quarto.
all along against Tilenus his Scoptick Libel, maintains, that no such matter,
will after any fashion, follow from the Doctrines of the Synods of Dort and
Arles, who yet are known to be for Sublapsarianism.

Fifthly, There is therefore nothing so plain, as that what Mr. T. P.
transcribes out of him, p. 124. that in the Judgment of all Sublapsarians the
Supralap. do infer God to be the Author of sin, for holding God to decree sin,
as a means accomodated, for God to attain to his purposed ends of
Praedestination, the Doctor speaks (b) V^ndic. Lib. 1. p. 87. Si hunc timorem
in anem esse docuero, ad omnem ad tum huic sententiae, praecludendum nihil,
puto, reliqui facturus sum.
not of what the Sublapsarians do usually infer against the Supralapsar^ans
(who are known every where to do the quite contrary) but of what they might be
apt to infer, if they by falling into the lower way, should gratify the
Arminians too much. He expresses what the fears of Sublapsarians might be not
what their Faith was, concerning their Brethren of the upper way. And therefore
in the following words, next ensuing those quoted by Mr. T. P. he shows how
vain their fear is, (g) and how little they gain by their seeming condescension
to their known adversaries, the stubborn Armin^ans.

Sixthly, It was impossible for him to charge the Sublapsarians with any such
crime, as Mr. T. P. charge them with, unless he would much more besmudge his
own Doctrine, from whence it may seem, and it does but seem, the crime will
more handsomely be concluded. But all those who are acquainted with the
perspicaciousness of that transcendently acute Doctor, will laugh at any man,
who surmiseth him to have been such a silly com senseless The Sublapsarian
opinion is cand^dly and pithily set down by Wollebius, in Compend. Theolog.
Christianae. Cap. 4. De praedestinat. These. 5. and 8. Peccatum non est
reprobation^s, causa impulsiva: sed materiae seu objecti, conditio necessaria.
Licet autem non causa sit Reprobationis, est tamen causa reprobabilitatis. 8.
Diversae quaestiones sunt. 1. Quo jure Deus hominem, creaturam suam, reprobet?
2. Cur non omnes sed quosdam elegerit, quosdam vero reprobarit? 3. Cur hunc e.
g. Petrum, elegerit, alium vero e. g. Judam reprobarit? Ad primum respondetur,
ex causa materiali, quia homo qua lapsurus, reprobabilis erat. Ad secundum, ex
fine; quia Deus gloriam miser^cordia and Justitiae patefacere voluit. Ad
tertiam denique, ex causa impulsiva; quia sic ei placuit.
.

Seventhly, Doctor Tw^sse had some reason, and that with some acrimony to
dispute against Moulin himself (the thing which Mr. T. P. cracks of, p. 125.)
in no less then 8. Chapters, who in what he holds about Reprobation, does not
only recede from the Supralapsarians, but from all the Sub-lapsarians too, who
only maintain the object of Reprobation to be man, considered on^y as lapsed in
Adam, but not as living and dying in final unbel^ef and impenitence. But our
valiant Chevalier, and great Champion, against no meaner man then Doctor
Twisse, should have tried his skill and strength, in con^u^ing of Dr. Twisse,
his 8. large Chapters against Moulin, rather then to have played at the sorry
small Game of nibling at some of his quick expressions; and upon that occasion,
flurting out into a digression of almost a page and a half, against Mr. Calvin's
style and temper, p. 125, 126, 127.

. 13.

To what he keeps a huge stir about, in no less then three several places (if
not more,) viz. in his 32.. p. 127, 128. in his. 34. p. 129. in his Chap. 4. p.
36. and all but about quoting Calvin instead of Zwinglius.

Answ. Mr. T. P. is the valiantest man at knocking a flea on the head with a
great Beetle, of any that ever I knew; ^or first, in civility, as his Correct
Copy says, p. 8. he forbeares to name the Authors which he musters up
together in his slanderous Decachorde, p. 9. 10. though he says, he had them
lying by him very particularly quoted and would produce them, if challenged by
any man's doubt, or curiosity: and then he crows over me, Phil. Chap. 4. p. 36,
37. because being blind folded by him, I mistook but one of them; for he cannot
deny, that I lighted right upon the rest, by no other d^rection, than what I
had from my Conjectures, what Authors those were which his stomach boyles most
against. And in reference to what I had found in a matter of 9. Quotations, of
10. I might be allowed to say, in my Corrept. p. 52. that to any attentive
Reader, he did quote them very particularly, as to Book, Section, and almost
L^ne.

Secondly, By the Pages which he quotes out of Mr. Calvin's Institutions, in the
margin of his Decachorde Correct Copy, p. 9. it is plain, that he follows one
Edition of Calvin's Institutions, and I another, which might somewhat mislead
me, where the pages agree not, as those in Correct Copy, do not at all, with my
Geneva one, in Octavo, printed 1585.

3dly, I'^e give him all the Books which are in my Study, for a halpenny, which
I should be loath to part withal, for a 150l. if the fourth Test^mony, which
he quotes out of Calvin, Lib. 1. C. 17.. 12. p. 66. be to be found in Calvin's
Book of Institutions, in the place quoted by him in either of the Editions of
his Correct Copy; and yet, he says peremptorily, Phil. Chap. 4. p. 50.. 36.
and by Bellarmine acknowledged to be there, Lib. 2. de amiss. Great. and statu
poccati Cap. 13. That I might have found that saying, if I had but turned to
the Chapter, Section and Page, set down expressly in his Notes; for how else
(says he) did I know, that he took that place out of Calvin, when he only
referred to the place, but concealed its Authors name.

Fourthly, The 9th place, quoted as plainly as can be by him, Correct Copy p.
10. out of Calvin's Institutions, Lib. 1. Cap. 18. p. 118.. 1. The words these,
in Latin, Si Dei Judicium est excaecatio and amentia Achab, nudae permissionis
sigmentum evanescit: quia rid^culum esset* Judic^m tantum permittere, non etiam
decernere quid fieri velit, and mandare executionem ministris, and by every
Reader to be had and found there, he is not ashamed to say in this his
Philanth. Chap. 4. p. 60.. 41. that it is taken from Dr. Twisse, and is by Mr.
B. again, imputed with great injustice to Mr. Calvin; and upon this, he plays.
p. 61. as if Mr. Calvin in his Grave* had expounded that saying of Dr. Twisse,
before Dr. Twisse was old enough to lie in his Cradle.

Fifthly, It was the easiest thing in the World for me, being ^o hood-winked by
him, as I was, to mistake Calvin for Zwinglius; not only 1. because most of the
former passages in his Decachord: were taken out of Calvin. 2. Or because I had
not Zwi^glius in my findy (a thing which Dr. Twisse is not ashamed to confess,
whilst he is de^ending of him against Bellarmine. Opera Zwinglii mihi
nequaquam supp^tunt. L^b. 2. p. 46. Col. 1.


3. But also for that both Zwinglius and Calvin, have wrote de Providentia
Divina, could I easily tell, whether he meant Zwinglius or Calvin de
Providentia; especially, when in Calvin lying by me, I find his Adversaries
laying much the same things to his charge, in the place quoted by me out of
Calvin de occult. Providentia, which Mr. T. P. charge Zwinglius with?

. 14.

To his new malicious Catalogue, drawn out from p. 132. to 140. as also to what
is fit to be answered to that jirksome Defense, which he makes for his former
Decachorde, Chap. 4, from p. 37. to 65.

Answ. If I can but prevail with any ingenious Readers, attentively to heed
those general Observations which in my Corrept. Correct, from p. 53. to 58. I
did promise to the formet Defense, which I made against his first Decachorde,
(a thing wholly neglected by him) little or nothing would be expected by them,
by way of answer to this larger Bede-rowl, which he draws ou^.

For 1. What would it conduce to the determining of the first main question, in
debate betwixt us, about absolute Reprobation, though some of the Phrases
quoted out of diverse owned Classical Authors, should not prove to be exactly
defensible?

2. What necessity compels any sober Orthodox Divine, to stand up in
justification of every Phrase, which in the heat of contention, dropped at any
time from the pens of Learned and Reverend Calvin, Peter Martyr, Twisse, etc.
whose writings we all value, but account not Canonical, we owe them our
Judgment, not our Faith Luther. Solis Canonicis debemus fidem, Caeteris
omnibus Judicium.
.

3. If that which all Reformed Churches, nay, I may say, all Churches in
Christendom hold, viz. That God is the Author of every act, as such in genere
entis physici and positivi, and that he is not an unwilling Permissor and
Ordinator, and Gubernator of all the evil of sin, which falls out in genere
mali moralis, and privativi, a thing which Mr. T. P. has scarce spirit enough
to deny outright as we have heard out of his p. 129. I am pretty confident,
that he should have the good leave of most of the Authors whom he does most
gracelesly traduce, to use as soft Phrases in the explicating of such matters,
as he could possibly think on. G. Voetum in methodo respondendi calumniis de
Deo authore peccati. Remonstrantes, omnes omnium adversariorum and
calumniatorum conatus superare voluerunt. Nec mirum, cum unicum hoc and
extremum causa suae praesidium, post omnia frustra tentata, sibi relictum
videant.


. 2. But seeing (as most Writers of his stamp, viz. Some such as that of R.
Rollocs in Roman. Cap. 8. v. 29. Decretum Dei duplex est: vel est decretum
(...) simpliciter: vel est decretum (...) secundum quid. Decretum secundum quid
voco, quod non simpliciter, and proprie decreti nomine vocatur; sed secundum
quid, and cum adjecto, decretum permission^s. Causa enim deficiens non proprie,
ac simpliciter causa est. Est autem tum cum decernit ac vult aliquid, at non
simpliciter, verum decernit and vult permittere ut illud fiat. Ideoque etiam
suo tempore non ipse efficit id proprie, sed permittit ut fiat a malis
instrumentis, etc. Horum (viz. malorum mediorum excaecationis, indurationis,
etc.) est decretum permissionis, non ut mala sunt: est quidem, fateor, respectu
malitiae and anomiae quae est in illis rebus, non autem respectu substantiae
ipsarum rerum and actionum: Cujus ut Paulo ante di^imus, decretum est
simpliciter divinum: verum non est decretum malitiae qua malitia est, sed qua
bonitatis rationem habet, etc.
had done before him, he places (if I may so speak) the fortunes of his Cause
in these his Collections, as unto the last safest refuge for the supporting of
it, I must crave the Readers patience, whilst I enlarge somewhat upon th^se
three following particulars, viz.

First, The opening of his most hateful design in this his Collection;
together, with his absurd and disingenuous ways of carrying it on.

2. Out of the Authors, wracked and barbarously tortured by him, I shall show
the genuine meaning of some of the harshest expressions which they use.

3. I shall give in some Reasons, why I need not be more particular in answer
to other particulars hudled up by him.

. 1.

About the first, 1. There is not a Reformed English Protestant of note, either
in Heaven, or above ground on the Earth, though otherwise in their way, they
may have been never so Episcopal, or ritual; but they have, and are ready to
express their zealous detestation against this execrable way of representing
most of the following Authors, as maintainers, either in words, that God is
the Author of sin, or that as he with an impudent mouth says, p. 130. that
they say a great deal worse, and in much worse Terms. Especially, since diverse
of the places quoted by him, if they be heartily considered, by what goes
before, or follows after, will evince the contrary; and since that many of
them in their Writings against the Libertines, which are full of acrimony, and
sting against them, Take one Testimony for all, out of Calvin. Contra Libert.
C. 4. Duae rations me ad istos nominandos impulerunt, qui alioqui ne mentione
quidem ulla digni sunt: tantum abest, ut Chartae debeant eorum nomine
conspurcari. Primum nonnulli qui ignorabant quid sibi vellet Libertinorum
nomen, id Quintini nomine cognituri sunt. Expedit etiam Belluas adeo
perniciosas nota aliqua insigniri, ut dignosci possint ab unoquoque: nec
quisquam non monitus damnum aliquod recipiat. Caeterum minime ignoro me hand
gratum omnibus facturum, quod eos nominem. Sed quid agerem? Cum quatuor
ganeones (aut tres saltem) video, qui plusquam quatuor millia hominum in
exitium duxerunt, etiamnum hunc assidue lapidem volvere ut evertant veritatem
Dei, miseram Ecclesiam dissipent, in errorem abduca^t omnes, quos irretire
possunt, blasphemias execrabiles spargant, and, quod omnium deterrimum est,
totum orbem perturbent ea confusione a qua bestia ipsae abhorrerent: an tacere
debeo aut dissimulare? Nullum autem est Latrocinium adeo scelestum, nec venenum
adeo perniciosum quam execrabilis haec Doctrina quae eo tendit ut non solum
Christianam Religionem, sed etiam honestatem omnem atque humanitatem dissipet
ac deleat, quae hactenus inter Turcas ipsos and infideles valuit.
do abundantly evince the contrary.

Reverend Doctor Reynolds (I thank him) directs the Reader to many English
Protestants, who express their just Indignation against such odious Suggestions
as Mr. T. P. uses, unto which many more might be added, if need were. I shall
only wish him seriously to mind how Dr. Crackenthorp does represent this his
proceedings, when he met with it in that noted Apostate from Protestantism
Archbishop Spalato, Crackenthorp. Defens. Eccles. Anglican.
in his Defense of the Church of England, Chap. 36.

The second notorious Haeresie of the Puritans, mentioned by you, is, that God
is the Author of sin. This is an old Calumny, most lyingly, out of your
School, objected by Fevardentius, Dialog. L. 2.
Bellarmine, Lib. 2. de amiss. Great. Cap. 3. 4, 5. and seq.
and others, against Calvin, Beza, Peter Martyr, and the Calvinists, which has
often times been confuted more clearly than the light. If there were in you,
either shame, or piety, or modesty, or any the least love of the truth, you
would long have repented in Sackcloth and in ashes, for such an impudent
calumny. But being now past the bounds of shamefastness, you are become so
sedulously impudent, and have drawn such a brawn upon your Consciences and
foreheads, as also upon your Papers and pens, that as the Prophet says, you do
proclaim your sins like Sodom, and with a stubborn mind, which Sodom never did,
you stand up in the Patronage of it. That same Crambe or Coolworts so
oftentimes, not without loathing served in, you do here again boil up, serve
in, and by a most signal calumny, object unto Calvin, Beza, and the Calvinists.
But know you, that that Haeresie, and horrid Blasphemy, has by word, and
writings, and reasons, been rejected and condemned, and has been so clearly,
nervosely, and solidly rejected by them, as that when your men handle this
cause, they do seem to be very Children, and Babes to them: so sordidly do your
toys and dirty puddles, appear to be, when compared with their clear writings.

Secondly, Though this design be highly Jesuitical, yet when the worst of
Jesuits have all said, and all done against us, the force of truth is such, as
that it wrings, even from a Bellarmin's pen, a Confession in effect, the same
to what he had most voluminously opposed, Bellarm. (citante D. Crackenthorp.
Cap. 36. ejusdem defensionum) Lib. 1. de Amiss. Great. Cap. 1. In peccato duo
reperiuntur, substantia quae est materiale, and ratio ipsa quae est formale
peccati. Substantia peccati est actio aliqua voluntaria, vel voluntaria actonis
omissio. Ratio peccati est ipsa declinatio, seu recessio a Regula in illa
action. Actio tota est a Deo, ab ipso habet non solum esse genericum, sed and
specificum and singular. Deformitas autem ipsa, seu declinatio, quae est
formale peccati, Deo tribui non potest, nec tam causam habet efficientem quam
deficientem, etc. Suarez De concursu Dei Lib. 1. C. 2. N. 7. Pererius Vega, etc.
and so as that the more modest sort of them, became Apologists for
Protestants, Armin. De efficaci. provid. These. 14, 15, 16. etc.
and the like has befallen Arminius himself, and his more graver followers
Armin. De efficaci. provid. These. 14, 15, 16. etc.
.

Thirdly, What can all this serve for, but to render the soundest classical
Protestant Authors odious, that in the room of them, among young Divines, and
others, room might be made for the worst of Pontificians, for his prodigious
Grotius, his Sebastian Castalio, and other Socino-Remonstrantes, which Mr. T.
P. himself, has lately taken into his bosom Chap. 3. p. 144. 149. etc.
?

Fourthly, He has a forehead to thrust in among Reformed Authors (whom in
scorn, but for this scorn I thank him) he calls my Masters, p. 136. Hobs of
necessity and liberty, p. 22. 23, 24, etc. and another Book, called, Comfort
for Believers, which by the late Reverend Assembly of Divines at Westminster,
was judged worthy of the fire, and was by the then Parliament of both Houses,
condemned to it.

Fifthly, This Objection of Gods being the Author of sin, to the Orthodox, is
but an old musty stale protrite objection of the Pelagians August. ad Articulos
sibi falso impositos, Prosper ad excerpta genuensium. Object. 6. Quod Deus tale
in hominibus plasmet arbitrium, quale est daemonum, quod proprio motu nihil
aliud possit vel velit nisi malum.
and yet he that will seem to be a great Anti-pelagian, makes it the strongest
against us, that he knows how to produce any.

. 2.

As to the second thing proposed, p. v^z. about the Genuine meaning of the
harshest Phrases which he has been able to pick up out of the Orthodox
Writers, nothing would need at all to be said to it, if in his heart, there had
been any the least charity G. Voetius upon this occasion said well. Method.
Respondend. Calumniis, p. 1136. Nullo modo verisimile est viros in Scripturis,
and patribus, nominatim Augustino, nec non Lombardo and Thoma Aquinate,
eorumque sectatoribus* insuper in Linguis, artibus, and Philosophia versatos,
tam crassa, stupida, absurda, contradictionem implicantia, horrida, blasphema
and scandalosa, contra omnem Theologiam and universi Christianismi consensum,
contra omne dictamen luminis naturalis, and rectae rationis, contra propria
placita, proposu^sse aut defendisse. Cogitetur quales and quanti-fuerint,
Lutherus, Zwinglius, Bucerus, Calvinus; Beza, Martyr, Zanchius, Danaeus,
Perkinsus, Gomarus, etc.
toward many eminent Authors of the greatest renown, for Learning and Piety,
who in their lives, having expressed so much holiness and hatred to sin, and in
their works so much depth of Learning were never like to be the Authors of so
foul, sottish, unholy an opinion, as he would fain pin upon them. The least
measure of good affection toward their persons and labors, would have put him
upon other-guess glosses, for the finding out their meaning Gerson de vita
Spirituali animae seu 1. Coroll. 11. Notetur hic quod doctores, etiam Sancti,
sint magis reverenter glossandi in multis, quam ampliandi, quoniam non omnes
semper adverterunt ad proprietatem locutionis. Improprietas autem non ampliari
debet, sed ad proprietatem reduci: abioqui quid mirum si augetur deceptio?
. Such men as he traduceth, were never like to need an Apology, like that of
the Poet, Lasciva est nobis pagina, vita proba.

I shall therefore say the less in a known case, to what he brings out of
them, viz. that one of them says in Terminis, p. 125.

1. That God is the Author of sin, that they all say. 2. God wills sin, that
some say. 3. He impels to it. 4. Yea, Forces men to it.
To the first then, p. 135. That Satan is judged to be the Author of evil,
(whether of sin, or of punishment) one way, and God another way?

Answ. 1. I for my own part, do at no hand like it, that God should be said to
be the Author of any culpable evil.

But 2. A little Candor and attention in our Anti-Zwinglian to the Phrase which
he sets upon the Tenter-hooks, for racking; would have served him to have
interpreted it.

1. Of the Author of the evil of punishment, rather then of the evil of sin,
in the sense of the Prophet Amos 3. 6. Shall there be evil in a City, and the
Lord has not done it? Zwinglius his words lie as fair for the one, as for the
other.

2. Or if at all of the evil of sin, yet not at all, as a moral Author, so as
the Devil is by way of persuasion, inward suggestion, infusing of malice, in
which sense alone, any becomes the Author of sin, to speak properly.

4. Is it credible, that Zwinglius will be understood of any other Author or
Cause, then as of a non removens prohibens, or then as of a Causa per accidens,
a mere occasion, so as fire, if men stand too near, is the Cause of men's
schorching their shins, as a Sword is of a man's killing, when it is in the hand
of a mad man. Just so as Peter Martyr explains himself in the like case? Si
minus proprie loqui velimus, Deus poterit aliquo modo d^ci, aut initium, aut
causa peccati, non propria quidem, sed ea quae non removens prohibens
appellatur Loc. Commun. Loc. 13.. 7.


3. I have some reason to believe, that if he had met with harsh Phrases, in
some Popish Authors, he would by no means, have made such a Tragical
Representation of them. Medin. in 1. 2. q. 79. a. Ocham and Gabriel affirmant,
quod Deus in rigore, and in proprietate locutionis est causa peccati.


Secondly, About Gods willing of sin.

Answ. 1. How that is understood by Orthodox Writers, has been often explained.

2. Let us but a little hearken how Calvin explains himself about it, against
his Calumniator (Mr. T. P's. renowned Martyr Castalio, Phil. Chap. 3. p. 139.)
Respons. ad Calumnias Nebulonis. p. 732. 1. Calvin will not grant God to will
evil by it self, i. e. as it is evil; but in men's Crimes, Gods Judgments are
resplendent, as by the incestuous lying of Absalom, with his Father's
Concubines he did punish the Adultery of David.

He understands it in no other sense then the greatest Schoolmen had, with
applause understood it in the Church, before ever Calvin's eyes were open See
about this at large. Thom. Bradward. de causa Dei Lib. 1. c. 34. Si adhuc
dicatur quod semper male sapit multis, dicere Deum qualitercunque velle
peccatum, pro certo verum est, and hoc forsan secundum Hugonem; non quiae quod
dicitur non been dicitur, sed quia quod been dicitur non been intelligitur.
Utinam igitur acciperent Salem Sapientiae, saperent, and intelligerent sapidam
sano gustui veritatem, scirentque nullum esse malum in mundo, quod non est
propter aliquod magnum bonum, and forsitan propter aliquod majus bonum: cur
ergo, etc.
.

Thirdly, About Gods impulse to sin, which he often objects against Calvin,
Chap. 4. p. 44, 45. and passim, and against Piscator, Chap. 3. p. 133. That God
does drive, or thrust men on unto wickedness.

Answ. 1. Neither of them understand it, in such a flagitious and
unconscionable manner, as he would have his credulous Readers believe, that I
hold it, Phil. Chap. 4. p. 42. and had in Corrept. Correct, p. 61. l. 2. 3.
spoken (as he says) something to that purpose, viz. that as we put spurs to a
dull Jade, to make him go faster, so God does stir up wicked men (or dull
sinners, such as are but slow at sinning of themselves) that they may sin so
much the faster, or with more mettle, and become as it were, gallopers in the
carrier of sinning; as if of themselves, they were not infinitely too fleet,
but rather needed stirring up; for in this case, who sees nor, that this kind
of Impulsion, would be altogether a contrary inclination to the parties stirred
up, and contrary to the scope; for which, as any body may see and read, I
brought the Simile of the dull Jade, to prove, that man, in the Simile, would
not be Author of the halting, but of the going of the Horse.

2. But Calvin and Piscator, as they explain themselves, understand it only of
Gods natural agency of the act of sin, and his Sovereign ordering and governing
of sins obl^quity. Hear them speaking together in Piscator's Aphorisms, a true
Epitome of Calvin's Institutions. Loc. 6. These. 3. Though God by his providence
do govern sin, yet he is not the cause, or Author of sin: because he delights
not in sin, but does rather abominate it: neither does he sin, or can he sin,
because he neither commands sin, nor persuades to it, nor does he infuse any
malice into sinners, nor compel them unto sin; and besides, he directs all unto
a good end.

3. Neither of them, nor the Correptory Corrector, in the Simile which he carps
at, understand more, if so much, as his Arminius himself professedly grants
against Perkins, p. 176. I answer, that I do by no means exempt from Gods
efficiency, the act which is not, without sin, committed by the Creature; yea,
I profess openly, that God is the cause of all acts, which are perpetrated by
the Creatures; but that I do mainly desire this, that that efficiency of God,
may be so explicated, that nothing may be derogated, from the liberty of the
Creature, nor that the guilt of sin be not ascribed to God: that is, that it
may be showen, that God indeed is the effector of the act, but only the
permissor of the sin; yea, that God is both the effector and permissor of one
and the same act. These later things are as much performed by Calvin, Piscator,
and those who follow them, as I think any body will be able to prove the matter
to be capable of.

Fourthly and lastly, What has been said about other Phrases, will serve for
that of Coaction, unto which, add only;

Answ. 1. Orthodox Writers use it very seldom.

Secondly, Whenever they do so, they do mostly at the same time, acknowledge
they speak improperly: because they understand it not of a Coaction, which
destroys the will of man, but rather of such a one, as proceeds from the
fierce Impetus, and Inclination of a sinners will Paraeus explains it well in
his defense of Zwinglius against Bellarmine. Qui cogit, impellit, nempe
invitos, and cum intention peccati, is est causa peccati: Qui vero cogit
impellit volentes, sponte ad opus malum ruentes, non intention peccati, sed
justi sui operis; is quidem per se causa est boni operis quod intendit, peccati
vero causa vera and unica est ipse impulsus sponte peccans; ut si tu (and
contra T. P. Cap. 4. p. 42.) equum ultro claudicantem impellas ad motum; tu
quidem causa eris motus, quia nihil nisi motum intendisti, claudicationis vero
causa erit equus ultro claudicans, etc. in castigationibus ad Libros Bellarm.
de Amiss. great. and Stat. peccat.
.

Thirdly, They speak not any thing so harshly, as Bellarmine himself does,
after all his wranglings against Protestants, when he says, that God does
draw, yea, torture the will Bellarm. de amiss. great. and statu peccati. Lib. 2.
Cap. 13. Deus dicitur per quendam Tropum imperare, at que excitare ad malum,
praesidet ipsis voluntatibus malis, easque regit, gubernat, torquet and
flectit, etc.
, against whom it will concern, Mr. T. P. not to be half so invective, as he is
against Calvin, and the Reformed, lest he should prove unthankful unto him for
most of the Scriptures, Reasons Authorities, which out of him he has produced
in his Correct Copy, and in this his Philanthropy, in the matt^r of proving
against Calvin, etc. that God is not the Author of sin.

Fourthly, When they come to explain themselves, they do but deliver-in the
current School- Doctrine of all the Thomists Alvarez Disp. 2^. 9. Deus motione
praevia efficaciter applicat voluntatem creatam ut libere and infallibil^ter
operetur* sicut etiam applicat alias causas secundas, ut naturaliter operentur.
.

. 3.

As to the third thing, viz. why I need not to deliver in any more particulars,
by way of answer to what in my Corrept. Correct. I had brought in against his
Decachord Correct Copy, p. 9. 10. against which he is extremely Luxuriant,
Phil. Chap. 4. from. 33. to p. 37. to the end; these few Reasons ought to
satisfy any man.

First, It cannot be done, without needless Repetitions of what I have often
upon several occasions delivered already.

2. Neither my self, nor any body else, need to be over sollicitous, what
becomes of Dr. Twisse's, or of my particular expressions, when as otherwise our
meaning in them, is sufficiently made known, so as none without wilfulness, can
be mislead by them.

Thirdly, This task has abundantly, yea, redundantly been performed by many
others. I Will name but a few of them, and those who may most commonly be had.
Calvin against the Libertines. David Paraeus in his Castigations of Bellarmines
Books, De amiss. gratiae and statu peccati (out of which Cardinal's writings
for the most part all those Catalogues are drawn out, which fly up and down
against Zwinglius, Calvin, Beza, Zanchy, Ursin, Peter Martyr, etc. Gisbertus,
Vo^^i^s, in a select tract by it self, subjoyned to the first part of his
select Theological disputations, entitled, Methodus Respondendi excerptis and
calumniis de Deo autore peccati, p. 1119. etc. Pithy and acute Doctor Ames,
Tom. 40. Bellarmini Enervati, Cap. 2. de causa peccati. And above them all,
voluminous Dr. Twisse in his full Answer to all that Jacob Arminius vindic.
Lib. 2. a p. 27. usque ad 140. had challenged all the Orthodox to answer, and
which under the following heads, Bellarmine had brought in against the
Protestants, in fifteen Chapters of his second Book, de amiss. great. and stat.
peccati: wherein that stomackful and slanderous Champion of Rome, labors to
prove; that they maintain,

1. That God is truly and properly the Author of sin. 2. That God does verily
and properly sin. 3. That God alone does sin, and not man. 4. That with the
Libertines, they maintain sin to be nothing. 5. That the Opinions which he pins
upon them, are against Scriptures, Fathers, and natural Reason. 6. He pretends
to answer to all the Scriptures and Arguments which the Protestants bring for
themselves.
Who ever can but be entreated to peruse any of these Authors, but especially
the latter, upon these Arguments, will need no Apology, to be made by me for
them, but will receive it for themselves.

Purius ex ipsis fontibus bibuntur aquae Fourthly, I am well assured, that what
I shall at this time omit to do, will, before long, to the ample satisfaction
of all good Scholars, be fully performed by my Reverend and learned friend,
Doctor George Kendall, in his answer to Fur Praedestinatus, which contains a
Catalogue, as like to that which Mr. T. P. draws out, Chap. 3. p. 132. etc. as
if so be Mr. T. P. were Fur Fraedestinatus alter, and his very second, pretend
he what he please, in his Asiatick excursion to the contrary, Chap. 3. p. 144.
145.

Fifthly, We have already very often seen, how basely he abuses the Correptory
Correct. contrary to his very Conscience; yea, very eyes: (a Book as were most
fitting, like to be in any man's hand, into whose hands his should light, in
which Book, as he says, Chap. 4. p. 60. I call Mr. Calvin wicked Calvin, that
I conclude the necessity of railing, p. 12. 1. 4, 5, 6, 8.) now he that does
thus shamefully wrest a writing, easy to be had, and to be read by all English
men; how much more bold will he be with other Authors, not so easy to be
procured? Ex ungue Leonem. Further searching into him, would but serve to
discover the shame of his nakedness: of which, we have had enough already.

. 13.

To what he has about Adams inclination to sin, before the Fall, Chap. 4.. 24.
He has a strangely weak and false assertion of A. Rivet, in the Margin of his
38. page, which he says, will prove unavoidably true, viz. that they who
affirm an inclination to sin before the Fall, do lay all the fault of the sin,
upon God the Author of nature; since such an inclination cannot but be
vicious, which yet must needs have been from God, if it were before the fall.

Answ. 1. It is well known, that Learned Doctor Rivet could tell how to make
very strong Scholastic Arguments, before Mr. T. P. did ever so much as peer
in Divi Luminis Auras.

2. Possibly he might blush, had I leisure to show how many eminent Doctors in
the Church, have used that Argument, as well as he.

3. He has not, as yet, showed how Adam had, or possibly could have any thing
before the Fall, but what he had from God, and Ergo, if he had this inclination
unto sin in him, (and that prove but to be sinful, as I shall show presently)
before the fall, it will follow inevitably, that God is the Author of sin, or
he is not the Author of all that Adam had before the fall; and so he has not
enervated Dr. Rivet's Arguments; but whatever he declaims against others, who
are innocent of it, he himself maintains God to be the Author of sin.

4. Now that an inclination unto sin, which is as a weight-Plummet inclining,
or as I may so say, ballasting the soul unto sin, is in it self sinful, I prove
thus, That which comes from sin, and only tends to it, and is terminated in it,
as it is such, that must needs be sin. But every inclination unto sin, does so;
Ergo, Aug. contra Julian: Lib. 4. Cap. 1. and 2. De concupiscentia, inquit,
nihil boni agitur de ipsa, nihil boni agit ipsa, nihil bon^ concupiscitur ex
ipsa, sed and malum est quicquid concupiscitur per ipsam. Job 14. 4.
. The Apostle in effect, proves this Argument, when he shows us, that all
sinful inclinations, or the primo-primi motus unto sin (as they be called) are
under a prohibition, even before they be actually consented to, Romans 7. 7. The
Law says, thou shall not lust. So James 1. 14, 15. and this was Austins
Argument long since They be sharp words in Austin, in opere posthumo Lib. 1.
advers. Jul. Cap. 68. Videant qui legunt utrum respondendum sit homini, qui in
tantam progreditur insaniam, ut confiteatur malum esse peccatum, bonam esse
dicit concupiscentiam peccatorum, etc. Et quod intolerabilius dieitur, ad malum
provocabat, and malanon fuit. Item. Lib. 13. de civit Dei, express asserit non
potuisse esse concupiscientiam peccati, ubi nullum fuit peccatum, quia non est
nullum peccatum, ea quae lex Dei prohibet non concupiscere.
.

2. If an inclination unto sin, be not sinful, then Adam was miserable, before
he was sinful, or else (which I think no Child of God, acquainted with sin,
will dare to say) its no part of a man's misery, to have inclinations unto sin,
Romans 7. 24.

3. If the Image of God, according unto which, Adam was created in true
righteousness and holiness, whilst he stood, preserved him not from
inclinations unto sin, it was given him to no purpose; yea, (which is
formidable to utter) man had the Devils Image upon him, as well as Gods; for
lustings unto sin, are by our Savior called the Devils lustings, John 8. 44.

4. Adam before his fall, had something to fight against, or else he was not to
fight against inclinations to sin. But how contrary is this to the sweet
Harmony which in the first Adam at his first Creation, was betwixt the inferior
and superior faculties of the soul Aug. contra Pelag. Lib. 2. Cap. 23. Nanc
obedientiam prin squam violassent homines, placebant Deo, and placebat eis
Deus; and quamvis corpus ani^ale gestarent, nihil inobediens in illo adversus
se movere sentiebant.
?

5. If inclination unto sin, be no sin in its own nature, then it cannot become
so by yielding unto it. No man sins by yielding unto a good, or to an
indifferent suggestion. If it be not fowl before I touch, my touch cannot make
it so, unless my hands be so. If the Tree be not naught, the fruit cannot be so.

6. What sense can there be in it to imagine Inclinations unto sin, to have
been in the first Adam, before his Fall, more then there was in the Angels,
before they left their first station, Jude v. 6. or will he and his party, in
the pure nature of Angels, as at first created by God, maintain Inclinations
unto sin? what would this be, to use his own Phrase, Correct Copy, p. but to
maintain, that men and Angels too, were betrayed by the guide of their youth.

7. If inclination unto sin, before actual sin were no sin, what need he be shy
of granting it to Christ, when he says, p. 24. that the Devil tempted our
Savior, but could not possibly prevail, because he had not inclination to any
the least evil? Sin only excepted, was not Christ in all things like unto us?
Heb. 4. 15. I may suppose, by that time he has studied his S. Castalia, his
applauded Martyr more Phil. Chap. 3. p. 148, 149.
, he will with him maintain, that even Christ had inclinations to sin, or else
(for that is the goodly Argument Castalio brings for it) he could not have been
virt^ous Seb. Castal. Dialog.
. If Christ (says he) were necessarily good, he was not good at all. Necessity
excludes all choice.

8. To maintain inclinations to sin, to be no sin, is as pure a Pelagian Which
he learned from Pelagius, who maintained it to have been in Christ, and in the
very bodies of glorious Saints, after the Resurrection, vide C. Jansen. Tom. 1.
Lib. 3. Cap. 7. p. 142, 143. and upon the very same grounds (e). Aug. Lib. 4.
Cont. Julian. c. 2. Itane babere tecum Libido and amicitiam meretur and Bellum,
ut abs te and expugnetur in te and defendatur adversum me? bellum vestrum latet
am citia patet. Ex hoc quod patet. suspectum facis esse quod latet etc. quomodo
vis ut arbitremur adversus aculeum te dimicare Libidinis cum libros impleas
laud Libidinis?
, Popish Canon. Council. Trident. Sess. quinta. Hanc concupiscentiam quum
aliquando Apostolus peccatum appellat, sancta synodus declarat Ecclesiam
Catholicam nunquam intellexisse peccatum appellari, quod vere and proprie in
renatis peccatum sit, sed quia ex peccato est and ad peccatum inclinat.
, Arminian and Socinian, a tenent Armin Artic. perpend paragraph, p. 18.
Inclinationem ad peccandum in homine ante lapsum fuisse, licet non it a
vehementem and inordinatam. Sic Corvinus citante D. Walaeo contra Corvinum, p.
254. 282. and alibi edit. in quarto.
, as ever ^ell from the pens of any of those parties. And for all this goodly
Divinity, I suppose my Neighbor is beholding to his great friend, Dr. Tailor,
who taught it him, in his Chapter of Original sin.

. 2. I but against all this, he objects 1. p. 24. l. 4, 5, 6. Had not Eve an
inclination to the forbidden fruit, before she eat it? was it not fair to look
on, and did not this incline her eye, etc?

Answ. 1. She had an inclination, before she did actually eat it, but not
before the seduction of her understanding, and the corrupting of her will had
wrought in her, that inclination. Austin was wont to say, that as to the very
first sin of all, voluntas trahebat concupiscentiam, non concupiscentia
voluntatem. The corrupt will was a Shooing-horn to concupiscence, not
concupiscence to the will. Austin advers. Julian. Pelag. opere posthumo, Cap.
68.

Object. 2. Ibid. L. 30. 31 etc. Whence was the sin, if there was no
inclination? Not from Eve her self, who if she had no inclination, had no
temptation from within: not from the Devil, whose temptations have no force, if
contrary to all our Inclinations.

Answ. 1. What if we should say, that we cannot tell how to answer these
Questions? certain we are, that sin is come into the World, and that Romans 5.
12. by one man, instigated to it, by the Devils temptations, but not at all by
God Eccles. 7. 29. August ad Artic. 13. falso sibi impositum. Si ab justitia,
and pietate quis deficit, suo in praeceps fertur arbitrio, sua concupiscentia
tra^itur. Nihil ibi Pater, nihil Filius, Spiritus sanctus, etc.
. But further, the Scripture being silent, we cannot at all tell. Non sunt
neganda aperta, quia non tenentur operta seu occulta, plain things are not to
be denied, because secret things cannot be known. We need not to seek after
crevices and wickets, when the door is open. And this answer either satisfied
his Learned Professor, J. Arminius himself, or then when he was about it, he
durst give in no other, but withdrew his hand Armin. contra Perkins. p. 98.
Ingredimur hic, Perkinse Doctissime, tractatum difficilimum, and vix
expl^cabilem, mihi saltem Tyroni adhuc, et in istis apicibus Theologiae sacrae
non satis exercitato. Audebimus tamen aliquid; but when now he should perform
his promise, he slings up his pen, and makes a halt, as may be seen on the
place.
. It will become all Christian D^vines well, to be more studious, how to get
sin out of the World, then over tediously to dispute, how it came in at first.

2. Whom this Answer contents not, as a very Learned Divine has very well
observed J. Camer. Defens. contra Epist. cujusdam, viri docti, p. 163. Ai^
nullam posse dari causam primi p^ccati primi hominis praeter Diaboli
instinctum: cum esset is ita a Deo creatus ut mutabilis esset qui miremur si
impulsu Satanae dejectus fuit de gradu and statu: quid enim aliud dici possit?
An hoc factum ideo quia cessit loco, quia se non pr^buit cautum and
consideratum? At haec ipsa negligentia peccatum fuit, etc. Nulla peccati Adami
in Adamo reddi causa potest, qu^ non sit ipsa peccatum, quaeque ipsa, non
aperiat fenestram novae subinde quaestioni, atque ita in infinitum.
, they must fall upon the absurdity of a Progressus in infinitum, or of
something primo prius, before the first, the very things so irrationally
objected here, p. 24. against the Orthodox.

3. Adam and Eve, at first might have no inclination to sin at all, yet by God,
according to what the condition of every Creature at first did require, being
made not in an immutable, but mutable condition, he was not naturally
inclinable to fall, yet liable to it, if he would so do. As it is possible for
any one man to destroy himself, so as to become his own Executioner, (it is
Austins Simile, in the very case before us) Aug. E^chirid. Sicut enim mori est
in hominis potestate cum velit; nemo est enim, qui non sese ipsum, ut nihil
aliud dicam vel non vescendo possit occidere: ad vitam vero tenendam non satis
est, si adjutoria sive alimentorum sive quorum cunque tutaminum desint. Sic
homo in Paradiso ad se occidendum, relinquendo justitiam, idoneus erit per
voluntatem; ut ab eo teneretur vita justitiae, parum erat velle, nisi ille, qui
illum fecerat, ad juvaret.
; yet I trow, all men have not inclinations to cut their own throats, a thing
most abhorrent to nature. This possibility of Adam's falling, was a consequent
of his being a Creature, qua a Creature, distinct from his Creator, but was
not, as Mr. T. P. fancieth, p. 25. exsua natura, a gift of God: yet it was
matter enough for the Devil to work upon, who had unhappily before man, reduced
his sinless possibility to sin, into the abhorred act of sinning, Jude 6.

Thirdly, It is therefore now most easy, for any man to see how impossible it
is, that by our Tenants, who deny God to have made our first Parents, with so
much a^ any inclination unto sin, we should maintain God to be the Author of
sin, as he objects, p. 25. and in like sort he may as easily see how impossible
it is for the Adversary, who maintains the contrary, to avoid the force of his
own Objection.

. 14.

To what he has Chap. 4. p. 25, 26, 27.. 25. in his Plea for Infants. He
accuses me of saying, That Infants are harmless, notwithstanding original sin,
and that none in the World, dying Infants, are damned in his p. 39. But first,
in my p. 9. which he cites, there is not any such thing. And secondly if there
were, it were not liable to reproof.

Answ. 1. Both the things which I object, Corrept. Correct, p. 39. are plainly
in so many words and syllables, in his first uncorrect Copy, which I followed,
and unto which, I do there most expressly refer.

2. If the latter were not to be found in the Manuscript, which I objected, yet
it is at large to be found in his Sinner Impleaded Sinner Impleaded, Chap. 3.
p. 147. No truth shines clearer to me then this, that no man ever has
suffered, or ever shall suffer eterrall death, for no other sin then that of
Adam, (which in all his writings, he does all along confound with Original sin).
.

3. The former he does, in this his Infantile Plea for Infants, maintain not to
be liable to reproof, and therefore he should not have blamed me, for laying an
harmless Opinion (as he takes it to be) to his charge.

4. In all this his Plea for Infants, p. 25, 26, 27. he does either most
shamefully mistake me, as if I would have blamed him, for maintaining, that
Infants are comparatively harmless, and actually so, as to any injurious
thought, word or deed: (I gave him small rea on to make such a ridiculous
misrepresentation of me) or else he does, without any the least haesitation,
maintain, that all Infants are absolutely, originally, and habitually so, from
the Birth, the Womb, and the Conception, and may for harmlesness, be compared
with Job, David, Zachary, Elizabeth, the Philippians, who all, as we know, were
renewed by the spirit of Gods grace, to that innocence and sanctity which they
attained to. And is this the condition of all Infants, who are free from actual
sin? If so, first, what becomes of Original sin? No wonder, that Chap. 4. p.
27. L. 1. 2. he seems to make a mere nominal sin of it, when he says,
(according to others) that they are polluted with that sin which is called
Original, because it never was actually committed by them, though for the
covering of the shameful nakedness of that expression he presently subjoyned;
(for expiation of which, their Savior dyed.) Ergo. Infants had original sin,
but now have none?
Is he not as highly a Pelagian, as Pelagius himself was, at his very first and
worst setting August. Epist. 106. Peccatum Adami ipsum solum laesit and non
genus humanum. Gelas. in Epist. ad Episcopos per Picenum, citante J. Latio Lib.
de Pelagio Cap. 11. Cum in uteris matrum opere Divino creantur Infantes, justum
non videri, quod factura Dei, sine ullis propriis actionibus cuiquam peccato
nascatur obstricta. Parvulos sine Sacro baptismate decedentes pro Solo
Originali peccato non posse damnari.
forth? Come not all his pleas for the innocence of Infants, from the Pelagian
School They maintained them to have bonum inviolatae inculpataeque naturae.
Aug. L. 6. Contra Jul. c. 1. Laudabilis esse sanctitatis et puritatis naturae.
Li. de peccato originali C. 4. Sanos esse propter quos alii medicum quaerebant.
Lib. de Not. and Great. c. 21. and Sermon, 8. de verbis Apostolic. 6. Sic Lib. 1.
oper. imperfect. Contr. Jul. Infans est infucata primaevitate felicior, bonu^
felicitatis suae vitare non potuit, nullum habes de actibus meritum sed hoc
solum retinens quod tanti opificis dignatione possedit.
?

2. If Infants be altogether harmless, what becomes of Gods Justice in his
signal punishing of very many of them, Romans 5. 14. Aug. Lib. 2. posthum. contra
Julian. Cap. 110. Quia ergo gravi jugo a die exitus de ventre matris puniti
sunt parvuli, agnosce judicem justum and confitere originale peccatum. Punire
enim nullius peccati meritum habente^, sicut etiam ipse confiteris, non potest
sine eversione justitiae. Et cap. 3. In illo gravi jugo quo etiam parvuli
premuntur, quomodo est justus Deus, si nullus nascitur reus?
?

3. Why should they at all be baptized? what needs washing, if there be no
filth? The whole need no Physic nor Physician, but those that be sick Aug. de
peccato Orig. Cap. 29. Qu^squis humanam contendit in qualibet aetate naturam
non indigere medico secundo Adam, qu^a non est vitiata in primo Adam, non est
in aliqua quaestione in qua dubitari vel errari salva fide possit, sed in ipsa
Regula fidei, qua Christiani sumus, Gratiae Die convinc itur inimicus.
?

4. Because he is off and on, in the business of Original sin and that
according to his principles, he knows not what to make of it, is he not forced
ever and anon to interfere with himself, like a Satyr, to blow hot and cold?
does not his Sinner Impleaded, contradict this his Philanthropy? Read part. 1..
28. p. 68. where he writes thus, As a Leprosy is the foulest of all Diseases,
so sin is the foulest of all the Leprosies in the World. It Is so infectious a
Leprosy, that it polluted the body of nature: under the bondage of this
corruption, the whole Creation even groaneth, and (as it were) travelleth in
pain. It Is so inveterate a Leprosy, that it has run in a blood (it is now)
almost six thousand years; for as a great Piece of Ordinance does do as real
execution at a very great distance, as an ordinary Pistol does near at hand:
so the Leprosy of sin in Adam's Loins, has every whit as foul an influence
upon us, who are the latest of his posterity, as upon Cain and Abel, the
immediate fruit of his body. Quo teneam nodo mutantem Protea?

5. If all Infants, without any exception, are thus harmless, then the Children
of Turks, Indians, Jews, are alike holy with those of Christians, which is
directly contrary to the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 14. Else were your Children
unclean, but now are they holy.

Thus at length have I examined every material thing in this inhumane
Philanthropy of mine and the Churches Adversary, and I have found them not to
hold weight in the balance of the Sanctuary: many immaterial by-things which
he loves to be digressing upon, I have purposely omitted, not because I was
afraid to answer them; but because I was ashamed so to do. Their not gravity,
but levity, made me to neglect them; the rather, because I think no serious
Reader, is like to be any way scrupled by them, and that it will be easy for
such an one, from what has been said in this, and my Correptory, to satisfy
himself fully.

I had thought to have said much more concerning Mr. T. P's. carrying on
Grotius his design, against his Castalionism, and his but pretended
Melancthonism; but because I am, I cannot tell how, grown voluminous against
what I did at first project, and some way promise, I must leave the further
meddling with those matters, till a more convenient time, they being matters
Historical, and of fact, and not Theological, as to the matters debated: though
indeed it be true enough, that our Adversaries make more ado about them, and
by them, carry on their designs more succesfully, then by any Arguments which
their whole Arminian-Artillery is any way able to afford them. It is high time
for me to draw off to my 4th, and which I Will promise, shall be the last, as
well as the least Chapter.

Chap. IV.
WHich gives-in Reasons for the Resolution of a total withdrawing from any
farther meddling with Mr. T. P. unless he speedily change his way of proceedings.

First, I, of any man in the World, have the smallest reason to expect to have
any other returns from him, then such as shall argue his rage against me, his
wit rather to evade, then to answer any thing that is solid, his cruelty in
torturing of Syllables, and unwary Phrases, nay bits and spits, and very dashes
accents of words. And why should I be employed farther against such toyish
doings?

S^condly* It is easy for any to discern that so windy, so wordy a man, will
have the last word of any, who shall enter the lists with him. And in truth, if
mere words may carry it, it is as fit for him to wear the Garland, as any man
that I know, they be so fine, so pretty, and so sweet, many of them,

Vox est, and praeterea nihil.

I cannot out-voice him, in a mere Tongue-combat.

Thirdly, If any more need to be said, and much better said then I have done,
why blessed be God, blessed be God for it, there be yet in the Universities,
and elsewhere, sage and Reverend Doctors enough, to do that. This work, as all
the World may see, is not so proper for a mean Rural Minister, as for men of
their place and standing. They have more grace, understanding, eloquence*
Leisure, Books; for the managing of this cause then I have by a vast deal. I
trust they will no^ therefore neglect the taking up of the Bucklers against
him, if he will needs be again appearing upon a Rhetorical Theater.

Fourthly, If a lavish tongue, a broad Conscience, a crafty insinuating Pate*
can do it, all his Proselytes, and favorable Readers, shall be made to
believe, that all that I have done, or ever shall be able to do against him, is
not only in my own, or in (that which is dearer to me, than my very life)
Truth's Defense, but that it is much more self-vindicative, for some no slight
or small personal affronts. For my own part, by an obstinate kind of silence
for the future, I am resolv^d to cut off all the advantages, which in this kind
he may take against me, that my labors in the Church, and for it, be not
rather looked upon as Corrosives, then as Cordial healing Medicines. As I know
the strength of my Adversary, so I am indifferently well acquainted with the
Arts and Interests of him Basilius Epist. l. 33. Impossible est ut literis
nostris accusantium nos ora cohibeamus, imo credibilius est, nostris illos
Apologiis irritari quoque, ut majora ac pejora contra nos machinentur.
.

I shut up therefore all, commending all my undertakings to Gods blessing, with
a Profession, that I will de futuro, stick to that of the Apostle's, Tit. 3.
10. A man that is an Heretic, after the first and second Admonition, reject.

Brockhole, May 5th, 1657.
FINIS.

