THE SPEECHES, DISCOURSES, AND PRAYERS, OF Col. JOHN BARKSTEAD, Col. JOHN OKEY,
and Mr. MILES CORBET;
Upon the 19 th of April, being the Day of their Suffering at TYBURN.

Together with an Account of the Occasion and Manner of their Taking in
Holland: As also of their several Occasional Speeches, Discourses, and Letters,
both before, and in the time of their late Imprisonment.

Faithfully and Impartially Collected, for a general Satisfaction.

Prove. 29.26. Every Man's Judgment comes from the Lord.

Heb. 11.13. These all dyed in Faith.

-- Printed in the Year, 1662.

To the READER.
READER,
THou art here presented with a most famous and pregnant Instance of the
weakness and incapacity of Death, yea, of the worst of Deaths, to disturb, or
in the least to discompose the Spirits of Saints, who through the Faith of the
Gospel have entered into Rest. Death is indeed a King of Terrors to the children
of this world, Col. 3.15
but it is neither King nor terrible to him in whose heart the Peace of God
rules and reigns. Christ has said, Oh Death, I will be thy death: how can it
then have any Terror in it, when there is no life in it? it is now no more to a
Believer than a dead or painted Lion, which because of the want of life, can
upon no other account be reckoned terrible.

We have seen Death conquered before our faces; and a company of poor frail
men, subject to like passions with our selves, enabled by the Lord to bid
defiance to that, the fear of which makes the highest and greatest of men all
their lifetime subject to Bondage. Certainly these men did familiarize Death
to themselves, by those many qualified and easy Notions of it which do so
frequently occur in Scripture. Job calls it a going to bed, and a lying down to
rest and sleep, Job 14.1 13, 14.
a hiding in the Grave till the Indignation be overpast, a great and signal
change infinitely for our advantage: yea, he looks upon it as that which is in
a near relation to him, calling it his Father, Mother, and Sister. Job 17.1
Old Simeon calls it but a Discharge from our Imprisonment. And the Apostle
looks upon it as a way to bring unto Jesus Christ, Luke 2.2 (...)
which is best of all.

Surely, these men had no other apprehensions of Death than what did comport
with all the foregoing Scriptural Representations of it, whereof we have a
most plain and clear Evidence, in that they did without the least fear play on
the hole of this Asp, Isaiah 11.8.
and with so much courage put their hand on the den of this Cockatrice; and so
often with Agag (though in a more elevated sense, and upon far better grounds)
express with so great and open confidence, 1 Samuel 15.32.
that the bitterness of Death was past. And surely, upon a serious and
impartial reflection upon the several Passages contained in the ensuing
Narrative, relating to the Lives and Deaths of these men, the best grounded and
the most critical Charity (notwithstanding the Obliquity and Odium that lies
upon the Fact for which they suffered) will command us to hope and believe,
that they were wonderfully supported and strengthened by the Lord to drink of
that bitter Cup which their Father had given them. Joh. 18.11. Heb. 12 1, 2.
We cannot but believe that while they did run with such patience the Race
which was set before them, they did look to JESUS their forerunner, the Author
and Finisher of their Faith; and so for the Joy that was set before them,
endured the Cross, and despised the Shame; and, having overcome, are now set
down with CHRIST upon his Throne, Rev. 3: 21.
even as He overcame and is set down with his Father on his Throne. What
remains then, but that we should be continually above the fear of Death, which
looks most gashly at a distance: but when we approach it, and begin to converse
with it, we find that it has neither strength nor sting; and though before we
came near to it, we suspected it to be an Enemy, yet now we perceive it is a
Friend, and comes to us only upon this errand, to let us know that the
Bridegroom stays for us, and would have us partake of his Joy by a present
entrance with Him into the Bride-chamber. Yea, though thy Death comes in great
Pomp and Solemnity in its Fiery Chariot, yet do thou the rather for this smile
upon it, and give it a cheerful welcome. For if Believers are capable of any
honor in this world, it is that they are accounted worthy to suffer for the
Name and Cause of their Lord and Master JESUS CHRIST. This was that which gave
the Church at Philippi the pre-eminence, Phil. 1.29.
that unto them it was given in the behalf of CHRIST, not only to believe on
him, but also to Suffer for his sake. Oh if the Servants of God did but believe
this, there would be as much crouding at the Court of Heaven for this
Preferment, as there is at the Courts of earthly Princes for Promotion and
Advancement in their Church and State. How did the primitive Christians long
for Martyrdom, seeking and pursuing after it: publicly and boldly to the very
Teeth of the Tyrants and Persecutors proclaiming their Christianity, and
therewith their zeal and readiness to water it with their Blood. If we are not
attained to this, yet let us with much courage and cheerfulness conflict with
it when it first sets upon us; let the Gibbet and the Stake be the most
pleasant and delightful prospects to us, when the Providence of GOD for
Christ's Cause and Interest brings us to them: being assured of this, that if
the LORD vouchsafe so much of his comforting and supporting Presence to his
People, who declaredly suffer for Him, in a Cause that is at least very
doubtful to many good and holy men, then He will much more stand by those who
lay down their Lives in behalf of that which is clear and certain to all, Hebr.
12.1.
and concerning the truth of which we are compassed about with so great a Cloud
of Witnesses.

Let not therefore the Worm Jacob be discouraged, seeing the LORD has promised
to be with him, to strengthen him, to help him, and to uphold him with the
right hand of his Righteousness. Only look well to the settling of your
Spiritual state, else your hearts will not be quiet and settled when you come to
dye. Get an Interest in JESUS CHRIST, who alone has abolished Death, and
brought Life and Immortality to light through the Gospel: 2 Timothy 1.10.
If thou art in CHRIST, then though thou dyest, the Covenant is still alive;
the Relation of GOD to Abraham was as firm and strong when he had been a long
time dead, as when he was alive; therefore says he, I AM the God of Abraham,
Matthew. 22.32.
etc.

And to conclude. Get your hearts loosened from this present evil World, be ye
first crucified to the World, and then it will be no great matter to you to be
crucified by the World; do as the Patriarchs did, Confess your selves to be
Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth, Hebr. 11.13. 1 Pet. 4.12.
and then you will not think it strange concerning the Fiery Trial which you
are here exercised with.

This was certainly the happiness of these three Sufferers: GOD had thoroughly
weaned them from all things below Himself; Therefore how freely and cheerfully
do they leave All for CHRIST? This will be evident to all that will carefully
and impartially peruse the following Account of the several holy and gracious
words which did distill from them, like the Rain and the Dew* during the time of
their Imprisonment; as also their several godly Letters and Epistles written to
their Christian Friends and Relations, in and about the City of London;
together with their Discourses, Speeches, and Prayers at the time of their
Execution. All which have been with care and faithfulness collected from the
most authentic hands.

Some other material Passages concerning all, or at least some of these men,
remain yet unpublished, but are faithfully reserved for a fitter Opportunity.
In the mean time we remit the Reader to what is here collected, and are at
prayer for a Blessing upon it.

Some further Passages are coming from Holland, which are faithfully
communicated, and may be speedily published.

A Brief Narrative of Colonel Okey, Col. Barksteed and Miles Corbet Esquire
their departure out of England, their Christian carriage, and the kind
reception they found in all places where they came; Together with the
unparaleld Treachery and inhumanity exercised by Sir G. D. In decoying them to,
and apprehending them at Delph. As also their surreptitious imbarquing thence,
and Transporting to the Tower of London.
THE three Persons who are the Subject of this ensuing Narrative being involved
in one, and the same danger did since the Kings coming in at several times, and
from several Places Ship themselves for Holand where after many great
Difficulties and Hazards which they conflicted with (too long to be here
inserted) they safely arrived. Two of them, viz. Col. Barkstead and Col. Okey
after a short stay in Holland did travel up higher into the Country, and at
length settled themselves at a Town called Hana in High Germany, where by their
good carriage and obliging Conversation they obtained the favor and privilege
to be enrolled free Burgers of the said Town or City. They continued there for
many Months in good Esteem and Acceptance with the Inhabitants, and with
great endearment of Affections to each other. Some urgent occasions inviting
and constrayning Col. Barkstead to return for Holland: Col. Okey out of mear
kindness and respects to his Friend and Companion resolves to accompany him,
and so both of them took their first convenience and Embarque for Holland;
having before received encouragement to undertake the Voyage from a Friend whom
they had employed to solicit some of the States General, that they might abide
for a short time within their Jurisdiction unmolested; To which, as their
Friend informed them, they did most freely and willingly condescend. Another
also was more particularly engaged by Col. Okey to acquaint Sir George Downing
(the Kings Residene now in Holland) with their intentions of coming speedily
into that Counrey, in case they might for a few days remain there in safety,
and that he had no order from the King his Master to seize them* Si^ George did
assure that Gentleman that he had no order from the King to apprehend or molest
them, but that they might be as free and safe there as himself. Upon this last
encouragement they did very much depend, Col Okey especially being confident
that Sir George Downing had a particular kindness for him who gave him his
first bread in England, and by whose single interest at first he was advantaged
to ascend so many steps of preferment till he was thereby raised to a capacity
to engage his present Majesty to reflect the rays of his favor upon him, and
to commit a Trust of so much Profit and Honor to him: And it is to be wished
that he prove not as prodigiously Treacherous to his Latter as he did to his
former Master. This Generous and Plain-hearted Col. (who took a measure of all
men by himself) did without the least Haesitation repose a great deal of Trust
and Confidence in one whom he had been Instrumental to raise from the dust:
Little thinking that his New- England Tottered Chaplain whom he Clothed, and
Fed at his Table, and who dipped with him in his own dish should prove like the
Devil among the twelve to his Lord and Master. But whether will not Light and a
Religious Profession debauched and stifled precipitate a dunghill
earthly-minded man, whose gain is Godliness. This is the Runagado that will
not in the least stick at the greatest violation of the Laws of Humanity, that
with Delight and Pleasure can lick up the very vomit of a Heathen. They had not
been long in Holland before their occasions called them to Delft, whereof the
forementioned Knight had timely notice by one of his Spies employed for that
purpose, and having in redyness a Warrant from the States General for the
seizing of them, he immediately by a most horrid lie drew in a person to be
Instrumental in the apprehending of them, who when he came to know who they
were did mourn bitterly for it, and said he looked upon it as a very great
Judgment of God upon him that he should be trapanned into a design he so much
detested and abhorred. But the Knight and his ruffainly crew without the least
sense of Humanity or Honor, having certain knowledge of their Arrival at Delft
did the very same night proceed upon their design, and took them at their
Lodging, together with Mr. Corbet, who upon notice had that they were in Town,
went only to give them a visit, and it being late was even ready to take his
leave of them, but Providence kept him there till he with the other two his
Companions in his Banishment should fall into the hands of these men who
thirsted after their blood. When they were all three thus seized, immediately
they were hurried to Prison, and by the procurement of Sir George Downing were
most barbarously used, having Shackles and Fetters put upon them, and so cast
into a nasty moist and dark Dungeon, having nothing else but the damp Earth to
repose upon, and there continued all night till two of the clock the next day
in a very sad Condition; But afterward being treated a little more like men,
some of the States came to them into the Prison bringing one of their chief
Ministers with them, and between examining of them and discoursing with them
concerning the Fact for which they were seized, and the Cause in which they
were formerly Engaged in England, wherein Col. Barkstead especially gave them
such Satisfaction, that all of them, and particularly the Minister, when they
took their leaves of them, seemed to have a better opinion both of their
Persons and their Cause then they had before, and did withal give them
assurance that they should not be delivered up to be sent for England until
they had had a more Public Hearing of what they could say in their own
defense. But by the extreme Officiousness of Sir Ge^rge Downing and his
continued Solicitations accompanied (as is reported) with strange menaces,
these persons were soon after (not only contrary to the particular engagements
of the Lords before mentioned, but also against the very Laws of Nations, and
of all humane Society and Commerce, yea against their own former practice in
the Case of Ravilleak who murdered the King of France.) By order from the
States General at two of the clock in the Morning taken out of Prison, and
being manacled with wrist-Irons, chayns and locks, were thrust into a Vessel
lying at Delst, and from thence conveyed into one of the King of Englands
Frigots provided for the purpose, and so in a few days were brought for
England, where they Arrived at the Tower of London upon the Lords Day in the
Evening, being the day of where they were forthwith disposed of by Order of the
Lieutenant to their several Prison Lodgings, and there continued in a very
comfortable Condition in respect of the Peace, Joy and Patience in which they
did possess their Souls (as will more fully appear in the ensuing part of this
Narrative (until the 16. of April, 1662. Upon which day they were carried up
by Water to the Kings Bench Bar to receive Judgment, having been already by
Act of Parliament attaynted of High Treason for compassing the death of the
late King Charles the First. After a very short dispute whether the Prisoners
at the Bar were the Persons named in the forementioned Act of Attainder yea or
no* Witnesses being produced who made full proof in the Affirmative, and the
Prisoners themselves confessing it, the Jury without going from the Bar, gave
in their Verdict that they were the Persons named in the said Act, whereupon
Judgment was given against them accordingly. After Sentence was given they
were remanded back to the Tower, and in what frame of Spirit they were, and how
full of Joy and Peace in believing, and how sweetly and patiently both to
themsel^es and others, they spent that little time which remained from the day
of their Trial to the day of their Suffering, the following Collection of the
occasional Speeches and Discourses which fell from them will abundantly
testify.

Their Opinion of the Covenant.
In Satisfaction to many Friends that much desired to know what their opinions
were as to the Covenant, and the late proceedings against it, and also what
they thought of the Condition of these Nations, they freely and fully upon
occasion still answered, and largely discoursed to this effect.

Truly, said they, we can affirm and do affirm it, that it was in pursuance of
the Covenant that we acted, and that in defense of it we now suffer, and doubt
not, but in due time God will own his Cause and this Covenant, and in such a
manner too, as shall be to the amazement, yea, to the Horror and Confusion of
them that oppose it; and of others also, the heretofore professed Friends of
it, who have lately acted so strangely upon it. Was it ever imagined that any
of the very first and strictest Composers and urgers of this Covenant either
Here or in Scotland, should deal with it, as they have done? That they should
divide the civil part of it from the Religious, and whilst their Zeal is all in
a flame for the former, they should be key-cold for the latter, leaving that to
the utmost Hazard which was the main, if not almost the whole Concernment and
Intendment of it? Is it likely that God will long bear with such juggling as
this? Or can any expect that it will pass in the Day of their Accounts? Men
may think to baffle with God, and their own Consciences, to invent shifts,
distinctions, pretenses, and put fair glosses on their Actions: but let them
not be deceived, God is not mocked, he never was, and never will be, as they
will find at last if they repent not.

When some mentioned the burning of the Covenant, and by Authority of
Parliament too, Why, what then (said they) what though the Common Hangman has
made Bonefires of it? yet is the Obligation to it burned also? No verily, it
neither is nor can be, nor is it any humane Law that can take it off, but still
it does and will abide in full force and virtue, either to be conscientiously
performed by them that are under it, or to be severely pleaded against them, if
they neglect it.

But it seems the Covenant must be abjured also, and is abjured already by
some, and this by a Public Law too, from the Peoples representatives in
Parliament, and so is made the Act of the whole Nati^n. Be astonished Oh
Heavens! and tremble Oh Earth! Let the Sun it self be clothed in blackness at
this so horrid an impiety! what! abjure such a Covenant! a Covenant so Solemnly
taken! a Covenant for the matter of it, so Religious! so Holy! so universally
owned by three Nations! and owned in yea, Authorized by Parliament, sworn to by
the King himself, a Covenant so zealously pressed upon Peoples Consciences! ^he
force of which has been so strongly urged and improved for the bringing his
Majesty to the Throne! what! a Covenant that engages to a Reformation! and a
Reformation according to the best and highest Patterns! This Covenant abjured!
and thus abjured! even by a Law! and upon such deep and and sore penalties!
What is this but to bid defiance to God himself? yea, to put it to the Trial
whether there be a God or no, that does indeed look down from Heaven upon the
doings of men, (Psalm. 14.2.) and whether he be such a God, as will avenge these
things? Is it not his word that is made the Rule of this
Covenanted-Reformation? and was it not he himself, even his own Al-knowing
Divine Majesty, that was attested, and called in as a Witness to the sincerity
of their hearts that took this Covenant, and that upon their own eternal
Damnation or Salvation? And must this Covenant be abjured now? This Covenant?
Is not Gods own Word, and God himself too after a sort abjured, in that Act,
whoever are gulty of it? and what if some of those that do, or shall abjure it,
or urge the abjuring of it upon others, have formerly been Professors of
Religion, and so far Professors of it, that they have seemed to have been in
love with it, delighted in it, and so to have tasted of the powers of the World
to come, will not these of all others be the very chief of sinners, whilst
they become guilty of no less than the very sin against the Holy Ghost? or at
least border as near to it as possibly may be? Oh amazing vengeance! oh most
dreadful of all Judicial strokes that can fall upon the Reprobate minds of men!
May not the dismal doom of Francis Spira be here remembered? and Solomon's
back-slider in heart, who shall be filled with his own ways? Prove. 14.14.
Though to commit murder upon the high way, and to do it deliberately, and in
cool blood too, be a most horrid crime, a crime against the very light of
Nature, and against the second Table: yet how short does it come of this the
highest of all crimes imaginable? a crime that murders conscience! that
murders souls! that murders Religion it self! a crime against the first
Table! most immediately against the Sovereign God! and the greatest of that
nature that men can be guilty of. Indeed one sin more is found now common among
us that comes the nearest to it of all others, and that is, not only the
jeering of godliness and godly men, but the histrionical acting of the Zeal
and Affection, even the sweetest and warmest (such as the most Gospel Ministers
are sometimes moved with in Praying and Preaching) by way of mockery and
derision upon Stage Plays. Oh horrible, horrible, horrible Abomination! even
such an abomination that must needs make desolate! Oh tremandous fact! if this
be not to do despite to the spirit of grace, what is? the corrupting and
vitiating even the Flower of the three Nations in the Nobility and Gentry, as
well as the Youth of the City, by the Blasphemous, Obscene and Filthy
Stage Plays as aforesaid; the polluting the eyes and hearts of Common
Spectators even in the open Streets, by the many impudently Spotted, Painted
Faces, and shamelesly exposed nakedness; The most odious conversation of the
Pantaloon Gallants (as they are called) with their Brutish Concubines in Stews
and Brothel houses, are but petty sins to these: Such as the fleshly and more
carnal parts are ruined by, but those other sins reach higher, even to the
Superior part, the mind and conscience: not but that all sins even the least
that are, have an influence upon the mind too, yet not to such eminent and
manifold degrees of guilt as these. Did the poor deluded people ever intend
these things? Did they imagine that matters of this nature, would have been
ever countenanced, yea enforced, and that by a Law? and among other things, did
they ever mean or think that their burning and shining lig^ts should be
extingushed? or did they think it possible, it could have been done so soon at
least? did they ever dream of such grossly Ignorant, Lazy, Sottish, Debauched
wretches to be put into places of Preferment, and the fat things of the three
Nations, some of them possessing, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, yea 9, or 10.
Preferments together (not fully discharging any one of them in their own
persons, no, nor by their Deputies neither) whilst many hundreds, if not some
thousands of Faithful, Painful, able Ministers, are wholly laid aside; they and
their Families in the mean time being ready to perish for want of bread for
their bodies, as well as the Congregations from whence they are thrust, are
ready to perish for want of bread for their Souls? did they ever aim at the
encouraging, or at least at the permitting of Priests and Jesuits to come
swarming in among us, and that by thousands, from all foreign parts? (which we
are well assured of since we have been abroad, and in some of those Countries
too from whence they came) such busy and Industrious Agents they are for their
Great Master the Pope, and so successeful already that they boldly affirm it in
Print, that there is a common favor voted for them in this Nation, as may be
seen and read in one of those three Popish Books of Contention between the said
Priests and Jesuits among themselves, which were lately Printed and Sold
Publicly at the Exchange. Sure by this time the eyes of City and Country must
needs be opened (unless they are wholly given up to blindness) to see their too
late lamented mistakes, especially in the choises they have made, or been
constrained to make. Now the poor Under tenants that have given their vote as
their Landlords pleased; now the abused Inhabitants of Towns and Corporations
that have gratified the letters of their powerful soliciters, or menacers
rather, for men, that either they never knew, or could never have any tolerable
satisfaction in may see and feel unto their sorrow what miseries they have
brought upon themselves and their posterities, when their few remaining lights
are all quite put out, when darkness, thick darkness covers them, when they
are ready to perish for want of vision, Prove. 19.18. and a little time has
brought in that woeful ignorance and brutality which the high contempt of so
glorious a Gospel, as these Nations, and especially this City of London has so
l^ng enjoyed, deserves: then what may not easily be done with, or to such a
people? what vassallage, or bondage spiritual or temporal will they not submit
unto? Ah poor England! ah thou City of London! what woes and calamities even of
thine own procuring art thou already fallen into? and how inevitably must thou
undergo them? Thou triumphedst in the undoubted expectation of assured peace,
greatest plenty, most prosperous and mighty trade; but how art thou already
tossed with cares and fears? threatened with scarcity and want? impoverished
with the loss of trading? thou boastedst of freedom from taxes and other
public burdens; but what two years did thou ever find so costly before, and
so heavy to thee? besides thy other constant Assesments and payments; what
think thou of the Pole Money, the benevolence, the chimney-money, the
Protections to thy debtors, the monopolies that have come upon thee thick and
threefold? Thou did reckon to be the glory of Nations, the crowning City, to
shine as bright in thy stones of fire as ever proud (...) did, Esa. 22.8. Ezekiel.
28.14. but how greatly art thou disappointed? what plagues and judgments
rather may thou not look for suddenly to overtake thee? for our parts we are
now dying men, but if we were sure to live, yet the very apprehensions of these
things makes us even dye already. Well, what remedy remains? surely none but
that which in a manner we see too much cause even to despair of, and that is
such a speedy, h^arty and through Repentance; such a general Reformation, such
a closin^ and firm uniting of all parties, as our deplorable condition
require^, and the Covenant we have bin speaking of, binds us all to

Obj^ctions we know there are against this Covenant, and such too as seem to
have ^^rength and weight in them, but when Examined by impartial Judges, will
be found otherwise.

Some object against the Matter of the Covenant; but to the intelligent and
considerative Reader, do not the very words of it, and that in the literal and
grammatical construction, most plainly declare, that the great scope and aim of
it is, the preservation and Reformation of the true Prostetant Religion, both
Personal and National? and that the preservation of other (...) secured by it,
in no other sense, and upon no other (...) but in order unto that, or at
leastwise no further then will or can cons^st with that? has not the whole
frame and ^onnexion of it, a most apparent dependence upon, and reference to
the Religion aforesaid? and if things be duly exami^^ and the Reader will but
take pains to search into the followin^ Scriptures, shall he not there find that
the Covenanted Reformations of Hezekiah in 2 Chronicles. chap. 29 and 30. and of
Josiah in the same, 2 Chronicles. chapters 34 and 35. and of Ezra, chap. 9 and 10.
and of Nehemiah chap. 9. and 10, were not more holy nor Solemn in the matter of
them, then this our very Solemn League and Covenant.

And whereas it is farther said, that it was unlawfully imposed, and by an
unlawful Power, unjustly forced, and therefore not obliging. We Answer to this
also, when it was first taken men did not say so, nor did the Generality or
Body of the three Nations think so (whatever some particular and otherwise
interested persons might,) and we say further too, that all the force used
(that we know of, or can remember) were only arguments and convictive
discourses either from Prints or Pulpits. This means indeed was used, strongly
urged, and pressed upon peoples consciences, and by those very men too chiefly,
that while it was burned to ashes, were altogether silent in the defense of it,
a sin which we pray God to give them Repentance and Pardon for.

But if this Objection had any weight in it (as indeed it has not) so long as
the matter of the Covenant is good, and the great God is now attested by them
that took it, and thereby indispensably obliged to God by it, do not some of
the Bishops themselves, Dr. Sanderson by name, hold it binding, notwithstanding
the pretended force of it?

But what need we trouble our selves with Arguments for this from the
concession of men's? since God himself pleads this very cause so irrefragably as
he does, both in the case of the Gibeonites whose Covenant though gotten by
fraud, as is most apparent in the 9 of Joshua, yet the breach of it was sharply
revenged, many years after in 2 Samuel 21. And of Zedekiah, whose Covenant was
forced upon him against his will, even by an Heathen Prince, and yet because he
brake it, see how God breaks him, in the 17. of Ezekiel. Let not men think to
escape from an Omnipotent and an angry God. A God that always has avenged,
and still will avenge the quarrel of his Covenant, ( Levit. 26.25.) and is
therefore called the Lord G^d of Recompens^s, and the Lord God of recompenses,
that will surely requite, (Jerem. 51.56.) and himself gives the reason for it
more then once by the mouth of the same Prophet, saying that it is the
vengeance of the Lord, the vengeance of his Temple, Jerem. 50.28. and 51.11.

Let our Sufferings therefore be what they will or can be, we are sure it is
for doing no more, then what in our Places and Callings by this Covenant we
were bound to do, and that upon the utmost hazard of our inward peace here,
and eternal happiness hereafter.

We are charged indeed with Disloyalty to our late Prince, but as matters stood
with us, being thus engaged, how could we have been Loyal to the King of Kings
if we had not endeavored at least to perform our vows to him? If we were
brought into this dilemma or double straight, that we must necessarily come
under the censure of Disloyalty either to God or the King, we say with the
Apostles in Acts 4.19. whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto
you more then unto God, Judge ye.

Some may think and perhaps may be ready enough to say it too, that we dye like
Fools, and have no sufficient warrant for our Sufferings: But for our parts we
are of another mind, and hope shall be enabled to assert and seal it to the
last drop of our blood. And though for a time in the present heat of things,
men may insult over our mangled bodies, as if by killing us they had got the
victory, and may triumph at the sight of our exalted Quarters, yet when the
eyes of people are thoroughly opened, and they have been long enough wearied
with the Miseries and Oppressions of all sorts, which they have been so eagerly
fond of, and for want of due foresight have so hastily and violently
precipitated themselves into, they will have other thoughts: and such of us as
now pass for Murderers (and the vilest and most execrable that are too) may
perhaps be accounted worthy of the esteem of Martyrs; for what has brought us
to this we are now come to? Is it not the same Cause (upon the whole matter)
which all the three Nations owned? and which some of us pleaded in Parliament,
and others of us fought for in the Field? was it not for opposing and doing
what we were able to remove and prevent for the future those very mischiefs as
well in Civils as Ecclesiastics, which while we were in power, could not break
in upon us, but now are returned more fiercely then ever, even like a mighty
Torrent that bears all before it?

Let all true Englishmen lay their hands upon their hearts, let them remember
and compare without passion and prejudice the last twenty years Enjoyments with
present times and things. Though we had Armies then, and Taxes upon the people;
yea though we deny not, but there were some Unusual Actings and Irregular
Proceedings, arising inavoidably from the necessity and exigence of Affairs,
(not from the choice or desires of those that were Actors in them.) Yet how
great and invaluable were the Privileges and Liberties which the people then
enjoyed? Were their Charters and Enfranchisments endangered as now they are?
Was their Trading ever so low, even in the worst of those times, as at this
present? Was their Precious and Glorious Gospel extinguished, or so much
Eclipsed at least, in the light of it? Did poverty every where march so fast
upon them even in that time of War, as now it does in our days of peace, like
an armed man? Did we not flowrish at Home (at least comparatively) and were we
not a terror to enemies abroad? Though there was not so due a care as should
or might have been for the preventing of Divisions, and uniting all just and
good interests together (a sin that is to be lamented, and will be lamented)
yet was there ever such a Flood-gate opened to all impiety as now there is?
What prophanations of the Sabbaths are now found among us? What vain and
superstitious Worships? What dreadful Apostasy? What Teaching for Doctrines,
the precepts and inventions of men, directly contrary to Christ and the
Apostles, Mat. 15.9. Colloss. 2.20. to 23. What lewd and lawlesse-lives among
all sorts of men and women? What Chamberings and Wantonness? What Riot and
excess? What Drinking and Whoring? What Swearing and Swaggering? What Gaming
and Revelling? What Cursing and Damning? What Roaring and Ranting? What
uncontrolable wickedness rages every where through the Land? Even as if the
men of these times had been delivered on purpose to do all these abominations,
Jerem. 7.10. may not ruful England as much now as ever, sit down in tears, and
even weep her eyes out for grief, Dr. Gauden himself being Judge?

It is true indeed, there are many that cry up the blessedness of these times,
and the happy changes we are now under; that do in a manner conclude, that it
is impossible any thing can be now done, which may admit of amendment: that
nothing ought now to be accounted grievous or oppressive; no, not though
Princes themselves become companions of thieves, (Esaias 1.23.) though open
Robberies, Assaults and Murders be done by them upon the very high ways. The
Poor Commons of England, traveling about their lawful occasions, may be now
slain, and their innocent blood bought and sold, if they be great men, or great
men's Sons that do it. They may Kill and Murder and do what they please, and
yet shall find a deliverance. Oh! how are witnesses even in the case of blood
now tampered with, silenced' or overawed by Bribes or Threats? What Corrupt
and Unrighteous Juryes have we? How is Judgment turned into wormwood? Murder
into manslaughter, and manslaughter into murder, as the case lies for, or
against a Phanatique (as they call him) or a poor Commoner? But may not such as
bring the price or guilt of innocent blood upon their own Families (as well as
pollute the Nation with it) chance to have the innocent blood of themselves or
some of theirs be enquired after by the next Jury, whilst thus they encourage
the hands of murderers against their Brethren?

As for those that bless themselves with such times times as these, what are
they (for the most part at least) but men of most filthy and dissolute lives?
such as were described before? Haters of God and godliness? such as cannot
endure holiness of Life, or soundness of Doctrine, but are even mad against a
convincing Ministry in the Nation, and the pious Examples of such neighbors as
walk most close with God, least their own wickedness should be reproved or
shamed? and what ever their pretended devotion may be, yet are they not such
generally, as care no more for one Religion then for another any further then
it suits with the full swing and dominion of their lusts? and is it not for
this very reason, that they contend so much for present things, even with a
zeal as hot as hell?

For our parts we account it no privilege to live, to behold what is already
come in part upon us, and is farther coming upon these Nations, and therefore
are the less sollicitous about our death; And however at present we may be
judged to suffer as mal^factors, yet who can tell but that our blood may prove
as fattening and sructifying toward the Common Cause, as the blood of the
Martyrs did in the Church? and then it will be no soliscisme to say, Sanguis
Martyrum semen est, ut Ecclesiae, sic and Reipublicae.

Some Occasional Passages, Discourses and Letters of Col. John Barksteads as
they were taken from his own mouth, or left behind him in writing under his own
hand.
AFter Liberty was granted to some of his Relations and Friends to visit him in
his imprisonment, very many of them did at several times repair to him; Those
who first came to him were so affected with those choice Expressions which
dropped from him, that like the Woman of Samaria, they made it their work to
invite and encourage others to partake of the same Mercy with themselves: upon
which many had the opportunity to hear him speak, and amongst them several
sober and descreet Persons did commit to writing the things that were most
remarkable which fell from him. And here we begin with what he spoke to several
Friends who came to visit him during the time of his imprisonment.

Having been, says he, but a very little while off of my Watch, in that time
giving way to a Parley with Flesh and Blood, Satan who is never idle was not
now wanting, but put me for some hours to it, endeavoring to present to me the
greatness of the Sufferings I was yet to go through, and my own weakness to
go through them, I saw indeed my own weakness and inability, and taking the
Bible to look for a word from whence I might get strength and encouragement,
the Lord brought to me that place of Isaiah 26.3, 4. Thou will keep him in
perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he tru^teth in thee: And
so v. 4. Trust ye in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting
strength. And so v. 8. Yea in the way of thy Judgment O Lord have we waited
for thee, the desires of our souls is to thy Name, and to the Remembrance of
thee.

The Lord helped him by this word to conquer all his fears, which did arise
from the sense of his own weakness and utter insufficiency to conflict with
those difficulties and deaths which did now encounter him, neither was the Lord
wanting in renewing his strength from other portions of his good Word, which
upon the opening of his Bible his eye by Providence was still directed to,
whereof hear him give his following account.

When I was (says he) locked up in my lodging in the Tower alone, I began to
consider what my present condition called for from me, and taking my Bible (my
joy) I first pitched on this Scripture, Psalm 4. verse. 4. Stand in aw and sin
not, commune with your own hearts upon your beds, and be still, and verse. 5.
Offer the Sacrifice of Righteousness, and put your trust in the Lord. After
some hours spent in Reading and Meditating upon these words, and finding not
one syllable in which there was not an overflowing fullness as to me. At this
time of my Affliction, I was lead forth in my Spirit abundantly to add more the
goodness of the Lord to me, that I should so providentially pitch upon this
Scripture; And now my heart being filled with ravishing Joys and Rejoycings, I
looked a little further, and reading verse. 7. Thou have put gladness in my
Heart, more than in the time that their Corn, and their Wine increased; I found
that Scripture abundantly made good to me, and can truly seal to this, that in
all my full enjoyments of the Creature, I never had such Joy and Gladness in
my heart as now, and that all the Afflictions, Cares and Torments I have met
with are nothing to those sweet enjoyments that God has given in through
Christ; No no, there is more affliction in the least sin, then in the greatest
of Sufferings, and that I can truly say there has not one private thought past
through me that I was sorry or wish I had not been so far engaged in this
Glorious Cause, but I have rather admired the great love of Christ to me, that
he should make choice of such a poor Creature as I am to be employed in his
Work. I must further say, that the Lord has made crooked things straight, and
rough ways plain, and hard and difficult things easy to me, through the Free
and Rich Love of Christ; Oh he h^th made death nothing unto me now, but yet I
have no strength of my own, no my strength lies in my weakness, and it is
Christ alone that can renew my strength, which he does daily, by setting upon
my heart these following Scriptures, which have been a constant relief to me.
The Lord is my Light and Salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the Rock of
my life, of whom should I be afraid, Psalm. 28.14. Wait on the Lord, be of good
courage, and he shall strengthen thy Heart, wait I say on the Lord. Psalm.
33.11. The Counsel of the Lord stands for ever, and the thoughts of his Heart
to all Generations: Blessed be the Soul that has the Lord for its inheritance,
Psalm. 138. verse. 8. The Lord will perfect that which concerns me: the
Mercies of the Lord endures for ever, forsake not the works of thine own
hands, Prove. 16. verse. 9. A man's heart devises his way, but the Lord directs
his steps; in the day when I cried thou answeredst me, and strengthenedst me
with strength in my soul; commit thy ways to the Lord, and thy thoughts shall
be established, Prove. 28. verse. 28. When the wicked arise, men hide themselves,
but when they perish, the Righteous increase. But now thus says the Lord that
created thee O Jacob, and he that formed thee O Israel, fear not, I am he that
blotteth out thy Transgressions for my own sake, and will not remember thy
sins, Esaiah 63. verse. 9. In all their afflictions he was afflicted, and the
Angel of his presence saved them in his love, and in his pity he redeemed
them, and he bare them, and carried them all the days of old, Lam. 3. verse.
24. and 2.5.2.6, 37. verse. 38. The Lord is my portion says my soul, therefore
will I hope in him; The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the souls
that seeks him, it is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for
the Salvation of the Lord. Who is he that says it comes to pass when the
Lord commands it not, out of the mouth of the most High proceeds not evil
and good, Psalm. 34.9. Oh fear the Lord ye his Saints, for there is no want to
them that fear him, Psalm. 11.22. Though hand join in hand the wicked shall not
be unpunished, but the seed of the Righteous shall be delivered.

Some Experimental Passages in Discourse with a Friend.
A Friend coming to him the week of his Trial and Suffering, did partake of
many choice breathings from him, some of them which he could call to mind are
here faithfully collected.

We are to esteem Sufferings the better when they are in the Ways of God, and
we must not esteem the Ways of God the worse because they are accompanied with
Sufferings in this world.

A Believing Souls Sufferings for Christ do confirm him the more in the ways
of Christ.

A Principle of Faith finds three sorts of Promises in the Gospel.

First, The Promise of Assistance.

Secondly, The Promise of Acceptance.

Thirdly, The Promise of Reward.

Then he proceeded in some further Spiritual Discourse.
Although I find I have no strength to encounter with those great Trials I am
to meet with, yet I will labor to quit my heart through the Spirit of Faith,
from that Scripture, Esa. 30.7. Your strength is to sit still, and indeed I
find it so. Then one present did ask him, if he thought the Cause in which he
had been engaged would ever arise again. He said, The Cause lies in the Bosom
of Christ, and as sure as Christ arose, the Cause will arise again, and we die
but to make way for it, for when John the Baptist came to prepare the way for
Christ, he must be beheaded for it; so we by our death do but make way for the
next coming of Jesus Christ personally to reign a thousand years with his
Saints. And although we die, the Cause will certainly live.

The Thursday before his Suffering, he entertained some Friends who came to
visit him, with very sweet and Heavenly Discourse, to this purpose.
That although God had given him a sight of his Eternal happiness, yet Satan
would have brought all his sins before him, yea the very sins of his youth as
unpardoned, yea says he, I my self also would fain have set them before me,
but God out of his free love through his Son, was stronger then them both, and
would not suffer it, but gave me in a full assurance that all my sins were
freely forgiven and blotted out, and never to be remembered against me any more,
which caused such unspeakable Joys that he was not able to utter, nor was he
to the best observation of Friends then present, ever seen so cheerful in the
greatest of his prosperity.

At noon one desired him that he would eat, he answered him that he was above
that kind of meat, for the Lord (says he) has fed me with the fat things of
his own Spirit.

The night before he Suffered, he was exercised with some fears, least he
should want strength to go through the great work he was now suddenly to engage
in, he took his Bible and opened it at an adventure, and God gave him in such a
word that was so suitable for him at the time, that he rejoiced and said Blessed
be his Name that never leaves me without a Word; the Scripture which Providence
then presented him with, was Isa. 54.10. For the mountains shall depart, and
the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither the
Covenant of my Peace be removed from thee, says the Lord that has mercy on
thee. Oh says he to his Friends and Relations then with him, You are the
Mountains and the Hills that must depart from me now; and so took his leave of
them all with much cheerfulness, saying, Go seek the Lord for me, for I cannot
go one hairs breadth in my own strength.

At another time he thus spoke to some near Friends and Relations who were with
him; Certainly (says he) if I had known the comforts of this sweet communion
with God in a Prison before, I had run to a Prison long ago. If I had suffered
when my Brethren did suffer, I had had little or no blood in my body to have
spilt for Jesus Christ in this good Cause; but God carried me into Germany, and
there made us to sow a good Seed, which will never dye; and now God has
brought me back again, with more strength to suffer for his Name and Cause:
Indeed the Lord has made me in some measure now fit to go through Sufferings
for him, and it is indeed He alone who has done it.

Upon hearing the news of his Trial which he knew was Death to him, taking and
looking into his Bible, God was pleased to set home that Scripture with his own
Spirit upon his soul, 2 Timothy 4.6. For I am now ready to be offered, and the
time of my departure is at hand; and says he, I can truly say in the strength
of the Lord, I am now ready to offer up my body to the Lord, all things being
very clear to me in my own Conscience.

He earnestly desired some Friends to seek to the Lord for him, that he might
have a better heart than that which he had to burn; but, blessed be the Lord,
says he, I have in a good sense a heart and a heart, though still my strength
is in my weakness.

He was wont frequently during the whole time of his Imprisonment, to utter
very sweet expressions to this purpose; That the ways of God are very pleasant
ways, and that his sufferings were as nothing, Prisons, Chains, Manacles, with
Buffetings, etc. were not to be accounted sufferings; and that had he known
before, what it had been to be in Bonds for Christ, and to have the Presence of
God in such a condition, he would never have gone beyond Sea; and that he had
enjoyed more of God in that Palace (for so he called his close Prison) than
ever he did in his life before.

He often said likewise, especially the day before his Execution, to an eminent
Minister, That it was his great burden at this time, that ever he lifted up a
finger against any of the People of God that were heretofore of another
Persuasion, different from his; and exhorted all his Friends that were present,
to love the Image of Christ wherever they see it.

A Minister being with Col. Barkstead the day before he suffered, and having
heard that whilst he was Lieutenant of the Tower, he had been somewhat severe
and harsh to certain godly persons (called Fifth-Monarchy-men) then in his
custody; asked him this Question,

Sir, Had not you some good men in your custody once when you were in power?
(and intended further to have said) and were you not then somewhat harsh and
severe to them? But Col. Barkstead anticipating his meaning, prevented him with
this affectionate Reply; Oh Sir! that very thing has cost me many a tear, when
I was some hundreds of miles from this place, and before I came into this
condition; indeed they held forth an opinion concerning the Fifth Monarchy or
Kingdom of Christ upon Earth, which I was then much prejudiced against, and so
prejudiced, that I was not willing to hear or read any thing in favor of it:
but now I am so far persuaded of the truth of it, that I could freely lay down
my life for it. Oh Sir (says he) many hours would not suffice to tell you all
my Experience, as touching this particular; it was since I came into Prison
that the Lord has led me into the light and knowledge of this Truth; and when
I many times opened my Bible, such places of Scripture presented themselves to
me as preached this Doctrine, which I several times out of prejudice waved, and
would not look into; but notwithstanding, the Lord did so overcome my heart, to
the faith and love of this Truth and Doctrine of Christ's visible Kingdom here
on Earth, or the Fifth Monarchy, that now I could, as I said before, freely lay
down my life for it; and I hope the Lord will help me to speak something to
this particular to morrow; but if through weakness I should not then speak so
fully to it, I have left a Testimony behind me to that glorious Truth.

When he saw his Friends at any time sad about him, he would often say to them,
Be sad for nothing but Sin, fear nothing but Sin; There is more evil in the
least Sin, than in the greatest Sufferings: this was (as he said) his own
experience.

The Sheriff's man bringing him word of his Execution, and telling him he was
sorry to bring him the ill news; he smiled, and very cheerfully returned him
this answer, Blessed be the Lord, I am ready, and therefore it is no ill news
to me.

After which time, until Execution, he behaved himself with much Joy and
Cheerfulness, so that many that came to see him with tears in their eyes, went
away rejoicing for that of God they saw in him.

At another time, to a Friend speaking to him of the greatness of his
Afflictions, he returned this Answer: My greatest Affliction (says he) has
been my Opposition to those of the People of God who were contrary-minded to
me. And said further, that he was much comforted and helped by the Prayers of
the Saints, yea, of those Saints, (said he) which considering my dealings with
them, had more cause to curse me, than to bless me: when I heard that such
prayed for me, I believed they would prevail, and that God would answer his own
Spirit in his People for me. He also desired a Friend to use his interest to
reconcile him to those Saints whom he had offended and dealt hardly with, viz.
those who are in a proper Scripture-sense for the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; a
Truth which he confessed he so much opposed, together with the Professors of
it: which Opposition says he) I have often felt in my very bones, in regard of
the sorrow it cost me: But now (says he) I rejoice that the Lord has
enlightened me in it, though much without humane means, only by the Bible, in
the time of my Sufferings.

The day before his Execution, he dined and supped with his Friends as heartily
and cheerfully as ever they saw him, and slept as well that night as he had
done these many years; being still much refreshed and kept up with that
Scripture, He that believes in me shall never dye.

In the morning he arose early, and the Gentleman-Jaylor bringing him word that
the Sheriff was come, desired him to be ready. He answered, Blessed be the
Lord, I am ready: but he staying a little longer than was expected, he was as
one in haste to be gone, and often looked out at the windows, still wishing for
the coming of his Chariot (for so he called the Sled) and when the Jailer came
for him, he went with that readiness and cheerfulness as was to admiration.

These following Scriptures he left written upon the walls of his
Prison-Chamber in the Tower, viz. Exodus 32.14. And the Lord repented of the
evil which he thought to do unto his People. Numb. 14.19, 20. Pardon I beseech
thee the Iniquity of this people, according unto the greatness of thy Mercy,
and as thou have forgiven this people, from Egypt, even until now. And the Lord
said, I have pardoned according to thy word. Psalm. 73.25, 26, 27, 28. Whom have
I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee.
My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever. For lo, they that are far from Thee shall perish; Thou have
destroyed all them that go a whoring from Thee. But it is good for me to draw
near to God, I have put my trust in the Lord God, that I may declare all thy
works. Isa. 43.2. When thou passes through the Waters, I will be with thee; and
through the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walk through the
Fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. Jer.
49.11, 12, 13. Leave thy fatherless Children. I will preserve them alive; and
let thy widows trust in me. For thus says the Lord, Behold, they whose
Judgment was not to drink of the Cup, have assuredly drunken, and art thou he
that shall altogether go unpunished? thou shall not go unpunished, but thou
shall surely drink of it. For I have sworn by my Self says the Lord, that
Bozrah shall become a desolation, a reproach, a waste, and a curse, and all the
Cities thereof shall be perpetually wastes. I have heard a rumor from the
Lord, and an Ambassador is sent unto the Heathen, saying, Gather ye together,
and come against her, and rise up to the battle.

Other Passages and occasional Speeches of Col. John Barkstead, taken by
another hand, as follows.
AT the first entrance of a Friend into his Lodging, the respect and affection
he had for him, forced him to shed a tear, at which he was much displeased, and
said, that he would have none of his Friends weep for him, but those that
envied his happiness, those that were unwilling he should go to Heaven; And
having had some other discourse with his Friend as he lay on his Bed* he gave a
brief account of Gods dealings with him in the Prison (otherwise called and
esteemed by him as his Palace) which is as follows At my first entrance into
this place, I was deprived of all company, being locked up close-Prisoner, none
being suffered to come to me, only my Keeper, and he not very often; but
blessed be God the Sun of Righteousness still did shine upon me, though
deprived of other earthly enjoyments. Now finding my self in this deserted
condition (for so I looked upon it with an eye of sense) I began to consider
with my self of my estate, what a miserable man I should be were my hopes and
confidence only in this life, did they depend soley on such momentary things,
as Friends, Relations, Liberty, etc. of which in so short a time I am so much
deprived; but having a confidence built upon that God that I had so long
trusted in, I resolved to apply my self to Him, which accordingly I did by
Prayer; and having waited long at the Posts of Wisdoms Gate (for who would not
have done it, having a key that would certainly open it, I mean that gracious
Promise of an Almighty God, That those that seek his face in sincerity, shall
not seek it in vain) the Lord was pleased evidently to appear to my poor soul,
and told me, that being here in Prison, destitute of all earthly enjoyments,
and having nothing in this world to trust to, I should find him instead of all
to me: I continued to make my Application to him; but he was pleased afterward
for a little space to hide his face from me; but, blessed be his Name, his
Spirit did not depart, but encouraged me with Jacob, not to let him go till he
had blessed me, and after a while I beheld the light of his countenance again.
Now, who would not trust in such a God as he is, in regard such a poor creature
as I am could no sooner ask, but prevail. And from that time to this, the
sweetness of that Communion that I have had with my gracious God, is not to be
expressed; Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither can it enter into the
heart of man to conceive of those things that are laid up for those that love
Him. --

Several Friends coming in to see him, he was for a while interrupted in
speaking, but when they departed, he proceeded with this ensuing discourse.
Several, says he, came to persuade me to repentance for that horrid sin of
murdering my late Sovereign (so termed by them.) For their good counsel I
returned them hearty thanks, and told them that I had with tears laid all my
sins open to God, and blessed be his Name, he had done the like to my
conscience, for the pardon of which, through the Blood of Christ I had a full
assurance; and I told them, that among all the catalogue of my sins, I could
never find that (so termed by them) to be a sin.

The day before he dyed, there came a Letter from one that pretended to be his
Friend, (though to him unknown) the substance of which was, That provided he
would give a very inconsiderable sum of Money, he did not question the
purchasing of his Life. Having read the Letter, he turning about to his Wife,
with a smiling countenance, told her, that there was another snare, showing her
the Letter (having had several others before) and turning to the Messenger that
brought the Letter, did desire him to return his Friend many thanks for his
kindness, and to acquaint him that he was a very poor man, and as for Money he
had none, but withal told him, that he so little esteemed temporal life, that
if he had but a Farthing he would not give it to purchase it.

Another Letter came to his hands the morning he went to dye, and advised him,
that if he would make his Address to the King by way of Petition, he might have
his Liberty, Provided he would fight under the Portugal, against the Spaniard.
He returned this Answer, without the least pause, and with a smiling
countenance, That he was now going to fight under the Banner of King JESUS, and
therefore such Temptations as these were very unsuitable to his Spirit.

Several being present at Dinnertime on the day before he dyed, and refusing
to eat with him, he eating so heartily: He told them he admired they could
stand by and see a dying-man eat so heartily, and they not eat at all.

At night at his going to Supper, his Wife desired him to wash his hands, it
being the last time he should eat with his Friends: but he refused it, telling
her that to morrow they would be put upon the City Gates on spikes, and then
the rain would save him that labor: He likewise desired one of his Relations
to air his last Shirt, which accordingly she did: all which he spoke with a
cheerful smiling countenance.

Saturday, being the day of his Execution, his Friends came early in the
morning to see him, and having been there about a quarter of an hour, he asked
his Keeper how he had slept that night? who answered, Very well. He likewise
asked his Keeper, whether he did not laugh about three of the clock in the
morning? supposing it to have been only a Dream: but the Keeper made answer,
That about the forementioned time he made a very great laughter; the Keeper
admiring at the occasion of it, said, Do you laugh, Sir, and are to dye to day?
who answered, To dye! I die to live, quoting that Scripture, He that believes
in me shall never die: The reason of his laughter being, as himself said,
because he was exceedingly transported with joy in the evidence of Christ's
love to his soul. And indeed nothing but Joy was daily seated in this
dying-man's countenance, as did evidently appear to all the Spectators.

The morning being far spent in discoursing with his Friends, the Sleds about
eight of the clock came into the Tower, which making a great noise upon the
stones, he ran to the window with a smiling countenance to view them, and said,
Oh our Chariots are now come! A little while after the Sleds came, the
Gentleman-Porter, or some other Officer in the Tower, came to acquaint him with
it, desiring him to prepare for his Departure: to which he rejoycingly
answered, That blessed be God, it was not then to do; and so with much
cheerfulness he committed his Wife into the hands of the Lord God Almighty,
resting upon his Promise, That he will be a Father to the Fatherless, and a
Husband to the Widow. A little before his Departure, he desired his Wife to
button on his Cloak, which accordingly she did, and presently the
Gentleman-Jaylor and a File of Soldiers came by the Lieutenants Order and
received him, at which time he parted with his Wife and Relations, as himself
professed, with as much joy as ever he received them. Now being brought by the
Jailer to the Lieutenants Door, that being the place appointed for the Sleds to
receive them; and although it was the place and house in which he lived in
plenty and honor, yet he had so much estranged himself unto it, that he did
not so much as cast his eye upon it; and no wonder, if his treasure were in
Heaven, that his heart was there also. He was appointed the first that should
enter the Sled, and so to be drawn the foremost of the three through the City.
Having thus entered the Sled, he sat down, and looking about him with a cheerful
countenance, and speaking comfortable words to such Friends as were near him;
after a while the Sleds were ordered to be drawn away, which accordingly was
performed; and coming down the Church-hill, opposite to his Prison ( alius his
Palace) his Wife with some other Friends standing at the window, took her
Handkercheif out of her Pocket and shook it at him, which he perceiving, took
off his Hat and several times shaking it over his head, cried out with an
astonishing cheerfulness, To Heaven, to Heaven, to Heaven, my Love, and leave
you in the Storm. Thus passing along, he came to the Tower-Gate, where some
reviled him in words and carriages, not only his Enemies, but his former
intimate Friends, which he rather smiled than was troubled at. Near Holborn
there came a young woman to him, being very earnest to speak to him, which the
Sheriffs Officers permitted; all that she told him she had to say to him was
this, That whatsoever he did, she begged of him to go on cheerfully in so
Glorious a Cause. Several spoke to him in the same manner. And though he met
with some Revilers in the way, yet the number of his Friends, and of such as
blessed him and the rest in the Name of the Lord, far exceeded them. As he
passed along, several times a Friend that accompanied him asked him how he did?
who told him, he was never better in all his life, and that he grew stronger
and stronger every moment. And going up Holborn, being in discourse with the
same Friend, he with a smiling countenance told him, That he evidently saw
Jesus Christ coming down the Hill to receive and embrace him; and that this
hours difficulty that he was now to go through, was not to be mentioned with
that Glory he was to enjoy. When he came near the place of Execution, the
multitude of people increasing, they could not bring the Sled near the Gallows,
so the Sheriff ordered that he should be brought on foot, which accordingly was
performed, and a Cart standing ready under the Gallows, he cheerfully got into
it; before which some of his Friends took their leaves of him, he leaving this
word of Counsel with them, To trust in that God that has promised, Never to
leave nor forsake those that trust in him.

Being entered the Cart, the Executioner tied his hands with black Ribbons,
taking off his Perriwig, and putting on his Cap, the Sheriff told him, that he
would permit him to say any thing between God and himself, but nothing in
justification of the Act: but he refused to say any thing till Col. Okey came,
which was immediately after.

Several reviled him at the place of Execution, among the rest the Lord --
bidding him (in a scoffing way) Good buoy Barkstead, good buoy. To which, with
a smile, he returned this Answer, Sir, you are no Gentleman to triumph over a
dying-man.

Another thing observable was, That a Courtier by way of derision told him, O
Barkstead, you have got the Comforter, meaning a little Strongwater-bottle that
he had in his hand: to which he replied, That blessed be God, he had a better
Comforter than that, or else he should not be able to stand there so cheerfully
as he did.

To conclude, all his carriages and actions were exceeding cheerful, going
through those Difficulties he met with, with an undaunted resolution, to the
admiration and astonishment of his Enemies, and the great rejoicing of his
Friends, who had before earnestly besought the Lord to vouchsafe his comforting
and assisting presence to him.

A Letter of Col. Barksteads, sent when he was beyond the Seas to a near Friend
of his in London.
My dear Friend,
YOurs of the last of April I received the twelfth of June. The first sight of
your handwriting filled my eyes with such floods of tears, that for some hours
I could not recover my sight to read it: yet at last to reading I went, but
then every line, yea every word called back my tears, and so overwhelmed my
affections, that I could not get through it till between one and two of the
clock that night, though the refreshing Comforts I found therein, and received
thereby, I trust will never get through my heart, but have ever a place there
while I have a being in this dying vain and miserable world, to which I desire
we may get our hearts mortified and dead, and alive only to our God in and
through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Now if we be mortified and dead to
the World then nothing in this World con trouble us; were all the Mountains in
the World thrown on a dead man they would not trouble him because he feels none
of their weight. Christ's boxes were not broken on the Cross because he was
dead before, but the bores of the two Thieves were. So let afflictions and
Troubles find us with mortified and dead hearts to the World, and they will
never break our bones. No, no, the bones of those were broken which were alive.
Our desires will be hankring after the World, but surely our business is to
labor after Poverty of Spirit, and as the Lord has by his Wise and
Overruling Providence emptied us of the Creature, and so of those empty
comforts, we may labor to get our hearts filled with the fuln^sse of him, in
whose fullness there is joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for ever
more, one drop of whose fullness is worth ten thousand Worlds. Ah, alas, alas,
content does not always go clo^thed in silk, neither is it the company of rich
men and women. No, no, they, and they alone are the contented rich men and
women in this World whose desires are satisfied, I mean whose desires are
sati^fied in God, or whose desires God satisfies; such a poor Soul looks on its
present condition best because God sees it best. I cannot here but cast a
weeping eye and a bleeding heart back on those our many days and years of
mercy, the Lord was pleased to entrust me with both in relation to my Soul, and
Body, but I did not honor the God of my mercies. He gave me health but I
abused it, and therefore the Lord brought and continued sickness. I neglected
those precious Ordinances I did or might have enjoyed, and behold the Lord has
cast me into a Wilderness, where no water, no bread is; I neglected the
communion of the Saints, and have been I had almost said shut out from the
society of men, but more of that when I see you; I neglected the society of the
living, and have been and am shut up as among the dead; under these and many
other considerations of the like nature has the Lord been at work with my poor
Soul in this my Wilderness condition, the particulars of which would be too
large a volume for a letter, under all which, he who is, who was, who is to
come, who is the chosen, faithful and true, he even he has said, I will never,
never, never leave thee nor forsake the, and he that has said it is faithful
and will not lie, he cannot lie. Now if I can truly say the Lord is mine, and I
am his, what care I if all the W^rld forsake me? If the Lord takes away the
World* and the things of the World, and friends of the World, and gives me
himself I have enough. It was an excellent note in yours to me, God loves to
the end and there is no end of that love, the World and the men of the World
cannot do so. No, no, they are a lie, they are empty dying vanities, they are
not while they seem to be nor what they seem to be. Man, a buble, a vapor, a
shadow all nothing; then for riches they are as uncertain; riches take to
themselves wings and fly away Now if man and riches be thus uncertain nothings,
what must their dependents be but less then nothing? as honor, pleasure, great
things, yea great men, all a shadow that makes no stay put pass^s away, and
immediately they are not. O is it not then below a rational Creature to lay out
himself, his precious time, his strength, his all upon such pitiful poor
nothings? but for a Christian, a child of God, an heir of Heaven to engage his
Soul in such pitiful underling vanities, O let it not be, Has the Lord broken
our estates, let us beg of him to break our hearts too, for a broken estate,
and a whole and a hard heart will never agree together, and there can be no
content; But on the contrary, a broken estate, and a broken heart does very
often bring much more content then the full enjoyment of the Creature. I bless
the Lord I can through mercy seal to this truth in the Wilderness; Ah my Friend,
my Friend, a naked dying Christ is above and beyond all the honors, profits,
and pleasures of this World. An evennesse and Proportion between our hearts and
our conditions brings content, has God made our estates low, let not us lift
up our head above our condition, for this will bring bitterness in the end; it
is through the wise and overruling Providence of Almighty that our condition is
for the present changed; now if we in our present condition desire to serve the
Counsel of God in our cond^tion, it will certainly exceedingly tend to our
advantage. See what the Spirit of the Lord says the 54. of Isaiah. 17. When
thou passest through the fire and through the water I will be with thee, (and so
on.) Now if God be ours and we his, he will be with us, and then what will harm
us, what will or can our loss be, or rather what will not our advantage be,
that it is a gallant thriving time with the People of God with you, I much
rejoice and with you desire to bless the Lord, for that to me is an assured
sign that the Lord is at work with them, and for them, and when he has fitted
his people for mercies, he will come, and will not tarry; where he gives a
returning heart, he is not far from healing that heart, see the 3. Jer. 22.
Return you backsliding Children (the very next words) and I will heal your
backslidings; and where the Lord comes to heal see how ready the Soul is to
close with the Lord. For the following words (we come) to whom (to thee) why
so? For says they, thou art the Lord our God our business is to get an
assurance that the Lord is our God, and Salvation and deliverance is certainly
near, or at least a suitable spirit to our present condition which is all one.
My Friend, I doubt not before this you understand the reason of my not writing,
I am not angry, I shall never have more to do with anger as formerly; No the
Lord has made me through mercy sensible of that evil, yea of my great evil and
sin therein, and therefore I trust that I shall never be angry more, but with
sin, which is and ought to be the only object of our anger; No no, it is a
meek and quiet Spirit that is most suitable for a Christian at all times, but
especially at such a time as this, See Mat. 11 19. Learn of me says Christ,
for I am meek and lowly. Meekness signifies humility or sweetness, it is the
bridle of anger, it is the glory of a Christian, it graces his calling, it
keeps the soul in a continual peace, it makes all other graces shine, it is a
grace that a Christian has constant use of, and so is of continual use in all
places and on all occasions, but of exceeding use in this our day; for that to
a humble heart all crosses are small, because it admires your least mercy
looking on it self as unworthy of it, it is a convincing grace, a grace on
which the Lord sets a very high price, it brings rest to the Soul, and so makes
(...) life comfortable, it keeps our heads and hearts lower then our conditi^^^
and so frees the Soul from being destitute in the world, it is very suspi^^ous
of it self and so willing to know the worst of it self, it bemoans and afflicts
it self and thinks better of others then of it self, the 3 Col 12. As the Elect
of God put on the bowels of meekness, loving kindness and humility, this must
be done as the elect of God. We read in Numbers, that the Nazarites as they
were to drink no wine, so they were to drink no vinegar. Now a Nazarite was a
Type of one set apart for God, such are all believers whom God has set apart
for himself, God expects they should drink no vinegar, that is they should not
be of froward, peevish, waspish and sour spirits; But on the contrary, of
sweet, meek and gentle spirits which is of great price both with God and man,
and of great advantage to us both in relation to our souls and bodies. I have
been the larger in this, having been here in speaking to my own soul, O had I
had the acquaintance with this grace formerly which the Lord has been teaching
me in the Wilderness I should certainly have been more watchful of those floods
of passions then I was, I should have known that nothing could be well done in
anger or passion, I should have considered my own frailty, and labored to have
turned the stream of my affections another way, I should certainly have set a
higher price on the grace of meekness then I did, and have made it more my
business to have been humbling my soul for what had been past, and been mindful
of renewing my Covenant daily, and thereby kept my peace with my God. I must
beg your pardon for giving you the trouble of so many scribed lines, one of
thine to me excells all I can write, but the excellency of the grace of
meekness together with the usefulness of it at all times, but more especially
at such a time as this; Indeed when I set pen to paper, I intended anoth^r
subject, but having had occasion to make trial of the usefulnes of this
Transcendent grace, I could not pass it by, but was enforced to present you a
last of those full drafts the Lord has been pouring forth into me even in the
Wilderness of the Wilderness, this I shall unridle to you hereafter. But if
this grace of meekness be of so transcendent excellency and usefulness, then
how much does it concern us to labor both to get and keep it; which that we
may do, the first and princip^l means is certainly to study the word more, and
therein of a more full knowledge of God and Christ and of our selves. Of our
selves consider what once we were* what we might have been, and what it cost
Christ to bring us out of that condition, and what we would be if God should
leave us to our selves but for a very little space, in what condition should we
then certainly be in one day. Let these and the like consideratieons cause us
to rise and be doing, and to labor to get and keep our hearts in a ready frame
and temper for every duty the Lord shall call us forth to, either to do or
suffer, and not only so but to get our hearts in love with the duty; love makes
hard and difficult things light and easy, and he^ let us not loose our former
encouragements, nor continue in the guilt of any one sin, but be careful to
preserve all our former Experience, to be very careful to order the duties of
our present condition and conversation, to beware of disturbing passions, and
entertain all opportunities of enjoying communion with the Saints, let us be
much in the exercise of faith, and always laboring after strength of grace,
endeavoring as much as in us lies to make all the ways of Christ easy, that
so they may be delightful to us, and when we have done all to leave the
success and issue to the Lord, all whose ways are even and none of them
crooked or contrary one to the other, they certainly bring strength and in all
of them there is good success, for that a gracious soul has all the passages
of Gods Providence to help him, they being eases to the soul for that they ease
the soul from care, yea they make all other things easy, in the ways of Christ
a gracious soul is always receiving its wages in its work (Psalm 110.) Thy
people are a willing people in the day of thy power; the heart of a Christian
does readily embrace Christ because there is something in a Christians heart
like Christ, and from hence it is that the ways of the Lord become strength to
the righteous, it must needs be easy, yea even at that time when others may
look upon them as most rough, difficult and hard; A skilful Sailor will make
way to his desired port with a three quarter wind, yea if he have Sea-room he
will lay hold on some Tack or other though the wind blow directly against him;
The way from Egypt to Canaan was not long nor difficult; but behold through
unbelief together with a murmuring and repining spirit, (The constant
Handmaids) what windings and turnings did they meet with in the Wilderness
before they came to Canaan; the same spirit is and will be at work in every one
of us, and if the Lord give us not strength will exceedingly trouble us, and
therefore we must take heed of vinegar spirits, and consider that a gracious
heart accounts his duty his privilege, and the reason is because the word that
commands it is sweet, and therefore it is, he would rather come under any other
burden then cast off the Yoke of Christ, for that this is to him easy; Now if
we will follow Christ we must not think of following the World, for that is at
continual enmity with Christ; yea those that follow the World: are natural
Enemies to themselves being at emnity with God; To follow the World is a
slighting of Christ, by leaving the example of Christ and his Saints; It is
also below the excellency of a Christian, for the Mysteries of Godliness are
above the riches of the Word, again it puts the soul upon a necessity of
miscarrying to follow the World, crosses all our prayers, it hinders us from
the receiving of good and deprives us of the good we had before.

But I must abruptly break off and take my leave of you; I am Yours J. B.


Another Letter of Col. Barksteads written to a Christian Friend in London.
MY Dear Friend, I am very sensible of my great neglect of that duty which is
incumbent upon me, to you-ward in the Relation I stand to you, that I had not
long before this given you an Account how it has been with me, and what the
Lord has done for me his poor unworthy servant since I last saw you; that I
have been a Stranger in a strange Land I need not tell you, I am persuaded you
will judge favorably of me till you understand how it has pleased the Lord to
deal with me. The truth is, my condition in some respect may resemble the Dove
that Noah sent out of the Ark that could find no place to set the foal of her
foot on, thus has it been for some months with me, so that I could not with
any convenience (because of those that bear an evil will to Zion) write to you;
but my Dear Friend though I have been absent from you in the body, yet I can
say truly I have not been so in my Spirit; the Lord knows how my Soul has both
night and day longed after you and all the rest of my Christian Friends in
Christ Jesus, and in all my approaches to the Throne of Grace I have made it my
earnest request to the Lord Jesus Christ that the Father of all glory would
give unto you more and more the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the
knowledge of Christ; And that you may walk worthy of the Lord unto all well
pleasing, being fruitful in all good works, increasing in the blessed knowledge
of our God, and that you may be filled with all the love of God to his glory
and your everlasting comfort. I know you are ignorant why I left my Native
Country, and all that was near and dear unto me in this world, but which is
most of all the precious Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the communion of
his people, a loss of losses, not to be made up but in Christ, and in him
alone: and therefore my dear Friend, though now you enjoy the light, yet you do
not know how soon it may be taken from you or you from it, it is and shall be
my continual prayers that it may not be, for it is indeed the Judgment of all
Judgments. The Lord God pardon unto me in the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ
that great neglect of it whereof I was guilty while I was with you, that I did
not improve it more to the comfort of my own soul. Oh my Dear Friend, did you
but see and hear that which I have seen and heard in my Travels, especially
among those that profess Popery, it would make your hearts to tremble, that
blaspheming the Blessed Name of the Lord, all manner of wickedness, the horrid
profanation of the Lords day, and other abominations; and Oh that I could have
said that I had not seen and heard too much of the same, even among those that
term themselves of the Reformed Religion. Alas, alas, the best of what they
enjoy here, is but as the bran to the wheat in comparison to what the Lord has
bestowed on you, and therefore I beseech you prize the Gospel more and more,
and those Godly Ministers that it has pleased the Lord to send among you, for
the Lord has not done for other people as he has done for you; I am verily
persuaded it is one great cause among many others that the Lord has dealt so
severely with his own people, as to give them up into the hands of his and
their enemies, has been the slighting, despising, contemning and undervaluing
the precious Gospel and the faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ; the Lord in
great mercy pardon it not only to his own people but to the whole Nation, if it
be his blessed will, that they may yet know the things that concerns the glory
of God and their own everlasting ^^st before they be hid from their eyes; Oh
the precious Jewel of the Gospel to which all the other enjoyments even the
quintessence of whatever this world can afford are not to be compared. What is
there in this base world but vanity of vanities? what is there in great men or
great things, a sparkle of fire, or a storm at Sea, or a treacherous Friend
brings all to nothing in a moment? As we have seen by sad experience, every day
do witness the Truth of it; Therefore says the Apostle love not the World, not
the things of the World, a little grace is worth ten thousand worlds; It was a
notable saying of that worthy Marquess, that he was not worthy of Christ that
would not give the whole World for one days Communion with him. Oh it is a
good thing to have a heart established in grace, it is good in times of
prosperity, it is good in days of adversity; Oh it is good in such a day as
this, when one wave comes on the neck of another, yet the Lord even then
remembers those, whom he has promised he will never leave nor forsake, yea
though their troubles be many, yet the Lord will deliver them out of all in his
blessed time, for all things shall certainly work for the glory of God and the
good of his own people. And now my Dear Friend, do I most humbly beg in the
Name of the Lord Jesus the continuance of your Prayers to the Lord for me, that
he would be pleased to give me more and more of his Holy Spirit, that while he
is pleased to give a being in the Land of the living, I may in some measure
live answerable to the many unexpected mercies he has bestowed on me his poor
and unworthy Servant, both in relation to my soul and body, and that too since
I came into a strange land, and truly as I want a heart to be thankful to the
Lord, so I want expressions to let you know it; I shall only at present say it
was good for me that I have been Afflicted, and if the Lord gives me life I
shall not fail to let you know the goodness of the Lord to me in this day of my
greatest of troubles which have not been a few. And as I humby desire your
Prayers for me, so do I also beg your thanks to the Lord for me, who has been
so gracious to me every way. And oh that now with a cheerful heart I might
honor the Lord in this day of very great troubles, and that I might be very
humble and thankful, and be fitted to live or to dye as the Lord shall be
pleased to call me forth. That which lies with some wait on my Spirit is not
so much the loss of these outward things (for I praise the Lord he has
carried me in some measure above them) but that I should sin against so blessed
a God and loving a Father as I have done, and that I should with many of his
own People provoke the Lord to give up so many of his People so far into the
hands of his and their enemies as he has done at this day; would an ordinary
chastisement have prevailed, certainly the common Enemy had not had their will
over them; the good Lord sanctify his present hand of affliction to all his
more and more; and oh that now in this day of his East wind he would be pleased
for his Name sake to stay his rough wind, and that that may be the fruit to
purge them from their sin, and that his People may yet live to praise him in
the great Congregation, and there to declare the goodness of the Lord to them
in the time of their affliction, and to say it was good for them they were
afflicted.

And oh my dear Friend, I do again beg your prayers, for I am very sensible I
am at present but as a brand pulled out of the fire, and am very confident it is
for the sakes of the Lords People that I am alive at this day; The Lord grant
that while I live I may live to the glory of his most holy Name, I hope you
will excuse me for being so tedious to you, I shall therefore no further
trouble you, but only present my due respects to you, and all the rest of my
Christian Friends, wishing you from my soul all good here, and glory hereafter
in that World which is to come. And now the God of all praise that brought
again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ the great Shepherd of his Sheep,
through the blood of the Everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good
work, and work in you that which is wel-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus
Christ.

I am your loving friend in the Gospel of our Lord Christ, J. B.


Another Letter written by Col. Barkstead to a dear Friend.
INdeared and endearing Friend, Thine of the fourth instant came to my hands,
which I bless the Lord was as seasonable as welcome, and as welcome as
seasonable; it was to me as Apples of Gold in P^ctures of Silver, very Pleasant
and Beautiful.

Dear Friend, I being now a close Prisoner in the Tower, in one of the (as they
conceive) meanest and securest Prison lodgings, in which when it rains I have
no place to fit dry but in a high window, being attended with a Lifeguard of
two Warders and two Soldiers day and night, and denied the use of Pen, Ink and
Paper; so that what I write is so by stealth, and that so by bits, that I am
sore't sometimes before I have writ two lines to tear what I have written, and
with much trouble to secure my Paper, ink and pen; but yet I have adventured on
a line or two to you, to let you know that I received your welcome Letter, every
line of which was being filled with that spirit in and by which my soul has
been through free mercy born up by to this very moment, far beyond and above
what I am here able to express; Oh the infinite and Eternal Riches of the free
Grace of our good God, in and through the Lord Jesus Christ, to poor unworthy
creatures! it is he, and he alone that has and does make hard things, easy,
soft and pleasant, bitter things sweet, crooked and rough ways plain and
pleasant; this has (through mercy) been his way toward me, unworthy man;
since I became man's bondman. He, even he alone, out of the free riches of his
never-failing Mercy in Jesus Christ, has made me his freeman, He has set my
feet in large and fresh pastures; He has not only taken out the blots and
blurs that my sins have made in my old Evidences, since the old Record and
Assurance I had many years of his Eternal and Everlasting Love to my poor soul
in Jesus Christ, but he even since I came within this my Palace (for so I can
truly and cheerfully call it) I say, through the free Grace He has not only
cleared up my old Assurance, but has also given me fair new Copies, together
with such Inlargements, that are unutterable. In the Deeps I cried, when and
where none could hear but He, and He alone, who heard and answered, blessed be
his Name: When my heart and my strength failed, He then heard, so that as a
return of prayer, yea, of yours and the People of the Lord, together with the
breathing of his own Spirit in the hearts of his People here, He has made such
gracious and full returns, that I (through mercy) can say from the first of my
being in bonds, notwithstanding the weakness of my body, and present want of
health through extreme Colds, yet the Dungeon, Chains, Bolts and Manacles have
not had the least of hardness in them; no, I must say it again, through free
Grace, the Lord has not only made them easy, but pleasant, yea kickings and
buffetings, when in Irons, by some of Downing's men, yet the Lord strengthened
me. Pray mistake me not, I do not write this, as having here any thing to boast
of from my self, or from any strength of mine; no, no, I have not been without
my buffetings, though in them the Lord has been wonderful gracious to me, and
he has made me a very great gainer by them. Three times since I came into this
Room or Palace, Satan, who may be truly said to go about like a roaring Lion
seeking whom he may devour, waiting his opportunity, I having been for a very
very little space drawn off my Out-Sentinels, and beginning to hold a Parley with
Sense, and reason with flesh and blood, to look backward and forward, on the
right and left hand, in which work I do not remember I exceeded above half an
hour, but I perceived a general discomposure and unsettlement in all my former
settlements, and immediately found Satan with a full Body ready to surprise my
Main-guards; but the Lord was merciful, and made good his Promise to me, He in
the instant of time came in and showed me where my weakness lay, and where my
strength; I cried out to Him, as a ravished Damosel, He heard and strengthened
me with strength in my soul; blessed, O blessed be for ever his most great and
glorious Name.

My dear Friend, I hint these things only to let you know how seasonable
(through mercy) the Lord has made me, and does keep me off my own weakness,
and nothingness, and unworthiness; indeed I dare not be off the Watch, or from
going the Rounds, to see if all the Sentinels be watchful every moment; I do
now very well understand that Command, Pray always, Pray continually; watch
and pray, pray and watch, are and must be a Christians constant, and continual,
and unseparable Companions, at all times, and in all places.

Now that the Lord has thus far answered the prayers of his People, what I
shall be able to undergo the next hour I know not, I therefore do heartily
again and again beg, that you would with me continually be blessing and
praising the Lord for those blessed Returns he has hitherto made to your
former Prayers, and lay them before you as encouragements, and spread them
before the Lord as Arguments for his hearing your Prayers, for the future, for
what is yet to come; for, though I can say, the Dungeon, Bolts, Chains and
Manacles, with kickings and buffetings, have been nothing, and therefore can
comfortably and confidently desire the People of the Lord not to fear any of
them, but to fear sin only, for that the least sin has more terror in it than
the greatest evil or trouble that can befall a Child of God here; therefore
fear, O fear sin, I say: I do not know what a Sled, a Gibbet, a Halter, Ax, or
Knife are, I have often set them before me, and have been often going up the
Ladder to see if they would terrify me, but blessed be the Lord they have not
hitherto given me the least disturbance; no, no, in all that is past I could
never yet suffer so much as such a wish to pass through my thoughts, Oh that I
had not been engaged in this thing, or that I had before 1648 deserted this
Cause; no, the Lord would not to this day suffer such a thought to pass through
my thoughts, much less through my heart; no, I have over and over gone through
the Cause from first to last, even from the Blood of Rochel to Irelands
Massacres, the Blood of Scotland, and the Blood of both the Wars in England.

My dear Friend, and reconciled Friends on the best account, I must at present
leave you, earnestly begging the constant continuance of yours and the People
of the Lord's Prayers, with and for me, that as he has, so would continue to
support and bear up the spirit of his unworthy Creature, and in those few
days, or hours, he has yet to remain on this side Eternity, he may neither do
nor speak any thing, wherein or whereby he should in the least dishonor God,
grieve the Spirit of Jesus Christ, or give the least trouble to any of the
meanest of the Saints, or desert that Glorious Cause, that the Lord does and
will own, and will raise up at his appointed time, in despite of all the Devils
in Hell, and all the Kings, Princes and Great-men of the Earth, whose flesh
must become meat to the fowls of the Air, and their Carcasses dung to the
Earth; for, the Kingdoms of the Earth, or of this world, are to become the
Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever, and ever.

This from your truly reconciled Friend, J. B.
Praise and pray, pray and praise, and above all watch unto prayer; pray
always, and watch continually.




Several occasional Passages, Speeches and Letters of Col. John Okey, during
the time of his Imprisonment in the Tower, till the day of his Suffering.
ON Wednesday the 16th of April 1662. being the day that Col. Barkstead, Col.
Okey, and Mr. Corbet had Sentence passed upon them at the King's Bench Bar,
after which a Friend went to visit Col. Okey, and found him in a sweet and
blessed frame of spirit and very cheerful, not in the least under any
discouragement, but acquainted the said Friend that they had been up at
Westminster, and that Sentence was given against them; and declared he was not
in the least disquieted at it, but thankfully owned the Providence of God in
bringing them from the place where they were beyond Sea, to their present
condition, wherein he professed himself to be much satisfied and declared he
had rather lay down his Life here, than to have been buried in another Nation;
and expressed further, that for what he was charged withal, and condemned, he
had not the least trouble upon his spirit. He also told this Friend, that he
desired to bless God for the Prayers of the Lord's People, for he found the
benefit and advantage of them in this time of his Trial. And with much
cheerfulness of spirit afterward he did bless the Lord for his Goodness to
him, declaring he had got more benefit and advantage in the time of these his
troubles, than in many years before; and one day especially since his coming
into the Tower, he said, he was reading some verses in the 16th chapter of
John, and the Lord did so set home upon his spirit, ver. 26, 27. especially
that word, [ The Father himself loves you] that he was so much refreshed in
his soul, that for an hour together he was as it were ravished with the Joy of
the Lord; the sight of which was much comfort to his dear Wife, and did much
refresh and cheer her spirit.

And upon Friday, the day before his Suffering, several Friends went unto him
about one of the clock, and were with him some hours; he several times spoke to
them, saying, Well, Friends, I shall now get to Heaven before you, and shall go
out of a sinful evil world, into that place where I shall sin no more, nor
sorrow any more; I bless the Lord he is good to me in all his dispensations,
and I could not have been without any of these afflictions. Then he mentioned
diverse choice places of Scripture, as 2 Cor. 4.8, 9, and the 17 verse,
explaining the words to sweet advantage: As for afflictions (said he) they are
but slight and momentary, and that they work to glory, yea an exceeding, yea, a
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: And much strengthening himself
with the Promises of God, Isa. 43.1, 2. upon which Scripture he did thus
descant; Though Jacob was but a worm, and so trodden upon by every one, yet the
Lord would be with him, and so with all his Saints and People in their
sufferings. He insisted also upon that Scripture, Heb. 13.5, 6. together with
many others which were proper to his condition, and the Lord was pleased to
make every one of them a strengthening cordial to him.

The next day, being the day of Execution, several Friends went again to Col.
Okey by six of the clock in the morning, where they found him ready dressed,
and with a sweet cheerful spirit bid them welcome. They asked him how he did?
he said, Never better in his life, and had found the benefit of prayers, and it
had been a sweet night unto him, being sweetly refreshed, which also did much
appear by his cheerful and fresh countenance; for it was observed that he never
looked better in all his days. He declared he had much quietness in his
spirit, and said, As for the loss of his Estate it did not in the least trouble
him. Then a Friend hinted to him, the parting with his Wife and Relations: he
answered, she had been a very tender Wife to him, and had expressed her abundant
love and tenderness in this his distress; but he was not in the least troubled
at their parting, being assured the Lord would be better to her, than he could
be; And also said, that though his Wife had lost much since she knew him, as to
outward, yet she had gained much, as to the better concernments (for so his
Wife had declared unto him) which doubtless, well considered, will outweigh
all other losses. Some of these Friends spent some time in prayer with him,
also the Colonel himself went to prayer, and the Lord appeared very much in
carrying forth his spirit to own his hand, and to see his goodness in all his
dispensations, and to implore further assistance: and between the times of
prayer, they had much sweet conference with him; in all which he manifested a
very gracious and holy frame of spirit, and often declared with great
cheerfulness, that he was ready to be offered up. He was heard often to ask,
whether his Chariot was yet come or no? and some Friends told him, Well, now
the time draws nigh; who answered, I am ready, I am ready. Then came the Order
for his going to the Sled, upon which he went with all cheerfulness, and so
went forward with undaunted courage to meet Death in the face, like a Christian
Soldier indeed; who, through the Lord's assistance, presently obtained more
than a Conquest over all his Enemies.

As he was in the Sled, and drew near to the place of Execution, a Friend came
to him and said, Sir, I have a great desire to know how it is with you, and how
the Lord is pleased to manifest himself unto you in the condition you are now
in.

The Colonel replied, Friend I thank you, I bless the Lord I have great cause
to praise and magnify his great and glorious Name, for his unspeakable
goodness toward me, especially in this present dispensation; for I can truly
say, and that by experience, that the Goodness of the Lord endures for ever;
and praised be God for this present trial.

The same Friend further replied and said, I pray, Sir, are you not at all
dejected in your spirits? are you not cast down in your mind? have you not hard
thoughts of God for this his strange providence toward you? The Colonel
replied, Friend, I shall endeavor to satisfy you as well as I can in this
matter: and I let you know that I have not the least trouble upon my heart, nor
the least burden upon my spirit upon the account of my Sufferings, neither have
I any hard thoughts of God: but, on the contrary, can speak to the praise of
his Grace, that his Goodness has carried me forth above the fear of all these
things. And (my Friend) let me tell you further, That I have had more
experience of God, and more acquaintance with God, within these three or four
days, than ever I had in all my life; and at this present I am so far from
being dejected or cast down in my spirits, as that I am so much elevated and
lifted up in my soul, that I am not able to tell you how it is with me.

And when he was ready to rise out of the Sled, another Friend came to him, and
asked him how he did? To whom he answered, I bless the Lord, I am very well,
and do no more value what I am now going about, than this straw (taking up a
piece of a straw in his hand) I have (says he) made many a Charge in my time,
but now I have but one Charge more to make, and then I shall be at rest.

Here follows two Letters of his, to two of his old faithful Friends, eminent
persons in the City of London.

A Letter from Col. John Okey, directed to a Relation of his, to be by him
communicated to some Christian Friends of his acquaintance about the City of
London.
SIR,
HAving a little time in this place, before I am removed to Newgate (where I am
to go as I am informed) I thought good to give you some account how it is with
me concerning my better part. I bless the Lord I never found so much spiritual
joy some years before, as I have in Prison; it is according as the Apostle
speaks, 2 Cor. 1.3, 4, 5. And therefore let the People of God not fear a
Prison, or to suffer in the Cause of God. I shall give you a touch but of three
things, viz.

1. How it is with me in my spiritual condition.

2. I shall speak something of the Cause, for which I suffer the loss of all
things which are near and dear unto me in this evil world.

3. In the last place, What a Mercy it is when the Lord is pleased to call
forth a creature to suffer for the Truths of our Lord Jesus Christ in such a
day as this is. I believe you have heard these from some other of the Servants
of the Lord, that have gone before, in whole dishes; but you are like to have
them in a broken dish, and but a few scraps, in comparison to that great feast
you have had before from them that are now with the Lord. Our Afflictions
sanctified, are good Cordials to the soul; and therefore it is no marvel that
David said, It is good for me that I have been afflicted. And* as one observes
and says well, a Prison being the place where, wanting other Books, a man may
there best study the Book of the knowledge of himself* being separated from all
business, but praying and praising the Lord God in Christ by the Spirits
assistance. And since I have, by the help of the Lord, looked in some measure
into my heart, I could not have thought there had been so much ignorance and
impatience, pride, inordinate affection to creature comforts, revenge,
difidence of God, self-love, and iniquity of all kinds in me, as I now find
there is; and although the Lord in great mercy has kept me, by his mighty
power and restraining grace, from those Jayl-bird sins, as Swearing,
Drunkenness, Lying, Uncleanness, and hating of his People; yet I find a mass of
corruption in me, and a multitude of transgressions, so that my sins are as the
hairs of my head, which cannot be numbered for the multitude of them; and all
this darkness and filthiness of spirit is only discovered by the light of
Christ: By his lowliness in washing the Apostles feet, I see the height of
pride in my own spirit, and want of condescension when I was in prosperity, and
my unfruitfulness under the means of Grace, and little good I did when I had an
opportunity thereunto: and therefore I adore and acknowledge the Justice of
God, that he has most righteously deprived me of my Liberty and Estate; truly,
now I am thereby brought nearer to Christ, whereby I find (through Grace) that
Christ is become very precious to me, And more to be desired than Gold, yea, 1
Pet 2.7.
than fine Gold; and sweeter than the Honey, or the Honeycomb. And this I can
say (through Mercy) I do desire to love the good Word of the Lord before my
appointed food; I have begged of the Lord that he would enable me more and
more, that I may lay open before him all my sins known or unknown, and to loath
my self for them, and that not only for the shame which sin brings, but
rather because I should sin against so good a God, and loving Father in Christ
Jesus, as I have done; and especially for my actual known sins, committed
against so much Love, Light, Promises and Covenants from a gracious God, that
will not destroy me for all my abominations: blessed be his holy Name for ever,
and for ever. I desire continually to go out of my self, and to rely on the
Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, who only is the Fountain of Life, and
in his Light we shall see light. Oh! what Mercy is it, that the Lord should be
pleased out of his great Love and Compassion, to cast the mantle of his free
Grace upon such a poor worm as I am, and that he had not left me to the
wickedness of my own heart, as he has left thousands that do live in pleasure
and vanity, and so are dead while they live.

Now the good Lord grant, that as he has done for me more than he has done
for many thousands, so I may love Him more than many thousands do, that I may
yet live and die for the Glory of his holy Name, and that the few hours I have
to live, I may wholly spend to the praise of God. I humbly desire to bless the
Lord that has made me willing to live or die, as may be most for his Glory,
and the Good of his People: for I can say, through Christ that strengthens me,
I can do all things in some measure, and have learned how to want, and how to
abound; and can say, to live is Christ, and to die is gain; praised be the Lord
that has made my heart fit in some good measure for the work which he has
called me unto; and, as I hear, my departure is at hand, so through the Lord's
rich Grace and free Mercy to me his poor unworthy Servant, I am willing to be
offered up; and if I be offered upon the Sacrifice of your Faith, I joy and
much rejoice therein.

I hope by the continual Prayers of you and the rest of the People of the Lord,
he that has begun that good work in me, will carry it on till the coming of
the Lord Jesus. When I look upon my self, then I have cause to fear and
tremble, for my strength is as weak as water; but when I look to the Lord
Jesus, then am I strong, for he has promised, He will never leave nor forsake
me, nor all those that trust in Him. And I know, that through the Lord I shall
do those things that may tend to the praise of his great Name in this evil day;
and I hope by his Grace to honor Him more by my Death, than in all my Life
before: for indeed, although I had a desire in the day of liberty to do that
which was most for the glory of God and the good of his People, and on that
account I did not think my Life, nor any thing I had, near or dear to me, and
can say, I do believe no man did more rejoycingly go to lay down his Life than
I did; yet I was accompanied with so many failings in my best doings, that I
have cause to be ashamed and humbled for the best of all my services that ever
I have performed; and praised be his holy Name, although I have nothing in my
self to glory in, yet in Christ Jesus I can and will rejoice; giving thanks to
the Father of our Lord Jesus, who has made me meet to be partaker of the
Inheritance of the Saints in light, and for his unspeakable love to me in the
Lord Jesus: for, being justified by Faith, I have peace with our blessed God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ; to whom be praise and glory, both now and for
evermore.

And now a word concerning the Cause, for which I am to suffer all that is near
and dear unto me. I shall, as before the Lord (who only knows the hearts and
thoughts of all men) tell you my Faith. I do believe at long-run there is not a
man, that fears the Lord, will have any reason to be sorrowful for engaging in
that Good Old Cause, which I am now to seal with my Blood again, as I have many
a time done; I am satisfied in my soul, that it is a most just and glorious
Cause as has been in many years asserted; and although the Lord has been
pleased for the sins of his People, and for a great judgment to the wicked of
the three Nations, to let it be, in respect of the Cause, as it were the Sun
setting for a night, yet it will certainly arise the next morning very
gloriously, though now it be never so much reproached by the wicked of this
day. And when I die, I shall die in the Faith thereof. And that most of the
Reformed Churches in the world, by report, are all of that mind, and I my self
have heard the same from many among them where I have been abroad. I bless the
Lord I have no guilt upon me in reference to that Cause, if I had I would let
you know it. And although many object against me that place, 1 Pet. 4.15.
Let none of you suffer as a Murderer; yet I cannot, after much seeking the
Lord, be convinced that I am such a one. And in case any did it, out of base
ends of their own, I praise the Lord I had none, but looking at the Glory of
God, and the Good of his poor People in what I did; and I bless the Lord I find
the comfort of it at this day. And for the Cause, I shall say no more of it,
than what the Parents said to the Pharisees, when they asked them if that were
their son? they told them he was of age, he should speak for himself. So I say,
this Cause has spoken in most parts of the Christian World, and will speak
more when we are dead, when the Fowls have eaten of our vile Bodies, that are
to be set up on the Gates of the City.

I shall only add a word to the People of the Lord, to comfort them against
sufferings for the Cause of God; for it is a most glorious thing and
honorable, and therefore says the Apostle James, Count it all joy when ye
fall into diverse Temptations. And so the Apostle Paul, Romans 5
We glory in Tribulation. Also the like in Phil. 1.28, 29. To you it is given
in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for his
sake. And so again the Apostle says, Jam. 1^ 12. 2 Cor. 12.10. Act. 2 13.
Blessed is the man that endures Temptation: for when he is tried, he shall
receive a Crown of life. So the Apostle Paul rejoiced in his Infirmities,
Reproaches, Necessities, in Persecutions, in Distresses. And he professes
himself to be ready, not only to be bound, but to dye at Jerusalem for the Name
of the Lord Jesus.

Further, It is the duty of Saints to suffer, as the Apostle speaks, He that
will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer Persecution. 2 Timothy 3.12.
We are also commanded, not to fear their fears, nor to be terrified by any
thing that evil men can do against us; but suffer as good Soldiers of Christ
Jesus. We are likewise to rejoice, in as much as we are partakers of Christ's
Sufferings, that when his glory shall be revealed, 1 Pet. 4.13.
we may rejoice with exceeding joy. And as it brings peace to a man's own soul,
so it rejoices the hearts of the Saints; for, says the Apostle, We live, if
ye stand fast in the Lord. And therefore (dear Brethren) fear none of these
things; for the Devil shall cast some of you into Prison, and you shall have
Tribulation for ten days: but be faithful to the death, and you shall receive
a Crown of life. (Oh my dear Friends) it is better to fall with Christ than to
stand with Caesar: let us be willing to follow our Captain the Lord Jesus, who
is gone before, as also the blessed Saints and Martyrs of Christ.

We use to say, He is not worthy the name of a Soldier that will not follow
his Leader. Let us then follow Christ the Captain of our Salvation, who has
said to us, Fear not him that can but kill the body, and can do no more. Oh let
us, I pray you, fear the Lord, and take heed of all sin; for let me tell you,
there is more evil in the least sin, than there is good in any thing this base
world can afford: And although here we may suffer, and be condemned of men as
evildoers, (as our Lord Jesus, and was called Beelzebub, and the like) yet
this will be our comfort, that although men do condemn us, the Lord does acquit
us. You know what Christ says to his Disciples, Blessed are ye when men speak
all manner of evil of you for my Name sake, and the Gospel, then do ye rejoice
and be exceeding glad.

Thus I have given you to know in a few words, my thoughts concerning those
three things I spoke of in the beginning of this Paper. I had thought to have
been more large, but am strangely prevented by my Keeper, and for want of time;
Only one word to let you know, that blessed be the Lord for his great mercy
toward me, I am at present in a peaceable and comfortable condition, although
sometimes fainting fits do seem to seize upon me: for when I look on my self,
then I have cause to mourn for my unworthy walking; but when I look up to the
Lord, I have cause to rejoice and to be glad, and do desire to praise his holy
Name: Oh it is good to have our portion in the Lord, who is our only Good; for
one smile of his Countenance is better than Life: And therefore (my dear
Friends) above all things labor to give your selves up to the Lord, and appear
for his Cause and Glory, and for the Gospel; and stand up for the Truth, for
all Truth, and for the poor Saints at such a day as this is, so that you may
with the Apostle say experimentally, I have fought a good fight, I have
finished my course, I have kept the Faith; henceforth is laid up for me a Crown
of Glory: and not only for me, but for all those also that love the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

And now my dear Brethren in the Lord, I bid you farewell, and commit you and
yours to Him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you
faultless before the presence of his Glory with exceeding joy. Now to the only
wise God be glory for evermore.

Yours for ever in our Lord Jesus Christ. J. O.
Postscript.
Oh my Brethren, I have one request to you, that is, That you would beg of the
Lord, that the Saints may dwell more together in Love: And although they be not
of one form, yet let them labor to be of one mind in the things of the Lord,
and love as Brethren; and take heed of judging one another, which has been a
great fault. Give no offense to those that are within, nor to those that are
without, as near as you can; That those that are out of the way may be won by
your holy conversation in Christ Jesus.




Another Letter of Col. John Okey's, directed to an intimate Friend and old
Acquaintance of his in London.
Hon. Friend,
I Do much rejoice to hear of your good health, with your dear Wife, and that
the Lord does so much comfort and strengthen you in the day of your trouble, it
is a great honor that he has put upon you in this backsliding time, wherein
iniquity does so much abound, and most men are making shipwreck of Faith and a
good Conscience, in this day of Jacob's sorrows, now that wickedness is
established by a Law. Now the worse the times are, the Lord grant we may be the
better. Oh Sir, suffering-times are very glorious, when the Lord is pleased to
come in by his holy Spirit into the heart of a poor worm, there can be no
restraint where the Spirit of the Lord is, for there is liberty; for the
loving kindness of the Lord is better than any thing that this base world can
afford. My dear Friend, what a favor has the Lord been pleased to cast upon
you and me, that we should be called forth to bear witness to, and for, the Old
Cause the Lord himself has so often owned, by fighting our Battles, and in
destroying of the proud Enemies of God and his Saints, so that the sound of it
is gone through the whole World. And now I shall trouble you with a word, to
let you know how it is with me at the present concerning the inner man. I do
humbly desire to speak to the glory of the Lord's free Grace, that although I
am in trouble on every side, yet not distressed; something perplexed, but not
in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast into Prison, but not destroyed:
and therefore, blessed be the Lord, I faint not; for our light affliction,
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.16. We reckon that the sufferings of this present
time are not worthy to be compared with the Glory which shall be revealed, Romans
8.18. and therefore the Lord grant that we may watch and stand fast in the
Faith, quit our selves like men, be strong in his strength, and in the power of
his might; and as Joab said, Be of good Courage, let us behave ourselves
valiantly for our People, and for the Cities of our God, and let the Lord do
that which is good in his sight, 1 Chronicles. 19.13. Sir, I hear my time is short,
and I am in some measure, through much mercy, ready to be offered up; and if I
be offered up upon the sacrifice of the Faith of the Lords People, I shall joy
and much rejoice. Alas, you know I am a poor worm, and of my self can do
nothing, but in the strength of the Lord I shall be able to do what the Lord
shall be pleased to call me to: for he has promised to lay no more upon me
than he will enable me to bear; and therefore I do humbly beg your prayers for
me, and the rest of my suffering Brethren that are in trouble with me here, or
elsewhere, that the Lord would be pleased to stand by us, so that we be not
ashamed of the Cause of the Lord and his poor People: it would have been better
we had never made a profession of the Gospel, than for to deny any of the
Truths of the Lord, or the Cause of his People: What are our lives in
comparison of the Glory of God? better ten thousand of us should dye, than the
Gospel should suffer: and therefore I do again beg your prayers to the Lord
night and day, that the Lord would strengthen us with all might, according to
his rich and glorious power, unto all patience and long-suffering with
joyfulness; giving thanks to the Father, who has made us meet to be partakers
of the Inheritance of the Saints in light; who has called us to suffer for the
Truth, and not to fear base man, whose breath is in his nostrils: and although
they seem to be in honor, yet in a few days they shall fall and perish, and
become as the dung of the Earth, and men like themselves shall see them no
more. Oh we have no cause to be troubled when we see wicked men made great; for
when they die none of their pomp shall follow them; for, as they lived
undesired, so will they dye unlamented.

My dear Friend, I am fain to break off for want of time, and I hope you will
cover my weak lines; you have them from the heart that wishes you as well as
my own soul. Thus with my love to you, and my prayers to the Lord for you and
yours, and to the rest that love the Lord Jesus; and now for the present I
leave you to Him, who is able to keep you from falling, and to present you
faultless before the presence of his Glory with exceeding joy; to the only wise
God be glory and power now and ever.

Your faithful Friend till death, J. O.


A Letter of Col. John Okey to his Daughter.
My dear Daughter,
I Salute you in the Lord, wishing you all Grace here, and Glory hereafter. I
am something troubled at the cruelty of wicked men that will not let me see you
in such a day as this is; But it is not to be wondered at, for you know what the
Scripture says, The mercies of the ungodly are cruelty it self. But blessed be
our good God, though they can keep our Relations from us, they cannot keep us
from coming to our heavenly Father; within a few days we shall be out of their
hands, where they shall afflict us no more; for there the Oppressed shall be
free from the Oppressor, and therefore be not troubled for these things; I
thank you for your love to me as much as if I had seen you: and although we are
kept one from another in the body, yet we are not so in the spirit, but do
rejoice in one another: and be not much cast down for these outward troubles
that we meet with in this evil world, where we are pilgrims and strangers, for
it is the lot and portion of the dearest of God's People to suffer here in this
world; but rather rejoice that we are accounted worthy to suffer shame for his
most holy Name; and I beg that you would be earnest with the Lord, that he
would be pleased to keep my heart close to himself, that I may not dishonor
the Lord, nor bring a reproach to the glorious Gospel of our Lord Christ, and
his Cause, which the Lord has from Heaven so gloriously owned, by scattering
of his Enemies so often as he has done in the sight of the Sun, in bringing
many of them to Justice, so that the sound of it is gone through the whole
World, that it is the talk of the most part of the World; and this you may be
confident of, that the day is not far off when God will give a glorious
Resurrection to this Good Cause, that is so much scorned by the basest of men,
who (as Daniel says) shall fall in a few days like their own dung, and
perish, and be seen no more; for God has set them in slippery places, and
therefore be not troubled at their prosperity, but wait on the Lord, and he
shall give you the desire of your soul. And therefore my dear Daughter, I
humbly desire you that you would more and more give your self up wholly to the
Lord, to walk in all his ways, and to delight in all his ways: for, his ways
are all ways of peace and paths of pleasantness, to all them that fear and
love him; and although earthly fathers leave you, he will never leave you, nor
forsake you, but will bless you here and for evermore; therefore rejoice in the
Lord, and again I say rejoice. I am very sorry that I am not able to do that
for you which I desire, and did intend for you and yours, which I should have
delighted to have done; but the Providence of the Lord has been pleased to
order things other ways, praised be his Name; and I hope the good Lord will
supply all your wants through the riches of his Mercy in the Lord Jesus Christ,
to whom I shall commit you and yours, who has promised to do you good both in
soul and body; for he has said, When father and mother forsake you, he will
keep you for ever: And therefore, my loving Daughter, be comforted in the Lord;
for although I go before you, I shall not be lost, but we shall meet again in
Glory, through mercy, where we shall part no more for ever, where we shall
sorrow no more, nor sin no more, but shall be for ever praising his holy Name
to all Eternity.

I shall desire you to remember me kindly to your Husband, if it please the
Lord to bring him home, and to your Brother, and so to the rest of my Friends;
and let your Husband know, that if it please the Lord to return to his People,
he or his shall have a Portion; in the mean time the Lord will bless that
little to you, that shall do you and yours more good than the treasures of the
wicked; like to the widows oil, and the barrel of meal, that wasted not until
the Lord sent more: You know what David said, I have been young, and now am
old, yet he never saw the Righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread:
and Paul said, We brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we shall
carry nothing out: having food and raiment, let us therewith be content. I am
forced to break off at present, but I hope to see you once more, before I go
hence and be seen no more. I shall desire you would have a great care of those
little Children that the Lord has given you, to bring them up in the fear of
the Lord, whilst the Lord is pleased to let you be with them; And do also
desire, as you would do any thing for me or mine, that you would be kind and
loving to my dear Wife when I am gone, that is the last Request that I beg of
you. And thus with my hearty love to you and your dear Husband, and to your
Children, and to the rest of my Friends, and to John, and desire him that he
would beg of the Lord, to give him an heart to love the Lord, and to walk in
his ways, and it shall be well with him here and for evermore. Thus in haste I
commit you to the Lord, beseeching the Lord to keep you in all his ways, and
rest,

Your loving Father, in bonds for the Cause of God and his People, till death.
John Okey.
I bless the Lord I am at present well, wanting nothing but an humble and
thankful heart to praise his Name.




There was another Letter written by Col. Okey to his Son beyond the Seas, to
the same effect.

An History of the Life and Death of Mr. Miles Corbet, being intended shortly
to be made public (and so, many things reserved till then) in the mean time,
it is thought convenient that a taste be given of some of those occasional
Passages which fell from him whilst he was a Prisoner in the Tower, in the
hearing of several Friends, who have faithfully collected them, to be carefully
laid up, and wisely improved by them that survive.
ABout ten days before his Execution, an old Friend having obtained leave to
come to him, while yet a Close-Prisoner, Mr. Corbet embracing him, and
rejoicing greatly to see him, asked how he durst be so bold as to adventure to
give him a Visit, at that time, and in that place, and in that condition?

His Friend answered, he was afraid of being charged at the day of Judgment
with cowardice or want of love to Christ, in not visiting his Members in Prison.

To which Mr. Corbet smilingly replied, And let it be remembered to you at that
day, that you were one of the Visiters there meant by our dear Lord, whose
Servant I hope I am, and desire to be.

But, Sir, said his Friend to him, I was in hopes you had been safe enough, or
at least would have taken care to be so, when once you were abroad and had
escaped so long. And truly I thought so too (said Mr. Corbet) but God would not
have it so. Alas! who can be hid whom he shall please to discover? It seems he
has other work for me to do, and I bless his Name for it, I am not dismayed at
all. When I was beyond Sea, I did the best to secure my self, and was careful
not wilfully to run into danger; it was a mere hand of God that I was seized
on: for having not sent a Letter (says he) in eight months time to my Wife, I
went to the place where I was taken, to consult how to convey one safely to
her, and being ready to go thence to my own Lodging, I was surprised suddenly;
and though at first I was startled at it, yet I saw there was an overruling
Providence in it, and so was quieted in my own thoughts after a little space,
and found a power enabling me to submit. And now that the Lord has brought me
hither, and upon such an account as I am here for, His holy Will be done; for
(through grace) I can truly say with the Apostle ( Col. 1.9.) that I am filled
with the Will of God. Had I continued abroad, I might have died in obscurity,
and have been carried out into some hole in a dust basket, where my death would
have signified nothing: but now God has honored me, in calling me forth to
fight for him with my blood, and in my own native Country too, and in that
famous City where I have had my breeding and education for many years, and
where I have endeavored to do my Master Christ the best service I could, while
opportunity was in my hand. And this I can truly say in some measure (through
grace, a word which he often used) that I account it an high favor. All my
desire is, that I may not faint, nor any way dishonor the Cause that I am to
suffer for, by my weak and unworthy carriage, which I confess I am afraid of,
and therefore earnestly desire the prayers of Friends on my behalf, that God
will be pleased to support me, and carry me well through this so hard and
difficult a task.

Being asked what his Age was? He answered, Sixty seven years; the greatest
part of which time (says he) God has been pleased to use me, more or less in
public services, having for thirty seven years been still a Member in the
several Parliaments that have been called. In all which time (says he) I bless
God I have not sought my self, nor any worldly ends. And when I was (without
any of my own seeking) freely chosen to be a Member of the Long Parliament, I
saw my Call so full and clear, that I durst not deny but that it was of God;
and though (says he) the Trust and Work which I was to undertake, were very
great, and like to prove dangerous to as many as would be faithful to Christ's
Interest, yet (through grace, says he) I was resolved to go through it, and
accordingly I have done so, to the utmost of my ability, even to the prejudice
of my own Estate and nearest Relations, as themselves can witness, and do now
find (pointing to his Wife and one of his Sons there standing by.) Proceeding
further upon this subject, Now in my Age, says he, when I have most need of
all outward comforts, they are and have been of late furthest off from me. I
have neither Estate nor Habitation, nor wherewith to keep a Servant; yet in all
this (says he) I am comforted, because it is come upon me in the performance
of my duty, and the defense of my Master's Cause, and do well know I shall be
no loser at last by Him, he having been always found to be a good Play Master
to them that serve Him in truth, as I have desired and endeavored to do; Nay
(says he) I can say He has paid me already: for though I have nothing of my
own, no not so much as to buy Bread for me and mine, yet I want nothing. Ah!
how good is God! and how good is his Word! how faithful and how true is He that
has promised! He has said ( Matthew. 19.29.) Every one that has forsaken
Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Wife, or Children, or Lands for my Name
sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and that even in this life, besides the
Inheritance of everlasting life hereafter. I am sure, says he, I have found it
so, I have had many houses in mine Exile as free as my own; have found as much
care and tenderness from strangers, as from my own Wife and Children! every
body is kind to me! every body shows their love and their bounty to me! Ah!
blessed be God, says he, blessed be God! and so went on very largely in this
melting and moving manner: adding among many other sweet expressions, a
reflection upon the Speech of good old Polycarpus; for even as he said, That
Christ had been a good Master to him, and never did him hurt for eighty six
years; so (says he) may I say the like, Christ has been a good Master to me
these threescore and seven years.

Another time, discoursing of the frailty of humane life, and the many maladies
and accidents that it is liable unto, he took occasion to speak of the manner
of his own approaching Death. Alas! says he, I might have dyed long since of
some noysom disease, or lingering sickness; might have lain long weltering, and
at last been as it were smothered to death in a feather-bed, and perhaps with
the loss of my senses too, and the use of my Reason and Memory, as it happens
to many that dye in age; whereas now I am strong in body (as one of my years
may be) and of sound mind, having my Understanding in some good measure
vigorous, whereby I hope to be made able (through grace) to become a seasonable,
holy and lively Sacrifice unto God: and as for the pain of it, I reckon it far
less than what is usually felt in an ordinary sickness.

Indeed, the shame is something (says he) the Reproaches, Mockings and Scorns
that may perhaps be cast upon me all along the streets, in the face of the
multitude; but I set Heaven (says he) against all these; and considering what
I shall enjoy there, can easily laugh at them, and wear them as the Badge of my
Master's Livery, who himself also endured the Cross, and despised the Shame.

Tyburn (says he) is the place that I must dye at. Well! let it be so; blessed
be God that has so appointed it: for therein I shall be the more like unto my
Lord, who suffered without the Camp, as a Malefactor too great to suffer within
the City. But the more ignominious our Death, the more conspicuous will our
Honor be, while we are made spectacles to Angels and men. And for my own part,
I hope (through grace) I shall go willingly to meet my Savior even at Tyburn,
without the Camp, as the Apostle exhorts I should ( Heb. 13.13.) and there bear
his reproach.

Some Friends to whom he spoke thus, rejoicing to see him so sweetly supported:
Truly says he, it is a blessed thing to suffer for Christ; and if Conscience
be clear, so that the suffering be not for evil-doing, there is a secret hidden
comfort that goes along with it; and I bless God I have found it so, and do
find it: yet must tell you, I have my damps and fears come in sometimes upon
me, especially when I think of my carnal Relations, and other concernments of
this world; which do what I can, will ever and anon rush in upon me, and then I
find my heart sinking, and my flesh ready to fail, till God fetch me off again
by the consideration of higher things; which that he will continually please to
do, while yet I abide in the Land of the living, I still beg the help of your
prayers. And indeed this was a duty he would be often at, especially when any
new Friend came in that he judged fit to move it unto, and to join with therein.

He was in the days of his liberty for many years, a great lover of private
seeking of God by Fasting and Prayer; and said in the hearing of Friends about
two years since, at the end of such a day, There was more sweetness tasted at
such a Fast, than at the Lord Mayors Feast. And was given much to Prayer after
his coming from Ireland; and would much deny himself of Comforts he might have
had, to prepare himself for hardship.

About a week before his end, hearing some special Friend was upon a Journey to
visit him, said, This Visit would be against his Burial.

A few days before his suffering, certain Gentlewomen, partly of his old
Acquaintance, and partly such, as he said he never remembered he had seen their
faces before, sent in diverse good Dishes of Meat, with some Bottles of Wine, to
Dine with him; which kindness he was much affected with, and said, it put him
in mind of those good Women in Christ's time, and particularly of Mary
Magdalen, who brought an Alabaster box of precious Ointment, and poured on him
as he sat at meat in Bethany, which (says Christ, Mark 14.8.) she did for my
Burying, and shall be a kindness spoken of and remembered, wherever the sound
of the Gospel shall come through the whole world, Matthew. 26.6, -- 14. Even so
(says he) methinks these good Friends here have prepared for my Burial. And
why not for your Wedding rather? said a Friend that sat by. That is true too,
said he; for it is the Bridegroom that I am going to, and hope to meet him
shortly, and doubt not but he will meet me. Much of this kind of pleasant
discourse passed that Dinnertime. But among other things that fell from him,
this is not to be forgotten. Having occasion to speak of the former plenty and
fullness of all things which he was wont to enjoy, and of his being now deprived
of them; Truly, says he, when I had the good things of this world about me,
yea, even my fill of them, I was more carnal, heavy and earthy in my spirit,
less mindful of my future state, and the much better things of the other world,
present enjoyments took up, even all my heart, I am sure, much more of it than
they ought: but these temptations being removed from me now in the time of my
late Exile, me-thoughts I found my self much at ease, and wholly at leisure for
Heaven, without having any desire at all to those former delights; and then
using this comparison (which he craved pardon for, it being Dinnertime) A man,
says he, that has the wealth, power, dignities and pleasures of this world,
by which his mind is fed, and still irritated to give satisfaction to his own
corrupt and evil heart, is like one that is troubled with the Itch, a
troublesome distemper, which provokes him to scratch, and the more he
scratcheth, the more he desires and delights to scratch, but all the while
enrageth his distemper, and hurts himself; which when some Physician, a friend
of his, sees, he disswades him from scratching, and tells him he will prescribe
something that shall take away the cause and kill the itching humor, and so
give him a more healthy and sound state of body. Nay, but in the mean time,
says he, I must scratch, and I will scratch, and cannot help it. Even so (said
he) it was with me in the time of my prosperity, when I had wealth and power,
and other earthly contents about me; but now that I and they are separated, my
mind is more at quiet, and more free for a sweet communion and converse with
God. Then he proceeded further, to tell the company at Table how he spent his
time when he was abroad, viz. partly in Prayer, partly in Meditation, partly in
reading Scripture* and the Writings of holy men, especially the Notes of the
Dutch Bible, and the Works of his three choice Friends (as he called them) Dr.
Preston, Mr. Buroughs, and Mr. Bridge; and further said, that before he had
done his task, which he every day set himself, and always found delight in
performing, the day seemed too short for him, and was gone too soon, one day
seeming to tumble and huddle too fast upon another. And this, he said, was no
small mercy to him, especially since he was deprived of all public Ordinances,
and the society of Christian Friends.

After he was risen from Dinner, he looked toward the Window, and seeing the
people pass by, Truly (says he) I would not be as those people are that walk
at liberty, and go where they will, I am better where I am, and about better
work, since it is that which my Master (meaning Christ) has called me to, and
counts me worthy to be employed in; nor will it be long ere I receive my wages,
though I confess I have done little or nothing for it, I am sure not in
comparison of what I might or ought to have done. Ah! the Riches of Grace,
says he; Ah! the complete and all-sufficient Righteousness of Jesus Christ! Ah!
the Satisfaction which he has made for poor sinners! (which word Satisfaction
he often mentioned) Yea, and how sweet is that word too, where it is said, He
makes Intercession for us, and lives to that end, and for ever too, Heb. 7.25.
It will not be long now ere I know the meaning of these things more fully. Had
I lived to dye a natural death, in all likelihood, it would not have been many
years, being so aged as I am already, and then I might have dyed a worse death
by far than now I am to undergo; for this is an honorable one.

How great a Mercy is it, said a Friend, that God has thus quieted your mind,
and that he thus chears and warms your heart, even while the thoughts of Death
are upon it! to have the fear of that King of Terrors thus banished from you,
how singular a favor is it! and what an argument of God's Love to you, and of
his Presence with you! It is indeed, said he, and I hope it is partly in Answer
to the Prayers of Friends, whom I perceive God has stirred up to pray much for
me; and I beseech you, says he, let them not cease, but still hold me up
before the Lord, the little space I am yet to abide here: And because, says
he, I know not how soon I shall be called to my Trial, I earnestly desire that
some Friends would keep a day with me here in this place, if it may be with
safety and convenience; if not, yet somewhere else: which, in answer to his
desire, was done accordingly, upon Wednesday ( April 16.) which was the day of
his Trial.

The next morning, being Thursday, some of his near Relations and Friends that
came to visit him, having heard some malicious reports to his prejudice; as
that he had denied his Name, and not owned himself to be the person that was
mentioned in the Act, when he was at Westminster at the King's Bench Bar;
earnestly desired him to let them know the truth of things from his own mouth.
To which he readily answered, That he was much mis-understood, and wrongfully
presented, if any said so of him: And moreover said, That he blessed God, he
was neither ashamed of his Name, nor of his Cause, nor of his Master, and hoped
never should, and then related as follows; That his Brethren, Col. Barkstead,
Col. Okey, and himself, being brought before their Judges, were there called
all by their names, to which they made answer, and, as they were bid, held up
their hands. Then the Question being put, what they had to say for themselves
concerning the Fact which they stood there arraigned for, and which they were
charged with in the Act of Parliament, at that time read before them. Mr.
Corbet answered, he did not take himself to be the person named in the said
Act, for that he did never maliciously, wickedly, and traitorously imagine,
contrive or endeavor to murder the late King, as was there charged upon him in
the said Act, and therefore desired them to prove it. What! said some on the
Bench, will you deny your Names now? did you not answer to, and hold up your
hands at those Names? To which Col. Okey made answer (not understanding Mr.
Corbet's drift, which was to have a Proof made that they were guilty in manner
and form as the Act expresses it) he would never deny his Name for the matter;
No more will I, says Mr. Corbet, neither do I; But may there not be more men
of my Name, says Mr. Corbet, that perhaps may have been guilty of malice
against the King? though for my own part I never was. Then Col. Okey began to
perceive his mistake, and Col. Barkstead also, who being thus rectified, Mr.
Corbet proceeded, and told the Judge, It was true, they were called by their
right Names, and did accordingly own them; yet (says he) it does not
judicially appear to this Court, that we are the persons meant in the Act,
putting an emphasis on the word Judicially. No! says one, the Parliament has
adjudged it, and you are the men; Yet however, said some, let a Jury be
empanelled; and then the Attorney General saying that he was ready for a Trial,
a Jury was called, against which no Exceptions being made, Evidences were
taken, and they found guilty. The Judge then asked again, what they had now to
say why Sentence should not pass? Mr. Corbet replied, he humbly conceived the
Proceedings of the Court were not regular, nor agreeable to former Presidents:
for, according to Law, there ought first to be an Indictment, an Information,
and Scire Facias (as was in the Case of Sir Walter Rawleigh) all which were
pre-requisit to an Issue in Law, as their Lordships well knew; so that here was
a Conclusion without Premises: Yet, if it should please the Judges to overruled
it, he was contented (carrying himself with much reverence and respect unto the
Court.) To which either the Attorney General, or some other, replied, that Mr.
Corbet said truth, as to ordinary proceedings, but here it was extraordinary,
viz. by Act of Parliament in a Bill of Attainder, and then cited a Book-case of
one Stafford, who was thus proceeded against, sentenced and executed in Henry
the 7ths time. To which Mr. Corbet replied again, he had nothing to say to
that, but what the Authority of the Nation had made Law, he must submit to; and
did acknowledge, as things stood, they did proceed according to the Rules given
them, and in that respect did what was just, according to the present Law. But
did you not confess the Fact, says one, by your own flight? it being a known
Maxim, Qui fugam facit fatetur facinus. To which Col. Barkstead answered, that
he for his part fled for fear of an Arrest, threatened against him for twenty
thousand pounds for pretended false Imprisonment. Mr. Corbet said, that he for
his part did not sly for twelve years together after the Fact done, and that
any body who had a mind to it, might easily have seized him, it being well
known where he was all that time; and when he did fly, it was not prohibited,
nor any way unlawful, as conceived, for himself or others so to do; and now
that he was returned again, he knew not that he was an out-lawed person, and if
occasion had been, could have been ready to have traversed any Suit commenced
against him. And as for what he had done in this business that there he stood
accused for, he said, he was engaged in it by the then Supreme Public
Authority of the Nation, the lawfulness of which Authority, he said, at that
time was everywhere acknowledged and reputed so to be; and had he not this to
plead for himself, he should then have thought that what was done by himself
and others, had been very wicked and abominable. But the Authority being since
that time changed, and new Laws made, by which both the Fact and the Power it
self too, by virtue of which it was done, are both said to have been invalid
(though the Lawmakers at that time did not think so) he had nothing further to
add, but only to leave this one word with them, from Isa. 33.22. The LORD is
our Judge, the LORD is our Lawmakers, the LORD is our King, He will save us.
You mistake, says one, it is not Lawmakers, but Lawgiver in the Text. But in
the Margent, says Mr. Corbet, it is Lawmakers.

This is a true Relation of this matter, as near as possibly can be taken from
his own mouth; if any mistake be in a word ignorantly related, or sentence
misplaced, the Reader is desired to pardon it.

This Mr. Corbet having been heretofore bred at Lincoln's Inn, and known to be a
good Lawyer, and late Lord Chief Baron in Ireland, and also much acquainted by
long experience with Affairs of State, as having been a Member in all the
Parliaments that have sat since the beginning of the late King's Reign; and
being also further known to have been an ancient, and long-experienc'd sound
Christian, a man of a very tender Conscience, and of an holy Life and
Conversation, and that as well in his greatest Prosperity as in his Adversity:
it was the earnest desire of many, even of all parties that knew him, fully and
clearly to understand from his own mouth, (especially now in this time of his
Affliction) what inward peace, quiet and satisfaction he had in his own
Conscience touching that Act which he was condemned, and very shortly to dye
for, and which passes under so many dreadful names, of the most horrid,
heinous, wicked and unwarrantable Act that was ever done; of the vilest Murder,
most execrable Regicide, detestable and bloody Crime that men ever were guilty
of; and like unto which, none has been said to have been ever perpetrated in
this world before, except the putting of Christ himself to death.

His Answer to this Question was the more desired, because he being taken for
so good a Christian, and so able experienced a Lawyer and Statesman, as is
before described, his Opinion therein would be the more considerable, and his
words be of the greater weight, which side soever they should fall, whether to
the Justification or the Condemnation of the Fact.

Now to this Question (which he said he had long before examined thoroughly, and
very well digested) he said, he would make this true, faithful, and ingenuous
Answer, and hoped he should stand to it, and maintain it to his last breath.
And although he did find (he said) some near Relations were not of his mind in
it, yet for his own part he remained steady and unmovable therein, and before
several Witnesses (which he has now left surviving) that heard him, declared
as follows.

First, he said, When he was named and appointed by the Parliament to be one of
the Judges, he was not present in the House, nor did he at any time give his
own personal consent thereto, or approbation of it, but rather fully resolved
never to engage in that business.

Secondly, When the Bill came into the House, he spoke against it, and gave his
Reasons; nor could he be drawn by any Arguments to appear in the High Court of
Justice, or allow of their Proceedings.

Yet, thirdly, The state of Affairs being as then they were, and the
Consequence on both sides (either of owning, or not owning and joining in that
Act) being with much prayer and consideration well weighed by him, he at last
came to a fixed settlement in his mind about these ensuing particulars.

(1.) That the Supreme Authority of the Nation, as then it stood
(notwithstanding the Alterations made in it) being generally accepted and
submitted to at home, and owned by foreign States abroad, without any question
made of it from the body and bulk of the People, (though here and there some
scrupled it, whose Interest lay contrary) was lawful and sufficient to warrant
all that was or should be done in reference to the late King.

(2) That the solemn Appeals made to God on both sides, both by the King on his
side, and by the Parliament on their side, all the time of the War, and
answered so distinctly and fully from Heaven, on behalf of the Parliament (as
all men then seemed to judge) did further confirm him in the warrantableness of
their Undertakings and righteousness of the whole Cause.

(3.) That the foresight of such miserable Changes, as by return of the
Hierarchy, and the concommitants and effects thereof (which he saw was aimed
at, and did believe was intended by the late King, at least after some time)
did greatly induce him to look into, and fully inform himself about the matter
of the Charge against the said late King.

(4.) That upon mature and long debates of Parliament, and such as were
authorized to search into the Charge aforesaid, he found things fully proved;
and moreover said, that the matters objected were of a very unusual and high
nature, but that which principally swayed him to do what he did, was the Blood
of Ireland, and the levying War against the Parliament, who were thereupon
forced for their own defense and the safety of the People (by whom they were
trusted, and whom they did represent) to take up Arms, and so against their
wills to maintain a most costly, dangerous and unnatural War.

(5.) That though he was now fully satisfied in his own mind of the lawfulness
of the Fact, as well as of the Power by which it was done, and that it was his
duty no longer to stand out, but to join with his Brethren as an Actor in it,
or else might become guilty of unfaithfulness to the Cause of God and his
Country; yet such was his base and timorous spirit, that he kept back and would
not appear in it, the rather, because he was much set upon by his Nephew, Sir
Thomas Corbet (who then lived in the house with him) not to meddle at all, or
have any hand in it. Now this Sir Thomas Corbet having a very considerable
Estate, to which himself was next Heir, and which (in case he should go cross
to his mind in this business) he had power (by cutting off the Entail) to give
away from him and his Children, he was loath to displease; for he saw apparently
which way his said Nephew was bent. Yet,

(6.) Notwithstanding this, Conscience wrought much with him, and would not
suffer him (he said) to be quiet night nor day; for, while, on the one hand,
these carnal fears and disturbed thoughts pulled him from his duty (so he
called it) yet, on the other hand, it pleased God more strongly to draw him to
it, by often bringing and setting home upon his heart, that Scripture in Revel.
21.8. The fearful and unbelieving -- shall have their part in the Lake that
burns with fire and brimstone. This Text did so work and work in his mind,
and so powerfully prevail with him, that though he had deferred to appear at
the High Court of Justice till the very last day of the Trial, yet then he
durst stay no longer, but made haste to come in and sit among them, come what
would come of it in this world; lest the aforesaid punishment of the fearful
should hereafter for ever befall him. And what he now did, he said he did it
with a free and resolved mind, and he blessed God that had conquered his
cowardly spirit, and enabled him at last (though late first) to come in and do
his part, and in some measure to prove himself faithful and obedient to God's
as well as the Nations Call herein. And further said, that upon the grounds
before alleged, if all that has been done were to be acted over again, he
would do as he had done, and would not abate an inch of it; which words he
spoke with great soberness and setledness of mind but the very day before his
Execution.

Lastly, as to the whole business, he said, he could and did appeal to God the
righteous Judge of all things, that what he did (as far as he could discern
himself) was not out of any ill spirit toward the late King's Person, nor out
of any the least malice or disaffection to him; nor yet out of any unworthy end
or design of his own; for, as to the said King's Lands or Goods, or other
public Title, he never desired nor endeavored to get any of them, but always
by good Providence kept himself free, that neither himself nor any of his,
might grow rich, or make the least advantage that way. And as for that
necessary and public Act of Justice (as he called it) he did never repent at
all that he had a hand in it, nor, after all the searchings of heart about it,
did see cause so to do, when at any time he had the most serious and calm
reflections upon it: though he did confess, as to the circumstances of that Act
(the substance whereof he said he must always own) he had been compassed about
with many sinful weaknesses and infirmities in the managing of it, as he had
before in part hinted, which he hoped and believed were all washed away in the
Blood of Christ.

This is a careful and true Collection of what at several times he said about
this business to several persons, (and more than once too) and as near as
possibly can be remembered, in his own very words and syllables, especially in
those passages that are of the greatest weight. To which, let this expression
of his be also added, That what he had now lived to see in the late amazing
Changes, and overflowing Wickednesses of all kinds, rather to be trembled at
than reckoned up, did give no small confirmation and justification to those
former Proceedings, which are now so much condemned.

On Thursday night late, when tidings were brought to him of his suffering the
Saturday following, some persons came to convince him of the Sin for which
Execution was to pass upon him, and to exhort him to Repentance, aggravating
the heinousness of it: but the next morning he told his Friends, that they left
him as they found him, not at all altered, by what they had said, in his
opinion about that business; which he said, he had examined as thoroughly as he
could, and believing that he had a good Warrant both from God and man for what
he did, he was satisfied as to that, whatever others did judge of it here, and
therefore left it to be judged over again by the Righteous Judge of all, at the
last and great day.

He said he found no consternation of spirit at all upon him, when he was
before the Kings Bench Court.

Being asked how he had slept that night after such heavy news? To this he
smilingly answered, he blessed God he had slept well, much after the rate as he
used to do, and that he found not any consternation or fear at all upon his
spirit; for it was no more, he said, than what he expected, and as far as God
was pleased to enable him, had been preparing for.

A little after, speaking of the Journey he was to take, I am going (says he)
where all good souls would be glad to be. The Terminus a quo, the place I am
going from, is, this present evil world, even this evil world: and if ever it
were evil, sure now it is, and now more than ever, so evil as I never thought
to see it: and the Terminus ad quem, the place I am going to, is, Mount-Zion,
the City of the living God, the living God, says he, (doubling and putting an
Emphasis on that word Living) and to the heavenly Jerusalem, which he also
repeated again, putting the like Emphasis on the word Heavenly. Ah! says he,
this living God, and this heavenly Jerusalem, how sweet is the thought of it!
the God that I am going to, is, the living God, the God that lives, that still
lives, that lives always; whatever persons die, or whatever Cause or Interest
seems to die, yet He lives, and can make what he will to live; yea, and to live
again too, even after it has lain for dead: And the Jerusalem that He lives
in, is, an heavenly Jerusalem; an heavenly! that has nothing of earthliness,
no dross, no corruption, nothing of impurity, weakness, mutability or
instability; Ah! this heavenly Jerusalem! Thus he descanted on the words, and
even fed upon them. Then he proceeded after the same manner to what follows,
And to an innumerable company of Angels! to the general Assembly and Church of
the firstborn, which are written in Heaven, and to GOD the Judge of all, the
Judge of all (repeating that word) and to the Spirits of Just men, made
perfect; and to JESUS the Mediator of the New Covenant (which last words he
staid long upon, doubling and trebling them again and again) and to the Blood
of sprinkling, (which also he dwelt upon) Seeming to speak all with a very
great fervor and inward joy upon his heart. Scarce an hour passed in the day,
wherein he did not touch upon this Scripture in discourse with such new Friends
as still came in upon him, it being the last whole day of his life.

When he saw the Room begin to fill (for now none were restrained) he said, it
comforted him to see the faces of so many Servants of Christ together, and that
they should express such love and tenderness as he perceived was in their
hearts toward him: and truly, says he, I take it as a token for good, that
such a poor worm as I am should be so much minded, should have a room in your
affections and prayers. And though he was by constitution a melancholy man, yet
the smiles were scarce off from his face all this day; every new Friend that
came to see him, he heartily and smilingly embraced, and always parted from
them at their going away, with the like smiling-countenance.

As he was speaking (in the afternoon) to a knot of Friends, some of them his
old dear Acquaintances, whom he longed to see, and was much joyed when they
came in to him, among many other excellent passages that fell from him, and
cannot here be recalled, this was one that much affected those he spoke to; I
am going (says he) up to the Cloud of Witnesses, and hope to make one of that
number shortly; and though I shall ascend to them by the Gallows, yet that
troubles me not, because Jesus Christ has sanctified the Gallows.

It was a frequent speech which he used to many, Oh never be afraid of a
Prison, of Exile, or any sufferings for Christ; if he give you a call to
suffer, and to suffer for his sake, never be troubled at it, the Presence of
God in that condition, and the supports he gives, will be so sweet to you, and
will come in so seasonably, that you will think it the best time that ever you
enjoyed. Believe it from my experience, I am a poor timorous weak man
naturally, and yet can say (through grace) I never had so much of God in my
whole lifetime, as since I have been in, Exile and in a Prison. When I was
abroad in my hole, where I lived and saw few Friends, and wanted the comfort of
public Ordinances, I found God coming in to me, and making all up by Himself
alone. And when I employed my self in reading and meditating upon his Word,
me-thoughts I found it the same to me, that Bread and Salt is at the greatest
Feasts, the most savory and substantial nourishment. Though I wanted the
varieties of dishes that others had, yet this I always had my fill of; and had
one benefit more than ever before, leisure enough to mind it. Heretofore I was
encumbred with this business, and with that; but since I have been thus taken
off, I have had all my time to my self, I have had leisure to converse with God
and my own soul; I have had opportunity to search into the whole course of my
former life, to ransack my heart, and to make all even between God and me,
which advantage I would not have been without for a World.

He said, when he was in foreign parts, and considering his manner of life
there, his incapacity of service, and the obscurity of his condition; he could
then have chosen rather to be at witnessing-work for God, than preservation and
safety in the former way: but yet waited for God's Call to Suffering-service.

The evening of this last day of his life drawing on, some asked whether he
found any fears begin to approach him, now that he was hastening so fast to his
end? To which he answered, that he had more than once found a double fear upon
his spirit; one was, lest he should faint at the time of his Suffering, and so
dishonor God and his Cause; for, says he, I may well fear this, when my
Master himself had something of it as he hung upon the Cross, crying out, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? yet he was supported, says he, and so
I hope shall I; for he prays for us, that our Faith fail not. And besides, I
can say (through grace) that I have comfortable Evidence that my state is good,
as to the main, whatever the clouds may be, or the eclipses that I may meet
with. Another fear I have, says he, lest through the pride of my heart, I be
puffed up with the conceit of applause and vainglory, which I find my self apt
to be tickled with, and therefore entreat your prayers the more earnestly, that
God will preserve me from both these.

Being asked, whether he intended not to prepare something to speak at the
place of Execution? Truly, no, says he, I shall trust God with that, and speak
as he shall then be pleased to enable me, who has promised, it shall be given
at that hour, what and how to speak. If I should prepare any thing, especially
about that which I desire most to speak to, and am to suffer for, and which
happily will be expected from me, I know not how much I may be disappointed by
prohibitions or interruptions; however, I doubt not but my Death will speak,
and my Blood cry, as well as the Blood of Abel.

Some advising that money should be given to the Executioner, that he might be
the more favorable to him, (he over-hearing it) I will have no hand in that,
says he; let the Sentence be executed, and the Law pass in the rigor of it. If
the Executioner should be cruel, what makes matter, says he, let him be as
cruel as he will, the more bloody he is, the better for me: and then quoted a
story, which he had read, of an aged Martyr, who when the Tormentor would have
spared him because of his Age; Nay, says the aged Martyr, spare me not at all,
it is no matter for my Age: for, look how much thou abatest of my Torment, thou will rob me of my Crown. And indeed, he spoke often of his Crown, and of that
Inheritance (mentioned in 1 Pet. 1.4.) which is said to be incorruptible,
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for him.

Having been much spent in this his heavenly converse, and eat little or
nothing all the day, some body mentioned a Cordial to be given him to refresh
his spirits: A Cordial, says he, what do you talk of that? I bless God I need
none; his Favor, and the light of his Countenance is Cordial enough to me.
However, his Wife brought him a Glass of Sack, with a toast in it, of which he
drank a little, remembering his old Friend Mr. Bridge of Yarmouth, to another
ancient and reverend Friend of them both, which then he drank to.

Upon occasion of one saying to him, Oh how good is it to be ready when God
calls! Truly, says he, I would be so, but methinks I am not so ready as I
should be; the Bridegroom (says he) is ready, and the Marriage-Supper is
ready, and the Robes and Crown are ready; but I am not ready.

Supper being called-for, while the Cloth was laying, one going away, but
desirous first to know of him how some Friends in Holland did, and what manner
of converse there was amongst them, because of their difference in opinions?
(for it seems there are some of all parties gone thither, as well Quakers as
others.) He answered with much grief of heart (for so he said it was to him all
the while he was there) to see how much they shamed the Gospel, opening the
mouths even of strangers against them; partly, by reason of their bitterness
against each other, and partly by their pride and haughty carriage, both in
their Apparel and otherwise, very unsuitable (he said) to that state of
Affliction that they are in; and this in that place too whither they are sled
for refuge: and then desired those he spoke to, that they would tell all his
Christian Friends and surviving Brethren he should leave behind him, that he
made it his last earnest Request to them, even as upon his knees, and as a
dying man, To lay aside this bitter spirit, with that Pride, Covetousness, and
conformity to this world and the fashions of it, which hitherto God had been so
much dishonored by, and which have brought all that evil upon us that we now
groan under.

At Supper-time, he began to discourse again (as his manner was) very savourly
and sweetly, it being usual with him to be the first in this duty; and indeed
he was the fittest to begin, because he had so rich a treasure in him of things
new and old.

Among other things, speaking of Dr. Preston, whom he often mentioned (calling
him his Friend) and always with great reverence to his name and worth; he
said, he was the most fruitful man that ever he met with; and that his custom
was, wherever he came, especially at meal-times, to set on foot some
profitable discourse, and would always carry it on without wearyness; and that
he often said, he had found it very beneficial to himself, and successful to
others, as well those that attended at the Table, as those that sat at it. And
did now himself make it another of his last and dying Requests, that this
practice also might be commended from him, and in his name, to his Christian
Friends; and that we would all endeavor, as much as might be, to propagate it
everywhere among the People of God.

Being something hungry, and tasting the sweetness of the Creatures there
provided, he brake forth into great expressions of God's goodness and bounty;
and said, when he was in his retirement abroad, he seldom saw a whole Joint of
meat, unless it were when they traveled in company together, and yet (says
he) I found God all-sufficient to me, even in my short commons. I was
satisfied, I had enough, my little morsels were a full table to me. And then,
enlarging his discourse farther (as his turn came to speak) Ah! says he, how
sweet is Christ! how precious! His Person is precious, his Graces are precious,
his Love is precious, his Name is precious, every thing of Christ is precious!
Yea, said a Friend that sat by, and his Cross is precious too! His Cross,
said he! I, there the Honeycomb lies.

His two Brothers being called away from the Table, a Friend went and sat in
one of their seats next to him, and asked how he found himself, and whether the
nearer he came to Heaven, his desires of it did not the more increase? Truly,
says he, I bless God, I am not of the mind of a Judge, that I once knew (but
will not now name) who when he lay on his dying-bed, and Doctor (such an one,
says he, naming of him, but shall here be concealed, because being now a
Bishop, perhaps he may be offended) exhorted him to think of the long Journey
he was to take (for he was past hope of recovery.) To which (it being the time
of the Judges Circuits in the Country, of which himself was appointed to be
one) the said Judge replied, Truly, says he to the Doctor, I have provided me
a very good tite new Coach, and a set of excellent Horses, and I hope, if I can
get over my present ilness, I shall perform my Journey very well. Yea, but
says the Doctor, I mean your Journey to Heaven, for you seem to me to be a
dying man, or words to that purpose. At that the Judge called to his Clerk
there standing by, saying, What think thou, are there any Fines and
Recoveries there? Truly, said Mr. Corbet, this was a sad speech of a dying man,
as if he were one that had neither thought or belief of a Heaven, or of a
future state in another world. But I bless God for my part, my Comfort lies
there, and I can truly say (through Grace) I believe there is a Real Heaven;
and that I doubt not, but as I am going to it, so I shall be shortly in the
possession of it.

After Supper, Friends parting from him, received his hearty thanks for their
acceptable society, and his desires, that they would not be slack in their
prayers for him; for now he said, it was but a little while longer that he
should need them.

The next morning (being Saturdy, and the day of his Execution) his Wife coming
in to him, (who lodged in the Tower that night) asked how he did? and how he
had slept? Better I believe (says he) than my Girl did, (meaning her his
Wife.) For my first sleep, said he, from the time I went to bed, continued till
two a clock, and I have had two sleeps since, and now shall need no more,
neither nights nor sleeps, nor bed to lie on, but within a few hours more,
shall be in my Fathers bosom.

When he was up, he prayed most affectionatly with his Wife, for near an hour
together, and among other expressions used those words of our Savior; Father,
if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me; but if not, thy Will be done:
earnestly pressing Him that he might be enabled to resign himself up to Him his
God and Father that day, with all readiness and willingness; and, as it
appeared afterward, was answered in this his prayer.

Some Friends coming in, that had been often with him before, to see him once
more, and to stay with him till the Sled should part them, and so to take their
last leave of him; he embraced them with great affection, saying* Well! I see
you will not leave me till you needs must; this love of yours will not be
forgotten one day, when Christ shall say to his kind Friends, I was in Prison,
and you visited me.

Breakfast being brought in, and with other things, some burnt Claret; This is
Funeral-drink says he, and then drinking to his Wife, said, I shall have
better Wine anon in my Fathers Kingdom.

As he was eating, he pointed to the several sorts of provisions that were
before him, saying, How much sweetness does God put into all these? yet all
that is in them, how very little is it in comparison of what is in God himself?
there is a drop of sweetness indeed in this creature, and a drop in this, and a
drop in this, pointing to diverse things, and to his Wife last of all; but I am
going from these drops, says he, to the full Fountain, where all sweetness is,
and will be for ever.

Having finished his Breakfast with an Egg (which was the last thing he ate) he
threw the shell away with these words (pronounced with a kind of rejoicing of
heart) Farewell creature comforts, I shall use you no more.

Breakfast thus ended, Mr. Corbet himself gave thanks, praying to, and praising
God with such melting language, such readiness of speech, such a composed frame
of heart, and such holy well-digested matter, that it much affected some that
joined with him, to hear an old Disciple of Jesus Christ, so nigh his Death,
and such a Death as he was within a few hours to undergo, to have a mind so
sweetly settled, without any the least seeming disturbance at all. Among other
passages in that his heavenly Prayer, these were some, viz. That as God had
been his Guide unto Death, so now he prayed that he would be his Support in
Death; that he would make Death a safe and speedy passage unto Glory. That God
would enable him to make a good Confession of Him before men, and carry him
well through that new kind of terrible work which he was now about to undertake
in His Name and Strength, and in Witness to His Cause. That he might joyfully
go hence, as from the use of creatures, which he had been now refreshed with,
so most of all from Sin and the snares of it. With diverse other like
expressions fitted to his present case.

Time growing short, now I stand (says he) upon dying-ground, and every inch
is precious, I had need therefore improve it to the utmost; and so called to
such as were present to join in Prayer with him, and for him, and accordingly
they did so; the Lord assisting him that was the mouth of the Company with
Petitions very sweet, and pertinent to the occasion.

The Prayer ended, he fell to discourse again, and speaking of Sufferings,
Truly, says he, it is not an ordinary common spirit that will fit men for such
Work; and when I think of that froward and bitter carriage which still I find,
and now leave among the People of God, I wonder what God will do upon it, and
fear the consequence, if it be not repented of and removed. And then again, he
renewed his aforesaid dying Requests, which he had mentioned the night before;
further entreating that every one would make it their business, to persuade all
parties of God's People, how differing soever in their Opinions, to give no
further advantage to the Common Enemy, by their still continued unbrotherly
distances and divisions, but that they would rather exhort and admonish each
other, and set upon a personal and friendly Converse together, which (he said)
is one of the best means to unite and strengthen. And for this, he again
propounded Dr. Preston's Counsel and Example, one, of whom (says he) I may
truly say, that he was a man of the most excellent parts, the sweetest Friend,
and the most savory Christian that ever I was acquainted with.

A Friend coming in that he had not seen before, but wished for, made haste to
one of the other Prisoners who expected him, and so took leave of him; then he
taking the said Friend by the hand, desired him to remember him very kindly to
his Brethren and Fellow Sufferers, and tell them, says he, that I pray for
them as I am able, and desire them to do the like for me, That God may appear
for us, and with us, and be magnified by our Death.

Then speaking afterward of his ten Brethren, that first suffered in this
Cause, Those (says he) that went first, had the greatest Honor, and usually
they that have the first Honor in Sufferings, have an answerable Assistance
and Presence of God with them; but we that follow them may happily miss of such
eminent Appearances as they had with them. Nay, says a Friend, but why do you
say so? were not their Assistances for the encouragement of others? and has
not God been very much with you? and do you not even at this present find it
so? why therefore should you now doubt? To which he answered, It is true
indeed, you speak well, I must confess I can say, Eben-ezer, Hitherto God has
helped me, and I hope, says he, he will still do it, and enable me from former
experiences to trust Him to the last; only this I find, that all my Comfort and
Support comes in by a present Faith. I remember, says he, that speech of the
Psalmist, Thy People shall be willing in the day of thy Power; and truly, it
must be a supernatural Power that must make flesh and blood willing: and, Oh
that I may be willing! I desire to be so, for God does not love an unwilling
sacrifice, that must be pulled and haled like a Dog in a string. No, the
excellency of our services, is from the freeness and readiness of our
performance, when in sincerity and in truth.

Blessed be God says one, I am comforted to hear you speak thus. If God (says
he) will be with me, I shall both speak and do too. Ah, says he, when I think
of Stephen the Proto-martyr, how the Heavens opened upon him, and what a sight
they gave him of the Son of God, whilst the stones were about his ears, it much
encourages me. Some think, says he, it was the intensness of Stephen's
natural eye, at that time raised and strengthened on purpose to behold that
most comfortable and glorious object; but if God will please to give me an eye
of Faith to behold him at the Throne of his Father, interceding for me, and
ready to receive me when I am giving up the ghost, and pouring out my blood for
him, it will do as well. Ah! the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, says he, his
complete and most unspotted Righteousness! the Righteousness of the Lamb slain
from the beginning of the world! Ah! how glorious is it to appear before God in
that Robe! Oh! that I may be found not having mine own righteousness, but the
Righteousness of this Son of God upon me. Then a Friend telling him* that so
long as he held there, he would have good hope indeed, and a solid and sound
peace; for it is that Righteousness that we must all trust to, if ever we get
to Heaven. Yea, says he, and through Grace I have trusted to it; and the more
I think of it, the more I cleave to it, and see the need of it; methinks it
grows upon me, I am greatly raised with my expectations from it, else I am sure
I should have sunk long ere this time: but still I can say, Eben-ezer, (an
expression much used by him) hitherto God has helped me.

About an hour before the Sleds came, he was speaking of the Providence of God
in freeing his mind from cares and distractions about matters of this world:
Had I had an Estate (says he) to leave behind with my Relations, I should have
been troubled about the dividing and disposing of it; one would have been
asking this of me, another would have been asking that, but now I am eased of
all that trouble; what Estate I had, I spent it all in the Parliament service,
and now must leave my poor Wife and Children to the good Providence of God, and
the love of such Friends as he shall please to stir up to pity them; and then
spoke to such as were present, that they would show what Kindness they could to
his desolate Wife, there standing by him: at which, when she fell a weeping, he
turning to her, said, Ah my Dear, shall we part in a shower? may I not say,
says he, as our Savior did to the daughters of Jerusalem, Weep not for me,
but weep for your selves, and the Calamities that are coming upon you; for
verily, says he, you are entering into great Sufferings, and such as I am
persuaded, says he, will shortly send some of you after us, up into our
Country, lifting up his eyes toward Heaven.

Not long after the noise of the Horses and Sleds were heard, as they came in
at the Tower-Gates, which one telling him of, and saying that the Sleds were
come, he turning quick about, Call you them Sleds (says he) they are the
Chariots which are sent to fetch us to Heaven: adding presently thereupon, I
shall now go from the Tower to my Coronation; which words he uttered again,
before he went, that morning.

As the Discourse went on (for he was always dropping some excellent speech or
other) when it was his turn to speak, he affectionatly touched upon that place,
in Romans 8.19 to 24. where mention is made of the earnest expectation of the
Creature to be delivered from bondage; the word (says he) signifies such an
expectation as one has that puts his head out at a window, to see whether the
party looked for be coming, and within sight; Even so (says he) it is with me
now (moving his head toward the window) Methinks I look for the Bridegroom,
methinks he is nigh, yea, very nigh, even at the door there, pointing that way
with his hand.

His Opinion being asked, what he thought of the Cause of God, that now seems
to lie in so forlorn a condition, and to have miscarried so much, besides the
hopes and expectations of them that fear and love the Lord? Truly, says he,
how justly it is come upon us, I need not relate, and by what means too, it is
visible enough. God's own People have done foolishly, yea, have sinned greatly.
How worldly did they grow? how high and stiff against each other? How
solicitous and busy was every one, to set up his own Party and Interest when
power was in his hand, without minding the general and common welfare of their
Brethren? The truth is (says he) all Parties have been blameworthy, and every
one more or less has contributed to the common heap of Guilt, and may look to
share in the Punishment; yet, says he, could we see an humble, self-denying,
self-judging, and reforming Spirit among all parties of good men, and an hearty
readiness and endeavor in every one to unite, heal, and close up breaches
between God and themselves, much might be hoped; but without this, how weak and
feeble must our hopes needs be? so that though I doubt not (says he) but God
will revive his Cause again, and in due time, not only give it a new life, but
make it flourish more than ever, yet not till his People have repented, and
gotten their Pardon sealed. I remember (says he) that Text, in Psalm. 79.8.
Remember not against us former Iniquities; or (says he) as the Dutch Notes
has it, the Iniquities of them which have been before. And sure then (said he)
if former Iniquities, and the Iniquities of them that have been before, must be
prayed against, till they be forgiven and forgotten, ere better times can be
expected; then present Iniquities must be done away also. The People of God had
need look about them, and see what it is that hinders Mercy, that keeps good
things from them, and remove it as fast as they can, else in vain will their
hopes be.

Indeed, we are apt, says he, to be quick in our expectations for good, but
slow in our amendments. I remember a passage (says he) in the Dutch
Anotations, upon the words of Eve (Genesis 4.1.) when Cain was born; I have gotten
a man (said she) from the Lord, understanding thereby, the promised Seed which
should break the Serpents head; as if Cain had been that promised Seed, when as
it proved quite otherwise, God having another channel for that precious Seed to
be conveyed through, not so soon by far in the time of it, as Eve dreamed of.
Even so (said he) we are apt to conclude upon promised Mercies to be
accomplished about such or such a time, and by such or such Instruments, but we
may be deceived; and yet God will not be worse than his Word, or let the Faith
and Prayers of his People go away ashamed. As for his Enemies, they sometimes
seem to carry all before them, and think to remove every person and thing that
crosses their design; but they consider not that God is able to find or make
new Instruments for his own Service and Glory, when the old ones are gone: but
the worst that they do, or can do, even then when their Power and Rage is
greatest, is more Gods work than their own; For, what is it can come to pass
without his fore-ordination and appointment, or can possibly happen contrary to
his wise Decree? Our Adversaries think now by this their severity toward us,
to advantage their own cause; whereas who can tell but that God may get himself
more honor, and we may do him more service by our Deaths (how sharp and
ignominious so ever they be) than ever we did in all the time of our Lives?

His Wife weeping (as she often did) at his heavenly discourse, saying, Oh!
what a precious Husband shall I lose! he said to her, Ah! my dear heart, why
do thou weep thus? may I not say unto thee, as Paul did to his Friends at
Cesaria (Act. 21.13.) What mean you to weep and to break my heart? for I am
ready, not to be bound only, but to dye for Christ. He died for me, and gave
his Life for me; and what greater honor can befall me, than to die for him?
and taking his Wife by the hand, said, Truly Mol, thou will greatly engage my
heart to thee, if thou will now willingly yield me up to God.

Time hastening, the Warders desired the Company to depart, and left only two
or three Friends in the Room with him, besides his Wife and Son. Now, says he,
as ere-while I took leave of the Creatures, let me take leave of Duties too, at
least in this place, and with you my Friends and dear Relations: for I may now
say, Farewell Faith, and farewell Hope, but welcome Love, for that shall remain
still, even for ever; since I may truly say with my old Friend, Dr. Preston, I
shall only change my place, but not my Company; words uttered by him, when with
a sudden death he went to Heaven.

Then he prayed briefly, but with most pithy words, full of life and power,
some of which were as follows.

Oh holy and dear God and Father, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and my
Father, look down upon thy poor Worm with an eye of mercy, that is now coming
to Thee; it will be an hour of darkness if Thou shinest not, shine therefore, O
thou Fountain of Light and Love! how else shall thy poor Worm be comforted, or
enabled to go through what he is to suffer? O take the sting of Death away; how
dreadful will the thoughts of Death be, if that be not done? how shall thy poor
Worm graple with the King of Terrors, if Thou be not with him, to stand by him
and support him? Oh let all the Sins of thy poor Worm be done away, wash thou
his Soul in thy Sons blood; Remember not against him former Iniquities, but
prevent him with thy tender Mercies, now when Thou have brought him so very
low. Accompany thy Servant whither he is going; take the Soul of thy poor worm
into thy Bosom, and let thy holy Angels be in readiness to receive it. With
more words to the like effect.

Whilst he was finishing his Prayer, there was a noise at the door, occasioned
by some that hasted to come in (not knowing what he was about) to tell him that
he must prepare for the Sled, but that he should be called for the last of the
three.

In the mean while he fitted himself for his Journey; and first bethought
himself of his Cap, saying, Must I not carry a Cap to the Gallows? and so
looked out the best he had. Truly (said he) I had almost forgot it, but it may
well be excused, for I have not been used to these things.

Then he took his Bible (which he promised to send back and give to his Keeper
when he should have done with it) and put it into his pocket to carry with him
as his best and surest Friend and Companion both in the Sled, and at the
Gallows. Next, he put a little bottle of Cordial into his pocket for his use by
the way, if occasion should be; but I hope (says he) I shall find a better
Cordial, else I know I shall faint for all this. This done, and his clean linen
got on, viz. Band and Cuffs, with his Cloak clean brushed and fitted about him,
and also a new pair of Gloves put on, which his Wife had provided for him, and
which he called his Wedding Gloves, he was now in readiness whenever he should
be sent for* which a Friend taking notice of, put him in mind of a speech which
fell from him the night before; saying, Sir, you said last night, the
Bridegroom was ready, and the Marriage-Supper was ready, and the Robes and
Crown were ready, but that you were not ready; Methinks you are ready now! and
a very trim and handsome Bride! to which he smilingly replied, Am I so? the Lord
make me so; blessed be God, I can say I am willing to it, as I have good
reason, for I am sure it is the best Bridegroom that ever was, that I am going
to. And you need not be ashamed to go, says his Friend, considering what
garments you are clothed with, and how you are decked (alluding to those words
in Isa. 61.10.) To which he replied, Whatever we have of that kind, it is all
of our Bridegroom's own cost; He is not like other Bridegrooms, for, He
purchases his Bride, he clothes her, and he adorns her; whatever beauty she
has upon her person, or love in her heart toward the Bridegroom, it is He only
that put it in her.

Some of the Warders at the door, asking if he would please to go? Does the
Gentleman-Jaylor call for me, says he? No, said they. Then, said he, I have
not my Warrant yet to go, I must stay for that first, till that come, my duty
is to be passive; it being with me, as it was with Peter, who was to be carried
whither he would not; yet when I am called, I hope then I shall go without
further bidding. Then he reminded us of being in the way of our duty, and in
that to trust God; but take heed (says he) of neglect of duty, take heed of
sinful complyances, of apostatizing from God; take heed of Superstition,
Popery, Idolatry; keep close to God and his Truth; Oh! trust God, trust in him,
and then he will never leave you.

And now a Messenger was indeed come, to tell him, that the Sheriffs were ready
for him; and I for them, says he, and so presently hastened away, without
taking leave of his Wife; which one perceiving, said to him, Will you not speak
to your Wife before you go? O yes, said he, and then turning back, saluted her,
and committing and commending her to the Lord, bid her farewell: but she
clinging to him, cried out, Oh my dear Husband! my precious Husband! what an
Husband shall I now lose! whom I have not prized, whom I have not improved as I
ought and might have done! Oh, says she, what will become of me! At which
carriage of his Wife, though some tears were ready to start from his eyes, yet
he conquered himself, and taking his Wife by the hand, said, O my dear Wife,
shall we part in a shower? (which words he had used on occasion once before) be
contented, said he, God will be an Husband and a Father to thee and thine, with
other such like good words, and so kissing her, turned to his Son Miles, whom
he took by the hand and blessed him also, and then hastened to the Sled,
desiring a Friend to stay with his Wife and his Son to comfort them.

When he was bound in the Sled, and ready to be drawn away, one that had showed
him some kindness in the time of his Imprisonment, took him by the hand, and
asked him how he did? Methinks, says he, I begin to see the Lord appearing,
looking up to the Skies, which at that time (said he that he spoke to) were as
clear and bright as he had ever seen them: To this Friend Mr. Corbet said,
Farewell, and the Lord requite you for all the Civilities that I have received
from you.

As he rid along he carried his Bible in his hand, with his eyes much fixed
upon the World over him that he was now going to; and being naturally a very
black, swarthy, melancholy man, and aged also, his countenance seemed sad and
dejected at a distance, which caused such people as knew him not, to think his
heart within too was like his face without, but they were much mistaken; for,
though he abounded not, nor was lifted up with ravishing joys, as some have
been, yet he had an inward, firm, solid, well-setled Peace and Comfort, which
was not now new to him, but which he had enjoyed and lived upon many years: as
is evident by many passages which came from him even while in the Sled, take
two for instance till more come.

When one asked how it was with him, after he had been drawn a good part of his
way? he gave this cheerful answer, I am well now, says he, but I shall be
better anon, when I am gotten yonder, above that place, pointing to the Heavens
before him.

Not long before he got to the end of his Journey, one came from a Friend to
the Sled side, to tell him, that endeavors were used to get his Body for
burial. What care I (says he) what becomes of my Body when I am dead; let them
do what they will with it, I bless God my Soul is safe.

Many other excellent Passages are yet behind, scattered in the hands of
several Friends, which cannot be yet brought together; but care is taken that
they shall not be lost, but are all preserved to a more large Account, when the
aforementioned History of his Life and Death comes out, together with several
choice Letters of his, very worthy of Record; All which will ask some time to
prepare, and put them into due order for the Press.

The Several SPEECHES and PRAYERS, of Col. John Okey, Col. John Barkstead, and
Miles Corbet, Esquire at the place of Execution, April 19. 1662.
UPon April 19. 1662. being the day appointed for the Execution of Col. John
Barkstead, Col. John Okey, and Miles Corbet, Esquire who were drawn on three
several Hurdles from the Tower to Tyburn; Col. Barkstead was first brought to
the place of Execution, and then Col. Okey, and then Mr. M. Corbet, who at a
good distance of time one after another mounted a Cart, which was prepared for
them to stand in whilst they spoke to the people.

Col. John Barkstead was the first that ascended the Cart; And as soon as he
was in, he lifted up his eyes to Heaven, and said, Blessed be God -- and then
immediately one, supposed to be of the Lifeguard, cried out very loud, He is
almost dead; if he be not quickly hanged, he will be dead before: therefore
hang him, hang him, before he be quite dead: See how he looks.

But, being much spent, he waved speaking to that; And after he was tied up,
finding the Rope very strait, he would sit on the side of the Cart to rest
himself, but could not till the Rope was somewhat loosened. After resting
himself, it was expected he would say something before the other Prisoners
came, which was at least half an hours distance. The Sheriff therefore spoke to
him to this effect.

Sheriff. You must not speak any thing in justification of such an horrid
Offense, for which you came hither to suffer.

To which Col. Barkstead replied, I cannot speak much, Barkst.
by reason of the weakness of my body, I desire to get as much refreshment as I
can before I speak

Then the Sheriff spoke to Mr. Hastings, Sheriff.
who was Undersheriff of the County of Middlesex. Will not you dispatch one
first of all?

To which the Undersheriff answered, We use to hang all together. Undersh


Col. Barkstead then lifted up his eyes and hands to Heaven.

Then replied the Sheriff, Let it be according as it use to be. Sheriff. Execut.


Then said the Executioner to Col. Barkstead, You may be going on in your own
prayers, and lose no time.

Barkst. I shall be but short; and taking something out of a silver Box,
putting it into his mouth, lifting up his eyes, said, I bless God, I have a
better Comforter than this.

Then being asked by some person of quality, whether he were not sorry for what
he had done? He answered, Sir, I shall be sorry for whatever the Lord
convinces me to be a sin. When the Lord sets home that upon my soul, I shall
express it unto God and man; and truly that must be from him alone.

Mr. Th. Porter.
Then Mr. Thomas Porter spoke to him. I am sorry to see you there; but you will
be a happy man within this half hour.

Barkst.
I have, I bless God, an assurance through Jesus Christ that I shall be so; but
feeling the Cart stir under him, as he did several times before, and thereby
the Rope pinched him, he desired it might be eased.

Then Col. Okey was brought toward the Cart, and when Col. Barkstead saw him,
he lifted up his eyes and hands.

Some of the Sheriffs Officers, when Okey came to the Cart, said of him, That
he was a lusty stout brave man as ever fought in England.

Sheriff.
Then said the Sheriff to Col. Okey, I hope I need not give you this Caution,
that you make no justification of this horrid Offense, not to justify that
Offense for which you are brought hither this day.

Okey.
To which Col. Okey made this reply; Sir, I must not lie for God, much less for
you; I hope you will give me leave to speak what lies upon my conscience,
whether I am guilty or not guilty. We will speak something of what lies upon us.

Then Mr. Corbet being at the Cart ready to come up, Col. Okey stooping down to
help him up, said, Come brother Corbet, how do you? and clapping his hand upon
his breast, Okey.
said, I thank God, I have it here. Then speaking to the Sheriff, he said, May
I have my Hat on, or stand bare?

Sheriff.
Which you please, said the Sheriff, you have your liberty for that.

Then Col. Okey addressed himself to speak to the People as follows.

Colonel Okey's Speech.
GENTLEMEN,
THe Providence of God has brought me to this place, to pay that which every
man owes. I shall not trouble you with what is superfluous, which is, to tell
you of my Family, which of all the Families in Israel was the least, and I was
the least of that Family. It is not unknown to most here what troubles have
been in this Nation, and how eminently the hand of God did appear therein.
Among many others that were called forth to serve the King and Parliament (as
then the Cause was stated) I was one, which I did faithfully, according to the
best of my power and knowledge. I here do bless God that I was called to that
Work: For I am persuaded in my heart, that it was for the Glory of God, and the
good of his People, however it was turned at last: and if I had as many lives,
as I have hairs on my head, I should have ventured them all in that Cause. I
have nothing upon me as to that, and I thank God I am fully satisfied as to
that Cause: but I shall say no more to that, but only this in general, That as
the Parents of him that was born blind, being asked by the Pharisees how he
came to his sight? answered, He is of Age, let him speak for himself: and so
the Cause is sufficiently able to speak for it self. But as to that which I
have been adjudged for, and am come hither to give my Life for, viz. the Death
of the late King, I shall only say thus much, That I think most of you know,
that I was none of the Counsel within or without, neither did I know any thing
of the Trial of the King, or who were the Judges, till I saw my Name inserted
in a Paper; and I did sit there but once or twice: but for any malice to him, I
had no more than to my own soul, but prayed for him to the last hour of his
life, as I did for my self; and so I have done for this King also, which is my
duty to do. I have many hundred times since I went out of England, this two
years last past, and before also, begged with tears of the Lord, if there were
any iniquity or malice, or any thing of that nature in what I did, that God
would show it to me; yea, the like I did this very morning, beseeching the
Lord, that if I had any guilt of his Majesty's blood upon me, or any hatred
against him, he would reveal it to me, that I might here confess it before you
all. But I have nothing upon my spirit as to that. And what ever other men did
I shall say nothing to that; as for my self I can say again, that I got not any
thing by it, but remained in the same condition; I was a Colonel before, and
was no more since: I thank the Lord I am clear in that. (Then, making a stop,
he said, there is such a noise I cannot speak) And, Sir, I shall tell you now
what is upon my spirit: I take what has befallen me as righteous and just
from the Lord for my unworthy walking, for being no more zealous for God and
his People, no more fruitful in my Generation, and no more thankful: but as for
that thing, I thank the Lord, I have no guilt upon my spirit. And as for all my
other sins, I confess they are many and great, but I thank the Lord he has
given my soul the pardon of them all, through the Blood of Christ, for his Name
sake, and through the Riches of his Grace, and his abundant Mercy toward me.
And now I will only speak a word to our Friends here. You all know we have had
many troubles, and much blood has been shed, and there has been a vacancy as
to a single person: But the Nation did earnestly desire him that now reigns,
and I wish from my soul he may reign gloriously and righteously; and reign here
so, as he may reign for ever. And now they have the great Mercy they did
desire, I wish that they would make a right improvement of it, and that they
would walk in some measure answerable to that mercy that they have so much
desired. I shall beg this, as a dying man, That as they have received a Mercy,
which they account so exceeding great, that they would walk answerable to it,
that God might have the glory, and the Nation might yet flourish in Peace and
Righteousness. I shall beg of these Some of the Guard.
Gentlemen, and all others that have a great affection to their King, that they
would pray more for him, and love him more; and that they would swear less, and
drink less: for, if you were beyond Sea, to hear what I have heard of this
Nation, it would make your hair stand on end, and your ears to tingle. They say
certainly, that notwithstanding the great answer they have had of their
desires, yet, if they go on in the way of wickedness and Blasphemy, which they
report do abound in England, (for my part I have been a close Prisoner, and
have spoken with no body almost since I came) that this Nation cannot stand
three years together: therefore I shall make it my humble request, That as this
Nation has flourished and gone beyond other Nations in Piety and Religion, it
might flourish ten times more than it has done this many years upon the same
account. It has been a Nation that has professed the Gospel, which indeed has
flourished here more than in any other Kingdom, and so it has had more glory
and honor than other Nations; and I desire it may continue, that you may have
Peace within your Palaces, and Plenty within your Dwellings. Oh that every man
would study in his place to fear God, and honor the King, and to give glory to
God, and walk in some measure answerable to those many mercies they have and do
enjoy; And, that as they have what they so much desired, every man would now
beg that the Gospel may flourish, and that Righteousness and Truth may be in
the midst of you. There is something that I shall speak more, I would be loath
to speak so, as to offend you in any thing. (Then replied the Sheriff, I am
glad to hear these Expressions from you.) Sir, let me tell you, because it is a
very great matter, and looks like a black thing that is charged upon us in the
Indictment, I should have abhorred it, had there not been a face of Authority,
an Authority that then was owned; had it not been so, I should have abhorred to
have done any thing in that business, as much as any Gent. here: therefore, I
thank God, I have peace as to that, and Peace as to the Pardon of all mine
Iniquities whatsoever, through rich Grace and Mercy: And truly as to the Cause,
I am as confident even as I am of my Resurrection, That that Cause which we
first took up the Sword for, which was for Righteousness, and for Justice, and
for the advancement of a godly Magistracy, and a good Ministry (however some
men turned about for their own ends) shall yet revive again. I am confident, I
say, That Cause for which so much Blood has been shed, will have another
Resurrection; that is, You will have a blessed fruit of those many thousands,
that have been killed in the late War: But I would leave this to all my
Brethren and Friends, that they would keep their places, wait upon God, stand
still and see the Salvation of God; and rather suffer than do any thing to
deliver themselves by any indirect or unjust ways. If his Majesty had been
pleased to have given me my Life, or if I had come over, or heard, (for I had a
Warrant for my return into England from the House of Commons, but I fell short
two days, and so was fain to go back) time enough of the Proclamation; I would
through the blessing of God have lived quietly, and rather have suffered than
have done any thing against the Law of the Land, and I would say this to all
good men and others: Rather to suffer than take any indirect means to deliver
themselves; but to wait upon God, keep their way, stand still and see the
Salvation of God: And God, when it shall make most for his own Glory, and the
good of his People will deliver, and that in such a way, that himself shall
have Glory in, and the Gospel shall have no Reproach by. But because some think
we are enemies to Magistracy, and Ministry; I shall only say this, That I
always (I thank the Lord) did pray both for Magistracy and Ministry, and that
you might have righteous Laws established, that so Judgment may run down like
a Stream, and Righteousness like a mighty River: And that shall be my Prayer
now, That God would give you Peace and Truth, and scatter them that delight in
Blood and War.

Mr. Corbet's Speech.
WE are now dying Men, and upon dying ground, and we are now in the presence of
the great God, to whom we are now going: Truly I desire to speak in His Fear
touching that which we are here come to suffer for. I will only say this ( Mr.
Sheriff) both the Levying of the War, and that Act that we are now accused and
condemned for, if they had been done without Authority, they had been
abominable; and to justify that Authority, I do not come here to do it. The
Parliament, the Wisdom of the Nation, that now is, has decryed it down, and
said it is void; and the Court of Justice* where we have been in pursuance of
their Judgment, have given Judgment against us. Truly so long as that Act of
Parliament stands on foot, Judges must give Judgment accordingly; But there
has been many Appeals about that Authority, and the Nation has been governed
by it, and the Nations about us have owned it, and we are now going to God who
is the Righteous Judge, and that Word is upon my heart, Isa. 33.22. Truly Men
may judge, and they may make Laws, and it is our duty to submit to the Laws of
the Nation, or leave it if we think them too hard. But whatsoever Laws are
made, God is our Judge, and he will Judge this Cause, and God is our Lawgiver:
It is a Scripture phrase, God is our Lawgiver, and He is also our King, and he
will save us: He will Judge the Cause of his People: And I hope that the minds
of sober Men will wait for that Judgment. Truly Mr. Sheriff, as concerning that
common aspersion laid upon us, that we should be against Magistrates and
Ministers; the Lord knows it is my Principle, and I desire there may be a
standing settled Government, a godly Magistracy, and likewise a godly Ministry
in this Nation. And I pray God grant that his People may be blessed under them;
and truly, for the Magistrate that now is, the hand of God has brought him
into the Throne; while I have been in other Nations, I have blessed God, and
desired the Lord that he may Rule for God, and be a terror to evil doers, and
countenance the true Professors of the true Protestant Religion, that he may
defend both Religion it self and the Professors of it. Truly there have been
many (as they call them) Sects and Heresies, that have sprung up in these later
times; but blessed be God, there have been also great appearances of God, and
much Light is broken out; more in this Nation, than I could ever hear of or see
in the Nations round about, though they profess the same Religion. I have been
among many whom they call Reformed Protestants, but of true Protestants, such
as hold out their Profession in their Lives, there are more in this Nation than
elsewhere, and they are not to be compared for number, blessed be God, and the
Lord increase them, and multiply them daily; For the glory of the Nation is not
in a Multitude of People only, but of such as Fear the Lord, and Worship God,
and lift up his Name; and truly my desire and Prayer is, That the Gospel, the
true and glorious Gospel of God, the Gospel of Jesus Christ may have a free
course in this Nation, and may be glorified in the Lives of men as well as in
their Words.

As for the particular Way of Worship that I am of, I shall only say, that in
my Judgment and Conscience I have and do understand that which is called the
Congregational way, to be nearest to the Word of God, and I do freely bear my
Testimony to the Confession of it, that is extant, which was made at the Savoy:
But with this, that also of the Assembly of Divines that was made in the time
of the Long Parliament; and the Declaration they made concerning Religion,
saving only as to the discipline-part: As to the other I do fully subscribe
unto it; for I think that the said Confessions are the most clear of any
Protestant Confessions (whereof I have seen diverse) that are extant. And in
Foreign parts they will confess as much.

Mr. Sheriffs, As to what I shall desire for the Nation, (for truly we are
taking our leaves of it, and we shall see your faces no more) that which I upon
the knees of my soul do beg for this Nation, is, That as they are Protestants
in Name, and take that upon them in Profession, so their Lives may be
answerable. Truly, nothing does more dread my spirit, and cause me to fear the
Wrath of God to come upon this Nation, then when I hear that amongst those
which bear the Names of Protestants, there is such Profaneness, Drunkenness,
Swearing, and such Abominations that are not to be named, no not among Moral
men. The Lord stop the course of them, as also the growth of Popery and
Superstition, and that the Truth of God may break forth, and that men may love
it: for truly, the Gospel is worth the loving; the Truths of God are worth
loving: And if we love them, then truly God will love us, and bless us.

Mr. Sheriffs, For my own part, if there were any here that I knew I had
wronged* I would ask them pardon and forgiveness, if I knew them. I must
confess, I have been in many public actions; I have been of all the
Parliaments since the late King's Reign; and in the beginning of this
Parliament, I must confess ( I being called to it) did think it was my duty, to
act according to the ability God gave me, and to deny my self. I thank God for
it, I came with an Estate to the Parliament; and I bless God for it, I spent it
while I sat in the Parliament. And truly, I thank God, they cannot find any
Estate that I have forfeited; for I have none to forfeit. This business that we
are here for, I was very far from being a Contriver of. When the Bill came into
the House, I must confess, I being a Member of the Parliament, did somewhat
wonder at it, and I did speak against it: but when it was past, and I was
named, to be a Commissioner, truly, it being done by that, that was then called
the Authority of the Nation, I did think I was bound to obey in that respect. I
will say no more. I never sat but once in that they called the High Court of
Justice, but for that I Will say no more. I do not come to condemn that Authority
and Power; neither will I now (because the Parliament, and the Nation, and the
Spirits of Men are against it) justify it. (And being a little interrupted, he
said) I will not speak to offend any man. Truly, I thank God, I never got any
thing, either of Kings Lands, nor Bishops, nor Dean and Chapters Lands, I never
knew what belonged to the Trade of Buying or Selling Lands. I thought I was in
a better way, looking to that Station which God had called me to: And as my
Brother said, let men hold to their Stations, and to what God has called them,
and so serve God and their Country, and let them not be afraid. And I think it
is the honor of good Christians, and of good People, to be obedient to the
Government they are under, and to uphold it to the uttermost. I have not much
more to say; If any man has done me any wrong, (as I perceived when we came
along, some peoples tongues were against us) I pray God forgive them. I desire
not to open my mouth against any of those Reproaches we met with. Some I
perceived did express their love, and their love to my soul; and I hope God
will hear their Prayers. And while we are in the Land of the Living, I shall
desire to do as we have done since his Majesty came unto the Government. When
we were in Holland, we did pray for the King and the Government, and desired of
the Lord that they might settle Peace in the Nation; which if we love our
Country we ought to rejoice in, and our private interests must give way to it.
And truly I shall desire even from my very soul, that if any man here or
elsewhere has wronged me, that the Lord would forgive them. And truly the
Court of Justice that past their Judgment upon us, as the Law stands, I think,
did according to their Places. And if we may have liberty in a few words to
commend our selves to God, I shall trouble you no further. And I thank you for
your Civility.

Then Colonel Okey spoke a few words, as follows.
Mr. Sheriff.
Col. Okey.
I will not trouble you with any thing that he has said, something of which I
thought to speak, as to my own Judgment. But this I would leave among you that
live in the land of the living. I have been in most Reformed places where they
call themselves Protestants, but I must tell you, there is a great deal of
difference between their Ministers and the Ministers that be in England; and so
of their Professors. And therefore as God has given you such Ministers as
scarce any other Nation has besides, so that you would honor and respect
them; as also those that are Professors and godly People; not such as have a
show only, but those that are really such, that you would countenance them, and
honor them: for, as for Ministers and People that live according to the Word,
I think there is not such again in the World as are to be found in these
Nations. I shall add one word further.

I was, as near as I can reckon, a Major and Colonel sixteen years in the Army,
(I only speak that, because I have a word to say to another thing) I do not
know whose Ox or whose Ass I took away in that sixteen years time; and if I
have done any man any wrong, I hope and desire they will forgive me, as one that
had many failings. And whoever has proceeded against my Life, either in
England or Holland (for there was one (who formerly was my Chaplain) that did
pursue me to the very death, where I remained but two nights, and was going
back again, for I had done my business) But both him, and all others upon the
Earth, I forgive as freely, as I desire the Lord to forgive me. I have no
malice either to Judge or Jury, but desire that the Lord would forgive them; as
also those in Holland that sent us over, contrary to what they did engage to my
Friends: We will say nothing of them, but pray God that our blood may not be
laid to their charge, nor to the charge of any in England.

Then Col. Barkstead addressed himself to speak, as follows.

Colonel Barkstead's Speech.
Mr. Sheriff,
I Shall as near as I can observe your order, and not willingly do any thing
that shall give offense. I must confess the weakness of my body is such, which
has not been of a day, but of a long time, that it will not give me liberty to
speak much; and I have had this advantage, that my Brethren have spoken before
me, and were I to speak at large, I must speak over the same things which they
have spoken already, and I am unwilling to trouble you with that, because you
said your time was overslipt, and therefore I shall only speak to the Cause, as
it was at first stated, (and, I hope, without offense we may say something to
that, so far as the Acts of Parliament have sealed it up, or rather left it
open. Truly, therein I did engage very freely at the beginning of the War, for
King and Parliament, and in the place to which I was chosen, I bless the Lord
he made me faithful to those I served: as to what has been since that, I
shall forbear to speak to, only in the general say, That before, and since I
came into this late trouble, I have begged of the Lord to give me a sight of
all my sins, and show me a Pardon in the blood of Jesus Christ; which, through
free grace and mercy, I can say the Lord has done. I could not have stood with
so much Comfort as I do now at this time, if he had not given me an assurance
of the Pardon of all my sins; and where he has spoken Peace, there is none can
speak War or Trouble. I conceive it not proper to give you here an account of
my Faith; for if I should, I should go very little aside from my Brethren that
have spoken before me: that which has been my Judgment and my Practice, has
been the Congregational way; I must own that, and do. I should much rejoice to
see a spirit answering that great Mercy that the Lord has given to this
Nation. I mean that great Mercy that he has bestowed in giving them the
Gospel, and that in such a manner, as truly we, though we have been some
hundreds and thousands of miles among the Protestants abroad, yet I do not know
it to be so pure, as it is in this Isle, blessed be the Lord: and I hope to the
Nation of England the Lord will give hearts to walk accordingly.

And as to the business of the Government of this Nation, as it now stands, I
have prayed for it, and can pray for it, and shall as long as I have breath
pray for it; and do from my soul desire that the Lord would bless the King, and
give him a heart to rule for Him, and his Glory, and then I am sure the Lord
will prosper him.

Indeed, as to those that fear the Lord in the Nation, I could wish that the
Lord would settle them, and make them of one mind; but that is the work of the
Lord, and it must lie there; and truly, He will do it in his time. I must
confess I speak the rather to that, because there has formerly been something
acted by me toward persons that were not of my Judgment, which I have seen
since was very hard; and I bless God, I have seen it, and have been sorry for
it: and therefore I do desire that all that fear the Lord, would make it their
work and their business, to study to love God, and to love one another, and to
love the Nation wherein they live, and to give no disturbance to it: For
certainly, Sir, I should leave this, as that which the Lord has settled upon my
heart, their work is to sit still, yea, their strength is to sit still, for the
Lord will do his work in his own time; and when he comes to do the work, there
is none shall hinder. I think you have had all experience of it in the late
works which the Lord has done; for I must own it his.

Indeed, Sir, I am sorry that my weakness of body does prevent me from speaking
more to you; yet I do bless God that I have this opportunity: All I shall say
further, is, That there is a Truth (and I hope I may speak it without offense)
that is much upon my spirit, and I am confident I shall speak it without any
offense at all. I think we are all here Christians, and there is none here (I
think) but says the Lord's Prayer, and says, Thy Kingdom come, Thy Will be
done in Earth as it is in Heaven, etc. and I hope they go through the Prayer,
and say why they do pray that Prayer; also say, For thine is the Kingdom, the
Power and the Glory, for ever, and ever, Amen. God has given the Kingdoms of
the Earth to JESUS CHRIST, He shall Reign; and happy and blessed is that King
and Nation that has Him for their King. And, certainly, for his Majesty that
now is, to reign under Jesus Christ, is no dishonor at all to him. For CHRIST
does, and shall Rule over all the Kings, Princes and Nations in the World. And
therefore, indeed, this is that Kingdom that is most certain, and that we do
desire, and all pray that it may come; and I do wish that all persons would
have a tenderness, and not to be at enmity with, nor hate, nor, as much as they
can, cut the throats of those that own that Kingdom, and the coming of that
Kingdom.

As to other things, there has been so much said, that I shall forbear
speaking; only this, as to the business of the King, I bless God I can say it,
I was no Actor or Contriver, either within or without. I was many miles from
this place when that was doing: I was put in by the Authority that then sat,
and I was called and chosen to that work; and truly, what I did, I did without
any Malice, without any Contrivement in the least; and did even to the very
last pray for him: And since his Majesty that now is* came to the Throne, I
have, as I have prayed for my own soul, prayed for him, and that he may reign
in Peace and Righteousness, to the Glory of God, and the good of all the people
of the Nation. I shall not trouble you with more, because I see your time is
past, and my weakness is such that I am necessitated to break off.

Then Col. Okey spoke further, as follows.
Mr. Sheriff,
It is not only our Judgments now, but it was our Practice when we were beyond
the Seas; we did shun any Disputes, nay, we avoided occasions of seeing our own
Countrymen, because we would have nothing to do with the affairs in England,
but to pray for them, and to persuade to be quiet, and to sit still; so that we
may say, as Paul did in another case, They neither found us in the Temple
disputing, or wrangling, or stirring up the People; only our work was to pray
for them.

Then Mr. Corbet said, Now we have done speaking to men, we may now speak unto
our God; truly, he must help us, and give us his own Spirit: men may say
prayers and read them, but to pray in the Spirit, and to pray so, as to be
accepted with God, requires much strength and assistance from Him. Then Mr.
Corbet addressed himself to Prayer.

Mr. Corbet's Prayer.
O Lord our God, our dear and heavenly Father; Thou that art the great and
mighty God, the God of Glory: all the Nations of the World are unto thee as the
drop of the bucket, and as the dust of the balance. O Lord, what are we then
that are dust and ashes, sinful dust and ashes? O! look upon us, look upon us
in our Lord Jesus Christ that great Mediator. O we desire to come to thee in
the Name of that blessed Mediator; we pray thee let us have acceptance through
Him; O that we might come unto the Throne of Grace through Him, and obtain
Mercy at thy merciful hand, and find Grace and Help now in this time of need.
Truly, Lord, it is a day, a day of need for thy poor Worms that stand in thy
presence, that are despised of men, that are condemned of men, as not worthy to
live in the world. O our God, thou may also justly destroy us, and thou
may justly condemn us, and then woe be to us. Oh! Forgiveness belongs unto
thee, Mercies belong unto thee. O Lord, we acknowledge our Iniquities here in
thy presence, and in the face of this great People. O Lord, against thee,
against thee only have we sinned, our Iniquities are gone over our heads, they
are a mighty burden, too heavy for us. O Lord, we desire especially to bewail
our Gospel-sins, our walking unworthy of the Gospel, our Barrenness under all
the means of Grace that we have enjoyed; our Unthankfulness for those Glorious
Appearances of our God in these days, in these Nations. O we have withheld thy
Truth in unrighteousness: O we desire to bewail our sins against Love, and our
sins against Light, and our sins against thy Mercies; though we have professed
the Gospel, and the Truths of Jesus Christ, yet, O Lord, where is that Love,
and that Fruitfulness that should have been found among us? O how much
dishonor has thy holy Majesty had from us in all our stations? O we desire
also to be humbled for our Family-sins, and the sins we committed in our
stations, that thou our God did call us to. O Lord, we desire to acknowledge
that thou art just and righteous in all thy Chastisements, thy great
Chastisements that have been upon the Nation, and upon us, and our Families: We
desire, Lord, to humble our selves before thee, and to cover our faces with
shame here in thy presence, and in the presence of this great Assembly. Woe unto
us, for we have sinned against thee! But, Lord, are there not Mercies with
thee, are there not tender Mercies, multitudes of tender Mercies, that thou
may be feared? Truly, such poor Wretches as we are, coming in unto thee,
have Mercy from thee through Jesus Christ. O these sins of ours, and of every
one of us, and those multitude of sins that thy poor Worm that now speaks is
guilty of in thy sight, our Lord Jesus Christ he has born; He was made sin for
us. Now Lord, where sin is, there is shame and grief, and curse, and wrath, and
death. O Lord, has not He born our sins, and so likewise our shame, and
carried our sorrows? O Lord, what shame was cast upon Him, as thy poor Worms
are at this day and at this time a shame in the eyes of many present? O Lord,
he was despised and rejected of men. O did not He suffer death? did not that
Righteous one, that Holy one suffer death? O he dyed for those sins of ours; He
was cut off from the Land of the Living; He poured-out his Soul unto death. Nay
Lord, blessed Father, it pleased thee to put Him to grief, and he has born our
sins; and o Lord, the chastisements of our Peace was laid on Him, he was made
sin for us. Blessed Lord, we will lay all our sins upon the head of the escape
Goat, upon our Lord Jesus Christ: Him thou have given to be a Propitiation. O
dear Lord, in him, and through his Blood thou have found out a way of Atonement
for sin, and by that one Oblation that he once offered, he is able to save to
the uttermost all that come unto thee through him. Lord, we come in the blood
of that Mediation, we desire to lay hold on the Atonement and Propitiation that
he has offered up unto thee; O he has satisfied thy Justice: He that knew no
sin, he was made sin, and thou did lay our sins upon him, and thou have
accepted of that satisfaction that he has made, and thou have raised him from
the dead, and set him at thy right hand; and though he dyed but once, yet by
that one Oblation he has satisfied for all our sins. O here is the Blood of
God, the Lord Jesus Christ, which was God and man. O that Righteous one, he
loved us, and dyed for us that we might live; he bare thy Wrath, that we might
be reconciled, that we might find mercy; yea, and through him thou art
merciful. Thou God of Mercy, show Mercy to our souls, and to the souls of all
those in this great Assembly that is met here: and, dear Father, accept us in
his Mediation. O it is our comfort, though he dyed but once, having satisfied
thy Justice, thereby he does ever live to make Intercession for Sinners: Lord,
here is Comfort for poor wretched Sinners; the Great Mediator that is so
pleasant in thy sight, whom thou hear always; O he does continually live to
make Intercession for us: we pray thee, in and through Him, accept these poor
Prayers of ours, these poor Petitions and Requests of ours, which we make known
to thee: O it is pardoning love we seek, O Reconciliation with thee, before we
go hence and be seen no more. O Lord, we do believe that thou have sealed our
Pardon, that thou art reconciled to us, and that there is Peace betwixt thee
and our poor souls, through that great Peacemaker, else it would go ill with
us now we are going out of this world. O come and sprinkle every one of our
souls with that precious Blood. O that we, that are in our selves vile
Wretches, may yet stand righteous before thee in his Righteousness. O the same
Righteousness of Christ which thou have appointed: for thou have made him to be
Righteousness for us, and Sanctification and Redemption, and He is the Lord our
Righteousness. O put that Robe upon us, that glorious Robe of his
Righteousness, that we may be presented now, not having our own righteousness,
for that is like a vile filthy Rag, a menstruous cloth; but cloth us with that
Righteousness, that we may be presented before thee in and through him without
spot, and without wrinkle, before thy presence, through him with exceeding joy.
O thou have made him our King; O that he would now undertake our Cause, the
Cause of our poor souls. Come, Lord Jesus thou King of Saints, come, tread our
Enemies under our feet, especially that great Enemy. O Lord, he has conquered
Satan, he has born our sins, and has condemned sin. O he took the likeness of
sinful flesh, and in his flesh condemned sin in the flesh; O that now through
his Righteousness we might fulfill thy holy Law: He is our Righteousness, his
obedience we now fly to. O dear Lord, thou have set before us, as a Refuge to
fly unto, that blessed hope, even those Glorious things the Gospel holds out. O
the hope of Eternal Life, which thou that art the faithful God that can not
lie, have promised unto us. O thou have set this hope of perfect Justification
and perfect Sanctification before us; O thou have held it forth, this same hope
of Righteousness thou have set it before us, and now we fly unto it in this day
of our distress to lay hold upon it. O thou art pleased, Lord, that we might
have strong consolation, thou art pleased to confirm this thy Covenant with an
Oath, That by two immutable things, the Covenant of God, and the Oath of God,
we might have strong Consolation. Now we fly to this Covenant through Jesus
Christ. O be a God in Covenant with us; Father, say to us every one, that we
are thine, that thou art in Covenant with us; and then say, Fear not, Worms.
Else, ah Lord God, now were we to encounter with Death, that King of Terrors,
what would become of us? but O Lord, speak Peace to us, speak Comfort to us
thou God of Comfort; O comfort our hearts: O Lord, it must be done by our dear
Lord Jesus Christ himself. Our Father has given us Everlasting Consolation;
Come and comfort our hearts, o comfort us with thy Love o Lord: o set thy
Banner of Love over us. Thou do not despise the affliction of the afflicted,
blessed be thy Name. We have found thee, Lord, we bear witness to thee before
this great Assembly. O thou have not despised the affliction of the afflicted,
thou have seen us in our low estate, and been very good to us. We have had a
Banner of Love over us, and we bless thy Name for this very Affliction that
thou have laid upon us. O that we could bear witness to thee in the face of
this great City, and before this great Assembly, of thy Goodness and
Faithfulness, and of thy Mercy, which endures for ever. O we have tasted of thy
Love, and it is good to cleave unto thee. Father, thou art a Refuge to the Poor,
and Strength to the Poor and Needy: Come, and be a Refuge to us in this great
Storm: truly, we are to go through a great Storm before we come unto thee; o
that we may find Death a sweet inlet and a passage into thy blessed Arms
through Jesus Christ: When our poor souls shall be coming to thee, we pray thee
give thy Angels charge over us, and strengthen us against the fears and terrors
of Death. O let fresh strength come from Jesus Christ at this present. It is
not all the Graces we have had will now do us any good, unless we have fresh
supplies. Our fresh springs are in thee; Arise O Spring. O the Fountain of
Life, now let it come flowing upon our poor souls, that we may be presented
before thee with exceeding Joy. Lord, let us hear that same joyful Sound, Come,
ye blessed of my Father. O though we be despised of men, and some they reproach
us: o but Lord forgive them, and the Lord pardon them; whosoever has done us
any wrong, the Lord pardon them, through Jesus Christ we beg it. And, blessed
Father, we pray thee let us hear this joyful sound, Come, ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you. O there is a Crown of Life laid
up for them that love the Lord. Thou know thy poor Worms desire to love
thee; o dear Lord, shed abroad thy Love in our hearts: and though we be now
dying, yet we desire to love thy Name; though thou art now correcting us, yet
we have cause to love thee, and bless thee; o shed abroad thy Love in our poor
souls. O Lord we pray thee come and accept us, and let our cry come and pierce
the heavens: o Lord let us now be looking for, and hastening to the glorious
appearing of that blessed hope, our Lord Jesus Christ. He that shall come, will
come, and will not tarry. Come quickly, Lord. O that thy Servants could see
thee, as thy Servant Stephen, (in much-what such a condition as we are in) he
saw Jesus Christ standing at thy Right Hand. Though we cannot look upon thee
with our bodily eyes, yet we desire to see thee with the eye of faith. O we
pray thee look down upon us, and, Lord, strengthen our Faith; and that our
Faith may not fail: O let us obtain the end of our Faith, the salvation of our
Souls. And o that thou would strengthen us according to thy Glorious Power,
with all Patience in this hour. O Lord, though our hearts would faint, and
flesh faint, o Lord, thou art the God of our strength; come, lay hold upon us,
lead us by thy Righteousness, and let thy Everlasting Arms be under us. O dear
Lord, let us taste of Love in this bitter Cup; o we pray thee let us see thee
in Mercy; do not correct us in thy Wrath. O we bow our knees to thee, let not
this Affliction be in thy Wrath: We are under the wrath of men; but, Lord, do
thou forgive, and let us be under thy Love; and lay no more upon thy poor
Worms, than the strength that thou shall now give us through Jesus Christ, will
enable us to bear: and come and take us into those Mansions that our Lord Jesus
Christ has prepared. Is it not thy promise to go and provide Mansions for us?
our forerunner is gone to appear for us in Heaven now before the Throne of
Grace: O hear us now in him, and dismiss us now with a blessing. And the Lord
bless this Nation; the Lord bless the Government; the Lord continue thy
Truth, keep the Gospel still in this Nation, which has been the glory of it; O
let thy poor People glorify the Gospel in their lives, it is that we beg of
thee for the Lord's sake* and do thou prevent those heavy Judgments that hang
over our heads; Lord, pardon those great Abominations that thine eyes do see,
that Profanation of the Sabbath. O the spirit of Profaneness is broken out
among us! O we desire to be humbled and mourn for it; Lord, turn from thy
Wrath, and dear Father, continue thy Gospel in the purity of it. O the Lord
forgive the sins of those that bear thy Name; thy Wrath is kindled against us,
and therefore it is that thou do rebuke us; but we pray thee give thy People
a Spirit of returning to thee, and do thou heal our backslidings, and give us
a Spirit of Love to Thee and to thy Truths, and one to another; and take away
the Envy betwixt Ephraim and Judah. Thou see these bitter Contests; we pray
thee put a stop to them, and let thy People be of one heart and one mind, and
let them mind the great things of Jesus Christ, and those Truths that are
after Godliness; let those be more and more enquired after, and embraced by the
People of these Nations; and the Lord grant that those Superstitions and
Idolatries that are a provocation in thy sight, may not be brought into the
Nation; for thou art a jealous God, and if we go that way, thy Wrath will be
kindled once more; but Lord, show Mercy to England, and do not take away the
Gospel, nor remove thy Golden Candlestick from the midst of us. And the Lord
bless the Government, and the King thou have set over us; that which we beg of
thee for him, is, That he may rule righteously; and let him hate whom thou
hate, and love those whom thou love. And bless the Ministers of the Word,
them that are faithful to thee, Lord, continue them in their Liberties, and let
not our Teachers be removed into corners; bless them that are faithful to
thee, and make them more faithful -- (Being interrupted, after a while he
proceeded as follows.)

O Father, we have many Suits to put up unto thee: but we now commit our selves
unto thee; here we are, Lord, we will roll our souls upon thee, and rest and
wait for thy Salvation. We pray thee accept of us; forgive the sins of this
duty; O sprinkle the Blood of the Lord Jesus upon us, and take us into thy
Arms. Father of Mercy, that comfortest us in all our Tribulations, come and
comfort us in this hour, and do thou accept of us in Christ, for through him we
offer up ourselves, our souls, a sacrifice. Father, accept of us, and our
sacrifice, etc. The Conclusion was omitted, because of a busling among the
horses.

Then Col. Okey addressed himself to Prayer, as follows.

Colonel Okey's Prayer.
MOst Glorious, most Holy, Eternal, and most blessed Lord God, who art the
glorious Creator and the blessed Maker of all things, who art from Everlasting
to Everlasting, blessed for evermore; Thou art worthy to be praised from the
rising of the Sun, to the going down thereof; Thou art the mighty God that art
clothed with Glory and Honor and Majesty, as with a garment, and Thou art the
Fountain of all that is good, and the Wellspring of Everlasting-life. O Lord,
we are once more in thy glorious Presence, the Lord has been pleased to give
us this opportunity, that we may once more pour out our souls to thee in the
Name of Jesus Christ, before we go hence and be seen no more. Now we pray Thee
for the Lord Jesus sake, as thou have been pleased to put a price into our
hands; so, O Lord, we pray thee for Jesus Christ's sake give us hearts to
improve it. O Lord we pray thee convince us, in whose glorious presence we are,
and of the great work we are now about; we are before Thee, the Eternal and
Unchangeable Lord, who searchest the hearts, and know our thoughts, and Thou
know with what intents we pour out our souls before Thee at this time. O
blessed Father, we beseech Thee for Christ's sake, draw nigh to us, that we may
draw nigh to Thee our God. O that Thou would pour down Thy holy Spirit, that
we may pour out our souls before Thee. O Lord, we pray Thee for Christ's sake,
give us the Spirit of Wisdom, and the Spirit of Understanding, and the Spirit
of Knowledge, and the Spirit whereby we may cry, Abba, Father. We are not now
come to tell long stories of our Iniquities, time and strength would fail us,
they are as the hairs of our heads, and as the sands of the Seashore: but, O
Lord, we are before Thee in the Name of Jesus Christ, humbly to entreat and
beseech Thee, O for the Lord's sake to look upon us; there was never any more
unworthy of Mercy than we are, yet never any poor Wretches stood in more need
of Mercy than we do. We humbly pray thee for the Lord's sake extend Mercy to
us. O Lord, do not remember against us what we have done, but remember what the
Lord Jesus Christ has suffered; and when Thou have looked upon thy dear Son,
then look upon thy poor Worms: O Lord, we humbly pray Thee for Jesus sake
forgive whatever is past, cover us with the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, let
none of our nakedness appear, we beg for the Lord's sake. O that the Lord would
be pleased to speak Peace now to our souls. Blessed Father, we have in some
measure (blessed be thy Name) the assurance of thy Love sealed to our Souls by
thy glorious Spirit; we humbly pray Thee, O Lord, we beseech Thee for Christ's
sake look upon us, and come and pour down thy glorious and holy Spirit upon us;
and let us, we beseech thee, have yet more Assurance that our Sins are
pardoned, that Thou have found out a Ransom for us; that our Names are written
in the Book of Life, and that we shall not die, but live for evermore, because
we are washed with the Blood of Christ, even with the Blood of thy dear Son,
who has loved us, and died for us, and washed us with his own Blood. O that
the Lord would be pleased now to come and warm our souls with thy Love, that
they may never be cold more. O Lord, we beseech thee, receive us into the
Everlasting Arms of thy Mercy. O Lord, we beseech Thee for Christ's sake, that
Thou would now let us see (as Stephen once did by the eye of Faith) even
Heaven opened, and the Lord upon the Throne, and Jesus Christ at his
Right Hand, and the glorious Angels receiving our souls into thy everlasting
Mercy. Blessed Father, we beseech thee for the Lord sake, that Thou would be
with us, and bless us, and the Lord show us Mercy only upon the account of our
Lord Jesus Christ. And we pray Thee bless us, and with us, all Thine all the
World over; Remember thy Churches from the rising of he Sun to the going down
of the same. Think upon this Nation wherein we live, we humbly beg for the
Lord's sake, that England, Scotland and Ireland might live in thy Glorious
Presence; and that England may be a quiet Habitation for thy People to dwell
in. O for the Lord's sake, as Thou have given them a Name, and a Gospel above
any other Nations that we have heard of, or seen; So pour down abundance of thy
Spirit; and give them Grace and hearts, that they may walk answerable to the
Gospel, and be a Nation for thy Glory, more zealous than any other Nation. And
Lord, we humbly pray Thee continue the Mercies they yet enjoy, and remove and
divert any Judgments that they feel or fear. And for the Lord's sake, bless
him that Thou have been pleased to set over us, let the King live in Thy sight;
we humbly beg that he may reign so here, that he may reign in Glory for ever;
that he may be a nursing father to thy Israel, and that he may be a Friend to
those that are thy Friends, and an Enemy to those that are thy Enemies, and
Enemies to thy Gospel: let him remember that he is but a Steward, and he must
ere long give an account, and the Lord grant that he may do it with much joy,
and not with grief: and bless the Council, do thou pour down thy Spirit upon
them, and guide and direct them to do the things that may be for thy Glory, and
for the Comfort of their own souls. And bless the Faithful Ministers of the
Gospel, O that the Lord would double his Spirit upon them, and that the Lord
would be pleased abundantly to increase the number of them; let not that
Judgment come upon the Nation, that the Godly, Faithful and Holy Ministers
should be removed from us, that their eyes should not behold their Teachers;
Lord, let us not have a famine of thy Word for the Lord's sake, but that the
Gospel may continue in more splendour and glory than ever it has done
heretofore. O that the Lord would be pleased to keep Idolatry out of this
Nation; O let not that Judgment befall this poor Nation for the Lord's sake.
And we humbly beg for thy Name sake, that the Lord would be pleased to look
upon this great City; Thou have made them famous for Religion, and for owning
the Gospel; but Lord grant that they may not decline, but that they may
abundantly improve their gifts and graces, and that they may walk humbly and
thankfully; and O that the Lord would be pleased to bless the City and the
Nation from one end to another, and that he would give them the blessings of
the right hand and the blessings of the left, that they may have the dew of
Heaven, and the fatness of the Earth, and that they may provoke and stir up one
another to praise thy holy Name, and to live in Love, Unity, and Peace. O Lord,
we pray thee for Jesus sake, look upon us in thy presence, and show Mercy to
us, and look in love and mercy upon any that are near unto us; we leave them
with Thee, we commit them into thy hands, we beg for the Lord's sake show Mercy
to us, and be with thy poor Servants; and, Lord, we pray thee, accept of us and
our services in Jesus Christ, and pardon our deadness, and pardon our weakness,
our wanderings, and all our sins, even for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, since
we came into Thy glorious presence* and we pray Thee to accept of us, and do us
good, and receive us to Mercy and Glory; and all, only for the glory of thy
Name, and for the sake of our Lord Jesus Christ, who died for us, and rose
again, and lives for ever at Thy right hand; to whom be all Honor and Glory
and Praise, for evermore.

Then Col. Barkstead addressed himself to Prayer, having first spoken to the
Sheriffs these few words following.

Mr. Sheriff,

I do see your time is spent, and we are drawn up into a very narrow compass.
And I hope you will take my word now as before, I shall only speak a word or
two unto the Lord, and no more.

Colonel Barkstead's Prayer.
O Eternal and ever-blessed Lord God, Thou who sit upon the highest
Heavens, who have the highest Heavens for thy Throne, and the Earth for thy
Footstool; We poor Creatures are here by thy Providence, brought at this day,
to this place, at this time, and by Thee it is that we are in the Condition we
are now in; for which, O Lord, we bless Thee, and for which we can bless thy
Name. Blessed be thy Name, O Lord, that Thou were pleased before Thou
broughtest us hither to speak Peace to our poor souls in the Blood of Jesus
Christ; and blessed for ever be thy Name, that thou givest-in Assurance of
Peace, Pardon and Reconciliation to our Souls at this very minute, blessed be
thy Name: Dear Father, for the Lord's sake continue it; and o draw forth the
hearts of thy poor Creatures, even while one blast of breath is in us, to
bless thy holy Name. Father, we pray Thee, remember the Nation in which we
live; the King whom Thou have set over the Nation; Lord, make him Thine, and
cause him to rule for Thee in Righteousness, and for thy Glory; that so, Lord,
he may rule to the Comfort of all that fear thy Name. O dear Father, look in
mercy upon all that fear thy Name in the Nation, make them all of one heart and
mind to advance thy Name and Glory, to live in Unity one with another, and to
make it their business to seek Peace and pursue it, that so they may thereby
truly advance the Kingdom and Scepter of Jesus Christ, who is coming and will
come: O dear Father, carry forth the spirits of thy People to love Thee, and
one another, and to walk closely, and humbly, and holily before Thee all their
days. Remember the Relations of thy poor Creatures here before Thee; Lord, do
good to them that we leave behind us, we commit them into thy Arms; Lord, take
them into thine Arms: O Lord thou have said in thy Word, Leave thy fatherless
Children; I will preserve them alive, and let thy Widows trust in me. Lord, it
is thy Word, and this is thy Command that we should leave them with Thee;
therefore we leave them in thy Arms. Dear Father, we desire from the bottom of
our hearts, freely and fully to forgive all that we any ways think have done
us wrong in any kind whatsoever (freely and fully) either in England or
elsewhere; and we pray Thee show kindness to those that any ways have showed
kindness to us, for the Lord Jesus sake reward all their labor of love a
thousand fold into their bosoms. Look in mercy upon the Chief Magistrates that
are here at this time; dear Father, pardon their sins, and reconcile them unto
thy self in the Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, in which we pray Thee wash
their souls. And, O Lord, as for the person that is now appointed to take away
our lives, and to destroy our Bodies, dear Father, do not Thou destroy his
Soul, but wash his Soul in the Blood of Jesus Christ; Even that person that is
to wash his hands in our Blood, O pardon him, and let not any of his sins be
remembered before Thee. We leave ourselves with Thee, and blessed be thy Name,
Thou have been good unto us, and thy Presence is with us, and there is nothing
that gives trouble to us at this moment. Father, continue this thy
loving kindness to us. O Lord, thou have not (blessed be thy Name) caused Death
to be terrible to us; no Lord, thy poor Creature can say with freeness and
comfort, that there has not been any thing of trouble or terror that has past
thy Servant since he came into this place, either for what he is to suffer, or
the manner of his Sufferings, but here he is before Thee, and begs further help
and strength from Thee, being willing to surrender up his Soul to Thee, in and
through the Lord Jesus Christ.

Then Col. Okey spoke a few words more, as follows, I did break off duty,
because you desired it, and I would not be troublesome to you. Then he very
earnestly expressed himself further, as follows. O love the Lord, and hate
all things that are evil. I have found by experience, more evil in the least
sin, than good in any thing this world can afford. Therefore I beg it of all
that are here, To love God, and to hate that that is evil. The Lord give you
Peace and Truth.

I hope our Relations shall not fare the worse for us, but that you will show
them kindness.

And as to what my Brother said, I thank the Lord, I have the Assurance of his
Love, and the Pardon of my Sins through the Riches of his Grace, and free love
in Jesus Christ.

After this Col. Barkstead called a young man, who was known to him, and taking
a silver Box out of his pocket, he charged him to give it to his Daughter.

Their Speeches and Prayers being ended, the Executioner cleared the Cart of
the rest of the People, who were gotten in, and then pulled down their several
Caps over their eyes, and upon the lifting up their hands the Cart was drawn
away; at which time Col. Barkstead especially was heard to say, Lord Jesus
receive our Souls; and after he had hanged for a little space, he lifted up his
hand:

That which many did especially take notice of, was, That there was not so much
as the least attempt made by any to raise a triumphant shout upon the drawing
away of the Cart; but there rather appeared the symptoms of an universal face
of Sadness in that vast and generally tumultuous Assembly, who were the
Spectators of their several Deaths.

They all hung near about a quarter of an hour: The first that was cut down was
Col. Barkstead, who was quartered according to the Sentence, the other two
hanging all the while.

The next cut down was Col. Okey, Mr. Corbet hanging still, who, after Col.
Okey was quartered, had the Execution done upon him also, according to the
Sentence. Their several Quarters were brought back to Newgate, about five of
the Clock in the Afternoon, to be boiled.

A brief Account of Col. Okey's Funeral.
WHen Col. Okey's Body was quartered, it pleased the King to send a Warrant to
the Sheriff of London, to deliver the macerated Body to be buried where his
Wife should think meet. Which thing being granted, without Petition or
Application from her, or his Relations; and the Rumor of his Funeral suddenly
flying about the City, and the place appointed at Stepney, (where his first
Wife lies in a fair Vault, which he purchased formerly for a Burying-place for
him and his Family) there was a numerous Concourse of sober, substantial People
assembled to Christ-Church, to attend the Corpse, and some thousands more were
coming thither to that purpose; so that there were in view about Twenty
thousand People attending that Solemnity at, and coming to the place aforesaid,
who in a solemn and peaceable manner behaved themselves, as that affair
required: Yet it so pleased the King to revoke this first Grant to Mris. Okey,
and by the Sheriff of London to disappoint and send home again the Company
attending the Funeral; which Sheriff, with much harshness and many bitter
words, did his work. The People, though much troubled at the disappointment,
yet, so soon as they understood the King's pleasure, departed; and left the
mangled Limbs to the dispose of them that had devoted them to the Gibbet and
Ax; the Company left many a thousand sighs to attend him to his then unknown
Grave.

That Night the Body was carried to the Tower of London, and there, by Mr.
Glendon Parson of Barkin, was buried with the Service Book, afresh wounding his
bleeding Limbs thereby: but Rapes are imputed only to the Ravisher. Mr. Glendon
could not but say, that his Body was laid there in sure and certain hope of a
Joyful Resurrection. His Testimony was true, though a Poet of their own. And
now there he lies, and the Tower of London is his Tomb. His Epitaph he partly
writ in the hearts of thousands at the place of Execution.

FINIS.

