A SERMON Preached before the KING AT NEW MARKET April 24. 1670.

By MILES BARN Fellow of St. Peter's College in Cambridge.

Printed by His Majesty's special Command.

POCULA SACRA HINC LUCEM ET ALMA MATTER CAN^^ BRIGIA


CAMBRIDGE: Printed by John Hayes, Printer to the University, 1670. And are to
be sold by Edw. Story Bookseller in Cambridge.

1 St. John Chap. 5. ver. 4. And this is the Victory that overcomes the World,
even our Faith.


THe Church of Christ, here below, is justly styled the Church Militant, not
only in distinction to that which is Triumphant above; but likewise upon the
score of those many enemies, which she encounters in the world: and
consequently every member of the same, at his first entrance into it, his
initiation into Christianity, does solemnly denounce war against the Pomps, and
Vanities of this wicked world; Our life is termed a continual Warfare; Christ
is called the Captain of our Salvation; his Apostles acquaint us, how much they
suffered because they would not deny the Faith; nor turn Renegadoes from Him:
particularly, His stout Champion Saint Paul, gives in a large account, of the
several Conflicts, which he had with the world; And how he came off more than
Conqueror through Christ that strengthened him: when he was in danger of
suffering Martyrdom at Rome, he made it his pious boast, that he had fought the
good fight, that he had kept the Faith; And when he would render his Christian
impregnable, against the assaults of the world, he commands him to put on the
whole Armor of God, (otherguise weapons then those which either Homer armed
Achilles with, or Virgil his Aeneas) But above all he bids him take the shield
of Faith, wherewith he boldly assures him, that he should be able to quench all
the fiery Darts of the wicked. For,

This is the victory that overcomes the world, even our Faith.

I cannot do greater right to the Text, then if I should awhile insist upon,
and recount to you the several Trophies, and noble Achievements of Faith: How
that not only the Author, and Finisher of it, for the joy that was set before
him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and was therefore set down at the
right hand of the Throne of God; But moreover how its first embracers obtained
a good report, as well by the greatness of their sufferings, as the strangeness
of their conquests. Their sufferings were as great, as either wit, or malice
could make them; And yet their courage was far greater, for they did not only
triumph over their most exquisite torments, but oftentimes conquered their most
obdurate tormentours.

As for their conquests; they were carried on by no humane force; they used no
open Hostility; the stratagems of war, were as much against their simplicity,
as upon this score, they were contrary to the express words of their betrayed
Master. Peter put up thy sword, it is enough. There was but one single blow
given, and that, too, upon the justest occasion that ever presented it self in
the world; For it was to rescue the very Lord of Life, out of the hands of that
miscreant, who betrayed Him to Death: And yet he that gave it received a severe
check for his pains. They that take the sword shall perish by the sword.

Let Mahomet propagate his senceless Alcoran by force of Arms; let him by the
same power, he tyrannized over the bodies of his vassals, captivate their
souls; and so at once betray both to utter ruin. Let Enthusiasts, and
Fanatics dictate the whimsies of a cras'd Brain, those slavish Doctrines,
which are but the necessary result of a morose temper, for the immediate
Oracles of God, the (...) the Gifts, and Graces of his free and Princely
Spirit. And if they be not presently received; let them betake themselves to
open violence; commit the most horrid Outrages upon their fellow creatures; as
they have done in several parts of the world, when once they got the sword into
their hands. But the Gospel of Peace knows no such boisterous methods. Christ's
Soldiers, for the Propagation of his Doctrines, never drew any sword, but that
of the Spirit. They used none of those cruel Engines, by which the Chieftains
of the world carried on their bloody Conquests. Their weapons were spiritual.
The Victories which they aimed at were over men's minds. They had no defense but
the Breast Plate of Faith: And yet they fought not against flesh and blood
only, but against Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the
darkness of this world, against Spiritual wickedness in high places. And as
they fought against them, so they overcame them. By their Faith they spoiled
Principalities; divested the evil spirits of their usurped power over the minds
of men; threw them out of their Temples; silenced their Oracles; beat down
their images, making show of them openly, and triumphing over them. And as the
Romans, to magnify their Conquests, were wont to lead their captived Enemies
in Triumph through their Cities; so the Apostles, by the might of Christ,
carried the powers of Hell in open triumph, as those whom they had victoriously
taken captive. Thus, by the light of Faith, was the Prince of darkness
vanquished, and all his strong holds cast down.

And as they thus conquered him, so did they all those whom he had made Enemies
to the Faith. Neither the greatness of the Roman Empire on the one side, nor
the malicious practices of the Infidel Jews on the other; neither the wit, and
crafty wiliness of the Philosophers, who decried the Disciples for so many
credulous Fops; nor yet the Harangues, which the Orators made against the
meanest of Christ's Doctrines, (...), as containing nothing in them either
Great, or New; were able to disparage, or withstand the Faith. Insomuch, that
notwithstanding the great opposition it met with in the world; The
despicableness, as to all outward appearances, of the Apostles who first
promulged it; the great prejudices which the generality of men had taken up
against it, ( as concerning this Sect, Acts 28.22.
we know that it is every where spoken against) and that most forcible tie of
interest, which hindered many from becoming Christians; I say, notwithstanding
these great disadvantages, it grew mightily, and prevailed; And the Sect of the
Nazarens, (as Tertullus maliciously called the Christians) was in a short time
more numerous then any Sect whatsoever; the Doctrines of Christ more
universally received, then the Dogmata, the Opinions, of any the most renowned
Philosophers. In sum, the Disciples, by believing on the name of the Lord
Jesus, from silly, cowardly persons, became valiant, and wise; conquering the
strong, confuting the learned; baffling the wits, and overpowring the great
ones: The Faith which they had received they valiantly maintained, in spite of
bonds, and imprisonments; threats, and entreaties; through honors, and
dishonours; cruel mockings, and scourgings; In a word; In spite of all the
various, and most affrighting shapes which Death could present it self in. Thus
the Disciples and Primitive Christians conquered the world; Thus the Fathers,
and Prophets of old obtained a good report; Thus fought the noble Army of
Martyrs; And thus, must all the Professors of Christianity behave themselves,
in their several combats with the world. For, This is the victory that
overcomes the world, even our Faith.

That I may then proceed Methodically, and speak distinctly to the several
parts of my Text.

I must show what this Faith is which overcomes the world. What are the
necessary Qualifications to render it victorious. That this Faith so Qualified
is the surest, and best way of overcoming the world.
What this Faith is which overcomes the world, I need not go far to seek. The
next words to the Text resolve the doubt. It Is the Believing that Jesus is the
Son of God; (that he is the true Messiah,) and consequently the Believing all
his Threats and Promises, the obeying all his Precepts and Commands.

But because we live in a skeptical Age; an Age which is apt to strike at the
very Foundation of all Religion; and, with Celsus that Drolling Atheist, to
object against the Christians, that which makes them so; their very Faith:
Orig. cont. Cel. l. 1. (...) etc.
as if the Doctrines of Christianity were received without due examination.
Though this Objection might very well be retorted upon themselves; For, who (I
pray) are greater Dictatours, then the Opposers of Religion? And must not their
followers be strangely credulous, who embrace the Prescripts of fallible men,
in opposition to the Word of eternal Truth? Yet I shall briefly endeavor to
show, that Christ the second Person in the Trinity, whom we adore in
expectation of eternal salvation, was the true Messiah.

Taking then for granted the Divine authority of the Scriptures, the Writings
of the Old and New Testament: Though this must not be thought a Begging the
Question; since there are better Arguments to prove them so, then can be
produced for the truth of Salust, Livy, or any the most Authentic Historians:
Vide Socin. de Aut. script.
This granted, it is manifest, that immediately upon the fall of Adam the
Messiah was promised, The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head; and
consequently raise his posterity to an higher pitch of preferment, than the
integrity of his Creation entitled them to. That Christ, born in the fullness
of time, was the then promised Messiah, is manifest; since in him were
fulfilled all the Prophesies relating either to the Birth, Life, Person, or
offices of the Messiah.

To begin with the First. The coming of Elias, foretold by the Prophet Malachi:
Mal. 4.5.
Behold, I will send you Elijah the Prophet, before the coming of the great and
terrible day of the Lord. Was not this accomplished by his forerunner Saint
John Baptist, who by preaching repentance, by an extraordinary severity, and
gravity suitable to that Doctrine, prepared the ways of the Lord, and made his
paths strait? And are not the Jews most sottishly barbarous, who will needs
fetch Elias from Abraham's bosom, (that place of Rest) and so make him, a second
time, undergo the miseries of this life, for the fulfilling this prophecy?
since whatsoever benefit they expected from him, they might have reaped from
the strict pattern of the holy Baptist; whose life did so exactly resemble, if
not outdo the Austerities of Elias; that (unless they were wilfully blind) they
must needs conclude him to be but a type of Saint John Baptist.

As for the Prophecy of Isaiah; Isa. 7.14.
Behold,a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son; He that denies such to have
been the miraculous Birth of Christ, does him a greater outrage, then his most
malicious enemies the Jews ever offered him; though they had most severe Laws
against Adulterers, Deuteronomy. 22. v. 23, 24.
and means sufficient to prove that he was not born in marriage; for which they
might have had the Confession of Joseph his reputed Father, and Mary his Mother.

The place of his Nativity was expressly appointed by the Prophet Micah, Mic.
53, 3.
to be Bethlehem in Judea. And is it not manifest, that Christ born there, was
the very person designed by the Prophet? as well by the answer, which Herod
gave to the wise men, after he had enquired of the Doctors of the Law, where
he should be born; as by that unparallelled murder (when he found himself
mocked by them) of about fourteen hundred infants, that so he might be sure to
cut him off, whom the Jews at that time most earnestly expected for their
Deliverer. So horrid a Massacre! that nothing but a cursed jealousy of loosing
his usurped power, could have made the bloody Tyrant guilty of it.

Then as for the manner, and condition of his life, foretold by Isaiah; Isa.
53.3.
that he should be despised, and rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief: Were not all these doleful passages verified in Christ?
Did he not spend about thirty years of his Life, in a solitary, abject
condition? When he made himself known unto the world, was he not upbraided with
the meanness of his parentage? Is not this the Carpenters Son? Was he not a man
of sorrows, when in his Agony he complained, that his soul was exceeding
sorrowful, even unto Death? And was he not acquainted with grief, when he
uttered those Tragical words, upon the Cross, Mat. 27.46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

Those words of David, Psalm. 22.16.
they pierced my hands, and my feet, apparently specify the manner of his
Death: And they must relate to Christ, since in David's time there was no such
punishment in fashion among the Jews. And were not all the other circumstances
of it fulfilled to the least Punctilio? For, what could make those rude
soldiers, who pierced his Sacred Side; that the scripture might be fulfilled,
Zech. 12.10.
They shall look on him whom they have pierced; so civil, as not to break his
legs also? was not this done that another might be fulfilled, A bone of him
shall not be broken?

Was not likewise his Resurrection foreshewn by the same holy Writer? Psalm.
16.10.
Thou will not leave my soul in Hell, neither will thou suffer thine Holy One
to see Corruption. David could not speak this of himself, since he was laid
unto his Fathers, put to bed in the dust, and suffered the corruption of the
grave; But it had its completion in Christ, who according to his promise rose
again from the Dead; in spite of all the attempts of the Jews to the contrary,
their sealing the Stone, and setting a strict Watch: For it was impossible,
that the Conqueror of Death, should be detained Prisoner by the Grave.

Were not all the miracles, which were to be wrought by the Messiah, fully
performed by him? He gave eyes to the blind, ears to the deaf, speech to the
dumb, feet to the lame, restored the dead to life. These were such stupendous
things, as surpassed the power of Nature, for their greatness; exceeded the
slight of Magic, for their reality; and were directly contrary to any
Diabolical design, for as much as they aimed at the good, and benefit of
mankind. And it is very observable, that when the snarling Pharisees, would have
blasted the credit of his miracles; they used such a ridiculous argument He
casts out Devils through the Prince of Devils, S. Mat. 9.34.
as only served to prove, how well they deserved that character which Christ
gave of them, viz. that they were of their Father the Devil, or more then so,
since they endeavored to exceed him, in his essential property, of lying, and
calumniating.

Then as for his Offices. He was to be a King; Infidel Jews! and so he was;
though not as ye vainly imagined; that he should prove a victorious Prince,
conquer all the Nations of the earth, by the dint of his Sword; And that all
the Potentates of the world, should lay down their Sceptres at his Triumphant
feet. From which of your Prophets, could ye fetch this conceit? At his coming
were not Isa. 2.4.
swords to be beaten into Plowshares, and spears into pruning hooks? And
therefore surely he never intended to march in Battle array, or to engage in any
bloody Conquests. Zech. 9.9.
Was not he to be lowly, riding upon an Ass, and a Colt the Foal of an Ass? and
therefore a despiser of the Pomp, and Grandeur of this world. Did he not
plainly disown all Sovereignty here on Earth? S. John 18.36.
My kingdom is not of this World. And, indeed, what though he had been more
victorious, than Alexander? won more Battles, than ever Caesar did? Would this
have given him a renown comparable to those victories, which he obtained over
hearts, their unruly passions, and appetites? What though he had appeared in
more magnificent splendor, than Herod when he sat on his gaudy Throne; would
this have been a Garb half so becoming the Son of God, as those Robes of
Righteousness, which made him shine so bright in the world? His Kingly Power
was conspicuous in more illustrious Instances, through the whole System of the
Creation. The Angels were ambitious to minister unto him. The Devils trembled
at his word, and fell like lightning before him. The wind and the Sea obeyed
him. Hunger and Thirst, those impatient desires, waited his leisure. Sickness
and Health, Death and the Grave, and Hell it self were forced to acknowledge
his Sovereignty.

As for his Priestly Office. The Aaronical part of it he dispatched by offering
himself a sacrifice to his incensed Father. And does he not still continue a
Priest, after the Order of Melchizedek, in blessing us, and crowning us with
the Gifts and Graces of the Holy Ghost?

As for his Prophetical office, which consisted first in making known to us the
Will of God; This he did through the whole course of his Life; but especially
in that Divine Sermon on the Mount, wherein he added whatsoever was wanting,
explained whatsoever was obscure in the Old Law: and propounded Blessedness
upon such easy, suitable, and pleasant Terms, that we cannot miss of Heaven,
without making our selves miserable on Earth. As for the second part of it,
which consisted in foretelling things to come; of this he gave many Instances,
particularly that sad one of the destruction of Jerusalem; which he sighed out
in the very anguish of his Soul, Mat. 23.27.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem; Behold, your House is left unto you Desolate. Which
was accordingly accomplished by the Romans, under the conduct of Titus, about
the 70 year of our Lord. When the miserable Jews, too late, found him a true
Prophet to their cost. For from that very time they became a most distressed,
and despised Nation. Instead of being any longer the Darlings of Heaven, the
People of God, and the Seed of the Faithful; they became the scorn of men, the
refuse of the Earth, and a Proverb of Infidelity. An instance so dismal,
attended with such Tragical circumstances, that it alone is enough to strike
terror into all those, who will not believe that Jesus is the Son of God.

But if to this we add the miracles which he performed, The Divinity of his
sayings; S. John 7.46.
For never man spoke like him: The unblameableness of his Life; For he did no
sin, 1 S. Pet. 2.22.
neither was guile found in his Mouth: If to these the infallible testimony of
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; the Confession of the Demoniack, 1 S.
Joh. 5.7. S. Luke 8.28.
What have I to do with Thee, Jesus, Thou Son of God most high? If to these the
dismal Prodigies which happened at his Death: As the renting of the Vail of the
Temple, to show the Abrogation of the Old Law: the cleaving of the Rock, to
upbraid the more stony hearts of his Crucifiers: The total Eclipse of the Sun,
that it might not behold the setting of the Sun of Righteousness. If to these,
his powerful Resurrection; and after he had conversed forty days upon Earth,
his no less wonderful Ascension: And lastly, the great esteem his very enemies
had of him, manifested in the motion which Tiberius made to the Senate for his
Apotheosis: He who seriously considers these things, will be forced to confess
with the Centurion, truly this was the Son of God. Which Confession is that
Faith which overcomes the World. And that it may prove effectual, it must be
duly Qualified: The second thing to be considered, What are the necessary
Qualifications to render our Faith victorious.

of Faith, would do the great work of our Salvation; Then might those who are
dead in trespasses and sins, hope for as fair an inheritance in the Kingdom of
Heaven, as any, who by mortifying their earthly members, raised themselves to
newness of Life; Then might those lazy, cowardly souls, who never had courage
enough to give Battle to any one single Lust, expect the same recompense of
reward, with those generous spirits, who by the difficult, and assiduous
Acquists of virtue obtained a noble Victory over themselves; Then might the
Regions of Purity be defiled by things common and unclean; And Heaven be so far
from being a reward, that it would be as much shunned by all good men, as Hell
is now dreaded by the wicked. If an Historical, notional Faith would serve our
turn, then might Lucifer, and his cursed crew hope to regain their first
glorious estate, ( For the very Devils believe, and tremble) notwithstanding we
are ascertained, that S. Jude 6.
they are reserved in everlasting chains, under Darkness, unto to the judgment
of the great Day. In sum then; that I may neither enter into dispute with the
Solifidian, concerning Justification by Faith alone; nor yet contend with the
Romanist, whether good works have any part in that glorious Act; I am sure
Saint James is positive in his determination; S. Jam. 2.26.
For as the Body without the Spirit is Dead, so is Faith without works also:
And consequently no more able to obtain that difficult Victory, which is here
attributed to a lively Faith, then a dead Body is to perform the functions of
Life. And indeed, as Epicurus was the greatest Atheist in the world, in
allowing the existence of God; but then, (as if he had suspected either his
Prudence, or Justice in managing the affairs of the world) complementing him
out of his Sovereignty over it, for fear of disturbing the serenity of his
Being: so will the Solifidian be found to be the truest Infidel, who allowing
Faith to be necessary to salvation, most perfidiously strips it of all those
enlivening Properties, which might fit, and adorn it for so great an attainment.

Ephesians. 4.5.
For there is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, and one only name under
Heaven, given unto men whereby we must be saved; even the name of the Lord
Jesus. Acts 4.12.
So long as the Christians continued together, and were of the same mind; so
long as they maintained simplicity, and liberality, being solicitous for
nothing but an Holy life; when all the gain they studied was Godliness; when
all the strife, and emulation they had, was to outvie each other in the
Practice of Piety; when there were no Divisions, but of Goods, and Possessions
to be parted among the Needy: Then did the Church flourish, and a daily
Addition was made of them that should be saved. But when, instead of these
lovely Qualities, there arose Sects, and Schisms; when once that unhappy
Distinction was made of Paul, and Apollo; of Christ, and Cephas; when men began
to be lovers of themselves, more then of God; when the old strife was renewed;
which of them should be the greatest; when the loss of a Preferment, was
cruelly revenged upon the Church, by the setting up of an Heresy; when the
wits began to deride the simplicity of the Gospel; and the learned were divided
about points of Faith: Then did the Church truly suffer, and sustained more
damage by these intestine broils; then by the hottest persecutions of the
Heathen Emperors. Of the truth whereof; we have too sad an instance in the
fourth Century; when the tares of Arianism, had almost quite choked the wheat;
when the gates of Hell, were so near prevailing against the Church; that the
Catholic Faith seemed to have but one Confessor; the Church of Christ to be
no where visible, but in Athanasius his Temple; if that common saying be true,
The whole world against Athanasius, and Athanasius against the whole world. So
much it concerns us to keep the Unity of the Spirit, in the bond of Peace. For,
as a Kingdom, so a Church divided within it self cannot stand.

And since this cannot be effected by the sole Threats, and Menaces of the
Gospel, (though most severe against Schismatics) nor yet by the utmost power
Christ has committed to his Church, the dreadful sentence of excommunication;
1 Cor. 5.5.
by Saint Paul defined to be the delivering up to Satan: (For what will they
care for the Power of the Keys, who account it their privilege to be without
the pale of the Church?) Therefore is it, that God has ordained Kings to be
Nursing Fathers; And from hence arises another way (as ancient as Constantine
the Great, the first Christian Emperor) of dealing with obstinate Dissenters,
the enacting and executing Penal Laws against them. And may we not yet hope,
that they whom forbearance made dangerous, and Toleration it self at length
rendered intolerable; may at last be reclaimed, (however, the danger prevented)
by a late Renowned Act? An Act worthy the Royal Fiat of him who justly wears
the glorious Title of Defender of the Faith; and becoming the greatness of its
establishers, who could never have done God and their Country, the Church and
State better Service; than by preventing and suppressing Schismatical and
Seditious Conventicles.

tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, it must of
necessity at last suffer Shipwreck. They that have itching ears open to every
Novel Teacher, are in danger of forfeiting the Ancient, Catholic Faith. Thus
if instead of relying upon the Authority of Primitive Fathers and Councils, we
admit of every upstart Writer; will not this at length invalidate the commands
of the Apostles? If we receive our Religion from the Tribunal of the Civil
Magistrates; may not this at last bring us under the condemnation of the
Pharisees; of rendering the Word of God of none effect, through their
Traditions? And as it must be steadfast, so it must be well grounded. That is,
we must be well assured of the truth of it our selves, and able to convince the
gainsayers.

For our own assurance, it is enough, that we have the same Faith which was once
delivered to the Saints; That they had the honor to converse with the Author
of it; that they were Persons of the greatest Integrity; and therefore would
not deceive others; that they were Persons very inquisitive and circumspect;
and therefore would not be deceived themselves; that it was confirmed by
miracles, attested and sealed by their Blood; that it prevailed in spite of all
opposition, and has been kept entire in all Ages of the Church; According to
Christ's own Promise, Mat. 16.18.
That the Gates of Hell should never prevail against it. And now I might very
well challenge our Modern Infidels, to produce half such convincing Arguments,
for the certainty of any thing which they believe, as these which the Christian
has to assure him of the truth of his Faith. But the prosecution of this
Topic, (though very pleasing) would carry me beyond the limits of a Sermon.

The best way to convince gainsayers, is to hold fast the faithful word, as it
has been taught, or as the Greek renders it; (...), Tit. 1.9.
which is according to Doctrine; (not according to Fancy, private
Interpretation, or the Pretensions to an extraordinary Light) For the constancy
of the Christian in his Profession, has always been found one of the best
Arguments to confute Heretics. Faith thus qualified, that has good works for
its Lifeguard, that is at unity with its self, that is built upon the
Foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
Corner stone; shall stand like an impregnable Fortress, against all the
Batteries of the World. The last thing to be considered,

That Faith thus Qualified is the best, and surest way of overcoming the World.

What is here meant by the World, let Saint John determine; 1 S. Joh. 2.16.
The Lusts of the flesh, the Lusts of the eye, and the Pride of Life: to which
we may add evil Examples, Persecutions, and in a word, whatsoever Bait the
great Adversary of Mankind throws in our way, to seduce us from our Religion;
and consequently as he dispossessed our First Parents of a Terrestrial, so to
prevent our arrival at a Celestial Paradise.

And are these the strongest Forces, which the World can muster up, and bring
into the Field against us? Impar congressus! The Flesh against the Spirit! The
members against the mind! impotent Earth against the Powers of Heaven! all of
them in open Rebellion; And may they receive a Doom answerable to their Crime.

1. Then Faith bids you consider the baseness and weakness of your Enemies.
Lusts and Pride; Things which the common consent of Mankind, has branded with
a note of Infamy. He that makes his Belly his God, hates to be counted a
Glutton. The covetous wretch, though he detesteth the virtue, courts the title
of a liberal Person. He that is most addicted to vainglory, would not be
thought ambitious. He that is seduced by every little temptation, thinks he is
disparaged when you count him one of an easy facil temper. Can any thing then
be more ignoble, than to be led captive by such vices which proclaim their
baseness, by disowning their name? was it not a strange oversight in Esau, to
sell his birthright for a mess of pottage? A prodigious piece of folly in
Judas, to betray his Master for a few pence? In Lucifer to forfeit Heaven, to
gratify his pride? And yet of this rank are all those, who surrender their
Faith into the power of such mean adversaries. It Is highly against the points
of Honor, for a Person of Quality to enter the field, and engage with a
Peasant. How much more dishonorable is it, for an high and Heaven-born Soul to
be overcome, by the low and baese temptations of the World?

Phil. 4.13.
do all things through Christ which strengthened him; and if we cannot do so
too, it is not because Christ is wanting to us, but we to our selves. The flesh,
indeed, may war against the Spirit; The members may mutiny against the mind:
But it is at their own peril if they do; for the one is weak and unwieldy, the
other ready and active; and if the members ever prevail, it must be through the
consent, degeneracy, or inadvertency of the mind. We disparage our faculties,
and dishonor God who gave them; when we think all the freedom left us,
consists in a liberty to sin. It were better for us if we had no wills at
all, than that they should lie under such a fatal doom. We may, if we please,
exercise that dominion, which is the undoubted right of our Supreme Powers. A
manifest proof whereof is, that there are very few who are totally captivated
by sin. And they who are, have taken more pains, thus vilely to enslave
themselves, than they need have been at in asserting the glorious liberty of
the Sons of God. It Is far more difficult to conquer the checks of Conscience,
than to keep it void of offense both toward God, and toward man.

make us forfeit an eternal weight of Glory?

These are such Considerations as have hitherto prevailed in the World; and
they must do so still; unless we can dethrone the King of Kings; murder the
immortality of the Soul; cancel the immutable laws of Good* and Evil; banish
the reward which belongs to the one, and take away the punishment which is due
to the other.

And therefore in the last place. That you may neither be overcome by the
temptations of the World, nor think the joys of Heaven unattainable; Faith
propounds to your imitation a whole cloud of witnesses, of Apostles and
Prophets, of Martyrs and Confessors; who acquitting themselves valiantly,
received a Crown for their recompense.

And as Faith is the means of overcoming the world, so is it the victory it
self. For after it has fought the good fight here below, and reigned till it
has put all its enemies under its feet; then it begins to offer a kind of
sacred violence to the Regions above, sees Heaven open, and Christ standing at
the right hand of God; and so never cease to be victorious, until it be
overcome in an abyss of Glory, and swallowed up in the beatifical Vision.

To conclude. Let not this Faith which heretofore subdued Kingdoms, and wrought
righteousness, be it self overcome by the iniquity of Christian divisions; This
Faith which fought with beasts at Ephesus, let it not be conquered by any
brutish passion; Let not this Faith which has hitherto silenced the Disputer
of this World, be now drolled out of the Church by the Atheist; This Faith
which stopped the mouths of lions, let it not be devoured by the Leviathan of
our age. In a word; Keep this Faith which renowneth Kings, and makes Princes
famous, which enobleth Nobility, and keeps the people in due subjection,
which causes a nation to flourish, which will render our lives happy here, and
crown us with bliss hereafter.

FINIS.
Page 12. lin. 3. for hundred, read thousand.


