Truth cleared of Calumnies, Wherein A Book entitled, A Dialogue betwixt a
Quaker, and a Stable Christian. (Printed at Aberdeen, and upon good ground
judged to be writ by William Mitchell, a Preacher near by it, or at least that
he had the Chief hand in it) is examined, and the disingenuity of the Author,
in his representing the Quakers is discovered. Here is also their case truly
stated, cleared, demonstrated, and the Objections of their Opposers answered,
according to truth, Scripture, and right Reason. By ROBERT BARCLAY.

Isai. 53: 1. Who has believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed? Joh 5: 39. 40. Ye search the Scriptures, because in them, ye think
to have eternal life, and they are they, which testify of me, and ye will not
come unto me, that ye may have life. Matthew 5: 11. Blessed are ye, when men
shall revile you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake.
Act. 24: 13. After the way, which they call Heresy, so Worship I the God of my
Fathers. 1 Thessalonians. 5: 21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good.
Printed in the Year 1670.

The Preface To the READER.
READER;
FOR thy better understanding the matters handled in this treatise, I thought
fit to premise somewhat by way of Preface; and indeed the nature of the thing
calls for it, that thou may receive a true information concerning the
People here pleaded for; and so generally opposed: but more particularly in the
City of Aberdeen, that thou may understand how the case stands betwixt them,
and their adversaries in it.

Know then, that after the Lord had raised up the witnesses of this day, and
had opened in them and unto them the Light and Glory thereof; diverse of them
at sundry times were moved of the Lord to come into these parts, and unto the
town of Aberdeen, in love to the seed, which there was to be gathered, but
their acceptance for diverse ye ^res together, was very unsuitable.

For the enemy that had wrought, and was exalted, in the mystery of inquity, to
daeken the appearance of this day, had prepared and stirred up his Ministers,
to resist them and their testimony by aspersing them with many gross
Calumnies, lies and reproaches, as dem^n^ed* distracted, bodily possessed of
the devil, practicing abominations under Color of being led to them by the
Spirit, and as to their Principles, blasphemous denyers of the true Christ, of
Heaven, Hell, Angels, the Resurrection of the body and day of judgment,
inconsistant with Magistracy, nothing better then John of Leyden and his
accomplices, This was the vulgar and familiar language of the pulpits which was
for a time received for unquestionable truth: till about the year 1663. some
sober and serious Professors, in and about the said Town, did begin to weigh
these things more narrowly, and find the savor of that life in the testimony
of that so much reproached people which some years before had stirred in
others, who were now come to a great loss and decay, and this gave them
occasion to examine the Principles and ways of that People more exactly, which
proving upon inquiry, to be far otherwise, then they had been represented,
gave them a further occasion to see the integrity and soundness of that
despised People and of their Principles, on the one hand; and on the other, to
see the prejudiced disingenuity and enmity of their accusers. In these the Lord
caused his word to prosper, (who were few in number, yet noted as to their
sobriety in their former way of profession) and raised them up to own that
People and their testimony, and to become one with them: now their adversarys
finding nothing in these whom the Lord had raised, up in these parts whereof to
accuse them, as to their conversation, these Calumnies must be cast upon
strangers living some hundred miles distant, where these untruths cannot be so
easily disproved; but as to these at home the tune must be turned: therefore
George Meldrum who has more particulary espoused the quarrel against truth and
its followers, then any of his Brethren, begins to say that it is no wonder to
see Quakers forbear gross outbreakings, for that Heretics have formerly come
as great a length (but surely abstinence from gross outbreakings and a clean
outward conversation is no good Argument against the Quakers,) so now the
clamor is, though they have been Professors and that noted ones too, and
though they be honest in their conversation, yet they are deluded and deceived,
and are deceivers. And thus as of old, the truth and the witnesses of it have
always been reproached by those of the Pharisaical Spirit. So now; for
sometimes they said Christ had a Devil, sometimes the Apostles are drunck, and
other times mad. Since these things have thus occurred, there has been no
little industry used, to suppress this People, by threatenings and persecution,
(on which account diverse of our Friends have been cast into Prison, and some
detained long in, of the said town,) and also by preaching and writing, of
which for thy information receive this account. There were 30. Queries sent by
the Bishop of Aberdeen (so called) to Alexander Jaffray. Also about the same
time, a paper of 3. or 4. sheets subscribed by G. M. entitled, The state of
the controversy betwixt the Protestants and the Quakers: The 30 Querys were,
not long after, answered by G. K. in respect of A. J. his sickness at that
time, and returned to him from A. J. and sometime afterward, George Meldrum
his paper called, The state of the controversy, etc. was answered by G. K. to
which papers of G. K. somewhat was premised by A. J. which papers being
several times called for, (but particularly in a letter, from G. M. his own
hand to A. J. wherein he entreats for an answer that he might know, as he
said, in what things we did differ, or in what things we only seemed to
differ) were sent to him within 9. months after the receipt of G. M. his papers
Before all which a sermon on Purpose was preached by G. M. against the quakers
in the ninth month 1666. wherein the sum of both his papers was asserted,
only that it was digested in a Pulpit-way and introduced with an insinuating
discourse of his pretended kindness for the persons of some Quakers, and his
unwillingnesse to meddle with them, were it not his office, and zeal for the
truth did engage him to it, but if it had been so indeed, he would have said
no more of them then the truth, whereas it is stuffed with lies; which are
positively asserted to be the Quakers principles, by this pretended Preacher of
the Gospel from his chair of verity, (so called,) or rather of falsehood:
whereas yet G. M. his Papers aforementioned, were not so much as sent, far
less answered, by which according to the words of his own letter above
mentioned he was to receive an understanding of the diffe^ences, and yet before
he received this understanding, whilst he was ignorant of the differences
according to his own Confession, he is not ashamed to forge numbers of lies,
upon the Lords People: and as if they had been truths, consisting in his
knowledge, to vent them before a public auditory, which sermon is largely
answered by G. K. together with some animadversions upon it from A. J. Also
several papers past betwixt W. M. and G. K. which ha^ their rise from some
queries sent by P. L. to W. M. answered by W. M. to which was returned a reply
by P. L. the sa^e was replied ^o, by G. K. which having received a reply from
W. M. was again replied to at length by G. K. it is now two years and upwards,
sineth last papers, from our friends hands, were returned to the respective
Priests; unto which as yet there is no answer, nor any of them published, but
instead of all at last com^s out a Dialogue (of which the proverb is verified,
( p^rt^riu^t montes, nascitur mus) subscribed by no hand, but generally
understood to be W. M. and by him not denied, which whether it be to deal
fairly or ingenuously, the ingenuous may judge. Ingenuous dealing would have
stated things as related from our own friends hands, and given an account of
the many. Scripture proofs and arguments made use of, in our friends papers,
which this author in his Dialogue, has done nothing less, but deceitfully
has represented us, (considering what had past before, to which he himself,
who ever he is, could not but be privy,) and disingenuously has dissembled and
waved almost all the Scripture proofs and arguments, used by our friends, in
their aforesaid Papers, as any may see, who are willing to look into the said
Papers, Coppyes of which are in several hands, and any who desire to read them,
may have them readily from our friends. Therefore, however this work of his
may satisfy and deceive a benighted multitude whose faith is pinned upon other
men's sleeves, nevertheless, I hope, it shall be an occasion to discover these
men, to any who are ingenuous, and love not to be hood^incked, but are willing
to know the Truth. So Reader, having given thee this account, I leave thee, to
the perusing of the following Papers, omitting these needless Apologyes, and
flattering insinuations, usual in Epistles, of his Kind, my end being to answer
the good in all, and to starve, and not to feed the evil in any. And I refer
my self to that innocent and pure principle, the Light of Christ Jesus in
thee, which bears testimony against all evil; that thereby tbou may try,
and examine what is here writ, and who are the owners of Scripture, and who are
the wresters of it, which thou can only, truly discover and discern, by the
Spirit from which the Scriptures came, even that inward Light and Word of Grace
that is able to build thee up, and establish thee in the Truth, unto which I
recommend thee.

Urie the 19 of the 2 Month, 1670. R. B.

To the AUTHOR.
HAving taken a serious view of the Dialogue lately published by thee, and
having weighed and considered it, in the fear of the Lord, I found it incumbent
upon the, to reply unto it, both upon the account of Truth, at which it
strikes, and for thy Souls sake, as also for others, that any simple hearts,
who have received hurt by it, may be undeceived, and thy unfaire dealing may be
manifested, in order whereunto, before I enter upon the examination thereof
particularly, I have some things to lay before thee.

And first, as to the manner and method of thy book by way of Dialogue, it is
no ways allowable from thee, being but a mere shift, to shuffle by, those
other papers aforesaid, from being noticed, o^ regarded, where all these
controversies are spoken to a^ large.

Secondly, the nature of this kind of wro^ng ought to have engaged thee, to set
down, as largely, what could be said on the one hand, as on the other, and to
have brought in all the proofs, and arguments, alleged by the Quakers, or at
least the most considerable, but in that thou have done nothing so much as
becoms a man far less a Christian, as any who have converse^ with that people,
cannot but be sensible of. Thou have made a bare representation of the Quaker^
principles, and that so scantly and mincingly, that thou frequently give^t thy
self occasion to fight against a man of straw. But that wherein thou have
manifested the ba^nes of thy Cause, and thy weakness in pleasing for it, is that
the substance of what thou have said is nothing else, but that which was writ,
in the papers before mentioned, and so largely answered already: Whereof thou
art altogether silent and would insinuate, that what thou have here writ, was
never answered by any Quaker, yea is unanswerable.

Thirdly. In the beginning of thy Epistle, thou alledgest that thou have
examined diverse Opinions (of the people called Quakers) and after ^^yall, found
them to be naught, where as thou have not so much as mentioned, far less
answered, the Arguments used by them, and in the manner of signifying their
principles, thou give not their own words, but couchest them, in such words
of thy own framing as may bear the most disadvantagious construction; hence
thou say, that they deny original sin, that they overturn the doctrine of the
Saints perseverance, that they call the ordinances of Christ, the inventions of
men, all which things as so conceived, are false.

4. There has appeared in thee, ane airy spirit, full of vanity and self
conceit, a thing which thou seem much to cry out against in others, and will
not see it in thy self, hence in thy Epistle, thou boastest, that thou have so
succinctly confuted their errors, highly commending the manner of thy writing,
as that, which, for ought thou know, was never done by any, who never
handled these things with greater plains and condescendingnes to the meanest
capacity, and in so narrow a compass, as thy own words bear. The signifying
that it was the judgment of some, that the publishing of thy papers might tend
to edification; the crying up of thy Zeal, for the ordinances, and many other
passages, too tedious to relate do very much evidence, an itching desire in
thee to be commended and applauded in thy enterprise.

5. In the writing and framing of thy discourse thou have introduced thy self,
most child^shly and ridiculously, and take frequent occasion to play upon thy
own wor^s, and snatch, at them, as if thou had got some great advantage, not
unlike dogs, that bark at their own shadow, or these cr^aturs that run and are
mad, when they see themselves in a looking glass; supposing it to be some
other, when ind^ed it is but their own^ Image, that this is thy way appears in
many pages in thy book, as they are hereafter examined.

Now more particularly.

So soon as thou enterest upon the matter of debate Page 2. thou beginnest
with great disingenuity: an evidence of what may be expected or will be found
throughout the rest. For notwithstanding the words of the Quaker. are of thy
own framing, and that they lie patent before thee, yet thou have not had so
much honesty, in thy answer as to subsume them aright. The Quaker says, I use
not flattering titles, and give thee not heathenish salutations and bowings,
least I should sin and be found an Idolater: in answer to which thou beginnest
with a false subsumption, saying thou wonderest that he should call salutations
and bowings heathenish, and Idolatrous. Indeed it is no strange thing, that
thou and others misrepresent us, and belie us in repeating our words at a
distance, when in this manner of writing thou can not truly repeat, those
words, which thou placest for ours, when they be just written before thee. Is
it not one thing to say, that Salutations that are heathenish or heathenish
salutations, cannot be used without sin, and idolatry, and another thing to
say, that salutations and bowings are heathenish, and idolatrous? Who is so
blind as not to see here a vast difference. As to the first, who dares deny it
to be a truth, that will offer to call himself a Christian? to wit, that
salutations, and bovvings, that are heathenish, cannot be used without
idolatry and sin? But as to the other that Salutations and bovvings are
heathenish and idolatrous, being taken in general, was never said, nor judged
by the Quakers, and therefore to charge them with it, is utterly false, and a
lie, for such salutations as Christ commands, and the Apostles practiced, the
Quakers dearly own, and frequently use, and find in them great refreshment
because there through the life flovves, and is communicated from one vessel to
another, but such salutations, thou art ignorant of, and of the life that is
there through communicated, which bears testimony against all that is
heathenish and idolatrous, and leads out of it, and therefore in thy dark mind,
would from thence, plead for the customary salutations of the heathen, as
appears by the proofs thou bring wherein thy folly is very much manifested.
Christ, say thou, commanded his disciples, when they entered into a house to
salute it, he did so, and what more? And if the house be worthy, their peace
shall be upon it, to wit, the peace through the salutation intimated or
offered, because they brought to that house, the tender of the Gospel and glad
tidings, which was a good salutation, but what would thou infer from
that? that we ought to do of our hats one to another, a thing which they
never did, by whose example thou would press us to do it, and it is
known, that it is a thing unusual in that part of the world to this day. That
other proof, alleged from Paul, saluting the Churches makes as little if not
far less to the purpose, Paul in his Epistles, who was at a great distance,
wishes grace and peace to the Churches from God the Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ; Ergo we ought to take of our hats. Can there be any thing more
ridiculous? is this the great esteem ye put upon the scriptures to take the
salutations of the blessed Apostle Paul signified by the motions of the Holy
Spirit, which was the very blessing of Paul to the Churches or rather of the
Spirit through him, for to prove your doing off hats, one of the corrupt
customs of this world. Is not this to make a mock of the Scripturs, and a
stretching them to plead for that, against which is the natural tendencie of
their testimony. Next thou give us Abraham's practice; but every practice of
Abraham is not a rule to us, nor to you either; the like may be said of that of
Moses. Though Moses did obeisance to his father in law that makes nothing
against us, far less his kissing of him, and asking him of his vvelfare, both
which things the Quakers deny not. Thou acknovv ledgest that religious
worship given to the Creature is idolatry. What is Religious Worship but that
which is given to God? and is not the bowing of the body, and uncovering of
the head, the signification of your Worship to God? And if ye give the same to
the Creature also, where is the difference? for in the external signification
it is not distinguished, unles it be said to be, the intention, which if it be,
we shall have the Papists pleading the same, for their adoration of images,
and the relicts of the saints. And truly your being found in these things gives
them advantage in that matter. That courtesy and Christianity are not
repugnant, we deny not, and therefore for Christians to be Courteous one to
another is very fit, which indeed that the Apostle commands we acknowledge:
But that Courtesy consists in taking off hats, and bowing to one another,
that rests for thee to prove. In the next place, to prove the indifference of
using the plural number instead of the singular to one person, thou say,
thou art very confident, the Kingdom of God consists not in words so am I
too, yet I strange, thou should say so, considering thy principles, for what
is all your preaching but words, yea what is the Scripture it self, (I mean
that which ye have of it, to wit the letter) but words? And seeing the very
Gospel according to you, is but a company of words being a declaration of
what past, many hundred years ago, how has thy zeal here to oppose the
Quakers made thee forget thy self in this matter? Thou say, that to which
the singular number is agreeable, the plural may be applied to without making
a lie. The proofs alleged for that be Matthew. 23. 37. Luke 22. 31. 3 Epistle of
John, verse. 13, evince nothing in this matter, for the Contexts being rightly
considered will clearly make out, that the words are not applied to one
single person only, exclusively of others, and that of Luke is to a flock
comprehending the disciples, to whom he was speaking just before, but there
is no confounding of the number, where one single person is only spoken to,
and that without understanding of any more. And though indeed it were good,
that the difference were not greater, yet the differences in these things
evidence that there be differences in greater matters. And in respect that ye
are estranged from the principle that leads out of corruption in all things,
therefore ye cannot see the weight, that is in these things which is more
then ye are aware of.

Page 3. Thou seem^t to take great advantage of these words. Heretofore I
walked according to my light, and the same I do still, and while in the
integrity of my heart, I walked in the way, thou art now in, I dare not say,
but God, countenanced me in it. Here thou make a great stir as if thou had
brought the Quaker to a great Dilemma. But to pass by thy examining of the
weak objection, which thou make in the Quakers behalf which I believe was
never alleged by any of them unto thee, as that wherewith they either only or
chiefly defend themseves in this matter. To wit Salomons sacrificing at gibion.
As in many other particulars so in this thou statest the Quakers part, but too
weakly, and faintly, yea disingenuously, for the light, which we walk
according unto and desire to walk according to it for ever, is the light of
Christ in us, and not our light otherwise then by the free gift of God which
we do freely acknowledge did shine* in our hearts in some measure in the
time, we walked with you (though we did not so know it) and gave us some
knowledge and discerning of things, and begot a measure of integrity and
honesty of heart toward the Lord in diverse of us, and turned the bent of our
hearts truly toward him in measure. And the Lord countenanced and visited and
sometims refreshed us secretly in these days, with a regard to that measure of
integrity he found in us, and not because of, or in respect unto that way of
Profession we then walked in, which way was truly a hurt unto us and not
advantage, and it was not your way, which we walked in with you, that the Lord
countenanced but the integrity and uprightnes, which he had begot in us, and
had placed in us, as a tender plant and as a root in dry ground, under the
oppression of your way, which burdened it, and until we were brought out of
your way, by his arm which drew us, his seed and plant in us suffered, and was
oppressed as a cart with sheafes, but after we were delivered from yout way,
and turned to the way we now walk in, the seed and plant, which suffered came
to receive strength, and be raised unto life and Dominion, as many are
witnesses at this day. Nor is this thy argument, any other, but that which
which the papists did throw against those who sometimes walked with them in the
popish way of profession some hundred years ago when they came out from
among them, whom the Lord visited, while they were among them, and at times
refreshed them; till he brought them forth to witness against them; for the
Lord has a people in Babylon, and has his sheep, which are scattered on the
dry and barren mountains of many sorts, and ways of professions, who have
some tender breathings, and desires after him, and with a regard to his
breathing seed in them, he visits them, and refreshes them at times, which
yet proves not that they should remain, where they are in Babylon, and upon
the dry mountains of dead professions and observations. For the Call of the
Lord is unto them to come out of Babylon, and his arm is stretched forth, to
gather them, off from all these hills, unto his own holy hill, Mount Zion,
that they may feed and lie down with them, who were as sheep going astray, but
are now returned unto the shepherd and bishop of their souls. Also may not
those of the Episcopal form object the same, against those who have left it,
upon a further discovery, and yet its like thou will not deny, but some who
have been under the episcopal form, had a measure of integrity to God, while
under it, and with a regard to that the Lord at tym's refreshed them; God does
not frequently discover his will to his Children, all at once, nor lead them
thoroughly out of things, out of which, they are to come, in an instant, and yet
that he countananceth them in there travel cannot, be denied, did not the Lord
countenance Cornelius, before Peter came unto him? As appears by Acts 10. 4.
And yet this was no argument, that Cornelius, should not own the Apostles and
Christians, and did not the Lord countenance the disciples, though even, when
they were following him, they were ignorant of many things, and in some things
wrong, and whither did not the Lord countenance Luther in his testimony against
the Pope, as well in the first, as in the last steps of it, although it
appears: that when he first began to preach, against indulgences, he
intended, not such a thing as afterwadrs followed, but things opened more and
more unto him, till they came unto that period, they were brought unto, before
his death; and who of you will say, that God did not countenance him from the
beginning whilst he held many things, which he himself came to see to be
wrong, and erred very grossly in the matter of Consubstantiation. The like may
be said of John Husse and others, whom you acknovvledge to have been Martyrs:
at last thou endest it, with a question, asking vvhither it be safe, to lean
to the audience of that light, which one while says that such a way is the
way of Christ, and another while thou must come out of it, for it is the way
of Antichrist: To which, what is above mentioned, answers sufficiently, yet
further I may easily retort the Question thus, upon the most of all the
national Ministry in Scotland, who are now licking up, that which they
heretofore cried out against as Antichristian and with fire and svvord
persecuted those who offered to plead for that which now they both practice,
and avovv themselfs in. Now as the fault of this cannot be ascribed to the
scripturs, which is the rule, whereby they pretend to be guided so neither can
any man's instability that pretends to be guided by the light (if any such thing
could be shown) prove the light a guide not to be followed.

To prove that Christ is not in all men, thou arguest thus. Christ is not in
all men, because the Scripture speaks of a being without Christ in the world, to
which thou addest the Reason, the unconverted must needs be without Christ,
because they want the uniting principle, which is faith; to answer, that
Christ is in them, but not in union with them, thou say is a fond
distinction because the Scripturs way of expressing peoples union with Christ,
is by asserting Christ to be in them, which thou take for granted, and from
thence dravvest thy conclusion, but if it be found to be false, then the whole
fabric Falls, to the ground (as indeed falls it is): For even according to the
Scriptures, the in being of Christ in men sometimes signifies union, and
sometimes his existence in them vvorking and operating in them, by way of
repr^^fe, and judgment, as also by way of call and invitation, to prepare for
union with him. As appears by the very first Scripture cited by thee, John.
15. 4. 5. which answers not thy mind. For we say not, that where there is
no union, fruit can be brought forth unto God, but mark the last part of it,
how much it makes against thee, without me says Christ, ye can do nothing.
For how becoms an unconverted man a convert, but by having Christ to work
with him? and where does Christ cooperate? Does he not there where the
work of Conversion is wrought; and is not that within? So that Christ must
needs be in men, before they be in union with him, whereby the faith may be
wrought, by which they are united to him and as to that other Scripture, 1.
John. 3. 24. these and other Scriptures which might be cited hold forth that in
being of Christ, which is by union, but say nothing, against his in being in
them, where the union is not, for he is in them who know him not and are
Darkness, Ioh. 1. ver. 10. and 5. and he was crucified in the Corinthians and
Galathians, which was in the time of their unbelief, 1. Corint. 2. ver. 2. and
Galat. 3. ver. 1. for the words in the greek are (...), i. e. In you; and
indeed there can be no greater absurdity them to say, that Christ is in no man,
but in them with whom he is united; for Christ is not separated from that
light and seed, which is of him, that is in every man but is united with it,
which bears testimony against all iniquity, but many tyms, men are far from
being in union, with that in them, which witnesses against all sin, as
experience sufficiently teaches. Then, if that be in them, which is pure, and
if Christ be in that pure the^ Christ is in them, and if they be not united
with that which is pure in them, then are they not united with Christ, which is
in the pure, that is in them.

It seems strange to thee, that Christ should be in the heathen, and they not
know him. Was it not as strange, that he should be among the Jews, who had
tho letter that did bear a testimony of him, and they not know him, 8. that
notwithstanding his miracles, and other proofs he gave of himself, they
should so far mistake him, to judge him to be an impostor and blasphemer. Thou
say, is Christ so u^couth to them, he dwalls in, as not to reve^l himself
unto them, but though we say that Christ is in all men, we do not say, he
dwells in all men* for dwelling signifies more then in being, and yet I say,
he does reveal himself in some measure unto all, in whom he bears witness
against iniquity, for the revelation of Christ unto one, is not always, by
giving the knowledge of what past externally, but is a revelation of the
righteous judgment against the transgressour in them, which to say, that the
heathen wanted is false, and contrary to scripture Romans 1. 18. 19. 20. Ioh. 3.
18. 19. 20. yea and contrary to the very acknowledgement of Americans, who have
confessed, that there was that in them, which judged and reproved evil;
Whither or not, their ignorance of the outvvard transaction, derogats any thing
from their capacity of salvation, coms here after in its place to be examined,
together with that other saying of thine, wherein thou shevvest, the like
disingenuity, viz. that the saying that every man has sufficient light to lead
him to life and salvation tends to put Christians in the same condition with
Pagans: because say^st thou Christians have no more; and the preaching of the
Gospel, and the benefitt of the scripturs, are little to be regarded, for
without them, men have sufficient light to lead them to the things of God; for
the saying that men have sufficient Light, has no such tendency, for he that
is tru^y and real^y a Christian, (and not nominally, only) is one, that is
united to Christ, and b^l^ives in him, now it is one thing to have the Light,
and another to believe in it, which is clearly made out by that scripture,
wh^le y^e have the Light believe in the Light (...) may become the children of
it. And that it is a great advantage to have the knowledge of the scripture, as
outwardly, we de^y not, forth reaching and raising of the feed in them, that
are a far off, and also for the comforting and refreshing of them, in whom it
is raised, as the scriptures are used in that Spirit, which gave them forth.
Therefore we labor and travel so much for that end, and are found using the
Scriptures testimony. If it be said, that therein we contradict our
principle, seeing it is possible that people may be saved with out the
scriptures. I answer Iay. For many things are profitable, which are not of
absolute necessity, you your selves acknovvledge, that other book^ besides the
scriptures, are not of absolute necessity unto men's salvation and yet you judge
not all other books useles, yea, ye to much rely upon books. Also you do not
say, that it is impossible that any can be saved, without preaching upon the
scripturs, and yet you reckon not preaching to be in vain. But do ye not
rather contradict your principles, who say that the number of all those who
ever can be saved, is so definite from all eternity, and that without respect
to their faithfulness or diligence in the using of the means, in the
foreknowledge of God that none of them can miss of Salvation, and yet keep
such a stir about preaching and ordinances, for you deny, that God has
decreed men unto savation, whom in his foreknowledge he did foresee, would be
faithful, and diligent in the use of the means.

Page 7. Thou say all men have not saving and sufficient light in them,
because the Scripture says that some men are brutish in their knowledge, ^erem.
10. 19. But why did not thou cite these words, For the pastors are become
brutish, and have not sought the Lord, therefore they shall not prosper. We see
the proof of this, at this day, but from thence, how make thou it appear,
that some men want Saving light: the pastors are now as brutish, as they were
then, and it is because they turn their backs upon that light, and will not
follow it: therefore we have the more need to bear testimony unto it, and
against their brutishnes, who reject and despise it. Next thou citest Romans 3.
11. There is none that understands. But, will that infer that there is not
any saving light in them? Why understand they not, but because they are not
turned to the light that can give them understanding? It is supposed say
thou, that the light in some may be darkness. So it may indeed, to wit, that
light, that is gathered, from the carnal and earthly wisdom, which is from
below, where it takes the letter of the Scripturs, and ads thereunto its
commentaries and consequences, setting up this in them, as their only light,
we find that light proves but darkness; but that will not infer that the true
light, which coms from Christ, is or can be darkness unles in that sense, as the
day of the Lord is called darkness, in Scripture, for even the true light, unto
them, who reject it, is as darkness, in that it gives them not that comfort and
joy, which it gives unto them, who love it, and own it, but troubles and
affrighteth them, as the night, and the darkness. So that these Scriptures stand
in good unity with the Principle of all men's having saving light in them. Next
thou objectest that having of saying light, and grace presupposes Conversion;
But that I deny, for on the contrary, Conversion presupposes having light and
grace, by which and to which men are to be converted, So that before a man be
converted he must have Saving grace in order to convert him, even as, the
being healed of a wound, presupposes the plaster, or salve, but not on the
contrary, for, the application of the plaster, presupposes not, the being
healed. But whereas, thou say, what need is there of his turning, when men
are in this state already? thou misrepresentest us, for we do not say, that
all men are in a state of light and grace; to be in a state of grace, is to
stand in grace, which the wicked do not stand in, yet this hinders not, but
that grace is communicated unto them, whereby they may come to a state, or
standing in it, while the day of their visitation remains.

Again thou undertakest to prove, that all men have not sufficient light, two
ways; first, that all men, have not the Spirit of God. jud. 19. to which I
answer, that there may be a sufficient light in men, who may be said after a
certain manner, not to have the Spirit, as being such, who, though the Spirit
be in them, to invite, call, and dravv them unto God, yet resist his dravvings,
and so separate themselves from it, so continuing until the day of Gods
visitation unto them, come to an end, concerning whom it is true, that then,
they have not the Spirit so much as to invite and call them, unto God, or to
give unto them, the least tender of his love. And though all have not the
spirit bringing forth the fruits thereof in them, to wit love, mecknes,
gentleness, etc. as no wicked persons have, yet all, even the wicked in a
certain day, have the Spirit in them, to reprove and convince, yea to call
upon them: and strive with them, in order unto their Conversion* for the
Spirit of God reproves the world of sin. John. 19. 8. and Acts. 7. 50. Ye
stiff necked and uncircumcised, ye do always resist the holy Ghost, and
Genesis 6. My spirit, shall not always strive with (or in) man and many more to
that purpose.

For a Second reason of its insufficiency, thou say, it reveals not Jesus
Christ a savior, in respect, it gives not a discovery, of his incarnation,
passion, resurrection, etc. Citing, 1. Cor. 2. 2. and from this place, thou
would infer, that the Apostle preferred the knowledge of Christ, as
crucified outwardly, to all other knowledge. Answer. Though we willingly
acknowledge, that to know him, even as he did outwardly come, and was
crucified, etc. Is a Good knowledge, and of great profit, and comfort to them,
who believe, yet we deny, that the knowledge of him, as outwardly crucified,
is the best, of all other knowledge, of him, or to be preferred to all other
ways of knowing him, nor does that Scripture. 1. Cor. 2. 2 prove it. For Paul,
is not speaking there, of Christ, as crucified outwardly in Judea, but of him,
as he was inwardly crucified in the Corinthians, when Paul first came unto
them, to preach the Gospel, as the words do plainly import, being rightly
translated out of the Greek, for I determined not to know any thing, (...), i.
e. in you, but Jesus Christ, and him crucified. This was the Apostle his care,
and travel in his ministry, to declare and hold forth unto the Corinthians,
and other gentiles, Jesus Christ, who was crucified in them, in his suffering
seed, even that seed of light and truth, which suffered, and was crucified in
them, under the burden of their transgression, in the time of their unbelief,
and to preach, salvation, and deliverance from sin, and wrath, through Jesus
Christ, according to his weak and low appearance, in them, in the suffering
seed, through their beleving in him, and closing with him, as manifest therein,
according to which, he said to the Galathians, that Jesus Christ, was
evidently set before their eyes, crucified in them, (...), and Ephesians. 3. v. 8.
he said, this grace was given unto him to preach, (...), i. e. in the
gentiles, the unsearcheable riches of Christ, parallel to which, is that of the
Apostle, 1. Col. 27. for so should all these places be translated, which riches
of Christ lay hid and wrapped up in them, in the seed of the Kingdom, which
was the least of all seeds, even as the riches and fruitfulnes of a tree lies
hid in the seed of it, which coms to be brought forth, as the seed, takes root,
and gets liberty to grow up, unto the due stature, so for this the Apostle
labored, that people might know Christ in them, and might embrace him in their
hearts, that so he might be formed in them, Gal 4. 19. And they might know him
to l^ve in them, and his life to rule in them; which is more, then to know him,
as outwardly crucified, and indeed, none know, the weight and greatness of what
he suffered outwardly, but who know him, first, as he has suffered in
them, and suffer, and become crucified with him, so as to have a Sympathy, and
fellovv feeling with him, even, as the members suffer, and are pained, when
any thing hurts the head, or heart. And whereas thou say, you see, the
Apostle judges the knowledge of Christ crucified, to be that one thing
necessary. We deny that the knowledge of his being outwardly crucified is
that one thing necessary, for people must know him in them, Know ye not, that
Christ is in you, unles ye be reprobats, 1. Cor. 13. 5.

As for thy charge, upon the Quaker, saying, with what face can you blame me,
for being in darkness, seeing your opinion is, that all men have sufficient
light in them. It is frivolous, for though the light, which is sufficient be
in thee, thy opposition to the light, blinds thee, and hinders thee from seeing
light, a man may have a candle burning in his house, but if he put it under a
bushel, it will not give him, the sight of things in the house.

That there is no other name under heaven, whereby any can be saved but the name
of Jesus Christ, is granted, but that name is another thing, then the bare
expression, or declaration and knowledge of words or things, as with out;
because his name is said to be a strong tower, whereunto the righteous fly and
are safe; which is another thing, then the bare nameing of his death, and
cross without, for many unrighteous plead a right to that and can fly unto it
as we see by the example of the Papists; To whom it seems, ye will needs
join your selves in this matter, who say, that the outvvard naming of Christ,
and signing with the cross puts away Devils: and that we are of another
mind then you in this matter, is much to our advantage, because we know the
inward is the maine thing, and vvher it is enjoyed, the efficacy, and benefit
of the outvvard can not be vvanting, though the distinct knowledge of it be
not had. The knowledge of Christ his cross within which is his power, that
crucifies unto the world, is more then the knowledge of the outward, and to
know Christ after the Spirit, is more, then to know him after the flesh, as
is clear from the words of Paul; though I have known Christ after the
fllesh, yet hence forth, know I him so no more The Apostle Peter knevv well,
that God was not so narrovv hearted, as ye would have him to be, therefore
he said, that he had seen, that with God, there was no respect of persons
but in every nation, he that loves righteousness, and fears God, is accepted
of him. You your selves dare not deny, but that some infants, and deaf persons
are saved by Christ, without the external knowledge. If you say they are not
in a capacity to know these things, I answer, so neither are many of the
Gentiles, who never had these things revealed unto them. But if the external
knowledge be necessary to the one, why not to the other? And it thou say
that some infants are in the decree of election, I ask at thee, or any of you,
who of you, has seen the decrees of God, and how know thou, that none of
the Heathen, are enrolled into them?

And vvheras thou say. Is not the application of Christ his blood and
sufferings, necessary to them that would profit, and get good thereby? For
though the blood of Christ be a healing plaster, yet the plaster must be
applied, ere the sore can ^e healed. Now what application can the soul make of
Christ's blood, who knows no such thing? the blood of Christ is applied by
faith but true faith is not a blind faith. Answer. It is granted, but this
blood is known and felt within, to wash and purge the conscience, for Christ
as he is within, is not without his blood, which is spiritual, even the pure
blood of the vine, and is that wine of the kingdom which is inwardly felt to
wash, and to refresh, which he givs to them, who know not distinctly the
outward sheding of the blood, as it was many hundred years ago, and which many
are ignorant of who have heard much of the outward shedding of his blood, but
know not the blood, as shed and poured forth in them to sprinkle their
consciences from dead works, for it is a mystery sealed up from all who stand
in opposition to his light within. But there, mark thy own words, The
plaster must be applied, ere the sore can de healed. Must not then saving
grace be applied ere, the soul be converted, or healed? Contrary to thy other
assertion, Page 7. that having of saving light and grace presupposes
conversion, that is healing.

As for thy deceitful insinuation, to render us odious, That if our principles
were generally owned the nations in one age, or two, would be overspread with
as palpable darkness, as the heathen nations at this day are. Seeing it has no
just ground, we return it upon thee, as false and malicious: for It is the
owning the light and other principles held by us, therein, which will make
these nations, and all others who own it, and them, to overflow with the true
and saving knowledge of God and Christ, but so long as they follow such blind
guides as thy self, who oppose the light, darkness will cover them, as at this
day, notwithstanding all their professions, and confessions of him, while in
works they deny him, and remain estranged from his light in them. The reason,
thou addest is blind and unreasonable, For according to you (thou say) the
light within us, is a sufficient teacher, take heed to this, and there needs no
more: For we say, the light within must not only be taken heed unto, but
believed, and obeyed and walked in; which who do, it will lead them to read
and make use of the Scriptures, and will lead them to the assemblies of Gods
people, and to hear and receive the ministry of those, whom God sends, yea to
love and esteem them greatly, for their works sake, and it will lead them to
own Christ, and the benefits of his death, and sufferings in the outward, and
give them an understanding, how to conceive, and use a right those things, as
opportunity is given them.

Page 10. Thou say, Christ is a light, who communicates light to all men,
but where find you, that the light communicated to all men is Christ himself?
we must not confound the light giver, with the Light or enlightening given.
Answ. We do not confound them, but we must not divide, or separate them, as
thou and you do, for where the light or enlightening from Christ is, there is
Christ himself; he is not separated from it, but is in it, and with it: we
must not be so gross, as to conceive that Christ enlightens men, in such a way
of outward distance, as the body of the Sun, being so many thousand miles above
the clouds, enlightens our natural eyes, but comes not near us otherwise then
by its influence, and rays; for Christ is near unto every one, no less then
his influence, for in him we live and move and have our being. And this
nearenes of his unto all men, in a day, is more then that general presence, in
respect whereof, he abides, with all the works of his hands, for as much as
he is in them to enlighten them, that they may believe Joh. 1. 9. compared
with 7. Verse. Page 11. Here because thou can not deny, but that there is
light in all men, thou say it is commonly called the light of nature, and
that some remainders of knowledge, and principles of good remain in man, after
the ruins of Gods Image in him, as when a city is demolished, some foundation
of houses do still roman. But how is this consistent, with what you say, to
wit, that there is no good thing at all in men unconverted, and that man fell
wholly from God, and that Adams fall was not in part but wholly, as to all
things, that are good? And that we derive nothing from him, but that, which is
corrupted, and defiled? But the Scriptures testimony is plain, that since the
fall, the free gift or grace of God, is come upon all, unto justification of
life. It is not said, justification is come upon all: but the free gift or
grace of God, is come upon all unto justification, so that all may be
justified, if they did close with it, Romans 5. 8. And God so loved the World,
John. 3. 16. And this is the condemnation of the World, that Light is come
into it, Verse. 19. Which is after the fall. And what ever any may conceive that
remained in man of the Image of God after the fall, that could not have any
power to convince man of evil, or enable him to do any thing that is good, if
it were not visited and influenced a new from the fountain of Light and Life,
but it would remain as a thing without all Life and virtue, as a candle
extinguished. For by the fall, the lamb, the witness came to be slain and
remained so, until the Spirit of life again was sent from God into it, to give
it life and power, to witness against men's transgressions: for a witness that is
wholly dead, cannot witness unto particular things of fact, against men, as this
inward witness in all men does, who do not again crucifi^ it in themselves.
And seeing Christ tasted death for every man, and the grace that brings
salvation, has appeared to every man, and the Gospel is preached in every
creature, as it is according to the Greek, in Hebr. 2. Tit. 2. Col. 1. 23. It
is manifest, that the illumination given to every man, is a new and fresh
visitation of Gods love in Christ freely given, unto them for salvation.

Now as to the word Nature, if it be rightly understood there shall be no great
difference about it. For if by Nature thou understandest the Nature that is
corrupt and fallen, and that which simply is derived from Adam, then we deny,
that, that Nature can claim any right to this Light, or that it can be said to
proceed, from that Nature. But if thou understandest by nature, the nature,
that is spiritual and heavenly, and is derived from Christ, the second Adam,
the quickening Spirit, the Lord from Heaven, then I say the Light may properly
be called the Light of that Nature, in which sense, is to be understood, that
place of the Apostle, Romans 2. v. 14. cited by thee, where he says, The
Gentiles which have not the Law did by nature the things contained in the Law.
For who will be so gross, as to say that the Gentiles by the corrupt Nature
could do the things contained in the Law, which is pure and Holy? But by that
Nature, which is one with the Law, towit, divine and heavenly, they might do
them. So that thou can not, but still be accounted, a wilful enemy to the
Light, whilst thou opposest it, and do not turn to it, and by it, come to
see the evil of thy ways, and forsake them.

Page 12. Though it ^e here asserted, in name of the Quakers, that the
Scriptures are of excellent, and blessed use, yet thou will not believe it, and
alledgest, they will not make the due, use of them, for these Reasons. First
Because a Bible thou say, Is not to be seen in all our meetings: But that
will infer nothing at all, for we meet not to read the Scripture, but to
wait on the Lord, and be taught of him, and receive from his Spirit, what he
pleases to administer, either in our selves, or through the mouths of his
servants; and we meet to Worship God, whose worship is to be performed in
Spirit and in truth, and not in external reading. Thou say Christ took the
book of the prophet I saiah and read out of it: But was not this, the
performance of a legal duty, and in condescendence to the Jews manner? for it
was in the synagogue, but did he ever coustitute it, as a part of the Christian
worship; for one man to take the bible, and speak upon it, and all the rest to
be excluded from speaking, while he pratles, his own barren empty notions
about it? show me where that was the practice, or order among the Apostles and
primitive Christians: In the churches way 1. Cor. 14. there is no such thing,
but on the contrary verse. 29. let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the
other judge, if any thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the first
hold his peace for ye many all prophecy, one by one, that all may learn, and
all may be comforted. By which it plainly appears there was no such settled
custom among them, but it is one of the maine inventions brought in, in the
Apostasy, whereby barrennes and drynes has entered and whereby the quickening
unlimited life has been stopped from flowing through many vessels. It is true
the Apostles at times cited Scriptures out of the law, and the Prophets, to
show their fulfilling, or to open the mind of the Spirit concerning them, which
is frequent is our meetings, to cite Scriptures, and open them in the same life
and Spirit that gave them forth, in the order of the Spirit, but not in the
order and way of man's wisdom and Spirit, as is your way, which savours more of
Aristotle's School, then of the Church of Christ. Secondly as to what thou
say that it is not our way to encourage the People to read the Scriptures,
and to try doctrines by them, it is utterly false, for we desire that all may
come to try doctrines even by the Scripture, but we bid them also come to the
light in them, to read and try doctrines, and understand the true sense of the
Scriptures therein, and if People did so, we know, that then your jugjuglings
about them would be made manifest: but indeed we are far from desi^ing People
to heed your false Glosses and commentaries upon them, whereby ye darken them,
rather then interpret them. Thirdly thou say, when you want an inward
command to a duty I trow the (...) command of the Scripture is not regarded.
Ans: here thou writest as one unacquainted with the Law and new Covenant
writ in the heart; the inward command is never vvanting in the due season, to
any duty, as it is vvaited for, and the outvvard testimony or signification of
the command, we regard in its place. Is it not a regarding the outvvard to
mind the inward unction and spirit, to which it directs? which inward
teaches all things, and leads into all truth. 1. Ioh. 2. 27. 1. Cor 14. 15.
John. 16. 13* yea, do not such more regard the outvvard, then they who under
a pretense of an outward command do run about these things in their own
natural will and Spirit, neglecting to vvait upon the Lord, for the leading and
help of his Spirit. Thy comparing us to servants, who will not be moved to
work, by their masters letter, etc. is vain and riduculous nor does it reach
us, for our Masters letter is writ in our hearts, and there we ar to find it,
neither is our Master separated from us, as those Masters are, who use to
write letters to servants to set them on work, while they are absent, and
cannot help them by their presence, for our Master is alvvayes with us, and
he requires us to do all our works by his imediate counsel, direction, and
assistence, as present with us, and in us. And that nature we witness
brought forth in us, which does not shift his will, but delight in it, to do
it, and know it, whether told us by a lively voice, or by any other inward
signifification of his Spirit. Fourthly, and because thou art ignorant of that
great duty, of waiting upon the Lord, in silence, out of all thy own thoughts
and words, and art trampling it under foot, thou look, upon it, as misspent
time or a mere looking upon the ground; whereas if ever thou come to know
the Scriptures a right, or to confer a right, concerning them so as to proffit,
thou must first come to that silence, thou now so much despisest. So that
these things very well consist, though the world may judge otherways, whom
thou vvilt have to be judges in the case* but in the judgment of those who
are redeemed out of the world, we shall be found to put the scriptures in
their true place.

Thou can not but smile, thou say, that a man of understanding, should
grant the Scriptures to be a declaration of Gods mind, and yet deny them to be
Gods Word, for what is a Word but a declaration of ones, mind.

Ansvv. Here thy lightness appears, which darkens thy understanding: if thou
must needs smile, do it, at thy impertinent reason, for though a man's Word,
be the declaration of his mind, yet every declaration of his mind, is not his
word: for signs may be a declaration of a man's mind, without his word, and
people usually distinguish betwixt a man's Word, and his writ. And so though
the scripture be a declaration of Gods mind, yet it is not his Word, properly
nor can those properties which are declared of the Word, belong to the
scriptures, as has often been demonstrated, but to that inward and living
Word, as it does declare it self whether in the heart, or in the mouth. The
Word of God is like unto himself, spiritual, yea Spirit and life, and
therefore cannot be heard, or read, with the natural external senses, as the
Scriptures can, nor does the Scriptures cited by thee, as Hosea. 1. 1. Joel. 1.
1. Isaiah. 38. 4. Jeremiah. 14. 1. prove thy intent. For that Word, which
came unto the Prophets, was that from which the scriptures were given forth,
which Word you confess was immediate from God, but you say, it is ceased to
come now. And did not all the Prophets prophecy from Christ, the Word? Thou
might ss well reason thus, that when it is said, the Spirit of the Lord
came upon such a one or to such a one, that therefore the scripture is the
Spirit, and so deny all Spirit, but that which, is the Scripture as some do,
in other Sects, calling the vvritings of the Apostles and Evangelists, the
Spirit, and denying the necessity of any other thing, which is abominable
dece^pt, and wresting of Scriture, and that the Prophets declaring their
message said, thus says the Lord, provs that what God spoke in them, and
through them, as the living Word declared it self, was the Word of God, but
not, the letter, or vvriting. And whereas thou say it is all one to say,
the scripture says, and God says. Answer, by way of inference and
collection, it may be said, they are one, because of their agreement, yet the
living Word and speech of God, is not the scripture, more then the sun beam,
is the shadow though the one agrees with the other; every one that reads or
hears the scriptures read, hears not God immediately, now that which God speaks
to any, or in any, immediately, that is only his Word properly unto them. As
they who only read my Letter, cannot be said, properly to hear me by Word of
mouth. Christ said to the jews, ye have not heard his voice, though they
heard the scriptures and though the Apostle uses some scriptures out of the
old Testament, it prove not, he had not the Word of the Lord speaking them,
immediately in him, and to him. That scripture thou biddest remarke, 1 Thessalonians. 2.
13. provs not thy intent neither: for the Word, which they heard of the
Apostles, was that living Word, declaring it self, through the Apostles,
which was answered by the same in them, who heard; they heard Christ of, in and
through the Apostles, does it therefore follow, that Christ is the Scripture?
And lastly, Mark. 7. 13. Servs thy purpose no more, then the rest: for the
Pharisees in striking at the fifth commandment, did conesquentially strike at
the living inward Word which gave it forth, as those who struck at any of the
Apostles struck at Christ, yet none of the Apostles was Christ as nether is the
(...), as it is outwardly writ, to speak properly, the Word of God. And
truly the reason, why we may not call the Scriptures the Word of God, (to
speak properly) is that people may be directed to that inward living Word,
for by their being so much called the Word of God, they have been putt in
Christ's stead, and have been set up as an Idol, in stead of that from whence
they came, so that to avoid this hazard, we have putt them in their due place.

Page 14. To prove that it is the mind and Will of God that the Scriptures
should be the Rule thou citest Isay. 8. 20. To the Law, and to the testimony.
etc. But it rests to be proved, that the Law, and testimony was not the inward
Law, and that that Word, according to which they were to speak, was not the
inward Word, which is said to be in the heart. It is observable that to prove
this thou bring, Ioh. 7. 49. where the Pharisees say, have any of the
Rulers or Pharisees believed in him, but this people that know not the law are
accursed. This place suits the matter very well, but makes much against thee.
For the Pharisees here were crying up the outward Law, and the knowledge of
it: averring that the ignorance of it caused the mean people to believe in
Christ. So do ye now; ye pretend to cry up the Law, and say, the ignorance
of it occasions so many to leave you. And as they then were setting the Law
above Christ, and covering themselves with a zeal for it, persecuting him, and
reviling his followers as ignorants. So ye now, whilst ye are boasting of
your great knowledge in the Law, and in the scripture; and your high esteem of
them, ye are despising, crucifying the same Christ in his spiritual
appearance, and upbraiding his followers now, as they did then, as ignorants,
and contemners of the Law. And as to Luke 10. 26. how read thou? This was
spoke to one, that was a Lawyer, or interpreter of the Law, and relied upon it,
so Christ spoke this to check him, and beside, the dispensation of the Law;
which this Lawyer was under, was different from that of the Gospel, in this
matter, as may appear Heb. 8. 10. Again as for Christ, and his Apostles useing
the Scriptures for convincing of their opposers; so do we, and yet this
proves not, that either he, or we judge them to be the Rule whereby to try all
things and Spirits, yea even the Spirt of God himself.

Page 15. Thou seem to lay much stresse upon this, that it were impossible
for us to prove to a Jew, or a Turk that Jesus the Son of Mary, is in very deed
the Christ, without the Scripture. But I Answer thee to that easily by what way
will thou persuade a Turk to believe the Scriptures, or their t^stimony, but by
the inward testimony of the spirit? Calvin after he has said all that can be
said, of outward ways, at last concludes, the only certain way to know it in
deed, is by the testimony of the spirit. l. 1. c. 7. Sect. 4. of his Inst. and
as to the course that Paul took, with the obstinate Jews it was very
commendable, because they said, they believed the Scriptures, and seemed to
esteem them much, though they opposed the truth witnessed to in the
Scriptures. so that it is evident that some great pretenders to the Scriptures,
can make a cloak of them, to deny Christ himself as ye do at this day. And
though Paul took that course with the Jews, yet we see he took no such
course with the Athenians, to wh^m he cited no Scripture, nor endeavored to
persuade them by it, but told them they were the off spring of God, and wished
them to feel after him, who was not afar of from every one of them. thirdly
say thou, the saints had recourse to the Scriptures, in the examination of
Doctrines. So have we too, as before has been declared, but that will not
prove the Scripture is the rule.

Page 16. Fourthly, thou say, we ar commanded to search the Scripturs John
5. 39. Answer. The words may be translated, you search the Scriptures, as
Pasor, translateth them, But we do acknowledge, the Scriptures are to be
searched, but are not to be rested in, which was the Jews fault, who would
not come to Christ to get life, thinking to have eternal life in the
Scriptures, which Christ cheks them for: and that the Scriptures are
profitable, for doctrine, correction, instruction, we own, (and are
commended for their dignity, and authority) but they are thus profitable only
to such, as come to the Spirit, to guide and direct them, how to make use of
them, else they may prove an occasion of stumbling, as they did to the
Pharisees: hence it is said that the man of God may be perfect, mark, the man
of God, not every Man, now no man can be truly called the man of God but he
that is led by the Spirit of God. Next thou would undertake to prove, that
it is not the mind of God, that the Spirit within men should be the Rule, in
which thou fallest very short, as appears, by saying, that Christ made use of
the Scripture, to prove himself, etc: and not the light within. And did these
Jews receive him, who had the Scriptures, did they not reject him? and why?
because they hearkened not unto the inward voice and testimony of the Father,
concerning him: and this was the testimony, which he said was greater, then
that of John, though John was the greatest of the Prophets, and those who
believe had the witness in themselves. 1 Ioh. 5. 10. but to the unbeleiving
Jews, he said, ye have neither heard his voice, nor seen his shape.

Secondly: Thou say, there is an express command to try the Spirits. 1.
Ioh. 4. 1. Answ. but is there any word, there of trying them, by the Scripture,
Cannot the Spirits be tried by the Spirit of God? or is there any better way to
try them? How tried Peter the spirit of Ananias and Saphirah? And is not the
trial and discerning of Spirits the privilege of the Saints now? And how is
it a peculiar privilege to saints, unles it be done by the Spirit of God? For
the Scriptures any can make use of, the Apostle John, writing to the Saints,
concerning seducers, points them, to the Anoin^ing, which remained in them, and
did teach them all things, and by this they did know, all things, and
consequently Spirits, 1. John. 2. 20. 26. Thirdly, thou say, undoubtedly,
there are strong delusions, etc. Ans. there are so indeed. But was there any
more strongly deluded, then the Pharisees? Yet how much did they lay claim to
the Scriptures? how came they then to be deluded who were so skilled, in the
Scriptures? according to the letter of them? and the poor People, who were not
so skilled, so rightly to hit the matter?

And as to thy question, what way, shall the delusion, be tried, if you neglect
the Word of God, and look only within? Answ: As for the Word of God, nor yet
the Scriptures testimony we neglect not, but what way, think thou shall the
delusion, be tried? If you neglect the Spirit within? and look only upon the
letter, and words without you? if the Delusion be strong in the heart, will it
not twine, and wrest the Scriptures without, to cause the Scriptures to seem
for it? and suppose a man be deluded with a Spirit of delusion, what can help
him, but God whose Spirit searches all the deepest things of Satan, and can,
and does dscover them, to those, who love to be undeceived and are faithful
to God, in what they certainly know. And though the same deluding spirit, who
deceived first, may deceive over again, that makes nothing against the
insufficiency of the Spirit, to discover, the delusion, but if a man be
deceived either first, or again he is to blame himself for his defect, in not
being duly watchful, and faithful, in what is discovered to him of God
truly, and certainly; Consider the tendency of thy argument which strikes not
only, at the certainty of the Saints faith now, from the Spirit within, and the
assurance of knowledge, there from, but also strikes at the very certainty and
assurance of all the Faith, and knowledge the holy Prophets, and men of God
had, from the Spirit within, when Seripture was not. We are in no greater
hazard to be deceived now, then they were then. You that set up the Scripture,
as your only rule, the many sects of you, what jangling and contesting is among
you, while one pleads for his sense, and another for his? which all proceeds
from their wandering from the Spirit, that gave forth the Scriptures. And as to
satisfying of others, we refer and recommend them to the same Spirit in them,
to receive their satisfaction from that, which only can, and will satisfy them,
who wait for it in singlenes.

Page 18. And whereas thou say, the Saints, are led and guided by the
Spirit, but it is according to the Scriptures. So say we too, But it does not
therefore follow, that the Spirit has so tied and limited himself to the use
of the scriptures, as always to use them, in every particular step, of his
guiding the Saints; the Spirit is free to use, or not use the scriptures, at
his pleasure, and guides the Saints in many particular steps of their life,
for which, there is no particular scripture, either to approve, or disprove
them in. As for the more sure Word of Prophesy we grant it is the rule, but
deny, that that more sure Word, is the Scriptures, but it is that Word in the
heart, from which the Scriptures came, and in, and by, which the Scriptures are
to be interpreted; and is it not gross blindness and darkness, to say, the
Scripture is more sure, then that Word, light, life, and Spirit, from which
they came? Had not the Scriptures all their sureness, from the inward testimony
of the spirit? How then can they be more sure? Thy example of the Schoolmaster,
and the copy, servs not thy turn, for the Spirit is unto the Saints both
their teacher, and their Copy. And they need not go forth, for a Copy; and
if they walk according to this, by looking upon it, and eying it, they shall be
good Scholars and Proficients, he writes them, a living Copy in their
hearts, engraves it on fleshly tables whereas they who look upon no other
Copy, but the Words without them, are those, who are ever learning, but never
able to come to the knowledge of the truth.

Page 19. Thou ask, why we disjoine the Spirit and the Scriptures? citing
Isaiah 50. 21. Answ. We are not to disjoine, what the Lord puts together,
sometimes the Spirit joineth, or concurreth, with the Scripture Words and
sometimes not, how many preach and pray, and read the Scriptures, and talk of
them, without the joint concurrence of the Spirit? Which we say, they ought
not to do, the Scriptures should never be used to preach, and pray, etc. But
in the concurrence, and assistance of the Spirit; for they are not of true use,
to any without the Spirit, but ye disjoine them, who would have praying in the
letter, and useing of it without the motion of the Spirit; to such the
Scripture is indeed but a dead letter, and it is nowayes a reproach unto them,
to be so called. Yea what are the best of men without the Spirit, but dead men?
and this is not a reproach to them, but their Glory, so, nor is it to Scripture.

Thou say, they are said to be a killing letter, and this shows, that they
are not dead. Answ. A poor argument indeed! Can not dead things kill, if men
feed upon them? If thou feedest upon sand, gravel, stones, shells will not
these things kill thee though they be dead? And if thou feedst upon the letter,
without thee, and not upon the life, thou can not live; yea if one that
lived, did depart from feeding upon the life, to feed upon the letter it would
kill him. And as for that Scripture cited by thee, it makes very much against
thee, to wit. Isaiah. 59. 21. For it is one thing for God to put Words, into
men's mouths, and far another, for men, to gather these Words from that without
and put them into their own mouths; nor does it say that the Words, God shall
put into their mouths shall be no other words, more or less, but the express
scripture words; why art thou not ashamed to cite this scripture? do ye not
say, to speak as the infallible Spirit givs utterance, is ceased, and
consequently, Gods putting Words into the mouth, Gods furnishing them, with
Words, suggested from his own Spirit and life? which the holy Prophets, and
Apostles witnessed, to speak, as moved by the holy Ghost: do ye not say,
this is ceased? why then citest thou a scripture, which is so plain and clear
for it? but that thou art in blindness and confusion Page 19. In thy procedure,
upon the point of justification thou make a large step, in that crooked path,
of deceit, wherein? Thou had too much traced from the beginning, but now
more abundantly then ever, thou displayest the Banner of thy disingenuity, and
gatherest all thy forces together, it should seem, resolving to give the
Quakers a final, over throw; And to make the matter misty in the very entry of
it, thou raisest Dust to thy self venting thy own filthy imaginations, under
the notion of coming from them, applauding thy endeavors, as if thou were
studying to preserve pure, the principle of justification, in a point, where
none is jumbling it, among us; as thou advancest a little further Page 20. 21,
having given a very scant account of their doctrine, in this matter, couching
it in most disadvantagious terms, thou take great liberty to extend thy
self, in a foolish, and vain excursion, as if, having fathomed the Quakers,
thou had discovered them to be either turned, or turning rank Papists,
therefore to trace thee thoroughly in this matter, that if it be possible, thou
may come to have a discovery of thy Vanity and malice, or, though, thou
should prove irrecoverable, yet others may have a view of both; I shall
first, in honesty and plainnes declare the principle of truth in this matter,
thereby observing thy misrepresentations. Secondly show what vast difference is
betwixt us, and the Papists, therein.

And thirdly, make manifest, how much nearer of kin ye are to the Papists,
even as to this particular, and the things relating thereunto then we, which
may serve, as a seasonable shower to allay that windy triumph, which thou
endeavourest to establish unto thy self. As to the first, we are justified
by Christ Jesus, both as he appeared, and was made manifest, in the flesh, at
Jerusalem, and also as he is made manifest, and revealed in us; and thus, we
do not divide Christ, nor his righteousness, without, from his righteousness
within, but we do receive and embrace him, wholly and undivided, THE LORD OUR
RIGHTEOUSNESS. Jeremiah. 23. 6. 1. 30. By which we are both made and accounted
righteous in the sight of God and which ought not, nor cannot be divided. And
the manner and way, whereby his righteousness, and obedience death and sufferings
without, become profitable unto us and is made onrs, is, by receiving him, and
becoming one with him, in our hearts, embraceing and entertaining that holy
seed, which as it is embraced and entertained, becomes a holy birth in us,
which in Scripture is called, Christ formed within; Christ within the hope of
glory. Gal. 4. 19. Coloss. 1. 27. By which the body of sin and death is done
away, and we cleansed, and washed, and purged, from our sins, not imaginarily,
but really; and we really, and truly made righteous, and holy, and pure in the
sight of God, which righteousness is properly enough said to be the righteousness
of Christ, for it is immediately from him, and stands in him, and is as
unseparable from him, as the beams are from the sun, and it is, through the
union, betwixt him, and us, (his righteous life and nature brought forth in us,
and we made one with it as the branches are with the vine) that we have a
true Title, and right to what he has done and suffered for us, for, being so
closely united to Christ, his righteousness becomes ours, his obedience ours,
his death, and sufferings, ours: thus we know hiw and the power of his
resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable to
his death, Philip. 3. 10. By which nearnes, and fellowship, we come to know,
an unity with the suffering seed, both in our selves, and others, and therein to
travel, for its raising, and deliverance; which yet no ways derogats from the
worth of the sacrifice, he offered up unto God, without the gates of Jerusalem,
while he humbled himself unto death, even unto the death of the cross,
tasting death, for every man. This is an honest, and plain, and true account
of our belief in this matter, and is in substance one, and the same, with
that, which at sundry times, thou and thy brethren, have received from us;
notwithstanding the bare, scanty, and disingenuous account thou give of us in
this matter. Secondly, As to the vast difference, that lies betwixt us and the
Papists, any who are not wilfully blind, may see it, who know their Doctrine,
and ours, in this thing.

It is not the works, of Christ wrought in us, nor the works which we work, in
his Spirit, and power; that we rest and rely upon, as the Ground and
foundation, of our justification; but it is Christ himself, the worker,
revealed in us, indwelling in us, his life, and Spirit covering us, that is the
Ground of our justification, and we feeling our selves in him, feeling him in
us, and his Spirit, his life covering us, we feel our justification and peace
with God in him, and through him, the alone Mediator betwixt God, and Man.
Now, this manner of justification by the indwelling of Christ, in the Saints,
and of his Spirit, is not held by the Papists, but is expressly denied by them,
and disputed against, particularly by Bellarmine. And Christ Jesus himself is
both first and last our justification and foundation of it; and as to being
justified by works, the Scripture is plain for it, and so we may not deny it,
but plead for it, according to the true sense and mind of the Spirit, as we
are taught of him. But to be justified by him, is more then to be justified by
works, and therefore are we justified in our works; which we work in him,
because, we are in him, and work them in him, and because the Lord accepts
and justifies us, in him; therefore he accepts and justifies, our works,
wrought in him, and accepts and justifies, us, in relation to these works;
and though it has been said, by us, that Good works, which are wrought in
Christ, and are rather his, then ours, are meritorious, yet we understand it
not any otherwise, then thus; that all their Merit, or worth is from Christ,
and seeing they are said in Scripture to have their reward; and Reward, and
Merit, are relative terms, inferring one another, in that sense, wherein they
are said to be rewarded, they may also be said to be meritorious; which yet
hinders not, the freedom of Gods grace in justification, for we do verily
believe, and confess; that both the Works and the Reward, are of the free
grace of God, and that the Lord gives us all things, not of Debt, or as being
in our Debt, but of free gift and his infinite goodness and VVisdome has seen
it meet to promise a Reward to good works; and so he does reward them, because
of his goodness, and faithfulness, and not because he is addebted unto any of us,
otherwise then as he has bound himself by his promise, And this is contrary
to that ^alse Popish Doctrine, which affirms, that men deserve a Reward from
God, for good works, upon the account of strict justice, without respect to the
Promise. And if it be answered, that all Papists do not say so, but are more
moderate, well then, I say If some of them be moderate, and pass from the
erroneous opinion of Popery, and speak that which is true, if others speak
what is true also, in that particular, should the truth, be accused, and
condemned for rank Popery, because, some Papists at times confess to it. You
your selves know, that Papists contradict one another in diverse things, and
where men directly contradict one another, one of the sides, must speak true;
But as to that, wherein the justification stands, and on which it is grounded,
to wit, Christ himself as in dwelling in the Saints, none of all the Papists,
for ought we ever heard, or read, do own it, but are against it. Again as
to the works by which the Papists seek to be justified they are such, as we
believe, none can be justified by viz. their outward observations, their
invocation of Saints, bowing to images, saying Ave mary's, telling their
Beads, their Pilgrimages, their whipping themselves, their keeping Lent, and
many other such like works of voluntary humility, by which they seek to be
justified, though they are evil works, as not done in the faith, and power
of God: nor does it serve thy turn to say, that Papists think not that works
considered as evil and sinful, are sufficient to justify them, for that is
not the question whether the Papists think to be justified by works sinful
and evil, but this is the Question, whether the Papists think to be justified
by Works, which are really sinful and evil, (hovvever they may imagine them
to be good) and herein I say, we differ vastly from Papists, they think and
seek to be justified by such Works, as are evil, in the sight of God,
whereas we believe that by no such works can any man be justified. Other
weighty differences cold be shevved, in relation to this matter, but what is
here in short declared, may suffice to evince, that we differ vvidely from
the Papists, concerning justification.

Thirdly look how near a kin, ye are to Papists, as in many other things, So
in these, relating to justification. First do ye not say, that ye are not
justified by Christ in dwelling in you? so say the Papists. Secondly, Do ye
not say, that the way to attain to a state of justification, is not by
beleiving in the Word of faith, which is in every man, and in the Light,
where with Christ has enlightened every man, that coms into the world? And so
say the Papists: who though they talk of universal Grace, yet they deny that
this Universal Grace, is an Evangelicall principle of Light; by beleiving in
which, men can attain unto a state of justification immediately. 3. Do ye not
say that Gods act of justification is not an immediate testimony of his Spirit,
declaring or pronouncing men righteous? And so say the Papists. 4. Do ye not
say, that men are not to know their justification, or that they are in a
justified state, by an immediate testimony of the Spirit, in them by way of
object, for this were to assert immediate revelation? so do the Papists. So
by these fevv. instances given here and by many other instances given by
others, in other particulars try your selves, and first clear your selves, of
Popery, before you, or thou do throvv it upon us.

Now where as thou alledgest, that the Apostle in the matter of justification,
excluds all works, even those of Christ his working in the Saints, and which
they work in him, It Is falfe, nor do the Scriptures cited by thee, prove thy
intent, as Romans 3. 20, gal. 2. 16. Tit. 3. 5. thou say, the Apostle speaks
of works in general without any limitation. But herein thou contradictest the
very express Scriptures cited by thee, for all these Scriptures speak of
works, with a limitation, as Romans 3. 20, by the deeds of the law, there shall
no fllesh be justified, and Gal. 2. 16. knowing that a man is not justified, by
the works of the law, here, the works of the law are excluded, but not the
works of Christinus, which are not of the law; for the law or first Covenant
was weak, and gave not strength, to them, who were under it, to fulfill
righteousness, but these who were in Christ Jesus, witnessed the righteousness of
the law fulfilled in them, who walked not after the flesh, but after the
spirit. And as for that other Scripture Tit. 3. 5. though it exclude works of
men's doing, as of themselves yet it excluds not all works, nor inward
righteousness of Christ, but expressly includs it, according to his mercy he
saved us by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy holy Ghost;
thou cauldest not have brought a more plain proof against thy self; for thou
citest this Scripture as holding forth justification. Now the Apostle says,
he saved us according to his mercy by the washing of regeneration, and renewing
of the holy Ghost, and is not the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the
holy Ghost, a work, which comprehends many particular works, of the Spirit of
Christ, in the Saints? And is not regeneration, and the renewing of the holy
Ghost, a righteousness wrought in us? How is it then, that thou art not ashamed
to charge us, with rank Popery, for saying, we are justified by a righteousness
wrought in us, seeing the very Scripture cited by thee is expressly for it? May
we not pertinently return these words upon thee, which thou misappliest to
us, Oh, tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the Streets of Askelon, etc.
That a man, who pretends to teach others aright, in the matter of
justification, has so confounded himself, that to prove that justification is
not by a righteousness wrought within, bring a Scripture, which speaks expressly
of a righteousness within, to wit, that of regeneration and renovation by which
we are saved. And if any should say the words do not say, we are justified
by the washing of regeneration and renewing of the holy Ghost; but we are
saved thereby, as intending sanctification, and not justification: I answer,
This helps not, the Author out of the ditch, for he brings this Scripture forth
applying it to the matter of justification: But again, if these words,
exclude all works generally, and without any limitation, then they exclude,
all works, which are wrought by the Spirit of Christ, from sanctification, as
if men, were sanctified by no works of the Spirit of Christ within them; or
if it be said, that works of our own doing, selfe-righteousnes, are only
excluded, from having place in our sanctification, but not the works, wrought
in, and by the Spirit of Christ; then I say, why may not the same distinction,
have place in all these other Scriptures, which say, we are not justified by
works, etc. and indeed in all these Scriptures, it holds true no less
concerning sanctification, then concerning justification. As thus, by the deeds
of the Law, there shall no flesh, be sanctified, knovving, that a man is not
sanctified by the works of the Law, etc. but it were vain to infer from this
that men at Sanctified, by no works of righteousness, wrought in them, by the
Spirit of Christ therefore it is as vain to infer that men are justified by no
works of righteousness, wrought in them, by his Spirit.

Page 22. Thou say, we can shift of popery with this, that they are not our
good works, which deserve and merit justification, but the good works of
Christ's working in us. yea I say, we do justly cast of the accusation of
Popery, as having the express testimony of Scripture, that we are justified
by works, to wit, such as are wrought in Christ, and by him in us, James. 2.
24. you see then, that a man is justified by works, and not by faith only,
compared with Tit. 3. 5. beforementioned and as for the Papists works, by
which they seek to be justified, we do not acknowledge them to be such
works, as whereby or wherein any can be justified.

And whereas thou pleadest, that the good works of Christ's vvorking in us,
are ours, citing Isai. 26. 12. Matthew. 5. 16. etc. We grant it, but they are
not ours in that signification, as where it is said, he that is entered into
his rest has ceased from his own works, Hebr. 4. 10. There are works, which
are so ours, that they are not, the works of the sanctifiing renewing Spirit
of Christ in us, and such are works both of open unrighteousnes and of self
fained righteousness, which has no better root to bring them forth, then man's
own will and Spirit, and by such works, we deny to be justified, yea we
deny all such works, and the justification by them, and desire to stand in a
continual denial, unto them, and forbearance from them: But again, there are
such works, which are so ours, that they are Christ's also, who works them
in us, and by us, and are ours by his free grace, and by such works, we
affirm men are justified.

Page 23. Thou pleadest, That men cannot be justified by any works of Christ's
working in them, because they are imperfect. And for their imperfection, thou
instancest, 1. Faith; because it is said, O ye of little faith, why doubt ye.
Answ. By this thou may as well exclude faith, from justification, every way,
as works, if it were granted, that their faith was imperfect; but that
Scripture, nor no other, speaks not of imperfect faith, but of little faith.
Now little Faith is perfect in the measure of it, as a little Gold is perfect
Gold. And though the Disciples, had doubting, yet the faith, was not the
doubting, nor was it made impure by it, for the least measure of true faith
can never be defiled, otherwise it could not purify the heart, it is like the
fire, which cannot be defiled, with the impurities of those things, it works
upon: And as for the Disciples, at that time, as they vverein part, justified,
or approved by the Lord, in relation to their faith, so were they reproved, and
not justified of him, in relation, unto, or because of their doubting. But this
Scripture, nor none other, provs not, that faith was, or is always accompanied
with doubting; Abraham believed Gods promise, without doubting; and was strong
in the faith, giving glory to God, and it was imputed to him for Righteousness,
Romans 4. 20. 21. 22. And said James, His faith was perfected by works, Chap 2.
22. For that which is perfect in a less measure, can be further perfected in a
greater. Secondly, Thou pleadest that knowledge is imperfect, because the
Apostle says, We know, but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 9, But the Apostle does not
say, our knowledge is imperfect, or impure: We may know a thing in part, and
yet that which we know of it, we may know perfectly. Thirdly, Thou
pleadest for the imperfection and uncleannes of the Saints obedience, from
Eccles. 7. But that place is not to be understood, concerning all men in all
states and times. There is an earthly unrenewed state and while men are here,
there is not a just man among them, as Romans 3. ver. 10. There is none
righteous, no not one, and there is a heavenly renewed state, wherein a Man is
borne of God, and sins not, Ioh, 3. ver. 9. And said the Apostle, Let no Man
deceive you, he that does righteousness is righteous; which imports that there
are righteous Men, who do good; and said the Lord to the Servants that used
their talents, Well done, good, and faithful Servant, Matthew. 25. ver. 21. 23.
And that other Scripture, thou citest Isai. 64. 6. Servs nothing thy turn: For
the Prophet says not, all our righteousness, which is of thy working, in us,
who are Saints, is as filthy rags, but all our righteousness, which we, even
the best of the Saints, can perform, of, and from themselves, are as filthy
rags, man's best works, his best righteousness, which is of, and from himself,
is filthiness, and unrighteousnes before God; and he is to cease from all his
own works, Hebr. 4. ver. 10. And it is plain that when the Prophet in that
place says, We are all as unclean, and there is none, that calls upon
thy name he does understand the multitude of the Jews, who generally were a
carnal People, and relied upon their outvvard observations, and did not Worship
God, in Spirit, and in but did not understand it of all, and every one, among
them; for he himself did call upon his Name; and that, the Saints were
vvashed, and cleansed, see 1. Cor. 6. 11. But ye are walked, are sanctified,
are justified, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. And
Ioh. 15. 3. Now ye are clean, through the word, which I have spoken to you.
And Ezeki^l 37. 33. At which time I shall cleanse you, from all our iniquities,
I shall also cause the cities to be inhabited. Which imports a time upon earth,
wherein they should be made clean, from all their iniquities. And how art
not thou, and you ashamed to affirm, that the best works of the Spirit of
Christ in his Saints, are as a filthy rag? Does not the Apostle say, that a
meek and quiet Spirit is an ornament, which is of a great price, even in the
sight of God; how then can it be, a filthy, or menstruous rag? A filthy and
menstruous rag, is good for nothing, but must be thrown away, upon all
accounts, and if that holiness, and righteousness and meeknes, which is of
Christ his vvorking in men, be as filthy rags, then according to your doctrine,
men should throvv them away, as being not only unprofitable to justification,
b^t to any other use, yea a filthy and menstruous rag, men do hide from the
sight of another, and do never vvear it as an Ornament whereas the Saints put
on the meek, and quiet, and sober, and righteous Spirit, as an Ornament, of
great price, not only in the sight of the Saints, but even in the sight of God.

Page 24. Thou pleadst, though that the good works of Christ in the Saints, are
defiled and imperfect because the Saints who are subservient, and isntrumental
in them, are unclean, and who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?
Job. 14. 4. Answ. It is granted that the Saints are subordinate co workers with
Christ but yet it follows not, that his works in them, and by them, are
defiled, and though it be said, who can bring a clean thing, out of an
unclean, this hinders not, but that the Lord, can, and does make Clean,
those* who have been unclean, and so out of them, who are made clean, bring
forth, clean things. And though, every one, in whom the work of sanctification
is begun, be not wholly cleansed, but that there may be an unclean part in
them, for a time, yet there is also a clean part in them; who are in the least
measure sanctified, and so these who work with the Spirit of Christ; work with
him, according to this clean part, and it is the clean part in them, which
he makes use of, as his instrument; and as for the unclean part, it is not
to work with Christ, but to be chained down, and fettered, and bound up
from working, to the end it may be wrought upon, that it may be cleansed, and
thus by degrees, the clean part increases, and the unclean is diminished,
till all the uncleannes be wrought out, and vvher the unclean part, is let
loose to work, the pure Spirit of Christ, does never join in vvorking with
it, but judges, and reproves it, and therefore, in so far, as the unclean
part works in any, that man, in whom it works is not thoroughly justified,
and approved by the Lord, but there are who witness the cleansing from all the
uncleannes; and so, as clean vessels, and instruments throughout, bring forth
clean things, clean works.

The example, how that clean water passing through an unclean pipe, receivs
a tincture of uncleannes, hits not the case: For the Spiritual Water, is not,
like the common gross outvvard Water, which, an unclean pipe can defile,
but like the fire, and the light which though it touch unclean things cannot
be defiled by them: Every thing of the Spirit, is undefilable, as the Spirit
is, which no unclean thing can defile. And if thou were well skilled in the
outvvard creation, thou might find an outward water, so pure that passing
through an unclean pype shall not be defiled with it; but if thou know
not, these earthly things, and beleivest them not, as Christ said, Ioh. 3. 12.
How shall thou believe, if we tell thee heavenly things.

Page 25. Thou chargest us, With erring grievously in confounding
justification and sanctification. Answ. Justification is either taken, for God
his adjudging a man, unto eternal Life, and in that sense it is not to be
confounded with Sanctification, yet it is not be separated there from, for God
adjudgeth no man, but the sanctified unto eternal life, or happiness; or it is
taken, for the making a man righteous, and then it is all one, with
Sanctification: And that thou say the word is most frequently used in
Scripture, in that sense of adjudging, being opposed to condemnation; does
imply, thou have not the confidence to assert, that it is always so used as
indeed it is not.

And whereas thou citest Philip. 3. 9. to prove, that the choicest Saints upon
earth have disclaimed all righteousness, wrought in them, by which they chould
be justified; I say, that Scripture provs no such thing, and thy observation to
prove it, is insufficient; to wit, that the Apostle does not speak of his
righteousness, whilst he was a Pharisee, for that he disowned, ver. 6. 7. for
admitting it, yet he was still to deny and disowne the work, and righteousness,
which could proceed from his own will, and Spirit; even all the willings, and
runnings which can arise from a man's self though he be a Saint, without the
immediate operation of the Spirit of Christ, the Saints have this to watch
against, to keep down the active and working self-will and stop it from
working the selfe-righteousnes, which if it be not watched against, and stood
against, will fall a working its righteousness, which God accepts not, as being
but the bare righteousness of man, and this is that righteousness, which Paul
denied to have, which he even calls the righteousness of the Law, but this, (
which is of the Law,) thou cunningly omittest, (because it made against thee,)
it seems. Now what that righteousness of God, through faith, was, which he
desires to have, he plainly expresses, ver. 10. that he might know him, and
the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, in being
made conform unto his death.

Now, is not the knowledge of him, and the power of his resurrection, a work of
the Spirit of Christ in the Saints by which, they are justified? according to
that; by his knowledge, shall my righteous servant justify many: and is not
the fellowship of his suffering, or the suffering with him, a work of his
Spirit? and Lastly, is not the conformity unto his death, a work of his Spirit
in the Saint, comprehending the whole work of mortification?

Page 26 Thy last argument, from 2. Cor. 5. 21, is most absurd and impious, for
accordingly, it would follow, that as Christ was made sin for us, or suffered
for our sins, who himself had no sin, no not in the least; So we may be made
righteous before God, though we have no righteousness, no holiness, no faith, no
repentance, no mortification, no good thing wrought in us. And does not this
strengthen, the wicked, ungodly and profane in their presumption, to have title
to Christ his righteousness? And so to return thy misapplied instance in
another case, Suppose some of the profane, who plead a right to Christ's
righteousness, having lost some of their number, should happen to hear thee
disputing against all good works, as being profitable to justification, might
they not say concerning thee, and thy brethren, who teach such doctrine, we
have not only got the lost sheep, but the lost shepherds and the chiefest of
them too, on our side, let us rejoice, we have found them? We find, the
Apostle maks a far better inference from Christ his dying for us, 2. cor. 6.
15. he died for all, that they who live might not any longer live to
themselves, but to God; yea and every where he holds forth inward holiness
and righteous, as that without which no man, can lay claim to Christ; if any
man be in Christ he is a new creature, but he does not say, God reputes him a
new creature, though he be not really renewed. And though it be said that we
are made righteous in him, this hinders not, as thou vainly inferrest, that we
are not made righteousness, by an inward righteousness; for he is in the Saints
and fulfills the righteousness of the Law in them; that the righteousness of the
law might be fulfilled in us, Romans 8. 4. Therefore that 2. Cor. 5. 21. is thus
to be understood, that Jesus Christ, who knew so sin, was made to be sin for
us, that is suffered for our sins, that we who had really sinned, and so
deserved wrath, might partake of the love and grace by him, and through the
workings thereof, be made the righteousness of God in him for that the Apostle
understood here, a really being made righteous, and not a being esteemed or
held as righteous, while indeed impure, is very evident, by the whole following
chapter, but especially toward the end, what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousnes, wherefore come out from among them, touch not the ^uncleane
thing, be ye separate, and I will receive you, and ye shall be unto me, for
sons, and daughters.

Now to be received of the Lord, is to be justified of him, and here we see
plainly, that in order thereunto, there is required a righteousness, by which,
they must be separated from the evil and unclean, and must not touch it.

And whereas thou say, that the holiest actions of the Saints, because of the
sinfulnes of these actions deserve condemnation. I ask thee, whither did the
Apostles sin in writing the Scriptures, in preaching Christ, and gathering the
Churches? Whither their being the instruments made these things sinful, which
were done, not only by the command, but by the power, and virtue of Christ in
them? and seeing thou canstnot deny, but the Scriptures (called by thee the word
of God) were brought forth by the holy Spirit, in the holy men of God, and did
flow* as waters, from the Spirit of God, which gave them forth, through the
very first penmen of them, because of the uncleannes, which thou supposest to
have been in them? If thou say Nay, thou contradictest thy former instance
of clean water, receiving a tincture of uncleannes from the unclean pipe,
through which it passes if thou say yea to wit, that the Scriptures were
defiled, and corrupted, by the penmen of them, I leave it to all of any sound
judgment; whither you, or we, be most esteemers of the Scriptures, we, who
say, they were pure words as gold, without any tincture of uncleannes, or
corruption, as they came forth, from the Spirit of God through the penmen of
them, or you, if you say, that they were defiled with the uncleannes of the
men, through which they were given forth, he who has any true understanding
let him judge, concerning these things.

Page 26. Thou blamest it as an unsuitable thing for a Quaker to say that that
people to whom he is joined, are the most Christ-like Christians this day upon
the earth; and yet will any of you, say less of your way? for if yours be not
the best way, why do ye plead so much for it? Why do ye preach it up? Why
do ye study to draw people to it, and complain of those who have left it?
Now is not a good Principle, a ready way to lead people to good practices? And
are not these who are in the right way, of the flock of Christ? And is not
Christ's flock, like unto him? Can it therefore be an unsuitable thing for one
who supposes himself to be of Christ's flock, to say, the flock with whom he
is, is likest to Christ? Will any of you say less, except ye grant your
selves not to be of Christ's flock? We are not the most Christ-like people,
say thou, by what we outwardly appear; because the Monks and Hermits therein
excel us: nor yet by what we inwardly feel, because others different from us,
have felt as much. As to the first, thou have showed thy ignorance of the very
appearance of Christiantiy: for the appearance of Christianity, is not in
fleeing the Society of men, or retireing the outward man, making Vows of
voluntary poverty; for any one, that has the least knowledge in true
mortification, may know, that where a man's meat, and provision is laid up for
him, and that there is no care of these things lying upon the mind, but a full
liberty to live in idleness ( which is the Monks case) it is an easy thing in
selfe-vvill to take on, a demure deportement, or to wear haircloath or go
barefoot; which by custom becoms familiar. And truly many of the Commons in
Scotland, are used to greater hardships, then all that, and yet are far from
having the appearance of Christianity, But the matter is, for people to be
conversant in this World, to have their occasions, and business in it, and to
have dealing with the Spirit of it, and yet to keep to the, meek, lowly,
simple appearance, using it, as if they were not using it, by keeping out of
its Spirit, and Way, in all manner of Conversation. This is to be like unto
Christ, who did not retire himself unto a Hermits lodge, but conversed among
Publicans, and sinners. Now let your flocks, and the Quakers, be compared
together in this particular, and let the light in all consciences judge, who
are likest to Christ. Secondly, to evidence, that some different from us, have
had as much inward feeling, thou say, thou can tell us of some, who have
had so much of the fear and dread of God, upon their hearts, that they durst
not adventure upon sin, by this thou seem to grant, that there are inward
feelings and enjoyments among the, Quakers, saying, what good is it that you
truly feell, that persons different from you have not felt? And how does
this consist, with your judging the Quakers fallen into Apostasy, and
delusion, of the devil? And that they are possessed with the devil? can such
have inward feelings and enjoyments of God? for my part I am glad to hear,
that any such have been, who have had so much of the fear and dread of God
upon their hearts, that they durst not adventure upon sin, and I should be
glad, and so I know would any of the Quakers be glad to meet with them; But
now such who have so much of the fear of God upon their hearts, that they
durst not adventure upon sin, would they not love to be perfect? would they
dispute against perfection, and conclude it impossible? would such, who dare
not sin for a world, sin every day, yea every moment, as you say, ye do? if
they dare not sin, would they not refrainse from sin, and cease from it? and
would they make use of that poor evasion, which thou addest, that therefore
they would not willingly sin for a world? As long, as the dread and fear of
God remains, and stands over the heart, sin is shut out, and the minds will is
to fear God, and not to Sin. Thou can tell us of others, (thou say) who
many years lived in the sweet sense of Gods favor, and have gone most
triumphantly out of the world, with strong persuasions, of their eternal
vvel-being.

But would such have pleaded for continuance in sin? Does not continuance in
sin eclipse, and take away, the sense of Gods favor? and further would such
have denied fellowship with God, by immediate revelation as you do? Would they
have denied the immediate teachings of the Spirit as you do? do not some now
living remember some of them who had these feelings, and did bear an express
testimony to the immediate teachings of the Spirit, and immediate fellowship
with God, and plainly declared that no preaching, was profitable, but that
which came immediately from the Spirit: and found fault with the Ministers,
that they preached from their study, and their books, and wished them to put
away, or burn their books, for that they were a hurt to them; and some of
those savv over and beyond, and unto the end o^ your so called ordinance of
outvvard bread and wine, and said plainly it was but a shaddovv, or figure,
and that those who witnessed the substance, had no need of the other, and
though those, and some others who witnessed such inward feelings, and
enjoyments of God were not called Quakers, nor had their understandings so
clearly opened as to many things, as the people called Quakers have: yet with
the same life in some measure, they have been acquainted, which is the
Quakers way even Jesus Christ, who is the way, the truth, and the life; and so
as to those examples, thou give, which was witnessed (thou say) some
twenty years ago. We deny not but that the Lord did appear, and was near
the simple hearted in that day, and some who are now among the Quakers
remember that day and have a share in those feellings, and enjoyments which
are now, and in the experience and enjoyment of them can bear a true
testimony, that the feellings and enjoyments of this day, unto those, who
follovv the Lord, in his leadings, ^^oe far exceed what was in that day: and
now the sun is set upon that day, for the Lord is calling his people further,
and those among us who had those former feelings, can witness, that while
they would have b^ene tasting of that sweetness, and remained still with you,
the Lord would not; but suffered drynes, and barrenness to come over them;
and that which sometime had been as a fruitful field, to become a barren
wilderness till they savv, that they were not to limit him, to invented
forms, but were to forsake those things in his will, in which through his
indulgence and compassion, he had sometimes appeared, unto them, and to be
found follovving the footsteps of the flock whom he is leading on to a
further state; in which they find the Lord appearing more gloriously then ever
to their refreshment: Glory to him for evermore. But with you it is otherwise,
for who among you witness these things at this day? Yea some of you are so
ingenuous, as to confess that ye find not these things now; and that this is
a cloudy, and gloomy day, and it shall certainly so continue unto you: until
ye come, and walk with us, in the Light of the Lord: But because ye will not,
but will confine the Lord, in these forms, whereunto ye have devoted your
selves, therefore is darkness over you, and your Prayers are become dry, and
barren, and full of complaints of an absent God. And what inward joy from God,
any have felt among you, we cannot impute it to your way; more then, what some
have felt of refreshment in some other professions, and forms can be imputed to
their way.

Page 30. Thou say, It is known that we are enemies to singing of Psalms,
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, and because we say, that we are not against
these things, therefore thou call us, disingenuous, or such, as seek to
delude People; which challenge is false, and a calumny, for we do indeed
own these things, in the true acceptance, and meaning of them, and in the
substance and reality, and if we do so, are we disingenuous, and deceitful,
because we deny them in your acceptance, which only comprehends the shadow,
that passes away? If Baptism, which is really and truly the Baptism of
Christ, we own, and participation of the Body, and Blood of Christ, which is
really so, I say, if these things be really owned by us* as they are indeed,
can we be said to deny them, because we use not the shadow, as ye do while
ye are ignorant of, and strangers to the substance? Nay it may be retorted
much more properly, and without deceit upon your selves, that ye do but
pretendedly, in Words, own these things while indeed ye deny them? so that
herein ye are found to be the Equivocators, who are contending for the husk,
and will needs have it accounted the kernel: and there can be no error more
dangerous, then to place the shadow, for the substance; for suchas so do are
those that trample upon the precious ordinances of Jesus Christ, in which the
work of grace is begun and increased.

Page 32. To prove thy assertions particularly, thou beginnest saying, that
singing of Psalms is an ordinance of Jesus Christ; whereby if thou
understandest that singing of Psalms was used by the Saints, that it is a part
of Gods Worship when performed in his will, and by his Spirit, and that yet
it may be, and is vvarrantably performed among the Saints it is a thing denied
by no Quaker, so called, and it is not unusual among them, whereof I have my
self been a witness, and have felt of the sweetness, and quickening virtue of
the Spirit therein, and at such occasions ministered. And that at times, David's
Words may also be used as the Spirit leads thereunto, and as they suit the
condition of the party, is acknowledged without dispute but that without the
Spirit, in self-will, not regarding how the thing suits their condition, for a
mixed multitude to use and sing the expressions of blessed David, we deny. For
that was not the method, the Apostle spoke of 1. Cor. 14. 15. when he said, I
will sing with the Spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also,
therefore though singing of Psalms, in the true use of them, be allowable, yet
as used by you, it is abominable; and is a mock worship, because ye cannot
deny, but that the persons using it, are a mixed multitude, known to be
Drunkards, Swearers, Whoremongers, etc. Now such cannot praise God, for they
are dead in their sins, and it is the living, that praise him, and not the
dead. Next, all lying is abomination, but many times it falls out that by
singing of Psalms, the people come to lie in the presence of God, in stead of
worshipping him, by saying, I am not pu^t up in mind, I have no deceitful heart
I water my couch with tears; and much more of this nature which were the
particular experiences of David, and may be safely said, by those that
witness the same thing, but as to you that use them, are false and untrue. I
say, as thou do, that though every Psalm does not suit our condition, yet
in every Psalm, there may be meditaion, for edification: but this no ways
meets the case for there is a great difference betwixt meditating upon a
Psalm, and singing one whereby we apply ourselves to the Lord, in the
words of David, which unless they suit our condition, cannot be done without
a lie.

Page 33, and 34. Thou come to prove that Baptism with water is an ordinance
of Jesus Christ, for which thou give as a reason, First, because John
baptized with water, and was really sent of God; Which thing is not denied,
because John's baptism was a Baptism, with Water; But that that was the
Baptism, which was to continue is the matter in question: to prove which,
thou bring in thy Second reason, that the baptism of Christ and the
baptism of John differed only in circumstance, and not in substance, because
they agree in the Author, in the Matter, and in the End. To which I answer,
that though they agreed in the Author, that will not conclude them to be one,
because by the same reason, it might be said, that the Old Testament, and the
New are one, or that Circumcision and Baptism are one, for that God was the
Author of both. As to the matter, they are not one neither, for the one was a
Baptism with Water, and the other, a Baptism with the Spirit, and with fire,
as John himself distinguishes them. Mark. 1. 8. Now in respect baptism with
water can be administered, where the other, to wit, with the Spirit, is not,
therefore they are not one in Substance. They also agree not in the end; for
the end of the one, to wit, Baptism with Water, is but to point or show forth
the other, So that as the shadow, and the Substance differ in their ends, in
like manner do these two: for the end of the shadow is but to point to the
substance: the end of the Substance, in this thing being to cleansc, and
purify the heart produceing that effect to such as it is truly administered
unto, but the shadow is frequently administered, and the heart not cleansed,
therefore they differ in their ends. Now to show, that they differ in substance,
it is written, Acts. 19. Verse. 2. 3. 4. 5. that there were of the baptism of
John, who had not so much as heard of the holy Ghost, far less received it.
Now had the Baptism of John, and the Baptism of Christ been one they could
not have had the one, and been altogether ignorant of the other. For a Third
Reason, thou say, that Jesus Christ commanded, and enjoined the Disciples to
baptize, and that baptising they used water, But where he commands them to
Baptize, Math. 28. there is no command to baptize them with Water, or into
water, but into the name of the Father, Son, and holy Spirit, So here is the
baptism into the Spirit, but not into outward water, and the Apostles were
Ministers of the Spirit, and ministered the Spirit unto those who believed. And
though they used the water baptism at times, yet it rests to be proved, that
they did it in obedience to that general command, Math. 28. and not in
condescendence to the people, who had received a great esteem of John, and
were so nursed up, with outward Ceremonies, that it was hard, suddenly to
vveane them from such, as they did the like in other cases, which also servs
for answer to thy Fourth Reason, vvher thou instancest Peter his baptising
Cornelius after he received the Spirit, for Peter's words imply no command, but
only that at that occasion the thing might be done, Can any man, said he,
forbid water, that they may not be baptized Acts. 10. 47. And though it be
said, Verse. 48. that he commanded them to be baptized in the name of Christ
yet it holds forth no command from Christ, only the thing being agreed upon,
that it might be done, he bid do it, but that the Apostles received no
commission to baptize with water, is clear from that of Paul, where he
says, I thank God, I baptized none of you but Crispus, and Gajus, and the
household of Stephanus, etc: for said he, I was not sent to baptize, but to
preach the Gospel, 1. Cor. 1. 16. 17. Now it is not questioned, but his
Commission was as large, as any of the rest, for he himself said, that he
was not inferior to the chiefest of the Apostles: but, that he thereby
denied, he was sent to administer the holy Spirit, which is the baptism of
Christ, is absurd to think: for a Fifth Reason, thou say, it is the will of
Christ, that this ordinance should continue and abide in the Church, because
he promised to be with his Ministers to the end of the World; To which I
answer, that this promise related to the Baptism of the Spirit, which is
Christ's Baptism is granted, but that it related to the Baptism of water is
denied: for he was with Paul, who yet professed, he was not sent to baptize
with water. And whereas some give their meaning to Paul his words, that he was
not sent only, or principally, to baptize with water, this is an addition to
the Scripture Words, for which they can show no sufficient ground: And if men
will take a liberty to add to Scripture Words, from their own Spirit, they
may wrest the Scriptures, to defend the worst of opinions, as when it is said,
Thou shall not bow down to them, nor Worship them, one should put this
meaning upon it: thou shall not bow down to them, not Worship them
principally, and therefore would aver that graven Images may be worshipped,
this were a most perverse abusing of Scripture. Sixthly, Thou say, Those who
cast off this ordinance do what in them lies, to rob themselves of all the
excellent ends, and uses of it, which are held forth in these Scripture
expressions. Ans. I hat such who cast off the Baptism of Christ by the Spirit,
may incur that hazard, it is granted, but that any such thing will follow
from the not useing of water is denied: as shall appear by examining the
Scripturs cited. The first is, Act. 2. 28. Repent and be baptized every one of
you, for the remission of your sins. Ans. Here is no mention made of outward
Water, and Repentance, and Remission of sins may be, and are found without it,
and where it is, both these are frequently wanting: But though it should be
understood of outward water, it is spoke but to particulars, and is no
universal command. The Second is, 1 Pet. 3. 21. The like figure whereunto, even
baptism does also save us: But the very follovving words do give an answer
to that, and clear the meaning, not to be of Water baptism, saying, Not the
putting away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience
toward God, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. The Third is, Act. 22. 16.
Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins. But that a being baptized with
water is a washing away of sin, thou can not from hence prove, seeing the
contrary is abundantly witnessed, and suppose Water-baptisme were here to be
understood, it being but spoke to one, infers no universal command. The Fourth
is Ephesians. 5. ver. 26. That he might sanctify and cleanse it; with the washing
of water. But by water cannot here be understood outvvard Water, but that of
the Word and Spirit, for the next Verse speaks of presenting it without spot,
or vvrinkle: Which the outvvard Water cannot do, see the like place John. 3.
5. Unless a man be borne of the water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God. Now if by Water here, were to be understood
outvvard Water, it would infer that Water baptism is absolutely necessary
to Salvation, which thou say, thou can not affirm with Papists. Lastly,
thou citest, Gal. 3. 7. For as many as have been baptized into Christ have put
on Christ; But Water Baptism cannot be here understood, because many who are
baptized with Water, never put on Christ, nor bear his Image, but the
Devils, and are found doing the Devils works; So that none of these
Scriptures prove the Water Baptism to be of continual necessity, in the
Church, for it being but a figure, it was to give place to that one Baptism,
Ephesians. 4. 5. And whereas, it is said by some, that the Water Baptism, and the
Baptism by the Spirit is but one, because of that agreement betwixt the
signification of the Water, and the Spirit, thereby signified; this is a
wresting of this Scripture, as much, as if one should say, rhat all the tipes
figures, and shadows of the old Testament, were one with the substance
signified by them, and consequently that these Tipes are all now to be upheld
and used, whereas indeed, the coming of the Substance ends the figures, among
which are the diverse Baptisms, for so should the place be translated, Heb. 9.
10. which were imposed until the time of Reformation, but are no longer
binding, since the Reformation is come.

Thou endest this matter, with asserting, That thou can safely say, that the
Spirit of God concurring with, and blessing this ordinance; It is a profitable
mean to further our Salvation: but if so be it be no ordinance of Christ, as
heretofore is proved, then we cannot expect, that the Spirit will concur
with it; but indeed that he is provoked by it, considering the abuses in your
administration of it: as First, in administering it to Infants, for which ye
have no command, nor example in Scripture: Next, in causing ignorant people to
promise and engage before God, that the Children shall forsake the Devil, the
World, and the Flesh, while they themselves be slaves to all the three, and
many more abuses, as that whereby ye pretend to inroule Children as Members
of the Church of God, which is pure and holy: it being oftentimes an occasion,
of excess and drunkenness; and is indeed, rather like an inrolling under the
Devils banner, seeing it is for most part accompanied with doing his work,
therefore it is so far from being hazardous to contemn such an ordinance, of
man, that it cannot be, but hurtful to continue in it.

In the Third place, Page 39. thou come to prove, that the Lords Supper so
called, is an Ordinance of Jesus Christ: For which thou bringst, as a First
Reason, that Jesus Christ was the Author, and Ordainer of it, but that proves
not; That it was to be of perpetual continuance. Nor thy Second Reason, for
though, the Disciples were bid do it, in remembrance of him, they were not bid
do it always: Neither will, Act. 2. ver. 42. which thou bring as a Third
Proof, serve thy turn, for by comparing it with Verse 46. it is evident, that
their breaking of bread was their ordinary eating, for it is said they
continued daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread from house to
house, did eat their meat with gladness and singlenes of heart, so that this
was a daily eating, from house to house, and not at all such an eating, as
years is, which you have but once, or twice, or thrice in a year, or at such
set tyms, as you appoint to your selves; whereas theirs was an eating from
house to house, wherein they received food sufficient to their bodily
nourishment: your eating is not so: You vvil not have your Sacramental Bread
and Wine, so called, to be used in private Houses, or, Familiies, and your
eating, is rather a mock-eating, wherein you do not eat, that which is
sufficient to the Bodily nourishment (as these did Act. 2. 42. 46.) every one
of you taking a little bread about the quantity of a Bean, wherein you have
no example from the Saints, but rather from the Papists, who have their
vvafers.

Again, this eating mentioned Acts. 2. ver. 42. 46. is conjoined with this,
that they sold their possessions, and had all things in com^on, and so they did
eat together daily in common, which is not like your eating; Now if you would
make their example, and and practice, your Rule, why do y^e not sell your
possessions, as they did, and have things in com^on? also why do ye not
abstain from eating blood, and things strangled, as they did? and why do ye
not wish one another feet, which they were as solemnly commanded to do, as to
take and eat, etc: Ioh. 13. 14. 15. If you say, these things were but to
continue for a time, what ground have ye to affirm, that these were not
always to continue, and those of Water-Baptisme and breaking bread were to be
always continued; For a Fourth Reason thou say Paul recommended the
practice of this to the Church of Corinth. Cor. 11. 23.

Answ. that he recommended it unto them by way of command, we deny, for he
delivered unto them no command to practice it, but that which he delivered
unto them was the Relation of the matter of fact as what the Lord did in the
night, wherein he was betrayed; Thou say, The Apostle does not only here
relate the matter of fact, but like wise warrants the frequent use of this
ordinance: it is one thing to warrant the use of it and far another to
command the use of it, we do not deny but the use of it, was lavvfull, and
vvarrantable at that time, but we say, it was not commanded unto them, but
left, or permitted to them, as these words import, as often as ye eat, etc.
and again, let a man examine himself and so let him eat; the words imply no
command, but only that they were in the use, or practice of it, and being
therein he gives them direction, how they might use it, so as not to receive
hurt there by Now that the Corinthians were weak in many things, and did many
things by permission, is clear by the whole strain of that Epistle to them.
For a Fifth Reason; thou say, thou read not in Scripture, where Christ,
and his Apostles did abolish it, Answ: if it were so, that then there was no
absolute need, for the very institution intimats the abolishing thereof at
Christ his coming, as to any necessity by way of command, though afterward it
might have been used by permission, being gradually to pass away, as did
other things, for Circumcision, was abolished by the coming of Christ; yet it
was used after his coming, together with diverse other Jewish coremonies; But
as concerning the abolishing or ending of it see 1. Cor. 10. 15. 16. 17. I
speak as unto wise men, judge ye what I say, the cup of blessing which
we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? the bread which
we break is it not the communion of the body of Christ? And then he
proceeds to show, what that bread was, for (says he) we being many are one
bread. Now what is that one bread? is it the outvvard, or is it the inward and
spiritual? if it be the outward, then there is no inward and Spiritual bread,
Or if it be the inward, and Spiritual, which is that one bread, then that
outward bread, (as being, but a figure) is ceased from being of use, as to any
necessity, and this he spoke unto the wise who saw beyond the shaddovv, and
figure, unto the substance, the end of it; which was that heavenly bread and
refreshment, which Christ himself gives unto these souls to feed upon, who
know the mystery of his indwelling in them; which bread is indeed his body. So
that now the bread being one, which is the body of Christ the outward bread
has no place in the supper of the Lord; for then there should be not one
bread, but two: for the outward bread, and the inward are two, and not one
bread and if any say, the outward bread, though it be not properly the body of
Christ and thing signified, yet it may be said to be one with it, because of
that agreement, betwixt the sign, and the thing signified.

I answer, that is not sufficient, why the outvvard bread should be called
the one bread, or one with the thing signified, otherwise by the same evasion
one might plead for the continuance of all the Sacrifices and offerings, of
Ra^^s, and Bulls and Goats, and say they are one with that one offering of
Christ, mentioned Hebr. 10. 14. because they signified that one offering: Now
were not this an abominable wresting of the Apostles words, to say, all these
outvvard offerings were the one offering, because they did signify it? For
indeed he does contradistinguish them, from this one offering, that because of
its being come, he inferrs they were to pass away. And so it is as plain
that the Apostle contradistinguished, betwixt that one bread and the outward
bread, together with the other Figures, and shadows, according to which,
writing to the Colossians he says Coloss. 2. 16. 17. let no man condemn you
in meat, or drink or holy day, or New moon, or Sabbath days which are a shadow
of things to come, but the body is of Christ. And he bids them seek the
things above, and not the things, which the Apostle said, did perish in the
using, saying touch not, ta^t not handle not. Coloss. 2. 10. 21. 22. Compared
with Coloss. 3. 1. 2. which he spoke, because they began to lay too great a
weight upon these things, and to hold them up as perpetual, which we^ to pass
away: for a Sixth Reason, thou say, the Apostles, and Primitive Christians
who did partake of the Spirit in a large measure did use it. Ans. that they
used it for some time is granted, but that they used it as of necessity, or
command, is denied, nor did they use it for themselves, but for the sake of the
weak who could not be suddenly weaned from it. Thy Seventh Reason, is, that it
is the mind, and will of God, that this ordinance should be continued in his
Church until the second coming of Christ to judgment, By which Second coming
thou, and you, understand his outward coming for which you have no ground, to
say, that he bid them observe it, till his outward coming so many hundred
years after: for the Scripture speaks nothing so, but thus -- ye show forth
my death, till I come: now we say, he did come according to his promise in a
Spiritual and inward way of appearance in their hearts, feeding them, with the
heavenly food, and refreshment of his own life and, Spirit which is the
substance, and concerning this coming he spoke unto them, in many places,
particularly John. 14. 18. I will not leave you fatherless, I will come unto
you. Yet a little while, and the world, sees me not, but yet shall see me: and
ver. 23. If any man love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love
him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him: which coming was
inward; according to verse. 20* you in me, and I in you. And those that
witnessed him thus come, needed not outward bread and wine to remember them of
him, for his own Spirit would bring all things to their remembrance: they need
not look upon the figure and shadovv, who have the Substance: Paul said, we
look not upon things, which are visible neither will Gods condescendence to
their weakness, who were but newly redeemed from out of a mass of heathenish
superstitions, prove a command, or a rule to the whole Church, or a warrant for
any, now to be found in the Administration thereof; and to hold up the outward
figure, do cloak themselves, by shutting out,, and denying the Spiritual
appearance of Christ, as he does immediately reveal himself in his children,
in whom he has made manifest, the substance, which ends the shadow. For an
Eighth Reason thou say, that persons who cast off this ordinance, are their
souls great enemies, for they stand in the way of their souls Spiritual
good, in that this is a Spiritual nourishing, strengthening ordinance, where
Spiritual food is offered, and delicate meat and drink, for strengthening
believers, in their journey to heaven; To which I answer, that those who
neglect and despise having fellowship and communion with God, and laugh and
scoff at the useful, and necessary duty of waiting upon the Lord in
silence, wherein his children feel their souls nourished with the Body, and
blood of Christ, and with spiritual Manna which descends from heaven, and is
distilled into their souls; not only, once, or twice a year (which are the
seasons, wherein that which thou termst Spiritual food, is ministered among
you) but daily, and hourly, by the fresh incoms of life such indeed are to
their souls, great enemies, though they be sticking to the performance of some
external ceremonies wherein in former times, God (in condescendence to some,
because of the simplicity of their hearts) appeared, and yet even then
frequently, as much, and more, at other times. But now the Sun is set upon
those who will needs be upholding the shadovv, in opposition, to the substance:
therefore their table is become polluted, and may more truly be termed the
table of devils, then the communion of the Body of Christ, where a mixed
multitude of all sorts of wicked persons, living out of Gods fear, sit down
together, being seemingly in words excommunicated from approaching, by the
Preacher, and yet presently admitted to it, by the same: and to turn away from
such an Ordinance so called, is no sin, nor hurt, but all who become obedient
to the light of Christ in them, will find it their place to forsake it, as
being such an ordinance, which the Apostle said, touch not, taste not, handle
not, which is all to perish with the using.

In the fourth place Page: 41: thou vvilt prove, that the ministry of the
word is an ordinance of Jesus Christ: because first Christ, appointed Ministers
and Pastors to be in his Church; But this cannot be asserted in opposition to
the Quakers, who grant the same. And why citest thou, Ephesians. 5. 11. and. 1.
for. 12. 8. which if they prove the contin^ance of Pastors, and teachers, prove
also the continuance of Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles, which ye deny.
As to the second Reason that the Ministry is not common to all, but that there
be some Pastors and teachers, is also owned by us: Yet that hinders not, but
that any at a time may speak, when the Saints are met together, as the Lord
moves by his Spirit. according to 1. Cor. 14. 31. for it is one thing to be
particularly called to the Ministry, and another to be moved to speak at a
particular time: which distinction that it was usual among the Apostles in
the Primitive times is easily observed, in the forenamed Chapter* For a Third
Reason, thou say, whom God calls to the Ministry, he does it either
immediately, without the intervention of men, or mediatly by men authorized for
that purpose: but for this, thou bringst no proof neither art thou able to
make out, that ever God called any under the new covenant so mediatly to their
Ministry by men, as they were not to have an immediate call in themselves:
Though the approbation of good and experienced men, in its place, is not denied
by us, but dearly owned. Fourthly thou say, who ever pretends to an
immediate call they ought for the satisfaction of others to show signs, and
tokens of their Apostleship* to which I answer. That those who come preaching
the Gospel not in speech only, but also in Power, and in the holy Ghost, and
in the evidence and demonstration thereof: As it is. 1 Thessalonians. 15. and. 1. Cor.
2. 4. give sufficient proof that they are called of God, though they come not
with outvvard miracles. And though Paul came to some with miracles, where
he preached the Gospel, yet many believed, who savv no outvvard miracle.
Also many of the Prophets wrought no miracle, nor John the Baptist. And though
some miraculous things came to pass about his Conception and birth, those do
not of themselves prove him to be a Prophet, for miraculous things, and
miracles were wrought upon many, who were no prophets. If Miracles be
necessary to evince a man sent of God, he must come with these Miracles,
before the people, which John, did not, nor did Jonas come with any Miracle
to convince the Ninivites, but simply declared his message. And John Calvin
asserteth that there is no need of Miracles, and yet he maintains, that in
his day, God raised up Apostles, or Evangelists, saying, that it was needful
such should be, to bring back the poor people, that had gone astray after
Antichrist* Lib. 4. Chap. 3. Inst. Neither did any Protestants pretend to do
any Miracles, they pleading against the Papists, that there was no absolute
need of any in respect they preached not a new Gospel, but that which was
already confirmed with miracles by Christ, and his Apostles. And so thy plea
against us here, is the same, that was urged by the Papists, against the
primitive protestants. An evil and adulterous generation, said Christ, seeks
after miracles; and though Miracles should be given, they who will not believe,
the testimony of the Spirit of God in their consciences, bearing witness to
the truth, will not also believe, because of Miracles, as we see plainly in the
Jews. And whereas thou say, John's immediate call is evident by the special
predictions both of Malachy, and Isayas concerning him. So are there many
special predictions, concerning the Lord his pouring forth of his Spirit upon
many in these latter days, to prophecy or minister, as the Spirit should putt
words into their mouths, And as for these Scripturs Tit. 1. 5. Ast. 14. 23.
which thou bringst in the Fifth place they prove not, that those Elders had not
the Authority and call of the Spirit of God in themselves. And whereas in the
Sixth place thou say, though Ministers be set apart, and ordained by men,
yet their Ministry is not from men, but from God, I answer; where the inward
call and Authority of the Spirit of God is not witnessed, it cannot be said to
be of God. And though Moses be said to consecrate Aaron, yet it does not
follovv that Aaron, had no immediate call from God. Seventhly, thou say, The
ministry is so necessary, that it is the will of Jesus Christ, that it should
continue unto the end of the World, Ephesians. 5. 12. 13. But thy proof from that
Scripture is altogether impertinent as to you, who believe not, that the
Saints can be perfected in this life, seeing the Ministry is given for the
perfecting of them. And that this perfection is on Earth, is clear, from the
follovving verse, That hence forth, we be no more as Children tossed to and
fro, for in the other life, there is no hazard of being so tossed. And if the
Ministry perfected not men in this life, it no where perfecteth them, for in
the other life it has no operation upon them. The Law, and Priesthood thereof
was abolished, because it made nothing perfect, and if the Gospel Ministry
should not make perfect it should also be abolished. And seeing your Ministry
perfecteth not, it is not the true Ministry of the Gospel; as indeed it is
not, for it stands not in the power of God, nor is it exercised in the will
and motion of God, your Ministry being such, that the whole ESSE, or BEING of
it, may be, without saving, grace: or true holiness, you expressly affirming that
holiness is not necessary, to the being of a Minister but that a man may be a
Minister of the Gospel, who ought to be received, and heard, though he have
not the least grain of holiness* Eighthly thou say, they who cast off the
Ministry of the word, wrong their own souls, etc. Ansvv. if it be
understood of the Ministry of Christ, it is granted, but of yours, it is denied.

In the Fifth place Page 44* Thou would prove that the Lords people, are
under a tie, and engagement to keep the first day of the week for a Sabbath
For a First Reason, thou say, the Fourth commandment requires the keeping
holy of one day of seven; but as it requires the observation of one day of
seven, so it expressly instanceth that day to be the seventh, which day ye
keep not: vvherfor as to the Second Reason, If the command, be moral and
perpetual, as thou call it, it ought to be kept in every point of it;
which ye not doing, therein condemn your selves, but the outvvard Sabbath or
the keeping one day of the week, for a Sabbath, is not perpetual, but
abolished together with the new moons, and other feasts, of the Jews see
Coloss. 2. 16. 17. Let no man judge y^u; in meat, or drink, or holy day, or new
moon, or sabbath days which are a shadow of things to come. See also Romans 14.
which plainly holds forth all days under the Gospel to be alike, and said
Paul to the Galathians, ye observe days, etc. I am afraid of you. For a Third
Reason, thou say, that Jesus Christ plainly intimates the continuance of a
Sabbath, because that speaking of the desolation of Jerusalem, he said, pray
that your flight be not in the winter nor on the Sabbath day, Ansvv. but that
Sabbath day, is neither here nor else where said to be the first day of the
vveke. The Jews were to fly at that time and Christ holds forth their
difficulties, that it should be grievo^s unto them, to be put to it, to fly on
their Sabbath day, or be killed. For they kept it in the strictness of it, but
as for any of your Sabbath keepers they are not so strait-laced, but they will
do less necessary things, then to fly from a danger on that day. And as the
outward Jew, de^ireth, that he may not be putt to fly, on his outward Sabbath,
so the inward Jew, in Spirit, desires much more that he may keep his Sabbath,
which is his Spiritual rest in Christ, that the enemy often seeks to break,
to cause him to fly on his Sabbath day, but this to you is a Mystery. Viz. what
the Sabbath, of them who believe, is Heb. 4. 9. 10. There remains therefore a
Sabbatism, to the people of God, and he, that is entered into his rest has
ceased from his own works, as God did from his.

And that this Sabbath, or rest is not an outward day, is plain, because in the
next verse he says let us labor therefore to enter into that rest. But if it
were an outward day it might be easily entered into, but this is such a rest as
none can enter into; who hearken not to the voice of the Lord, by beleiving and
obeying it. For a Fourth Reason, thou say, though ye keep not the same day
the Jews did, ye have the same authority for keeping your day, that they had
for theirs. Hence this day, that we keep (say thou) is called the Lords day
Rev. 1. 10. it being set apart by the Lord for his service, and as a Special
memorial of his Resurrection, Answ. but for all this, here is no probation at
all, but mere assertions. If ye have the same Authority, produce it, and let
us see it. John was in the Spirit on the Lords day, therefore the first day of
the week ought to be kept, how hangs this together? Prove that John meant the
first day of the week: we read much in Scripture, of the day of the Lord,
which is the Lords day, but no where do find it called the first day of the
week, or any other natural day. For it is spiritual, and as God called the
natural light, day, so he calls the Spiritual light of his appearance
(where the Sun of righteousness arises with healing under his wings) Day. And
this is the day of the Lord, wherein his people rejoice, and are glad. And
whereas thou say, it is set apart by the Lord, as a Special memorial of
his resurrection. This is thy naked assertion, without any shadow of proof and
if thou will say, that therefore it is to be a holy day, because he rose on it.
Is not this a fair inlet to all the Popish holy Days? If ye keep one day for
his Resurrection, why not one day for his Conception, another for his Birth,
another for the Annunciation of the Ange, another for his being crucified,
another for his Ascension? and then we shall not want holy days in good
store. Fifthly thou say. who oppose the Sabbath day, sin against mercy, and
equity, and Justice. Answ. It is granted, bnt who oppose your day which ye
have made, or imagined, to be the Sabbath, do not sin against any of the
foresaid, if in other things they keep unto the rule of mercy, and justice.
First they sin not against mercy, if through all the days of the week, they be
found in that, which is for the good of themselves, and their neighbors. Not
laying too heavy burdens, upon their own souls, by excessive care and labor
in outward things nor yet forcing their bodily strength, beyond the rule of
mercy and love, nor imposing any things upon either servants, or cattle,
contrary to mercy. For if the Law required mercy, even in these things, much
more the Gospel, so that we grant, times of rest are to be given unto
Servants, and Beasts, and Mercy is to be showed unto them, more then under the
Law. And thus is the end of the Sabbath answered, which was made for man: yea,
this is indeed to keep the Sabbath. To undo every burden, and to let the
oppressed go free, both as to the inward, and the outward. And the Lords
People have frequent times, more then once a week, wherein, laying aside their
outward affairs for a season, they may and do meet together, to wait upon the
Lord, and be quickened, and refreshed, and instructed by him, and worship him in
his Spirit. And may be useful unto one another, in exhortation, or admonition,
or any other way, as the Lord shall furnish; And such who find any distemper
upon their minds, through letting them go forth too much upon outward things,
may find the Lord allowing them any other day, or time, no less then that, to
get their hearts reduced into a right frame. And it were sad, if the Lord had
only allowed, but one day of seven, unto this effect. The Lord inviteth and
allows the weary, and distempered, (who love to be cured of their ^^^^empers)
to come unto him every day: And as for those, who abide not in a due care every
day, to have their hearts ordered arights, but let their minds go forth
excessively in outward occasions, all the week, they provoke the Lord, to shut
them out from access to him, upon the First day. And our souls do often bless
the Lord in allowing us many times of refreshment, and strengthening, to the
establishing and confirming us in his love and life, and disburdening our minds
of earthly things, much more frequently, then in one day of seven. And as for
sinning against Justice, they cannot be charged with it, who give up unto the
Lord, not only one day of seven, but all the seven, even all the days of
their life unto his service: for equity and J^stide calls upon us to spend
all the seven in his service, that our hearts may continually be exercised in
his fear, and love, and what ever we do, we may do, it to him, and in him.
And as for the first day of the week* we meet together even on that day, (as
we do on other days) according to the practice of the primitive Christians,
to wait upon the Lord, and worship him, but to plead so obstinately as ye do,
that the fourth Commandment, binds to a particular observation of that day,
and yet to be found so slack in the observation of it, as you generally are, is
such an inconstancy as the Quakers cannot own. And so whereas thou would
confine the Lord his giving rest, and comfort to the souls of his people, and
the falling of the Manna, to the first days, calling them spiritual market
days, as if there were no other, we cannot own it, knowing that the Lord
gives rest and comfort, every day, and causes the Manna plentifully to fall
every day, to those that walk in his fear, and wait upon him; and he has no
such circumscribed Market day as thou dreamest of, but that ye, (I mean the
Priests) make a Market day, of that day (So that ye may call it your day, as
thou say Page 44. our day) we know, wherein you sell, and vend your
Babylonish, commodities, and will be forceing, and compelling, all to come, and
buy of them, or if nor, to send you money, whither they receive ought, or not;
or else ye will endeavor by the help of the Magistrate to have them punished.
So that it is made manifest, that it is only the inventions of men, that we
disovvne, and not any of the ordinances of Jesus Christ.

Page 46. Thou grantest the word, Original sin, is not found in Scripture and
yet thou pleadst for it, ^ecaus, say thou, the thing intended by it, is
contained, and expressed in Scripture. Ansvv. we deny, that the thing by you
intended, is expressed in Scripture, to wit, that all in^a^^s are sinners before
God, only for Adams sin, and that there are reprobate Infants, who are sent to
hell only for Adams first sine this we deny; nor do the Scriptures cited by
thee prove it, Psalm. 51. behold I was conceived in sin. But first, if this
place should prove the Infant guilty of any sin, it should be, of the sin of
its own immediate parents, in inquity did my mother bring me forth. Now you
say, the infant is not guilty of the sin of its own immediate parents, but
only of Adams, and Eva's first sin: of which, this Scripture speaks nothing.
2. it does not say, I was conceived and brought forth a sinner, as you would
have it; why make you infants guilty of Adams sin, and not of the sins of then
immediate parents? Now it is granted, that there is a seed of sin, derived
unto Adams posterity but we say, none become guilty of sin before God, until
they close with this evil seed: and in them, who close with it, it becoms an
origin, or ^o^intaine of evil thoughts, des^res, words and actions, which are
their sins who close with it. But that the guilt of Adams first sin lies at
the door of Infants, who never actually, sinned, we deny. For a Second
Proof; thou citest Romans 5. 12. Alleging it should be rendered, that in Adam
all sinned. But it is no such matter: For the words, however they be truly
translated, can never be so rendered in Adam all sinned: The strictest
translation of the words is thus, [upon which all have sinned, or in which all
have sinned] Now, if the words be translated. [ Upon which all have sinned.]
They hold forth, how that Adam, by his sin gave an entrance to Sin in the
World, and Death by Sin, and so upon this occasion, all others, have sinned, to
wit, actually in their own Persons, so that all who ever sinned actually, it
was upon the occasion of Adams sin. For the Apostle is here speaking, not of
Infants, who are not capable of any Law, but of such, as have a Law, and act
against it. Yea from the Apostles words in the other following Verse, it is
plain, that sin is not imputed to Infants. For says he, Sin is not imputed,
where there is no Law. Now there is no Law given to Infants as such. For they
are not capable of it. What the Law says, it says to them, who have in
more or less some exercise of understanding, which Infants, newborn, have
not, or, if the words be translated, [ in which all have sinned] that word
WHICH has a nearer relative then ADAM, to wit, Death, for the seed of sin, is
justly called Death, because where it is joined unto, and obeyed, it kills:
and so in this seed all have sinned, who ever did actually sin; and as for the
verse 18, of Romans 5. which is commonly used to prove infants guilty, and under
condemnation, it is not tightly translated for the word judgment, or
condemnation, or guilt, is not at all in the Greek, but those, who have drunk
in this imagination, have added this word, to the Scripture so bending and
bowing the Scripture to their false opinion. And whereas tho^ say. we were
all in the loins of Adam, and therefore would infer, that infants are
sinners in him, or guilty of his sin. I say, It follows not, more then to
say, we are guilty of all the sins of our Forefathers, because we have been
in their loins; again thou labourest to prove that Infants are sinners because
they are subject to pains, and diseases, and death. But this proves them not
to be sinners, as it proves not that the Earth is a Sinner, or that the Herbs,
and Trees of the field are sinners, for even these things have suffered, by
Adams fall, a great decay: And as for the outward Death of those that are saved
from eternal Death, it is rather a sleep, then a Death, as Christ said,
concerning La^arus, he sleeps; and concerning the Maid, she is not Dead,
but sleeps. And therefore, that Scripture, Romans 6: 23. cannot be applied, to
them, who dye not, or perish not eternally: for though the Saints lay down the
outward man, it is not as the punishment or reward of their Sins, which are
forgiven, and from which they are delivered. And so the sting of Death, being
taken away, in those who are saved, it is not that Death, which is the wages of
Sin, and seeing the Apostle said unto the Saints, that all things were theirs,
even Death, it cannot be that their Death should be reckoned the wages of their
Sin, how many of the blessed Martyrs have looked upon their suffering a most
violent Death, for truth, and righteousness as a Gift of God? How then could it
be said to be the wages of their Sins; which implye as if their Sins were not
all freely forgiven?

Page 48. From this doctrine, thou say; it will follow, First, that all
Infants, that die in their infancy, are saved, and though charity may be
pleaded for this opinion, (thou say) yet what Scripture can be alleged for
it? Answ. If, I should bring that Scripture, Suffer little Children to come
unto me, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, It will much more naturally
flow from the words, then that they ought to be sprinkled, which is the
meaning ye put upon them. And whereas some object, it is not said of them, but
of such. I answer, but that such includes them, and all others, who are like
them, in harmlesnesse: otherwise if they had been excluded he would not have
given it as a reason, why he bid suffer them to come unto him: but besides,
the 18. Chap. ver. 20. of Ezekiel, is a plain proof, The soul that sinn^th
shall die, the Son, shall not bear the fathers iniquity: unless that the Son
be found acting the same iniquity, and continuing in it; for then he visits
the iniquities of the Fathers upon the Children. Now thou have produced no
Scripture to prove, that any infants do perish, and indeed there is nothing in
Scripture for it, but against it. Secondly thou say, it would follow, that
infants dying in their infancy, stood no in need of Christ, as a Savior; for
he is a savior to save his People from their sins. Answ. He is a Savior
not only to save from sins, but also from the consequences of sin, and not only
from the fruits and branches of it, but from the seed: and they are saved from
sin, who are not suffered to fall into it. And so these infants, whom the Lord
takes away in their infancy, that they might not sin, are saved from it. It is
salvation, to be kept from falling into a pit, as truly, as to be taken out of
it, after the falling in. And as for that Scripture, it makes against you,
Math. 1. 12. For it speaks of a salvation from sin, whereas you dream of a
salvation in your sins: Nor does Romans 7. 24. Speak of infants, so thy citing
it here is impertinent. And though there be a time, wherein there is a crying
out for deliverance from the body of sin, and death, yet there is also a time
of deliverance from it; even before the laying down of the outward body, as is
plain from Romans 6. 6. 7. Knowing this that the old man is crucified, and he
that is dead, is freed from sin. Yet we acknowledge there is great occasion to
be low, and to be in great fear, and care, left sin, which is once crucified,
revive again.

Page 48. Thou chargest us, as holding a falling away from Regeneration, and as
agreeing therein with Arminians. But if the Arminians hold a falling away from
Regeneration, we hold no such matter. For those who fall away, never attained
unto the Regeneration, and so were never the children of God, but only were in
the way to it, by having attained to some beginings of Faith, from which some
may, and have fallen away, for that it is expressly said by Christ, some
believe, and afterward fall away: and some depart from the faith, and make
shipwreck of it, and some, who have tasted the good word of God, and the powers
of the world to come fall away. These and many such instances are in Scripture,
nor do the Scriptures cited by thee prove the contrary: as Philip. 1. 6. which
is to be understood no otherwise, then as the condition is performed upon their
part. As Heb. 3. 14. we are made partakers of Christ, if we hold fast the
principle of our establishment, (or whereby we are established) firm unto the
end; and so these, who hold fast this Principle, witness the work, which God
has begun in them, to be carried on until the day of Christ, even till he be
completely formed in them, and they in him. It may be supposed, that Paul was
as confident that God would perfect the Work begun in himself, and yet he
supposes, it night be other wise, where he says least preaching the Gospel
to others, I my self become a cast away. And though some fall away, the
dishonor of the foolish builder cannot be cast upon God, but upon them, who
fall away: for it stands very well with the wisdom, and power of God, to
suffer them to fall away, who knowingly, and wilfully depart from the Lord, and
will not concur, with him in the work, as subordinate Instruments, but resist
him though her invite, and call, yea draw them; The next thou citest, is. 1.
Peter. 15. Answ. Such as are so kept by the power of God, it is through Faith,
but as they abide not in that power, through Faith, but wand^r from it, they
fall, and cannot but fall away: And as for Ierem. 32. 40. cited by thee, it
should be translated thus, I will putt my fear into their hearts, that they may
not depart from me, so Iunius and Tremellius version; or not to depart from me,
as the Septuagint has it. Now to say, that they may, not depart, is one thing,
and to say, they cannot depart, is another. Yet where the fear of God coms so
to be raised and established in the heart, over all, we believe such cannot
depart, but every one, is not attained to that State, where yet the fear of God
may have some place. And as touching these other Scriptures. Ioh. 10. 27. 28.
29. And John. 13. 1. and. 1. John. 2 19. they speak of those, who are come to
a through Regeneration, who (we do believe) can never fall away; as being be
got into the perfect Nature of the elect sheep and Children. Nor does it
follow, from this that one may be a Child of God to day, and a Child of the
devil to morrow, for these, who are once, properly the children of God through
a true and through regeneration, can never become the children of the devil,
nor be cast out of Gods special love, that he bears to his own children.
For to end this matter, thou say it is safer to question the truth of the
graces of those that fall away, then the doctrine of the perseverance of the
Saints. But do thou look upon the Quakers, as having fallen away? if thou
do, how comes it, that thou bespeakest them in thy Epistle, as those, who
have had real Grace, saying to them, did ye attain to that knowledge of, and
acquaintance with God, which ye have, in the use of ordinances? and again,
ye did run well, who did hinder you? And again, why should they asperse these
ordinances, which have been the means of their conversion? Or are these words
only a Ioabs kiss, by which thou would kiss the Quakers, while in the
mean time, thou have a svvord hid under thy cloak to strike them thorough,
under the fifth rib. But the Quakers are aware of thee, and having on the
armor of God, are out of thy reach.

In the last place. Page 50. thou undertakest to prove, that our errors (as
thou call them) tend to irreligiousnes, and Atheism; because they tend to
take away the worship due to God, but it has been heretofore proved, that
we deny not true Worship, but only your idolatrous superstitious worships,
which cannot truly be called the Worship of God. Our way (thou say) tends
to irreligiousnes; because frequently, we go to meat, and come from it,
without seeking a blessing, or returning thanks; which is to deny God a part
of that Worship, which is due to him. 1. Tim. 4. 4. 5. Ansvv. to receive the
gifts, and benefits of God, with thanks giving and to witness it blessed, and
sanctified to us, by the word, and prayer, is owned by us: and to know this
so, without taking off the hat, or using of formal speaking of words,
(though it be a thing frequently used by us also) tends to no irreligiousnes:,
for it is a thing usual among us, when we sit down to eat, to vvait upon
the Lord, for some time that we may feel his presence, and know ourselves
stated in his fear, to which the blessing is^ and as we there stand, if any
outvvard expressions, be required of any, then in Gods fear, they may utter
them, and this is to know, the blessing indeed, and to be in the place, that
is blessed. But for people that are conversing, out of Gods fear, stated in a
Light airy Spirit, not only many tym^s laughing and scoffing, but some times
even blaspheming, presently so soon as the meat comes, to clap off their
hats, and speak a fevv words in a custom, and so soon, as they have done,
fall to their former work again: is not this Atheism, and irreligiousnes?
for if such did think of God aright, and know, what it were to fear him,
they would be far from addressing themselves in such postures unto him,
neither could they be so impudent, as to expect a blessing from him, while they
stand in that condition, to which the curse is annexed.

In the second place. Page 51. Thou say, Does not the taking men off from
prayer, tend to Irreligiousnes, and Atheism? Now you teach, we must not pray
in private, nor in families, without an impulse therefore. Answ. This is no
sound argument; to take men off from prayer, tends to irreligiousnes, is
granted, but to say, that a man cannot, nor ought not to pray, without the
Spirits, drawing, and motion which you commonly name by impulse (a word,
which common people do not understand) has no such tendency, or, that it
takes any off from prayer, truly so called is denied. For has that a bad
tendencie which take's men off from such Prayers, as are abomination, and are
not true Prayers, but hypocritical, and deceitful? As all such Prayers are that
are performed without the help of the Spirit. We say, whosoever can pray to
the Lord indeed, let them pray, we are not to forbid them, but, that any can
pray without the Spirit that we deny, according to 1. Cor. 14. 15. I will pray
with the Spirit, etc. And Romans 8. 26. likewise also, The Spirit helps your
infirmities, for we know not, what we should pray for, as we ought: Now if
we know not, what to pray for, without the Spirit, how can we pray without
it? Paul durst not adventure upon this duty, without the assistance of the
Spirit (yea, he said, no man could say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the
holy Ghost) but here, an arrogant generation will needs by praying without it,
which yet is not Prayer, and such families where this only is used, cannot be
truly said to call upon God, while such truly may be said so to do, that wait
upon the Lord, and stand in his fear, and bring forth the fruits of
righteousness, though they be not, so much in the external signification of
words, which also at times is found in our families, as the Lord requires it,
and gives utterance. And whereas thou say, That thou beleivest it will be
found, that some of us, for the space of a whole Year have not so much, as
once bowed a knee to call upon God in their families. What ground have thou,
for this thy belief? May they not bow their knees in their families, though it
be hid from the observation of malicious eyes, who may so asperse them? May
they not pray in secret, and be seen of the Father to pray* according to
Matthew. 6. 6. Though they cannot be seen by the eyes of malicious Spies? And
where a public testimony in words is required, it is also given, nor do we
know any friends of truth, who have any, whom they can join with in Prayer, in
the family, but do meet together in the family, and wait together, breath
together, and pray together, and that much oftener, then thou insinuats,
sometimes without, and sometimes with the outward signification of words, so
that we return this thy charge as false and malicious. Thou say, If this
impulse be denied for Years, men all that while (according to us) must not
pray. But here thou speak as one, wholly unacquainted with the ways, and
motions of the Spirit, to suppose such a case, which cannot be; for the
breathings, and motions of the Spirit, and especially unto Prayer, are very
frequent, unto those who wait for them, and are as necessary unto the Children
of God, as their daily bread, yea and more, which the Father withholdeth not,
but gives in due season. But many times, the Spirit of Prayer, is felt to
move, and is answered, when there is no liberty given, to speak words, in the
hearing of others; nor is thy other supposition less vain, and foolish, that
if aman, were at the gates of death, and in danger of present drowning, yet
without an impulse, (as thou call it) he must not adventure to cry to God
for mercy, and help; for suppose he did cry, without all help of the Spirit,
what would it avail him, would it have any acceptance with God? Show us,
vvherever a spiritlesse prayer, was accepted of God, or required: Nay, it is a
vain oblation, which is expressly forbidden, and it is expressly commanded,
that praying be alvvayes in the spirit. Ephesians. 6. 18. And as for the Saints,
when they are dying, or in any difficulty, we know, the Spirit of prayer will
never be wanting, to breath through them, at such occasions; and to give words,
as there is a service for them.

But further, thou alledgest, that this Principle of ours, leads to woeful
security, for what need you be d^^quieted, for refraining prayer before God
(thou say) or any other piece of service, seeing you have salve at hand to
heal this sore, and that is, the want of an impulse. Answ. If any fall into
security and refrain prayer, it is not, that our Principle leads into it;
for our Principle leads out of all security, into continual watching unto
prayer, and wating upon the motions of the Spirit of God; now if any feel not
these motions, they are nothing the less guilty, because by their neglect, they
provoke the Lord to withhold them, and render themselves out of frame to feel,
or entertain them, and thus who neglect the worship of God, are justly under
condemnation, and if they have peace, it is but a false peace, which will fail
them; and as for our peace, we have found it, to be great peace, but we have
not come by it, after such a way, as thou do falsely, and rashly judge: as
by neglecting the worship of God, and stopping the mouth of conscience, but by
being turned to that living Word and Law of God in our hearts, by loving it,
and cleaving to it yea by receiving the reproves and chastisements of God
through it, and submitting to the judgment of it, when it has been as a
hammer, and as a sword, and as a fire in us, breaking in pieces, and destroying
all that false unsound peace, we had created to our selves, in the day of our
alienation, from the light of God in us. And unto peace we are come, through
great tribulation of soul, even such, as thou art a stranger unto, being
ignorant both of the one, and the other, and so have therein showed thy folly
in judging what thou know not. And as for woeful security, we know not,
where it more abounds, then among hypocritical professors, who, with the
Whore in the Proverbs, offer up their sacrifices of morning and evening
prayers, and thereby create a peace to themselves, though they let their hearts
go a whoring after their lusts all the day: did not the Pharisees pray much
outwardly, and were much in orher outward practices of devotion, and so created
a false peace, and esteem unto themselves? And can you deny, but that there
are many such among you, who make up a false peace, to themselves by leaning
upon their outward performances? Now what If I should charge this upon your
Principle would thou think it fair dealing.

Thirdly, Page 52. Thou say, Does not that opinion, tend to Atheism, which
renders mortification of sin (even in this life) useless, etc. Answ. Here thou
dealest disingenuously. Is mortification of sin useless, where the end of it,
is attained? And is not perfection the end of mortification? Again thou
say, The opinion of a sinles perfection, wounds the very vitals of Religion?
Answ. Who could have expected, that one, that pretends to Religion, would have
been so brazenfaced, as to put such an expression in print? What is the end of
true Religion, but to lead out of sin? Do the vitals of Religion consist in
sinning, or in not sinning? If it consist in sinning, then they that Sin most,
are most religious: But if it consist in not sinning and keeping the
commandments of God, without sin, then to plead for such a thing as
attainable, hurts not the vitals of Religion? What! Cannot the Saints live
better without sin, then with it? Yea surely, they can live well without that,
which is a burden, and as Death unto their life: they whose life is in sin,
cannot live but in sin, but the Saints life is not in sin, but in righteousness:
And thy consequences are vain and foolish, as 1. That men need not pray for
pardon of sin, 2. That they need not the Blood of Christ, to cleanse them from
sin, 3. That they need not repentance: For we grant, that all have sinned, and
so need those things, by which they may attain unto perfection, and who
witness perf^ction, are come to witness the true use of these things, and as
the Blood of Christ cleanses from all the sin, so is preserves clean, and
such have received the forgivenes of their sins, being turned from them unto
righteousness, which is the fulfilling of repentance. And whereas thou say,
Bring me to the particular person, that is sinlesse, and I shall apply to him,
that of the Apostle. 1. Ioh. 1. 8. Thou shevvest openly thy confusion, for by
thy applying to him, that of the Apostle, would thou infer a sinlesse man
to be a sinning man? That is a contradiction, but though we should bring a
man to thee, that is made free from sin, by the power of God; Thou could no
more judge of him, then a blind man can judge of colors, and as to ^ Ioh. 1.
8. it is a plain case, If we say, we have no sin, and have fellowship with
him, and yet walk in darkness, as Verse 6. Then we deceive our selves, so it
is conditional, otherwise it would contradict what follows Verse 9. and
Chap. 2. 4. and Chap. 3 6. 9. As to that of the Sabbath, it is ansvvered above.

Page 53. Your Religion (say thou) will be welcome to the worst, and
wickedest of men, for you will please them exceedingly, in crying down of
ordinances, the observation of the Sabbath, and private and family Prayer, etc.
Ansvv. We cry down no Ordinance of God, but your hypocritical vvayes, and
we know no worse men, then those Hypocrites, whom we are so far from
pleasing, in crying down their hypocritical Prayers, and performances, that
they fret, and gnash at us with their teeth, and if they could get their
will, would tear us in pieces, for vvitn^ssing against thos^ things. And they
are very blind who see not, that the d^nying of those things in shadow, and
bare formalitie, and establishing them in the power and substance, can no ways
be acceptable to the wicked, but most impleasing to hypocrites, who can perform
the one, but not the other But now, let us examine, whither your Principles, or
ours, be most acceptable to the wicked, and hypocrites. 1. Wicked men, and
Hypocrites love well to hear that they can never be free from their sins, in
this life, and that they must always sin. 2. They love well to hear, to be
justified by Christ without them, and his righteousness without, but not by him,
and his righteousness within them. 3. They love well to hear, that the words
without them, are the only Rule, which they can wrest according to their own
corrupt inclinations, but they love not to hear, that the word, and light of
God within, is to be their rule, which they cannot wrest, nor bend. 4. They
love well, to hear, that they may use the fashions and customs of this world,
bow, and cringe and give, and receive the honor of this world. they love to
hear, they may use sports, and games, and plays. 6. To wear laces and ribbons,
and gold rings, and other superfluity. 7. They love well to hear, that men must
not expect to hear God immediately, being such as those who said, let not God
speak unto us. 8. They love well to hear, that water baptism, giving of bread
and wine, are the ordinances of God, and the true Baptism and Supper, for then
they think they are Christians if they partake of these outward things, and
they are mad against us, who call them shadows: and as for their observation
of that called the Sabbath, we find, none more plead for it, then profane
light men, and women, for they can easily dispense to hear a man talk for an
hour, or two, and then have all the rest of the day, to spend in idleness, vain
communication, and frequenting the alehouse, and decking themselves with vain
apparel. 10. They love well to hear, that they may be members of the Church,
though they have no infallible evidence of holiness. 11. They love to hear of
your doctine of election and reprobation. 12. And of your doctrine once in
grace, and ever in grace, whereby they feed themselves in presumption, and
carelesnes. Many other particulars could be mentioned, but these may serve
enough to show, that your Principles are pleasing to the wicked and hypocrites,
and our displeasing. Next to come to expecience: where are the drunkards, the
swearers, the whore mongers, the envious licentious persons, the scorners, the
mockers, whither are they yours, or ours? If our Principles be so acceptable
unto them, why do they not inrolle themselves among us, why do they oppose us
at our meetings, at Aberdeene, and else where, and curse, and rant, and use all
manner of filthy communication and are ready to stone us on the streets: And
none more found so doing, then that young fry, and spawne of the Priesthood,
who are bred at your nurseries of learning. Now whose Church members are those,
yours, or ours? is not the proverb, verified of you: Fowls of one Feather, fly
together.

Thou closest, with addressing thy self to God, with a notorious lie, saying,
follow with they blessing, that which WE have been about. Meaning the Quaker
and thy self, but it was none of the Quakers work; the Dialogue not being any
real conference: is not this to deride, and take the name of God in vain

FINIS.

