THE FAITHFUL And Wise Servant.

Discovered in a Sermon preached to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, at their late private Fast in the Parliament
House, Jan. 9. 1656.

By Matthew Barker, a Servant of Christ, and his Church in the work of the
Ministry, at Leonards Eastcheap, London.

And his Lord said unto him, Well done thou good and faithful servant.

Matthew. 25. 21. Keep therefore and do (my STATVTES and JVDGEMENTS) for this is
your wisdom, and your understanding in the sight of the Nations, which shall
hear all these Statutes, and say, Surely this great Nation is a wise and
understanding People.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for Luke Fawn, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Sign of the Parrot, in Paul's Churchyard, 1657.

To the Truly Honorable, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland.
THE Great Lesson that the Lord has been teaching man in all Ages (which,
alas, he has yet but a little learned) is, That he is nothing without God.
David sought to teach his Son Solomon this, in that Psalm that he composed on
purpose for him, Except the Lord build the House, they labor in vain that
build it: Except the Lord keep the City, the Watchman waketh but in vain.
Solomon he knew was to succeed him in his Throne, and to have affairs of a
Public and weighty Import in his hands, and therefore would have him well
digest this first and best Rule in Christian Policy, That the creature acts in
all things in vain, wherein it acts without God.

No rule is more needful for Magistrates to learn, and which when once well
learned, and well practiced, will of all other things (if the world could but
once believe it) most avail to the prosperity and success of their Affairs.

When God called Gideon forth to a Public Work, he first tells him he would
be with him; and then adds, Go forth in This thy might.

If the Creature goes forth in any might but this, it is a poor weak thing.

It is Recorded in Sacred Story, that the Israelites followed Saul trembling,
when he went to Battle against the Philistims.

They thought they should be strong, and victorious when they had gotten a
King, and no sooner had they him, but they follow him trembling. Such will all
creature strength be to us, it cannot deliver us from Fear, and Falling; or be
a Rock to the heart of Man.

Your deep sense of this (Right Honorable) was that which I suppose moved you
to set apart a day for a more solemn seeking Aid and Counsel from God; and
wherein you was pleased to call for my poor Service in that days work, together
with two others far more able. That we might do for you, (according to what
Jonathan did to David when he was in streights, in the Wilderness of Ziph)
strengthen your hands in God.

You were then as in a Wilderness, and you did not clearly see your way; but
have your hands been since more strengthened in God?

You was pleased to command (for so is your Desire to me) that I should speak
something from the Lord to you; and what I spoke, as it was calculated for your
Meridian, so I intended it for no wider a Sphaere then the Walls of your own
House: But seeing you are pleased to call for it to walk abroad, I have obeyed
you, though not without some reluctance.

The Work you met upon was Serious, and the Day Solemn; so that I durst not but
preach plainly, as those will find that read.

Only I must acquaint you, that the latter end of the Sermon I preached not,
because I was prevented by the time, choosing rather to be abrupt then tedious.

Which indeed was a further Motive to me to yield it to the Press; and that I
might present that to your Eyes, which I could not then present to your Ear^.

And here and there I have added something above what I spoke, as being then
compelled to shorten, where I could with least loss.

So that this I can say, I have presented you with a fuller expression of what
was in my thoughts and papers in the Sermon as Printed, then the Sermon as
Preached.

VVhat-ever it is, though it shows forth much of my weakness, yet I assure you
it shows forth my hearty willingness to serve Christ, and to serve you in a
subordination unto him.

One generation passes, to make way for another; and so men serving their
generations, have past away that others might come in, Moses was taken off,
that Joshua might come in, and David to make way for Solomon; And so other
Powers, and Parliaments have past away to make room for you. And now ye are
upon the Stage, and therefore endeavor to Act Nobly, to Act Gallantly, as
standing in the view, not of men only, but of God, and that when you go off you
may go off with the Applause, I will not say of men, but of God himself.

There is a Providence that orders in what Generation every man shall be
brought forth; and therefore every man should be enquiring, why was I brought
forth in this generation, and not another? And what is the work of this
Generation wherein the Lord expects that I should come forth, and serve him?
And it is Satan's design and policy to amuse men about other work that concerns
them not, that so he might divert them from that which is their proper work.

And shall I be bold here, (Honored Gentlemen) to put you in mind of that,
which I hear has been some time already under your consideration; and that is
to do something toward the payment of the debts that are yet behind upon the
Public faith, especially to the poorer sort: Many poor honest people live yet
in hope that that Faith will not fail.

I know the wants and expenses of the Nation are great, yet Mercy and Justice
never to this day did any wrong to a State.

The condition also of poor Prisoners, that would pay if they could, as I was
solicited to present it before you, so I humbly leave it to your Justice and
Wisdom to consider of it.

I know also your work is great, and God may cut out more work for you, and for
his people in this Nation ere long, then they are ^^t aware of. Oh it is an
happy thing to have Spirit fitted to what work God will engage us in.

And let us take heed that calm times do not make us secure, and settle in the
world.

You know when Sampson slept in Delilah's lap, then he lost his strength, and
lost God: and when he went to rouse up himself as at other times, then he felt
his weakness.

So if through security, and lying in the lap of any beloved Delilah, we do
fall asleep, we hazard the loss of our strength, and the departing of God, and
then when we may be called forth to any work, we may arise and think to
prevail as in the days of old, when alas our strength is gone.

Oh be watchful, faithful, low in your own eyes; and the lower you are thus,
the more will God delight to honor you, and the more honor he puts upon you;
the lower be you still.

As we read of Moses, Gideon, David, Solomon, yea and Saul, when the Lord came
to call them forth to public work, and put honor upon them, then were they
lowest in their own eyes.

God delights to work by such Instruments that are low in their own eyes; yea
that may be low in the eyes of others; that glory may be his alone.

And to be serviceable in your Generation to Christ, his People, and the
Nations whereof you are the Messengers: if you please at your leisure to peruse
the following Discourse, you shall find it to be your greatest Interest* and
your Truest Wisdom, and as I have in my S^^^on endeavored to discover it; so,
that you may eminently attain it, shall be the earnest prayer of him, who would
fain approve himself to be the

Faithful Servant of Jesus Christ, and of Your Honors in him, MATTHEW BARKER.

THE FAITHFUL And Wise Servant.
Delivered in a Sermon preached before the Parliament, at their late Fast,
January 9. 1656.
From Psalm. 2. 10, and part of Verse. 11. Be wise, now therefore, O ye Kings, be
instructed ye Judges of the Earth, Serve the Lord with fear, etc.
THis Psalm is an eminent Prophecy of the Kingdom of the Messiah, and so
acknowledged by the Jews themselves, although it agree to David's Kingdom in
the letter; yet David's Kingdom was not set up so much for it self, as to be a
type and shadow of another Kingdom to be set up after it in the world. And
though it be the most blessed Kingdom that ever arose, and set up on purpose
for the delivery and salvation of man, yet when it came to be set up, the whole
world in a manner rose up against it. In the Psalm we have

1. A Distribution of the persons; the several sorts of men that stood up in
opposition to it: As first, The common people, and that both of Gentiles, Why
do the Heathen rage? and of Jews, And the people imagine a vain thing? verse 1.
And secondly, The Kings and Rulers of the earth; The Kings of the Earth set
themselves, and the Rulers take Counsel together against the Lord, and against
his Anointed, v. 2.

2. He shows implicitly at least wherein they do especially oppose it, viz. in
the Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances of it; Let us break their Bands asunder, and
cast away their Cords from us. verse 3. This Kingdom comes to lay bands upon
men, to lay Laws and yokes upon the lusts, and licentious nature of man, which
he cannot bear.

3. He shows what success they meet with in their opposition; as it is a bad
work, so it meets with as bad success: for it is said.

1. God laughs at them; As a company of madmen, busying themselves about their
own ruin, verse. 4. He that sits in the Heavens shall laugh at them.

2. He speaks to them, and that in his wrath, he gives them warning to forbear,
as in verse. 5. Before he falls upon them, he does admonish them of several
things; As

1. That it was his King they oppose a King that he himself had set up, as in
verse. 6.

2. A King also settled and established by his Decree, as in verse. 7.

3. The King also was his own Son; Thou art my Son; And he tells them the
particular time of his Instalment, to day, This day have I begotten thee. Which
the Apostle applies Acts 13. 33. to the day of Christ's resurrection; for though
Christ was anointed before, yea he was born a King* yet he came not into the
full possession and execution of his Kingly office until his Resurrection; As
the Apostle asserts Romans 14. 9. To this end Christ died, and rose, and revived,
that he might be Lord both of quick and dead. Yea and Christ himself attests
it, Matt. 28. 18. where he speaks after his resurrection, All power is given
me both in Heaven and Earth.

4. He tells them, he was a King that he had given universal Lordship and
dominion to; I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession, verse. 8.

These things they are told by way of admonition, but when this prevails not:
then, Lastly, he falls upon them, and he breaks them in pieces, Thou shall
break them with a Rod of Iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a Potters
Vessel, as verse. 9.

Now in the three last verses of the Psalm he makes application of the whole
preceding discourse, and applies it particularly to the Rulers and Governors
of the Earth; either because they are the most likely to oppose the Kingdom of
Christ, as fearing it might clash with their earthly and secular interests, as
Herod did; Or else because their subjecting to it, is likely to make a fair way
for its entertainment throughout the world: And he applies it by way of serious
advise and counsel to them.

1. First, he advises them to be wise, and well instructed; (as it behooves men
in power to be men of wisdom) Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, be instructed
ye Judges of the Earth, verse. 9.

2 He tells them wherein they are to declare their wisdom; Serve the Lord with
fear, rejoice with trembling; Kiss the Son, which he presses by a double
argument.

1. Ab incommodo, from the great evil, and mischief that was likely to ensue in
case they did not thus; Least he be angry, and you perish in the way, when his
wrath is kindled but a little.

2. Ab utili, from the great and blessed advantage that would follow upon it,
in case they did; Blessed are all they that put their trust in him. Thus you
have in brief the Analysis of the Psalm: But, I must go back to my Text, which
is nothing else, as I said, but a piece of serious and wholesome Counsel
administered to the Rulers, and Governors of the world, whether higher or
lower, more fixed or transient about their comportment toward Christ, and his
Kingdom, when he is setting it up in the world.

And though this word was spoken by David, many hundred, yea thousands of years
ago, yet it speaks now as much as ever, and is this day brought (though by a
mean instrument) within your walls, and speaks to you.

In the Text we have considerable.

1. The matter, or the substantial part of the Counsel; which is, Serve the
Lord.

2. Here are the persons, to whom it is particularly directed; the Kings, and
Judges of the Earth, they are the persons especially admonisht to serve the
Lord.

3. Here is the manner how the Lord is to be served, Serve the Lord with fear.

4. Here is the motive or argument whereby this Counsel is enforced; And that
is, This will be their Wisdom, hereby they will show themselves wise men, men
well instructed.

1. First, I shall speak to the matter, or substance of the Counsel: which is,
serve the Lord, where we have: first the Act, serve; and the Object about which
it is conversant, The Lord.

The Act, Serve; The word Service, as applied to God or Christ, is taken either
more strictly, for that service we perform when we are upon some part of his
instituted worship, as prayer, hearing, etc. and so is enjoined in the second
Commandment, and is so taken, Acts 26. 7.

Or else it is taken more largely, for any duty of Christianity, any action of
man's life, which he performs in obedience to the will of God, and
subordination to his glory: and so it takes in all the other 9. commandments,
and is thus used, Romans 12. 11.

And as I conceive also in the Text.

Then for the Object, The Lord. In the Heb. Jehovah: And whether it is God the
Father here spoken of, or Christ, who is the King mentioned before, that was
set up, and the Son that is to be kissed, though it is somewhat controverted
among Expositors, yet I think it not material to spend time about it; seeing we
cannot serve one aright, but we must serve both, the Son as in the Father, and
the Father as in the Son.

And then for the persons that are thus more particularly admonisht to serve
the Lord, they are Kings, and Judges, men that sit at the upper end of the
world. The eminency of their place does not the more acquit them, but rather
the more engage them to service: Though they be Kings, yet there is a King
eminently above them, from whom their power is derived upon them, and therefore
they must serve; If they be Judges, yet there is a Judge higher then they,
before whose tribunal they must stand, and be judged, and therefore they must
be serving.

So that the main propositions from hence resulting, which I shall insist upon,
is this,

creature is serving some end without it self. So is man much more made for an
end without himself, which is to serve the Lord.

So that, (Right Honorable) my work I come upon this day amongst you, is to
put you in mind of your Debt, I mean that Homage, Duty, Service, and
Subjection, which you all do owe to the Lord; and which must be paid by every
one of you: for though the Debt of Satisfaction which through sin we owe to the
justice of God, he remit it for Christ's sake to his people, yet the Debt of
Service which we owe to his glory, he neither has remitted it, or ever will
remit it to any of the sons of men.

But that we may a little understand what it is to serve the Lord, take this
twofold distinction.

There is a serving God either mediately, or more immediately.

First, As to the Mediate Service, The whole Creation serves God; by and
through man, the creatures without reason, without sense, and without life, do
serve their Creator, as they hold forth to man such footsteps of his glory
wherein he may admire, praise and glorify him.

The greatness of the works of God show forth his greatness, their beauty his
beauty, their perfection his perfection, their order and workmanship, his
infinite wisdom; their course, and motion, his providence in the world.

Or else they serve God through man, as they serve to maintain him in his Life,
and Being, which being maintained are to be subordinated to the Lord, and to
his service: The Sun sends down its influence that man might live, the clouds
distill their moisture that man might live, the Sea sends forth its waters that
man might live, the Earth brings forth its fruit that man might live; all do
serve the life of man, that the life of man might serve the Lord.

2. There is a more immediate serving God, and so there are but two sorts of
creatures, Angels, and Men, whose service can immedia^ely refer to God. For no
other creatures are capable of an immediate application of themselves to him.
They have not understanding to know him, Wills to close with him; and so not
capable of applying themselves to him, or looking at him in any thing they do.

The second Distinction is this.

There is a serving the Lord, ex Intention, and praeter Intentionem.

1. Praeter Intentionem, or accidental as to him that serves; and so wicked
men, who thought of nothing less then serving God, yet have eminently served
him: As Nebuchadnezar King of Babylon served a great service for God against
Tyrus, Ezekiel 29. 18, 19, 20. and God gave him the land of Egypt for his wages,
though he intended nothing less then to serve God in that Design.

And so the King of Assyria was employed by God to execute his vengeance upon
the hypocritical Nation of the Jews; Howbeit (says the Text) he means not
so, neither does his heart think so: as you read Isa. 10. 6, 7.

And so when Baasha executed the vengeance threatened upon the house of
Jeroboam, 1 King. 15. 29. and when Zimri executed the vengeance threatened upon
Ba^sha, 1 Kings 16. 12. and when Jehu executed the judgment of God upon the
house of Ahab, it was service done for God; though they did not do it with an
intention of serving him: yea the most eminent Prophesies upon Record have been
fulfilled besides the intention of the instruments: As that of Christ's being
crucified for the redeeming of the world: Pilate and the Jews thought of
nothing less then the fulfilling the counsel of the Lord in what they did, or
in serving his decrees, or his glory therein, though they were eminently served
hereby.

2. There is a serving God ex Intention; when the mind and heart of man
respect God in what he does. And this is the service that God calls for, and
the Text calls for, and does alone find acceptance with God.

Now to this intentional serving God, there are three things necessary, that it
find acceptance. 1. That man's principle be right. 2. That his rule be right. 3.
That his end be right.

1. That his Principle be right. It is something of God in man that can alone
aright serve God. So says the Apostle, Heb. 12. 28. Let us have grace, whereby
we may serve God acceptably. Now grace is a divine principle, and it is only
this whereby a man can serve acceptably.

The Apostle speaks in Heb. 11. of many Heroic acts of service done by these
ancient Worthies, as Abel, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Moses, etc. But that which
gave them their acceptance was the Principle, they did them by Faith, says the
Text, and tells us in verse 6. that without faith it is impossible to please
God. There must be the out-going of the soul toward God in that service which
finds acceptance; Now no principle can act the soul toward God, but that which
is divine, and springs from him.

2. As his Principle, so his Rule must be right; for God must be served
according to his own rule, which is his revealed Will; and where the rule is
dark, we must either forbear until God does clear it up, or else act up to it,
as near as the light* we have will lead us. And this is the praerogative of man
above the creatures below us, though they all act by a rule, and to an end
which their Creator has set them, yet they are not capable of understanding,
either their rule or their end; but man is, and therefore if he would be
accepted, he must have respect to his rule: As Saul, he offered Sacrifice,
which in it self was a good thing, and the case was somewhat urgent, for Samuel
came not, and the people began 1 Samuel 13.
to scatter from him, and the Philistims to gather together against him, but
because he walked not by rule in that action, he was rejected of God.

Man's righteousness lies especially in his conformity to the Rule; as the
Schoolmen speak of a Lex aeterna in Deo, an eternal Law according to which God
does all his works both in Heaven and Earth, which is the righteousness of God:
So there is (...), Lex scripta, a Law written either inwardly in man's heart, or
without in the Scriptures, which is the rule of man's walking; and conformity
thereunto is the righteousness of man.

His End must also be right: For God is not served when he is not our end. A
man may be praying, and fasting, and yet not serve God; doing justice, giving
alms, punishing sin, rewarding virtue, and yet not at all serve God. Men indeed
look most to other matter and substance of their actions, because they lie more
open to the view of men; but that which God especially looks at in man, and
which is the most material thing in his actions, is his end. Sometimes when a
man through ignorance mistakes his rule, yet if hi^ end be upright, he may be
accepted notwithstanding. As the Apostle in Romans 14. tells us of two sorts of
Christians in that Church, some that understood their Gospel liberty, and
Gospel rule of walking, and therefore did not observe days, nor confine
themselves to eat herbs, as others did, but yet because in what the one and the
other did, they had respect to God, they did both serve him; as he says verse
6. He that regards a day, regards it to the Lord; and he that regards not
the day to the Lord, he does not regard it. And they were both living to the
Lord; and so both living and dying they were both the Lord's; as he also speaks.

And now these few things being premised, I shall proceed to draw forth such
inferences from the Point, as may most naturally spring from it, and be most
suitable to the present day, and this honorable Assembly: And what may be
needful by way of Argument to confirm it, I shall present in the Application,
that so I may make the best improvement I can of a little time, and speak to
your judgments and affections both together.

must be served in spirit, and no man can serve in spirit, but he that has
received the spirit. The Apostle in Romans 7. 4. speaks of Believers that they
were dead to their first husband the Law, that they might be married to
another, even to him who is raised from the dead: And why must they be thus
married? That we might bring forth fruit unto God. By marrying with Christ, by
our union with him, we come to partake of his Spirit and so to bring forth
fruit unto God. The Spirit is that divine sap which is shed from Christ the
root into those souls that are in union with him, whereby they bring forth
fruit unto God.

And there is a threefold work of the Spirit that must pass upon man before he
can be made a true servant.

1. A work of Conviction: He must be convinced of that absolute dependence he
has upon God; that he cannot subsist and live of himself without God: For
until a man does see his dependence, he will not serve. A man will not
willingly subject himself to the will of one, upon whom he has no dependence.
Now a man without the spirit, his heart speaks that he can subsist of himself,
by his own wit, wisdom, providence, industry, and creature Interest, and
therefore he regards not God, he serves not God; but himself, or the creature,
as thinking he depends more upon these then upon the Lord. And this is the
reason that when men are to transact any work, they are careful about the
means, but they look not at God, or very slightly; it is because they think
they depend more upon the means then God; which is a piece of Atheism that
grows in all our hearts; and those have found it, that are come to know their
own hearts; and must be rooted up by the convictions of the Spirit, before man
will indeed become the Lord's servant.

Yea again* He must also be convinced that in serving God there is the best
reward. Every man before he enters upon work, is looking what his reward and
wages shall be: As those in the Gospel that we read of in Matthew. 20. 6, 7.
being asked why they stood all the day long idle; they answered, because no man
has hired us; they would not work till they had some promise of wages; now
when man is thoroughly convinced that Gods work will have a reward, and the best
reward; this inclines him and draws him to his service: now the Reward that God
gives, it excels, 1. In the greatness of it, no reward can match it; what ever
the Devil or the World may offer, yet God does infinitely outbid them, what
they offer is but a piece of light and fading vanity, but what God offers is a
weight, an eternal weight of glory.

The Reward must needs be great, because God rewards not only according to man's
work, but according to the riches of his own grace, and bounty: A great King
accounts it his shame to give a mean reward, he must do all things like
himself: It is said Heb. 11. 16. of those believing Patriarchs, God was not
ashamed to be called their God; why? for says the Text, he has prepared for
them a City; that is, if God had not well provided for them, if he had not
prepared a glorious habitation for them, somewhat like himself, he might have
been ashamed to be called their God: so

This Reward excels in the sureness of it. It will certainly come. Though we
may fail of success in our work, yet we shall not miss the reward of it, as
the Prophet Isaiah speaks, Isai. 49. 4. I have labored in vain, there he mist
his success, yet my judgment is with the Lord, and my works with my God: there
he finds the reward. And it is the Apostles argument, 1 Cor. 15. ult. let us
abound in the work of the Lord, and the Argument is, not only because there is
a reward, but the reward is sure; as knowing that our labor is never in vain
in the Lord.

It is true God does defer it, at least the greatest part of it; but why is it?
that he might learn us to live upon Trust. He having given us such a sure
promise, he may presume that we have enough to support and encourage us, though
the reward be for a season deferred; Therefore says the Apostle Heb. 10. 35:
Cast not away your confidence which has great recompense of reward: Oh, but we
do not see the recompense, we possess it not; therefore he adds, yet a little
while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry, and the just shall
live by faith.

2. The second work of the spirit is a work of mortification, Man's selfish
nature must be mortified; else he will be serving himself, and not the Lord.
That life in a believer that serves the Lord, springs out of the death of his
carnal life: as man cease to be his own, so does he come to serve the Lord,
and live to him.

The message that Moses carried to Pharaoh from the Lord was this, Let my
people go, that they may serve me; they must go out of the Land of Egypt, and
from under the power of Pharaoh, that they might serve the Lord.

So must man go out of that selfish nature that keeps him in bondage, and out
of the power of the infernal Pharaoh, before he can be capable of serving God.
And this is done in us by the Spirit, that smites those enemies that held us in
bondage, that we might go forth into the liberty of serving God; pride must be
smitten, and self-love must be smitten, and unbelief must be smitten, etc.
before any man does indeed enter into the Lords service. No man, says Christ,
can serve two Masters; especially two Masters whose commands are contradictory;
now every lust is a Master, which man is serving, and till the Spirit crucify
them, man cannot be serving Jesus Christ.

3. The third work is a work of renovation. The faculties of the soul must pass
under a spiritual renovation before they can be fit to serve the Lord. For I am
not of their opinion who think that if lust be mortified, the soul would of it
self return into its primitive course; as a river that is stopped, if you remove
the dam, it runs of it self; or a stone that hangs in the air by a string, if
you cut the string, of it self it falls to the center: but there must be
aliquid divinitus infusum, a principle infused from above to act it toward the
Lord, and in his service.

Lust, it is a confining thing, it makes man dwell at home, and serve himself,
but grace is enlarging, it lets man out of himself, and brings him home to the
Lord, and to the service of the Lord. He that is a fit servant for a Prince,
must have many accomplishments to fit him for it: And so would I dwell here, I
might show you how many things are necessary to accomplish a man for the Lords
service, as Faith, Love, Hope, Humility, Self denial, etc. are all necessary;
that he may be a vessel of honor prepared for his Masters 2 Timothy 2. 21.
use: For natural accomplishments may fit a man for the service of man, but man
must be accomplished from Heaven to fit him for the Lords service: But I pass.

we are no debtors, yet these should have more real, more free, more cheerful
service then God, then Christ, to whom we are indebted by so manifold
engagements, and obligations!

This is true, but ah, is it not sad? Has not Christ, think you better
deserved of the World? Has he not? Might not Jesus Christ promise himself,
that after he had manifested such stupendous love, as to lay down his life for
an undone world, that they should be so amazed, so ravished with this love, as
to be ambitious who should love him most, and honor him most, and serve him
most; that the very naming the name of Christ, should be argument enough to
provoke them to engage in any service for him.

Yea and after he had laid down the price of his blood, the greatest price that
Heaven or Earth could give to purchase us, might he not promise himself, that
the Sons of men would no longer be their own, but his, wholly his? But alas,
we see nothing less then this in the world. Men after all this are their own,
live to themselves, serve themselves, and Christ and his service both, are
despised, and rejected of men, may not Heaven and Earth even tremble* and be
astonished at this?

Or, when men are serving Christ, do they serve him with the best, do they
serve him with such life, and vigor, as they serve themselves, and the world;
do not they bring him the lame, the blind, the torn, the maimed, as if any
thing was good enough for Christ; as Jeroboam made Priests of the lowest of the
People; so do men think the lowest of their affections, the very dreg of their
time and strength good enough for God.

Was there ever such love, as that which Christ showed to the world, and was
there ever any carriage so unworthy, and so unsufferable as that which Christ
receives from the World?

We have the Type of this in the Nation of the Jews. You know God did
wonderfully for that people; brought them out of Egypt by an out stretched arm;
and carried them through the wilderness by a continual miracle, and then settled
them in a pleasant land, such a land as could not, for, all things, be matched
by any upon earth; might not now God expect, think you, eminent love and
service from such a people: but when they come into the good land, they
presently defile it with their Idolatries, they forget the works of God: and
as the Prophet Jeremy expresses it, They say not, where is the Lord that
brought us out of the Land of Egypt, that led us through the wilderness? etc.
So after all the wonderful works of power and love that Christ has wrought
for the redemption of man, and for the settling him in an heavenly inheritance,
Oh how much is this Christ forgotten; How few are there that say, where is this
Jesus that has done these things; Oh where is he, that we may adorn him, that
we may embrace him, that we may devote our selves, and all that we are and have
to him: Ah, must not this be for a Lamentation this day, may we not lament upon
Christ's account, that he should be so much despised, and his service neglected,
and upon the worlds account, that they should no better understand their own
Interest, then to be serving other Masters and cast him off.

But to come a little nearer home, May not we particularly mourn over our
selves, and the Nation this day? Oh the mercies that England has received! But
have we not too soon, too soon forgotten them? Has God been served under his
mercy, and served with his mercy as he should have been? Do we ask after the
God of our mercies, and say, Where is the God of all these mercies? Where is
that God that delivered us from the Bondage of Popery and Superstition in Queen
Marys days; and from those ensnaring Ceremonies, and superstitious Innovations
in the late Prelates days? Where is that God that appeared for us at Keint^n,
Newberry, Naseby, Dunbar, Worcester, etc?

Might not God promise himself, that when he had delivered us out of the hands
of our enemies, we would serve him without fear, in righteousness and holiness
all the days of our life? But do we so?

And that when he had delivered us from those innovations that were intruded
into his Worship; he should have a pure worship, and pure Ordinances set up
amongst us; and a joyful and holy walking in them: But is it thus?

And that when once the danger of Saints meeting together, called
Conventicling, was removed, they would fall into a sweet and blessed communion
and fellowship among themselves: But alas is it thus?

As also might not God expect that those which suffered together, and were
delivered together, should join heart and hand together, to promote the common
Interest of Christ against the Common Enemy: But is this found amongst us?

God told the Jews, Zach. 8. 19. that he would deliver them, and turn the Fasts
of the fourth, fifth, and seventh month into joy and gladness, and cheerful
Feasts; and that therefore they should love the Truth, and Peace.

God has done much toward our deliverance, we must not, we dare not deny it;
we inherit the fruit of the Prayers and blood of many of his precious Saints:
But after all, Do we love the Truth, and Peace? Is Truth embraced? Is Peace
preserved? Nay, Is not the light of Truth darkened by pernicious Errors, and the
beauty of Peace sadly defaced by unhappy divisions? And must not these things
be for a Lamentation this day?

I remember when the Book of Sports came out in the late Kings days, there was
a general lamentation among the good people of the Land, and a holy zeal for
the spiritual observation of the Christian Sabbath; But now, How many have set
their Consciences free from any such duty, and others are running back to the
Jewish Sabbath, and that more then every one is aware of? And the first step to
fall to the latter, must be the casting off the former.

greatest work, may be most minded. And seeing that (Honored in the Lord) you
have appointed us to be this day your SPEAKERS, to speak to God for you, and to
speak from God to you: give me leave to enjoy that which is the Privilege of
this House, to speak freely. And I shall be bold to speak to you, as standing
before the Lord this day, in a threefold capacity. 1. As Men. 2. As Christians.
3. As Magistrates, and the TRVSTEES of the three Nations.

First, I shall speak to you as men; and as men you are engaged to serve the
Lord: For,

First, Have you not received your Beings from him? Has not he made you, and
not you your selves? Does not then the Law of Creation engage you to serve him
by whom you are, or else you had never been?

There are certain Duties which Divines call Natural Worship, which the light
of Nature does dictate to men, and are due to him by the very Law of Creation;
as to love God, fear him, trust him; so also to serve him, and refer our
actions to him, which God never did, nor never will dispense with to the sons
of men: So that he that lives in the world, and is not truly serving God in the
world, this man sins against the very Dictates of natural light, and against
the Original and Fundamental right which God claims to us, as being his
creatures, and the work of his hands. Shall the thing that is formed say to him
that formed it, What have thou to do with me? And, wherein am I indebted to
thee? Shall not God enjoy his own Creature? And does he enjoy it, if it is not
serving him?

Secondly, As man was made by the Lord, so he was made peculiarly for the Lord;
He made the rest of the Creation to serve man, but he made man to serve
himself. He furnished him with such Faculties of mind, that rendered him capable
of knowing, praising, and serving his Creator: and is there but this one
creature in this lower world that God made peculiarly to serve him, and shall
he be disappointed in that one?

Nay, shall the rest of the Creatures keep their station, and serve their end,
and man not serve his?

When God would Arraigne a people that was rebellious against him, he calls
Heaven and Earth to hearken, Isa. 1. 2. Hear O Heavens, and hearken O Earth:
Why? What strange thing has God to bring forth? Why this; I have nourished and
brought up children, and they have rebelled against me* As if he had said, Is
there such a thing to be found out in the whole Creation, that any creature
which God had made, maintained, and showed his power and goodness in, should
rebel against him? O Heavens! Is there any such thing to be found with you? O
Earth! Is there any such thing to be found in thee? May not the Heavens, and
the Luminaries above, rise up against man, and say, We have observed our place,
kept our distances, runs our race, poured down our influences according to the
Law set us in our Creation? May not the Earth rise up and say, I have stood
firm upon my Basis, I have brought forth my increase, I have been serviceable
to man's being, and man's d^light, by those varieties of fruits I have brought
forth to him, sweet to his taste, fragrant to his sm^ll, and beautiful to his
fight, and that with a new Edition every year? Here are now the creatures
serving thee, O man, and what, art not thou serving the Lord? Do they hand up
that service which they owe to thee, and wilt not thou hand up that service
which thou owe to God? Shall the work stick at thee? What? at thee! It is
observable that which we read in Genesis 1. That God did not say of the works that
he had made, that they were very good, until he had made man; he saw them to be
good before, but now very good; for God had now made a creature that was to be
the lord of the Creation, and that was made capable of bringing in to him the
glory of his works, and so took the greater pleasure in them upon that account:
and therefore man ought to be careful that God be not disappointed in him.

Thirdly, It is man's Excellency and Glory to serve the Lord.

The excellency of every thing lies in its serving its end; as of a knife in
cutting, a pen in writing, etc. Now man being made for the Lord, as his end; it
is his excellency to be serving him.

It is natural to man to seek after Excellency. Omne desiderium ad superiora
tendit. Some men seek for it in a great estate, others in Rule and Dominion,
others in Wisdom and Learning, etc. according to men's several Constitutions and
Apprehensions, so they seek after several excellencies: but true excellency
consists in a man's upright and faithful serving his End. He that does most
eminently serve the Lord in his generation, this man does most excel.

Solomon says, Prove. 12. 26. The righteous is more excellent th^n his
Neighbor: and this is the thing wherein he excels, because it is he only that
is serving the Lord. In other things his neighbor may excel him.

The commendation that God gives to Moses at his Funeral was this, that he was
the servant of the Lord, Genesis 34. 5, 6. So Moses the servant of the Lord died;
and he buried him in a Valley, in the land of Moab, etc. The Spirit of God
might have styled him Moses the Honorable, Moses the Prince, Moses the
Scholar, Moses the Beautiful; But this was Moses his chief excellency, that he
was the Servant of the Lord. Though other excellencies may commend man more to
the world, yet this is that which commends man to God.

Fourthly, Consider this, not to serve the Lord is the highest Injustice: We
withold that from God which is his Due: For service is a debt that we owe
him, and shall we dare to rob God?

What says the Prophet Malachy, chap. 3. ver. 8. Will a man rob God? Scarce
could there be found among the Heathen any so profane and sacrilegious, as to
dare to rob their gods, though they were but dumb Idols; and shall any man dare
then to rob the living God? To give away that service to Mammon, to Satan, to
encroaching lusts, which of due belongs unto him.

Give unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto God the things that
are Gods.

Caesar expects to have his due; if men do not give it, Caesar will take it:
and what then shall not God much more have his due? And will he not severely
require it at their hands that do withold it?

Parliaments are the Supreme Courts of Justice, the Fountains from whence
Justice and Judgment are to run down like a stream throughout the Nation; and
shall you (Right Honorable) you that are Fountains of Justice, be guilty of
that high Injustice your selves, as not to resign up your selves, and all that
you are and have, to the service of God, which is the debt you owe him, and the
Due, he expects from you?

Fifthly, Again, Consider this, (for I yet speak to you as men) if ye do not
serve the Lord, this is that which will destroy you: for if a thing will not
serve its end, we cast it away: If a Pen will not write, if a Knife will not
cut, if a Needle will not sow, we cast them away; for what are they good for,
when they do not serve their End?

So when we plant a Tree to bring forth Fruit, and it become barren, we cut it
down, and make fuel of it for the fire; it does not answer our end. So has God
made man to be as a Tree of Righteousness, to bring forth the fruit of service
and obedience to him; and if he proves barren, and serves not God's end; Will
he not say as Christ of the barren Fig Tree? Cut it down, Why cumbreth it the
ground? Luke 13. 7.
Those men shall become fuel to God's Justice, that will not be servants to his
will and glory.

Was not this that which destroyed the old World? The Lord had made man to
serve himself; but when the Lord saw that mankind was degenerated, and that
they were become a generation of Rebels, the Lord repented that he made him; as
we repent of any work we have done, when therein we do not attain our end: And
hereupon it was that God destroyed him from off the face of the Earth.

It is a true saying, In nihilum valet, quod non valet in finem suum: That is
good for nothing, that does not avail to its end: So that as we would not be
cast away, and cut down, and destroyed, it does concern us to be careful that
we serve our end, which is to serve the Lord.

Sixthly, In the next place, consider, If a man does not serve the Lord, he is
spending his money for that which is not bread, and his labor for that which
satisfies not. For if a man does not serve the Lord, the fruit that he will
reap of all his other service, will not satisfy him. Every man expects when he
comes to receive the fruit of his travel, to find something that may be as bread
for his foul to feed upon, and be satisfied; now no travel, no labor, but that
which is expended in serving God, will bring in that fruit which may give rest
to the soul of man; because it can fetch him in but some Finite good, which is
too narrow to satisfy the soul.

Solomon in the Book called the Ecclesiastes, gives us a Catalogue of the
several vanities that he had observed under the Sun; and one is this, which he
mentions chap. 6. verse. 7. All the labor of man is for his mouth, and yet the
belly is not filled. Man labors and toyls, and yet he has not out of all his
labor, that which can fill his appetite: His appetite is capable of more then
his labor can bring him in, which was a vanity he observed.

But now he that is in sincerity serving the Lord, when he comes to enjoy the
fruit, and the reward of his service, he shall find that which will be
satisfa^tion to his soul; for he shall find God himself both in that service,
and especially at the end of the service.

As the good servant in the Gospel that had faithfully served the Lord, was bid
to enter into his Masters joy: Other servants that are serving the World; and
serving their Lusts, may enter into the joy of the creature, and the joy and
pleasure of sin, but not into the joy of the Lord, which is only that joy that
can satisfy the heart of man.

Lastly, consider this, If a man does not serve the Lord, he does not Live: I
say again, he does not live. It is true, take life in a large sense, so it is
the whole activity of the Reasonable Soul, displaying it self in the several
actions of man in the world: But take life in a stricter and Theological sense,
and so it is the activity of the soul, displaying it self by the power of the
holy Ghost, in the service of God. So that when the service of God is the
Sphaere, and the Spirit the Principle of the souls activity, this is most truly
and properly life.

The Apostle says of the Widow that lives in pleasure, She is dead while she
lives.

The Widow indeed, She serves God day and night, as he 1 Timothy 5. 6.
said before: But she that lives in pleasure, not serving God, is dead whiles
she lives.

I suppose you have heard the story of him that was converted in the latter end
of his days, and therefore would have this Inscription upon his Tomb after his
death, Diu fui in Mundo, parum vixi: I have been long in the world, but I have
lived but a little: For that life which man lives whiles he is serving himself,
and acting his lusts, and promoting his own carnal interests is so far
differing from that life which he at first reveived from God in innocence, that
it is quite another, and not that life, as if he that had lived the life of a
man should come to live the life of a beast: as Nebuchadnezar did, you would
say this is another, and not the same life: So that when a man is in sincerity
serving the Lord, this is his original life, and his only true life.

Thus I have spoken to you as men, and the engagements you see that lie upon
you, on that lowest account are very strong, to be serving the Lord; but those
that follow are yet stronger, wherein, I shall speak to you:

2. Secondly, as Christians. Christians I mean, not in the largest sense, as
Baptized only into the name of Christ, but in a stricter sense, as Baptized
into his Spirit; for I believe I speak to many such at this time; and as such,
you are peculiarly engaged to serve the Lord. For,

1. First, you are those that the Lord has bought; peculiarly bought, for
though Christ in a more general sense, has purchased all men, yea the whole
creation; for his Lordship and dominion over all creatures, comes in upon him
upon the account of his death; yet his death, and the purchase of it, does more
peculiarly relate to his people, Being the Savior of all men, yet especially
of those that believe. Now the Apostle argues, 1 Cor. 5. last, concerning the
believing Corinthians, Ye are not your own, why? For ye are bought with a
price: What then? Therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit which
are the Lords.

As a servant that is but hired, is engaged to serve his Master, how much more
if bought with his money, as those servants under the Law. So that the Lord
has a stronger title to you then others; as being not only his by the more
common right of Creation, but the more peculiar right of purchase: And the
price that purchased you is not Silver and Gold, which yet are accounted the
most precious things in nature, but the blood of Christ, the blood of God,
which is indeed the greatest that Heaven or Earth could yield. So that Gods
expectation cannot but be greater upon his people then upon any others, that
whoever deny him service, yet that they should yield it to him.

And so says the same Apostle 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. If one died for all then were
all dead, etc. that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves,
but unto him that died, and rose again

As if he should say, we were indeed all dead, but we are purchased from death
into life by Jesus Christ; and this life now, we are not to live it to our
selves, but unto him by whose death we come to live.

2. As Christians you are Married to the Lord. He has divorced you from your
first Husband, which is the Flesh, which you were in League with, and obedient
to, and he has married you to himself.

Now why are you thus married, the Apostle tells you Romans 7. 4. We are married
to him, that is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit to God:
We are married to Christ Crucified, that we might be dead to sin; and to Christ
raised from the dead, that we might live a new life, which is, to bring forth
fruit to God.

As we know in Marriage, a man marries a wife, that she might bring forth her
fruit, as by himself, and not by another, so to himself, and not to another
also: Now this is to serve the Lord, when the fruit we bring forth, we bring it
forth not to our selves, but unto him.

And we know also by the Law of marriage the wife is not her own, but her
Husbands, and has not power over her own body, but the Husband, as the Apostle
speaks 1 Cor. 7. 4. So is the case here, ye that are married to the Lord, the
Law of that spiritual Relation does take you off from being your own, or having
a power over your selves, so as to be serving your selves; and does engage you
to be the Lords, and to be serving him.

3. As Christians, and Saints, he has bestowed more cost and workmanship upon
you then upon others, he has formed you for himself.

He has Created you again. So says St. Paul, Ephesians. 2. 10. We are his
workmanship; why? So are all Creatures: but he adds, Created in Christ Jesus;
we have a new creation in him: but to what are we created? To good works, that
we should walk in them, and what is that, but to be serving the Lord?

Why was it that the Lord did so expect fruit from his Vineyard, Isaiah 5, and
so wondered when he found it not, it was because he had bestowed so much cost
and work upon it? He had fenced it, and gathered out the stones of it, and
planted it with the choicest vine, etc. THEN he looked it should bring grapes.
Had not the Lord bestowed so much workmanship upon it, he would not have had
such expectation upon it. God expects better and greater things from his people
then from others, that they should do that which is singular, and serve him at
a more Spiritual and excellent rate then others either do or can, and that upon
the account of that workmanship he has bestowed upon them.

It is said 1 Kings 10. 12. That King Solomon made of Almug-trees Psalteries
and Harps for Singers, to praise the Lord. So all the spiritual carving and
polishing that God bestows upon the Spirits of his people, is but to make them
instruments of service and praise to himself.

4. Consider again, Does not the Law of Love, as you are Christians, engage you
to be serving the Lord? How can we say we love Christ if we do not serve him?
The Nature of love is to deny it self, and overlook it self, that it may serve
the person beloved. Amor est Donum Amantis in amatum. Through love, the true
lover bestows himself upon his beloved. and if himself much more his service.
(...): as that Ancient speaks, it suffers not a man to be his own. Now can we
justify it to Christ or our own Consciences that we love him, if we bestow not
ourselves in a way of service upon him?

What is the reason that men are so serving themselves? is it not because they
love themselves? It is this self love that does confine man within himself, and
makes his charity not only, (according to the Proverb) to begin at home, but to
end at home also: But now when man does indeed love the Lord, this same carries
him out of himself, and resigns him up to the Lord, and all that he is and
has, to be serviceable to the Lord.

Lastly, How can we say that Christ reigns in our hearts, if we are not serving
the Lord? For the great end of Christ's reigning, is to subdue in man his
self-ish Nature, whereby he is serving himself; that the Lord that has right
to him, may have service from him.

Christ is made Lord of the Creation, is set up King of all the Earth, that he
might make the Creation serviceable to God; that God might have the glory of
his works come into him through his Son; So is he set up King in the heart of
man, that he might smite those Enemies that had carried him from God, and his
service; and subdue his Reason, his Will, his Affections, and his whole man to
the obedience and service of God. And it is an undoubted Truth, That as
Christ's Reign and Kingdom prevails in the heart of man, so does he cease from
himself, and is serving the Lord.

Thus I have spoken to you also in the second capacity, as Christians; and now
give me leave also to speak a few words to you in that capacity wherein you
meet in this House, that is, as Magistrates, or Parliament Men.

And in this more Public and Politic capacity you are to serve the Lord:
For every Talent that is in our hands, we are to improve it for our Masters
use. For what is a Talent, but any Ability or Opportunity that is in the hand
of man, whereby he may be useful to the praise and service of God: And where
there are more Talents, there will be the more required.

He that had but one Talent in the Parable, was severely punished, because he
hid that one in the Earth, and improved it not: But suppose that he that had
the five Talents, should have hid them all five, Should he not have been
punished five times more?

Men that have great Estates, great Authority, great Interests, and act in a
wider Sphaere then other men; as they have greater advantages in their hand, so
their sin, and their punishment will be greater, if they (I do not say abuse
them, for the unprofitable Servant did not so, but) neglect them, and improve
them not.

The Magistrates of the world, Kings, and Judges of the Earth, are particularly
called upon to serve the Lord, in the Text; and to Kiss the Son in the next
verse; For whatever power they have, even as such, is derived from Christ the
Mediator; By whom Kings Reign, and Princes Decree Judgment. For Christ is not
only King of his Church, but King of the World; and so the powers of the world
are derived from him, and are to be subordinate and subjected to his honor;
and (so far as they are concerned) to the Affairs of his Kingdom in the Earth.

I intend not to enter that perplex controversy of the Magistrate's power in
matters of Religion, about which I find a double Extreme; The one in that
opinion of ERASTVS, that would have no other Government in the Church, but that
of the Civil Magistrate, and his power to interpose, even in the Intrinsic
affairs thereof.

The other is that of the Jesuits, whose Maxim is, Magistratus nil statuat de
Religione. And I have heard it asserted, That nothing of the first Table, or of
the Souls of men, does at all fall under his cognizance: which I humbly
conceive to be an Extreme on the other hand: For without question, something may
and ought to be done by the Magistrate, to the befriending of the Gospel, and
its progress in the world.

I shall only speak of those things which I think most sober men will grant;
because it is a tender point.

1. Without question he is to do nothing to hinder the preaching and spreading
the Gospel within his Dominion: For the true Gospel has a right to be preached
in all Nations. The Apostles had a Commission from him that was King of kings,
and Lord of lords, To Go and teach all Nations; and therefore they might by
virtue of their Royal Commission from him, demand of the subordinate Kings and
Rulers of the Earth a free and un-interrupted passage through their several
Dominions, for the publishing of this Gospel, in any part of them. And they
were not to be accounted Intruders, in any Nation, or any City, which they
might enter into for the discharge of their Commission.

2. Because the Gospel has such a Right, Magistrates ought not only to suffer
it, but to remove outward Obstructions that may lie in its way, and that may
hinder the passage and progress thereof: And he does but that which is to have
a free passage through the world.

So that if any should shut their doors against the preaching of it, he may
command them to be opened; If any should lay hands upon the Dispensers of it,
to restrain them in their work, he may command that they be set at liberty; if
any disturb and interrupt them in their work, he may forbid all such
disturbances: Yea, if the people will not come to hear it preached, but be
spending their time in drinking and revelling, and the like, when they should
be attending upon it, he may command them to give their attendance upon it, at
least in one place or another; especially such as own the Christian profession,
as we do generally in this Nation.

3. He is not only to remove obstructions, but he ought to countenance and
encourage the true Preachers and Ministers of the Gospel in their preaching,
and the Professors of the Gospel in their profession. He is to take them under
the wing of his Government, and to protect them in their just Liberties against
all opposers; and to furnish them with convenient places for their meetings,
and public Worship; and to provide what maintenance may be necessary for the
furtherance of the preaching the Gospel, and spreading of it, as Constantine
did in his time. And all this he is to do, because of that Supreme Right that
the Gospel has from him that is the King of the Earth, to be published in the
world.

4. But lastly, He may also upon the same account inhibite the divulging and
propagating of any principles, opinions, or religion so called, which will
directly tend to the undermining and subverting of this Gospel: For it is only
the true Gospel that has a right to be propagated, and received in the world.
So that the Magistrate is under no engagement to any Religion, but the true
Religion; any Gospel, but the true Gospel, any profession but the true
profession; for that only has a right, as I said, to be propagated and
entertained.

So that if any man will come and preach another Gospel, then what the
Apostles, had a commission from Christ to preach, and will preach such Doctrine
as will tend to the undermining of it. The Magistrate is under no engagement to
give to that, liberty; much less countenance, but rather to restrain it,
because it is not that Gospel, and that true revelation of the mind of God,
which he has decreed to be entertained of men.

If a man will come and preach up Paganism, Turcisme, Judaisme, Papisme; yea
and to go farther, Pelagianisme, Socinianisme, or Arminianisme, in the grosser
points of it, and claim liberty, and protection from the Magistrate in so
doing, let him show by what right he would claim this liberty: for where can he
show that ever any man had a commission from Christ to preach up these
religions or opinions in the world.

I would be understood to speak only of those opinions, that do undermine the
true Gospel, and that way of truth which God has revealed for the salvation of
the world, and which may be accounted in the number of those Heresies that are
damnable, and not of lesser mistakes either in point of Doctrine or Discipline
wherein the godly both have and may differ: for in things that are doubtful, or
not fully certain, there ought to be a forbearance, least the truth be
restrained in stead of error.

Neither have I pleaded for the punishing of any man's person merely, because he
holds this or that opinion; what I have said is that the Magistrate is under no
engagement to error as error, or to give liberty to the spreading of those
opinions, that raze the Foundation of our Christian Religion.

Object. 1. But there are such c^ntroversies in religion, that we know not how
to be sure what is a truth, or what is error; and so we may oppose truth in
stead of error, and make way to error in stead of truth.

Answer. Are we not sure that the Christian Religion, is the true Religion: if
we are not sure of that we leave our souls in a desperate hazard, and lie
sadly open to the snares and temptations of the Devil, and of men Cunning to
deceive.

But if you say, you are sure the Christian Religion is the true Religion, may
you not then be sure also of those great truths, which are as the pillars upon
which it stands? May we not be sure that Jesus Christ is the true Messiah, and
that he was really in the nature of man, and that in that nature he suffered
death for the Redemption of the world?

May we not be sure, that he is risen from the dead, and lives for ever, making
intercession in that nature wherein he died? and that he will come again to
judge the world?

May we not be sure that the Scrip^ures are the written word of God, and the
rule of our Faith and obedience, by which all light in the hearts or Doctrines
of men is to be examined?

Again, may we not be sure that we are justified by Faith, and not by the works
of the Law?

May not we be sure, that there shall be a Resurrection of men's bodies at the
last day, and that some shall rise to eternal life, and others to go into
everlasting fire, etc.

If we cannot be sure of such things as these, my preaching may be vain, and
your Faith also vain.

Object. But the Magistrate is not to determine what is truth and what is
error.

Answ. 1. I do not say he is ^o determine, yet I say he is to be instructed, as
the Text speaks, and to know which is the true Religion, and the great truths
upon which it is built, and when he knows them, he is to give freedom,
countenance, and what furtherance he may to them. And if some Magistrates have
through ignorance, or prejudice, turned their power against the truth; yet it
was their duty to have improved their power for it in those ways, and upon
that ground that I before mentioned. His ignorance and inability to discharge
his duty, does not at all exempt him from it.

Thus I have shown briefly, and I hope clearly, wherein the Magistrate may
befriend the Gospel, and the true Religion; and so upon that account be serving
the Lord.

There are other things also of another nature, wherein he may serve the Lord;

As in suppressing open vice, and wickedness, putting down those houses that
are the nourishers and maintainers of them, I mean disorderly Alehouses and
Taverns, whereof we have yet too too great a store every where. Something I
perceive has been done upon that account in the Countries, and I could wish
they were a little more narrowly looked after in the City.

God had a sad controversy with Eli, though a good man, that when his Sons did
wickedly, he restraind them not: He 1 Samuel 3. 13.
was a Magistrate, and though he could not change their hearts, yet he might
have restraind their practice. And I think this will somewhat befriend the
Gospel, and the passage of it among us.

And then as for other things wherein you may serve the Lord, as Enacting
righteous Laws, doing justice, and judgment, relieving the oppressed,
establishing the Liberties of the Nation, so far as may consist with the just
liberties of the people of God, and the security of that cause, wherein the
godly of the Nation have been, and yet are so deeply interested, that our
motion may not be Retrograde, and we loose the things that we have wrought.

As also for the carrying on your affairs at Sea, and the war wherein you are
engaged with Spain, wherein you would ask counsel from Heaven this day, it is
not for me to advise any thing in these things, they being so much out of my
sphaere; I shall only say, The Lord direct you.

Yet only this I shall say, that the Monarchy you have to do against, is deeply
defiled with blood, and with that blood which has the loudest cry; and when
its iniquity is at the full, and its defense taken off, it shall be, as Caleb
said of the Canaanites, but as bread for those Instruments that God shall
employ to take vengeance.

Only let me bold humbly to advise you, as that which is of the greatest
concernment to the success of your Affairs, That you would Interest God as much
as may be in them all: For seeing you are men that do pretend to God in what
you do, and have his Name upon you, you are to expect your success to come in,
not in a common way of Providence, but in a way of prayer, faith, and sincere
serving him in all your undertakings. This is the third Inference.

Fourthly, I shall infer something by way of Trial in a word or two, that we may
a little know our own hearts, and whom we are serving whether our selves, or
the Lord. You may know it,

First by this. If you serve the Lord in what you do, then you expect your
Reward principally from him: for the thing or the person that man is serving,
from the same does he expect his reward, He that is serving man, expects his
reward from man; He that is serving mammon, from mammon he looks for his
reward: And he that is serving the Lord, he expects also his chief reward from
the Lord: And the sense of that reward which he shall have from God, is the
motive that quickens him more in his work, then any he may receive from man.

Secondly, He that serves the Lord in what he does, has his eye upon him as
his ultimate end. He that looks no farther then himself, this man is serving
himself; let his work be what it will be, as I said before. But when the Lord
is Finis operis, the end of the work; or at least Finis operantis, the end of
him that works, then is the Lord served.

Lastly, He that serves the Lord, he endeavors to manage his work so, as it
may be most serviceable to him. If a Minister uprightly serve the Lord, he will
preach the Word, and manage the whole course of his Ministry, not in such a way
as may be most pleasing to men, but most to the good of souls, and the honor
and service of Christ: And so I may say of Magistrates, and of private
Christians; if they are serving the Lord, they then will so endeavor to act,
and so steer the whole course of their life, as that the Lord may be most
served and honored by them.

good and faithful servant. The service of the Lord, though we may suffer
reproach in it, yet it is the most honorable; and loss in it, yet it is the
most gainful; and pain and trouble in it, yet it is the most pleasant service
in the world,

Ah (much honored Senators) you that are in the integrity of your hearts
serving the Lord, besides all that peace and pleasure that you may have at
present, there is a day coming, wherein all your service and labor of love
will be returned into your Bosoms an hundred fold.

Oh how honorably does that man live, and how blessedly shall that man die,
that has been doing the Lord's work in the world!

Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, etc. for they rest from their
labors, and their works follow them. Rev. 14. 13. their works are ceased as to
the labor of them, but follow them, and will be with them for ever, as to the
reward of them.

The rich man's riches shall not follow him, the voluptuous man's pleasures shall
not follow him, nor the honors of the honorable shall not follow them; but
the faithful servants works shall follow him, and be with him for ever.

It is said of David, that after he had served his generation according to the
will of God, he fell asleep, Acts 13. 36. How sweetly may that man lay himself
down in the sleep of death, that has in his life been serving his generation
according to the will of God.

The Lord himself will give Testimony to such a man, as he does to the faithful
servant in the Parable; Well done thou good and faithful servant. For a
Magistrate, for a Minister, Mat. 25. 21.
for a Christian to have an Euge from Christ; for the Lord himself to give an
honorable Testimony to a man, and his service, is the truest honor, and the
highest commendation. And though he be but a servant, yet his Master will make
him sharer with himself, and that in the best thing which he has, which is his
joy; Enter thou into thy Masters joy: And is not this enough to encourage you?

But yet, if a bigger word then this can be spoken, we have an expression or
two falling from Christ's own mouth, and recorded by Luke, chap. 12. which I
cannot think of without wonder.

The one you find in the 43, 44. verses, Blessed is that servant whom the Lord
when he comes shall find so doing. Of a truth I say unto you, that he will
make him Ruler over all that he has. Can any thing be spoken more? Yes, in
ver. 37. we have a greater word then this, which I durst not have spoke, if
Christ had not spoken it himself: Blessed are those servants whom the Lord when
he comes shall find watching; Verily I say unto you, he shall gird himself,
and make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them.

In the former expression he says, That all that he has shall be at their
service; and that is very much: But in this latter, he says a great deal more;
That he himself will gird himself, and put himself as into the posture of a
servant, and come forth and serve them. And now, Beloved, who would not be the
Lord's servant.

And thus I have spoken to the matter of the counsel here given to the Kings
and Judges of the Earth, which is, to Serve the Lord.

I shall next in a word speak to the manner, how the Lord is to be served; and
that the Text says, is with Fear. Serve the Lord with fear.

Though they are Kings, and Judges, and are a Terror to others, yet even they
must serve the Lord with fear; and though they are men that usually have the
greatest defense about them, yet lie as open and naked to God as any others,
and therefore must serve with fear.

Quest. But what fear is this they are to serve with? and of what?

Answ. For the former question, the Apostle resolves it in that parallel
Scripture, Heb. 12. 28. Let us have grace, whereby we may serve God with
Reverence, and Godly Fear: There is a base slavish fear that makes a man run
from God, and have hard thoughts of him, and binds him up from serving him.

As the unprofitable servant, if he speak his heart, was bound up from
employing his Talent by this base fear: Matthew. 25. 24, 25. Lord, says he, I
knew thee, that thou art an hard man, reaping where thou have not sown, etc.
and I was afraid.

But the fear wherewith we are to serve God, is an ingenuous Son-like fear:
Such a fear as

1. Springs from Love, and that Honorable esteem we have of God, which in
Hebr. 12. is called Reverence: which Moralists tell us, is an affection
compounded of love and fear; and is wrought in the heart by a due sense of that
greatness and goodness which is in God.

2. Which quickens a man in service. For this true Fear, is a strong Incentive
to action. The Apostle to quicken those dull Hebrews in their travel to the
true Rest, does endeavor to possess them with this holy Fear, Heb. 4. 1. Let
us therefore fear, lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any
of us should seem to come short of it. Security rocks the soul asleep, but Fear
awakens it, and sets it a work.

Quest. 2. But what are they to be in fear of?

Answ. The verse after this Text does in general tell us and that is, the Lords
displeasure, lest he be angry, and you perish says the Text, and that, if his
wrath be kindled but a little, what then if he should stir up all his wrath? as
the Psalmist speaks.

This fear is to possess every man's heart, and is to run through all the
Acti^ns of his life.

1. For natural actions, as eating, drinking, etc. we are to manage these with
an holy fear of displeasing the Lord.

2. For Civil and Political actions, as buying, selling, trading and commerce
in the world; him we are also to fear least we displease him.

3. As for Religious actions, praying, or hearing, etc. we are to manage these
with this holy fear, least we displease the Lord by formality, distraction of
thoughts, hypocrisy, carelessness, or the like.

But especially Magistrates, for they are the persons particularly spoken to in
the Text. They are to manage the whole course of their Government with this
fear of displeasing the Lord. They are all subordinated to him, and are to give
up their accounts to him, and therefore are to be exceeding careful that
nothing in the constitution, or course of their Government be displeasing unto
him. And they do displease Christ.

1. When they oppose his interest in the world, when Christ has a work upon
the wheels for the advance of his Kingdom, the establishing of Jerusalem, etc.
then, when they oppose their power to this interest, then they displease him.
As when Maximilian the Emperor, and some other Princes opposed Luther in that
great work he was upon.

2. Secondly, when they neglect his interest, when they do not come forth to
serve it with what ever ability, or opportunity is in their hand: but are
wholly swallowed up into a more private interest of their own. As Meroz was
cursed not coming forth to help the Lord, Judge. 5. 2. 3.

3. When they subordinate his interest to their own, when they are carrying on
an interest of Christ, but it is that they may serve some private end of their
own upon it: when they ingraft a selfish design upon Christ's stock, that it may
the better thrive. And thus did Jehu, in taking vengeanoe upon the false
Prophets of Baal, and Ahabs house, which was but to confirm the Kingdom to
himself, 2 Kings 10.

4. When they deal injuriously with his Saints, then they do highly displease
him: Though they are a poor despised people in the world, yet their Redeemer is
mighty, and when they cry, he will hear them.

I find two principal places in the prophecy of Isaiah, wherein the Lord is
presented in a strange heat of wrath; the one is 34. Isaiah the beginning of it.

The indignation of the Lord is upon all Nations, and his fury upon all their
Armies, verse 2.
Their mountains shall be melted with blood, verse. 3.
And the Host of Heaven shall be dissolved, verse. 4.
And my sword shall be bathed in Heaven. verse. 5.
And the sword of the Lord is filled with blood, verse. 6.
Now if you ask me, What means the heat of this great wrath? he tells you verse.
8. It is the day of the Lords vengeance, and the year of recompense for the
controversy of Sion.

The other place is 63. Isaiah beginning. Where the Lord is set forth in his
red Apparel, and his garment died in blood, and treading the Wine Press of
wrath: And the reason of all this you read in the 4. verse. For the day of
Vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come.

We cannot touch God in a tenderer part, then in his people, for they are the
Apple of his eye.

Justin Martyr in his Apology for the Christians, tells the Roman Emperors,
that whiles they persecuted the Saints, the Empire was afflicted with Floods,
Earthquakes, Pestilence, etc. It was not their tolerating, but their
persecuting them, that brought those calamities upon them. Nothing will sooner
bring down wrath upon a people then this.

And on the other hand, to protect and Cherish the Saints, is that which God
takes kindly at the hands of Magistrates: and which is likely, eminently to
conduce to the prosperity of their affairs, according to the promise in the
122. Psalm. 6. They shall prosper that love thee. Only I would be understood as
speaking of true Saints, and they walking as Saints.

But I hasten to a Conclusion. And therefore I come now to the last part of the
Text, as I divided it at the beginning, and that is the Argument whereby this
Counsel is enforced, (for so I shall make use of it) upon the Kings and Judges
of the Earth; This will be their Wisdom and their understanding, Be wise now
therefore, or, And now, be wise O ye Kings, be instructed ye that Judge the
Earth.

God having before showed them, that their opposition against his Son, would be
their undoing, and break them to pieces, he therefore does advise them, as they
would appear to be wise men, and men well instructed to serve him; whereby they
should save themselves from that destruction that else would unavoidably fall
upon them.

Every man will be pretending to wisdom, and it is a thing so desirable, that
even fools that have no wisdom, yet they will be wise in their own conceit. O
Sapientia, as he said, sed ubi es? but where is wisdom to be found?

The Graecians they pretended to it; 1 Cor. 1. 22. The Greeks seek after
wisdom, they had their wise men, whom they called (...), and they loved to be
applauded with a (...) at the end of their Orations, and who has not heard of
their seven Wise men?

The Romans they pretended to it, as the Apostle speaks 1 Romans 22. Professing
themselves to be wise, they became fools:

The Persians they pretended to it, and they had their Wise men among them, who
were called Magi.

The Jews they had their Wise men, whom they called Chacamim; and the Pharisees
affected to be called Rabbi, Rabbi, which i^ as much as to say, a man of much
learning, or wisdom.

But if you would know where true wisdom lies, the Text tells us, it lies in
serving God. The Veyn of True Wisdom runs all along in the service of God. This
is wisdom, though not in the worlds balance, yet in the Balance of the
Sanctuary.

The Oracle of Apollo was once consulted to show who was the wisest man. But it
is only Gods Oracle that can resolve this; and that tells you every where it is
the godly man, the man serving God.

And here first I shall show how it is the wisdom of men in general, and then
particularly of Magistrates, to serve the Lord. First in general.

1. Is it not wisdom for a man to be seeking his own happiness; and to depart
from that evil which would destroy him? We see this Instinct of wisdom planted
in the Nature of every creature, whereby it gathers into it self that good that
is con^ucible to its happiness, and expels and avoids, what it may, that evil
which is contrary, and so destructive to it.

Now he that is sincerely serving the Lord, he is the only man that is pursuing
that good that is man's true happiness, which is God himself; and avoiding and
expelling that evil which would destroy him, and that is sin: and the
consequences of it. So that he is truly serving himself, that serves the Lord.

As Job in his 28. Chapter brings his discourse about wisdom to this
conclusion, in the last verse, Behold the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and
to depart from evil that is understanding.

And Solomon a man well able to judge of wisdom and folly, gives us a character
of both Prove. 22. 3. A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hides himself; the
wicked pass on, and are punished.

2. Is it not wisdom to bestow a man's service and labor where it will turn
most to his account? A wise man will not run and sweat to catch a Butterfly; He
will see whether that which he toyls and travels for will countervail his
pains: For, what profit (says the wise man,) has he that has labored for
the wind? Eccles. 5. 16. Now no labor does bring in such a rich Revenue, does
so turn to a man's account, as that which is bestowed upon the service of God.

Again, Is it not wisdom for a man to improve his season? There is a season for
every thing under the sun, says Solomon; and the wise man watches his season:
The wise Merchant will observe his season; and the wise Physician his season;
and the wise Statesman his, and the wise Husbandman his; yea the Ant does
embrace its season, the Swallow, the Crane, the Stork, they do all observe
their seasons: And therefore the Apostle exhorts the Ephesians, Ephesians. 5. 15. To
walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time, or the
season.

Now man's season it is in general the fruit of his being in this world, or that
day of grace that is in his hand, which he is to make use of, to get
acquaintance with God, and to lay up for himself a good foundation against the
time to come: which no man is doing, but he alone that is faithfully serving
God.

4. It is wisdom to subject a man's self to that Lord, that has a true Right
to him; to whom of Right he owes subjection and service. And a wise man will
not willingly subject himself to any that upon no account has Right to him: A
servant willingly subjects himself to his own Master, and a child to his own
Father, for they see they have a Right to them; but not to strangers.

Now he that is serving the Lord, he subjects himself to that Master that has
a true Right to his service: whereas now carnal men subject themselves to
strange Lords, Satan, and fleshly lusts, etc. that have no Right at all to Rule
over them; which as it is their sin, so it is their folly also.

5 It is wisdom to make provision for the future: a fool only looks at what is
just before him; but a wise man is able to see a far off. Now he that looks
beyond this, (...), this present time, and is making provision for eternity,
this is the wise man; and no man does this, but he that in good earnest is
serving the Lord.

But then especially it is the wisdom of Magistrates to serve the Lord; and I
will show it only in these two particulars, 1. It will be their stability. And
2. Their Prosperity.

1. This will be their Stability. Nothing does more establish Commonwealths
and Kingdoms, then when the Power and Authority of those that sit at Stern is
improved for the Lord. As God told Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 7. 17, 18. If thou will
walk before me as David thy Father, and do according to all that I commanded
thee, and observe my Statutes and Judgments: What then? Then will I establish
the Throne of thy Kingdom, etc. But (he adds) If you turn away, then will I
pluck you up by the root out of my Land, etc.

Yea, he makes such a promise to Jeroboam, 1 King. 11. 38. If thou will walk in
my ways, and do that which is right in my sight, and keep my Statutes, etc.
Then I will be with thee, and build thee a sure House.

I need not tell you in what a tottering condition the Nation stands, how it is
shaken by divisions, and what a discontented spirit is working every where: now
if any thing in the world do establish us, I do not say, take it from me, but
take it from the God of Truth, it must be a holy subjection to the Lord, and an
hearty serving his Will, his Glory, and his Providence, with what Talents he
entrusts us with.

2. This will be their Prosperity. It was the counsel that David gave Solomon
at his death, and therefore sure had weight in it, 1 Kings 2. 3. Keep the
charge of the Lord thy God, and walk in his ways, etc. And what then? That thou
may prosper in all that thou do, and whithersoever thou turnest thy self.
What can be more plain?

So that now (Honored and Beloved) ye see what is the way to have Counsel, and
direction come in upon you; and success and prosperity to follow you in your
Affairs; and what will be found to be wisdom, when all wicked and Machiavilian
Policy, which has too much acted the Counsels of men, and the power of the
world shall be discovered to be but mere folly in the end.

Now is it not an unseemly thing to see a Counsel without wisdom, and a
Christian Counsel without Christian wisdom?

Thus I have done, yet only give me leave to add these two words by way of
enforcement upon the whole.

1. Consider that your day is short. The day of your life is short; but your
day of service may be shorter. And therefore, What ever your hand finds to
do, do it with your might, Eccles. 9. 10. Which is the Counsel of Solomon, the
wisest Prince, and Statesman that ever sat upon Throne: And as he Counseled,
so he practiced. For with what vigor and industry did he manage that great
work which was in his hand, of building the house of God. So that he finished it
in seven years, and an half, as you may easily compute it if you read the 1
Kings 6. But he was thirteen years in building his own house, 1 Kings 7. 1.
which is recorded not for his disparagement, but his commendation, that he
followed the work of Gods House with greater vigor, then his own house: A good
pattern for our imitation.

Yea we have the example of one greater then Solomon, even Christ himself, for
the improvement of our day, John 10. 4. I must work the works of him that sent
me while it is day, the night comes wherein no man can work.

The natural day was appointed for work, so is the day of life, the day of
grace, and the day of service; and when the night comes upon any of these
days, then is the time of work ceased, with you, with me, and with all men.

And is not this day short at longest? and much of it is already past; and that
which remains, flees faster away then an Eagle in the Air, or an Arrow from the
Bow of the mighty. Therefore let me beseech you, to be walking, and working,
and living apace, for the shadows of the evening will suddenly be upon you.

2. Consider lastly, that your account is hastening, when You must give an
account of our Stewardship, and be no longer Stewards.

And stand naked at the Bar of Christ divested of all your external Ornaments,
whether, Riches, Power, Honor, greatness, and the like, and every one give
account of himself unto the Lord.

And the Judgment will not proceed so much upon this or that particular
action, as what has been the main end, and Scope of your life. Whether you
have been living to Christ, or to your selves.

Those that now can summon others to stand at their bar, must ere long stand at
the bar of Christ themselves; and give up their accounts to him that is the
Great and only Po^en^ate; the Supreme Judge of the World; from whom there is no
appeal, and against whom there is no resistance: and according to the Judgment
they receive there, so to stand, either Justified or Condemned for ever.

FINIS.

