Herculeas ultra quem jactat rauca columnas
Famasnec officio par lamen illa suo).
En libi BARLOUM potuit quae Sculptor at ipsa
Art licet claram vincit ut umbra manum!
Ora venusta vides, et nobilis Atria mentis;
Quod nitet interius nulla Tabella dabit.
The Tullie (...)

SEVERAL Miscellaneous and Weighty Cases of Conscience, Learnedly and
Judiciously Resolved By the Right Reverend Father in God, Dr. THOMAS BARLOW,
Late Lord-Bishop of Lincoln. VIZ. I. Of Toleration of Protestant Dissenters.
II. The King's Power to pardon Murder. III. Objections from Genesis 9. 6.
answered. IV. Mr. Cottington's Case of Divorce: With the Judgments of Dr.
Allestrey, Dr. Hall, Sir Richard Lloyd, Sir Richard Raines, Dr. Oldys, and the
Doctors of Sorbonne, upon the same. V. For Toleration of the Jews. VI. About
Setting up Images in Churches. VII. An Dominium fundatur in Gratia?
With two Pages omitted in the English Machiavel, and his Lordship's Censure
thereupon.

London, Printed, and sold by Mrs. Davis in Amen-corner, 1692.

The Bookseller's PREFACE to the Reader.
THE Reader may be pleased to take notice, that the following Tracts were
written by the late Eminent and Learned Father of our Church, Dr. Thomas
Barlow, Lord-Bishop of Lincoln; and printed from MSS. written with his own Hand.

The Occasions these.

I. The Case of the Lawfulness of Toleration of the Jews, was writ at the
Request of a Person of Quality, in the late troublesome Times; when the Jews
made Application to Cromwell, for their Readmission into England.

II. The Case of Toleration of Christian Dissenters, was written to, and at the
Request of the Honorable and Learned Mr. Robert Boil, 1660. soon after the
Restoration of K. Charles II.

III. Whether it be lawful for his Sacred Majesty K. Charles II. to reprieve or
pardon a Person, convicted and legally condemned for Murder; written upon
occasion of Mr. St. John's being unfortunately convicted for the unhappy Death
of Sir William Estcourt Bar.

IV. The Case of Murder, in Answer to an Objection then made, from Genesis 9. 6.
That Kings have not Power to pardon Murder.

V. Mr. Cottington's Case, concerning the Validity or Nullity of his Marriage
with Gallina, (her former Husband then living) 1671. Mr. Cottington applying
himself, and Mr. Brent coming from the then Earl of Danby, to request his
Lordship's Opinion therein. With a further Resolution of the same; as also the
Judgments of Dr. Allestrey, Dr. Hall, (now Lord-Bishop of Bristol) Sir Richard
Lloyd, Sir Richard Raines, Dr. William Oldys, and the Doctors of Sorbonne at
Paris, in point of Law and Conscience, upon the same.

VI. A Breviate of the Case concerning setting up Images in the Parish Church
of Moulton, in the Diocese and County of Lincoln, 168. Writ upon occasion of
this Learned Bishop's being cited before the Dean of the Arches, for suffering
such Images to be defaced, etc. And upon reading of which Case, so truly and
evidently stated, the whole Prosecution (which was then violently and
virulently enough carried on) against him was stopped.

VII. Whether that Dominion is founded on Grace, be a Tenet chargeable on the
Church of Rome?

VIII. One Folio Leaf omitted out of Machiavel in English, with the Bishop's
Censure thereupon.

The Reader may please to observe, in Mr. Cottington's Case, the Counsel use
the Name of Frichinono, for the Husband of Gallina, which was his proper Name;
but the Bishop that of Patrimoniale, which was the Title of his Public Office,
and by which latter he was frequently known and called by at Turin. The
Resolution of this Case may be of great use, it being never so fully stated
before. Davila tells us in his fifth Book, Vide Hist. H. 4. France, by the Bp
of Rhodes, and Monsieur D'Ossat 's Letters. Davila, lib. 3.
that Hen. 4. was married to Q. Margaret, at Nostredame, by the Cardinal of
Bourbon, in Presence of the whole Court; and she was given in Marriage by
Charles 9. her Brother: and after a long Cohabitation, the Cardinal of Joyeuse,
the Pope's Nuncio, and the Archbishop of Arles, being delegated by the Pope,
nulled the Marriage, propter vim and metum; Q. Margaret alleging, she was
forced to it by her Brother. And the Sentence gave liberty to the King and
Queen to marry whom they would: And accordingly, the King afterward married
Mary of Medicis, one of whose Daughters was Henrietta Maria, the Wife of our K.
Charles I. and Cardinal D'Ossat justified the Legality of this Sentence, tho
there had been no Cause shown. But the Law of Nations does not oblige our
Courts to execute or pronounce Sentence according to Foreign ones.

Now tho the Bishop gave these Cases to his Friends, when first writ, with his
leave to print them; yet they, fearing some of them might prejudice his further
Promotions in the Church in those Days, forbore Publication of them. Tho we
must do his Lordship this Right, to aver, that he had no regard to that: so
careless was he of the Event of any Action he thought himself obliged to do,
Religionis causa, that he has been often heard to say occasionally, as a kind
of Principle, viz. He who thinks to save any thing by his Religion, but his
Soul, will be a Loser in the end.

And his Lordship lived to see the Church of England of his Opinion, in being
indulgent to Dissenters; for in that incomparable LETTER TO A DISSENTER,
written by the best and noblest Pen of our Age, The M. of Hallifax.
and upon the Measures of that Church, in the Reign of K. James II. the
Dissenters are told in express Words, That the Church of England is convinced
of its Error in being severe to them.

THE CASE of a TOLERATION IN Matters of Religion.

To the HONORABLE ROBERT BOIL, Esquire
SIR,
IT is now a good while ago since you gave me command, (for so your Desires
are, and shall be to me) to give you my Opinion in writing, concerning the
Toleration of several Religions, or Opinions, in a well-governed Church and
State. And though it matters not much what my Opinion be, and (besides my many
Disabilities both of Body and Mind, the little time I have (by reading or
meditation, to collect more, or digest those Notions I have, renders me
incapable of saying much, (or indeed any thing which you do not know already;)
yet (in obedience to your command) something I shall say, (for, Cur me posse
negem, quod tu posse putes?) which may be an argument of my confiding in your
Candor and Goodness, and of my daring to trust you with all my Infirmities, and
an evidence, not of my ability, but willingness to serve you. In short then, I
shall give you some of my Thoughts concerning Toleration, tho not in that exact
order and method, not with that clear explication, and confirmation of the
Truth, as I really desire, and the Subject deserves.

I say then,

I. The Toleration we speak of, is a Toleration of several Religions, or
several Opinions concerning it: and therefore Atheists (if there be any such)
come not under it. For he who acknowledges no God, cannot possibly be of any
Religion, which essentially includes both an acknowledgment, and worship of a
Deity.

II. Toleration of Religions presupposes several Religions, or different
Opinions ( Respectu Doctrinae, Disciplinae, or both) for without such
disserent, Religions cannot be different.

III. Now amongst several Religions in any Nation, all cannot be true, ((...),
as Jamblichus tells us truly, Truth is one, and cannot differ from it self);
and that which is owned and established by the just Authority of any Nation, is
supposed to be the True Religion: It follows, that Toleration must necessarily
relate to those Religions, and ways of Worship, which are (at least supposed)
false, as being different from that which the Nation (that tolerates them)
owns, and establishes as true. I say, supposed to be false: For it may, and
many times does happen, that the False Religion may be established, and the
true only tolerated. So in France Popery is the Religion owned, and Protestancy
only tolerated; in England contrary.

VI. Now this Toleration, or Establishment, must relate to some (and the same)
Authority. That Authority which establishes the True, must tolerate the
Religion, or Religions which are supposed false; for we speak of an
Authoritative and Legal Toleration. So that as the Supreme Legislative Power
must (and only can) legally establish the True, so it only can tolerate those
ways of Worship which are supposed to be false.

V. And here further, As this Legal Establishment brings a twofold obligation
on those who submit to it; 1. An obligation to Obedience, and a conformity in
their Practice to the Established Law: And 2. An obligation to the Punishments
(mentioned in the Law) in case of Disobedience: So on the other side, a
public, and Legal Toleration exempts those to and for whom it is granted,

1. From the obligation to Obedience, and conforming themselves to the
established way of Worship: For Toleration intrinsecally notes the taking off
such Obligation.

2. It exempts them from those Punishments which are (to those who have
submitted to such a way of Worship) the consequents of non-obedience, and
nonconformity to the Established Religion. For no man can be justly punished
for non-obedience to any Law, who is not under the obligation of it.

VI. Once more; As those to whom such Toleration is granted, may justly expect
impunity, and exemption from all penal Sufferings, tho they conform not to the
way of Worship publicly established; so on the other side, they cannot
reasonably expect the Privilegia quae contemplatione Religionis indulta sunt,
catholicae tantum Legis observatoribus prodesse oportet: Haereticos autem and
Schismaticos ab his privilegiis alienos esse volumus. Imperat. Constantinus, ad
Dracilianum, l. 1. de Haereticis in Cod. Theodosiano. page 493*
Rewards and Encouragements which a Prince distributes to those who cheerfully
obey, and give conformity to the Religion established. For as Rewards and
Punishments are the Sepimenta Legis, the great Mounds and Hedges to keep men to
their duty and obedience to any Law of God, or Man, (hope of Reward encouraging
men to obedience, and fear of Punishment frighting them from disobedience) so
they go together, and are inseparable, and belong only to those who are under
the obligation of such Law. So that he to whom the Law is not given, (and to
these who have a Toleration it is not) as he need not fear punishment for
Nonconformity (the Law not obliging him to it) so he cannot expect, or hope
for those Rewards, which are the encouragements of that obedience, which he
refuses to give. Those then who are under the obligation of such Law, are (in
one respect) in a better condition, because they may justly expect from their
Prince Rewards and Encouragements, proportionable to the measure of their
Obedience: So on the other side, those who have the Toleration, are (in another
respect) in a better condition, because they need not fear any Punishment for
their Nonconformity.

7. It must be remembered, that it is a Toleration we speak of, not an
Approbation of those Religions, or ways of Worship which differ from the
Religion established in a Nation. For the Established Religion being always
supposed to be true, (and as such owned by the Authority establishing it) the
ways of Worship tolerated only, must of necessity be (supposed at least to be)
false, and so cannot be approved by that Authority, which (for just Reasons)
does, and may tolerate them. For such an approbation of the False, would be a
condemnation of the True Religion; and so, if they approve what they tolerate,
they condemn what they establish: which is such a contradictory piece of
Indiscretion and Injustice, as hardly any Authority can be guilty of.

VIII. This premised, the grand Query will be; Whether, Query.
and how far the Supreme Power may, and ought to grant such a Toleration to
Religions, and ways of Worship, differing from that established?

Now seeing the granting of such a Toleration (as almost all other humane
Actions) may be good or bad, Answer.
according to the various Circumstances, and several Conditions, 1. Of the
Power that grants. 2. Of the Persons to whom the Grant is made. 3. Of the
Religions tolerated. 4. And of the time in which such Toleration is granted.


It cannot be expected that I, (or any body else) should give one Absolute and
Categorical Answer to the intite Query: and therefore I shall crave leave to
say something toward an Answer, by several steps and degrees, in these
following Positions.

1. Then, it is to be considered, who they are who desire such a Toleration?
their number and quality at home, and what Friends and Assistants they may have
abroad. For if the Persons desiring such Toleration, be so considerable for
number and strength at home; or for their assistance abroad, that a War, or
dangerous Insurrections and Seditions may follow (if a Toleration be denied) to
the hazard of the public Peace and safety of the Commonweal; Then (I think)
the Magistrate (in Prudence and Conscience) may, and ought to grant their
Desires; and rather tolerate a False Religion (with such prudent
Qualifications, and for such time as shall be agreed upon) than hazard the
unsettlement and ruin of the True. For as in the Body Natural we endure a
Gangrened Member with much pain and patience (tho without hopes of cure) when
it cannot be cut off without endangering the whole; so in the Body Politic, or
Ecclesiastical, an erring part may, and ought to be endured, and tolerated,
when the cutting off would hazard the weal of the whole. And indeed such a
Toleration, in such a Case, is rather necessary than voluntary in the
Magistrate: only he (in this case) makes a virtue of necessity, giving that (by
way of favor and kindness) freely, which probably they might have by force.
Thus he secures the public Peace, and the Religion established, obliges the
Dissenters by the civility and courtesy of a moderate Toleration; and yet all
this is indeed but granting impunity, when he cannot punish. And this is most
consonant to the Principles of right Reason, and the perpetual Practice of all
Nations. For Quod multis peccatur inultum est; when Seditions have happened in
a Commonweal, or Mutinies in an Army, if the Seditious and Mutineers were many,
it has ever been thought more prudent to pardon, than punish. Multitudo
peccantium poenam tollit, licet non peccatum. As it is impossible to punish
universally, so it is ever dangerous to punish a major, or any great and
considerable part of a Community Minutius Felix Octav. page 77.
Defensio communis furoris est, furentium multitudo. And (I believe) wherever
Protestants are tolerated in Popish or Catholic Countries, it is from this
principle, That they do not think it prudent or safe for themselves, to
persecute the Protestants within their Territories. It has been (and is) the
opinion of wise men, that the Spaniard by a mild and moderate Toleration might
have compassed that in the Netherlands at the beginning, which (unhappily
taking the contrary way) has cost him so vast a proportion of Treasure and
Blood, and is not compassed yet, nor ever like to be. This particular will be
considerable in the present condition of this Kingdom, wherein (by the
unhinging of all Government, and an unhappy Civil War) Papists, Schismatics
and Sectaries, are multiplied into so great a number, that possibly it may be
more safe for the public to pardon than punish, to grant a moderate
Toleration, than run the hazard of further divisions and bloodshed. This I only
propose (in thesi) to be considered: But (in hypothesi) what is particularly
most fit to be done in this time and Nation, I shall not be so confident as to
undertake the determination, but (according to my duty) leave it to the great
prudence of those to whom God has given a greater measure of understanding and
authority for such a business; and constantly pray for a blessing upon their
endeavors in settling this divided Nation.

2. But admit that the numbers of those who dissent from the Religion
established in a Nation, be not so great, nor their Qualities and Assistants so
considerable, as that the State need fear any new War, or public disturbance;
Is the Magistrate then bound in prudence and piety to punish, or may he
(without violation of either) tolerate? To answer this, we must consider, 1.
The nature of the punishments to be inflicted. 2. The nature of the false
Religions or Opinions for which they are inflicted.


The first; All punishments to be inflicted, are either Ecclesiastical or
Civil: The 1. Spiritual, in foro interno, ex Potestate clavium, to be inflicted
by the Church, by those who have Spiritual jurisdiction, and are (...), and
Stewards of Gods Household. 2. Temporal, in foro externo, jure gladii, and
belong to the Civil Magistrate, as he is Custos and Vindex utriusque Tabulae.


Now for the first of these, I say further, that the Church has no Commission
from Christ or his Apostles, or any practice of the Primitive Church, to punish
any man, either

1. With loss of Livelihood, by Pecuniary Mulcts, or Confiscations.

2. Nor loss of Liberty by Imprisonment.

3. Nor loss of Life by Capital punishment.

The saying is old, and true, (admitted by all sober Protestants) Dominium non
fundatur in gratia. Pagans and Infidels have a good title to their Patrimonies,
and a just propriety in their Estates real or Personal; to become Christians,
neither gives them a new, nor confirms their old title. So that if they turn
Heretics, or (which is worse) Infidels, they do not forfeit their livelihood
(much less their Libertas inastimabilis res est. Paul. c. 2. ad Edict. Leg.
106. Stat. de Reg. Juris. And again, Infinita aestimatio est libertatis. Id. l.
13. ad Plantiam, F. de R. Juris. l. 176. Sec* finali.
liberty or life) the Church may ( per modum paenae) take away what (on
condition) they gave, if that condition be not made good. Our admission into
the Church by Baptism, gives us Communion with the Church, and a right to all
those Spiritual advantages for Heaven, which are dispensed in it (as hearing
the Word, receiving the Sacrament, Absolution upon a serious and real
penitence, etc.) these the Church gave, and (for heresy or impiety) may take
away, but no more. If any Bishop or Church Officers have any further power (as
to imprison, lay Pecuniary Mulcts, etc*) this they have ex Indulgentia
Principum, not from Christ, but the Civil Power of the Commonwealth where they
live.

2. This being so, I observe further, that the persons we now speak of (as
Papists, Schismatics, and Sectaries) dissenting from the Established Religion,
need no toleration or grant of Impunity, as to Church Censures, or Spiritual
punishments; as not being liable, or any way obnoxious to them. For the Church
having no power to punish any save those of her own Body, (by Penance,
Excommunication, etc.) of which the persons we now speak, are not (as neither
acknowledging the Churches power, nor living in Communion with her) it follows,
that as she has no power to punish them (they not being Members of her Body)
so they have no need of a Toleration, or Act of Impunity, as to Ecclesiastical
punishments, to which (on the supposition now made) they are not obnoxious. And
if the Church should Excommunicate them, it were but (at least) in their
opinion, Brutum fulmen, and vanae, and sine viribus Irae. they would value the
Excommunication of our Church, no more than we value theirs, that is, nothing
at all.

3. So then, the Impunity this Toleration (we nowspeak of) must give, is from
temporal punishments inflicted by the Civil Magistrate. Now before we can
determine what Impunity such a Magistrate may give to men of a false Religion
(for so all differing from that publicly Established, are in this case
presumed, and supposed to be) we must consider the nature and condition of the
Religions or Opinions to be tolerated. And here I conceive,

1. That no State should or will grant a toleration to any Religion, which
contains any thing in it which may be destructive to the Civil peace and safety
of it self. Salus By [ Populus] I understand the whole Body Politic, Head and
Members, King and People; and not the People only in opposition to the King.
Appellatione populi, viri and cives significantur connumeratis Patriciis and
Senatoribus. Instit. de Jure Not. Gentium and Civili. L. Lex est.
Populi, is (in all States) Suprema Lex, the Supreme Law, and utmost end of all
Authority. This public safety, may and must be secured, though (if there be no
other way) with the ruin of Particulars. For as in the Body Natural, if Fingers
or Toes, Legs or Arms, etc. are so corrupted and gangrened that they endanger
the whole body, Ense recidantur, etc. they are not to be tolerated, but torn
off. So in the Body Politic, or Commonweal, if any persons maintain such a
Religion as is not consistent with the public safety, as it were imprudence in
the Magistrate to grant, so it were irrational for them to ask or expect a
Toleration. For why should any power tolerate that which will ruin it self?
Upon this account it will be hard to tolerate

1. Such Anabaptists as deny all Magistracy (for such there have been, and are)
for why should any Prince own and protect them as subjects, who will not obey,
or own him as their Prince?

2. Such as make it a part of their Religion, to believe all Oaths unlawful,
and so will take none, (for such there are, whether really or in pretense I
know not) for on this account they will refuse all Oaths of Allegiance. And
then what tie or obligation can the Prince lay upon them, whereby he may be
secured of their Loyalty? And then why should a Prince secure them (by a
Toleration of Impunity) who will not secure him of their Loyalty.

3. Such (especially if their number be considerable) as by the Principles of
their Religion, think all War unlawful (as being contradictory to the charity
of the Gospel) and by consequence must deny their Prince any Personal
assistance in his Wars, though he and his Kingdom be in the utmost hazard and
necessity. For if Subjects be once of this opinion (that they will not fight
for their King and Country) the Prince is left to be inevitably ruined by the
next Invader: It being an easy matter to ruin that Prince whose Subjects will
not fight for his preservation.

4. Such, who (although they allow and will take an Oath of Allegiance, yet (by
the Principles of their Religion acknowledge a power which can Vid. Gratian.
Gaen. 2, 3, 4. Causa. 16. Quest. 6. Innocent. Part. 5. Cap. ultimo, etc.
absolve them from that Oath, and arm them against their Prince, depose him,
and dispose of his Kingdom, nay of all the Kingdoms of the world. For in such a
case the Prince can never be secure of their Loyalty to him, or the public
safety against them. This the Papists do, as appears by General Vid. Council.
Lateran. sub Innocent. 3. Can. 3. de Haereticis, apud Petr. Crabb. Tom. 2. page
948. Col. 1. and Council. Trident. Seyalt. 25. de Reformation. cap. 19. and cap.
20. ubi (...) sic habet. Cogantur omnes Principes Catholici conservare omnia
sancita quibus immunias Ecclesiastica declara
Councils of their own (and the most Authentic they have) and amongst their
greatest Authors (not to trouble you, or my self with any more) Bellarminus de
Romano Pontisic. lib. 5. cap. 6. etc.
Bellarmine tells us, Non potest Papa ut Papa, Ordinary Principes
deponere..... tamen potest mutare regna, and vim auferre, and alteri confer,
tanquam summus Princeps Spiritualis, si id necessarium sit ad animarum salutem.
What safety can a Prince have, who has such people for his Subjects, who
acknowledge the Pope to be Summus Princeps, above all Kings, The supreme Power
of this Nation by Act of Parliament, command all to come to Common Prayers (and
so all did, Papists and Protestants till 11o Eliz.) The Pope, Julius 5. by his
Bull forbids it. The Papists obey him, not the Act of Parliament.
(so that they are indeed not absolute or supreme, but feudatory Princes) and
that so far above them, that they may dispose of, and give away their Kingdoms,
Si id necessarium sit ad animarum salutem. Now he himself being Judge of this
necessity (if he had power) he can never want a pretense to depose any King;
especially if he be a Protestant, and so (with them) an Heretic. Nay, if he be
no Heretic, yet he can depose him for much less faults; so Gratia. Can. Alius
3. Lucet. 6. Can. 16.
Gratian tells us, that Pope Zachary deposed the King of France, Non tam pro
suis iniquitatibus, quam pro eo, quod tantae potestati esset inutilis. Nor is
this a singular example, for he there adds, Quod etiam ex authoritate frequenti
agit sancta Ecclesia. And if this Summus Princeps decree the deposition of any
King, you may be sure he is to be obeyed. So Pope Stephen tells us, (in the
same Gratian) Gratian. Can. Nulli. 5. Did. 19.
Nulli fas est, vel velle, vel posse transgredi Apostolicae sedis praecepta,
and c. Nor must we wonder at this; for Pope Agatho tells us, that the Papal
Sanctions must irrefragably be obeyed, seeing (with them) the Popes Decretals
pass for Gratian* Can. in Canonicis 6 Distinct. 19. and Canon. Enim vero 4.
Ibidem.
Canonical Scriptures, and that in the strictest sense of the word Canonical;
as if St. Peter himself had writ them: Sic omnes Apostolicae sedis sanctiones
accipiendae sunt, Idem ibidem Can. sic omnes 2. and Juv. Part. 4. cap. 238.
tanquam Ipsius Divini Petri voce firmatae. And indeed, the Excommunicating of
Queen Elizabeth, and encouraging the Spaniard to take possession of her
Kingdom, the murdering of great Navarre in France (approved by the Pope in
consistory) and the Powder Plot In England, are sad Examples of this truth; too
evident to be false, and too fresh to be forgotten.

It Is true, Bellarmine says, that the Pope cannot dispose of Temporal Kingdoms
Direct and Ordinary, but only indirecte ( in ordine ad spiritualia) and
extraordinary: which is no solution, but a plain concession of what we object.
For if he may do it extraordinary and Indirecte, then it is evident he may do
it (in their opinion) and then how can a King be secured against the rebellion
of such Subjects, and his own deposition, that one side of the distinction
cannot do it, so long as the other may? Whether it be done direct or
indirecte, it is all one, he is deposed. If my enemy should tell me he could not
run me thorough with the one end of his Sword (meaning the Hilt) what security
were that to me, when he may do it with the point? If I am killed, it is no
matter which end of the Sword did it. Sure I am, as my enemy (if he have a mind
to kill me) will make use of the point of his Sword, so the Pope well knows
which side of the distinction to make use of when he has a mind to do mischief.

I do not speak this against all Papists, as if none of them could be good
Subjects, (for I both believe and know the contrary) but

1. I do not see how the Jesuits and those who believe and own their Principles
(who are indeed the Puritans of the Roman Church) can be good Subjects to a
Protestant Prince, or capable of a Toleration, without indangering the public
peace and safety of the Commonweal.

2. And that others are good subjects (as I know some are) it is to be imputed
more to their piety and personal goodness, than the principles of their
Religion, diverse of which (as might easily and evidently appear) are no good
dispositions to Loyalty.

2. And as no King (in prudence) can give a Toleration to such Religions and
ways of Worship as are destructive to the Civil State and public peace of the
Commonwealth; so pari passu, (and for the same reasons) he cannot tolerate such
as are destructive of the Ecclesiastical state or peace of the Vid. Constit.
Impp. Honorii and Theod. in Append. Cod. Theod. Theod. page 31. contra
Donatistas, etc. and aliam Constit. ibid. page 38. ubi ^idem Imperatores in
Donatistas, Pacis and. Ecclesiae turbatores sententia capitali Vindicant. Et
Cod. Theodosii. L. si quis. 31. de Episcopis.
Church; at least so far as they are so, and without such restrictions and
qualifications, as may rationally secure the Established way of Worship: For
otherwise he should be cruel to the true, while (by a Toleration) he is kind to
a false Religion.

3. If any Religion, or way of Worship, approve and practice any thing against
the Law of Nature, (as Blasphemy, Theft, Perjury, Adultery, etc.) such as all
sober men acknowledge to be crimes, and are destructive, or evidently dangerous
to the well-being of humane Society; I suppose no prudent Prince should give a
Toleration to such. Sure I am Seneca tells us, that no Nation ever did grant
impunity to such Impieties. Seneca de Beneficiis, lib. 3. cap. 6. number. 27. page
38. in Edit. Just. Lipsii. H. Grotius de Jure Belli, lib. 2. cap. 20. Sect. 50.
page 345.
In hoc consensimus (says he) adversus omne maleficium datur actio, and
homicidi, veneficii, parricidii, violatarum Religionum, aliubi and aliubi
diversa poena est; sed ubique aliqua. But here it must be observed, that the
crimes I now speak of, (to which I would have no impunity or toleration
granted) must

1. Be such as are clearly and certainly crimes against the Law of Nature, so
that all sober men generally know, and acknowledge them to be such. For if it be
dubious whether they be crimes or no, or how far, or what measure of malice is
in them, then it will be very hard to punish them. For it will seem irrational,
and (indeed) unjust to inflict a certain punishment, for a dubious and
uncertain crime. Certa culpae cognitio, must always (in justice) be antecedent
to the Inflictio poenae. If I hang a man, I am sure he has ( per modum paenae)
lost his life, and therefore ( per modum culpae) I should be sure of the crime
for which I hang him; Seeing it cannot be just to inflict certain death for an
uncertain crime.

2. They must not only be confessed Crimes (to which I now deny Toleration) but
also such as are dangerous, and noxious to humane Society. For as Lipsius in
locum Senecae praedictum number. 27. page 47.
Lipsus (on that place of Seneca) well observes: Naturae quodam instinctu, ea
maleficia coercent homines and puniunt, quae societatem convellunt. For there
are many crimes against the Law of Nature, and Dictates of Right Reason (as
Ingratitude, Lying, breach of Promise, etc. which yet in almost all Nations,
have had a Toleration and impunity, and have been left Odio hominum, and
vindictae Deorum. So Seneca (in the same place) speaks of Ingratitude...
Excepta Macedonum gente, non est in ulla, data adversus ingratum actio;
magnumque hoc argumentum dandum non fuisse. Hoc frequentissimum crimen nusquam
punitur, ubique improbatur. Neque tamen absolvimus ingratum, sed cum Difficilis
esset incertae rei aestimatio, tantum odio hominum damnavimus, and inter ea
relinquimus, quae ad Vindices Deos remittimus. Where you see, the reason why
Ingratitude (though certainly a crime against the Law of Nature) was not
punished, but tolerated... Quia difficilis erat incertae rei aestimatio. It was
very hard to know when a man was ungrateful, and the measure of his
ingratitude, and therefore hard to punish it. All just punishments consisting
in a proportion between the sin and the suffering of the person punished, which
cannot possibly be known, unless the nature and measure of the crime be first
known. It Is true ( in thesi) that all know and confess Ingratitude is a great
crime, but ( in Hypothesi) whether Titius be ungrateful to Sempronius, and how
far, it is hard (if not impossible) to know; seeing that cannot be known, unless
all the Courtesies and injuries which each have done to other mutually, could
certainly be (as indeed they cannot be) comprehended. By the way, when Seneca
says, that in nulla (excepta Macedonum) gente, adversus ingratum dabatur
Actio, and so not in Rome; he speaks this of his own time. For afterward
Ingratitude (by the Institut. de Capitis diminut. L. Maxima.
Roman Law) was highly punished, even with Maxima capitis Diminutio, by which
the ungrateful person and civitatem and libertatem amisit.

4. Upon these grounds some Sects amongst us, can have little reason to expect
(and the Magistrate as little to grant) a toleration or impunity. As,

1. Adamites (such there were) who held a promiscuous use of women.

2. Quakers who give no civil respect to any, no not the Magistrate, but curse
and rail, and damn all but their own Disciples. These Crimes being evidently
against nature, and inconsistent with humane (much more with Christian)
Society, are not to be tolerated, but severely punished. It were vain to reason
or dispute with such men, who have cast off all civility, and even humanity it
self; Argumentum baculinum, is the fittest means* (if not to convert, yet) to
keep them within some bounds of reason and civility, that they may not make
others worse, if they will not be better themselves.

5. These things considered (which relate to matter of fact, and the actions of
persons professing a false Religion) we come now to the main Query, concerning
matter of Faith and false Opinions: Query.
Whether men of a false faith and heretical opinions, may be tolerated, and
have a grant of Impunity, or whether the Magistrate is to punish such erring
persons? (suppose Sectaries, Papists, Socinians, etc. and then how far, how
long, with what punishments, and what measure and degrees of them he is to do
it? for instance, Whether he may punish them,

1. In their Purse only, by Pecuniary Mulcts, taking away some part, or all
their Livelihood.

2. Or in their persons too, taking away either,

1. Their liberty by imprisonment.

2. Or their City (the jus Civitatis) by Banishment.

3. Or their Life, by Capital punishments, as the Donatists and Circumcellians
of old, and they of Rome (of late) use those whom commonly they miscall
Heretics, consuming those to ashes whom they cannot confute otherwise than
with Fire and Faggot; a way not only incongruous, but impious and barbarous,
whereby they may make men coals and cinders, but not Christians. I say the
Query is, (supposing those of the Religion differing from that established, to
be otherwise peaceable and good Subjects, neither rebelliously or seditiously
disturbing the public peace, nor injuriously wronging their neighbor, for in
these cases it is irrational for them to expect, or the Magistrate to grant
impunity, Whether the Magistrate may justly grant them a Toleration of their
Opinions and Religion (though at least supposed false) or compel them by
punishments to the Established way of Worship, which is supposed true and
Orthodox?

In answer to this, Answer.
though I shall not say, that it is absolutely unlawful for the Civil
Magistrate (in this case) to use temporal, and compulsory, punishments, yet
thus much (giving my reasons for it) I think I may safely and truly say, that
it will be very difficult and dangerous for him to do it. My reasons are,

1. Because we find no Warrant for it in the Gospel; there is neither any
precept or practice of our Savior, or his Apostles, to compel any to be
Christians. The means they used, either to convert Pagans, or continue and
confirm Christians, were constant Preaching, and a rational pressing that truth
to others, which they had received from God, and believed themselves, a prudent
and meek disputing, and reasoning men out of their Errors, a pious life and
patient suffering for the truth they Preached: Verbo and exemplo agebant, non
gladio, it was their Christian patience, not any coactive violence which
converted the world, it was dying themselves, not killing others which planted
and propagated the Gospel; Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae, it was the blood
of the Martyrs, not of murdered Heretics, which made the field of the Church
so fruitful; and by what authority we should do that now, which they thought
not fit to do then, I know not. Certainly, as they best knew what means were
most proportionable, and congruous both for the plantation and propagation of
the Gospel, so we have reason to believe that those mediums they made use of,
were such; and (on the other side) we may rationally conclude, that had there
been any other means as congruous and conducible to the end they aimed at, as
those they used, they would not have omitted them. Seeing then neither Christ
nor his Apostles ever commanded, or (by their example or practice) commended
violence, or any coactive means to make or confirm Christians, we have great
reason to believe, that they conceived such means not congruous; and if so, why
should any think otherwise? Object.
It is He^^. Altingius Problem. Theolog Part 2. Probl. 20. page 337. Williel.
Zepperu Legum Mosaicarum Forens. Lib 4. cap. 5. p. 258.
replied to this, that there are is Scripture examples of coactive punishments;
Answ.
so Paul was struck to the ground, and punished with blindness, Ananias and
Sapphi^a with death, Elymas the Sorcerer with blindness, etc.

But these Instances (though urged by great men) are impertinent, as to this
case we now speak of: For,

1. When Paul was so punished, he was no Christian, (for he was afterward
Baptized) whereas we now speak of different opinions, and ways of Worship
amongst Christians.

2. He was persecuting the Church with imprisonments and death, in which case
we grant violent and coactive means may be used by the Magistrate, to In such
cases the Magistrate is, (and* ought to be) Nutritious Ecclesiae, and Defensor*
fidei, and may use the Sword against those who abuse it against the Church.
preserve the Church which such Persecutors would destroy.

3. The Question is, What man (the Magistrate Civil or Ecclesiastical) may do
Jur^ ordinario, whether he may punish Heresy or Infidelity with loss of
Livelihood, Liberty, or Life? Not what God may do, Pro dominio, and jure suo
absoluto, extraordinary? we deny not but God (who is the searcher and judge of
our hearts, who knows perfectly our most secret sins, and inmost iniquities,
together with the nature, measure, and aggravations of them) may punish
Heresy, Infidelity, or any other sin, how and when he will; so he punished
Ananias and Sapphira with death: But we deny that man (the Magistrate) can do
so, Jure Ordinario. It is true, it was our Savior which punished Paul, Act. 9.
5.
I am Jesus whom thou persecutest; and so it may seem, that we have our
Savior's example for coactive punishments. But then we must consider our
Savior; 1. In the state of Humility, while he was here: 2. In the state of
Glory after his Ascension. The Punishment of St. Paul was an extraordinary Act
of our Savior after his Ascension, when he was in the state of Glory, and so
can be no good warrant or foundation of an Ordinary Power and Jurisdiction in
any man here to do the like. For certainly there is little Logic in this
consequent, Our glorified Savior by his absolute power, extraordinarily
punished Paul with blindness: Ergo, The Magistrate here may ordinarily do it.
The thing we deny, is, that our Savior while he was here (in the state of
Humility) has left us any precept or example for coactive punishments: He
tells us, that his Kingdom was not of this world; Joh. 18. 36.
it was not a Temporal, but Spiritual Kingdom, and so the Administration of
Justice in it, was not by Temporal, but Spiritual punishments. His too zealous
Disciples would have had fire called for from Heaven, etc. but he tells them
that he came not to destroy, or take away any man's life, but to save it; and I
believe he did not delegate that power to his Apostles, (not to Peter) which he
neither did, nor had Commission to use himself. 4. For the Examples of Ananias
and Sapphira, and Elimas, they are as impertinent to the purpose for which they
bring them, as that of Paul: For,

1. They were punished for matter of fact, not of faith or opinion concerning
Religion; Ananias and Sapphira for Sacriledg, and robbing God and his Church of
the Consecrated things, and Elimas for perverting by Sorceries, and seducing
Christians; (as by the Text appears) in which cases we do not plead for
impunity.

2. Their punishment was extraordinary, and miraculous from the hand of Heaven,
not of any man or Magistrate. This is clear in the death of Ananias; Act. 5. 3,
4, 5.
and tho Peter may seem to have had a hand in Sapphira's death, yet those words
( verse. 6.) are praedicentis, non infligentis poenam, he only foretells her,
that the hand of God (not his) would be upon her. And so it was too with Paul
and Elimas, The hand of the Lord shall be upon thee, Act. 13. 11.
etc. It Is the hand of the Lord (not his) that made him blind; Paul (as a
Prophet) foretold, what God (as a just Judge) did. However, it is (beyond
dispute) evident, that those punishments of Ananias and Elimas were
Extraordinary and Miraculous; and therefore cannot possibly be any just
foundation of an ordinary jurisdiction. But too much of this, for (to me) these
examples seem altogether impertinent, and though often urged, yet to little
purpose, seeing they prove nothing, save that (sure) they wanted better
arguments, who bring such bad ones as these. Object. 2.


2. It is objected by Hen. Altingius Problem. Theol. Part. 2. Problem. 29. Page
333. Will. Zepperus in Explication. LL. Mosaic. Lib. 4. cap. 3. page 262.
Calvin. in Luc. 14. 23. page 182. August. Epist. 50. ad Bonifacium, and alibi
passim.
many, and great men, that the Gospel does afford examples of coactive and
compulsory means used to bring men to the faith. They urge that Parable of the
Marriage Feast ( Luke 14. 23.) (...), etc. Compelle intrare, (as the vulgar
Latin) ut impleatur Domus mea. On which words St. Augustine thus, Qui
compellitur, quo non vult cogitur: sed cum intraverit, jam volens pascitur.
Hence they infer, that it is (at least) Lawful to use coactive means in case of
different Religions, to compel men to the best.

But in answer to this instance, Answer.
which is so much urged by all those who are against Toleration, I say,

1. Locus parabolicus non est argumentativus, Parables are no proofs, nor a fit
foundation for concluding Arguments to be built upon.

2. But however it is true, what Grotius observes, that (...) there signifies
not any external violence or coaction, but only Vid. Gro^^um in Luc. 14. 2, 3.
and de Jure Belli, Lib. 2. cap. 20. Sect. 48. page 345. to the same purpose,
Dr. Hammond's Diodati, the Assembly-Divines, etc. on Luc. 14. 23.
Instantiam vocantis, the instance and importunity of the Call. Christo enim eo
modo convivae cogi solent, sed importuna flagitatione. So Theophylact expounds
the place, who tells us, that although (...), that all men do voluntarily
believe, yet the Holy Ghost says, (...), not only call, but compel; not that
he means any coaction (properly so called) or violence, (...) Theophyl. in Luc.
14. 23. Page 438. c.
(...), etc. Sed ut sciamus magnae Virtutis Dei esse, Gentes credidisse. And
then concludes, (...) (...), etc. Admir abilemtranslationem significare volens,
necessitatem nominavit. And it is evident that the word, [(...)] many times
signifies no more, but an earnest and prevailing importunity, even in Scripture
it So Mat. 14. 22. Mark 6. 45. Gal. 11. 14. Vid. Grot. loco supra Citato.
self.

3. It is certain and confessed, that in this Parable the Gentiles are meant by
those who are said to be compelled; Vide Theophylactum in loc. etc
and yet neither St. Augustine (who first urged this passage against the
Donatists and Circumcellians) nor any that I know since, affirm Pagans ought to
be compelled to Christianity; and so they quite mistake the meaning of the
place (who urge it against Toleration) and the business they bring it for.

2. Besides this, [that there is no example or precept of Christ, Reas. 2.
or his Apostles, that they did, or we should use violence, or any coactive
means, to make, or confirm Christians] there are several express places in the
Gospel which strongly persuade the contrary; that no violence or coaction is,
or ought to be used; so when some of our Saviors Disciples did Apostatize and
forsake him, he mildly asks the Twelve, Joh. 6. 6, 7*
Will ye also go away? He neither recalls those who had forsaken him, nor
confirms those who stayed, by threatening loss of Livelihood, Liberty, or Life;
but faith only, Will ye also go away? To go or stay, was res spontaneae
voluntatis, non coactae necessitatis; it was a thing of choice, not coaction,
which was to make or continue them Christians. Ostendit se ne velle quidem
discipulos nisi volentes, (faith ( a) Grotius;) Grotius in Joh. 6. 67.
in the Constitutions of Clemens (an ancient Book, though not of (lemens his
compiling) (...), etc. Liberam reliquit hominibus arbitrii potestatem, non
morte temporali eos puniens, sed in altero saeculo ad reddendam rationem eos
vocans. And again, Athanasius Epistola ad Solitariam Vitam agentes.
( b) (...), etc. Dominus non cogens, sed libertatem suam voluntati permittens,
dicebat quidem vulgo omnibus, si quis vult venire post me. Apostolis vero,
numquid and vos abire vultis? And the Greek Father thus, Chrysostom. in Joh. 6.
67. Idem habet Cyprian. Epist. 55.
( c) (...), etc. Interrogat, an and ipsi velint discedere? quod omnem est
amoventis vim and necessitatem. Lastly, (as to punishing of Heretics with
death) our Savior seems to resolve the case (in express terms) that they ought
not so to suffer death, though they were Heretics. It is in the Parable of the
Mat. 13. 28, 29.
Tares, where he tells the servants, that they must suffer the tares to grow
with the wheat (Heretics with Verse. 38.
Catholics) till the Harvest (the Verse. 39.
end of the world) and he gives the reason of it, Lest the wheat be endangered
by the extirpation of the tares. How far the Romish Inquisitors, (and others
who punish Heretics with death) fulfill or follow this advice, let the world
judge. Sure I am, this precept, [ Let them grow together till the harvest] and
their practice, are contradictory. He that consumes Heretics with fire and
faggot, does not let them grow and continue with Catholics; Unless an absolute
eradication of the Tares be a continuation of them with the Wheat, which would
be an exposition like that in the Gloss of the Canon Law Glossa ad* Cap.
Statuimus 4. Distinct. 4. apud Gratianum.
Statuimus, (i. e.) abrogamus. When Theophylact had told us that by Tares,
Heretics were meant, he adds, (...), Theophylact. in Mat. 13. page 77. A. B.
etc. Quae permittuntur esse usque in consummationem saEculi: nam si
exscinderemus and occideremus Haereticos, seditiones fierent and pugnae, and
forte etiam multi fidelium in seditionibus perirent, etc.

3. Such compelling punishments and coaction is not, Reas. 3.
cannot be a fit and congruous means to work faith and true Religion in erring
persons. That faith comes by hearing we read and know, but that men are or can
be beaten into a belief of Truth we read not. Nova lex se non vindicat ultore
gladio, (says Tertullian) and the Fathers in the Council of Toledo, Council.
Toletanum 4. cap. 5.
Statuit sancta Synodus nemini ad credendum vim infer. And hence Gratian
infers, Gratian. cap. de Jud. 5. Did. 45.
Ergo non vised lebera acbtrii facultate ut convertantur, suadendi sunt, non
impellendi. Admonendi sunt, non cogendi, (says the Glossa ad dictum cap. 5. de
Jud. Did. 45.
Gloss there) to beget faith, Argumento opus est, non baculo. Bonds and
Imprisonment may captivate the body, but not the understanding; Fire and Faggot
may consume, but not convert an Heretic. Religion is seated in the
Understanding and Will, things incapable of force, or coaction. Plunderings,
Sequestrations and Imprisonments may beget an outward compliance, and
hypocrisy, not true and unfeigned Piety. To put me in Prison is a poor
argument to prove that I am in an error, and we may justly suspect he wants
better, who uses that.

By such means men are rather confirmed in their opinions than confuted, as is
evident in the Christians of the Primitive times, when Christianity thrived,
and Christians were multiplied by persecution; so that the Martyring many made
more. The Church (in this) like old Rome in the Poet: Per damna, per caedes ab
ipso
Ducit opes, animumque ferro.


He that suffers persecution, and boldly dies for his Religion and Opinions,
(be they what they will, true or false) is (by his party) esteemed a Martyr,
not a Malefactor; and such suffering is so far from a confutation, that it is
indeed a great confirmation of them in their opinions; Crescit adversis fides,
and a motive to make others embrace them. The Massacre in France made more
Protestants in one night, than all Calvin's Works have done since their first
publication, And Erasmus observes, that a Carmelite Friar (who was employed to
inquire after, and punish Heretics) did by his Cruelty and Severities,
increase the number of those he persecuted, Ubicunque saevitiam exercuit
Carmelita (says Erasmus) ibi diceres factam fuisse Haerese^n sementem. So
disproportionable was the means he used to the end he aimed at, that whiles he
murdered, he multiplied Heretics, and made more, even by those Mediums which
he used to leave none. And as it was then, so it may be still; a prudent
Toleration may prove a far more effectual means for the conversion of erring
Christians, than the Serverities of a Persecution.

4. In all just punishments, Reas. 4.
as the best Lawyers truly tell us, Grotius de Jure Belli, l. 2. cap. 20. Sect.
9. Salmanus de Arianis.
there must be two things: 1. Cognitio culpae. 2. Aestimatio poenae, Haeretici
sunt, sed non scientes; apud nos sunt haeretici, apud se non sunt; veritas apud
nos est, sed illi apud so esse Praesumunt. Errant ergo, sed bono animo errant;
non odio, sed affectu Dei honorare se dominum credentes. Et qualiter pro hoc
ipso falsae opinionis errore in die judicii puniendi sunt, ^cmo potest scire
nisi judex, etc.
the crime to be punished, (together with the magnitude and measure of it, the
degrees of the malice of it in it self, and the mischief it does to others)
must of necessity be certainly known, else it cannot justly be punished, for
the justice of punishments consisting in a proportion between the crime and
punishment, he that would justly proportion this to that, must first know the
crime, and the measure of the malice contained in it, the mischief done by it,
else it is impossible he should proportion a just punishment for it. Now I
conceive it very difficult, if not impossible, for any man certainly to know
how far Erroneous opinions in Religion, or Herefies, (as they call them) are
sinful. For,

1. No Heresy, or erroneous opinion can be sinful, unless it be voluntary.
That of Saint Augustine, is an universally and justly received principle;
Peccatum non est peccatum, nisi sit voluntarium: There is no malice in the mind
or will unless it be voluntary. But now how far the Errors of Titius and
Sempronius are voluntary, whether they proceed from weakness or wilfulness; and
what degree of weakness or wilfulness they have, none (I believe) does, or can
know (without Divine Revelation) but he that knows the heart, and therefore
none (but he) can justly punish such Errors, because not knowingly; and this is
the reason which Seneca de Beneficiis, 1. 3. cap. 7.
Seneca gives, why Ingratitude was not punishable by any Law in his time, Quia
difficilis erat Incertae rei aestimatio, it was (to them) so difficult to know
the measure and degrees of Ingratitude, that they did not dare to punish it,
but left it, Odio hominum and vindictae Deorum, who only knew the measure of
the fault, and so the means justly to punish it, for although (in Thesi) all
men by the light of Natural Reason knew, and confessed Ingratitude to be a fault,
yet (in Hypothesi) how far this, or that man (in particular) is guilty of that
fault, is very difficult, if not impossible to be known by any, save him who
knows the heart.

2. It is a known and received truth by all Lawyers and Divines generally, that
no positive Law of God or man does, or can bind us, without a sufficient
promulgation; such a sufficient Promulgation being necessary to the obligation
of all positive Laws. But now, when the positive truths of the Gospel are
sufficiently revealed and romulgated to Titius and Sempronius (to this and that
particular person) is difficult, if not impossible for any man to know, unless
he could know the diverse abilities and capacities of those persons to whom
those Truths are published. For as those Pagans to whom the Gospel was never
revealed (as to many Nations it never was) are no way under the obligation of
it, nor any way liable to sin, or punishment for not believing it (whence that
saying of Augustine speaking of the Gentiles, Augustinus.
Veniam habebunt propter Infidelitatem, damnabuntur propter peccata contra
naturam. So amongst those to whom it has been revealed, there is a great
difference in respect of the sufficiency or insufficiency of its promulgation;
for it may be a sufficient promulgation to one, which (their capacities
considered) is not to another, and so the error of one be a crime, when the
other, tho holding the same opinion, is innocent. And theerefore to persecute
and punish men with loss of Livelihood, Liberty, or Life, for Opinions in
Religion only (when we cannot know whether, or how far they are crimes;) to
consume diffenting Brethren with Fire and Faggot, to make a Coal of a
Christian, and certainly kill him for an uncertain crime, this is that which
none should, and it were to be wished that no Christian would do. It is (to this
purpose) well observed by Grotius de Jure Belli, lib. 2. cap. 20. Sect. 50.
Grotius, that in the Jewish Religion) which was established (in some cases) by
Penal Sanctions, and Coactive punishments) although the Sadduces denied the
Resurrection, and (in that) were judged to be (as indeed they were) erroneous,
yet they were not punished for it. Nunquam eos poenis subdiderunt (faith
Grotius) and he conceives the reason to be that we now speak of, (that is, want
of clear revelation, or sufficient promulgation) Dogma resurrectionis
verissimum illud quidem, sed in lege judaica non nisi obscure, and sub verborum
aut rerum involucris traditum. And on this ground I think many thousand poor
Souls in Spain and Italy (who by Priests, and Parents, and Governors, are kept
in an invincible ignorance of the Gospel) innocently disbelieve, or are
ignorant of many Gospeltruths, which to us (who have a greater measure of
Revelation) would be Criminal and damnable.

5. Upon this ground, Reas. 5.
I am absolutely against punishing See many Reasons for this in the Lord
Faulkland's Reply, page 224, 225, etc.
Heretics with death, it being uncertain who are really such: For to kill a
man for an Heretic, before I can tell whether he be so or no, is certainly a
temerarious act, which may argue some zeal, but little Justice in him that does
it. For further evidencing of this, I say,

1. That it is not yet Vid. August. de Haeresibus in Praefat. page 32. Edit. in
80.
agreed amongst Divines who are formally Heretics, and to agree of the
punishment (and that Capital) before there be a constat for the crime, is a
strange piece of justice.

2. Aquin. 2. 2. Quest. 11. Art. 2. and Commentat. ejus ibidem. Filiucius.
Tractat. 22. cap. 6. Sect. 152. San. lib. 2. cap. 7. Azorius. lib. 8. cap. 9,
etc.
Some would have the formality of Herefie to consist in pertinacy, or
contumacy, out of St. Augustine, who tells us, Qui in Ecclesia pravum quod
sapiunt, si correcti non sapiunt, sed resistunt Contumaciter Haeretici sunt. So
St. Augustine. de Civitat. Dei, lib. 8. cap. 51. and de Origin Animae, cap. 15.
Augustine, and Justinian to the same effect, though in other words, L. Nullus,
2. Cod. Just. de Summa Trinitat vid. Grotium in Tit. 3. 10.
Haeresis est obstinatioris animi dementia. Now Seeing pertinacy is an internal
thing, and such a (...) and constitution of the Soul, as none but God does, or
can know; it were but just to stay the execution of Heretics, till they be
certain what is Heresy. Constet de culpa priusquam irrogetur paena.

3. The Greek Vid. Theophyl. and Oecumenium in Tit. 3. 10*
Scholia (on that of Tit. 3. 10.) require to an Heretic that he be (...)
self-condemned, incurable, incorrigible; but none of these are within the
compass of humane cognizance; for who can tell what Heretic is self-condemned,
incorrigible, or incurable? and if they cannot, why should they inflict a
certain for an uncertain crime? Certainly all sober men will and must confess,
that Autocatacrisie, Incurability, and Incorrigibility depend on many spiritual
and internal Circumstances, which are visible to no eye but that of Heaven* And
therefore the punishment of those Crimes should be left to that Judge, who
alone can certainly know them. Si judicas, cognosce.

4. They Aquin. 2. 2; Quest. 11. Art. 2. in Conclus. Ita Filiucius, Azorius,
Navarzus, alii, etc.
say an Heresy must be contra Articulos fidei. Now it is not agreed which, and
how many are such, and what makes them so; those being Articles of Faith to
some, which are not so to others. Certainly it is but equal that men should not
be hanged for Heresy against the Articles of our Faith, till it be resolved
and known what Propositions are such. If a man commit Murder, Adultery, Theft,
Perjury, if he be a Traitor to his Prince, See the Lord Viscount Faulkland's
Reply in defense of his Tract of Infallibility, page 217, 218, 219, etc. That
it is not lawful to put Heretics to death.
or a Robber on the Highways, all men generally agree in this, that these are
crimes, and accordingly punish them. But it is not so with Heresy and Opinions
in Religion, each party believes his own Positions to be true, and condemns his
adversary; so that what is Heresy to one, is Catholic verity to another. In
short, it were to be wished, that men would not be so fierce to punish Heresy,
till they be more certainly informed, and assured what it is.

But if Heresy cannot be certainly known, Dub.
why does the Apostle say, Haereticum de vita. How can we avoid what we cannot
certainly know? why do we and all Christians punish Heretics with
Ecclesiastical Censures, Suspension, Penance; Excommunication, etc. Can we
justly punish that crime (with any punishment Ecclesiastical or Civil) which we
cannot certainly know?

To this Discourse (in short) I say, Answer.
1. That the old Monk mistook the Apostles meaning much, when he would have us
believe that the Apostle there commands to punish the Heretic with death, and
reads the Text thus, Haereticus de Vita, (i. e.) de vita toll. He was beholden
to the Latin Translation for that Gloss (for sure he was not guilty of much
Greek, though the Latin was little beholding to him for mangling it so
barbarously.

2. He says only (...) Glossae veteres in calce Cyrilli, (...) Evita.
evita, turn away from such a one. Such are to be admonished first, ( Mat. 17.
16, 17.) and then (as Grotius in Tit 3. 10. vid. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 4.
cap. 13. Lat. 14. Gr. page 94. A. B.
Grotius well observes) Id sinon prosit, abrumpenda est cum eis omnis
familiarior consuetudo. Here is nothing of punishment, it is only Evita, not
Excommunica.

3. And if you ask how I can avoid an Heretic, if I cannot certainly know what
Heresy is? I answer (and I am beholden to Hierom* in Tit. 3. 10. page 209.
Hierome, Grotius in Tit. 3. 10.
Grotius, and Christ* Justellus in Cod. Can. Eccles. Univers page 213. ad Can.
12. and ad Cod. Can Eccles. Africanae, page 103.
Justellus for it) that such an Heretic as the Apostle here speaks of might be
known well enough, and punished too.

4. That this may appear, I say, 1. That the word (...) here, is (as all know)
vox mediae significationis, sometimes taken in a good, sometimes in a bad
sense. The several Sects of Philosophers were anciently called (...) Diogenes
Laert, de vitis Philosoph in Proaemi^ page ^3. Vid Hieron in Tit. 3. ^0 page
209. ^.
Hippobotus writ a Book, de sectis seu Haeresibus Philosophorum, (...), etc. So
Christianity is called Act. 24. 5. and 14 Act. 28. 22, etc. Vid. Eusebius. Hist.
1. 8. c. 29. page 253. ^.
(...), by St. Luke. And (...). Act. 26. 5.
(in the same Luke) signifies the Heresy or Sect of the Pharisees. On the
other side, sometimes it is taken in the worse sense. See Gal. 5. 20. (Heresies
are reckoned amongst the works of the flesh) Tit. 3. 10.
and in this of Titus also. 2. Concerning Heresy in the worse sense, I believe
it true which Grotius observes, Ubi Haeresis in malam partem sumitur,
significat idem quod (...), nisi quod illa generalitas (...), voce (...)
limitatur ad eas parts quae fiunt ex opinionum diversitate. Est ergo
Haereticus hic is, qui per opinionem de Ecclesia parts facit. He is an
Heretic here in the Apostles sense, who not only embraces and maintains an
erroneous opinion, but makes a schism in the Church by separating himself from
the Communion, and drawing others after him, and so disturbs the public peace.
This is the opinion of Grotius, and Justellus, and (long before them) of St.
Hierome, Hieronimus in Tit. 3. 10. page 209. C.
Inter Haeresin and Schisma hoc interesse arbitramur, quod Haeresis perversum
Dogma habet, Schisma propter Episcopalem Dissensionem, ab Ecclesia Pariter
separet. Quod quidem in principio aliqua ex part intelligi potest diversum;
caeterum nullum Schisma non sibi aliquam confingit Haeresin, ut recte ab
Ecclesia recessisse videatur. In his opinion Heresy and Schism do both agree
in this, that they make a rent in the Church ( Pariter separant) and so break
the bond of Peace, and Ecclesiastical Union. Whence it is, that the Apostle
calls him (...), self-condemned, so we render it, amiss I believe, for the
Apostle speaks of such an (...), as men may know, see, and be sensible of;
(...), (i. e.) knowing that such an Heretic is subverted, being (...), not
self-condemned, for who is so, none does or can know; It being impossible for
any man to know when an Heretic maintains his Heresy against the light of his
own Conscience, none being able to know that, save he who knows the heart: And
therefore I conceive that (...), here should be rendered, a seipso separatus,
rather than a seipso condemnatus. One that broaches an error, and separates
from the Church. This self-separation may be known, but self-condemnation
cannot, and therefore the Apostle speaks not of this, but that. And I am the
rather induced to be of this opinion:

1. Because the word will very well bear this signification, for (...) (whence
(...) comes) originally and properly signifies seccrno, separo, as well as
judico: And (if Stephanus mistake not) to separate, is the prime signification
of it.

2. Because I find Justellus, Christoph. Justellus and Grotius locis supra
citatis.
and Grotius of the same opinion. Grotius on these words, (...); says thus,
Non dicit Excommunica, nam ipsi ultro Communionem deserunt. And St. Hierome
more fully, Hieronimus in Tit. 3. 10. page 209. Col. 2. C.
Propterea a seipso dicitur damnatus, quia fornicator, homicida, adulter, and
caetera vitia, per sacerdotes de Ecclesia pelluntur: Haeretici autem in
semetipsos sententiam ferunt, suo arbitrio de Ecclesia recedentes, etc. So that
(in St. Hierom's opinion) the Heretic Saint Paul speaks of, is such a one, who
(besides his Erroneous opinion) is Schismatical, and not only makes a
separation from the Church himself, but seduces others, to the disturbance of
the public peace; which crime is visible, and confessedly punishable. However,
it is certain, we may know, and avoid all familiarity with such a person, which
is all which that Apostolical Injunction [ Haereticum devita] signifies. And so
much for that passage in St. Paul.

3. For the practice of the Primitive Church in punishing those they called
Heretics with Excommunications, I confess it is true, they did so. But then, 1.
It will not hence follow, they did well and justly in doing so. Afacto ad jus,
non sequitur argumentum. We cannot infer, Illos just fecisse, ex eo quod
fecerint. Nay he that reads the ancient Church-story, will find that even those
ancient Christian Bishops (though otherwise good men) were often times too
precipitate and passionately hot, and fierce against their Brethren, and too
free of their Anathematismes and Excommunications (although they were not then
come to the now practiced Popish cruelty of confuting Heretics with fire and
faggot.) As is evident in that famous story of Pope Victor (to omit others)
Excommunicating the Asian Bishops for their Observation of Easter, Eusebius. Hist.
Eccles. lib.
though no Law of God or man obliged them to keep it otherwise than they then
did. 2. Yet I grant, that the Church anciently did, and still justly may punish
an erring person with Excommunication (although they cannot be certain how far,
and in what measure such persons err culpably;) and yet neither Church or State
can justly punish such persons with loss of Livelihood, Liberty, or Life. So (I
suppose) an Arian, or one who denies the Resurrection (though otherwise
peaceable, neither separating himself, nor factiously seducing others) may
justly be Excommunicated by the Church, because he does not keep the Conditions
on which he had the Christian Communion. He that has the grant of any Communion
(Sacred or Civil) upon Conditions, cannot be Excommunicated justly while he
keeps those Conditions, but if he do not, then ( condition non praestita) he
may be justly Excommunicate. Now Christians anciently; (and in ours, and all
Churches) were received into the Communion of the Church, on Condition of
believing the Creed (or Faith into which they were Baptized.) The Priest at
Baptism asked, Do thou believe in God the Father Almighty? etc. The party
Baptized answered (by himself, if he were of age, by his Sureties, if not) All
this I steadfastly believe. Then the Priest demands further, Will thou be
Baptized into this Faith? He answers, That is my desire, etc. Upon these
Conditions he was received into the Church, and admitted into the Christian
Communion. Now if after Baptism, and this promise, he deny any of those
Fundamental Articles into the belief of which he was Baptized (though otherwise
he lived never so peaceably) he might justly be Excommunicated by the Church.
It Is a good and true Rule in Morality (and Divinity too) Volenti non fit
injuria, he desired, and had the Communion on that Condition; and when he
rejects, and does not make good that condition, the Church may justly eject him
by Excommunication, (tho they cannot distinctly know the measure and degrees of
the malice that is in such error, it being impossible for any man certainly to
know whether he err out of weakness and infirmity, or malice and obstinacy.)
And further, every such person may be called (...), (as the Tit. 3. 10.
Apostle here, Iren. adversus Haereses, lib. 1. cap page 103. Eras. Cod. Can.
Ecal. Univers. Can. 144.
Irenaeus and others after him call all Heretics) not because they maintain an
error against their Conscience, (for certainly many do not, and when any do,
none can possibly know, but he who knows the heart) but because (as Nic. de
Lyr. in Tit. 3. 10.
Lyranus tells us) Fidem quam in baptismo recepit ut veram, nunc condemnat ut
falsam. He condemns that Faith now, (and so himself) which before he professed
as true. So that he is said to condemn himself, Non respectu judicis interni,
(for he may at both those times, think he is in the right) but respectu
professionis, and facti externi; he professes that as true at one time, which
he himself condemns (as false) at another. And so the same person at several
times, approving and condemning the same Doctrine, may (properly enough) be
said to condemn himself, seeing he now disapproves and condemns what before he
approved. Lastly, (which is no little prejudice against punishing for Opinions)
in the Primitive and purer times of Christianity, we find no persecution for
Religion (except by Pagans.) The Arians (amongst the Professors of
Christianity) were the first who used it. So Athanas. Ep ad Solitariam Vitam
agentes Operum Tom. 1.
Athanasius tells us, and Hu Grotius de Jure Belli, lib. 2. cap. 20. Sect. ult.
page 347. vide Hilarium Orat. ad Constantium.
Grotius observes it out of him, In Arianam haeresin acriter invehitur
Athanasius, quod prima in contradicentes usa esset judicum potestate, and quos
non potuit verbis inducere, eos vi, plagis, verberibusque ad se pertrahere
anniteretur. Such force and compulsion may be means for Mahomet, for a Pagan or
Arian to promote Infidelity and Heresy, but not for a Christian.

Nec tali auxilio, nec defensoribus istis Christus eget.

After them the Donatists (equally guilty of Heresy and cruelty) persecuted
the good Christians: And Optatus (for this very thing) denies them to be true
Members of Christ's Church, Optat. Milevit. lib. 2. page 51. Edit. Casauboni.
Neque enim Ecclesia dici potest, quae cruentis morsibus pascitur, and
sanctorum sanguine and carnibus opimatur, etc. For though these be the words of
Parmenian the Donatist, objecting to the Orthodox that they persecuted the
Donatists, and therefore were not the true Church: Yet Optatus grants his
Position to be true, that, Ecclesia dici non potest quae cruentis morsibus
pascitur, etc. And retorts the argument against them, telling Parmenian:

1. That the Orthodox and true Church persecuted none: Optatus ibid. lib. 2^
page 54.
Doce aliquem nostrum (says Optatus) cuiquam insidiatum esse: quem a nobis
persecutum esse, aut dicere possis, aut probare? the Orthodox Christians did no
such thing, nor any way approved it then.

2. But the Donatists did: Optatus ibid. and page 55, 56. vide constir. Honorii
and Theodos. Aug. ad Curtium P. P. in Appen. Cod. Theod. per. Jac. Sirmondum,
page 31.
De sedibus suis multos fecistis extorres, cum conducta manu venientes,
Basilicas invasistis, multi ex numero vestro, per loca plurima cruentas operati
sunt caedes, and tam atroces, ut de talibus factis, ab illius temporis
judicibus relatio mitteretur, etc.

Thus the Arians and Donatists, and Donatist. species. vid. Optat and August.
de Haeres. cap. 69. and Notas L,. Danaei Sect. 3. Page 212. Genus hominum
azreste, and famosissiun. audaciae, in alios immania facinora perpetrantes.
August. ibid. Page 208.
Circumcellians (the worst sort of Donatists) and after them the Church of Rome
has (of all others) been most guilty of this cruelty; using, when they wanted
better reasons, force, fire and faggot, to consume whom they could not
rationally convince. And indeed those who are so fierce for persecution for
Religion, have no better examples to follow than Pagans (in their Persecution
of Christians) or Mahomet (establishing the Alcoran by the Sword) or Arians,
Donatists and Circumcellians. Now how far it may be safe or honorable for any
to follow such examples, let sober men judge. Sure I am, neither our Savior nor
his Apostles, nor the Primitive and Orthodox Christians for several ages,
either used or commended force and coercive punishments, as a congruous means
to propagate the Gospel where it was not, or confirm it where it was. He that
reads Justine Martyr, Athenagoras; Tertullian, Arnobius, Minutius Faelix,
Lactantius, etc. or indeed any Ecclesiastical Author for 300 years after
Christ, will find Grotius his Observation to be true, Grotius in Luc. 14. 23.
Page 748.
Quod perpetuo asserunt. Neminem ob fidei professionem esse cogendum. The
ancient saying is still true, Tertullianus ad Scapulam.
Religionis non est Religionem Cogere, quae sponte suscipi debet, non vi.
Suaderi potest, cogi non potest. The internal Acts of the Soul (in which all
true Religion originally consists, and without which no external Acts of the
body are capable of any Religion) cannot be compelled, nor is there any
possibility that they should be capable of compulsion. I confess the Body may
be compelled, the Feet to go to Church, the Ear to hear Prayers, Sermons,
Disputations, the Hand to subscribe Articles and Canons, but all this (if the
Heart and Hand do not go together) is so far from true Religion and Sincerity,
that it is downright hypocrisy. Whence it was that St. Augustine (even when he
was of opinion that in some cases, coactive punishments might be used) thought
it best, August. Ep. 50. ad Bonifacium, page 219.
Quod ad Catholicam veritatem cogeretur nemo, sed eam qui sine formidine vellet
sequeretur, ne falsos and simulatores Catholicos haberemus. Athenagoras
pleading against Persecution for Religion, to M. Aurelius Antoninus, tells him,
and us, (...), etc. Athenag. in Legatione pro Christianis.
Et uno verbo, quantum ad Gentes and populos, sacrificia peragunt quae volunt
homines and mysteria. And then adds, (...), etc. Et ista omnia conceditis and
vos and leges. Rome gave always Liberty of Religion to those Nations she
subdued, they might serve their own Gods, so they paid tribute, and without
sedition served her too. Fides voluntatis est, non necessitatis, was the saying
of St. Ambrose, and still true. Our Savior is Captain of our Salvation,
(Christianity is a Spiritual Militia, and the Church militant, an Army with
Banners, Christians Soldiers, but Volunteers, not pressed men.) Vid Joseph.
Castim in Manuduct. ad Viam Pacis, page 40. Eleuth. 1650.
Nec Christum invitis, servis aut mancipiis, sed liberis regnaturum, Psaltes
Psalm. 110.
olim dixit. Populus tuus Spontaneus in die fortitudinis, seu victoriae tuae.
The Original (if rendered ad verbum) sounds thus, Populus tuus spontaneitatum.
A people which must come without compulsion. Christ and his Apostles never
inflicted or threatened any temporal punishments here, but eternal hereafter.
Qui non credit, condemnabitur. Our Savior's Kingdom is Spiritual, and the
means to preserve, increase, and propagate it, are so too. Fire and Faggot,
Chains and Imprisonments are not amongst Evangelical means to make or confirm
Christians. Those were things Christians were patiently to suffer themselves,
not to inflict on others. The Gentiles never were compelled, but freely came to
Baptism, Sacro Christianae; militi ae Sacramento libere obligati, (as a good
Author tells me;) to be Christians, is to be in Covenant with Christ, which
cannot be compelled; it is essentially consensus mutuus, and where such free
consent is wanting, there is no Covenant, or real and true Christianity. It is
Tertullian who tells us, Hoc ad Irreligiositatis elogium concurrit, ut non
liceat mihi colere quem velim, sed cogar credere quem Nolim. It seems to him
irreligious to compel Religion. Piae religionis est, non cogere sed suadere,
Athan. Epist. ad Solit. vitam agentes.
(says Athanasius.) And again, Dominus non cogens, sed libertatem suam
voluntati permittens; dicebat quidem vulgo omnibus, Si quis vult venire post
me: Apostolis vero, Numquid ae vos abire vultis? Chrysostom. in Johan. cap.
And Chrysostom (on the same place of John) (...), etc. Interrogat, an and
ipsi velint discedere? quod omnem est amoventis vim ac necessitatem. It is an
excellent passage in Hilary to this purpose, Hilarious ad Constant. Imperatorem.
Intelligit singularis sapientia tua, non decere, non oportere cogi, and
compelli. in vitos ac repugnantes, etc. Idcirco laboratis, ut omnes quibus
imperatis dulcissima liberate potiantur. Nec alia ratione quae turbata sunt
componi, quae divulsa sunt coerceri possunt, nisi unus quisque nulla servitutis
necessitate adstrictus, integrum habeat vivendi arbitrium. And again, Permittat
lenias tua populis, ut quos Voluerint, quos Elegerint audiant Docentes, and
divina Mysteriorum solennia concelebrent, etc. And a little after, Deus
cognitionem sui Docuit potius, quam Exegit, coactam confitendi se aspernatus
est voluntatem. Deus universitatis est, obsequio non eget necessario, non
requirit coactam confessionem; non fallendus est, non promerendus, nolit nisi
Volentem recipere, nisi orantem audire, nisi profitentem signare. Lactantius
thus, Lactant. lib. 1. cap. 20.
Defendenda Religio non occidendo, sed moriendo, non saevitia sed patientia;
illa enim Malorum sunt, haec bonorum; and necesse est bonum in Religione
versari, non malum. Nam si sanguine, si tormentis, si malo Religionem defendere
velis, jam non defendetur illa, sed Polluetur and violabitur. Nihil enim est
tam voluntarium quam Religio. And the same Lactantius elsewhere: Non expetimus
ut Deum nostrum velit nolit, Lactant. lib. 5. cap. 7. and cap. 14.
colat aliquis invitus, nec si non coluerit irascimur. Quis imponit mihi
Necessitatem vel colendi quod Nolim, vel quod Velim non colendi?

St. Augustine was at first against all Persecution for Religion, and would not
have the Emperor solicited to punish the Donatists with Secular and Temporal
punishments. At last (as Aug. Epist. 50 ad Bonifac. Operum Tom. 2. page 219. C.
Edir. Frob.
he confesses) he was of another opinion, yet even then he was against
punishing any (even the worst) Heretics with death: Ita enim lex fuerat
promulgata ( August ibid. Col. 220. B
says he) ut tantae immanitatis Haeresis Donatistarum (cui crudelius parci
videbatur, quam ipsa saeviebat) non tantum violenta esse, sed omnino non
fineretur esse impune, non tamen supplicio capitali (propter servandam etiam
circa indignos mansuetudinem Christianam) sed pecuniariis damnis, etc. There is
in Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 10. cap. 5. page 287, 288. Edit. Gr. Lat.
Eusebius, an Edict of Constantine and Licinius, which gives a Toleration to
all Religions, (...), etc. Ut tum Christianis, tum aliis omnibus liberam
optionem omnino daremus, eam Religionem sequendi, quam ipsi in animos
inducerent. And again, (...), etc. Consilio rectissimo decrevimus, ut nemini
prorsus libertas negetur Christianorum cultum imitandi, and Cuique detur copia,
suam mentem ei Religioni addicendi, quam ipse sibi maxim convehire censuerit.
And he gives the reason of this Indulgence, (...) etc. Quia nostrorum temporum
tranquillitati and quieti revera accommodatum est, ut quisque facultatem habeat
deligendi eam in Deo colendo rationem, quae sibi maxim placuerit, hocque a
nobis factum, ut nullius Religionis authoritas a nobis ulla ex part imminui
videatur. Afterward such Toleration was not granted, but (as we see in the
Imperial Laws) sometimes more or less according to the Vid. Justin: Cod. de
summa Trinit. and fide Catholica l. Cunctos and leg. nullus. 2. and Cod. de
Haereticis and Manichaeis, and Cod. Theodos. lib. 16. Tit. 5. de Haereticis,
and Constitut. Theod. and Valent. ad Amatium P. PR. Galliar. in Append. Cod.
Theodosiani per Ja. Sirmondum page 14. qua Haeretici omnes e Galliis exulabant.
Et Constitut. Honorii and Theodosii, ibid. page 31. and eorundem Impp.
Constitutionem ibid. page 38. Et Gratianum Distinct. 45. cap. 5. de Judae is.
Vide etiam Constit. Impp. Arcadii, Honorii and Theodos. A. A. A. Hadriano P.
PR. in Append. Cod. Theodos. l. 21. p. 59. Constitutio sic habet: Adversarios
Catholicae fidei Extirpare hujus Decreti authoritate prospeximus, etc. Et paulo
post, Quare hac lege sancimus, ut quisquis fuerit rebaptizasse detectus, judici
qui Provinciae praseidet offeratur, ut facultatum omnium publicatione mulctatus
inopiae poenam, qua in perpetuum adficiatu^, expendat.
Constitution of the Emperors, and the fierceness and importunity of the
Bishops.

But enough (if not too much) of this, and therefore manum de Tabula: He that
desires more, either sayings of Fathers or Imperial Edicts, or Constitutions of
particular Churches and Nations, concerning Persecution or Toleration of
several Religions, may have them Collected to his Hand by many Grotius de Jure
Belli, l. 2. c. 20. Sect. 48, 49. etc. Wilhelmus Zepperus in Explanat. Leg.
Mosaic. lib. 4. cap. 3. de Pseudo-Prophetis, Jos. Castim in Manuduct ad viam
Pacis, page 25. usque ad p. 108, etc.
Authors. Qui plura vellet, illos videat.

Quer. 1. Whether he that would give a Toleration to several Religions, should
not (in prudence and conscience) first know what these Religions are, what
Points they hold different from that Established, that so he may knowingly judge
how far he may, or may not grant Impunity? For if he Tolerate a Religion before
he know it, he Tolerates he knows not what: Which cannot be an act of prudence
in any Magistrate. Seeing (in this case) he grants a Toleration to that
Religion, which (for ought he knows) he ought not to Tolerate.

Quer. 2. Whether he that does (and justly may) Tolerate a Religion different
from that Legally established, and so compells none to be of his Religion, may
not yet compel his Subjects to those Media (and the use of them) by which may
be informed of the reasons and truth of his Religion? As (for instance) whether
our King, though he should grant a Toleration to Papists, and so no way compel
them to be Protestants, may not compel them to come to Sermons, and hear
Disputations, by which they may be informed of those Truths we hold, and the
Grounds and Reasons of them. (As Parents compel their Children to go to School
for Information, though they should not, cannot compel them to an assent, and
belief of what they are taught.) Seeing (by the Law of Nature and Scripture) we
and all men are bound to Try all things, and hold fast that which is good; and
so may (by our Lawful Governors) be compelled to an examination and rational
trial of several Religions, though not to the belief of any? Now the reason of
this difference in this, 1. It is evident (and confessed) that it is every man's
duty to make such trial of the truth of several Religions, that so he may be of
the best Religion by choice, and not only by chance. 2. It is as evident, that
the end of Magistracy is to bring all men under their Jurisdiction to do their
duty, either by suasory allurements; or (if that will not do) by compulsory
punishments, and so (by consequence) he may compel them to such trial of the
truth. 2. But after such trial made (by hearing Sermons and Disputations) the
Magistrate cannot tell certainly, when it is their duty (of several Religions)
to believe this, or that in particular; for it is no man's duty to believe any
positive truth of Christian Religion, till it be sufficiently revealed (a
sufficient revelation of truth being absolutely necessary, and antecedent to an
obligation to believe it, and so to the duty of believing) and when that is,
the Magistrate cannot certainly know; and therefore he cannot compel any to
the belief of these or those opinions (as a part of their duty) seeing he
cannot certainly know, whether it be their duty or no.

Sir, These Adversaria (tumultuarily put together will need your pity and
pardon, being neither in a just order or method, nor having that evidence of
proof which otherwise they might have had, had either my parts been better, or
my time for Meditation more. As they are, you freely have them, and an absolute
power (to approve or condemn them) Given you by,

SIR, Your most Obliged humble Servant, etc.

THE CASE OF MURDER.

The Case of MURDER.
GENESIS ix. 6. An Objection from the said Text, That Kings have not power to
pardon Murder, Answered.
FOR the clearing and further Evidence of the truth of this Position, Object.
[ That Kings and Supreme Powers may in some Cases pardon Murder] there remains
one (and for ought yet appears, but one) Objection to be answered; it is
grounded on the Law given to Noah after the Flood, Genesis 9. 6.
and about 796 years before the Mosaical Law, which says, that the Murderer
shall surely be put to death: Numb. 35. 3^.
The Law given to Noah, was in these words; He that sheds man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shed. Wherein God Almighty appoints death to be the
punishment of Murder. Now if it be granted, that the Mosaical Law binds only
the Jews, to whom it was given; yet this Law given to Noah, and in him, to all
his Posterity; must bind Jews and Gentiles too, who are all equally his
Posterity.

Sol. In answer to this Objection, and the reason of it, (which no way proves
what is pretended) I say,

1. It is confessed, that this Law given to Noah, did bind him and all his
Posterity. There were three men (and but three) who could make Positive Laws,
to bind all the World. 1. Adam. 2. Noal. 3. Our Blessed Savior. Whatever Laws
any of them made, (after sufficient Promulgation) obliged the whole World; and
what Laws God gave to Adam or Noah, all such Laws, (after sufficient
Promulgation) obliged their Posterity; that is, the whole World; (for as before
the Flood, all the men in the World came from Adam; so after the Flood from
Noah; and it must be confessed, that although this Law given to Noah, does not
bind many, to whom it was never promulg'd or made known; yet God has
sufficiently made it known to all Jews and Christians, in the holy Scriptures;
and therefore we must confess our selves under the Obligation of it.

2. It is certain, that this Law given to Noah, was (as all Penal Laws are) a
Positive Law; and that all such Laws are capable of Dispensation; and that in
several Cases, ( without any dispensation) their Obligation ceases: of which
more anon.

3. It is certain, that by these, Numb. 35. 30.
words [ By man shall his blood be shed] By man there, the Magistrate is meant,
who had Jus Gladii, Power of Life and Death; and so Authority to condemn and
execute a Murderer; which no Private Person had, or could upon any just Grounds
pretend to.

4. When it is said, That the Murderers blood shall be shed by man: The
Proposition is not Universal, that every Murderer shall be put to death. For if
Noah, or any Supreme Power had been a Murderer, (as even David the best of
Kings was) he could not by this or any other Law be put to death. 1. Because it
is evident that the Supreme Power has no Superior, and therefore none to punish
him, especially not with death, the greatest Punishment man can suffer. 2. Nor
could he do it himself, for although Kings and Supreme Powers have Authority to
take away other men's lives, (when they are Capital Offenders, and do things
worthy of death) yet they cannot take away their own; (...), or Self-murder,
being in no case lawful. 3. And as they could not without sin and great
Impiety, kill themselves; so they could not give Commission to any to do it. It
being impossible that I should give another Power to do that, which I had no
power to do my self.

5. And as this Law extends not to Supreme Powers; whose Blood cannot be shed
by man, although man's Blood have been shed by them; so it extends not to all
Subjects and Inferior persons, who have Lawful Magistrates. This the infinitely
wise and just Lawgiver ( God himself) has told us in the Text, Exodus 21. 20, 21.
That if a Master had slain his Manservant, or Maidservant, and they die
immediately under his hand, then he was to be punished; but if that Servant
lived a day or two, (24 hours, say the Rabbis, Joh. 11. 9.
the Jews accounting 12. hours for a day) his Master who killed him, was not to
die. So that, though a Master had shed the blood of his Manservant or
Maidservant, yet his blood (by this Law given to Noah) could not be shed for
it.

6. Other Cases there may be, and are, wherein a man may shed man's blood, and
yet his blood may not be shed for it. Numb 35. 30.
For instance, Deuteronomy. 17. 6.
The Law required two Witnesses to put any Murderer to death; and therefore if
Sempronius had shed Titius his blood, yet if there was but one Witness legally
to prove it, Sempronius his blood could not be shed by any man.

By the Premises I think it is evident, that this Law given to Noah, [He that
sheds blood, by man shall his blood be shed] is not so universally obligatory
as some may think it is. Seeing there may be many persons and cases, wherein
man's blood may be shed, and yet he who did it, cannot be put to death for so
doing. The Query then will be, Whether the Supreme Power, who (as to have his
blood shed by any man) is not under the Obligation of this Law, may not (in
some cases) pardon a person condemned for Murder? For a distinct answer to this
Query it is to be considered;

1. That it is certain, that this Law given to Noah (nor any Law de poenis) is
not a Natural or Moral Law; (all which Laws were ab Origin, at the Creation,
writ in the Heart of Adam, and from him in the Hearts of all his Posterity, and
their Obligation eternal and indispensable). But it was a positive Law given to
Noah 1658. years after the Creation.

2. It is certain, That all such Positive and Penal Laws, are capable of
Dispensations; and many Cases may happen, in some times and circumstances, (of
which the Supreme Power is the only, or (at least) the Supreme Judge) wherein
the Obligation of such Laws cease; so that no man is bound to execute or
undergo the Punishments appointed by those Laws. That this may evidently appear
I shall give some few Instances:

1. It was a Divine Positive Law, Genesis 17. 14.
that all the seed of Abraham should be Circumcised the eighth day on pain of
being cut off from his People: And yet the Obligation of that Divine Positive
Law ceased, Josh. 5. 5, 7.
for forty years, while they wandered in the Wilderness; and yet Moses, their
Supreme Power, did neither Punish (according to the Letter of the Law) nor
blame them for it.

2. It was a Divine Positive Law, that they should keep the Passover on the
Fourteenth day of the first Month; and yet there were several Cases, Exodus 12.
6.
wherein the Obligation of that Law ceased, so that they did not sin, though
they did not that day eat the Passover: For if any one was casually unclean by
touching a dead body, Numb. 9: 6, 10:
or if he were on a journey, etc. the Obligation of that Law ceased, (as to
him) and he sinned not though he did not eat the Passover, on the day appointed
by the Law.

3. The Sanctification of the Sabbath (as to that particular day) was enjoined
by a Divine Positive Law; and (by that Law) it was capital to violate the
Sabbath, Exodus 31. 14, 15.
or do any of our own Work; the Worship of God Almighty being the proper and
only work of that day: And yet it is certain (and on all sides confessed) that
in many Cases the Obligation of that Law cease, so that we may lawfully do
that which otherwise to the Jews was Capital. If an Enemy invade our Country,
or a City be set on fire on the Sabbath, or our Lord's day, we may lawfully
take Arms to defend our Country; and (the Church and Divine Service left) make
haste and labor hard to quench the fire, and save the City. Now as to the
aforementioned Divine Positive Laws, there may be many Cases, wherein their
Obligation ceases, so that the Punishment otherwise required by those Laws may
lawfully be pardoned. So in this Law given to Noah there have been, and may be
several Cases, wherein that Law does not bind ad Poenam, and so the Murderer
may lawfully be pardoned.

3. And it is further to be considered, that this Law (de Homicidio) given to
Noah, does neither expressly say, nor by any good consequence intimate, that
the Supreme Power shall not (in any Case) pardon a condemned Murderer: It only
declares death to be the just reward and punishment of Murder; but it does not
say, that it must necessarily be always executed; so that no Pardon, in no case
is to be admitted.

4. And it is certain, (and in our present case more considerable) That Jacobs
two Sons, Simeon and Levi, Genesis 34. 25.
were guilty of Murder, Genesis 49. 6.
and yet were pardoned, notwithstanding the Law given to Noah: Sure it is, that
they were neither sentenced nor put to death for their Murders; but long after
went down into Egypt with Jacob their Father, and died there. Though they had
impiously and abundantly shed Man's blood, yet their blood was not shed for it.
Tho Jacob their Father, and Isaac (who was then living) were the Supreme Powers
in the then Church of God, (consisting in the seed of Abraham) and had power to
do it. Nor could those Patriarchs ( Isaac and Jacob) be ignorant of the Law
given to Noah, seeing Noah himself lived till the fifty seventh year of
Abraham, and died only forty three years before Isaac's birth. Now, considering
the persons of these two great Patriarchs, that they were Prophets, men of
exceeding Piety, and beloved of God; we may be sure they would not have
transgressed that Law given by God to Noah, if they had believed that the
Obligation of it was such as excluded all possibility of Pardon. In short, if
those pious Patriarchs might pardon Murder, then, I desire to know why Supreme
Princes (in some cases) may not pardon it now?

5. Lastly I ask, Did that Law given to Noah, bind David and the Jews in his
time, or did it not? If not, how comes it to bind us now, above 2700 years
after David's death? If it did bind David then; so as no pardon was to be
permitted, or granted to a Murderer, it is not probable that David (a Prophet
and the best of Kings) would have transgressed that Divine Law, and pardoned
Absalom. Especially if we consider, that his other known sins (as Murder,
Adultery, Numbering the People, etc.) are confessed by him; and in Scripture
mentioned as his sins; but his pardoning Absalom, is no where in Scripture
confessed by him, or laid to his charge, as a transgression of any Law. Sed
manum de Tabula.

I desire you to ask those, Query.
who made the former Objection against the King's power of pardoning Murder
from the Law given to Noah, and think the Laws given to Noah still Obligatory;
How it comes to pass that in the same place, Genesis 9. 4.
the first Law given to Noah, is a Prohibition to eat any Blood (which is
confirmed by Moses, Levit. 17. 10.
and no where abrogated;) And yet all Papists and Protestants eat Blood,
notwithstanding that Law of God to Noah forbidding it. I desire to know of the
Gentleman (who made the Objection, which I hope I have probably answered) why
the second Law given to Noah ( Genesis 9. 6.) about Murder, should be binding, and
yet the first Law ( Genesis 9. 4.) against eating Blood, should not be binding
too. He who can and will solve me this doubt, will do me a kindness, which (if
any) few can. I am,

Your Faithful Friend and Servant, T. L.

THE CASE OF Pardoning Murder.

The CASE of Pardoning MURDER.
Query. Whether it be lawful for his Sacred Majesty to Reprive or Pardon a
Person convict, and legally condemned for Murder.
My Honored Friend,
ALthough I well know, your Loyalty to be as much, and your Learning and
Knowledge of the Laws, and their Obligation, to be more than mine; yet
(according to your command and my promise) I have here sent you, a Compendium
and short Account, of some Discourses I lately had with some, who seemed to
doubt, Whether our Gracious Sovereign could reprive or pardon a person legally
condemned for Murder? For a distinct answer to this Query, I consider,

1. That it is certain, that all we Subjects, are (by the indispensable law of
God and Nature) bound, Prove. 24. 21.
( next to our good God, 1 Pet. 2. 17.
the great King of Heaven and Earth) to honor and obey our Gracious Sovereign;
and that not only for fear of punishment, Romans 13. 5.
but for Conscience lake. Romans 13. 2.
So that to do, or speak, or think dishonourably of the Lord Anointed, Act. 23.
5.
our King, Exodus 22. 28.
and to question and deny any of the Rights of his Crown and Prerogatives,
Eccles 10. 20.
is in all Subjects disloyal and impious. In the Natural Body, if there be any
blemish or disease in the head, if it be in any danger from without, all the
members of the body (the dictates of Right Reason, and the principles of Nature
requiring it) will industriously concur to cover and conceal that blemish, to
cure that disease, and prevent all danger that may happen to the Head. So in
the Body Politic, if the King (the Head of that Body) have any errors or
failings, as (our Blessed Savior only excepted) the best men in the world ever
bad; then all the members of that Body (as by the indispensable Law of
Allegiance, they are bound) ought to conceal the frailties of their Prince, and
not to censure or publish them to his dishonor, either by word or writing.

2. But notwithstanding this, it is too certain, that in this Nation, in the
late unhappy times of confusion, and most horrid Rebellion, we have had a
multitude and rabble of seditious people, (who miscalled themselves the Goldy
party) who have been so far from duly honoring their Gracious Sovereign,
maintaining the known Rights of his Crown, and preserving his Sacred person
from danger, that they have (without all ground) falsely slandered, and in the
Press and Pulpit, by Lies and Libels, endeavored to ruin his honor and
reputation. Nor stayed they here, but having got power to complete the Tragedy,
they did, what before they desired, seize the Kings Revenue, and all the Rights
of the Crown into their own bands, and at last, with a prodigious, and more
than Pagan impiety, ( horresco referens) they murdered their innocent and pious
Prince. An act so villainous, and so far beyond all expression barbarous; that
since our Blessed Saviors death, no Age or Nation ever had, or (I hope) ever
will have, any Villainy equal to it, and (all circumstances considered) of
parallel impiety. And since his Majesty's happy and Miraculous Restoration to
his Fathers Throne in peace, it is too evident by the impious Plots and
Conspiracies happily discovered, and their disloyal and Traiterous designs
disappointed, some still remain, who if they had (What I hope they never will)
ability, want not a mind to do mischief, who have talked so long of that
liberty and property of the subject, that to maintain the just Rights and
Prerogative of their Prince, (which in the first place ought to have been
considered and preserved) is no part of their care and desire, but rather the
diminution of it, and (had they ability and opportunity) the utter abrogation
of it.

The Premises considered, I think that every loyal subject, as he is (by
natural or sworn Allegiance, or both) at all times, so especially in the
circumstances we now are, is obliged with more care and diligence, to maintain
and vindicate his Sovereigns just Rights and Prerogatives. For where and when
there is greater and more eminent danger, there ought to be greater care and
diligence to prevent it. These Considerations, and some addresses of some
honest Cavaliers, who believed, that the King had power, by his Prerogative
Royal, to pardon in the Cafe proposed, but could more easily believe the truth,
than answer Objections against it, and therefore desired my assistance to help
them to answer the principal (and indeed the only pretended) Objection, which
seemed (and only seemed) to prove, that his Sacred Majesty could not pardon a
person legally condemned for Murder. I say, that these reasons induced me more
seriously to consider the Case proposed, and after diligent consideration of
all the particulars, being in my own judgment convinced, and having satisfied
my doubting friends, That his Majesty might lawfully pardon such a condemned
Malefactor, I shall now (in short) give you an account of those Reasons which
satisfied me and them, and refer them to your better Judgment. And here, that I
may set down what I have to say, with more method and perspicuity: I shall, 1.
Suppose two or three things, which (to me) seem evident Truths, and will
conduce to manifest his Majesty's power to pardon, and then I shall proceed. I
suppose then,

1. That the Kingdom of England is a Monarchy. That is, (as the word signifies)
a Government, wherein the Supreme power is in one single person. This our
Statutes say, Stat. 1 Eliz. cap. 1.
and (in our Oath of Supremacy) we swear, That the King is the ONLY SUPREME,
Governor of this Realm. 1. Supreme, and therefore none above him. 2. ONLY
Supreme, and therefore none coordinate with him, or equal to him.

2. That England is an Hereditary Monarchy. We say, the King never dies. The
man who was King may die, and cease to be, but the King and Royal Power ceases
not, but immediately descends to, and is seated in his next Heir and Successor.
In the next minute after any King's death, the next Heir to the Crown, is
actually King, as well and as much before, as after his Coronation. As in
Matrimony, it is not the Solemnization of it, in the Church, nor the Prayers
and Benediction of the Priest, that makes Husband and Wife. For it is (by Law
and Reason) certain, that consensus facit Matrimonium: Solemnization of it in
the Church, is only a public Declaration of the antecedent consent, which made
the parties man and wife coram Deo, before they came to the Church. So is
Coronation to a King, it does not constitute and make him so, but presuppose
and declare publicly, that this person is indeed our Prince. Neither has the
Pope or people, any thing to do by way of Election or approbation of a
Successor to the Crown. And so in our Oath of Allegiance, we swear fidelity to
the King, Statut. 3. Jacobi, cap. 4.
His HEIRS and SUCCESSORS. The same Oath of Allegiance we took to Charles the
Martyr, in the next minute after his death, as equally and indispensably bound
us, to be loyal and faithful to his Son and Heir Charles the Second, our now
Gracious King.

3. The Kingdom of England is not only a Monarchy, but an ABSOLUTE Monarchy. So
my Lord Cook tells us, My Lord Cook's Repor. Part. 5. de jure Regis Ecclesiast.
page 40. Edit. Land. 1612.
in these signal words, Thus it has appeared, as well by the ancient COMMON
LAWS, as by the Judgment and RESOLUTION of the JUDGES of the Laws of England,
in All AGES, and by the Authority of MANY ACTS of Parliament, that the Kingdom
of England, is an ABSOLUTE Monarchy; and that the King is the Supreme
Governor, etc. And Sir John Davis, (that I may not trouble you with any more
Quotations) says the very same thing, Sir John Davis his Reports, in the Case
of Praemunire, (which is his last Case) page 85.
The King of England are ABSOLUTE EMPERORS in their Dominions, etc. And again,
Idem ibid. page 89. col. 2.
The King of England has the same ABSOLUTE Liberties in his Dominions, as the
Emperor in his Empire. The meaning is not, that our Kings are so absolute as to
be freed from obedience of the Laws of God, ( natural or positive in the
Gospel) but because there is no power on earth, ( except their own) which can
lay any obligation or limitation upon them. And this is evident, because our
Kings being supreme, having none superior or equal to them, it is impossible,
that any power on earth, (for it is most certain that no inferior power can do
it) should be able to oblige or limit them.

But it may be said, Object.
If our Kings be absolute, so as no power on earth can oblige or limit them,
then they may by themselves make and abrogate Laws, lay Taxes on the people,
etc.

This does not follow; Sol.
for although no power on earth is superior to them, or can oblige or limit
them, yet they may limit themselves, by Oath or promise; and so our Kings have
limited their power, and promised and (in their Coronation Oath) sworn to do
none of those things without the consent of their people in Parliament.

But does not this limiting themselves, Object.
take away and destroy their Absoluteness?

No; if any other power could lay Obligations and Limitations upon them, then
(I grant) they were not absolute, but to limit themselves, is consistent with
absolute power. For the truth of this, we have an evident and authentic
instance. It is most certain, that God Almighty is an absolute King of all the
world; yet, (for the comfort of his people) he has limited himself by Oath and
promise, (so the Apostle tells us) That by two immutable things, Heb. 6. 17, 18.
in which it is impossible for God to lie, we might have strong consolation.

These things premised, concerning the great power of our Kings, That it is
Monarchical, Supreme and Absolute, the Query is, Whether they can and lawfully
may, either 1. Reprive 2. Or pardon
a person condemned for Murder?

Now it is a certain Rule,(in Law and Reason) that Omne illicitum est ex lege
aliqua illicitum. Sin is the transgression of a Law; 1 John 3. 4
and, where there is no law, Romans 4. 15.
there is no transgression. If then such Reprive or Pardon be unlawful, and may
not be granted by the Kings of England, then it must be so, by some law, which
prohibits it, and that must be either, 1. Some Humane, or 2. Some Divine,
Law.

For the first, unless it do appear, that the Kings of England are prohibited
to reprive or pardon such malefactors, by some law of our Nation, to the making
where of they have given their consent, and so limited their own power: I say
unless there be such a law, it will be evident, that it cannot be unlawful (by
any humane law) for our Kings to reprive or pardon such malefactors. But
although I have reason to believe, that there is no such law; Yet whether there
be any such Law or no, I shall not determine; but leave it to the Reverend
Judges, and the learned in our laws, who are best able to determine that
Question. It belongs not to my calling, or present business to determine the
Case, by humane laws. That which was desired of me was this, Whether the
Reprive or Pardon of a person legally condemned for Murder, were prohibited,
and so unlawful by the law of God; particularly by that Law given to the Jews
by Moses, in these words, Thou shall take NO SATISFACTION for the life of a
murderer, Numb. 35. 31.
who is guilty of death, he shall SURELY BE PUT TO DEATH. NOW to determine this
case of Conscience, by the Divine Law, is within the compass of my Calling; and
by this time (at the Age of 77.) I am, or ought to be, in some measure, a
competent Judge of such Cases. And therefore, seeing nothing is required of me,
save (what is in my power to give) my Opinion in the Case; I shall here,

1. Humbly and with submission to my Superiors, give my opinion and judgment in
the Case.

2. The Reasons for it.

1. For the first, my present opinion and judgment is, That there is no Divine
Law which prohibits, and so makes it unlawful for Supreme Princes, to Reprive
or Pardon a person legally condemned for murder. And this I shall endeavor
distinctly to show and prove, 1. That a Reprive 2. That a Pardon
is not by any Law of God unlawful.

1. For the first, To Reprive, Repriving
is not to null or make void the Sentence passed upon a murderer, or to free
him from it; but only (for some time) the delaying the execution of it. Now
it is certain, that there is no Law of God which prohibits such Reprive, and
delay of executing the sentence, or any way make it unlawful for the Supreme
power to grant such Reprive. The severest Law against Murderers, is that in the
Book of Numbers, Numb. 35. 31.
(but now named) which says; That no satisfaction shall be taken for the life of
a Murderer, but he shall surely be put to death. But that Law does not say,
that he must die the same day the sentence passed, or the same week or month.
If a Murderer be executed a month after the sentence passed, he dies As SURELY,
as if he had died the same day. 2. There may be just reasons drawn from the Law
of Nature and Scripture, why (in many Cases) the supreme Magistrate not only
lawfully may, but ought to grant such a Reprive. The Law of God and Nature,
does indispensably bind all, to love their neighbor as their selves; Mat. 22.
39.
and therefore (so far as we have ability) to endeavor his Salvation. Now a
condemned murderer (who has no pardon) is sure to lose a temporal life, and
that he may not lose eternal life too, (it is the observation and judgment of
the best Scholar and Lawyer in his time) it will Ne cum vita, spatium ad
paenitendum praecludatur, sciant hujus rei, a piis magistratibus, summam haberi
rationem, nec quenquam ad supplicium RAPI, NISI DATO TEMPORE, quo peccata sua
agnoscere, and serio detestari possit. Grotius de Jure Belli, lib. 2. cap. 20.
De Poenis. Sect. 12.
and should be the care of pious Princes, not to hurry such condemned
malefactors hastily to death, but to grant them some time, (by a Reprive)
before they leave this, to consult their Ghostly Father, and (by prayer,
confessing their sins, true penitence, and the comfort of Absolution) prepare
themselves for a better life. 3. But although this be a certain truth, That the
Supreme power may reprive a condemned Murderer, yet it will further appear,
(and beyond all contradiction) in the proof of the next particular: Where it
will appear, That the King (by his Supreme power, and Royal Prerogative) may
lawfully pardon such a condemned malefactor, and therefore much more may he
lawfully Reprive him. For he who can lawfully pardon and remit the punishment
of Death, that it shall never be inflicted, may certainly for some small time,
(for a week, a month, or two) suspend and delay the execution of it. And so I
proceed to the second particular.

2. It is not unlawful by any Divine Law, 2. Pardoning.
for the Supreme Power, to pardon a person convict and condemned for Murder.
The reason is evident, because there is no Divine Law, which prohibits the
Supreme power to grant such a Pardon. That this may more distinctly appear, it
is certain and confessed, that Divine Laws are either,

1. Evangelical, made known to us in the Gospel.

2. Mosaical, such as God by Moses made known to his own people the Jews.

1. For the first, The Evangelical Laws were given by our Blessed Savior in
the Gospel, for the gathering and perpetual Government of his Church. Now it is
certain, that amongst these Laws there is nothing of any temporal punishment.
Our Blessed Savior tells Pilate, Joh. 18. 36.
That his Kingdom was not of this world; (it was no Temporal Kingdom) It was
not to be promoted by the sword, or temporal punishments. He left his Apostles
no power to punish the transgressors of his Laws, either, 1. In their Purse,
(by Pecuniary Mulcts or Fines.) Nor, 2. in their Persons (by Death or
Imprisonments.) All such Power does, and ever did belong to the Civil
Magistrate, who only has Jus Gladii. Nor is there any Law in the Gospel, which
so much as mentions, much less prohibits the Civil Supreme Magistrate, to
pardon condemned Malefactors.

2. For the Mosaical Laws, ( Ceremonial and Judicial) they were such, as were
given by God himself, for the good Government of the Jewish Commonwealth. Now
concerning these Laws, it is certain,

1. That they were given Psalm. 147. 19. 20. Romans 9. 4. Ephesians. 2. 12.
only to the Jews, as is confessed and fully Suarez de Legibus, lib. 9. cap. 5.
Sect. 7. p. 738. Aquin. 1. 2. Quest. 98. Art. 4. Filliuc. Moral, Quest. Tom. 2.
Trac. 21. cap. 11. Sect. 402.
proved by the Schoolmen and Casuists.

2. It is certain, that no positive Law (Divine or humane) does, or can bind
any save those to whom it is given, and sufficiently promulgated and made
known. A sufficient Promulgation is absolutely necessary to the Obligation of
any positive Law.

3. And hence it follows, that those Mosaical Laws never bound the Gentiles
before our blessed Savior's time, much less Christians since, (as will anon
appear.) And therefore if that Law in Numb. 35. 31. (but now mentioned) or any
other Mosaical Law, had absolutely forbid, and made the pardoning of Murder
unlawful to the Jews, yet it will not hence follow, that it should be ( by that
Law) unlawful for Gentiles or Christians to pardon it, seeing it is manifest,
that those Mosaical Laws were never given to, nor any way obliged them. For the
Transgression of any Law, does necessarily presuppose its Obligation: It being
impossible I should transgress a Law, which never bound me to Obedience.

4. The obligation of the Ceremonial Laws ceased, (even to the Jews, to whom
they were given) at the death of our Blessed Savior. They were Types and
Shadows of his Death, and our Redemption by him; and when the Substance, and
thing typified by them was come, the Shadows ceased. Whence it is, that Divines
(both Ancient and Modern) truly say, That at our Blessed Saviors Death, the
Jewish Ceremonial Law was Mortua, (as to its obligation;) it was abrogated, and
the observation of it not necessary; tho for some time, to gain the Jews, even
the Apostles did voluntarily observe it. But when the Gospel was more fully
published, it became Mortifera, and the observation of it inconsistent with the
Gospel. Gal. 5. 2.


5. For the Judicial Law of the Jews, it is certain, that the Obligation of it
ceased (at least) at the destruction of Jerusalem, when the Jewish Government,
and their Commonwealth was utterly destroyed.

6. And hence it evidently follows, that all those Mosaical Laws, (Judicial and
Ceremonial) have been abrogated and null, and have neither bound Jew or Gentile
above this 1600 years last past; and therefore it is impossible that any of
them should now bind any Christian Supreme Power not to pardon any condemned
malefactor.

And what is said of the Judicial and Ceremonial Laws, given to the Jews by
Moses; that none of them ever did, or could bind any Gentiles or Christians;
the same we say, of the Moral Law, (as to punishing or pardoning Murderers)
that it never prohibited Supreme Princes to reprive or pardon any person
condemned for Murder. That this may appear, it must be considered, that there
are two Editions of the Moral Law; both writ by the Omnipotent and Gracious
Author of it, by God himself,

1. In the heart of Adam, where it was most entirely and perfectly writ. His
Understanding being clear, and abundantly able to know and distinguish good
from evil; quid faciendum, quid fugiendum; and his will obsequious to follow
those dictates of right Reason. But by the fall of Adam, this Writing and
perfect Edition of the Moral Law, was much blotted, corrupted and defaced, both
in Adam, and all his Posterity. For although the substance of that Law, did (
after the fall) continue writ in their nearts; yet so defaced by the Fall, that
(ignorance having blinded the Under standing) it was in many places, not
legible, nor ( sin having corrupted the will) practicable.

2. The second Edition of the Moral Law, (in respect of the writing of it,
which remained in the hearts of men after the fall) was multo auctior and
emendatior. And this Edition of the Moral Law, is that, which God, by Moses,
gave only to his own Church and People the Jews. In which he gave them,

1. A just and perfect Compendium of that whole Law in two Tables of Stone,
containing Ten Precepts.

2. A full and more perfect explication of those Precepts, and the particular
duties required by them.

3. An addition of many Gracious promises and blessings to those who sincerely
observed those Laws; and many threats and punishments for those who
transgressed any of those Laws. This Edition of the Moral Law, with the many
promises and punishments annexed, was (as I said) given only to the Jews, not to
the Gentiles.

And this appears by that memorable passage in St. Paul, wherein he tells the
Romans in these words, The Gentiles which HAVE NOT THE LAW, do BY NATURE, Romans
2. 14
These HAVING NOT THE LAW, are a law to themselves, which shows the work of the
Law WRITTEN IN THEIR HEARTS. In which words, we have the two Editions of the
Moral Law, before mentioned, expressly set down, and that the Gentiles had only
the first Edition; and that the second and more perfect Edition, was given only
to the Jews. For the Apostle says,

1. That the Gentiles HAD NOT THE LAW; to wit, as it was Lex scripta in Lapide,
and given to the Jews, with the Addition of many Promises, and many several
punishments annexed to the transgressions of particular Precepts.

2. That the Gentiles HAD THE LAW writ IN CORD, for so all men by nature had
it. And it is the Moral Law he means, for no positive Law of God or man, is by
nature writ in any man's heart.

Now what is said in the second and more perfect Edition of the Moral Law, as
it was given by Moses only to the Jews, is either, 1. De Officiis. 2. Or de
poenis and promissis.

I. De Officiis; quid faciendum aut fugiendum: What good we are to do in
obedience to the Affirmative Precepts. As in that, Remember the Sabbath Day to
keep it holy: Honor thy Father and Mother, etc. And what evil we are to avoid
in obedience to the Negative Precepts; such as these, Thou shall not kill, Thou
shall not commit Adultery, etc. In short, the sum of all those Duties which the
Moral Law requires of us, is this, That we love God with all our heart, and our
neighbor as our selves. Now as to all these duties, the obligation of the
Moral Law, is Universal, Eternal, and Indispensable. It binds all men, Jews and
Gentiles, and that indispensably.

2. De promissis and poenis, concerning the Promises and punishments which are
annexed to the Moral Law, as it was given to the Jews by Moses. And here,

I. For the Promises, it is certain that they were given only to the Jews. For
the Apostle expressly tells us, That the Gentiles were aliens and strangers to
the promises. For instance, the promise added to the fifth Commandment, Ephesians. 2.
12. and Ephesians. 3. 6.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the land which
the Lord thy God GIVES THEE. Canaan is the Land promised and given to the Jews
only, not to the Gentiles, nor ever intended for them; it being indeed
impossible, that all Jews and Gentiles should live in that little Land. But to
pass by the promises, (which do not so properly belong to our present business)
I say,

2. That it is as certain, that all the Mosaical Laws de Poenis, are (not
natural, but) Positive and Judicial Laws, which never bound any save the This
the Schoolmen and Casuists generally consels and prove. See Suarez de Legibus,
lib. 9. cap. 5. Sect. 7. page 738. Aquinas 1, 2. Quest 98. Art. 4. Fillincias.
Quaest. Moral. Tom. 2. Tract. 21. cap. 11. Sect. 402.
Jews, (or those who became Proselytes, and voluntarily submitted to them) to
whom only they were given. That this may further and more distinctly appear, it
is to be confidered as certain and consessed,

I. That the Law of Nature (as all just Laws do) binds all men; 1. Ad
Obedientiam, to a willing and perfect Obedience. And, 2. (upon supposition of
sin) ad Poenam. But the Punishment to which the Law of Nature binds, is Death;
and that Eternal Death. For as in Adam (by reason of sin) all die; so they had
died eternally, 1 Cor. 15. 22.
had not God most graciously sent his Son to redeem them from that death. Every
sin (how small soever) by the Covenant of Works, (of which the Moral Law was
the condition on man's part to be performed) was a capital crime, Deuteronomy. 4. 13*
and Death the Wages or punishment, Romans 6. 23*
(by that law) due to it. But those many various laws de Poenis, which occur in
the Mosaical law, which he gave to the Jews, are not (...), non leges nobiscum
nataE, and in cord naturalitere inscriptae; not Natural laws, writ in our
hearts, and born with us: But they are (...)(...), leges a Deo datae, positive
Laws, which neither do, nor ever did bind any but the Jews. As may appear,

2. Because they were given only to the Jews; and that after they came out of
Egypt, Deuteronomy. 29. 1.
which was after the Fall of Adam Israelitae excunt ex Aegypto, Anno Mundi,
2453.
above 2450 years. But those Mosaical Laws de Poenis, (of which we speak) were
never given, nor published to the Gentiles. But had those Laws de Poenis, been
Natural Laws, (as the Precepts in the Decalogue are) they would have bound all
mankind from the Creation to this day, and that indispensably; and then all
Christians should be bound to obey and practice those Penal laws, and punish
all Malefactors with such punishments only as in those laws are appointed;
which is evidently untrue, as may appear,

3. By the judgment and consent of the Christian World; for no Christian Church
or State did ever think themselves bound to observe those Mosaical Poenal Laws,
and to punish transgressors of the Divine Law, with those punishments which are
prescribed by Moses. For instance, That the stealing of a Sheep should be
punished with restitutio in quadruplum, with restoring four sheep for one,
Exodus 22. 1.
(if the thief had sold or killed the sheep he stole); but if the sheep was
found in his hand who stole it, he was only to restore two sheep for one. Exodus
22. 4.
That the stealer of an Ox should restore five Oxen. Exodus 21. 1.
That he who curses, or who smites his father or mother, Exodus 21. 15.
or will not obey them, Levit. 20. 9.
should be punished with death, Deuteronomy. 21. 20, 21.
and stoned with stones. That to do any of our own work (so much only as to
gather a few sticks) on the Sabbath day, Exodus 31. 15.
should be capital, Exodus 35. 2.
and the offender in any one of Numb. 15. 32. 35.
these things, surely put to death; although these, and such other Laws de
Poenis, were Divine, given to the Jews by Moses, and obliged them; yet no
Christian Church or State, did ever think themselves obliged to the observation
and practice of them. And they had good ground in the Gospels to think so. For,

4. Our Blessed Savior in his Sermon on the Mount, Mat. 5. 6, etc.
explains and confirms all the Moral Laws de Officiis, yet those severe
Mosaical Laws de Poenis, he did not confirm: But expressly declares, that legal
severity to be inconsistent with the Charity of the Gospel. For though by the
Mosaical law, a Jew might justly require, Exodus 21. 24.
and the Judge give an eye for an eye, Deuteronomy. 19. 21.
and a tooth for a tooth; yet our Blessed Savior expressly declares against
such legal severity. You have heard (says he) it has been said, Mat. 5. 38.
(in the Law of Moses) an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth: But I say
unto you, Resist not evil, etc, He does not allow that severity in poenis, in
the Gospel, which Moses allowed the Jews under the Law; and therefore we may be
sure, that it was not any Moral or Natural Law which required those punishments
appointed for several sins in the Law of Moses, (for then they had been
unalterable, nor would our Blessed Savior have contradicted them); but it was
the positive law of Moses which required them of the Jews, to whom only these
Laws were given, and obligatory. And here (for further evidence of this truth)
it is to be considered,

1. That in that Mosaical Law, Numb. 35. 31.
(which is ignorantly or maliciously urged to prove that our Gracious Sovereign
cannot pardon murder) the strictest binding words are these, The Murderer SHALL
SURELY BE PUT TO DEATH. Therefore, (say they) he cannot be pardoned. They who
reason thus, did not well consider the consequence of such arguing from the
Penal Laws in Moses. For if this argument be good, Moses says, The Murderer
shall surely be put to death: Ergo, He cannot be pardoned: Then this ( grounded
on the same law of Moses) will be every way as good and concluding. Exodus 31.
15.
The same Moses says, Whosoever does ANY work on the Sabbath Day, he shall
SURELY be put to death; Ergo, He cannot be pardoned. If such Logic were good,
it would conclude all men to be unpardonably guilty of death; seeing (I
believe) there is no man who on some Lord's Day, has not done some work, and
therefore (by such Logic as this) must be unpardonably guilty of death. But
enough of this, for indeed such arguments do not deserve any serious answer or
confufutation. Sure I am, that never any Christian Church or State did, (or had
any reason to) believe, That the severe Jewish Law, for the observation of the
Sabbath, did oblige Christians; and therefore there neither is, nor can be any
more reason why their severe Law against Murder should be now obligatory to
Gentiles or Christians, to whom it was never given.

2. When the Law says, Number. 35. 31.
The Murderer shall SURELY die; our best See Ainsworth on Numb. 35. 31. and R.
M. Maimonides (by him cited) in his Tract. of Murder, cap. 1. Sect. 4.
Commentators (out of the Rabbis) say that this is spoken to the Judges,
before whom such Causes regularly came. Now those Judges in the Jewish
Commonwealth were appointed by the Supreme Deuteronomy. 1. 13. and 15. 2. Chron. 19. 5.
Power, and by his Authority judged and determined Causes under him. Admit
then, that the Judges (who were Magistrates Subordinate to the Supreme Power)
were to take no satisfaction for the life of a Murderer, but were (by that Law)
obliged to condemn and execute him; yet it does not hence follow, that the
Supreme Power (who made them Judges) might not (in some cases) reprive or
pardon some, whom they had condemned. Sure I am, that David (the best of Kings)
who knew the Jewish Laws as well as any, did reprive Joab, who had murdered
Amasa and Abner, 1 King. 2. 5, 6.
and delayed the execution of the Law, and left it to Solomon his Son, who did
accordingly put Joab to death. 1 King. 2. 29, 30.
2. And as David reprived Joab, so he pardoned Absolon, 2. Sam. 16. 21, 33.
who had slain his Brother Amnon. Nor does the Scripture any where impute the
reprive of Joab, or the pardon of Absolon to David as crimes or transgressions
of the Law of Moses; but rather declares him innocent, when it is expressy
said, That David did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, 1 King. 15.
5.
and turned not aside, from ANY THING, that he commanded him, ALL THE DAYS OF
HIS LIFE, save ONLY in the matter of Uriah the Hittite.

Now, if notwithstanding those Mosaical Penal Laws, it was lawful for David,
the Supreme Power amongst the Jews, (to whom those Penal Laws were given, and
they bound to the observation of them:) I say, if David might lawfully Reprive
and Pardon Murderers, how can it by those very Laws be unlawful for the
Christian Supreme Power and Gentiles (to whom those Laws were never given, nor
they ever under the obligation of them) to reprive or pardon such condemned
malefactors? In short, the sum of what I have said, endeavored to prove, and
believe to be true, is this:

1. That there is no Law of God or Man which does prohibit, (and so make it
unlawful for) Supreme Princes, to grant such Reprives and Pardons.

2. That the end of all Penal Laws, and of their due Execution, is, that the
honor of our great and most Gracious God, and his true Worship and Religion be
preserved, and, Ne quid detrimenti capiat Respublica, that the Commonwealth be
not damnify'd, by too usual and frequent granting pardons! For too great
Impunity will occasion and encourage Impiety.

3. That all loyal and faithful subjects are bound, (and have good reason) to
believe, that his Sacred Majesty, as he is Gods immediate Vicegerent, Defender
of the Faith, and whose greatest Interest it is to promote those good ends, so
he will carefully endeavor (by a due Execution of our good Laws) to attain
those ends.

4. That such Cases heretofore have, and may again happen, wherein (the time,
persons, and all other Circumstances duly considered) a Reprive may not only be
lawful, but necessary: And wherein a Pardon may conduce every way as much, (and
possibly in some Cases more) for attaining the good ends of Penal Laws, as a
perpetual, severe, and rigorous execution of them. And of such Cases, the King
is the Supreme and sole Judge, who (if need be) may call for, and have The
advice and counsel of any of his Subjects, of whose prudence and piety he is
well assured. This is the sum and substance of what I have said, at several
times, to several persons; to confirm them in the belief, and encourage them to
a just vindication of His Majesty's Legal Rights and undoubted Prerogative. And
what I have done in this, was a duty I did owe to my Gracious Sovereign, not
only by common Allegiance, as he is my King, but in gratitude as to my Patron,
whose undeserved favor and goodness, has placed me in the good Station wherein
I am. And therefore, that God Almighty would be graciously pleased to bless and
preserve his Anointed from all the impious Plots and Conspiracies of all His
enemies, give Him a long and peaceable possession of a Temporal Crown here, and
an Eternal Crown of Glory hereafter, is, and shall (while I live) be the Prayer
of

Buckden, Jan. 20. 1684. Your Affectionate Friend and Servant, T. LINCOLN.

Mr. Cottington's Case, CONCERNING The Validity or Nullity of his Marriage with
Gallina (her former Husband then living) Anno. 1671.

Mr. Cottington's Case: A DOUBT OR Case of Conscience PROPOSED.
CASE THE FIRST.
1. GAllina Marries Patrimoniale, Anno. 1664. Lives and Cohabites with him as
his Wife a year and a half, has a Child by him (a Daughter:) And all this while
voluntarily gives him Reverence and due Benevolence; Sine protestatione aut
Querela, without any protestation or complaint, of any Nullity or Illegallity
of the Matrimonial Contract, by reason of any Antecedent Force or Fear to make
her consent and plighted troth Involuntary; never endeavors to recede and make
an Escape from him, when she was in Loco Tuto, and had opportunity to make such
Protestation or recess with safety.

2. After this, Anno. 1666. The Archbishop of Turine (by sentence given)
pronounces the said Marriage Void and Null, by reason of Force and Fear into
which her Father put her; which rendered Gallina's consent involuntary (as was
supposed) and contrary to the nature of a Conjugall Consent, which ( Jure
Naturae) ought to be free and spontaneous, otherwise it will not be Obligatory.

3. After this, Anno. 1671: The said Gallina Marries Mr. Cottington, (her
former Husband then Living, and who is yet alive) and at Law, and in the Court
of the Arches, claims him for her Husband.

4. The Court ( Sententia lata) Determines and Declares that Mr. Cottington and
Gallina are lawfully Husband and Wife, (without taking notice of the Archbishop
of Turin's Sentence, whether it was valid or void) and enjoined them to
Co-habit.

2. This is the Case, and the Query is, Whether Mr. Cottington (after a just
and serious consideration of the Premises) may acknowledge, The Query.
take and use Gallina as a lawful Wife without Sin; and so with a safe
Conscience, and (without Danger or Fear of offending God) with security to his
Soul?

3. This is the Case of Conscience in which my Opinion is desired, The Answer.
which how insignificant soever it may prove, yet (in Obedience to the commands
of that Excellent and Noble Person who requires it, and Charity and
Satisfaction to the doubting Gentleman, and discharge of my own Duty (as a
Minister.) I shall willingly give it, and plainly set down what (at present) I
conceive truth in the Case, and the reasons why I do so.

The Premises then (as before set down) being supposed true, and (as to matter
of Fact) granted, (with submission to the better Judgments, of persons of
greater Knowledge in Divinity, the Common, Canon and Civil Laws,) my answer is
Negative: That Mr. Cottington cannot (with a safe Conscience, and security from
Sin) acknowledge, take and use Gallina as his lawful Wife. And this seems to me,
not only a Probable, but a certain and evident Truth.

That this may appear, I consider.

1. That it is certain and confessed that the Obligation of the Matrimonial
contract, is not grounded on any Positive constitution of Man, but on the
Divine Law of God and Jus natural quod instinctu nature non constitutione
aliqua habetur, ut viri and faemine conjunctio. Can Jus natural 7. Did. I.
and L. Jus natural I Instit. de Jure Not. Gent. and Civil.
Nature. For although the contract cannot be made without the positive consent
of the Parties, yet the consent once passed, the Obligation to conjugal Duties
arises immediately from the Law of Nature.

2. Hence it is, That this Matrimonial contract (while the Rom 7. 2. 3. The
Wife is bound to her Husband so long as he lives, etc.
Parties live) is Immutable and Indispensable; and therefore Marriage (in the
Modestinus Leg. Nuptiae I F. De Ritu. nuptiarum.
Law is defined to be, Maris and Faeminae Conjunctio, Divini and humani Juris
communicatio, and omnis vitae consortium.

3. And hence it follows evidently; That if the conjugall contract between
Patrimoniale and Gallina, was ( Matrimonium legittimum and ratum) a legal and
valid marriage, ab Origin; and when it was made, then it continues so, (both
parties being yet living) and was and still is valid and obligatory. If it was
a just and valid contract in 1664. it must continue, and be so now, in this
year, 1677.

4. And further, if this be true and granted, that Gallina's Marriage with
Patrimoniale in, 1664. was and to this day continues valid; then her Marriage
with Mr. Cottington, Anno. 1671. is absolutely Null, and to all intents and
purposes void; for first, Impossibilium nulla est L. Impossib. 185 F. de
Regulis Juris and L. 31. and 135 F. jisdem. `Tis certain a precontract nulls
any subsequent Marriage. Canons I Jac. 1603. Can. 102.
obligatio, or contractus contra naturam and bonos mores initus, est omnino
nullus. If Gallina's pre-contract and marriage to her former Husband, was legal
and valid, when her subsequent Marriage with Mr. Cottington, was an evident
violation of the Law of Nature, (which indispensably obliged her to be
Faithful to her former Husband,) and of her Faith before Solemnly given to
another, and so absolutely Null, and in it self Void. Secondly, It is consonant
Nemo potest mutare consilium suum in alterius injuriam L. nemo potest 75 F. de
Reg Jur. Antiqui
to Law and right Reason, and a received rule in all contracts (as well as
Matrimonial.) Quod Renuntiare semel constitutae obligationi adversario non
consentiente nemo potest L. sicut 5 Cod. de obligat. and Actionibus.
nemo potest altera part invita, a contractu semel perfecto recedere. And
therefore, if Gallina's conjugal contract with Patrimoniale, was perfect and
legally valid, she could not (without manifest Injustice) recede from it, leave
him, and adhere to another Husband.

In Matrimony (as generally in other contracts,) our consent in Contractus ab
Initio voluntatis, expost facto, necessitatis. Gothofred in notis ad dictam
legem sicut. Lit. 1.
making them, is, (and should be) free and voluntary; but when they are made,
their Obligation and our Observance of them is necessary. So that if this be
so, if the Matrimonial contract between Patrimoniale and Gallina be legal and
really valid, then no power on Earth or ( de Jure) can oblige Mr. Cottington to
Co-habit with Gallina, as with his Lawful Wife; seeing on the foregoing
Hypothesis, she is indeed Wife to another Man. And if any (though the Supreme
Authority) should command Mr. Cottington so to Co-habit with Gallina, this were
to require him to live in impious, and abominable Adultery with another Man's
Wife, which as no Humane Power can justly command; so neither Mr. Cottington
(nor any other) can obey without wounding his Conscience, and hazard of his
Soul and Salvation. It Is active Obedience I mean, for if such commands should
come, though we cannot do what is required yet we may, and ought quietly to
undergo the punishment, and agere and pati fortia Christianum est, no Courage
like that of a good Christian; who will suffer any thing patiently from his
Governor, rather than sin against his God.

2. The next Query will be concerning the Invalidity and Nullity of Gallina' s
Marriage with Patrimoniale. For if it be indeed Null (as it seems, some do, and
would persuade others to believe) then the Case is altered; Mr. Cottington may
and ought to Co-habit with Gallina, as his lawful Wife. For if her first
Marriage were indeed a Nullity, then her second with Mr. Cottington, will be
lawful and valid, and he obliged to Co-habit with her, as her undoubted
Husband. Now in the Case proposed, I find but two Mediums brought to induce a
belief, that Gallina's Marriage with Patrimoniale was a Nullity.

1. The Authority and Judicial Sentence of the Archbishop of Turine, declaring
it to be a Nullity.

2. The reason alleged (on which it seems that sentence was grounded) drawn
from the Force and Fear, which made Gallina's consent involuntary.

Now I conceive (with submission to better Judgments) that these Mediums are
too weak and insufficient to give satisfaction to Mr. Cottington, or to quiet
his Conscience so as that he may, without danger or doubting Co-habit with
Gallina. For if he should Co-habit with her, and only doubt of the Lawfullness
of it, he Romans 14. 2. 3.
certainly sins. It is a received and certain rule amongst Casuists, That
quicquid fit reluctante vel dubitante conscientia est peccatum. If may
Conscience tell me it is not, or doubt whether the thing I do be good and
Lawful (what ever it be) I sin if I do it. And that is the meaning of that
saying of the Apostle (many times mistaken) whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin.
That is, whoever does any thing without a Moral Certainty, that what he does is
just and lawful, he sins in doing it. Now concerning the former of those two
Mediums, the Archbishop's judicial Sentence in this Case, it is to be
considered.

1o For the Archbishop of Turin's Sentence.
That admit that Archbishop and the Pope too (his Superior and beyound Sea)
their supreme Judge, had both concurred in giving the same Sentence, and
declared the Marriage of Patrimoniale and Gallina a Nullity; yet seeing (by the
known and just Statut. 24. H. 8. cap. 12. and 25. Hen. 8. cap. 19. 20, 21. etc.
I Eliz. cap. 1. 3. Jacobi. cap. 4. our Articles of Religion. Art. 37. The
Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction in England.
Laws of England) they have no Authority or Jurisdiction over any here; it is
certain, they can lay no Obligation on any English Men, to approve or submit to
such Sentence.

2. Nor can such Sentence (if the Pope and Archbishop had given it, be any
reason or just ground to warrant any Judge or Court in England, to give the
same Sentence, in the same or the like Case, or be any just bar or reason to
hinder them to give the contrary Sentence. All know that a Facto ad jus non
sequitur Argumentum; the Pope, this, or that Court or Council, judged so; ergo;
we must or may do so is evidently inconsequent. In the Case of Hen. 8. and
Queen Katharine, the Pope in and with his Consistory, judged, that he had Power
to give (and actually gave) a Dispensation to Marry Relictam Fratris, his
Brothers Wife; and yet afterward, our own at home, and abroad the greatest
Universities in Christendom, judged the quite contrary in their Convocations
called for that purpose. Nay our own Supreme Court (the Parliament) in Hen. 8.
time Statut., 25. H. 8. cap. 22.
Judged that Marriage to be against the Laws of God; and in Queen Mary's time,
the Parliament (by Public Act) declared that it was Statut. 1 Mariae Sess. 2.
cap. 7.
according to the laws of God. The Sentences of that Supreme Court are
contradictory, and ergo; one of them (be which it may be, is evidently Untrue
and Erroneous,) and therefore can neither be a just Warrant for any in England
to approve it, or judge according to it, or a just Bar or Let to hinder us to
judge the Contrary. Now, if notwithstanding the respect and reverence we owe to
that Supreme Court, we may, in this (and many the like Cases) disapprove its
definitive Sentence, and be of a contrary Judgment. Then much more may we
disapprove, and be of a Judgment contrary to the definitive Sentence of the
Archbishop of Turin, who is in nothing our Superior, nor has any Authority or
Jurisdiction in England; especially in a matter of Fact, wherein neither that
Archbishop nor the Pope himself (though the Jesuits and some Canonists be of
the contrary opinion) pretend to be infallible.

And once more, as the definitive Sentence of any Popish Archbishop, or of the
Pope himself in his Consistory, or in a general Counsel can be no good
President or just ground, to warrant any Protestant Judge or Court, to judge
accordingly, or any legal Bar or Let to hinder them to give a contrary
Sentence; so sure I am, that no such Sentence given by such Persons and Judges
in any of their Courts, Consistories or Counsels, can be a sufficient ground
for Mr. Cottington to rely upon, to give stisfaction and quiet to his
Conscience, so as to secure him, that he may safely and without sin, Co-habit
with Gallina; as with his Lawful Wife; only because they have pronounced her
Marriage with Patrimoniale to be a Nullity. For (besides that he has many
Reasons (if they may be heard, as in Law and Conscience they ought. Reg. Nullus
20. de Reg. Juris. in 6.) to suspect and deny that Sentence, and to believe it
illegal and injust. The thing is evident, because definitive Sentences given
not only in Inferior, but in Superior Courts, and General Councils, are so
far from giving satisfaction to Protestants or Papists, or quieting their
Consciences in a belief of what is in such Sentences judicially defined; that
in many things they actually dissent, and confidently deny such Definitions. so
it was the Definitive Sentence of a Popish In the Convocation, Anno, Hen. 8.
22. Domini. 1531. Vid. Antiquit. Britan. in Archiepiscopo Warham, p. 325.
Convocation and Parliament Vid. 24. H. 8. cap. 12. 25. H. 8. cap. 19, etc.
(in the time of Hen. 8.) that the King was Supreme over all Persons, and in
all Causes Ecclesiastical and Temporal, and that the Pope had no Articuli
Relig, Eccles. Anglic. Art. 37. confirmed in Parliament and subscription
required. Vid. Statut. 13. Eliz. cap. 12. Vide Antiquit. Britan. P. 329. ad.
Ann. 1534. Edit. Hanoviae 1605.
power in England, yet the Sentence of those two great Courts (each Supreme in
its kind) give little satisfaction to our Papists now, who absolutely deny such
Supremacy. So the Convocation and Parliament (in the beginning of Queen Mary's
Reign) by their definitive Sentence Establish Popery here in England, which
gave as little satisfaction to Protestants, who did both believe and know that
the Religion Established was Erroneous, and therefore the Establishment, by the
Law of God and the Gospel, unwarrantable and unjust. In short, the adequate and
only rule of Conscience, (which can satisfy and quiet it, and on which it may
securely rely for sure Directions) is the will of God made known to us, (
lumine naturae, aut scripturae) by natural Reason, or Divine Revelation in
Scripture. For what ever can be made appear to us, by clear and convincing
Reason, grounded on Nature or Scripture, de facienda, aut fugienda, this may
and will satisfy, and secure our Conscience, so that we may innocently act
accordingly; but otherwise, no Sentence of any Man or Court, ( Ecclesiastical
or Temporal) can do it, unless the Reasons of such Sentence be (and appear to
be) sufficient. And this brings me to the second Medium, expressed in the Case,
to show the Marriage of Patrimoniale and Gallina to be a Nullity. The reason
alleged for the Nullity.
The reason alleged in the Case, as the ground of the Archbishop of Turin's
Sentence, and of the Nullity of the said Marriage, is this: That Gallina was
under a Force and Fear, caused by her Father, by reason whereof her consent was
not voluntary, (as by L. 12. and L. 14. Cod. de nuptiis and Leg. 21. and 22. F.
de Ritu nuptiarum cap. Cum locum 14. extra De Sponsali and Matrimonijs.
Law) it ought to be; and therefore the Matrimonial contract (for want of such
a voluntary and free consent) invalid and a Nullity. But thisreason is too
weak, and altogether insufficient.

To be a just ground either first, of the aforesaid Sentence of Nullity, or
secondly, to secure and quiet the Conscience of Mr. Cottington (it he obeyed
that Sentence, and should Co-habit with Gallina) as may appear if we consider,

1. That it is the avowed Judgment of a Person Eminent for his great knowledge
of all Learning, especially of the Laws, that no Fear, how great soever (humane
Constitutions secluded) does make the actions which proceed from it Ego (says
Grotius) omnino illorum accedo sententiae qui existimant, (seposita lege
Civili, quae obligationem potest tollere aut minuere) eum qui metu promisit
aliquid, obligari. Grotius de Jure Belli, lib. 2. cap. 11.. 7.
Involuntary; so as to hinder their Obligation and Validity. For he who
promises any thing for fear (which otherwise he would not have done) is yet
obliged to make good his promise.

2. His reason is Quia consensus hic adfuit, nec conditionalis sed absolutus;
nam, ut recte ait Aristoteles, qui naufragij metu res suas jactat, vellet eas
servare sub condition, si naufragium non immineret, sed absolute vult eas
perdere, spectata scilicet loci and temporis circumstantia. Grotius Ibidem.
because he, or she, who consents and promises any thing for fear, does indeed
and actually consent and promise, and that absolutely, and not upon any
condition. This he further proves by the Authority, and an Aristotle Ethic.
Nicom. lib. 3. and Rhodius, and all his Scholiasts and Commentators there.
instance of Aristotle; who says, That he who in a Storm at Sea, casts his
Goods over Board, would be willing to save them on this Condition, if he might
escape Shipwreck; but in those Circumstances and Danger he is then in, he is
absolutely willing to loose them, and cast them into the Sea.

Nor is it Aristotle only and Grotius, who say this, but all the Scholiasts and
Commentators on Aristotle, both Greek and Latin, which I have yet seen, say
the same thing. And then, if the Authority and Judgment of so many and so
learned Men, be valuable, as no doubt it is, fear, as is pretended, does not
make those Actions whose Principle it is, involuntary, and the truth of this,
is further and beyond dispute evident.

3. Because Fear is the Principle which makes such Actions voluntary, and the
Person under such fear willing to produce them. For it is evident, that there is
nothing which makes a Man in a Storm willing to cast his Goods into the Sea,
but the fear to loose his Ship and his Life, if he do not so. Nay, secondly, so
far is fear from making our actions Involuntary, that the greater the fear is,
they are by it made more voluntary; for no Man before he was in fear, was ever,
willing to cast his Goods into the Sea, but after the Storm and his Danger (and
so his fear) begun, his willingness to loose his Goods and save himself begun
too; and as the Danger and his Fear increased, so proportionably his
willingness to cast away his Goods; and when his Danger and Fear are come to
the height, then, and not till then, he is absolutely willing to cast them into
the Sea, and makes have to put that will in Execution; being as really desirous
and willing to loose his Goods, as by so doing to save his Ship and himself, so
that if fear made our actions Involuntary, then the more the fear was they
would be more Involuntary; whereas the contrary is evident, that as our fear
increases, so our willingness to do those actions which proceed from it.

4. The fear and force Gallina pretends to make her contract with Patrimoniale,
a Nullity. was from her own Father: It is pretended, her Father forced her to
consent; whence it appears, that she had her Father's consent and command to
marry him, and may be, many and severe Threatenings too, if she did not Marry
him: Whether this was so, or not, I know not; but if it was so, yet this
neither did, nor by any Law of God or Man, could make her Matrimonial contract
a Nullity. First, That any Law of God, Natural or Positive, should make the
consent, command or threatenings of a Father sufficient to Null the consent, and
matrimonial contract of his Daughter, neither is, nor can be pretended.
Secondly, For humane Laws the Civilians and Canonists tell us, That the fear of
a Father makes not the Marriage or Consent of his Daughter a Nullity. Arnold.
Vinnius Comment. in Institut. De nuptjis ad Textum, Qui possunt nuptias
contrahere, 53. Jachim. a Beust. De Jure connubiorum cap. 44. page 8. 6.
Plane metust reverentialis, sive obsequium reverentiae Paternae debitum;
matrimonium non impedit, uti nec Consensum. No not when the Daughter gives her
consent Dionys. Gothofredus ad leg. Si Patre 22. F. De Ritu nuptiarum, and idem
ad lib. 3. F. Quiod metus causa, p.
Patre suadente, admodum urgente and hortante. And the law it self tells us,
That if a Father compel or force his Son to marry a Wife, there is the same
reason for his Daughter to marry a Husband, which otherwise he would not have
Married; yet the marriage is valid, and (by reason of that force) no Nullity;
Dicta lege. Si Patre 22. F. de Ritu nuptiarum. The Law says, Quod vi, metusve
causa gestum, ratum non est. But then it must be, vis atrox contra bonos mores,
non eam quam magistratus intulit, 1. 3. F. eod.
si Filius Patre cogente ducit uxorem, quam non duceret, si sui arbitrij esset,
contraxit tamen matrimonium, quod, inter invitos non contrabitur, maluisse hoc
videtur. So that even according to Human, Civil, and Canon Laws, it is not all
Co-action, force or fear from a Father which makes the consent of a Daughter in
a Matrimonial contract, invalid or Nullity; and therefore it is impertinently
pretended for such in our present Case.

5. I confess, the Canonists and Civilians say, That fear makes the consent
Involuntary, and so indces a Nullity. Cap. Cum Locum 14 extra De Spansali and
Matrimonis.
Locum non habet consensus, ubi metus vel co-actio intercedit, etc. So says
that Law, and the Lawyers Panormitan. ad dictum cap. Vinnius, a Beute,
Gothofredus, etc. Locis supra citatis.
consent and say further; Quod Matrimonium per metum, vel minis contractum,
deficiente consensu, est ipso jure nullum. But it is certain, first, That they
do not mean a Reverential Fear, a fear of displeasing a Father; for the same
Men, in the same places say, That such a fear does not vitiate the consent, or
make a Nullity: Now all the fear pretended by Gallina (in our Case) was from
her Father. Secondly, If the fear arise from the many and severe Threats of a
Father, yet this cannot make the consent involuntary, and so a Nullity. I
confess, that if a Father should Command and Threaten his Daughter to Marry an
impious and unworthy Person, the Tum solum dissentiendi a Patre licentia Filiae
conceditur, si indignum moribus, aut turpem sponsum ei Pater eligat, l. sed
quae 12. tunc autem F. De sponsalibus.
Law will warrant her disobedience; for in that Case she is Parentis consensus
in nuptijs liberorum requiritur, ex reverentia parentis debita, nisi manifest
iniqua sit Parentis voluntas. Grotius de jure Belli lib. 2. Oap. 5. 10.
not by Law bound to obey her Father's commands or threatenings. But in our Case,
no such indignity or incapacity of Patrimoniale's person is complained of, or
so much as pretended for a cause why Gallina's consent should be involuntary,
and the conjugal contract a Nullity.

Now if this be true, and the Law it self says it; That, tum solum dissentiendi
a Patre licentia Filie and conceditur, cum indignum moribus aut turpem sponsum
ei Pater eligat. If the Law allow a Daughter to disobey her Father's commands
(proposing a Huband to her) only in such Case; then if he choose and propose a
Person better qualified, and no way unworthy of her, and give his consent and
command, that she shall marry him (as the matter of Fact was in our Case) then
she is bound to obey him. For if it be Lawful for a Daughter to disobey her
Father, only when he proposes and unworthy Husband; then, when he proposes one
worthy, she is bound to obey him. Seeing then the Husband proposed to Gallina,
by her Father was no way unworthy of her, but she bound (upon her Father's
consent and command) to marry him, it follows, Thirdly, That her actual
marrying him, upon her Father's command and fear to displease him, was an act
of filial Obedience and Duty, and therefore could not possibly vitiate her
consent, and make the conjugal contract involuntary, invalid, and, as
pretended, a Nullity. Nay, Fourthly, it is certain that a Father has a just
Authority by the Law of God Exodus 20. 12. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, etc.
and Nature, to consider and judge what is good for his Children, and not only
to command their Obedience, but to use Threats and Menaces; yea, and
Castigations and Whippings too, to make them do their Duty, and obey his just
commands; so our Heavenly Father commands us to obey his Laws, uses Menaces,
threatens Death and Damnation if we do not; and these Means he has appointed,
Threatenings as well as Promises, to make us willing to do what he commands, our
Duty. And therefore to say, that such Paternal Commands and Threatenings
(whether of our Heavenly or Earthly Parents) can be a just ground, to make our
consents to such commands involuntary, which he has ordained to make us give a
willing and voluntary Obedience, is to Blaspheme his infinitely wise
Providence, and to say that the means which he has appointed to produce a
willing and voluntary consent in us to obey his Commands and do our Duty, has a
necessary and contrary effect, and makes them involuntary. So that it being
granted that Gallina's Father commanded her to marry Patrimoniale, and to make
her to do it, added many and severe Threatenings; for The Law says, L. 2. F.
Quod metus Causa, Quod vi, metusve causa gestum, ratum non est. But then it
means, vim atrocem and contra bonos mores, non eam quam magistratus just
intulit, Scilicet Jure licito honoris quem sustinet, li, 3. Ib. non
comminationem, neque alterius nudam Reverentiam. Gotofred. ad dictam legem. So
that, it is evident, that the Menaces of a Father or Magistrate (who have
Authority) do not cause any Nullity, by Law, when what they command is, not
illicitum or contra bono smores; as certainly Gallina's Marriage with
Patrimoniale was not.
fear of which she did (and without them would not have done it) marry him,
this may prove, that (in those circumstances, and to avoid her Father's
displeasure) she willingly made that conjugal contract; but neither is, not can
be any ground to prove that her consent was involuntary, and so the contract in
valid, as is pretended, and a Nullity. Fifthly, And this may further appear,
that such Actions are not involuntary, by the consent of Christendom, thus: In
the Primitive Church and times of Persecution, some Christians suffered
Imprisonment and many Torments, for their Religion; yet at last for fear of
Death, threatened by their Pagan Persecutors, they offered Incense in the Idol
Temple; and yet all those Imprisonments, Torments, and Threatenings of Death,
did not make that act of theirs Involuntary, for then it had not been Sin;
peccatum utique non est peccatum nisi sit voluntarium; and yet the Church and
Christian World judged it to be a great Sin, and Ecclesiastical Punishments,
and long Penances Vid. Can. 24, 25, 26, etc, in Cod. Can. Eccl. Universae seu
Concilij Ancyrani. Can. 4, 5, 6.
were imposed on them for it, as appears by the for it, as appears by the
Ancient and approved Canons. Now if all these Sufferings and Fears of present
Death, did not make their act of Sacrificing in a Pagan Temple Involuntary,
then neither will the like, if any such had been, make Gallina's act of
marrying in a Christian Church involuntary, nor consequently invalid and a
Nullity. Sixthly, But let it be further granted, that Gallina was unden very
great force and fear from her Father, as is pretended; and that, that force and
fear was of such a Nature and Degree, as the Canon and Civil Laws judge What
force and fear are sufficient, the Law tells us, L. 1, 2, 3, etc. F. Quod metus
causa gestum est, Gloss. and Gotofredi note ad dictas leges Tit. 20. Lib. 2.
Cod. and Cap. 14, 15. 21. extra De sponsal. and matrimon. and cap. insuper 4.
extra Qui matrimon. accus. possunt vel contra. The Gloss. and Panormitan ib.
and L. interpositus Cod. de Transactionibus.
sufficient, to make a conjugal contract invalid, and a Nullity. Yet seeing (in
this case) Idem est non esse and non apparere, till this do legally appear by
just proofs; no judge can (as least none should) give sentence for a Nullity;
nor can Mr. Cottington with any Security, Quiet or Peace of Conscience Co-habit
with her, as with his legal Wife. And in this and such other Matrimonial Cases
of Nullity and Divorce, our Church requires, that the greatest Caution be used
and all means possible, to find our the truth by deposition of Witnesses, and
other lawful Proofs, but would have no credit given to the confession or oaths
of the Parties. The words are these in our Canon: Constitutions and Canons
Ecclesiast. I Jacobi 1603. Can. 105.
We straightly charge that in all Proceedings to Nullities of Matrimony, good
circumspection and advice be used, and that so far as is possible, truth be
sifted out by deposition of Witnesses and other lawful Proofs, and that credit
be not given to the sole confession of the Parties, however taken upon Oath,
either within or without the Court. This is the Law of England, for I believe a
Canon made in Convocation, and confirmed by the King's Supreme Authority, to be
a Statut. 25. H. 8. Cap. 19. Judge Vaughan's Reports, page 327. and page 21.
and 132.
Law, in re Ecclesiastica, as well as an Act of Parliament is in re Civilis.
And by this Law, no Sentence of Nullity of a Matrimonial Contract, can legally
be pronounced, till just and That just proofs are prerequired to a just
Sentence, Reason and Law tell us. L. Si donationis 7. and L. Metum. 9. Cod. De
his quae vi metusve causa gesta sunt, and L. Interpositus. 13. Cod. De
Transactionibus.
legal Proofs be made, and (by the same Law) the Confessions and Oaths of the
Parties are no sufficient Proofs; so that in our present Case, if Patrimoniale
and Gallina had both confessed and solemnly Sworn, that there was such force
and fear (as is pretended to be the ground of that Nullity) yet by our Law,
such Confessions and Oaths are no legal Proofs. Nor does it appear, that there
were any other legal and sufficient Proofs of it, and therefore Mr. Cottington
having no sufficient assurance or just ground to believe, either, First, That
there really was any such pretended force and fear; or, Secondly, That such
pretended, but not proved, force and fear, was a sufficient ground of a
Nullity; for while no force did by legal Proofs appear, it was impossible to
know the Nature, Degree and Measure of that pretended force, and so whether it
was such as could cause a Nullity. I say Mr. Cottington having no sufficient
certainty of these Particulars, he cannot with Innocence and a safe Conscience
Co-habit with Gallina, as with his own Wife, seeing she may be, and (for ought
appears to the contarry) is another Man's.

Lastly: But let it be granted (tho it appear not by any legal Evidence) that
Gallina was under some force and fear, at the time of her Marriage; so that her
consent was not so voluntary and free, as other wise is required in such
Contracts; yet it is evident and confessed, that she afterward lived with her
Husband a year and a half, had a Child by him, and all that while never made
any protestation or Vid L. Cum te. 2. Cod. De his quae vi metusve causa gesta
sunt, where it is resolved, that he who said he was compelled to pay Money, and
yet, omissa Querela, having ground for it, did not complain; gestum praesumitur
spontance factum, no metu. Gotofred. ad dictam legem.
complaint of any such force or fear, or that her consent was involuntary,
though she had all that time, and being in a safe place, many opportunities to
have done it, which spontaneous and voluntary Co-habitation with her Husband,
was a legal confirmation and ratihabition of her first consent; so that it was
sufficient to make the conjugal contract valid, firm, and obligatory. This is
an evident truth established by the Civil and Canon Laws, acknowledged by the
best Civilians and Canonists, received and practiced in their respective
Courts. That this may appear, I say.

First, That a good Canonist Paul. Lancellot. Institut. Jur. Canon. 1. 2. it is.
22.. Coactio.
tells us, not obiter and casually, but in his institutions made and allowed by
and Institutiones in Aula Romans Mandato Pont. max. ab illustribus viris
recognitae. So the Epigraphe.
Authority of the Pope himself; That if a Woman do prove that her conjugal
consent was through fear, at first involuntary; yet if afterward, she
willingly did Co-habit with her Husband, and he had Carnal knowledge of Her,
the fear is Purged (though it was at first a just fear) and the Matrimonial
contract valid and Obligatory. The words are these -- Quae invita probat se
sponsalia contraxisse, si comperiatur postea sponte cognita ad matrimonii
Dissolutionem proclamare and metum causare non poterit. And the Lemma or Title
of that Paragraph is this; Justus metus si purgatus fuerit, and Antecedentem
metum spont anea copula ex post facto purgat, Matrimonium non impedit. We see
that a just fear, and that proved, makes no Nullity nor Invalidity, if
afterward she willingly consent to Carnal Knowledge, and give due benevolence
to her Husband. But Gallina's fear, in our Case, was pretended only, not
proved; she Co-habited with him willingly eighteen Months, and had a Child by
him; and ergo, much less could such pretended fear prove a Nullity.

Secondly, And the Cap. Insuper, 4. extra Qui matrimoniium accusare possunt,
vel contra, etc.
Law it self expressly determines the Case, wherein the Lemma prefixed to the
Chapter is this: Invita desponsata postea sponte Cognita contra Matrimonium non
auditur; and then the Pope determines the Case, whether it was Gregory, the
9th. or his Chaplain Raymond calls him Clement the 3. Loco proxime citato, and
Gratian calls him Celestine. Cant. Videtur. 2. Cause. 35. Quest. 6.
Clemens or Celestine, I inquire not, ipsi viderint, thus; Adversus
Mattrimonium audiri non debet quae ante Cognitionem sui cum potuit minime
reclamavit, postquam enim copulae carnali semel consentit ex Ratihibitione sibi
super hos silontium non ambigitur indixise. Gallina in our Case lived eighteen
Months willingly with her Husband, had a Child by him, willingly I suppose, and
cum potuit minime reclamavit; and, ergo, a fortiori, such her Spontaneous
Co-habitation; and Carnal Copulation, was a real and legal Ratihabition and
confirmation of her consent and conjugal contract; although it had been, which
appears not, at first, through force or fear, involuntary. And that such a
subsequent spontaneous consent is sufficient to ratify an antecedent Contract
supposed, or really being involuntary, is justified by the L. Si per vim. 4.
Cod. De his Dqu^e. vi metusve causa fiunt, si per vim vel metum mortis aut
cruciatus corporis, venditio a vobis extorta est and non postea eam consensu
corroborastis, etc.
Civil Law and best Civilians. Nor does the Law require that such subsequent
consent be given in express words, but a tacit consent, by doing some act which
signifies, and gives a moral certainty of the internal willingness of the
party, is sufficient. Consensu etiam tacito (says a most learned Dionys.
Gothofredus ad dictam legem, lit. p.
Lawyer, and proves it by express L. Cum te. 2. Cod. De his quae vi metusve
Causa, etc.
Law) Ratihabitio actus, as he goes on; antecedentem actum metu gestum non
fuisse demonstrat. Consensus geminatio tollit metus Presumptionem. So Grotius
de Jure Belli, lib. 2. Cap. 11.. 20.
Grotius, Tractat. de Jure Comnubiorum, Cap. 44. page 81.
Joach. a Beust, Panormitan, and others cited by them, and generally all I have
yet seen.

Thirdly. Once more: The truth of what I have said does further; and if that be
possible, more evidently appear to be res judicata and proa veritate habenda.
For it is a Case in Terminis, and expressly determined by Pope Clement the
Third, who was a better Casuist and Judge if not infallible; yet sure I am of
far greater Authority than the Archbishop of Turin: For Pope Agatho (if Gratian
cite him right) has told us, Sic onnes Apostolicae sedis sanctiones accipiendae
sunt tanquam ipstus Divini Petri voce firmatae. Can. Sic omnes. 2. Did. 19.
That all the Popes Decretals are to be received, as if the Divine Authority of
St. Peter had confirmed them. The Determination of Pope Clement, Cap. Ad id
extra De sponsalibus and Matrimoniis.
which I mean was (by Gregory the Ninth) Registered and referred into the body
of the Canon Law; where the Title or Summary prefixed to the Chapter is this;
Matrimonium per vim contractum, Co-habitatione spontanea, convale scit, hoc
dicit, and quotidie allegatur; where we have, first, the Law in this Position.
A subsequent spontaneous Co-habitation confirms a conjugal contract made by
force or fear Secondly, The received and common practice of it. It was no
antiquated Law, or abolished by any contrary Law or Desuetude. No, says the
Summary, Quotidie allegatur, it was in continual and daily use: Thus the Title,
The Popes Decision of the Case, follows in the Chapter, so Parallel with our
present Case as nothing can be more; Nec 1. The Woman then pretended force and
fear in the Contract, made her consent involuntary, so does Gallina non.
ovum ovo similius. The Case then was thus; A Woman was married unwillingly, 2.
The Woman then desired, that for that force and fear that conjugal Contract
might be declared invalid and a Nullity; so does Gallina now.
and her consent involuntary, yet afterward she lived with her Husband a year
and a half; which Co-habitation was (by the Pope) judged a confirmation and
ra-tihabition of the conjugal Contract, which was at first Involuntary. The
words are these -- Faemina quaedam cuidam Teutonico Matrimonialiter copulatur,
quae quamvis ab initio invita fuisset ei tradita, and renitens; tamen quia
postmodum per annum and dimidium sibi Cohabitans, 3. The Woman then after her
contract, lived willingly for a year and a half with her Husband without
complaining, or protestation of her unwillingness; so did Gallina.
consensisse videtur, ad ipsum est cogenda redire; Nec de caetero recipiendi
sunt Testes, si quos dicta mulier ad probandum, 4. It was then judged, and it
was then and still is Law, that the subsequent Co-habitation purged the former
fear, and ratified the contract; and Gallina's Case and the Law, being still
the same, it should have the same Sentence.
quod non consenserit nominaverit producendos, cum mora tanti temporis
hujusmodi probationem excludit; from which Sentence and Law it is evident,

First, That though the Woman's Act was at first involuntary, yet her
Co-habitation with her Husband (for a year and a half) ratified and confirmed
the Matrimonial Contract; and therefore, in our Case, had Gallina's consent
been at first involuntatary, (which is not proved) yet her Co-habitation with
her Husband for a year and a half (especially having a Child in that time by
him) did by the same Law ratify the former, though involuntary contract.

Secondly, That by this Sentence and Law of the Pope, the Woman having lived
with her Husband a year and a half, that Co-habitation had so confirmed and
ratified the conjugal contract, ex post facto, that although, ab initio, it
were involuntary; yet that could not cause any Nullity or Invalidity in the
Marriage or Contract which made it. And therefore the Pope and the Law say, --
Qu'd Testes de caetero non sunt recipiendi, quia mora tanti temporis hujusmodi
probationem excludit. It was in the Pope's Judgment, against Reason and Law,
after a spontaneous Co-habitation for a year and a half, to admit of Witnesses
to prove that her consent was (at first) involuntary, in order to a Nullity of
the Matrimonial Contract; seeing that being granted, it did not follow that
there was any Nullity or Invalidity in the said Contract; and therefore the
Pope truly judged, that it was impertinent to bring Witnesses to prove that,
which (in that Case) was indeed granted; and otherwise, if it had been proved,
could no way profit them: The subsequent spontaneous Cohabitation having
abundantly ratified the Contract, and supplied the defects of the first
involuntary consent. And hence, it farther follows, and (if I mistake not)
evidently,

First, That the Sentence of the Archbishop of Turin (in Gallina's Case) was
repugnant and directly contradictory to Law. First, Because he admitted and
examined no Witnesses which (in such case) the Law expressly forbids. Secondly,
In that he by his definitive Sentence, judged and declared that to be a
Nullity, which the established, and, though may be not to him, the known Laws
and the Pope too, had declared and judged to be none.

Secondly, That therefore that Sentence of the Archbishop (being against Law,
and the definitive Sentence of the Supreme Judge) was absolutely and in it self
Sententia dicitur nulla, quia lata est contra jus constitutionis, nulla vero
non transit in rem judicatant. Panormitan. Judiciarij Ordinis Processus. Forma
Apostolorum, and sententia lata contra legem, vel ex juris errore, est ipso
jure nu. Commun. opinionum, Tom. 1. 51. Number. 11.
Null, to all intents and purposes.

Thirdly, And then such sentence being (by the Laws Civil and Sacred)
absolutely Null; it follows, that the Matrimonial contract between Patrimoniale
and Gallina, was firm, valid and obligatory.

The premises considered, I think there is some Reason to believe, that no
Court or consistory on Earth, can justly oblige Mr. Cottington to Co-habit with
Gallina, the conjugal Contract with her former Husband remaining firm and
valid. Yet if any should ( quod absit) I am sure, he cannot possibly, with
Innocence and a good Conscience, use her as a Wife. For seeing the Law and
right reason tell us, that illud solium possumus, quod L. filius 15. ff. de
condit. institutionum.
jure possumus, it can be no more possible for him to Co-habit with her (with a
good Conscience) than to lie with another Man's Wife, as Gallina certainly is,
and commit Adultery.

Ita est. T. Lincoln.

Query. Whether the Bishops of England have Power to question a Sentence of the
Archbishop of Turin?
My Honored Friend,
I Understand by your Letter, that some say (who they are, I neither know nor
inquire) that the King and Bishops of England have no Power to Question the
Archbishop of Turin's Sentence, given in the Case of Patrimoniale and Gallina.
I confess, I do not a little wonder at the strangeness of their Position; the
rather, because (having consulted very learned Divines and Lawyers,) I can find
no ground for it. But, on the other side, many (to me) evident reasons to the
contrary, which I submit to your Censure: and si quid novisti rectius, candidus
imperti, and I will be your thankful Proselyte. Here then, I consider, that a
Sentence of the Archbishop of Turin, may be either, 1. Such as concerns his own
Subjects only, over whom he has a just Authority and Jurisdiction. 2. Or, such
as may concern one or more of the King of England's Subjects.


For the first I conceive it is certain, First, That the Archbishop of Turin,
being (as to all his Subjects) a legal Superior, obedience is due to him. It
being Law with them of Rome, (and I shall not deny it) that in In dubijs,
standum est sententiae superiorum, maxim Pontificum. Fillucius Quaest. moral.
Tractat. 10. c. 2. Quaest. 8.. 55. Can. Quod culpatur. 4. Cause. 23. Quaest. 1.
and cap. Ad aures. 5. extra De Temp. ordinandorum.
things lawful, or dubious, the subject must stand to the Sentence of his
Superiors; they have no power to question or rescind his Sentence. Secondly,
And it is granted, that the King and Bishops of England, neither have, nor
pretend to have any power to question any Sentence of that Archbishop (which
only concerns his own Subjects) so as to rescind, make it Null, or not
Obligatory. For that cannot be done, save by a power Superior to that of the
Archbishop; such as neither the King nor the Bishops of England pretend to.
Thirdly, But I think it as certain, that the King and Bishops of England, may
question any Sentence of the Archbishop of Turin, or the Pope himself, so far,
as to consider and examine the Truth or Justice of it (when there is a just
occasion, and our King or his Subjects concerned) and approve or condemn, admit
or reject it, when and so far as (all circumstances considered) they find it
just and true, or otherwise, as shall (God willing) anon appear. But of such
Sentences, I suppose, the present Query is not.

Secondly, But the question principally is concerning such Sentence, wherein a
Subject of England is concerned, (as in Mr. Cottington's Case) who owes Loyalty
and Subjection to his King, and may expect protection from him. Now in this
case, the Archbishop's Sentence might either be.

1. For Co-habitation, requiring Mr. Cottington to Co-habit with Gallina: to
give her due Benevolence and Maintenance.

2. Or, only to declare a Nullity of the Matrimonial Contract between
Patrimoniale and Gallina.

For the first, If the Archbishop's Sentence was such as required
Co-habitation, that Mr. Cottington should give due Benevolence and Maintenance
to Gallina; Then his Sentence was absolutely Null, Quia a non judice lata,
(that Archbishop having no Jurisdiction over Mr. Cottington) and an usurpation
of the just Rights of our King, the Supreme, and of our Bishops who (from and
under him) have a sub-ordinate Jurisdiction over the Subjects of England, and
so over Mr. Cottington. Sure I am, the Archbishop of Turin had no Jurisdiction
over Mr. Cottington, a subject of the King of England. First, Not Supreme;
that is only in our King, as our Laws and Oaths testify. Secondly, Not
Subordinate; for that must be derived from the King, who surely never gave the
Archbishop of Turin any Jurisdiction over Mr. Cottington, or any of his
Subjects. And therefore, if the Archbishop of Turin's Sentence was such, our
King and Bishops might justly question and censure it, for what it was, a
Nullity, and an illegal usurpation of the Rights of the Church of England.

For the second, If the Archbishop of Turin's Sentence was only, that the
Matrimonial Contract between Patrimoniale and Gallina, was a Nullity; then I
consider,

First, That it is confessed, that Res Leg. Res judicata 207. F. De Regulis
juris.
judicata pro veritate accipitur, and the Sentence may be put in Execution;
Bronchorst. ad dictam legem.
Si sententia judicis, appellatione nulla suspensa sit, nec ex alia causa
potest restaurari. But this must be understood in respect of the Parties
litigant, L. Eleganter 23.. Si quis post. F. De condict. Indeb.
Facit jus irretractabile inter parts, says the Law and Habetur pro veritate
inter litigantes. Gloss. ad dictam Regul. 207. Card. Tuschus Concl. Pract.
Juris, lit. R. Concl. 267. Number. 57.
Lawyers. And they add, Abb. Cons. 73. Videtur primo Col. 2. In princ v. primo
contra eum l. 1.
Sententia a qua non est appellatum, facit jus inter parts, etiamsi ab initio
fuit injusta.

Secondly, But yet this Rule has several limitations and fallentiae, as they
call them; for L. 2. Cod. Quan^^ provec. non est neocess. L. Si expressum. 19.
F. de Appell. and Leg. Eum prolatis. 32. F. De re judicata.
Si sententia judicis sit ipso jure nulla, and contra jus lata, tum sine
appellatione infringitur, and non transit in rem judicatam. And a good Lawyer,
with relation to the Laws cited in the Margint, tells me Ever. Bronchorst. ad
l. 207. F. de Reg. juris.
His legibus dicitur, quod sententia lata contra leges, statuta, vel
constitutiones principum, est ipso jure nulla, and ideo citra appellationem,
causa de novo in judicium deduci potest. And Panormitan Abb. Cons. 60. in casu.
Col. 1. in fin. l. 2. Card. Tuschus loco citato. 27. And it is a memorable
saying of Vlpian to this purpose. Condemnatum accipere debemus illum, qui rite
condemnatus est, ut sententia valeat: Nam si aliqua ratione sententia nulla
sit, dicendum est, condemnationis verbum non tenere. L. 4.. Condemnatum. 6. F.
De re judisata.
sententia pro Matrimonio, non transit in rem judicatam, cum extat impedimentum
lege divina vel humana, and super eo non est dispensatum. So that it is not
every Sentence of a Judge (though not suspended by an appeal) which passes in
rem judicatam, no not in the same State or Kingdom; and therefore the
Archbishop of Turin's Sentence, declaring the Matrimonial Contract between
Patrimoniale and Gallina, to be a Nullity, if it be against any Law of God, or
Man; as undeniably it is against both; if the grounds on which it was given, be
Ea quae contra leges fiunt, non solum inutilia, sed pro infectis habenda. Can.
Imperial 13. Cause. 25. Quaest. 2. Rescripta contra jus elicitum, ab omnibus
Judicibus praecipimus refutari. lb. Can. 75. Ita statuunt Impp. Theodosius, and
Valent. log. Rescript. 7. Cod. De Precibus Imperat. Offerendis, etc.
such as they have been represented to me, is it self Null, and to all intents
and purposes invalid.

Thirdly, But let the Archbishop's Sentence, as to the Nullity, be what it
will, true or false, just or unjust; yet if it concerns a Subject of England,
our King and Bishops have good reason, and a just power to question and examine
it; and according to its Validity or Nullity, admit or reject it.

Fourthly, And that it does highly concern a Subject of England, is evident:
For although ab Origin, it concerned only Patrimoniale and Gallina, two of his
own Subjects; yet Mr. Cottington having before, or since the Sentence, I know
not, married Gallina: He is highly concerned to be sure, that the Archbishop's
Sentence is just and true. For if it be not, if indeed there be no Nullity in
that Contract, then what Casuist or Court soever determines and decrees, that
he shall Co-habit with Gallina as his Wife; does ( ipso facto) decree, 1. That
he shall Co-habit with another Man's Wife. 2. That he shall live in continual
Adultery. 3. That if he have any Children by her, they are none of his; for, is
pater est, quem nuptioe demonstrant. 4. And so in case she out live him, he
shall not be in a possibility, to leave any lawful Issue to continue his Name
and Family to Posterity.


Fifthly, If then the Archbishop's Sentence be untrue, if the contract between
Patrimoniale and Gallina, was Matrimonium ratum, and no Nullity; then all those
sad or sinful consequences, will necessarily follow; and so not only Mr.
Cottington, by Co-habiting with another Man's Wife, but his Judges too, who
command such Co-habitation, will be guilty of those horrid Impieties. For if it
be true, as undoubtedly it is, that the Magistrate who Qui non prohibit peccare
cum possit, jubet. So 1 Samuel 3. 13. Eli is declared guilty of his Sons
impleties, because he restrained them not.
prohibits not Impieties, when it is in his power, is himself guilty of them:
Then much more will he be guilty, who expressly commands them. And that
Magistrate, whoever he be, who by a judicial Sentence, commands Mr. Cottington
to Co-habit with another Man's Wife, for so she is, in case there be no
Nullity, commands him to commit and continue in Adultery.

Sixthly, It will therefore, both in Prudence and Conscience, highly concern
our Bishops and Ecclesiastical Judges, to whom the cognizance of this cause
belongs, that they be As a Subject may not disobey his Superior unless he be
morally sure that what he commands is illicitum and sinful; so a Superior may
not command, unless he be morally sure, that what he commands is licitum and
not sinful. Vid. Rob. Lincoln. de obligat. Cons. Praelect. 6. 16. page 227.
morally sure, that the Contract between Patrimoniale and Gallina was indeed a
Nullity, before they decree and require Mr. Cottington to Co-habit with her. It
is evidently repugnant to the nature of Justice, and the integrity of a just
Judge, to give a certain damnatory Sentence, upon an uncertain and dubious
Ground. Now it is absolutely impossible, that any Man should be sure of such a
Nullity as is declared in the Archbishop's Sentence, unless he know the reasons
on which that Sentence is grounded, and that they are such, as efficaciously
prove the Nullity: And if Mr. Cottington doubt of the Nullity (as of necessity
he must, till by some rational medium it appear) and be not sure, Gallina is
indeed his Wife; I am sure he sins, if he Co-habit with her, seeing he
Co-habits with one, who (for ought he knows) is another Man's Wife. And then
the Rule is certain, Quicquid fit, reluctante vel Romans 14. 23. Quod dubitas ne
feceris. Cicero. Whatever is not of Faith is Sin, sales the Apostle. Ex fide,
id est, ex credulitate and fiducia conscientiae de eo quod agit, quod licitum
sit id agere. Pererius Jesuita, in Romans 14. Disp. 8.. 45. page 1177. And what
Pererius calls Credulitas and Fiducia Conscientiae; Estius calls Moralis
Estimatio, etc. A Moral assurance, that what is done, is lawful. Estius in Romans
14. 23.
dubitante conscientia, est peccatum.

Seventhly, If it be said, That the Archbishop of Turin has, by a judicial
Sentence, declared that Contract to be a Nullity. It is confessed, but that is
no just ground for Mr. Cottington, nor any body else, to be assured it is so,
unless the Reasons on which his Sentence is grounded, appear to be cogent and
sufficient to prove such Nullity. That Archbishop and his Assessors, neither
are, nor pretend to be Infallible, and the Sentence of a fallible Authority,
(so long as the Reasons of it are unknown) is not sufficient to satisfy and
quiet a doubting Conscience. Our Holy Mother (the Church of England) has truly
told us, and all her Sons subscribe it, that General Art. Religionis, 21.
Councils may and have actually erred, much more may a particular Popish
Consistory. I know it passes for good Law and Divinity, among the Popish
Casuists and Schoolmen, that the People are bound to believe their Bishop, even
then, when he preaches Heresy: And are so far from sinning in doing so, that
their submission to the Bishop, and believing errors, when taught by him, is
Meritorious. It is a Cardinal who tells us, -- Card. Tolet. Instruct.
Sacerdotum, lib. 4. cap. 3. 7. page 612. Rothomagi, 1630.
Si rusticus circa Articulos fidei credat suo Episcopo, proponenti aliquod
dogma Hereticum, meretur in Credendo licet sit Error; quia tenetur credere,
donec ei constat esse contra Ecclesiam. And before him, our Rob. Holcot in lib.
1. Sententiarum. Quaest. 1. Ad sextum principale, in Replic.
Countryman, and he a famous Schoolman, tells us, to the same wild purpose; --
Si audiat prelatum praedicantem propositionem erroneam quam nescit esse
erroneam, and credat ei, non peccat, sed tenetur errare, quid tenetur ei
credere -- and meretur volendo credere errorem, and tum simplicitas and
ignorantia excusant. Nay, such an ignorant person (believing an Error, which
the Bishop has preached and proposed as a Truth and Article of Faith) if he be
put to Death, and die in defense of that Error, which he believes to be an
Article of Faith, he shall be a Martyr and have the honor and merit of
Martyrdom. Holcot Lb. in dicta Replica. The errors of the Church of Rome are
many and great, and therefore it is their Interest to keep the People Ignorant,
least they come to know and abhor them. And on this ground, they teach this
irrational Doctrine, That the People may and ought to believe even those errors
their Priest and Pastor Preaches. For though this be irrational, yet it is in
favor of their false Religion: And so it is trus which their Canon Law, says,
Favore religionis multa contra rationem constituuntur. Cap. Quantae. 47. Verbo
interpretans in Glossa Extra de sententia excommunicationis.
Concedo, si interficiatur pro tali errore, quem credit esse articulum fidei,
potest adipisci meritum debitum martyri, quia error invincibilis non diminuit
de merito. But however, this anciently did, and at Rome still does pass for
Catholic Doctrine, with the Pope and his miserably inslaved Party; yet the
Church of England, and all her true Sons, believe and know it to be a
prodigious and stupid Error.

Eighthly, That our King and Bishops, have power to question that Archbishop's,
or any such Sentence; and when our King or his Subjects are concerned, if upon
a just Examination, they find it for want of Truth or Justice faulty, they may
justly condemn and reject it. This is, I believe, evident: For our Kings and
Church of England (de facto and jure) have questioned, condemned and rejected
Sentences of greater Popish Consistories, than that of the Archbishop of Turin;
I mean, Sentences given by the Pope himself, in his own Consistory, and his
general Councils: Of this we have a hundred Instances. I shall for your
satisfaction set down three or four; thus.

First, Pope Julius the Second, Ex plenitudine potestatis, and certa scientia,
etc. Grants a Dispensation for Hen. 8th. to marry the Relict of his Brother
Arthur, and declares the Marriage to be just and lawful; and yet Hen. 8th. and
his Bishops (b) Conterbury, London, Winton, Bath, Lincoln, and by the King's
command at Dunstable. Vid. My Lord Cherbury's Life of Hen. 8. page 347. where
you have the Sentence of our Bishops, etc.
did and justly might afterward examine the Papal Sentence, disobeyed it, and
declared it Null.

Secondly, Pope Paul the Third, ( Venerabilium fratrum Cardinalium consilio and
consensu) gives Sentence and declares for a general Council, and by his Bulls
summons it to meet at To meet there, Call. Jan. 1537.
Mantua, then at Vincentiae, Call. Maij, 1538.
Vincentia, and then at Trident. Call. Nov. 1542.
Trent. But Hen. the 8th. and his Bishops and Parliament, having seen those
Bulls, containing the Pope's Sentence and Authoritate Petri and Pauli, de
Fratrum nostrorum 5. Romans E. Can. Consilio and assensu genesis concilium
incipiendum, etc. statuimus, decernimus. Ita habet Bulla Pauli 3. in Bullario
Cherubim. Tom. 1. page 550.. 10.
Decree for, and Summons of a general Council, at several times, and to several
places; they did not only question his Sentence and Summons, but condemned
(though they were Papists) and absolutely rejected it, showing the many
Nullities of that Summons, and added their Protestation which they made good,
that they were neither bound nor would obey it; as is evident by an Epistle
Sereniss. and inclyti Regis Hen. 8. Eistola de synodo Vincentina, 1539.
of Hen. the 8th. to the Emperor and all Christian Kings; and in a Illustriss.
ac potentisse. Regis Hen. 8. Senatus populique Angliae sententia, etc. de
concilio quod Paulus Papa 3. Mantuae futurum simulavit, and de Bulla quae
prorogavit. Edit. 1537.
Tract containing the Sentence of the King and Parliament, and their
Protestation against the Pope's Sentence, for, and Summons to, that Council.

Thirdly, When that Trent Council had met and sat eighteen Years, made many
Canons and Constitutions, particularly about Matrimony, and pronounced many
Anathema's against all who did not believe and obey them: The Bishops of
England were so far from thinking, that they had no power to question those
Synodical Sentences and Constitutions; that they have constantly and publicly
Preached and Writ against them, and proved them to be, in many things
erroneous, impious or idolatrous. Have the Bishops of England power to question
and condemn the constitutions and synodical Decrees of the Pope, made in his
own consistory, and his general Councils; and have they no power to question
one single Sentence given in a consistory of an inferior Archbishop? Credat
Judaeus Appella.

Fourthly, Pope Paul the Third, Paulus 3. Bulla 7. Dat. Romae, 3. Cali. Sep.
1535. in Bullario Cherubim. Romans 1638. Tom. 1. page 514.
Habita cum Cardinalibus deliberatione matura, and de illorum consilio and
assensu, (by a solemn Sentence) Excommunicates Hen. 8. Deposes him, absolves
his Subjects from their Oaths of Fidelity, etc. So Pius 5. Bulla 101. In
Pullario dicto, Tom. 2. page 229.
Pope Pius 5. sub eadem forma, Excommunicates and deposes Queen Elizabeth. And
when some honest and loyal Papists had (under their hands) signified their (b)
opinion. Anno 1648. Vid. Remonst. Hibernorum Authore R. Caron. Part. 1. cap.
4.. 3. page 12.


1. That the Pope could not absolve Papists from their Oath of Allegiance to a
Protestant King. 2. That he could not Depose and Murder Excommunicate Kings,
etc. I say, when this was heard at Rome, Pope Innocent the 10 th. with his
Sacra Cardinalium Congregatio, passes a damnatory Sentence, and condemns the
true opinion of those loyal Papists, as heretical: and declarat subscriptores,
in poenas in sacris Canonibus and Constitutionibus Apostolicis, contranegantes
potestatem Papae in causis fidei, incidisse. Now pray 'ask those Gentlemen,
whether the Bishops of England, have not power to question the aforesaid Solemn
and Judicial Sentences of the Sure I am, that the incomparable Bishop Jewel,
has a very loyal and learned Tract, wherein he fully shows the manifold
Nullities and Impieties of Pope Pius 5. his Bull of Excommunication against
Queen Elizabeth. It is extant, at the end of his reply to Harding's Answer.
Inter ejus opera, Lon. 1609.
Popes, for excommunicating, deposing, and murdering Kings? If they have such
power, and may question the Pope's judicial Sentences, given in his own
Consistory, or his General Councils; then certainly, they may much rather
question Sentences past in any Archbishop's or inferior Consistory. But if they
say, what I suppose they will not, I am sure they should not, That we have not
power to question such Sentences; they must pardon my incredulity, if I neither
do nor can believe them to be Protestants or true Sons of the Church of
England, but rather Jesuited Papists; for I know none (save Campian the
Jusuite, (a Traitor to the Queen and his Country) in his examination, said, for
himself and his Society, That no Court in England had any power to question
Pontificis Romani summam authoritatem. Vid. Tractatum de Torturis, in Calce
Justitiae Britanniae. Land. 1584. and the Pope's Parasites, the Canonists, are
of the same opinion. Can. Si Papa. 6. Did. 40.
such) who do or dare say, That such impious and traitorous Sentences given by
the Pope in his Consistory, or Councils, may not be questioned by any Authority
in the Church of England. Is it possible, that any Protestant, nay, any honest
Papist, should seriously think, that a Sentence of the Pope to depose a King
and absolve his Subjects from all Fidelity and Allegiance to him, should be
such as is not to be questioned by the King, his Bishops, or any loyal
Subjects? If so, good night to Monarchy, and all the royal Rights of Kings; the
Pope may when he will depose and deprive them of all their Jura Regalia, and
their Subjects (though by the Law of God and Man obliged to it) must not assist
them.

Ninthly, It is to be considered, That our present Case is an Ecclesiastical,
not a Civil Cause, concerning the Validity or Nullity of a Matrimonial
Contract; which both by Vid. Statut. 24. Hen. 8. Cap. 12.
our Laws, and those of Council. Trident. sess. 24. De Sacrament. Matrimonij.
Can. 12. Quit dicit Causas matrimoniales non spectare ad judices
Ecclesiasticos, Anathema sit.
Rome too, is of Ecclesiastical Cognizance. Now there is (both in Law, and the
nature and the consequences of them) a great difference between Ecclesiastical,
and Civil Causes. Many instances might be given, but being not my business, I
shall only set down two or three; thus:

First, Had it been an action of Debt, and the Sentence at Turin had been, that
Mr. Cottington should pay 500 l. to Gallina. Admit also, that no such Debt was
due, and so the Sentence unjust; and admit, that at Gallina's instance, that
Sentence had been confirmed, and executed here in England, and Mr. Cottington
compelled to pay that Sum. It might be a piece of injustice, and a sin in the
Si praelatus iniquum aut durum (quod tamen turpe aut inhonestum non est)
imperet, and subditus obsequatur, and imperatum) faciat, tum unius Imperantis
culpa est; tam abest a culpa qui obsequitur imperio, ut omnino peccaret si non
obsequeretur. Rob. Lincolniensis, de obligat. Conscient. Praelect. 5.. 8. page
165.
Judge to sentence him to pay what was no way due. But (as to Mr. Cottington)
it might be his Calamity, being compelled to pay what he did not owe, but his
crime it could not be. It could be no sin in him, compelled by his Judge, to
pay that Money, though indeed it was not due. For he might lawfully have given
Gallina so much Money, without and before any compulsory decree; and that
decree could not make it to him unlawful. But in our present Matrimonial Case,
it is far otherwise: For if there was no Nullity in the Contract, and the
Sentence at Turin unjust, and if upon that Sentence, it be decreed here, that
Mr. Cottington shall Co-habit with Gallina, here obedience to that unjust
Sentence, will not only be his Calamity, but his Crime; because in this Case,
he Co-habits with another Man's Wife, and is guilty of Adultery. Nor will the
Judge's Sentence, requiring such Co-habitation, any way excuse him. And on this
consideration it highly concerns the Judges in this case to be assured of the
Nullity, least they sentence Mr. Cottington to Co-habit with another Man's
Wife, and so to sin and commit Adultery. But if they do, quod absit, it as
highly concerns Mr. Cottington, to obey God rather than Men; and though he
suffer for it here, rather disobey an unjust Sentence of an earthly Judge, than
the eternally just Judge of Heaven and Earth, and suffer for it for ever
hereafter.

Secondly, The Church of Rome has Ecclesiastical Laws, particularly about the
Validity and Nullity of Matrimonial Contracts, which neither are nor ought to
be approved by the Church of England. For, 1. They admit the Oaths and
Confessions of the parties desiring Sentence for divorce or Nullity, and so it
was in our present case, which the Church of England Vid. Canones 1 Jacobi.
Anno 1603. Can. 105.
admits not. 2. It is their generally received opinion, that although the
Matrimonium be indeed ratum, yet a Papal Dispensation may dissolve the vinculum
conjugale, and so induce a Nullity. Dico, says a great Popish Vincent.
Fillucius, Quest. Moral. Tractat. 10. Cap. 2. Quaest. 8. 54. 55. page 152.
Casuist, Matrimonium ratum posse dissolvi per Papae dispensationem. And for
Proof of it, he cites five Popes did dispense with such Marriages; and then
adds Ib.. 55. And the Trent Fathers tell us, That the Church may dispense with
the Law of God in Levit. 18. And those degrees of Affinity or Consanguinity,
Quae impediunt Matrimonium contrahendum and dirimunt contractum. And pronunces
an Anathema to those who shall say the Church cannot constitute new impediments
to dissolve Marriages. Qui dicit Ecclesiam non posse constituere impedimenta
Matrimonium dirimentia, Anathema sit. Council. Trident. Sess. 24. De matrimonio.
Can. 3, 4. And shall we not question the Sentences of such Judges, who
determine cases by such Laws?
Quod Gregorius Papa 13 Unica die, cum undecim Matrimonijs ratis dispensavit.
And further tells us out of Sanchez, of no less than forty nine Divines,
Canonists, Summists, etc. cited for the same opinion, (and he might have cited
as many more;) and then he himself from their own received Principles fully
proves it. Now it highly concerns Mr. Cottington, and his Judges too, to know
on what grounds the Archbishop of Turin gave Sentence for a Nullity. For if it
was only on the aforesaid Reasons and Popish Principles; no Bishop or knowing
Casuist of the Church of England, will or can admit that Sentence to be just,
or grant a Nullity on such Grounds, or sentence Mr. Cottington to Co-habit with
Gallina, her former Husband yet living, and no just ground of any Nullity in
their Matrimonial Contract appearing.

Thirdly, The Laws of England concerning all Ecclesiastical, particularly
Matrimonial Causes, are Vid. Statut. 24. Hen. 8. Cap. 12.
express, forbidding all persons whoever they be, inhabiting or resiant in this
Kingdom, to make use of or excuse the Judgments or Sentences of any Foreign
Person, Court or Judicature; and requires, upon pain of a Praemunire, that all
such Causes be tried and finally determined within this Realm, by our own Laws
and Judges. The words are thus, The said Statute. Be it further inacted,
compared with the 2.. And whereas the King.
If any Peron, Inhabitant or Resiant in this Realm, or any other of what
condition soever, at any time hereafter, for any of the Causes aforesaid,
(Matrimonial causes are expressly forenamed) do procure from Rome, or any other
Foreign Court out of this Realm, any manner of Foreign Process, Sentences, or
Judgments of what kind soever, or execute any of the same, or do any Act, etc.
such persons shall incurr a Praemunire. I understand not Law, and therefore
referr this to you, and those who do: Only I observe, 1. That the Word in the
Statute is not Copulative; If any Man do Procure, and Execute, and do any Act,
etc. but Disjunctive, If any Man Procure, or Execute, or do any Act, etc. That
is, if any Man do any one of those particulars mentioned; if he either procure
such Foreign Sentences, or Execute, or Abett and Assist, etc. Though he do not
all, yet he is liable to the punishment appointed by the Statute. 2. That the
end of the Statute, is, to provide against the damages and greivances of the
Subjects of England; and therefore forbids all Appeals to any Foreign Court,
Prelate or the Pope; or to bring in any Foreign Process, Sentence or Judgment
given in any Foreign Court whatsoever. And this is one reason of the
Prohibition, which the Statute does instance in; because Statut. 24. H. 8. Cap.
12.. 2. And whereas the King.
neither the necessary proofs nor the true knowledge of the Cause, can neither
there be so well known, nor the Witnesses there be so well examined as within
the Realm; so that the parties grieved by means of the said Appeals, be most
times without remedy. So that though the Title and Epigraphe of the Statute be
against Appeals to any Foreign Judicature; yet in the body of the Statute the
bringing in, and executing of any Foreign Process, Sentence, or Judgment, are
equally forbid.

Thirdly, Now for Gallina, no Subject of England, though now resiant here, to
bring in a Sentence of a Foreign Court, and though the Proofs or Reasons of it
be utterly unknown, to plead it, and have it, without Examination, executed, to
the Irreparable damage of a Person of Quality, and a native Subject of England;
this seems to me, to be against the true intent and meaning of this good
Statute.

To conclude, I do and must confess, that of the Laws, I have ventured to cite,
Law being none of my Profession, I am no competent Judge; and therefore,
begging your Pardon for my mistakes, and meddling with them, I referr them, and
my self, to You and the Learned Gentlemen of the Long Robe, who best understand
them, who can, I know, easily discover my mistakes; and will, I hope, without
any severe Censure pardon them. But for the Theological part of the
Controversy, and the Case of Conscience, wherein his Judges in the
Ecclesiastical Court, and Mr. Cottington are concerned; this being within the
compass of my Calling and Profession, I may, and with modesty, and more
confidence, do affirm, 1. That till the pretended Nullity of the Matrimonial
Contract, between Patrimoniale and Gallina, do upon just grounds, and such as
may induce a moral certainty, appear, no Judge can ( Conscientia and Justitia
salvis) by a judicial Sentence, require Mr. Cottington to Co-habit with
Gallina. For in this Case, idem est non esse and non apparere; Gallina must be
reputed Patrimoniale's Wife, he yet living to whom she was first contracted (
Solemni Ecclesiae ritu) and with whom she Co-habited ( sine querela) a year and
an half, and by whom she had a Child. I say, she must be reputed his Wife till
it appear she is not. And it is impossible that should appear, till the Nullity
of that first contract be legally and sufficiently proved. 2. And if any
Ecclesiastical Judge, should decree Mr. Cottington to Co-habit with her, before
such Nullity (which is pretended, but hitherto no way proved) do sufficiently
and by legal and just proofs appear; yet, notwithstanding such Decree, it is
impossible for him, with a safe Conscience, to Co-habit with her, as his Wife:
Seeing, for ought appears, or he knows, she may be another Man's Wife rather
than his. And certainly he is highly concerned to be sure, that she is indeed
his own Wife, before he give her that due Benevolence, which without great
Impiety and Adultery, cannot possibly be given to any other, who really is not
his Wife, etc.

Your Servant.T. Lincoln.

PAtrimoniale and Gallina intermarry Anno 1664. and Co-habit about twenty
Months, and have Issue, a Daughter. But Gallina afterward not liking that
Marriage, pretends it was Null, propter vim and metum, and obtains a Sentence
of Nullity from the Archbishop of Turin; but without any defense, for ought
appears, made by her Husband Patrimoniale, or proof of the pretended force or
fear: And in the said Sentence of that Archbishop, there is a Condition
interposed in these Words, viz. Saving however the solemnity required by the
Holy Council, and a solemn Oath to be beforehand taken before Us by the said
Gallina, that she contracted the said Marriage, on force and for fear of her
Father, and that she gave not her free consent unto the said Marriage; and by
the Certificate annexed to the Archbishop's Sentence, it appears that she Swore,
That by the force and fear, that she was put into by her Father, she contracted
Marriage with Patrimoniale, and that in that Contract, she did not give her
free consent; but does not swear that she gave not her consent to the said
Marriage.

Patrimoniale afterward married another Wife, and Gallina being thus
separated, does in the Year 1671. marry Mr. Cottington; against whom in the
Year 1674. she brings an Action in Causa Matrimoniali, before the Dean of the
Arches here in England, where she does Allege and prove her Marriage with Mr.
Cottington; to which Mr. Cottington does answer, That her first Husband
Patrimoniale was and is still alive. She replies, it is true, but that first
Marriage of hers was declared Null and Void by the Archbishop's Sentence; and
Mr. Cottington rejoins, That that Sentence it self was Null and Void, being
given without proof, and contrary to Law. The Dean of the Arches having this
Fact before him, does give Sentence for this second Marriage of Gallina, and
enjoins Mr. Cottington and her to Co-habit; alleging that he has no power,
and is not by Law to examine or question the Validity of the Archbishop's
Sentence; but ought, notwithstanding any Defects or Nullities therein, to give
Sentence for this second Marriage of Gallina. Mr. Cotttington says, That the
Dean of the Arches at the time of his giving Sentence against him, declared his
Mind in Words to this effect, viz. As a private Man, I should look upon the
Sentence of the Archbishop of Turin, for dissolving the Marriage between
Patrimoniale and Gallina, to be an irregular, wrongful, and an unjust Sentence;
but, as I am a public Minister, I must look upon it as good against Mr.
Cottington, because all Sentences given beyond Sea by any equal Court, I ought
to look upon as good; whether good or bad, having no power to reverse or
examine them; and therefore ought to cast Mr. Cottington in this Case.

It is not on Mr. Cottington's part denied, but that when he Married Gallina,
he knew of her being Married to Patrimoniale, and of Patrimoniale's being still
alive, when he the said Cottington married Gallina; nor is it alleged and
proved by Gallina in this Cause here in England, that she at any time made any
Protestation of the pretended force and fear she was under, or that she used
any endeavors to escape from Patrimoniale, when she was in a safe place, and
might have escaped from him if she had pleased; but on the contrary, her
Co-habitation with Patrimoniale for about twenty Months, and her having had a
Child by him in that time, and her having the usual liberty of Women in a
Married Estate, during that Co-habitation, has been proved in the Court of
Arches by her own Witnesses. But Mr. Cottington, being unwilling to make
unnecessary contests with the Sentences of Courts, and being now fearful of
offending God or his own Conscience, does most humbly request the Reverend
Doctor, Richard Allestry, the Regius Professor of Divinity, in the University
of Oxford, to give him his Opinion, whether the matter of Fact, being true
according to the Premises, he the said Cottington may Salva Conscientia,
Co-habit with Gallina as his Wife.

Supposing this Case justly stated, and the matters of Fact true according to
the Premises; I conceive the marriage of Patrimoniale and Gallina (especially
being ratified by such Co-habitation, and the effects of it) valid and firm.
And consequently, notwithstanding any Sentence of Nullity, that she is his
Wife, and therefore that no other person can Co-habit with her, Salva
Conscientia, as with a Wife.

October 11th. 1677. Richard Allestry.

MR. Cottington having desired the Opinion of Dr. Hall, the Lady Margaret's
Professor of Divinity in Oxford, to the same case propounded to him, as was to
Dr. Allestry, the Regius Professor there; Dr. Hall gave his Opinion thereupon
as follows, viz.

As this Case is Stated, I conceive that the Marriage of Patrimoniale and
Gallina is not Null, and therefore Mr. Cottington cannot with a safe Conscience
Co-habit with Gallina as his Wife.

Jo. Hall.

Mr. Cottington for his further information, sent the following Case to the
Doctors of Sorbonne, and had the following return from them.
Lucius an English Man Marries Sempronia an English Woman in England, according
to the Laws and Customs of the Church of England, and she Co-habits with him
about a year and a half, and has a Child by him; and afterward she makes
Application to Titius the Bishop of the Diocese in England, and alleges before
him, that her Marriage with Lucius was made by fear and force of her Father;
and therefore desires, that he by his definitive Sentence, would dissolve that
Marriage; which Titius accordingly does, and by his Sentence declares it Null
and Void, and by the said Sentence pronounces it lawful for Lucius and
Sempronia to marry whom they will; yet so that a solemn Oath be taken by
Sempronia, that she contracted Matrimony with Lucius out of fear and force from
her Father, and that to her Marriage with Lucius, she gave not her free
consent; which Oath she took, and no proof of the fear and force in that her
Marriage with Lucius appears, to have been otherwise made before Titius.

Sempronia afterward, in England Marries Caius a French Man, Lucius being
still alive; and Caius after that going into France, and there living a part
from Sempronia, she is advised by her Council, to cause Caius to be cited
before Maevius, a Bishop of the Roman Catholic Church in France, and to
endeavor to obtain the Sentence of Maevius to compel Caius to Co-habit with
her, saying, That her Marriage with Caius is not Null and Void, although Lucius
was still alive; because her Marriage with Lucius was dissolved and declared
Null by the Sentence of Titius, who though he was a Protestant Bishop of the
Church of England; and though that Sentence as to its form was Irregular and
Null, and as to its substance contrary to the Law of God, and to the Law of the
Roman Catholic Church, and contrary to the Canon, and contrary to the Law of
France, and even contrary to the Laws of the Church of England, yet the said
Sentence being de facto, given by Titius, her Council says; That Maevius: has
not power to question it, nor to pronounce contrary to it, as being but of
equal power with Titius, they both being Bishops of several Diocesses; but that
he ought to pronounce Caius and Sempronia lawful Man and Wife, and command
them to Co-habit; and he declares that his Opinion in this Case, is according
to the practice of France.

Now the Query is, if Maevius has not power to question the Sentence of
Titius, because he is but of equal Power with Titius, they being both Bishops,
though of different Countries and Churches, and if he ought to pronounce Caius
and Sempronia lawful Man and Wife, and command them to Co-habit.

The Doctors in Divinity of the Faculty of Paris under written, having seen the
Case above put with all its circumstances, do esteem that the first Marriage is
valid, and that the first Sentence given by Titius is against all sort of
Justice; and therefore that the second Marriage is Null.

Given at Paris the 16. of December. 1677.

Puischard. Thuby.


Here follow the Opinions of Sir Richard Lloyd, and Dr. Richard Raines, Doctors
of Law.
THE CASE.
PAtrimoniale and Gallina intermarry 64, and Co-habit (about twenty Months) and
have Issue a Daughter.

But Gallina, it seems not liking that Marriage, pretends it was Null, propter
vim and metum, and obtains a sentence of Nullity from the Archbishop of Turin;
but without any defense, for ought appears, made by her Husband Patrimoniale,
or proof of the pretended force or fear.

Gallina being thus separated, does Anno 71, marry Cottington, against whom
Anno 74, she brings an Action in Causa Matrnioniali here in England, -- where
she does allege and prove the second Marriage.

To which Cottington does answer, that her first Husband Patrimoniale was then,
and is still alive. She replies, It Is true, but that first Marriage was
declared Null and Void by the Archbishop's Sentence; and he rejoins, That that
Sentence it self was Null and Void, being given without proof, and contrary to
Law.

The Ecclesiastical Judge here in England having this Fact before him, does
give Sentence for this second Marriage, and enjoins the Parties to Co-habit;
alleging, that he has no power, and is not by Law to examine or question the
Validity of the Archbishop's Sentence; but ought, notwithstanding any Defects
or Nullities therein, to give Sentence for the second Marriage.

Q. Whether the Judge of one Territory may by Law examine and question the
validity of a Sentence of a Foreign Judge, and in particular as this Fact is
where it is given in a Matrimonial Cause?

A. We conceive that the Judge of one Territory cannot directly examine and
question the Sentence of a Foreign Judge, because he has no Superiority over
him. But if it happens that such Sentence does upon any incident come before
him; as if he be requested to put the same in Execution, or if one of the
parties litigant shall (as the cause may require) make his Plea and found his
intention on such Sentence, then the Judge may enquire into the grounds and
merits thereof; and if he finds it is not agreeable to the Principles of
internal Justice, and that it wants the substantials of a Sentence requisite,
not by the positive Laws of the place, but by the common and general Law by
which (it is supposed) the Case is to be judged, he is to forbear putting the
Sentence into Execution, or to admit it as a Plea until those points be
declared, wherein he finds, or has just cause to judge, it is not agreeable to
the Law. There is a great difference in this matter, betwixt Judges of the
same, and a Foreign Territory: In the first Case, the Sentence of the Superior
is of force, by reason of Subordination and Subjection; and for that Cause, Res
judicata pro veritate habetur: But in the second Case, the Sentence is not
simply took for truth; it has only a presumption for it. And when that is took
off by clearer evidence, it has no force and operation on a Foreign Judge, who
is to observe the Rules of that general and Common Law, and to respect the
precept of the same Law; which says, An unjust and null Sentence is not to be
executed, or regarded, rather than the mere Authority and Jurisdiction of any
equal Court and Judge.

Now the substance and perpetual rights of Marriage are determined by the Law
Divine, and observed in the Catholic Church, which has added some Supplement
or Explications thereunto. All which at least, where they are received and
practiced, as they are here in England, make the common and general Law, to
which every Ecclesiastical Judge there is subject, and which he is ex officio,
and by the precept of the Law, bound to observe, even against the consent of
Parties, and the authority of any Coordinate equal Judge.

The Premises considered, since in this Case here is a perpetual impediment
objected, by Cottington, viz. That the first Husband of Gallina was then, and
is still alive; and since the Archbishop's Sentence is grounded on a pretended
force and fear, not proved (for ought appears;) and if it was, it is by the
abovesaid Co-habitation and Issue, purged in construction of Law; we are of
Opinion that the Judges of this Territory, ought not to pronounce for the
second Marriage, until they shall be satisfied (if it may be) that the
Archbishop's Sentence was good and valid.

Rich. Lloyd. Rich. Raines.


In the Index of a Manuscript of Collections by Sir Julius Caesar, Fol. 277. is
referred to under his own hand, in which Fol. is contained as follows. (The
Book is marked on the outside, A. A. 10.)
UPon the Treaty with Gray Lord Chandois, it was thought meet that 16500 l.
should be alloted to the Lady for her right, to the value of 14500 l. in Land,
and 2000 l. in Money. But in regard the whole Estate moved from the Lady, and
that Sir John was able to give her no Advancement or Dower out of his Estate,
it was thought meet, that the Lady should have 8000 l. at her sole dispose, and
the residue to be at their joint dispose.

After, upon motion on the Lady's behalf, out of a fear, that the Estate might
be wasted by Sir John, and thereby she deprived of maintenance (she then having
on knowledge of the Marriage in Scotland, or hope of a Divorce, or Nullity of
the said Marriage) it was appointed that the same should be conveyed over to
certain Feoffees in trust to her use; that she by her Indenture under her Hand
and Seal, solely and without Sir John, might dispose thereof.

The which conveyance was directed by three living of this Honorable board,
viz. The Lord Treasurer, the Lord Privy Seal, and the Lord Stanhope; and by the
Lord Popham, Lord Tanfield, Sir Thomas Hesketh, Sergeant Dodridge, and Mr.
Stephens.

The Land allotted the Lady, being sold for 7800 l, with 6500 l. thereof
Barn-Elmes was purchased; but Sir John being trusted by the Lady to go to Mr.
Stephens to draw the conveyance, went to other Council; and in the clause where
it should be freely at the Lady's disposal solely without Sir John, he caused
to be inserted these Words, That the Lady should have power to convey the same,
to such intents and purposes as by the said Elizabeth, solely and without the
said Sir John Kennedy by writing under her Hand and Seal enrolled, should be
limited and appointed. Wherein, besides the contradictariness of the Sense, he
caused in that Deed delivered the Lady (the more to blind her Eyes) enrolled to
be razed and made indented. Deed. 31. December. 3. Jac.

And after the Rasure was found out, then by his Deed Dat. 2. Julij, 4. Jac. he
the said Sir John did limit power to the Lady by her Deed enrolled, or not
enrolled to limit uses.

The Lady has been a Suitor two years (if Sir John for saving his own Credit
will not confess matter to make a Divorce) then that in course of Justice she
may be admitted to her proof, which for that it concerns matter of State (as
is suggested) she is denied.

1. And therefore she hops, it is but the same equity to stay his proceeding,
touching her Estate against her or her Feoffees in Course of Justice,
considering it is not by her lachess that the Marriage is not disproved, until
both the said causes having a dependency one upon another, may be handled at
this Board.

2. The course of Conveyance by Feoffees, was by Honorable Personages, Grave
Judges, and Learned Lawyers directed when the Lady was supposed the true Wife
of Sir John, and they held in Law and Equity sufficient, and now a fortiore it
should be more sufficient, she being none of his Wife, if she may be admitted
to proofs.

3. Sir John has already advanced himself by the Sale of the Lady's Estate,
over and above the purchase of Tonbridge which cost 8500 l. wherein he has a a
joint Estate of Inheritance, and all her Debts that he has paid, 7500 l.

4. If the course propounded at this Honorable Board shall not hold, then will
the Lady never assent to Sell, and so shall the Debts of the Lady before
Marriage, now resting unpaid, being 2207 l. and Sir John's own Debts rest
unsatisfied, to the oppression and clamor of many poor Men, and the King still
troubled with renewing his Protections.

5. If Sir John should proceed in course of Justice, and that the conveyance
made to Feoffees, should not be held sufficient and strong enough to convey the
same to the Lady; yet Sir John can have but the profits thereof, being but 300
l. per annum, and not that clear which is not able to pay half the use of the
Money.

6. Besides, before any Suit began, the said Manor of Barn-Elms was for
valuable consideration of Money lent, Mortgaged and now rests forfeited for
Non-payment of 2000 l.

In the Index of Sir Julius Caesar's Manuscript of Collections, Fol. 280. is
under his own Hand referred to, in which Folio is contained as follows.
The Book is marked on the outside A. A. 10. It Is in the Index writ with his own
Hand, in relation to Fol. 280. Whether an English Jurisdiction may disanull a
Marriage solemnized in Scotland?

A. B. a Scotchman, in a Parish Church in Scotland, publicly in the presence
of the Congregation, solemnizeth Marriage with a Scotchwoman.

About six or seven years after the said Marriage, the Scottish Woman
pretending that at the time of her Marriage, she was but Ten years Old, or at
the least under Twelve, before certain competent Judges in Scotland, procures
a sentence of Divorce to be given against the said A. B. whereby the Marriage
between A. B. and her was pronounced to be void, and of no force; and that she
was at liberty to Marry again to any other upon this ground, That she was under
Twelve years of Age at the time of her Marriage, and that she never consented
thereto after she was Twelve years Old, nor had Carnal knowledge of the said A.
B. from which Sentence no appeal or provocation was made.

Afterward, the said A. B. coming into England, did solemnize Marriage with an
English Woman, the Scottish Wife being then living; after which marriage the
said A. B. and the English Woman for certain years Co-habited together here in
England, as Man and Wife; the said English Woman being ignorant of the
premises done in Scotland. During the time of which her Co-habitation with the
said A. B. the Scottish Woman dies: After whose death the English Woman being
certified, that A. B. had another Wife living when he married her, so as he
could not be her lawful Husband at the time of her Marriage, the said A. B. and
she dwelling both in England, she refraineth from the company of A. B. and
complains to the Ecclesiastical Judges in England, having Jurisdiction in the
place where the said A. B. and she dwells; and craving Justice, offers to
prove that the said A. B. and the said Scottish Woman were lawful Man and
Wife; and after the said Marriage, had Carnal knowledge of each other, and that
they Co habited together as Man and Wife, five or six years after she was
Twelve years of Age, admitting she had been under that Age at the time of the
Marriage; and desires to be admitted judicially according to the ordinary
course of Law, to allege and prove her aforesaid Assertions before the said
Judge, and upon proof thereof to have Sentence for the Nullity of her own
Marriage according to Justice.

It is objected on the behalf of A. B. That she ought not to be admitted
thereto, for these causes, viz. Because the Marriage with the Scottish Woman
was solemnized in Scotland; the sentence of Divorce was given in Scotland by
the Judges there, where the Judges of England have no Jurisdiction, nor
Superiority over them. That there was no appeal or provocation from that
Sentence. That it was given by the Judges of an high Court in Scotland, from
whence no Appeal lies: And that if the English Woman's marriage should be
pronounced void here in England, the justice of the Realm of Scotland may
thereby seem to be taxed.

The Question is, Whether the Ecclesiastical Judges or Judge, having
Jurisdiction in the place in England, where the said A. B. and the English
Woman dwell, be competent Judges, and may and ought at the Petition of the
English Woman, to hear and determine this cause of Nullity, of the marriage
between her self and A. B. notwithstanding the former Objections?

We are of Opinion, without any doubt, That the Ecclesiastical Judge haing
Jurisdiction in the place in England, where the said A. B. and the said English
Woman dwell, may and in Justice, is bound at the complaint of the said English
Woman, to hear and determine the said cause, concerning the validity of her
said Marriage, and to pronounce the marriage between her and A. B. to be void,
if she prove before him the matters by her alleged; notwithstanding the
aforesaid Objections.

Neither can the Justice of Scotland be thought to be impeached thereby, though
upon sufficient proof made before the Judge here in England, which was not made
before the Judges in Scotland; he gives a Sentence which may seem repugnant to
the Sentence given in Scotland.

In a Manuscript Book of several Collections made by Sir Julius Caesar, Master
of the Rolls, and Chancellor of the Exchequer, and one of the King's most
Honorable Privy Council; there is referred to in the Index of the Contents,
writ with his own hand, viz. That the question between Sir John Kennedy Knight,
and his Lady, touching the lawfullness or unlawfullness of their Marriage, may
be tried, heard or determined in England, where both parties are inhabiting.
And from Fol. 2d. of that Book, to Fol. 8th. the following Leaves are
Transcribed; the Page before Fol. 8th. in Sir Julius Caesar's Book, is thus
with his own Hand indors'd, viz. The Reasons of the Resolution of A. B. 25.
Jan. 1610. The said Manuscript Dr. Trumball borrowed of Sir Charles Caesar, and
it yet remains in the Doctors Hands. It Is marked in the back C. S. 8.

Certain Points in Law and Reason, whereby it may plainly appear, that the
question between the Lady Kennedy, and Sir John Kennedy, concerning the
Validity of their Marriage, may and ought by ordinary course of Law, be heard
and determined before the Ecclesiastical Judges in England, who have
jurisdiction in the places where they both dwell. Whereupon the Civilians have
grounded their Opinions, given in this Case to that effect.
FIrst, by Law and Reason, there can fall out no Question or Controversy
between any Persons inhabiting in any Civil Commonwealth or State, but the
same must be decided by some competent Judge, or Judges, who ought to have
Authority to hear and determine the same; or else there must needs ensue
Confusion and Horror.

Secondly, When any Controversies happen between any Persons proceeding of any
contract whatsoever, that require a Determination or ending by Judgment
wheresoever the Contract was made; those Judges are by Law the competent Judges
to hear and determine that Controversy, who have jurisdiction and power in the
place, where both the parties or the party defendant dwells, to hear and
determine causes of that Nature.

Thirdly, If there fall out any Controversy between any two Persons, the
Defendant cannot be compelled to appear to answer the Plaintiff; but before the
Judge of the place, where the Defendant dwells, and especially if the
Plaintiff himself dwells under the same Jurisdiction.

Fourthly, In all Causes where there may ensue peril of Soul and continuance in
Sin, the Judge of the place ought of his Office to enquire thereof, and redress
the same though no Man complain thereof.

Whereupon it follows, That the Ecclesiastical Judges here in England, who
have Authority to hear causes of Matrimony, are the competent Judges, and have
power to hear and determine this matter of the lawfullness or unlawfulness of
the Lady's Marriage; and the rather, for that the Lady's Marriage (which is the
principal matter in question) was made and solemnized here in England.

If it be objected, That because that Point whereupon the Validity or
Invalidity of the Lady Kennedy's Marriage depends, viz. the Marriage between
Sir John and Isabel Kennedy, is already adjudged by a definitive Sentence long
since; from which there has been no appeal or provocation, and therefore it
must Bar the Lady. We answer, That although in Causes of other Nature, where
no danger of sin might ensue, though the Sentence were against the truth; if a
Sentence be once lawfully given, and not appealed from in due time, the matter
cannot be called in question again; yet, where a Sentence is given to dissolve
or anull a lawful Matrimony, that Sentence may at any time, though never so
long after, be called in question and reversed, whenever it may be made to
appear that the truth is contrary to that Sentence; and that may be done even
by the party himself who obtained that Sentence. And therefore not only Sir
John Kennedy, but Isabel her self might have reversed that Sentence, proving
the same was given by error; much less shall the Lady who was not party to that
Suit, be thereby debarred from proving the Nullity of her Marriage, being a
distinct cause from that. And the reason of the difference between a Sentence
against a Matrimony, and a Sentence in another Cause; is, because in other
Causes, where no fear is of Sin, or peril of Soul to ensue, the parties may by
their agreement make what end of the Business they list, by composition or
otherwise. And therefore if they do not appeal from the Sentence given against
them, they are thought by their consent to confirm the same; but because a
Marriage by God's Law cannot be dissolved by the Agreement or Consent of the
Parties, no Sentence therein given against a Marriage, contrary to the truth by
error, can by the Parties agreement be confirmed, lest if it should be
otherwise, thereby they might by color of the erroneous Sentence marry other
Persons and live in Adultery. Nay more, If the Parties themselves thus
erroneously divorced contrary to the truth, would hold themselves contented
with the Sentence; if either of them marry any other Person, or they both live
incontinently with other Persons, the Judge of that place, where they inhabit,
may and ought of his own Office to enforce the Parties, so by error divorced,
to live together again, as Man and Wife, and separate them from their second
Spouses.

If it be objected, That the Sentence was given in another Country, where the
Judges of England have no Jurisdiction, and in an High-Court from whence there
lies no Appeal; and that the Judges of England have no Superiority to call
their Sentences in question, and that therefore the Lady cannot call that
Divorce in question here: We answer, That the principal cause in this case of
the Lady's, is not to reverse or call in question the Sentence given in
Scotland: but the principal Cause here is, Whether her Marriage made in England
with Sir John, be of Validity or no? For that (as we say) Sir John had another
Wife living, viz. ( Isabel Kennedy) at the time of her Marriage, without any
mention to be made by the Lady of any Sentence of Divorce given in Scotland;
against which our Allegations, if Sir John object, That he was Divorced from
her by Sentence in Scotland; this question of the Divorce is brought in, but
incidently by Sir John in this Cause, and also vainly and impertinently, if it
can be proved, that the truth is contrary to that Sentence; for that Sentence
is in Law merely void, and cannot Bar the Lady for the reasons before
alleged, and for that Ecclesia was decepta in giving of that Sentence. Now
when a Sentence which is void in Law (and especially against a Marriage) is
called in question, but incidently before any Judge whatsoever, though an
inferior in a Cause which does principally belong unto his Jurisdiction, that
Judge may take knowledge of, and incidently examine the validity of that
Sentence, whether it were good or no, by whom and wheresoever that Sentence was
given, though he were never so Superior a Judge; not to the end to reverse or
expressly to pronounce that Sentence to be void or not void, but as he finds
it by examination of the Cause to be good or void; so to give Sentence
accordingly, and determine the Cause principally depending before him, without
ever mentioning the erroneous Sentence in his Sentence.

Neither can the Sentence given here for the Nullity of the Lady's Marriage,
upon other matter than was pleaded and proved before the Judges in Scotland;
although the same Sentence had been principally called in question, and
directly pronounced to be void, any ways impeach the Justice of Scotland; for
since Judges, in all Courts and Causes must judge according to that which is
alleged and proved before them; what impeachment is it to the justice of any
Judge (although his Sentence be revoked, and a contrary Sentence given by
another Judge) when the parties between whom the Suit is, either cannot, or
through negligence or collusion, will not allege or make such proof before
him, the first Judge as they might, but afterward before the second Judge,
good and sufficient proof is made; a matter which falls out every day here in
England, in every Civil and Ecclesiastical Court, upon appeal made from one
Court to another, and the like falls out in all other Countries; and yet the
former Judge, whose Sentence is reversed, thinks not himself any whit
impeached of injustice thereby.

That the absurdities which would ensue, may by example more plainly appear, if
the Law should not be as we say. Put this Case: A Widower in the confines of
England toward Scotland, marries a Wife in a Parish Church publicly, in the
presence of a hundred Witnesses, and afterward they live together by the space
of a Year, and have a Child; at the years end, upon some coffeehouse) they
both being desirous to be rid the one of the other,) the Woman in England sueth
her Husband to be Divorced from him; pretending that at such time as he married
her, he had another Wife living, and produces Witnesses which prove that he
had married another Wife before he married her, and Paradventure make some
probable show, that that Wife was living, when he married his second Wife, who
in truth was dead before, as the Man could have plainly proved by twenty
Witnesses, if he had listed; notwithstanding, the Husband being willing to be
rid of his Wife, either would not plead that his former Wife was dead, or else
would not make any proof thereof. Whereupon the Woman obtains Sentence
against the Man, whereby the marriage between them two, by this collusion and
error, is pronounced void; from which Sentence there was no Appeal or
Provocation. Now within a Month after this Divorce, this Man goes into the
Confines of Scotland, not ten Miles from the place where he and his divorced
Wife formerly dwelt, and there marries another Woman, being ignorant of the
former Wife and collusory Divorce, and there Co-habiteth and dwells with her.
This Woman shortly after, understanding of the premises, and that she could
not be his lawful Wife, but lived in Adultery with him, desires before the
Judge in Scotland, under whose jurisdiction they both dwell, to be divorced
from him, and to be delivered from her adulterous living with him; and offers
to prove all the Premises most manifestly. Were it not now a most absurd and
abominable thing, that this Woman should have no remedy any where, but be
enforced to live still in Adultery with this Man; because the Sentence of
divorce was given by a Judge in England, pronouncing the Marriage between the
Man and his second Wife to be void; whereas it can be most manifestly and
apparently proved, that his first Wife was dead before his second Marriage; and
so the Sentence was given against the apparent truth? And what impeachment of
injustice can this be to the judge in England, before whom it was never proved,
That the Man's first Wife was dead, to have his Sentence reversed upon new
proofs made before the Judge in Scotland?

Now between the Lady's Case and this Case, there is no difference in truth of
matter and point of Law, only by reason of the multitude of the Witnesses, the
nearness of the time, and place when, and where these things in this case were
done. The truth thereof may more easily and readily be proved, than in the
Lady's cause it can; but if the truth in her Case be proved, though with more
difficulty, the Cases are all one.

If any Man shall yet doubt, whether this cause can be heard and determined by
the Ecclesiastical Courts in England, it is desired, That Sir John's Council,
considering the Marriage was made here in England, and the Lady and Sir John do
both dwell here, and by Law Sir John is not compellable to appear in any other
place than England for this matter, they would tell, before what Judge this
matter should be heard, and determined? For it is to be presumed, that when two
persons live in Adultery together, and so in continual sin, and the one of them
seeks redress, and to be freed from that sinful and adulterous life, no Man
will say, That he or she shall be compelled to live notoriously in Adultery
still, and have no Judge at all to separate them and remedy this enormity.

If further doubts be made how, where, or in what manner proof shall be made in
this Cause; it is said, that this Question does not concern the Question, What
Court or before what Judges, the cause shall be heard and determined; but to
this, it is answered, That the proofs shall be made in such manner, as they be
ordinarily in all other Cases; that is, by the Answers of the contrary Part
upon Oath, by such Witnesses as they can procure voluntarily to come before the
Judges here, from whence, or out of what Country soever they can procure them.
If they will not come voluntarily, then if they be within the jurisdiction of
the Judge, and the party producent think so good, he shall have Processes to
compel them to come before the Judge; if they dwell so far off as that it will
be too chargable to bring them before the Judge, then a Commission shall be
granted to some Commissioners to examine them near the places where they dwell,
and this if they dwell within the Judge's Jurisdiction; but if the Witnesses
dwell out of the Judge's Jurisdiction, in any other Place, Realm or Country,
Then the Judge of the Cause may direct a Commission requisitory to the Judges
of the Places or Countries where the Witnesses dwell, to entreat them to
examine the Witnesses remaining there by their Authority, and to send their
Depositions to the Judges of the Cause, also by the Records of other Courts; or
any other Instruments or Writings which may any ways further the Cause; these
being the ordinary and usual courses used for making of Proof in every Cause,
every Day, and will not be denied by any acquainted with the Proceedings in any
Ecclesiastical or Civil Courts.

Q. 1. Whether in the Tucin Process for the dissolution of the Marriage betwixt
Frichinono and Gallina, there appears so manifest a Collusion, that if the said
Process comes to be examined before our Court, the Sentence for the dissolution
grounded on that Process will be declared Void?

A. I am of Opinion in the Affirmative.

A Collusion, as all other Clandestine Acts and Agreements, is accounted by the
Law to be Difficilis Probationis, and therefore a direct Proof is not required,
but Conjectures and Presumption alone, arising not only from what has been
done, but from what was omitted, will pass for full and concludent Evidence, ut
per Felin. c. Praeterea n. 2. de Testibus and D. D. com omnes in c. Literis,
etc. tertio loco de praesumpt.

Now there does not appear throughout all the Acts, that the parsrea used any
diligence to defend the Cause. It Is true there was the formality of a Proctor,
but he seems rather to be appointed to substantiate Proceedings on the other
side, than to defend the Marriage on this; for that it appears by the Sentence,
there was nothing done on the part of Frichinono: the words are Visis Actis ex
part Gallinae tum distributis; Then it is Gallina that is at all the expense,
though she obtains in her Suit, and likewise gives an ample Reward of 100
Crowns in Gold to the Court for Testimonials.

Frichinono, though in his Answer upon Oath, he believes it to be a good
Marriage, and never knew of any such Aversion as is alleged; yet he adds, That
if it shall be so determined, he does not dissent, but that the Marriage may be
declared Void; and as he does nothing in this instance, so neither does he
Appeal. Now by these Omissions the Collusion appears, which Collusion renders
the Judgment Void, but especially against a third Party, and that it has been
thus often determined in like manner.

Monoch. Consil. 501. n. 8. and 688. n. 35. Sententia inter alios lata, etsi
certis in casibus nocet, Surdus de Alimentis. F. 9. Q. 42. n. 32.
id tamen intelligitur quando ille victus omnem adhibuit diligentiam ne
vinceretur.

Atque ita constare debet eum bona fide litem pertractasse. L. Si duo patroni.
F. De jurejur and. and ita communiter. Atqui nostro in casu non adhibuit, ut ne
vinceretur, quia non modo non contradixit, sed quodammodo consensit, in that he
declares he will not dissent. Praeterea (says he) culpa and negligentia ejus
detegitur, quia a sententia lata non appellavit, ut fieri solet, and jure
permissum est. Et accidit quod haec omissio Appellationis est tacita quaedam
jurium renunciatio, quae alteri quam renuncianti nocere minime potest, sicuti
in specie Baldus and Salicet in L. 2. C. quibus res jud. non nocet: and ibi,
Imo non appellans, cum facere id debuit, colludere cum adversario praesumitur.
L. Si servus plurium.. Sed si anteF. De Leg. and Decius Consil. 306. n. 4.
allique ibid.

This was in a Civil Cause, but the present Case is much stronger, being a
spiritual Cause, ubi vertitur periculum animae; and odious too, in that it is
for the dissolution of a Marriage, which in consequence may occasion the Sin of
Adultery; in which there might have been pleaded many things as exceptions to
the Persons of the Witnesses, and their sayings; But chiefly the Cohabitation
with all its Circumstances; and at last, the Fear that is pretended is but
Reverential. Why, what can be concluded from hence, but that by such Artifice
the Church is deceived, 1. Lator de sen. and re jud.
and the Law in that Case is, Quod quandocunque constiterit de errore,
retractabitur sententia. c. Fraternitas de frigidis and maleficiatis.

Q. 2. Whether the pretended proof of the Force and Fear, she suffered from her
Father in that Process, be not insufficient in Law?

A. I am of Opinion that the Proof is insufficient.

1. For that they are but single Witnesses, and nunquam probant etiamsi mill
jungentur; especially in Arduis, such as are Criminal, and Causes de matrimonio
dirimendo. But more especially where the presumption of Law is against it; as
in our Case, if we Consider the Co-habitation with all its Circumstances.

2. The matter deposed does not amount to such a Force as the Law takes notice
of. And it is chiefly ex auditu, either from her own Relation, or the Father's
or Brother's; as they heard her say, She had no Affection, That she would not
consent, That her Father would Force Her. Giacono Batta and Compeggio depose no
more; Rath. Quaglini and Monfort, say, He told them so, and she too, but
separate: Galliero heard Dominico chiding and threatening, but 'twas but the
Father told him, 'twas in the Business with Frichinono. None but Cornelius
swears to Knowledge, and he to an uncertain time. At Supper once she told her
Father, She would not consent, for that she had no Affection for him; Dominico
then rose and gave her two Blows; and when she was gone, he said, He would
strangle her if she would not have him. This is the substance of all the
Evidence, which certainly can make no concludent Proof, either of the Dislike,
or Force or Fear; perhaps there might words of this Nature fall from her, as
it is usual among young Women when they are Courted, either to their Familiars
or their other Lovers; for by speaking against those that are absent, they more
oblige him that is present.

But then there is this to be attended, and it is Argumentum a verisimili
Negative. Is it probable that in Case there had been such an Aversion as she
pleads, and such a clutter to force her Consent, that Frichinono should never
know it before or after, either from her self or some other? For so he does
directly swear; and yet it is apparent enough by what has been said, that he did
countenance the Divorce, and so seems to swear against himself.

3. If there is any stress laid upon that additional proof made by her
suppletory Oath, that is as weak as the rest, for that is not admissible by Law,
especially in dirimendo matrimonio, c. Mulieris. De Testibus, and gloss. ibm.
D. D. Coiter omnes in l. 3. etc. Admonendi. F. de Jurejurando, especially if we
consider all the Circumstances in this Case.

4. In case the Force and Fear that is pretended were in full Proof; yet it is
but Reverential, and the Force how soever it may be in other Cases which are
frequent in our Books; yet I find by the best Authorities, that the Law is
otherwise in case of Parents, especially where the Children are not Minors,
that a reverential Fear cannot dissolve a Marriage; for that it is not believed
that Parents would do any thing prejudicial to their Children, Cum praesumatur
Patrem recte consuluisse filiae: and the Civil Law allows but one cause of
Dissent: L. Sed ea quae, F. Despons. Tunc autem solum dissentiendi a Patre
licentia filiae conceditar; si indignum moribus vel turpem sponsum ei pater
eligat. There are some of Opinion that a Reverential Fear with other
Circumstances may, as if there be Minae and verbera in the Case, and that the
Parents are wont to put their threats in Execution; and this Opinion is founded
Supra c. in literis De spons. impuberum. I think a very weak Ground. The Case:
There was a Girl of 12 years old, was espoused to a Boy of 9 or 10. Quae de
voluntate parentum potius quam sua ad domum patris pueri adducta, ubi nolens
and invita, minis parentum, impulsa moram feeit per annum, and tandem regressa
est. The Judgment was, Cum puer nondum ad 14 Annum pervenit, nec ad eandem
carnaliter accessum habuit, she should have the Liberty to marry with another.
Now we are within but one Circumstance of that Case. The Woman here was nearer
30 than 12: It does not appear in Proof, nor is offered, that she was Forced by
threats to continue at Frichinono's House; it is clear, that Frichinono was
nearer 40 than 14, and that it is very probable he had the carnal knowledge of
her, for she had a Child, which with the voluntary Co-habition for near 2
Years, with liberty of going whither she pleased, together with what is in
proof by her own Witnesses, of her Visits to Persons of Quality, and
Frichinono's Absence in France for about half a Year, and no protestation
before or after. Bellus Consil. 65. is clear in this very Case.

Q. 3. Supposing the said Marriage were really made through Force and Fear, yet
being ratified by a Co-habitation of almost 2 Years, and issue, whether the
Council of Trent does Authorize its dissolution?

A. I am of Opinion in the Negative, for that the Council has prescribed a
Probatory Form for Marriage, enacting, That all Marriages shall be void that
are not celebrated in the Presence of the Parochus and 2 Witnesses. Now some
are of Opinion that the old Law is corrected by this, not only in the Addition
of the Parochus, but in a far greater matter, collecting from hence, that a
contract, so celebrated, but being void by reason of Force, though it were
ratified by a subsequent Co-habitation with issue, which might purge the Force
by a tacit consent; yet because it was not de novo, in the form of the Council
celebrated before the Parochus, and two Witnesses as it was at first, Tom. 1.
part. 2. c. 3.. 6. Cons. 170. l. 4.
it cannot pass into a substantial Marriage. But I do conceive this inference
cannot be justified out of the Council.

1. Because I do not find it asserted by any modern Authorities, such as have
wrote since the Council of Trent, who otherwise are tenacious enough of the
Decrees of that Council; such as Covaruvias, Parisius, Christinaeus and Bellus,
(who was Prothonotory of the Apostolic Sea, and Dean of the Roe of Avignion,
Anno 1620.) but that they all agree, that a subsequent Co-habitation where the
cause of Fear does not remain, induces a Tacit Consent and establishes a
Marriage, which might otherwise have been void. Now if the form of the Council
had been necessary a second time, these could never have been silent in it.

2. Because the Council does not expressly command it in this Case, and then the
vulgar Rule is, Quod a jure veteri recedere non debemus, nisi quatenus jus
vetus expressim est correctum. Neither is there a parity of Reason with the
desponsatione Impuberum, which was adjudged decis. noviss. part. 4. f. 69. for
those are but sponsalia de futuro, though the words are de praesenti.

3. Reason suggests otherwise. It Is certain that Consent is an act of the Will,
and does consist in the Mind, and can appear to us to be voluntary, by no other
means than as Force and Fear is proved, and that by conjectures; now these
conjectures must be collected either from Words or Acts, such as may signify
and give a moral certainty of the internal willingness of the Party, perhaps
more than Words; for so it was adjudged of him that said he would not do the
Will of his Father, but yet did it; if therefore the subsequent Acts be of the
like Nature, and pursuant to the principal, we always judge that they have
respect to it as the Original, and serve to Expound and Confirm it, nam
ratihabitio retrotrahitur and mandato aequiparatur. Now it is evident in this
very Case, here was a consent of Gallina solemnly expressed in the Form of the
Council; whether 'twas voluntary and really her Mind or no, God and her own
Conscience only can tell; but there does not appear any thing in Proof, to the
contrary at the time of the Marriage.

And therefore admit, that before and after the Solemnity, she might say that
her consent was not free, yet she did not say so at the time. And in Truth and
Reality, notwithstanding these common. Pretenses, it might then be free; and
Law and Reason presume it was so, from those subsequent Acts that were in
pursuance of it, such as was the Co-habitation in this Case with all its
Circumstances; for those subsequent Acts do not create a new Marriage instead
of that which was Null and Void for want of free consent; but ratify only and
confirm the first, or rather give us an assurance and demonstration that that
was a free internal consent, which was expressed in the Form of the Council;
notwithstanding those specious Pretenses to the contrary, whereby she would
impose upon us, and according to which we (that can see no further than
outwardly) ought to have judged, in Case there had not been these subsequent
Acts; and therefore undoubtedly there needs not a second Celebration in the
Form of the Council, when by th^se Acts we are assured that she gave her free
consent in the First. Ex coitu matrimonium praesumi, si prius consensus verbis
expressis, sed propter causam aliquam vel impedimentum humani juris nullum
praecesserat: satis senim tacit aliquo sufficient signo novum consensum
praestari, says Parisius, who was a Cardinal since the Council of Trent.

Q. 4. In Case the Council does authorize its Dissolution, whether it does
therein act contrary to the Law of God?

A. I Will leave this question to the Divines, but if that be Law, I have said
before, then I think God has joined them.

Q. 5. Supposing the Council of Trent does authorize its dissolution, and that
it does not act contrary to the Law of God therein; whether according to the
due and usual proceeding of our Courts and the Laws of our Nation, where the
Council of Trent was never received, we shall, or ought to allow of such a
proceeding upon the account of a community of Rights, or any other account
whatsoever?

A. I am of Opinion in the Negative.

For however it may be in Civil Causes in point of Commerce or the like; the
Reason is not the same in Criminal or Matrimonial, ubi vertitur periculum
animae, which may arise from the difference in Laws and Religions; for 'twould
be strange Doctrine to assert, That a Subject of England ought to be executed
here upon a Sentence of Heresy in Rome; and as strange to adjudge the
dissolution of a Marriage here, because it was not celebrated according to the
form of the Council of Trent: or rather as this Case is, To force a Subject of
England to Cohabit with a Woman, who in the construction of the Laws in
England, is another Man's Wife; for that is done by putting in Execution here a
Sentence of Divorce, which was given at Turin upon the Council of Trent, (which
Council was never promulgated in England,) and when the Law is in Terms
otherwise, Hipol. de Morsil. singular. 138. n. 2. Judex, says he, unius
territorij mandat Executioni sententiam judicis alterius territorij, etc. Tene
tamen mente quod istud procedit quando Judex pronunciavit secundum leges, non
autem statuta ipsius loci; tum alter judex non tenetur. And therefore says,
Jason, In executivis debent attendi statuta illius loci in quo fit executio,
and non alterius, secundum Bart. and omnes. And further says Angelus l. Si ut
proponi, c. De execut. rei Jud. Talis Judex alterius territorij potest de
iniquitate talis sententiae cognoscere, and si viderit esse iniquam, aut de hoc
vehementer suspicaretur, non debet illam executioni mandare. And this is the
common Opinion.

William Oldys.

I have read and considered the Answers given by Dr. Oldys to the foregoing
Questions; and do agree with him in Opinion.

Richard Lloyd.

(...) DE JVDAEIS in Reipublica Christiana tolerandis, vel de novo admittendis.

THE CASE OF THE JEWS.
TO this Question in short I say, 1. That in Scripture Romans 2. 28, 29.
we meet with a Jew in a Double Notion. 1. (...), and in Cord. 2. (...), and
in Carne.


2. For the First, they are called, Circumcisio Spiritualis and in Spiritu; The
Second, Circumcisio Carnalis and in Litera. De Judaeis Cord non quaeritur, For
so every true Christian is (in Scripture) called a Jew. Rev. 3. 9. and Rev. 2.
9.

3. For the Second Sort of Jews in Carne, they are, 1. Natione tantum Judaei.
2. Religione tantum. 3. Natione and Religione simul.


Now the Question is only of a Jew in Religion (of what Nation soever) or of
him who is a Jew, Natione and Religione simul. Whether such may be admitted in
a Christian Commonwealth?

In Answer to this Question, I say, That the Toleration or Admission of such
Jews may be considered in a Twofold Relation. 1. Respectu Reipub. 2. Respectu
Ecclesiae.


1. In Respect of the Commonwealth, there are only Two Things properly
considerable to a Statesman, which may make their Toleration or Admission Legal
or Illegal, Convenient or Inconvenient, according to the Nature and Condition
of those Politic Considerations.

Now these Considerations are,

1. Whether there be any Law of the State against such Jews being here: for if
there be, then stante Lege, they cannot legally be admitted. And in England
there is such a Statut. de Judaismo. Termino Hillarii. An. 18. Edvardi 1. And
they were expelled An. 1291. Th. Stubbs. de Pontif. Ebora. censib. in Joh.
Romano.
Law; but that Law taken away (and as the Supreme Power made it for good
Reasons (as they conceited) then, so the Supreme Power may (possibly for better
Reasons) alter it now; the State may readmit them Lege non obstante. So that if
the Supreme Power abrogate that Law, then it is manifest there is no Legal
Impediment (as to the Civil Law of this Nation) but that they may (if it seem
good to the Wisdom of the State) be readmited*

The Second Consideration (as to the Political Part of this Question) is the
Damage or Benefit, the Conveniences or Inconveniences which may accrue to the
State by their Admission or Rejection.

Now as to this I shall add,

1. That seeing the Law of Nature and Nations tell us, Cicero de legib. Lib. 1.
that Salus Populi suprema Lex est, if it appear to his Highness and his
Council (who only are Judges of this and not the People) that the Commonweal
will be advantaged by their Admission, then (no doubt) they may and ought to be
admitted.

2. If otherwise, they are not.

Now whether it be for the Benefit and Secular Advantage of the Commonwealth
to admit the Jews, I shall not Dispute, but leave it to the Prudence of the
State, only I shall observe here Two Things.

1. That whilst the Jews lived in England it was a vast Benefit to the Crown. I
shall give one Instance taken by my Lord My Lord Cook Institut. part. 2. page
506. De Statuto Judaismi.
Cook out of the Rot. Patent. An. 3. Edvardi 1. m. 14. 17. 26. Midleton Reddit
Computum.
Records. That from December 17. Anno 50. Hen. 3. till Shrovetide. 2. Edvardi
1. which was about Seven Years, the Crown had 420000 l. 15 s. 6 d. De Exitibus
Judaeorum. The Ounce of Silver was then but xx d. and now it is more than thrice
so much, so that (as Money goes now) The Crown had of the Jews in Seven Years,
above 1260000 l. such a Sum now might save Contributions.

2. It appears by our Story that the Jews (at their Expulsion, and many times
before) were not only Videsiis Matthew. Paris ad Ann. 1239. in Hen. 3. page 489.
and ad Annum 1254. page 887. Walsingham Hypodig. Neustriae, ad Ann. 1289. page
476.
Unchristianly, but Inhumanely and Barbarously used; and then seeing
Commonwealths and Societies never die (though particular Persons do) it may be
a Query whether the Commonwealth of England now are not bound in Conscience
and Equity to make some Satisfaction by real Kindness and Civility to the
present Jews for the And as in England, so elsewhere the Jews (though bad
enough) were falsely accused, and upon that Banished. Vt eorum bona fisco
vindicarentur. So they were expelled out of Spain by Ferdinand, and Emanuel
King of Portugal, out of France by Dagobert and Philip the Long. Bodinus de
Repub. lib. 3. page 549. Edit. Francof. 1594.
Injuries the same Commonwealth did to their Progenitors then?

Dub. The main Objection against them, why they were banished, was their Usury,
and the Mischief that came thereupon, as appears by the Preamble of the
Statutum de Judaismo Term. Hillarii 18. Ed. 1.
Statute by which they were banished.

To this I say, these things,

Sol. 1. That Usury is tolerated in all Christian Common-weals (even in ours)
and therefore to expel Jews for that which is tolerated in Christians, is
irrational.

2. The State may limit their modus usurae, not to exceed that allowed by
Statutes, and then no more Fault in them, then us.

3. If you consider the Tolleration and Readmission of the Jews, respectu
Ecclesiae, there are only Three things which may rationally hinder a Toleration
and Readmission of them, into a Christian Commonwealth, as Christian.

1. Inhonestum. 2. Incommodum. 3. Scandalum.
1. Inhonestum. I conceive, that for Jews to live among Christians, or
Christians amongst Jews is not Inhonestum, or Malum per se, as being against no
Law of God, natural or positive, either that of Nature or Scripture. Because,

1. Our Savior and his Apostles after him, lived amongst Jews unconverted,
which they would not have done had it been unlawful.

2. The Apostles and primitive Christians lived amongst Pagan Idolaters, who
were far worse than Jews, yet made no Scruple of Conscience, nay the Apostles
approving it: For the Apostle commands the Christians to live so, that they
might gain the Pagans to the Faith by their Pious and Christian 1 Pet. 3. 1.
and 1 Pet. 2. 12.
Conversation: and therefore they supposed they might live amongst them; for it
were not Sense to suppose, that they could gain those by their Conversation,
with whom they might not converse.

3. It is certain and an undoubted Principle, That Domium non fundatur in
gratia, and therefore a Jew, nay a Turk, or Pagan has a just Right and
Propriety in their Estates, as well as Christians. And having so when some of
the Jews were turned Christians, they were neither bound to quit their
Inheritance or Country, to avoid the company and conversation of those Jews,
who were not, nor when they were multiplied so, that the major and ruling Part
were Christians, could they (by any Law of God or Man) without manifest
Injustice, disquiet the Unconverted Jews in their Possessions, or banish them
from their Inheritance.

4. In the Jewish Church (by Gods express approbation and command) their Gezim
Advenae, Deuteronomy. 14. 29. Exodus 20. etc.
(...) (whom the 70 Interpreters, and Hellenists call (...) and (...), from the
Caldee Giorim) even those which they called Proselyti Portae, who were neither
circumcised, nor submitted to the Law of Moses, were permitted to live; and God
expressly commands, that the Jews should use them kindly; provided that they
abstained from Idolatry and worshiped the God of Israel: Now if these might
live in the Jews Church though not circumcised, nor submitting to Moses's Law,
why may not Jews live in the Christian Church, though they be not baptized and
submit not to the Gospel?

5. The Practice of the Christian World in all Ages, and the Leg. ultima Cod.
Judaeis. and ibid. Leg. nullus 14.
Imperial and Canon Extra de Judaeis. Can. sicut, etc. Vide Bodinum de Repub.
1. 3. p. 546. Edit. Francof. 1594. Et Auctores ibi in margin allegatos.
Laws approve the living of Jews amongst Christians, and why it should be
thought unlawful amongst us, I know not.

6. Our Merchants live and converse with Jews (nay Turks and Pagans) abroad,
and therefore why may not Jews converse with them here? seeing that there is
less Danger that a few Jews should live amongst many Christians here, than that
a few Christians should live amongst many Jews, Turks and Pagans abroad.

2. Incommodum. The Second thing proposed (which might render the admission or
toleration of the Jews unreasonable) was the Incommodum, the Harm or
Disadvantages which might come to Christianity or Christians by their company
and conversation: For if indeed the admission, and tolleration of them were
disadvantageous to the Gospel, and really tended to the abolition or diminution
of the true Faith, or the subversion and hinderance of Christianity, it were
certainly neither pious in the supreme Magistrate, nor prudent to admit them;
but he ought (in this case) rather to expel them if they were here, than
readmit them, now they are away: seeing he is, Non solum Reipublicae, sed and
Ecclesiae Nutricius, qui non solum Civilia, sed and Sacra procuraret, being
Custos utriusque Tabulae; a sacred Obligation lying upon him by the Law of
Nature and Nations, to be vigilent and cautious; Ne quid detrimenti capiat
Ecclesiae. But on the other side, if the civil State may be advantaged by their
admission, and the Church secured against such pretended Danger, then ( ex hoc
capite) there is no Reason but they may be admitted.

And that there is no such Danger which might rationally hinder their
admission, I am induced to believe,

1. Because, if there had been any such Danger, the Apostles would never (which
yet they As above, 1 Pet. 3. 1. and 1 Pet. 2. 12.
did) have permitted and approved the Christians living and conversing amongst
the Jews.

2. It has been the constant and continued Practice of Christendom, ever since
to this Day, to admit Jews to live amongst Christians, and why we should
pretend more Danger (in this particular) than either the Apostles or the
Christian World ever since, I understand not.

3. It Is true they have been Banished out of Thom. Stubbs. ubi supra in Johan.
Romano Eboracensi Archiepiscopo. Anno 1291.
England and Ad Annum Christi 1252. page 861.
France, and some other Countries, Vide Statutum de Judaismo. Anno 18. Edvardi
1.
but it was not for matter of Faith but Fact, not for their Religion, that they
were Religione Jud aei but for other crimes, and enormities, as their
Blaspheming Jesus Christ, Crucifying Children in opprobrium Christi, Vilating
the Pacta conventa and Capitulations of their Admission, etc. as plainly
appears by the Statut. de Judaismo Term. Hillar. Anno 18. Ed. 1.
Preamble to the Statute of their Banishment and by our Vid. Chronicon Joh.
Brompton in Hen. 1. page 1005. lin. 53. Et in Hen. 2. page 1043. and page 1050.
lin. 38. Hen. de Kinghton de Eventibus Angliae: lib. 2. page 2394. lin. 17. and
lib. 3. page 2462. lin. 58. Et ibid. lib. 3. cap. 1. page 2466. lin. 16.
Historians generally.

3. It is the Judgment of an eminent Divine both for Learning and Moderation,
that there is not much Danger that the Jews will subvert any or much endeavor
the seducing of others to their Religion, (and he has it out of Osiander and
Capito, two Persons of eminent Note in their time) and he gives his Reason,
Philip. Melanchon. Epist. 68. ( In Edit. Corn. B.) page 75. Epistolar. lib. 1.
Quia Judaei antiquitus, etiam stante eorum Politia ante Christum natum, si
Civitatem aliquam, aut Populum bello devicissent, legem Mosaicum ipsis non
imponebant, ( legem enim illam ad Gentes pertinere non put abant) sed solum ut
relictis Idolis, Deum unum colerent, and praecepta Noachida observarent. And
indeed as we find not in any Story that the Jews have been active to gain
Proselytes, so we do not find any considerable number of Men in any Country
which have apostated from Christianity to Judaism. And the Reason of this may
be (besides the senceless irrationality of their Worship and Pretenses for it,
and the Odium that lies upon them universally as being hateful to the Christian
World) because they are a dispersed and vagabond People, Slaves wherever they
come, obnoxious to the Will of those Princes and States in whose Territories
they live; and so want all those temporal advantages, which might allure
Proselytes, having no Jurisdiction or Authority any where to Protect
themselves, much less others who shall desert their own Profession to embrace
theirs: So that in all likelihood (considering the Evidence of Truth, and the
very many Advantages which the Professors of Christianity have above that of
Judaism) by the Readmission of the Jews, the cohabitation and conversation
amongst Christians, they may be sooner converted to Christianity, (God blessing
the means) than Christians seduced into Judaism.

And something we have to this purpose in Sacred and Profane Story. In the
time of Queen Annum Mundi 3495. Ante Christum. 509. Vide Ja. Vsserii Armach.
Annals Mundi. Aetat. 6. Ad Ann. Mundi. 3495. page 163.
Esther, the Jews by (her means) had infinite Honor and Privileges in the
Persian Monarchy, gained for them (by her) of Ahassuerus ( Darius Hystaspis was
the Man) her Husband, Adeo ut musti ex populis terrae facti sunt Judaei, says
the Ester 8. 17.
Text, and the Reason is rendered, Quoniam pavor Judaeorum super eos erat. It
was their great Privilege, and secular Advantages which made many turn Jews;
But now, as their Religion is absolutely out of Date, and their Misery more, so
the Fear that any should turn to them is less. Nor do I find that when that
Jewish Commonwealth was in its Glory, they compelled any to be of their
Religion, no not those who lived amongst them and Vide quae habet Grotius de
jure Belli. lib. 1. cap. 1. s. 16. p. 7. Ex Deuteronomy. 33. 4. and Levit. 22. 25.
were uncircumcised (for such did live quietly, and were permitted so to do)
amongst them. Nor only so but they were very scrupulous in admitting those
Proselytes which did voluntarily come unto them. As will fully appear by a
large Discourse of Mr. Jo. Seldom De jure naturali, and Grotium apud Hebraeos.
lib. 2. cap. 2. and ibid. cap. 4.
Selden's to that purpose. And though we find in Joseph. Originum lib. 13. cap.
17.
Josephus, that Johannes Hyrcanus commanded the whole Nation of the Idumeans to
be circumcised, yet that was because they were of the Seed of Abraham, and so
(as his (...) and Posterity) bound to be circumcised. Whence it is that even
Geograph. l. 16.
Strabo, (...) 60. (...).
Stephanus and Lib. De differentia Bon.
Ammonius do reckon them for Jews. But if it should be otherwise with the Jews
now, if they should be sollicitous and busy to seduce any to their Religion,
the Prudence of the State may by the Capitulations of their Admission, tie them
to the contrary, and make such Seduction (if voluntarily attempted by them) a
Forfeiture for their Privileges, and so secure the Public as to that
particular.

3. Scandalum. For the third thing which might make the admission of the Jews
unlawful, to wit, Scandal; I conceive the case will be more plain than the
former: For though I know not what Scandal some may take (who are hardly
pleased with any thing the Public Magistrates do, which suits not with their
ends and interest) yet I do not see any colorable Reason; why the Readmission
of the Jews into this Nation, should by any sober and intelligent Person, be
thought Scandalous, ( Scandalum datum I mean) or be a ground of just Offense to
any.

And that this may appear, I reason thus, If the supreme Magistrate by
readmiting the Jews, give a just ground of Scandal, then it is either to
Foreign States abroad, or their own Subjects at home, but neither of both can
rationally be said.

1. Not to Foreign States abroad, for there neither is, nor hardly ever was any
Kingdom or State in Christendom, which sometime or other has not admitted
them: Sure I am most do now, and certainly such States have no just Reason (nor
can have) to condemn us, for that which they do themselves.

2. Not to their own Subjects at home; and that this may more distinctly
appear, I consider

1. That in relation to humane actions to be done, or not to be done by us, all
things in the World are, and (of necessity) must be ranked in one of these
three Particulars;

1. Some things are absolutely good.

2. Some are absolutely bad.

3. Some are Res mediae, and indifferent.

1. Things absolutely good are such, as are Sub praecepto divino affirmativo, (
naturali vel positivo) and these of necessity ( necessitas praecepti) is meant,
must be done, and without sin cannot be left undone by any Man in the World,
(no one rational individuum excepted; For I speak not of Children or natural
Fools who want the use of Reason) if they be juris naturalis: nor if they be
juris positivi, can they (without sin) be left undone by any Man to whom that
positive divine Law is sufficiently revealed. Now I take it for manifest, and a
truth (which I believe) will be granted by all sober Men; that neither the
admission or exclusion of the Jews is absolutely good, or sub praecepto divino
affirmativo ( naturali vel positivo.) For

1. If their admission were a thing absolutely good, and sub praecepto divino,
then all those who admit them not (and much more they who eject them) would be
found guilty of a manifest violation of the Law of God, which no Man ever said,
nor with any congruity of Reason can say.

2. If their exclusion were absolutely good and sub praecepto divino, then all
those who have admitted them (and the Christian Churches in all ages, even
those of the Apostles themselves have done so) will be found guilty of a great
sin, and manifest transgression of the Law of God, and then the primitive
Christians, and the Apostles themselves must of necessity be guilty of this
Crime, which neither is, nor can justly be affirmed.

2. Things absolutely bad are such as are sub praecepto Dei negativo naturali
vel positivo, forbidden by God, and and so absolutely unlawful for us; and that
the admission of the Jews into this, or any other Christian Commonwealth
should be thus unlawful, and so malum per se, I believe is not, and I am sure
cannot with any congruity be asserted.

1. Because there appears no Law of God (natural or positive) against such
admission, he that thinks otherwise let him show it.

2. If admission of the Jews into a Christian Commonwealth, if cohabitation
and an outward and civil conversation with them, had been an evil of this high
nature; then, as is before said, the primitive Christians and Apostles, nay our
blessed Savior himself, which is impious to think, had been guilty of it; who
all their lives permitted, and practice such communion and outward conversation
with the unconverted Jews.

3. Well then, let the admission and exclusion of the Jews be (as most
(manifestly they are) amongst the (...), the Res mediae, those things we call
indifferent, and in themselves neither morally good or bad, but such as may be
either, according as they are clothed with several circumstances; Then I say
if the supreme Magistrate, (who is trusted with the managing of public
affairs) think it fit to admit the Jews into this Commonweal (and of the
conveniences and inconveniences of their admission, he only (and not the
People) is to judge) and by a Law authorize their admission; then (as to the
Subjects) their admission is no more a thing of indifferency, but necessity: No
more matter of Offense or Scandal, but Obedience; such as we who are Subjects,
should not dispute, but obey. So that if any Man take offense, or be
scandalized at it, it will certainly be Scandalum acceptum non datum. And so
not the fault of the Magistrate but of the Men (if there be any such) who are
irrationally offended. And this will manifestly appear, if we consider,

1. The Magistrate in reference to the People under him.

2. The People in reference to the Magistrate, and in reference one to another.

1. For the Magistrate, as he stands in Relation to the People, it is certain
(by virtue of that supreme authority with which he is entrusted) he is to judge
what things are convenient or inconvenient for the People.

2 When after serious Debate and mature Deliberation, (all circumstances
considered) he shall really think and judge that this, (which before was
indifferent and no way enjoined) is hic and nunc best for the public good,
then he justly may (by his legislative Power) enjoin the doing of it, and by a
positive Law bring a just Obligation upon the Subjects to do accordingly.

3. Nor is this all, he not only may, but is bound, and (if he will do his
Duty) must do so, and that by the Law of Nature, and from the very first
Principles of his Duty, and that Magistracy he is entrusted with, for it being
certain, that Salus Populi suprema Lex est, and by his great and sacred Office,
an Obligation lies upon him (by all honorable and honest means) to procure
their good, so far as in him lies: if he see such things, (though at present
indifferent) would much conduce to the Public Good, if they were enjoined, and
obeyed accordingly. I say, in this case, if he do not command them, he neglects
his Duty, and violates that sacred Obligation which binds him to it: So in this
present case, if (all things maturely considered) he impartially judge the
readmission of the Jews will really and indeed tend to the good of the Public,
he is bound to readmit them, and he should be wanting to his Duty in promoting
the Interest and Good of the Commonweal, if he should do otherwise.

4. Nor is it possible that any Scandal or Offense taken by the People, should
be of that moment as to hinder him. And the Reason of this is manifest, because
the Obligation of doing his Duty, and procuring the Peoples Good, lies so
indispensably upon him, that he must not omit it, though they be never so much
displeased, seeing (if it must be so that one party will be displeased) it is
far more rational to hazard the Peoples, than Gods Displeasure: For if he do
it, and the People be scandalized and offended at it, that Scandal is only
Scandalum acceptum, groundless, and (on his part) altogether causless. But if
he neglect his Duty and do it not, God is really and justly offended. So that
in short, (if after all things considered) the Wisdom of the State shall judge
it convenient and beneficial for the Public to readmit the Jews, (and we are
bound in Charity to think that unless they judge so they will not admit them)
then they are in Duty bound to do it, notwithstanding any Displeasure (or
pretended Scandal) which their Subjects will or can conceive against them for
so doing: It being evident that no supreme Magistrate is to neglect the doing
of his Duty, or using his just and lawful Liberty and Authority in putting that
in Execution, which upon impartial judgment and deliberation, he conceives
convenient for the good of the Commonwealth. It is I (confess) to be wished,
and heartily prayed for, that all Men would (with a charitable Opinion and
obsequious Obedience) rest satisfied with the deliberate resolutions and
constitutions of their Magistrates really intended for the public Good; and
(no doubt) all sober and moderate Persons will do so. But this is rather to be
wished than hoped for. The understandings, aims, and interest of Men being so
different, that supreme Governors in no Age or Country did ever satisfy all,
no not with their best Actions, and therefore it is not to be expected now. But
this pretended Scandal and Dissatisfaction of some, should (in reason) be no
Remora or Hinderance to the Magistrate to go on, and according to his best
Skill and Judgment, promote the Good of all. And if this be not admitted, it
will unhinge and enervate all Governments whatsoever: For the Command of no
King ever pleased all his Subjects, of no General all his Soldiers, of no
Fatherof a Family all his Children and Servants, of no Schoolmaster all his
Scholars: and yet this never did (or indeed should) hinder any King, or
General, or Father, or Master to give Commands, such as in prudence they
thought convenient, and being given, to put them in Execution. The truth is, it
were impossible for any Government to subsist if supreme Magistrates should
make no Law, or civil Sanction, till all their Subjects were satisfied.

5. And as evident Reasons may, (in this Case of readmitting the Jews) be drawn
for the Liberty, which (by the Law of Nature and Scripture) is inherent in the
supreme Magistrate's, and his just Authority to determine of indifferent
things, to prove that he gives no Scandal in case he use that Liberty and
Authority in readmitting, and giving Privileges, (such as in prodence he shall
think fit) to the Jews: So there may be further Reasons (drawn for the same
purpose) from the consideration of the Subjects in relation to the supreme
Magistrate. For as they stand in this Relation, there lies an Obligation upon
them, by the Law of God and Nature, to yield cheerful and willing Obedience to
all the just Commands of their Governors, (as this undoubtedly is) and then
where Obedience is morally due, Offense and Scandal is in vain pretended. It is
irrational and irreligious too to pretend Scandal for the neglect of my Duty,
and so evidently disobey God, and my Governors, upon pretense, I am afraid so
to do. But enough (if not too much) of this. He that would have more Reasons
from the Nature of Scandal may find enough in the best Vide Dr. Saunderson's
Sermon on Romans 14. 3. Conc. 2. Ad Clerum.
Casuist of our Nation, (and may be of any Nation else) where although his
Discourse in Hypothesi, be applied to other particulars, and a different Case
of Scandal from this now in question, yet what he has said there in Thesi, is
as applicable to this, as that.

6. Now concerning this Toleration of the Jews, we may further enquire;

1. What Power is to give this Toleration.

2. In what things they are to give it.

3. For what Reasons and Motives they are to do it.

4. How far, and with what Restrictions and Limitations this should be done.

For the First, notwithstanding what Tho. Erastus in Explicatione gravissimae
Questionis, etc. Pes. clavii Anno 1589.
Erastus with his Vide Tho. Hobbs in his Leviath. Part 2.
Followers, and Joh. Seldenus libris de Synedriis Judaeorum.
Seldom of late have said, I believe it to be a manifest Truth, That in every
Christian Nation there are (or should be) two divine distinct Powers.

1. Sacred or Spiritual. 2. Civil or Temporal.
In both which Powers we may consider.

1. Principium a quo, the Principle and immediate Cause from whence they flow,
and from whence they are derived to Men, and thus the Temporal Power is
immediately from God, as he is the great Maker and Monarch of the World, by
whom Kings reign, who communicates his Power and Name to Magistrates, so that
they are not only ( Romans 13.) (...), his Delegates and Substitutes, but Vide
Exodus 22. 28. Joh. 10. 34.
(...) Gods too ( Psalm. 82.) I have said ye are Gods. 2. The Spiritual Power is
from Christ, as Head of his Church, his Father gave him, Matthew. 28. 18.
All Power in Heaven and earth, and some of that Power he has communicated to
his Apostles and Ministers, who are his Ambassadors, Pastors of his People, and
Stewards of his Household.

2. Subjectum in quo, the civil Power in the civil Magistrate, the sacred Power
in the Ministers.

3. Finis in quem tendunt, the one being ordained to procure our temporal Good
here, the other our eternal Good hereafter.

This premised, I say, That the Jews neither desiring, nor intending to be
Members of our Church, but only of our Commonweal; their Admission or
Exclusion depends only on the Civil Power. For the Command of the Commonweal
(as it is a civil Society) being solely in the Civil Magistrate, to him only it
will belong to judge whether it be fit to admit or exclude them, and to do
accordingly. It Is true the Kingdom of Christ (his Church) is not a Temporal but
a Spiritual Society, which he rules inwardly by his Spirit, outwardly by his
Ministers (Bishops, or Presbiters, or Pastors, call them what you will) who are
his Ambassadors and Stewards, who have a Law to rule by the Gospel of Jesus
Christ. To these he has committed the Keys of his House and Kingdom, so that
they (and they only) can admit Men into it by Baptism, and exclude by
Excomunication. The end and use of a Key, being to open and shut, and these
Keys committed to them, they only have the use of them, and according to the
best of their Skill, are to use them accordingly. On which Principles it
follows, that the Jews neither being Christians, nor (for ought appears)
intending to be, their Admission or Exclusion no way belongs to the Spiritual
Governors of the Church; their sacred Jurisdiction being only over the
Household of Faith (the Christian Church) of which the Jews are no part, and
therefore not under that Jurisdiction. So that I doubt not but the Admission or
Nonadmission of the Jews belongs only to the Civil, not Sacred Power.

2. The Second Query is, In what things they are to be tolerated? And to this I
say,

1. That there is an Antithesis and Opposition between Approbation and
Toleration of any thing; so that (in propriety of Speech) we approve good,
tolerate bad things. And then when the Question is about the Toleration of the
Jews, we suppose that there is some evil in them, which for some Reasons, some
Ends and Purposes is to be tolerated in our Christian Commonweal.

2. That evils may be of two sorts, 1. Such as are against the Law of Nature.
2. Such as are against positive Law; that we usually call the Law of Nature,
this the Law of Scripture, both Divine. For in this Case the humane Laws come
not in Consideration: For if it please the supreme Magistrate, to admit them by
a Law, then all humane Laws of this Commonweal (if there be any against them)
are ipso facto null, and abrogated: And so their Admission (the will of the
State legally declared for it, being supposed) cannot possibly be against any
positive Law of this Commonweal.

2. Now then for the first sort of evils, such as are against the Law of
Nature, and are intrinsece and ex natura suamala, these no Magistrate may
tolerate. The Obligation of the Law of Nature is so inviolable, that God
himself in all the Old Testament never gave any Vide Grotium de Jure Belli.
lib. 1. cap. 1. 5. 10. etc. Suarez Aquinatem. Pet. a sancto Joseph. etc. De
legibus.
Dispensation of that Law, nor Vide Grotium ubi supra. 17. p. 9. ubi contrarium
non sine errore asserere videt?
Toleration of any sins against it, much less can the Civil Magistrate who is
but his Vicegerent and Deputy; and neither has (nor can have) any Commission
to do more than his great Lord and Master. It Is true, the Magistrate is (...),
Gods Minister and Vicegerent, and so Custos utriksque tabulae, armed with the
Sword of Justice, which he must not bear in vain, but is bound by his place,
and that sacred calling he carries to be (...), Romans 13.
a Revenger of such Sins, and a Punisher of Malefactors against the Law of
Nature.

And that we may apply this in Hypothesi, to our particular Case of the
Readmission of the Jews, I say,

1. That in the Vide Hug. Grotium de Jure Belli. lib. 1. cap. 1.. 17.
Law of Moses and the whole old Testament, there is nothing contained to the
contrary, or repugnant to the Law of Nature.

2. That this Law of Moses, and the old Testament, is (or at least should be)
the adequate rule of the Jews Religion; and therefore so long as they keep to
this, there is no thing in their Religion which is intolerable on this
Account, as being against the Law of Nature.

3. But if there be any thing in their Religion (as now they profess it)
superinduced by Error or Custom, which is indeed against Jus natural, that
should not be tolerated in this, or any Christian Commonwealth. And if the
Christian Magistrate tie them to abstain from all Idolatry, Blasphemy, Murder,
Adultery, and all such other Sins against the Light and Law of Nature, he ties
them to no more, then they (in their flourishing State of their Commonweal)
tied others. For though they did not require of their Proselytes (those of the
Gate I mean) to submit to the positive Law, and Precepts of Videsis Joh. Seldom
de Jure naturali and Gentium apud Hebraeos. lib. 2. cap. 2. page 138, 139. and
ex R. Mose Maimoinde and R. Mos. Mikotzi.
Moses, yet they did universally require of them to abstain from Blasphemy,
Idolatry, and all natural Injustice, as is manifest in Josephus, the Sacred
Text it self and their Rabbinical and Talmutical Writers. So that if Christian
Magistrates do (as indeed they should) deny any Toleration of such unnatural
Enormities, they have Reason to rest satisfied with it, seeing no more is
denied to them in ours, than they denied to others in their Commonwealth.

Dub. But it must be said, Usury, Boligamy, and the Marriage of a Sister, was
(by the Law of Moses) permitted to them, and therefore the Practicers of some
things against the Law of Nature.

Sol. To this I say, 1. That it is true, that Aristotle and diverse other
Philosophers, conceived Usury to be against the Law of Nature; and many Divines
of eminent Note have thought (and published their Opinions to the World) That
both Usury and Poligamy and marrying a Sister, are so too. Vid. Aquinat.
Quaest. 94. Art. 5. Commentat. ibid. Vasquez. in 1. 2. Disp. 150. Fran. Suarez.
de Legibus. lib. 2. c. 5, 6. etc. Fran. Duacenum ad Tit. de Just. and Jure c.
5. Hug. Donellum. Comment. de Jure Civili c. 6, 7. Ludov. Melinaeum de
Justitia. Tract. 1. Disp. 4. page 10.
Yet 2. This I conceive to be a manifest Mistake, for it will evidently and
undeniably follow, God permitted Usury and Polygamy and marrying a Sister to
the Jews by a positive Law, therefore neither of them is, or can be against the
Law of Nature, it being a demonstrative Truth, and generally confessed by the
best Lawyers, Schoolmen and Casuists, That God Vid. Petrum a Sancto Joseph. in
Idea Theologiae moralis. Lib. 1. De Legibus. Cap. 2. Resolu. 4. Page 14.
never did, nor ( manente natura humanaeadem) could dispense with the Law of
Nature. So that I think that Assertion of Grotius de Jure Belli. lib. 1. cap.
1.. 17. page 9.
Grotius, (and many before him) to be a certain Truth, That nothing was
permitted to the Jews in the Old Testament, which was against the Law of
Nature; nor should any such Sins be tolerated now.

2. The Second sort of Sins are, such as are against some positive Law of God,
and of such the Jews must needs be guilty (I mean such of them, (and only such)
to whom the Gospel has been sufficiently revealed) as denying the blessed
Trinity, and the whole Gospel of Jesus Christ, That I may not be mistaken in
this Assertion, I say,

1. That sufficient Promulgation, is absolutely necessary to the Obligation of
any positive Law of God, or Man, Humane or Divine, it being morally impossible
that any Man should be bound to obey the Laws of any Authority, till it be
sufficiently evidenced to him that indeed they are the Laws of such Authority.

2. If then there be any Jews in any part of the World (as I doubt not but
there may be many) to whom the Gospel (or any part of it) is not sufficiently
revealed, then I dare pronounce them innocently ignorant of all, or so much of
the Gospel as has not been sufficiently discovered to them, and Christians
guilty, who have taken no more Care and Pains to discover that Truth to others,
of which they were abundantly convinced themselves. And upon this ground I
think that there lies a sacred and heavy Obligation upon Christians (as being
bound to seek the Glory of God, the Propagation of the Gospel, and the
Conversion and Salvation of their Brethren) to endeavor the Conversion of the
Jews, which certainly cannot be by banishing them from all Christian
Commonwealths. And therefore they must either go to the Jews, or bring the
Jews to them, that so they may win them to Christ by the Innocence of their
Lives, and the Truth and Evidence of their Doctrine. Now these two are both one
(as to our present Case and Purpose) for certainly if it be lawful for us to
go, and live amongst the Jews to Preach the Gospel, then it will be as lawful
to bring them hither, and let them live amongst us to the same Purpose. And so
the bringing in of the Jews will not be so irrational a thing as some fancy
(for it is no more) very strongly, and would make the World believe their
Readmission to be guilty of (I know not what) Iniquity.

Dub. But it may (and may be will) be said, That the whole Gospel was
sufficiently promulgated by our Savior and his Apostles, that their Preaching,
and innocent Life and prodigious Miracles done in Confirmation of it, and the
Obsignation of it by our blessed Saviors Death and Resurrection were Evidences
enough, that it was a divine Law, and therefore obligatory, both to them that
heard it, and their Posterity; so that it needed no more Promulgation, but is
still obligatory by the Force of the First: as Moses his Law being once
miraculously promulged in Mount Sina, brought an Obligation on those that heard
it and all their Posterity.

Sol. To this I say, that it is a manifest and certain Truth, That the
Publication of the Gospel by our Savior, and his Apostles, was a Promulgation
of it abundantly sufficient to all those who heard and saw those divine
Persons, their Preaching and Miracles, I say personally to them and properly,
and per se, to none else unless (...) (as the Greek Scholia tell us) by the
Tradition, and constant and faithful Testimony of those Eyewitnesses it had
been carefully delivered down to Posterity. For suppose (which is not
impossible) that all those who heard our Savior's and his Apostles Doctrine
and saw their Miracles, had concealed them from their Posterity, so that they
had never heard any thing of them, Then I say their (...) and Descendents (who
neither heard the Doctrine, nor personnally saw the Miracles, nor had them any
way delivered to them by the Tradition or Testimony of their forefathers) were
no way obliged to believe any Gospel-Law, as never having any such Law
sufficiently promulged, and made known unto them, without which it was
impossible they should know those Laws* and by consequent, impossible they
should be obliged by them. So that it is not the first miraculous Promulgation
of the Gospel, which does per se, and of its own Nature oblige us to Faith, and
Evangelical Obedience, but the Continuation of it down to us, by the Tradition
and constant concurring and faithful Testimony of those that were
Eyewitnesses, and those that followed them. And if through the impiety or
negligence of this (or any other) Age, this Continuation of the First
Promulgation should cease, then the Obligation to believe the Gospel would
cease also (as to our Posterity) unless it ceased by their Fault, or were
otherwise made sufficiently known unto them. Whence also it follows, that the
Sin and Infidelity of those Jews who saw Christ's Miracles is far greater (as
being against such demonstrative Evidences of Truth) then the Infidelity of the
present Jews whose Evidences for Conviction (though enough) are much lesser,
and by Consequent their Infidelity not so great. And hence it further follows
evidently enough, that seeing the Apostles themselves held Correspondence, and
had Communion and civil Conversation with those Jews whose Obstinacy and
Infidelity was far greater (as standing in Contradiction to all those
miraculous Works and divine Testifications of Evangelical Truth) certainly we
may have our Conversation and civil Communion amongst those Jews whose
Obstinacy and Infidelity (though great enough) is far less. And then it will be
manifest that their Readmission into our Christian Commonwealth (with those
bounds and limitations which we believe and hope the Piety and Prudence of the
State will put upon them) is not in it self unlawful Quod er at dicendum.

I have stood the longer upon this Discourse, because I believe, that from
these and such like Principles, an evident and fundamental Reason may be given,
why Sinners against the Law of Scripture and positive Evangelical Sanctions may
be tolerated in a Christian Commonwealth; when Sinners against the Law of
Nature are not, nor indeed can be.

Quaere. Let the Query then be this; Why may a Christian Magistrate tolerate
Sins and Sinners against the positive Law of the Gospel, and not against the
Law of Nature?

Sol. In answer to which Query I shall crave leave to say Two Things.

1. De facto, That it ever has been so, in all Ages of the Church all
Christian Kings and Commonweals (at least of which we have any story left)
giving Toleration to the Jews, notwithstanding their Infidelity, and
Non-submission to the Gospel: and yet never tolerated them (or any else) in any
Sins against the Law of Nature. So that they might disbelieve the Gospel
impune, and without Punishment; but if they were guilty of Blasphemy, Idolatry,
Adultery, Homicide, Theft, or any other sins* against the Light and Law of
Nature, the Laws did as severely vindicate these Sins in them, as any other
Subjects.

2. De jure, that rationally and upon good grounds of Justice, it might be so;
this is a harder Business, and of that Difficulty, that I find not one of those
Casuists, or other Writers, (who have writ of this Subject) so much as offer at
a Reason of it; that is, All Christian Common-weals have ever severely and
indispensably punished* Sins against the Law of Nature, and yet even then
tolerated Infidelity, and other Sins against the Law of Scripture.

Now (I conceive) that the fundamental Reason of this Difference (as to the
Vindication of some, and Toleration of other some Sins) must be taken from the
nature of the Sins so vindicated or tolerated for.

1. Sins against the Law of Nature are evident, and manifestly such, and cannot
possibly admit of any Apology in any Persons who have the use of Reason (for in
Children and Idiots the Case is otherwise.) It is a manifest Truth and a
received Principle, both amongst Philosophers, and Lawyers, That Ignorantia
Juris Naturalis non excusat a peccato. So that if Titius commits Murder,
Adultery, or Idolatry, etc. we are sure he is a Sinner, and the Magistrate may
safely punish him for it, seeing there is no possibility of any pretense
whereby he may render himself excusable either from the Sin, or suffering for
it.

2. But then Secondly, for those Sins against the positive Evangelical Law, the
Case is much otherwise, for

1. No positive Law of God (or Man) brings (or can bring) a just Obligation
upon us, till it have a sufficient Promulgation.

2. The sufficiency of such Promulgation is not easily known, for that may be
sufficient Promulgation to one, which is not to another, according to the
different measure of Parts and Abilities in those to whom it is promulged. For
those to whom God has given a larger measure of Understanding and Learning,
may sooner come (unless they be wilfully obstinate) to a Knowledge of the Truth
of the Gospel, and of those Reasons which may convince them of it; and then an
Obligation comes upon them to believe accordingly, and if they do not they sin:
whereas others of no Learning, and less natural Abilities, may innocently
disbelieve, till further means (proportionable to their Capacities) be used for
their Conviction. Now this Difficulty of knowing when the Promulgation is
sufficient, and consequently when Infidelity is a Sin (for till this time it is
a Calamity, not a Crime.) should make Magistrates very cautious not to
precipitate the Punishment of such misbelieving Persons: For seeing in all such
Punishments there should be Congnitio culpae, before there can be Inflictio
Paenae, he that punishes before he be certain that the Person so punished is
guilty of the Crime, does an Act that may be just, but certainly he is not just
in doing it.

3. But that which adds more Difficulty yet is this; That no Promulgation of
any positive Law is sufficient till the Persons be convinced to whom it is
promulged, (unless through their own Perverseness, for Ends and Interest, they
wilfully hinder such Conviction.) Now whether the Infidelity of the Jews arise
from the Perversity of their own Wills, or from their Infirmity and Want of
sufficient Preaching and Promulgation, it is very hard (if not impossible) for
any Magistrate to know; and till it be known, they cannot be justly punished
for their Infidelity, which neither is (nor can be) Sin in them (nor any body
else) till after sufficient Promulgation they wilfully reject the Gospel. Now
this great Difficulty (and almost Impossibility) to know when they wilfully
(and so criminally) reject the Gospel, makes it very difficult proportionably,
and almost impossible, for any Magistrate justly to punish them for such
Rejection.

4. We commonly say (and there is much Truth in it if rightly understood) that
the Mysteries of the Gospel are such as cannot be understood, and John 6. No
man can come unto me unless the Father draw him.
assented to without the special Assistance of the blessed Spirit of God. And
John 15. 5. Without me ye can do nothing.
So that those who want this Assistance, or such a measure of it as may be
sufficient to overcome all opposed Difficulties, cannot possibly believe, and
then it will be very questionable, whether Infidelity in such be a Sin, it not
being in their Power (without such Assistance) to believe. This in Scripture is
called the opening of the heart* So when Saint Paul Preached, Lydia believes,
others did not, and the Reason is given in the Text, Acts 16. 14.
God opened the heart of Lydia so that she attended to those things spoken by
Paul. Now as the opening of her heart was no Merit or Act of Virtue in her (it
being the Work of God upon her Soul, and the only passive in that particular)
So the not believing of others whose hearts he was not pleased to open might
possibly (at least for some time till they had heard him further and seen his
Miracles) be no Sin in them. However it will be sure enough, that seeing no
humane Magistrate can know whether the Jews now have such Assistance, or what
Measure of it they have, it will be hard for them to punish, least in so doing
they may punish them for not doing that which is impossible for them to do;
which with what Justice or Warrant from God's Word, they can do, I know not.
And here I shall transcribe a Passage in Hug. Grotius de Jure Belli. lib. 2.
cap. 20.. 48. page 345. Vide etiam Annotata ad dictum.
Grotius (casually by me, but happily met with) if I mistake not, very
pertinent to this purpose, Doctrina Evangelii ab his quinunc eam audiunt
penitus in animum admitti nequeat, nisi Secretis Dei Auxiliis accedentibus,
quae sicut quibus dantur non dantur in operis alicujus mercedem: ita si quibus
negantur, aut minus large concedantur, id fit ob causas non iniquas illas
quidem sed plerumque nobis incognitas ac proinde humano judicio non Punibiles.
And then he adds many things out of Scripture and Antiquity to the same
purpose, That neither Jews (nor any body else) is (by Punishment) to be
compelled to a Belief of the Gospel, (that is a Turkish slavish means, which may
befit Mahomet to promote the Alcoran, but certainly contradictory to the Laws
of Christ, and the Meekness of Gospel Dispensations.)

By what has been said, I believe it may appear in part that the Toleration of
the Jews in this, or any Christian Commonweal, is not in it self unlawful,
either in ratione inhonesti incommodi or Scandali; but that as de facto, they
have been ever tolerated in Christian States, so de jure they may still.

So then the Readmission of the Jews is in it self indifferent, yet may be made
morally good or bad according to the several Ends, the different Limitations
and Qualifications of their Admission. First, The Ends of their admission may
be either 1. Civil, 2. Or Sacred and Religious.


1. For the civil end of their admission, that is in general the Emolument and
Benefit of the Prince, and Commonweal. And though In compendio manualis. lib.
5. cap. 17. concl. 1. p. 510.
Becanu^ the Jesuit (with a transparent piece of Hypocrisy) condemn this end
as unlawful, it is evident that his great Jupiter Capitolinus of Rome, as
Eubulus Cordatus in Epist. praefixa libro Nicolas de Clemangis, de corrupto
statu Ecclesiae.
one said long since of some of his Predecessors) makes this an end (and a
principle one two) of their admission; and if he had no greater Faults, I
should pardon this. For Secondly, it is manifest that the Supreme Magistrate may
justly make this one end of their admission: For by his Place and Office there
lies an Obligation upon him to preserve the Civil Interest of his Nation, and
the Good and Benefit of the Commonweal, and may propose it as an End by all
honorable and honest means to be attained. Whence it is, that all Princes
protect and encourage Trading, all Merchandising, and Manufactures.

2. The Sacred and Religious End of their Admission should be the Glory of God,
and the Propagation of the Gospel, in the Conversion and Salvation of their
Souls. And we are bound to endeavor this

1. By the natural Obligation of Charity, as they are Men, and so our Brethren,
whose Good we ought to promote (especially that of their Souls) by all honest
ways.

2. And more particularly as they are the Reliquiae of Gods own People,
concerning whom, and their Conversion, there are many gracious and glorious
Promises in the Gospel, and it will be an Happiness to us if we have an hand in
it.

It was a Saying of Martin Luther M. Luther in Epist. ad Jeselin. Judaeum
Roshimensem operum. Tom. 6. Ton. German. fol. 509. apud Balduinum Casuum
Conscienciae. 1. 6. cap. 6. Casu 5. page 188.
Se propter unum Judaeum crucifixum omnibus favere Judaeis. And if we love
them, and desire their Conversion and Salvation, (as in Christian Charity
certainly we ought) then the way to effect that, will not be to banish them,
and prohibit their Habitation amongst us, so compelling them to live amongst
Turks, Pagans, or Papists; The Images and Idolatry of which last, has
undeniably been the greatest Scandal, and Remora, which has long hindered them
from being Christians. Whereas (if they be permitted to live amongst us) that
stumbling block will be taken away.

2. For the Conditions of their Admission, for the Restrictions and Limitations
to be put upon them, a great deal of Caution and Christian Prudence is to be
used, lest while we pretend their Good we do Mischief to our selves. For as to
deny them all Liberty and Commerce with us, may be an Act of unchristian and
indeed inhumane Cruelty; So to give them too much, is an Act of Imprudence and
Folly. And indeed we find some Andrew Rivet. Comment. in cap. 23. Exodi. page
95. col. 2.
sober Men (not without good Reason) complain of the too much Liberty they have
in some Christian Commonwealths. In short, what Qualifications and Limitations
are to be put upon them, I shall not take upon me to determine, but leave that
to the Piety and Prudence of the State. Yet (with Submission) I conceive such
Limitations as these will be convenient, if not necessary; the rather because I
find in our Histories, in the Imperial and Canon Laws, and in the old
Capitulars and Canons of Councils, that such Restrictions have been anciently
laid upon them. As,

1. No Toleration ever was, or de jure can be given them to profess or practice
any thing against the Law of Nature.

2. No Toleration should be given them to speak any thing blasphemously or
impiously against Jesus Christ and the Gospel: For though we may tolerate them
in the Profession of a bad, yet not in that Blasphemy Vide Rescript. Honorii
and Theodosii. A. A. Anthemio. P. P. L. Judaeos. 11. Cod de Judaeis.
of a good Religion.

3. They never were nor should be permitted to circumcise Leg. Judaei 16. Cod.
de Ju-daeis and Judaeus. 18. Ibid and Basilicon. lib. 6. Tit. 54. cap. 31.
Children of Christians, or seduce any Christians, to their Religion: Let them
prosess, but not propagate their Religion.

4. They were not permitted to carry any Office L. haec valitu. Cod. de Judaeis.
or Dignity in the Christian Commonweal, though Gloss. ad dict. L. verbo haec.
ex F. de decur. l. generaliter finali and can. cum. sit 16. Extra de Judaeis.
it seems that sometimes even that was permitted them.

5. They were not permitted in any Suit or Difference between a Jew and a
Christian, to draw the Christian, or his Cause before a Leg. siqua. 15. Cod. de
Judaeis. Vide Bartolum ad L. Judaei. 8. Cod. de Judaeis
Jewish Magistrate: For it is a ruled Case in the Imperial Law, Judaeus Actor
vel reus, Forum sequitur Christianum.

6. They were never permitted to make Marriages Hoc prohibent Imp. P. P.
valent. Theodos. and Arcadius A. A. A. leg. Ne quis. Cod. de Judaeis.
with Christians, and the Glossa ad dictam. leg. Ne quis:
Glossator gives the Reason of it in Law, Leg. 1. F. de Rit. Nuptiarum.
Quia matrimonium debet esse communicatio divini and humani juris. Whereas a
Jew and Christian being of different Religions cannot communicare in Sac is.
And this is consonant to the Law of the Gospel, which forbids us to be 2. Cor.
6. 14.
unequally yoked. upon which grounds, I believe all Marriages with Papists to
be unlawful, that is, Fieri non debuit, it is unlawful to make such Matches,
though that factum valet, when such a Match is made the Contract is valid.

7. Their frequent Imppp. Theodosius, Arcad. and Honorius. L. Nemo. Cod. de
Judaeis.
divorcing their Wives was tolerated. For though Moses seem to suffer it, yet
the Emperors by express Edict forbid it.

8. By the Imperial Laws L. Nemo. Cod. de Judaeis.
Polygamy, and plurality of Wives was not tolerated in them.

9. If any of the Jews turn Christian (by Vide Descriptum Constantini. A. ad
Evagrium. P. P. L^g. Judaeis. Cod. de Judaeis. and Cod. Theodosian. L. 16. Tit.
8. leg. 5.
Civil Law) in case the Jews endeavored to reduce him, and maliciously injured
him, they were to be burned for it.

10. They might repair their old Synagogues, but were not tolerated (by the L.
Haec valitura. Cod. de Judaeis. and Can. Judaei. 3. Et Can. Car. Consuluit 7.
Extra de Judaeis.
Roman Laws) to build new.

11. They were not tolerated to have any Christian Servants, Nurses, or
Midwives. Can. Praesenti. 1. Extra de Judaeis. Ex concilio malis conenti.

12. By the Can. in nonnullis 15.. In diebus. Extra de Judaeis.
Canon Law they might not come abroad on Good Friday.

13. They were not permitted to wear Garments Leg. eadem.
exactly of the Christian Fashion, but were to have distinct Habits, that all
might know them to be Jews.

14. They might not be Cap. Nullus and Cap. omnes. Causa 28. Quest. 1.
Physiacians, or give Physic to any Christian.

15. They were not permitted to be of the Roman L. 16. De Judaeis* and
Caelicolis. In Cod. Theodosiano.
Militia (though they were permitted to be Advocates) by the Rescript of
Honorius, and Arcadius to Romulianus P. P.

16. The Jews being the greatest Usurers in the World, and believing they may
justly take the highest Use they can get, (even Vsurae centessimae, if they
could have it) of us Gentiles, it is all the Reason in the World, they should
be limited in this particular, and not permitted to take more of us, than the
Law permits us to take one of another.

17. They should be enjoined to admit of friendly Collations and Disputations
sometimes about Gospel Truths, and not obstinately to reject all means of
Conversion, and Conviction, and Satisfaction of those seeming Reasons which
keep them off from embracing the Truth: For there will be little hopes (or
possibility) of their Conversion, if they be permitted obstinately to refuse
all means of doing it.

But enough (if not too much) of this, I shall only add one old Inter leges
Edvardi Confessoris. leg. 29. In Edit. LL. Saxonicarum. Per Abrah. Whelog. page
145.
Law concerning the Jews made before the Conquest (above 600 Years ago) and
confirmed by the Conquerours amongst other the good Laws of Edward the
Confessor, and so continued Law (for ought I know) in all the Kings Reigns till
the Banishment of the Jews, which was Anno 18 Edvardi 1. The Law is this,

Sciendum quoque quod omnes Judaei, ubicunque in Regno sunt, sub tutela and
defensione Regis ligea debent esse; nec quilibet eorum alicui Diviti se potest
subdere, sine Regis licentia. Judaei enim, and omnia sua Regis sunt, Quod si
quisquis detinuerit eos, vel Pecuniam eorum, perquirat Rex si vult, tanquam
suum proprium.

I wish the chief Magistrate could admit them on these Terms, for so they, and
all theirs ( omnia sua) should be suum proprium, which possibly might supply
him with Money and so save Taxes.

And upon these Terms I, (and I believe every body else) will willingly consent
to their Readmission.

If any desire further Satisfaction in this particular, either from Civilians,
Schoolmen, Casuists, Canonists, Historians, or other Divines, he may consult
these or such like:

I. Justinian Cod. de Judaeis* and Caelicolis, lib. 1. tit. 12. and the Gloss
there.

II. Codex Theodosianus de Judaeis, Caelicolis, and Samaritanis, lib. 16. tit.
8. page 515.

III. Jacobi Sirmondi Appendix Cod. Theodosiani, leg. 6. page 14. and leg. 4.
page 11.

IV. Marquardus de Susanis Tractatu de Judaeis, and aliis Infidelibus inter
tractatus Illustrium, tom. 14. page 28. Vide Bernardum, Hieronimum, Alexandrum
Iltum, aliosque Auctores ab eo ibidem citatos.

V. Mathaeus Wesenbecius in Comentario in Codicem Justinianeum de Judeis, tit.
9. page 14.

VI. Decretum Gregorii extra de Judaeis, and Saracenis, lib. 6. tit. 6.

VII. Clementinar. lib. 5. tit. 2. de Judaeis.

VIII. Corvini Jus Canonicum, tit. de Judaeis, page 295.

IX. Fredericus Balduinus Casuum Conscientiae, lib. 2. cap. 6. casu 5. page 188.

X. Capitulare Caroli Magni, lib. 6. cap. 120. and cap. 308.

XI. Hen. Altingus Problematum Theolog. part 2. problemate, 21. page 340.

XII. Petrus Crespetius in summa Ecclef. Disciplinae Verbo Judaeus, page 520,
etc. fuse.

XIII. Phil. Melancthon. Epist. lib. 1. epist. 68. page 75. In Edit. Corn. Be.

XIV. Martinus Becanus in compendio manualis, lib. 5. cap. 17. page 509.

XV. Decretum Concilii Viennensis contra Judaeos apud Hen. Canisium Lect.
Antiquarum, tom, 1. page 621. and apud Binium, tom. 3. part altera, page 1493.

XVI. Filiucius Casuum Conscientiae, tract. 22. cap. 5. page 40. col. 2. de
Judaismo.

XVII. Johannes de Lugo, de virtute fidei divinae, disput. 22. sect. 4. and
Auctores ibi citat.

XVIII. Bodinus de Repub. lib. 3 and 4.

XIX. Statutum de Judaismo apud D. Edvardum Cook Institit. part. 2. page 506.
and Commentarium ejus in dictum Statutum.

XX. Aquin. 2. 21. quaest. 10, 11. vbi varia occurrunt de Judaeis.

XXI. Erasmus Brockmannus Systemate Theologiae, universae, art. 41. cap. 2.
quaest. 9. tom. 2. page 5043.

XXII. Basilica Lenuclavii, lib. 1. tit. 1. cap. 9. de Judaeis, Page 2.

XXIII. Hieronymus de sancta fide, lib. contra Judaeos.

XXIV. Petrus Galatinus de Arcanis Catholicae veritatis.

XXV. Gilbertus Genebrardus in Symbolae fidei Judeorum e R. Mos. Aegyptio, etc.

XXVI. Vide etiam (si placet) Scriptores (innumeros pene) quos exhibet Georgius
Draudius in Bibliothea Classica inter Libros Theologicos, page 349, 350, etc.
Alii alios de facili addant.

FINIS.
THE CASE Of Setting up IMAGES IN CHURCHES.

A Breviate of the Case concerning Setting up Images in the Parish Church of
Moulton, in the Diocese and County of Lincoln, Anno 1683/4.
UPON pretense of adorning and beautifying the Church, some of the Parishioners
did,

1. Wash out all the Sentences of Scripture formerly writ upon the Walls in
that Church.

2. Then (without the Approbation and Advice, or the general Consent of the
Parish) they set up the Images of five or six of the Apostles; which giving
great Offense, ( for thirty seven of the I have the original Protestation,
signed by thirty seven of the Parishioners Hands.
Parishioners did under their Hands protest against it) they procured an Order
from the Deputy-Chancellor of Lincoln, to approve and confirm what they had
done, and authorize them to set up (as they were pleased to call them) more
Effigies.

3. By this Order and Authority they set up the Images of thirteen Apostles,
St. Paul being one: the Image of Peter they placed above the Ten Commandments;
and that of Paul, above the King's Arms and the Holy Ghost in the Form of a
Dove, over them; and (in contempt of the Translation of the Bible, approved and
received in the Church of England, and in compliance with the erroneous and
ridiculous Vulgar Exodus 34. 30, 35. In the Vulgar Latin it is, Facies Mosis
erat Cornuta: Whereas their own most Learned Translators (Arias Montanus and
Pagnine) are ashamed of it; and (as our English Version truly has it) render
it, Resplendebat, aut Promicabat Facies Mosis.
Latin) they picture Moses with Horns.

4. Then (when they had done all this) they did ( ex post facto) petition the
Bishop for his Approbation of what they had done, who denied their Petition,
and for Reasons given them (some of which here follow) told them, that he never
would, nor (de jure) could approve what they (without and against Law) had done.

5. Lastly, The Chancellor nulls the Order of his Deputy, as to the setting up
of those Images: and those who had done that Work (without the Consent of the
Parish) appeal to the Arches, where now that Appeal depends.

This is the Sum of what the Painter and Parishioners have done, (in setting up
so many and such Images, as (I believe) no Church in England has seen since our
Reformation, and (I hope) never will permit) and what the Deputy-Chancellor (as
he and they think) confirmed. But what they have done is Unwarrantable and
absolutely Illegal, contrary to our known Laws, against the Authority and
Doctrine of the Church of England, Declared and Established both by our
Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws, and (to omit others) in these Particulars.

1. It is confessed, that to beautify Churches (which they pretended) is a
Pious and Worthy Work. But in doing this, the Way they took was Unwarrantable
and Illegal; for our Supreme Power Ecclesiastical (the King in Vide Canones. 1
Jacobi, Can. 85.
Convocation) requires, That our Churches should be decently beautified, not
according to the Humor of an ignorant Painter and some few Parishioners, but
according to an The Homily for comely Adorning of Churches, in the 2d Book of
Homilies, p. 77. Edit London. (by the King's Authority) 1633. which Edition I
shall always cite.
Homily published for that purpose; in which Homily (compared with the 2 d Part
of the In the 2d Book of Homilies, page 7. compaved with p. 80. of the same
Book.
Homily for the right Use of Churches) it appears, that Images are so far from
beautifying, that, if they be set up, they defile and pollute our Churches.

2. Their razing out the Sentences of Scripture, formerly writ upon the Walls,
was absolutely Illegal, and by no Law Warrantable: For those Sentences were
placed there (as appears by the Sea the Canon Jacobi, Can, 82.
Canon) by the Supreme Power of the King in Convocation; and therefore for the
Painter and Parishioners to take away that, which the Supreme Power had by
express Canon placed there, must of necessity be Unwarrantable and absolutely
Illegal.

Nor could the Deputy. Chancellor's Order (got ex post facto) confirm what they
had illegally done: For it is both Reason and Law, that a Nullity is not
capable of Confirmation, because Confirmation always presupposes some
antecedent Right Confirmatioest Juris prius habiti Corroboratio. Cap. inter
Dilectos, extra, de Fide Instrument.
in the thing to be confirmed: It does not give a Qui consirmat aliquid, is non
censeturdare. Paulus Leg. Sidontae, and si Sponsus,. de Donat. Inter Virum and
Uxorem, and Leg. and quia.. de Jurisdict.
Right, but does only strengthen an antecedent infirm Right. Now it is certain
that the Parishioners had no Right to raze out those Texts of Scripture, which
the Supreme Authority had placed there, and therefore no Order (got ex post
facto) could confirm what they had Illegally done.

3. Nor could the Deputy-Chancellor's Order (if they had procured it before
they went to raze out those Texts of Scripture formerly writ upon the Walls)
have given them any just Power to raze out those Texts; it being Quae contra
Jus fiunt, debent pro Infectis haberi. De Reg. Juris. in 6. Reg. 64.
impossible that any inferior Judge or Court should null the Sentence of the
Supreme.

I know that Pope Gregory the First (one of the first Introducers of Popish
Superstition about Images) tells us, that Images are Laymens Books, and that
Pictures are as Quod legentibus Scriptura, hoc Idiotis praestat Pictura illam
cernentibus, etc. Gregorius Magnus Epist. ad Sennum, Tom. 4. page 349. Vide
cundem, Tom. 4. Epist. 54. ad Stcundinun, page 271.
profitable to Idiots who cannot, as the Scriptures are to those who can read
them. An Assertion evidently erronoous and impious. And yet the
Trent-Conventicle, to the same purpose, faith, That Images instruct and confirm
the People in the Articles of Faith Doceant Episcopi Picturis erudiri and
confirmari Populim in Articulis Fidei commemorandis, and exnibus facris
Imaginibus mag, number fructum percipi. Council. Trident. Sess. 25. in Decreta de
Invocatione Sanctorum and sacris Imaginibus.
to their great Benefit. But God Almighty by his Prophet tells us, That Images
are Habak. 3. 18, 19. Romans 1. 23. 25.
Teachers of Lies. This King James of happy Memory, and his pious and learned
Convocation well knowing, and that the Church of England had condemned the
setting up of Images in our Churches, (as shall anon appear) they Decree and
Command, That instead of Popish Images, which were Teachers of Lies, the Ten
Commandments, and choice Canones 1 Jacobi, Can. 82.
Sentences of Scripture, should be writ upon the Walls of our Churches, whence
(without fear of Error) the People might learn Divine and Infallible Truths.
And here the Saying of an ancient and excellent Person is worthy of our Memory
and Consideration; it is this, They deserve to err, who (as the Papists do) seek
Errare meruerunt, qui Christum and Apostolos, non in sanctis Codicibus, sed
pictis in Parietibus quaesiverunt. August. de Consensu Evangelist. cap. 10.
Tom. 4. page 377. Edit. Basil. 1569.
Christ and his Apostles, not in the Sacred Scriptures, but in Images and
Pictures.

I know that the Painter and those few Parishioners, who were for taking away
those Sentences of Scripture, anciently writ upon the Walls, have instead of
them, writ some other Sentences of Scripture in several Places where none were
before. But this does not excuse, but rather aggravate their Crime. For,

1. This was not done till some time after they had finished their Work, washed
out the Texts of Scripture anciently writ upon the Walls, and set up all their
Images. When finding what they had done displeased many, (particularly their
Bishop) and that their Proceedings were censured as Illegal, and by no Law
Warrantable; then, and not till then, they caused some other Texts of Scripture
to be writ upon the Walls.

2. And this they did without any Advice or Direction of their Minister, or any
who had the Cure of their Souls: Whereas the Canon required, that Canones 1
Jacobi, can. 88.
chosen Sentences of Scripture should be writ upon the Walls. And we may be
sure that the pious and learned King and Convocation, who made that Canon, did
not intend that the ignorant Painter and poor Parishioners, but some who had
more Understanding, and Cure of their Souls, should choose such Sentences as
should be for the Peoples Edification, most plain and pertinent. But no more of
this. For although what the Painter and a few private Persons, did against the
Canon and Constitution of the Supreme Power, was Illegal, and by no Law
Warrantable, yet the setting up Images in the place of those Sentences of
Scripture, which they have erazed, was much worse, as being repugnant and
directly contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England, which has been and
is approved, and by our Supreme Power at present stands established by our good
Laws Ecclesiastical and Civil. That this may evidently appear, it is to be
considered,

1. That the Popish Church in their Trent-Council, (which to them is an
Ecumenical and General Council) does define and command, in order to their
superstitious and Idolatrous Worship of them, That the Images of their Saints
be had and Imagines Christi, Deiparae Virginis, and alioru^ Sanctoru^m, in
Templis praesertim habendae and retinendae, eisque Veneratio debita
impertienda. Council. Trildent. Sess. 25. in Decreto de Invocat. and Venerat.
Sanctorum and sacris Imaginibus.
retained more especially in Churches, where the poor People may see, and have
opportunity to worship them.

2. That in the Reformation of our Church, our Supreme Powers who regularly
begun, and piously and happily finished it, expressly condemned not only the
worshipping of Images, but the having them in our Churches.

This does evidently appear in our Authentic Records (to say nothing of our
Learned particular Writers) published by Supreme Authority to that purpose. For,

1. By the Injunctions of Edw. 6. it is commanded thus, See the Injunctions of
Edw. 6. to all his Subjects, as wel^ Clergy as laity, Anno 1547. Anno Reguisu^
1. Injunct. 29.
They shall take away and utterly destroy all Shrines, etc. and all Pictures,
Paintings, and all Monuments of Idolatry and Superstition, that there remain no
memory of them in Walls, Windows, or elsewhere, etc.

2. And about three or four Years after, in the same King's time, it is by Act
of Vide Staturum Anno 3. and 4 Edvardi 6. cap. 10.
Parliament expressly required, That all Images graven, carved or painted, which
yet stand in any Church, should be defaced and destroyed. And though this
Statute (in favor of Popish Superstition and Idolatry) was Staturum 1. Mariae,
cap. 2.
repealed by Q. Mary, yet that Queen's Statute was by good K. James Staturum 1.
Jacobi, cap. 25.
repealed; and to prevent and discourage Popery, that Statutre of Edw. 6. was
expressly revived, and so remains still obligatory.

3. Queen Elizabeth in her The Injunctions of Q. Elizabeth to all her Subjects,
Clergy and Laity, Anno 1559, Regnique sui 1. Injunct. 23.
Injunctions, Injunct. 23. renews the Injunction of Edw. 6. in the same Words,
That all Images, Paintings and Pictures, should be taken out of all Churches,
etc.

4. And the Homilies published by Q. Elizabeth tell us, that Images de facto
were taken out of Churches. For the Homily says, See the Homily for repairing
and adorning of Churches, page 80. in the Edition of our Homilies, Anno 1633.
Part 2. and this Homily is approved and confirmed by the King and Convocation,
1 Jacobi, Anno 1603. Can. 85.
That the Churches were scowred and swept from the sinful and superstitious
Filthiness which defiled them: By which, as appears by the said See the second
Part of the Homily for the right use of Churches, page 7. of the second Book of
Homilies, of the aforesaid Edition, 1633.
Homilies, Images are principally meant.

5. To the same purpose Cambden in his Life of Q. Elizabeth, tells us, That
Images were actually removed out of our Churches, by the Cambden's Elizabeth,
Lib. 7. ad Annum 1559. page 17, and 20. of the English Edition.
Authority of Parliament.

6. Once more, the learned and incomparable Bishop See Bp Jewel's Defense of
the Apology of the Church of England, in his Works printed at London, Anno
1621. page 446, 447.
Jewel, in his Defense of his Apology of the Church of England, does both say
and prove, that Images ought not to be in any Churches, or Places of God's
Public Worship.

By the Premises it may, and I believe does appear, that in the Judgment of
the Church of England, Images are not to be tolerated in our Churches, and
Places of God's Public Worship; and therefore they were removed and defaced by
the Supreme Powers Ecclesiastical and Civil, declared and published in Canons
of Convocation, and Acts of Parliament.

But here it is objected by the Enemies of our Church and Reformation, That our
Reformers have been so zealous and indiscreetly fierce against Images, that
they have condemned the ingenious Art of Painting, and even the civil Use of
Images.

But this is a malicious Calumny, Sol.
and no real Consequence of our Churches Doctrine about Images, as has been
expressly and publicly declared both by our Church and State. For,

1. Our Church has declared her Judgment, that all Images are not absolutely
See the third part of the Homily against the Peril of Idolatry, in the
beginning of it, page 39: of the second Book of Homilies, printed 1633.
unlawful, or simply forbidden in the New Testament, but only some, in some
Places and Circumstances, when they may (especially to poor ignorant People) be
dangerous Occasions of Superstition and Idolatry: and more expressly a little
after, the Words are these; We are not so In the same Homily against the Peril
of Idolatry, page 44.
scrupulous, as to abhor Flowers wrought in Carpets, Hangings, Arras, etc. or
Images of Princes on their Coin: nor do we condemn the Art of Painting or
Image-making, etc. Whence it is evident, that our Church is neither against the
Art of Painting, nor any Civil Use of Images.

2. Our State has (by express Act of Parliament) declared, even in the time of
our Reformation, That they did not condemn any Civil Use of Images. For even in
that Statute in which they severely condemn, and command the defacing Images in
Churches, they have this Proviso, Vide Statutum: Anno* 3 and 4 Edvardi 6^ cap.
10.
Provided always, That this Act shall not extend to any Images or Pictures, set
or engraven on any Tomb, in any Church, Chapel, or Churchyard, only for a
Monument of any King, Prince, Noble Man, or any other dead Person, which has
not commonly been reputed for a Saint, but that all such Images may continue.

Whence it is evident, that our Church at the Reformation, did not condemn any
Civil Use of Images, no not in sacred Places, as Churchyards, Chapels or
Churches, much less in other Places. And that we may more distinctly know what
Images they condemned, and why they would not tolerate them in Churches; It is
further to be considered;

1. That the Church of England absolutely condemns all Images of the Trinity,
or any See the third part of the Homily against the Peril of Idolatry, in the
second Book of Homilies, page 40.
Person in it, (Father, Son, or Holy Ghost) as absolutely unlawful, and
expressly condemned in Deuteronomy. 4. 12, 15, 16, 23. Isa. 40. 18. Romans 1. 23, 25.
Scripture. Such Images are not to be tolerated neither in nor out of Churches.

2. No Images of our See the last named Homily, Book 2. p. 42.
Blessed Savior, of any Saints and Martyrs, (which with stupid Superstition
and Idolatry have been, and still are worshipped in the Popish Church) are, in
the Judgment of our Church, to be tolerated in our Temples, or any Place of
God's public Worship. For if they be, it will be to the great and Ibid. page
^2*
unavoidable danger of Idolatry. This, I conceive, is the approved and received
Doctrine of the Church of England: and that it may more plainly and distinctly
appear to be so, I shall cite the Judgment of our Church, and her Reasons for
it, in her own express Words: and amongst other things (too many to be
transcribed) she plainly tells us;

1. That it is an ungodly thing In the second Book of Homilies, page 7.
to set up Images or Idols (which in her Ibidem, page 12, 13.
Judgment signify the same thing) in our Churches, because it may give a great
occasion of worshipping them.

2. That Images in Churches, painted on Clothes or Walls, are In the second
Book of Homilies, page 24.
unlawful, and contrary to Christian Religion.

3. That setting up Images in Ibidem, page 42
Churches, is to the great and unavoidable danger of Idolatry; and that the Law
of God is Ibidem, page 43.
against it.

4. That the setting up the Image of God, of our Ibidem, page 45, 46.
Blessed Savior, or any Saints, is not tolerable in Churches, but against
God's Law.

5. Woe be to the setters up and maintainers of Images Ibidem, page 55.
in Churches.

6. It is not possible, if Images be in Churches, to Ibidem, page 56, 58, 60,
61.
avoid Idolatry.

7. Images of God, our Blessed Savior, and the holiest Saints, are of all
others the Ibidem, page 61, 75.
most dangerous to be in Churches.

8. Images in Churches are a Ibidem, page 65.
Snare and tempting of God, to the great danger and destruction of many.

9. That Images in Churches, in the Judgment of the Prophet and Apostle, are
only Ibidem, page 72. Hab 2. 18. Romans 1. 23, 25.
Teachers of Lies.

10. God's horrible Wrath cannot be avoided, without Ibidem, page 75.
utter abolishing Images in Churches.

This is evidently the express Doctrine of our Homilies, which absolutely
condemns not only the worshipping, but having Images in our Churches. And it is
no less evident, that the Homilies, and the Doctrine contained in them, are
both approved, received and established by the Supreme Authority of our Church
and State, Canons of Convocation, and Acts of Parliament. This will appear,

1. By the Testimony of King James, who commends the diligent reading of our
See K. James his Directions to the Clergy of England, Anno 1622. They are in
Dr. Heylin' s Cyprianus Anglicus, page 93. Direct. 1, 4.
Articles and Homilies, set forth by the Authority of the Church of England.

2. By the Convocation of Q. Elizabeth, (the Supreme Ecclesiastical Power)
which expressly and particularly names and approves all our Homilies, and
declares the Doctrine contained in them, to be a godly Doctrine; as appears by
the In the 35th Article.
Articles of our Church, composed and published in that Convocation.

3. By the Convocation I Jacobi. For as the Article last named declares our
Homilies to contain a godly Doctrine, so the Convocatio 1 Jacobi, Can. 36.
Convocation of King James, declares all things contained in that Article, to
be agreeable to the Word of God.

4. All the Clergy of Ibidem, Can. 36.
England, all Graduates in the Universities, all Ibidem, Can. 127.
Chancellors, Commissaries and Officials, before they exercise any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, are willingly, and ex animo Ibidem, Can. 36.
to assent, consent, approve, and subscribe these Articles, and this Doctrine,
and that absolutely, without any My Ld Coke' s Institutes, Part 4. cap. 74.
page 323, 324.
Glosses or Senses of their own.

5. And these Subscriptions are required (and so the Doctrine subscribed to
confirmed) by several See the Statute 13 Eliz. cap. 12. and the Statute 14 Car.
2. The Act of Uniformity.
Acts of Parliament.

6. And if any impugn this Doctrine, so declared and established by the Supreme
Power, or maintain any Doctrine contrary or repugnant to it, he is by our Vide
Canones 1 Jacobi, Can. 5.
Canons to be excommunicated ipso facto; and by the Statutum 13 Elizabethae,
cap. 12.
Statute, if he be a beneficed Clergyman, deprived.

The Premises being certain and evident Truths, the natural and necessary
Consequences which follow from them, to omit others, will be these.

1. That neither the Deputy-Chancellor of Lincoln, nor any inferior Court, has
or can have any just Authority or Power to approve and authorize the setting up
of such Images in the Church, which by the Supreme Power (Ecclesiastical and
Civil, in Convocation and Parliament) is expressly condemned as altogether
unlawful, and to the poor ignorant People pernicious.

2. That they who maintain and encourage this Doctrine of setting up Images in
our Churches, if they persist in it, are by our known Laws now in Force, to be
excommunicated ipso facto; and if they be beneficed Clergymen, to be deprived.
Viderint quorum interest.

3. And if any Ecclesiastical Judge or Court ( quod absit) should approve,
authorize or encourage the setting up of such Images in our Churches, it
evidently follows from the Premises, that in so doing, they approve and
authorize that which the Church of England has publicly declared to be
dangerous, against the Law of God, against Christian Religion, and (to many)
pernicious. And therefore we have reason to believe, that no good Son of the
Church of England, will approve, authorize or encourage that which his Holy
Mother has so absolutely and publicly condemned.

A Friend of the late Bishop of Lincoln's, observing how customary it is to
Protestant Writers to charge on the Papists, the Tenet of Dominium fundatur in
Gratia, requested his Lordship to resolve him how far the said Tenet is
chargeable on the Church of Rome. And thereupon his Lordship was pleased to
send him under his own Hand a Paper writ as follows.
Quaeritur, An Dominium fundetur in Gratia?
IN Answer to this, I shall say only a few things, which (to me) seem certain
and evident Truths.

1. The Question must be held Negatively; Dominium non fundatur in Gratia:
Neither Dominium Temporale, of Kings or Lay-Magistrates; nor Dominium
Spirituale, of the Bishops and Clergy. This has been evidently proved by many
of our Divines, especially and clearly by Dr. In his Book entitled,
Dererminatio Quaestionum quarundem Theologicarum, etc. printed at Cambridg,
1634. Quaest. 30. page 130.
Davenant Bishop of Salisbury.

2. The Papists (who are both the Accusers and Judges) do impute this Opinion
to Wickliff and Hus, and their Followers, and condemn the Opinion, and them for
it, as Heretics, for saying, that Dominium fundatur in Gratia: which is a
manifest Calumny, and no just or proved Accusation; as might be proved out of
Hus his printed Works, and several Manuscript Works of Wickliff in Bodley's
Library. But they bring these lying Accusations against them, that they may
have some pretense to destroy and murder them.

3. That erroneous and impious Council of Constance, Anno 1413, (which is an
Ecumenical and General Council at Rome) having confessed, that our Blessed
Savior did institute the Eucharist in both kinds, they blasphemously add,
Concillum Constantieuse, Sess. 13.
Quod non obstante Institutione Christi, they decree, That the Sacrament should
be taken only in one kind. Whence Luther would not call it Concilium
Constantiense, but Concilium NON-OBSTANTIENSE. Now this Council condemns this
Proposition, Dominium fundatur in Gratia;

1 st. In Ibidem, Sess. 15.
John Hus and his Followers.

2 dly. In Ibidem, Sess. 8.
Wickliff and his Followers.

4. I do not find any Popish Author, who affirms and approves this Proposition
( Dominium fundatur in Gratia) in those very Terms in which the Council of
Constance had condemned it as Heretical: For this were to contradict their own
Principles, and approve that for Truth, which their Supreme Infallible Guide (a
General Council) had Synodically declared Heresy.

5. But the Church of Rome (though in other Terms) does both profess and
practice this Doctrine, that Dominium fundatur in Gratia: For they say, that
Dominium fundatur in Fide and Religione Catholica, (so they miscal Popery, or
the Roman Religion) so that if any Man, by Apostasy, desert their Religion, or,
by Heresy, deny any Article of their Faith, he does not only forfeit his
Dominion over his Inferiors, but all his Goods and Livelihood, and his Life
here, and eternal Life hereafter. This is the erroneous and impious Doctrine of
the Church of Rome, approved and vindicated, not only by their Schoolmen,
Casuists, Canonists, Summists, etc. but received into the Body of their
Canon Law, in their last, and (as they say) the most correct Editions of it,
and declared and confirmed in their General Councils. That this may appear, I
shall (of many hundreds) give you some few, but pertinent and great Instances.

1. Aquinas Aquinas 2. 2. Quaest. 10. Art. 2.
says, PRINCIPIBUS apostatantibus a Fide, non est obediendum. And again, when
such an Apostate Prince is excommunicared; Ipso facto, ejus Subditi a dominio
and juramento fidelitatis ejus liberati sunt. And a little Aquinas 2. 2.
Quaest. 11. A^t. 3. An Haeretici sint tolerandi?
before, Haereticus non solum excommunicari, sed just occidi potest: and
excommunicatus ulterius relinquitur judicio saeculdri, a mundo exterminandus
per mortem. His Commentators do believe, and (as far as they are able) justify
this Doctrine.

2. Alphonsus a Castro is very large and learned on this Subject, and proves,
first, That for Heresy a Father does lose the Dominion (and yet that Dominium
is jure Naturae Patri debitum) which he had over his Children; Propter Haeresin
(says De justa Haereticorum punitione, lib. 2. cap. 7. Operum page 1244. B.
he) Pater amititt Jus quod habuit super filios, etc. And again, Dominium
Politicum amittitur per Haeresin, it a quod Rex I demibidem, page 1245. E.
factus Haereticus, ipso jure est Regno suo privatus, and Dux suo Ducatu, etc.

3. Nicolaus Eymericus in his Directorium Inquisitorion, Part 2, and 3. and
Francis. Pegna his Commentator, do assert all and more than I have said, and
(out of many Popish Canons and Councils, and Papal Constitutions) fully prove
it.

4. The Canon Law tells us, That Bona Leg. Cum secundum 19. de Haereticis in
60. and cap. Vergentis 10. Extra. de Haereticis.
Haereticorum sunt ipso jure confiscata; and not only so, but their Children
are made incapable of any Benefice or Office Ecclesiastical or Civil; Leg.
Statutum 15. de Haereticis in 60.
Haereticorum filii, usque ad secundam generationem, ad aliquod beneficium
ecclesiasticum, seu publicum officium ne admittantur, quod st secus actum
fuerit, sit irritum. There are many other Constitutions in their Vide praecipuc
cap. ad abolendam, 9. and cap. Excommunica^us, 13. Extra. dl Haereticis
Canon Law, which expressly declare, that Heretics (that is, such as deny any
Article of their Popish Creed) lose all Dominion Ecclesiastical and Civil, of
which they were justly possessed, before they fell from the Popish Faith into
Heresy, as they call it.

5. Lastly, Their Concilium Lateranum Magnum sub Innocentio III. in which there
were (for so they tell us) about 1200 Fathers; I say, this great Council (which
they acknowledge to be General or Ecumenical) expressly declares, That an
Heretic (tho a King or Emperor) does by his Heresy forfeit all his Dominion;
and therefore with them Dominion must be in Fide fundatum, that is, in their
Apocryphal Popish Faith. For if believing, and continuing in that Faith, do
preserve their Dominion; and the rejecting it by Heresy, forfelt it; then it
necessarily and evidently follows, that their Roman Catholic Faith is the
Foundation of their Dominion, and the Cause which preserves it, as Here Is is the
Cause why they lose it. And as this is their Popish impious Doctrine, that not
only Subjects, but Supreme Governors, Kings and Emperors, forfeit their
Dominions by Heresy; so the Practice of their Popes has in this case been
suitably impious and sinful. I need not go far for evident Instances in
particular: Paul Vide Bullarium Romanum Romae, 1638. Tom. 1. page 514, 515. The
Bull bears date, Jan. 3. 1538.
III. excommunicates our Henry 8, for Heresy, absolves his Subjects from all
Oaths of Allegiance, and declares him to have lost all Right to his Dominions.
So Pius V. Vide Bullam Pii V. in dicto Bullario, Tom. 2 page 229. The Bull is
dated at Rome, 5 Call. Maii, 1570.
for the same reason, (because Q. Elizabeth was an Heretic) excommunicates and
deposes her, and gives her Kingdoms to Philip the 2 d of Spain, who came with
his great Armada, and the Pope's Benediction (which brought the Curse of God
upon him and his Fleet, for there is no Power or Policy against Providence) to
take possession of it, in 1588. In prosecution of these Principles, many
hundred thousands have been actually murdered in the Papacy; either, 1. By open
War, as in France, and the Countries adjoining; in Ireland, in our late
Rebellion, etc. 2. By their bloody Inquisition. 3. Or endeavored to be
murdered by secret Conspiracies, as in our Gunpowder Treason, and many
Conspiracies against Q. Elizabeth, and our late gracious Sovereign. But his
Sacred Majesty having graciously promised to maintain the Church of England, as
it is by Law established, (who has ever been, and I doubt not, will be faithful
in his Promises) this secures me against such Fears, and makes me willing to
believe, that the impious Popish Principles shall never be put in Execution in
England. Dirum omen, qui solus potest averruncet Deus.

And because in these Times, many who would be thought Wits, and who by the
Vanity and Looseness of their Principles, have been tempted to malign the Clergy
in general, and have made the Priestcraft a Term in vogue, it is thought
seasonable to stop such Persons in their Career toward Atheism, by letting
them see from what Forge the virulent Expression of Priestcraft came. Nor yet
is this late Reverend Bishop's Testimony given in his Letter against the
Rebellion of 41, fit to be concealed.

To..... etc.
My Honored Friend,
I Received yours, and return (what is most due for that and many more
Civilities) my hearty Thanks. News here we have none, and so I cannot requite
your Kindness, by sending you (what you so kindly send me) Intelligence. You
have seen (I believe) Machiavel's Works (translated out of Italian or Latin)
in English, which came out the last Year, 1675. The Printer (in the second
Page) says, it was Licensed, but tells us not by whom. In the end of it, there
is a Letter of Machiavel's (so it is pretended) in Vindication of his Writings.
That Letter endeavors two things; 1. To magnify Democracy, (as the best
Government) and decry Monarchy. 2. To decry the Clergy in general (not only
those of Rome) as a sort of People, so far from holy, that they have nothing
left of Integrity or Humanity. He tells us of an execrable innate ill Quality
inseparable from the Priestcraft, and the Conjuration or Spell of their
newnvented Ordination; and would have them rooted out so, as not one Sibra were
left, etc. When it was printed, (by whose Authority or Advice I know not) a
considerable Piece (one whole Leaf in Folio) was left out, which I have in MS.
and do here enclosed send you a Copy of it. The business of that Piece which is
left out, is to tell us, what is not Rebellion, (so he pretends;) and if his
Principles be true, we have had no Rebellion in England this 40 Years. My
humble Service to your Neighbor, and my honored Friend. I am in extreme
haste, and

Q. Coll. Oxon. May 11, 1676. Your affectionate Friend and Servant, Tho.
Lincoln.


Omitted out of Machiavel's Letter, in Vindication of himself and his Writings,
between page 4, and 5.
NOW having gone thus far in the Description of Rebellion, I think my self
obliged to tell you what I conceive not to be Rebellion. Whosoever then takes
up Arms to maintain the Politic Constitution or Government of his Country in
the Condition it then is, I mean to defend it from being changed or invaded, by
the Craft or Force of any Man, (although it be in the Prince or Chief Magistrate
himself) Provided that such taking up of Arms be commanded or authorized by
those, who are by the Orders of that Government legally entrusted with the
Custody of the Liberty of the People, and Foundation of the Government; this I
hold to be so far from Rebellion, that I believe it laudable, nay, the Duty of
every Member of such Common wealth: for he who fights to support and defend the
Government he was born and lives under, cannot deserve the odious Name of
Rebel, but he who endeavors to destroy it.

If this be not granted, it will be in vain to frame any mixed Monarchies in the
World; yet such is at this Day the happy Form under which almost all Europe
lives, as the People of France, Spain, Germany, Poland, Sweedland, Denmark,
etc. wherein the Prince has his Share, and the People theirs; which last, if
they had no means of recovering their Rights, if taken from them, or defending
them, if invaded, would be in the same Estate, as if they had no Title to them,
but lived under the Empire of Turkey or of Muscovy.

And since they have no other Remedy but by Arms, and that it would be of ill
consequence to make every private Man judge when the Rights of the People (to
which they have as lawful a Claim as the Prince to his) are invaded, which
would be apt to produce frequent, and sometimes causless, Tumults; therefore it
has been the great Wisdom of the Founders of such Monarchies, to appoint
Guardians to their Liberty, which if it be not otherwise expressed, is, and
ought to be understood to reside in the Estates of the Country, which for that
reason, (as also to exercise their Share in the Sovereignty, as making Laws,
levying Moneys) are frequently assembled in all these Regions in Europe before
mentioned. These are to assert and mantain the Orders of the Government, and
the Laws Established, (if it cannot be done otherwise) to arm the People, to
defend and repel the Force that is upon them. Nay, the Government of Arragon
goes farther; and because in the Intervals of the Estates or Courts, many
Accidents may intervene to the prejudice of their Rights or Fueros, as they
call them, they have, during the Intermission, appointed a Magistrate, called
Justitia, who is, by the Law and Constitution of that Kingdom, to assemble the
whole People to his Banner, whenever such Rights are incroach'd upon, who are
not only justified by the Laws for such coming together, but are severely
punishable in case of Refusal. So that there is no question, but that if the
Kings of Arragon (at this day very powerful, by the Addition of the Kingdom of
Naples, and of Sicily, and the Union of Castile) should in time to come invade
their Kingdom of Arragon with the Forces of their new Dominions, and endeavor
to take from them the Rights and Privileges they enjoy lawfully by their
Constitution, there is no question, I say, but they may (tho their King be
there in Person against them) assemble under their Justitia, and defend their
Liberties with as much Justice, as if they were invaded by the French, or by
the Turk: for it were absurd to think, since the People may be legally
assembled to apprehend Robbers, nay, to deliver a Possession forcibly detained
against the Sentence of some Inferior Court; that they may and ought not to
bestir themselves, to keep in Being, and preserve that Government which
maintains them in possession of their Liberty and Property, and defends their
Lives too from being Arbitrarily taken away.

But I know this clear Truth receives Opposition in this unreasonable and
corrupt Age, when Men are more prone to flatter the Lusts of Princes than
formerly, and the Favorites are more impatient to hear the Impartiality of
Laws, than the Sons of Brutus were, who complained, Leges esse surdas; that is,
though they were fine Gentlemen, in favor with the Ladies, and Ministers of
the King's Pleasure, yet they could not Oppress, Drink, Whore, nor Kill the
Officers of Justice in the Streets, returning from their Night-Revels; but the
Execution of the Laws would reach them as well as others, who in the time of
Tarquin, it seems, found the Prince more exorable. Nay, the very Divines
themselves help with their Fallacies to oppugn this Doctrine, by making us
believe, as I said before, that it is God's Will all Princes should be
Absolute, and are so far in a Conspiracy against Mankind, that they assert that
in the Text ( This shall the Manner of your King be) God was giving that People
the Jus Divinum of Government, when in truth he was threatening them with
Plagues of Monarchy. But I spare the Divines here, since I shall have occasion,
in discoursing of my next Accusation, to show how that sort of People have
dealt with God's Truths, and with the Interest of Men. And to be as good as my
Word, I shall presently fall upon that Point, having been so tedious already in
the former.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Mr. Cottington's Case.
PAge 17. after the last word, dele the Period. p. 63. for Appella, read
Apella. P. 72. line 2, f. excuse, r. execute. P. 117. l. 12. f. Tulin, r.
Turin. P. 119. f. Monoch, r. Menoch. P. 127. l. antepenult. f. Roe, r. Rote. P.
131. l. 6. f. senim, r. enim.

The Case of the Jews.
In Title-Leaf, r. Republica.

P. 8. in margin, r. videsis. P. 14. near the end, r. vigilant. P. 26. l. 2.
r. practiced. P. 43. l. penult. r. Practices. P. 63. l. 7. r. principal. Ibid.
f. two, r. too. P. 70. l. 5. after was, add not.


