A LETTER CONCERNING Invocation of Saints, AND ADORATION OF THE CROSS, Writ Ten
Years since, to JOHN EVELYN of DEPTHFORD Esquire.

By Dr Barlow then Provost of Q. College, and now Lord Bishop of LINCOLN.

PSALM. LXV. 2. O Thou that hear Prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.
LONDON, Printed by John Macock for John Martyn at the sign of the Bell in St
Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXIX.

My honored Friend,
WHen I had the happiness to see you at our Act, you were pleased to show me a
Passage of a Sermon of St Cyril's in Binius, and ask me, whether it might not
be a good Argument for the Popish Invocation of Saints. I told you then (upon a
slight perusal of the Passage) that I conceived it was no ground of any
Argument for Invocation of Saints: I perceive since (by your Letter to Mr.
Walker) that you desire me to give a Reason why I think so; and seeing your
desires are, (and ever shall be) a Command to me, I do (without any excuse or
Apology) obey. I know my disability to give a just Reason of this particular,
(or any thing else) but seeing you require it, and (out of your charity) think
I can, I will think so too -- Cur me posse negem, quod tu posse putes? I have
hereby sent you a tedious, and (I fear) an impertinent scrible: You know I have
a great many little businesses to do, and at this time so many, that I had
scarce time to review, much less to transcribe, what I have writ. But I dare,
(and do) trust you with all my Infirmities, well knowing that you have as well
goodness enough to pardon, as judgment to find my faults. If you communicate
my Papers to him who urged the Passage in Cyril for Invocation of Saints (or
any Papist else) per me licet, you have my free leave, only conceal my name;
and if any of them will, or can show me (pertinently and in short) that I have
erred in the particular of Cyril's Sermon, or in the other things I have said
against their Invocation of Saints, they will do an Act of great Charity to me,
for which I will heartily thank God and them. As to the Passage in Cyril, it
seems to me (evident, beyond dispute) that it is only a figurative speech, an
usual Apostrophe, and no Prayer; and for their Doctrine and Practice of
Invocation of Saints, it is a Novel and Impious Error and Superstition. He who
thinks otherwise, and can give me any concluding Argument for it: Either, 1. A
lumine Naturae, from the Principles of Natural Reason common to all Mankind:
Or, 2. A lumine Scripturae, from Divine Revelation comprehended in the sacred
Scriptures: Or, 3. A Traditione Universali, from the Belief and Practice of the
Primitive Church especially, and so downward: I say, he who can give me a
cogent Reason from any one of these Topiques (nor is there any other medium in
the world will do it) shall have me his Proselyte: Otherwise, (...). It is now
toward twelve a clock, and I more than half asleep (as you may guess by this
rude scrible) and therefore (my Respects remembered) pray pardon

SIR, Your Affectionate Friend, and (for a thousand Civilities) thankful
Servant, Q. Col. Oxon. Sept. 28. M DC LXIX. Tho. Barlow.

The place in Cyril before mentioned, urged by a Popish Priest for the
Invocation of Saints.
Cyril of Alexandria in an Homily before the Council of Ephesus on St John's
day, and in a Church Dedicated to his Name, having cited those words, Heb. 1.
6. When he brings in the first-begotten into the World, he says, Let all the
Angels of God worship him: And having asked who that was, and how he came into
the world? He adds -- Extat locus apud Binium Council. Tom. 2. p. 548, 549.
Edit. Paris. Anno 1636.
(...), etc. Mysterium hoc aperi, O Evangelista, effare etiam nunc, O beat
Johannes, qui voces habes immortales. Ecce tantus his pastorum coetus ad te
venit, remove nobis lapidem, sicut beatus Jacob pastoribus; resera nobis puteum
vitae: da, ut nunc quoque de salutis fontibus hauriamus, etc.

COncerning this Passage, the Querie is, Whether Quest.
it be not a plain and evident Passage to prove (that irrational and most
Apocryphal piece of Popery) The Invocation of Saints?

In answer to this Querie, (though utterly unworthy Answ.
of any serious Answer) I shall crave (your pardon, and) leave to say --

1. That I acknowledge this Homily to be St Cyril's.

2. That, although there are faults both in the Greek and the Latin version,
(which might easily have been amended by the MSS. or better Greek Vid. Acta
Oecumen. Synodi 3. Ephesi habitae. Heidelberg. 1591. Graece p. 216.
Copies extant in print) yet I do not think that the Text (as in other parts of
Binius I know it is) has been data opera, and willingly any way corrupted; and
so I shall take it as it is, (granting it to be Cyril's, and not corrupted) and
let them make the best of it.

3. That I wonder any knowing person should seriously cite a passage so
insignificant, and altogether impertinent: which carries no shadow of proof of
that, for which it is produced. Sure I am, Binius (who diligently observes and
urges whatever may advantage the Catholic Cause, (as they commonly miscall
it) takes no notice of this passage of Cyril, (as appears by his In calce Part.
3. Council. Ephesini, Tom. 2. p. 665, etc.
Notes, in which he has nothing of it) which he would not have omitted, had he
conceived it a pertinent proof of the Romish Invocation of Saints. Nor does
Bellarm. de Sanctor. Beatitud. lib. 1. cap. 19.
Bellarmine, Hen. Hen. Vicus Tit. 24. de Sanct. Invocatione, page 342, 343.
Vicus, Gabriel Vasquez lib. 1. De Adoratione Disput. 5. cap 2.
Vasquez, Gregorius Valentia, Disput. 6. Quaest. 2. De Oratione Puncto 7. Tom.
3. page 1261.
de Valentia, or any I have yet met with, (though possibly others may) make use
of this passage of Cyril to prove Invocation of Saints, when and where they do
ex professo, and data opera, diligently quote all the Councils and Fathers they
can to prove that point.

4. It is well known to all (to whom Rhetorique and Theology are not unknown)
that there is a vast difference between a figurative, and a proper phrase and
form of speech, between a Rhetorical Apostrophe, and a Theological Prayer. And
that such Rhetorical and figurative expressions are very usual in all Authors,
Sacred or Civil, (especially in Poets and Orators) is certain, and on all sides
confessed. For instance, 1. An Apostrophe, they say, is Vid. Eustath. ad (...)
Homeri, page 453. l. 11. Romae 1542. Quintil. Institut. Orat. lib. 9. cap. 2.
Figura cum a Judice vel Auditore ad absentem aliquem Orationem convertimus,
and quasi praesentem alloquimur. So Virgil, -- Virgil. Aeneid. 1.
Musa mihi causas memora, etc. So Tully, -- Cicero Orat. pro Cluentio.
Te nunc alloquor Africane, cujus mortui nomen splendori and decori est
Civitati. And David, (or whoever was Author of that Psalm. 148. 11, 12, 13, etc.
Psalm) has an Apostrophe to Kings and People, Princes and all Judges, Men and
Maids, Young and Old, calling upon them to praise the Lord. That the words of
David (or those of Virgil or Tully) were properly a Prayer, or any more than an
Apostrophe, a figurative and Rhetorical Invocation, as none (with any Truth or
Reason) can, so, I suppose, none will say; or if any do, they may as well say,
That he prayed to the Sun and Moon, to Stars, Beasts, Birds and Fishes; (for
the Apostrophe or Prosopopoeia is equally Ibid. verse. 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.
addressed to them) which were very irrational in the judgment of a Learned
Sim. de Muis, in Psalm. 148. verse. 3.
Papist, who truly tells us, that it is a Prosopopoeia and not a Prayer. In the
Song of the three Children (which is Canonical to them of Rome) all Creatures
in Heaven and Earth are Dan. 3. 52, 53, etc. Edit. lat. vulgatae. So Isai. 1.
2. Hear O heavens, and hark O earth. So Cicero calls to the Hills and Woods of
Alba -- Vos Albani tumuli atque luci, oro and obtestor, etc. No Prayer, but a
Rhetorical Prosopopoeia.
called upon to bless the Lord; and then v. 86. it follows -- Benedicite
spiritus and animae justorum Domino, etc. The words evidently contain a
Rhetorical figure, an Apostrophe, not a prayer, as will, (and must) be
confessed by the Popish Party; who say, that in the time of the Old Testament,
there was no Invocation of Saints, because their souls (before our blessed
Saviors resurrection) did not enjoy the beatifical Vision, and so could not
understand the wants or prayers of men living here below.

Once more, we have the like Rhetorical Apostrophe in Nazianz. in Invectiva 1.
contra Julianum, in principio.
Nazianzene. (...), etc. Audite haec omnes gentes, omnes qui habitatis terram
auribus percipite -- Audi Coelum and auribus percipe Terra -- Audi haec etiam
Constantii magni anima ((...)) si quis mortuis sensus est, etc. Here we have a
Rhetorical figure, but no Prayer (as is manifest) and it is observable, that
Nazianzene could not tell, whether the Soul of Constantius (whom he so much
commends in that Oration) could hear him: and therefore he adds, (...), or (as
the Greek Scholiast expounds it) (...), Si quis sensus sit quo res hic gestas
audiat. And in Cyril's Works (besides this This Oration of Cyril's in Binius,
occurs in Cyril's Works, Tom. 5. Part. 2. page 352.
Oration of his in Binius, of which we are now speaking) there is Ibid. page
379.
another, wherein he has the like Apostrophe to St John and others, thus --
(...), etc. Salve porro, o ter beat Johannes Apostole and Evangelista,
virginitatis decus, pudicitiae magister, diabolicae fraudis exterminator,
Ephesinae urbis portus and propugnaculum, pauperum nutritor, afflictorum,
peregrinorum quies and refrigerium -- And then it follows, -- Salve Maria
Deipara, Virgo Matter, Lucifera, vas incorruptum, etc. all which (and much more
which follows) is only an usual Apostrophe, a Rhetorical figure, and properly
no Religious Invocation or Prayer: Unless we will say, that he prays to the
City of Ephesus, for in the same Cyril. ibidem in Encomio in sanctam Mariam
Deiparam, page 379. I.
place he invokes that in the same form -- (...), etc. Salve Ephesiorum Urbs,
vel potius maris Dea, vel spectaculum, (for so it should be rendered.) This (as
the other before) is clearly an Apostrophe, a Rhetorical figure, but nothing of
a Prayer. In relation to such passages in Ecclesiastical Writers (especially
the Greek Fathers in their Orations and Poems) it is a good caution which is
given by a Learned Papist -- Saepe monuimus (says Sixtus Senensis Bibliothecae
Sanctae lib. 6. Annotar. 152. Vide Theodoret. Dialogo 3. Where he says, That
no Rule of Doctrine is to be taken from the Panegyrical Orations of the Fathers.
he) non esse Concionatorum verba semper eo rigore accipienda, quo primum ad
aures auditorum perveniunt. Multa enim Declamatores per hyperbolen crebro
enuntiant, vel occasion locorum, temporum, ac personarum adducti, vel
affectuum impetu and Orationis cursu rapti, etc. So evident it is, and on all
sides confessed, that it is neither rational nor safe to make Rhetorical
expressions Principles, and Foundations, and Grounds of Theological Reasons; to
make figures premises, and thence infer (what will not follow) conclusions
in Divinity. Now to bring this home to our present Passage in Cyril's Homily:
I say,

5. That the Passage in Cyril (like those abovementioned) is only a Rhetorical
Apostrophe to St John; a figurative Speech, but no Prayer. This will be evident
to any who impartially considers Cyril's Words. 1. He cites that place, Heb. 1.
6. Cum inducit primogenitum in orbem terrarum, dicit; Et adorent eum omnes
Angeli Dei. 2. He asks, Quis is est qui in orbem terrarum ingressus est? And
intending (as appears by the sequel) to answer that Question with a Passage in
St John's Gospel; He does, 3. Make a long Rhetorical Apostrophe to St John, as
if he were there present, (...), etc. Mysterium hoc aperi, O Evangelista;
effare etiam NUNC, O beat Johannes, qui voces habes immortales; and oblivio ac
tempus tuis cedunt verbis. Ecce tantus hic Pastorum coetus ad te venit; remove
lapidem, resera nobis puteum vitae: Da ut NUNC quoque de salutis fontibus
hauriamus: Imo vero tuum nobis fontem appone. (...), Annon DICENTEM AUDIMUS?
(for so it should be read, and rendered) or, as it is in Binius (for it is all
one, as to our present business) (...), AUDIAMUS itaque DICENTEM. All this is
spoken by way of Apostrophe to St John, as if he had been present, and heard
them: And then, ( as if John had given his Answer, and they heard him) it
follows, Audiamus itaque dicentem. Well, First, Where did John speak this which
they were to hear? Non in Coelo, (for they had need of long ears, and he a loud
voice, if at that distance they could hear him) sed in Evangelio. Secondly,
When did John speak this? Not when Cyril The Sermon was made when the Council
of Ephesus sat, which was Anno 431.
made this Sermon, and said, Audiamus itaque dicentem: but about three hundred
and thirty years before, when he Scripsit Evangelium paulo ante mortem: moritur
Anno Christi 101. Eusebius. in Chronico, and Hieronymus de script. Illustr. in
Johanne.
writ his Gospel. Thirdly, What was it he spoke? Not any thing de novo; but
what he had spoke and writ so long before in the 1 Chap. and 1. verse of his
Gospel; for Cyril having said -- Audiamus itaque Johannem dicentem, he
immediately adds, (what John said, and he would have them to hear) In principio
erat verbum, and verbum erat apud Deum, and Deus erat verbum. Whence I further
observe,

6. That this passage of Cyril, which is pretended to be a Prayer, and a proof
of their Invocation of Saints, is only a piece of Cyril's Homily or Sermon,
not of any Prayer either before or after it.

7. All Cyril desires of John in this Passage (and pretended Prayer) is only
this; That he would tell them what they well knew already, out of that Gospel
he had writ above three hundred years before. For so the words are -- Da, ut
nunc de salutis fontibus hauriamus; imo TUUM nobis FONTEM appone. By fontes
salutis, he means the Gospels; and by TUUM FONTEM, St John's Gospel; and so all
he desires is, That St John would set his Gospel before them (which was before
them already) that out of it they might draw, or learn that passage -- In
principio erat verbum, etc. Now for Cyril (or any body else) to desire of John
in a serious Prayer, that he would tell them, what he had told them (and they
well knew) long before, were irrational and ridiculous: But to do it (as beyond
dispute, Cyril here does) by way of an usual figure and Rhetorical Apostrophe,
is not only allowable, but in the best Authors commendable. Cyril says here --
Audiamus Johannem dicentem, Let us hear what Saint John says, (though in
truth, and propriety of speech, St John spoke not one word then, nor was it
possible they should hear him speak what he spoke not.) And so our Church in
her In the Communion Service, a little after the General Confession. 1.
Liturgy makes use of the very same figurative expression, -- Hear what
comfortable words our Savior says -- And again, Hear what Saint Paul says --
And again -- Hear what Saint John says. The truth manifestly is this: The
Priest, who Officiates at our Communion, exhorts the Congregation to hear what
our blessed Savior, what Paul, and John says (in the present tense) when he
reads unto them comfortable Passages spoke by then sixteen hundred years
before, and left upon Record in the Gospel out of which he reads them. So St
Cyril here in his Sermon, being to prove the Dignity and Divinity of our
blessed Saviors person, out of Saint John's Gospel; he first makes that long
Rhetorical harangue and Apostrophe to John (as if he were present and heard it)
and then cites the Text, as if he had spoke it then, which he well knew was not
then spoken by John, but about three hundred and thirty years before. So that,
he who makes Cyril's words here, to be any thing but a Figurative Expression,
and a Rhetorical Apostrophe; he who would have his words ( in propriety of
Speech) a serious Prayer, and supplication to John, that he would tell them,
what he had already ( three hundred years before) told, and they certainly
knew: I say, he who makes this the meaning of Cyril's words, makes both Cyril
and himself ridiculous.

Well, but suppose (though it be evidently untrue) that Dub.
Cyril did, in this Sermon and Passage, properly (without any figure) and truly
pray to Saint John; will it not be a great Argument for the Popish Invocation
of Saints, and confirm the truth of their Doctrine? etc.

No, it will be no Argument at all. For, it being Resp.
granted, that Cyril did pray to Saint John; it will not follow, that
Invocation of Saints is commendable, or ( to him, or us) lawful. All the
Argument that can be built upon this Passage (taken in their own sense, which
yet is evidently false) is only this -- Cyril prayed to John a dead Saint,
[ergo] Invocation of Saints is lawful, which is an illogical deduction,
evidently inconsequent, no better than these -- David committed Adultery [ergo]
Adultery is lawful. Peter denied, and forswore his Savior, [ergo] we may do
so. All men know, that A facto ad jus, non valet argumentum. Sempronius or
Titius did such a work, [ ergo] It was well done, or, we may do it, this is
irrational, and a manifest non sequitur. Cyril's Fact (if he had done it) does
no more justify Invocation of Saints, than what David and Peter did, the
lawfulness of Adultery, and denying our Lord and Master. If it be said, Cyril
was a Saint, a great and good man, and therefore his Example of more weight and
more imitable. I answer, 1. He is called a Saint, and I (in charity) believe
him so; but whether he really be a Saint, none under Heaven does, or can
certainly know, no not the Pope, notwithstanding his Infallibility. 2. He was
(I grant) a great and (for ought I know) a good man; but David and Peter (for
many reasons I do know) were far greater and better, as far before him in
dignity and piety, as in time; and therefore his Action (had it been his) will
no more warrant Invocation of Saints, than David's or Peter's can legitimate
Adultery or Perjury.

But this was not Cyril's Fact or Opinion only, but the Dub.
Judgment of the Ecumenical Council of Ephesus: It was in that Council he had
that Homily. It was Cyril and the Council prayed to Saint John -- (...), etc.
Ecce tantus PASTORUM COETUS ad te venit, it was the whole Synod which did
supplicate to St John; and therefore Invocation of Saints has not only the
Approbation and Authority of Cyril, but of the whole Ecumenical Synod of
Ephesus. This is the utmost can be said (by those who bring it) in the
prosecution and pressing this Argument.

To this, (which is all gratis dictum) I say, 1. That Resp.
it is evident (and, I believe, may in part appear by what is abovesaid) this
whole passage in Cyril, is only a figurative speech, an Apostrophe, but no
Prayer to Saint John; and so (though it have the approbation of Cyril, and the
Synod too) is altogether impertiment, and no proof of Invocation of Saints. 2.
I deny this Sermon, or this passage in it, to have the Authority and
approbation of the Council in which it was spoke. It Is true, the Sermon was
spoke in the Synod at Ephesus, and is registered amongst the Acts of that
Council: But all know, who have read and considered the Acts and Editions of
Councils, that many things have been read and spoken publicly in them, and are
now Recorded amongst the Acts of such Synods, which are but of private (not
Synodical) Authority; such are Sermons, Letters, Petitions, Disputations, and
such like, which have been spoke or read, or heard publicly in Councils, and
yet have no Authority beyond that of their particular Authors, and the persons
whose they were, and whence they came. This is most undeniably certain, in the
Canons, and Synodical Definitions of all Councils; Whatever, in any Council,
has the Assent and Subscriptions of the Fathers in it; this, and only this, as
it has the Approbation and Definition, so it has the Authority and Ratification
of the Council: But such Authority (arising from the Approbation or
subscription of the Synod) this Sermon never had. 3. I confess, these words --
[ Ecce tantus Pastorum Coetus venit ad te] are in that Sermon; but they are the
words of Cyril, not of the Synod; and so all the Authority they have, (or can
have) is personal, (depending on one single person) and not Synodical. 4. That
many things ( Sermons, Epistles, Petitions, etc.) are Recorded amongst the Acts
of Synods, which have no Synodical Authority, is, and must be confessed on all
sides, seeing a hundred such things occur in the Tomes of the Councils, which
neither Protestant nor Papist believe: As may appear in an Instance or two, Thus

1. In the second Nicene Council, which (though it really was an Erroneous and
Impious Conventicle, yet) at Rome is received as a Legitimate General Council:
John Bishop of Thessalonica declares publicly -- That the Rational Soul,
Angels, Archangels, and all Spirits are Corporeal and Visible -- Synodo Nicena
2. Act. 4. apud Binium Council. Tom. 5. page 701. C. D. Edit. Paris. Anno 1636.
(...) -- Non sunt incorporales omnino and invisibiles, sicut Pagani fatentur
-- (...) -- sed subtiles autem corpore, and aerei, aut ignei, prout Hebr. 1. 7.
scriptum est, Qui facit Angelos suos spiritus, and ministros suos ignem
urentem. And he says too, that the Catholic Church knows this to be so, --
(...), novit hoc Ecclesia Catholica, etc. Whether the Fathers of that
Apocryphal Council approved this Passage then or no, I know not; sure I am the
Church of Rome does not approve it now, though it was publicly spoke then, and
still remains amongst the Acts of that Council.

2. In the same Ibid. apud Binium Council. Tom. 5. page 503, 504.
Council (it is in Baronius Annal. Tom. 9. ad Annum 726. number. 30. page 68.
Baronius too) there is an Epistle of Pope Gregory the Second to the Emperor
Leo Isaurus, in which there are several things said by that Pope (who was sure
as Infallible as any of his Successors) which are not now believed at Rome,
though the Epistle was writ by a Pope, and is Recorded amongst the Acts of that
Council: For 1. Gregory there tells the Emperor (and us) that our blessed
Savior writ a Letter to Augarus (so Ibid. p. 503. F.
Binius and Ubi supra page 67. E.
Baronius read Gregory's Letter, though Hist. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 13. ultimo.
Eusebius have Agbarus or Abgarus) King of Edessa, and withal sent him --
(...), sacram and gloriosam ejus faciem (the Picture of it he means) ad eum
misit. A most putid and Apocryphal Fable, and (as such) damned at Rome almost
Sedet Gelasius Anno Christi 491.
twelve hundred years ago by Pope Apud Gratianum Can. Sancta Romana 3. Did. 15.
Gelasius (as Infallible as his Predecessor Gregory) in a Council of seventy
Bishops. 2. Gregory tells Leo, that they neither pictured God the Father, nor
was it possible for them to do it -- (...), etc. Patrem non pingimus, quoniam
quis sit non novimus, Deique natura pingi non potest. But now the Case is
altered, they know (it seems) more than Gregory did, and do that which he said
was impossible, for they do picture God the Father (and the Holy Vid.
Breviarium Romanum, Part. Aestiv. in Festo Trinitatis, page 132. Antverpiae,
1660. Nay in Henry the sevenths time, the Picture of the Blessed Trinity was
the sign of a Stationers shop in Paul's Churchyard; and I have seen a Book
printed with this in the Title page -- Venundantur ad Insigne Trinitatis, etc.
Londini, etc.
Trinity too) a thousand times. Nay, there is a Note in the margin of Baronius,
which directly confutes the Text, and tells us so. In the Text Gregory says --
Non pingimus Deum Patrem. The Baron. loco citato, page 68. B.
Note says, POSTEA in Ecclesia usu venit ut pingatur Deus Pater. He confesses
the Fact, they now paint the Father, which anciently was never done; and he
adds a reason to (confute Pope Gregory, and) prove it possible to picture God
the Father, as he is described in Scripture -- Quod enim describitur, idem and
pingitur, cum sit eadem ratio utriusque, stili and penicilli. The Cardinal
tells us, That God the Father may be pictured; and his reason is -- The Father
may (in words) be described by the pen, therefore he may be pictured with the
pencil. And he does prove this -- Quia eadem est ratio stili and penicilli;
there is the same reason of the Pen and Pencil. But this reason is (like the
Conclusion it is brought to prove) wildly irrational, inconsistent with truth,
and their own Popish Principles. For it is confessed by the Trent Council. Trid.
Sess. 25. In princip. de Invocat. Venerat. and Reliquiis sanctorum, etc.
Council, That the Divinity of God cannot be pictured; and the Trent Catechis.
Romanus, s^u Trideminus, Part. 3. de 1. Praecepto Sect. 18, 19.
Catechism tells us, (and proves it very well) that to picture the Divinity of
God, is a Violation of the first Precept of the Decalogue (they make the second
Precept an Appendix, or part of the first) so that it is (and must be)
confessed, that it ever was, (and still is) utterly unlawful to picture the
Deity; and so all use of any Pencil, (as to this purpose of painting the
Divinity) is forbidden. Whence it follows, (by the Cardinals Logique) Eadem est
ratio stili and penicilli; that as it is unlawful to paint the Divinity with
the pencil; so it must be unlawful to express and describe it with the pen: But
this is evidently untrue, for not only the operations, and persons, and
properties of God, but his Nature and Divinity are (by the pen) fully described
in Scripture, and out of it, by all Divines Ancient and Modern, Protestant and
Papist. By which it further appears, that the Cardinals position [ Quod
describitur idem and pingitur, quia eadem ratio stili and penicilli] is untrue
and Apocryphal; seeing it is, and ever was lawful to describe the Divinity of
God by the pen; and yet (by the confession of all sides) it neither is, nor
ever was lawful for Jew or Christian, to describe or picture the Divine Nature
with the pencil.

3. Once more, (to show that many things are Recorded in the Acts of General
Councils, which have no Synodical Authority, but are rejected by Papists
themselves) in the beforementioned Epistle of Gregory the Second to Leo
Isaurus, amongst the Council. Nicenum 2. apud Binium, Council. Tom. 5. page 504.
D. E.
Acts of the second Nicene Council; we have the Emperors Accusation of Pope
Gregory and his Party, for Worshipping Images -- (...). Dicis nos Petras,
Parietes and Tabellas adorare: That was the Accusation. The Answer there is --
(...), etc. Non est ut dicis, o Imperator: He denies the Accusation, They did
not worship Walls or Tables (Images.) The use (he says) they made of them,
was, (...), etc. Ut memoria excitetur, and men's ad coelestia erigatur, (no harm
in this) and then adds -- (...), Spem Spem in Imaginibus non ponimus, says
Pope Gregory the second, (he was made Pope Anno 714.) and long after him Pope
Innocent the 3d (made Pope Anno 1198.) says the same -- imaginibus inclinamus,
non ut spem salutis in illis constituainus, sed ut ad memoriam excitati,
devotionem erga Deum demonstremus. Vide Opera Innocentii 3. Venet. 1578. Tom.
^. page 75. Col. 2.
enim in illis (Imaginibus) non habemus. This (it seems) was true in Pope
Gregory's time (in the beginning of the Eighth Century;) but the Case is much
altered since that; the Church of Rome does worship Images, and acknowledge it;
nay, they worship them with Latria (as they call it) due to God only, and
profess publicly, that they PUT THEIR TRUST IN THEM. Let Aquinas be a Witness
for this. He proposes the Question. Aquinas Part. 3. Quaest. 25. Art. 4.
An Christi Crux sit Latria adoranda? He affirms it, The Cross (says he)
adoratur eadem adoratione cum Christo, scilicet adoratione Latriae; and propter
hoc etiam Crucem alloquimur ac deprecamur, quasi ipsum crucifixum; and that
Veneration is to be given, not only to a Golden Cross, but in ^^lia quavis
materia (be it made of a rotten stick, or Rubies, all is one for that) adoranda
est Latria, etc. And he proves it thus, Illi exhibemus Latriae cultum, in quo
ponimus spem salutis: Sed in Cruce Christi ponimus spem salutis: [ ergo] The
first Proposition is certain: The second he proves by (an Infallible Authority)
the testimony, and public practice of the Roman Church; Quia cantat Ecclesia,
In Dominica de Passione Domini, in Hymno: So it is cited in the margin of
Aquinas.
(says he) and then he cites that known, old and impious Hynm, --

O Crux ave spes unica, Hoc passionis tempore. Auge piis Justitiam, Reisque
dona Veniam. This was the Hymn in Aquinas his time, since when it is (though not
mended, yet) a little altered, for instead of the two last lines, in their late
Breviaries, they have substituted these,

Piis adauge gratiam, Reisque dele crimina. This Hymn is not (I confess) used
now by the Roman Church, In Dominica de Passione Domini, (as it is cited in the
margin of Aquinas;) yet it is very many times elsewhere used, as you may see in
the late Roman 1. Sabbato ante Dominicam passionis. page 446.

2. Sabbato infra Habdomadam Passionis. p. 461.

3. Maii 3. In festo Inventionis S. Crucis. page 876. Partis Hiemalis dicti
Breviarii.

4. Sept. 14. In festo Exaltationis S. Crucis. page 649. Partis Aestvae istius
Breviarii.


Breviary at Antwerp, Anno 1660. So we see Rome is not much mended since
Aquinas his time; they still worship a despicable wooden Cross with Divine
Worship ( cultu Latriae) they place their Hope of Salvation in it; Nay, their
ONLY HOPE, for so their Church-Hymn -- o Crux ave SPES UNICA, etc. If it be
said, that by The Cross, they mean Christ Crucified; it is evidently untrue: For
1. Aquinas says, the Cross is to be worshipped with Latria; Aquinas ubi supra
Part 3. Quast. 25. Art. 4. And yet the 2. Council of Nice, which first
established worshipping of Images, expressly denies Latria to be due to any
thing save God -- (...). In unum solum Deum Latriam and sidem nostram ponimus
(says Tarasius) And the Council assented -- (...), etc. Binius Tom. 5. page
570. D. Edition. Paris. 1636.
propter similitudinem, and propter contactum Christi; because it is like, and
because it touched our blessed Saviors Body, and that ( ex quavis materia) of
what Mettle soever the Cross be, Gold, or Silver, or Wood, (all is one) it may,
and must have Divine Worship; by all which it is evident he meant (for nothing
else possibly can be meant by those words of his) the Material Cross, and not
our blessed Savior. 2. And that the Church of Rome in that most blasphemous
Hymn, does (and must) mean so too, and that it is not Christ (our blessed
Savior) but the very wooden Cross, which they call Spes Unica, is no less
evident from the immediately preceding words of that Hymn, Thus --

Arbor decora and fulgida, Electa digno stipite, Tam sancta membra tangere,
Statera facta Corporis, etc. After which words (which can relate to nothing but
the wooden Cross) it immediately follows --

O Crux ave spes Unica, etc. And that this is indeed their meaning, that the
Material Cross (be it Gold, Silver or Wood, or what else you will) is the thing
which they worship with Latria; is manifestly declared in their Roman
Pontifical; where describing the Order of the Procession to be used at the
Reception of the Emperor into any great Town or City when the Popes Legate is
there; We are told that the Sword (Insigne Imperiale) is born before the
Emperor, and the Cross (Insigne Papale) before the Legate. Then it is there
ordered, that the Cross shall have the ( more honorable, ov) right hand in the
Procession, and the Imperial Sword the left hand: The reason there given is
this -- Vide Pontificale Romanum jussu Clementis 8. restitutum Romae, 1611. In
Rubrica Ordinis ad recipiend. Processionaliter Imperatorem, page 480.
Crux Legati, QUIA DEBETUR EI LATRIA, erit a dextris, and gladius Imperatoris a
sinistris. So then (if the Church of Rome understood her own meaning, and speak
truth in Her Public and Authentic Offices) Latria is due, and by them given
to that Cross which is carried in Procession, which certainly is not our
Blessed Savior, but the Material Cross, whether of Gold, or Silver, or Wood,
etc.

And here (though it be not directly to our present business, and I beg your
pardon for the extravagance) I shall add a little more, not out of any private
Author, (of how great Authority and Repute soever) but out of their Public and
most Authentic Offices, that you may see how much the Church of Rome (since
the time of Gregory the second) is improved in her Image Worship, especially in
her prodigious, and more than Pagan* Superstition and Idolatry in her
Staurolatria, and worshipping the Cross. In their Roman Pontifical, in their
solemn Benediction of a New Cross (that is the Lemma or Title to that Office)
they pray --

1. Thus -- Pontificale Romanum, p. 359. De Benedictione Novae Crucis,
Editionis Romae, 1611. Where the first Rubric begins thus -- Nova Crux, seu
Tabula, in qua Crucifixus est depictus, hoc modo benedicitur. A New Cross of
Gold, or Silver, or Wood, the Picture of it, or the Table in which it is
pictured (all is one) so it is to be blessed.
Benedic Domine Jesu Christ, HANC CRUCEM TUAM, per quam eripuisti mundum a
potestate Daemonum, etc. 1. The Gospel expressly tells us, and all good
Christians know, That it was our blessed Saviors Blood and Passion which
delivered us, a potestate Daemonum, not two despicable wooden sticks laid
across. 2. But if it had been the Cross, by which he freed us, a potestate
Daemonum, yet certainly it was that Cross on which he actually suffered ( An.
Tiber. 19.) and not any Cross which had no being till 1600. years after his
Passion, and the Redemption of the World; and yet it is here, Benedictio NOVAE
CRUCIS: A Carpenter makes a Wooden Cross to day, to morrow the Bishop
Consecrates and blesses it in this Solemn (and Impious) Form -- Benedic hanc*
Crucem tuam (this New Cross, which was never his, any more than theirs) per
quam eripuisti Mundum, etc.

2. After this follows another Prayer in the same Office, and the same page of
that Pontifical, so blasphemously impious, that it is a wonder, the Contrivers
were not, and the Users of that Prayer are not afraid of a Thunderbolt, or Fire
and Brimstone to consume them in the practice of such prodigious impiety. The
Prayer ( horresco referens) is this -- And that you may see the stupidity and
madness of Popish Idolatry, in the MS. Missale secundum usum Abbatum
Eveshamensis Monasterii (in my possession) there is Benedictio Sepulchri,
wherein the grave is blessed with these very words, ut sit Remedium salutare
humano generi, Redemptio animae, etc.


Rogamus te, D. Sancte Paten Omnipotens, ut digneris benedicere hoc Signum
Crucis tuae (in the old ORDO ROMANUS it is Vid. Ordinem Romanum veterem apud
Georgium Ferrarium de Catholicae Ecclesiae Divinis Officiis, etc. page 86. Col.
2. B. Edit. Romae, 1591. where the prayer is verbatim the same, only Lignum
Crucis there, is here changed into Signum Crucis.
Hoc LIGNUM CRUCIS tuae) ut sit REMEDIUM SALUTARE GENERI HUMANO; SIT SOLIDITAS
FIDEI, PROFECTUS BONORUM OPERUM, REDEMPTIO ANIMARUM, SIT SOLAMEN, ET PROTECTIO,
AC TUTELA CONTRA SAEVA JACULA INIMICORUM, etc. Is it possible for any man in
his Wits, (who labors not under that, (...) that efficacious and cursed
delusion, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.
to believe a lie) to believe, that two despicable pieces of Wood knocked, and
hewed, and cut, and laid across by a simple Carpenter to day, should the same,
(or next) day be made a Saving means of Mankind, the Redemption of our Souls,
our Comfort and Protection, and Defense against the Devil? How should two
rotten sticks defend our Souls, which cannot any way defend themselves? In the
old That Ordo Romanus, was composed by Bernoldus Constantiensis Presbyter,
circa An. 1060. Possevin. in Apparatu, and Trithemius in Bernoldo
Constantiensi, and Vossius de Symb. Coenae Dom. These. 2. page 441.
Ordo Romanus, (as is abovesaid) it is -- Rogamus, ut digneris benedicere hoc
LIGNUM CRUCIS, ut sit remedium salutare generi humano, Redemptio animarum, etc.
whence it is evident, that (after such Benediction, for, I suppose, they
believed their Benediction was effectual) they relied upon the (Lignum Crucis)
Wood of the Cross, as on their Savior, and the Redeemer of their souls; and
now (having changed those words into SIGNUM CRUCIS) they must rely on the Sign
of the Cross for the salvation of their souls; both which are alike stupidly
irrational, and (beyond all dispute) highly Idololatrical. And lest you should
think that this impious Prayer or Benediction of the Cross, is only in the old
Ordo Romanus, and Pontifical; or that now they have left it out, (as not
approving such a stupid and impious piece of Impiety) you may find it (in the
same words and Benediction) both in the Rituale Roman. Antverp. 1652. page 280,
281.
Rituale Romanum, at Antwerp, 1652. and the Rituale Parisiense, Paris: 1654.
page 394.
Rituale Parisiense, printed at Paris, 1654. And that you may see the strange
folly and contradiction of Error and Superstition, (for Errors are
inconsistent both with themselves and Truth, the Church of Rome tells us, That
the Images of Saints, the Cross, and such like things, though they be, Rerum
sacrarum signa, yet they are no Sacraments -- Catechis. Romanus, Part. 2. Cap.
7. de Sacramentis in genere.. 12.
Quia sanctitatis and Justitiae vim efficiendae non habent; they have no Power
or Efficacy to produce Grace or Sanctity. So the Roman Catechism, and so the
Trent Council (both Authentic at Rome) Concilium Tridentinum Sess. 25. de
Invocat. and Veneratione, and sacris Imaginibus.
Imagines Christi, Deiparae, etc. sunt venerandae, non quod credatur its inesse
aliqua Virtus, propter quam sint colendae, vel quod ab iis aliquid sit
petendum, vel quod fiducia in Imagine sit figenda, etc. Now, if the Roman
Catechism, or Trent-Council say true, (and if they do not, good night to their
pretended Infallibility) then neither the Cross of Christ, nor Images, Vim
Justitiae efficiendae ullam habent; nulla Virtus iis inest propter quam sunt
colendae; nihil ab iis est petendum, nec fiducia in iis figenda. And if this be
true, then all the passages before cited out of their Ordo Romanus, their
Authentic Breviary, the Pontifical and Ritual are manifestly false, (and then
too, good night to their Infallibility:) For in that Hymn,

O Crux ave spes UNICA, Auge piis Justitiam, Reisque dona Veniam. They pray to
the Cross, and yet they say, Nihil ab iis est petendum. 2. Here they say, the
Cross is Spes Unica, and yet they tell us, Nulla fiducia in iis est figenda. 3.
Here their Church says, the Cross -- Auget piis Justitiam, reisque donat
veniam; that it is -- Remedium salutare generi humano, soliditas fidei,
redemptio animarum, etc. (for so their Ritual and Pontifical have it in the
places cited) and yet they tell us too (as above) that neither in the Cross, or
any Image -- Vis ulla inest sanctitatis aut justitiae efficiendae, aut Virtus
ulla propter quam sint colendae. If this be true, (that there is no Power or
Virtue in the Cross to hear or help us) then their worship of it with Latria
(worship due to God himself, as Council. Trident. Self. 13. de Eucharistia. Cap.
5. Latriae cultus qui vero Dio ^i^^^^r.
they confess) is evident and impious Idolatry: for what can be more stupidly
Idololatrical, than to give Divine Worship, (due only to an Infinite Power and
Excellency) to a wooden (and sometimes a rotten) Cross, In qua (by their own
Confession) vis nulla inest sanctitatis efficiendae, nec VIRTUS ULLA propter
quam est colenda. In short, were I not certainly assured by the sacred
Scripture, that all sin is folly, and Idolatry Spiritual Jerem. 50. 38. they
are mad (...) their Idols.
Madness: I could scarce believe that men in their wits should profess and
publish such (...), such inconsistent Positions, and (as my Countryman Scotus
calls them) Incompossibilities. Sed e diverticulo in viam.

But let it be granted, that Cyril did not only ( de facto) Dub.
invocate Saint John, but de Judicio too, that he seriously judged it lawful
and profitable so to do; that he did not only practice (as David committed
Adultery, and Peter denied his Master, as to matter of fact) but in his
Judgment, approve Invocation of Saints: I say, if all this were freely granted
(which is not proved) would it not be a good Argument for the Romish Doctrine
which justifies against ours (which condemns) Invocation of Saints?

No, it will be no Argument at all; For we grant, that Answ.
not only about the time when Saint Cyril made that Sermon, (which was Anno
Christi 451.) but about eighty years before, that is, about the year three
hundred and seventy, Invocation of Saints begun to be held by some, and
practiced (quite contrary to the Doctrine and the practice of the Ancient
Church) especially by some Monks, by some Orators, Preachers, and Christian
Poets, as you may see both confessed and proved in Two Learned Men, Chemnitii
Examen Council. Trident. part. 2. page 200. Col. 1. Edit. Francofurti, 1578.
( Martinus Chemnitius, and Vid Vossii Theses de Invocat. Sanctorum Disp.
Historica altera. These 1. etc. page 189. Edit. Oxon. 1628.
Joh. Ger. Vossius;) in whom you may find a just account, when, and how, and by
what steps and degrees Invocation of Saints came into the Church. They
acknowledge, that about the end of the fourth Century, Basil, Nyssen, and
Nazianzene have several passages, which are not only Rhetorical Apostrophe's,
or Prosopopoeia's, but such as are indeed Invocations, and not to be excused.
Nor does this any way prejudice our Cause, who willingly acknowledge and
confess such instances, toward the end of the fourth Century, well knowing they
come too late to prove Invocation of Saints a Catholic Doctrine. For
Vincentius Lirinensis his Rule is, (and that much magnified every where by the
Popish Doctors) that, That is Catholic only -- Vincentius Lirinensis adversus
Haereses, Cap. 3.
Quod ubique, quod Semper, that is, it must be (else it cannot be Catholic)
veritas a Christo and Apostolis tradita, and ab Ecclesia successive credita. So
that whatever commenceth after Christ and his Apostles, is a Novelty, no
Catholic Verity.
semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est; and therefore, if the Primitive Church
for above three whole Centuries, neither approved nor practiced any invocation
of Saints; if all their Addresses and Prayers were made to God only, and by the
Mediation and Intercession of Jesus Christ (and not of any Saint or Angel)
solely desired; then (by Lirinensis his Rule) whatever is postnate to this, and
has its Birth and Original in the fourth Century; this (whatever it be) will be
so far from being a Catholic Verity, that it will be an up-start Novelty, as
indeed it is, and sic transeat cum caeteris erroribus. 2. When Nazianzene (and
some others about that time) begun to use (in their Panegyriques, Poems and
Homilies) some more than Rhetorical Invocations, they did it with such
Qualifications, and limiting clauses annexed, which plainly show that they were
dubious, and had no assurance to be heard. So Nazianzene making his Address to
the Soul of Constantine (or Constantius, as it is in some Copies) says thus --
Nazianzene Orat. 1. contra Julianum in principio. Other such examples you have
in Vossius his Theses de Invocat. Sanctorum, page 199, 200. Edit. supradictae.
Quin haec quoque audiat Constantini Magni Anima ((...)) si quis mortuis sensus
sit. His Invocation is Hypothetical, on supposition that he could hear his
Prayers; which whether he could or no, he knew not. Nor was it possible he
should, (without Divine Revelation) there being no Principle in Nature or
Scripture from whence it can certainly be deduced, that Souls departed can
either hear or help us here below. He (whoever he be) who thinks otherwise, let
him produce such a principle and deduction, and I do hereby promise to be his
Proselyte. 3. Besides this (according to the Popish Principles) Invocation of
Saints presupposes the Saints to enjoy the Lombardus Sent. lib. 4* Did. 45.
Durandus ibidem Quaest. 4.. 8. etc. and Scholastici (quos scio) omnes.
beatifical Vision; for on that they do ground the knowledge the Saints have of
things here below. It is in speculo Trinitatis, that they see our wants and
desires; Qui videt videntem omnia, is videt omnia, (that is the Schoolmens
Axiom) and then it will follow, that they who deny the departed Saints to
enjoy the beatifical Vision, must also (unless they will contradict themselves)
deny their Invocation, this necessarily presupposing that. But now it was a
common Opinion amongst the Ancients for above four hundred years, ( infra
aetatem Augustini, says Joseph Scaliger Annot. in Joh. 18. verse. 31. where he
says, OMNES VETERES etiam infra aetatem Augustini, etc.
Scaliger truly) That Souls departed did not enjoy the beatifical Vision till
the day of Judgment, but were Extra Coelum in abditis quibusdam receptaculis,
where (in Tertullians language) they did -- In candida expectare diem judicii.
Sure I am, Vid. Sixth. Senensem Bibl. Sanctae lib. 6. Annot. 345. where he
confesses this, and cites the places of these Fathers (and almost as many more)
who were all of this Opinion.
Irenaeus was of that Opinion, and so were Justin Martyr, Origin, Chrysostom,
Theodoret, Theophylact, Euthymius, Aretas, Victor, Lactantius, Hilarious,
Prudentius, Ambrosius, Augustinus, Bernardus, -- ( nec aliter omnes, if you
will believe Scaliger) and very many more, as might easily be demonstrated,
were it now pertinent. So that none of those were of this Opinion, unless they
contradicted their own Principles, and if they did, we have little reason to
believe them. 4. If it be said, that Basil, Nazianzene, Nyssen, (and others in
the latter end of the fourth and following Centuries) were Excellent Persons,
Learned and Pious Fathers of the Church, and therefore we may securely embrace
their Doctrine, and follow their example in the Invocation of Saints: To this
we say,

1. We both may and will follow them, so far as they follow Christ, S. Paul
requires no more: 1 Cor. 11. 1.
Be you followers of me, even as I also am of Christ. Whatever Doctrines
pretend to be Catholic and Evangelical, and cannot derive their Pedigree from
our blessed Savior, and his Apostles (let their Antiquity be what it will, if
short of this) (all men should, and) we do reject. Christus solus audiri debet,
(says Cyprian. Epist. 63. ad Caecilium, apud Pamelium page 249. Col. 2. A.
Cyprian) Hic est filius meus dilectus, IPSUM AUDITE, and then he adds, --
Quare si SOLUS Christus audiendus est, non debemus attendere, quid ALIUS ANTE
NOS faciendum putaverit, sed quid, qui ante omnes est, CHRISTUS, prior fecerit.
Neque enim HOMINIS consuetudinem sequi oportet, sed DEI veritatem, etc. As
Cyprian neither did, nor would follow any before him, further than they
followed Christ and his Apostles: so neither should we follow any before us.
And therefore, if an hundred Fathers in the end of the fourth Century, should
preach up, and practice Invocation of Saints (without warrant from Scripture,
or the doctrine and constantly received practice of the primitive Christians
down from the Apostles) this would be no argument to us, nor should to any.
Sure I am, Communicating So Clemens Roman. Constit. Apost. l. 8. cap. Cyprian.
Epist. 59. ad Fidum. Gennad. de Dogmat. cap. 52. Council. Toletan. 2. Can. 11.
August. Epist. 93. Paulinus, Episc. Nolanus, Epist. 12. ad Severum. Fulgentius
ad Ferrandum Diaconum, Cap. 11. Graeci usque hodie communicant Insantes.
Azorius Instit. Moralium, lib. 5. cap. 11. Duravit etiam haec Consuetudo
communicandi Infantes in Eccles. occidentali usque Tempora Ludovici Pii and
Lotharii. Ita Beat. Rhenanus in Tertullianum de Corona Militis, page 38. Edit.
Junii.
Infants at their Baptism, and abstaining from all No Church Latin or Greek
allowed eating any blood, for 1215. years after Christ; that is, till
Transubstantiation was decreed. The Greek Church allows it not to this day.
Blood ( as utterly unlawful) were more ancient, and far more generally
believed and practiced in the Primitive Church (East and West, Greek and
Latin) and yet the Church of Rome has (notwithstanding their antiquity, and
that great authority which received them) rejected both: and therefore she must
pardon us, if we reject Invocation of Saints, which begun later, and had far
less authority and consent of Fathers to establish it.

In short, he who impartially considers the doctrine and practice of the Church
of England and that of Rome, (as to the business of Invocation) I say, such a
one, who has eyes and will impartially use them, may evidently see, that our
way is sure, and theirs wholly uncertain (to say no worse) and irrational. We
direct our Prayers neither to Saint nor Angel, but to God only, and in the name
and mediation of Jesus Christ only. And for this, we have

1. Divine Precept, and a command to come to him.

2. A promise that he will hear and help if we do come. Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon
me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, etc. and Matthew. 11. 28. Come
unto me all you that labor, and I will give you rest. And John 16. 23.
Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name ( not in the name of any Saint or
Angel) he will give it you. So John 14. 13, 14. And Phil. 4. 6. In every thing,
by Prayer, let your Requests be made known to God, etc.

3. The practice of all good men (so far as we have any Record) from the
foundation of the World till above 300. Years after Christ. For all the Prayers
of the Patriarchs, Prophets, and holy men mentioned in the Old Testament, of
our blessed Savior and Apostles in the New, and of the primitive and pious
Christians afterward (for the time before limited) are solely directed to God,
and never to any Saint or Angel. So that, we having so many great and good
Examples to follow; so divine a command to come, and so gracious a promise to
be heard when we do come; Here is the ground and foundation of our faith and
confidence of success, when we pray to God, in the name of Jesus Christ: being
also fully assured (by the clear principles of nature, as well as Scripture) 1.
That the God to whom we pray, is omniscient, and so able to hear all our
Prayers. 2. That he is Allsufficient, and therefore able to supply all our
necessities. 3. That his mercies in Jesus Christ are infinite, and therefore he
is willing (which also evidently appears by his many and most gracious
promises) both to hear and help us: These are the just and satisfying grounds
of our praying to God only, and of all our comfort and assurance of success in
so doing.

But on the other side, the Church of Rome praying to (I know not what) Saints
and Angels, and having no just ground or warrant for it, do that, which is not
only irrational and vain, but (what, I fear, they will one day find) sinful and
impious. For,

1. There is no Precept for Worshipping and Invocation of Saints: nor is it
pretended to. All the Trent-Fathers durst say (and that is not true neither) is
Council. Tridentinum Sess. (...). de Invo^^t. Sanctorum. vid. Catechismum Roman.
part. 3. cap. 2.. 11, 12, 13, etc. where the Doctrine of Invocation is ex
professo explained, and (as well as they can) provid by Councils and Fathers,
(partly in the Text, and partly in the Margent;) but not one word of Scripture
to prove either precept or promise for Invocation of Saints. See the last and
best Edition of that Catechism, Paris. 1635.
Bonum and utile est, suppliciter Sanctos invocare. Bonum, sed non ex lege
necessarium: there is no pretense of any law to enjoin it. And then 1. Our
refusing to pray to Saints, is no fault in us; seeing no law requires it. 2.
Their praying to them, their worshipping Saints and Angels, will be (at best)
(...), a piece of Will Worship, damned by the Apostle, Col. 2. 19. And
(notwithstanding all Vid. Gul. Estium in Col. 2. 19.
their (...), their wild expositions and shifts to avoid that censure) they
really are guilty of that crime, and liable to that damnation.

2. There is no promise, that our Prayers shall be heard, or any way beneficial
to us, in case we do pray to Saints. If any think otherwise, let him show that
promise; and (for my part) Cedat Iulus agris, let him take the Cause.

3. There is no Example, or any Record of any Patriarch, Prophet, or pious
person, who directed their Prayers to any Saint, from the foundation of the
World till our Saviors birth, nor of any Apostle or good Christian for 300.
years after it. And here, 1. For the time before our Saviors Birth, I confess
Bellarmin. De Beatit. Sanctorum, Lib. 1. Cap. 29.
Bellarmine brings some places (most impertinently) out of the Old Testament,
to prove Invocation of Saints.

But he confutes, and evidently contradicts himself in the same Bellarmin.
Ibid. Cap. 19.. Item Exodus 32.
Chapter; and expressly says, That the Saints in the time of the Old Testament
did not enjoy the beatifical Vision till our Saviors Resurrection, and so
could not hear the Prayers, or know the wants of the living, (and so it had
been vain to pray to those who could not hear.) His words are these. And it is
the Opinion of Pet. Lombard, Sentent. lib. 4. Durand. Ibid. Quaest. 4. Ad
tertium, and their Schoolmen generally.
Sancti qui ante Christi adventum moriebantur, non intrabant in coelum, nec
Deum videbant, NEC COGNOSCERE POTERANT ordinary preces supplicantium; etc. So
(by their own Confession) there was no Invocation of Saints before our Saviors
Resurrection; or if there was any, it was vain and unprofitable, because (for
all that Period of time) the dead were in such a condition ( extra coelum) that
they could not hear the Prayers of the Living. I know that the Trent-Fathers
say, Invocation of Saints, is, Council. Trident. Sess. 25. de Invocat.
Sanctorum, in Principio.
Juxta usum Catholicae and Apostolicae Ecclesiae, primaevis Christianae
Religionis temporibus receptum. And the Trent Catechism tells us, that the
Chief Argument they have to establish Invocation of Saints, is, Custom
continued since the Apostles time. The words these: Catechis. Roman. ubi supra,
part. 3. cap 2.. 12.
Et, quod CAPUT EST, consuetudo accedat ab Apostolis accepta, and in Ecclesia
perpetuo retenta, etc. This they say: Invocatio sanctorum est consuetudo ab
Apostolis accepta, etc. But when they come to prove this, they have not one
Author to witness for them in the first three hundred years, (the time of which
we speak.) The Compilers of the Roman Locis supra citatis.
Catechism, and Locis supra citatis.
Bellarmine, and Lindanus in Panoplia, lib. 3. cap 26. He cites (I confess)
there, Origenes in Jobum, a spurious work, not by Origin, but an Arian.
Lindanus Ruraemundensis Episcopus (and so others) data opera, and diligently
rake up all the Testimonies they can out of Councils and Fathers, and yet bring
not one Father (there is no pretense for Councils) who writ within the three
hundred years next after our Blessed Savior, save Dionyfius Areopagita, and
Irenaeus. Now for Areopagita he is a spurious Author, (of no Authority, as to
the particular we now speak of) as is evidently demonstrated by Vid. Cocum in
Censura Patrum in D. Areopagita. Rivetus in Critica sacra, lib. 7. cap. 9. 10.
our Authors, and confessed by Cajetan, Erasmus, Valla, Gul. Grocinus, and
others. 2. For Irenaeus, him (I confess) to be Testis Idoneus, within the time
mentioned, for he flourished about the year of our Lord 170. But for the place
in Irenaeus which they cite to prove Invocation of Saints, it is so
ridiculously impertinent, that I wonder any knowing person should produce it;
and yet the wonder is the less, when I consider, that as a drowning man will
lay hold on any twigg, how insignificant soever to save or help him: So (being
resolved to maintain a desperate and dying Cause) they must use bad Mediums who
have no better. The place in Irenaeus is this, Irenaeus adversus Haereses l. 5.
ca. 19. page 464. Edit. Fen-Ardentii. Et cap. 16. page 341. Edit. Gallasii. Et
in Editione Irenaei per Erasmum, page 238.
Sicut Eva seducta est, ut effugeret Deum, sic Maria suasa est obedire Deo, ut
Virginis Evae Virgo Maria fieret advocata. This is the place in Irenaeus so
much (and so impertinently) magnified. Here I observe, --

1. That Feu-Ardentius (that all might take notice of it) puts this Note in the
Margin over against it -- Beata Virgo Maria, Evae and aliorum peccantium
advocata est. But (that I may, and justly enough, use that old saying)
Maledicta sit Glossa quae corrumpit Textum. Had he said only -- Maria Evae
advocata est, the Text of Irenaeus would have been some ground for it: But when
he puts in -- Et aliorum peccantium Advocata, (of which nothing in Irenaeus)
this must be reckoned amongst the piae frauds of Rome, by which they usually
and impiously cousen inconsiderate persons into their Superstitions.

2. In his Notes on the place, he begins thus -- Feu-Ardentius in Irenaeum.
Ibid. page 464. number. 3.
Hinc EVIDENTISSIMUM est priscos Patres and Martyrs, proxime ab ipsis
Apostolorum temporibus, Deiparam Virginem invocasse, caeterisque, ut
implorarent, Authors fuisse. Sure I am, there is nothing in Irenaeus
(notwithstanding his -- Hinc evidentissimum est) to prove any one thing in this
confident Assertion; and yet I shall not call him impudent, but this I may
modestly and truly say, That certainly a little thing will not make him blush.

3. As Feu-Ardentius has a long Note and Discourse, to prove how much that
Passage makes for Popery, and Invocation of Saints: So Gallasius in cap. 16.
lib. 5. Irenaei. 3. page 399.
Gallasius has as long (indeed thrice as long) a Discourse to clear the Text,
and Irenaeus from the suspicion of it; or (in case he meant what Rome would
have) to confute him. Now (that I may freely say, what I believe is true in
this particular) they are both beside the Book; nor has Feu-Ardentius any just
ground to brag and magnify, nor Gallasius to be afraid of this Passage in
Irenaeus. For indeed it makes nothing for them, nor against us. That this may
appear; I say --

1. Admit (which is not true) that Irenaeus in this Passage did really approve
Invocation of Saints, and affirm that the Virgin Mary was their Advocate; He
affirms too, That our Savior lived till he was Irenaeus, lib. 2. Cap. 39, 40.
about fifty years old, (and yet it is certain, and on all sides confessed, that
he was Crucified Anno Aetatis 34 currente.) He affirms also the Millenary
Irenaeus, lib. 5. cap. 32, etc. confessed by Feu-Ardentius, and largely
explained, page 494. and sequentibus, usque ad finem libri.
Opinion to be True, That the Saints shall Reign One Thousand years in temporal
felicity before the day of Judgment, (and yet this goes for Heresy at Rome,
and has done so this thirteen hundred years at least.) Now as it will not
follow, Irenaeus affirms our Savior to have lived about fifty years; and that
the Millenary Opinion is true; [ergo] Those Affirmations of his are truth, and
we to believe them; (for both Protestant and Papist disbelieve both,
notwithstanding Irenaeus his Authority) So neither will it follow, Irenaeus
approves Invocation of Saints (dato hoc, sed non concesso) [ergo] We are to
approve it too. Seeing there neither is, nor can be any reason why his
Authority should necessarily conclude this, and not the two former Positions,
he equally asserting all.

2. But further, it is certain, Irenaeus neither did, nor (without evident
contradiction of his own Principles, and theirs of ROME too) could believe,
that Eve (or any body else) did invocate the Virgin Mary, or any deceased Saint
whomsoever. For it is his express Opinion, That the Souls of all dead Saints (of
the Apostles, Martyrs, and the Virgin Mary too) are in an invisible place, and
shall not be admitted to the Vision of God till after the Resurrection --
Irenaeus, lib. 5. cap. 31. page 491. in Edit. Feu-Ardentii. and page 250. Edit.
Erasmi.
Discipulorum Animae (says Irenaeus) abibunt in invisibilem locum (He writ in
Greek, and (...) was his word, which properly, is (...), locus invisibilis; or,
as Tertullian and Augustine call those places, Abdita animarum receptacula,)
and ibi usque ad resurrectionem commorabuntur, sustinentes resurrectionem; post
recipientes corpora, sic VENIENT IN CONSPECTUM DEI, etc. This was evidently
Irenaeus his Opinion, (and Saint Augustines too, as Feu-Ardentius in Irenaeum,
page 493. Col. 2.
Feu-Ardentius there confesses, and proves out of many places of that Father,)
That the Saints departed did not enjoy the Presence of God, and the beatifical
Vision; and seeing it is confessed by Bellarmine (in the place before Bellarmin
de Beatitudine Sanct. l. 1. cap. 19.. Item Exodi. 32.
cited) and the Church of Rome, that without such Vision of God, the Saints
departed cannot hear our Prayers, or know our particular desires or wants; it
follows, that if Irenaeus held Invocation of Saints, he must hold Invocation of
those who could not hear, which contradicts the clear Principles of Reason, and
the declared sense of the Church of Rome too, etc. --

3. But let Irenaeus his words be taken in what sense they will, yet it is
manifest, they afford nothing like an Argument, to prove invocation of Saints.
For 1. Irenaeus says indeed, Quod Maria suasa est obedire Deo, ut fieret Evae
advocata: Whence they may (with some seeming consequence) conclude, That Mary
was Eve's Advocate, and pleaded or prayed for her: But this does not prove any
invocation of Saints. They may be our Advocates, and (in the general) pray for
us, (as all confess) and yet, we not pray to them. Had Irenaeus said, that the
Virgin Mary prayed for Eve, that had looked like Invocation, but he says no
such thing: And indeed it is most irrational and ridiculous to say, That Eve
prayed to Mary, or that Mary prayed for her. 1. Eve could not pray to the
Virgin Mary, seeing she was dead above Natus est Christus (secundum Jac.
Usserii Armachani computum) Anno Mundi, 4004. Vid. ejus Annal. Part
posteriori. page 54^.
three thousand years before Many was born. 2. Or thus -- If Eve did invocate
Mary, then, either while she lived here in this world, and that was impossible,
because Mary was so far from being a Saint while Eve lived, that she had no
being till three thousand years after; or, after she was dead, and to say that,
is impertinent; for the invocation we speak of, is that of the Living, who pray
to Saints departed, and not of one departed Saint to another. 3. And further,
(notwithstanding what Irenaeus seems to say, and what they of Rome would make
of it) it was impossible that the Virgin Mary should be ADVOCATA EVAE, even
according to the received Principles of the CHURCH of ROME. For, 1. Eve was
confessedly dead some thousands of Years before the Virgin Mary was a Saint;
and so if the Virgin prayed for Eve, it must be after she was dead; but no
Papist ever said, (nor with any sense can say) that the Saints departed are
Advocates for Saints departed this life as well as themselves; but for the
living left behind. That which they say (and in vain labor to prove) is, Quod
Sancti defuncti and coelo donati sunt vivorum Advocati. 2. Eve was a glorified
Saint before the Virgin Mary, so that (upon their Principles) Eve might have
been Mariae advocata, she being in Heaven, and enjoying the beatifical Vision,
while Mary was alive here below. That this is so, I prove from the received
Popish principles, thus. 1. They say, Aquinas Part 3. Quaest. 52. Art. 5.
Durandus in 4. Sent. Distinct. 45. Quast. 4.
that the Fathers and Saints of the Old Testament, were not in Heaven, but in
Limbo Patrum, till our Saviors Resurrection. 2. That our Savior at his
Resurrection (or immediately after it) freed them from thence, and brought them
to Heaven and the Beatifick Vision, and (so amongst the rest) Our Grandmother
Eve must be a glorified Saint in Heaven, about the time of our blessed Saviors
Resurrection; whereas it is confessed, that the Virgin Mary Vid. Baronium
Annal. Tom. 1. ad Annum 48. n. 4.
lived 13, or 14. Years after; so that Eve (being in Heaven, a glorified Saint,
for 13, or 14. Years, before the Virgin Mary came thither,) might be Advocate
for the Virgin Mary, but it was impossible (what Irenaeus seems to say) that
Mary should be Evae advocata: for she could not be Eve's Advocate till she came
to Heaven; and when she came, it was too late; Eve did not need her Advocation,
seeing she was glorified before, and so Senior to the Virgin 13, or 14. Years,
or (for they agree not about the Year of her Death) at least for some number of
Years. The Issue is; Eve neither did, nor possibly could Invocate the Virgin
Mary (who had no being for above 3000 Years after Eve was dead:) nor was it
possible that the Virgin Mary (in her own person) should be Eve's Advocate,
seeing she was in Heaven before her. I say, in her own person, the words being
properly taken: But if the words of Irenaeus be taken figuratively, by an usual
Metonymia, (or Hypallage, as the Rhetoricians call it) and the Virgin Mary be
said to do that, because she was the happy mother of a Son who did it; Then the
sense of the words will be plain, Maria est Evae Advocata, not by her self
personally, but by her Son; who is indeed a Mediator, Intercessor, and Advocate
for Eve, and all, who are saved, from the foundation of the World. The words
taken this way, are good sense, (but neither prejudicial to us, nor beneficial
to Rome) otherwise they are manifestly false.

1. From the premises, I argue thus. They who have no 1 Precept to pray to
Saints; nor any 2 Promise that they shall be heard, or have any benefit by it,
in case they do pray; nor any 3 Practice of the It Is confessed, That toward
the end of the 4th Century, some particular persons did invocate Saints, (yet
doubtingly, and therefore vaitly) but it was long after, before any Church in
the world used it in their Liturgies; in all which, all their prayers are
directed solely to God; in the Liturgies of James, Mark, Peter, Basil,
Chrysostom, Gregory the great, etc. (all extant in Gr. and Lat.) in the Missa
Latina Antiqia circa Annum 700. usitata, etc. In all these they pray for the
Saints departed, (even the Virgin Mary) but no prayer directed to any of them.
And so in the Canon of the Mass (the only ancient piece of their Missal) they
pray for all the Saints departed; but in the whole Canon there is not ^^^
Prayer to any Saint or A^g^l.
Primitive Church, (for above 300. Years after Christ,) to encourage them; nor
any cogent 4 reason to assure and satisfy their understandings, that the Saints
do hear, and can help them; these cannot pray in faith without doubting; seeing
they have no medium strong enough to exclude doubting, and create a certainty
in their assent. But the Papists have no such 1 Precept, or 2 Promise, or 3
Practice, or 4 Reason (from the light of Nature, or Scripture) to assure them,
that such Prayers will be profitable to them; [ ergo] They cannot pray in faith
without doubting. He (who ever he be) that can rationally make it appear to me,
that they have any one of the four things, mentioned in the minor Proposition;
I shall be thankful to God and him for the discovery, renounce my opinion,
(which now I really believe) and embrace the Popish Invocation of Saints, which
(as a novel, groundless and impious error) I now abhor.

2. Whence I argue further, thus -- All Prayers not made in faith, without
doubting, are vain, and (as to the obtaining any thing) ineffectual, Jam. 1. 6,
7. But such are the Popish Invocations of Saints (as wanting all those just
grounds of assurance and certainty) [ergo] they are vain and ineffectual.

(...).
FINIS.

