Votum pro Caesare; OR, A PLEA FOR CAESAR; Discovering briefly the great
sinfulness of opposing the Authority of the higher Powers. Delivered in a
SERMON, October. 7. 1660.

By EDM. BARKER, Chaplain to the Right Honorable, the Lady CAPELL Dowager.

1 Samuel 26. 9. Who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords anointed and be
guiltless?

2 Kings 14. 14. And it came to pass, as soon as the Kingdom was confirmed in
his hand, that he slew his servants which had slain the King his Father.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN WILLIAMS at the Crown in S. Paul 's Churchyard. M D
CLX.

To the Right Honorable. The most accomplished and excellent Lady, The LADY
ELIZABETH CAPELL DOWAGER;
MADAM,
MAy this discourse appear as gracious in your eyes, as it lately seemed
pleasing and acceptable to your ear. I shall not beshrew my self of my folly in
letting it walk abroad, and giving it leave to take the fresh air. Madam, my
obligations from you are very many, and the comforts which I have hither to
enjoyed under you (ever since I first took Sanctuary in your family) not a few:
I have lived to see many waveings and tossings in other men's fortunes and
conditions, whilst I my self have laid at anchor, and enjoyed the sweetness of
a secure retirement, and have been sheltred from those storms and tempests
which have lighted heavy upon many. This privilege, next under God, I do
humbly acknowledge to be owing to your Honor; and the remembrance hereof
affects me with the sense of a great Obligation; and this forces my modesty,
and puts me upon the necessity of returning (though nothing proportionable, yet
at least) somewhat in way of acknowledgement as a pledge and testimony of my
thankfulness. And to let your Honor see how ambitious I am to be accounted
grateful, I have adventured to do that now against which I ever had the
greatest aversation: which is, to appear in Print. And though what I here
present you with, be no ways worthy your eye; yet having been lately honored
with your ear, it is ever since grown proud, and will needs be gadding abroad,
and see the fashions of the world, with resolutions (according as it likes it is
entertainment) to bring more of it is fellows after it. But, Madam, I must
remember that it is but a very small discourse which I here present you with,
and I must not widen the gates beyond the proportion of the City; I do
therefore most humbly offer it into your Honors hands, and if you please cast
it at your feet; and in case you shall think so favorably of it, as to
vouchsafe it now and then the Honor of your eye, and admit it graciously into
your presence, it will reckon it self highly graced and dignified, and not
ambitiously desire any other patronage. And howbeit (I confess indeed) it is
not so properly calculated for your Family and relations, (whose Loyalty has
been abundantly tried in the Furnace, and have come forth glorious and shining)
yet I (am proud to conceive) it may be of some Use to others, and if but to
one, it is enough. And thus recommending both it to the favor of your gracious
acceptance, and your self and most excellent relations to the protection and
blessing of God Almighty, for a continuance of his comforts to you here, and a
full consummation of perfect joy and happiness hereafter, I do humbly take my
leave of you, and rest

MADAM, Your Honor's Most highly obliged, and perfectly devoted Servant and
Chaplain; BARKER.

Luke 19. verse. 27. But those mine Enemies which would not that I should reign
over them, bring hither and slay them before me.


THese words are parabolically uttered by our Savior in the name and person of
a certain Noble man, as we render the word (...).
verse. 12. Although it is plain by the following passages in the Parable, that
this Noble man was none other but a King; for he took his journey to receive to
himself a (...) Verse. 9. (...).
Kingdom: and he severely destroyed and punished his rebellious Subjects in the
Text, for not willing that he should reign over them: And this also may suite
well enough with the (...),
(...) for though that properly relates to nobility of Birth, yet it excludes
not the more excellent title and Arist. lib. 1. de Anima.
office of Kingship, which is the highest step of Honor and Nobility, and from
whence are derived (...)
(as streams from their fountain or spring head) all those Titles of honor and
nobility which do put a difference among subjects, and make some noble and
honorable above others.

Now I confess indeed that this whole Parable is mystically and spiritually
meant, and to be understood of Christ; (viz.) the institution and establishment
of his Kingdom; the rebellion and opposition of the Jews and wicked men
against it; and then lastly Gods severe judgment and vengeance inflicted on
them for their rebellion. And if any shall contend this to be the only proper
and genuine scope and design of our Savior's repeating it here to his
Disciples; for my part I shall not my self contend with him about it, but
easily and readily grant what he contends for.

Howbeit, seeing the words (without any respect to the design and scope of
their direction and intention) do carry a good literal sense in themselves,
agreeable to the analogy of Faith, and the voices of other Scriptures; I shall
accordingly for the present consider them altogether under this grammatical
sense and construction. And so they are the words of a justly enraged and
provoked King taking vengeance on a company of traitorous and rebellious
Subjects.

In them we have particularly considerable these three parts.

1. The parties arraigned and condemned: those mine enemies. (...).
2. The ground and reason of their arraignment and condemnation. No less then
an act of the highest Treason and rebellion, Who would not that I should reign
over them. (...).
3. The sentence determined, and passed uponthem, Bring hither and slay them
before me. (...).

I shall begin with the first of these, the parties arraigned and condemned;
[Those mine enemies] now who or what these Enemies were, we have generally set
down and described verse. 14. they were (...) his Citizens, people that had
lived long and happy under the protection of his government, had derived all
their rights and privileges from him, had enjoyed all their freedoms and
immunities under him; and we will suppose too, that they had sworn fealty and
allegiance to him, which (if so) brought a new accession of heinousness to
their foul sin of ingratitude, (viz.) breach of Oath and promise: And can any
punishment be too great, or sentence too severe for such? who have so little
sense of their duty, make so little conscience of their Oaths, show so little
respect and reverence to the sacredness of that authority to which (under God)
they owed their very being and preservation.

Should such Enemies be connived at, to what purpose then were Laws, of what
use then were Magistrates; yea to what end did God Almighty stamp such a signal
Item of * Nolite tangere, upon Regal Majesty Psalm. 1^
and authority, Touch not mine anointed, not my unctos populos, my anointed
people, not them causelessly and wrongfully: but my unctos Reges, mine anointed
Kings and Princes, the heads and rulers of my people, not these at any rate.

Now is it a sin to touch them, and is it not much more sinful to affront
them? may not their persons be touched rudely and irreverenlty, and can it be
less then a sin deserving the highest punishment to frame Articles of
Indictment and accusation against them, to send abroad messages of exception
against their government; and instead of paying them their dues of ready
subjection and obedience to their commands, to leap presently into their
thrones and chaires of state and Majesty? if such offenders as these should go
away unpunished, and that it should be free and safe for every unquiet and
ambitious spirit (who is only an enemy to Majesty, because himself is not
King; and a despiser of governments, because himself is haughty and proud, and
thinks scorn to be subject) to practice such irregularities: then farewell all
Laws, all order, all government, all difference of persons, all enclosures of
civil title and propriety, all distinctions of Meum and Tuum; in a word,
nothing but utter confusion and desolation, and turning all things upside down,
must needs be the unhappy product and conclusion of such dangerous connivances.
This for the first consideration of these enemies; they were his own (...).
subjects and Citizens.

2. A second Consideration of these enemies respects their inward hatred and
enmity toward him, says that Text, they hated him. See, it is said (...)
indeed that they hated him; but there is no cause given of their hatred, no
reason alleged of their enmity; and it is no matter whether there were or no;
for what reason can be given, or cause alleged for a subjects hatred of his
true and lawful Sovereign? at least what just cause, what warrantable reason?
Rex semper honorandus, si non propter se, atpamen proter ordinem, August.
quaest. Vet. and No. Test. q. 35.
Admit his government be exorbitant, yet is his authority venerable; grant his
practices be vicious, yet is his person sacred: admit the execution and
administration of his power be besides or contrary to law, yet is the
derivation of his power by express deputation from God, and that to be sure is
the supreme Law of all; and therefore says Solomon, Eccles. 10. 20.
Curse not the King, no not in thy thoughts; it is not said of a good, or a
just, or a pious, or a merciful King only, but of a King, qua King; curse not
such a one, no not in thy thought; not only not openly in the reproaches of
thy common and ordinary discourses, but not so much as secretly in any inward
dislikes and undervaluings of thy thoughts, though thou art sure to escape
unpunished, and not possible to be discovered by men.

God Almighty to the end that he might always secure in us an awful reverence
and veneration of Majesty, has not only sealed up our tongues from evil
speeches (according as we have it Acts 23. 5. Thou shall not speak evil of the
Ruler of thy people;) but also our hearts from evil thoughts and surmisings: we
must not curse them at any rate, no not there. And if not that, then doubtless
(by like proportion) not reproach them, not speak slightingly of them, not make
irreverent approaches into their presence, not publish their infirmities, not
lessen their abilities, not heighten their deviations, not scruple their just
and lawful commands; in a word, not do any thing which may probably tend to
the least abatement or diminution of Majesty. And then see here the exceeding
vileness of these enemies, they hated Him, their King. What, (...)
hate their King? a person, whom God almighty has signally honored with his
own name, Psalm. 82. 6.
Dixi, Dii estis, I have said ye are gods; has immediately raised up by his
own proper ordination and constitution, Prove. 9. 15.
per me Reges regnant, by me Kings reign; has invested with unquestionable
power and authority Eccles. 8. 4.
where the word of a King is, there is power, and who may say unto him, what
do thou? has advanced above the jurisdiction and cognizance of Laws, and
made responseable to none but to himself; Psalm. 51. 4.
tibi soli peccavi said holy David a King, against thee only have I sinned:
though we know he defiled Bathsheba, and caused Vriah to be put to death: but
they were both his subjects; and though the wrong was done to them in person,
yet was the sin punishable by God only, Si quis de nobis, o Rex, justitiae
tramites transcendere voluerit, a te corripi potest; si vero tu excesseris,
quis te corripiet? loquimur enim tibi, sed si volueris, audis, si autem
nolueris, quis te damnabit; nisi is qui se pronunciavit esse justitiam, Greg.
Turon.
who alone is superior to Kings, and the only Judge and censurer of their
Actions.

Thus you see what signal Characters of Majesty and authority, of reverence and
veneration, God Almighty has stamp't upon the person and office of Kings,
enough to make their names sacred and venerable with men, and to advance their
Office above the aspiring reaches of popular ambitions and usurpations. That he
might be sure to render their persons God the only ruler of Princes, Liturgy
of the Church of Engl. Collect for the King.
sacred and inviolable, he has hedged them in with a special and peremptory
Nolite tangere, touch not mine anointed; and to assert the divine extraction
and origination of their office, himself calls it Romans 13. 2. (...),
his own ordinance and constitution.

We do not intend in all this to advance them above the degree and condition of
mankind, though we place them in the highest rank and order of men. Divisum
imperium cum Jove Caesar habet, Mart.
We dare not with that fawning Poet, call them copartners and fellow-sharers
with God in power and sovereignty. No, our Faith teaches us better manners,
our religion will not permit such flatteries; we do not give this honor to
them, we dare not have these thoughts and apprehensions of them: yet this we
say of them, and the Apostle warrants it, that they are Romans 13. 4.
(...), Gods immediate substitutes and deputies; his most proper Lieutenants
and representatives upon earth: further yet this also we say of them, and
Tertullian warrants it, that they are homines a Ad Scapul. cap. 2.
Deo secundi, and solo Deo minores, of men the very next step to divinity, and
inferior to none but God: nay further yet, this also we say of them, and (...).
the ancient Poet warrants it, and one of greater authority then the Poet, S.
Basil (I take it;) that they are (...), of all other the liveliest transcripts
and images of that Sovereignty and Supremacy which is proper only to Divinity.
So that now though we Deifie not the men, yet we magnify their office; though
we adore not their persons, yet we reverence Colimus Imperatorem sic quomodo
and nobis licet, and ipsi expedit. Tert. ad Scap.
their authority; we know them all the while to be but men which shall dye, and
Esaias 51. 12.
Sons of men which shall ere long be as grass. And if happily their great power
and command should beguile them, and put cheats upon them, and make them think
otherwise of them selves, yet by and by either a fever, or an ague, or a fit
of the stone, or colic, or gout, will discover the cheat, and show that it is
nothing so.

Howbeit, though we have these common thoughts and opinions of their
humanities, yet dare we not have the least slighting persuasions and
apprehensions of their authority. Gods command 1 Pet. 2. 17.
is to Honor them, and at no rate to hate them; he bids us to pray for them,
yea for them (...) 1 Timothy 2. 1
first of all, for them in the first place, and by no means to curse them: His
ordinance it is Romans 10. 1.
that every soul be subject to them, yea to them as (...).
the highest powers, and inferior to no power but his own; and who then can
rebel, and arm himself against them, and not at the same time fight (...)
against God? This for the second Consideration of these Enemies, respecting
their inward hatred and enmity.

3. The third Consideration respects them in their posture of actual mutiny and
hostility, The open breaking out of their sedition and rebellion: They sent a
message after him, saying, We will not have this man to reign over us; so we
indeed, but in the Greek it is (...), they sent an embassage after him. See how
soon they begin to King it themselves; they (forsooth) must be in the mode of
great Princes, and must be dispatching their Ambassadors, and sending abroad
their messages; and to whom do they send them? why to their King; well, but
what kind of message is it I trow? one would think that being a message from
subjects to their King, it should be dressed up in all the circumstances of
fear and reverence, of awfulness and trembling, of loyalty and fidelity, of
submission and obedience, that possibly could be: but this is nothing such, but
a message of open defiance and hostility, a message of utter disclaimure and
renunciation; in a word, a message as full of rebellion and treason as words
could possibly set it forth, nolumus hunc regnare, we will not have this man to
reign over us.

Well, but mark first what a fit time they take to send this message after him;
it was now in his absence, now that he was upon his journey. All the while he
was present among them we hear of none of these carriages toward him, not a
word of any such messages sent after him; but being onwards in his journey they
presently take the advantage of his absence, and then they send after him. See,
the children of darkness how wise, how cunning, how active, how diligent they
are in their works of darkness: if any opportunity falls in their way which
may advantage their wicked purposes, how greedily do they catch at it? how
presently do they embrace it? how advantagiously do they improve it and make
use of it? These enemies (it is like) had waited a long time for an
opportunity, but could light of none fit and ripe enough for their purpose: and
now the first that offered it self, see, how presently they lay hold of it,
what great advantages they make of it? Oh that the children of Light were also
as wise and watchful, and serious in their generations! that they were but in
as good earnest, would but take as much pains, and be at as much cost, and make
as many journeys, and lie as much at the catch in their ways of piety, as
sinners and wicked men do in their ways and courses of sin.

Well but they uttered not these words in his (...)
presence, but sent them after him; and indeed, (...)
had they done otherwise, their impudence would have been greater, and their
rudeness far more strange and wonderful: for God Almighty has stamp't such
secret characters of reverence and awfulnesse upon the persons of Kings, that
those very men who regard not the authority at all, are yet many times greatly
afraid and awed with the Majesty of the presence. I have read of many in former
times, and have heard of more of late times, who brought along with them
mischievous designs and purposes enough against the life of their Prince, but
when they came once into their presence, they wanted power to accomplish their
errands, and courage to perfect the execution of their wicked designs. And
therefore these men we see were subtle and cunning in their wickedness; and
that they might work the surer, they dissembled an appearance of some modesty
and bashfulness in their carriages; they did not violently assault their King,
they did not formally arraign him, they did not erect an high Court of Justice
to try him, and judge him: but (though wickedly enough, yet somewhat more
modestly) they took the opportunity of his absence, (...), they sent after him.

Well, but mark further a notable climax or gradation in their sin; first,
(...), they hated him; next (...), they send after him, next follows the full
period and consummation of their wickedness, an act of open disclaimure and
renunciation, (...), we will not have this man to reign over us. See here Sin's
usual way of motion, how it moves progressively, and creeps on by little and
little, and improves by degrees; and one Sin is a step to another, and every
lesser Sin the disposition and inlet into a greater; It is rare that any man
begins with great Nemo repent ^t turpissimus.
Sins at first, but slips into them by degrees, and ordinarily observes a kind
of method in sinning, and commonly begins first with evil thoughts, then with
evil desires, next with evil speeches, after that with evil actions, and last
of all grows up into evil habits and customs: and then indeed is sin
consummate and perfect, and has all it is measures of viciousness; when a man
comes once to make a trade of sin, and has left off to blush at the conviction
of an evil action; and does begin now to work uncleanness * with greediness,
(...), Ephesians. 4. 19.
and to make sinning a matter of course and necessity.

There is commonly in most spirits a natural bashfulnesse unto sins of open
same and scandal, and men are at first shamefac't and modest, and their
reputation begins to be concerned, and their spirits to fly back and start at
the odious names of theft, or drunkenness, or murder, or sacrilege; neither
does the Devil usually make these his first Lectures, but commonly begins first
with smaller sins, and sins of less public notice and discovery, and
entertains the sinner at first with the wantonness of an evil thought, or an
idle motion, and leaves him a while to make sport and play with this bait; but
then having once well entered him here, and persuaded him into an easy yielding
unto these, he with little ado afterward draws him one step further unto
evil desires and lustings, as being of equal privacy and secrecy with the
former; and now the heart being full of evil thoughts and lustings, does
naturally desire to ease and vent it self in sinful speeches and discourses,
and is in some pain 'till it be delivered of them; and here the tongue begins
first to dissemble, next to lie, next to swear, next to blaspheme: and the next
thing that the man goes in hand with, is the practice of evil actions; and here
also (as before) the Devil keeps him to his old method: and first learns the
man the art of fraud and cozening, after that the practice of extortion and
oppression, afterward the trade of open theft and violence; and by this time
the man is grown a perfect artist and proficient, and is taught to swallow any
bait, and to scruple at nothing.

This I add the rather to persuade Christians to be very wary and careful of
the first motions and beginnings of sin, for he that easily gives way to a
sinful motion, cannot certainly tell where it will end, and how far it may
possibly carry him. Holy David doubtless was sincerely pious and religious, and
one, that had a proposition of adultery or murder been made to him at first,
would certainly have thrown away the motion and abhorred the proposition, and
have reckoned himself much undervalued, and have been very angry with the man
that should have made it: but yet you see how soon the entertainment of a
single lust drew him on to adultery; and being gone thus far, the regard of his
credit and reputation did afterward force him upon the necessity of moving a
step forwards, and of adding the commission of another sin, to conceal and hide
the shame of his former folly. It has never yet been accounted safe playing an
after* game with Sin; the surest course is principiis obstare, to begin with it
at it is first rise, to crush it in the egg, to stifle it in it is first movings
and beginnings; he that will keep sin out of his tongue or hands, must be
careful to continue always a strict and constant guard upon his heart, and
observe every passage there, that there be never a chink or cranny left for sin
to enter in at; for the least leak of all may let in water enough to drown the
biggest Vessel. But no more of this.

I have hitherto shown you the manner of these Enemies comport and carriage
toward their King: come we now to examine a little the condition and nature of
the message which they send after him; a message (you will soon grant, I am
sure) of huge disloyalty and disaffection, of the highest pride and insolency;
and to say no more of it, a message of open and actual defiance and
renunciation, Nolumus hunc regnare, we will not have this man to reign over us.
How is that? we will not: why then is it wholly as we will? Is the title and
office of Kings become now such a precarious Title? or do they hold their
Crowns and Scepters altogether in Tenancy from the people, that it is in their
choice and power, to King them or un*King them, to continue them or displace
them at pleasure? says not the Romans 13. 1. (...), Clem. consti-tut.
Divine wisdom, per me Reges regnant, by me Kings reign? is there ever such a
word as per populum, in all that Charter, which might entitle the people to
some right and power in the choice of their supreme Magistrate? Again, says
not the Apostle, The powers that are, are ordained of God? So that here you see
is the joint consent and suffrage of both Testaments, to confirm and warrant
the proposition, that Magistracy is not a popular choice, not a humane
creature, but a divine ordinance: and though 1 Pet. 2. 13. (...), Porphyr.
(...), lib. 4. narrat. de solenni apud E^senos juramenti formula.
S. Peter indeed calls it an ordinance of man: yet must we not so understand
the expression, as if he intended it of Magistracy in respect of the first rise
and institution of it, (which other Scriptures do expressly affirm to be of God,
and not of man) but in regard of the subject wherein it is placed, and unto
whom (of God) the due exercise and administration thereof is committed: neither
(in respect of what follows in the same verse) can it be imagined that S. Peter
in calling Magistracy an humane ordinance, had the least design to assert a
right and power in people of creating and making their King: for this would be
to maintain a flat contradiction: in regard that Him (the King) he calls
supreme; (...).
and if the King be supreme, then are the people inferior to him; and that
too, not only distributively in respect of every single and particular man
(for this would be but to advance him into the rank and order of the best and
noblest sort of subjects; a goodly advancement for a King) but collectively, as
comprehending the whole mass and body of people. And as for that distinction
of singulis major, but universis minor; it is a notion as far short of truth,
as it is of antiquity: being a distinction of yesterdayes invention only,
unknown to the Sages of ancient times, and on purpose devised of late, to serve
the ambitious ends of some, who by making that unsound and dangerous position
the chief ground and reason of their actions, did thereby plainly bewray the
weakness of their cause, and how little of solid truth and reason they had to
pretend for what they did. But to return to our business; if the chief
Magistrate be supreme, and the people inferior to him, then can be not be the
peoples creature: for the Creator must of necessity be confessed superior to
the creature, and not the creature to the Creator; neither is it possible that
that which is made, should be more noble and excellent then that which made it;
so that should it once be granted, that the chief Magistrate is the peoples
creature; it must needs follow, that the same things at the same time, and in
respect of the same, are supreme and not Supreme, inferior and not inferior.

But to give you all this more clearly in an example: and because I will free
my self from the pretense of any exception, I will instance in the first King
which was ever set up over the people of God, and that was Saul King of Israel.
Now he, of whose choosing and setting up (I trow) was he? did the people choose
him, was he their creature, and did they appoint him, and set him up over
themselves? nothing less: they desired a King indeed, and went crying to
Samuel that he would make them a King, 1 Samuel 8. But a King is too noble and
excellent a creature for Samuel's making; accordingly he carries this request
and desire of the peoples unto God, to know his pleasure in the matter; and he
afterward chooses them a King, and singles out the man, and describes the
person, and impowers him with commission and authority, and causes him to be
brought before them; and when he was set before them, hark what Samuel said
unto the people, 1 Samuel 10. 24. See the man whom the Lord has chosen; mark, it
is not whom you, but whom the Lord has chosen. Cujus jussu homines nascuntur,
hujus jussu and r^ges constituuntur, apti iis, qui in illis temporibus ab ipsis
reguntur Irenaeus l. 5.
So that Kings you see are of Gods immediate choosing and setting up, the first
King of all it is clear was so; and primi and ultimi par ratio, the charter
holds alike in succession; accordingly it was well said of De civitat. Dei, l.
5. c. 21.
holy Austin. Qui regnum dedit Constantino Christiano, ipse dedit Iuliano
Apostatae, he that gave the Kingdom to Constantine a Christian, gave it also
to Julian an Apostate; there was a very vast difference in the dispositions and
qualities of these two Kings, the one a Christian, the other an Apostate; the
one a protector, the other a persecutor; and yet you see they both alke derived
their commissions from the same divine hand; and they had both the same letters
patents to produce for their authority, he that gave the Kingdom to the one,
gave it to the other too; he that set up the one, set up the oath likewise; he
that made the one King, made the other King also. And then say, was it not a
most frontless and impudent usurpation of power in these Citizens to say unto
their King, Nolumus hunc regnare, we will not have this man reign over us?

Well, but is it then as they will? to continue their King, or to cast him off;
to pay homage unto him, or to rebel against him at pleasure? Are Kings thus
beholden to Subjects for their Allegiance? and is it a courtesy in them to pay
it? and not rather their duty, yea their special privilege, more, their
singular happiness, if they would see it. Call you this the way to honor
Kings, which the Scripture every where inculcates? Non n^scius David divin^m
esse traditionem in officio ordinis regalis, id^irco Saul in ^adem traditione
positum honorificat, ne Deo injuriam facere videretur, qui his ordinibus
honorem decrevit, August. Quaest. Vet. and No. Test. q. 35.
is this to be subject to the higher powers, which the Apostle so plainly
commands, and that too in words of most peremptory and indispensible
importance, Romans 1. 13.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers?. See I pray, how he extends
the duty, how he lays it at the door of every particular man's concernment; Let
every Soul, High and Low, Rich and Poor, Noble and Ignoble; one with another
all must submit, all must be subject to the higher powers. Again, mark well the
expression he uses, Let every Soul; now I confess that this word (Soul) is
many times put (...) in Scripture to signify the whole man, and so it does
here too; but yet (in regard of what follows v. 5.) I cannot conceive but that
the Apostle happily might have a special design in his choice of that word here
in this place (viz.) to imply the right and proper principle of true Christian
subjection; that it be not a mere forced, or yet a formal submission
altogether, not ore Significantius dicit, Omnis anima, cum debuisset dici,
Omnis Homo, ut inteliigeremus, non solum res nostras, non solum corpora nostra,
sed e^iam animas debere subji^i principibus saecularibus* in iis quae possunt
l^gitime imperare, Cajet. in locum.
tenus, or genu tenus, not a lip*subjection, or a knee-subjection only, but a
free and willing obedience, a subjection out of Conscience, a submission out of
free choice and election, that we do ex animo obedire, obey from our souls;
paying higher powers their tribute of all due subjection and submission, not
barely as a task or imposition of duty laid upon us, but as a tender of willing
choice and election freely flowing from us. And he that is such a Subject, and
makes a conscience of his obedience, is straightly tied up to a necessity of
continual subjection, and desires not to cast off any yoke which Conscience
lays upon him; But perseveres constant and steadfast in his duty, and nothing
can shake him out of his allegiance, or persuade him to disloyalty, or tempt
him to rebellion, Si totus orbis adversus me conjuraret, ut quidpiam molirer
adversus regiam Majestatem, ego tamen Deum timerem, and ordinatum ab eo Regem
offendere non auderem, Bern. Epist. 170.
or to practice any thing against the person, or honor, or life, or estate, or
interest of his lawful Sovereign; yea though an absolute Tyrant, though an
open oppressor and grinder of his Subjects, though of a nature never so fierce
and intractable, of a spirit never so hard and difficult, yet all this weighs
nothing at all in the balance of Conscience, which carries the Law and reason
of it is obedience in it is own breast; and so does readily answer whatsoever can
be objected in this kind, with the Apostles two words, (...), Tibi summum rerum
judicium dii dedere, nobis obsequii gloria relicta est: dixit M. Terent. ad
Caesare^, apud Tacit. Annal. lib. 6.
I must needs obey; every duty stands firm and sure upon the feet of
Conscience; and therefore in whomsoever that is truly his principle of action,
that man moves evenly and uniformly in every posture of duty, and hangs not in
aequilibrio, in an equal poise and indifferency Romans 13. 5.
to either parts of a contradiction; but necessarily moves that way whither
Conscience draws him, and is indispensably forced and put upon the practice of
that, which Conscience tells him is his duty, and he must do it, or he sins
grievously. I have donw now with the first part of the Text, the parties
arraigned.

Proceed we on to the second, the Cause and reason of their arraignment,
employed in these words, who would not that I should reign over them.] In the
message which these Citizens sent after their King, we meet with words of foul
scorn and contempt, of most vile lessening and undervaluing; so mean and cheap
(it seems) he was in their esteem and account, that they thought him not worthy
a particular compellation; they scorned to call him by his proper name and
title, but slightingly passed him over with a plain and common (...), we will
not have this man (this sorry, Hunc, despicientium est, and dedignantium
nominare, Brugens. in locum.
easy fellow, or indeed what ye please) to reign over us. And this indeed has
ever been the constant guise and practice of mutinous and seditious spirits,
when ever they went about, and had a mind to resist and rebel against the
authority of their lawful Sovereigns, still to vilify their persons, and to
lessen and disparage their parts; and in a word, to throw on as much load, and
to cast as much dirt upon the men, as may be, to the end that by so doing they
might render them more cheap and contemptible in the eyes and esteem of the
vulgar. An usage which Machiavel solemnly taught his Scholars, with an Item of
Nolite oblivisci, and which has been but too much practiced of late years: and
yet neither is this any thing more then what is necessarily preparative to
rebellion, and has been the constant practice of Rebels; (viz.) to begin
first with reproaching the persons of their Rulers, and possessing peoples
minds with strange reports and stories of the men; and this being once done,
the Scene is fairly laid as they would have it, and they have a handsome
opportunity for their purpose, and people are willing to be helpful and
assisting to them; and now the mask begins to be laid aside by little and
little: and the next posture which you shall likely find the men in, is in
complete arms, in some strong garrison, or pitched field, in open confrontment
and opposition of the power and authority of their King. Howbeit (if you mark
it well) in this Kings charge and indictment here in the Text, there is nothing
of all this recorded, nothing of their rudeness named, but only their rebellion
punished, not their previous incivilities toward his person mentioned, but
barely their present contempt of his authority sentenced. And was not this
Crime enough, you will say, Crimenlaesae Majestatis, a Crime of the highest
possible Treason? what can be more treasonable then this? or indeed is
treasonable in comparison of this? what, to say of a King, nolumus hunc, we
will not have this man to reign over us? and conformably thereunto to endeavor
actually the dispossessing him of his Regal power and authority? Can Subjects
possibly do more against their Sovereign? yes they may do more, and late
examples have told us they may do more, (I speak not of a Licet what they
lawfully may do, for so indeed they may not do so much; but of a factum est,
what some subjects wickedly have done) they may also add fury to their
rebellion, may lay violent hands upon their Sovereign, may draw up articles of
Indictment against him, may cause him to be brought before their Tribunals, and
thence pass sentence of death upon him; this they may do, for some we know
have done it: But tell it not in Gath, publish it 2 Samuel 1. 20.
not in the streets of Askelon; lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice,
lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.

Howbeit these Rebels in the Text, were not such through proficients; they had
not as yet learned the art of killing of Kings, and of putting their lawful
Princes and Sovereigns to death: accordingly you see they laid not violent
hands upon his person, but only remonstrated their disaffection to his
government; they drew not up articles of Indictment against him, but only cast
off all yokes of obedience and subjection to his authority; their rebellion was
not dressed up in like formalities and circumstances with others of a later
edition, only, noluerunt regnare, they would not have Him to reign over them.

And why not Him I trow? was it for any misdemeanors in his government? or for
his cruelty and severity toward them? or his Tyranny and usurpation over them?
No, none of these reasons are alleged; and we may probably conclude they were
not pretended, because not alleged. But they will have him no longer King,
because they will, stat pro ratione voluntas. And this indeed, would but people
speak out, is the plain English of all rebellion, nolunt regnare, they will not
have any King to reign over them: well, but where lays all the exception? not
so much against the person of their King, qua Man, but his Office, qua King;
for it is not said noluerunt esse, they would not have him to continue and
remain among them, but non regnare, not to reign over them, not to be superior
to them, not to have any place of command or power, or pre-eminence above them;
so that it was not so much the person of the man, as his authority, all this
time, which they fired against, and did strike at; and made use only of the
person, to the end that through his sides they might mortally wound and destroy
the authority it self. And this indeed is the whole bone of the controversy,
Men are proud and aspiring, covetous and ambitious; they would all be Kings;
and this makes them despisers of government, disobedient to Laws, undervaluers
and contemners of those in places of command and authority. I think I may very
truly say it, that scarce ever yet was there a professed Rebel in the world,
who did not all the while carry a King in his belly.

Would but the Church have made Pelagius Bishop, it might happily have been freed
of his heresy; might but Corah, Dathan and Abiram, have been all of them
Priests, it is like they would not have disturbed the Congregation with their
strange fire: and Facite me Romanae Ecclesiae episcopum (said Praetextatus a
heathen to Pope Damasus) and ero protinus Christianus, an ingenuous confession,
Make me but once Bishop of Rome, and I will presently turn Christian. There is
usually in all seditious and discontented people, a spirit of much pride and
ambition, and they are generally sick of a tympany, and their spirits begin to
swell and grow big, and to quarrel with their condition; and Pelagius must be a
Bishop or he will turn Heretic; and Diotrephes must have the pre-eminence
given him, or he will breed great stirs in the Church; and Praetextatus must
be made Pope, and wear a miter, or he will not turn Christian; and this is that
which puts men ever and anon upon strange and desperate designs: and because
nothing can likely more serve their turns then pretenses of Religion and
reformation, to make Them commonly the stratagems and expedients of their
ambition: for they observe most people to be naturally much delighted and
pleased with pictures and images of Religion; and if they observe a man to pray
long, or to fast often, or to be zealous against superstition, or to be open
mouthed against profaneness, or to have a mortified look, or a sullen eye brow,
presently they cry him up for a Saint, and he is voiced abroad for an heavenly
man; not considering all the while how his Principles are laid, and whereat his
Religion may possibly be designed: and we our selves have lived in times which
may sufficiently convince any sober man, that the forwardest professors and
greatest talkers of Religion, are not always the best Christians.

But these (...) in the Text were no such pretenders of Religion, they wanted a
mask of devotion to cast over their face of rebellion; they were right-down
rebels; and if any rebellion be better then other, this is that: their design
was rebellion, and they professedly owned it: and so their wickedness (though
vile and bad enough) was by so much less sinful, as it was more plain and
simple: they did not sugar it over with pretenses of Religion, or dress it up
with the garnish and false colors of devotion, but plainly told him their
mind, noluerunt regnare, they would not have him to reign over them.

And thus now having hitherto discovered to you their guilt, I presume you will
say it is high time that the men be brought to speedy execution; which also
brings me to the third and last part of the Text; the sentence determined and
passed upon them, (...), bring hither and slay them before me.

In which sentence we have two things considerable,

First, the severity of the punishment.

Secondly, the speedy execution of the sentence.

The first you have employed in the (...), slay From (...), a quo (...) jugulum.
(...), Thucyd.
them, destroy them, cut their throats, more pecudum, as we usually serve
beasts; and good reason for it too, that they who by their sin had degenerated
beneath the common civility and ingenuity of men, should now in their
punishment be dealt with, and served after the manner of beasts.

Again the latter, that also you have intimated in the (...), bring them forth
hither: He would not (it seems) have the sentence deferred, and put off from
day to day, but be presently put in execution, and his own eyes must be
witnesses of the vengeance, bring them hither and slay them before me. And why,
in this sin of theirs there were two things to be considered;

First, the horriblenesse of the fact it self.

Secondly, the evil example which it gave: both which did call for a speedy
execution of justice, to the end, that neither by the long delay and suspension
of vengeance, the course of justice might be stopped, nor by a general Act of
pardon and oblivion, others be encouraged and emboldned unto the like wicked
practices.

Now the observation which I shall raise from both these, is this; That a
speedy execution of punishment upon notorious Offenders and malefactors, is a
necessary Act of justice, and a seasonable mercy to a Nation. I grant indeed
that mildness and clemency, that pardon and tenderness are special virtues in
a Magistrate; and S. Iude's rule is very good, and worthy the imitation of such
persons: (...), of some have compassion, making a difference: howbeit, Jude 22.
though such are to show mercy at times, yet they must do it (you see) (...),
and it must be dispensed with a difference: All spirits are not capable of
mercy, all people are not proper for mercy; and to be sure, not scandalous,
not notorious Offenders. Oh no; such must be made examples, and be brought to
speedy trial; and it is much more mercy to punish them,, and to let the
sentence of justice pass upon them here, that neither themselves in their
persons, nor others by their means, and the encouragement of their impunity,
may perish eternally hereafter. And indeed, these quick and speedy proceedings
against such Offenders, they are of very great use in a Kingdom, and do serve
to several important purposes.

First, they are excellent expedients in themselves, and the readiest and
likeliest means to prevent public judgments and calamities. When the
Magistrate once draws his sword of justice against sin, then does God also
begin to put up his sword of vengeance, and commonly not before. The Scriptures
afford us variety of examples in this kind. When Joshua and his men went
against Ai, The people of Ai (says the Text) came out against them and smote
them, and chased Jos. 7. 5.
them away; this presently filled Joshua with wondering and admiring at the
strangeness of the discomfiture, that he who had fought so many victorious
battles hitherto, should now be affronted and checked by such a little paltry
City, such an inconsiderable handful of people: well, but mark the course he
takes, he goes and complains, and prays, and cries heavily unto God; but God's
ears are usually stopped to prayers which are not attended with justice. All
his complaining, and praying, and crying prevailed not with God Almighty; No,
he must have justice upon Malefactors done first: there was in Joshua's Camp
one Achan, who had lately committed a great sin, and deserved a great
punishment, and until execution be done upon him, Joshua may complain and cry
if he will, but shall be sure to be worsted. Another like example we have 2 Samuel 21. 1. There was a famine in the days of David three years, year after
year; and David enquired of the Lord, and the Lord answered, it is for Saul and
for his bloody house, because he slew the Gibeonites; well, see the course that
David takes, he calls for the Gibeonites, and asks what reparations he should
make them, that they might bless the inheritance of the Lord; And the
Gibeonites said unto him, we will have no silver, nor no gold of Saul nor of
his house; But the man that consumed us, and that devised mischief against us,
that we should be destroyed from remaining in any of the coasts of Israel: let
seven men of his sons be delivered unto us, and we will hang them up unto the
Lord in Gibeah of Saul: and this being duly performed and executed, mark the
issue, the famine presently ceased; and there was a speedy return of plenty and
abundance again. But most memorable above any other is that example of Ahab, 1
Kings 20. who for sparing and showing kindness and favor to Benhadad, whom he
should have destroyed and slain, received this heavy doom from the mouth of
God, ver. 42. Because thou have let go out of thy hand a man whom I had
appointed unto utter destruction, therefore shall thy life go for his life, and
thy people for his people. A Text which should make Magistrates very wary and
cautious, lest the mercy which they show to Malefactors, do over a while
rebound ba^k in heavy judgments either upon themselves or their posterity.

But then secondly, such speedy proceedings are also great checks and restrains
to sin. Nothing does more awe wicked men into good order and discipline, and
make them more afraid of sinning, and bind them over to their good behavior;
then a speedy execution of justice upon Offenders: for he that sees such men
punished before his eyes, though he makes no conscience at all of the evil of
the sin, yet will he somewhat tremble, and be afraid of committing the same
fact, for fear of incurring a like punishment. It is true indeed, were all men
ingeniously and virtuously spirited, as there would be no occasion, so would
there be as little need and use of such severities; but you know what the
Apostle saves, Lex non posita est justo, 1 Timothy 1. 9.
the Law is not made for a righteous man, but for sinners and wicked persons,
to restrain and hinder them from sinning; and common experience (too evidently)
proves it, that the Magistrate contributes much more to the suppression of vice
in a nation, by one stroke of his sword, then do many others, by a whose life
of pious example and doctrine. Yea and for this cause too says the same
Apostle Romans 13. 4. is the Sword of justice put into his hand, that he should
be ((...)) an avenger of wrath to every one that does evil.

Again thirdly, such speedy proceedings are also great preservatives of peace
and quiet in a nation. Nothing does sooner stifle rebellions, and suppress
tumults, and appease murmurings, and discourage wicked devices and conspiracies
then these: hence says Solomon of Righteousness, (a main part whereof you
know consists in timely distributions of punishments) that it exalts a
nation, Prove. 14. 32. that is, makes it rich and populous, safe and secure.
Ministers may preach their hearts out, and study to devise motives, and to
prescribe rules of peaceable living; but when all is done, the Magistrates
sword must have a great stroke in this work; he is the fittest (...), and the
likeliest of all other to keep the peace: and therefore if he once grows
remiss and backward in his executions of justice, it makes people proud and
scornful, and confident, and presumptuous; and every single sinner escaping
unpunished, puts hope into thousands, that they also may do so too: and so in
the effect, a mercy shown to one, proves a cruelty done to many.

Again fourthly and lastly, such speedy and timely proceedings are great
gladdings and rejoycings to the righteous and good people of the land. The
righteous (says holy David) shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance; Psalm.
58. 10.
and in perditione imp^orum (says Solomon) erit plaudatio, when the wicked
perishes, there is shouting: Prove. 11. 10.
When Goliath was slain, the people rose up and 1 Samuel 17. 52.
shouted for joy: when the Egyptians were drowned, Moses penned that admirable
(...), Exodus 15. when Sisera was overthrown and killed, Deborah and Barak fell
to composing their song of praise and thanksgiving, Judge. 5. when Haman was
hanged upon his lofty pair of gallows, the Jews presently instituted their
feast of Purim, dies epularum and laetitiae, days of general feasting and
rejoicing, Esth. 9. Not that the righteous do (properly) take delight and
pleasure in the destruction of any man; only it glads them to see Laws openly
vindicated, justice duly executed, sin timely punished, and open marks of
reproach and punishment set upon wicked men; Dum mala opera puniuntur,
laudantur bona; ipsa enim punitio malorum, laus est bonorum, Cajet. Com. in
cap. 13. ad Romans
and such sights as these cannot doubtless but make every righteous man much
applaud and comfort himself in his choice of innocence, and the constant use
and practice of a virtuous life.

And now all that I shall add more as to the application of this point, is a
word only of exhortation; and I shall direct it chiefly to Magistrates, and
persons in places of command and trust, and into whose hand the sword of
Justice is put, and to whom specially the administration of Laws belongs:
neither shall I take upon me the boldness to prescribe rules and forms of
justice to them: but as a Minister of the Gospel, and in the bowels of Jesus
Christ, I do most humbly beseech all such, that, for Gods sake, for the
Kingdom and Churches sake they would be courageous and active in their speedy
and exemplary Executions of Justice upon Offenders and Malefactors: Those
Malefactors especially, then whom (next unto those that crucified our Savior)
the Sun never yet saw any more impudently lewd and wicked. What, (said Pilate
to the Ioh. 19. 15.
Jews concerning our Savior) Shall I crucify your King? speaking as one that
admired and wondered at the strangeness of such an Act. But, see, what an
heathen admired and wondered at, some Christians have since practiced. But I
must not honor them with that (...), with that worthy name; rather, some that
Iam. 2. 7.
called themselves Christians, and would needs be accounted such: but let not
our adversaries cast this in our teeth, Exierunt e nobis, they went out from
us, they were not of us, who did these things, and in doing 1 Ioh. 2. 19.
what they did, they un-Christned themselves. It is impossible for any
Christian to arrive at such an height of impiety, but he must first quit his
religion, and shake hands with his Christianity: for if any thing can possibly
tie up men to Laws and Government, to duty and allegiance, to obedience and
reverence toward the persons of Kings, it is doubtless Christian Religion.
Howbeit, to men that have once out grown all sense and modesty of conscience,
such ties and obligations are but as a fence of cobwebs, which they can easily
break through at pleasure, and laugh at when they have done. And shall not such
Offenders be punished? shall not such Malefactors have speedy and exemplary
justice done upon them? is it not sit that they should? is it not just and
necessary that they ought? Under the Mosaical Law, no land which had innocent
blood shed in it, could be cleansed, but by the blood of him that shed it, Nu.
35. 33. Now was that the Law for common and ordinary blood? does that bring
such a sin? does that intail such a curse? does that leave such blot and stain
upon a Nation, that there is no washing it off, no possible cleansing and
wiping it out, otherwise then by the besome of vindicative justice and
vengeance? and shall we have cheaper thoughts, and make lesser account of Royal
Sovereign blood? does that call loud for vengeance, and does not this cry much
louder? will not God be friends with the nation, where that is silently
connived at, and passed over? and will he likely ever be reconciled to that
Kingdom where This is not severely punished? You know what great difference the
Scripture puts betwixt the life of Kings, and of Subjects; making one drop of a
Kings blood of more worth and value then many large quantities of the blood of
subjects. If we flee away (said the men of 2 Samuel 18. 3.
Judah to David) they will not care for us, and if half of us dye, they will
not care for us. But now thou art more worth then ten thousand of us; see the
disproportion! ten thousand, to one. And does not God (think you) expect that
we should observe a like proportion in our inquisitions after the blood of
Kings? And doubtless it is nothing less then a special miracle of mercy; that
we have been spared all this while, and that our land (the unhappy Scene of all
this wickedness) has not long since become as Sodom, and been made like unto
Gomorrah: and yet did we not stand here, but have been daily adding to our
measure of sin, and pickling up other horrible crimes (which though in horror
and magnitude not equal to the former, yet) such as the innocence of former
times would have blushed at, and the modesty of our fore fathers have been put
out of countenance to have heard so much as mentioned. But Aetas parentum,
p^jor^vis, tulit Horat.
n^s Nequiores; we are a viperous generation, a thriving sort of sinners,
people that have out done the immodesties of former Malefactors, and devised
new arts and stratagems to commence Excellent in wickedness, and to try how
far it was possible to sin. Many strange, many horrible things have of late
years been done amongst us; and blood has been as common in our streets as
water; and the murder of Christians, as the slaughter of beasts. And no wonder
neither, for having once leaped over this highest fence, and adventured that
upon the life and person of their Sovereign, which never yet entered into the
thoughts of the most heathen and barbarous people, (to be sure not dressed up in
like formalities) what ties of Laws, or obligations of Conscience, or motives
of Reason, or arguments of Modesty can be imagined of strength and force
sufficient to restrain such spirits from breaking out into any open violences
which unbridled fury and frenzy can possibly suggest? Is it like that those
salvages would afterward grow tender and squeamish, and make a conscience of
the blood of their fellow subjects, who were so prodigal of their Sovereigns?
And yet, say I beseech you, has not this been our manner of living for these
twelve years together? how has our land been made another Aceldama, a field
of blood? and this Kingdom of ours so famous in the Histories of former times;
for modesty and civility, for justice and equity, for Religion and reformation,
for excellent Laws and government, been changed into the rudeness of a
wilderness, a dominion and habitation of Wolves and Tygres? Oh the abundance
of innocent blood which has of late years been shed among us! the cry whereof
has already pierced the Heavens, and is Genesis 4. 10.
come up into the ears of the Lord of hosts, and is importunate, and will not
be satified: and many souls of them that have been barbarously slain for the
word of God, and for the testimony which they held, do at this very time lie
under the Altar, calling out and crying with loud voices, How long oh Lord,
holy and true, do thou not avenge our blood on them that dwell Revel. 6. 9.
on the earth? And yet neither is this all; there has of late years been a
very great reproach and scandal brought upon the Protestant religion, and the
wound has gone deep, and our enemies do rejoice and laugh at it, and there is
no way possible to wipe it off, but by the exemplary punishment of them that
brought it. And until this be done, I fear God will not be perfectly
reconciled unto us, nor our Church ever able to get up, nor our Kingdom ever
recover into it is ancient happiness and security; but still there will be
fears, and plots, and jealousies, and continual parties and factions amongst
us, and wicked men will be emboldned unto strange attempts, and good men much
discouraged in ways of loyalty and obedience. It is a notable example for
Magistrates, that which we have recorded, Psalm. 106. 30. Then stood up Phineas
and executed judgment, and so the plague ceased; See, justice timely executed,
it stays plagues, it hastens mercies, it removes and puts by judgments. We
must not think that God will be reconciled to our land barely by our praying,
or preaching, or fasting, and the like; nay but he will have justice executed
withal, and sinners shamed, and Malefactors brought to condign punishment;
when that work is once over, then if (afterward) we return to him in the
exercise of those holy duties, we may hopefully expect that he also will be
friends with us, and will delight to dwell among us, and to do us good; and
will be a wall of brass about our Kingdom, and will defend the person of our
King, and will restore to our Church her ancient rights and honors, and will
rain down blessings into our laps; and we shall not be any longer a reproach
and a scorn, and a by word to our neighbors; but a joy to our friends, a
terror to our enemies; and shall enjoy a lasting succession of much peace, and
plenty, and happiness in our land: and (in a word) when we have once made our
kingdom terram justi^iae a land of righteousness, by removing the wicked from
out of it: then will God also continue it to us for ever, terram visionis,
another Goshen, a land of light and vison: Amen.

Numb. 35. 31. Moreover, you shall take no satisfaction for the life of a
murderer, which is guilty of death; but he shall surely be put to death.

FINIS.

