THE Great Preservative of Mankind: OR The transcendent Virtue of the true
SPIRIT OF SALT.

Long looked for, and now Philosophically prepar*d and purified from all
hurtful or Corroding Qualities, far beyond any thing yet known to the World;
being both safe and pleasant for the use of all Men, Women, and Children.

By a Physical Laboratory in LONDON, where all manner of Chymicall
preparations are carried on, without any Sophistication, or abuses whatsoever.

(...).
LONDON, Printed by R. D. in the year 1662.

THE TRANSCENDENT VIRTUE Of the true SPIRIT of SALT.
THere have been so many false preparations of that, commonly called, The
Spirit of Salt, retaining most pernicious accidents, as it will be a hard
matter to have the worth of that which is perfect admitted into a vulgar Creed.
Yet when the noble and universal qualities of seasoning and preserving our
Food by common Salt are weighed, the ingenious must needs conclude, that when
separated from its dregs and scum, and presented to us in its strength and
vigor, it cannot but be worth a welcome reception amongst modern intelligent
persons, as well as it had amongst many of the learned Ancients.

Therefore, as Basilius Valentinus, Paracelsus, Helmont, and many others most
excellent Chemists, have wrote in the commendation thereof, it may well be
hoped, the publication of three or four hundred persons fresh experiences of
its virtue in some particular cases, should not be unprofitable for the public
good, who are ready to testify the truth of these Assertions following,
against all opposers and objections. And indeed, its of so inherent an
excellency, that it needs neither Epistle Dedicatory, or Commendatory: but that
this famous City and Kingdom should not be ignorant of so great a mercy, its
inward and outward virtues must not be concealed.

And first, as to the Inward.
Stomach.
THough it communicates not much nourishment to the Body it self, yet procures
good appetite, helps digestion, keeps the Body loose, prevents putrefaction of
any thing in the Stomach, strengthnining and cleansing it from all raw and
phlegmatic humors, whether they proceed from drinking, or otherwise, and
prevents drunkenness, or sickness therefrom.

Fevers.
In Fevers of long continuance, its very good given in the Spirit of Wine,
quenches thirst in such as languish under Thirst.
hot distempers, or from what cause soever drought does arise in the well and
healthful, in hot weather cooling the Blood, and inflamed Liver.

Blood.
At all times it revives the Body, and defies diseases that arise from a
corrupted Blood, by purifying it, th at lay before idle, and settled in the
veins, and makes it volatile, and to proceed more regularly in its circulation.

Rheums.
It delivers the Breast and parts adjacent, from Rheums and Distillations.

Cough.
A rooted Cough, and the shortness of Breath proceeding from thence, without
much difficulty it perfectly cures.

Spleen.
It helps the Liver and the Spleen, in its unnatural weight and burden.

Jaundise*
It stifles the Iaundise in the birth, or kills it in its strength.

Wind.
The hypochondricall Melancholy; pains also in the Sides and Bowels, and
whatsoever has its origin from Wind, it easily disperses and removes.

Dropsy.
Most especially it cleares the Body from all hydropicall humors, and those
which the Legs bear with such regret and trouble.

Urine.
It keeps the Vreteries from all filth, or slime, and sends away the water that
lurks betwixt the skin and flesh, by Stool and Urine.

Stone. Gravel.
Persons afflicted with the Stone, it helps whether in Reins or Bladder, and
forbids Coallition of the Gravel, and in time dissolves the Stone, if not
already congealed and hardened.

Lungs. Falling Sickness. Palsy.
Its good for healing the Ulceration and Consumption of the Lungs, the
Falling Sickness and the Palsy.

Scurvy.
And for the Scurvy, its a most approved Antidote and Remedy.

Worms.
Prevents breeding of Worms, and kills them where they are.

Plague.
Its a received preservative against the Plague, and does very much help those
already infected.

Poison.
As also any that are poisoned by Opium, etc. or stung by Serpents, Spiders, or
otherwise.

Women.
And as to Women, it removes obstructions, helps them to the benefit of Nature,
And those that have the Matrix clogged with superfluous humors, may use it with
success.

Thus much for the inward Benefits.
For the Virtue outwardly used.
IT keeps a good and lively Color. Any putrifi'd wounds or proud flesh, being
gently washed with it, are cured, and the place preserved by it, clean and
sound.

It brings life into benumbed Members, and is very good against the Cramp.

It may be outwardly applied for the French disease: as also in cold Gouts,
mixed with Oil of Turpentine, Wax, Amber, Hartshorn, or the like.

Its good for the Kitchen, in rendering meats grateful and pleasant; for
instead of Vinegar, Lemons, or other sharp Sawces, its more healthfully taken:
mixed with Sugar its excellent Sauce for Roasted meats.

By it Raisins recover their former bigness, and beauty, mixed with some
fountain water, are pleasing to the pallat, and very cordial to refresh a weak
Stomaek.

Pigeons, Chickens, and all flesh seasoned with it, are of a pleasing relish:
Beef steeped in, or sprinkled with it, is made tender.

It cleanses the Teeth, and makes them white as snow, and takes all stains out
of Linen.

To say no more, its that which cuts the Sinews of all diseases, and supports,
as well as restores weak Bodies.

One thing more cannot be omitted; when at Sea water is scant, a little of this
prepared into a Salt, laid on the tip of the Tongue in a small proportion,
takes a way all inclination to drink.

These are some of the rare advantages, that attend this Spirit of SALT: Others
there be more secret, which require Private impartment.

Who use it, find these Effects: If any doubt, let them try in some one, and by
that judge the rest.

Its to be had, near the Old Exchange, with Mr HUCHINSON, at the White Swan, in
Burching-lane.

At Gray's Inn, with Mr THOMAS FIRBY, under the Gate.

At St Dunstons-Church, in Mr MARRIOT'S shop.

At New Exchange, with Mr HENRY HARRINGTON, in the Low Walk.

At Westminster, with Mr HARMAN, in Stephens Alley.

At Lambeth, with Mr NEVITTS, near the three Mariners.

Where Directions are for the several occasions, and use of such as desire it,
on moderate Rates.

The Authors forbear their names, and publishing the further Virtues (that are
almost wonderful) until they see the kind reception of this one Product of
their great expense and labor.

Veritas cum sit Lux Astrorum, angulis non coarctatur: Itidem and SAL ex Astris
Oriens, exaltatus, non potest quin radios suos hominibus effundat; veluti
Prophylacticum simul and Alexipharmacum perpetuum, cum sit Aeternitatis Divinae
Nobilae Symbolum.

Truth being the Light of the Stars, cannot be closed in Corners: In like
manner, SALT also arising from the Stars, being exalted, cannot but pour out
its Rays upon Mankind, as a famous Preservative, and perpetual resister of
Poison, since it is a Noble Symbol of Divine Eternity.

FINIS.
DIRECTIONS For the use of THE SPIRIT of SALT.
FIrst, in GENERAL. All sorts of Liquors, are the Conveyes thereof; as Water,
Beer, Ale, Syder, Wine, Broths, Sawces, etc. more healthfully used than
Oranges, Lemons, Vinegar, or Verges; and with Oil is most pleasant: Indeed its
proper in all sorts of Cookery, to be used by the healthy, to prevent these
Maladies, mentioned in the Treatise of its Nature, as well, as for their
Remedy; and that so much, as gives the Palate a smart Relish, at the
discretion of the User: No Error can be committed, by taking any quantity from
10 drops to 40, at any time, mingled with Sugar, may be doubled; and taken in a
Mornings-Draught, is very Efficatious: For it preserves not only the Body, but
whatever it receives, from all manner of Corruption, by Restoring Nature to its
Primitive State.

In PARTICULAR. 20 Drops of this Spirit in half a Pint of any sort of Liquor,
is a good Standard: And after the proportion of 60 Drops in a Quart, it revives
all sorts of Beer, Ale, Syder, and Wine; long preserving them both Strong and
Generous: And the like quantity being put into Barrels of Water, for Mariners
to drink at Sea, it will be better Preserved, have a gratefuller Taste, and
avoid that putrefaction which arises from Raw Water; especially preventing the
Worms and Scurvy. And so also for preserving Meat in long Voyages, 40 Drops
hereof mingled with a Pint of Water, and so proportionably covering the Meat,
will increase the Weight, and make it wholesome.

In dressing all sorts of Fish, Flesh, and Fowl* being old and Tough, they are
made Tender and nourishing, by so much hereof mingled with any Spices, Water,
or Butter, and sprinkled on them, as may give a quick taste in their Sauces;
and any cold Meat also sprinkled therewith, is preserved from detriment: And to
make a harsh tender amongst the curious Pallates, dissolving a little Argall
with this, and some SALT. makes most dainty wholesome food.

In Pickling any Sallets, as Cucumbers, Capers, Fennel, Purslain, Broom-buds,
etc. being mingled with Water, and Salt, so as to make it sharp and quick, is
very healthily pleasant.

To prevent the Toothach, to cleanse and preserve the Teeth white, Put 6 Drops
in a spoonful of running Water, (or for the Curious into Rose Water) and with a
small Linnen-Ragg, rub the Teeth, and its impossible they should corrupt, or
putrify: It cleanses them from their Corrosive Gravel.

As for WOMEN, in most cases its fit to give private directions* But for such
as give suck, let them, with 60 Drops turn a Pint of Milk into a Posset, and
take the Whey, mingled with Sugar (if they please) and drink a reasonable
draught thereof in a Morning, fasting an hour after it, and their Children will
be kept thereby from the Scurvy, small Pox, Fevers, Convulsions, and the like
Diseases.

In CHILDREN. Who desire to prevent the Stone and Gravel, which (by Experience)
destroys them, as well as others (who are not capable to take other Medecines,
by reason of the Nauseousness and great quantities) may give them of this sort
of Posset drink, and they will find it both preserving, and cleansing those
parts of the Body subject to these Afflictions, and also promise good Natural
Rest to them.

In want of Water, a Drop or two of this mingled with Sugar put on the Tongue,
will refresh the Palate, and quench Thirst. Wherefore to avoid the hazard of
Glasses breaking, it shall be Composed also into a BALSOMICK SALT, Portable in
any Box, Purss, or Paper; which will not only accomodate the Rich, (who travel
with Coach and Horses at their ease) but also the Poor, and Infantry of Armies;
who traveling on foot in the heat of Summer, are often forced to drink
Puddle-water, wherein Filth and Carryon lie, by which, they are subjected to
Surfeits, and such other Diseases as make them dye like Flies.

Almost infinite other Advantages; As preserving dead bodies entire, etc. are
hidden in this Spirit; which in success of time, by Gods grace shall be
manifested: And if any desire more exact instructions in their particular
Cases, they may repair where its made, and be more fully directed.

But if any Persons of Honor, or Quality, do more esteem this Spirit of SALT,
prepared sweet, and separated from all its sharpness, they may be pleasured
with it, freed from any Phlegmatic Quality, being prepared from the pure
Essence of that Spirit, by the assistance of a Learned, famous Grecian, who
has traveled most parts of Christendom, and experienced the same: And being
recommended from both Universities, is now entertained in a Laboratory, whence
several other Chemical preparations, for the good of this Kingdom, its hoped
ere long, shall appear.

Besides the places published before, (being much enquired after) this Spirit in
several and great Quantities, may be also had in small Glasses, from one
Shilling, to six Shillings, sealed up, At Horsly-down, with Margaret Alleyn,
near the Gate of the Artillery-ground:

And at Mr. Samuel Watsons, at the sign of the Turks*Head, a Coffee-house, in
Friday-street, near Cheapside:

Also by the Tower, at the Lion in the Den.

Despicit, nescit.
POSTSCRIPT.
Courteous Reader*
ALbeit, in the former Sheet of this Book, the Authors name is spoken of, as
being suppressed; yet upon further consideration, (however void of all
Osteutation in the thing) he has made a mature retractation of his then
thoughts, and does now own himself to be the Author of this Book, by whom this
Apologitick Epistle is subscribed: Not doubting, but that hereafter he shall
suddenly hint something to the World, which shall be more for the Public good,
than this; hoping in the Interim, that this shall meet with all due, and
favorable acceptance, as being intended by him, for the good of others, more
than his own; who now does subscribe himself,

Thine in the Bond of the surest Engagements, R. BARKER.

Sheet 1. Page 5. line 5. for Huchinson, read Hutchison.

Sheet 1. Page 5. l. 22. for Nobilae, read Nobile.

FINIS.

