A LETTER TO A LADY, Furnishing her with Scripture Testimonies Against the
Principal Points and Doctrines OF POPERY.

All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is Profitable for Reproof,
for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness: That the Man of God may be
Perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all Good Works, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. The Law of
the Lord is Perfect, converting the Soul, etc. Psalm. 19. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
Search the Scriptures, etc. John 5. 39. Blessed is he that reads, etc. Rev.
1. 3. Licensed, July 6. 1688.

LONDON, Printed for John Tailor, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, M DC
LXXX VIII.

Admonition to the Reader, concerning the Authority and Use of the Holy
Scriptures.
THe following Papers, being intended only for a private Satisfaction, and not
for the public View, are writ in a Style agreeable to the Sex to which they
are dedicated, and the few Arguments here and there added, either to explain or
Illustrate a Text of Scripture, are such as are more obvious to a Female
Capacity, than perhaps the common way of Arguing used by one great Disputant
against another is. For it was no more my intent, than it was my Business, in
writing to Women; who by Reason of their general want of Learning, understand
nothing of Logical Reasoning, and as little of Syllogismal Inferences, to
endeavor to make a thing plain, by rendering it more unintelligible: But to
make every thing as obvious and plain to the most ordinary Understanding, as I
might, though my Words were never so homely; And though it is confessed, The Lady
to whom these Papers were especially directed, is a Person endued with better
Parts, and more Learning than others of her Sex generally are; yet I
considered, That many more of her Society or Acquaintance, might be concerned
in the Reading of them: And therefore I thought, as a plain Method would not be
unpleasant to the Lady her self, so it would certainly be both more Acceptable
and Profitable to others, not laden with so much Sagacity and Understanding.

But, since in this Undertaking I have wholly relied on the Testimony of the
Scriptures, and have drawn all my Arguments from them; I think it proper to
vindicate my Proceeding that way, by giving the Reader a cursory Account of the
Supreme Authority of the Sacred Writings, consisting in two Particulars: The
First is, Their containing, fully, all things needful for our Salvation. And
the Second, Their being sufficient to determine Points of Doubt and
Controversy. In both which I shall still make my Appeal to the Scriptures
themselves; and likewise intermix a few Testimones of the Fathers, not for
Confirmation of the Scriptures Authority, for that is evident enough in it
self; but to show the Opinion of those great Pillars of the Church in a Matter,
about which there is so great a Disagreement betwixt us and the Church of Rome.

I begin therefore with the first Evidence of the Supreme Authority of the
Scriptures; Their containing, fully, all things needful for our Salvation.

The Evangelist, Joh. 20. 30. tells us, That Jesus did many signs, in the
presence of his disciples, which are not written in this book. But these, says
he, are written, That ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the son of
God, and that believing ye might have life through his name. And Cyril. in
Praef. in Johan.
this Gospel by S. John, may without Injury, be thought to excel the other
three, says S. Cyril; and he gives no weak Reasons for it: One of which is,
That it contains all things pertaining to Truth, which the other do also, but
not in so high a Strain: For whereas the rest do most Exquisitely describe the
Genealogy of our Savior, either descending from Abraham to Joseph, or
ascending from Joseph to Adam; S. John has not much labored in these Matters,
but with an aspiring Mind seems to soar beyond Human Possibility, and is not
afraid, in express Words to set down his Ineffable Generation; In the beginning
was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was God. The same was in
the beginning with God: And so aspires directly to the Foundation of Divine
Truth. Where, by the way, it will not be amiss to observe, That this Evangelist
was the beloved Disciple of our Lord, and therefore it cannot reasonably be
supposed he would conceal any thing from him that was necessary to be known:
But on the contrary, he revealed more to him than was needful to be set down,
in some Particulars whereof he was commanded to be Silent; as may be seen, Rev.
10. 4. But when any thing might be known, he is to declare it, Chap. 22. 10.
and Chap. 1. 3. They are blessed who read and hear the words of this prophecy,
with an intent to keep those things which are written therein. So then, though
we are ignorant of some things, yet by what is written, we may sufficiently be
acquainted with whatever is necessary for us to know.

S. Paul, Acts 20. after he had told the Ephesians, Verse 30, That of their own
selves should arise men, speaking perverse things to draw away disciples after
them. At the 32 Verse he commends them to God, and to the Word of his Grace,
which, he tells them, is able to build them up, and to give them an inheritance
among all them which are sanctified. And lest it should be thought that he had
broached some unwritten Traditions of his own, he professes Chap. 26. 22. That
having obtained help of God, he still continued, witnessing both to small and
great, but saying no other things than those which the Prophets and Moses did
say should come. Accordingly he tells the Romans, in his Epistle to them, Chap.
1. 16. That he was not ashamed of the gospel of Christ, because it is the power
of God unto salvation, to every one that believes. And Chap. 15. 4. Whatsoever
things were written aforetime, were written for our learning, that we through
Patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. And says S. Chrysostom,
Wherefore are these things written, but that we should In Romans hom. 9. In 2
Cor. hom. 13. In synop. Athan.
learn them? For says he, The Scriptures are (...), of all, the most exact
Balance, Guide and Rule. And according to S. Athanasius, they are (...), The
Anchors and Support of our Faith. And Irenaeus calls them (...) Iren. l. 3. c.
1.
(...), the immovable Canon of Truth; and the Pillar and Foundation of our
Faith. And we being sure of what the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. That all
Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, That the man of God
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto Canonem fidei in Prophetarum and
Apostolorum libris figi atque terminari. Aug de C. D. l. 11. c. 41.
all good Works; may safely conclude with S. Austin, That the Rule of Faith is
fixed and terminated in the Books of the Prophets and Apostles. It was the
constant Opinion of this great Doctor of the Gentiles, That the Scriptures were
of themselves able to make Men Wise unto Salvation. Neither is he alone; for
St. James assures us, That they are able to save our Souls, Jam. 1. 21. And
therefore St. Peter calls 'em a more sure word of Prophecy, than a Voice from
Heaven; and says, That all Men would do well that they take good heed to 'em,
as unto a Light that shines in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1. 19. And our Lord
himself, in the Parable, brings in Abraham telling the Rich Man in Hell, That
his Brethren had Moses and the Prophets, whom let 'em hear, says he; for if
they will not hear them, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from
the Dead, Luke 16. 29. 31. Upon which words, St. Chrysostom's Inference was,
That we should believe the Scriptures. Though the Dead should rise, and though
Angels should descend from Heaven, we must prefer the Testimony of Scriptures
before them: According to the Apostle, Gal. 1. 8. Though we, or an Angel from
Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you, than that which we have preached unto
you, let him be accursed. All which I take to be Indications plain enough of
the sufficiency of the Scriptures, as to all things pertaining to Salvation.

But besides this, I said they were also in themselves sufficient to determine
Points of Controversy.

The Psalmist says of the Word of God, That it is a Lamp to his Feet, and a
Light to his Path, Psalm. 119. 105. And therefore it was that he so often speaks
of ordering himself according to this Word, and prays so earnestly to God to
enable him to do it.

And thus the Prophet expostulates with the Jews, Isa. 8. 19, 20. When they
shall say unto you, Seek unto them which have familiar spirits, and unto
wizards that peep and mutter; Should not a people seek unto their God? for the
living, to the dead? To the law and to the testimony: if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them.

It was the way of the Apostles, on all occasions, to have recourse to the
Scriptures. Thus St. Peter, in his Sermon to Cornelius, to confirm his Doctrine
of the Messiah, says, To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his
Name whosoever believes on him, shall receive remission of sins, Act. 10. 43.
And that it was the constant practice of St. Paul, no Man can deny that has had
the least converse with his Writings; especially that great Axiom of his, which
has never been contradicted, That the Scriptures are given by Inspiration of
God, and are profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for
Instruction in Righteousness, is a more than ordinary instance of his Opinion
in this particular. And as it is written, was the only refuge of those
Primitive Builders of the Church. And it was the very same method that our Lord
himself took to reprove the Tempter, Matthew. 4. 4. It is written, Man shall not
live by bread alone, etc. And Verse. 7. It is written, Thou shall not tempt the
Lord thy God. And Verse. 10. It is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God.
And thus he used always to bring the Testimonies of Moses and the Prophets
against the impious Objections of the Jews; very often telling them, That he
did not speak his own Words, but the Word of him that sent him; that is, the
Word of God.

And now, would it not be a thing to be wondered at, if the Holy Fathers of the
Church should be ignorant of this way of arguing? Or if they did know it, that
they would not choose to follow his Example whom they pretended to worship and
obey? But we have no cause to wonder at this, but rather at their ignorance, or
wilful stubbornness, who pretend to be acquainted with them, and yet, seemingly
at least, assert their Sentiments and Practice in this matter, to be contrary
to their Predecessors.

It was usual with Basil thus to express himsel, (...). Epist. ad Eustath. 80
(...); Let the Scriptures, which are divinely inspired, be Judge between us.
For, says he, Whatsoever Idem Etb. Defin. 80. c. 22. 6.
is contrary to them, is not of Faith, and therefore sinful. Every Word or
Cause ought to be tried and confirmed by the Holy Scriptures.

Neither does St. Cyprian come behind him in this Cypr. ad Pomp. cont. Steph.
Pap.
particular; If (says he) the Pipes through which Water is conveyed into the
City, should be suddenly deficient, should we not go presently to the Spring,
that thence we may know the cause of the defect, whether the Spring it self is
dry, or whether the Pipes are stopped by any thing which may hinder the course of
the Water? And so the Pipes being cleared, the City may be supplied with Water
as before. So ought the Ministers of the Gospel to do: In matters of Doubt they
should go to our Lord and his Apostles, that they may model their Actions by
their Doctrine, as the Fountain and Original of Divine Truth.

Tertullian likewise would accept of no Argument that was not drawn from the
Scriptures. And by this Tertul. de carne Christ. Idem de Resur. mort.
he confuted the Heretics of his time. For (says he) take away the Sophistry
of the Heathen Philosophers, which the Heretics make use of, and when they
come to argue from the Scriptures they will not be able to stand.

St. Chrysostom says, That if any thing is asserted without the authority of
the Scriptures to back it on, it leaves Chrysostom. in Psalm 95.
the Hearers in doubt. (...), says Clemens Alexandrinus; We say nothing against
the Scriptures. Cl. Al. de Pet. Strom. lib. 6. Theod. dial. 1. cap. 6. Id.
Hist. lib. 1. cap. 3.
And Theodoret, (...); I confide in the Scriptures only. To which we may add
his Testimony of the Saying of Constantine the Great, That the Books of the
Evangelists and Apostles, and the Oracles of the the ancient Prophets do
evidently teach us, what we are to think of the Divine Power. Therefore in
every seditious Controversy, let us discuss the Point in question, by the
Testimony of those divinely inspired Writings. Whence we may see, that all the
Fathers are not against us in this matter.

I think Origin may come in for one on our side. For in his Comment upon the
Sixteenth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, having explained those
Admonitions of the Apostle, verse. 17, 18. and coming to verse. 19. where the
Apostle tells the Romans, That their Obedience is come abroad unto all Men: And
that he is therefore glad on their behalf, The Apostle (says he) therefore
rejoices over those that were obedient, being sure that as he had taught them
not to use that general Obedience which they indifferently pay to all Men, for
that which is due to God only, whereby they obey God rather than Man; so this
Obedience was embraced by them before the other. For it is indeed an argument of
no little discretion, but of a quick and most piercing Judgment, if we can
discern what Opinion is to be followed, and what is rather to be rejected. In a
word, our Lord himself in the Gospel says, Beware of them which come to you in
sheeps clothing, but inwardly are devouring wolves. Therefore a watchful Soul
and settled Mind are required in order to our discovering the plain simplicity
of Sheep, or the more hidden malice and greediness of Wolves. Whence we may
learn what great danger they are in, who neglect the study of the Holy
Scriptures, from which only they can be furnished with such a knowledge and
discretion.

St. Austin has an Expression, which makes a great bluster in the World; I
would not believe the Gospel (says he) if the Authority of the Catholic Church
did not move me to it. Upon this the Authority of the Church is magnified above
the Authority of the Scriptures.

But if St. Austin did not intend any such thing, where are we then? He
expressed himself once to this purpose, Thou, O God, have assured me, that not
they who Aug. Conf. l. 6. c. 5.
believed thy Books, which with so great Authority thou have established in
almost all the World; but they who did not, were culpable: Neither are they to
be heard, who shall ask me, how I know, that those Books are given to Men by
the Spirit of One most true God. Which shows, that he did not altogether rely
on the Testimony of the Church, which was only outward; but chiefly the inward
Witness of the Holy Ghost in his Conscience. But we may know more of his Mind
by more of his Words; We (says he) do not bring a false Balance, that we may
make things Idem. cont. Donat. l. 2. c. 6.
weigh what we please, and how we please, and so give judgment what is light,
and what heavy: But we give you the divine Balance of the Holy Scriptures, the
Treasures of the Lord, and by that we tell you what is heavy; yet not we, but
the Lord himself; who having weighed all things already, we tell you from him
what is heavy, etc. And can we think that Great Father ever intended to set up
the Authority of the Church above the Scriptures? He does not say, We tell you
from the Church what is light, and what heavy; but, we tell you from the
Scriptures. And thus again, There are (says he) certain Books of the Id. de
unit. Eccl. c. 3.
Lord, to whose Authority we wholly assent, which we firmly believe, and in all
things obey. In them let us seek the Church, by them let us discuss our Cause.
Now, if St. Austin did really believe the Scriptures, on no other account than
barely the Churches Testimony, why does he say, He must find the Church in the
Scriptures? This would be to run round in an indeterminate circle; first to
look for the Church in the Scriptures, and then to search for the Scriptures in
the Church. I don't see how these can stand together. But let it be as it will,
we may with more safety give credit to what a Man is constant in, than to what
he says but once, or, it may be, never at all; and so we may assure our selves
of the concession of this Holy Father to what we assert, That the Scriptures
are the supreme Decider of Controversies. The only thing needful to be added to
what has been already produced, is, That nothing ought to be put to, or taken
from the Word of God.

Bellarmin acknowledges the Scriptures to be a Rule, but says it is only partly
so; for the Scriptures joined with Traditions, make one perfect Rule.

But we have seen that the Scriptures alone are a perfect Rule; and, An
Infallible Rule (says St. Basil) ought to be so, without addition or
diminution. And Basil. cont. Eunom. l. 1. Id. Conf. Fid.
further, That it is a manifest departing from the Faith, and an evidence of
Pride, either to take away any thing from what is written, or to add any thing
that is not written; for our Lord has said, My sheep hear my voice. And (says
St. Jerome) Whatever does not come from the Jerome. in Matthew. 23.
Holy Scriptures, is as easily condemned as approved. Eusebius tells us, That
after the Death of the Eusebius. Hist l. 3. c. 32.
Apostles, though the Scriptures were extant, yet the Church did not long
continue an unspotted Virgin, but Heresies and Corruptions of the Gospel
increased apace. And then I would fain know what method the Orthodox Doctors
took to purge and refine the Church again? I suppose it may be answered, that,
A General Council was to represent the whole Church, and to determine the
Points in Controversy. Granting this, the next Question will be, which way the
Doctors assembled in Council proceeded in this great Affair? Did they appeal to
the Church? The most impious Heretics would confidently affirm, That only they
were of the True Church. Would they appeal to the Fathers? There were many
Learned Men who in their Writings maintained the worst of Heresies. Would they
appeal to Apostolical Traditions? The Founders of many of the greatest
Heresies, lived in the Times of the Apostles; and on that score, had as good a
plea for their knowing their Sentiments, as any of the Orthodox Fathers could
have. I am certain the first Nicene Council took no such way, but on all
occasions urged the Scriptures against the Opinions of those Heretics they
were to deal with, as might be shown at large, if it was absolutely necessary
to our purpose.

At present let us content our selves with a few Testimonies of the Fathers
against such proceedings.

And first, against Appealing to the Churches Custom; St Cyprian says, a
Custom which some have taken up, Cypr. ad Pomp. cont. Steph. Pap.
ought not to prevail against the Truth; for Custom without the Truth, is but
the Ornament of an Error: For which Reason let us forsake the Error of such a
Custom, and follow the Truth. And when S. Austin bids us seek the Church in
the Scriptures; he cannot intend, in my Opinion, That we should follow the
Church in any thing repugnant to the Scriptures: But besides, A Rule of Faith
ought to be Perfect. But Origin tells us, That as Orig. in Ezech. hom. 1.
on every Floor there is Chaff as well as Wheat, so is the Church on Earth,
some part Wheat, and the rest Chaff. And upon Matthew. 21. 14. where it is said,
Id. in Matthew. hom. 15.
That the blind and the lame came into the Temple to Christ, and he healed
them: The Moral Construction of this, says he, is, That in the Church all
cannot see, neither can all walk Upright; but some are Blind and others Lame.
To which he immediately applies this Remedy, as the most effectual: They, says
he, who are sensible of their own Blindness, since there is no other way to be
rid of it, but by the Word of God, they should apply themselves to that, and
they cannot miss of a Cure. Which is enough to prove the Insufficiency of the
Churches Customs or Authority, as to Matters of Faith at least.

Secondly, Neither will the Testimonies of the Fathers be of any Force in this
Particular: For a Rule of Faith must be full of Knowledge, and sufficiently
able to instruct us. But what says S. Austin of himself? I am Aug. ep. 119.
not only ignorant, says he, in many other Things, but even in the Holy
Scriptures themselves, I am yet to learn more than I know already. And thus he
elsewhere Ep. ad Hi^^.
expresses himself: To the Books of the Scriptures only, which are called
Canonical, do I owe this Honor, that I firmly believe, That none of their
Penmen have erred in any thing they have written. But I esteem other Writers
according to their Sanctity and Learning: I do not think any thing true, merely
because it was their Opinion. Which very well agrees with that Axiom of
Tertullian; If, says he, a Bishop, Tertul. de praescr. haeret.
or Deacon, if a Widow or Maid, if a Doctor, or even a Martyr should err from
the Rule, would the Error be ever the Truer or Better for their Sakes? We do not
prove the Faith by the Persons, but the Persons by the Faith. And the
Acknowledgment of Biel is to the Bie^ sup. Can. Miss. l. 41.
same purpose; That the Authority of the Fathers compells no Man to assent to
their Sayings, unless they build on the Holy Scriptures, or Divine Revelation.
On this account therefore S. Austin might well cry out, Aug. in Psalm. 57.
Let our Writings be withdrawn, that the Book of God may be introduced.

And as for Apostolical Traditions, let the Testimony Iren. l. 3. c. 1.
of Irenaeus serve for all: By the Apostles, says he, the Gospel came down to
us, which they then preached; and afterward by the Will of God, they delivered
to us in the Scriptures, what was to be the future Foundation and Pillar of our
Faith.

Now, if neither the Customs of the Church, nor the Judgment of the Fathers,
nor Tradition, can be a perfect Rule of Faith; no more can all these united in
a General Council be so: For a Rule must be in every respect perfect. But we
have seen, That the Church is in many respects Defective, and the Fathers
subject to Ignorance and Error: And if Irenaeus may be credited, The Apostles
preached nothing contrary to what they have left us in Writing, and therefore
there can be no Place for Apostolical Traditions. So that a Rule, which is
Imperfect, and Defective in every Part, must needs be so in the whole. And
Bellarmin himself has proved, Bellarm. de Council. l. 2. c. 12.
That the Decrees of General Councils cannot be a perfect Rule, because they
cannot pretend to immediate Divine Revelation; That they may Err in some
things, and in many of their Definitions, they conclude only Probably. But a
Rule of Faith ought to be every way Perfect, and to conclude necessarily. And
such an absolute Perfect Rule the Scriptures appear to be, not only from their
own Testimony, but from Testimonies of the greatest Pillars of the Church, in
the Second, Third, Fourth and Fifth Centuries. And therefore if any Man's
Interest has led him to a contrary Judgment in the later Ages of the Church,
his Opinions ought not to be set up as a Standard against Antiquity joined with
Truth. From hence, then, we may infer, what has been already asserted, That the
Scriptures being of themselves a perfect and Un-erring Rule, nothing must be
put to, or taken from them. To which purpose, besides what has been produced
already, the Reader may give himself the trouble of Perusing the following
Texts; Deuteronomy. 12. 32. Josh. 1. 7. Prove. 30. 6. Gal. 1. 8. and 3. 15. Rev. 22.
18, 19. And let him learn the Danger of Adding or Taking away, that is, Doing
any thing contrary to the Scriptures. From these Lev. 10. 2. Isai. 1. 12, 13,
14, and 66. 3. Hos. 9. 15. Matthew. 15. 6, 9. Mark 7. 9. Gal. 4. 10. From all
which Texts, will evidently appear the Invalidity of any thing that is not
built upon the true Foundation, and the danger of being led away by such
Vanities. And so I hope, I have sufficiently vindicated my Relyance on the
Testimony of the Scriptures in the Business of the following Undertaking.

I shall only trouble the Reader with two or three necessary Cautions,
concerning the right Use and Understanding of those Sacred Writings, and then
give him his Liberty to proceed.

I. If any Man will make choice of the Scriptures for his Guide in matters that
concern his Well-being here and hereafter, he must have a care of believing
every Spirit. We must not take things of such Moment on Trust, merely because
they are asserted by one that Pretends to great Learning or Inspiration; for we
are to look on the Gentlemen of these Times, as such as will make the best they
can of every Word, when they meet with one of an ordinary Capacity.

Therefore, II. It behooves every Man that has any regard to his own Safety,
to search into these things himself; to read the Holy Scriptures diligently,
that so he may learn from them whether such things are true or no.

But as I am now Writing to those of the meanest Rank, in Learning lat east It
is necessary that I caution such Readers of the Scriptures, against laying too
much stress on the literal Interpretation of a Text: For the Holy Ghost very
often makes use of Metaphors and other Obscurities, wherein the Sense is not
obvious to every Eye: And though, as S. Austin says, There is nothing so obscure
in one Place which in another is not made plain: Yet it is not supposed that an
ordinary Reader knows how to find that Place out, or if he does, that he has
Judgment enough to satisfy himself. For the Scriptures consist of a Soul and a
Body: The Body is the Letter, and the Soul is the true Interpretation. Every
Man, therefore, says Origin, that De princip. lib. 4.
desires to come to the Knowledge of the Truth, must have his Eye on every
Word, for every Nation has a different way of speaking; let him therefore mind
rather what is signified, than with what Words it is expressed. For there are
some things, which no Human Words can explain, but they are only conceivable in
an honest Understanding. By which Rule also we come to the Knowledge and
Understanding of the Holy Scriptures, that what we read is not to be understood
according to the Letter, but according to the Divinity of that Holy Spirit
which inspired it. Wherefore the Honest Reader will do well to take care, That
he is not drawn by the Letter out of the right way. And to this end the best
advice I can give him, is, Before he presumes to read, to beg the Asistance of
God's Holy Spirit to direct and enlighten his Understanding. And when he meets
with an obscure Text, let him pray again, and besides that, communicate his
Doubt to some learned Minister, of whose Integrity he is in some learned
Minister, of whose Integrity he is in some Measure assured, and by these means
he may be fully satisfied. And thus he will show himself an humble Enquirer,
and manifest to the World, That his Proceedings are from a Principle of
Honesty, that he searches only for a right Information; and on these Accounts
he has a Right to that encouraging Precognition of S. Cyril, in his Preface to
his Comments on S. John's Gospel: The Doctrine of all the Evangelists, says he,
is most excellent, and of Divine Extraction: For as it overlooks all things, as
it were from the top of a high Tower: It so amply accommodates it self to all
that follow it, that whoever thirsts after Divine Truth (if with an honest
Mind, he enquires into the Sense of the Scriptures) he may easily meet with
whatever concerns him. But this gracious Satisfaction is not conferred on
those, who make a rash Search, and are rather led by Human Reasons than the
Authority of the Scriptures, (forasmuch as the Holy Ghost does not dwell with a
depraved Soul, nor does he throw his precious Jewels before Swine, to be
trodden under foot) but pours out his Truth into the Hearts of all Religious
Searchers after it, who not affecting Cavils and Disputes, pursue the ready
Road to the Kingdom, in sincerity.

To conclude, That true Meat and Drink which we have from the Word of God, says
S. Jerome, is the true Knowledge Hier. in Eccl. c. 3.
of the Scriptures. And all Men having the greatest Encouragement imaginable to
read those Holy Writings, if they read them to good Purposes, and not to wrest
them to their own Ends; let us go to that Fountain of Divine Truth, from whence
the meanest Reader may learn whatever is necessary for him to know. For, says
the Royal Psalmist, The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul, the
testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple. The statutes of the Lord
are right, rejoicing the Heart: The commandment of the Lord is pure,
enlightening the eyes. The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever: The
judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether; more to be desired are
they than gold, yea, than much fine gold, sweeter also than honey, and the
honeycomb. Moreover, by them are his Servants warned; and in keeping of them
there is great reward, Psalm. 19. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. And our Blessed Savior
himself, bids us Search the Scriptures, Joh. 5. 39. I shall conclude therefore
with that Pathetick Exhortation of S. Chrysostom; That all Men would read the
Scriptures, and that not cursorily, but with the greatest Diligence; Chrysostom. in
Col. 3. hom. 9.
that they would get them Bibles as Physic for their Souls: And if they will
not read the whole, let them turn to the New Testament, and read the Gospels,
Acts of the Apostles and Epistles, those excellent Teachers: If any Mischance
befall us, come hither as to a Storehouse full of wholesome Remedies; hence
take Relief and Comfort in all Afflictions, whether loss of Goods, or Friends,
or Life it self; let them not only read once, but turn over these Writings
again and again, and fasten what they read to their Minds, that they may be
sure to remember it: For this is the Cause of all Evils, That Men are ignorant
in the Scriptures. If we go to War without Weapons, how can we be Safe? Men
that are armed may overcome, at least in a Capacity to secure themselves; but
those who are unarmed must fall. Therefore do not lay all the Burden upon the
Ministers Shoulders; be Sheep, but not as Creatures void of Reason, but as Men
that know something, etc. And as many Gal. 6. 16.
as walk according to this Rule, Peace be on them, and Mercy, and upon the
Israel of God.

Amen.
A Letter to a Lady, etc.
MADAM,
THe Tenderness of the Female Sex renders it more obnoxious to the Sophistry of
the Times; and the desire of Information in Matters of Religion, may make them
the more earnest in reading the Pieces sent abroad in the present Controversy.
And I presume I need not tell you of the subtilty of some Men, who to make
their Proceedings the more effectual, direct their Insinuations especially to
those they think are least able to withstand them: Your own Experience, I
suppose, may be Evidence sufficient as to this Particular.

There are a sort of Men in the World who live by their Wits, and will neglect
no opportunity to insinuate strange fancies into the Minds of the weaker sort
of People, to make them believe a thing is White, upon no other ground than
because it is not Black, though it may be Crimson in grain. Of this sort are
they (says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3. 6.) who creep into houses, and lead captive
silly women, etc. And he would have us know, That in the last days, by means of
these Men, perilous times shall come. The whole Prophecy is interpreted of the
Jesuits, by Men of Learning in the Church of Rome, as you may see at large in
a little Book (called The Moral Practice of the Jesuits) published by the
Doctors of the Sorbon. And these Men have Impudence enough to intrude
themselves into Ladies Closets, and venturing on their good nature, to use
their skill and sophistical endeavors to cajole them into a decoy. They Will
Reform the Church of Rome in a quarter of an hour, and wipe off all Imputations
of Error, while one may say, What Is this? if you will believe their Stories.
They Will tell you that the things which have so often been proved against that
Church, are all Lies: That no such Errors are embraced by her; but that the
Church of England, if their bold Assertions will do the business, has only been
guilty; and if She had not given her Sons Learning enough to defend her
Innocence, their Forgeries must have past for current. But I hope, Madam, you
know the Church of England better, than to give credit to every mouth that is
open against Her. And I know you have a discerning faculty, beyond many of your
Sex, whereby to judge of Opinions, right and wrong. However, give me leave to
present you with a small parcel of Scripture Testimonies against some of the
Principal Errors of the Roman Church: I say Scripture Testimonies, because
though there are many excellent Pieces published by our Learned Divines, yet
they are too full of Learning for most Female capacities, and the Treatises
large on every Subject; when, as I think the Scriptures the Supreme Judge in
Matters of Religion, so I suppose a short Catalogue of Texts from thence,
directly opposite to such Tenets as we justly charge upon the Church of Rome,
and by that means a Refutation of most of those Tenets in one short Essay, will
be more profitable, as I hope it will be more acceptable to an ordinary
Understanding. So that upon this account, as you will hereby, with more ease,
be furnished with what you may be sure is true, being drawn from the Fountain
of Truth, you will, I hope, be the more easily induced to pardon my
Undertaking, as designing nothing but Honesty.

I have chosen this way of Writing to you, Madam, First, because I know you
delight in conversing with the Holy Writings, and so I shall be more
conformable to your Inclinations. And Secondly, though I reverence the Judgment
of the Fathers, of the Church, and General Councils duly assembled, and not
swayed by popular Insolence; yet, as I once objected to one by word of mouth,
without receiving a satisfactory Answer, The Church of Rome says, That we have
False Copies of the Fathers; and we answer, That they have corrupted the True;
so that one of us must needs be in the wrong: And how shall we be satisfied in
this, without comparing them to the Testimonies of the Scriptures? And as for
General Councils, they have, of late, been purged, or rather perverted by the
Overruling Power of Popes and their Popular Factions, insomuch, that when they
began to act against the Interest of the Sea of Rome, though never so justly,
they were no longer allowed the liberty due to General Councils: And then what
dependence can we have from them? And Lastly, the Infallibility of the Church
of Rome, can be no better a Decider of Controversies, than the other two,
because that must be proved, if possible, from the Scriptures. So that, when
all other Instruments have been tried, the Scriptures will prove the only
Infallible Touch stone. From these and the like Considerations, this Piece was
at first conceived, and is now produced for your Service, and for such of your
Female Companions or Acquaintance as you shall think fit to communicate it to;
and I hope it will give Satisfaction.

Be pleased therefore to consider, that it is the duty of every Christian to
read and be acquainted with the Holy Scriptures. And though the Council of
Trent denied the reading of them to the Laity, pretending that the Vulgation of
them was the cause of so many Heresies abroad in the World; yet, by the leave
of the Fathers assembled in that Particular General Council, we cannot conceive
how a Country Plough-Jobber, should, by reading the Scriptures, be the Author
of an Opinion, either Orthodox or Erroneous: But, as might easily be proved if
it were to the present purpose, the Original of all Sects were Men, who to show
their Parts and Learning, took upon them to scrutinize and enquire into the
Sense of Holy Writ, and so spread the prime Infection. I will trouble you with
but an Instance or two to this purpose, and so proceed.

Arius, that known Heretic, as well for his Learning, as the many Proselites
he gained to his Party, meeting with that Text, Joh. 17. 3. This is life
eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent;
thought of a trick, by misplacing a Point, to seclude Christ from being True
God. In the Original it is, This is life eternal, (...), etc. To know thee only
to be true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. But he puts the Comma
after the Particle (...) ( only), and so corrupts the Sense by misplacing the
Point; a trick which certainly none but a Scholar could have thought on. Thus
we find Gregory the Great openly asserting, That whoever should call himself
Universal Bishop, was Antichrist; but the succeeding Bishops of Rome disputed
the contrary, and arrogated to themselves the Title.

I might likewise urge the Feuds of the Franciscans and Dominicans, and other
Orders of the Church of Rome, to prove that all Quarrellings and jangling
Disputes about Matters of Religion, have in all Ages been broached by Men of
Learning. But to come nearer home; would it not be very absurd, to imagine that
such a silly fancy as Quakerism could ever have been heard of, or so long
upheld among us, if some such Man as Penn, who is thought no great stranger in
a College of Fame, had not at first insinuated it into some poor ignorant
People, who were not able to resist his Logic, or it may be, were more taken
up in their worldly Employments, than the Study of Holy Scriptures? And indeed
it is not probable, that one who is better skilled in the management of a
Plough, than a Logical Argument, should be able to define in Matters of Faith
and Doctrine. It may be sooner proved that the principal Authors and Abetters of
most of our Divisions, came from Rome, than that they sprung from ignorant
People reading the Scriptures. And if you please to peruse these Papers, you will
find, that the Chuch of Rome in that Council, had other Ends in denying the
Scriptures to the Common People, than the Suppressing of Sectaries, as they
pretended. I come therefore to the business.

I proposed to your Consideration, the Duty incumbent on every Christian to
read and understand the Holy Scriptures. This I present to your Meditation in
the first place, as Preparatory to that which is to follow: It being my intent,
in this Undertaking, to have to do with nothing but Scripture Quotations. And
so I begin.

Deuteronomy. 6. 6. -- And these words which I command thee this day, shall be in
thine heart. And thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and shall
talk of them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the
way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. And thou shall bind
them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine
eyes. And thou shall write them upon the door posts of thy house, and on thy
gates. -- The words were spoken to the whole Congregation of Israel, and need
not be explained.

Deuteronomy. 17. 18. -- And it shall be when the king of Israel sits upon the
throne of his kingdom, that he shall write him a copy of this Law in a book,
out of that which is before the Priests the Levites; and it shall be with him,
and he shall read therein all the days of his life, etc. -- Where give me leave
to take Notice, That it being impossible to keep the Scriptures from the Eye of
the more Ingenious Gentry, they have been furnished with a Vulgar Latin
Translation of the Bible, which they call (though falsely enough) St. Jerome's;
and lest the Corruptions, wherewith they had (prudently) loaded it, should be
discovered, Pope Sixtus the V. in the Year 1578, published a Greek Copy,
purposely forged by Cardinal Carapha, to make Men believe, That the Latin was
agreeable to the Original.

Josh. 1. 8. -- This Book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but
thou shall meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe to do all
that is written therein -- This is the Psalmist's Character of a Good Man,
Psalm. 1. 2. His delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his law does he
meditate day and night. This was the Commendation of Apollos, Acts 18. 24. That
he was not only an eloquent Man, but mighty in the Scriptures: And this was the
Confidence of the Apostle concerning the Romans, Romans 15. After he had told
them, verse 4. That whatever things were written aforetime, were written for
our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope; At the 14. Verse he concludes, And I my self also am persuaded of you, my
brethren, that ye also are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, and
able to admonish one another.

Col. 3. 16. -- Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom,
teaching and admonishing one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs,
etc. -- And Chapter 4. 16. When this epistle is read amongst you, cause that it be
read also in the church of the Laodiceans, and that ye likewise read the
Epistle from Laodicea. Parallel to which is his Command to the Thessalonians, 1
Epist. 5. 27. I charge you by the Lord, that this epistle be read to all the
holy brethren. -- And indeed it would be some Comfort, if they of the Church of
Rome could but have the Gospel read in the Congregation, purely and without
Adulteration, in a Tongue understood by the Common People. This would be much
more to Edification than a few Stories out of the Golden Legend, or the History
of S. George's killing the Dragon; which I assure you, Madam, is a part of the
Service of his Day, and in their Prayer to him they solemnly commemorate this
Act of his, as if it were as True as the Gospel. But,

Lastly, S. Peter, speaking of the Voice from Heaven, This is my beloved son,
in whom I am well pleased; says, We have also a more sure word of prophecy,
whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a dark
place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts: knowing this
first, That no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation, 2
Pet. 1. 19, 20. I give you both Verses, because I know some Men would be apt to
object the last to the first: But we may observe, That if S. Peter does condemn
the Private Interpretation of Scriptures, he does not condemn the Private
Reading of them, but says, That all men will do well, if they take good heed to
them, as to a more sure word than a voice from heaven.

And thus, Madam, I think it sufficiently appears, That it is the necessary
Duty of every Christian to Read, and be well acquainted with the Scriptures,
they being the pillar and ground of truth, and the power of God unto salvation.

But, if after all, it is objected, as I suppose it will, That the Scriptures
are dark, and hard to be understood; be pleased to consider with me these few
Texts.

Deuteronomy 30. 11. -- This commandment which I command thee this day, is not hidden
from thee, neither is it far off; it is not in heaven, that thou should say,
Who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it unto us that we may hear it and
do it? neither is it beyond the sea, that thou should say, Who shall go over
the sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it and do it? But the
word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may
do it --

Psalm 119. 130. -- The entrance of thy words gives light: It gives
understanding to the simple.

Prove. 14. 6. -- A scorner seeks wisdom, and finds it not; but knowledge is
easy to him that understands. -- I take these to be sufficient indications
of the Plainness and Intelligibleness of the Law. But we have God's own Word,
if he may be believed, That the Gospel should be much more easy to be
understood.

Jer. 31. 33. -- But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house
of Israel, after those days, says the Lord, I will put my law into their
inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and they shall teach no more every
man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they
shall all know me, from the least unto the greatest of them, says the Lord. --
And that the Understanding of the Scriptures is not reserved for the more
Learned of Mankind only, is plain from our Saviors own Words, Matthew. 11. 25. I
thank thee, O father, Lord, of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these
things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes: Even so,
Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. And when his Disciples asked him,
Why he spoke to the Jews in parables, he answered and said unto them, Because
it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to
them it is not given, Matthew. 13. 11. And we know that his Disciples were, for
the most part Poor, Ignorant, Unlearned; and among the Jews came very often the
Scribes, Pharisees and great Doctors. All that I shall add, at present, to
complete this Subject, is, That Ignorance in the Scriptures is very Dangerous.

1. Because it is generally the Cause of Men's committing all manner of sins.

Isai. 1. 3. -- The ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib; but
Israel does not know, my people does not consider. -- God Almighty had been so
Gracious to them, as to give them his law first, for them to read, and the
Prophets afterward to explain it, that they might know and understand his Will
therein; but they would neither read the one, nor give ear to the other. And
this, without doubt, was the cause of God's crying out, How long shall I see
the standard, and hear the sound of the trumpet? for my people is foolish, they
have not known me, they are sottish children, and they have no understanding;
they are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge, Jer. 4. 21.
and Chap. 5. 21. Hear now this, O foolish peopole, and without Understanding,
which have eyes and see not, ears and hear not. Because they would neither read
the Law, nor give Ear to the Prophets, therefore they were justly called
Sottish Children, a foolish people, and without understanding; therefore they
were wise to do evil, but not to do good. For it is most certain, The Devil
will be sure to make his best of Ignorance, and use his utmost endeavor to
keep Men in it; because the more Light Men have, the more Work they can do, and
the better they are informed, the better they will act here, and so he will be
like to lose their Company hereafter. I think, then, that S. Austin's toll,
lege, will be good Advice to all that are willing to live Virtuous Lives; and
as Luther's advice to Governors, was to read the Books of the Kings, for their
Information how to Rule well; so, that all Men would read the Holy Scriptures
in general, would be good Counsel, because they afford the best Instructions
for living well.

2. Ignorance in the Scriptures is dangerous, because it is the greatest Reason
of Men's running into all sorts of Errors.

When the Sadducees proposed to our Savior the Business of the Woman that had
had seven Husbands, asking him, whose wife she should be at the resurrection?
falsely supposing, If there ever would be a Resurrection, there would also be
Marrying and giving in Marriage at the Resurrection; Jesus answered and said
unto them, Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures. And here, Madam, I might take
notice of the Subtlety of the Church of Rome, in denying the Scriptures to the
Laity, because maintaining so many Errors so directly contrary to Scriptures,
that any discerning Eye must needs discover them: Such are Purgatory, Pope's
Pardons, Adoration of Images, praying to Saints and Angels, and the like. But
our Lord said of the Pharisees, Matthew. 15. 14. Let them alone; they are blind
leaders of the blind: And if the blind lead the blind both shall fall into the
ditch. I shall say nothing therefore to these, at present, but proceed,

3. To show, That Ignorance in the Scriptures is very Dangerous, because as it
is the cause of Sin and Error, so by Sin and Error, it must consequently be the
cause of Destruction.

Isay 5. 13. -- Therefore my people are gone into captivity, because they have
no knowledge; and their honorable Men are famished, and their multitude dried
up with thirst. Therefore hell has enlarged her self, and opened her mouth
without measure; and their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and he
that rejoices shall descend into it.

Psalm 95. 10. -- Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and
said, It is a people that do err in their hearts, and they have not known my
ways: Unto whom, therefore, I swear in my wrath, that they should not enter
into my rest.

Prove. 1. 24. -- Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my
hand and no man regarded; but ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would
none of my reproof; I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your
fear comes; when your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction comes
as a whirlwind, when distress and anguish come upon you: Then shall ye call
upon me, but I will not answer, ye shall seek me, but ye shall not find me; for
that ye hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord. -- But to come
a little nearer home; Christ Jesus has brought Life and Immortality to Light by
the Gospel. But this, says he, is the condemnation, by way of Eminence, That
light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather than light, because
their deeds are evil: For every one that does evil hates the light, neither
comes he to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved; but he that does
truth, comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are
wrought in God, Joh. 3. 19. And surely, Madam, If they that deny us the
Scriptures, had not something to be ashamed of, they would not show themselves
so much concerned to keep People in Darkness. It must needs be a Device of the
Devil, to keep Men in Ignorance, that they might be damned; according to the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 4. 3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost; In
whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not,
lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God,
should shine upon them. But we know that Christ will one day be revealed in
flaming fire, to take vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thessal. 1. 8. If it is objected, That this
Text speaks of Heathen Persecutors; we may answer, That those Christians, who
are not acquainted with, and consequently, not obedient to the Gospel of
Christ, are worse than Heathens. I beseech you, Madam, to consider, If it was
through Ignorance of the Scriptures, the Jews crucified the Lord of Glory, as
the Apostle says it was, 1 Cor. 2. 8. We that are Christians, had best take
heed, That we do not through Ignorance crucify him again. And if it was a
Shame for the Corinthians not to know the Scriptures, in the very dawning and
twilight of Christianity, 1 Cor. 15. 34, what an abominable shame must it needs
be, for us, after almost seventeen hundred Years, to know no more, or it may
be, not so much?

To conclude this Point: The Apostle dedicates his First Epistle to the
Corinthians, To All that in Every place call on the name of Jesus Christ our
Lord. And what he should do so for, unless he intended it should be read by
All, I cannot imagine. If he intended it only for the Fathers of that Church, he
might in fewer words, and consequently with less trouble, have said, To the
Elders of the Church at Corinth; or else directed it to the Bishop of that
Church only. But he knew the Scriptures were able to make Men wise unto
salvation, and therefore would have all Men read them. And our blessed Savior
knew that the Jews thought they had Eternal Life in the Scriptures, therefore
he bids 'em Search them, Joh. 5. 39. The Injunction is the same upon Christians
also. And then certainly, if the Captain and Author of our Salvation bids us
Search, we may, notwithstanding the Insinuations of some bold Men to the
contrary. By what Rule else should we try the Spirits, whether they be of God,
as St. John advises us, 1 Ep. 4. 1. if not by the Rule of God's Word? Upon
this account therefore, among others, we are bound to read, search, and be well
acquainted with the Scriptures. I presume then, after all that has been
produced to prove this first Position, what the Evangelist says of the
Revelations, Chap. 1. 3. may on good grounds be attributed to the rest of the
Sacred Writings; Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of
this prophecy, and keep those things that are written therein.

And now, Madam, having made good from Scripture Testimonies, the Necessity of
being acquainted with the Scriptures; though I have already gone beyond the
ordinary bounds of an Epistle, yet I crave leave to trespass a little farther
on your Patience, in giving you a cursory view of some of the Principal
Doctrins of the Church of Rome, and demonstrating how contrary they are to the
Word of Truth. In order to which, I shall with all possible brevity enquire,

I. Whether any Man can do more than he ought to do?

II. Whether any Man by his own Works can merit Heaven?

III. To whom it belongs to Forgive Sins?

IV. Whether the Scriptures warrant Worshipping of Images, or Praying to Saints
and Angels?

V. Whether there is any such Place as Purgatory?

VI. Whether the Mass is a Sacrifice for Quick and Dead?

VII. Whether the Doctrine of Transubstantiation can be maintained by Scripture?

The first Enquiry must be, whether any Man can do more than he ought to do?
Where we are to consider, That though a Man, as a Christian, is in the state of
Grace, yet he is not in the state of Innocence, nor can be, till he arrives at
the state of Glory, where all Infirmities will be done away. For as he is Flesh
and Blood, liable to be tempted to evil, and apt to commit it, he must expect
to meet with Afflictions and Crosses from the World without, and the
Suggestions and Temptations of the Devil from within: And being naturally more
prone to Evil than Good, I think it a hard thing to say, That it is in his power
to do more Good than is required he should do, and a harder to prove it.

Under the Law, Men were not able to keep the Law perfectly, nor to walk in the
Commandments of God as they ought. For Moses himself, who took them from God's
mouth, and gave them to the Israelites, erred in so much, that he must not
enter the promised Land. That Text, Josh. 11. 15. has been objected by some
Gentlemen of the Church of Rome, but plainly to no purpose. For any one may
see, that Joshua's keeping the Commandments, was only his doing those things he
was commanded to do, in order to establish the Israelites in the Inheritance of
the Land of Canaan. And we find the same Joshua in another place asserting the
impossibility of serving God, Josh. 24. 19. at least he did not believe Men
could do more.

It may be objected, That the light of the Gospel is much clearer than that of
the Law, and the burden easier to be born, etc. But for all that, it is certain
the Gospel requires as full and perfect Obedience as ever the Law did. Nay, it
proceeds farther; for under the Law Men thought it no great Crime to murder
their Neighbor in his good Name, so they let his Body alone: They also thought
it no Sin to Lust after a Woman, provided they did not come to Action. But
under the Gospel our Savior tells us the contrary Ye have heard, that it was
said by them of old time, Thou shall not kill; and whosoever shall kill, shall
be in danger of the Judgment. But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with
his Brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the Judgment; and whosoever
shall say unto his Brother, Racha, shall be in danger of the Council: but
whosoever shall say, Thou Fool, shall be in danger of Hell Fire. Again, Ye have
heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shall not commit Adultery. But
I say unto you, That whosoever looks on a Woman, to lust after her, has
committed Adultery with her already in his heart, Matthew. 5. 21, 22, 27, 28. So
that we may see, though the Law was such a yoke as neither we nor our
Forefathers were able to bear, Act. 15. 10. yet the Yoke of the Gospel is not
so light as to be run away with. As easy as it is, it is very irksom to Flesh
and Blood; yet it is what we must bear so long as we live, and then it is God's
mere Mercy, if the heavier yoke of Everlasting Misery is not laid on us instead
of it.

If Man has Free Will to do good as well as evil, yet, I know that in me (that
is, in my flesh) dwells no good thing: for to will is present with me, but
how to perform that which is good, I find not. For the good that I would, I do
not; but the evil which I would not, that I do. Now if I do that I would not,
it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me. (And on the contrary,
if I do that good I would, it is no more I that do it, but the grace of God
that is in me, 1 Cor. 15. 18.) I find then a Law, that when I would do good,
evil is present with me. For I delight in the Law of God, after the inward man.
But I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, and
bringing me into captivity to the law of sin, which is in my members, says the
Apostle, Romans 7. 18. And he at last concludes, So then with the mind I my self
serve the Law of God; but with the flesh the law of sin. To which we may add
what the same Apostle says, 1 Cor. 2. 14. But the natural man (that is, flesh
and blood) receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. And then certainly our Free Will can do us little good, toward
making us do more than we should, when by reason of the stubborness of our
Flesh, we cannot do what we would. But the Apostle tells us, That we are not
able to do any thing of our selves, but it is God that works in us both to
will and do after his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. And our Savior himself says,
That no man can come unto him, unless the Father draw him, Joh. 6. 44.
Therefore I think it strange that a Man should be able to do more than he can:
It Is a Contradiction. Certainly he that made us, can tell best what we can do:
And he says, That the heart of man is only evil continually, Genesis 6. 5. and 8.
21. If then we are naturally more prone to do evil than good, how is it
possible for us to be better than we should be? And if under the Gospel we must
observe every Punctilio so strictly, as not to be angry with our Neighbor, not
to look on a Woman to lust after her, etc. how are we able to do all that is
required of us? The Apostle St. James goes a step farther; If ye fulfill the
Royal Law, according to the Scripture, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self, ye do well: But if ye have respect to persons, ye commit sin, and are
convinced of the Law as Transgressors, Jam. 2. 9. To have respect to Persons in
civil Conversation, one would think a small matter, to make one guilty of the
breach of the Law; but so it is. And our Savior goes farther yet, Matthew. 5.
43. Ye have heard that it has been said, Thou shall love thy Neighbor, and
hate thine Enemy: But I say unto you, Love your Enemies, bless them that curse
you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despightfully use
you and persecute you. This is a hard lesson, and not agreeable to Flesh and
Blood; yet it is made the condition of becoming the Children of our Father which
is in Heaven.

From what has been said, we may gather, That if any Man can do what he is
required to do, he cannot do more. And if, as we are told, Jam. 3. 2. In many
things we offend all. And if a just man falls seven times a day, Prove. 24.
16. Who can boast of being righteous over much? Nay, where is there a Man so
good, as that he may number his offenses? Holy David could not, though a man
after God's own heart. We read of but one man, throughout the whole Book of
God, who was without sin, and that was the man Christ Jesus; yet it was never
said of him, that he did more than fulfill the Will of his Father. And for us,
born in sin, and conceived in corruption, to say we can do more! -- I cannot
express the Folly and Nonsense of it. By so doing, we should make God our
Debtor, who is Debtor to no Man. If they of the Church of Rome can brag of any
works of Supererogation, they are such as these; The hallowing Daggers for the
cutting off Princes that are not for their turn: The sacrificing all they
please to call Heretics: The denying the Scriptures in a tongue understood by
the Vulgar: And several others which might be named, concerning which they may
indeed be asked, Who has required these things at your hands? But we of the
Church of England know of nothing to be done, more than what is our duty to do.
We know the Preachers Doctrine was, Whatsoever thy hand finds for thee to do,
do it with thy might, Eccl. 9. 10. And our Lord and Master's Advice is, when we
have done all we can, to acknowledge our selves but unprofitable Servants;
having done only what was our duty to do, Luke 17. 10. For no Man lives and
sins not. If therefore we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and
the truth is not in us, 1 John 1. 8. Nay, we make God a Liar, who has said,
there is not one that does good, Psalm 14. 1, 3. In a word, if there is a Devil
to tempt, we are still in danger of sinning. And if every thought will be
brought in to Judgment, who can call himself Inncent? It Is my opinion, that
instead of thinking we can do more than our Duty; Every Man should rather
repent of the sins, as well of Omission, as Commission he is daily guilty of;
and with the Psalmist cry out, Who can understand his Errors? cleanse thou me
from secret faults, Psalm. 19. 12. For our Savior's censure on the most
righteous, is, Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish, Luke 13. 3, 5.
To conclude this first Quere; if it were possible for any Man to over-do his
Duty, I would ask any reasonable Man, Whether, when he has done more than he
ought to have done, he would not commit a great sin in thinking so, and a
greater in saying so? If the Affirmative holds good, then the poor Man has
still some part of his Duty to perform, viz. to repent of that sin; and so in
infinitum.

II. The second Enquiry proposed, was, Whether a Man by his own Works can merit
Heaven?

Here, Madam, be pleased to consider with me these few following Texts.

Deuteronomy. 9. 4. -- Speak not thou in thine heart, after that the Lord thy God has
cast them out from before thee, saying, For my righteousness the Lord has
brought me in to possess this Land; but for the wickedness of these nations,
etc. -- The Land of Canaan, of which this Text speaks, is generally looked on
as a Type of Heaven: And then this is plain enough.

Job 9. 30. -- If I wash my self with snow-water, and make my hands never so
clean; yet thou shall plunge me in the ditch, and my own clothes shall abhor
me, etc. And Chap. 15. 14. -- What is man, that he should be clean? and he
which is born of a woman, that he should be righteous? Verse 16. How much more
abominable and filthy is man, which drinks iniquity like water? -- All spoken
by one, whose Fellow was not to be found upon the Face of the Earth for Virtue;
and therefore if any could boast, he might.

Psalm. 130. 3. -- If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities, O Lord, who should
stand? But there is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared. -- And
Psalm. 143. 2. -- Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight
shall no man living be justified.

Isai. 53. 6. -- All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one
to his own way, and the Lord has laid on him the iniquities of us all. -- And
Chap. 64. 6. -- But we are all as unclean things; and all our righteousnesses
are as filthy rags, and we do all fade as a leaf, and our iniquity like the
wind has taken us away.

Romans 3. 10. -- As it is written, There is none righteous, no not one; there is
none that understands, there is none that seeks after God; they are all
gone out of the way, they are altogether become unprofitable, there is none
that does good, no not one. Their throat is an open sepulcher, with their
tongues they have used deceit, the poison of asps is under their lips, whose
mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, their feet are swift to shed blood,
destruction and misery are in their ways, and the way of peace have they not
known; there is no fear of God before their eyes. -- All this is spoken of all
Mankind in general, both Jews and Gentiles; and if it be true, what can any Man
find in himself to challenge Heaven as his due?

Romans 6. 23. -- Eternal Life is called, The gift of God, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. -- Now if Eternal Life be a Gift, I would fain know how a Gift can be
Merited? And if it be for the sake of Jesus Christ our Lord, I would know
whether the same Gift can be said to be Merited by him for us, and by us for
our selves too? if this is affirmed, then something to this purpose must
follow, That the Passion and Death of Christ are Significant, and partly not,
because a Man, as a Christian at least, may Merit, and consequently enjoy
Heaven, by his own Works, without the Application of Christ's Merits; which
would be very Absurd, to say no worse of it: But if it be denied, then the
Consequence will be this, That let a Man merit what he will, he must be
beholding to the Merits of Christ for his Admission into Heaven, at last.

2 Cor. 4. 4. -- For I know nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby justified;
but he that judges me is the Lord. -- Let us then suppose a Man to be in the
Apostles Case, in my Opinion such a Man could have but little Comfort from his
own Merits, if he being so perfect as not to know any evil by himself, should
not for all that be certain of his Justification. I would ask one of these
Meritorious Gentlemen, in the Words of the Apostle, at the seventh Verse of the
same Chapter; Who makes thee to differ from another? and what have thou that
thou did not receive? now if thou did receive it, why do thou glory as if
thou had not received it?

Ephesians. 2. 8. -- For by grace ye are saved, through Faith; and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God; not of works, lest any man should boast.

2 Timothy 1. 9. -- Who has saved us, and called us with a holy calling, not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace; which was
given us in Christ Jesus before the world began.

Tit. 3. 5. -- Not by works of righteousness, which we have done, but according
to his mercy he saved us, etc. And many more you will meet with in reading; but
by these few you may judge how available our works, even the very best we can
do, are to salvation.

Before I leave this Point, I presume it will not be impertinent, if I add
something, in this Place, touching Justification by Faith: In which, for
brevity sake, I shall do little more than set down the most pertinent Texts of
Scripture, and leave the rest to your Ingenuity. And in the first place,

Genesis 15. 6. -- Abraham believed in the Lord, and he counted it to him for
righteousness.

Habak. 2. 4. -- Behold, his soul which is lifted up, is not upright in him;
but the just shall live by his Faith.

Joh. 1. 12. -- But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become
the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name. And Chap. 3. 16. For
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes on him should not perish, but have everlasting life. --

When our Savior went to raise the Ruler of the Synagogue's Daughter, he bid
him, only believe, Mark, 5. 36.

Acts 10. 23. -- To him give all the Prophets witness. That through his name,
whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins. And Chap. 16. 31.
When the Keeper of the Prison, wherein Paul and Silas were, asked them, What he
should do to be saved, their Answer was, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
thou shall be saved, and thy house.

Romans 3. 23. -- For we have all sinned, and come short of the glory of God,
being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus
Christ; whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, through faith in his
blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past,
through the forbearance of God: To declare, I say, at this time his
righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier of him which believes
in Jesus. Where is boasting then? it is excluded. By what law? of works? Nay,
but by the law of Faith; therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by
faith, without the deeds of the law. -- If you consider this Quotation
thoroughly, you will find it as complete to the purpose, as can be desired.
However, I Will present you with a few more.

Romans 4. 1. -- What shall we say then, that Abraham our father, as pertaining
to the flesh, has found? no, for if Abraham were justified by works, he has
whereof to glory, but not before God; for what say the Scriptures? Abraham
believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness: And to him that
works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is
counted for righteousness. -- Where, by the way, the Word ( ungodly) in this
Text, must not be taken to mean Impenitent Sinners, for they, as such, can have
no Right to Justification; but as no man is Upright in the Sight of God, he is
said, in the Best of Men, to justify ungodly, freely by his grace, in the
foregoing Chapter, Verse 23, 24. So that this makes doubly for my Purpose,
showing, first, That Justification comes by Faith; and also, That those that
are Justified, being Sinners before God, cannot with Reason boast of the Merit
of Works.

Romans 5. 1. -- Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. And Chap. 10. 8. The word is nigh thee, in thy
mouth and in thy heart; that is the word of faith which we preach, That if thou
shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart,
that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved.

Gal. 2. 16. 21. -- Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the
law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ,
that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the
law, for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified. I do not
frustrate the grace of God; for if righteousness come by the law, then Christ
is dead in vain. And Chap. 3. 11. -- And the Scripture foreseeing that God
would Justify the Heathen through Faith, preached before the Gospel unto
Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed. But that no man is
justified by the law in the sight of God, it is evident, for the just shall
live by faith: For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision nor uncircumcision
avails any thing, but faith which works by love. -- Let that Text. Ephesians. 2.
8. above cited, sum up all; For by grace ye are saved, through faith; and that
not of your selves, it is the gift of God, not of works lest any man should
boast. Neither have I been at all this Pains, from a solifidian Principle, to
endeavor to seclude Good Works from being the Fruits of a lively Faith: For so
I should frustrate the Grace of God. And I presume, Madam, you know my Opinion
better than to think so; my Intent was only to show, How Erroneous it is to
suppose Merit from Works, especially according to the Doctrine of the Church of
Rome, That Men may Merit for themselves and others. To conclude this Point,
give me leave to present to your Meditation the Heinousness of Original Sin
only, and then I Will leave you to Judge, if, for all that, and the many Actual
Sins we daily commit, God will be gracious to us, and receive us unto his
Glory, how little Reason we have to boast of that Nothing we have done to Merit
his Favor.

Genesis 6. 5. -- And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth,
and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually; and it repented the Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it
grieved him at his heart: And the Lord said, I will destroy man, whom I have
created, from the face of the earth, both man and beast, and the creeping
thing, and the fowls of the air; for it repents me that I have made them. --
I think no man can deny Original Sin to be the Cause of all this; and then, how
Heinous a thing that is, which is the Cause of so much Displeasure in God, I
submit to any person to Judge. You will read to the same Purpose, Verse 11, 12,
13.

Job 14. 4. -- Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one. For,
Psalm. 51. 5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive
me. Prove. 20. 9. Who then can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from
my sin? Eccl. 7. 29. For lo, this only have I found, That God made man upright
at first, but since they have fallen away from that Upright State, they have
sought out many Inventions.

Jer. 17. 9. -- The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately
wicked, who can know it? For, Matthew. 15. 19. Out of the heart proceed evil
thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false-witness,
blasphemies, and all things that defile a man. And the Reason of all this is,
Because, Joh. 3. 6. That which is born of the flesh, is flesh. Man, as he is
Flesh and Blood, is naturally fleshly minded. Romans 7. 14. For we know that the
law is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin; for that which I do, I allow
not, for what I would, that do I not, but what I hate, that I do. And so, Ephesians.
2. 3. All are by nature the children of wrath.

Jam. 1. 15. -- Then when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin; and when
it is finished, brings forth death. -- Our first Parents lusted after the
forbidden Fruit, and that brought forth the sin of breaking the Commandment;
and that sin brought forth Death. And Romans 5. 12. As by one man sin entered into
the world, and death by sin; so death passed upon all men, for that all, in
him, have sinned. -- Wherefore if all are guilty of Original Sin, and that
guilt makes us Children of Wrath, and consequently Heirs of Damnation, I don't
see any reason we have to boast of our righteousness, but rather we have too
much cause to bewail our wretchedness, and to pray continually against the
inevitable misery we are liable to undergo, for all the good works we have
done, or can do, unless God be more merciful to the best of us, than we deserve.

And though by Baptism the guilt of Original Sin is washed away; yet it is more
than probable, that the first Actual Sin brings it again. For, as he that by
amendment of life turns to God, his former sins shall not be remembered; so, he
that returns from the Service of God, his righteousness shall be blotted out
and forgotten, and all his former iniquities shall testify against him. To
conclude; from what has been produced, this at present occurs to our
Observation; That though there is no such thing in truth, as a Solifidian
Justice, but every Man that will be saved, must be enduced with a Faith that
works by Love; yet after all we can do, we must expect Salvation by Faith in
Christ's Blood, and not from our own worthiness.

III. The Third Enquiry proposed, was, To whom it belongs to Forgive Sins?

Psalm. 3. 8. -- Salvation belongs to the Lord. -- 49. 7. -- None of them can
by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him. For the
redemption of their soul is precious. -- And 37. 39. The salvation of the
righteous is of the Lord. Therefore, 130. 7. Let Israel hope in the Lord. -- It
was the Psalmists opinion, That it belonged to God to Forgive Sins, and
therefore, Psalm. 51. 14. he thus addresses himself to him; Deliver me from
blood-guiltiness, O God, thou God of my salvation. And thus God affirms of
Himself, Isai. 43. 11. I, even I am the Lord; and beside me there is no
Savior. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for my own sake,
and will not remember thy sins. where we may take notice, That it belongs to
God to Forgive Sins; and also, That he Forgives them for his own sake, which
takes off all Merit by Works.

Dan. 9. 9. -- To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses. -- It was
the constant Opinion of the Jews: For when our Savior said to the Sick of the
Palsy, Man, thy sins are forgiven thee; the Jews, not believing him to be God
as well as Man, accused him of Blasphemy, saying, Who can forgive sins but God
only? Luke 5. 21. So our Lord himself, though John Baptist called him the Lamb
of God which takes away the sins of the world, Joh. 1. 29. directs us to ask
God to forgive our sins, Mat. 6. 12. For at Verse. 14. It Is our heavenly Father
that must forgive us. And thus the Apostle tells the Colossians, That they
being dead in their sins, and the uncircumcision of their flesh, God had
quickened them, and forgiven them all trespasses, Col. 2. 13. From all which it
appears plainly enough, That Forgiveness of Sin, belongs only to God.

The consequence of this, is, That if it belongs to God only to Forgive Sins,
then Confession of Sins is due to him alone.

A Member of the Church of Rome, is in danger of passing immediately into Hell,
if he dies without having confessed his Sins to a Priest: So absolutely
necessary do they teach Auricular Confession to be in order to Salvation. But,
if we may examine it a little, I am apt to think, it will appear much like the
rest.

Psalm. 32. 5. -- I acknowledged my sins unto thee, and my iniquity have I not
hid: I said I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest
the iniquity of my sin. -- The Psalmist was absolved without Auricular
Confession, only by acknowledging his Sins to God.

1 King. 8. 47. -- Yet if they shall bethink themselves in the Land whether
they were carried Captives, and repent and make supplication to thee in the
Land of them that carried them Captives, saying, We have sinned, and have done
perversely, we have committed wickedness, etc. -- Here is no Confession to a
Priest mentioned.

Ezra 9. 5. -- And at the evening sacrifice, I rose up from my heaviness, and
having rent my garment and my mantle, I fell upon my knees, and spread out my
hands unto the Lord my God, and said, O my God, I am ashamed, and blush to lift
up my face to thee, my God, etc.

Psalm. 41. 4. -- I said, Lord be merciful unto me, and heal my soul, for I have
sinned against thee. Hence Confession of Sin is due to him against whom we have
sinned. And then it is due Relatively to our Neighbor, if we have done him any
injury: But Properly to God, according to the Psalmist, Psalm. 51. 4. Against
thee only have I sinned, etc. when he had committed Adultery with Bathsheba,
and caused her Husband to be slain.

Dan. 9. 15. -- And now, O Lord our God, that have brought thy people forth out
of the Land of Egypt with a mighty hand, and have gotten the renown, as at this
day; we have sinned, we have done wickedly. Therefore, Jer. 14. 20. We
acknowledge, O Lord, our wickedness, and the iniquity of our Fathers; for we
have sinned against thee. -- In a word; I should never have done, if I should
quote all the Texts to prove Confession of Sins only due to God. And therefore,
because you will meet with them in reading, I shall at present only refer you
to the Sixth Chapter of St. Matthew's Gospel, to what our Savior says there of
Prayer and Fasting: For Repentance and Confession being inherent parts of
Prayer and Fasting, I think they may be included in the same Advice; which I
need not have inserted, by reason of your frequent using the Lords Prayer, in
which it is evident.

After all, there is not one Text, as I know of, that by any good Consequence,
makes Confession to a Priest so absolutely Necessary, as the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome does: If any will do it, and do it sincerely, we do not deny it
to be Good. But after it is done, without a Private Confession to God, it must
needs be Imperfect; for it is God that knows our Hearts better than we do our
selves, and we are guilty of many Sins we know not of, as the Psalmist
professes: Wherefore we should cry out with him, Psalm. 19. 12. Who can
understand his errors? cleanse thou me from secret faults. The consequence of
all is, That all Men ought to Confess their Sins to God, against whom only they
have sinned, as to one that has the sole Power to forgive them. Not that I
desire, in the least, to diminish the Power of the Keys given to the Church;
for I own, That our Blessed Lord gave Power and Authority to his Ministers, to
declare and pronounce to his People, being Penitent, the Absolution and
Remission of their Sins, in his Name: But, to confine that Power to the Church
of Rome only; and to say, All that Die out of her Communion are certainly
Damned for want of it, and to make the Bishop of Rome joynt-Competitor with
Christ in the Business, is against the Grain, and will not digest in my
Stomach, whatever it may do in other Men's.

I should wast too much Time and Paper, If I should examine the Gross
Nonsensical Consequences of Believing the Bishop of Rome able to Forgive Sins,
which have from thence been imposed upon the greater part of the Church of
Rome, the Ignorant sort of People. That the Pope can at once Forgive a Man all
the Sins he ever has committed, or ever shall be guilty of; that he can thrust
a Man into Heaven, for as long a Time as he pleases, where he shall lie
undiscovered by the all-seeing Eye of God, and at the end of that Term be
kicked into Hell; that he can forgive the Sins of all that are in the Communion
of the Roman Church, of all Christians, nay, if he pleases, of the whole World
at once. It has been acknowledged by many of their own Writers on this Subject,
who have been guilty of the least Extravagance, That the Pope has Power, if he
will, at one Mass, to free all the Souls out of Purgatory. If this were true,
King James the First's Inference on the Position, was, with Abnegation of the
Popes Charity, and Admiration of his unparalled Cruelty, That, being granted
to have a Power so to do, he does not apply his Will to it. But I know, Madam,
you are no Friend to such Fancies; therefore I shall appeal no further than to
your own Ingenuity, to judge from what has been produced, Who has the Supreme
and only Power to forgive Sins, to whom Confession properly is due, and in
whose Name only Absolution ought to be Pronounced. And so proceed.

IV. The Fourth Enquiry proposed, was, Whether the Scriptures warrant the
Worshipping of Images, or Praying to Saints and Angels?

The Second Commandment is so much to our Purpose, that they of the Church of
Rome have prudently left it out of the Decalogue, and to make up the number,
they cut the Tenth into two Parts; so the Church of Rome's Decalogue is this,

I. Thou shall have no other Gods before me.

II. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, etc.

III. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath Day, etc.

IV. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, etc.

V. Thou shall do no Murder.

VI. Thou shall not commit Adultery.

VII. Thou shall not Steal.

VIII. Thou shall not bear false Witness against thy Neighbor.

IX. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors Wife.

X. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors House, etc.

So that the generality of the People of the Church of Rome know of no such
thing in Being, as the tedious Harangue against Images, by us called the Second
Commandment. However, there are Texts enough besides, both in the Old and New
Testaments, clearly against them; of which I will only give you a few of the
chief.

Judges 13. 15 -- And Manoah said unto the Angel of the Lord, I pray thee, let
us detain thee, until we shall have made ready a kid for thee. And the angel of
the Lord said unto Manoah, Though thou detain me, I will not eat of thy bread;
and if thou will offer a Burnt-offering, thou must offer it unto the Lord. And
Manoah said unto the angel of the Lord, What is thy name, that when thy sayings
come to pass, we may do thee honor? And the angel of the Lord said unto him,
Why ask thou after my name, seeing it is secret? -- The Angel would not tell
his Name, because Manoah should honor God only.

Psalm. 29. 2. -- Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his Name; worship the
Lord in the beauty of holiness. For Isai. 42. 8, I am the Lord, that is my
name, and my glory will I not give to another; neither my praise to graven
Images. -- And I am certain there is not one Text to the contrary; but many to
the same purpose.

Acts 10. 25. -- And as Peter was coming in, Cornelius met him, and fell down
at his feet and worshipped him. But Peter took him up, saying, Stand up, I my
self also am a man. And Chap. 14. Verse. 11. -- When the People saw what Paul
had done, they lift up their voices, saying, in the speech of Lycaonia, The
Gods are come down to us in the likeness of Men. And they called Barnabas,
Jupiter; and Paul, Mercurius; because he was the chief Speaker. Then the Priest
of Jupiter, which was before their City, brought Oxen and Garlands unto the
Gates, and would have done Sacrifice with the People. Which when the Apostles,
Barnabas and Paul, heard of, they rent their Clothes, and ran in among the
People, crying out, and saying, Sirs, why do ye these things? we also are men
of like Passions with you, etc. -- I am apt to believe these things were done
and suffered by the Providence of God, on purpose to show, that as they were
not to be worshipped while they were on the Earth, so neither should we pay
Divine Honors to 'em now they are in Heaven. But the Apostle to the
Corinthians is very express to the purpose.

1 Cor. 1. 13. -- Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye
baptized into the name of Paul? Chap. 3. 4. -- Who then is Paul? and who is
Apollos, but Ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every man?
I have planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the increase. So then, neither is
he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters; but God that gives the
increase. -- Now Judge, Madam, what a horrid thing it must needs be to make
Images and Pictures of the Saints whereby to Worship 'em, if it was so great a
Crime to esteem one of 'em before another while they were on Earth. But as we
are not to Worship the Saints, so neither must we pay such honor to Angels.

Col. 2. 18. -- Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary humility,
and worshipping of Angels, etc.

Rev. 19. 10. and 22. 9. -- And I fell at his feet and worshipped him, and he
said unto me, see thou do it not: I am thy fellow servants, and of thy Brethren
that have the Testimony of Jesus: Worship God, etc. -- And certainly, if we
must not Worship an Angel if we should see him, I know not which way it can be
proved lawful to intrude into those things which we have not seen, as the
Apostle says of them that Worship Angels, Col. 2. 18. I can find no Text of
Scripture for it; but you see, Madam, how many I have produced against it. And
I believe we shall see as little reason to pray to Saints and Angels, as to
worship 'em.

Isai. 63. 16. -- Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of
us, and though Israel acknowledge us not; thou, O Lord, art our Father, our
Redeemer, thy Name is from Everlasting. -- Where be pleased to observe, that,
if it was lawful to pray to, and in so doing to worship Saints departed, why
might not the Israelites have made them Images of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and
prayed to them to help 'em in time of trouble; or, to put the best face upon
it, that they would pray to God for their own Offspring on Earth, as well as
they of the Church of Rome have their Representatives of, and Prayers to their
Saints; who for the most part, we are apt to believe, are only titular ones?
They knew this would be to no purpose, for Abraham was ignorant of 'em, and
Israel acknowledged them not. But,

Jer. 15. 1. -- Then said the Lord unto me, Though Moses and Samuel stood before
me, yet, my mind could not be toward this People. -- That is, If it was
possible for Moses and Samuel, whose Prayers were so prevalent with me when
they lived on Earth, to interceed for this People now, yet my Mind could not be
toward them. Thus then appears the Vanity of invocating Saints departed, in
that the Dead know nothing, neither have they any more a portion for ever of
any thing that is done under the Sun, Eccl. 9. 5, 6. But whether Angels and
Saints departed, are acquainted with our Condition, or can hear our Prayers, is
not much to the purpose; it is enough to tell you, that, supposing they are
endued with such Faculties, our Worshipping them would detract from the Honor
of God, which he has said he will not give to another: and our invocating them
would make them Mediators and Intercessors, when the Apostle plainly affirms,
That there is but one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. 5.

To conclude this, because I would be as brief as possibly I may, I shall refer
you to the Fourth Chapter of Deuteronomy, where you will find, the great Reason
that Moses gives the Children of Israel, why they should not make 'em Images,
is, because when they heard the Voice of the Lord from the Mountain, they saw
no Similitude; which he urges more than once. And then, what Grounds can they
of the Church of Rome pretend, for exposing a Picture of him, who always was
Invisible? This has been lately acknowledged to be Idolatry, by one that writ
more for the Church of Rome in this particular, than, as he said afterward, he
intended, though all little enough to the purpose: or at least more was added, by
somebody else, to what he did; as may be conjectured from the variation of the
Style: but no matter which. The Author makes Idolatry of two Sorts; Reasons for
abrogating the Test, p. 128.
The first whereof is, the Worshipping any Image or Symbols of false Gods, as
the Supreme Deities: and says, If they do not this, then they are innocent of
the worst part of Idolatry. The second is, the making, or, as he says, the
attempting to make a Similitude of the true God, or uncreated Divine Nature.
That, says he, is the other part of Idolatry, and the Scripture knows no more;
therefore however Superstitious they may be in their use of Images, yet they
cannot be guilty of Idolatry, but upon one of these two accounts, (I suppose he
means, the bare use of Images in the Worship of God was none, because he says,
p. 124, that God was so far from forbidding the use of Images in his Worship,
that he would not be Worshipped without them.) And he says, that no Man was
ever so hardy as to charge either of these two Kinds of Idolatry upon that
Church. But, not to enquire whether their Worshipping God by an Image, which he
seems to Vindicate in another P. 126.
place, be the making a Similitude of the true God, or uncreated Divine Nature;
I assure you, Madam, I have seen the Ancient of Days pictured like an Old Man,
with a great Beard, by which they represented the Unity of the Godhead: And in
another place, the Trinity of Persons, standing on a row in a Sheet held up by
two Angels; two of the three, viz. The Father and the Holy Ghost, with their
Backs toward me, to express their Invisibility, though in the other Picture I had
seen God face to face: and the Son in the middle, as the second Persons place,
with his face visible. Now in my opinion, one or both of these Representations
must be Idolatry by their own confession. But the present Circumstances of the
Roman Church are such, that if they cannot make People believe they Practice no
such things as these, they will do little good on those of the Church of England:
and it is to be hoped they will get but little ground that way, while there are
any left to discover their Forgeries.

No more Authority have they for invocating Saints and Angels, than for
Worshipping Images. The only President, as I know of, in the Primitive Times,
was the voluntary Humility of the Gnostics, condemned by St. Paul himself,
Col. 2. But for these they must have recourse to the Revelations made to
doting Women, and the Visions of mad Franciscans, and I know not whom -- That
Raphael should be invocated on a Journey, and against Diseases in general; but
in particular, Apollonia against the Toothache; Sebastian and Roch, against the
Plague; St. Nicholas, against Tempests; Michael and St. George, against
Enemies. From whom, if Serrar. lit. 2. q. 32.
they be invocated particularly, say they, Experience and Tradition have
discovered special help in these Cases. But what is this, but the ancient
Heathen Idolatry, revived in the Church of Rome? Which is so much the worse
there, because of the Profession of Christianity; and Men that pretend to know
the true God, blasphemously imagine, or assert against their Consciences, which
I think the worse of the two, That help to come from the Creature, which can
only come from the Creator. May not we on better Grounds deisy our Physicians?
But these things they will venture to deny, though they are easily proved: that
which they chiefly acknowledge in this Point, is their praying to Saints and
Angels to pray for them, or as some say, to pray to Christ to interceed for
them, it being arrogant Presumption, for Mortals to go to Christ immediately.
But this is downright Gnosticism; and we of the Church of England, have our
Savior's own words for our Encouragement, if they of the Church of Rome have
not, Joh. 14. 6, I am the way, the truth and the life: no man comes to the
Father but by me. And we know of no other Intercessor in Heaven, but Christ.
Therefore I think it a privation of our Christian Liberty, to debar us from
Praying to him immediately, on Pretense of too much Presumption in so doing;
for he himself invites all that labor and are heavy laden, to come to him, and
he will give 'em rest, Matthew. 11. 28. He does not say, Come to me by my Mother,
or by St. Michael, or St. Bennet, etc. But, Come to me -- directly.

5. The Fifth Enquiry must be, Whether there is any such Place as Purgatory?

The Doctrines of the Church of Rome, as they have been managed, are most of
'em so ordered, as to be as suitable and conformable to the temper of Humane
Nature as they well may be: as might be made appear, if we had time, in these
already spoken to. But above all, the Doctrine of Purgatory, is as obliging and
complaisant to Flesh and Blood, as any thing can be. For this takes off all
necessity of a strict and restrained life; here needs no mortifying our Members
which are upon the Earth, as the Apostle's advice was: Men need not be so
fearful of pleasing their Appetites, as they should be, if they were to follow
the rigid Precepts of our Savior, or St. Paul. But the Epicuroean Principle
will make a Man happy here, in gratifying the Lusts of the Flesh; and hereafter
he shall be happy in Heaven too, if he has but been so frugal as to save a
little Money to pay for a Catholic Burial, only undergoing a little Frixation
or Roasting by the way. That this is the genuine Explication of the Doctrine of
Purgatory, as it is received and propagated in the Roman Church, might be made
appear by many good Consequences, if I had time, and it was worth the Pains to
consider every Particular. But it is done at large already by an Excellent Hand;
and the Business of the present Undertaking, Dr. Still. Idol. of the Church of
Rome.
is not so much to that, as to Enquire whether there is any such Place as
Purgatory or no?

There are but two Texts in the New Testament that can with any color be urged
to this purpose. One is, 1 Pet. 3. 19. where it is said, that Christ went and
Preached to the Spirits in Prison. And the other, 1 Cor. 3. 15, If any man's
works shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss: but he himself shall be saved, yet
so, as by fire. On these two Texts this Doctrine is built. If therefore I can
make it plain, that neither of these Texts are to the purpose, I think I shall
have little more to do than to deny the Doctrine to be true; forasmuch as in
any Matter of Dispute the Affirmative ought to be proved before the Negative. I
begin then with the first, 1 Pet. 3. 19.

In the foregoing Verse, the Apostle tells us, that Christ has once suffered
for sins, the just for the unjust, (that he might bring us to God) being put to
death in the flesh, but quickened by the spirit. And then adds, By which also
he went and preached to the spirits in Prison. From whence most Expositors
gather, that what our Savior is said to do here, he did after his
Resurrection: As if the Apostle had said, He was put to Death in the Flesh, but
was quickened, or raised again by the Spirit; and after that, he went by the
same Spirit, or Power, that quickened him, and Preached to the Spirits in
Prison. And that the word Prison, here, cannot mean Purgatory, will more plainly
appear, if we follow the Apostle as he goes on -- By which also he went and
Preached to the Spirits in Prison; which sometime were Disobedient, when once
the long suffering of God waited in the Days of Noah, while the Ark was
preparing: wherein few, that is, Eight Persons were saved by Water. The like
Figure whereunto, even Baptism does also now save us, by the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ, etc. We read, Genesis 6. 3. that God said, My Spirit shall not
always strive with Man, for that he also is Flesh: yet his Days shall be an
Hundred and Twenty Years. The Deluge was determined for the Sins of the Old
World; yet God of his Mercy would give 'em so long time as One Hundred and
Twenty Years to Repent in; and sent Noah to Preach Repentance, and Threaten
Destruction to all that would not amend their Lives. Whence this of the Apostle
has been interpreted of Christ's Preaching the Gospel to the Gentiles, by his
Apostles, after his Resurrection when he had sent his Spirit among 'em. And so,
those that would not repent at the Preaching of the Gospel, should one Day
perish by Fire, as they of the Old World did by Water, for not Repenting at the
Preaching of Noah: For as Christ was then revealed in a flood of Water, so he
will again be revealed in flaming Fire to take Vengeance on them that obey not
his Gospel. But they that would repent, and be obedient to his Gospel, should
be saved by Baptism, as Noah was in the Ark: yet not merely from a Temporal
Punishment, but from Everlasting Destruction. Now, to make the Prison here
spoken of, Purgatory; is to say, in effect, that those that were destroyed by
the Deluge of the Old World, have remained ever since in this Purgatory 'till
our Savior's Crucifixion, and that in one of the Three Days in which he lay in
the Grave, he went and Preached the Gospel of Repentance to them. But this
cannot be made deducble from the words of the Apostle, but rather the contrary.
For, the word (...) which we render, Prison; signifies any kind of Receptacle
whatever, a Sheath for a Sword, as well as a Gaol for Prisoners, and as
properly the Body of a Man, wherein the Soul is kept, as any thing else: any
thing containing, is (...), a Prison, in reference to the thing contained. So
that Christ's Preaching to the Spirits in Prison, here, is nothing else, but
either the Preaching of Noah to those of the Old World, or of his Apostles to
the Gentiles of the New, whose Souls were penned up in their Bodies, which were
exercised in Filthy Lusts, as useless as a Sword is while it remains in the
Sheath. And this is the sense that the best Expositors put upon the place. Beza
especially, is very copious, and fully discusses the point, proving that this
Prison can in no wise be taken for Purgatory. But the Reverend Dr. Hammond has
most ingenuously and accurately expressed the Apostles meaning; and therefore
with his words I shall conclude, -- Christ, says he, is an Example of suffering
for well-doing, in his Dying for Sins, not his own but ours, he being righteous
died for us who were unrighteous, (that when we were Aliens and Enemies to God,
he might reconcile us to him, and give us Authority to approach him,) wherein
yet for our example and comfort it must be observed, that though as a Man
clothed in our Flesh, he was put to Death, and that innocently, to purchase
Redemption for us, yet by the power of God in him he was most gloriously raised
from the Dead, and shall consequently, by raising and rescuing us out of the
present Sufferings, and destroying all obdurate Sinners, show forth wonderful
Evidences of Power and Life: The very same in effect that of old he did at the
time in which, beyond all others, he showed himself in Power and Majesty
against his Enemies, but withal in great Mercy and Deliverance to his Obedient
Servants that adhered to him: I mean in the Days of the Old World, when by
Noah, that Preacher of Righteousness, he gave those treatable warnings to those
that made no use of the Light of Nature in their Hearts, to the Spirits or
Souls of those that were then alive before the Flood, which God had given them
with impressions of Good and Evil, but through their customs of Sin were as a
Sword put up in a Sheath, laid up in their Bodies unprofitably. -- So then,
upon the whole matter, whether the sense of the Apostle be referred to our
Saviors Preaching, by Noah, to them of the Old World, or by his Apostles to
the Gentiles of the New, is not much to the purpose; this is the plain
resolution of the present Quere, That the word Prison here made use of, is only
a Metaphorical Epithet given to the Body in reference to the Soul, a Comparison
made of the Soul confined in the Body of a sinful Man, with a Man locked up in
a Prison, And thus when our Savior, by his Ministers, Preaches the Gospel,
especially to Unbelievers or Wicked Men, he may be said to Preach to Spirits in
Prison. From what has been said then, I think Purgatory cannot be asserted from
the words of St. Peter.

Whence we come to consider those of St. Paul, If any Man's Work shall be
burnt, he shall suffer loss, but he himself shall be saved, yet so, as by Fire.

The Apostle, Verse 10, says, According to the Grace of God which was given to
me, as a wise Master Builder I have laid the Foundation, and another builds
thereon: And, Verse 12. he speaks of Two sorts of Men that build on this
Foundation; First, those that build thereon Gold, Silver and Precious-Stones:
and Secondly, those that build thereon Wood, Hay and Stubble. Now, says he,
Verse 13, Every Man's Work shall be made manifest. For the Day shall declare
it, because it shall be revealed by Fire, and the Fire shall try every Man's
Work, of what sort it is. And, as he goes on, If any Man's Work shall abide
which he has built thereon, he shall receive a Reward. But if any Man's Work
shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss, etc. Which may be thus explained.

There were among the Corinthians, when the Apostle writ this Epistle to 'em,
two sorts of Preachers; some, who endeavored nothing more, than to Preach the
pure simplicity of the Gospel, and to feed the Flock of Christ with sound and
wholesome Doctrine: And others, who pretended to greater parts and knowledge
than other Men; and these with superfluous flourishes and empty glosses
endeavored to win the Hearts of their Hearers by their worldly wisdom, as the
Apostle calls it. As the other studied for the preservation of a Good
Conscience in the faithful discharge of their Duty, so these made it their
chief care to become the Peoples Favorites, by being as complaisant and
obliging as they could, and by Indulging 'em in some petty matters, as they
called 'em, that the Gospel might not seem too heavy a burden to 'em. They
would tell the People of Works of Supererogation, some things they might do
more than they were commanded to do; and so brought in worshipping of Angels
under a pretense of voluntary Humility, intruding into those things which they
had not seen, being vainly puffed up with their fleshly minds, as the Apostle
testifies, Col. 2. 18. And by such little tricks as these they gained more and
more upon the giddy Affections of the multitude, 'till at last they broke out
into that Division which called for this Epistle. Things being at this pass,
the Apostle thought it high time to think of a way, if possible, to put a stop
to those Enormities which were so fast breaking into the Church. And to this
end, he first mildly reproves the Corinthians, for their overmuch curiosity,
and affection of Speculation, rather than wholesome Doctrine. And then
heproceeds to show 'em the vanity of such Speculative Preachers, by telling
'em, that he had laid the Foundation, and that no Man could lay another than
what was laid already, which was Jesus Christ. Now, says he, If any Man builds
upon this Foundation, Gold, Silver, Precious-Stones, Wood, Hay, or Stubble?
Every Man's Work shall be made manifest. For the Day shall declare it, because
it shall be revealed by Fire, and the Fire shall try every Man's Work, of what
sort it is. And if any Man's Work shall abide, which he has built upon that
Foundation which he had laid, he shall receive a Reward. That is, He that shall
approve himself a sincere Preacher of the Gospel, that he has fed the Flock of
Christ with sound and profitable Doctrine, he shall in the Day of Trial have
this to comfort him against all Temporal Calamities, That he has Acted as a
faithful Pastor ought to do, and therefore though Tribulations beset him on all
sides, yet he is certain he whom he has served is faithful, and will
undoubtedly perform his promise to his faithful Servants, so that in the midst
of the greatest Afflictions he is sure to become more than a Conqueror, and as
such shall not miss of a most glorious Reward. But, If any Man's Work shall be
burnt, he shall suffer loss: That is, He shall in the Day of Trial be convinced
of the invalidity and unprofitableness of his Preaching, which will cause in
him the pains of a guilty Conscience, which commonly attend on those that have
been unprofitable in their Stations; and the loss of his former credit, will
cause him shame, and a detestation of those vain and empty Opinions, which
before he so earnestly defended; and all these together will put him in danger
of losing his reward hereafter. Yet notwithstanding all this, though his fleshy
opinions are consumed and brought to nothing, if he has been so fortunate as to
hold to the Foundation in the main Doctrines of Christianity, he himself may be
saved, but 'twill be so hardly, as by Fire. That is, though he had been infected
with Gnosticism, if he did not proceed so far as actually to deny Christ the
Foundation, as his Doctrine before was that he might in case of Persecution,
yet his not denying him at last, is an Abnegation of that Doctrine as
Erroneous, and on that account he might be saved, notwithstanding the
unprofitableness of his Preaching otherwise simply considered, but it would be
so hardly, as when one with the greatest difficulty frees himself from the fury
of a devouring Fire. I suppose the Apostles meaning may be to this purpose;
that That Preacher who takes more delight in discussing Points of Controversy,
and the nice Speculations of School-Disputes, than in Preaching the Gospel so
as it may best edify the generality of People that come to hear him; If to this
he adds some superfluous Doctrines of his own, provided they be not Heretical,
but he still holds the Foundation, yet all this may not damn him, if he does
not at last deny Christ, but though his Works in the day of Trial shall prove but
empty Chimera's, the vain Fancies of his own Brain, Wood and Stubble built upon
the Foundation of the Gospel, and as such shall instantly be consumed, yet he
himself may escape the deserved Punishment of an Unprofitable Preacher, but
'twill be, as a man whose House is on fire round about him, and all his
Substance being burnt, he himself with great hazard of his Life escapes the
Flames. For it is not to be thought that every petty Error incurs Damnation if
it is not of Faith; for thus the Holy Fathers of the Church in all Ages have
failed, yet their failings not thought damnable, so long as in all things
necessary to Salvation they held to the Foundation. But the question is,
Whether according to the sense of the Apostle, such Men must be saved by the
fire of Purgatory? St. Austin tells us that, Both good and bad, those on the
right hand as well as those on the left, must be tried by this Fire the Apostle
speaks of. And a little after, This Fire, says he, is to be understood as such,
through which both must pass, They that build Gold, as well as those that build
Wood. And will any say that St. Peter, St. Paul, and the rest of the Apostles
passed through Purgatory? Or will any of the Church of Rome assert this thing
of their Seraphic St. Francis, St. Dominic, or their ever famous Loyola? It Is
plain, the Apostle here speaks Metaphorically; he makes a Fire wherein a man is
in danger of Burning, a Similitude of the danger those Gnostics were in by
building their vain and unprofitable Doctrines upon the Foundation which he had
laid: So that upon the whole, I think the best way to explain a figurative
Expression, is by a figurative Supposition. Let us therefore suppose a
Foundation of Stone laid by some famous Builder: Two men take this Foundation
whereon to Build 'em Houses to live in; one of the two Builds his House, we'll
suppose of Gold and Silver, as the Apostle expresses it, but very plain and
homely, after the rude Gothic way of Building, no way charming or delightful
outwardly. The other makes use of no other Materials but Wood and Straw, but
alarms the World with his curious Carving, and fine Devices, after the
beautiful Corinthian Order, Stately and Magnificent, to Charm all that shall
look on it, and so finishes a delicate Piece of Work. Now the common Vanity of
the World is such, that Men are generally apt to part with all to please their
Fancies; and so it is here, the Multitude admire his Building, and cry up the
Workman almost to Adoration, and though his next Neighbor's House is built of
Gold and Silver, yet it is a plain homely thing, rough and old fashioned, not
worth taking notice of or looking on. But here, the Ingenuity and Art of the
Workman, the singular contrivance of every part, the joint and apt connection
and suitableness of the whole, the just Decorum and Harmony every where
visible, the regularity of the Columns so adorned with all sorts of delightful
Carved works, Fruits and Flowers; and, in a word, the whole Fabric is so
noble, and in all respects outwardly perfect, that it is preferrable to all the
Gold and Silver of the Universe. But now comes the day of Trial, when the Fire
must try both these men's works, of what sort they are. The Foundation being
Stone, the Fire passes on to the Building; And by reason of the first man's
House being built with Gold and Silver, which the Fire cannot reduce into it
self, That escapes untouched, only as there might possibly be a drossy
substance on the outside, the Fire licks off that, and so, all the alteration
it makes there, is, when that dross is consumed the House appears much more
splendid and glorious, as the Metal is more refined, and purified by the Fire.
But the condition of the other fine Building, is quite contrary; for,
consisting chiefly of Wood and Straw, and such combustible Matter, it presently
takes fire, and burns furiously, that the Poor man, who is suddenly surpised
with the Calamity, being perhaps two or three Stories high, and the Flames
ascending, and threatening Destruction round about him, knows of no way whereby
to escape one danger, but by running into another: And delays in such cases
being dangerous, he looks out at his Window, and, not considering the greatness
of the fall, his fear of Burning being much greater, he at the hazard of his
Life, endeavors to save it, by leaping down into the Street; whence, if he so
escapes, he becomes a miserable Spectator of the Ruin of that, which but
Yesterday was the Worlds wonder: and they that were before so taken with it,
now see it reduced to Ashes, while the other House which before they thought so
despicable, shines in their Imaginations as the Sun in the Firmament. This I
take to be as lively a representation of the sense of the Text, as the words
will bear: and then I leave to any reasonable Person to judge if the Apostle
here speaks of any such place as Purgatory. I dare say, St. Chrysostom had no
such thoughts; for repeating the same words, But he shall be saved, yet so as
by Fire; That is, says he, as a man that, when at Midnight his House is set on
Fire, wakes and leaps out of Bed, and runs Naked out of Doors, taking nothing
along with him, his only care being to free his own Body from the Flames. But
the Gentlemen we are to deal with in these days are mere Grammatists where they
can find any thing in the Letter that seems to favor their purpose, though the
sense of the Text may be hid in a Figure. But he that can assert the Doctrine
of Purgatory from such a Text as this, may as well say that the Apostle was a
Mason or Carpenter, because he calls himself a Builder; or that he Preached to
Houses and Walls, because he calls the Corinthians God's Building; or that our
Savior himself was a Stone, because he is expressly called the head stone of
the corner. But whither would such absurdities hurry us? I assure you, Madam,
it is very unreasonable to suppose the Doctrine from such a Text as this; and I
think they can find none plainer than one of these two. Which being made thus
plain to the contrary, I shall only briefly hint a few Texts against the
particular Doctrine of Purgatory, and so conclude this Point.

Eccl. 11. 3. -- If the clouds be full of rain, they empty themselves upon the
Earth: and if the tree fall toward the South, or toward the North: in the place
where the tree falls, there it shall lie. -- This Text is a Metaphorical
intimation of the state of the Soul after this life. As a Tree that is falling
must fall one way, either to the South or to the North, etc.; So the Soul when
it leaves the Body must go to some certain place: and as the Tree shall remain
in the place where it fell, so the Soul must abide in the place whither she
first goes when she leaves the Body. But the Preacher is more plain to the
purpose, Chap. 12. 7. where he says, The Dust, that is, Man's Body, shall
return to the Earth as it was; and the Spirit shall return to God who gave it.
And the Prophet says, Isai. 57. 3. The Righteous shall enter into Peace. -- Now
according to the Practice of the Church of Rome in this particular, unless the
special favor of the Bishop of Rome intervene, all, both good and bad, must
pass through Purgatory, in order to their Perfection, though according to the
Doctrine of the first Query, they may be more than perfect before they come
thither. But what then becomes of the many Promises made to the Godly, both in
the Old and New Testaments, if before they can enjoy the Rewards promised, they
must undergo so severe a Punishment by the way?

Revel. 14. 13. -- And I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, write,
Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth -- And, if there is
any such place as Purgatory, wherein the best of Men must endure Torment for a
Time, how can the Blood of Christ be said to cleanse any from all Sin, 1 John
1. 7? Certainly, God does not require that his Servants should pass through the
Fire to purify 'em and make 'em fit for Heaven, after they are washed in the
Blood of his Son. We are taught by the Apostle, Heb. 9. 14, that the Blood of
Christ purges our Consciences from dead Works: but we quite destroy the belief
of this, if we admit the least thought of any other Purgation. Our Savior
tells us, Joh. 3. 18. that He that believes on him is not condemned. And if
God does not condemn, it is hard to think he will punish: which he must do, if the
best of Men must pass through Purgatory before they can come to Heaven. But we
can meet with no such place in the Scriptures. We find but two ways mentioned,
a narrow and a broad; a strait gate and a wide, into one of which we must
enter. And the Apostle says expressly, All shall appear before the Judgment 2
Cor. 5. 10.
seat of Christ, there to receive according to what we have done in the Body:
and then certainly, if there is any such place as Purgatory, God must be
thought unjust in calling Men to account for their Sins when they are purged
from 'em. But it is much safer to believe there is no such place.

Virgil indeed tells us of some such kind of place in the Sixth Book of his
Aeneas, in his Account of Aeneas's Progress into the infernal World to visit
his Father. When he came to the Stygian shore, he saw Old Charon about his
wonted Business, plying the Oars to carry such over as came thither for
Passage. But he saw some miserable Ghosts on the Banks and in dark Woods
thereabouts, to whom the old Ferry-man was very surly, and denied 'em Passage,
though without doubt they would have paid him as well for his pains as others did.
Aeneas, as we may suppose, was amazed at this partiality, and asked his Guide,
What was the meaning of Charon' s rough behavior to those poor Souls? To which
she answers, Those you see him take into his Boat are buried, and by that means
challenge his Service; But those he beats away, are not. None must pass these
Streams 'till the Ceremonies of their Funeral are performed; but they must
abide in these dismal Shades on this side the River an Hundred years, unless
they are buried sooner, and then, I suppose buried or not buried, they obtain
their Passage. Then the Poet sets down a Dialogue between Aeneas and his old
Pilot Palinurus, who being unfortunately cast away, was killed in Italy; and by
the cruel Murderers left unburied: for which reason he must be confined to
this Purgatory, 'till those People, moved by Prodigious Omnes, should Solemnize
his Funeral. Now not to make a Parallel between this Fiction of the Poet, and
the Purgatory of the Church of Rome, I shall only tell you, that, I have seen
the place represented by them of that Church, not much unlike it. They have a
River, in which many are plunged up to the Neck, and laboring very hard to get
out, at one side of the River is Hell's mouth open, to terrify the poor Souls,
and over their heads, Heaven for their Encouragement. Whether they intend this
River for Styx or Acheron, is not to the purpose; it is enough to suppose the
Doctrine of Purgatory very ancient; because in vogue with the ancient Romans
before Christ's coming into the World: though of late years it has got a Name
which it wanted before, and as it was formerly known by the Stygian shore,
Black shades, etc. now Purgatory is the Proper name of the place, and is
therefore deservedly written with a Capital P.

6. The Sixth Enquiry proposed was, Whether the Mass is a Sacrifice for the
Quick and Dead?

This Doctrine is built upon the other of Purgatory, and it is to be delivered
from that place that Men are so willing to trade for Masses and Indulgences:
which has added so much to the Revenue of the Church, that it can now very
hardly be laid aside.

But I have often thought it strange, that Men professing Christianity, should
be so far bewitched to Gain as to deny the Efficacy of Christ's Sufferings. For
if Indulgences will make amends for Sin, and the Mass atone for
unrighteousness, what becomes of the All Sufficiency of Christ's Merits, the
Satisfaction made by his Death? What need have Men to go so far about for Mercy
and Forgiveness, when they may have it nearer home? Here Is a Merchant has
Indulgences to sell at reasonable Rates, by virtue of which a Man may gratify
the Lusts of his Flesh here, and when he Dies, a small Matter toward Building
or Repairing some religious Conventicle, will purchase Masses enough to deliver
him out of Purgatory; and then let any judge if such a Man is not far wiser
than a sneaking Heretic, who lives in ignorance of these Catholic Helps and
Salvo's. But for all that, if we may be allowed to believe the Scriptures, we
have no such by-ways to Heaven; the way that leads thither is strait as well as
narrow. So then, let others trust to Indulgences, and so be cheated of their
Souls and Money too, while we tread in the Path which is made plain before us;
and though we may want a little Elbow-room, yet it is better traveling so in a
clean and safe way, than, by rambling out of it for more liberty, to trust to
the Promise of a false Guide that we shall come into it again, and so follow
him through Boggs and Rivers in danger of Drowning every step of the way. It Is
evident enough, that the Son of God is our only Sacrifice; for the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. ^^. 7, Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us: And the
Scriptures sufficiently testify, that by one Oblation of himself once offered,
he made sufficient Satisfaction for the Sins of the whole World. And then what
need have we of farther Sacrifices? nay, what warrant can be brought from the
Word of God, to justify the Sacrifice of the Mass, which is the only new one
contended for? The Apostle, Romans 12. 1, Exhorts us to present our Bodies a
living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, as our reasonable Service. Which
Text Bellarmin thinks sufficient to the purpose, and thus he argues: (...) is a
Sacrifice properly so called, that is, an External Oblation, made only to God,
wherein by a lawful Minister, some sensible Substance is by Mystical rites
consecrated, and so changed, or, in reference to what it was before, destroyed.
But Christians have no such Sacrifice to offer to God, but the Mass. Neither
are the Romans here commanded to Kill themselves; for that would be an heinous
Sin. Therefore the Mass must be the Sacrifice here spoken of. And farther
(...), which is the word here used by the Apostle, is that Sacrifice which is
offered by a lawful Minister. But no Sacrifice is among Christians offered by
the Minister, but the Mass. Therefore the Mass is (...), or a proper Sacrifice.
Now not to say the Mass is no sensible Substance, which he makes the main
condition of a Sacrifice, I shall at present thus examine the Argument.

1. The Apostle does not speak here of the office of a Minister, but the Duty
of the Ministers and People both. All are to present their Bodies a living
Sacrifice. I beseech you therefore, Brethren, etc.

2. Therefore supposing the Mass was a sensible Substance, yet the Apostle
cannot intend that, because that is to be offered by the Minister only.

3. Granting all he would have in reference to the Mass's being a Sacrifice,
yet the word (...) is as properly used by the Apostle in reference to the
Sacrifice of a Man's Body, as of the Mass: For it is confessed that (...) is an
Oblation made to God only, wherein some sensible Substance is by mystical Rites
consecrated, and so changed, or, in reference to what it was before, destroyed.
Accordingly, the Apostle advises us to present our Bodies a living Sacrifice
unto God; and in the next Verse, Be not conformed to this World: where, by our
renouncing the World, we consecrate our Bodies to God's Service, and so, as the
Apostle farther exhorts us, we are transformed or changed by the renewing of
our Mind, and our Bodies in reference to what they were before, corrupted and
polluted by Sin, are destroyed.

4. So then the Apostle here makes use of a Metaphor to express a reasonable
Duty; as a Sacrifice is laid on the Altar, killed and cut in pieces, so we must
die to sin, and mortify our Members which are upon the Earth, cut off all
Affections to this World keep our Bodies under, and bring 'em into subjection
to the Will of God, and so being transformed from what we were before, Servants
and Sacrifices to Sin, we become holy Sacrifices and acceptable to God. Whence,

5. Let us enquire what are the proper Sacrifices of Christians, because he
says, that they have no other but the Mass. St. Peter, 1 Ep. c. 2. v. 5, says,
we as lively Stones, are built upon a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, to
offer up spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. And what
those spiritual Sacrifices are, we may be informed by other places of
Scripture. The Psalmist, Psalm. 4. 5. advises us to offer to God the Sacrifices
of Righteousness. And, Psalm. 50. 23, Whosoever offers Praise, glorifieth God.
And, 51. 17, 19, The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit: and, the Lord will
be pleased with Sacrifices of Righteousness. And, Psalm. 141. 2, Let my Prayer
be set before thee as Incense; and the lifting up of my hands, as the evening
Sacrifice. These are great Expressions from one under the Law, when the Morning
and Evening Sacrifices were so absolutely necessary. But what have we from
those that were under the Gospel? Our Blessed Savior of right challenges the
first place, who in his own Person, blames the Pharisees for not knowing the
meaning of this, I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice, Matthew. 12. 7. The Apostle
is very plain, to the purpose, Phil. 4. 15, etc. Now ye Philippians know also,
that in the beginning of the Gospel, when I departed from Macedonia, no Church
communicated with me, as concerning giving and receiving, but ye only. For even
in Thessalonica ye sent once and again unto my necessity. Not because I desire
a gift: but I desire fruit that may abound to your account. But I have all, and
abound: I am full, having received of Epaphroditus the things which were sent
from you, an Odor of a sweet smell, a Sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to
God. From all which, the Sacrifices of Christians are Mercy, Alms-Deeds,
Prayer, Praise, Contrition, and all Christian Duties. And these are the
Sacrifices which are to be offered up to God, by every living Christian for
himself. But I can find no such Sacrifice as the Mass, nor indeed any other
than those abovementioned. For Christ Jesus is the Sacrifice for all
Christians in general, and these are Sacrifices which every Christian must
offer to God for himself in particular. And thus I have briefly given my
Opinion of the Mass, which amounts to this in the general, that Christ being
our Sacrifice and Propitiation, we have no reason to think of any other; and he
having offered himself once to God for all, there can be no other Offerings
needful, but such as every Man must offer for himself, the Sacrifice of
Righteousness. And as the Mass is not a Sacrifice for the Living, neither can
it be supposed a Sacrifice for the Dead.

If Christ Jesus has made satisfaction for the Sins of all that are called by
his Name; and if that satisfaction is certainly applied to all who are true
Christians, and Die in the Faith of Christ Crucified, and if this is made the
absolutely necessary Condition of having a Title to that satisfaction, I can
see no ground Wicked Men have to hope for pardon, if they forfeit that. The
Scriptures are altogether silent as to any thing that can be done for us after
Death. To which purpose I Will give you the trouble of the following Instances,

1. Holy David, when God struck the Child he had by Bathsheba, prayed for its
recovery, and fasted and lay all Night upon the Earth: His sorrow for the
Child's Sickness was intolerable. But when the Child was Dead, he arose from
the Earth, and Washed, and Anointed himself, and changed his Apparel, and came
into the House of the Lord and Worshipped: then he came to his own House, and
having Bread set before him he did eat. Then said his Servants to him, What
thing is this that thou have done? thou did fast and weep for the Child while
it was alive, but when the Child was dead, thou did arise and eat Bread. And
he said, While the Child was yet alive, I fasted and wept: For I said, who can
tell whether God will be gracious unto me, that the Child may live, 2 Samuel 12.
22. We read nothing here of any Sacrifice offered for the Child, which
certainly would have been recorded if such a thing had been done: but he did
not so much as pray for him or weep after his Death. For,

2. No Man can by ANY means redeem his Brother, or give to God a ransom for
him, Psalm. 49. 7. I think this is plain enough against any thing that is
pretended to be done for the benefit of the Dead; and if no Ransom can deem a
Man from the State he immediately passes into out of this World, what signify
the many Masses that are sent up daily for one or other in the Church of Rome?
I think it would not be impertinent to add that of our Savior, What shall it
profit a Man if he shall gain the whole World and lose his own Soul? Or what
shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul? Mark 8. 36. Which shows the
impossibility of Redemption from a State after this Life. And this is farther
evident in Luke 16. in the Discourse between Abraham and Dives, where Abraham
tells him, Verse 26. That between them there is a great Gulf fixed: So that
they which would pass from one to the other could not. And then I would fain know
how they can say that any can be fetched out of Purgatory, as Hell is more
mildly called, to Heaven? But,

3. The Apostle tells the Thessalonians, 1 These. 4. 13. that he would not have
'em to be ignorant, concerning them which are asleep, nor to sorrow, as others
which have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died, and rose again, even so
them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. The Apostles and the
Primitive Christians had their hopes in the Resurrection; they had no thought
of a state of Punishment after Death, from which they were to be freed by the
Sacrifice of the Mass, but they built all upon the Merits of Christ's Blood,
the full satisfaction which he had made, and on that score made it their
constant endeavor to become worthy partakers of it. The Scriptures make no
mention of Offertories for the Dead, but in many places they argue clear the
contrary: That there is no time or place of calling on God in the Grave, or for
those that are in their Graves: All shall at the Day of Judgment receive
according to what they have done in the Body. There Is no Expiation of Guilt
after Death, but he that is not absolved in this Life must be miserable for
ever. Therefore these performances on the behalf of the Dead, are no better
than a breach of the Third Commandment, a taking God's Name in vain, by calling
on him for those, for whom he cannot be entreated. Upon the whole therefore, we
may truly say with the Preacher, Eccl. 9. 4. To him that is joined to all the
living, there is hope: But to him that is dead there is no hope but what his
way of living here will administer to him.

I conclude this with the words of the Apostle, Heb. 13. 7, etc. Remember them
which have the Rule over you, who have spoken unto you the word of God: whose
Faith follow, considering the end of their Conversation. Jesus Christ the same
yesterday, and to day, and for ever. Be not carried about with diverse and
strange Doctrines: For it is a good thing that the heart be established with
Grace, not with Meats, which have not profited them which have been occupied
therein. We have an Altar whereof they have no right to eat, which serve the
Tabernacle. For the Bodies of those Beasts whose Blood is brought into the
Sanctuary by the High Priest for Sin, are burnt without the Camp. Wherefore
Jesus also, that he might sanctify the People with his own Blood, suffered
without the Gate. Let us go forth therefore unto him, without the Camp, bearing
his reproach. For here we have no continuing City, but we seek one to come. By
him therefore let us offer the Sacrifice of Praise to God continually, that is,
the fruit of our Lips, giving thanks to his Name. But to do good, and to
communicate, forget not: for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased.

7. Now I come to the Seventh and last Enquiry proposed, viz. Whether the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation can be maintained by Scripture?

This has been endeavored by our Adversaries, but to no purpose. And the
Scriptures furnish us with two very good Arguments to the contrary. Which are,

1. That Christ's Body can be in but one place at once.

2. That we eat the Body and drink the Blood of Christ only by Faith. Against
both which, Transubstantiation makes Christ's Body visible in a Thousand places
at once; and asserts that we eat the very natural Flesh of Christ, and gnaw it
with our Teeth as we do our common Meat. And since in this Case we are denied
the use of our Senses, we must be judged by the Sense of the Scriptures.

And first, The Scriptures testify, That Christ's Body can be in but one place
at once.

Our Savior, Matthew. 26. 11. tells us, We have the Poor always with us but him
we have not always. For, John 16. 28. As he came forth from the Father into the
World, so again he will leave the World and go to the Father. Accordingly, Mark
16. 19. when he had spoken to his Disciples, he was received up into Heaven,
and sat on the right hand of God. And there St. Stephen afterward saw him,
Acts 7. 56. In which place, as St. Peter testifies, Acts 3. 21. he must remain
till the times of the restitution of all things. When, and not before, he shall
so come in like manner, as he was seen to go into Heaven, Acts 1. 11. Now, I
suppose you know the last shift they that believe this Doctrine are fain to fly
to, is God's Omnipotency, and this they know we dare not contradict. But we
know, that though God is able to do any thing, yet it is evident in many things
he does not apply his Will to his Ability: And on this account, though John
Baptist told the Jews, Matthew. 3. 9. That God was able of the Stones of the
Earth to raise up Children unto Abraham, we must not presently make the Fable
of Deucalion and Pyrrha an Article of our Faith. For if this would do the
business, how soon would the World be filled with Absurdities, and yet all pass
for Miracles? But if we consult the Sacred Writings, we shall find that though
God is sufficiently declared to be Omnipotent, yet he never acted any thing
contrary to himself, his Power never appeared contrary to his Will. Now in the
present case, if we believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and that his
Will is declared in his Word, it sufficiently appears, that Christ must be
Corporally present in Heaven, 'till the end of the World; and then, to say that
he is Corporally present on Earth too, and in so many Thousand places at the
same time, because nothing is impossible with God, is to say in effect that
God, to show his Power, does some things which are repugnant to his Will; and
to preserve the Prerogative of his Omnipotence inviolate, will upon occasion
contradict his own Word. But the Apostles had no such thoughts, some of 'em saw
Christ ascend Bodily into Heaven, and others, as St. Stephen, and St. Paul,
afterward saw him Bodily present there. Accordingly St. Paul tells the
Hebrews, Chap. 8. Verse 1. that he is set on the Right Hand of the Throne of
the Majesty in the Heavens. And Chap. 10. Verse 12. After he had offered one
Sacrifice for Sins for ever, he sat down on the Right Hand of God. Where be
pleased to observe two Errors confuted in one Text, The Sacrifice of the Mass,
in that Christ has offered one Sacrifice for Sins for ever; and the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, in that after he had offered the Sacrifice, he sat down on
the Right Hand of God. Therefore his Advice to the Colossians, Chap. 3. Verse
1. is, If they are risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where
Christ sits at the Right Hand of God. For, Phil. 3. 20. our Conversation,
says he, is in Heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior the Lord Jesus
Christ. Wherefore, Madam, I think the Counsel of our Lord himself is best to be
followed, Matthew. 24. 23. If any Man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or
there, believe it not.

Secondly, Another Argument deducible from Scripture, against this Doctrine, I
told you, was, That we eat the Body, and drink the Blood of Christ, only by
Faith.

John 6. 47, etc. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that believes on me has
Everlasting Life. I am that Bread of Life. Your Fathers did eat Manna in the
Wilderness, and are dead. This is the Bread which comes down from Heaven, that
a Man may eat thereof, and not die. I am the Living Bread which came down from
Heaven. If any Man eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever: And the Bread
that I will give, is my Flesh, which I will give for the Life of the World.
Where we are to consider, First, That Faith in Christ is made the Condition of
having Everlasting Life, Verse 47. Secondly, The Bread of Life, which, Verse
51. is called his Flesh, is only that Spiritual Nourishment of the Soul, which
comes by that Faith in Christ: And therefore he says, that if any Man eat of
this Bread, he shall live for ever. Whence I think it plainly appears, that
eating Christ's Flesh, and believing on him, are only terms used promiscuously
one for the other, and so make nothing at all for Transubstantiation. But the
chief of the Argument is to come, Verse 52, etc. -- The Jews therefore strove
among themselves, saying, How can this Man give us his Flesh to eat? Then Jesus
said unto them, Verily verily I say unto you, Except ye eat the Flesh of the
Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you. Whosoever eats my Flesh,
and Drinks my Blood, has Eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the last
Day. For my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed. He that eats
my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him. As the Living
Father has sent me, and I live by the Father: so, he that eats me, even he
shall live by me. This is that Bread which came down from Heaven; not as your
Fathers did eat Manna, and are dead: He that eats of this Bread shall live
for ever. -- Perhaps you may think, Madam, that these reiterated expressions
are Indications plain enough that our Savior here intends Transubstantiation:
But I assure you they mean nothing less. For, first, he says, Except ye eat the
Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you. And on
the contrary, Whosoever eats his Flesh, and drinks his Blood, has Eternal
Life, and he will raise him up at the last Day. Now, if our Savior speaks all
this of his natural Flesh and Blood, with which he was clothed, and which was
nailed to the Cross and split on the Ground; and lastly, which he carried with
him into Heaven; and if, according to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, his
natural Flesh and Blood are as really eaten and drunk in the Lord's Supper,
Then, all Men, bad as well as good, nay any living Creature that is but capable
of eating and drinking, may be in as fair a way to Heaven as the devoutest
Professor of Christianity. For if eating the Flesh of Christ will carry one to
Heaven, give a Dog a piece of the Transubstantiated Bread, and why may not he
by eating it go thither too? However, to seclude Beasts, it would be a blessed
World certainly, if the worst of Men were in as sure a way to Salvation, as the
best! which must be, if the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and our Savior's
Words hold together. For he says, his Flesh is Meat indeed, and his Blood is
Drink indeed. And Transubstantiation gives all Men the real Flesh and Blood of
Christ, and by eating and drinking them we get Salvation, which is here called
Eternal Life. But Secondly, He that eats Christ's Flesh, and drinks his
Blood, dwells in Christ, and Christ in him. Now can Christ dwell in a Wicked
Man, or Unbeliever: What fellowship has Christ with Belial? Thirdly, This is
that Bread which came down from Heaven: not as our Fathers did eat Manna, and
are dead: he that eats of this Bread shall live for ever: Whence observe, If
one thing is to be understood according to the Letter, another is also. And
then if the Letter intends Transubstantiation, according to the Letter
likewise, they who eat the Flesh of Christ presently become Immortal. And thus
the Jews understood our Savior, when they cried out, Lord, evermore give us of
this Bread, Verse 34. But it is appointed for all Men once to die. Therefore,
eating the Flesh of Christ, and drinking his Blood, can mean nothing but our
feeding on him by Faith unto Salvation. And, if by eating the Flesh of Christ,
and drinking his Blood, we shall live for ever, and yet no Man can be saved
unless he believes in him, either our Savior must be thought to contradict
himself, or else this overthrows the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and proves
that we only eat and drink the Flesh and Blood of Christ by Faith. And I appeal
to your self, Madam, to judge which of the two it is most reasonable to believe.
But that what our Savior says here, is not to be understood according to the
Letter, will appear if we pursue it a little farther, Verse 60. -- Many
therefore of his Disciples, when they heard this, said, This is a hard Saying,
who can hear it? When Jesus knew in himself, that his Disciples murmured at it,
he said unto them, Does this offend you? What and if ye shall see the Son of
Man ascend up where he was before? It is the Spirit that quickens, the Flesh
profits nothing: the words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they
are Life. But there are some of you that believe not. From all which, I could
tell you, Madam, and upon good ground too, that there is nothing in this
Chapter, or very little at most, touching the Eucharist; but all that our
Savior says concerning his Flesh and Blood, is to be understood of his
exemplary Life, and wholesome Doctrine, which is Meat and Drink indeed. But
supposing the whole discourse to be upon that subject, yet there can be nothing
of Transubstantiation contained in it. Which will yet more fully appear by
considering how often he urges the necessity of believing on him in order to
Salvation: Verse 29. This, says he, is the work of God, that ye believe on him
whom he has sent. So, Verse 35. He that believes on me, shall never thirst.
But I said unto you, that ye also have seen me, and believe not. Again, Verse
40. And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the
Son, and believes on him, may have Everlasting Life: and I will raise him up
at the last Day. So likewise, Verse 47. He that believes on me, has
Everlasting Life. And this believing on him, in other places of the Chapter he
calls, coming to him; as, Verse 35, 37, 44, 45. And in other places again, it
is called eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood. Whence it is evident, they
are all Synonymous terms used to express one and the same thing. But to proceed.

The Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 1. tells us, that all our Fathers were under the
Cloud, and all passed through the Sea: and were all baptized unto Moses in the
Cloud, and in the Sea, and did all eat the same spiritual Meat, and did all
drink the same spiritual Drink (for they drank of that spiritual Rock that
followed them: and that Rock was Christ). Now the Paschal Lamb, was as lively a
representation of Christ, the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World, as
our Bread and Wine are, of the breaking his Body and shedding his Blood upon
the Cross: yet 'twas never thought that they in the Passover did eat and drink
Christ's real Flesh and Blood; but only in that Feast they fed on him by Faith.
And so when we come duly prepared to the Lord's Table, we are Partakers of his
Body and Blood by Faith, by which also Christ dwells in our hearts, Ephesians. 3.
17. Our Savior, Joh. 15. 5. says, I am the Vine, ye are the Branches: he that
abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit: for without me
ye can do nothing. Now, if all our Savior's words must be taken according to
the letter, which must we rather believe, that his Flesh is Bread, to be eaten
by us as we do our ordinary Food, or that he is a great Tree, and we Christians
are so many Branches growing from him; or that we are mere Sheep feeding on a
Common, and he the Shepherd to look after us; or lastly, that he is a Door hung
upon Hinges, through which we Sheep must enter into our Pasture? I would fain
know, if all these were to be taken literally, what we should do to know which
was true, and which not? Such Expressions as these must be taken
Metaphorically; and so, As we usually enter into a House by the Door, so we go
to Heaven by Christ: As a Shepherd takes care that none of his Sheep go astray,
so Christ the good Shepherd of our Souls, will lose none of all them that are
his: As a Vine gives Nourishment to its Branches, so is Christ a Vine to us, by
whom we live and grow ripe for a joyful Harvest, or Vintage: And lastly, as
Bread is eaten to sustain this Temporal Life; so Christ is that Spiritual Food
on which we feed by Faith unto life Everlasting.

To what has been said on this Subject, we may add many Texts of Scripture,
which assert the Elements which are the Matter of this Feast, to be the same
after Consecration, as they were before. Thus the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 16, The
cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ?
The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? So
again, Chap. 11. v. 26, As often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye
do show the Lord's death till he come. But that which is chiefly insisted on,
is what our Lord himself said at the Institution of his Supper; Matthew. 26. 26.
And as they were eating, Jesus took Bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and
gave it to the Disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body. And he took the
Cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, drink ye all of it. For this
is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the Remission of
Sins. If here is not plain Transubstantiation, I know not where to find it. Our
Savior himself in the presence of his Disciples takes a piece of Bread, and
plainly affirms that it is his Body; and shall not we believe him? yes, surely.
But what follows? Verse. 29, But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of
this Fruit of the Vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my
Father's Kingdom. I think he tells us as plainly here, that the Wine was still
the Fruit of the Vine after Consecration, as before he did, that it was his
Blood. But to this we may add what St. Luke says of his instituting his Supper,
Luke 22. 19, And he took Bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto
them, saying, This is my Body which is given for you: and so of the Cup, This
is the New Testament of my Blood, which is shed for you. Where, if I were given
to Criticism, I might take notice, as Beza has done, that Christ says, This is
my Body, which is given, for you, not to you. But to let that pass; we know
that Christ was not yet Crucified, till after the institution of this Feast: So
that here is another figure, he makes use of the Present Tense instead of the
Future, instead of, this is my Body, which shall be given for you, he says,
which is given for you, as if it was a thing already done. Now in my opinion,
it would have been much more for Transubstantiation, if he had used the Future
Tense, and told 'em plainly, This is my Body which shall be crucified for you:
and his acting the contrary, nulls all Pretenses to the Doctrine from his
words. But Bellarmin has wittily suggested another kind of Argument, which I
shall the rather mention, because it has lately been started afresh, and that
is, If these words, Hoc est corpus meum, do not intend Transubstantiation, they
must want a Grammatical Construction. For the Pronoun Hoc cannot Adjectively
agree with Bread, as its antecedent Substantive: for Bread is of the Masculine
Gender. Neither can Hoc be spoken Substantively, of a thing that is seen and
openly known, unless that thing be of the Neuter Gender: But Bread is of the
Masculine, both in the Greek and Latin. No man going to show another his
Brother would say, Hoc est frater meus: neither would any man say of the King's
Image, Hoc est Caesar. But all this is but a sly Insinuation, to cajole those
that know no more of Grammar than this Argument would teach 'em. And I have so
much Charity for that great Man, as to believe him too good a Grammarian to be
gulled by so poor an Artifice. I suppose he could not be ignorant, if he knew
any thing almost of the invalidity of such a shift, he knew well enough, I dare
say, that Hoc is here used as a Relative, and, as such, that it might very well
refer to either of the two Substantives, Bread, or Body; and in this case the
seeing, or not seeing the Bread signified nothing: but as the Relative would
refer to both Bread and Body, it was in his Power to make it agree with which
of the Substantives pleased him. And so, Hic est Corpus meum, would have made
as much for Transubstantiation, as Hoc, etc. and would have been as liable to
Cavil and Dispute: yet he that spoke the words would show himself a good
Grammarian either way. And so, though it is true, 'twou'd be improper to say of a
man's Brother, Hoc est frater meus, yet it may well enough be said of the
King's Image, Hoc est Caesar, because, as Hoc relates to the Image and not to
Caesar immediately, the Image being a thing without life, for that reason the
Relative is of the Neuter Gender. But to take a Simile nearer to the present
question: Suppose a little Girl, as like her Father as it is possible for her to
be, she being among more of her Sisters, any Person should single her out from
the rest, and say of her, This is the Father himself; I would know how we
should make this Sentence into Latin to avoid a Metamorphosis? I must confess,
if it had been spoken thus, This Girl, etc. Hoec Puella, the Article of the
Feminine Gender had been most proper: but as the word Girl is only included for
understood, and Father expressed, the Article of the Masculine Gender is as
proper, because, the Article may indifferently be referred to either the Girl,
or the Father. And this suggests to me another Argument against taking these
words of our Savior literally. The Girl here, by reason of her being so like
her Father, is said to be the very Father himself: Now would not the
Bystanders be called Fools or worse, if they should presently vindicate the
Poet's Metamorphosis of Iphis, by believing the Girl is at that instant turned
into a Man? and yet the Expression is no Hyperbole; but as the common way of
speech is, to call the Picture or Representative of a Man, the Man himself: and
thus our Savior might say, This is my Body, and yet only intend the sign for
the thing signified.

All this while, I think I have not made the least appeal to our Senses, though
in a Matter so obvious to 'em, and yet can find no ground for the belief of
Transubstantiation. But, as in things that are obvious to sense, our Senses
cannot be deceived; so neither did our Savior ever deny us the Evidence of our
Senses in such cases: but thus he expostulates; Have ye not seen the Miracles
which I did openly? And in order to convince us of the reallity of his
Resurrection, he appeals constantly to our Senses: Reach hither thine hand, and
thrust it into my side; a Spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have:
He is not here, says the Angel, but is risen as he said; see the place where
they laid him, There Is none of him. And why might not he have had two Bodies
then, one in the Grave, and another to show to his Disciples, as well as so
many Thousand now? No, then his Resurrection would have been taken as a Trick,
that some body like him had personated him: for 'twou'd be contrary to sense,
that the same Body should be whole and entire in two places so far distant at
the same time. 'Twou'd be a Miracle, but against reason; and that no Miracle
ever was, but the Miracle of Transubstantiation. Some Articles of Faith, are
above our Reason or Sense; but none contrary to both Reason and Sense.

And thus, Madam, I have endeavored to prove the great Disagreement between
some of the Principal Doctrines of the Church of Rome, and the Holy Scriptures.
And this I presume I may say for my self, that wherein I have meddl'd in the
clearing of an obscure Text, I have done nothing out of a designed Endeavor to
run down an Opinion, but as I thought in my Conscience it was Erroneous.

One thing only I desire at your hands, if you let any of the adverse Party
have a sight of these Papers, that you would desire 'em to be upon the square,
and not quote Humane Testimonies against the Holy Scriptures: And if they can
make good those Doctrines here censured, from the Word of God, notwithstanding
what is here produced, I my self will become a Roman Catholic with the first
appearance of Truth in those Doctrines I have hitherto thought False. But as I
think that can never be done, so I humbly recommend this plain, but, I hope,
faithful Piece to your serious Perusal, and hope it may prove to your complete
Satisfaction, and that you may reap the full Benefit of a sincere Believer of
the Gospel in the end. Which, that God of his infinite Grace and Mercy, through
his Son Christ Jesus, will grant to you and yours, is, and ever shall be the
constant and hearty Prayer of,

Madam, Your most humble Servant, etc.

FINIS.

