A DISCOURSE Concerning THE LAWS Ecclesiastical and Civil Made against
HERETICS BY POPES, EMPERORS and KINGS, Provincial and General Councils,
Approved by The CHURCH of ROME: SHOWING, I. What Protestant Subjects may expect
to suffer under a Popish Prince acting according to those Laws. II. That no
Oath or Promise of such a Prince can give them any just Security that he will
not execute these Laws upon them. With a PREFACE against Persecuting and
Destroying Heretics.

By a Cordial Friend to the Protestant Religion now by Law established in these
Realms.

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum, Lucret. LONDON, Printed for Thomas
Basset, at the George in Fleetstreet, 1682.

THE CONTENTS OF THE PREFACE.
THE Designs of this Treatise are, First, To demonstrate the Falsehood of the
Religion of the Church of Rome from the Repugnancy of her deportment toward
Heretics: page 1.. I. 1. To Christ's own words to his Disciples, Ye know not
what Spirit ye are of, etc. Luke 9. 54. which Text is largely handled, p. 2, 3,
4, 5, 6.. II. 2. To our Lord's Example, p. 7, 8.. III. 3. To the Example and
Deportment of his Blessed Apostles, p. 9, etc.. IV. 4. To the Parable of the
Tares, as it is interpreted by the H. Fathers, p. 15, etc.. VI. 5. To the
Principles of the Primitive Professors of Christianity, p. 19, etc.. VII. 6. To
the express Judgment of the H. Fathers, p. 26, etc.. VIII. 7. To the Practice
of the Ancient Church, p. 35, etc.. IX. An Objection of the Dissenters
answered, and our Church and Reverend Bishops freed from the Charge of
Persecution, p. 41, etc. Three farther Uses of this Treatise.. X. 1. To justify
the use of lawful means for the Prevention of these Mischiefs, p. 43.. XI. 2.
To stir us up to a serious Reformation of our Lives, and to a Preparation
patiently to bear the Cross, should this inhumane Religion once more prevail
amongst us; Rebellion against our Lawful Prince being unlawful, scandalous and
damnable, p. 44, 45.. XII. 3. To prevent our being gulled by fair Words, and
specious Promises of Toleration, p. 46. A father Reply to the example of the
Indulgence of the French King toward the Hugonots, p. 47, etc.
THE PREFACE.
MY Design in publishing this little Treatise, and the Use which I desire all
good Christians to make of it, is,

First, To confirm them in the Protestant Religion, by such a sensible
Demonstration of the Falsehood of the Religion of the Church of Rome, as men of
all Capacities may apprehend. For if this barbarous Deportment toward
Heretics be evidently repugnant to the true Spirit of Christianity, if it be
contrary to the Example of our Savior, which we stand bound to imitate; if it
be wholly opposite both to the Principles and Practice of the primitive and
purest Ages of the Church; I hope this will sufficiently convince Wise men,
that the Religion which commands these Cruelties and Inhumanities cannot derive
it self from him who is the God of Love, and Patience, and Mercy, and Pity to
the Sons of Men.

. I. Now that to burn, destroy, extirminate all those who differ from us in
Religion, and upon that account are called Heretics, (though they be men of
peaceable and quiet Lives) and prosecute them according to the Laws here
mentioned purely on the account of Conscience, that this, I say, is evidently
repugnant to the true Spirit of Christianity, we learn from Christ's own words
to his Disciples, who, when a Village of Samaria refused to receive him,
because he appeared to them to be going to Jerusalem, ask this Question, Luke
9. 54.
Lord will thou that we command fire from Heaven to come down, and to consume
them, as Elias did? For our dear Lord no sooner heard this Question but he
rebuked his Disciples, saying, Ver. 55, 56.
Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of, for the Son of man is not come to
destroy men's lives, but to save them. Where observe,

1. That whereas they who are thus persecuted by the Church of Rome, are falsely
supposed to be Schismatics and Heretics, the Samaritans undoubtedly were
both. For, First, In opposition to the Temple of Jerusalem, which God himself
appointed for the Place where he would be worshipped, commanding all men to
repair to it, they erected a Temple upon Mount Gerizim, and there they
worshipped, deserting the Temple of Jerusalem, this was their Schism. Secondly,
They also were Heretics and Idolaters, for they erred in matters which
concerned Salvation, they feared the Lord, and served their own gods, 2 Kings
17. 33. And this our Savior testifies in these words, John 4. 22.
Ye worship ye know not what, we know what we worship, for Salvation is of the
Jews.

2. Observe, That whereas Romanists do exercise this Cruelty on them whom they
call Schismatics and Heretics, chiefly for their refusing to receive and own
him as Christ's Vicar who manifestly does usurp that Title, these Samaritans
refused to receive our Savior himself in his own Person, and that because he
seemed to be going to Jerusalem to worship, so that the Honor of God, and of
Religion, and of Jerusalem, the Place of his peculiar Worship, were all
concerned in this case.

3. Observe, That the Permission of what was here desired by Saint John and
Peter, would have been more effectual for the Conviction of the Heretical,
Schismatical Samaritans, than any of the Punishments inflicted by the
Inquisition, or any Arts of Papal Tyranny can be for the Conviction of those
whom they call Heretics and Schismatics; for these Disciples did not desire
that they themselves might execute on the Samaritans this Sentence, by
committing them to the Flames, or by imploring the Magistrates assistence to
consume or burn them, they only did request that they might call upon the God
of Heaven to rain down fire upon them, and consume them; which had it pleased
him to do on this occasion, the rest of the Samaritans, by what this Village
suffered, must have been evidently convinced by Demonstration from Heaven, of
God's displeasure against their way of Worship, and of the Truth of that
Messiah and his Doctrine, who procured this Vengeance to be executed upon them;
whereas the Persecutions of the Church, because they minister no Conviction to
the Conscience, serve only to harden Men's Hearts and imbitter their Spirits
against those who use them, and to induce them more firmly to believe That such
a barbarous Religion cannot be of God.

From these three Observations it is evident that whatsoever may be pleaded by
the Church of Rome to justify her Practice in burning, massacring, extirpating
of Heretics and Schismatics, might with advantage have been pleaded here:
Does she practice Dr. Tillotson's Sermon, Nov. 5. 1678. p. 15.
her Severities out of a Zeal for Truth, and for the Honor of God and Christ,
and of the true Religion, and for the reclaiming Heretics and Schismatics,
and the preventing or terrifying others from adhering to them or being deluded
by them; upon all these accounts you see that the Disciples had far greater
cause to call for fire from heaven upon this Village of Samaria. And yet our
Savior, under these Circumstances, thinks fit to rebuke even the desires of
doing this to one small Village; How then will he rebuke the actual performance
of it to many hundred thousand Souls, after his solemn Declaration of the
Repugnancie of these Proceedings to the Design of his most blessed Advent, and
to the Spirit of his Gospel? For the true Reasons why Christ rebuked his
Disciples for their Desire of dealing thus severely with these Schismatical and
Heretical Samaritans were these.

1. Because this Spirit of Severity toward erroneous persons, in whomsoever it
is found, is highly opposite to the calm Temper of Christianity, as is
insinuated in that Reply of Christ to his Disciples, Ye know not what spirit ye
are of, that is, Ye do not well consider under what Way of Dispensation ye are
placed by me. Ibid. p. 7.
The Way I come to teach men, the Temper, Disposition and Affection I would fix
within them, is not a furious, persecuting and destructive Spirit, but mild,
and gentle, and tender of the Lives and Interests of Men, even of those who are
our greatest Enemies. Vide Dr. Hammond in locum.
Under the Old Testament, indeed, they who rejected and scoffed at a Prophet,
suffered severely for it, the Prophet had Commission to call for fire from
heaven to devour them presently, curse them in the name of the Lord, 2 Kings 2.
24. But they who reject and crucify Christ are by him prayed for, and are, by
his Command, to be still preached to, and, if possible, brought to Repentance,
and according to this Example, so are all Christians to conform themselves,
acting toward Contemners of their Persons, or Rejectors of their Doctrine, not
according to the legal, but the evangelical Dispensation; not according to the
Severity of Elias, but the Meekness and Gentleness of Christ. And therefore
your Desire of proceeding according to the extraordinary Spirit of Elias, under
the gospel Dispensation, is intolerable; for that designs universal Love, Peace
and Good Will even to Enemies, it does engage us to show all meekness to all
men, Tit. 3. 1.
and so no Difference of Religion, no Pretense of Zeal for God, can justify
this fierce, vindictive and exterminating Spirit.

Our Savior's second Reason against this Proceeding is, That it was repugnant
to the End for which he came into the World, which was, not to destroy men's
lives, but to save them: Dr. Tillot. ibid. p. 8.
He came to discountenance all Fierceness, and Rage, and Cruelty in men one
toward another, to restrain and subdue that furious and unpeaceable Spirit
which is so troublesome to the World, and the cause of so many Mischiefs and
Disorders in it, to beget a peaceable Disposition in men of the most distant
Tempers, making the Lamb and Wolf lie down together, and no more to destroy and
hurt each other, Esa. 11. 6, 9.
but turn their swords into plowshares, Es. 2. 4.
and their spears into pruning hooks; Mich. 4. 3.
engaging them to lay aside all bitterness and wrath, anger and clamor, and
evil-speaking, with all malice. Ephesians. 4. 31.
He came to introduce that excellent Religion which consuits not only the
eternal Salvation of men's Souls, but their temporal Peace and Security, their
Comfort and Happiness in this World: Whose Fruits are righteousness and peace,
Romans 14. 18. love, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness and meekness,
Gal. 5. 22, 23. whose wisdom is pure and peaceable, gentle, and easy to be
entreated, full of mercy and good works, Jam. 3. 17. and which commands the
wise and knowing man to show forth out of a good conversation his works with
meekness of wisdom, ver. 13. condemning all his bitter zeal as earthly,
sensual and devilish, ver. 14, 15. which suffers not the Servant of the Lord to
be engaged in foolish questions which beget strife, because that the Disciple
of this mild and gentle Savior must not fight, but must be gentle toward all
men, patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves against the
truth, though their doctrine spread as a gangreen, and overthrow the faith of
some, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25, - 17, 18. not dispatching them out of the way, as is
the manner of the Romanist, but with Longsuffering expecting if God
peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledgment of the truth:
Which teaches us to bear the infirmities of persons weak in Faith, Romans c. 15.
v. 1. to restore them in the spirit of meekness, Gal. 6. 1. to become as weak
to the weak, that we may gain the weak, 1 Cor. 9. 22. to bear with the weak,
and be long suffering to all men, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14. to speak evil of no man, to
be no fighters, but meek, showing all gentleness toward all men, and that upon
this sole account, that we our selves were sometimes foolish and deceived, Tit.
3. 2, 3.

Now both these Reasons are such as equally concern all Persons, Magistrates as
well as Ministers, men who thus persecute out of mis-guided Zeal toward God,
as well as they who do it out of Envy, Hatred, and such carnal Principles. And
they seem plainly to infer, that no man should be persecuted, as in the Church
of Rome men are, purely for his mistake concerning, or his denial of any
Article of Faith revealed by the Gospel, but only for seditious and
treasonable Doctrines, or for such Crimes as, had the Gospel never been
revealed, might justly have been punished by the civil Magistrate, or for
seducing others from the Truth, when by the Magistrate they are forbidden so to
do, or propagating and divulging their pernicious Errors to the Disturbance of
the civil Peace.

. II. 2. Against this barbarous Deportment toward our fellow Christians it may
be farther argued from the Example of our Savior and the Deportment of his
Blessed Apostles. For,

1. Our Savior's Miracles were not destructive to Mankind, but beneficial to
them, whereas he could, and, had he been of the same Judgment with the Church
of Rome, he should have exercised his Power to the Destruction of those false
Prophets who deceived many, Matt. 24. 11. and of those Scribes and Pharisees
who did so vigorously oppose the Propagation of the Gospel, and who ascribed
his Power of working Miracles to Beelzebub, Matthew. 12. 24.
and by so doing became guilty of the impardonable Sin. v. 32.
For what can be pretended for the Exercise of this Severity at present, which
might not with advantage have been then pretended? What can be said for doing
this by humane Power, which might not have been said more plausibly for doing
it by divine Power? Will you say the Scribes and Pharisees did ignorantly
oppose the Gospel, and therefore by our Lord's Example are to be forgiven, that
they were objects of God's mercy, because they did it ignorantly in unbelief, 1 Timothy 1. 13.
as well as Paul? No doubt their Ignorance was as gross as that which they can
reasonably object to us whom they call Heretics, and therefore the Example of
our Savior's Prayer, Father forgive them, they know not what they do, and of
God's Mercy to Saint Paul, more strongly plead for Mercy toward them, whom
without Mercy they destroy. Were not those blind Guides, who led their
Followers into the pit, Matthew. 15. 14.
who made their Proselytes ten times more the children of Satan than
themselves, who neither would enter into the Kingdom of God, nor suffer other
men to enter, Matthew. 23. 13, 15.
as fit objects of our Lord's Displeasure, as was Huss, and Jerome of Prague,
Archbishop Cranmer, Latimer and Ridley, of the displeasure of the Church of
Rome? Was not the Execution of Death from Heaven upon these violent Opposers of
the Truth as likely to convert the Jew or terrify the Enemies of the Gospel,
as is the burning, massacring, tormenting of the Heretics, to fright them from
their Heresies? Might not our Lord as well have called for his twelve legions
of Angels to destroy the Scribes and Pharisees, as his pretended Vicar gathers
his Crusado's to destroy the Heretics? And might he not more plausibly have
pleaded Zeal for God and for Religion in his Case, than does the Church of Rome
in hers? But, notwithstanding all these Provocations and specious Pretensions,
our Lord, Dr. Tillotson, ibid. p. 13.
intending that his Religion should be propagated in humane ways, and that men
should be drawn to the Profession of it by the Bands of Love, and the Cords of
a Man, by the gentle and peaceable Methods of Reason and Persuasion, gave no
example of a furious Zeal and religious Rage against those who despised his
Doctrine. It seemed good to the Author of this Institution to compel no man to
it by temporal Punishments, when he went about making Proselytes he offered
violence to no man, only said, if any man will be my disciple, if any man will
come after me. And when his disciples were leaving him, he does not set up an
Inquisition to torture and punish them for their Defection from the Faith,
only says, Will ye also go away? John 6. 67.


. III. But to proceed to the Example and Deportment of those Apostles by whom
the Gospel was first propagated, let us consider,

1. That in their days the Heretics were as pernicious, the false Prophets
and Deceivers as dangerous, and so as fit to be cut off, as were the Heretics,
who have, and do thus suffer in the Church of Rome. Our Savior did foretell
that Matt. 24. 11, 24.
they would deceive many, and, if it were possible, even the elect. St. Paul,
Act. 20. 29, 30.
That grievous Wolves should enter into the Church, not sparing the flock; That
men should speak perverse things, to draw away disciples after them; 1 Timothy 4.
1.
That in the latter times some should depart from the Faith, giving heed to
seducing Spirits and doctrines of Demons, speaking lies in Hypocrisy, etc. St.
Peter, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2.
That there should be false Prophets among them who should bring in damnable
Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, by reason of whom the way of
truth should be evil spoken of: They declared concerning these Deceivers, Romans
16. 18.
That by good words and fair speeches they deceived the hearts of the simple;
Gal. 3. 1.
That they bewitched them, that they should not obey the truth; 5. 2, 4.
That they made them fall from grace, and rendered Christ unprofitable to them; 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18.
That their Doctrine did spread as a Gangreen, and overthrow the Faith of some;
Tit. 1. 11.
That they subverted whole houses, teaching things which they ought not,
particularly, Rev. 2. 20.
that Jezabel, calling her self a Prophetess, did pervert Christ's servants, and
teach them to commit whoredom, and eat things offered to Idols; That by means
of these false Teachers, and Corrupters of the Truth, some had already swerved
from the Faith, turning aside to vain janglings, 1 Timothy 1. 19.
some had made shipwreck of the Faith, and that they were in doubt of others; 2
Cor. 11. 2, 3.
that they were jealous over them with a godly jealousy, and feared lest as
the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so their minds should be
corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. So that you see, they had
great reason to do themselves, and to advise the Rulers of the Church, civil
and sacred, in future Generations, to do all that was proper and fitting to be
done by Christians for the rooting up of these tares, and the delivering the
Flock of Christ from their pernicious Delusions.

2. Consider that the Disciples of our Lord could have confounded all these
Heretics, false Prophets and Deceivers, and by a word have sentenced them to
death, as Peter in the case of Ananias and Saphira did, had they conceived this
method of proceeding suitable to the Mind of God, the Rules of their Profession,
and tending to the Edification of the Church. For they were furnished with a
Power of working Miracles, the 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5, 6.
weapons of their warfare were not carnal, but mighty through God, to the
pulling down of strong holds, and casting down every thing that exalted it self
against the knowledge of Christ, and to revenge all disobedience against him:
they had a Power given them by Christ, 2 Cor. 13. 10.
(...), to use severity, provided that it were for edification, and not for
destruction, 1 Cor. 5. 13.
(...), to take away, or, to cut off the wicked person from among them by the
Spiritual Sword; The Kingdom of God preached by them was not in word only, but
in power, they had 1 Cor. 4. 21.
a Rod for the Chastisement of those refractory persons on whom the Spirit of
Meekness could not prevail, and they could Chap. 5. 5.
give men up to Satan for the destruction of the flesh; but yet we never find
that they did use their Power to inflict Death upon the Heretic or the
Deceiver, or that the Power of the Lord, which did attend upon their Censures,
ever did thus operate. But on the contrary, the Fathers note that the (...).
Oecum. in 1 Cor. 5. 5. p. 408. Gr. Theodoret. in locum. (...). Chrysostom in
locum.
Apostle sets bounds to the chastisement of the Devil, permitting him to
afflict the body of the wicked person, or the Heretic, with a disease, or
boil, but not to take away his life, as in the case of Job.

3. Consider, that these Apostles, knowing by the Spirit, that the Christian
Faith would certainly prevail, and after a few Centuries would have the Favor
and the Protection of the Civil Magistrate, could, had they thought it meet,
have left, in those most Sacred Books which they composed to be a Rule of Faith
and Manners to all future Ages, some Directions to the Civil Magistrate for
dealing with the Heretic agreeable to the Decrees of Roman Councils; for it is
not to be supposed that they either wanted Zeal for that Religion which they
promoted with the loss of Life, and all things in this World desirable, to
prompt them so to do, or that they wanted Wisdom to know what was the best
and truest method of promoting or of preserving that Religion which they had
preached throughout the World.

4. Consider that the Apostles showed their Care and Zeal for preservation of
the Church from the pernicious Doctrines and Delusions of these false Teachers,
by all other ways which they judged proper for this End. For,

1. We find in their Epistles frequent Exhortations to the Christian to 1 Cor.
16. 13.
stand fast in the Faith, to Hebr. 10. 23.
hold fast the Profession of the Faith without wavering, to 2 Timothy 1. 13.
hold fast the form of sound words, to Tit. 1. 9.
hold fast the faithful word as they had been taught, against all Opposers, to
1 Pet. 5. 9.
be steadfast in the Faith, to Jud. 3, 20, 4.
contend earnestly for the Faith, and to build up our selves in our most holy
Faith, and that because of certain men crept in among them who turned the grace
of God into lasciviousness; to Act. 14. 22.
continue in the Faith, and in John 8. 3.
the Word of Christ, and 2 Timothy 3. 14.
in the things which they had learnt.

2. They gave all Christians notice of these False Teachers and Deceivers that
they might avoid them, and beware of their Delusions. Beware of false Prophets
says our Savior, by their works you shall know them, Matthew. 7. 15. See to it,
says he, I have told you of them, Mark 13. 23. Mark them, and avoid them,
says Saint Paul, who cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine
which you have received, Romans c. 16. v. 17. Beware of dogs, beware of evil
workers, beware of the concision, says the same Apostle, Phil. 3. 1. turn away
from them, 2 Timothy 3. 5. beware lest, being led away by the error of the wicked,
you fall from your own stedfastness, says Peter, 2 Pet. 3. 17.

3. They frequently exhort the Rulers of the Church to take heed to their
Flocks, and to be watchful to preserve them from these Wolves, Act. 20. 28,
31. to stop their mouths, and to rebuke them sharply, Tit. 1. 11, 13. to
reject, and to turn from them, 2 Timothy 3. 5. Tit. 3. v. 10. And our Lord, Christ
himself, rebukes the Church of Thyatira, for suffering Jezabel to seduce his
Servants.

4. They sometimes did deliver up to Satan those who made shipwreck of the
Faith, and who had overthrown the Faith of some, as in the case of Hymeneus and
Alexander, 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20. they declare that they were ready to revenge the
disobedience of the Seducers of the Church of Corinth, 2 Cor. 10. 6. they
wished them cut off who troubled the Church, as in the case of the Galathians,
Gal. 5. 12. And that God would reward them according to their works, as in the
case of Alexander, 2 Timothy 4. 14. And yet, though in another Instance, and for
another Crime, they once inflicted Death upon two Members of the Church, yet
did they never do it in the case of Heresy, but on the contrary, they
declared their Power was given not for Destruction, but Edification. 2 Cor. 13.
10.


5. Consider that their miraculous proceedings against Heretics, had they
thought fit to act after the manner of the Church of Rome, must have been more
convincing to the remaining Heretics, and more effectual to preserve others
from the infection of their Heresy, and for all other pious ends, than humane
Punishments can be supposed to be, they being Demonstrations from Heaven of the
Falsehood of the Doctrine of the Heretic, and the Displeasure of the Lord
against it, they being done, (...), by the power of the Lord, confirming the
Sentence of these Church Governors, must be a Confirmation of the Justice of
that Sentence. Whereas the Proceedings of the Church of Rome can have no such
effects, but rather tend to harden persons in their supposed Heresy, and show
that they of Rome distrust the merits of that Cause which cannot be maintained
by any other Arguments but Fire and Faggot, Swords and Inquisitions. That
therefore the Apostles declined this method of proceeding, that they gave no
Instructions to future Ages to deal with Heretics in such a bloody manner, is
a convincing Demonstration, that they conceived such Actions were repugnant to
Christianity, and to that Doctrine which they preached. And truly, Dr.
Tillotson, p. 11.
if Christianity can be contradicted, it is most palpably and grossly done by
those men, who, instead of showing all meekness toward all men, though foolish
and deceived, do by inhumane Cruelties and Persecutions, by barbarous
Inquisitions, bloody Massacres, endeavor to extirpate all that differ from
them; who, instead of instructing in meekness those that oppose themselves, if
God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledgment of the truth,
convert them with Fire and Faggot, and render it impossible for them to repent;
who, instead of chastising the Flesh, that the Soul may be saved in the day of
the Lord Jesus, and laboring to recover them out of the snare of Satan, give
them up quick into his hands, their Bishops being not ashamed to say at the
Condemnation of an Heretic, Jam committimus Animam tuam Diabolo, We commit thy
Soul to the Devil.

. IV. Besides these, other Reasons have been used by our Divines against this
kind of Persecution, and putting Heretics to death, which, though they seem
not to me so convincing as the former Arguments, yet were they used by the
Ancient Fathers to that very purpose for which they were produced by our
Writers, and so deserve to be insisted on, at least to show the full agreement
of the Ancient Fathers with us in this Point. And,

Matt. 13. 29, 30. Dr. Taylor's Liberty of Prophecy, Chap. 13.
1. They plead our Lord's Command, who says to his Servants, Gather not the
Tares by themselves, but let them both grow together till the harvest; Where
the Enquiry will be, First, What is meant by Tares, or, The children of the
Wicked one; Whether Persons wicked only in Re practica, or vicious in their
Lives, or men criminal or faulty in Re intellectuali, perverse in Judgment, and
reprobate concerning the Faith, for one or other of these two must be meant,
but the former cannot be meant, because it would destroy all Bodies politic,
which cannot consist without Laws, nor Laws without Compulsion and the Power of
the Sword; so that if Criminals were to be let alone till the day of Judgment,
Bodies politic must stand or fall at the pleasure of Wicked men, and nothing
Good could be protected, not Innocence it self; nothing could be secure but
Violence and Tyranny; it follows then that the Persons whom Christians are
forbidden here to root out of the field, must be men faulty in another kind, in
which the Gospel had not in other places clearly established a compulsory Power
of this Nature: since therefore in actions practically criminal, a Power of the
Sword is permitted here, where it is denied, the Crime must be not in things
practically criminal, but intellectual, that is, in Matters properly heretical.
And this Interpretation is confirmed by the Reason of the Prohibition, which is
this, lest we also pull up the Wheat with them, that is, lest we by our mistake
destroy those Persons, who, notwithstanding their Ignorance or Error in some
unnecessary Points of Faith, may be good men; we being not so able to discern
whether they err through obstinacy or perverseness, or only through ignorance
or weakness, as we are to discern the outward actions of the vicious Person,
which deserve to be punished. Secondly, For Explication of this Precept, it
will be necessary to enquire, what it is to gather up these Tares; now Christ
himself informs us, that it is the same to gather up, and to root the Tares out
of the field, in which the Enemy had sown them, that field is, says our
Savior, the world, and therefore to root these Tares out of this field, is to
destroy them out of the World. The Prohibition therefore lies against the use
of the temporal Sword in cutting off these Persons. Accordingly Saint
Chrysostom concludes, (...), etc. To. 2. page 297.
that Heretics are not to be cut off. Theophylact upon the place declares,
(...). Theophyl. in locum.
that God permits not Heretics to be consumed by Wars, lest the Just should
perish with them. The Observation of St. Austin on the place is this, Dicam,
inquit, Messoribus, unde intelligitur colligendorum zizaniorum ad comburendum
alia esse ministeria, nec quenquam Ecclesiae filium, N. B. debere arbitrari ad
se hoc officium pertinere. -- potest ei suboriri voluntas, ut tales homines de
rebus humanis auferat, si aliquam temporis habeat facultatem, sed utrum facere
debeat, justiciam Dei consulit, utrum hoc ei praecipiat vel permittat, and hoc
officium esse hominum velit, hinc est quod Servi dicunt, Vis imus and
colligimus ea? quibus Veritas ipsa respondet -- non esse tales auferendos de
hac vita ne cum malos conatur interficere, bonos interficiat, quod forte futuri
sunt, -- sed tunc opportune fieri cum jam in fine non restat vel tempus
commutandae vitae, vel perficiendi ad veritatem, etc. an forte ideo simul
eradicatur triticum cum auferuntur zizania, quia multi primo zizania sunt, and
postea triticum fiunt, qui nisi patienter, cum mali sunt, tolerentur ad
laudabilem permutationem non perveniant, itaque si evulsi fuerint, simul
eradicabitur and triticum, quod futuri essent, si eis parceretur. August.
Quaest. ex Matthew. lib. un. cap. 12. To. 4. p. 366, 367.
that our Lord, speaking to his Servants, says not, in the time of the harvest
I will say to you; but I will say to the Reapers, whence, says he, we may
learn that the work of gathering the Tares to burn, belongs to other Ministers,
and that no Son of the Church ought to conceive that Office does belong to him.
When the Servant sees so many Falsities of Heresies, he may have a desire,
says he, that such men should be taken out of the World, but then he consults
the Justice of God, whether he commands, or permits, or would have this to be
the Duty of men. Hence the Servants say, Will thou that we gather up the Tares?
To whom he, who is Truth it self answers, That such men are not to be taken out
of the World, lest whilst men endeavor to kill the bad, they also kill the
good, or such as perhaps would be such. But this will commodiously be done
when, at the end of the World, there remains no more time for Change of Life:
And perhaps, says he, therefore the Wheat is rooted up with them when the
Tares are taken away, because many are first Tares, and afterward Wheat, who,
unless they are patiently born with when they are bad, come not to a laudable
change; and therefore, if they be plucked up, the Wheat will be plucked up with
them, because they would have been such had they been spared. Euthymius, on the
place says, that by the Harvest our Lord understands the end of the World, and
therefore commands his Servants that they should suffer the Heretics to live
with them, non ablatos quidem, sed separatos, though separated from them, it
being likely that before that time many of them may be converted.

2. It is urged by our Divines that when our Savior went about to make
Proselytes, he offered violence to no man, only he said, if any man will be my
Disciple, if any man will come to me; and that when his Disciples were leaving
him he did not set up an Inquisition to torture them for their defection from
the Faith, only said, Will ye also go away? And the same Argument is twice
produced by Saint Athanasius against the persecuting Arians, (...). Athan.
Epist. ad solit. vitam agentes, p. 830, 831. And p. 855. (...);
The Devil, says he, because he has no truth in him, invades the doors of
them who receive him with an ax and hatchet, our Savior on the contrary is
mild, and says, If any man will follow me, and be my Disciple; and when he
comes to any one, he does not offer violence, but only knocks, and says,
Open, my Sister, my Spouse. And if they open, he enters, if not, he departs,
for Truth is not to be preached with the Sword and military preparation, but by
counsel and persuasion. And again, Our Lord himself not offering violence, but
giving place to humane choice, said to all, If any man will come after me; and
to his Disciples, Will ye also go away? This Heresy therefore, which is
perfectly repugnant to Piety, What should it do, but that which is contrary to
our Savior?

. V. The Reasons against this Deportment toward Heretics are also very
cogent, but they are so incomparably managed by Dr. Tailor, in his immortal
Book styled The Liberty of Prophesying, that it is not easy to add any thing of
moment to them. I therefore only shall take notice of one passage in him,
viz.. 13. Numb. 12.
That it is one of the Glorys of Christianity, that it came in upon the World
with no other Force but that of Reason and Demonstration of the Spirit; that
toward the Persons of men 'twas always full of Meekness, Charity, Compliance,
Toleration, Condescension and Forbearance, restoring persons overtaken with an
Error in the Spirit of Meekness: Now things are best preserved by that which
gives them their first Being, and which agrees best with their Temper and
Constitution, and it would be a mighty Disparagement to so glorious an
Institution, that in its Principle it should be merciful and humane, and in
the Propagation of it so inhumane, and it would be improbable and unreasonable,
that the Sword should be used in the persuasion of one Proposition, and yet in
the persuasion of the whole nothing like it: To do so may serve the end of a
temporal Prince, but never promote the Honor of Christ's Kingdom.

. VI. Moreover, This bloody, persecuting Temper, as it is contrary to
Scripture, so also does it flattly contradict the Principles and Practice of
the Ancient Church, and of the Primitive Professors of the Christian Faith; it
is repugnant to many Principles which then obtained amongst Christians. For
instance;

1. It was a Principle which generally obtained among Christians till the days
of Constantine, and afterward continued to be maintained by many Fathers of
the Church, viz. That men were to be left to their Freedom in Matters of
Religion, and not to be compelled by outward Punishments to the Profession of
it. Humani juris, and naturalis potestatis est, unicuique quod putaverit
colere, -- sed nec Religionis est cogere Religionem, quae sponte suscipi
debeat, non vi. Tertull. ad Scap. cap. 2. Videte, ne hoc ad irreligiositatis
elogium concurrat, adimere libertatem Religionis, and inter dicere optionem
Divinitatis, ut non liceat mihi colere quem velim, sed cogar colere quem nolim.
Apol. cap. 24.
This, says Tertullian, is the natural Right of all men, to worship what they
think fit. It is no business of Religion to compel men to Religion; for that,
says he, must be embraced willingly, and not of Force. Consider, says the
same Tertullian, whether this do not add to your Irreligion, to forbid the
Freedom of Religion, and interdict the choice of a Deity, that I may not
worship whom I will, but must be compelled to worship whom I would not.

Quis imponat mihi necessitatem vel colendi quod nolim, vel quod velim non
colendi? Quid jam nobis ulterius relinquitur, si etiam hoc, quod voluntate
fieri oportet, libido extorqueat aliena? Lactant. l. 4. cap. 13. etc. 19. Non
est opus vi and injuria; quia Religio cogi non potest, verbis potius quam
verberibus res agenda est, ut sit voluntas -- Quid ergo saeviunt? ut stultitiam
suam dum minuere volunt, augeant? Long diversa sunt carnificina and pietas,
nec potest aut veritas cum vi, aut justitia cum crudelitate conjungi. Nihil est
enim tam voluntarium quam Religio, in qua si animus Sacrificantis aversus est,
jam sublata, jam nulla est.
Who may impose upon me, says Lactantius, a necessity either of worshipping
what I would not, or of not worshipping what I would? What have we farther
left, if another Lust may extort from us that which ought to be done freely?
There is here no need of Force or Injury, says he, for Religion cannot be
compelled, you must use Words, not Stripes to make men willing. Why therefore
are men cruel? that whilst they do endeavor to diminish, they may augment their
Folly? Torments and Piety extremely differ, nor can Religion consist with
Force, or Justice be conjoined with Cruelty. For nothing is so voluntary as
Religion, in which, if the mind of the Sacrificer be averse, the Religion is
lost, and is none at all.

The Epistles of the Arians, says Hilary, Quid aliud his literis quam
libertatem fidei, and contagionem Ariani nominis deprecantur, orantque vincula,
carceres, tribunalia, etc. Deus cognitionem sui docuit, potius quam exegit, and
operationum exlestium admiratione praeceptis suis concilians auctoritatem,
coactam consitendi se aspernatus est voluntatem, si ad fidem veram istiusmodi
vis adhiberetur, Episcopalis doctrina obviam pergeret, diceretque, Deus
universitatis est, obsequio non eget necessario, non requirit coactam
confessionem, non fallendus est, sed promerendus, simplicitate quaerendus est,
confessione discendus est, charitate amandus est, timore venerandus est,
voluntatis probitate retinendus est: at vero quid istud quod Sacerdotes timere
Deum vinculis coguntur, poenis jubentur? Sacerdotes carceribus continentur,
etc. Hilar. lib. ad Constantium Augustum, page 338, 339, 340.

Ideirco laboratis and salutaribus consiliis Rempublicam regitis, -- ut omnes
quibus imperatis duleissima liberate potiantur. Non alia ratione quae turbata
sunt componi, quae divulsa sunt coerceri possunt, -- permittat lenitas tua
populis ut quos voluerint, quos putaverint, quos elegerint, audiant docentes.
Page 338.


what do they do, but deprecate the liberty of Faith, and beg for Bonds, and
Prisons, and Tribunals, and all that is pernicious; whereas God rather taught,
than exacted the Knowledge of himself, and ascertaining the Authority of his
Commands by Works of Power, despised all compelled confession of himself. If
such Force should be used to compel your Faith, (says he to the Arians) the
Episcopal Doctrine would oppose it, and would say, God is the God of the whole
World, he needs no compelled obedience, nor requires any such confession of
him; he is not to be deceived, but well-pleased. God is to be sought with
Simplicity, learnt by Confession, loved by Charity, worshipped by Fear,
retained by Probity of Will; whence is it (therefore) that Priests are
compelled by Bands, and commanded by Punishments to fear God? that they are
imprisoned, etc. Therefore do ye labor and rule the Commonwealth with salutary
Councils, says he to the Emperor, that all under your Government may enjoy the
sweetest Liberty, there is no other way to compose our Troubles; let (then) thy
Lenity permit the People to hear them teaching whom they would hear, whom they
think meet, whom they choose.

2. They also thought it an indecent and unworthy thing to call in the Secular
Arm for the assistence of Religion, and for the Punishment of Errors in
Religion, or Assronts offered by them to the Deity. Saint Hilary, in his Book
against Auxentius of Milan, represents them who did this, not as the Bishops of
Christ, but the Servants of Antichrist. And Ac primum misereri licet nostrae
aetatis laborem, and praesentium temporum stultas opiniones congeiniscere,
quibus patrocinari Deo humana creduntur, and ad tuendam Christi Ecclesiam
ambitione seculari laboratur. Oro vos, Episcopi, qui hoc vos esse creditis,
quibusnam suffragiis ad praedicandum Evangelium Apostoli usi sunt? quibus
adjuti Potestatibus Christum praedicaverunt, gentesque fere omnes ex Idolis ad
Deum transtulerunt? Anne aliquam sibi assu^ebant e Palatio dignitatem, hymnum
Deo in carcere, inter catenas and flagella cantantes? Edictisque Regis Paulus
Christo Ecclesiam congregabat? Nerone se, credo, aut Vespasiano,
patrocinantibus, tuebatur, quorum in nos odiis confessio divinae praedicationis
effloruit? At nunc, proh dolor! divinam fidem suffragia terrena commendant,
inopsque virtutis suae Christus, dum ambitio nomini suo conciliatur, arguitur.
Terret exiliis and carceribus Ecclesia, credique sibi cogit, quae exiliis and
carceribus credita est, pendet a dignatione Communicantium, quae persequentium
est consecrata terrore, fugat Sacerdotes, quae sugatis est Sacerdotibus
propagata, diligi sese gloriatur a mundo, quae Christi esse non potuit, nisi
eam mundus odisset. Idem Epist. ad Auxentium, p. 347.
first, says he, we ought to pity the Labor of our Age, and groan at the fond
Opinions of the present Times, in which men think to defend God by men, and
labor to preserve the Church of Christ by Secular Ambition. I beseech you
Bishops, who conceive your selves to be so, What Suffrages did the Apostles use
in Preaching of the Gospel? and by what Powers were they assisted when,
Preaching Christ, they converted the heathen World from Idols to God? Did they
assume to themselves any Authority from the Palace, when they sang Hymns to God
in Prison? Did Paul gather a Church to Christ by the King's Edict, who was
himself a Spectacle in the Theater? Did he defend himself by the Protection of
Nero, or Vespasian, by whose Hatred against us the Preaching of our Faith then
flourished? But now, which is to be lamented, earthly Suffrages commend divine
Faith, and Christ is represented as destitute of his Power, whilst the Favor of
men is purchased in his Cause. The Church terrifies by Exiles and Prisons; she
compells Belief, which was believed in Exiles and Prisons; she which was
consecrated by the Terror of Persecutors, depends upon the Favor of them who
communicate with her; she puts to flight Priests, which was propagated by
Priests put to flight; she glories that she is beloved by the World, which
could not be the Church of Christ, if the World did not hate her.

The Plea of Heathens for their Cruelty against the Christians was to this
effect, That they did punish Christians, to revenge the injuries done by their
Faith and Doctrines to their Gods. This, say the Ancient Fathers, is a
ridiculous and absurd method of proceeding, and you ought rather to leave the
Sacrilegious and Impious Transgressors of their Laws to the Vengeance of your
gods. For, Si quid diis tuis numinis and potestatis est, ipsi in ultionem suam
surgant, ipsi se sua majestate defendant; aut quid praestare colentibus
possunt, qui se de non colentibus vindicare non possunt? Cyprian. ad Demetr..
12.
if your deities have any power, says St. Cyprian, let them rise up, and
vindicate themselves, and by their Majesty defend themselves; for what can they
do for those that worship them, who cannot vindicate themselves from those who
do not worship them? Ergo humana patrocinia dii quaerunt? and nisi vestra
fuerint assertione protecti, idone^ non sunt ipsi qui propulsare, defendere
suas valiant contumelias. Arnob. l. 1. p. 11.
Is it so, says Arnobius, that the gods desire the Protection of men? Are they
not able without your asserting of their Cause to defend themselves, and to
repel the Calumnies of us Christians? Cum puniunt deprehensos in Sacrilegio,
ipsi de deorum suorum potestate diffidunt, cur enim illis non relinquunt
ulciscendi sui locum, si eos posse aliquid arbitrantur? Lact. lib. 2. cap. 4.
When the Heathens punish the Sacrilegious, says Lactantius, they distrust the
power of their gods, for if they think they can do any thing, why do they not
leave them to execute their own Vengeance on such persons?

3. Another Principle, though not so generally embraced, yet taught by many
Eminent Assertors of the Christian Faith, was fundamentally repugnant to this
cruel Butchery, viz. That their Religion did not permit them to kill, or, even
to behold the shedding humane blood. It was objected to them by the Heathens,
that in their Meetings they murdered little Children, and did feast upon their
Flesh and Blood. This, say the Fathers, is a thing impossible, because the
Christian Faith does not allow of Murder, or Shedding humane Blood. Nobis
Homicidium nec videre fas, nec audire. Minuc. p. 34.
We are so far from Killing men, says Minucius, that it is not lawful for us
to behold Manslaughter. (...). Athenag. Legate. p. 38.
Can any man, says Athenagoras, object to them that they kill men, who, as
they know, dare not see a person justly slain? It is in no case lawful to
destroy men, says Ergo si Homicidium facere nullo modo licet, nec interesse
omnino conceditur, ne Conscientiam persundat ullus cruor. Lact. l. 6. c. 20. In
hoc Dei praecepto nullam prorsus exceptionem fieri oportet, quin occidere
hominem sit semper nefas, quem Deus sanctum animal esse voluit, Ibid. Neque
accusare quenquam crimine capitali justo licebit, quia nihil distat utrumne
ferro, an verbo potius, occisio ipsa prohibetur. Ibid.
Lactantius, or to be present where they suffer, lest the Blood stain the
Conscience; there is no exception from this Precept, for it is always a
Wickedness to kill that man whom God has made Sacred. A Just man therefore
will accuse no man of a Capital Crime, it being all one to kill men with our
Words or with our Swords: The Servant of the Lord, says Fidelis neque judicet
de capite alicujus, vel pudore, neque damnet, neque praedamnet; neminem
vinciat, neminem recludat aut torqueat. Tertal. de Idololat. cap. 17, and 19.
Et praelio operabitur filius pacis, cui nec litigare conveniet? Et vincula, and
carcerem, and tormenta, and supplicia administrabit, nec suarum ultor
injuriarum? De Coron. cap. 11.
Tertullian, may not judge in Capital Causes, he may not condemn as a Judge or
a Lawmakers; he may bind, imprison, torture no man. Will he, who does not
revenge his own Injuries, inflict on others Bonds, Prisons, Torments,
Punishments? If Christian Religion, says (...). Orig. contra Celsum. l. 3. p.
115.
Origin, had received its Rise from Sedition, as Celsus says, surely their
Legislator would not have forbid them to kill men, teaching, that action was
unjust which his Disciples did attempt upon the most wicked person, Mat. 26.
52. for he conceived it unbecoming his Divine Laws, any way to yield to the
Death of a man, nor would the Christians, had they had their beginning from
Sedition, admitted such mild Laws as give them up to be slain like Sheep, and
will not suffer them to help themselves against their Persecutors, or to repel
Injuries.

Let then our Adversaries judge whether these Principles can be consistent with
the Doctrines of their general Councils, and with their Practice of burning and
destroying all whom they call Heretics, and binding Christian Magistrates to
do so? Whether these Fathers do not expressly teach, that their Proceedings
against Heretics are irreligious, inconsistent with Religion and Justice,
opposite to the Episcopal Doctrine, ridiculous, absurd, and matters of just
Lamentation? Whether they do not say, that their Severity in this kind is a
Conviction of their Folly, and that they, by promoting it, do act not like
Christ's Bishops, but the Servants of Antichrist? Whether they who thought that
men were to be left to their freedom in matters of Religion, and not to be
compelled by corporal Punishments to the Profession of it, would have approved
of the compulsory Decrees of Roman Councils? Whether they, who thought it
unworthy of the Christian to call the Secular Arm to their assistence, were of
their Religion, who by Oaths and Excommunications, and other grievous
Penalties, oblige the Magistrate to persecute? Whether they, who thought it
utterly unlawful to shed humane Blood, believed that Christianity allowed the
murdering of Heretics, or could approve those Sanguinary Laws which they have
executed throughout all Regions of the World, where their Religion has
prevailed, destroying many hundred thousand Souls only for keeping a Good
Conscience?

, VII. Moreover this method of Exterminating Heretics is condemned expressly by
the Holy Fathers, and represented as a Practice fit only for the Heathen and
the Heretic, but most unworthy of any Orthodox Professor of Christianity. We
may hate them that hate God, says the (...), etc. Pseudo-Ignat. Epist. ad
Philadelph. ed. Uss. p. 95.
Interpolator of Ignatius, but we must not beat or persecute them, as do the
Gentiles which know not God. We must separate from them, and admonish them, if
happily they will hear and rest satisfied, for our God is a Lover of mankind, and
would have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the Truth; on
which account he causes his Sun to rise upon the evil and the good, and rains
upon the just and the unjust; and, being desirous that we should imitate this
his Goodness, he says, Be you perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect: This
is there spoken concerning Schismatics, False Preachers, Men of False
Opinions, Foxes, and Corruptors of the Vine, and therefore certainly of
Heretics. Defendenda est Religio, non occidendo, sed moriendo, non saevitia,
sed patientia, -- illa enim malorum sunt, haec bonorum, and necesse est bonum
in Religione versari, non malum, nam si sanguine, si tormentis, si malo
Religionem defendere velis, jam non defendetur illa, sed polluetur, atque
violabitur. Lact. l. 5. c. 20.
Lactantius says thus, Religion is to be defended, not by killing, but by
dying for it, not by Cruelty, but by Patience; so good men do defend it: But
wicked men, by Cruelty and Murder. If you go about, says he, to defend
Religion by Blood and Torments, you do not defend, but pollute and violate it.

The Holy Synod of Alexandria, consisting of the Bishops of Egypt, Thebes,
Lybia, and Pentapolis, laments the Practice of the Arians, who had directed an
accusatory Epistle to the Emperors, which stirred them up to inflict Death, or
at the least Banishment, upon Athanasius, (...). Apud Athanas. Apol. ad
Imperat. Constant. p. 723.
this, say they, is just matter of lamentation, these being works so averse
from Bishops, who should teach others the way of Justice, that even the meanest
Christians, and scarcely Heathens, would be guilty of them; and this the
Conscience of you Catholic Bishops throughout the World, to whom we write,
very well knows.

Athanasius, having declared how the Arians spoke thus to Constantius the
Emperor, (...). Athanas. Epist. ad Solitariam vitam agentes, p. 815. (...),
etc. (...), page 830, 831.
Thou see how all men desert us, few remaining, therefore begin a
Persecution, that we be not deserted by those few: And speaking of the
Influence this Persecution had upon some fearful Bishops, says thus, If it
were unbecoming Bishops to change their Opinion out of Fear, yet was it far
worse for them to compel men unwillingly to change their Judgments, and an
evidence that they distrusted their own Cause; this, says he, is to act like
the Devil, and unlike our Savior, who never used Force, but Persuasion only,
for the Truth must not be taught by Swords, and Weapons, and Soldiers; but by
Persuasion and Consultation: Now what Persuasion is there where there is Fear
of the King? What Consultation, where he that contradicts must suffer
Banishment or Death? -- by this Compulsion it appears, says he, that their
Wisdom is not according to God, but merely humane:

As for other (...), etc. (...). Athanas. ibid. p. 855.
Heresies, says he, they being convinced by Demonstrations, are silent, and
do nothing but blush at their Conviction; but this new and execrable Heresy
of the Arians, when it is overthrown by Reason, when by Truth it is put to
shame, it endeavors to draw them by Force, Stripes and Imprisonments, whom it
could not persuade by words, and so does manifest it self to be nothing less
than pious, for it is the Property of true Religion not to compel, but to
persuade, as we have said already; -- for our Lord himself, not offering
Violence, but giving place to humane Choice, said to all, If any man will come
after me; and to his Disciples, Will ye also go away? This Heresy therefore
which is perfectly repugnant to Piety, what should it do but that which is
contrary to our Savior? There are some things for which we must fight
valiantly, says (...). Orat. tertia pro Pace, p. 220, 221.
Gregory Nazianzen, viz. with Reasons, not with Arms, for to lift up our hands
against them (that is, against Heretics) is wholly contrary to our Profession,
and must be left to them who hate us.

Saint Chrysostom, in his Exposition of the Parable of the Tares, speaks thus,
(...). In locum.
Wherefore does Christ introduce his Servants saying, Will thou that we pluck
up the Tares? his Answer is, That he might tell them that it was unlawful to
cut them off. They permit not themselves, says he, to do this, but they
expect the Sentence of their Lord, saying, Will thou have it done? Now he
forbids them, saying, lest you root up the Wheat together with them; and this
he said forbidding Wars and Blood and Slaughters to be made; for it is not
lawful to cut off the Heretic, though he is like to bring an irreconcilable
War upon Earth. Again, by these words, Lest you root up, he either says, that
if you go about to wage War, and stay the Heretic, it will necessarily happen
that you will destroy many of the Saints with them, or that it may so happen
that many of the Tares may be converted, and become Wheat; if therefore you
prevent their being so, by rooting them up, you prejudice the future Wheat, by
taking them away, who may be changed and become better. Christ here forbids us
not to stop their mouths, restrain and hinder their Boldness of Discourse,
dissolve their Synods and Confederacies, but he forbids us to Kill, and Cut
them off. In his Homily against Anathema's he permits us to (...). Tom. 6. p.
441. (...) p. 443. (...), page 441. lin. 31. etc.
anathematize the Heresy, but commands ut by all means to spare the Heretic;
if, says he, the man remain contentious, and will not be reclaimed, do thou
only testify against him with Long-suffering and Goodness, that thy Judge
require not his Life at thy hand, hate him not, persecute him not.

Saint Austin vehemently condemns the inflicting Capital Punishments upon
Heretics, and says that all good Christians did agree with him in that
matter. For when Cresconius had objected to the Orthodox, that they were
instrumental to procure the Death of three Donatists, St. Austin answers, that
Nullis tamen bonis in Ecclesia Catholica hoc placet, si usque ad mortem in
quenquam, licet haereticum, saeviatur, neque vero si long a morte cujuslibet
molestiis libido ulciscendi malum pro malo retribuat, approbamus; multo amplius
detestantes, si ex hac occasion, velut pro unitate conandi, concupita quis
auferat aliena -- haec omnia displicent nobis, and ea prohibent, and cohibent
quantum possunt, quantum autem non possunt, serunt: and, sicut dixi, pro pace
laudabiliter tolerant, non ea laudabilia, sed damnabilia judicantes. August.
contra Crescon. Grammat. l. 3. cap. 50.
No good man in the Catholic Church allowed the punishing of Heretics with
Death, and if the Lust of Revenge in any person does render evil for evil, we
do not approve of them, though their Punishments be much less than Death; much
more do we detest the robbing any of their private Goods, or taking away what
belongs to them, though this be done for the procuring Unity: all these things
displease good men, they forbid, they hinder them as much as they can, judging
them not laudable, but damnable.In his Book De fide and operibus he complains,
that, Quidam intuentes praecepta Severitatis quibus admonemur corripere
inquietos, ut Ethnicum habere Ecclesiae Contemptorem, a compage corporis
membrum quod scandalizat ave^lere, it a perturbant Ecclesiae pacem ut conentur
ante tempus seperare zizania, atque hoc errore caecati, ipsi potius a Christi
unitate seperentur. August. De fide and operibus, cap. 4.
some considering the Precepts of Severity by which we are commanded to correct
the unquiet, to look upon the Contemner of the Church as an Heathen, to
separate the Scandalizing Member from the Body, do so disturb the Church's
Peace, that they endeavor, before the time, to pluck up the Tares, and, being
blinded with this Error, are rather separated themselves from the Unity of
Christ. Besides these Passages, he has Four several Epistles writ upon this
very Subject, viz. the 127th to Donatus, Proconsul of Africa; the 158th, 159th,
to Marcellinus the Tribune; the 160th to Apringius; in which we may observe,

1. The thing which he most earnestly requests, viz. Vos rogamus ne occidantur.
Sic eorum peccata compesce, ut sint quos poeniteat peccasse, Ep. 127. Poena
sane illorum, quamvis de tantis sceleribus confessorum, Rogo te, ut praeter
supplicium mortis sit, Ep. 158. Tu ab eorum sanguine, etiam propter Christum,
juridicum gladium cohibe, Epist. 160.
that the Heretics may not be killed, that they may be so corrected as not to
be cut off, Ep. 127. that they may not be punished with Death, Ep. 158. that
the Sword of Justice might not shed their Blood, Ep. 160.

2. Observe the Importunity with which he urges his Request, desiring,
admonishing, interceding, Ep. 160. Yea, Quod te per Jesum Christum, ne facias,
obsecramus, Ep. 127. Obtestor fidem tuam quam habes in Christo, per ipsius
Domini Christi misericordiam, ut hoc nec facias, nec fieri omnino permittas,
Epist. 159. Per misericordiam Christi obsecro, Ep. 160. Necessitate nobis
impacta and indicta, ut etiam occidi ab iis eligamus, quam eos occidendos
vestris judiciis ingeramus, Ep. 127.
beseeching them by the Name of Christ, not to inflict this Punishment upon
them, Epist. 127. and by the Mercies of Christ Jesus, that they would neither
do it, nor permit it to be done, Ep. 159, 160. declaring his great Solicitude
for the Prevention of it, Epist. 159. And professing that the Orthodox had
rather dye themselves, than that this Punishment should be inflicted on the
Heretic.

3. Observe the Persons for whom he thus pathetically intercedes, viz. the
Circumcellians, who cruelly had shed the Blood of Catholics, and had
confessed, before these very Magistrates, that they had killed Comperi plurimos
eorum de homicidio quod in Restitutum Catholicum Presbyterum commiserunt, and
de caede Innocentii alterius Catholici Presbyteri, atque de Oculo ejus effosso,
and de Digito praeciso fuisse confessos, Ep. 159, 160.
Restitutus, a Catholic Presbyter; put out the Eye, and cut off the Finger of
Innocentius, another Presbyter, Epist. 159, 160. they therefore had deserved
Death as Murderers, if not as Heretics.

4. Observe the Reasons which moved him and others to be thus importunate, and
with such Passion to entreat these Heretics might not be punished with Death,
viz. 1. Ne obliviscamur quid nobis praeceperit, pro cujus veritate ac nomine
patimur, qui diligimus inimicos nostros, and oramus pro eis, Epist. 127.
That they might not seem to be forgetful of Christ's Command, to love their
Enemies and to pray for them, Ep. 127. 2. Non suffecit Apostolo monere ut
mansuetudinem servaremus, sed ut eam etiam notam omnibus faceremus. Ep. 159.
Because this was that Mildness which became Catholics, and which the Rules of
Christianity required from them, commanding them not only to be gentle, but to
make known their lenity to all, Epist. 158, 159. 3. Time ergo nobiscum judicium
Dei Patris, and commend a mansuetudinem Matris, cum enim tu facis, Ecclesia
facit; propter quam facis, and cujus silius facis. Epist. 160.
Because the Person who inflicts, and the Church which permits these
Punishments to be inflicted, would both have cause to fear the Judgments of God
for this Cruelty. 4. Propter conscientiam nostram rogo. Ep. 158. Ubi ponimus
ipsam conscientiam ne malum pro malo, qui passi sunt, reddidisse videantur, Ep.
160.
Because it was against their Conscience to allow of such Deportment toward
these men, Ep. 158, 160. 5. Ut sint quos poeniteat peccasse. Ep. 127. Tu
inimicis Ecclesiae viventibus relaxa spacium poenitendi. Ep. 160.
Because they desired that these Heretics and Schismatics might not
inevitably perish, but might have time to repent of their Sins, Epist. 127. 6.
Si occidendos in his sceleribus homines putaveritis, deterrebitis nos ne per
operam nostram ad vestrum judicium aliquid tale perveniat. Ep. 127.
Because this harsh Proceeding would deter the Catholics from seeking the
Protection of the Magistrate against such men, Epist. 127. 7. Hoc Ecclesiae
Catholicae expedire contestor. Ep. 159. Nec tamen sic Ecclesiae causam
desererem. Ep. 160.
Because the contrary Mildness was expedient for the Catholic Church, and the
Cause which they pleaded was the Cause of the Church, which they could not
desert, Ep. 159, 160. Lastly, Ne passiones Servorum Dei Catholicorum, quae
prodesse debent ad exempla patientiae, inimicorum suorum sanguine foedarentur.
Ep. 158. Ep. 160.
Because the Passions of the Servants of God would be polluted and dishonored
by the Blood of their Enemies, Epist. 158, 160. And this he tells us was the
Judgment of a whole Council of his Brethren, this was obtained by the
Complaints of many other Bishops upon occasion of the Murder of Maximianus,
Bishop of Vaga, that the Cruelty of the Donatists should be punished, Non tamen
Supplicio capitali, propter servandam, etiam circa indignos, mansuetudinem
Christianam. Ep. 50. p. 220.
but not with Capital Punishment, that Christian Meekness might be preserved
even toward the unworthy.

If then the Fathers do assert that it is Heathenish to beat and persecute the
Heretic, that it is that which Heathens scarce would do. That only wicked
men defend Religion by Cruelty and Torments; and that this way of defending it
ought to be left to them. That they who do endeavor to defend it by Blood and
Torments, do pollute and violate it. That it is averse from Bishops and from
all orthodox and pious Christians to stir up Christian Emperors to inflict
Banishment and Death on a Religious account, and, contrary to our Profession,
to lift up the hand against the Heretic. That it was worse to compel men
unwillingly to change their Judgments, than for others out of fear to do it.
That this is Diabolical, unlike our Savior, and an evidence that they who do
so, distrust their own cause; and that their wisdom is not according to God,
but merely humane. That it is contrary to Religion, and to our blessed Savior.
That it is unlawful to cut off the Heretic, though he be likely to bring an
irreconcilable War upon the Earth. That Christ himself forbids it, and that to
do it is to be unmindfull of his Precepts and of the Rules of Christian Faith.
That they who do so may expect their Judge should require their Lives at their
hands, and should inflict his Judgments on them, and on that Church which does
permit it. That no good Catholic allowed the Punishment of Heretics with
Death or Deprivation of their goods, or with Punishments much less than Death.
That these things were not laudable but damnable; and that it was against their
Conscience to approve of them. That they who act thus against Heretics are
Disturbers of the Churches Peace, and separate themselves from the Unity of the
Church. Lastly, That they had rather dye themselves, than Heretics should be
slain. I say, they who assert these things sufficiently condemn the Church of
Rome, the Practice of that Church, and the Decrees of her most General Councils
in this Point.

. VIII. Moreover this Severity was as repugnant to the Practice of the Ancient
Church as to the Principles of her renowned Doctors. For we do not desire,
says Nos non expetimus ut Deum nostrum velint nolint colat aliquis invitus,
nec si non coluerit irascimur. Lact. l. 5. cap. 20. p. 524. Nemo a nobis
retinetur invitus, inutilis est enim Deo qui Devotione and Fide caret. Cap. 19.
p. 519.
Lactantius, that any man should worship our God against his will, and if he
does not do it, we are not angry; we retain no man against his will in our
Profession; for he who wants Faith and Devotion is unprofitable to God. The
Synod of (...), etc. Apud Athanas. To. 1. p. 724.
Alexandria expressly says, That Bands and Slaughters were things repugnant to
their Church; that Athanasius never delivered up any one to the Tormentor; that
the Prison was never troubled with any one sent thither by him; our Priesthood,
say they, or, our Administration of things Sacred, as it has always been, so
is it now, pure, and sanctified by no other Blood but that of Jesus. And
therefore when Cresconius, the Grammarian, had objected to the Orthodox the
Death of three Donatists, Contra Crescon. lib. 3. cap. 50.
St. Austin answers, that no good men in the Catholic Church allowed of the
punishing Heretics with Death; that they forbad and restrained it as much as
they were able.

Tum vero Idacius atque Ithacius acrius instare, arbitrantes posse inter initia
malum comprimi: sed parum sanis consiliis, N. B. seculares Judices adeunt, ut
eorum decretis Haeretici urbibus pellerentur. Sulpit. l. 2.. 62. Igitur post
multa and foeda, Ithacio supplicante, elicitur a Gratiano tum Imperatore
reseriptum, quo universi Haeretici excedere non Ecclesiis tantum aut urbibus,
sed extra omnes terras propelli jubebantur. Ibid. Ubi Maximus oppidum
Trevirorum Victor ingressus est, Ithacius ingerit preces plenas in
Priscillianum and Socios ejus invidiae atque criminum, -- it a omnes ad Regem
deducti -- Idacius and Ithacius Episcopi, quorum studium in expugnandis
Haereticis non reprehenderem, si non studio vincendi plus quam oportuit
certassent; Ac mea quidem sententia est, mihi tam reos quam Accusatores
displicere.. 63. Tum Martinus apud Treveros constitutus non desinebat increpare
Ithacium ut ab accusatione desisteret, Maximum orare, ut sanguine infelicium
abstineret: satis superque sufficere ut Episcopali sententia Haeretici
judicati, Ecclesiis pellerentur: novum esse, and inauditum nefas ut causam
Ecclesie Judex seculi judicaret. Denique -- egregi^ authoritare a Maximo
elicuit responsum nihil eruentum in reos constituendum. Sed postea Imperator
per Magnum and Rufum Episcopos depravatus, and a mitioribus consiliis deflexus
-- censuit Priscillianum Sociosque ejus capitis damnari oportere. -- it a
Priscillianus Capitis damnatus est, unaque cum eo Felicissimus and
Armenius-Latronianus quoque, and Eutrochia gladio perempti -- itum deinde in
reliquos sequentibus judiciis, damnatique Asarinus and Aurelius diaconus gladio
-- hoc fere modo homines luce dignissimi pessimo exemplo, N. B. necati, aut
exiliis multati: caeterum Ithacius videns quam invidiosum sibi apud Episcopos
foret si accusato, etiam* postremis Capitalium rerum judiciis astitisset,
subtrahit se cognitioni frustra, callido jam scelere peracto.. 64.
Sulpitius Severus does inform us, that when the Hereste of the Priscillians
sprang up, Idacius and Ithacius, thinking this Evil might be suppressed in the
first Rise, went unadvisedly to the Civil Judges, desiring them to decree that
the Heretics might be expelled the Cities. That when Maximus came to be
Emperor, Idacius and Ithacius applied themselves to him against the
Priscillians, on which account, says Sulpitius, the Accusors displease me as
much as the Guilty. Moreover he informs us that Saint Martin, a man, says he,
to be compared to the Apostles, reproved Ithacius, advised him to desist from
his Accusation, and desired Maximus the Emperor to abstain from the Blood of
the Heretics, declaring, that it was sufficient, N. B. that being judged
Heretics by the Spiritual Sentence, they should be expelled their Churches,
and that it was a new and unheard of Wickedness, that a Secular Judge should
determine of the Cause of the Church, and that he obtained a Promise from
Maximus, that nothing bloody should be done against them. That afterward the
Emperor decreed, that Priscillian and his Companions should suffer capital
Punishments, and that accordingly they did thus suffer, and so, says he, men
not worthy to live, by a most vile example, were either killed or exiled. He
also does inform us, that Ithacius, having procured this Wickedness, vainly
withdrew himself from the Trial of these men. In his Third Maximus Imperator,
alias sane bonus, depravatus Consiliis Sacerdotum, post Priscilliani necem,
Ithacium Episcopum, Priscilliani accusatorem, caeterosque illius Socios, vi
Regia tuebatur, ne quis ei Crimini daret, opera illius cujuscumque modi hominem
fuisse damnatum, -- congregati apud Treveros Episcopi tenebantur, qui quotidie
communicantes Ithacio, communem sibi causam fecerunt. Et jam pridie Imperator
ex eorum sententia decreverat Tribunos mittere, summa potestate armatos, ad
Hispanias, qui Haereticos inquirerent, deprehensis vitam and bona adimerent --
illa praecipua cura ( Martini, sc.) ne Tribuni cum jure gladiorum ad Hispanias
mitterentur, pia enim erat solicitudo Martino, ut non solum Christianos qui sub
illa erant occasion vexandi, sed ipsos etiam Haereticos liberaret. -- spondet
si parceretur se communicaturum (cum Ithacianis) dummodo ut and Tribuni: jam in
excidium Ecclesiarum ad Hispanias missi retraherentur -- satius aestimans ad
horam cedere, quam his non consulere quorum cervicibus gladius imminebat:
postero die se inde proripiens, cum moestus ingemisceret se vel ad horam noxiae
communioni fuisse permixtum; -- astitit ei repent Angelus. Merito inquit
Martine compungeris, sed aliter exire nequisti, repara virtutem, resume
constantiam, ne jam non periculum gloriae sed salutis incurreris, itaque ab
illo tempore satis cavit cum illa Ithacianae partis communione misceri. Dial.
3.. 15.
Dialogue he informs us, that after the Death of Priscillian, Maximus the
Emperor, a man otherwise good, being led aside by the Counsels of some
Bishops, did by his Kingly Power defend Ithacius and his Companions from being
accused for this Crime. And that some Bishops were met at Treves, who, by
communicating daily with Ithacius, had made his Cause their own, and had
obtained of the Emperor a Decree to send some Tribunes armed with the Sovereign
Power, into Spain, to enquire after the Heretics, and to deprive them both of
Life and Goods; that Saint Martin labored with great Care to prevent the
Mission of these Tribunes into Spain, with the Power of the Sword, as being
piously solicitous not only to preserve the Christians, but even the Heretics
also from Death, and that, to accomplish this work,* he for a while consented
to embrace the communion of Ithacius, and his Party; that afterward the good
man was troubled that he had communicated with them, and that an Angel appeared
to him, and told him he had just cause to be sorry for what he had done, and
that he should repair his Virtue, and reassume his Constancy, lest he incurred
the loss not only of his Honor, but Salvation, and that from that time Saint
Martin would never any more communicate with the Ithacian Party. Ad An. 386..
27.
Baronius confesses that Pope Syricius did also refuse communion with Ithacius
and his Party upon this account, and wrote Letters against them. Saint Cum
videret me abstinere ab Episcopis qui communicabant ei, vel qui aliquos, devios
licet a fide, ad necem petebant. Ambros. Ep. 27.
Ambrose also says, that he abstained from the communion of those who desired
the Death of Heretics. The Illud decrevit praeterea Sancta Synodus, ut quoniam
Legatos Episcopi Galliarum, qui Felici non communicant, destinarunt, si quis se
ab ejus communione sequestrare velit, in nostrae Sanctae pacis consortium
suscipiatur. Council. Taurin. cap. 5.
French Bishops also refused communion with Felix, as being made a Bishop by
them, and the Council of Turin gives leave to any so to do. Not. in Council.
Trevir. An. 386.
Binius confesses that Theognostus, and other Bishops of the Ithacius and
Ursatius, Episcopi, ob necem Priscilliani, cujus Accusatores fuerunt, Ecclesiae
communione privantur. Prosper. Chronic. ad A. D. 389. Isidor. De viris
illustribus, cap. 2.
Catholic communion did excommunicate Ithacius with his Companions on this
account, -- as sanguinary, bloody, and unworthy of the Priesthood. Nondum enim
de Episcopo aliquo auditum in Ecclesia Dei erat de Sontibus poenam sanguinis
exegisse. Baron. ad An. 385.. 29. and rursus, nullus Sanctorum Patrum laudavit
id posse fieri suggestione Sacrorum Antistitum. Ad An. 386.. 27.
Baronius and Spondanus treating of this Example, ingeniously confess, that not
one of the Holy Fathers did allow, that Ecclesiastical Persons should procure
the Punishment of Heretics with Death, or move the Civil Magistrate to do it;
but that they vehemently dehorted them from it; and therefore they excuse the
Practice of their Church, their Pope, Bishops and Councils, by telling us that
Unde in Ecclesia Catholica usu receptum est, ut cum quis expetit a Secularibus
Magistratibus opem adversus impios, ne Ithacianae partis Sectator esse
videatur, contestationem illam consulte praemittat, sic se correctionem
expetere incorrigibilium delinquentium, ut tamen citra poenam sanguinis
puniantur. Spondan. Epist. ad A. D. 385. p. 513, 514. Baron. ad A. 386.. 23.
in the Catholic Church it is the Custom, that when any one desires the
Assistence of the Civil Magistrate against Heretics, that he may not seem to
be a Follower of the Ithacian Party, he first advisedly makes this
Protestation, that he so desires the Correction of these incorrigible
Delinquents, as to entreat their Blood may not be shed. And Binius adds, that
Theognostus, aliique Catholicae communionis Episcopi, Ithacium cum Sociis --
excommunicarunt, quia saevius agens, in eosdem poenam capitis procurasset,
solit amque Interpositionem non interposuisset, qua se Delinquentium
incorrigibilium correctionem sic expetere declararet, ut tamen a Sanguinis
poena abstineretur. Not. in Council. Trevir. A. D. 386.
Ithacius was condemned because he desired that Heretics might be punished
with Death, without the Interposition of this Protestation. Now this is such a
piece of Diabolical Hypocrisy as does not in the least excuse, but highly
aggravate their Crime. The Hypocrisy and Profanation of God's holy Name,
which by these Writers is styled The Protestation used by the Catholic Church,
is this, When they deliver the condemned person to the Civil Magistrate, the
Bishop or Inquisitor, having delivered him, speaks thus, Domine Judex, rogamus
vos cum omni affectu quo possumus, ut amore Dei, and Misericordiae intuitu, and
nostrorum interventu precaminum miserrimo huic nullum mortis vel mutilationis
periculum inferatis. Pontis. Romans Romae, 1611. p. 456.
Sir, We passionately desire you, for the Love of God, and in regard of Piety,
Mercy and our Mediation, you would free this miserable person from all Danger
of Death or Mutilation of Members; but notwithstanding all this seeming Piety
and Tenderness, when they have sentenced an Heretic to Death, they require the
Infra Sex dies, sine aliqua processuum visione, Sententias latas prompte
exequantur, sub Excommunicationis paena, aliisque Censuris. Innoc. 8. Constable.
10. Bullar. Romans To. 1. p. 337.
Magistrate to execute that Sentence within Six days, upon pain of
Excommunication, Deprivation, and Loss of Authority and Offices, says the
Constitution of Innocent the Eighth; within Five days, says the Constitution
of Innocent the Fourth; Cap. 24.
he must presently take him into custody for that end, says the Costitution of
Clement the Fourth. Bull. Romans To. 1. p. 174.
Their Popes have approved and confirmed the Decrees of Emperors, Kings, Dukes
and other Civil Governors, which command them to be put to Death; they have
decreed, that the Punishment of Heretics shall neither be relaxed nor delayed;
Vide. 12.
that the Magistrate shall execute the Sentence without revising of the Justice
of it; that he shall take an Oath to execute it: Nay, both their Bishops, Popes
and Councils, since the Twelfth Century, have been continually employed in
instigating others to destroy and to cut off the Heretic, and raising Armies
of Crusado's to that end; all which is fully proved in the ensuing Book. Yea,
their own Writers do ingenuously confess, that this Intercession in behalf of
the condemned Heretic is in the common opinion barely a color; that it is
verbal, not effectual; for the Criminal is delivered to the Secular Power for
this very end, that he may dye. And the Magistratus secularis quemcunque
Haereticum sibi a Judicibus fidei traditum debet ultimo supplicio afficere.
Vide R. Episc. Lincol. Brutum Fulmen. p. 207, 208.
Magistrate ought to punish him. Let therefore any reasonable person judge,
whether their Practice in this kind be not most gross Hypocrisy, Self
Condemnation, and Profanation of God's Holy Name; and whether this will in the
least excuse them from being Partis Ithacianae Sectatores, or, Followers of the
Example of Ithacius?

. IX. Objection. But, says the querulous Dissenter, Is there no other Church,
or Person, concerned in this Example besides that of Rome? Know you of no
Decree or Edict elsewhere, ut exilio mulctarentur Priscilliani? Was there never
any Supplication made to Gratian by some Ithacius, Sulp. p. 467.
Vt universi Haeretici non Ecclesiis tantum, aut Vrbibus, sed extra omnes
Terras propelli juberentur? p. 474, 607.
Was there never any other Emperor, alias sane bonus, per Magnum and; Rufum
Episcopos, a mitioribus consiliis deflexus?

Answ. I know that Mr. Baxter and some other Non-conformists speak much of our
Ithacian Prelates, but, had they found them such, they would not have been here
to make such Tragical Complaints against them without cause: Sure I am that our
Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled have sufficiently declared
against this persecuting Spirit on the account of Religion by their full
Approbation of, and thanks returned to the Lord Bishop of Saint Asaph for his
Sermon preached before them, Nov. 5. 1680. and their desire that he would print
and publish that Sermon, in which, First, He lays down this Position, viz. p.
9.
That of Societies of men, Christians, of all other, are most averse from ways
of Violence and Blood, specially from using any such ways on the account of
Religion; And, among Christian Churches, where they differ among themselves, if
either of them use those ways upon the account of Religion, they give a strong
Presumption against themselves, that they are not truly Christian. The reason
is, because Christ gave Love for the Character by which his Disciples were to
be known, Joh. 13. v. 35. And lest men should unchristen others first, that
they may hate them, and destroy them afterward, Christ enlarged his Precept of
Love and extended it to Enemies, and not only to ours, but to the Enemies of
our Religion, Matt. 5. 43, 44. Secondly, p. 12, 13.
He adds that by this we may usually judge who they are that excel among
Christian Churches, when there happens any difference between them, whether
touching the Faith or the Terms of Communion; they that were the more fierce,
they generally had the worst Cause, as, v. g. p. 14.
the Nicene Council suppres'd the Arians by no other force but putting Arians
out of their Bishoprics; they could not think Heretics fit to be trusted with
the Care of Souls, but otherwise as to temporal things, I do not find that they
inflicted any kind of Punishment; but when the Arians came to have the Power in
their hands -- then Depriving was nothing, Banishment was the least that they
inflicted. Thirdly, p. 37.
That he would have no man punished for his Religion, no not them that destroy
men for Religion. Fourthly, p. 20.
He says that neither our Religion nor our Church is of a persecuting Spirit,
she has no Doctrine that teaches Persecution, N. B. she has not practiced it
as others, when they were in authority. I thank God for it, and I hope she will
always continue in the temper; which being added to the other marks of a True
Church, may assure us, she is a Church according to the mind of Christ. The
same is in effect declared by the House of Commons, when they returned their
Thanks to Dr. Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury, for his Sermon preached before
them, Novem. 5. 78. desiring him to print that Sermon; where, having laid down
the Example of our Lord, he adds, p. 13, 14.
that in imitation of this blessed Pattern, the Christian Church continued to
speak and act for several Ages, and this was the Language of the H. Fathers,
Lex nova se non vindicat ultore gladio, The Christian Law does not avenge it
self by the Sword; This was then the Style of Councils, Nemini ad credendum vim
infer, To offer violence to no man, to compel him to the Faith; adding p.
19. that to separate Goodness and Mercy from God, Compassion and Charity from
Religion, is to make the two best things in the World good for nothing. And, p.
30. That true Christianity is not only the best, but the best-natured
Institution in the World, and so far as any Church is departed from good
nature, and become cruel and barbarous, so far is it degenerated from
Christianity. We have indeed a Statute about Banishing Dissenters, but no
Ithacius, that I know of, who ever supplicated for the Making, or for the
Execution of it, but only for Retaining of it as a due Curb for men too prone
to Faction and Sedition. And so it lies still dormant in the hands of his most
Gracious Majesty, and may it ever do so.

. X. 2. This Treatise serves to justify us in, and to provoke us to the use of
any lawful means for the avoiding of these Punishments. They who exhort us in
this Exigence to trust to Providence, must know that Providence does not
exclude, but rather does require, and suppose the use of any honest means for
the prevention of impendent Dangers; for we can have no reason to expect that
Providence should supernaturally engage for the immediate Accomplishment of
that which may be done by Divine Blessing upon ordinary means. First therefore
we must use the Means; then pray that Providence would bless, and countenance,
and render prosperous our just Endeavors in this kind; and when we have
performed our utmost to prevent Dangers in a lawful way, and find that our
Attempts prove frustrate, then only is the time to trust to Providence without
subordinate endeavors.

Now what Means may be lawfully pursued, according to the Constitutions of this
Kingdom, for the preventing this aboding Evil, Divines should not presume too
nicely to determine, who do then chiefly deviate when they do meddle extra
Sphaeram Theologiae; it rather does become them to leave this Matter to those
Persons whose Business and Office it professedly is to be skillful in the Laws,
and who may rationally therefore be presumed men better qualified to pass a
Judgment in this Case. This notwithstanding I may safely say, That what no Law
of Nature or positive Command of God forbids, may lawfully be done, and is
expedient to be done, for Preservation of the Souls and Bodies of a whole
Community, and their succeeding Generations from the worst of Evils.

. XI. 3. This Treatise may be useful to quicken us, by a due apprehension of
this so barbarous Religion and inhumane Doctrine, to labor to prevent it by our
most serious Reformation, and most importunate Addresses to the Throne of
Grace; or, if the Providence of God sees fitting, for the Punishment of our
Iniquities, to give us up to this tremendous Judgment, to let us see what need
we shall then have of the most perfect Patience and undaunted Courage, the most
unshaken Faith and steadfast Resolution to undergo the Fiery Trials, to which
we may expect to be exposed, if we continue firm to our Religion. For if the
Providence of God should, for our crying Sins, permit our lawful Prince to be
perverted to the R. Faith, and poisoned with these bloody Principles, I declare
to all the World, that Christianity, and our own Oaths both of Allegiance and
Supremacy engage us, upon pain of everlasting Ruin, not to lift up our hands
against him; that all who do resist him must resist God's Ordinance, and so
Romans 13. 1, 2.
receive damnation to themselves; that all who use the Sword without Commission
from him, take it, and Matthew. 26. 52.
they who take it, though in Defense of me, says Christ, shall perish by it.
In this case therefore I freely do acknowledge with L'Estrange, Character of a
Papist, etc. p. 3.
we have no other choice before us but either to suffer the highest degree of
Misery that can befall us in this World, or else to prostitute our Souls for
the saving of our Lives and Fortunes; p. 13.
and I do make with him this public Profession to the World, that, though I
have as little mind to be under the Government of an English Papist as any
mortal, and would do all that I could justify as a Christian and an honest
man to avoid it, yet, since I can no more choose my Governor than my Father, and
that I may as well renounce my duty to the one upon the score of Religion as to
the other, I am resolved to pay the duty of a Subject to what (Legal) Prince
soever the all-ruling Providence of God shall set over me, and patiently to
suffer where I cannot conscientiously obey. And I conjure all reformed
Christians, if ever they lie under these unhappy Circumstances, not to
blaspheme their Holy Calling, or cast a Scandal on the Reformation by any
Mutinies or Insurrections against God's Vicegenent, which will assuredly
incense the Wrath of God still more against them, prolong their Miseries, and
make their temporal Calamities be a sad Prologue to eternal, but that they
would resolve to suffer as becomes Christians, and to commit their Cause to
him that judges righteously.

. XII. 4. This Treatise may be instrumental to prevent being gulled and deluded
by fair words and specious promises, and by vain hopes of Freedom from these
dreadful Miseries, if this Religion should prevail; there being nothing in the
World more inconsistent with the avowed Principles of Popery, nothing more
contrary to the continual Practice of the Church, and to the Oaths and
Obligations of the Members of it, than to permit the Heretic to escape these
sad and direful Effects of their inhumane Cruelty. And whatsoever Prince
neglects to execute these Punishments on any other score but those of Policy,
must solemnly condemn the Constitutions of those General Councils which are the
sole Foundations of his Faith; he must believe the Church of Rome not only
Fallible, but False in her Determinations, and guilty of more Murder and
Barbarity than all the Heathen Emperors were guilty of in the Ten Persecutions.
He must continue in, and own that Church to be the only Church of Christ,
which yet he does believe to be the vilest Church on Earth, and guilty of the
greatest Crime imaginable.

Ibid. p. 42, 43.
Mr. L'Estrange takes care to tell us that Henry the Fourth of France did not
exercise one act of Tyranny over his Protestant Subjects. But he forgot to tell
us that he was first deposed, and then stabbed for his remisness in that matter:
Spond. To. 2. p. 868.. 4. p. 875.. 4.
He was twice deposed by Gregory the Fourteenth, A. D. 1591. by Clement the
Eighth, A. D. 1592. as being a Favorer of Heretics, and, by the continual
Rebellions and Defections of his R. Catholic Subjects, he was forced, for
Quietness sake, to turn Papist, A. D. 1594. And yet, because he was indulgent
toward Heretics, his Life was attempted the same year by John Castle,
belonging to the Jesuits; by a Monk, A. D. 1600. and he was at last stabbed by
Ravilliac.

And, because others frequently object the like Example of the Indulgence of
the French King toward the Hugonots, to what I have already answered, Section
the Ninteenth of this Treatise, I add, 1. That from the beginning of the
Thirteenth, till the middle of the Sixteenth Century all Europe has scarce
equaled the Severity of France for Persecutions of this kind, or frequency of
Councils making Laws for the Destruction of the Heretic, as in this Treatise
you will find. 2. The Author of The Policy of the Clergy of France informs us
p. 13.
that their Princes have not lost the Design of destroying Heretics, though
Prudence has obliged them for the present to suspend it, because it could not
be done by them without great Danger. Since my writing of this the French King
has answered this Objection with a vengeance.
And Bellarmin himself will grant, Non esse Haereticos Bello petendos quando
sunt fortiores nobis; That Heretics may be spared when they are stronger than
the R. Catholics, and it is to be feared that more of them might perish than
of us: And this is all the Lenity that ever was allowed by the Church of Rome
toward the Protestant. If any man can show me, 1. That any of the Laws here
mentioned have been condemned, abrogated or relaxed by the Church of Rome or
the French Church; 2. That any Princes have been blamed for, or in the least
deterred by any of her Prelates from executing of those Laws, or even exempted
from that Oath which, says the Pope, does bind them to extirpate Heretics, or
that by any Council of the R. Church they ever were permitted to neglect the
Execution of them, or that from the Thirteenth to the Sixteenth Century any
Prince escaped the Censures of the Church who did neglect to execute them; 3.
That any Country or City has been rejected from Communion with that Church for
Massacring Protestants, and Killing many Myriads of them in cold Blood; if, 4.
It can be made appear that the same Principles which do oblige them to receive
other Articles of Faith determined by those Councils do not oblige them to the
Execution of the Decrees established by the same Councils, or others equally
obliging; if, lastly, There be no Design on foot for the Destruction and
Extirpation of a pestilent Heresy which has long reigned in the North of
Europe: If these things can be evinced; then may we have some little hopes of
being kindly dealt with by a Popish Prince, though he were zealous to a miracle
for Propagation of the R. Faith, and had it in his Power thus to purge his
Territories from Heretical Pravity.

THE CONTENTS OF THE DISCOURSE.
. I. THE Heads to which the Laws made against Heretics may be reduced, page
2.. II. The Endeavors which are, or have been used by the Church of Rome to
preserve her Members from that which she is pleased to call Heresy, are, 1.
Binding all her Males at Fourteen, and Females at Twelve, to abjure all
Heresy: 2. And also Governors to do the same: 3. Forbidding Laymen to
dispute publicly or privately touching the Catholic Faith; and, 4.
Withholding from them the Books of the Old and of the New Testament: That hence
we have great reason to suspect the Truth of that Religion, p. 3, 4.. III. The
Care they take for discovering and apprehending Heretics, page 5.. IV. The
Persons authorized for this Work, viz. Inquisitors, Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbots, and the Assistence they must have from Civil Governors: They have Power
to require the Magistrates Assistence in enquiring after, taking and spoiling
Heretics: to compel all the Neighborhood to swear to enquire after, and, if
they know of any Heretics, to endeavor to give notice of them, and secure
them. All Earls, Barons, Rectors and Consuls, etc. must also swear
efficaciously to assist the Church according to their power in this Work, p. 6,
7.. V. These Laws are made, or, being made by others, are confirmed by their
approved General Councils; who also give power to these Inquisitors,
Archbishops, etc. to require a Corporal Oath upon the Relics of the Saints,
or a Crucifix from all whom they suspect of Heresy, to answer to Questions
containing all the Romish Superstition; and, if they will not undergo this
Canonical Purgation, to condemn them as Heretics: they give this Power to them
in all Places, and over all Persons of what Dignity soever, p. 8, 9, 10, 11..
VI. When they are discovered and apprehended, they and their Favorers must be
excommunicated, their Goods confiscated, the Houses in which they are found
must be destroyed, their Persons must be imprisoned: When they have them in
Prison, they may use any Cruelty which does not diminish their Members or
endanger their Death, to make them to confess their Errors, or accuse others,
p. 12, 13.. VII. They must be banished or exterminated out of all Places: All
Secular Powers must swear to expel Heretics out of their Dominions, with all
their Favorers, and set forth Edicts to this effect, p. 13, 14.. VIII. If any
Governor permit them to abide there, he must be excommunicated, be deemed a
Favorer of Heretics, and lose his Dominions, p. 15.. IX. All these
Constitutions are confirmed by the approved General Councils of the Romish
Church, and are by them extended to Kings, Emperors, and Supreme Governors; who
must lose their Territories if they do it not, p. 16, 17, 18, 19.. X. These
General Councils encourage men to butcher Heretics, not only by invoking the
Secular Arm against them, but also by promising Remission of Sins and a great
Reward hereafter to all that fight against and labor to destroy them, p. 20,
21, 22.. XI. Heretics and their Abettors must be punished with Death; and if
after Death they appear to have been Heretics, their Bodies must be dug up,
p. 22, 23.. XII. All Governors must execute these Punishments upon them without
delay, relaxation or enquiry into the Justice of them, p. 24.. XIII. Every
Governor must have a Copy of these Laws, he must not alter or diminish them,
but must abolish all Statutes contrary to them, p, 24, 25.. XIV. At their
Admission they must swear to execute them; and, if they be remiss in doing it,
they must lose their Office, be excommunicated, and their Jurisdiction
interdicted, p. 25, 26, 27.. XV. They who will not execute this Sentence must
be proceeded against by Ecclesiastical Censures as Favorers of Heretics: And
the Bishop who is remiss in these Matters must be deposed from his Office: All
Believers, Favorers, Defenders of them are subject to very grievous
Punishments, and must be punished as Heretics, p. 27, 28.. XVI. Such are they
who believe, that they, who by the Church of Rome are called Heretics, may be
saved, or that they who prosecute them do offend: The most Infamous Person may
accuse a Heretic; And the Heretic must not know who does accuse him, p. 28,
29.. XVII. Examples of Princes and Civil Governors deprived of their Dominions,
as being Heretics, or Favorers of Heresies, or remiss in punishing them, p.
29, 30, 31, 32, 33.. XVIII. The Concernment of the Church in these Actions of
the Pope, p. 33, 34.. XIX. No Popish Prince can give Security to his Subjects
that he will not proceed against them according to these Laws; 1. Because,
being Papists, it may rationally be presumed they will act, according to the
Convictions of their Consciences, as such: 2. Because they are subject to a
Superior Tribunal which can overrule their Promise, and can absolve them from
their Oaths, and which has actually judged, that they ought not to be kept;
and because it is an Unlawful Promise, and made concerning a Spiritual Cause,
in which they must not intermeddle: They who have actually made this Promise,
have not performed it, p. 34, -- 59.. XX. All this is confirmed by the
Proceedings of the General Council of Constance, p. 59, -- 63.. XXI. The
Character of a Popish Prince given in the Expressions of their Councils, or
sutably to their Decrees, p. 63, 64.. XXII. The Conclusion, p. 64, etc.
The Errata's in the Discourse are,
Page 3. lin. 18. this, r. the. p. 9. l. 6. marg. confessali, r. sati. p. 13.
l. 27. received, r. renewed. p. 20. l. 9. confirming, r. confirms. p. 23. l. 2.
Natureni, r. Pat. p. 37. l. 2. dele He. p. 44. marg. l. 13. fungebantur, r.
batur. p. 60. marg. emittimus, r. committ. p. 67. l. 13. manly, r. manfully.

In the Preface,
Page 3. l. 24, 25. the Church, r. the R. Church. p. 10. l. 1. overthrow r.
threw. p. 20. l. 24. another, r. another. p. 46. l. 11. the Chapter r. that Church.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the LAWS Ecclesiastical and Civil Made against
HERETICS BY POPES, EMPERORS, etc.
MANY of late have excellently discoursed of those Doctrines of the Romish
Faith, which, when believed and practiced, must be highly prejudicial to, or be
sufficient to disturb all civil Governments; and have demonstratively proved,
that men whose Consciences are guided by the Romish Casuists, or who have
heartily embraced the Principles of that Religion, can give us no security that
they will not disturb the Government by which they are protected: But few (if
any) have of late made it professedly their business to speak of what may be
expected by such as they are pleased to call Heretics, when they are so
unhappy as to be subject to a Prince who has embraced the Romish Faith, and to
a Clergy which does own the Principles of that Communion; which being in this
present Juncture of Affairs a most important Subject, I hope it will not seem
either unseasonable or unprofitable to discourse briefly on that head. Now what
such persons may expect to suffer we may learn from what already has been
decreed by them concerning Heretics, and what they have already practiced.

. I. The Laws Ecclesiastical and Civil made against Heretics, by Popes, Kings,
Emperors, and Councils, may be reduced to these Heads; 1. Laws made for the
Preservation of the Members of the R. Church from falling into that which they
call Heresy; 2. The Laws made for the Discovery of Heretics, their Favorers,
Abettors, or such as they suspect to be inclinable to Heresy; now they are
either such as do empower Persons to be active in enquiring after them, and do
encourage them to make Discoveries of this nature, or such as lay an Obligation
on them to be diligent in making these Enquiries and Discoveries, and upon
others to assist them in so doing. Or, 3. Laws which concern the Punishment of
Heretics discovered so to be, and the Engagement which they lay upon men to
execute these Punishments upon them.

. II. And, 1. So conscious are the Romish Prelates of the gross Absurdity and
the apparent Folly of their own Doctrine, and the plain Contradiction that it
bears, in many of its Articles, to Scripture and the clearest Reason, that they
dare not permit the meanest members of their Church to look into the Scripture,
or make Inquiry or Search into the Articles of their Faith; or trust a Child of
twelve years old without an Oath to bind him firm unto their Superstitions.

And therefore, 1. It has been decreed by many of their Councils, That all
Males at fourteen, and Females at twelve years of Age, shall abjure all Heresy
extolling it self against the Holy Catholic R. Church and Orthodox Faith, and
shall swear also, that they will hold the Catholic Faith which the Roman
Church teaches and holds. This is determined by a Council. To. XI. part. 1. p.
430. p. 693. p. 722, 724, 725.
Council of many Bishops and Prelates met at Tolose in France, An. D. 1229.
Can. 12. by a Council held at Beziers, A. D. 1246. Can. 31. by a Council of
many Bishops and Prelates held at Alby in France, Can. 11, 12. Moreover this
Oath, by the Decrees of the Council of Tolose and Alby Ibid.
is to be renewed upon them every two years. And, All that do come in, and
confess their Heresy, must take the same Oath, says this Council of Beziers,
Can. 5.

2. All Consuls, Governors of Castles, Authorities, and Barons, must be
compelled by Ecclesiastical Censure to abjure Heretics, with the Favorers and
Abettors of them, Council. To. XI. p. 308.
says the Provincial Council of Narbon, Can. 15.

3. No Layman, upon penalty of Excommunication, must dispute publicly or
privately touching the Catholic Faith, Bullar. Romans To. I. p. 182.
says Nicholas the Third, Constable. 2.. 19.

4. No Layman must have any Books of the Old or New Testament, except the
Psaltery, the Breviary, and the Hours of the Blessed Virgin (three New
Testament Books of the Roman Edition) any of which they must by no means have
in the Vulgar Tongue, Council. To. XI. p. 430.
says the Council of Tolose, Can. 14.

And surely such unworthy Arts do give just Reason to all considering persons
to suspect the Truth of that Religion which needs thus to be supported by
Oaths and Abjurations made by Children; by stopping of men's mouths, and not
permitting them to ask that Reason of their Faith which all men are obliged 1
Pet. 3. 15.
by their Christianity to be in readiness to give to all that ask it; and by
withholding of those Scriptures of the Old Testament which are able to make 2 Timothy 3. 15.
them wise unto Salvation; which by the Law of Moses were to be continually
read unto, continually Deuteronomy. 6. 7.
talked of by the People; to which they, by the Prophets, were advised to go,
and by which to pass Esa. 8. 20.
Judgment on those who spoke unto them of Religious matters; which our Lord
does enjoin them both Joh. 5. 39.
to hear and search; as also his Apostles did, commending 2 Timothy 3. 15.
them who from their youth had known, and who upon occasion search the
Scriptures; and also those Act. 17. 11.
of the New Testament, which were on purpose writ in the most vulgar Language
of the World, that all might know them, and in great plainness of speech, 2
Cor. 3. 12.
that they might understand them; and which were left to be a Rule of Faith and
Manners to all succeeding Generations, which the Primitive Fathers do
vehemently commend to the perusal of all Christians, and which the Heathen
Persecutors, as fiercely as the Roman Catholics, did strive to wrest out of
their hands.

. III. 2. If notwithstanding all this Care to keep them ignorant and blind,
some by the strength of natural Reason and Religion, and others by conversing
with men of better Principles, or reading that so pestilent, and therefore
carefully forbidden Book, the Word of God, come to the knowledge of his Truth,
and be convinced of the Superstitions and Follies of the Roman Doctrines, and
so become, according to their notions, Heretics. 1. All imaginable Care is
used that they may not escape their Hellish Cruelty, nor find a corner in
Villages or Woods, above or under ground, which may preserve them from their
Fury. And therefore,

2. For the better discovering and apprehending of Heretics, and those who
favor and abet them, or are suspected of these matters, they have these
following Persons authorized for that Work. Council. To. XI. p. 619.
The Bull of Martin the Fifth published with the consent and approbation of the
general Council of Constance begins thus, Martinus Episcopus -- Archiepiscopis,
Episcopis ac Inquisitoribus Haereticae Pravitatis ubilibet constitutis. Bin.
To. 7. p. 1119.
1. Inquisitors of Heretical Pravity constituted by his Holiness for that End.
v. Leg. Fred. 2. 2. All Archbishops and Bishops in their respective Provinces
and Diocesses, with their Officials and Vicars. And, 3. Abbots within their
Precincts. And, 4. For the Assistence of these persons, every Governor or
Magistrate throughout Lombardy and Italy is bound to keep twelve honest men,
two Notaries, and as many Servants as the Bishop, or two of the Brethren
Inquisitors shall think fit, who shall be bound to search after, apprehend
Heretics, or bring them within the power of the Diocesan, or his Vicars, and
to require all persons to assist them in so doing. Constit. Innocentii Quarti,
cap. 3, 4. Clem. 4, Constable. 13. Leg. 3. Council. 10. XI. p. 605.
Bullar. Romans To. 1. p. 173.



These are the persons authorized by as good Authority as the Court and Church
of Rome has any, to discover and apprehend the Heretic and his Abbettors. And
their Commission is exceeding large. For,

. IV. 1. If the Bishop, his Vicar, the Inquisitor, or these 12 Officers require
it, the Magistrate must assist them in enquiring after, taking and spoiling
Heretics, by sending Soldiers with them; this must be done by Cities under
the Penalty of 100 li. by Villages under the Penalty of 50 li. by private
persons under the Penalty of 25 li. Constable. Innoc. IV. Council. To. XI. p. 606.
cap. 19. By the Constitutions of Clement the Fourth every Governor and
private person is bound to assist the Inquisitors and Officials of the Bishop
and his Bullar. Romans To. I. p. 174.
Visitor to apprehend Heretics. Constable. 13. L. 18.

2. Council. To. XI. p. 608.
They also have Power to compel all the neighborhood to swear, that if they
know of any Heretics, or any that keep secret Conventicles, or any that
believe, defend, receive or favor Heretics, they will endeavor to give
notice of them to the Inquisitors appointed by the Apostolic See. Constable.
Innoc. IV. cap. 30. Ibid. p. 428.
The Council of Tolose, Can. 1. decrees, That the Archbishops and Bishops shall,
in every Parish within their Cities and without, bind one Priest, and two or
three honest Lay men, or more, if that be needful, by their Oaths, that they
will diligently, faithfully and frequently enquire after Heretics in the said
Parishes, by searching any houses or subterraneal receptacles that may give
suspicion of them; and if they find any Heretics, Believers, Favorers,
Receivers or Defenders of them, they will secure them, that they may not fly,
and then with all speed give intimation of them to the Archbishop, Bishop, Lord
or Bailiff of the Place. Vide simile Statutum H. Chichley, Cant. Archiepiscopi,
ed. A. D. 1416. Spel. Council. To. II. p. 672.
Ibid. p. 694.
This Decree is renewed by the Provincial Council of Beziers held An. Do. 1246.
Can. 34. by the Council of Alby, Can. 1. p. 722. by the Council of Arles, A. D.
1234. Can. 5. the Council p. 2341. To. 13. p. 325.
of Saltzburgh held A. D. 1420. commands all persons under the penalty of
Excommunication and eternal Death, as soon as they know that any Heretic is in
their Territories, to reveal them to their Superiors; and all Magistrates, when
the Inquisitors give notice of them, are bound under the same Penalty to
apprehend, imprison and deliver them to the Inquisitors. Can. 32. And by the
Constitutions of Nicholas the Third, Bullar. Romans To. 1. p. 182.
directed to all Christians, they are liable to excommunication who neglect to
do so.

3. The Lords of Territories must be solicitous to enquire after Heretics in
their Houses and Woods, and to destroy their Hiding places. Council. To. XI.
part. 1. p. 449. p. 427.
Council. Tolos. Can. 3. Stat. Raimundi, Com. Tolos. Council. Albiense, Can. 4.
p. 723. They must assist the Ordinary in taking them, under the Penalty of
Excommunication. Part. 2. p. 1912.
Council. Paris. A. D. 1346. Can. 4.

4. All Earls, Barons, Rectors, and Consuls of Cities, and other secular
Powers, bearing any Office whatsoever, must be admonished by the Diocesan to
swear, that they will faithfully and efficaciously assist the Church, according
to their Power and Office, against Heretics and their Accomplices, and will
use their utmost diligence therein, and, if it be found necessary, they by
Church Censures Part. 1. p. 679, 630.
must be compelled so to do, says the Council of Beziers, Can. 9 p. 693, 694.
. the Council of Alby, Can. 20. page 726. the Provincial Council of Narbon,
Can. 32. And sutably to this, the Canon Law determines, Decretal. l. 5. tit. 7.
cap. 9. par. statuimus.
That all Earls, Barons, Rectors and Consuls of Cities, and other places,
shall, at the Admonition of the Bishops, engage themselves by Oath, that, being
required by them, they will faithfully and efficaciously help the Church,
according to their Office and Power, against Heretics and their Accomplices.

. V. Nor are these only the Decrees of Popes, and Emperors, and of Provincial
Councils, but many of them are confirmed by their approved general Councils.
For,

1. The fourth general Council of Lateran assembled A. D. 1215. Can. 3.
Adjicimus insuper, ut quilibet Archiepiscopus, vel Episcopus, per se aut per
Archidiaconum suum, vel idoneas personas honestas, bis, aut saltem semel in
anno, propriam Parochiam, in qua fama fuerit haereticos habitare, circumeat:
and ibi tres vel plures boni testimonii viros, vel etiam, si expedire
videbitur, totam viciniam jurare compellat, quod si quis ibidem haereticos
sciverit, vel aliquos occulta conventicula celebrantes, seu a communi
conversatione fidelium, vita and moribus dissidentes, eos Episcopo studeat
indicare. Council. To. XI. part. 1. p. 152.
decrees that, all Archbishops, by themselves or their Archdeacon, or by some
fit and honest persons, twice, or at the least once a year, shall visit their
own Parishes, in which it is reported that any Heretics do dwell; and shall
compel three or more men of good report, or if it seem expedient to them, the
whole neighborhood, to swear that if any of them know of any Heretics there,
or of any that keep secret Conventicles, or that differ in their Lives or
Manners from the common Conversation of the Faithful, they will endeavor to
acquaint the Bishop with them. The general Council of Constance, that is,
Martin the Fifth, Discretioni* vestrae, sacro approbante Concilio
Constantiensi, per Apostolica Scripta committimus and mandamus. Council. Constable.
Sess. 45. Bin. To. 7. p. 1120.
with the consent and approbation of that Council, Vobis, and aliis omnibus
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis and Electis ac Commissariis, and Inquisitoribus,
virtute sanctae obedientiae praecipimus and mandamus, ut quilibet eorum, infra
limits and loca suae Jurisdictionis, -- circa exstirpationem and correctionem
errorum and haeresum, -- in favorem ipsius fidei orthodoxae diligenter
invigilent, and omnes infamatos seu suspectos de tam pestifera labe sub
confessali criminis, excommunicationis, suspensionis, interdicti, aut alia
formidabili paena canonica, vel legali, prout, quando, and quemadmodum eis
videtur expedire, and facti requireret qualitas, per juramentum corporaliter
praestitum, tactis sacrosanctis Evangeliis, seu sanctorum reliquiis, imagine
crucifixi, secundum quorundam locorum observantiam, juxta infra scripta
interrogatoria, ad quemlibet Articulum convenientia respondere compellant.
Council. Constant. Sess. 45. Bin. To. 7. p. 1121.
commands all Archbishops, Bishops, Inquisitors, Commissaries, or Elect
persons, by virtue of their obedience, that every of them, within their limits
or places of their Jurisdiction, diligently do watch for the extirpation and
correction of all Errors and Heresies. And wheresoever they find any that are
infamed or suspected to be guilty of those Crimes, to compel them under the
Penalty of excommunication, suspension, interdict or confession of the crime,
or any other more formidable punishment canonical or legal, to take a corporal
Oath upon the Evangelists, the Relics of the Saints or a Crucifix, to answer
to the Questions they shall ask them. Now the Questions, among many others, are
these following, viz.

1. Page 1124.
Whether they think it lawful that such an Oath should be imposed upon or
taken by them for their Purgation, ( i. e.) an Oath ex officio, obliging them
to condemn themselves.

2. Whether they hold it a mortal Sin to be guilty of Perjury, though it be to
save their Lives, or for the advantage of the Faith. This may be done by
Catholics, but must not be done by Heretics.

3. Whether he believes, That, after the Consecration of the Priest, in the
Sacrament of the Altar, under the Elements of the Holy Bread and Wine, there
remains no material Bread and Wine, but the same Christ entirely, who suffered
on the Cross, and sits at the right hand of the Father.

4. Whether he believes, That, the Consecration being made by a Priest under
the species of Bread alone, and without the species of Wine, there is the true
Flesh, and Blood, and Soul, and Deity of Christ, and whole Christ, (in his
broken body) and the same Christ absolutely, and under every one of the species
in particular, ( i. e.) whether there be one million of Christ's, and yet but
one.

5. Whether he believes, That the Custom of communicating Laymen in the
species of Bread alone, -- approved by this Holy Council, be to be observed, so
that it is not lawful to change it without the Authority of the Church, ( i.
e.) whether he hold that the Council, forbidding what Christ commands, is to be
obeyed before Christ.

6. Page 1125.
Whether he believes, That the Pope, being canonically elected, is the
Successor of St. Peter, and has supreme Authority in the whole Church of God?
with many Questions of the like nature, containing the whole superstition of
the Church of Rome.

2. Si qui vero ex eis juramenti Religionem obstinatione damnabili respuentes,
jurare forte noluerint, ex hoc ipso tanquam Haeretici reputentur. Council. Lat.
quartum, Can. 3. Council. To. XI. p. 152.
If any person whom they suspect to be guilty of Heresy will not undergo their
canonical Purgation, or by a damnable obstinacy refuses thus to swear in order
to his Purgation, he is to be condemned as an Heretic; so the 4th general
Council of Later. and the general Council of Qui autem de Haeresi per Judicem
competentem Ecclesiasticum inventi suerint sola suspicione notati, seu
suspecti, nisi -- propriam innocentiam congrua devotione monstraverint*, in
purgatione eis canonice indicta deficientes, and se canonice purgare non
valentes, aut pro hujusmodi purgatione facienda obstinatione damnabili jurare
renuentes, tanquam Haeretici condemnentur. Council. Constable. Sess. 45. Bin. To. 7.
p. 1121.
Constance.

3. This Power is given to Archbishops, etc. throughout all Tam and Regnum
Bohemiae, and convicinas illi, quam alias quaslibet parts in quibus haec
superstitiosa doctrina quomodolibet pulla^erit. Ibid.
parts of the World where any Heresy arises, viz. to make these Enquiries,
and proceed accordingly; so that no Country, where this Religion does obtain,
can expect any thing but a continual Butchery of all that will not be most
gross Idolaters. And,

4. They command their Mandamus quatenus vos Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, and
Electi, and quilibet vestrum, per se seu alium, vel alios, quos graves and
idoneas personas spiritualem Jurisdictionem habentes esse volumus, omnes and
singulos cujuseunque dignitatis, officii, praeeminentiae, status vel
conditionis existunt, and quibuscunque nominibus censeantur, qui de praeexcelso
-- Sacramento corporis and sanguinis Domini nostri Jesu Christi, vel de
baptismate, seu peccatorum confessione, poenitentiae pro peccatis, injunctione,
vel reliquis Ecclesiasticis sacramentis, seu fidei articulis, aliter sentire
aut docere quam sacrosancta R. Ecclesia and universalis docet, praedicat and
observat, -- tanquam Haereticos judicetis, and velut Haereticos seculari curiae
relinquatis. Council. Constant. Sess. 45. apud Bin. To. 7. p. 1120.
Officers to proceed against, and to condemn as Heretics, all persons of
whatsoever Dignity, Office, Preeminence, State and Condition they shall be, and
by what names soever they are called, who think otherwise of the Sacrament of
the Body and Blood of Christ, or of Baptism, or of Confession of Sins, or
Penance, or any other Sacraments, or Articles of Faith, than the H. Roman
Church and Universal teaches, and as Heretics, to give them over to the Civil
Magistrate. Council. Constan. ibid. And,

5. They renew the Constitution of (Constitutionem) Felicis Recordationis
Bonifacii Octavi, quae incipit, ut Inquisitionis negotium, renovantes, and
etiam exsequentes, universos Potestates, and Dominos temporales, and Judices
antedictos, quibuscunque dignitatibus, vel officiis, seu nominibus censeantur,
exhortando requirimus, and mandamus eisdem, ut sicut reputari cupiunt, and
haberi fideles, ac filii Ecclesiae nuncupari, and in Christi nomine gloriari
ita pro defensione Fidei vobis Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, and Electis, ac
Inquisitoribus haereticae pravitatis, and aliis Judicibus seu personis
Ecclesiasticis per nos ad hoc -- deputandis, fidem and communionem Sanctae
Matris Ecclesiae tuentibus pareant and intendant, praelean^que auxilium and
favorem, in haereticorum, ne^^^^ credentium, fautorum, receptatorum, and
defensorum ipsorum investigatione, captione, custodia diligenti, cum ab iisdem
fuerint requisiti. Ibid. p. 1121. Vid. Sexti Decretal. l. 5. tit. 2. c. 18.
Boniface the Eighth, concerning the Inquisition, requiring and commanding all
Powers, and Lords temporal, and Judges, of whatsoever Dignity, Name or Office,
as they desire to be reputed Christians and Sons of the Church, and to glory in
the Name of Christ, that they obey, and attend these Inquisitors, and other
Ecclesiastical persons deputed, or hereafter, by the Apostolical See, to be
deputed, for the finding-out and punishing of Heretics, affording them their
aid and favor in finding-out, apprehending and imprisoning them, and all that
do believe, favor, receive or defend them. And so much for the Laws made for
inquiring after Heretics.

. VI. 3. The Laws which do concern the Punishment of Heretics, when they are
once discovered and apprehended, are either such as do declare what Punishments
shall be inflicted on them; or such as do oblige men to inflict those
Punishments upon them. Now the Punishments which by their Laws must be
inflicted on them are these following, Council. To. XI. p. 688.
viz. Excommunication, Confiscation of their goods, Imprisonment, Exile, Death.
Council. Bitter. An. Dom. 1246. Can. 2. And,

1. Page 45^. Page 679. Page 726. Decretal. l. 5. Tit. 7. c. 13.
They must be excommunicated, with all their Favorers, every week, says the
Council of Beziers, A. D. 1233. Can. 1. and An. D. 1246. Can. 8. And the
Council of Alby, Can. 19. They are actually excommunicated says their Canon
Law. This Sentence does pass upon them yearly in the Bulla Coenae.

2. They must lose all their Goods.

For (1.) whosoever apprehends them (which all have liberty to do) has free
leave to take from them all their Goods, and full right to enjoy them. Council.
To. XI. p. 605.
Constable. Innocentii IV. cap. 2. And this Punishment, says Innocent the Third,
7. Decretal. l. 5. Tit. 7. cap. 10.
we command to be executed on them by the Princes, and Secular Powers, who
shall by Ecclesiastical Censures be compelled thereunto.

Moreover, after the Sentence is pronounced against them, their Goods, if they
have any still remaining shall be all confiscated, and never shall return unto
them. To. XI. p. 6^
Constable. Fred. 2. Council. Bitterrense, Can. 3. p. 678. Statuta Raimundi, Com.
Tolos. page 449, 450. Council. Arelat. A. D. 1234. Can. 5. p. 2341.

The very House in which the Heretic is found must be destroyed and never
built again, and the ground must be confiscated, and so must all the other
Houses contiguous to it, if they belong to the same person, (unless it appear
to the Inquisitors that the Lords of them were wholly inculpable) and all the
Goods of them must be sold, or become his that takes them. Ibid. p. 607. p.
428. p. 449. 450.
Innocent. 4. cap. 26. Clem. 4. Constable. 13. Leg. 25, 26. Council. Tolos. Can. 6.
Council. Bitterr. Can. 35. p. 694. Council. Albien. Can. 6. p. 723. Stat.
Raimundi Commit. Tolos. Council. provinc. Narbon. Can. 35. p. 694.

3. They are to be imprisoned without delay.

And when they have them thus in hold, the Governor is, by the Constitutions
of Pope Innocent the Fourth, obliged Citra diminut^ nem membr^, mortis pericul^
To. 11. p. 6^
to compel them by any Punishments which do not dismember them, or endanger
their death, expressly to confess their Errors, and to accuse all other
Heretics they know of, and the Believers, Receivers, or Defenders of them, and
to tell where their Goods are. Bullar. R. ^ p. 174.
Constable. Innocent. 4. cap. 25. Which Constitution is received by Clemens the
Fourth, Constable. 13. Leg. 24. and is the ground of all the Hellish Cruelties
which those poor Creatures meet with in the Inquisition.

. VII. 4. They must be banished, exterminated, or driven out of all places
where they are. For the Council of Cologne commands Council. To. 1^
all that are subject to it to rise up against Heretics, their Favorers and
Receivers, and faithfully to procure their Extermination. Can. 9. A. D. 1425.
p. 363, 364. And in order hereunto,

1. All secular Powers must swear to expel Heretics out of their Dominions.
To. XI. p. 622.
The Constitutions of the Emperor Frederick the Second run thus, We make a
perpetual Decree, That the Officers, Consuls, Rectors, whatsoever Office they
enjoy, shall, in defense of the Faith, take a public Oath, That they will
honestly endeavor with their utmost power to expel all Heretics, as such
condemned by the Church, out of their Territories. ^^id. p. 423.
And all that shall be admitted hereafter to any place of Government temporal
or perpetual, shall be bound to take this Oath, or lose his Government.
Ludovicus the Seventh, King of France, with the advice of his Nobles, sets
forth his Edicts against Heretics, ^^ncil. To. XI. 423, 424.
commanding all his Barons, Bailiffs, and other Subjects present and future, to
be solicitous and intent to purge their Territories from Heretics and
heretical Filth, and to swear to the observation of this and all the other
Statutes made against them. They must swear to do their endeavors to
exterminate out of their Dominions all Heretics, Believers, Receivers,
Favorers, or Defenders of them, says the Council of Alby, Can. 20. p. 726.
^^^cil. To. XI. ^^^2. p. 2340.
The Council of Arles gives power to the Bishop to compel them by Church
Censures to take this Oath. Can. 3. See the like, Council. Bitter. Can. 9. p.
679, 680. Council. provinc. Narbon. Can. 32. p. 693, 694.

The Constitutions of Innocent the Fourth decree, XI. p. 605.
that every Governor in Lombardy, having called a Common Council, shall put
forth his Edict, to banish all Heretics from under his Jurisdiction, and to
declare, That none of them shall stay within his Jurisdiction. Constable. 2. Bull.
Romans To. I. p. 173.
So also do the Constitutions of Clement the Fourth, Constable. 13. Leg. 2. Now,
for the better Execution of this Punishment, it is decreed,

. VIII. 1. That if any Governor knowingly permit a Heretic to abide in his
Dominions he shall be excommunicated. Council. Bitterr. Can. 2. p. 677.

2. That whosoever, having temporal Dominion, neglects to prosecute those who
by the Church are denounced Heretics, or to exterminate them out of his
Province, or Dominion, is to be deemed a grievous Favourer of Heretics.
Incomparabilit^^ Reus, p. 492.
Council. Narbon. Can. 15.

3. He who knowingly permits a Heretic to abide in his Dominions shall for
ever lose them. And his Body shall be in the Power of his Lord, to do with him
as he ought. Council. To. XI. p. 428.
Council. Tolos. Can. 4. Council. Bitterr. Can. 2. p. 677. Council. Alb. Can. 5.
p. 725. If the temporal Lord being required shall neglect to purge his
Territory from heretical Pravity, after one year elapsed from the time of his
Monition, says the Emperor Frederick, we expose his Territories to be seized
by Catholics, who, having exterminated the Heretics, without contradiction
shall possess it, and preserve it in the Purity of Faith, so as no injury be
done to the right of the superior Lord, who does not any way oppose this
Procedure; provided notwithstanding that the same Law take place against them
who have no principal Lords. p. 622.
Bull. Romans To. p. 90.
Constable. Fred. 2. And this his Constitution is confirmed by Honorius the Third.
Constable. 1.

. IX. Now all these Constitutions of Popes, Kings, Emperors, Provincial
Councils, are also confirmed by the approved general Councils of the R. Church;
and are extended and enlarged by them to Kings, Emperors and Supreme
Governors, and so they are not only Constitutions of State, or of the Court
of Rome, but also of the whole Church of Rome. For,

1. The Fourth general Council of Excommunicamus and anathematizamus ^mnem
Haeresim extollentem se adversus hanc ^anctam orthodoxam Fidem quam superius
ex^osuimus, condemnantes universos Haereticos qui^uscunque nominibus
censeantur. Council. Lat. Can. 3. Council. To. XI. p. 148.
Lateran begins the Chapter against Heretics thus, We excommunicate and
anathematize every Heresy extolling it self against the H. Orthodox Catholic
Faith, which we have now expounded, condemning all Heretics by what names
soever they are called. Eos and Defensores eorum and Recepto^es Anathemati
decernimus subjacere. Council. Lat. tertium. cap. 27.
We anathematize them, their Defenders and Receivers, says the Third general
Council held there.

2. The Third general Council of Bena ejusmodi Damnatorum, si Laici ^erint,
confiscentur. Council. Lat. quartum, ^an. 3. ibid. Confiscentur eorum bona, and
li^rum sit Principibus ejusmodi homines subjice^^ servituti. Lat. tertium, cap.
27. Bona ip^^um, a tempore commissi criminis, secundum ^^onicas Sanctiones
confiscata. Council. Constable. ^^ss. 45. Bin. To. 7. p. 1121.
Lateran under Alexander the Third, the Fourth general Council of Lateran under
Innocent the Third, and the general Council of Constance decree that the Goods
of Heretics, if they be Laymen, shall be confiscated.

3. They decree that the Temporal Lords, being required by the Inquisitors,
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. Ut praesatas personas pestiferas -- in ^estatem, seu
carcerem -- infra eorundem Do^norum potestatem, seu judicum districtum ^cant,
vel duci faciant, sine mora, ubi per ^ros Catholicos -- sub arcta and diligenti
custodia, ne fugiant ponendo eos etiam compedibus and manicis ferreis, teneant,
donec eorum negotium per Ecclesiae judicium terminetur. Council. Constable. Sess.
45. Bin. To. 7. p. 1121.
shall within their Jurisdictions, without delay, imprison Heretics, and cause
them to be kept in close custody, by putting them into Fetters and Iron Chains,
till the Church has passed sentence on them; and not Vide Sext. Decretal. l.
5. tit. 2. c. 18.
freeing them from prison without the License of the Bishop or Inquisitors. And,

4. They decree that the Moneantur autem, and inducantur, and, si necesse
fuerit, per Censuram Ecclesiasticam compellantur Seculares Potestates,
quibuscunque funguntur Officiis, ut sicut reputari cupiunt and haberi fideles,
it a pro defensione Fidei praestent public Juramentum quod de terris suae
jurisdictioni subjecti; universos Haereticos ab Ecclesia denotatos bona fide
pro viribus exterminare studebutn: it a quod a modo quomodocunque quis fuerit
in Potestatem sive spiritualem sive temporalem assumptus hoc teneatur capitulum
Juramento firmare. Council. Lat. quartum. Can. 3. ibid.
Secular Powers, what Offices soever they enjoy, shall be admonished, and, if
need be, compelled by Ecclesiastical Censure, that as they desire to be reputed
Christians, so they will take an Oath for the defense of the Faith, that they
will honestly endeavor with their whole Power to exterminate all Heretics,
condemned by the Church, out of their Territories. Thus the fourth Lateran
Council has defined. The general Council of Constance requires Omnes
Christianae and Catholicae Fidei Professores, Imperatorem, Reges, Duces,
Principes, etc. necnon caeteros jurisdictionem temporalem exercentes juxta
Juris formam and exigentiam Authoritate Apostolica exhortando moneatis and
requiratis ut de Regnis, Provinciis, Civitatibus, Oppidis, Castris, Villis,
Terris and Locis aliis, ac Dominiis supradictis, omnes and singulos Haereticos
hujusinodi, secundum tenorem Lateranensis Concilii, quod iucipit sicut ait, --
tanquam oves morbidas Gregem Domini inficientes, expellant: nec eosdem in suis
districtibus praedicare, domicilia tenere, larem fovere, contractus inire,
negociationes and mercationes quaslibet exercere, aut humanitatis solatia, N.
B. cum Christi Fidelibus habere permittant. Conc. Constable. Sess. 45. apud Bin.
To. 7. p. 1121. A. Vide Council. Lat. tertium, cap. 27.
All Archbishops, Bishops, and other persons chosen for this Work, to admonish
and require all Kings, Emperors, Dukes, Princes, Earls, Barons, etc. and by
the Apostolical Authority to command them, to expel all Heretics
forementioned out of their Kingdoms, Provinces, Cities, Towns, Castles,
Villages, Territories and other Places, according to the Canon of the Lateram
Council which begins with the words, Sicut ait, that is, according to the
Twenty seventh Canon of the Third general Council of Lateran, which, under
Anathema, forbids any one to let the Heretics there mentioned tarry within
their Houses or Territories.

5. The Fourth Council of Si vero Dominus temporalis requisitus, and monitus ab
Ecclesia, terram suam purgare neglexerit ab hac haeretica foeditate, per
Metropolitanum and caeteros Comprovinciales Episcopos excommunicationis vinculo
innodetur, and, si satisfacere contempserit infra annum, significetur hoc Summo
Pontifici, ut ex tunc ipse vasallos ab ejus fidelitate denunciet absolutos, and
terram exponat Catholicis occupandam, qui eam, exterminatis Haereticis, sine
ulla contradictione possideant, and in fidei puritate conservent, salvo jure
Domini principalis, dummodo super hoc ipse nullum praestet obstaculum, nec
aliquod impedimentum opponat, eadem nihilominus lege servata circa eos qui non
habent Dominos principales. Ibid. p. 148, 149.
Lateran adds, that if the Temporal Lord, being required and admonished by the
Church, shall neglect to purge his Territories from Heretical Filth, he shall
be excommunicated by the Metropolitan and his Suffragans; and if he neglect to
give satisfaction within a year, this shall be signified to the Pope, that he,
from hence forth, may pronounce his Subjects discharged from their obedience,
and expose his Territories to be enjoyed by Catholics, who, having
exterminated the Heretics, shall possess it without all contradiction, and
keep it in the purity of Faith, so that no injury be done to the Principal
Lord, who does not oppose his procedure; provided notwithstanding that the same
Law take place against them who have no Temporal Lords. Now let it be observed
that both the Councils of Cord and ore prositeor fidem secundum traditionem
octo Conciliorum generalium, neenon Lateranensis, Lugdunensis, Viennensis,
Constantiensis, generalium etiam Conciliorum, and illam fidem usque ad unam
apicem immutilatam servare, and usque ad animam and sanguinem defensare, and
praedicare. Council. Constant. Sess. 39. Basil. Sess. 37.
Constance, and of Basil, do reckon this of Lateran among those Councils which
all their Popes must swear to maintain to the least tittle, and to defend even
to Blood; and that the Council of Per Lateranense Concilium Ecclesia statuit.
Sess. 14. c. 5.
Trent not only has declared it to be a general Council, but also does affirm
one of its Definitions to be the voice of the whole Church, and therefore these
three general Councils must be supposed to approve all that is cited from this
Council. The general Council of Omnes and singulos Haereticos hujusmodi, necnon
Sectatores ipsarum Haeresum and Errorum utriusque sexus, tenentes, and etiam
defendentes eosdem, aut Haereticis ipsis quomodolibet, public vel occulte, in
divinis, vel alias participantes, etiamsi Patriarchali, Archiepiscopali,
Episcopali, Regali, Reginali, Ducali, aut alia quavis Ecclesiastica vel mundana
praefulgeant dignitate, -- excommunicatos singulis diebus dominicis and
festivis, in praesentia populi nuncietis, and per alios nunciari faciatis, and
nihilominus contra cosdem omnes and singulos, utriusque sexus, hujusmodi
errores tenentes, approbantes, defendentes, dogmatizantes ac Fautores and
Receptores and Defensores eorundem, -- and quemlibet ipsorum, cujuscunque
dignitatis, status, praeeminentiae, gradus, ordinis vel conditionis existunt,
auctoritate nostra diligenter inquirere studeatis, and eos quos per
inquisitionem hujusmodi diffamatos, vel per confessionem eorum, vel per facti
evidentiam, vel alias hujusmodi haeresis and erroris labe respersos reperretis,
auctoritate praedicta, etiam per excommunicationis, suspensionis, and
interdicti, necnon privationis dignitatum, personatuum and officiorum,
aliorumque beneficiorum Ecclesiasticorum^^^ soudorum, quae a quibuscunque
Ecclesiis, Monasteriis, ac aliis locis Ecclesiasticis obtinent, ac etiam
bonorum and dignitatum secularium -- and per alias poenas, sententias and
censuras Ecclesiasticas, ac vias and modos quos ad hoc expedire, seu opportunos
esse videritis, etiam per captiones and incarcerationes personarum, and alias
poenas corporales quibus Haeretici puniuntur, seu puniri jubentur, aut solent,
juxta Canonicas Sanctiones. Council. Constant. Sess. 45. apud Bin. To. 7. p.
1125.
Constance decrees that all Heretics, all Followers and Defenders of them, or
Partakers with them, though they shine in the Dignity of Patriarchs,
Archbishops, Bishops, Kings, Queens, Dukes, or any other Ecclesiastical or
Mundane Title, shall be pronounced excommunicate in the presence of the People
every Sunday and Holy Day: And that the Archbishops, Bishops, and Inquisitors
shall diligently enquire concerning them, who hold, approve, defend, dogmatize
or receive such Heresies or Errors as they before had mentioned, of what
Dignity, State, Preeminence, Degree, Order or Condition soever they are, and if
they be found guilty or infamed, by their Authority shall proceed against them
by the Punishments of excommunication, suspension, interdict, as also of
deprivation of their Dignities, Offices and Benefices Ecclesiastical, and also
of their Secular Dignities and Honors, and by any other Penalties, Sentences,
Ecclesiastical Censures, ways or manners which they shall judge expedient, even
by taking and imprisoning their persons, and executing upon them any corporal
Punishments with which Heretics use to be punished, according to the Canonical
Sanctions. The general Council of Siena Council. To. XII. p. 367.
confirming this Bull of Martin the Fifth made with the approbation and
concurrence of the Council of Constance, and so, upon the matter, renews all
the forementioned Decrees.

. X. And whereas our dear Lord declares, he came not to destroy men's lives, but
to save them, they have set up under the Banner of the Cross an Host of men on
purpose to exterminate, destroy and butcher those whom they are pleased to call
Heretics, and, to encourage them in this inhumane service, do promise them the
greatest privileges. The Si Bohemi non venerint ad Concilium sic solenniter
mandati, tunc Principes and Christi Fideles poterunt ad pugnam animari: ( and
paulo post) just induci possit bellum contra Haereticos damnatos. Append. ad.
Council. Basil. apud Bin. To. 8. p. 200.
Council of Bourges, approved by the general Council of Basil, declares, that
War may justly be waged against condemned Heretics, and that Princes and
Christian People may be animated to fight against them.

The Fourth general Council of Catholici vero, qui Crucis assumpto charactere,
ad Haereticorum exterminium se accinxerint, illa gaudeant indulgentia, illoque
sancto privilegio sint muniti, quod accedentibus in terrae sanctae subsidium
conceditur. Council. Lat. quartum, To. XI. p. 149.
Lateran decrees, that they who under the badge of the Cross will set
themselves to exterminate Heretics, shall enjoy that Indulgence and that holy
Privilege which is granted to them who go in defense of the Holy Land, and that
is full remission of all their sins which they confess, and for which they have
been contrite, and a greater degree of everlasting Happiness than others may
expect. Can. 3.

The Third general Council of Eos qui ardore Fidei ad (Haereticos praefatos)
expugnandum, laborem iustum assumpserint, sicut eos qui sepulchrum dominicum
visitant sub Ecclesiae defensione recipimus, and ab universis inquietationibus
tam in rebus quam in personis, statuimus manner securos; and rursus fidelibus
Christianis qui contra eos arma susceperint biennium de poenitentia injuncta
relaxamus, aut si longiorem ibi moram habuerint, Episcoporum discretioni,
quibus hujus rei cura fuerit injuncta, committimus, ut ad eorum arbitrium
secundum modum laboris, major eis Indulgentia tribuatur. Council. Lat. 3. cap.
27. apud Bin. To. 7. p. 662.
Lateran decrees, they shall be taken under the defense of the Church, and
shall be secure from any manner of molestation in their Goods and Persons, and
shall have two years release of the Penance enjoined them, and receive greater
Indulgence at the discretion of the Bishops. Cap. 27. The general Council of
Siena decrees, that all who prosecute and procure the extirpation of the
Wicklefists and Hussites, shall enjoy all the Rights, Privileges and
Indulgences concerning the Pardon of their Sins, which have been granted to
them that rise up against Heretics. And to Statuit haec sancta Synodus, quod
quicunque capientes Haereticos, and in potestatem Ordinariorum vel Inquisitorum
Haereticae pravitatis effectualiter ponentes, vel eos, quos detinere, seu
capere non possent, de eorum territoriis omnes expellentes, aut bannientes, seu
etiam requisiti, brachium seculare contra eos praestantes eam Indulgentiam
consequantur quae dari consuevit personaliter proficiscentibus in subsidium
Terrae Sanctae. Council. To. 12. p. 368, 369.
all that will prosecute those Heretics, apprehend or bring them to the
Inquisitors, or, if they cannot apprehend, will expel them from their
Territories, and, if they be required fight against them; they promise all the
Privileges granted to those who went to the assistance of the Holy Land. So
also does the Canon Law. Eugenius Decretal. l. 5. Tit. 7. cap. 13.
the Fourth, in his Bull of Revocation of the general Council of Basil objects
this to them, That against the Decrees of the Holy Fathers, and the Edicts of
Emperors, which deny the admitting Heretics to audience, and in prejudice to
the Authority Apostolic, and the Authority of the H. Councils, they had
invited the Bohemians to dispute at Basil, about certain Articles condemned by
the Decrees of Popes and Councils, it being, says he, notorious to the whole
World, that the Bohemian Heretics were maturely and solemnly condemned in the
Council of Constance and in the Council of Siena, were by diverse Processes of
the Apostles See and his Legates aggravated once and again, and that War was
proclaimed and the Secular Arm invoked against them. Invocatione etiam auxilii
brachii secularis, and publici belli indictione multiplici. Bin. To. 8. p. 267.
Coeleste Regnum a Deo consequitur qui pro Christianorum defensione moritur.
He shall obtain of God the Kingdom of Heaven who dies for the defense of
Christians, says a Lemma of the Canon Law: the words of the Chapter are said
to be directed by Leo the Fourth to the French Army; and they speak thus, viz.
Omni timore and terrore deposito, contra Inimicos Sanctae Fidei, and
Adversarios omnium Religionum agere viriliter studete; novit enim Omnipotens si
quilibet vestrum morietur, quod pro veritate Fidei, -- ac defensione
Christianorum mortuus est, and ideo ab eo praemium coeleste consequetur.
Decret. Part. 2. Cause. 23. qu. 8. cap. 9.
laying aside all fear and terror, act boldly against the Enemies of H. Faith,
and the Adversaries of all Religion; for the Omnipotent knows, that if any of
you dies he dies for the true Faith, the Preservation of his Country, and the
Defense of Christians; and therefore he shall obtain of God a Heavenly Reward.

. XI. Council. To. XI. p. 619, 621.
The last Punishment which these poor Creatures must undergo is Death. They
shall not be suffered to live, say the Constitutions of Frederick the Second.
The Natareni and all other Heretics shall be duly punished by the Secular
Judge, they shall take them away by a damnable Death, say the same
Constitutions, p. 619. For their Extirpation, we decree, says Ludovicus the
Seventh King of France, Council. To. XI. p. 423.
that, being condemned, they shall be punished with the Animadversion due unto
them. So also does the Canon Law. Decretal. l. 5. tit. 7. cap. 13. By the
Statute of our King Henry the Fourth, against the Llollards, after the Sentence
pronounced against these Heretics; the Mayor, the Sheriff, or their Officers,
who must be present at the Execution, must take them into their Custody, and
burn them before the People in some eminent place. Council. Tom. 11. part. 2. p.
2101. A. D. 1408.

The Constitutions of Frederick the Second decree, Page 619.
that the same Punishment shall be inflicted upon those who cherish and defend
them.

And upon all who having once adjured their Heresy relapse into it. Ibid. p.
620.

If after Death they shall be found to have been Heretics, their Bodies must
be dug up, and their Bones burnt. Council. Albiense, Can, 25. p. 727.

And the temporal Lords, by the Diocesun, and the Inquisitors, must be
compelled by Ecclesiastical Censures to dig up their Bodies. Council. Alb. Can.
27. p. 728.

Moreover, The Sons and Nephews of Heretics or of their Receivers, Defenders
or Favorers, must be admitted to no public Offices or Benefices Ecclesiastical
or Secular, To. XI. p. 622.
nor to succeed to the Inheritance of their Fathers. Constable. Fred. 2. Innocent.
4. Bull. To. To. I. p. 182.
cap. 29. p. 608. Nich. 3. Constable. 2.. 21. These are the Laws established which
lay an Obligation upon those of this Communion to punish Heretics.

. XII. And that what they have thus established may be inviolably observed,
they decree, 1. That all the Governors forementioned must proceed according to
their Constitutions against all Heresies extolling themselves against the
Church of Rome. Clem. 4. Constit. 8.. 2. ubi supra.

2. That Page 608.
these Punishments of Heretics must by no means be relaxed. Constable. Innoc. 4.
Cap. 32. Clem. 4. Constable. 13. Leg. 34. Bull. To. 1. p. 175. and as they must not
be relaxed, so neither must they be delayed. For,

3. When any person is condemned for Heresy, the Magistrate, within five days,
must execute the Sentence which has past upon him. Innoc. 4. Constable. Page 607.
cap. 24. he must presently receive them into his Custody for that end. Clem.
4. Constable. 13. Leg. 23. Bull. Romans p. 174.
He shall punish them without delay. Constable. Ludovici, To. XI. p. 423.
Regis Francorum. And,

4. That no person may have any temptation or excuse, either for the relaxing
or delaying of them, they are required to execute them without enquiry made
into the Justice of them; For by the Constitutions of Innocent the Eighth, All
Magistrates, under the Penalty of Excommunication, must execute the Penalties
by the Inquisitors imposed on Heretics, without revising the Justice of them;
Because Heresy is a Crime merely Ecclesiastical. Constable. 10. Bull. Romans To. 1.
p. 453.

. XIII. Moreover, That no Governor may plead Ignorance as to any of these Laws,
by the Constitutions of Innocent the Fourth, To. XI. p. 609.
Every Governor must have a Copy of these Laws inserted into the Statute Book
of the City where he does preside. Constable. 33. Clemens the 4th commands all
Rulers throughout Italy, to write down in their Chapter-acts, or in their Books
of Statutes, the Constitutions set forth against Heretics by Innocent the
Fourth, and Alexander the Fourth, Bull. Romans To. I. p. 166.
Constable. 8.. 1. And,

2. If any blot out, diminish or alter any of these Constitutions without the
consent of the Apostolic* See, he must be proceeded against as a public
Defender or Favorer of Heretics, Innocent. 4. Page 609.
Constable. 34. Clem. 4. Constable. 13. Leg. 37. p. 175. And that no person may plead
an Obligation by virtue of any other Constitutions, to neglect the prosecution
of these Laws.

3. All Statutes contrary to these, throughout all Italy, must be abolished and
rased out of all places and Cities within their Jurisdiction, Innocen. 4. Page
609.
Constable. 37. Clem. 4. Constit. 13. Leg. 39. By the Constitution Bull. Romans To.
I. p. 175.
of Urban the Fourth, Sexti Decretal. l. 5. tit. 2. cap. 9.
the Statutes of any City, Castle, Village, or other place, whereby the
business of the Inquisition of Heretical pravity is directly or indirectly
hindered or retarded, are made void, and the Rectors and Governors of those
places are, by Ecclesiastical Censure to be compelled to revoke them.

. XIV. Again, That knowing of these Constitutions they may not dare to be
remiss as to the Execution of them; at their Admission they must swear to the
Observance of them, he who will not do so, must not be owned as a Governor in
any place of Italy, nor must any of his Acts be valid, nor any person be
obliged to perform the Oaths made to him, To. XI. p. 604.
Innoc. 4. Constable. 1. Clem. 4. Constable. 13. Leg. 1. Nor is Bull. Romans To. I. p.
173. p. 622.
he, by the Laws of Frederick the Second, to be admitted as a Governor in any
place of the Empire. And these two Constitutions are made a part of the Canon
Law, as you may see, Sexti Decretal. l. 5. tit. 2. cap. 11.

If, having thus sworn, he shall neglect to observe all, and several of these
Constitutions, he must be divested of his Office and Government, and be
henceforth incapable of any Dignity, Office and Honor, To. XI. p. 604.
and must be prosecuted as a person infamous, perjured, suspected concerning
the Faith, and a Favorer of Heretics. Bull. Romans To. I. p. 173.
Constable. Innoc. 4. Constable. 1. Clem. 4. Constable. 13. Leg. 2. If he do not proceed
according to these Rules against all Heresies extolling themselves against the
Church of Rome, he must be punished with an Excommunication and an Interdict
upon his Jurisdiction, to be inflicted by the Inquisitors on all Refusers. p.
166.
Constit. 8.. 2. Constit. 13.. 2. p. 172.

If any Bishop be negligent or remiss in purging of his Diocese from Heretical
pravity, he, by the Si quis Episcopus, super expurgando de sua Diocaesi
Haeretica pravitatis sermento, negligens fuerit vel remissus, cum id certis
indiciis apparuerit, ab Episcopali Officio deponatur, and in locum ipsius alter
substituatur idoneus, qui velit and possit Haereticam confundere pravitatem.
Council. Lat. Can. 3. Council. To. XI. p. 152.
Canon of the Fourth general, Council of Lateran, must be deposed from his
Episcopal Office; and the same Punishment is threatened by the general Council
of Nos enim contra omnes Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, etc. qui super extirpando
Haereticae pravitatis sermento -- negligences fuerint, -- usque ad privati nem
seu depositionem Pontificalis Dignitatis procedere intendimus and procedemus.
Sess. 45. apud Bin. To. ^. p. 1122.
Constance to all Archbishops, Bishops, or Inquisitors who are thus negligent
and remiss, and also by the Canon Law, Decretal. l. 5. tit. 7. cap. 13.

To. XI. p. 428.
If any Bailiff be negligent in this Work, he must lose his Goods and be
incapable of the Office. Council. Tolos. Can. 7. Council. Albiense, Can. 7. p.
723.

If any person whatsoever will not execute the Sentence of the Inquisitors, he
must be compelled to it by Ecclesiastical Censures; and if then he amend not,
both his Diocesan and the Inquisitors must proceed against him as a Defender
and Favorer of Heretics. Council. To. XI. p. 698.
p. 726. 727.
So the Council of Valence, A. D. 1248. Can. 9. Council. Albiense. Can. 22. A.
D. 1254.

. XV. And that no man may dare to give these Vide Bullam Nichol. 3. Constable. 2..
3. Bull. Romans To. I. p. 182. and Clem. 4. Constable. 13. l. 27. p. 175.
Heretics Credit, or show them the least Favor, they have decreed, 1. That all
who are Believers of Heretics, or give Credit to their Errors, shall be
condemned and punished as Heretics. Innoc. 4. Constable. 27. Now such a one is he,
says the Provincial Council of Narbon, To. XI. p. 495, 496.
who shows them any Reverence, who believes that they, continuing in their
Sect, may be saved, or may be good and holy Men, or Friends of God, or of good
Life and Conversation, or that they who prosecute them do offend. Can. 29. They
are to be reputed Favorers of Heretics, says the Provincial Council of
Narbon, P. 492. Can. 14.
who hinder the Cor-rection or Extirpation of Heretics, and those that believe
them, or do not do that which without manifest fault they cannot omit toward
it; they greatly favor them who conceal them when they may and ought to reveal
them; they more, who by concealing of them maliciously endeavor to hinder their
Examination, Incarceration or Punishment; they most of all, who release them
without the consent of the Church, when they are taken or imprisoned, or by
whose Counsel, Aid or Command, such things are done: Ibid. Can. 16.
Nor are they free from this Crime, who, having opportunity of place and time,
and power to apprehend Heretics, or help others so to do, wickedly let it
slip, especially, when they are required to assist by others that are willing
to apprehend them.

2. Credentes vero praeterea, Receptores, Defensores and Fautores Haereticorum,
Excommunicationi decernimus subjacere: firmiter statuentes, ut postquam quis
talium fuerit Excommunicatione notatus, si satisfacere contempserit infra
annum, extunc ipso jure sit factus infamis, nec ad publica Officia, seu
Consilia, nec ad eligendos aliquos ad hujusmodi, nec ad Testimonium admittatur:
Sit etiam intestabilis, ut nec tesrandi liberam habeat facultatem, nec ad
haereditatis successionem accedat: Nullus praeterea ipsi super quocunque
negotio, sed ipse aliis respondere cogatur, quod si forte Judex exstiterit,
ejus sententia nullam obtineat firmitatem, nec causae aliquae ad ejus
audientiam perferantur; si fuerit Advocatus, ejus patrocinium nullatenus
admittatur; si Tabellio, ejus instrumenta confecta per ipsum nullius penitus
sint momenti, sed cum Autore damnato damnentur. Council. Lat. quartum, Can. 3.
Council. To. XI. p. 149, 150.
If any Believer, Receiver, Defender or Favorer of Heretics, being
excommunicated, do not satisfy (the Church) within a year, he from hence
forward shall be infamous, and shall not be admitted to give Testimony, or to
public Offices, or to Councils, or to the Election of those that belong to
them: he shall have no power of making any Will, or succeeding to any
Inheritance: No man shall be obliged to answer him in any Cause, but he shall
be compelled to answer others; if he be a Judge, his Sentence shall be void and
null, nor shall any Causes come before him; if an Advocate, he shall not be
admitted to plead; If a Clerk or Notary, the Instruments drawn by him shall be
of no moment. So the Constable. Council. To. XI. p. 622, 623. Bull. Romans To. I. p.
182, 175.
Freder. 2. the Constitutions of Clement the Fourth, Constable. 27. And lastly, All
this is confirmed by the Fourth general Council of Lateran in express words,
To. XI. p. 150. 149.
Cap. 3. de Haereticis, and by the Canon Law, Decretal. l. 5. tit. 7. cap. 13.

. XVI. Moreover, for the Security and the Encouragement of such as shall accuse
them; Whereas* according to the Laws of heathen Rome, no man could Act. 25. 16.
be condemned, till he had his Accusers brought before his Face, they have
decreed that the Names of the Accusers of Heretics shall not be made public
either by Word or Sign, because this is the pleasure of the Apostolic See. So
Council. Narbon. A. D. 1235. Council. To. XI. p. 494. p. 689, 690.
Can. 22. Council. Bitter. An. Do. 1246. cap. 10. And whereas, in other Cases,
by the Laws of all Nations, notorious Criminals, infamous and perjured Persons,
were not to be admitted to give Testimony against others, especially in matters
of Life and Death: All Criminals, and infamous Persons, though Partakers with
them in their Crimes, may be admitted to accuse Ibid. p. 494. p. 690.
and testify against the Heretics. Council. Narbon. An. Dom. 1235. Can. 24.
Council. Bitter. An. D. 1246. cap. 12.

. XVII. Now sutably to these Decrees and Principles the Pope has frequently
proceeded, depriving Civil Governors of their Dominions, as being Favorers of
Heretics, or as neglecting to extirpate Heretics out of their Territories.
For Raimundus, Comes Tolosanus, Albigensium Fautor, jam saepius excommunicatus,
cum and ditionem suam cuivis occupanti a Pontifice concessam cerneret, etc.
Council. To. XI. page 35.
Raimund, Count of Tolose, was excommunicated by Innocent the Third, because he
was a Favorer of Heretics, and his Dominions, by the Pope, were given to any
person who would seize upon them. In the year 1210. the Citizens of Tolose were
by the Council of In quo Concilio excommunicati fuerunt, and expositi, Cives
Tolosani, pro eo quod ea quae Legato, and Cruce signatis, promiserant, de
expulsione Haereticorum, adimplere contempserant. Ibid. page 53.
Avignion excommunicated, because they neglected to perform what they had
promised concerning the Expulsion of Heretics. In a Council held at Vaur, A.
D. 1213. Arnaldus Apostol. Sedis Legatus, datis literis, Auctoritate
Apostolica, Regem admonuit, quin etiam imperavit, ut a protectione, defensione,
communioneque Haereticorum abstineret, alioquin easdem censuras and poenas
Ecclesiasticas in eum pronunciaret. Bin. To. 7. p. 792.
Arnaldus the Pope's Legate, by the Apostolic Authority, does admonish and
command the King of Arragon to abstain from the Protection, Defense or
Communion of Heretics, threatening that otherwise he would pronounce against
him the same Censures and Ecclesiastical Punishments which are denounced
against them. Yea the Pope himself informs him, that if he proceeded to be a
Nec nos tibi contra Fidei Christianae negotium possemus parcere vel defer,
quantum enim tibi unmineret periculum, si Deo and Ecclesiae, praesertim in
causa Fidei, te opponeres -- moderna possunt te exempla monere. Council. To. XI.
p. 95.
Favorer of Heretics, he could not spare him, nor delay his Punishment; and
that he might by the Example of others, who of late had opposed themselves to
God and the Church, perceive what great danger hanged over his head. The
occasion of all this was as follows; Peter, King of Arragon, solicits for
Raimund, Count of Tolose, that he might be received into the Church, and for
the Vt Comes Convenarum restituatur ad terram suam, ut Comes Fuxensis
restituatur ad sua. Council. To. XI. p. 82. Pro certo intelleximus, quod Comes
Convenarum Foedus cum Haereticis and eorum Fautoribus contraxisset, constatque
de Comite Fuxensi, quod Haereticorum extit it a longo tempore Receptator, p. 83.
Counts of Cominges and Fux, That they might be restored to their own again. To
this the Council answer, That Count Cominges had made a League with Heretics
and their Favorers, and that the Count of Fux was a Receiver of them, and
therefore his Majesty ought not to intercede for them till they have satisfied
the Church. Whereupon the King sides with them, endeavoring to obtain by Force,
what by Petition he could not obtain. In the year 1214. a Council met at In hoc
tandem omnium and singulorum vota and consilia convenerunt, ut nobilem Comitem
Montisfortis eligerent in totius terrae illius Principem and Monarcham. --
postquam ergo Archiepiscopi and Episcopi elegerunt praenobilem Comitem,
instantissime requisierunt a Legato, ut ipse statim traderet totam terram eidem
Comiti. -- Dominus Papa -- commendabat Comiti Montisfortis custodiendam, donec
in Concilio generali, quod in Kalendis Novembris illius anni, Romae
convocaverat, de terris praedictis before ordinaret. Council. To. XI. p. 104.
Montpellier, of five Archbishops, and 28 Bishops, who choose the Count of
Montfort, Prince and Monarch of the Dominions of the Count of Tolose, the
forementioned Favorer of the Albigenses, desiring the Pope's Legate to confirm
their choice. He, having no Instructions touching this matter, acquaints the
Pope with their Request, who does immediately commit to him the Custody and
allow him the Benefit of those Dominions, referring the matter of the Title to
the Decision of the Fourth general Council of Lateran, then called, and the
next year assembled, which resolves the Case thus; Council. To. XI. p. 148, 149.
That the Pope shall absolve the Subjects of such Favorers of Heretics from
their Allegiance, and expose their Territories to be enjoyed by Catholics,
who, having destroyed the Heretics, shall possess it without any
Contradiction, so that no Injury be done to the Principal Lord; who in this
Case was the French King. In a Council held in the Province of Statuimus and
praecipimus observari districte, ut Raimundus, filius Raimundi, quondam Comitis
Tolosani, Comes Fuxensis, etc. Tolosani Haeretici, Credentes, Fautores,
Defensores and Receptatores eorundem, Candelis accensis, pulsatis Campa^^^^,
de^uncientur excommunicati, and expositi cuilibet occupanti, tam in rebus quam
in personis per singulas Parochias, singulis diebus Dominicis and Festivis.
Council. Narbon. Can. 17. Council. To. XI. p. 308.
Narbon, An. Dom. 1227. Raimund the Son of Raimund, Count of Tolose, the Count
of Fux, the Heretics of Tolose, and the Receivers, Believers, Favorers,
Defenders of them are denounced excommunicate by Bell, Book and Candle, and are
exposed, as to their goods and persons, to every one that can seize on them.

A. D. 1281. Michaelem Palaeologum, qui Graecorum Imperator nominatur, tanquam
eorundem Graecorum, antiquorum Schismaticorum, and in antiquo Schismate
constitutorum, and per hoc Haereticorum, necnon and Haeresis ipsorum ac
Schismatis antiqui Fautorem, de fratrum nostrorum Concilio denunciamus
Excommunicationis Sententiam latam a Canone incurrisse, ac ipsius fore
Sententiae vinculo innodatum. Caeterum universis and singulis Regibus,
Principibus, Ducibus, etc. and caeteris omnibus cujuscunque sint
praeeminentiae, conditionis aut statiis, -- districtius inhibemus, ne cum eodem
Michaele Palaeologo, in hujusmodi Excommunicatione manente, societatem vel
confoederationem aliquam contrahere sub quovis ingenio vel machinatione
praesumant; -- omnes and singulares personas contrarium facientes -- Sententiam
Excommunicationis, quam nunc in ipsos ^erimus, volumus incurrere ipso facto --
and nihilominus societates confoederationum ipsas, etiamsi poenarum and
juramenti adjectione, vel quacunque fuerint alia firmitate vallatae, decernimus
irritas and inanes. Mart. Constable. Unic. Bull. Romans To. I. p. 182, 183.. 1, 2, 3.
Martin the Fourth does pass the Sentence of Excommunication, actually
incurred, against Michael Paleologus, as being a Favorer of those Schismatics,
the Greeks, and therefore a Maintainer of Heretics, and of their Heresies and
Schisms -- and he moreover does command all Kings, Princes, Dukes, etc. and all
other Persons, of what Dignity, Condition or Estate soever, under the Penalty
of the same Excommunication, to make no Leagues or Confederacies with him;
pronouncing all such Confederacies null and void; though they have been
confirmed with an Oath, or any other firmness whatsoever.

A. D. 1307. Clement the Fifth, by the Advice of Extrav. Com. l. 5. tit. 10.
cap. 3.
his Brethren, does pass the very same Sentence upon Andronieus Paleologus, the
Emperor of the Greeks, for the same Crime.

A. D. 1326. Castrutius, Governor of Luca, is condemned Spond. Annal. To. 1. p.
418.. 2.
by the Pope's Legate, as a Persecutor of the Church, and a Favorer of
Heretics and Schismatics, and is deprived of all his Dignities, and exposed
to every one that would fall upon him.

A. D. 1425. Martin the Fifth pronounces a most 16. p. 791.. 1.
heavy and severe Sentence against the Person and Kingdoms of Alphonsus, King
of Arragon, as being a Favorer of Schism.

A. D. 1512. Julius the Second, having notice that Apud Spond. To. 2. p. 297..
23.
the King of Navar favored the Enemies of the Church, he recurr'd to that last
Remedy which is wont to be used against Rebellious Princes, execrating the King
and Queen of Navar, depriving them of their Dominions, and exciting all Princes
to seize upon the common Prey. Tanquam Sectartorum Fautorem and Defensorem
publicum and manifestum. Vide Thuan. l 82. p 45. Bull. Sixti 5. edit. A. D.
1585.
Henry the Third of France spared the Blood of Protestants, and refused to
declare his Successor incapable of the Succession, though he was a Protestant;
wherefore Sixtus the Fifth, A. D. 1585* excommunicates him as a manifest
Favorer of Heretics, and grants Nine years of true Indulgence to any of his
Subjects who would bear Arms against him, and does absolve them all from their
Allegiance to him. Upon this, his Subjects rebel against him, and Friar
Clement murders him.

A. D. 1592. Clement the Eighth declares* that Henry Spond. ibid. p. 875.. 4.
the Fourth of France was unworthy of the Kingdom, as being a Destroyer of the
Orthodox Faith and a Favorer of Heretics, and therefore he commands the
Election of another.

A. D. 1570. Declaramus praedictam Elizabetham Haereticam, Haereticorumque
Fautricem, praetenso Regni praedicti jure, nec non omni and quocunque Dominio,
Dignitate, Privilegioque privatam, and etiam Proceres, Subditos and Populos
dicti Regni qui illi quomodocunque juraverunt, a Juramento hujusmodi, ac omni
prorsus Dominii, Fidelitatis, and Obsequii debito, perpetuo absolutos. Bull.
Pii Quinti. Bullar. To. 2. p. 303.
Pius the Fifth declares Q. Elizabeth a Heretic and a Favorer of Heretics,
and for that Cause deprived of all Dominion, Dignity and Privilege whatsoever,
and her Subjects absolved from their Oaths, and from all Duty, Allegiance and
Obedience, by that Oath due unto her.

. XVIII. Let it be then considered, that though Councils join with Popes in the
making of Canons, yet by the Constitutions of that Church the Pope alone is he
to whom belongs the Execution, and the Authentical expounding of those Canons,
as they must be reduced to practice: And that the Pope is authorized by their
Nos enim unum Ecclesiae corpus sumus, and ipse hujus corporis caput sub Capite
Christo, quicquid igitur fit ab hoc corpore Ecclesiastico, ab ipso magis quam
ab alio corporis membro procedere censetur, itaque non secus Synodalia Decreta
pro suo debito and honor exequi debet, ac per alios servari facere, quam si ab
ore proprio dictata and promulgata essent. Resp. Synod. Basii. apud Binium, To.
8. p. 141. A. C. D.

Quoties aliqua de universali Synodo aliquibus dubitatio nascitur, ad
recipiendam de eo quod non intelligunt rationem, ii qui salutem animae suae
desiderant, ad Apostolicam Sedem pro recipienda ratione conveniant. Decret.
part. 1. did. 17. cap. 4. Si quid eos de judicio universalis Synodi quod
Constantinopoli per primam nuper elapsam indictionem actum est, forte movebat
ad Sedem Apostolicam Electis aliquibus de suis qui dare and accipere rationem
possent dirigere debuerant. Decret. part. 2. cause. 23. qu. 5. cap. 43.

Si in his recipiendis aliqua difficultas oriatur, aut aliqua inciderit quae
declarationem, quod non credit, aut definitionem postulant, confidit Sancta
Synodus B. R. Pontificem curaturum, etc. Synod. Trident. Sess. 25. p. 648.


Councils, both to interpret and to execute their Canons during the Interval of
their Sessions. And then, this being well considered, you will find reason to
conclude, that their whole Church is very much concerned in what the Popes do
practice by virtue of those Canons, or in pursuance of them. And unless that
Practice of the Popes in Execution of the Canons, which is allowed by Councils
themselves, during the Intervals of their sitting, may be reputed the Practice
of their Church, I cannot imagine how they can impute any thing to their Church
which is not done in Councils: And if that only which is done in Councils must
be reputed as done by the Church, the Church must wholly be unactive in the
Intervals, and unable to exercise any Authority by virtue of such Canons as
have no Authentical Expositor, and no man authorized to execute them.

. XIX. Moreover though any Prince, who has embraced the Romish Faith, should
promise not to prosecute his Protestant Subjects according to the tenor of
these severe and sanguinary Laws, yet cannot his most solemn Promises give to
them any just Security of Freedom and Exemption from these Punishments. This
will sufficiently appear, if we consider,

1. That the same impulse of Conscience that makes a man a R. Catholic, will
also make him act like one, when he has opportunity to do it; it therefore
must engage him to believe that the Decrees of Nec quisquam illud dicere
praesumat quod aliquod generale Concilium legitime congregatum errare possit,
quia si hic perniciosus Error admitteretur tota Fides Catholica vacillaret, nec
aliquid certi in Ecclesia haberemus, quia qua ratione errare potest unum,
possint errare and reliqua Concilia. Basil. apud. Bin. To. 8. p. 128.
Blasphemia esset, si quis negaret Spiritum Sanctum dictare Sententias, Canones
and Decreta Conciliorum. Ibid. p. 131. Haereticum illum fateri debetis qui
putat Concilium generale in his quae ad Fidem seu bonos mores N. B. pertinent
posse errare, p. 135. Est certa regula, indeficiens mensura, Cunctos fideles
rectissime regulans, quae credenda aut agenda sunt saluberrime demonstrans, p.
206. De Haeresi suspectum rogari vult Concilium Constantiense utrum credat quod
illud quod Sacrum Concilium universalem Ecclesiam repraesentans approbat in
favorem Fidei and salutem Animarum sit ab universis Christi fidelibus
approbandum and tenendum, and quod condemnat esse Fidei (...) bonis moribus
contrarium hoc ab iisdem esse tenendum pro condemnato. Sess. 45. Bin. Council.
To. 7. p. 1124. Caetera item omnia ab Oecumenicis Conciliis, ac praecipue a
sacrosancta Tridentina Synodo tradita, definita and declarata, indubitanter
recipio, atque profiteor; simulque contraria omnia, atque Haereses quascunque
ab Ecclesia damnatas and rejectas and anathematizatas, ego pariter damno,
rejicio and anathematizo. Pii quarti forma Juramenti professionis fidei ab
Ecclesiasticis R. Ecclesiae suscepti.
general Councils concerning the Punishment of Heretics must in themselves be
just and equitable, and fit to be observed by him, and that the practice of the
whole Roman Church, pursuant to them, for the space of three whole Centuries,
must be a cogent Demonstration of the Reception and Approbation of those Laws
throughout all Catholic Kingdoms, that he who does not punish Heretics,
according as these Laws require, must be guilty of the Crimes with which these
Laws do charge him, and well deserves the Punishments they have decreed against
him; and that whosoever does exterminate and punish Heretics, as they
encourage him to do, shall certainly obtain the Blessings which they promise
to him for that Act. How can a Popish Prince abstain from thus reflecting with
himself? Either the R. Councils provincial and general, and the great Monarch
of the Church do well in animating and exciting all R. Catholics to fight
against all Heretics, expel them out of their Dominions, and execute these
Laws upon them; and in proposing the Rewards forementioned, as Blessing
certainly to be obtained by all who do engage under the Banner of the Cross for
their Destruction. And all the Roman Catholics did well, who, in Obedience to
their Commands, and Expectation of these Blessings, hazarded, and lost their
Lives, by their Endeavors to extirpate Heretics, or who did murder and
massacre so many millions of Heretics. And consequently, I also shall do well,
and may expect these Blessings, by acting as they did; or else these Popes and
Councils, and all those R. Catholics who fought, or acted, or did encourage
others to act thus against all Heretics, were truly guilty of all the
Christian Blood which in those Wars, between the Heretic and Catholic, was
spilt, and all the barbarous Massacres and horrid Murders which have been
committed upon Heretics. And if so, Why do I own that Church, that Pope, those
Councils, who have been guilty of these horrid Crimes, and these notorious
Marks of Antichrist; and which has often sainted, but never in the least
discountenanced, but kept communion and good correspendence with the Authors of
them.

2. This further will appear, if we consider that the same Principles which do
oblige a Popish Prince to own that Faith, oblige him also to execute these
sanguinary Laws upon the Heretic, whatsoever Promises or Obligations he has
made unto the contrary. That he is subject to a Power which can absolve him
from all Obligations of this nature which he at any time shall make, and which
already he has declared that it is not in his power to make them, or to
observe them when they have been made. That they are prejudicial to that
superior Tribunal of the Church to which he must be subject, and made
concerning Heresy, of which, as being a Spiritual Concern, he must not judge,
nor of the Punishments belonging to it, or of the Lawfulness of the Suspension
of those Punishments. All this it is easy to demonstrate. And,

1. According to plain Reason, When two Princes, that have distinct Tribunals,
make Laws or Constitutions thwarting one the other, the Constitutions of the
inferior Tribunal must give place to those of the superior: but by the
Principles of the Communion of the Roman Church, the Ecclesiastical Tribunal is
superior to that of Princes; since then it is decreed by that Tribunal, as we
have seen already, that all Catholic Princes shall faithfully endeavor to
extirpate Heretics from their Dominions, and that all Constitutions made to
the contrary are ipso facto void; no Constitutions made by Princes in favor of
Heretical Subjects can be observed by them, or be of any moment in prejudice to
the Determinations of the superior Tribunal of the Church. Now that, according
to the Principles of R. Catholics, the Ecclesiastical Tribunal is superior to
that of Princes, is evident,

1. From express Declarations of the Church in her most general and approved
Councils. Cujus quidem nulli Reges, nulli Principes possunt vel Decreta
contemnere, vel Jussa negligere, vel Authoritatem detrectare. Apud Bin. To. 9.
page 11.
Aegidius Viterbiensis says, with the great applause and approbation of the
Fifth Lateran Council under Julius the Second, that no Kings, or Princes can
neglect the Commands, or refuse the Authority of their general Councils. The
Council of Ipsa Synodus in Spiritu Sancto legitime congregata -- potestatem a
Christo immediate habet, cui quilibet, cujuscunque status vel dignitatis,
etiamsi Papalis existat, obedire tenetur in his quae pertinent ad fidem and
extirpationem dicti Schismatis, and reformationem generalem Ecclesiae Dei in
capite and membris. Council. Constable. Sess. 4, 5. Basil. Sess. 2.
Constance declares, that, being a general Council, it has Power immediately
derived from Christ, which every person of what State or Dignity soever he be,
even his Holiness himself, is bound to yield obedience to, in matters which
concern Faith, the Extirpation of the present Schism, and the Reformation of
the Church. The general Council of Haec Sancta Synodus in virtute Omnipotentis
Dei, a quo super omnes Christi fideles immediate potestatem vendicat, etc.
Council. Basil. Sess. 12. Bin. To. 8. p. 39. F. Veritas de potestate Concilii
generalis universalem Ecclesiam repraesentantis super Papam, and quemlibet
alium, est veritas fidei catholicae -- viritatibus duabus praedictis
pertinaciter repugnans, est censendus Haereticus. Ibid. Sess. 33. p. 95. F. A.
Hic Articulus de quo disceptamus fidem concernit, qui sine interritu salutis
negligi non potest. Ibid. Epist. Synod. p. 139.
Basil, in the second Session, renews the same Decree: and, Session the 12th,
does challenge, by virtue of the Omnipotent God, immediate Power over all
faithful Christians: and, Session the 33d they declare this to be a Doctrine
of the Catholic Faith, which he that pertinaciously resists is a Heretic: and
Session the 45th they add, that it is an Article which cannot be neglected,
without the loss of Salvation.

2. This will appear from express Acts of Jurisdiction exercised by them over
Kings and Princes, for to omit the frequent Excommunications, and Sentences of
Deprivations passed upon Emperors and Kings in the Fourth general Council of
Lateran, Can. 3. in the general Council of Lions, Council. To. XI. p. 645. in
the Council of Pisa, Sess. 14. in the general Council of Constance, Sess. 12,
17, 37. of Basil, Sess. 27, 34, 40, 41. all which expressly have decreed, that
Emperors and Kings, for Misdemeanors mentioned there, shall lose their Dignity
and Honor, and be deprived of their Government; I say, to pass by this, they
frequently demonstrate their supposed Power over them by laying their Commands
upon them; We enjoin Princes, says the Fourth Per censuram Ecclesiasticam
compellantur seculares Potestates. Council. Lat. quartum, cap. 3. Principibus
injungimus, cap. 67. Praecipimus Praesumptores hujusmodi, per Principes
seculares compesci, cap. 68. Per secularem compelli praecipimus potestatem,
cap. ult. Principibus injungimus, Council. Viennense apud Bin. To. 7. p. 870.
Per secularem compelli praecipimus potestatem. Council. Lugdun. Bin. To. 7. p.
858. Eis (Principibus and Regibus) in virtute sanctae obedientiae, authoritate
a Deo universali Ecclesiae concessa, districte praecipiendo mand^mus, Council.
Basil. Bin. To. 8. p. 207. Sacro approbante Concilio -- Nos laicos --
cujuscunque dignitatis, etiamsi Regalis extiterint, -- peremptory --
requirimus, Council. Lat. quintum, apud Bin. To. 9. p. 48, 49. Cogantur omnes
Principes, Council. Trid. Sess. 25. De Retorm. cap. 20.
Lateran Council, cap. 67. and the Council of Vienna. We command secular
Princes, says the Fourth Lateran Council, cap. 68. We peremptorily enjoin
them, says Julius the Second, with the Approbation of the Fifth Lateran
Council. We command that they be compelled by the secular Power, says the
Fourth Lateran Council, cap. ult. and the general Council of Lions, cap. Super
Cruciata.

3. Their Canon Law is full of Constitutions to this effect, declaring, that,
Lemma. In Ecclesiasticis causis Regis voluntas Sacerdotibus est postponenda.

Certum est hoc rebus vestris esse salutare, ut cum de cansis Dei agitur, juxta
ipsius constitutionem, Regiam voluntatem Sacerdotibus Christi studeatis
subdere, non praeferre. Ecclesiasticam formam sequi, non huic humanitus
sequenda ^ura praefigere, neque ejus Sanctionibus velle dominari, cujus
clementiae voluit Deus tuae piae devotionis colla submittere. Decret. part. 1.
did. 10. cap. 3.


When the things of God are treated of, the King must study to subject his Will
to the Will of the Priests, and not prefer it before theirs; that the Law of
Christ subjects Kings to the Priesthood of Christ, and puts them under their
Tribunals; that Christian Emperors ought to subject their Executions to the
Prelates of the Church, and not prefer them to theirs, because God would have
them to be subject to the Priests of the Church. By the same Law it is
determined that Kings must follow the Church Form, and not prescribe humane
Laws to her, nor seek to domineer over her Constitutions, but submit their
Necks to her Clemency. And, that they ought to yield obedience to the Laws of
the Church, and not exalt their Power above her. Lemma. Imperatores debent
Pontificibus subesse, non praeesse.

Ad Sacerdotes Deus voluit quae Ecclesiae disponenda sunt pertinere, non ad
seculi potestates, quas si fideles sunt, Ecclesiae suae Sacerdotibus voluit
esse subjectas. -- Imperatores Christiani subdere debent Executiones suas
Ecclesiasticis Praesulibus, non praeferre; obsequi solere Principes Christianos
Decretis Ecclesiae, non suam praeponere potestatem, Episcopis caput subdere
Principem solitum, non de eorum capitibus judicare. Decret. part. 1. did. 96.
cap. 11, 12.




2. According to the Principles of that Communion, all Princes must submit to,
and obey the Definitions of their general Councils, and the Determinations of
the Church in Cases Spiritual, because she is their only Guide in Spirituals:
this being therefore a Spiritual Case, viz. how far the Civil Magistrate does
stand obliged to punish Heretics, the Romish Prince must stand to her
Determination in that matter, and therefore is obliged to act according to the
Decrees forementioned which firmly are established by the Church, whatsoever
Promises or Oaths he may have made unto the contrary. Now that the Cause of
Heresy, and of the Punishments to be inflicted on the Heretic, is by them
judged a Spiritual Cause, with which the Civil Power must not intermeddle, is
evident from that Decree of Boniface the Fifth, which strictly does forbid
Sexti Decretal. l. 5. tit. 2. Cap. Inquisitionis negotium.
all Powers, Lords temporal, and Rectors, with their Officers, to judge or take
cognizance of that Crime, it being merely ecclesiastical, or to free them out
of Prison without the License of the Bishops, or Inquisitors, or to refuse to
execute the Punishments enjoined by them, or any way directly or indirectly to
hinder their Process or Sentence, under the pein of Excommunication, which if
they obstinately lie under for a year, they are to be condemned as Heretics;
and this Decree is taken into the Body of the Canon Law, and is confirmed by
the general Council of Constance, Sess. 45. The Crime of Heresy must be judged
only by the Ecclesiastical Court, and the Secular must not meddle with it,
says Gregory the Fourteenth, Bullar. Romans To. 2. p. 708.
Constable. 7.. 6.

3. No Promises, Oaths or Engagements can oblige to the omission of that which
is our Duty, by the Confession of all Christians, they cannot bind, says their
own Canon Law, Non juramenta, sed perjuria potius dicenda sunt, quae contra
utilitatem Ecclesiasticam attentantur. Decretal. l. 2. tit. 24. cap. 27. quia
non.

Juramentum praedictum vos excusare non potest, in quae debet intelligi jus
Superioris exceptum. Ibid. cap. 19. Debet ita intelligi, ut non obviet juri,
alias tanquam temerarium non obligat.

Cap. 21. ad nostrum.


to any thing which is against the benefit of Holy Church; for according to the
Determination of Innocent the Third, received into the Body of that Law, they
are not to be call Oaths, but Perjuries, which are attempted against the
Benefit of the Church. They cannot bind against the Right of a Superior, for
the same Law declares that in any Oath that is taken, the Right of the Superior
must be supposed to be excepted; they cannot bind against the Law, or the
Canonical Sanctions, for otherwise, says the same Law, it is a rash Oath, and
is not valid. Since then, according to the Doctrine of the Church, it is the
Duty of all Catholic Princes to punish and extirpate Heretics; they cannot be
obliged by any Oath or Promise to neglect that Duty, since this Neglect is
against Law and the Canonical Sanctions, against the plain Determinations of
the Supreme Tribunal, and against the benefit of H. Church, no Oath or Promise
can oblige them to it. And,

4. They who do claim a Power to absolve Catholic Princes from their
Contracts, Leagues and Engagements made to Heretical Princes, must have an
equal Power to absolve them from Contracts made with their own Heretical
Subjects, for sure the Contracts made with Equals must be more firm than those
which we have made to our Inferiors; but the Pope claims, and often has
exercised this Power of absolving Catholic Princes from their Contracts made
with other Princes on this account, because they were made with Heretics, or
Persons excommunicate. Ergo, etc. To give some few Examples of this matter, the
Bull of Urban the Sixth concerning this matter runs thus; Inter solicitudines
varias quibus assidue premimur, illa potissimum excitat mentem nostram, ut
circa salutem animarum Christi fidelium solicitis studiis intendamus, and (...)
fideles ipsi ex consortio and participatione Schismaticorum seu Haeretitorum
labefactari valiant, adhibeamus remedia opportuna. Ad nostrum nuper pervenit
auditum, quod tam Wencelaus, Roman. and Bohem. Rex, quam Carolus R. Imperator,
simul, vel successive, nonnullas confoederationes, vel colligationes, seu
ligas, aut conventiones cum diversis Regibus, Principibus, etc. fecerunt, and
quod alique ex hujusmodi Regibus, Principibus, etc. tunc erant, seu postea sunt
effecti Schismatici seu Haeretici manifesti, and ab unitate sanctae R. and
universalis Ecclesiae separati: nos igitur attendentes quod hujusmodi
confoederationes, colligationes and ligae, seu conventiones factae cum
hujusmodi Haereticis aut Schismaticis, postquam tales effecti erant, sunt
temerariae, illicitae, and ipso jure nullae, and si forte ante ipsorum lapsum
in schisma seu haeresin factae fuissent, etiamsi forent juramento seu fide data
firmatae, aut confirmatione Apostolica, vel quacunque firmitate alia roboratae,
postquam tales, ut praemittitur, sunt effecti, eo ipso tam idem Rex, quam alii,
qui forsan und cum eo hujusmodi confoederationes and cum talibus inierunt, and
ad quos tales confoederationes quomodolibet extendi possunt, ab earum
observatione absoluti existunt -- eundem Regem and omnes alios quorum interest,
vel interesse poterit, authoritate Apostolica, tenore praesentium declaramus
fuisse and esse ab earundem confoederationum, colligatiomon, ligarum, seu
conventionum observatione penitus absolutos, and ad eorum observationem
aliquatenus non teneri, illasque quatenus de facto processerunt, cassamus,
revocamus, ac nullius esse decernimus firmitatis; and tam eidem Regi quam etiam
omnibus hujusmodi aliis quorum interest, seu interesse potest, tenore
praesentium districtius inhibemus, ne confoederationes, colligationes, ligas
aut conventiones hujusmodi aliquatenus observent, seu ab aliis servari
quomodolibet permittant. Bulla Urbani Sexti, in Biblioth. D. R. Cotton. Vide
Crakanthorp. Defens. Eccles. Angl. cap. 83. p. 626, 627.
Amongst the many Cares which we continually are pressed with, our chief
concernment is, to provide fit Remedies for the preventing the Subversion of
the Faithful by consorting, or by participating with Schismatics or
Heretics: and truly we have lately heard, says he, that Wencelaus, King of
the Romans and Bohemians, and Charles the Emperor have entered into some
Confederations, Leagues, Compacts or Conventions with diverse Kings, Princes,
Dukes, Earls, Grandees and Nobles; some of which Kings, etc. then were, or
afterward have become manifest Heretics and Schismatics, being separated
from the Union of the Roman Church, though not by us declared such, we
therefore, considering that such Confederacies, Leagues, Compacts or
Conventions made with these Heretics and Schismatics, after they were such,
are rash, void and null by Sentence of the Law; but if they were made before
their falling into Schism and Heresy, and confirmed by an Oath, or by the
Apostolic See, or by whatsoever firmness, as soon as they become guilty of
these Crimes, the King, and all that with him have entered into these Compacts,
is absolved from the observation of them, and ought not to observe them:
therefore we, by our Apostolical Authority, declare the said King absolved from
them, and the Compacts themselves to be wholly void and null. Pope Martin the
Fifth, in his Epistle to Alexander, Duke of Lithuania, who had received the
Bohemians into his protection, writes thus; Quod si tu aliquo modo inductus,
defensionem eorum suscipere promisisti, scito, te dare fidem Haereticis,
Violatoribus sanctae fidei, non potuisse, and peccare te mortaliter si
servabis. Cochlaeus Hist. Hussit. l. 5. ad An. 1423. Spondan. ad An. 1422.. 1.
p. 779.
If thou have been any ways induced to promise to defend them, know, that thou
could not pawn thy Faith to Heretics, the Violators of the H. Faith; and
that thou mortally offendest, if thou do observe it. When Foedus cum Amarathe
in december annos ab Uladistao initum, idemque sanctissimis jura* mentorum
vinculis utrinque firmatum erat. Aenaeas Sylv. ep. 81. Bonfin. l. 3. dec. 6.
Spondan. ad An. 1444.. 3. p. 904.
Vladislaus, King of Hungary, had made Peace with Amarath the Turk for Ten
years, and had confirmed it with an Oath; The Pope Aen. Sylvius ait Eugenium R.
Pontificem -- est re audita, scripsisse Juliano, nullum valere faedus quod se
inconsulto ^um hostibus Religionis percussum est, Uladislao Regi, uti conventa
dissolveret, imperasse, juramenta remisisse, novum instaurari bellum tum
precibus, tum minis extorsisse. Sp^nd. ad An. 1444.. 10. p. 907. Julianus
Cardinalis ait fas esse quandoque publicae salutis gratia, neque stare pactis
quae illi contraria, neque perfidis fidem servare -- ac ne qua Rex, proceresque
tenerentur jusjurandi Turcis praestiti Religione, ea se illos auctoritate
Pontificis, cujus legatione fungebantur, liberare. Spondan. ibid. p. 905.
Eugenius the Fourth writes to Julian the Cardinal, to persuade him to violate
that Peace, alleging and declaring, that no League made with the Enemies of
the Christian Faith; without consulting with the Pope, is valid: Hereupon the
poor King is prevailed with to become a most perfidious Wretch, and fall upon
the Turk unawares, which he observing, and, being straightened in his Arms, pulls
out the Articles of the Covenant, and, looking up to Heaven, cries out, Haec
sunt, Jesu Christ, foedera quae Christiani tui mecum percussere, per nomen
tuum sancte jurantes, nunc, si Deus es, tuas, measque hic injurias, te quaeso,
ulciscere. Bonsin. Ibid.
O crucified Jesus, see the perfidiousness of this Nation, which, against their
Oath, have violated all Right and Faith; and if thou art a God, do thou revenge
this Perjury upon them, which was no sooner said but the Christians were put to
flight, the perjured King, and the Cardinal who persuaded him to violate his
Oath, were both slain; God teaching us by this Example, says Juramenta non
solum domesticis fidei, sed and hostibus servanda. Ibid.
Aenaeas Sylvius, that Oaths are to be kept, when made, not only with the
Faithful, but with Enemies. Pope Innocent the Third, in his Epistle to Peter,
King of A. D. 1213.
Arragon, writes thus: Serenitati tuae, in virtute Spiritus Sancti, sub obtentu
Divinae ac Apostolicae Gratiae providimus injungendum, ut praenominatos deseras
Tolosanos, non obstante promissione, vel obligatione quacunque praestita, in
elusionem Ecclesiasticae Disciplinae; ipsis quamdiu tales extiterint non
impensurus consilium, auxilium vel favorem. Council. To. XI. p. 94.
We enjoin thy Serenity, by virtue of the Holy Spirit, that thou desert the
forenamed People of Tolose, and that thou do not afford them any Counsel, Aid
or Favor, whilst they continue as they are, notwithstanding any Promise or
Obligation whatsoever made unto them, in elusion of the Ecclesiastical
Discipline. Paul the Third, in his Bull against Henry the Eighth, edit. A. D.
1538. Omnes and singulos Christianos Principes, quacunque etiam Imperiali and
Regali Dignitate fulgentes, hortamur and, in Domino, requirimus, -- ne Henrico
Regi per se, vel alium seu alios, public vel occulte, direct vel indirecte,
tacit vel express, etiam sul praetextu confoederationum aut obligationum
quar^ neunque, etiam juramento, aut quavis alia firmitate roboratarum and
saepius geminatarum, consilium, auxilium vel favorem quomodolibet praestent.
Bull.. 15. ubi supra.

A quibus quidem obligationibus and juramentis omnibus, nos eos and eorum
singulos -- per praesentes absolvimus, ipsasque confoederationes and
obligationes tam factas quam in posterum faciendas, -- nullius roboris vel
momenti, nullasque, irritas, cassas, inanes, ac pro infectis habendas fore
decernimus and declaramus. Ibid.


exhorts and requires, in the Lord, all Christian Princes shining in Imperial
or Regal Dignity, that they do not under pretense of any Confederations or
Obligations whatsoever, although corroborated by frequently repeated Oaths, or
any other firmness, I say, he does exhort them not to yield to King Henry, his
Accomplices, Favorers, Adherers, Consultors or Followers, or any of them, by
themselves or others, openly or secretly, directly or indirectly, tacitly or
expressly, any Counsel, Aid or Favor: And that they might not think themselves
obliged so to do, he absolves them all from all Oaths or Obligations made or
to be made unto him or them, and declares them to be void and null and of no
strength and moment. And lastly, Pius the Fifth absolves not only all the
Subjects of Queen Elizabeth, but also all others who had in any sort sworn to
her. Caeteros omnes qui illi quomodocunque juraverunt. Vide supra. 17.


5. They who do claim a Power to absolve Subjects from these Promises and Oaths
by which they were obliged to yield Obedience to their Heretical Princes, must
have an equal Power to absolve Catholic Princes from their Promises and Oaths
made to Heretical Subjects, for sure the Obligation of Princes to their
Subjects cannot be greater than is that of Subjects to their Prince: Now it is
known, that R. Popes and Councils claim the Power of absolving Subjects from
that Obedience which they have sworn to yield to their Heretical Superiors:
Ergo, by the same Principles they must have Power to absolve Catholic Princes
from those Promises and Oaths which they have made to their Heretical Subjects.
To give some Instances of this kind, Absolutos se noverint a debito
fidelitaris, and totius obsequii, quicunque lapsis manifesto in haeresin,
aliquo pacto, quacunque firmitate vallato, tenebantur obstricti. Decretal. l.
5. tit. 7. cap. 16.
Let them know, says Gregory the Ninth, who were bound by any Bond, how firm
soever, to persons manifestly fallen into Heresy, that they are absolved from
that Fidelity, Obedience and Homage which they were obliged to pay them: and
this Decree is put into the Body of the Canon Law, and has, says Tota
Ecclesia plusquam quatuor saeculis hoc Decretum recepit, laudavit, and in praxi
servavit. Discuss. Decret. Council. Lat. p. 98.
Singleton, been still commended and observed in the Church practice about 400
years. The Truth and Modesty of which Assertion as to the Limitation of it to
400 years, will be abundantly made good by these following Instances.

In the Eighth Century, Sigonius and others do inform us, that Ita Roma,
Romanusque Ducatus a Graecis ad Romanum Pontificem, propter nefandam little
haeresin impietatemque pervenit. Sigon. de Regno Italiae, lib. 3. Et rursus.
Extabant praeclara Gregorii 2. and 3. exempla, qui Leoni Isauro Imperatori
Sacris interdicere, and jurata Italiae obedientia spoliare non dubitarant, uno
eo crimine, quod Imaginibus se inimicum praebuisset, l. 9. p. 219.
Rome, and the Roman Duchy were lost by the Grevians, by reason of their
wicked Heresy, and got by the Pope of Rome. That wicked Heresy of Leo
Isaurus, which lost him the Empire of the West, was this, that he forbad the
Adoration of Images, and pulled them down everywhere, for this Romany ipse
persuadebat, si perstiterit Leo, ab eo tanquam Haeretico deficiant, ac tandem
Italos jurejurandi religione absolvebat. Blond. Decad. 10. lib. 1. Ita dignum
posteris reliquit exemplum ne in Ecclesia Christi regnare sinerentur Haeretici
principes, si, saepe moniti, in errore persistere, obstinato animo,
invenirentur. Baron. An. 730.. 40.
Gregory the Second persuades the Italians to revolt from him, as being a
Heretic, absolves them from their Oaths of Obedience to him, and strictly does
forbid them to pay him any Tribute or Obedience; whereupon they, rejecting the
Emperor, do bind themselves by Oath to be obedient to the Pope. This is the
Title by which the Pope holds Rome at present, even plain Rebellion and
tyrannical Invasion of his Sovereigns Estate and Dominions. Now by this Action,
says Baronius, he left to posterity a worthy Example, that Heretical Princes
should not be suffered to reign in the Church of Christ, if, being warned, they
were found pertinacious in Error. The next Successor of Gregory the Second, was
Hic statim ubi Pontificatum iniit, Cleri Romani consensu N. B. Leonem Tertium,
Imperatorem Constantinopolitanum Imperio simul, and Communione Fidelium private,
quod sanctas Imagines e sacris aedibus abrasisset, and Statuas demolitus esset,
quodque etiam de homousio male sentiret. Platina. p. 99. Italia ab Imperatore
Constantinopolitano, Leone haeretico Ichonomacho, Auctore Gregorio Tertio, Papa
defecit. Onuphrius ad An. 731.
Gregory the Third, who as soon as he had obtained the Papal Dignity, by the
consent of the Roman Clergy, deprived Leo the Third, Emperor of Constantinople
both of his Empire and the Communion of the Faithful, because he had swept
away the H. Images out of the Church.

In the Eleventh Century, Gregory the Seventh writes thus, Aut Rex ipse,
repudiato turpi Symoninidcae haeresis mercimonio, idoneas ad sacrum Regimen
personas promoveri permittet, aut Franci pro certo, nisi fidem Christianam
abjicere maluerint, generalis Anathematis mucrone percussi, illi ulterius
obtemperare recusabunt. Greg. 7. Epist. l. 1. Ep. 35. Council. To. 10. p. 34.
either King Philip of France, rejecting the filthy Merchandise of Symoniacal
Heresy, will permit fit persons to be chosen into the Government of the
Church, or the French will refuse to obey him any longer, unless they had
rather cast away the Christian Faith, being smitten with the Sword of a general
Anathema. Where you see plainly, that the Pope supposes Heresy to be a Crime
sufficient not only to justify Subjects in their refusal of Obedience to
their lawful Prince, but also to justify him in excluding them from the
Communion of Christians who obey him.

In the Twelfth Century, to give the better Color to the Deposition of Henry
the Fourth and Henry the Fifth, it was first voted in a Council held at the
Lateran, 1102. that it was Heresy to assert the Right of Bin. To. 7. p. 533.
Laymen to invest into Ecclesiastical Preferments. And this Decree was renewed
in a Council held at Dictante Spiritu S. investiturum omnem rei Ecclesiasticae
de manu laica, haeresin esse judicamus. Council. Vien. Bin. To. 7. p. 549.
Vienna, Anno Domini, 1112. and by another held at the Lateran, A. D. 1116.
and, in pursuance of these Decrees, were Page 554.
these two Emperors deposed. But notwithstanding all the Thundrings of Paschal
the Second against Henry the Fourth, the Church of Leod stood firm to him,
which so incensed the good Pope, that he writes to Robert, Count of Flanders,
to expel those Schismatics out of the Church: his words are these; Nam in hac
non tantum part, sed ubique, cum poteris, Henricum Haereticorum Caput, and
ejus Fautores pro viribus persequaris, nullum profecto gratius Deo Sacrificium
offerre poteris, quam si eum impugnes qui se contra Deum erexit, qui Ecclesiae
Dei Regnum auferre conatur, -- qui a Principibus Dei, sanctis Apostolis,
eorumque Vicariis de Ecclesiae domo Sancti Spiritus judicio expulsus est. Hoc
tibi, and militibus tuis in peccatorum remissionem and Apostolicae sedis
familiaritatem praecipimus, ut his laboribus ac triumphis ad coelestem
Jerusalem, Domino praestante, pervenias. Paschal. 2. Ep. 7. Bin. To. 7. p. 517.
It is just that they who have separated themselves from the Church Catholic,
should be separated from the Churches Benefices; wheresoever therefore thou art
able, do thou persecute Henry the Head of the Heretics, N. B. and all his
Favorers, with all thy might, for truly thou can offer no more acceptable
Sacrifice to God, than by impugning him who has lifted up himself against God;
who by the Judgment of the Holy Spirit (O horrid Blasphemy) is cast out of the
House of God by the Princes of the Apostles and their Vicars; this we command
thee to do for the obtaining the Remission of thy Sins, and the Familiarity of
the Apostolic See; which, as it seems, cannot be more effectually obtained by
any thing than by Rebellion against God's Vicegerent, and persecuting him with
all our might.

In the Thirteenth Century, in the year of our Lord 1245. Pope Innocent the
Fourth assembles a general Council at Lions, where he declares the Emperor
Frederick the Second guilty of Heresy, De Haeresi quoque non dubiis and
levibus, sed evidentibus argumentis suspectus habetur, plura siquidem eum
commisisse perjuria satis patet. -- privilegium insuper quod B. Petro, and
Successoribus ejus in ipso tradidit Dominus, viz. quodcunque ligaveris, in quo
utique authoritas and potestas Ecclesiae R. consistit, pro viribus diminuere,
vel ipsi Ecclesiae auferre sategit. -- merito p. 642. insuper contra eum de
haeretica pravitate suspicio est exorta, cum -- claves Ecclesiae contempserit,
-- and constanter asseruit se G. Papae sententias excommunicationis non vereri,
-- cum Religiosas and alias Ecclesiasticas jugi attriverit afflictione and
persecutione personas, -- nonne igitur p. 644. haec non levia, sed efficacia
sunt argumenta de suspicione haeresis contra eum, cum Haereticorum vocabulo
illos Jus civil contineri asserat, and latis adversus eos sententiis debere
succumbere, qui vel levi argumento a judicio Catholicae Religionis and tramite
detecti sunt deviare -- Nos itaque, super praemissis, cum fratribus nostris,
and Sacro Concilio deliberatione praehabita diligenti, -- memoratum Principem
-- omni honor and dignitate a Domino privatum denunci^mus, ac nihilominus
sententiando privamus, omnes qui ei juramento fidelitatis tenentur adstricti a
juramento hujusmodi perpetuo absolventes, authoritate Apostolica firmiter
inhibendo ne quisquam de caetero sibi, tanquam Imperatori vel Regi pareat, and
decernendo quoslibet qui ei deinceps velut Imperatori Consilium vel Auxilium
praestiterint, seu favorem, ipso facto excommunicationis vinculo subjacere.
Innocent. 4. in Council. Lugd. Council. To. XI. p. 645.
because he violated his Oaths, and because he diminished the Privilege granted
to the Successors of Saint Peter, in these words, Whatsoever thou shall bind on
earth, etc. and contemned the Keys of the Church, which, says he, must be
Heresy, seeing the Civil Law declares him a Heretic, and worthy to be
punished as such, who in a light matter does deviate from the Judgment of the
Catholic Religion. Then follows his Deposition of the Emperor in these words.
We therefore, after mature deliberation had with our Cardinals and with the
Sacred Council, upon the Premises, declare the formentioned Emperor --
deprived by God of all Honor and Dignity, and, by our Sentence, we deprive him
of them, perpetually absolving all his Subjects from their Oaths of Fidelity to
him, and by our Apostolical Authority forbidding them to acknowledge or obey
him hereafter as Emperor or King; and decreeing, that all who under that
Relation yield him Counsel, Aid or Favor, shall be ipso facto excommunicate.

A. D. 1254. Innocent the Fourth pronounces an Spond. To. 1. p. 188.
Anathema, on Maunday Thursday, against Ecelinus, Governor of Marchia
Tarvisina, as being a manifest Heretic, and frequently excommunicated upon
that account. And A. D. 1256. he gathers an Army of p. 197.
Crusado's against him.

In the Fourteenth Century, A. D. 1322. John the Twenty second excommunicates
Matthew, Viscount of Milan, his Sons and Abettors, as being Heretics and
Schismatics, passes upon them the Sentence of Deprivation of all their Goods,
Deposition from all Office and Dignity Ecclesiastical and Secular, of Spond.
To. 1. p. 405.. 5.
Inhability to any other, and exposes their Persons to be seized upon, and
treats with Frederick of Austria, King of the Romans, about sending an Army
into Lombardy, to suppress them.

A. D. 1323. John the Twenty second commands p. 409. S. 2.
Lewis of Bavaria to cease from all Administration of the Empire, and never to
assume it again, without the Approbation of the Apostolic See; and this was
done, as for other reasons, so in particular for this, that Lewis had showed
Favor and Patronage to Viscount Galeatius, and his Brethren, who had been
lawfully condemned for Heresy, and to some others who had rebelled against the
Church. An. Do. 1324. this Pope pronounces the Emperor contumacious and
deprived of all Right to the Empire, reserving to p. 412.. 3.
himself the inflicting of other Penalties upon him, if ever he endeavor to
meddle with the Administration of the Empire, or should presume to favor the
forementioned Heretics and Rebels, forbidding all the Subjects of the Empire,
under most grievous Penalties, in any manner to obey him, to call him Emperor,
or yield him any Aid or Favor. An. Dom. 1335. Benedict the Twelfth renews this
Sentence of p. 453.. 1.
Pope John. And the next year the Emperor makes a p. 456.. 23.
large Promise of doing almost any thing the Pope would ask, and giving Power
to his own Subjects to rise up against him, if he did not perform it; and yet
this was not thought sufficient to expiate the Guilt of Favoring Heretics and
Rebels to the Church of Rome, and doing that which was at Rome esteemed p. 457.
ibid.
Heresy. He therefore proceeds to confess that he had done ill in Favoring the
Viscount of Milan and others condemned by the Church as Heretics and
Schismatics: That in his Appeal, made against John the 22d, he had said many
heretical things; that he would make a full Confession of these things, and
would supplicate for Absolution; and take an Oath stare mandatis Ecclesiae, to
obey the Commands of the Church, and to extirpate Heretics; and yet all this
would not prevail for the obtaining of his Pardon. A. D. 1343. Clement the
Sixth renews the same Sentence p. 474.. 2.
against the Emperor; and the Conditions which he required, in order to his
Absolution, were, that An. Dom. 1344. p. 478.. 1.
he should confess his Heresies and Errors, of which he was accused, and that
he should resign the Empire, not re-assuming it, but by the Favor of the Pope;
that he should deliver up his Sons, Goods, and his whole concerns, into the
hands and will of the Pope, all which the Emperor promised to do; and yet this
would not satisfy. A. D. 1345, and 46. the Emperor p. 481. p. 493.
is again deposed, and his Subjects are absolved from their Oaths of Allegiance
to him. So dreadful was it even for Emperors to be esteemed Heretics, or
Favorers of Heretics, or Friends to them who have been Rebels to the Church of
Rome.

A. D. 1363. Urban the Fifth pronounces Barnabas, p. 557.. 1.
Duke of Milan, a Heretic and Schismatic, anathematized by the Church, and
for that cause deprives him and his Posterity of all Honor, Dignity, Privileges
and Jurisdiction, absolves his Subjects from their Oaths of Fealty to him, and
also frees his Wife from the Bond of Matrimony; and he subjecteth all that did
aid or favor him to the same Punishments; and grants plenary Indulgence to
all Crusado's that would fight against him.

In the Fifteenth Century, An. Dom. 1453. Consideratione praemissorum,
diligenti cum fratribus nostris deliberatione praehabita, ad ipsorum Amidei
Fautorum proterviam extirpandam -- Carolum Francorum Regem auctoritate
Apostolica, praesentium tenore vocamus, cique Ducatum Sabaudiae, omnemque
ipsius Amidei, notorii Schismatici, Haeretici excommunicati and anathematizati
terram, ac ejus fautorum, adhaerentium, complicum and sequacium bona,
diversimode bactenus confiscata, donamus. -- Et ut tam salubre negotium in Manu
forti and robusta procedat, -- nos omnibus, qui cum Rege praefato, contra
Amideum and sequaces eosdem, in propriis personis, propriisque expensis
processerint plenam suorum peccatorum veniam indulgemus, and in retributione
justorum, vitae aeternae policemur augmentum. Ep. 2. Council. To. 13. p. 1322,
1323.
Nicholas the Fifth, in his Epistle to all the Faithful, by his Apostolical
Authority, excites Charles the 8th, King of France, to extirpate the
perverseness of Amideus, Duke of Savoy, the Antipope, with all his Favorers and
Adherers, as being guilty of Schism and Heresy, and being therefore
excommunicated and anathematized, and he moreover gives him all the Dominions
and Goods belonging both to the Duke and all his Favorers, promising full
pardon of all Sins, and an augmentation of the Rewards of eternal Life, to them
who would go in person with the King of France to fight against them; and this
he did after mature deliberation had with his good Brethren the Cardinals.

A. D. 1462. Sigismundus Maletusta, for the Crime Spond. To. 2. p. 88.. 8.
of Heresy, is by Pope Pius the Second deprived of his Dominions and all his
Goods. In the same year, George, King of Bohemia, sends to Pope Pius the p.
87.. 5, 6, 7.
Second, desiring him to confirm the Indulgence granted to the Bohemians by the
general Council of Basil, and confirmed by Eugenius the Fourth, concerning the
Receiving the Communion in both kinds. The Pope answers by minding him of his
Coronation Oath, in which he had promised Obedience to the Sea of Rome, and
commands him therefore to comply with that Church. The King replies, that
indeed he had sworn, haereticam pravitatem e Regno abjicere, to expel Heresy
out of his Kingdom, but that he never esteemed the Receiving the Sacrament in
both kinds to be Heresy, and that he would live and die in the practice of it.
Then the King enquires of the Hussites, whether, if War should be waged against
him upon this account, they would stand by him? who answer, like good Subjects,
that they would do it with their Lives and Fortunes. But putting the same
Question to the Catholics, they answer fraudulently, that when the Honor of
God and Justice was not violated, they would not be wanting to assist the King
and Kingdom. For this the Pope prepares to execute his Censures on the King,
nulls the Contract of Agreement made betwixt him and his rebellious Subjects of
Breslaw, in which they promised submission to him, he absolves them from their
Promise, commands the King, and all other persons, under the Penalty of
Excommunication, not to hurt them, or to compel them to obey him, and exhorts
all Princes to be assistent to these Rebels and Trucebreakers, against all
Invaders. A. D. 1466. Hynco, one of the King's Nobles, being besieged by the
King in a Town called Zaraste, escapes privily in the night, and flys to Paul
the Second, who presently, in favor of this Criminal, pronounces an Anathema
against all who did not presently quit the Seige, and the Town notwithstanding
being taken, he sends Rudolph, his Legate, to try the Princes of Germany,
whether they would not hinder the Pope's proceedings against King George; their
Answer is, that the Pope knew what was his Duty, and they would do what became
Catholics; but that they could not break their League with him till the Church
had declared him a Heretic. In the mean time all the Catholic Nobility of
Bohemia rebel against him, and desire the Pope to absolve them from their Oath
of Obedience to him, which, when they had joined with the Inhabitants of
Breslaw and other Rebels, is granted to them, the King himself is cited to
Rome, Rudolph is commanded to procure Aid against him, and to gather an Army of
Crusado's for that purpose, which presently he does, and forces the King from
a Town that he besieged. And, because the King appeared not at Rome, and
desisted not from persecuting the Catholics, by the Advice of the Cardinals
and all the p. 108.. 2, 3.
Doctors of Divinity and of the Canon Law, he is pronounced a perjured,
sacrilegious Heretic, then the Pope deprives him, as being a Heretic, of all
Honor and Dignity, absolves his Subjects from their Obedience to him, and
declares him and his Posterity incapable of any Dignity; and lastly, offers his
Kingdom to Casimirus King of Poland. p. 112.. 6.


In the Sixteenth Century, Quasdam Leges seu generales Constitutiones edere non
erubuit, per quas Subditos suos ad quosdam Haereticos and Schismaticos
Articulos tenendos, inter quos and hoc erat, Quod R. Pontifex, Caput Ecclesiae
and Christi Vicarius non erat, and quod ipse in Anglica Ecclesia supremum Caput
existebat, sub gravibus etiam mortis poenis cogebat,. 1. habita itaque cum
venerabilibus Fratribus nostris S. R. E. Cardinalibus deliberatione matura, and
de illorum consilio and assensu per viscera misericordiae Dei hortamur and
requirimus in Domino quatenus Henricus R. a praedictis erroribus prorsus
abstineat, and constitutiones seu leges praedictas revocet, casset and
annullet,. 4. hoc praecepit sub majoris excommunicationis latae sententiae
poena,. 6. nec non rebellionis and quoad Henricum R. etiam perditionis Regni
and Dominiorum praedictorum,. 7. ipsiusque Henrici R. ac Regni, omniumque
aliorum Dominiorum, Civitatum, Terrarum, Castrorum, etc. Magistratus, Judices,
Castellanos, Custodes and Officiales quoscunque, necnon Communitates,
Universitates, Collegia, Feudatorios, Vassallos, Subditos, Cives, Incolas and
Inhabitatores etiam forenses, dicto Regi de facto obedientes, tam seculares
quam si qui ratione alicujus temporalitatis ipsum Henricum R. in superiorem
recognoscant etiam Ecclesiasticos, N. B. a juramento fidelitutis, jure
vassalitico, and omni erga Regem and alios praedictos subjectione absolvimus
and penitus liberamus,. 10. Bull. R. To. 1. p. 516. etc.
Paul the Third, An. Do. 1538. with the consent of his Cardinals, declares,
that Henry the Eighth of England, under severe Penalties required his Subjects
to hold some Schismatical and Heretical Articles, amongst which this was one,
That he himself, and not the Pope, was the Supreme Head of the Church of
England: These Errors he requires him to desist from, and to abrogate the Laws
made against the Pope's Supremacy; declaring that if he did not yield to this
Injunction, he should incur the Sentence of the greater Excommunication, under
which Sentence if he continued Ninety days, and did not within that time appear
at Rome, he, in the space of three days after, should incur the Penalty of
Deprivation of his Kingdoms and Dominions passed upon him. Moreover he absolves
his Subjects from their Oaths of Fealty of Subjection to him, commanding them,
under the Penalty of Excommunication, not to obey him or acknowledge him as
their Superior. A. D. 1570. Pius the Fifth declares Vide supra,. 17.
Queen Elizabeth a Heretic, whereupon he deprives her of her pretended N. B.
Royal Right, and all Dominion, Dignity and Privilege whatsoever, and declares
all her Subjects, and all others who had sworn to her, absolved from their
Oaths, and from any Obligation of Allegiance or Obedience to her. An. Dom.
1585. Sixtus the Fifth pronounces Navarrum and Condaeum tanquam Sectarios and
in Errore relapsos, Sectariorum Fautores, ac Defensores publicos ac manifestos,
Divinaeque Maiestatis Reos, and Fidei Catholicae Hosts proscribit, and
Navarrum quidem omni Jure quod in Navarrae Regno sibi competere contendit, and
ea part quam nunc occupat excidisse: Condaeum autem and utriusque Successores
omni Principatus, and Dignitatis jure in praesens and in posterum pariter
excidisse, indignosque esse ipsos, and eorum Successores qui in ullum
Principatum, ac speciatim in Regnum Franciae succedant, hac Sententia
pronunciat, Subditosque obsequii Juramento solvit. Thuanus, l. 82. p. 45.
Henry of Navar and the Prince of Conde to be Sectaries relapsed into Error,
manifest Favorers and public Defenders of Sectaries, that is, Heretics,
Rebels to the Divine Majesty, and Enemies to the Catholic Faith; having done
this, he deprives them and their Posterity for ever of their Dominions and
Kingdoms, absolving their Subjects from their Allegiance to them, in these
words, By the Authority of these Presents we do absolve and set-free all
persons as well jointly as severally from any such Oath, and from all Duty
whatsoever in regard of Dominion, Fealty and Obedience, and do charge and
forbid all and every of them, that they do not dare to obey them, or any of
their Admonitions, Laws and Commands. After the Death of Henry the Third, by
the barbarous Murder of Friar Clement, the Parisians send to the Sorbon
Doctors to know if it were lawful to submit to Henry of Borbon, to whom the
Crown of right belonged; their Answer is at large recorded in Thuanus, and
briefly is to this effect, Ad haec capita, post Spiritus Sancti invocationem,
N. B. responsum, Jure Divino N. B. prohiberi Catholicos hominem Sectarium, aut
Sectarii mali Fautorem, and Ecclesiae manifestum hostem, multoque magis
relapsum, and a Sancta Sede nominatim ab Union Catholica exclusum, ad Regnum
admittere, -- and quemadmodum qui Henrico ad Regnum aspiranti favent, aut
Suppetias ferunt, Religionis Desertores sunt, and in peccato cum vitae aeternae
dispendio degunt; ita qui se illi pro Religionis defensione opponunt, plurimum
apud Deum and homines mereri, and ut illos in hostis generis humani Regno
stabiliendo pertinaces, aeterna poena manet, sic hos, si ad sanguinis usque
effusionem resistant, aeternum in Coelo praemium, and, ut Fidei Propugnatores,
immarcessibilem Martyrii Coronam proculdubio consecuturos. Thuanus, lib. 98. p.
70, 71.
that Catholics, by the Divine Law, were forbidden to admit to the Kingdom a
Sectary, or a Favorer of a Sectary, and a manifest Enemy of the Church, much
more one that had relapsed, and was by name excluded from the Catholic Union
by the Apostolic See; that all who favor or assist him were guilty of damnable
Sin, and would infallibly be damned, and all that did resist him unto blood,
would dye Martyrs, and enjoy an everlasting Reward in Heaven. But it is
needless to multiply Examples of this nature in a case defined by two general
Councils: First, that of Lateran, under Alexander the Third, A. D. 1179. which
cap. 27. speaking of certain Heretics there mentioned, Relaxatos autem se
noverint a debito fidelitatis and hominii, and totius obsequii, donec in tanta
iniquitate permanserint, quicunque illis aliquo pacto tenentur annexi. Bin. To.
7. p. 662.
let all men, say they, know, who any way stand bound to them, that as long as
these Heretics persist in their Iniquity, they are relaxed from all Fealty,
Homage and Obedience due to them. The Second is, the Fourth Council of Lateran,
under Innocent the Third, which, as you have already heard, declares, Council.
To. XI. p. 148, 149.
that if the Temporal Lord neglect to purge his Territories from Heretical
Pravity, notice must be given of his Remisness to the Pope, that he from
henceforth may pronounce his Subjects discharged from their Obedience, and give
his Dominions to Catholics.

Moreover, in compliance with these Popish Principles, we find that Popish
Princes, who had made these Promises, did notwithstanding prosecute their
Protestant Subjects with the greatest rigor, and act clear contrary to the
Engagements made unto them. Our own Dominions will afford a sad and lamentable
Instance of this thing. For Dr. Burnet's Hist. of the Reformation, B. 2. part
2. p. 237.
when the men of Norfolk, and a great Body out of Suffolk, desired to know of
Queen Mary, whether she would alter the Religion set up in King Edward's days,
she gave them full Assurance, that she would never make any Innovation or
Change, but be contented with the private Exercise of her own Religion. And, on
the twelfth of April, she made an open Declaration in Council, That, although
her Conscience was stayed in the Matters of Religion, yet she was resolved not
to compel or strain others, otherwise than God should put into their hearts a
persuasion of that Truth she was in; but, notwithstanding these Engagements, as
soon as she was well established in the Throne, she presently began, and did
continually promote the Burning of her Protestant Subjects only for their
Religion sake. Another Instance of like nature we have in France; where,
notwithstanding all the Edicts made in favor of the Protestants, See The Policy
of the Clergy of France, p. 22. p. 32. p. 36. p. 40. p. 46.
their Temples are demolished, they are rendered incapable of all Charges of
Magistrature, they are abandoned to Injustice and Violence; their Children are
often taken up in the Streets, shut up in Cloisters, and they never hear more
of them; they are deprived of all means of gaining their livelihood, and are
not allowed to be of Arts and Trades, though the Declarations and Edicts
expressly bear they shall be received into them. p. 135.
In England, says the Hugonot, there, more Favor has been given to the
Catholics than was promised them; but in France, where we live under favorable
Edicts, they have promised us what they have not performed; it is only to us
that they make profession of not performing what they have promised; the Edicts
of Pacification are in all the forms that perpetual Laws ought to be, they are
verified by the Parliaments, they are confirmed by a hundred Declarations, and
by a thousand Royal words, they have been laid as irrevocable Laws, and as
Foundations of the Peace of the State, we rely upon the good Faith of so many
Promises, and on a sudden we see snatched from us what we looked upon as our
greatest Security, thus there is neither Title, nor Prescription, nor Edicts,
nor Arrests, nor Declarations, that can put us in Safety.

. XX. But lastly, That which chiefly does confirm this Truth is, the
Proceedings of the general Council of Constance against John Hus, who being
summoned by Sigismond the Emperor to appear before that Council, to take away
all Fears and Jealousies of what he might expect to suffer from them, the
Emperor grants Liber Epist Joh. Huss ed. A 1537. f. 1.
him safe Conduct, Vt Constantiam veniens e converse redire ad Bohemiam possit,
to return from Constance to Bohemia, and promises he would receive him into
the Safeguard and Protection of the Empire; and commanding all Princes of his
Dominions to permit him freely to come thither, stay and continue there, and to
return from thence. Ibid. f. 2.
But notwithstanding this, he had not been above three weeks in Constance, but,
contrary to his safe Conduct, he is thrown into prison; which being done in the
Emperor's absence he returns to the Council, and argues the Case with them,
upon which they pass the Decree contained in the Ninteenth Session of that
Council, in these words; Praesens Sancta Synodus ex quovis salvo conductu per
Imperatorem, Reges, and alios seculi Principes, Haereticis, vel de haeresi
defamatis, putantes eosdem sic a suis erroribus revocare, quocunque vinculo se
astrinxerint, concesso, nullum fidei Catholicae vel jurisdictioni
Ecclesiasticae praejudicium generari, vel impedimentum praestari posse seu
debere declarat, quo minus dicto salvo conductu non obstante, liceat judici
competenti Ecclesiastico de hujusmodi personarum erroribus inquirere and alias
contra eos debite procedere, eosdemque punire quantum justitia suadebit, si
suos errores revocare pertinaciter recusaverint, etiamsi de salvo conductu
consisi ad locum venerint judicii, alias non venturi; nec sic promittentem, cum
alias fecerit quod in ipso est, ex hoc in aliquo remansisse obligatum, Bin.
council. To. 7. p. 1075.
This present Sacred Synod declares that by whatsoever safe Conduct, granted by
the Emperor, Kings, or other secular Princes to Heretics, or such as are
defamed for Heresy, and by whatsoever bond they have obliged themselves to the
observance of it no prejudice can arise, no impediment can or ought to be put
to the Catholic faith, or other Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, but that
(notwithstanding the said safe Conduct) it may be lawful for any Competent and
Ecclesiastical Judge to enquire into the Errors of such persons, and duly
otherways proceed against them, and punish them so far as Justice shall
require, if they shall pertinaciously refuse to revoke their Errors; yea,
though they come to the place of Judgment, relying upon such safe Conduct and
would not otherwise come thither; nor does he, who so promises, remain obliged
in any thing, having done what lies in him. And having passed this Decree, for
the satisfaction of the Emperor, they pronounce John Hus Jam emittimus animam
tuam Diabolo. Ibid.
guilty of Heresy, and thereupon seven of the Bishops solemnly degrade, and
commit his soul to the Devil, his body to the Emperor, who commands Ludovicus,
Duke of Bavaria, to deliver him up to the Executioners, who there-upon commit
his body to the flames. The question then is whether the Emperor did not break
his Faith with John Hus in so doing, and whether the Council did not decree
that neither he nor any else were bound to keep it in this case with Heretics.
And although this case be so plain and clear to all persons who have any sense
of Justice and honesty, that we dare to appeal to the most indifferent persons
in the world. Whether it be not a most notorious Violation of faith for
Sigismond himself, after a solemn promise made to Hus of safe Return, to be the
Aberat tum forte Sigismundus, and certior factus graviter tulit, eoque venit,
sed cum Pontificii dicerent, Non esse Fidem servandam Haereticis, non modo
remisit offensionem, licet Bohemi frequenter intercederent, and fidem servari
peterent, sed etiam primus omnium acerbe in eum pronunciavit. Sleidan.
Commentar. l. 3. p. 59.
instrument of his execution, and whether they, declaring that the Emperor had
done what in him lay, as to the Observation of this Promise, do not expressly
declare, that Incinerationem Joh. Hus, Imperator non aequo animo tulit, propter
salvum conductum ei datum. Respondit ei Sacrosancta Synodus eum argui non posse
de fide mentita, quia Concilium ipsum non dederat ei salvum conductum, and
Concilium majus est Imperatore, and ideo non potuisse contra voluntatem
Concilii id concedere, praecipue in factis fidei. Nauclerus, Genesis 48. p. 272.
Emperors cannot hinder the Execution of an Heretic, when H. Church does
interpose for his destruction, what promises soever they have made of Safety to
him? Yet that which most of all confirms this truth, is the consideration of
the Answers made by the Doctors of the R. Church to Protestants acusing of this
Council, as well they might, of favoring the Breach of promise made by
Catholics, to such as they are pleased to call Heretics; now the chief plea
which Opusc. To. 2. p. 149. qu. 5.. 2. 3. Lab. Cant. p. 154.
Becanus, and after him the Author of Labarynthus Cantuariensis makes to free
the Councils from this imputation, is, viz. that by that Decree the Council
declares, that no Secular Power, how Sovereign soever, can hinder the
Proceedings of the Ecclesiastical Tribunal in Causes of Heresy; and
consequently, if the Emperor, or any other Secular Prince, grants a safe
Conduct, or makes Promise of any thing to the prejudice of that Jurisdiction,
it shall not hold. The reason is, because it is a Promise made of a thing not
pertaining to the Jurisdiction of that Prince, nor wholly in his Power to see
performed: Which, if I understand any thing, is expressly to say, that though in
Cases properly pertaining to the Prince's Jurisdiction he must perform his
Promise, yet not in this of Heresy; because it does belong to the
Ecclesiastical Tribunal: When therefore the Council of Constance decrees, that
no Secular Power is obliged by any safe Conduct to any thing that may hinder
the Ecclesiastical Tribunal's Proceeding in Cases of Heresy, what does it else
but declare in express Terms, that Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, that
is, in any thing relating to their Heresy; for this it seems the Magistrates
have nothing to do with: and therefore let Kings and Princes make never so
solemn Promises and Engagements to men suspected of Heresy, to their peril be
it who rely upon them, for they have nothing to do to promise in such matters,
and though their Faith be given never so publicly and solemnly, they are not
bound to keep it: Nay, they are bound not to keep it: For if they should, it
would be to the apparent mischief and prejudice of the Church. This necessarily
follows from their own words, and the distinction here used by them: And also
from the words of the Council, for if no safe Conduct of Emperors or Kings can
prejudice the Catholic Faith, or hinder the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction from
proceeding duly against Heretics, and punishing them as far as Justice does
require, it cannot hinder the Execution of them by the Magistrate when they are
given up to the Secular Power for that end; for, I suppose, the Council could
not but esteem the freeing Heretics, condemned by the Church, from civil
Punishments, a prejudice to the Catholic Faith and an hindrance of the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, by letting them escape who by that Jurisdiction
were condemned to suffer what was due to Heretics. So that the plain result of
all is this, That no Prince ought to promise Safety to the Heretic; But if he
does so, though it be more than he can do, yet the Church can make that good
use of it, that by that means she may get the Heretics under her Power, and
when she has them, it is but then declaring this Promise to be null, and she
may do with them as she pleases.

. XXI. Now to give you the Description of a Popish Prince placed in the Throne,
invested with the Power of the Sword, and settled in a Kingdom, where
Protestants, that is, damned Heretics, abound from the Decrees and the
Determinations of their approved general Councils, and almost in their own
Expressions, it is this, viz.

A Popish Prince is one who as he does desire to be esteemed a Christian, or a
true Son of the Church, stands bound to wait on the Inquisitors or Catchpoles
of the Church, affording them his Aid and Favor, in finding out and
apprehending, and in committing to the Gaol all Heretics, with all that favor
and abet them, that is, he is to do the Office of a Bailiff, Constable, and a
Gaol-keeper to a bloody Bonner, or any other Person deputed by his Holiness for
the Destruction of his Subjects. Moreover, as he would avoid the heavy Censures
of the Church, he must oblige himself by Oath, not only to rob and spoil his
Protestant Subjects of their Goods, and put them into Chains and Fetters, but
also to exterminate them out of his Kingdoms and Dominions, and when they are
by the Inquisitors or Bishops delivered up into his hands, he must presently
commit them to the Flames, that is, he must perform the Office of the Hangman
or Executioner for H. Church. And, if he be remiss or backward in butchering
his Subjects for their Conscience sake, he must then be deprived of all his
Dominions, and they must be disposed of to Persons more inclined to act these
bloody Tragedies upon them. And, lastly, if he has bound himself by Promises
or Oaths to deal more mildly with them, and to permit them to enjoy their own
Religion, or has engaged not to execute these Sanguinary Laws upon them, he
must repent of this his horrid Wickedness, be false unto the Oath of God, and,
in despite of all his Promises, he must effectually proceed to the
Extermination and Destruction of them.

. XXII. If he be backward or remiss in executing of these Sanguinary Laws, he
has his ghostly Fathers, the Archbishops and Bishops, who cannot, without
Perjury, forget to spur him on to the effusion of the Blood of Christians; for,
by the Oath which these Ambassadors of Peace do take at their Admissions to
their Sacred Functions, they oblige themselves Haereticos, Schismaticos aut
Rebels, eidem Domino nostro, vel Successoribus praedictis, pro posse
persequar and impugnabo. Pontif. Romans edit. Antwerp. A. D. 1626. p. 59, and 86.
to prosecute and impugn to the utmost of their power all Heretics,
Schismatics and Rebels to the Pope. If they be remiss in this matter, they, by
the Constitution of the Fourth general Council of Lateran, must lose their high
and Can. 3. vide supra,. 14.
rich Preferments, which, out of too much kindness to a damned Heretic, you
may be sure they will not do. It Is from their Importunity that all these
Sanguinary Laws of Princes had their rise, it is they who have insatiably
thirsted after Christian Blood, and, like Death, never said they had enough;
it is they who stablished all the forementioned Laws, and who in France and
Germany were still taking Council together how to destroy their Christian
Brethren, more righteous than themselves: Council. Salisburg. Can. 32. To. 13.
p. 325.
It Is they who do encourage and admonish one another carefully to execute,
observe and cause inviolably to be observed, by all their Subjects, all Laws
made against persons infam'd or suspected of any Heresy, and against all
Receivers, Favorers and Defenders of them, and against Secular Powers, who
being lawfully required, neglect to extirpate Heretical Pravity out of their
Dominions. And with what Faithfulness and Zeal they have performed, in this
point, their Oaths, a few late Instances will show. The general Council of
Siena, held A. D. 1423. exhorts, Council. To. 12. p. 367.
invites, admonishes all Christian Princes, by the Bowels of the Mercies of
God, and as they desire to avoid the Divine Vengeance, and the Penalty of the
Law, to be watchful and intent to extirpate with all speed the Heresy of the
Wicklefists condemned by the Church. A Council met at Council. To. 14. p. 441,
442, 443.
Paris, under the Archbishop of Sens, A. D. 1528. and therefore called
Concilium Senonense, renews all the Decrees of the Fourth general Council of
Lateran, excommunicating all Heretics, and declaring all that believe not as
the Church of Rome believes, to be Heretics, condemning them to perpetual
Imprisonment, Confiscation of their Goods, and decreeing that they shall be
given up to the hands of the Secular Magistrate, and commanding all Bishops to
be diligent in Execution of these Laws, and all Governors and Consuls of Cities
to take an Oath to be aiding in this Work, according to their power. This done,
they thus apply themselves unto his Christian Majesty, Francis the First.
We beseech the most Christian King by the Bowels of the Mercy of God, for the
singular Zeal, and wonderful Affection, and incredible Devotion which he
bears to the Christian Religion, he would forthwith expel all Heretics out
of his Dominions and Territories, and would exterminate them; p. 443.
And necessary, say they, is it that all Orthodox Princes should bend their
whole Endeavors, and exercise their whole power for the destroying and chasing
away Heretics, if they are willing to consult the good of Christianity, or
fear the Ruin of the Christian Faith; this is sufficient to work upon their
Piety if they incline that way. To move them to this Butchery, with hopes of
temporal and of eternal Advantages, they let them know, Ibid. p. 462.
that though God is able to destroy the Heretics himself, yet such is his
Goodness, that he would have men to be Co-workers with him in this thing, and
that he amply will reward all those that are so, and that it would be tedious
to rehearse the Glory and Felicity of them who, adhering steadfastly to the
Catholic Faith, did slaughter Heretics, as being the Capital Enemies of the
Crown. And to deter them, if they be superstitious, with the dread of
Punishments, they add, that, on the contrary, such Princes as have been
favorable to Heretics, and did not withstand their Errors, found the Vengeance
of God against them, and, being destitute of his Favor, fell into grievous
Calamities, and miserably ended their Lives: We therefore, considering these
things, according to our Duty, do instantly exhort all Christian Princes, and,
in the Lord, beseech them, that, as they desire to consult their own Welfare,
to keep the Rights of their Dominions pure, as they desire to keep the People
subject to them in Peace and in Tranquillity, they would, with powerful Arm,
defend the Catholic Faith, and manly endeavor to subdue its Enemies; Hoc
profecto nostrum desiderium, haec votorum summa, haec nostri conatus gloria,
hoc est quod tota mente exposcimus, and assiduis precibus a Domino flagitamus,
i. e. the Effusion of the Blood of Heretics is what we chiefly do desire both
of God and men, and to accomplish this is our chief Glory. The Council of
Milan, Bin. To. 9. p. 449.
A. D. 1565. puts up the like Petition to the Civil Magistrate in these words,
We exhort Princes, and the Magistrates of Cities, and by the Bowels of the
Mercies of Christ our Lord, we pray them, that, preferring heavenly gain before
earthly, they take care to forbid all Traffic and Commerce with Heretics, in
any of their Towns and Cities, and that they suffer not their Subjects, upon
these accounts, to repair to any Heretical Countries, especially that they
would be helpful to, and heartily would favor (that Hell above ground) the
Sacred Inquisition, and, being desired, would interpose their Authority to that
end; and what more they could ask it is not easy to imagine.

But should Popish Princes be remiss in execution of this Bloody Work, they
must expect to be still quickened, if not threatened to it by that great Malleus
Haereticorum called his Holiness. For this has been the constant business of
that See from the Twelfth Century till of late, to call upon all Catholic
Princes to ruin both the Souls and Bodies of those Subjects who refused to obey
the Church of Rome, or become Subjects to his Holiness. And to chastise those
Princes who did countenance any such Sects or Heresies, or who refused to
destroy and murder them. How industriously they have promoted, how vehemently
they have excited Princes and other Governors to these inhuman Persecutions,
will appear from the ensuing Instances collected from the Annals of their own
Spondanus.

In the beginning of the Thirteenth Century the To. 1. p. 36.. 4. p. 43.. 3.
Persecution waxed hot against the Albigenses and Waldenses, by reason of the
Fiery Zeal of Innocent the Third against them; who in the years 1208, and 1210.
excited Philip, King of France, to fight against Raimund, the Count of Tolose,
and to expel him with his Adherents out of his Dominions, because he was a
Favorer of Heretics. A. D. 1209. he promises p. 38.. 7.
to all confessed and penitent Crusado's, that would take up Arms against them,
the Remission of Sins, and Absolution from Penance, whereupon these Crusado's
besiege, and take the City of Beziers, and destroy in it Sixty or Seventy
Thousand Souls.

An. Do. 1211. Innocent the Third writes to the p. 41.. 4.
Count of Tolose, not to receive into his Territories the Albigensian and
Waldensian Heretics, declaring that, if he should neglect to obey this
Command, he would give up his Dominions to be possessed by the Exterminators of
Heretics, as afterward he did.

A. D. 1229. Gaufred, the Legate of the Apostolic p. 102.. 8.
See, excites the Citizens of Milan to animadvert upon the Heretics, by
banishing and apprehending them, by destroying of their Houses, by Confiscation
of their Goods, and other Penalties; and in the p. 104.. 4.
year following severe Laws were made against them there, by instigation of the
Pope, and many Heretics in Lombardy and Germany were burnt.

A. D. 1234. Gregory the Ninth excites Ludovicus, p. 116.. 3.
King of France, to restrain the Albigensian Heretics, and, in the same year,
by the Authority of the same Gregory, expedition is made against the Heretics
p. 117.. 7.
dwelling in the Confines of Saxony, Frisia and Bremen, the Cross is preached
up, and the same Privileges which were granted to those who went to the Holy
Land, were promised to those Crusado's who should take up Arms against the
Heretics. An. Do. 1235. He set forth an Edict against them, which caused p.
120.. 1.
many of them to be burnt.

A. D. 1238. Pope Gregory the Ninth excites Bela, p. 130.. 10.
King of Hungary, to fight against Asanus, Lord of Bulgaria, because he had
revolted from the Obedience of the Roman See to the Schism and Heresy of the
Greeks, and he solicits the Crusado's, gathered for the assistence of the Holy
Land, to fight against him, by promising to them the same Privileges upon their
expedition against him.

A. D. 1254. Innocent the Fourth sets forth diverse p. 188.. 6.
Constitutions against Heretics and their Favorers, commands the Cross to be
preached up against them, and gives the same Privileges and Indulgences to all
Crusado's, who engage against them, which had been granted by a general Council
to those who went to the Holy Land.

A. D. 1307. Clement the Fifth sent his Legate with p. 364.. 16.
an Army of Crusado's against the Dulcinists, who denied the Pope and other R.
Prelates to be true Pastors, because they lived not according to the Rules of
the Gospel, by which Crusado's the Dulcinists were forced up into the Alps,
where they were partly destroyed by the Sword, partly by Cold and Hunger;
Dulcinus himself, with some of his Companions, being taken, they were brought
to Vercelles, and there cut in pieces, and afterward their scattered pieces
were committed to the Flames.

A. D. 1335. Benedict the Twelfth excites John, p. 454.. 4.
King of Bohemia, and the Bishop of Almutz, against some Heretics who came
thither out of Germany and the neighboring Places: And Edward the Third of
England, against the Heretics in Ireland, who said the Sacrament was not to be
adored.

A. D. 1352. Clement the Sixth writes to Peter de p. 522.. 12.
Montibus, an Inquisitor, and to all Prelates and Rectors to persecute the
Heretics in the Province of Ambrun, this Persecution makes them fly into
Calabria. And An. Do. 1353. Innocent the Sixth writes to the King of Sicily to
assist the Inquisitors of Heresy against them there.

A. D. 1372. Gregory the Eleventh excites Charles p. 580.. 11.
the Fourth, Emperor of Germany, and other Princes of that Nation, to extirpate
the Heretics called Begardi and Bequini, who again sprang up in Germany.

A. D. 1374. He writes to the Archbishop of Prague, p. 582.. 2.
and to Charles the Emperor, to punish one Mallaesius an Heretic and his
Followers, and to assist the Inquisitors in so doing.

A. D. 1375. The Heretics abounding in the Provinces p. 586.. 5.
of Dauphine, Savoy, and other neighboring Places; the same Pope writes
vehement Letters to the Prelates and Rectors of those Provinces, and to
Charles, King of France, to labor with the Inquisitors to root them out of
those Provinces.

A. D. 1377. He writes to the King of England, p. 590.. 5.
and to the Chancellor of Oxford, to extirpate the Errors of Wickliff.

In the Fifteenth Century, A. D. 1409. Alexander p. 718.. 23.
the Fifth commands the Wicklefists to be apprehended and condemned as
Heretics, by requesting the Aid of the Civil Magistrate.

A. D. 1422. Branda, a Cardinal, was sent by Martin p. 779.. 2.
the Fifth, to prosecute the Holy War against the Hussites.

A. D. 1427. Martin the Fifth gives to Henry of p. 793.. 1.
Winton ample Power to raise an Army of Crusado's against the Wicklefists and
Hussites, promising to them the same Privileges which were granted to them who
went to the Holy Land.

In the Sixteenth Century, When Luther came upon the Stage, Leo the Tenth, A.
D. 1520. set forth a Bull against him, declaring, Post translatum ex Graecis, a
R. Ecclesia, in eosdem Germanos Imperium, iidem praedecessores nostri, and nos
ejusdem Ecclesiae Advocatos and Defensores ex eis semper accepimus, quos quidem
Germanos constat Haeresum acerrimos Oppugnatores semper fuisse, cujus rei
testes sunt laudabiles illae Constitutiones Germanorum Imperatorum pro
liberate Ecclesiae, proque expellendis exterminandisque ex omni Germania
Haereticis: Testis est in Concilio Constable. Hussitarum ac Wicklefistarum, necnon
Hieronymi Pragensis damnata ac punita perfidia: Testis est toties contra
Bohemos Germanorum sanguis effusus. Bull. Leonis Decimi. Council. To. 14. p. 391.
that since the Church of Rome, N. B. had translated the Empire from the Greeks
to the Germans, she had ever found the Germans to be severe Oppugners of all
Heresy, witness the Decrees of the German Emperors for the exterminating
Heretics out of their Dominions, the Condemnation of the Hussites,
Wicklefists, and Jerome of Prague by the Council of Constance; Witness the Blood
they have so often shed against the Bohemians. Wherefore, to show the Care he
bears for Christian Religion and the Orthodox Faith, Nos igitur, -- habita
super praedictis erroribus -- diligenti trutinatione, discussione, ac districto
examine, maturaque deliberatione cum venerabilibus fratribus S. R. E.
Cardinalibus, -- pluribusque aliis S. Theologiae, necnon utriusque Juris
Professoribus sive Magistris, and quidem Peritissimis, reperimus eosdem Errores
non esse Catholicos, -- sed contra Ecclesiae Catholicae Doctrinam and
Traditionem, contra Sanctorum Patrum Determinationes, Conciliorum quoque and
Summorum Pontificum expresses Ordinationes seu Canones, quibus non obtemperasse
omnium Haeresum and Schismatum fomes and causa semper fuit; de eorundem itaque
Fratrum nostrorum consilio and assensu, -- praefatos omnes and singulos
Articulos tanquam respective haereticos, aut scandalosos, aut falsos, and
veritati Catholicae obviantes damnamus, reprobamus, etc. ac pro damnatis,
reprobatis ac rejectis, ab omnibus utriusque sexus fidelibus haberi debere,
harum serie decernimus ac declaramus. Ibid. P. 394, 395.
he, with his Cardinals, and many other Divines most skillful in Theology, and
the most Eminent Professors of both Laws, after mature deliberation, diligent
examination and discussion of some Articles cited in this Bull, of which this
is one, viz. That it is against the will of the Holy Spirit, that Heretics
should be burnt, declares, that all those Articles were contrary to the
Doctrine and Tradition of the Catholic Church, against the Determinations of
Holy Fathers, and the express Ordinances and Canons of Popes and Councils,
which not to be obedient to is the Cause and Nourishment of all Heresies and
Schisms. He therefore, with the Counsel and Assent of the aforesaid Brethren,
pronounces all the aforesaid Articles to be respectively Heretical, or
Scandalous, or False, and contrary to Catholic Verity, and, as such,
reprobates and damns them; decreeing, that all Christians shall look upon them
as such. And he Inhibentes sub majoris Excommunicationis latae Sententiae
poenis, -- Regibus, Imperatoribus, Principibus, Ducibus, etc. ne praefatos
Errores, aut eorum aliquos asserere, affirmare, defendere, praedicare, aut
illis public vel occulte, tacit vel express favere praesumant. Ibid. p. 395,
396.

Regibus, Imperatoribus, Electoribus, etc. mandamus, quatenus, sub praedictis
omnibus and singulis poenis, ipsi, vel eorum quilibet, praefatum Martinum,
Accomplices, Adhaerentes, Receptantes and Fautores personaliter capiant, and
Captos ad nostram instantiam retineant, and ad nos mittant, reportaturi pro tam
bono opere, a Nobis and Sede Apostolica remunerationem praemiumque condignum.
Ibid. p. 398, 399.


inhibits all Kings, Emperors, Electors, Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, etc. under
the Penalty of the greater Excommunication, to be actually incurred without
judicial proceeding, to assert, affirm, defend, preach, or publicly or
secretly, tacitly or expressly to favor the aforesaid Errors or perverse Doctrine
of Luther; and under the same Penalties commands them personally to apprehend
him, his Accomplices, Adherents, Receivers and Favorers, and to retain them
till the Pope requires them, and then to send them to him, for which good Work
he promises to reward them. And lastly, He does excommunicate and anathematize
all Persons of what state, degree, condition, preeminence, dignity or
excellency soever, who any ways do hinder the Publication of this Bull in their
Dominions.

A. D. 1521. He pronounces Luther a Heretic, Spond. To. 2. p. 338. ad A.
1521.. 1.
and declares, that all Persons of what authority, dignity or condition soever,
who did patronize or yield him any counsel, help or favor, had incurred the
Penalties and Censures inflicted by the Canons upon Heretics, and all the
other Punishments contained in his former Decree. And he commands, that they
should every where be denounced excommunicate, anathematized, accursed,
interdicted, deprived of all Honor, Goods and Dignity, and that they and their
Posterity should be incapable of them for the future, and should by all men be
avoided.

A. D. 1522. Hadrian the Sixth excites the Princes p. 348.. 13.
of Germany to extirpate the Heresy of Luther, and writes Letters both to the
Secular and Ecclesiastical Princes to this effect, and particularly to
Frederick, Duke of Saxony, in whose Dominions Luther dwelt, admonishing him to
consider how he could answer at the Tribunal of Christ for cherishing a Madman
and a Subverter of the Doctrine of the Church. And Hoc tibi denunciamus in
virtute Omnipotertis Dei and Domini nostri Jesu Christi, cuius in terris
Vicarius sumus, nec te in praesenti seculo laturum impune, and in futuro
aeterni te ignis exspectare incendium. -- quare revertimini ad Cor, and
resipiscete, Tu, tuique misere seducti Saxones, nisi utrumque gladium,
Apostolicum simul and Caesareum, olim velitis experiri. Bull. Adrian. Sexti,
apud Bin. To. 9. page 180.
denouncing to him in the Name of the Omnipotent God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, that if he did not return to a sound Mind, he should hereafter be
condemned to Hell Fire, and should not go unpunished in this present Word, but
suffer by the Sword of Caesar and the Apostles See. And to that end this Pope
writes Letters to the Electors and other Princes of Germany, and sends an
Instruction to Cheregata, his Legate, how to proceed in this Matter.

A. D. 1525. Clement the Seventh exhorts the Senate p. 375.. 24.
of Paris to punish the Lutheran Heresy sprung up amongst them, professing
that he himself will spare no Diligence or Industry in that Cause.

A. D. 1568. Maximilian grants to the Nobility p. 704.. 25.
of Austria the free Exercise of the Augustan Confession in their Towns,
Castles and Villages, which when Pius the Fifth hears of, he presently sends to
him the Cardinal of Commendonum to hinder it, or if he could not hinder it, to
declare by the Apostolical Authority, that the Pope would inflict upon him, if
he did not suddenly rescind that Decree, all the Ecclesiastical Penalties and
Execrations, and would deprive him of his Dominions, and take care that another
should be chosen Emperor.

A. D. 1585. Sixtus the Fifth exhorts the King of p. 822.. 17.
France, that, being mindful of his Oath which he had taken at his Coronation,
De omnibus Haeresum atque Sectarum Seminibus extirpandis, to extirpate all the
Seeds of Heresy and Schism, he would effectually perform it.

THE END.
Books lately Printed for Thomas Basset at the George in Fleetstreet.
THE History of Romish Treasons and Usurpations; together with a particular
Account of many gross Corruptions and Impostures in the Church of Rome, highly
dishonorable and injurious to Christian Religion: to which is prefixed a large
Preface to the Romanists, carefully collected out of a great number of their
own approved Authors: By Henry Foulis, B. D. late Fellow of Lincoln-Colledge in
Oxford.

A Catalogue.
An Institution of General History, or, The History of the World; being a
complete Body thereof: In Two Parts; the First, from the Beginning of the World
till the Monarchy of Constantine the Great; wherein are described the several
Empires and the Contemporaries with them, all distinctly and by themselves; and
yet linked together by Synchronisms: As also the Forms and Models of
Governments, with the Power and Nature of their respective Magistrates,
Customs, Laws and Antiquities. The Second Part containing that of the Roman
Empire, its flourishing Condition, its middle or neutral State, and its Ruin
and Downfall in the West; from the Monarchy of Constantine the Great, to the
Taking of Rome by Odoacer, King of the Heruli, and the erecting of a Kingdom of
Barbarians in Italy; with an Account of the Polity of the Empire, and of the
several Laws of moment made during the Reigns of the Emperors both in East and
West to this Period. By William Howell, LL. D. sometimes Fellow of Magdalen
College in Cambridge.


