A TESTIMONY AGAINST Jeffery Bullock HIS Antichristian and Foolish Pamphlet,
STYLED, Antichrist's Transformations Within Discovered by the LIGHT WITHIN.
Wherein his perverse Spirit, Darkness and Whimsical Conceits are Reprehended by
the TRUE LIGHT.

Romans 1. 21. Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God,
neither were thankful; but became vain in their Imagination, their Foolish
Heart was darkened. Verse. 22. Professing themselves to be wise, they became
Fools. Printed in the Year, 1676.

A TESTIMONY AGAINST Jeffery Bullock HIS Antichristian and Foolish Pamphlet,
STYLED, Antichrist's Transformations Within Discovered by the Light Within.
HAving lately seen a Book printed by J. B. entitled, Antichrist's
Transformations Within discovered by the Light Within, this Testimony arose in
my Heart, That Antichrist's Transformations within is setting and would set it
self above the Light within, in such as have departed from it in themselves,
amongst whom is this J. B. with some others, who went out from us because they
were not of us, but went out, and so are made manifest; who, had they continued
in the Light, they had not been pushing at us and it; for such are at Unity
with the Light, and in it, in sweet Fellowship, Peace and Communion one with
another, and there is no Occasion of stumbling in them because they walk in the
Light: And these have been much opposed since they were a People, gathered by
the Light, in it to walk; and the Enemy has labored always to disperse their
gatherings, and to hedge up their Path; and when the National Priests and
others of all sorts, with their Weapons, could effect nothing, then have there
arose some amongst our selves, who have spoke perverse things to draw after
them; and so, this is no new thing, neither would we have any startled, or make
a wrong Judgment concerning, us or the blessed Light because thereof, and so
make their Bonds strong; for so you may read it was in the Primitive Times: And
those are more subtle then others, in that they have known something of the
Openings of the Truth, whilst in their first Love, Tenderness and Lowliness,
unto which it did open, which State they having lost have made use thereof to
make War against the Light and the Dwellers therein; and the Knowledge has pust
such up who have fed there, and departed from the Grace that humbles and
keeps humble, out of Contention, and Strife, and Enmity, where these dwell
who speak Evil of Dignities, and Despise Government, and would pretend to give
Honor to the Light, but dishonor and dis-regard them that are the Messenger
and were the Bringers of the Glad-tidings thereof to their Ears, who have
turned many to Righteousness, who do and shall shine forever and ever: And this
Subtilty is seen, and this transformed Angel of Light is discovered, though he
come in that Name and under the Pretense of Light, crying out against Man, and
calling it Man's Power and Man's Authority, as divided from the Lord's Power
and his Authority, even in those that are begotten of it, and live upon it, and
act by it, and judge the World through it; and this i^ not to honor the Light,
which has honored them that have honored it, and given them Power, which has
reached through them even to Thousands, who are their Witnesses they have used
it to Edification and not to Destruction: Neither have such forced any, or
exercised Dominion over the Consciences of any, as Rome and other Chuches have
done by their Coercive power and Penal Laws; so none like to be so ensnared by
their Power and Authority given them of God to judge Error and Blasphemy, and
whatever rises up that is of a contrary Nature to the pure Light and peaceable
Spirit of Righteousness, which has brought us forth a People to his Praise,
amongst whom is the Spirit of Judgment and a sound Mind, who have the Mind of
Christ, and will not be divided from their Husband, their Maker, nor let his
Judgments depart from his Law that he has placed in their Hearts, and his
Righteousness that he put in his Spirit in their Inward Parts, which now goes
forth to judge Unrighteousness and Filthiness, as well of Spirit as Flesh,
which makes the filthy Dreamers that despise Dominion angry, and causes them to
vent their Confusion, Blasphemy and Darkness, to the manifesting their own
Shame, as J. B. has done, because Judgment is gone forth against him for
denying that Christ that dyed at Jerusalem to be the Judge and Savior, who
having denied him in his Workings for our Salvation, we cannot think it strange
to see him inveighing against the Ministers and Elders, and the Form and Order
in the Church, established by the Lord, and his Power in them, which disowns
his Disorder, and Informings from Satan's Transformings against the Light
within his People, which can never lessen the Fame and Glory of the true
Ministers, or their Power and Authority in the Churches, amongst which the Lord
has given them a Name, who, as he sent his Son into the World, so has his Son
sent them, and has sanctified them through the Truth, that they may be one as
the Father is one, and the Glory which the Father gave him he has given them,
though J. B. grudges them it, and that which they have they return unto him,
who is the Giver, God blessed fo^ever.

Thy Judgment is thou say and believe, That whatever is writ to the
Churches by Men, Elders, ought to be written by the Holy Ghost, whether it be
Exhortation or Counsel, Admonition, Warning of Evil, etc. in Matters of
Conscience, which things belong to God. So then they have Power in the Holy
Ghost to admonish and warn in things relating to Conscience according to thy
Judgment; but we may go something further as well as our Brother Paul, who
wrote to the Churc^es Advice and Counsel, and said, He spoke by Permission, and
not by Commandment, and sometimes not the Lord but He spoke, and so his Faith
and Judgment herein was diverse from thine, and so is ours.

And the Paper to the Churches (thou say) is not to be owned, because it was
writ from a Sight or a Sense, or Sensible Part, and not from the Spirit of
Revelation. As if that employed Contradiction, as if the Spirit's Revelation put
out Sight and Sensibility, and so thou would have Blind Elders and Senseless
Ministers; and is not this from Satan's Transformings in thee? and has he not
led thee here into the Ditch? for did not those that spoke forth the Spirit's
Revelations, speak from a Sight and a Sense, and from that Part in them that
was made sensible of the Revelation? and were not the Prophets called Sears?
and were they not to declare what they saw? and did they not speak from the
sight they had of the Mind of the Lord? and were not they sensible of what they
declared? And did not the Apostle declare what he had seen with his Eyes, and
his Hands had handled, and what he had tasted of the Word of Life? so his
Senses were exercised therein, and from the Sense he wrote; but thou, who have
lost thy Sense and Feeling, cryest out against Sensible Ministers and Elders;
and so People may see what stuff they have, and are like to have from thee,
which is full of Senslesness; and it is much if thou can put it off with
giving it away; for it is not worth buying.

So thou run'st on in thy senseless Stuff, and say, The Woman is the Soul,
Heart and Mind of every Visible Man. And whence have thou this? who art crying
out against us for not holding the Form of Sound Words? have not thou presumed
herein above what is written? where does the Scripture say so? or where can it
be so much as inferred from thence? and do thou think to recover thy self
with writing such stuff as this, or hurt us thereby? or will it not make thy
Folly more manifest, that it might proceed no further.

And the following part concerns thy self, whose Mind the Adversary has stolen
from the Light, that would have kept humble, out of the Headiness and spirit of
Exaltation, in which thou standst feeding upon the Tree of Knowledge, that has
puffed thee up, who has made use of thy Kn^^ledge to serve Lucifer's Interest,
who is now become thy Teacher and Leader in the Work of Opposition against the
Light, and his Teachings, Leadings and Formings of his People.

And thy not owning the Judgment and Superiority of the Ministers who say, He
that is not justified by the Witness of God in Friends, is condemned of it in
himself, does not make it untrue, who contendest against the Truth and its
Ministers; for God's Witness is one, and its Judgment one, and as his Name is
one so is his People (though such as are got into Hardness, above the Fear,
would divide them, and make their Judgment differ) wherefore it will hold true
forever, That such as are unreconciled to the Church, are no Ministers to the
Church; for God's Church and He are in Unity (which thou art insensible of,
being divided from it) and the Church is in God; so they that are unreconciled
to the Church, are unreconciled to God, and so can be no Ministers unto it; and
he gives his Power to the Church that is in him; and they that will not hear
the Church, let them be as Publicans, says Christ: and such unchurch
themselves that receive not the Judgment of the Church that is in God, the
Pillar and Ground of Truth: and though the False Church may and does bring
Snares, yet will the True Church of God never bring Snares upon her Members.

And thy Testimony against the Practice of Imposing Books (as thou deemest it)
favors more of Malice then Truth; for thou know, there were none imposed
upon thee, nor any in the Meeting; and thou have dealt Enviously and
Treacherously in the Relation thereof: and when it was mentioned at Sudbury
(where J. B. opposed it) it was left to Friends Freedoms, who all besides him
then and there consented, without the least Contradiction. But he ^as more
gratified his own Enmity, then shown his care for the Poor. And so J. B. thou
have lost the sense of the Light that saves, and art got into that which
destroys, and darkens, and vails, as they that read thy Book may feel the
Darkness, it is so thick.

And thy crying up the Light to cry down the Messengers and Laborers it has
sent forth, is not from the Light, but from the Transformings of Satan, who
informs against its Messengers and Ministers; for the Light said of such, You
are the Salt of the Earth, and that salts the Earth; and he calls them, The
Light of the World, and has not excluded them from being Fellow-Workers
together with him, nor yet ashamed to call them Brethren: So thou and thy Work
are discerned, and there is Thousands can never forget the Day of their
Convincement, who would have even plucked out their Eyes for them that were made
instrumental in the Power and Spirit of the Lord, to beget them to God, having
them in Esteem for their Works sake, accounting them worthy of double Honor
(though thou have lost thy First Love and Sense of the Heavenly Visitation,
that reached through them unto thee) which they cannot forget who have kept
their Habitation, but must highly esteem them by whom they were begotten to the
Lord, as Fathers; and such as have believed through their Word, and abide
therein, cannot think slightly of their Authority, and that Power which has
effectually wrought for the breaking all Impositions and Yoaks of Bondage from
off their Souls, and those are found Witnesses for them, they are no Imposers
of such Yoaks, and so thy Arguments fall of themselves.

And thou who denyest the Resurrection of the Power, or the arising of the
Seed, or God in Man, have therein shown the Effect of the Power of Darkness and
Seed of Enmity risen in thy self. Jesus Christ humbled himself, and made
himself of no Reputation, but descended, that he might bring man up out of the
Fall, and in this Respect he is truly said to ^uffer the Just for the Unjust,
that he might bring again to God, who in the pouring forth his Soul unto Death
comes to see his Seed, and so thou art a Stranger to the Sufferings of Jesus,
and knows not the Fellowship of them, who never were baptized into his Death
with him, who art denying the Extent and Effect of his Sufferings, thou being
out of the Sense and Feeling. And if that which God made in Man be in Bondage
and Captivity (as thou say) then must he descend thither to fetch it out;
and this is according to Scripture, which says, I looked, and there was none
to help, and my own Arm brought Salvation. And so it is thou must come into
Silence, and sit in the Dust, who art an Inhabitant of Kir of Moab; and thy
Ranting Spirit is discerned, who talkest of the World's being the Church of
God; and what needst thou make such a do about Error in Principles and
Practices? they can but lead into the World, and so into the Church of God: and
if he be above in all the Sons and Daughters of men, he is then in his proper
^lace, and the Devil is in his, and so thou might have spared thy Pain^: but
the Scripture says, His Soul is pr^ssed as a Cart is press^d with Sheaves; and
are not the Sheaves above the Cart it presses? And does not David say, Let God
arise, and his Enemies shall be scattered? And though God in his Soveraignity
be over Man to his Condemnation, yet he delights not in the Death and
Condemnation of Man; but so great is his Love toward him, that he would rather
have him under the Power of his Love and Mercy, which cannot be as Man is in the
Fall; but by sending his Son to suffer, which Man being truly sensible of,
through the Participation thereof, c^mes to attain to the Power of his
Resurrection, and so by being risen with him becomes a Joynt-Heir of his
Kindness and Mercy: And thou ownest the Light and Spirit to be the
Resurrection, but denyest the Resurrection of the Power and Light; How great is
thy Darkness! and how do the Chains of it wrap thee about? How can thou own
it to be the Resurrection, if it rise not in Man? for Resurrection signifies
that which is risen again, which necessarily implies a descending before that:
And unto them that fear my Name shall the Son of Righteousness arise; but thou
being out of the Fear of his Name opposest his Rising, and so know not truly
the Resurrection, and therefore believe against, and would not have him
arise in Man and Woman; But his Power is risen in Thousands, who can testify
against thee; and he which was dead is alive, and risen over Death, Hell and
the Grave, Glory, Glory forever.

And who says, that God has lost his D^minion in man? for we say, That Man is
only in fault, who is under the Region and Power of Darkness, and therefore is
Christ sent to seek and to save that which is lost; and he that seeks a Thing,
declares thereby it is lost; and he has both sought us and found us out, who
were as Sheep going astray. And thou denyest the Travail of the Seed, and so
art unacquainted with the Labor of Love and Kindness of God in Christ, and
would make it void in Men and Women, who being deprived of, the Right of his
Dwelling place does stand at the Door and Knock, and cries, Open, open unto me,
till hi^ Head is filled with Dew, and his Locks with the Drops of the Night;
and his Light has been put out (as to Man) and by him, though in it self it
cannot be put out; and the Candle of the Wicked is often put out, and is put
out in thee, and so thou writest not what thou have seen; for the light that
thou actest and writest by is Darkness, and how great it is thy Book in a great
Measure does manifest.

And the Devil (thou say) could never get into Heaven since he was thrown
down. How then came the War in Heaven that John saw, who was in the Spirit; and
so thou art not in the Spirit, but in the Transformation, that has not seen
it; and John's Revelation was since the Fall, who saw it, Michael and his
Angels making War against the Devil and his Angels; and so thou art ignorant of
the Scriptures and the Power of God, that makes War against the Devil and his
Angels, who sits in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God, and is
exalted above all that is called God, and his Seat and Power in thee and thy
Brethren is that which makes War against them who sit in the Heavenly Places in
Christ Jesus, who are his Ministers and Elders; but John saw they prevailed
not, neither was their place found in Heaven any more, and so do we.

And as to our Testimony to that Christ that dved without the Gates at
Jerusalem, we are glad (for the Truth and our sakes) thou have printed it, and
our dealings with thee in that Particular, concerning thy Opposition to us in
it, and we can leave it to the Witness of God in the Consciences of them that
see it; and thy seeming Answer unto it is something Answered in what is already
written; and I am willing to add this further, seeing thou think thou art
yet unanswered, and also for the sake of the Simple: Rome and the Priests
saying, That they own Justification and Condemnation by that Christ that dyed
at Jerusalem, makes it not antichristian Doctrine; and we do not deny the True
Doctrine that Rome and the Priests own, but the Antichristian; and its not
contrary to the Scriptures and the Form of Sound Words, to expect Just^fication
and Condemnation by that Christ that dyed at Jerusalem, but agreeing with them:
And thy Subtilty is seen, in taking those Expressions to exclude the Manhood,
in which it is really included, which says, By Grace you are saved, and
therefore not by him that dyed, though he was full of Grace, and by it tasted
Death that he might reconcile unto God, without which no Salvation: And by the
Light of the World we are condemned; as if that was not he who dyed, who said,
I am the Light of the World; so that I might as well say, because it is said,
The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpent's Head, therefore not the Seed
of God; and a Man shall be for an Hiding Place, and a Covert from the Storm,
therefore not Christ; the Son of Man's Coming is as the Lightning, therefore
not the Spirit; God shall judge the World by the Man Christ Jesus, therefore
not by the Light; this is contrary to the Sense of Scripture; for that includes
them in one, and joins them together whom thou would part assunder, as thou
may read in John, when Christ said, The Son of Man must be lifted up: and
they asked him, Who is the Son of Man? his Answer was, Yet a little while and
the Light is with you, while you have the Light walk in it: likewise when the
Babe was brought to Simeon, he took it in his Arms, saying of it, Mine Eyes
have seen thy Salvation, a Light to lighten the Gentiles, etc. and the Prophet
speaking of him, And thou Bethlem-Ephrata, who art one of the least amongst the
Tribes of Judah, out of thee shall come forth unto me he who shall be Ruler in
Israel, whose Goings forth are from of old, from everlasting: so He that came
out of Bethlem was he that dyed at Jerusalem, who is the Ruler, that judges and
condemns, who was from Everlasting; so that the Gentiles need not perish that
were in the World before that Body came in it for want of Salvation; for his
Goings were from of old, from Everlasting; and God's Anointed is spoken of,
which is Christ (though thou understandest it not) before his coming in that
Body.

But thou tellst us, Only all the World was freed from their Offerings for Sin
by that One Offering, and that Only has an Also too, they were outwardly
reconciled by the Death of his Son. And was not he that was the One Offering
for Sin, that ended all other Offerings, the Justifier, Condemner and Savior?
why else did he put an End by it to all other Offerings, but because they were
faulty, and had not Efficacy in them to justify and save? and he that
reconciles to God by his Death, must needs be the alone Justifier and Savior?
and there is not another. And then to thwart thy self thou say, 'Twas the Man
in the Mystery that dyed, that was one with the Mystery, who was the Christ of
God, being one with the Spirit of God; so then according to this, he that dyed
that was one with the Spirit of God, does both justify, condemn and save. And
then in Contradiction again to the Man in the Mystery, thou say, 'Twas the
Woman's Part that dyed, which was his Soul and Body; for Eve (thou say) was
in Transgression: And did his Soul and Body sin, which thou say was the
Woman's Pars, which was in Transgression? And in page 2. thou say, The Woman
is the Soul, Mind and Heart of every Visible Man and Woman: and so thou make
no Difference between his Soul and Body, and the Soul and Heart of every
Visible Man and Woman; Oh gross Darkness, Blasphemy and Confusion!

And our Testimony has always had a reverend Esteem of that Precious Blood
that was spilt without the Gates, as being of great value in the Sight of the
Lord, and having a Testimony in it toward the Remission of Sin, to obliege all
that are sensible of the End thereof, not to live unto themselves, but unto him
that dyed for them: And as they are to be blamed that will not come to the
Light, but cry it down, relying upon the Death and Sufferings without it; so
art thou, who pretendest to cry up the Light to render the Loving Kindness of
the Lord invalid, in sending his Son to lay down his Life and Precious Blood,
and taste Death for Mankind; and such as speak from the Light, which is the
Life that was in that blessed Body, can never disregard regard, but have an
high Esteem of what he did and suffered therein.

And further, thou say, There is a Soul, or an Invisible Woman, which God
did make and place in every Visible Man. I never read before of an invisible
Woman that God did make; no, that is thy making, and comes from thee, who do
not write from Sight or Sense; a mere Figment of thine own Conceiving, being
gone from the true Sense and Sight which gives a plain Understanding: And Eve
(thou say) conceived and brought forth the first Invisible Man, the Son of
Perdition, which brought Death over all; but thou tellest us not who she
conceived by, and who brought Death over her, if she brought Death over all.
And in thy other Answer, which is much to the same, It Is plain in Scripture
(thou say) there is Two Christ's, Christ and Antichrist: And art not thou in
the Transformings, that would make Antichrist a Christ? and who will take the
Information of this Informer can we think, but Satan, who would have Antichrist
to be Christ, and lay it upon the Scripture also; but the Scriptures say,
There Is but One Faith, and One Lord Jesus Christ; and we believe them, and not
thy Writings from Satan's Transformings. And thou do directly oppose the
Scripture, who say, Christ came not of David or Israel; for in Romans 1. it is
said, He did come of the Seed of David according to the Flesh, and so thy
Spirit is seen, and the Opposition is discerned; and it is the less for us to be
Opposed by thee, who art so great an Opposer of Scriptures.

And Antichrist (thou say) strives to bring in his Doctrine, and would be
Head over all those Invisible Appearances that come from God, yea, and Visible
Appearances also; which is fulfilled in thee and thy Brethren, who are judging
his Ministers, and the Wholesome Order and Commendable Form in the Church, to lay
them waste; nay, that spirit has not left unattempted the Scriptures
themselves, that so all Outward Footsteps in the Goings forth of the Light
being abolished, and the Motions and Whimsies from Antichrist's Transformations
set up in their place, the True Light and Spirit might thereby be abolisht
also; and that is the Word of Truth in my Heart to that spirit whose Workings
have been to that End. So thy Work is seen, and Judgment gone forth against
that spirit, which it cannot escape: And the Judgment of the Quarterly Meeting
is true, and will stand over thy Head forever, except thou Repentest: And so
the Reasons of thy Disowning us are some of them answered in what has been writ.

And whereas thou disowns that Body or Church, who look upon themselves to have
Power to judge of Errors, and have not Power to convince of Error, etc. I
answer, that that Power by which the Ministers and Elders amongst us do and
have judged Errors, the same has convinced Thousands of their Errors and false
Doctrines, and I believe, even thee also in Years past, when thou wast little
and tender: There is a difference between Conscience truly tender unto God, and
that which is seared and hardened through Enmity, which is to be judged and
condemned by the Church, and such as make Strife and Division, to be amarkt by
them that keep in the Power. And how can thou deny thy self to be a Member of
any Church, but the true, who have declared, the World to be the Church of God;
and the true cannot admit of thy belief and speaking, who believes and speaks
contrary to the Faith of it? And how should thou understand the Faith and
Belief of the Church that is true, who art against Sight and Sense, and art
gotten into another Principle, viz. the Darkness which cannot comprehend the
Light and the things that are therein, which are only seen in its Pri^ciple
truly? And thou preferrest Rome before us, and so they may take thee; for thou
have been a Shame to us, who have manifested so much Sottishness and
Hypocrisy, a to be twenty Years and more amongst us, and be called after our
Name, and yet all this while remain ignorant of our Faith and Belief touching
Doctrine. And thou art for our marrying with the Nations; for thou say, The
Lord made all Nations of one Blood; but the Nations have poluted themselves,
and are gone from God's make, and the Lord has gathered us out from the
Nations and Kindreds; and thou would have us mix with them again, and put
that together, which God has disjoined, and this is the Informer's work
against God, and his Christ's work: And when Naomy's Sons married, thou did
not see where they were (who writes not from any Sight) for there wa^ a Famine
in the Land of Israel, and they were gotten into the Land of Moab amongst the
Moabites, where the Lord cut them off, and made Naomy return empty, but when
Ruth returned into the Land of Israel with her, she then matched with Boaz of
the Tribes of Israel; and so we are Witnesses to the Matches in the Land of
Israel, even of such as return from Moab: And the Law was not given forth when
Moses took the Ethiopian Woman; so where there was no Law, there was no
Transgression, and God justified him, thou say, contrary to his Commend, as
thy ranting Spirit judges; but the Apostle commanded not to be unequally
yoakt; for what part has a Believer with an Infidel? and so thou art for the
linsey-woolsey Garment and expects to be justified, and for bringing Confusion
into the Churches of God, who is the God of Order, and not of Confusion, as in
all the Churches, who has set Watch men upon her Walls; so they have not set
themselves, not assumed Authority, but he has raised and is raising Judges, as
at first, and Counselors, as at the Beginning, Men fearing him, and hating
Covetousness, who judge for him alone, and bear not the spiritual Sword in vain.

And in thy first Query, where thou ask, What is the Fruit the Tree of
Knowledge bears? in thy Book thou say, It was and is the Scriptures, And was
not the Tree and Fruit of it before they were written? And in thy 21 Query thou
say again, Such as are feeding upon the Tree of Knowledge or the Scriptures;
so I perceive thou understandest not thy own Queries, and thou art not like to
know more of them for me, who imployest thy Knowledge so ill, in which thou
have shown us what Swine do with Pearls.

And to thy Postscript, I refer the Reader to Geo. Whitehead's Answer to Will.
Mucklow's Queries, and take only notice of that, where thou say, That which
came as from thee in thy Book, was either from a Mcasure of the Spirit in thee,
or from Satan in thee transformed into an Angel of Light: it seems thou well
know not, but the Universal Spirit and Light thereof in all Consciences
does, by which thou art judged, and thy Work manifested: And s^, though thou
have born the Name of a Quaker long, yet what an one thou have been thy Work
has declared; and thou art no Priest, no, (but the Lord makes his Priests) nor
Teacher, mark that, and teach no more, seeing thou art none, etc. but an
Informer, and so take thy Place amongst the Informers, who art Fellow-Worker
with them, and must have their Wages, except thou Repent.

G. BARNARDISTON.
Many other Gross Absurdities, Confusions and Follies in J. B's Pamphlet are
here omitted.



THE END.

