(...), De Studio Theologiae: OR, DIRECTIONS FOR THE Choice of Books IN THE
Study of Divinity. Written by the Rt Reverend Father in GOD, Dr. THOMAS BARLOW,
Late Ld Bishop of Lincoln, Provost of Queen's College, and MARGARET Professor
of DIVINITY in OXFORD.

Published from the Original Manuscript, By WILLIAM OFFLEY, M. A. Prebendary of
Lincoln, and Domestic Chaplain to His Lordship.

OXFORD, Printed by LEON. LICHFIELD, 1699.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, JAMES, Lord Bishop of LINCOLN.
MY LORD,
WHilst others, who are more immediately under Your Episcopal Government, do
equally approve and commend Your Generous Disposition, and indefatigable
Industry upon all Accounts, to advance the Honor of the most Excellent Church
of ENGLAND; I cannot at this unhappy distance be silent, but think my self
obliged to mention that great Esteem which Your Lordship entertains for the
Memory of many Learned Prelates, who have presided over that Holy See, which
Your Lordship at present so deservedly fills: And I am very sensible what an
honorable regard Your Lordship in particular has for Bishop Barlow's Memory,
which suffered extremely from those Sir P. P. S. W.
two Relick-mongers, who printed a Genuine Remains, etc.
Spurious Book under his Lordship's Commanding Name and Character: And whereas
neither Religion or Gratitude were of any force to restrain their Endeavors,
from blasting their Great Benefactor's Reputation after his Death, by their
publishing of many small Tracts; it was thought necessary for Bishop Barlow's
Legatees (to whose Care his Lordship had committed all his own Original MSS.)
to undeceive the World, and put a stop to mercenary proceedings, by exposing
the Defects of those Papers which were surreptitiously printed: And, I hope,
those Reflections, which were drawn up, and published in the Year 1694. by my
Brother Chaplain (the late Ingenious Mr. Henry Brougham) and My-self, have been
so far serviceable, as to do justice to our Pious Patron's Memory, and to
vindicate Our selves from all Suspicion of being any way concerned in so base
an Action, as that of Selling to be Printed many private Papers, with the
specious Title of the Genuine Remains of that Learned Prelate Dr. Thomas
Barlow, etc.

My late Lord commanded, that particular care should be taken of all his
Original MSS. And that I may with greater ease discharge my Trust, I have
lately reposited all Bishop Barlow's Original Writings, in the Archives of
Queens College Library in Oxon, two MSS. only excepted; one treating of Bishop
Grosthead's Life and Works, which I left in Your Lordship's Library at Buckden,
in its way hereafter to the Library at Lincoln, where the Ashes of that
Memorable Prelate are Entombed: The other MS. relating to the Choice of Books
in the Study of Divinity, I here humbly present to Your Lordship's Patronage;
which Your Lordship has already been pleased in a great measure to grant, by
approving of my Design, and giving me good Hopes of Your Lordship's
recommending These Directions to the Clergy of Your Extensive Diocese, that
they may be acquainted with the smallest part of that Learned Bishop's Study,
whose Communicative Presence they were not so happy to enjoy, by his Visiting
of them in such a Regular, and Episcopal manner, as Your Lordship has lately
done in Your Primary Visitation of Your Diocese. That part of his Sacred Office
in our Church, Bishop Barlow often complained he was not able to discharge as
he ought: And when he once attempted to visit his Diocese in Person (which he
often did by Legal Deputies) by Confirming great numbers of People, at St.
Ives, Huntington, Buckden, and St. Neots.
Four several Towns in Hunting tonshire, he was necessitated to tell some that
then waited on him, That his great 68 when Consecrated, and 85 at his Death.
Age, and Infirmities would not permit him to go through The Five Counties and
in half.
several Counties of his Diocese: But to express his Willingness, and Readiness
to Confirm, such as wanted Confirmation, his Lordship published an
Advertisement at the end of his Articles of Inquiry; upon which many Persons of
good Quality came to Buckden, and received Confirmation from him in the Chapel
of his Palace.

How diligent he was constantly to perform all other Duties of his Episcopal
Function, none are ignorant, who at any convenient time waited on his Lordship
about Matters Ecclesiastical.

And as his Lordship's repeated wishes were, that the Diocese of Lincoln, might
be blessed hereafter more duly with the Solemn Rite of Confirmation; so it was
my Duty to attend, whilst Your Lordship performed the Sacred Office, for many
Days together, in Your Cathedral Church at Lincoln, and elsewhere, within some
Peculiars belonging to that Magnificent Church; particularly at Banbury, where
near a thousand Persons received Confirmation the 25th and 26th of September
last, some 80 Years of Age, and scarce any under 12, for which Blessing that
Ancient Corporation owns it self for ever obliged to Your Lordship.

May Your Lordship's Exemplary Life, and Doctrine, adorn the Faith and Practice
of that Above 1300 Clergy in Lincoln Diocese.
Numerous and Learned Body of Men committed to Your Pastoral Care, is the
earnest of his Prayer, who is,

MY LORD, Your LORDSHIP 's most Obedient Servant, WILLIAM OFFLEY.
Middleton Stony, in the Diocese of Oxon, Nov. 24. 1697.
THE PREFACE.
I Shall not trouble the Reader with any long Apology for the Publication of
the following Directions; only I think it necessary to inform Him, That had not
this Method for the Study of Divinity been first printed, and prefixed to many
other Papers, which swelled the Book to such a Six Shillings and Six Pence.
Price, that few cared to buy, it might the sooner have passed without Censure,
considering the Usefulness of such a Treatise, wheresoever it should be kindly
received: But being sensible withal that several Copies of this Method were
dispersed abroad, and that many things already falsely printed, did prejudice
the Church of England, and lessen the Great Author's Reputation; I thought it
my Duty to publish These Directions from the Original Manuscript, (which the
late Mercenary Editors never saw) without the long Train of Letters, which are
of no use, but to expose the Secrets of a Private and Hasty Correspondence.

And since some angry Men are known to pass many unkind Reflections upon Bishop
Barlow's Memory, I leave the Bishop's own Words (in a Letter, which I have
published at the end of these Directions) to vindicate himself from those
unchristian Censures, some at this day make use of, that they may wound the
Memory of A Great Father of the Church, who has written many Learned Books in
Defense of the Church of England, against all that oppose it.

As for the first Letter, which follows these Directions, I found it written
with Bishop Barlow's own Hand; and as an Instance of its being proper to be
included in his Directions to a Young Divine, his Lordship left it fixed to his
Original MS. on that Subject.

The Second Letter sell into my Hands, as I was making a Collection of some
scattered Papers, in my late Lord's Study; and having communicated it to many
Judicious Men, they advised me not to conceal such Modest and Excellent Advice,
but to do the Unknown Author the Justice of Printing of it: And I question not,
but such as are studious to know how to make Choice of the most proper Books
for the Study of Divinity, will soon experience the great Usefulness of these
following Directions, which I have published, to prevent them for the future
from being imposed on, by false Copies of this, or any other of Bishop Barlow's
Learned Works.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is lately Printed at the Theater in Oxon, a Catalogue of all Bishop
Barlow's Original Manuscripts, which are now in Queens College Library in Oxon;
and if any Person shall hereafter presume to Print or Publish any Part, or
Parcel of them, he shall be prosecuted according to Law, by Bishop Barlow's
Trustees.

(...), De Studio Theologiae: OR, DIRECTIONS For the CHOICE of BOOKS, IN THE
STUDY of DIVINITY.
THeology, or Divinity, is a Science, or Prudence, containing our Knowledge of
God, and our Duty, and that Divine Worship which is due to Him: And there are
but two Principles to know both:

1. Lumen Naturae, or the Principles of Natural Reason (common to all Mankind)
and on these Theologia Naturalis is built.

2. Lumen Scripturae, or Divine Revelation; on this Theologia Revelata, seu
Theologia Revelata (in its full Latitude) may be, 1. Patriarchalis, containing
the Positive Revelation of God's Will and Worship made to the Patriarchs before
Moses; for to them the Messiah was promised, and Salvation by him; they had the
Covenant of Grace, and Sacrificia (...), which were Sacraments and Seals of it.
2. Mosaica, which contained many further positive Revelations of God's Will and
Worship. 3. Evangelica, of which only at present.
Evangelica is sounded, containing such further Knowledge of God and our Duty,
as we have (beyond all that Natural Reason can tell us) by Divine Revelation in
Scripture.

1. Theologia Naturalis, we may call Morality, and the Religion common to all
Men, as Men, and Rational Creatures.

2. Theologia Revelata, we call Christianity, and it is the Religion peculiar
to Christians. Now to be a Christian pre-supposes him to be a Man, and
Christianity does not exclude, but pre-suppose Morality, and is an addition to,
and perfection of it; yet these two, Morality and Christianity, are as distinct
as Natural Reason and Revelation, which are their respective Measures and
Principles.

1. Theologia Naturalis, being grounded on the (...)
Law of Nature (or the Moral Law) it will be convenient to know the Nature,
Extent and Obligation of that Law (as also of all Laws in general) to which
end, we may consult, Grot. de Ju. Belli, lib. 1. cap. 1.. 9. etc. Pet. a Sancto
Joseph. Idaea Theol. Moralis, lib. 1. de Legibus. Aquinas, 1. 2. Quaest. 90.
etc. Suarez de Legibus. Azortus Instit. Moral. part. 3. lib. 1. cap. 1. And
when there is necessity to see more, all the Commentators on Aquinas, and all
Casuists, where they speak of the Ten Commandments, or Moral Law; amongst
others Filliucius Quaest. Mor. Tract. 21. Besides those many Divines and
Christians, who have expressly written upon the Ten Commandments, and all things
enjoined or forbid in them, there are many Authors of excellent Use, and
Authority to understand the Nature of Moral Habits and Actions, good and bad;
as (to omit others) Arist. Eth. ad Nicom. Andro. Rhodius paraphr. ex Edit.
Heinsii, Lugd. Batav. 1617. in an Octavo. The Greek Scholia in Arist. Eth.
Hierocles in (...) Pythag. so called, because they contain Pythagoras's
Doctrine; for Philo Crotoniates was the Author of those Verses. Johan. Stobaei
(...), Aurel. Allobrog. 1609. highly commended by Suidas (...), Suid. in Joh.
Stob. vid. Photii Biblioth. Cod. 167. page 366.
. Many of this kind there are (even amongst Pagan Writers) who have described
well the Nature and Kinds of Moral Virtues and Vices.

2. Theologia Revelata (of which the Sacred Scriptures Theologia (...)
are the sole Rule) is to be understood by considering the Text it self, and
the true meaning of it.

For the Text of the Old Testament, it will be convenient Bibles pr^pe^ for the
Te^t of the Old Testament.
to have,

1. Biblia Interlinearia Hebr. Lat. Antverp. 1584.

2. Biblia Graeca Septu. Interpr. Paris 1628.

3. Biblia Latina Junii and Tremel. in Fol. or Quarto.

4. Biblia Lat. Sixti Quinti Romae 1590. and Bablia Lat. Clementis Octavi Romae
1592. Both Popes pretend to Infallibility, and yet their Bibles contradict one
another expressly, and in terminis, above an hundred times. The Bibles of
Clement the Eighth, are many times Printed with a false Title Page, and
miscalled, Biblia Sixti Quinti; as in an Edition at Antverp 1628. in Octavo,
and in an Edition at Antverp 1603. in Fol. and in another Edition Colon. Agrip.
1666. in 8 little Vol. The (...) is Biblia Sacra Vulgatae Editionis Sixti
Quinti Pont Max. recognita; and yet (by comparing) it appears to be the Bible
of Clement the Eighth.

For the Text of the New Testament, there are For the New Testament.
many Editions; but I conceive two only to be most useful.

1. Novum Testamentum Gr. per Rob. Steph. Paris. 1550. in Folio; it is the best
for Character and Exactness, and it furnishes us with an Account of all the
ancient Sections and Divisions of the Testament, called Vid. Suidam, verb.
(...).
(...).

2. Nov. Test. Gr. a Steph. Curcel. Edit. Amstelod. 1658. in Octavo; it has the
Various Lections, and Parallel Places, more exactly than any other I have yet
seen; and yet Robert Steph. Edition has the Various Lections of 15 MSS.

When occasion is to consult the Bible in more Languages, and more Editions, we
have Bibles.


1. Biblia Complutensia, Complut. 1515. in 3 Folio's.

2. Biblia Regia (Reg. Hisp.) per Ar. Montanum, Antverp. 1569.

3. Biblia per Mich. Le Jai, 7 Linguis, and 10 Volumes, printed at Paris 1645.

4. Biblia Polyglot. Land. 1657. by collating these, we may see the difference
and variety of Reading.

For the better understanding of these Languages, Concordances.
and the Bible by them, it will be convenient to have some Concordances and
Lexicons.

We have many Concordances, and some of great use:

1. For the Extant Concordantiae Hebr. per Mazi. Calasium, in 4 Tomes, printed
at Rome 1621. in Bodley's Library, much larger than Buxtorf's; but whether
better, Docti judicent.
Hebrew (and Chaldee words, as many as are in the Bible) Concordantiae Bibl.
Hebr. per Joh. Buxtorf. Basil. 1632. There are other (but worse) Editions.

2. For the Hebrew and Greek of the Old Testam. Conrad. Kercheri Concord. Vet.
Test. Gr. Hebr. Vocibus respondentes, Francof. 1607. And it will be convenient
to have his Book (explaining the use of his Concordance) De Concordantiarum
Bibl. usu, in 4o, Whitberg. 1622.

3. For the Greek of the New Testam. Concordantiae Gr. Lat. N. Test. ab Hen.
Steph. Edit. Genevae 1624, there are former, and worse Editions.

4. For the Latin (which are of some, but much less use in the Study of
Divinity) Concordances, we may consult Concord. Bibl. Lat. ad Correctionem Romans
Edit. Vulgat. etc. Francofurti 1620. there are former Editions, but imperfect.

5. We may consult Corn. Jansenii Commentar. in suam Concordiam Evang. Mogunt.
1612. an 8o. Concordiam Evangel. per Theologum Parisiensem, an 8o, Printed at
Paris 1660. Osiandri Elench. Harmoniae, Basil. 1561. Comment. Ja. Fabri Stapul.
in Quatuor Evang. and ihi post Praefat. Canones seu Concord. Evang.

6. Nov. Test. Gr. per Steph. Lutetiae 1550. and Caenones Evang. ab Ammonio
conditos, and ab Eusebio absolutos.

7. We may consult eosdem Canones apud Hieronymum, and per M. Victorium, Tom.
6. in initio, and Dan, Tossanum in Evang. Harmoniam.

The use of the Hebrew and Greek Concordance is very great: In Reading of the
Text, when I doubt what a word signifies, I turn to my Concordance, to see how
many times the word occurs, and in what Sense it is taken. For Instance,
Hebrews 11. 1. Fides est (...), which some render, Persona, Substantia,
Expectatio, etc.

Now it is very incongruous to affirm, That Faith is a Person, Substance, or
Expectation; for it is an Accident, an Assent of the Understanding, and Truth is
the sole Object of it: I do not mean Bonum futurum, for that is the proper
Object of Expectation, or Hope. By consulting, in this Doubt, my Concordance, I
find the word (...), to occur five times in the N. Testament:

1. It signifies a Heb. 1. 3.
Person,

2. And twice 2 Cor. 9. 4. and 11. 17.
it evidently signifies, and we render it Confidence;

3. Though not so evidently, yet most probably it signifies Heb. 3. 14.
Confidence too: For (...), is Faith opposed to (...), in the 12. and 19.
verses, which is Principium and Fundamentum Fiduciae and Confidentiae nostrae:

By the Circumstances then of the Text, it is evident, that (...) signifies
Confidence; and if we apply that Signification to Hebrews the 11. 1. (the place
doubted of) it will appear to be very agreeable to the Nature of Faith, and the
thing there spoken of. Fides est (...), and (...), i. e. Fides est eorum quae
sperantur Tindal renders it so; Faith is a sure Confidence of.
Confidentia, and eorum quae non videntur argumentum; so Gloss. vet. in calce
Cyrilli, (...) Arguo, (...) Probatio; and oecumen. and Theophylac. (...), in
loc.
(...) properly signifies; and Hierom, and the Vulgar render it, Faith is
(...), i. e. (...), such an Argument, as is the ground of all the Assurance and
Confidence we have, or can have of Heaven. This seems to me the Genuine Sense
of the place, if we consider either the signification of the Words, or the
Nature of the thing signified; it is certain, and concluded by all, That a true
and firm Faith in the Promises of GOD in the Gospel, is the Foundation and
Evidence of all our Hopes of Heaven, etc. whence it is that the Council.
Trident. Sess. 6. de Justificat. cap. 8. Vid. Vasq. in 1. 2. Disp. 210. cap. 7.
page 744.
Trent Conventicle calls Faith, -- Humanae salutis initium, fundamentum, and
radix; and in the Margent cites this very Text, Heb. 11. 1.

2. For Lexicons and Glossaries, they are useful for Lexicons for the Old
Testament.
Explanation of the Words, in the Originals of the Old and New Testament; and
amongst them we may consult, for the Old Testament,

1. Lexicon Polyglot. 7. Linguis, per Ed. Castellum, Londini 1669.

2. Lex. Pentaglot. Val. Shindleri, Hanoviae 1612.

3. Masii Lex. Hebr. Sir. Chald. Gr. Antverp. 1571.

4. Joh. Buxtorsii Lex. Chald. Talmud. Rabbin. or his excellent Opus triginta
Annorum (as he calls it) printed at Basil 1639.

5. Kercher's Concordance (before mentioned) may well be called, and used for a
Lexicon Heb. Gr. every word in the Bible, and the various Translations of them
being expressed by the LXX. in their (as they call it) Hellenestical Greek.

6. Nomenclator Biblicus Hebr. Lat. per Ant. Hulsium, Bredae 1650. useful for
all Divines.

7. For Proper Vid. Hieron. de locis Hebr. Tom. 3. p. 904, 905. and Theatrum
Terrae Sanctae, per Adricomium.
Names (for these already named are for Appellative words) such as these may be
consulted:

1. Gregorii Greg. Lexicon Sanctum, Hanoviae 1634. in Octavo; wherein all
proper Names in Scripture are explained.

2. Onomasticon Sacrum, in quo omnia Nomina propria, Hebr. Chald. Gr. quae tam
in Vet. quam Nov. Test. and Apocryphis occurrunt explicantur, per Joh. Leusden,
Ultrajecti 1665. in Octavo.

For the New Testament, and 1. Appellative words, consult Hesychius, Suidas,
Phavorinus, Etymolog. L^^i^ons for the New Test.
mag. Glossae veteres, per Stephan. and Bonavent. Vulcanius, Stephani
Thesaurus, Harpocration, all these are useful.

2. For Proper Names, Lex. Sanct. Gregorii Greg. (before mentioned) gives an
Account of all their Proper Names, Hebrew and Greek in both Testaments. So
There are two Supplements of Stephanus extant: 1. Fragmentum Steph. de Urb. per
Sam. Tennulium, Amstel. 1669. in Quarto; 2. Genuina Stephani Fragmenta, per
Abra. Berkelium, Lugd. Batav. 1674. in Octavo.
Stephanus of Cities, and Suidas of the Proper Names of Men.

3. For Greek-barbarous words, you may consult Petri Chritomaei Graeco-barbara
Nov. Test. quae Orienti Originem debent, Amstel. in Octavo. his Lexicon also
Graeco Barbarum.

After the Knowledge of Words, (quae sunt Rerum Commentators on the Old Test.
Signa and Indices) the next business will be to know the true Sense of
Scripture signified by those words; to this purpose you must consult
Commentators: And first of all, those that have written upon the whole Bible.

1. The Critics of the last Edition at London, in several Tomes, the first
Printed 1669. the benefit of which Book is very great (I may call it
Bibliotheca) seeing when we doubt of any Text of Scripture, we may (uno
intuitu) see what many Learned Men say of it; and then (by collation of them
and others) judge which (or whether any) of their Expositions be true.

2. Biblia Universa cum Commentariis, 1. Lyrani, (Gente Judaei, Religioni
Christiani, Oxoniensis, hic enim literis operam dedit) 2. Cum Glossa ordinaria
quam Strabo Fuldensis condidit circa An. 846. 3. Cum Glossa Interlinearia,
Ansel. Laudunens. circa An. 1077. Of these three Lyranus is much the best,
especially on the Old Test. because he well understood the the Hebrew and Greek
Languages, which the other two (as most of the Barbarous Age) were wholly
ignorant of.

3. Biblia Sacra Vet. and Nov. Test. cum Notis Trimellii and Junii Editionis
tertiae, Hanov. 1596.

4. Cornelius a Lapide, Stephanus Monochius, Jacobus Tirinus, Emmanuel Sa, (all
Jesuits) and Joh. Deodat.

For your understanding of the Old Test. how the Ancient Jews interpreted it,
consult

1. The Chaldee Paraphrase. 2. Josephus. 3. Philo-Judaeus.
As for Antiquity, so for Authority and Sobriety, they are more significant
than any (may be) than all the Rabbis. Maimonides (Qui primus inter suos nug
ari desiit) comes next them.

5. Lugd. de Dieu has written very short, and significant Critical Notes on all
the Old and New Test. in 5 or 6 Volumes in 4o.

On the Pentateuch, consult Ainsworth, inferior to none. Cajetan, Calvin, (ubi
been nemo melius) Joh. Ferus, (a Pious Papist) who has said many things well
and truly, and therefore the Spanish Expurgatory Index has damned many Passages
in his Commentaries on the New Test. and his other Works: As for his
Commentaries on the Old Test. they are absolutely prohibited Caetera ejus opera
a Sectariis vitiata prohibentur, donec corrigantur. Ind. Expurg. Hisp. Madriti
1667.
, till the Inquisitors think fit to correct them. Paulus Fagius his Annotations
on the Chaldee Paraphrase, on the Penta. Procopius Gazaeus, Theodoret's
Questions on the Penta. Hyeronymus ab Oleastro, Antverp 1568.

Besides the Pentateuch, Cajetan, Calvin, Ferus, Theodoret, Hierom, August. and
Beda, and Pareus, have written on other parts of the Old Test. and upon
occasion may be consulted.

And for Genesis and Exodus in particular, you may consult Andr. Rivetus, who
has wrote well on both; he has also published a very useful Book in Quarto on
the XX. Chap. of Exodus Lugd. Batav. 1637. Pererius (the Jesuit) has also long
and learned Commentaries on both the two first Books of Moses.

In short, you have Catalogues of the Commentators on every part of the Bible
already printed, out of which you may choose the Commentaries of Brentius,
Calvin, Pet. Martyr, Joh. Wolsius, Bucer, Melanchton, Luther, Musculus, etc.
Cajetan, Masius, Ar. Montanus, Gaspar Sanctius, Simeon de Muis, (the best
Popish Writer on the Psalms) A Lapide, Corn. Jansen. Vitalpandus in Ezekiel. Fran.
Ribera in 12. Prophetas Minores, Arias Montanus in 12 Prophetas.

In Hexameron, you may consult, 1. Eusta. Antiochenum, Lugduni per Alatium
1629. in 4o. 2. Ambrosium in Hexameron Tom. 4. Operum, Edit. Erasmi, Basil 1527.

For the New Testament, very many (Ancient and Commentators on the New Test.
Modern) have writ Explications of it; some, or all may be consulted,

1. Chrysostom. has Homilies on most parts of the Ancient.
N. Test. 2. Hierom on the Gospels, Acts, and all St. Paul's Epistles; but they
are Vid. Rivoti Critica Sacra, lib. 4. cap. 5. page 373, 374.
none of his, as is certain and confessed. 3. Ven. Bid in 5 or 6 Tomes. 4.
Theophylact. on the Gospels, Acts, and all St. Paul's Epistles; his Commentary
on the Acts, is by it self very hard to be met with, Gr. Lat. per Laur.
Sifanum, Col. Agrip. 1567. Theophylact. has nothing on the Canonical Epistles,
or Revelations.

2. Beza's Notes on the whole New Test. the best Modern.
Edition (for there are many) is that at Cambridge 1642. Camerarius's Notes on
the whole N. Test. are joined with it. Calvin on all the N. Test. except the
Apocalypse, these two (paucis exceptis quae Disciplinam Presbyterianam and
Genevetismam sapiunt) are inferior to none, for the Literal Sense of the
Scriptures. Aug. Marloratus his Comment on all the N. Test. containing the
Expositions of many Protestant Writers. Zach. Muthesius in 4o. Edit. 1611. Dr.
Wm. Foulke in Nov. Test. contra Annotationes Anglo-Rhemensium. Erasmi Annot. in
N. Test. Aquinas in Nov. Test.

Chemnitius, Gochardus, Brentius, Bucer, Novae Writers on the Gospels.
Glossae in Mat. Mar. Luc. per Rob. Steph. They are damned by the Index Hispan.
Expurgat. Madriti 1667. in Rob. Steph. page 874. col. 2.
Spanish Inquisitors, and therefore Protestants.
more valuable.

Lucas Brugensis in 4. Evang. Antv. 1606. Maldonatus Papists.
, Lutetiae 1629. There are former and worse Editions; he is Vir Dotatus, but,
as Causabon calls him, maledicentissimus.

Hugo Cardinalis (alias Hugo de Sancto Claro) he writ about the Year 1244. in
which he was created Bellarm. de Scrip. Eccl. in Hug. de Sancto Claro.
Cardinal by Pope Innoc. the IV. in a time of great Ignorance, when Popery was
not formed; whence it is that He, and others of that Age, have many things,
which they at Rome like not. Jacobus Faber Stapulensis in 4 Evangel. He was an
Honest and Sober Papist; and has an Excellent Preface before his Commentaries,
concerning the Excellency, Perfection, and universal Use of Scripture, etc. And
therefore that Preface totally, and many other things in his Commentaries, are
damned by the Ind. Expurg. Belgico. Ulysip. verb. Jac. Faber.
Inquisitors, and all his Works prohibited by Possev. in Apparatu Sacro verb.
Jac. Faber.
Clement VIII. till they be purged, that is corrupted, and spoiled by the
Inquisitors, and their Indices.

1. Theodoret in omnes Pauli Epistolas, number. 14. he Writers on the Epistles and
Apocalypse.
has nothing on the 7. Canonical Epistles (James, Peter, John, Jude) nor the
Revelation; he is amongst Ancient.
the Ancients one of the best, and usually comes nearest the Literal Sense.

Ambrose in omnes Pauli Epist. (except. ad Hebr.) Peradventure because that
Epistle was not in his time, received in the Roman Epist. ad Hebr. inter
Canonicas Script. Consuetudo Latina non accipit. Hieron. in cap. 8. Isa. Tom.
4. page 32. col 2. and cap. 6. Isa. ibid. page 24. col. 9.
Church; which may be the reason too, why St. Hierom has no Commentary on that
Epistle, nor any Preface to it, as he has to most Books of the Bible; but those
Commentaries are denied to be Ambrose's by Vide Riveti Criti. Sacra lib. 3.
cap. 18. page 291. Bellarm. de Script. Eccles. in Ambrosio, page 130, 131, etc.
many, and suspected by more.

Primasius Utiensis circa Annum 545. Sedulius, circa Annum 430.

Ubi supra in Oecumenio, page 293.
Oecumenius (quisque demum fuerit) in omnes Pauli and Canonicas Epist. cum quo
conjungitur Arethas Caesariensis in Apocalyp. Who he was, and when he lived is
uncertain: Bellarmine places him after the Year 1000. and some sooner; his
Commentary is indeed a Catena taken out of about 121. Vide little nomina in
Possev. Appar. Sac. verb. Oecumenius.
Ancient Authors, (for so many he cites) and amongst them he often cites
Photius; whence it is evident he lived after Photius's time, who flourished
after the middle of the Ninth Century.

1. Conrad. Vorstius, on all the Epistles, (excepting Modern.
that to the Hebrews) who has, first, the Analysis, 2. the Paraphrasis, 3.
Scholia in Paraphrasin, 4. The Loci Communes of every Chapter. Dr. Hammond's
Annotations on the New Testament. Cameronis Mirothecium Evang. and Lud. Capelli
Spicilegium, (both bound together, printed in 4to 1632.) they have both many
short and considerable Notes on many particular places in the Epistles and
Apocalypse, etc. Estius in Epistolas; one of the best Popish Writers on that
Subject. Joh. Gagnaeius in omnes Epistolas and Apocalypsin, Brevissima and
facillima Scholia, in 80, Antv. 1564. Petrus Lombardus in omnes Pauli
Epistolas; He writ before Transubstantiation (Opinionis portentum and
prodigium) was Decreed in the Lateran Council, Anno 1215. and in many things
Honest Peter is no Papist.

Dionysius Carthusianus in omnes Pauli Epistolas, and many others, etc. Arias
Montanus in omnes Epistolas, and Apocalyp.

For the better Understanding of the Scriptures, it will be convenient to know,
and to consult such Books as have given General Directions for Studying
Scriptures, and particular Explications of the Jewish Antiquities, and Customs,
etc. such as these,

1. Antiquitatum Judaicarum lib. 9. per Ar. Montanum, Apparatua ad Scripturas
intellegend. 11.
Lug. Bat. 1593. in Quarto:

2. Buxtorfii Tiberias, seu Commentarius Historicus, Didacticus Criticus, ad
illustrationem operis Biblici, etc. Bas. 1620. Folio.

3. And. Riveti Isagoge, seu Introductio ad Scripturam Sacram Vet. and Nov.
Test. Lug. Bat. 1627.

4. Ant. Possevini Apparatus ad Studia Scripturae, Theologiae Scholasticae and
practicae, etc. Ferrariae 1609. Quarto.

5. Ejusdem Bibliotheca Selecta, and dictae Bibliothecae, lib. 2. and. 3.
Colon. Agrip. 1607. Fol. there are many such more:

Bibliotheca Studiosi Theol. per Gilb. Voetium, Ultrajecti 1651. lib. 2. sect.
2a. page 481. De Apparatu Theologico, Hen. Hottingeri Clavis Scripturae, seu
Thesaurus Philologicus, Tiguri 1649. in Quarto.

Seeing there are many Controversies concerning De Canone Scriptures.
the Canon of Scripture, some Books being Canonical to some, which to others
are Apocryphal; it will be convenient to consult some who have writ ex professo
of that Subject: Amongst others, these that follow,

1. Joh. Rainolds, de lib. Apocryphis, Tom. 1, 2. sunt quatuor, Oppenheim 1611.
there are many Controversies learnedly discussed (obiter) in those two Volumes,
besides those about the Canon:

2. The Scholastical History of the Canon of Scripture, by Dr. Cosins, late
Bishop of Durham, London 1657.

3. Hen. Lemmichii Vindicatio Lib. Apocryph. 1638. Octavo.

4. Consulendi sunt (cum opus fuerit) Scriptores Eristici (Pontificii and
Reformati) qui Controversiam de Canone Bib. tractant, quales sunt Chemnitius in
exam. Concilii Trident. Dan. Chamier. (Panstrat. Cath. Tom. 10.) Andr. Rivetus
(Catholici Orthodoxi) Tom. 1. Tract. 1. Eras. Brochman. universae Theol.
System. Tom. 1. de Sacra Script. Bellarm. Tom. 1. Controv. 1. de Verbo Dei, G.
Amesius contra Bellarminum. Vet. Erbormannus Jesuita in sua pro Bellarm.
Replica. contra Amesium, Herbipoli 1661.

5. It will be convenient also to consult, what the Ancient Fathers, and Canons
of Council determine concerning the Canon of Scripture; as, that I may name
some,

1. Canon Apostol. 85. apud Balsamonem page 278. apud Zonaram, est Canon 84.
page 42. Dionysius exiguus, antiquissimus Canonum Collector, Apostolorum
Canones tantum habet, spurius ideo est hic Canon 85. vet. 84. etc.

2. Canon Council. Laodiceni 59. apud Justellum, in Cod. can. Eccl. Univer. can.
163. seu ult.

3. Canon 47. Concilii Carthag. 3. apud Joverium, Conc. part. 2. p. 19. col.
2a, and in Conciliis per Labbe, Paris 1671. Tom. 2. page 1177. But this Canon
is Vide Joh. Rainoldi Theses, page 90. Dr. Cosin's Scholastical History of the
Canon of Scripture, p. 111, 112, 113.
Spurious, as might evidently be proved, if need require.

4. Athanasius in Synopsi, Tom. 2, page 55. Gr. Lat. he reckons the Books of
Scripture as we do.

5. Vide Hist. Ecclesiast. Anastasii Biblioth. page 189. Paris 1649. and Pet.
Pithaei Opera, Paris. page 14, 15.
Nicephorus Patriarch of Constantinople, his Catalogue of Canonical Books, apud
Eusebium Chronologic. page 312. Gr. Editionis Amstel. 1658.

6. Vide eandem Hierony. Praefat. 115. in Proverbia, Tom. 3. page 692. Edit. M.
Victor.
Hieronymi Prefatio 106. quae est in lib. Regum, Tom. 3, page 682, 689. ubi
libros vet. Testamenti, eodem plane modo quo Ecclesia Anglicana enumerat, and
tum addit -- Quicquid extra hos est inter Apocrypha reponendum.

7. Ruffinus in Symbolum Apostolorum, inter Opera Cypriani per Pamelium, page
552, 553. per Goulartium, page 575. where he has a Catalogue of Canonical Books
of both Testaments, the very same with Ours of the Church of England.

8. Epiphanius de Ponderibus and Mensuris,. 4, 5. Tom. 2, page 161.

9. Nazianzenus carm. 33. operum Tom. 2. page 98. utriusque Testamenti libros
(nisi quod Amphilochius Ieoniensis in Jambis (in reliquis cum Nazianzeno
consentiens) Apocalypsin etiam habet. In Bibliotheca Patrum per Marg. De la
Bigne, Par. 1589. Tom. 8. page 666.
Apocalypsis desideratur) eosdem plane, quos Ecclesia Anglicana, agnoscit,
((...).)

Eusebius (out of Origin) reckons the Canonical Books as we do; only he
(neither the Protestants nor Papists do) reckons an Epistle of Jeremy's, with
his Prophecy and Lamentations, Eccles. History, lib. 6. cap. 25. page 225.
Edit. Valesii. Vide etiam Cyrillum Cateches. Mystog. 4. page 36, 37. and
Nicephorum Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 46. page 216, 217.

For the Fathers and Ecclesiastical Writers, it will be convenient to know who
they were, when they De Patribus and co^um Saecul^ Scriptis.
lived, and what they writ: And for this, such Books and Tracts as these may be
consulted.

1. Nomenclator praecipuorum jam inde a Christo nato Ecclesiae Doctorum,
Scriptorum, Professorum, Episcoporum, Testium Veritatis, Scholasticorum,
Conciliorum, Haereticorum, Imperatorum, Pontificum Romans etc. per Hen. Ozaeum,
Hanoviae 1619. He (in an Alphabetical order) only sets down the Age, or Year
they flourished in.

2. Hieronymus de Illustribus Eccl. Scriptoribus: Extat operam Sancti
Hieronymi, per M. Victorium Tom. 1. page 263. Gr. Lat. ubi Sophronius dicitur
Versionis Gr. Author, cum tamen inepta est Versio, and Vide Isae. Vossium in
Notis ad Ignatium, page 257, 258.
Sophronio indigna. Prodiit Hieronymus de Script Illustr. (una cum Gennadio
Massiliensi de Illustr. Eccles. Doctoribus) Helmest. 1611. Prodiit postea (cum
aliis) 1639. quod ex sequente Aub. Miraei opere constet.

3. Bibliotheca Ecclesiastica, seu Nomenclatores septem Veteres, Hieronymus,
Gennadius, Ildefonsus, Sigebertus, per Aubertum Miraeum, cum ejus Scholiis and
Auctariis, Antverp. 1639. Fol. Sed hi Authors a Miraeo editi caute sunt
legendi; Miraeus enim non uno loco Romae potius, quam veritati favet.

4. Illustrium Eccl. Orientalis Scriptorum, qui secundo saeculo sloruerunt
vitae and monumenta; Authore Pet. Halloix, Duaci 1636. habet etiam Pontifices,
Imperatores, Persecutiones, and Concilia istius saeculi, etc. Fol.

5. Scriptorum Ecclesiast. Abacus Chronologicus (Vet. and Nov. Test.) a Mose ad
Annum Christi 1589. Authore Phil. Labbe, Paris 1658.

6. Tabulae Ecclesiasticae, quibus Scriptores Ecclesiastici, eorumque Patria,
Aetas, Ordo, and Obitus, exhibentur, a Christo nato ad Annum 1517. Land. 1674.

7. Phil. Labbe de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis, etc. in 2. Tom. 80. Paris 1660.
in calce Tom. 1. Tractatus Jo. Papissae Coenotaphium eversum.

8. Joh. Tritthemius de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis, cum Appendicibus duobus,
Paris 1546.

There are many such as these, who have given an account of the Time wherein
they lived, and the Writings of the Fathers, and Ecclesiastical Writers, and
upon occasion may also be consulted.

But because there are (in the Works of the Ancient De Scriptis Pat^um
Genuinis, Spuriis.
Fathers, and Ecclesiastical Writers) many Apocryphal and Spurious Books, and
Tracts, which are indeed none of theirs, whose Name they bear, it will be
necessary for a Divine to know, and have some of those Authors, who have writ
Critica Sacra, and Censures of Books, discovering the Fraud or Ignorance of
those who have published Erroneous and Heretical Books, under Catholic Names;
amongst others, such as these may be consulted:

1. Photii Bibliotheca by Shottus, 1611. Folio.

2. Hierom de Scriptoribus Eccles. of the Edition of Paris 1630. or rather of
Philip Labbe's Edition, with his Additions, in 2 Volumes, Paris 1660.

3. Censura quorundam Scriptorum, quae sub nominibus Sanctorum and Veterum
Authorum, a Pontificiis citari solent, etc. per Rob. Cocum, in Quarto Land.
1623.

4. A Treatise of the Corruption of the Fathers, by Dr. James, Quarto, Land.
1612.

5. Andr. Riveti Crit. Sac. libri quatuor, in Octavo, cum Tractat. de
Authoritate Patrum, Errorum causis, and Nothorum Notis, Genevae 1626.

6. Abrahami Sculteti, Syntagma Medullae Theologiae Patrum, in Quarto, Francof.
1634. he gives an Account of almost forty very ancient Writers, of their
Genuine Works, of their Suppositions, of their Errors, of their Consent with
Protestants, (and the Particulars wherein) and an Analysis of all their Genuine
Writings.

7. Joh. Dallaeus de Pseudepigraphis Apostolicis, Harderb. 1653.

8. Davidis Blondelli, Pseudo-Isiodorus and Turrianus Vapul. in Quarto, Edit.
1628. veterum Roman. Pontificum (a Clemente X. ad Sirisium, i. e. An. 383.)
Epistolas decretales ab Isiodoro Mercatore suppositas, and a Ioh. Vid. Pet. de
Marca, de Primatu Lugdunensis Eccl. p. 353.
Bosco editas, ac tandem a Turrianus ad Magdeburgenses Centuriatores pro
Canonibus Apostolorum, and Epistolis Pontificum, 40. Col. 1573.
Francisco Turriano defensas, spurias esse demonstrat Blondellus.

9. Bellarmine de Scriptoribus Ecclesiast. Sixtus Senensis in Bibliotheca:
Possevinus in Apparatu Sacro, etc. and many other Popish Authors confess and
prove many supposititious Books, printed and published with the Genuine Works
of the Fathers, and yet very usually cite those Tracts (when they make for
them) against Protestants: In the Paris 1623. per Mar. Victorium.
Edition of Hierom's Works, the whole ninth Tome consists of such Tracts, as
are now confessed to be all Tom. 9. complectens quae falso Hieronymo ascripta.
Vid. the Title Page.
Spurious. In the 17th. Tome of the Magna Bibliotheca Patrum, Paris 1654: There
is Index Chronologicus, and Index omnium Patrum Alphabeticus, in which we have
many things well, and truly said of the Times, and Writings of the Ancient
Fathers.

10. Vide Gratian. Did. 15, 16. praecipue can. Sanc. Romans 3. where we have a
long Catalogue of Authentic and Apocryphal Books, made by Pope Gelasius (and
he infallible sure as any of his Successors) and his Council of 70 Bishops An.
494. (the Vide Council. Tom. 1. page 991. and Council. per Labbe, Paris 1671. an
4 Toms, 1259, 1260, 1261. Surius Council. Tom. 2. page 318.
Canons of that Council we have elsewhere better than in Gratian.) In that
Canon and Council they call some things Canonical and Authentic, which they
damn now as Apocryphal (and so do we too) and other things they approve, as
Authentic, which now neither they nor we approve; vid. Joh. de Turre Cremata
his 15 and 16 Can. and Glossas, (especially the late Editionis Paris. 1612.
1618.
ones) where to reconcile the Contradictions of this Canon and Council to the
present Opinions of Rome, they are glad to say, that this Canon is so much Toto
hoc Canone tot modis distant collectiones ab Orig. ut satis certo statui, non
possit quae vera sit Gelasii Lectio. Nota ad verbum mandamus, Can. 3. Did. 15.
in utraque Edit Parisiensi.
corrupted, that they cannot tell which words in it are really the words of
Gelasius, and which not.

It will be requisite, for a Divine, to consult some De Authoritate and Usu
Patrum.
Writers about the Authority and Use of Fathers, (as to their Works which are
confessed to be Genuine) such as these;

1. Dallaeus de usu Patrum, Extat. 1. Gallice, 2. Latin, per Joh. Mettaienum,
Genev. 1656. in 4o.

2. Tractatus de Patrum, Council. and Traditionum Authoritate in rebus Fidei,
etc. per Emend. K. Vyfalvinum cum Praefat. D. Paraei, Francof. 1611. in 8o.

3. Tractatus de Patrum Authoritate, etc. (Qui sint Patres, Quid eorum
Authoritas, and ad quid, etc.) per And. Rivetum, praefixus libro suo, Quem
Criticum Sacrum inscripsit.

4. Vide Gratiani Distinctio 9. Glossam a Tur. Cremata ibidem, and multa de
Authoritate Scripturae, Council. Patrum, etc. True it is that the Socinians
grant the Totius Mundi (praeter Apostolos) Authoritas in Religione nulla est
Smalcius in Refut. 2. lib. Smeglecii de Erroribus nov. Arianorum, lib. 2. 16.
223. 225. page
Fathers no Authority at all, and the Papists (though all their Ecclesiastics,
Secular and Regular, are In Juramento Professionis Fidei in Council. Trident.
Sess. 24. de Reformat in calce cap. 12. Edit. Antverp. 1633.
sworn never to expound Scripture, but secundum unanimem Patrum consensum) but
very little; and (when they make against them) none at all: as we may evidently
see by He allows an Exposition of Scripture, though contra Torrentem Patrum ad
Commentar. in 1. cap. Genesis
Cajetan, He says, If all were left out of the Fathers, which we now believe
not; Bona pars Scriptor. and Patrum periret. Feuard. in Irenaeum, page 494. ad
Lectorem.
Feuardentius, Maldonat. in 6. cap. Joh. 111. p. 1487.
Maldonatus, etc. who tell us, it was the Opinion of Augustine and Pope Innocent
the I. that it was necessary to Communicate Infants, and that Augustine
delivered this, -- Augustini and Innocentii Sententia sexcentos circiter annos
viguit in Ecclesia, ibid.. 116. page 1488.
Non ut opinionem suam, sed ut Fidei and totius Ecclesiae Dogma: which Opinion
prevailed in the Church for many Centuries, though it is now denied.

For the better understanding Scripture, and Fathers, De Historicis
Ecclesiasticis.
the Knowledge of Ecclesiastical History will be necessary: To this end you may
consult such as have writ general Epitomes, and Comprehensions of
Ecclesiastical Histories; for instance (to omit others)

1. Timanni Gesselii Historia Sacra, ordine Chronologico compendiose digesta, a
Mundo condito ad annum Christi 1125. Trajecti ad The. 1659. 2 Vol. in 4o.

2. Joh. Cluverii Historiarum totius Mundi Epit. ab origin Mundi ad an.
Christi 1633. Lug. Bat. 1639. 1 Vol. Quarto.

There are others who have writ Ecclesiastical History anciently, and more
fully, as,

1. Eusebii Hist. Eccl. cum Notis Hen. Valesii, Paris 1659.

2. Socrates and Sozomon, per eundem, Par. 1668.

3. Theodor. Evagrii Philostorgii, and Theodori Historia, per eundem, Paris
1673. These give an Account of Church Affairs for almost 600 Years: And if
Ruffinus his 2 Books of Ecclesiastical History, by Ben. Laurent. de la Bar,
Paris 1580. and the Historia Tripartita, composed by Cassiodore, and published
by Ben. Rhenanus, Basil. 1528. be added, it may complete and facilitate the
Understanding of the forementioned Histories.

The late Writers of Ecclesiastical History, which are very full, are such as
these,

1. Historia Ecclesiastica per Centuriatores, Magdeburg. Basil. 1624. or the
Epitome of it in 7 Volumes, in Quarto, by Lucas Osiander, Tubing. 1607.

2. Annals Ecclesiastici Card. Baronii, a nato Christo ad annum 1197.
continuati a Provio ad an. 1431. and a Spondano ad an. 1646. observand. de his
Annalibus. 1. Quod ex Editionibus omnibus illam Antverpiae 1612. solam and
correctissimam agnoscit Bar. in Literis Christoph. Plantino datis, quae extant
in calce Tom. 1. and 10. Edit. Antverp. 1612. monet Lectorem omne illud esse
Adulterinum and Spurium, quod Editioni dictae non est consentaneam.
Baronius: There were three or four former Editions.

3. Rob. Saliani Annals Ecclesiastici Vet. Test. Tom. 8. Col. 1620. in Fol.
notand. extat Epit. Annal. Card. Baronii, per Lud. Aurel. 8o. Monast. 1638. 2
Vol. But before Baronius's Annals be read, it will be useful to read the most
Learned Contra Causab. pro Baronio scripserunt. Herebert. Rosweidus's Lex
Talionis, in Quarto, Ant. 1614. And. Eudemon Johannes in Quarto, Colon. 1617.
Convitiis fortiter, sed Argumentis frigide contra Causabonum agunt.
Exercitations of Causabon upon them, which discover the many Errors and Frauds
of the Annalist. For Baronius is very zealous in maintaining the Pope's
Prerogative, and all the received Errors, and ridiculous Superstitions of that
Church: And on the other side, the Centuriators are (in some things) a little
too strait-laced; so that the Truth (many times) lies between them, that the
Reader of their Stories can find it no otherways, but by collection of what
they have said, and the grounds why they did so.

It is useful also for to consult, Ad. Trebbechorii Exercitationes ad Annals
Baronii, ubi desiit Causabonus, in Quarto Edit. Kilonii 1673.

There are two Historians more, which I would commend, (for understanding the
state of Religion since Luther) both Persons of great Moderation, and Fidelity
(though of different Religions) and writ what they might, and did know.

1. Joh. Sleidani Commentarii de statu Religionis ab anno 1519. ad an. 1556.

2. Thuani Historia ab an. 1543. ad an. 1607. And to these you may add Father
Paul's History of the Council of Trent, all excellent Persons. Cedro digna
locuti.

It is necessary for a Divine, in Reading of Ecclesiastical Chronology.
History, to have some skill in Chronology; after a convenient Knowledge of the
Hac de re vide P. Crusium de Epochis, 8o. Basil. 1578. D. Petavius, in
Rationario Temporum, 2 Vol. Octavo, Paris 1636. Helvicum in Prolegomenis ad
suam Chronologiam, Oxon. 1651.
Tecknical part of Chronology: (de Anno, Mense, Septimana, etc. de Aeris, seu
Epochis, etc.) In order to this, He may consult such as these:

1. Helvicus's Chronology, (...), (as they call it,) Oxon. 1651. of continual
use in reading any History, Sacred or Civil.

2. Ja. Usserii Armach. Annals, etc. a Mundo condito ad an. Christi 73. 2 Vol.
Fol.

3. Chronicon Cath. Ed. Simson, Oxon. 1652. Fol.

4. Chronicon Charionis, a Melancthone and Peacero auctum and editum, Aureliae
1610.

Chronology and Geography are justly the Eyes of Geography.
History, (Sacred or Civil) and therefore such Maps and Books as are useful in
that kind, may with benefit be Erasmus, when he writ his Annotations on the
Acts of the Apostles, had a Map of the Roman Empire always before him; and
whilst he writ of St. Paul's Voyage to Rome, and finding all the places
(mentioned in the Text) in his Map, he was much pleased, and highly commended
the Study of Geography.
consulted, amongst others such as these:

1. For Maps. Those published by George Hormius, Accuratissima Orbis Antiqui
Delineatio, sive Geographia Vet. Sacra, and Prophana, Folio, Amstel. 1657.
particularly you may consult those Maps which concern Vid. the large Map of
Palestine prefixed to Eusebius, de locis Hebraicis; and Bonfrerius's Notes upon
it, page 246. in the Edition of Eusebius, mentioned hereafter.
Palestine, and other places of Scripture, which are mentioned in
Ecclesiastical History.

You may consult for Books, such as by way of Lexicon, or Dictionary, explain
the proper Names of Nations, Provinces, Cities, etc. which are spoken of in
Scripture, as

1. Stephanus (...), Gr. Basil. 1568. it is but an Epitome of Stephanus, made
by Hermolaus Grammaticus, and dedicated to Justinian the Vid. etiam Genuina
Stephani Fragmenta, Gr. Lat. cum Notis Abr. Berkelii. 8o, Lugd. Batav. 1674.
Emperor.

2. Fragmentum Stephani de Urbibus, per Tennulium, Amstel. 1669. in Quarto.

3. Eusebius de locis Hebraicis, seu Onomasticon Urbium and locorum S.
Scripturae, etc. a Jac. Bonfrerio, Edit. Paris 1659. Gr. Lat. in Fol. Vide
Geographiae Episcopalis Breviarium, per Phil. Labbe in Council. Collectione
maxima, Paris 1671. Tom. 16. p. 1, 2. etc.

4. Lexic. Geograph. Stephani, per N. Lloydium, Oxon. 1670. Folio.

5. Abrah. Ortelii Thesaurus Geographicus.

6. Lexic. Geographicum Mich. Antonii Baudrand, Paris 1670. the most exact of
any.

Such as have not writ by way of Lexicon, are these; which may also be
consulted.

1. Geographia Sac. Sam. Bocharti, Cadomi 1646. Fol.

2. Geographia Sacra Caroli a Scto Paulo, Par. 1641. in Folio; the most
considerable, and of greatest use for understanding Ecclesiastical History.

3. Notitia Episcopatuum Orbis Christiani, per Aub. Miraeam, 8o. Antverp. 1613.

4. Notitia Graecorum Episcopatuum, a Jac. Goar. Edit. Paris 1648. in calce
Codini.

5 Notitia Episcopatuum totius Orbis MSS. in Archivis Laudanis, J. 17. Bib.
Bodleiana.

6. Notitia utrius que Imperii, cum Notis Pancirolae, Genev. 1623. in Folio.

7. Notitia Dignitatum Imperii Romani, ex nova Recentione Phil. Labbe, cum
plurimis aliis Opusculis, and Notis, Paris 1651. He has none of Pancirola's
Notes, but only the Text of the ancient Notitia, and that somewhat more correct
than in the Edition of Geneva 1623.

8. Theatrum Terrae Sanctae, and Biblicarum Historiarum, cum Tabulis
Geographicis, Authore Christiano Adricomio, Colon. Agrip. 1590. Fol.

9. (...), Gr. Lat. cum Notis Gothofredi, Edit. 1608. in Quarto.

10. Geographia Vet. and Nov. Test. per Cluverium, Amstel. 1661. in Quarto.

In the next place, those Authors, which have Councils.
writ of Councils (General, Imperial, Patriarchal, etc.) are to be consulted:
And in the first place such as have given a general Account, when, and where,
and by whom they were called; what, and how they acted, etc.

1. Synopsis Conciliorum, in qua indicatur, Quale, Ubi, Quando, propter Quod
habitum fuit unumquodque Concilium, etc. there is joined with it Chronologia
Patrum, Pontificum, etc. and Chronologiae Ecclesiasticae continuatio ad an.
1671. Op. Douja. Par. 1671. in 8o.

2. (...) vetus omnes Synod. tam Orthodox. quam Hereticas brevi Compendio
continens, quae ab Apostolorum tempore ad Synodum 8. (i. e. ad an. 869.)
celebratae sunt, Gr. and Lat. per Joh. Pappum. Argentorati 1621. 4o. cum Notis
Joh. Pappi, and council. omnium Historicam Synopsin, per P. Labbe, Paris. 1661.
4o.

3. Synopsis Concilii Historica, etc. in Collectione Conciliorum maxima, Paris.
1671. Tom. 16, in principio.

4. Notitia Council. Ecclesiae, etc. per Joh. Cabassutium, Lugd. 1670. in 8o.

5. Solomon Gesnerus, de Conciliis lib. quatuor Witteberg. 1600. in 2 Vol. in
Quarto: The former Authors are Papists, the last a Protestant, and therefore
much rather to be credited than the other, who are all Vide Juram. Professionis
Fidei, in Bulla Pii Papae IV. in Council. Trident. Sess. 24. in calce, cap. 12.
de Reformatione.
sworn to believe, maintain, and (to the utmost of their power) propagate all
the Roman Doctrines and Practices, or all their received Doctrine, Discipline,
Rites, and Ceremonies.

6. Epitome Conciliorum omnium a Nato Christo ad an. 1619. Edidit (ac condidit)
Dan. Angelocrator, Francof. 1620. in Quarto: Angelocrator was a Protestant, and
an Anti-Arminian, as you may perceive in his Epitome, page 162, 163.

7. Brevis Historia omnium Council. in calce Epitom. omnium Conciliorum, per
Greg. de Rives, Lugd. 1663. Fol.

There are some Authors, who have given us only the Canons of Councils, and not
the Order, and Acts which passed in every Session; amongst many, these which
follow:

1. Codex Canonum Eccl. Dionysii exiguii (i. e. Ipso Interpret) floruit circa
Vide Bellarm. de Script. Eccl. Labbe, in Abaco Scriptorum Ecclesiast. Ozaeum in
Nomenclatore supra citatis.
annos 525, 533, 540. Edit. a Justello, Paris. 1628. in 8o. erat Abbas Roman.
and Codicem Canonum Ecclesiae Univ. primus corrupit, siquidem Canones
Apostolorum, 50. Concilii Laodicensis XXI. Concilii Carthag. 138. and Epistolam
Cyrilli, and Concilii Alexandrini addidit. And he Vide Codicem Canonum veterem
Eccl. Romans Paris. 1609. 8o. (antea erat edit. Mogunt. 1525. per Joh.
Wendelstinum) in that Edition all is left out, except the Canons of the Council
of Ephesus, and several other things put in, which are not in Dionysius exig.
has left out, 1. a great part of the last Canon of the Council of Laodicea,
(that is the Catalogue of the Canonical Books) page 86. 2. he has left out all
the Canons of the Council of Ephesus: 3. four Canons of the Council of
Constantinople, page 86. 4. The 28th Canon of Chalcedon; for these Canons, even
in the 6 Century were not liked at Rome.

2. (...), Gr. published by Joh. Tilius, Par. 1540. in 4o. In which the last
Canon of the Council of Laodicea, the Canons of Constantinople, Ephesus, and
Chalcedon (left out by Dionysius exiguus) are (according to all the Greek
Copies) faithfully put in. And the Canons of the Constantinopolitan Council in
Trullo, 103. and 22 Canons of the second Nicene Council put in.

3. Canones dictos a Joh. Tilio, Gr. solum editos; The same Canons were
published Gr. Lat. by Andr. Gesner. An. 1559. in a Book entitled -- (...); Fol.
Elias Ehingerus edidit eos Gr. and Lat. cum Notis nonnullis, Wittenbergae
1614. in Quarto.

4. Codex Can. Ecclesiae Universae, Gr. Lat. cum Notis, Edit. Justellus, Paris.
1610. This is the true and best Edition of that Codex Can. as it is published
by Justellus; and is indeed a most authentic Book, being it is approved and
received by the Universal Church, (Greek and Latin, East and West) whence it
was called Codex Canonum Ecclesiae Universae.

5. Codex Can. Ecclesiae Affricanae, Gr. Lat. per Justellum, Paris. 1614. 8o.
The best Edition of those Affrican Councils, with Justellus's Notes.

6. Synodorum General. and Provincial. Decreta, and Canones, Scholiis, Notis,
and Historica Actorum Dissertatione illustrati, per Chr. Lupum, in 5 Tom. in
4o. Buxelii 1673.

Next you may consult such Authors, as have writ Conciliorum Summas; and have
not only the Canons, but several Censures, Explications and Animadversions upon
them, etc.

1. Summa omnium Conciliorum per Bar. Caranzam, in 8o. Rothomagi 1633. there is
not much credit to be given to this Collection of Canons: For when any thing
makes against Rome, Caranza will corrupt the Text; so when they are in the
Council of Laodicea condemned, -- Qui Council. Laodic. can. 35. apud Caranz.
page 191.
Angelos colunt, he reads it -- Qui Angulos colunt, and that both in the Lemma
and Canon too. So of Pope Silvester the II. For -- Is Magus fuisse fertur, he
has it, -- Is Ibid. page 788.
Magnus fuisse fertur.

2. Summa Council. omnium per Francisc. Longum a Cariolano, Antverp. 1623. Fol.
A great and confident Parasite of the Court of Rome, and Pontificiae
Omnipotentiae vindex acerrimus.

3. Summa Council. omnium per Lud. Basil. in two Tomes in Folio, Paris 1659. as
high, and confident for Rome and Heresy, as the former, but of much more use;
he has in the beginning of the first Tome an erroneous Apparatus, De Triplici
1. Verbo Scripto, Scripturas sacras intelligit. 2. De Verbo Tradito, seu
Traditionibus. 3. De Verbo explicato per Ecclesiam (Romanam intelligit) idque
Vol. 1o. per Concilium, Vol. 2o. per Papam, extra Concilium.
Verbo Dei.

4. Sanctiones Ecclesiasticae tam Synodales, quam Pontificiae in tres parts
distinctae: 1ma Synodos universales; 2da Particulares; 3tia Pontificum Decreta
continet, per Fr. Joverium, Paris. 1555. Fol. This (both for Method, a good
Index, and the Author's Fidelity) is (by much) the best, and of most use.

In the next place you may consult such as have reduced the Canons of Councils
to Common-places, having made a Catalogue of their several Heads, and then
referred to every Head those Canons which concern it.

1. Epit. Juris Pontificii veteris, per Ant. Augustinum, Paris. 1641. Fol. or
(if that cannot be had) Romae an. 1614. a very useful Book, or rather a Library
of the Canon Law, to those that rightly use it.

2. Epit. Canonum, Conciliorum omnium, per Gr. de Rives, Lugduni 1663. Folio.
He has the Heads for Common-places in an Alphabetical Order, and then refers to
each of them, those Canons which concern them: a Book of good use.

It will be convenient to have, and (on occasion to consult) such Authors as
have made more full Collections of the Councils, with the Order and Time of
each Session of their Acts, Canons, Epistles, etc. such as these;

1. Council. per Pet. Crabbe, in 3 Tomes, Col. Agrip. 1551. there is a former,
and worse Edition in two Tomes, Colon. 1538.

2. Council. per Laurent. Surium, in 4 Tomes, Col. Agrip. 1567.

3. Council. per Nicolinum, in 5 Tomes, Venet. 1585.

4. Council. per Binium, in 9 Tomes, and X. Vol. Paris. 1636.

5. Council. in Tomis 37. Paris. 1644.

6. Council. per Labbe and Cossartium, Tom. 16. Paris 1671.

Now concerning all these, it may be observed;

1. That they are all Popish Editions, and have many things to be read with
great care and caution; there are Spurious Canons, and Decretal Epistles of
ancient Popes put in, and Genuine Canons left out, or corrupted, or
industriously contrived Notes to make them look like Rome.

2. To sense against these Frauds, you must collate Editions and MS. Copies,
and consult those Authors (beforementioned) which have writ Censures upon the
Works of Fathers and Councils.

3. Of all the Editions of Councils, and their Collections, Peter Crabbe is
most commended for his Fidelity, and (not for none but) less Fraud than those
who follow him. All of them generally leave out the 28th Canon of the Council
of Chalcedon: And those few who have it, rail at it, and always damn it, as got
by Fraud, and the Pride of the Patriarch of Constantinople.

And every one of them, even Crabbe, and Cossartius, in their Council. Maxim.
(though it be Council. hoc Pisanum 2m. Edit. est Paris. ab Hieronymo de Croaria,
1514.
extant, and printed before Hoc est ante an. 1517.
Luther) leave out Concilium Pisanum secundum, and only name it; and both they
and their Index Expurgat. Hisp. Madriti 1667. verb. Council. Pisan. Class. 3.
and Index Romae 1664. page 29.
Index Expurgatorius damn it, because it makes against them; though it was called
by the Emperor, King of France, and Cardinals, and kept only by Catholics (as
they call them) and that according to the Constitutions of their own General
Councils of Constance and Basil; and the Council it self (both in the time it
sat, and after) called -- It was called 1511. and printed 1514. and the Title
prefixed to it in the printed Copy is this -- Constitutiones factae in diversis
Sessionibus Sacri Generalis Concilii Pisani.
Sacrum Concilium Pisanum.

Of all the forementioned Editions, that of Labbe and Cossartius, Paris 1671.
in 17 Volumes, is the most comprehensive, containing above a fourth part more
than any other former Edition; by reason whereof (as also for exact Indices,
and many things in the Apparatus explained) it is of far more general, and
beneficial use for a Divine, than any other Edition.

There are also other Editions or Collections of Councils, or their Canons, of
great Use:

1. Versio Vet. Latina Concilii Niceni 2di, per G. Long, Col. 1540. In which,
page 68. we have these Words, -- Post Consecrationem, Corpus Domini and Sanguis
vocantur, (he speaks of the Eucharistical Elements) now Binius reads it thus --
Binius Council. Tom. 5. p. 758. Edit. Par. 1636.
(...), i. e. Post Consecrationem Corpus proprie and Sanguis Christi dicuntur.

It was (as is evident by the old And Crabbe uses that true Version, Council.
Tom. 2. p. 568.
Latin Version) (...), and Binius makes it (...).

2. Concilium Illiberitanum, an. 305. cum Discursu Apolegetico Ferd. de
Mendosa, and Notis Uberioribus Emanuel. Gundisalvi Tellei, Lugd. 1665. Fol.

3. Council. Trident. cum Declarationibus Cardinal. Citationibus Sotealli,
Remissionibus Barbosae, Additionibus Balthaseris Andreae, Antverp. 1633. 8o. It
is of all Editions (for there are many) the best, and indeed an Authentic
Common-place-Book, and a Repertory for all Points of Popery.

4. Council. Trident. Canones and Decreta, cum aliis in Concilio gestis, viz. 1.
cum Principum Literis ad Concilium: 2. Legatorum Orationibus ad Synodum
habitis: 3. Synodi Responsis: 4. Patrum Orationibus: 5. Eorundem Sententiis and
Disputationibus, de Rebus gravioribus in Synodo habitis, etc. per Phil. Labbe,
Paris. 1667. Fol.

5. Council. Constantiense and Basiliense, per Zachariam Ferrerium, Mediolani
1511. six years before Luther wrote against Rome.

6. Council. Constantiense and Pisanum 2um, (quod alias non extat) editum ab
Hieronymo de Croazia, Paris. 1514. in Octavo. These last Editions of the
Councils of Constance, Basil, and Pisa, are of unquestionable Authority, as
writ by Papists of those Times, Men of great Note and Learning, and no way
infected (as they call it) with Luther's Heresies, seeing they writ before he
appeared against Rome, and her Indulgences, which he first opposed.

And as for particular Editions of some particular Councils, it will be
convenient to know some more accurate Collections of the Canons and Decrees of
Councils. I shall only name two or three.

1. Bibliotheca Juris Canonici vet. oper a Gul. Voelli Dris Sorbonici, and Hen.
Justelli, (Men of great Learning and Fidelity) Paris 1661. in 2 Vol. Folio. In
them we have the Codex Canonum Eccles. Anglicanae, (with Justellus's Notes upon
both) scarce elsewhere to be had; and many more particulars truly published,
according to the Original MSS. Gr. Lat. and not (as many are) according to any
partial Interest.

2. (...), seu Pandect. Can. Apostolorum and Conciliorum ab Ecclesia Graeca
receptorum, and Epistolarum Canonicarum SS. Patrum, cum Scholiis Balsamonis,
Aristeni, Zonarae, etc. per Gul. Beveregium, Vol. 2. in Fol. Oxon. 1672. of
great use for a Comprehensive Knowledge of Ecclesiastical Antiquity.

Other Collections there are of Councils of particular Nations, which are to be
known, and (when there is occasion) consulted: For Instance,

1. For our Nation, -- Spelman's Councils, in two Vol. Folio.

2. For Spain, Collectio Conciliorum Hispa. per Gar. Loaisam, Madriti 1593.
Folio. For though they may be in Labbe's Council. Maxim. yet they are not there in
so good Order, nor so easy to be made use of.

3. For France, the Collectors of their Councils are many; to instance in some,

1. Council. Galliae, per Sirmondum, Tom. 3. Fol. 1629.

2. Concilia Galliae novissima, per Lud. Odespun, Paris. 1646. Fol.

3. Conciliorum Antiquorum Galliae Supplementum, Opera and Studio Pet.
Delalande, Paris. 1666. Fol.

4. Council. Galliae Narbonensis, Stephanus Balasius Notis illustravit and
edidit, Paris. 1668. in 8o.

As Controversies in Religion are now stated, it will be necessary for a Divine
to be acquainted Schoolmen.
with School Divinity: The Fathers of the Schoolmen are Lombard, and Aquinas.

1. For Lombard, the Master of the Sentences (as they call him) Bishop of
Paris; he flourished about the Year 1145. as Bellarm. de Script. Eccles. in P.
Lombardo.
Bellarmine (if he says true) informs us. It will be convenient to have,

1. His four Books of Sentences, either Editionis Lovarii 1568. in Quarto; or
(which is much better) Edit. Moguntiae 1632. in 8o. Edidit Ant. Demochares, Dr.
Sorbon. sub finem annexi sunt Articuli erronei (in quibus Magister non tenetur)
partim Parisiis olim damnati, partim communiter non probati.

2. Lambertus Danaeus in 1m Librum Sententiarum, in 8o. Genevae 1589. He has,
1. Prolegomena, quibus Scholasticae Theologiae Origo, Progressus and Aetates
ostenduntur: 2. Commentarius Triplex: 3. Elenchus Locorum, Scripturae and
Patrum, quos addendo, detrahendo, vel mutando corrupit Lombardus: 4. In calce,
Synopsis sanae and veteris Doctrinae de Trinitate.

3. Joh. Martinez de Ripalda in lib. 4. Lombardi: He 1. gives a short Analysis
of each Distinction: 2. A List of the Questions the Schoolmen handle on those
Distinctions: 3. Under every Question he cites the Schoolmen, who, and where
they handle such Questions, and so refers the Reader to the chief Authors who
handle each Question.

4. Durandus and Ariminensis; amongst the more ancient Schoolmen, Ockam,
Scotus, Ant. 1620. Ockam is damned in Indice Expurg. Alexand. Papae VII. Romae
1667. And therefore we may be sure, it is some great Truth he is guilty of.

For later Commentators on the Sentences, you may consult Gabriel Biel and
Estius (especially Estius) By comparing the Ancient and Modern Schoolmen, you
may see that Popery does proficere in pejus; for the Old speak many things more
freely, which (since Luther and the Trent Conventicle) pass for little better
than Heresy at Rome.

For Aquinas's Sums, it will be convenient to have,

1. His Sums, Col. Agrip. 1562.

2. Bannes Vasques, Suarez, etc. or Cajetan (who is the most moderate, and
comes nearer Truth and Us) and such others, (for there are many) and Catalogues
of them may be Vid. Catalog. Scriptor. in Summam Aquinatis in calce.
consulted. Aquinas's Sums are the most considerable of his Works; and the
impious Picture before them tells us, it had the express Approbation of our
Blessed Ita Christus in Cruce pendens Aquinatem alloquitur, in Iconismo Summae
ejus praefixo, Edit. Duaci 1614.
Savior, -- Been scripsisti de me, Thoma. --

Concerning Schoolmen, and their Theologia Scholastica, we may further consider;

1. That our Reformed Writers observe three Intervals of time, which they call
Theologiae Scholasticae Aetates.

1. Scholasticorum, and Theologiae Scholasticae aetas prima, seu vetus; incepit
Vid. Lamb. Danaeum in Lib. 1. Sent. P. Lombardi Prolegom. c. 2.
Anno 1020. Lanfranco Papiensi Scholasticorum istius aetatis Principe, and
duravit ad An. 1220. In this Interval Lanfranc and his followers undertook the
Justification of Rome, and all her Errors and Superstitions, particularly
Transubstantiation, which then began to be hatched, and was fully defined in
the Council. Later. sub Innoc. Papa III. An. 1215.
Lateran Council. 1st To effect this, they equal the Fathers to Scripture:
(finding something in them) but nothing in this for their purpose: 2ly They
make much use of Aristotle's Philosophy, and Aristotelem in Sacrae Theologiae
Templi and Sacrarii limen introducunt: 3ly Decretal Constitutions of Popes, and
all the received Doctrines and Rites of Rome were Authentic with them; and
whatever seemed to contradict them, was denied, or construed to a complying
Sense.

2. Scholastica Media ab Alberto Magno (ejus Principe) an. 1220. ad Durandum
an. 1330. In hoc Intervallo Aristoteles in ipsa adyto Sacrarii Theologiae
introductus, and Script a ejus demonstratione miti censentur; quae autem Verbum
Dei docet credulitate and opinione, probabili teneri; quod etiam express and
public Gul. Ockamus in Centilogico saepiuscule.
fatentur, and asserunt eorum Doctissimi: hac aetate Quaestiones curiosas
impias, Vid. Lamb. Danaeum loco citato, ubi earum Aliquas (plurimae enim sunt)
brevi Catalogo Lectori exhibet.
Blasphemas temere proponunt Scholastici, and impie discutiunt, and ex
principiis Philosophiae Peripateticae, potius quam Scripturae statuunt
definiuntque.

3. Scholastica tertia, ultima and pessima, ab an. 1330. ad an. 1517. Haec
Aetas (says my Author) long impudentissima, nam quae modestia in veteri and
media Scholastica adhuc manserat (ne temere de quibusdam Ritibus and
Quaestionibus adhuc dubiis affirmaretur) ista aetate periit. Utrum Papa sit
simplex Homo, an quasi Hence that Blasphemous piece of Poetry, -- Papa stupor
Mundi, Qui maxima rerum; nec Deus es, nec Homo, quasi neuter es inter utrumque.
Vide Glossam verb. Papa in Prooemio Clementinarum.
Deus? an participet utramque naturam cum Christo? an potestas ejus sit supra
Concilium? an Mariae Conceptio erat immaculata? An Calix sit Laicis negandus?
Haec and similia, sub deliberatione quadam posita quaesivit Scholastica prior,
sed haec ultima decrevit.

If you desire a fuller Account of the Schoolmen, and their Theologia
Scholastica, of the Original and Progress of it, and the Approbation and
Encouragement Rome gave it (the main Business and Endeavors of the Schoolmen
being to aggrandize and maintain the Pope's Power, and all the received
Doctrines and Rites of that Church, how Erroneous and Superstitious soever)
these Authors may be consulted:

1. Hospinian Historiae Sacramentariae, Tom. 1. lib. 4. cap. 9. p. 401, etc. 2.
Lamb. Danaeus in Prolegom. ad lib. Senten. Lombardi 1. cap. 1. 2, etc. fusi. 9.
3. Sixth. Senensis Bibliot hec. Sanctae, lib. 3. page 216. Edit. Col. Agrip.
1626. 4. Possevin. Bibliothec. Selectae, lib. 3. c. 1, 2, etc.
The two first give a true Account of the Iniquity and Ignorance of those
Times, of the Corruption of Divinity, Introduction of Errors and Superstitions,
and the Schoolmen's industrious and impious Endeavors to vindicate and
establish what the Pope and his Adherents had as impiously introduced: The two
last, Senensis and Possevine (being concerned and engaged in the same cause the
Schoolmen were) mince the Matter, and conceal the Truth, and tell a confused
Tale of the Original of School Divinity; and at last highly commend it, and its
Authors; (even for their Sixtus Senensis Bibli. Sanctae, Lib. 3. p. 217.
Learning, which all know they were never guilty of) and excuse their bad Latin
and Barbarisms with a piece of Scripture, miserably misapplied, transferring
that of St. 1 Cor. 11. 6. Though I am made rude in Speech, yet not in Knowledge.
--
Paul, to Peter Lombard and his Followers. But others, and more sober Papists,
are of another Opinion, and heartily confess that Truth which Protestants
affirm and know: I shall name one or two, and 1. Joh. Tritthemius Abbas
Spanheimensis, speaking of the time of the Emperor Conrad. Tertius, 1140, tells
us, Tritthemius de Scriptor. Ecclesiast. in Pet. Dialectico, seu Abelardo, page
161. Edit. Col. 1546.
Ab hoc tempore Philosophia saecularis Sacram Theologiam sua curiositate
inutili foedare cepit, etc. Tritthemius writ and finished that Work an. Christi
1494. Joh. Aventinus, no Papist, yet he is commended by Learned Papists, and
Conradus Adelmannus, Canonici August. 2. Quod legem Historiae, veritatem
scilicet religiose in scribendo observavit. I say Aventine speaking of Pet.
Lombard (who was made Bishop of Paris 1159.) writes thus, -- Ea Joh. Andr.
Quenstedt, Dialog. de Patrum Illustrium Doctrina and Script. Virorum. Joh.
Avent. Anal. Boiorum, Lib. 6. page 392. Edit. Basil 1580. and again 1615.
tempestate Petrus Longobardus Lut. Parisiorum creatur Pontifex, is quidem
Theologumenon. 4. Lib. scripsit, sed Sacrosanct. Philosophiae veritatem,
Fontemque purissimum (sicuti plus millies a Jacobo Fabro, and Jodoco
Chichtoveo, Proeceptoribus meis; and they not Lutherans or Calvinists, accepi
atque audivi) coeno Quaestionum, and rivulis opinionum conturbavit [id quod and
usus rerum magis (nisi coeci sumus) satis super que docet] verba haec lineis
inclusa, ex jussu Inquisitorum, ex Indicibus Expurgatoriis Hispan. Madriti
1667. and Lusitan. Olysipone 1624. sunt delenda: Vide dictos Indices in Joh.
Aventino, qui floruit circa an. 1500.

One thing more may be observed of the Schoolmen, (and of Popish Casuists and
Commentators too, especially those before Luther) that when they speak of Moral
Duties, and those things which are within the compass of Natural Reason, to
know and judge of, we shall find many things well, and some very acutely said:
But when they speak of those things, the Knowledge of which depends solely on
Scripture and Revelation (as of Faith, Repentance, Sacraments, Justification,
etc.) their Ignorance of Tongues and Antiquity, and consequently of the meaning
of Scripture being so great: (besides their being enslaved to maintain all the
Errors and Superstitions of Rome, which at that time were very many) In their
Discourses of such subjects, it is no wonder if their Mistakes (ex inscitia aut
partium studio) be many and great.

It is next necessary for a Divine to have some Casuists, and to know more,
that upon occasion he Casuists.
may consult them. Amongst the Popish Authors, there are very many; so that all
Persons of their Faction may find most Cases, (at least in the general) stated
and determined according to the Principles and Interest of their Church; and
their Prudence in this is great, was their Cause good.

For Protestants, there no part of Divinity, which has been (I know not the
reason) more neglected, very few having writ a just and comprehensive Tract of
Cases of Conscience: However, it may be useful to consult both Protestants and
Papists.

1. Protestants Casuists; and amongst them

1. Dr. Sanderson, Bishop of Lincoln, his two Tracts Protestants Casuists.
or Prelections De obligatione Conscientiae, and De Juramento, are of great use
and excellence; for in those Prelections he has so plainly explained, and
proved many Propositions concerning Oaths and Conscience in Thesi, and in
general, that he who seriously reads them, and remembers what he reads, may
determine and resolve many other Cases, which are not mentioned by Dr.
Sanderson.

2. Consult the five Cases of Conscience determined by a late Learned Hand,
(that is the (...), London 1666. in Octavo) no Name to them, but -- Parentem
referunt, they look so like that good Bishop, that any would suspect (and it is
certainly known) those Resolutions are his, and worthy our perusal.

3. Amesius de Conscientia, etc. A Nonconformist, and therefore caute
legendus, as to that particular; but otherwise he writes very rationally, and
what he resolves is short, and the Texts he urges very pertinent: So that when
is out, (which is not usual) you lose not much; and when he is right, you have
it in a little time.

4. Fr. Balduinus (a Lutheran) and therefore must be warily read, as to that
Point, De Casibus Conscien. Witterbergae 1628.

5. Casp. Eras. Brochmanni Systema Universae Theologiae, in quo singuli
Religionis Christianoe Articuli, Controversiae priscae and recentes polemicae
expediuntur, and praecipui Conscientiae Casus e verbo Dei practice deciduntur,
in 3. Vol. 4o, Lipsiae 1638. there be former, but worse Editions.

Popish Casuists are many, and Voluminous; for Ant. Dieina consists of 12
Parts, and 6 or 7 Vol. in Popish Casuists.
Folio; but these that I shall here mention are of greatest Note, and Authority.

1. Manuale Confessariorum, etc. per Mart. Azpilivetam Navar. Par. 1620. 8o.

2. Franc. Toleti Cardinal. de Instructione Sacerdotis, etc. lib. 8. Rothomagi
1630. in Octavo.

3. Vincent. Filliucii Quaestiones Morales, etc. Colon. Agrip. 1629. Fol. He
writes as fully and learnedly, as any among the Jesuits; of which sort of
Casuists, amongst those who do not (as some do) with ambiguous Words and soft
Expressions, disguise and mollify their harsh, and horrid Opinions; I shall
name a few, who write plain Popery, and openly endeavor to prove their most
desperate Opinions.

1. Ant. de Escobar Theologia Moralis, etc. Lugd. 1646. 8o. This is a good
Edition, but there are two something better after it; one at Lions, and another
at Brussels 1651.

2. Thomae Tamburini e Societate Jesu, Explicatio Decalogi, etc. Lugd. 1659.
Fol.

3. And that we may know what his Erroneous Opinions are, and where to be
found, we have a Catalogue of no less than 103 pernicious Errors found in his
Works, and the place where signified, in a Book with this Title -- Extraict de
plusieurs Erreurs and Maxims pernicieuses, contenues dans un Volume du Pere
Tambourin Jesuit, etc. Imprime a Lion, en la present Annee 1659. in Quarto.

4. If you desire to see more of the Jesuits Casuistical Divinity, you may
consult Pauli Lymanni Jesuitae Theologiam Moralem, Lugduni 1654. and Fr:
Bordoni propugnaculum opinionis probabilis in concursu probationis operum
Bordoni, Tom. 6. Lugd. 1668. in Folio.

5. And Lastly, vid. Amadaei Guimenii Opusculum singularia universae fere
Theologiae Moral. complectens, adversus quorundam Expostulationes contra
nonnullas Jesuit arum Opiniones Morales, Lugd. 1664. in Quarto. He endeavors
to justify all the Jesuits wild and extravagant Opinions, which the
Jansenists charge them withal in their Vid. Lud. Montalii Literas Provinc. de
Morali and Politica Jesuitarum Disciplina, Col. 1665. in 8o.
Provincial Letters and the Vid. The Jesuits Morals, collected by a Doctor of
Sorbon, Land. 1670. in Folio.
Jesuits Morals, and the In 4 or 5 Vol. in 8o. Not and. that there is Decretum
conditum in Congregatione Generali Romanae and universalis Inquisitionis, etc.
Dat. Romae, 1. Augusti 1641. in quo omnia edita and edenda, tam contra quam pro
Jansenio prohibentur, ne quis leg at, retineat, etc. And yet ever since they
write read, and maintain such Books amongst them.
Mystery of Jesuitism; and to do this, he shows that many Eminent Authors and
Writers of the Roman Church (before and besides the Jesuits) maintained (with
Approbation) the very same Opinions, which are charged upon the Jesuits. So
that this Work of Guimenius is a Common-place-Book, wherein we may find all the
Impious Opinions of the Roman Church, particularly cited by Guimenius, and
eight or ten more Eminent and approved Writers of that Church, who publicly
held and defended them.

Besides Popish Casuists, they have many Writers, whom they call Summistae, who
have put all the Summists.
Heads of Divinity in an Alphabetical Order, and then explain each by way of
Position, Case, or Question. There are many such Writings, the more Ancient
(before Luther, when they writ more secure) speak plain Popery, the later are
more cunning and cautious, yet sufficiently erroneous; I shall name two only:

1. Summa Universae Theologiae Rainerii de Pisis, Venet. 1585. in two Tomes,
Quarto.

2. Summa Ecclesiasticae Disciplinae, and totius Juris Canonici, aucta and
recognita, etc. Lugd. 1598. Authore P. Crespetio; the most useful amongst them,
if I mistake not, under every Head, he cites passages out of the Fathers,
Councils, Historians, Schoolmen, etc. And any thing which he thinks makes for
the Catholic Cause.

Of this sort of Writers (or Casuists) are Antonius Archiepisc. Florentinus,
Card. Cajetan, Turre-Cremata, (in his Summa de Ecclesia) a Book (by reason of
the Cardinal's Authority) considerable; as also (which occurs in the end of his
Summa) for his Apparatus super Extat hoc Decretum Gr. Lat. apud Binium Council.
Tom. 8. page 851. Edit Paris. 1636.
Decreto Vorionis Graecorum in Council. Florentino ab Eugenio Papa IV.
promulgato. August. de Ancona, and a Rabble of such Romish Janissaries, the
Pope's Pretorian Band, Capitolii Custodes, and Pontificiae Omnipotentiae jurati
Vindices.

Seeing every Divine of the Church of England is bound to subscribe and defend
the Doctrine and Discipline Writers of the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church.
of our Church, against all Adversaries; and none can do that, before they know
and understand what that Doctrine and Discipline is, and where it is
authentically treated of, and to be found; Jewel, Rainolds, Hooker, A Martyr
for our Church.
Laud, and Whitaker, are excellent Authors; but the most Authentic are, and to
be consulted,

1. Our XXXIX Articles, composed in the Synod at London 1552. i. e. 6to Edvardi
VIti, printed in Latin, An. 1553. they were in number 42, they were after (An.
1562. Elizabethae 5to) revised in the Convocation at London, and reduced to 39.
and published in Latin 1563. A Copy of which is in Bodley's Library amongst
Selden's Books, with the Original Subscriptions of the Clergy annexed to it.

2. Our Book of Homilies, composed 5 Years before the Articles An. 1o Edvardi
VIti, and Anno 1547.

3. Our Liturgy, which was first published An. 1549. then revised by Cranmer
and Bucer, and published An. 1552. i. e. 6to Edv. VIti. And left Vid. Stat 5.
6. Edv VI. cap. 1.
established at his Death; abolished by Queen Stat. 1. Mariae Sess. 2. cap. 2.
Mary, and again established by Queen Vid. Stat. 1. Eliz. cap. 2.
Elizabeth, with some Alterations, 1558.

4. Our Book of Ordination; all these are confirmed by Parliament and
Convocation, the Supreme Power Ecclesiastical and Civil; and therefore whatever
these four Books contain, relating to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church
of England, is authentic, and obligatory to the whole Church and Nation, and
to all Persons, whether Clergy or Laity. This our Common Lawyers will admit,
but no more; because they would increase their own Civil Power, and diminish
the Ecclesiastical. But we say, and can Vid. MS. de Excommunicatione
Cancellario missum An. 166.
prove, that there are other Books, which (as to the Discipline of our Church,
and her Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction) are, and de Jure should be, as authentic
and obligatory, as the former four already mentioned; that is,

1. Our Ecclesiastical Canons, made in Convocation in the first Year of K.
James the First, An. 1603.

2. The Provincial Constitutions, quas collegit Gul. Linwood, (erat M. Parker
Antiq. Britan. in Gul. Chichley, page 285.
Officialis Curiae de Arcubus, dein Custos Privati Sigilli, demum Meneven.
Episcopus) and Glossis illustrare It a Linwood in Praefatione.
incepit An. 1423. perfecit Vid. Glossam ad Constitutio: finaliter verbo
remotas, p. 161. Col. 3. Edit. Paris. 1505. de Haereticis lib. 5.
Glossas illas 1429. not and. Constitutiones has, cum erant in Synodo
Provinciae Cantuar. conditae, Provinciam illam solum obligasse.

3. Constitutiones Legatinae Othonis, and Othoboni (erant Legati Pontificii in
Anglia sub Hen. III.) cum Glossis Johan. de Aton, Canonici Lincolniensis. Not
and. 1. Quod Gul. In Glossa. Et quia verbo asserunt and locato and conducto.
Linwood citat hunc Johan. de Aton, qui erat Linwoodo antiquior: 2.
Costitutiones has Angliam universam obligasse, conditae enim erant in Vide M.
Parisiensem ad An. 1237. in Hen. 3. page 446, 447.
Conciliis, ubi ader ant utriusque Provinciae Episcopi, Pontificio Legato
Preside.

Now all these Canons, and Constitutions (Provincial and Legantine, and indeed
the whole Canon Law) are still in use, in all our Ecclesiastical Courts, and
Obligatory, so far as they are not contrary or inconsistent with, 1. The Law of
GOD: 2. The Law of the Land, or the Prerogative Royal: as may (and evidently
does) appear by many Vide Stat. 28. Hen. 8. cap. 19. ult. which is confirmed 1.
Eliz. cap. 1. Vide etiam 27. Hen. 8. cap. 15. and 35. Hen. 8. cap. 16.
Statutes not yet Repealed.

The next Inquiry will be, How a Divine may come to know the true Meaning of
those Writings, which authentickly contain Our Doctrine and Discipline, and the
Reason of both?

In answer to this Query (with Submission to better Judgments) there can be no
better way to know the true Meaning of our Articles, Canons, and Constitutions,
than by a diligent and intelligent reading the Works of those Excellent
Persons, who contrived those Authentic Writings, (ejusdem enim est exponere,
cujus est componere) and have ever since successively defended them against all
the Adversaries of Our Church (Pope, Presbyter, and Fanatic) and that with
Victory; I mean such as Cranmer, Buceri Scripta Anglicana praecipue Basil.
1577. vel Argentorati. He was Regius Professor of Theology at Cambridge.
Bucer, He was Regius Professor at Oxon.
Peter Martyr, Jewel, Rainolds, Whitgift, Bancroft, Hooker, Joh. White,
Dav'nant, Abbot, Crakanthorp, Field, Laud, Chillingworth, etc. and such others.
As for some later Wtiters (Scriblers rather) they have endeavored by the many
Apocryphal Pamplets, which they have of late Years published, to confute the
established and known Doctrine of Our Church, and all Reformed Churches in
Europe, and maintain Positions, which are evidently Socinian, Popish, or
Pelagian; and we have too much ground to wonder why such as are in Authority,
do give an Imprimatur to such pestilent Heresies, which they are bound (by Law
and Conscience) to condemn.

Now as it concerns a Divine to know the Doctrine How to know the Errors and
Opinions of the Enemies of our Church.
and Discipline of the Church of England, etc. so he ought to know what are
those erroneous Opinions which our Enemies and the Church's hold: for no one
can confute what he does not know. To write against Rome or Geneva, and upbraid
them for Doctines they do not hold, is a Calumny; all that Bellarmine, Lombard,
Vasquez, or Cajetan hold, (who were Great, but Private Men) is not presently to
be charged upon the Roman Church, but such things as she (by public Authority)
owns in her Authentic Constitutions, or Sacred and approved Offices: As for
Popish Errors, they are either Fidei aut Facti, in credendis aut agendis, such
as concern their Doctrine and Discipline.

1. For their Credenda, and Errors in Doctrine, (and many in Discipline too)
they have authentically declared, and we may find them,

1. In their Trent And so in all those Councils they call Ecumenical, and
approve, (though we do not) as the Second Nicene Council; and about 13 more,
which came after it: whatever Errors be in any of these, they do (and must)
own; for seeing they do approve those Councils, they must approve their
Positions and Decrees: We have a Catalogue of what Councils (General and
Provincial) the Church of Rome acknowledges, prefixed to the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Paris 1618. Fol. and to the last Edition of that Law, Lugd. 1661. in
Quarto.
Council; the Best Edition is that at Antverp 1633. in Octavo, (of which
before) page 18.. 3.

2. In the Catechism. Trident. (seu Roman.) ex Decreto Council. Trident. jussu
Pii Papae Quinti; there are many Editions of it, but the best and most useful,
is that of Paris 1635. in Octavo.

3. In their Pope's Bulls; many Collections of them there are: As for Instance,
1, Eclog. Bullarum Pii IV, Pii V, Gregorii XIII. Lugd. 1582. in 8o. Item. 2,
Literae Apostolicae, etc. De Officio Inquisitionis, cum Superiorum
Approbatione, Romae 1579. Fol. Extant hae Literae cum aliarum Auctario, in
calce Directorii Inquisitionis, per Nicol. Eimericum, Venet. 1607. 3, Novae
Compilatio Privilegiorum Apostolicorum Regularium, Mendicantium, etc. per Iman.
Roclerium, Turnoni 1609. Fol. In which Collection we have the Bulls of about 44
Popes: 4, Bullarium Romanum Noeissi, a Leone Magno ad Urbanum Octavum, Tomis 4.
in Fol. Romae 1638. Edidit Mar. Cherubinus, extat Editio hujus Bullarii alia
posterior, and (additis Urbani Octavi, and Innocentii Decimi Constitutionibus)
auctior, Lugd. sumptibus Phil. Board, etc. This last Edition is best: 1.
Because it contains more Bulls: 2, Because I find many things in this last
Edition of Lions, which (being damned by the Inquisitors) are to be Vid.
Indicem Prohib. jussu Alexandri VII. Romae 1664. Edit. page 19. verbo, Magnum
Bullarium and Deeretum Inquisitorum, ibid. page 371.
expunged, and the Edition prohibited, till they be so.

4. In their Canon Law, (of which I shall hereafter write something) all these
are of Public Authority, received with Approbation of their Popes and Church.

For the Popish Agenda, Matters of Fact and Discipline, their Sacred and Civil
Rites, and Ceremonies, we have them authentically set down in these Books:

1. In Missali Roma. There are very many Editions of it, and much differing one
from another, as is evident, and may appear by comparing the MSS. (of which
there are many in Bodley's Library, and some in my own) with the printed
Copies; the first and more ancient with those that follow. Besides the Roman
Missal (which never was in use in England in any Age) there are many others
proper for other Countries and Places: So we had in England, 1, Missale secund.
usum Hereford. 2, secund. usum Sarum: 3, secund. usum York: 4, secundum usum
Evesham: 5, Lincoln: 6, Bangor, etc.

2. Breviarium Roman. there be many, and differing Editions of this, and
Breviaries of other Churches, as well as Rome: The Breviary of Sarum (so famous
in England) they called it Portiforium, etc.

3. Pontificale Romanum, containing their Offices for Ordination, Confirmation,
Consecration of Churches, etc. and other things particular to the Bishop.

4. Rituale Romanum, continet Ritus in Administratione Sacramentorum usitatos,
viz. Baptismi, Eucharistiae, Poenitentiae, Matrimonii, Unctionis Extremae,
quorum Administratio ad Parochos spectat, etc.

5. Sacrarum Ceremoniarum, sea Rituum Ecclesiasticorum S. Roma. Ecclesiae
Libritres, Romae 1560. Folio: there are many more Editions of it, at Venice
1506. at Colon. 1572. and there again 1574, in Octavo. Whoever desires to be
informed, and convinced of the many Ridiculous (as well as Impious) Roman
Superstitions, and the prodigious Papal Pride, let him get that Book.

6. Processionale, Graduale, Paris 1668. Fol. Officium B. Mariae Manuale,
secundum usum Sarum, Horae B. Virginis, etc. And (to omit the rest) Psalterium
B. Mariae, per Bonaventuram (so they call it) and it is printed amongst his
Works; it is the most Blasphemous and Impious piece of Superstition and
Idolatry that ever saw the Sun: For whatever in David's Psalms is spoken of
GOD, or our B. Savior, is in that Psalter attributed to the Virgin Mary; and
yet Possevine in Apparatu Sacro, verbo Rossarium (mihi) page 357.
Possevine has the Impudence to write -- Psalterium Divi Bonaventurae laudibus
Beatissimae Virginis summa Pietate (Impietate potius in Deum Blasphema and
Idololatrica) accommodatum.

All the forementioned Councils, Canons, and Sacred Offices, have been
received, and publicly approved by the Church of Rome, and so what Errors or
Superstitions soever occur in them, may be justly charged upon the Roman
Church, and they are responsable for them; but not so for the Writings of
Particular and private Men, although otherwise (for Place and Learning) of
greatest Eminence in their Church.

It is necessary to understand the Popish Controversies; Books of this kind are
very many, to read Writers of Controversies.
them all, is not opus unius hominis, aut aetatis; I shall name some few of the
best, which will furnish an Intelligent Reader with a convenient Knowledge of
those things that are controverted.

1. Dr. Crackanthorp contra Archiepisc. Spalatensem, 4o. London 1625. It gives
the shortest and best Account of most Popish Controversies.

2. Gul. Amesii Bellarminus enervatus: I noted to you before, that he was a
Nonconformist, but he has very distinctly exposed Rome, and Bellarmine's
Pretenses, and given a Clear, Short, and Rational Answer to them. Vitus
Erbermannus, a Jesuit, and Public Professor at Mentz, has published (an
impertinent thing he miscalls) an Answer to Amesius, printed at Herbipolis
1661. in 2 Vol. in Octavo. But -- Omnia cum fecit Thaida, Thais olet; his
pretended Reply is inconsistent and irrational.

3. Andr. Riveti Catholicus orthodoxus, etc. It is extant in his Works,
Roterodami 1652. In French, Saumur 1616. Lat. 2. Tomes 4.o. Lugd. Bat. 1630. he
very fully handles almost all Popish controversies.

4. Chamierus contractus, seu Panstratiae Catholicae Dan. Chamieri Epitome, per
Fred. Spanhemium, one Vol. Fol. Genevae 1645. This is more full and large than
the former, and may supply their Brevity and Omissions.

5. If you desire (upon occasion) further Satisfaction in any Question, our own
Great and Learned Men, Jewel, Rainolds, John White, Whitaker, Laud,
Chillingworth, and others already mentioned, may be consulted; for none have
opposed Rome, and defended the Reformation with more Learning and Success. To
these may be added, such as have (ex professo) examined and confuted the
Council of Trent; as for Instance,

1. Chemnicii Examen Council. Trident. Francofurti 1578.

2. Examen Concilii Trident. per Innocentium Gentilletum, Genevae 1586. Octavo.

3. Anatome Concilii Trident. Historic. Theolog. cum Historia Council. Trident.
per Thuanum, and vindiciis pro P. Suavo Polano, contra Scipionem Henricum, per
Jo. Hen. Heideggerum, 2 Tomis, in Octavo, Tiguri 1672. more such Writers there
are, but one (Chemnitius) is best, or all of these will be sufficient.

There are some who have writ Enchiridia Controversiarum; such as these may be
consulted, Epitomizers of Controversies.


1. Manuale Controversiarum, per Martinum Becanum, Herbipoli 1623.

2. Or if that be too large a Work, we may get his Enchiridion Manual.
Controversiarum hujus Temporis, Duaci 1631. He gives also an Account of the
Lutheran Controversies, and of the Calvinists, and of the Anabaptists, etc.

3. Enchiridion Controversiarum, per Fr. Costerum, Jesuitam, Col. Agrip. 1587.
and postea Turnoni 1591.

4. Controversiae Generales Fidei, contra Infideles omnes, (he puts all
Protestants in that Catalogue) Octavo, Paris 1660.

And because in all Controversies about Religion, Scripture is urged on all
sides, and some things are Interpreters of the more difficult Texts of S.
Scripture.
hard to be understood; it will be convenient to consult such Authors as have
writ Explicationes and Conciliationes Locorum difficilium.

1. Fred. Spanhemii Dubia Evangelica, Tom. 3. in Quarto: the first Tome was
printed at Geneva 1634. the second and third Tomes 1639.

2. Gul. Estius in loca Scripturae dissiciliora, Folio, Duaci 1629. a Learned
Writer, who explains many places very well; but being sworn (as all their
Ecclesiastics are) to maintain all the received Doctrine, Discipline, and
Rites of the Church of Rome, (...), he does explain Places so, as may make most
(not for Truth, but) for the Interest of the Church of Rome.

3. Symphonia Prophetarum and Apostolorum, etc. a Joh. Schorpio, 4o. Genev.
1625.

4. (...), seu Contradictiones apparentes S. Scripturae, etc. Ven. 1645. 12o.

5. Vindicatio Locorum praecipuorum Vet. Test. a corruptelis Pontificiorum
(praecipue Bellarmini) Calvinistarum (he was a Learned Man, and a Lutheran)
Photinianorum, etc. in Octavo, Gissae 1620. per C. Helvicum.

6. Conciliationes locorum S. Scripturae, in specie pugnantium ex libris
Augustini, per Ludovic. Rabum, 4o. Noribergae 1561.

7. Harmonia totius Scripturae, seu Conciliatio locorum Script. etc. per Mich.
Waltheum, 8o. Argent. 1621. a Lutheran.

8. Conciliationes S. Scripturae, etc. per Andr. Athalmerum, 4o. Noribergae,
an. 1561.

There are many more Writers of this nature, but these I have here mentioned,
may be sufficient.

An mysteria Fidei a ratione naturali apprehendi possunt? Negant.
1. Lubbertus de Christo Servatore, lib. 4. cap. 12. For the Socinian
Controversy.
page 582. 2. Ludovicus Crocius in Anti-Socinianismo, Disp. 7. page 64. 3. Jac.
ad Portum Orthodoxa Fidei Defensione, cap. 30. page 377. 4. Andreas Prolaeus in
Mataeologia sua Sociniana, cap. 2. page 21, 22. etc. 5. Christianus Dithmarsus
in Coll. Exercitationum Anti-Socinianarum, Exercit. 2. page 32. etc. 6. Balth.
Meisnerus Considerat. Theologiae Photinianae, cap. 4. page 310. 7. Joh.
Hoornebeck Socinianismi confutati, Tom. 1. lib. 1. cap. 5. fuse. 8. Sam.
Maresius in Hydra Socinianismi confutata, lib. 1. cap. 25. page 392. 9. Suarez
Opuscul. lib. 3. cap. 1o, 2o. 10. Pet. Lombard. Sent. lib. 2. Disp. 26. Vid.
Commentatores, ibid. 11. Aquinas, 22. Quaest. 2. Art. 3. 4. and Commentatores,
ibid.
An Sociniani sint vere Christiani? Negant.
1. Lud. Crocius Anti-Socinianismi, Disp. 1.. 4. 2. And. Prolaeus in Mataeol.
Sociniana, cap. 1. qu. 5. lib. 7. etc. 3. Balthas. Meisnerus in brevi Consid.
Theologiae Photinianae, cap. 4. page 294. etc. 5. page 634. 4. Jacob. Martinus.
Synopsi Religionis Photinianae, cap. 6.. 26. page 144. etc. 1.. 14. 5. Joh.
Polyander Concertat. Anti-Sociniana, prima Disp. 4, 5. 6. Joh. Hoornebeck
Socinianismi confut. Tom. 1. l. 2. cap. 9. page 188.
Authors aliqui qui contra F. Socinum Senensem, suique sequaces scripserunt.
1. Jacobus ad Portum, SS. Theol. in Acad. Lausannensi Professor, scripsit
Defensionem Fidei Orthodoxae adversus Christophori Ostorodii Institutiones
Religionis Christianae, Genev. edit. an. 1613. 4o. 2. Sibrandus Lubbertus
scripsit contra F. Socinum. lib. 4. de Jesu Christo Servatore, 4o. 3. Andreas
Essenius (...), Hug. Grotii scripsit lib. cui Titulus -- Triumphus Crucis, seu
Fides Catholica de Satisfactione Christi, contra Joh. Crellium, Francofurti,
4o. 4. Johan. Henr. Bisterfeldius Nassovius, scripsit de Uno Deo, Patre, Filio,
and Spiritu Sancto, contra Joh. Crellii, l. 2. de Uno Deo Patre, Lugd. Batav.
1639. 4o. 5. Wolfangus Franzius scripsit Disp. varias adversus Photinianos pro
satisfactione Christi, sub hoc Titulo, Disputationes Theolog. de Sacrificiis
Satisfactionis Christi pro peccatis totius Mundi praestitae, Typis Firmissimis,
4o. 6. Christanus Matthias Dithmarsus in Academia Noricorum Altorsina
Professor, scripsit and edidit Collegium Exercitationum Theologicarum
Anti-Photinianum, in quo Disputationes december: 1. De Notitiae Dei naturalis
existentia and essentia: 2. De Notitiae naturalis usu and efficacia: 3. De
(...), i. e. Nomenclatura Divina in genere and in specie de nomine Jehova: 4.
De Appellatione Deus: 5. De Appellatione Adon, (...) Dominus: 6. De Dei
definitione, genere and Praedicatorum qualitate: 7. De Essentiae Divinae
unitate: 8. De natura Attributorum Divinorum ad intra consideratorum: 9. De
Attributis Divinis ad extra: 10. De ordine Attributorum Divinorum, 4o. 7.
Valentinus Legdaeus Suerinensis edidit Examen Refutationis Valent. Smalcii,
quam Thesibus Alberti Graweri de Aeterna Deitate and Incarnatione Filii Dei,
opposuit, 4o. 8. Joh. Winterus Naumburgensis edidit Refutationem Sententiae F.
Socini de Justificatione hominis coram Deo, quam tractat in Praelectionibus
Theol. cap. 15. Problemata Socini quinque ponit and refellit. Quarto. 1. An in
Justificatione nostra peccata nostra deleantur nuda remissione, sine
satisfactione? Asserit Socinus. 2. An Deus poterat peccata condonare sine
satisfactione? Asserit Socinus. 3. An vitae innocentia possit censeri loco
satisfactionis, and articulum Justificationis ingredi? Asserit Socinus. 4. An
Deus voluerit peccata sine satisfactione condonare? Asserit Socinus. 5 An
Christus pro peccatis nostris satisfecerit? Negat Socinus. Idem Scripsit
Collationem and Differentiam Vet. and Nov. Testamenti Sacerdotum: Item
Tractatum de hac quaestione, An Adamus in statu Integritatis fuerit Mortalis?
Asserit Socinus. Negat Winterus.
9. Joh. Junius Ecclesiae Sylvae Ducensis Pastor, scripsit Refutationem
Praelectionum Theologicarum F. Socini Senensis, Amstel. 1633. 8o. 10. Balthazar
Meisnerus in Academia Wittebergensi Professor, scripsit Lib. cui Tit. Brevis
Consideratio Theologiae Photinianae, prout eam F. Socinus descripsit Libello
cui Titulus -- Quod Evangelici omnino debent se illorum coetui adjungere, qui
falso Ariani and Ebionitae vocantur, 8o. 11. Jacob. Martin. scripsit Lib. cui
Tit. -- Synopsis totius Religionis Photinianae ex illorum Institutione brevi,
Volkelio, Ostorodo, aliisque ejus Sectae authoribus repetitae, and breviter
refutatae, 8o. 12. Joh. Junius Ecclesiae Essendelphensis Minister, scripsit
Examen Responsionis F. Socini ad Librum Jacobi Wieki, de Divinitate Filii Dei,
and Spiritus Sancti, Amstel. an. 1628. 8o. 13. Joh. Polyander Professor
Leidensis, scripsit Lib. cui Tit. Prima Concertatio Anti-Sociniana
Disputationibus 48. comprehensa, Amstel. an. 1640. 8o. 14. Joh. Paulus
Fetwinger in Academ. Altdorphina Alumnorum Noricorum Ephorus, scripsit Lib. cui
Tit. -- Vindiciae Incarnationis Jesu Christi aeterni Patris aeterni Filii, pro
Alberto Grawero Professore olim Jenensi, 8o. 15. Andreas Idem Keslerus habet
Logicae and Metaphysicae Socinianae Examen.
Keslerus Superintendens Eisfeldensis, scripsit Lib. cui Tit. Physicae
Photinianae Examen, etc. an. 1630. 8o. 16. Jacob. Martin. scripsit Lib. cui
Tit. J. Martini de tribus Elohim liber primus, Photinianorum novorum, praecipue
Georg. Emeldeni blasphemiis oppositus, an. 1619. 8o. 17. Andreas Volanus,
scripsit Lib. cui Tit. Paraenesis Ard. Volani ad omnes in Regno Poloniae, magno
Ducatu Lithuaniae, Somosatenianae Doctrinae Professores: and ad nova
Ebionitarum contra Paraenesin objecta respontio. Spirae, an. 1582. 18. Prodiit
not it a pridem Libellus cui Titulus, Specimen Refutationis libri Johannis
Crellii de Satisfactione Christi: Auth. L. V. etc. Trajecti ad Rhenum, an.
1648. 12mo. 19. Extat Meditatio Theologica De usu Vide sis hac de re Joach.
Stegman. de Judice and norma Fidei Controversiarum Libros duos: Eleutheropoli.
An. 1644.
and abusu rationis humanae, in interpretandis and aestimandis rebus and
Scripturis Divinis, per C. S. A. Lugd. Batav. 1633. 12mo. 20. Ambrosius de
Penalosa scripsit Opus egregium de Christi and Spiritus Sancti Divinitate, and
Trinitatis Mysterio, contra Socinianos, an. 1635. Fol. 21. Nicolaus Arnoldus
Polonus Ecclesiae Beetkumanae Minister, Lib. edidit cui Tit. Johan. Maccovius
Redivivus; continens, 1. (...) Pontificiorum Socinianorum, etc. 2. Casus
Conscientiae ad normam Doctrinae Socinianae; 3. Anti-Socinum, cum Appendice de
Atheis: An. 1647. 4o. 22. Hugo Grotius De Satisfactione Christi, contra F.
Socinum, Id est Socino.
cui resp. Andreas Essenuis in Triumpho Crucis, and L. V. in Specimine
refutationis Joh. Crellii de Satisfactione Christi, Octavo. 23. Vid. Ludov.
Lucium De Satisfactione Christi, contra Michaelem Gettichium, Edit. Bas. 1612.
8o. 24. Lambert. Danaeus in P. Lomb. Sentent. lib. 1. multa pro Trinitate
disputat. Edit. an. 1580. 8o. 25. Christianus Beemannus Bornensis, edidit
Exercitationes Theolog. pro Deitate Christi, etc. contra Socinum, Smalcium,
Ostorodum, Crellium, Mennonem Simonis, Paracelsum, Wiegelium, and c. Amst. an.
1643. Fol. 26. Joh. Paulus Felwingern, scripsit Examen Disquisitionis brevis
edit. Norembergae 1637. Octavo. 27. Sam. Maresii Xenia Academica, seu de
Divinitate and Personalitate Sp. Sancti, contra Socinianos (cum aliis) Quarto.
28. Disputatio Theologica Orthodoxa De Sanctissima Trinitate, Auth. Josepho
Voisin, Par. 1647. 8o. 29. Socinianismi confutati, Tom. 1. Auth. Johanne
Hoornebecke Professore Ultrajectano, Ultrajecti 1650. Quarto.

30. Hydra Socinianismi expugnata, contra Joh. Volkelium and Joh. Crellium, per
Sam. Maresium, Groningae 1651. Quarto. 31. Bernardus Paxillus, scripsit
Monomachian pro defensione Fidei Trinitatis, Cracov. 1616. in Biblioth. Bodl.
32. Joh. Cloppenburg. scripsit Vindicias pro Deitate Sp. Sancti, adversus Joh.
Bidellum Anglum, Franck. 1652. 33. Josuae Stegmanni Photiniasmus, seu succincta
refutatio errorum Photinianorum, etc. Rhinthelii 1623. 8o.
Alli pene infiniti, Pontificii pariter and Reformati sese Socino opposuere, ut
passim videre est. Vide sis.
Aegidium Hunnium in Articulo de Trinitate. Polanum in Syntagm. Theol. l. 3. c.
2. ad 11. Barthol. Terres in 1. part. Aquinatis. Benedict. Szentkiral.
Transylvanum, contra Georgium Enjedinum. Hieron. Zanchium de tribus Elohim,
etc. Hannib. Rosseli Comment. in Paemandrum Hermetis.
Calvinum in defensione Orthodoxae Fidei Sacrae Trinitatis, contra M. Servetum,
and Georg. Blandr.

Erasmum Brochmannum, qui utraque Controvers. part quaestiones Socinianas
proponit and discutit.

Dionys. Petavium, qui fuse pariter and docte in Dogmatis Theologicis
tractandis, contra Socinum disputat, testimoniis ex intima Antiquitate petitis.

Tandem longum Scriptorum Catalogum (eorum nempe qui contra Socinum and sui
sequaces militant) tibi exhibet Christianus Becmannus Bornensis, in
Exercitationibus Theologicis Amstelod. editis an. 1643 page 12. Ubi Authors 56
plus minus enumerat, qui justo Bello and Mart internecino contra Socinum,
ipsumque etiam Socinianismum animose militant. Qui vellet, videat.

Scholastici (quod ad Articulum Trinitatis attinet) in 1. Sent. P. Lombardi
distinct. 2. and in 1. part Aquinatis multa disputant, curiosa mag is fateor
quam viro cordato profutura. Quorum omnium Catalogum laboriose contextum tibi
exhibet Johan. Martinez de Ripalda in Lib. Sent. 1. Disp. 2.

Amongst other things, it is exceeding useful for a Divine, to have some
knowledge of the Canon Law; Canon Law.
there are many Books written of this Faculty, and amongst others (to omit
those which concern the Forum, and Jurisdictionem contentiosam) these following
may be useful.

1. For the Original, Parts, and Use of the Canon Law, it will be very useful,
first of all to read Dr. Duck De Usu and Authoritate Juris Civilis, Roman. Lib.
1. c. 7. de Jure Canonico, page 39. Edit. Land. 1653.

2. Institutiones Juris Canonici, per Paulum Lancelottum, cum Casibus Joh.
Bapt. Bartoloni, in Octavo, Col. 1609.

3. Arnoldi Corvini Jus Canonicum per Aphorismos strict. explicat. Amstel.
1651. in Octavo. And this for Brevity, Method, and Perspicuity, may (at the
first) be more useful to a Divine, than the aforesaid Institutions.

4. Corpus Juris Canonici, cum Accessione novarum Constitutionum summorum
Pontificum, and Annotationibus Ant. Naldi, etc. Lugd. 1661. in Quarto, and 2
Volumes: This is the last and best Edition Corporis Juris Canonici, (without
the Gloss) and contains many useful things, which are not in any former Edition.

5. If the aforesaid Edition cannot be had, then consult Corpus Juris Canonici,
at Paris 1618. Folio, the next in Time and Goodness.

6. Corpus Juris Canonici, cum Glossis, Par. 1612. cum Indice Steph. Davys, in
4 Volumes Fol.

7. The old Edition of the Canon Law, with the Gloss, at Par. 1519. in 3 Vol.
in 4o; or any other Edition before the Year 1572. for since that Time, many
things are left out of the Gloss, which were in before.

8. Censurae in Glossas Juris Canonici, Colon. 1672. where what is to be left
out of the Gloss, is distinctly set down.

After a General Knowledge of this Law, a few Books more will be of Advantage
to perfect that Knowledge, (so far as a Divine may be concerned in it) for
Instance such as these:

1. Joh. Cardinal de Turre-Cremata in Decretum Gratiani.

2. Abbas Panormitanus in Decretales, etc.

3. Conclusionum Practicarum in Jur. Utr. Foro, etc. 8. Tom. Fol. per Card.
Tuschum, Lugd. 1634. The whole Work is in an Alphabetical Order, like a Law
Dictionary, and things easy to be found in it.

4. Epit. Juris Pontificii veteris, per Ant. Augustinum, Fol. Romans 1614. aut
Par. 1641. It is divided into 3 parts: 1. De Personis; 2. De Judiciis; 3. De
Rebus, etc. He has a Catalogue of the Popes Councils, Collectors of the Canons,
and his Censure of them. A Book of great use for a Divine.

For Explanation of the Terms, and Ecclesiastical Words, which occur in the
ancient Canons, Histories, Law Lexicons.
Councils, and Ecclesiastical Writers, Greek and Latin, some Law Lexicons will
be necessary; there are many, but I shall name only what I think most useful.

1. Glossarium Graeco-Barbarum, Jo. Meursii, 4o. For the Greek.
Lugd. Bat. 1614.

2. Lexicon Juridicum Juris Caesarei Canonici, per For the Latin.
Jo. Calvinum, Joh. Christum, Genevae 1640. which Edition has escaped the
Inquisitors Fury.

Notand. Many things in this Lexicon are damned, and to be expunged by the
Command of the Inquisitors, in the Spanish and Portugal Indices; sed salva res
est, this Edition has escaped Purgatory. Vid. Indicem Expurg. Hisp. Madriti
1667. page 570, and Indicem Olysipone 1624. p. 742.

There are more Lexicons, which may (on many occasions) be consulted:

1. Lexicon Juris, per Sim. Schardium, Fol. Colon. Agrip. 1600.

2. Vocabulum Utriusque Juris, per Alexandr. Scot. 8o. Lugd. 1622.

3. Notitia de Vocabulis Eccles. etc. Rauolta de Domenico, Magri, etc. Romae
1650. part Latin, and part Italian.

4. Glossae P. Pithaei Capitulis Caroli Magni proefixae, Paris 1640, etc.

It is exceeding useful for a Divine to know the Civil Law.
Civil Law also (setting aside the Litigious part of it) such Books as these
may be useful: And first,

For a General Knowledge of the Civil Law, consult, 1. Ridley's View of the
Civil Law, etc. 4o. 2. Dr. Duck's first Book De Usu and Authoritate Juris
Civilis, Land. 1653. Elementa Juris Civilis, per Joh. Arnold Corvinum, Amstel.
1645. in 12o. Justinian's Institutions should be read with it: And for a fuller
Explication of Justinian's Institutions, it will be convenient to have, either

1. Joachim. Mynsingerus: 2. Joh. Scheideuinus; both have writ well on the
Institutions, but Scheideuinus later, and more fully, and (in many things) more
useful for a Divine: 3. Theophili Antecessoris Institutiones, Gr. Lat. cum
Scholiis Faberti, and Notis Curtii, 4o. Par. 1638.

3. Corpus Juris Civilis, (without the Gloss and Case) 2 Vol. in 8o. per Dion.
Gothofredum, 1614.

4. Or which is far better, Corpus Juris Civilis (with Gloss and Case) Paris
1612.

5. Codex Theodosianus, cum perpetuis Commentariis Jac. Gothofredi, etc. in 6
Vol. Fol. Lugd. 1665. In which there are many Titles, which concern
Ecclesiastical Matters, (Doctrine or Discipline) for Instance -- De Summa
Trinitate Catholica -- De Sacro-Sanctis Ecclesiis, etc. De Episcopis and
Clericis, De Episcopali Audientia -- De Haereticis, Manichaeis, and Samaritis,
ne Sanctum Baptisma Iteretur, De Judaeis, De Apostatis, etc. and many such
more. Now if we consider the Antiquity of those Laws, and Gathofred's most
Learned Commentary, and Explications of them, it must be confessed, That the
Knowledge of them will be very useful for a Divine.

1. Calvini: 2. Schardii Lexica Juridica (but now Lexicons to explain the Terms
of the Civil Law.
mentioned) or one of them; Calvin is more useful, and will be sufficient, as
to most Latin Words in that Law. Vid. Bar. Brissonii de verborum quae ad jus
pertinent significatione, libros 19. Par. 1596. Fol. An Excellent and Learned
Work; Alciate and Joh. Goeddaeus, have writ well on the same Subject, in Octavo
both. And after them Arnoldus Corvinus, very well, in Octavo, Amstel. 1646.
one, or all of these may be consulted.

You may consult (besides Meursius his Glossary) For the Greek.
1. Rigaltii Glossarium (...), De Verborum significatione, quae Novellis
Imperatorum Orientis, post Justinianum regnabant, etc. 4o. Lut. 1601. 2.
Glossae veteres Verborum Juris in Basilicis, etc. per Card. Labbaeum, Paris.
1606. In Calce Emendat. and Observationum in Synopsin Basilic(...)

6. There is one Title in the Law of great use in Divinity; (as well as Policy
and Civil Prudence) and that is, -- De Lib. 5. Degest, Tit. 17.
Regulis juris Antiqui: It contains above 200 Maxims of Law and Reason, so many
Principles, and Axioms of greatest Evidence and Authority; being great Truths
universally received in the Roman Empire (Pagan and Christian) by Divines, as
well as Statesmen, and Lawyers: And because there is hardly any Rule so
universal, but it may admit of some Exception, or Limitations, so those Regulae
Juris have been cautiously and learnedly explained by several Eminent Lawyers:
For Instance,

1. Everard Broncherst, 12o. Lugd. Bat. 1641. one of the last, and (I believe)
the best. De Regulis Juris scripserunt.
2. Jacob. Cujacius, Octavo, Bas. 1594. 3. Pet. Faber, Lugduni 1590. 4. Philip.
Decius (cum Additionibus) Octavo, Lugduni 1601.
It is of use to a Divine for to be acquainted with De Indic^bus Expurgatoriis.
the Roman Inquisitors, who corrupt (rather than purge) Authors in all
Faculties and Arts; (some of the Fathers not excepted) for this purpose we have,

1. The Popes Vide plures Pontificum Constitutiones de Libris Expurgandis in
Bullario Cherubini, in Indice Bullarii not at as, verbo Index, and verbo Libri
prohibiti.
Bulls, about their Expurgatory Indices, as

1. The Bulls of Pius IV. 1564. in Bullario Cherubini, Romae 1638. Tom. 2. p.
81, 82.

2. That of Clement VIII. 1595. In the same Bullarii, Tome the 3d. pages 37,
38. vide ibi citata de Congregatione Indicis, (as they call it) that is a
Congregation (A Committee) of Cardinals, who consulted about the composing and
perfecting the Index Expurgatorius.

For the Rules and Directions given the Inquisitors, for prohibiting what Books
they pleased, we have them (as given by the Authority of the Trent Council) in
the end of Vide council Trident. Ant verp. 1633. 8o. in calce post Indicem: And
in the Edition by Labbe, Paris 1667. page 230, 231.
some Editions of the Council.

3. For the Indices Expurgatorii themselves, it will be useful to have one or
more of them, (for there are many) and if possible of their own Editions:
Amongst those we have,

1. Index Trid. published at the end of those Editions of the Trent Council,
quoted in the Margin.

2. Index Hispan. Madriti 1612. Fol. and Madriti 1571, 1584. Salmurii 1601.
Madriti iterum 1614, 1628. and Hispali 1632. and Madr. iterum 1640. these are
the several Editions of it, but the most complete and useful, is that Madr. ex
Typograph. Didaci Duaci. Fol. an. 1667. In which we have 4 or 5000 Authors
damned absolutely, or so corrected with a Purgation (as they call it) that the
best things are left out, and corrupted Si Episcopus, Presbyter, aut Diaconus
Chartam falsaverit, aut falsum Testimonium dixerit, deponatur, in Monasterium
detrudatur, and quam diu vixerit Laicam tantummodo Communionem accipiat;
Concilium Agathense (Agathae in Gallia Narbonensi) celebratur, 506. Can. 50.
.

3. Index Libr. Prohibit. Alex. 7mi. jussu editus, Romae 1664. and iterum 1665.
ibid. extat etiam ex MS. 1667. Fol. In this last Edition the Index Tridentinus
is joined with it, and many Decrees of the Congregatio Indicis (wherein they
name particularly, and censure Books) which elsewhere I find Some of these
Decrees are extant in a Book, with this Title, Librorum post Indicem Clementis
VIII. prohibitorum Decreta, omnia hactenus Edita, Romae 1624. 8o. It is bound
up with the Index Librorum prohibitorum, Romae 1596. in Octavo.
not extant.

4. The Portugal Index, Olysipone 1624. in Folio: Continet 1. Indicem Roman. 2.
Indicem Prohibitorum, Lusitaniae: 3. Indicem Expurgandorum, a. page 195. etc.
vid. Papa. Bullas, and Librorum Expurgandorum Regulas, ibidem in Principio,
ante Indicem.

5. Index Expurgatorius, juxta Concilii Trident. Decretum, Philippi 2i. Regis
Catholici jussu, Albani Ducis Consilio, ac Ministerio in Belgico concinnatus,
an. 1571. and a Franc. Junio Edit. an. 1586. vide Epist. Dedicatoriam, and
Praefat. Junii, Diploma Regis Catholici, and Praefationem B. Ariae Montani,
dicto Indici praefixam.

Now it is to be observed, That in their Indices, Authors and Books are
distinguished into 3 Classes.

1. In the first Class, the Books and Authors too are damned, and all Heretics
(amongst which we Protestants are reckoned) and all their Books writ of
Religion: 2. In the second Class, Books damned, but not their Authors, when the
Authors are Catholics, and yet their Books absolutely forbid: 3. In the third
Class, such Books (writ by Papist or Protestant) as be purged, may pass. By
this we may come to know the best Books; i. e. Those condemned by them; Magnum
aliquid bonum est quod a Nerone damnatur.

2. By considering their Indices, we come to know the best Editions of many
good Books: For they name the Edition of every Book to be purged: so that if we
have that Edition they name (or any before) we are sure it has not been in
their Purgatory, nor (by putting in and leaving out) corrupted Editions.

3. Their Indices Expurgatorii (for that use we may make of them) are very good
Common-place-Books, and Repertories, by help of which we may presently find
what any Author (by them censured) has against them,

I shall only commend four Authors more of excellent use.

1. Historia Conciliorum Generalium, in 4 Libros distributa, Authore Ed.
Richerio, Doctore Sorbonico, Col. 1680. and again at Colon. 1683.

2. Joh. Launoii Parisiensis Theologi Epistolae, in 8 Parts or Volumes; both
Sorbon Doctors, and yet write learnedly against the Corruptions of Rome.

3. De Antiqua Ecclesiae Disciplina Dissertationes 7. Par. 1686. Auth. Ludov.
Ellis Du Pin Doct. Sorbonico.

4. Selectae Historiae Ecclesiasticae capita, and in loca ejusdem insignia
Dissertationes, etc. Paris. 1676. Authore Natali Alexandro, Ord. Praedicatorum,
and Doctore Sorbonico, in Octavo, and 23 or 24 Volumes. You may consult French
Men's Writings (both before and since Luther) such as Gerson, Chancellor of
Paris, and Espensaeas, etc. for they write more freely and learnedly against
the Corruptions and Errors of Rome, than any another Popish Writers.

Having writ this at several times, and scarce perused any part of it, as I
would; I hope the Reader will pardon my (...), and (not wilful) Mistakes. If He
desire to see any of the aforementioned Authors, they are all (some few
excepted) in my own Anno 1690. Now the Bishop's Library is in Bodley's and
Queens College Librarys in Oxon, to which He gave all His Books by Will, in
the Year 1691. valued at 3000 Pounds.
Library here at Buckden.

THOMAS Lincoln,

LETTER I.
Bishop BARLOW 's Letter to Dr. Howell Chancellor of the Diocese of Lincoln,
concerning his Primary Visitation.
Mr. CHANCELLOR,
WHEN I appointed this present Visitation of my Diocese, it was both my Duty,
and Desire to have done it in Person; as for several other Ends, so more
particularly that I might have the Happiness to know, and be acquainted with my
Brethren of the Clergy: But my Age (being now actually past 71.) and
Infirmities, necessitate me to lay upon you that Burden, which my weak
Indisposition at this time has disabled me to bear.

The Reason why I have not Visited before this Time, was this: My Predecessor
visited the Year he died, and though (de Jure) I might have visited the next
Year, yet I was unwilling to bring a burden upon the Clergy so suddenly; and
therefore resolved not to visit, until such time as my Predecessor (if he had
lived) might have visited, which was Anno 1677. When being called to the
Parliament, I was detained there, and (till now) had no Opportunity to
undertake (what I had really designed) a Visitation. This premised, I shall
entreat You to commend to my Brethren two or three things, in what Words, and
with what Enforcement You in Prudence shall think fit.

1. That they would be conscientiously careful to live a pious Life, and be
Exemplary in walking Themselves in that way they commend to their Hearers from
the Pulpit; for if they Preach never so well, and do not Live accordingly, they
will dishonor GOD, and do Mischief to the People, who are more apt to follow
Examples than Precepts.

2. That they would be diligent in Catechizing the Younger People (I fear too
many of the Older sort may need it) that they may know the Principles and
Grounds of our Religion; otherwise to preach to Uncatechiz'd People, is to
build without a Foundation.

3. That they would studiously endeavor to understand the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church of England, which they have subscribed to, and are
bound to vindicate. And in order to this, let them read such Books as
authentically contain both the Doctrine and Discipline of our Church, viz. Our
Liturgy, Homilies, XXXIX. Articles, and our Book of Ordination. These Books are
established by Convocation and Parliament, and ought both before and after
Ordination, seriously to be read and considered.

Jewel, Whitaker, Reynolds, Hooker, are excellent Authors, who vindicated the
Church of England, against all her Adversaries, with great Learning, and
Victorious Success; and if young Students in Divinity will apply themselves to
read them diligently, they will find that these Books are of excellent use for
the Explication, and Confirmation of Our Churches Doctrine, and Approved
Discipline.

4. And as Divines, we are bound to enable our selves, to know and defend our
own Doctrine and Discipline, (than which no Church in Christendom has better,
or more consonant to Scripture and Primitive Antiquity) so we should endeavor,
according to our Ability, to confute our Adversaries, Papists and
Non-conformists, who (as Herod and Pontius Pilate against our Blessed Savior)
are Confederates against Truth, and the Church of England.

What I have here mentioned, is to re-mind my Brethren, of what they know
already, and of the pressing necessity We now have (if We love Truth, and our
Holy Mother the Church of England) to know and confute the Impious and
Blasphemous Practices of all those Recusants, which at this Day disturb the
Peace of the Church and State.

I desire You to advise the Clergy to pay their Tenths to the King duly, for
the Reasons in a Paper, which the Reverend Mr. Skeleton, my Domestic Chaplain
will give You: And I have taken effectual order, to prevent the Clergy's being
imposed on, by undue Exactions, from any Officer or Collector, of their
respective Dues within my Diocese; resolving to lessen rather than augment the
Fees, etc. which the Clergy pay.

With my Respects to Your self, and my Brethren, I rest theirs, and

Your Affectionate (though Infirm) Friend, THOMAS Lincoln.
Sept. 1. 1688.
LETTER II.
A Short Method for the Study of Divinity, in a Letter to a Friend, by an
Unknown Author; and found in Bishop BARLOW 's Study.
SIR,
YOU ask of me one of the Hardest things I know: To direct A Young Student in
the the Methodical Study of Divinity. If I have any Knowledge in it, I must
profess to You, I know not how I came by it: I read as it happened, and thought
of what I read, and this is all I know of it. It is, I confess, a great Defect
in our Church, and the occasion of many Mischiefs to it, but it requires a much
better Hand than mine, and more Leisure than I have, to prescribe a Remedy for
it. But if You will be contented with some free and hasty Thoughts, You shall
have them.

The constant Reading of S. Scripture, with great application of Mind, is a
General Rule, and ought to be a constant Practice, whether we rightly apprehend
the true Sense of it at present, or not: For when the very Phrase or Expression
of S. Scripture, and the History of it is imprinted on our Minds, when we come
strictly to examine any particular Doctrine of Religion, various Expressions
will occur to our Minds, and will suggest such Thoughts to us, as are to be had
no other way. And though it is not supposed, that any Man acquainted with other
parts of Learning, and beginning to apply himself to the Study of Divinity, can
be in such a State; yet the Scripture is to be read, and learnt, as the Grammar
is by Children, who know not how to apply the Rules, much less understand the
Reason of them. And therefore part of them is to be read every Day, though only
in English (which I think very advisable for one who intends the Ministry)
without stopping at every Difficulty he meets with, but charging his Memory
with the Phrase, and the Series, and order of Events.

But to make the Reading of the S. Scripture useful, he must furnish himself
with all variety of Questions about Religion, that he may know what to observe
and enquire after: And you will think it hard, that I cannot direct him better,
than to send him to the Master of the Sentences, or Thomas Aquinas's Sums, or
Estius upon the Sentences: And yet so it is; Not that I think that either their
Questions, or Resolutions are always wise, but they will surnish a wise Man
with many Material Questions, and with some very Material Answers, and deliver
him from the Danger of ever being imposed on with School-Falacies. And a Man
who reads them with this Design and this Caution, will find great Benefit by
it. For though I am no Admirer of School Divinity, I doubt the great Ignorance of
some Persons may be ascribed to a Contempt of it, without knowing it.

But then he ought also to read other Systems of Divinity, as Calvin's
Institutions, and Zanchius, (whom I take to be one of the best and subtilest
Writers of Calvinists) and Arminius, Episcopius, or the late Remonstrant Philip
a Limborch. For a Man who will thoroughly enquire, ought to have the different
Schemes of Religion in his Head: But especially to read and consider well the
Articles, Homilies, and Canons of our Church: which every one, who intends to
be a Minister of the Church of England, ought to do.

Having thus far advanced, you may think I bring him back again, when I come to
more particular Enquiries: But if you think well of it, you will find he is not
sufficiently prepared for them before. And now I begin from the very
Foundations of Religion; To enquire strictly and severely into the Reasons of
Our Faith. And, 1. Why He believes there is a GOD. And here he must review all
the several Hypotheses of Philosophy, and examine the Powers of Nature, and the
Arguments of Atheists. Tully and Dr. Cudworth, will sufficiently furnish him,
if his Curiosity does not draw him further.

The next Enquiry is, Whether GOD has made any Revelation of his Will to the
Word: And here he must consider the Authority of Revelation, and the Canon of
Scripture: And Dr. Stillingfleet's Origines Sacrae, Huetius, or Dr. Cosin's
Canon of Scripture, will furnish him with all that is needful to be known, or
direct him where he may enquire further. And this is the most proper time to
read the Apologists for Christianity, Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Minutius
Felix, Arnobius, Lactantius, St. Austin de Civitate Dei, Theodoret contra
Gentes, and such like, as Eusebius's Praeparatio and Demonstratio, etc.

And now especially it is time to read the Scriptures with greater Care; both
to understand the Grammatical and Critical. Sense of them, by comparing the
various Versions, especially the Septuagint, with the Original of the Old
Testament, and by our Volumes of Critics (which have more than all that is
useful) and to understand the true Sense of them.

As for particular Commentators, I know not how to direct, because there is so
great variety of them: But Ainsworth upon the Pentateuch is allowed by all.
Josephus and Philo-Judaeus (tho'a Platonic Jew) are very useful for the Old
Testament, and Maimonides Nevochim, and such Tracts of Jewish Writers, as he
may meet with.

Dr. Lightfoot (I think) has prescribed the best Method of Reading the
Scriptures, by digesting the Historical and Prophetical Books into the order of
Time. And the Prophesies are certainly understood, by considering the times to
which they relate. Though I must needs say, That the shortest and most
compendious way to useful Knowledge, is to study the New Testament, and those
parts of the Old Testament, which he there finds applied to the state of the
Gospel; which will enable him the better to understand the Old Testament, when
he has more leisure for the thorough Study of it. And for Modern Authors, let
him read Mr. Poole's Synopsis Criticorum, allowing for the different Hypotheses
of the Authors, and reading with Caution. Though (if I may advise) when he
intends thoroughly to understand any Book of Scripture, let him read it several
times over, and make himself Master of it: Then let him read it Verse by Verse,
and observe what the Difficulties are, and try by the Construction and
Signification of the Words, and the Series of the Discourse, what he can make
of it; and after that consult Expositors. This is the most laborious and slow,
but the most useful, and will be found at last the shortest way to true and
substantial Knowledge. I have found such advantage by it my self, that I dare
recommend it.

From hence, he may proceed to the Enquiry into particular Controversies, which
he is now well furnished for, with a great compass of Knowledge: And here he
may begin, and end (if ever he can find an end) where he pleases. And he will
easily inform himself of the best Writers on both sides.

As for the Fathers, and Councils, and Ecclesiastical Historians, I think the
best way at first, is to examine, as he has opportunity, such Citations as he
meets with; and see to what purpose their Authority is urged on all sides; or
to read any particular Tract in them, as he has occasion for it: And then when
he finds leisure to read them, he will know how to use them.

This is sufficient Employment for some Years; and as imperfect as the Rules
are, if observed, will certainly make him a very good Divine, and furnish him
with useful Knowledge; and before he has done half this, he will need no
Director.

I have taken no notice of Reading the Ancient Moralists, and observing the
Differences of their several Sects, and how they differ from, or agree with the
Precepts of Christianity; nor of the Nature of Laws, etc. These being supposed
necessary Prolegomena.

FINIS.

