WHITE HALL FAIR: OR, Who buys good Penniworths OF BARKSTEAD.

THE FAIR PROCLAIMED.

O Yes, come all who do intend to buy
Good Penniworths; do you want Treachery,
Schism, Sedition, Votes, both pro and con,
Do you want bane, to kill a Nation:
Do you want Orders, Questions, Proclamations,
Covenants, Contracts, Compacts, Protestations.
Here you may furnished be, with sives of air:
O yes, come all then, unto White Hall -Fair.
Printed for A. P. 1648.

WHITE HALL FAIR, etc.
Spectator. Here Is a Fair well furnished? what Colonel Barkstead, art thou
turned Pedlar, what rarities, make thy pack look with so full a countenance;
thou art laden with other Commodities (sure) then Thimbles, and silver Spoones.


Pedlar. Sir I entrusted am, by our high States,
Who are the Kingdoms Rulers, yea their Fates,
To put to sale, those paper Ordinances
Who broke ere they were charged by sad mischances;
For to make money of those rotten Laws
Which shrunk, and durst not to support the Cause.
I am Authorized to present to view
The States Quodiblits, and I have a few
Of their strange wild projections, hard to see,
To kill the King, and all his Progeny.

Spectator. Pri-thee discover some of those envied Objects. What Is that thou
art so shie to bring out, rip up the belly of thy Bag, and let me take a view
of all.


Pedlar. Here is a Fairing, dangerous to reveal,
It Is the late counterfeited, new Great Seal:
With which the Commons ratify their Acts,
And do confirm, their treasonable Facts.
Nor is this to be thought, a grand deceit;
For they each one, even Kings do counterfeit.
The Kings Power virtually, is in them
They say, and therefore share his Diadem:
And though against all Reason, Law, and Right,
They keep him Prisoner, in the Isle of Wight.
By consequence, He does amongst them sit,
If you will please Sir, for to credit it.

Spectator. Their principles are altogether Paradoxes; but prithee, what is that
has so fair an outside, yet is so black within.


Pedlar. O Sir! this able is, all Hell to daunt,
This is the Solemn league, and Covenant;
A damned projection, such as Knox found out
When he, and Andrew Melvill went about
For to reform the Scottish Kirk, and draw
All to embrace, the Presbyterian law.
When the Earth sweat, for to behold their acts,
And Hell was plowed up, with their hellish facts.
This is the Gordian-knot, that once did tie
Two Kingdoms, in a traiterous Amity.
This thrust them forward, Bishops to pull down;
And after that, to ceaze on CHARLES his Crown:
While the poor Commons, of this bale-full Isle
Were forced for to be perjured, and mean while
Exposed to all calamity, and woe;
Their Persons slain, their Chattels ceaz'd on too*
But now the Members, having gained their ends,
They kick the Scots off, once their only Friends*
The Covenant no longer, they regard;
They fought for fame, their Brethren for reward.
And Oliver, even by his Sword has vowed
Their Government, shall never, be allowed,

Spectator. What Is that, that is so patch't and piec't there, with many Cuts
and slices in it, as if some Sword had been eating out a passage, through and
through it.


Pedlar. This is an Ordinance, of the purest kind;
That maimed Soldiers, may some succor find;
Those that have lost, a joint, an Arm, a Leg,
Must now no longer, be constrained to beg.
They shall have a relief, the day is set,
From those Delinquents states, not found out yet;
Their service is summed up, and this is all
That must be their reward, an Hospital:
Threepence a day, clean Straw, contempt and scorn,
This is the badge, that must their Arms adorn.

Spectator. Was any other to be expected, but that those who have ruinated
others for gain, should in the end perish themselves by want; but what more
have thou there, prithee make a full and free discovery?


Pedlar. Here Is a Declaration shows
The Members, do repent the woes
They have upon, the Kingdom brought;
While they good-men, it is welfare sought:
Therefore to bleare the Commons eyes,
And for to stint their heavy cries
This does declare; they will appoint
Those men, who to put all in joint,
Shall hear, their heavy plaints; redress
All grievances, that them oppress:
Though no such thing, they do intend;
Or that their Pressures, e're should end.

Spectator. Enough of that, but what is that other Scrowle there, thou have
bound up so surely?


Pedlar. O Sir, this Ordinance commands
The speedy sale, of Bishops lands;
For since the Church is quite defaced:
Why with Revenues, is it graced.
This lovely Pawn, is laid to pledge
To Satan, Prince of Sacrilege.
Since now no Learning's requisite
But what, the Spirit does indite.
Since Cobblers, Tinkers, Weavers, Tailors,
Rope-makers, Chandlers, Pedlars, Saylors
Can Preach, and lovely well can Pray,
When as the Spirit bids them say.
Since now each Dolt, although in jest,
Can put on black, and be a Priest;
And with his Staff in hand can trace
All over the Land from place to place.
And amongst the Rurals pick up pence;
Tearming it supreme providence.
What should we do, with Learned men;
No, let the Chaos, come again.
For since no lands the Church does merit,
We all will live, upon the Spirit.

Spectator. Church Lands are worth a million an Acre, and yet whoseever buys
one for a penny, will lose by the bargain, but those Sacrilegious thieves at
Westminster, are so flesht in wickedness, that were it in their power, they
would make sale of the Golden gates of Heaven, and traffic for the Emeraulds
and Saphires that pave it, but what other conceits have thou?


Pedlar. Sir, here is an Ordinance, that does command,
That all the Royal party, out of hand
Depart the City, and for preservation
Of those good Members, that now rule our Nation.
Not come, within ten furlongs of the City
Lest they be snapt, by a Select Committee.
Jerusalem, the holy City none
But Saints, must have their habitation
In thee; and therefore, now away profane,
And come, when you are sent for in again.
None must in London, take up their abode,
But the blessed Roundheads, the Elect of God.
Whom he has blessed, with a pure Reformation,
To trample on the ruins, of a Nation.
Bow, bow your backs, stoop, stoop and let them ride
Ye Cavaliers, your Fate you must abide.

Spectator. They are immeasurally happy whose occasions will permit them, to
keep out of that great but wicked City, who was the first fementer of the late
rebellious War, and will be the last that so arts the greatest for its
treachery? but what is that in the black box there?


Pedlar. Sir, this some call, Hells masterpiece, the core
And heart of all those Ills, that went before.
A vile projection, grimme, and dangerous
Deformed, defunct, destructive Hazordaus.
The Epitome, and extract of all crimes,
That have these seven years, abused the Times.
It Is called an Ordinance, that none shall dare
Lest they gain death, as those that Traitors are.
From their Liege Lord, a letter to receive
Or, any letter writ from him to give
Into their hands; hark, hark, ye Nations near,
Ye Tartars, who do only Demons fear.
It is high Treason now, for us to do,
That which the Law of God injoynes us to.
Yea and all humane Statutes, were they scand
Command us to obey, our Kings command.
Ring the Bells backward, now let all things jarre,
As when the furious Element managed war.
All things go quite contrary, blacks called white,
White black, right is called wrong wrong called right.

Spectator. Thou have shown me very strange ware, such as never no Pedlar
before thee could produce; but is this all?


Pedlar. No Sir I'ave one thing more, and this is it,
And let swift Fame, for aye remember it:
Pray shut your eyes, for that which now I show,
Once forct Sol back, when he the lines did view.
(...) As when Thiestes Banquet, stayed his course,
Or Joshua's Prayers, did unyoake his horse.
This I do want a name for, it is a thing
Some call a Declaration, against the King;
Taxing him for his Life; this if you buy,
You have the Masterpiece of treachery.
This, this alone, discovers their false hearts,
And that they ever, acted Traitors parts.
Since now for to support, their tottering state
They Will purchase Hell, sell sin, at any rate.
They would persuade the world, the Kings command
Did send his Father, to the Stygian strand.
O damned contrivers of a Nations woe,
The Ruiners of Prince, and People too.
Come who buys this, that he may read and see
What vipers our brave Westminsterians be.

But now it is night, and Sol is gone,
Darkness ore-spreads the Horizon:
All you, who to White Hall repair
Pray enter, and behold the Fair.
For such a Fair was never known,
Nor never will be, when this is gone.
FINIS.

