A FEW PLAIN REASONS WHY A PROTESTANT OF THE CHURCH of ENGLAND, Should not Turn
Roman Catholic.

By a real Catholic of the CHURCH of ENGLAND.

1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good.

IMPRIMATUR. Jo. Battely. September. 15. 1687.

LONDON, Printed for R. Clavel, at the Peacock at the West End of St. Paul's.
MDCLXXXVIII.

My Reverend Friend,
I Received Yours, wherein you tell me, That some Emissaries have of late
earnestly solicited some of your Parish, (and so belonging to your Cure and
Charge) to desert the Church of England, and turn (as they would be called)
Roman Catholics.

The Motives (amongst some others) they principally insist upon, (you say) are
these Two: First, That if they return to their Mother Church of Rome, they will
have (what they say, Protestants neither have, nor pretend to) a sure and
Infallible Guide to secure them from all Error and Heresies; which will be a
great Blessing and comfort to them.

Secondly, They will free themselves from the great and mortal sin of Schism:
For the Protestants (they say) neither have, nor can have any just reason to
desert the Catholic Church of Rome; and so their Separation from it, is
evidently Schismatical.

You desire me, to give You some directions, how to Reply to these Pretenses,
and fortify your People against them, who are not skilled in such
Controversies. You should rather have applied your self to your Diocesan; for
his Abilities, and immediate concern to assist you, being more than mine, I
doubt not, but he would willingly have assisted you.

But seeing you say, you are not particularly known to him, and therefore not
willing (by any such Address) to trouble him; and seeing we are bound to give a
1 Pet. 3.15, 16.
reason of the hope and faith which is in us, for the Confirmation of some, and
Conviction of others; I shall (in obedience to your Command) crave leave to say
a few things, and leave the management of them to your Prudence, according to
the several Circumstances of Persons, Times, and Places wherein You may have
occasion to make use of any of them. And here,

1. In the general, I should advise; That when you have occasion to discourse
of any of these Points, with the Romish Priests and Emissaries, who endeavor
to seduce any of your Parishioners; you remember and observe that good Rule in
the Gal. 6.1. 1 Pet. 3.15.
Gospel -- If any man be overtaken in a fault, You who are spiritual restore
him ((...)) in the spirit of meekness. All railing, all bitter and provoking
language should be avoided; and then by your good Reasons, and a Christian and
Meek urging of them, you may possibly bring your Adversary to see the Errors of
his own Church, which he endeavors to propagate in Ours.

2. For the Infallibility of their That the Church of Rome was Infallible, no
man before Gregory the 7 th. ever said. He tells us indeed, in his Dictatus
Papae. Number. 22. -- Quod Romana Ecclesia nunquam erravit, nec (Scriptura Test)
in perpetuum errabit. Vide Edmundi Richerii Historiam Council. Generalium cap.
13. page 197. Edit. Colon. 1680.
Church (of which they continually, and (without any thing like a good reason)
so vainly boast of.) I consider,

1. That if it did (which neither does, nor even can) really appear, that they
had an Infallible Guide, we of the Church of England are not so irrational as
not to follow an Infallible Guide; nor so simple, to take an ignis fatuus, for
a real and true fire, and believe they have such a Guide, because (against
evident reason) they confidently say so.

2. They are not yet agreed amongst themselves, who is their Infallible Guide:
And can they think it possible for them to persuade us, that they have an
Infallible Guide, when they themselves know not who it is? For,

1. Many of them place this Infallibility in the Pope, so Gratian (and the
Canonists who follow him) who tells us: That Sic omnes Apostolicae sedis
Sanctiones accipiendae sunt, tanquam ipsius divini Petri voce firmatae. Can.
Sic omnes 2 Did. 19.
all the Pope's Sanctions are to be taken as if they had been confirmed by the
divine mouth of S. Peter. And the Glossa, Quia enim. Did. 40. cap. 1.
Gloss, and Ib. page 2113. Ed. Par. 1612.
Marginal note, in another place, tells us, That to dispute or doubt of the
goodness of any of the Pope's actions is a mortal sin, and sacrilege. So we
have it in the best Par. 1612. Greg. 13. jussie editum, and ad exemplar Romanum
diligenter recognitum.
Edition of their Canon Law with the Glosses. So Pope Leo 10. in his Bull
against Luther, tells us, That neither the Roman Vid. Conc. per. Pet. Crab Tom.
3. p. 717. col. 1.
Church, nor any of the Ib. p. 718. col. 1.
Popes ever erred in any of their Constitutions. And to this purpose, the
Jesuits make the Popes as Peter's Successors, Infallible; not only in matters
of Faith, but of Fact too: as appears by their famous See the Jesuits printed
Theses defended in their College of Clermont, December. 12. 1662. These. 19, 20.
Theses publicly defended in France.

2. Many place the Infallibility in the Pope and Church, or General Council
concurring: So the Clergy See the Declaration of the French Clergy, Mar. 23.
1662. Art. 4.
of France.

3. Others in a General Council without the Pope: So the Council of Pisa and
Constance, and Basil, in which several Popes are condemned as Heretics,
Schismatics, etc. and the supreme Power to be in the Vid. Council. Basil. apud
Pet. Crab. Tom. 3. p. 146. col. 1. and 148. col. 1.
Council, and that Infallible.

Now is it not unreasonable for them to boast of an Infallible Judge of
Controversies, and think to persuade us to believe it; when they themselves
know not who that Judge is. If Sempronius were very sick, and Caius coming to
him, and pitying his condition, should tell him, that there was an excellent
Physician in that City, but knew not who he was, nor where to find him:
Sempronius would have little comfort or benefit from such a story. No more can
we from them, who tell us (with great confidence, but without any just proof or
probability) that they have an Infallible Guide in their Church, but can
neither tell us who it is, or where to find him.

But to manifest the exceeding vanity of their pretense to an Infallible Guide;
there are certain, and (to all Impartial Judges) evident reasons to
demonstrate, That neither the Pope, nor Council, nor both together are
Infallible.

^. The Pope not Infallible. Vid. Nic. Lyranum in Matthew. 16. and Jo. Launoium
Epist. part. 8. Ep. 13. page 387. and alibi passim,
1. For the Pope, they say, that he is Infallible as S. Peter's Successor, and
(as Peter was) Vicar of Christ. But this is gratis dictum, without any just
proof or probability. For,

1. Admit S. Peter was 25 years (as they say) Bishop of Rome; (which is
evidently untrue) yet that he left Infallibility to his Successor there, is an
Assertion which has no ground in Scripture, or Antiquity; the Popes themselves
not so much as pretending to Infallibility, for a thousand years after our
Blessed Savior.

2. S. Paul was an Apostle, and as Infallible as Peter, and planted many
Churches in Asia, Macedonia, and Achaia, etc. and left his Successors there:
But it is confessed, that S. Paul did not leave his Infallibility to any of his
Successors, (not to Timothy at Ephesus, nor Titus in Crete) and therefore, that
Peter should (which S. Paul did not) leave his Infallibility to his Successor,
is a Position for which they neither bring, nor can bring any just proof.

3. They say, that Peter was (before he came to Rome) Bishop of Antioch 7
years; and it is certain and confessed, that his Successors at Antioch, (though
that was his first Bishopric) had no such Infallibility left them by Peter;
and therefore I desire to know, how his Successors at Rome (his second
Bishopric) come to have the privilege of Infallibility, which his Successors
at Antioch (his first Bishopric) had not? most certain it is, that
Infallibility is a personal privilege, depending solely and wholely on the free
grace and gift of God; nor had ever any Prophet or Apostle power to transfer it
to their Successors, or any body else; and therefore unless they can make it
appear from Scripture, or some Divine Revelation (which is impossible) that God
has granted and given Infallibility to the Pope, as Peter's Successor and
Christ's Vicar, their pretense to it, will be (what indeed it is) very
irrational.

4. And this Position (that the Pope is not Infallible) does farther appear (to
say nothing of particular Writers) by the clear and undeniable Testimonies of
National and General Councils.

1. The Church of France in a In the Declaration of the French Clergy Mar. 23.
1662. before cited.
late and National Assembly of her Clergy, expressly denies the Popes
Infallibility, as much as we Protestants, whom they are pleased commonly to
miscal Heretics.

2. Their General Council of Basil tells us; That Nonnulli summi Pontifices in
Hareses and Errores lapsi leguntur. P. Crab. Council. Tom. 3. p. 146. col. 1.
several Popes have fallen into Errors and Heresies.

And again, it often Sape contingit. and contingere potest. Papam errare. Ib.
p. 148. col. 1.
happens, and may happen (as that Council says) That the Pope may err.

3. Their General Council of Constance, (amongst other crimes) declares Pope
Benedict 13. a Notorium Schismaticum, incorrigibilem and pertinacem Haereticum,
a fide devium, Council. Constant. Sess. 14.
Notorious Schismatic, incorrigible, and a pertinacious Heretic.

4. To omit Pope Vigilius condemned for Heresy in the Fifth General Council,
(which is by In his Book de Vigilio Dormitante.
Dr. Crakanthorp fully and evidently proved) I shall only add (which is
undeniable and authentic Authority against the Popes Infallibility) That the
Sixth General Council, (held at Constantinople in Trullo) did condem and
Synodus 6. in Trullo, Act. 4. and Act. 13. the words in the Council are,
Anathema Honorio, etc. He being a Monothelite, and for that Heresy condemned.
Anathematize Pope Honorius. And though some Zealots for Rome and the Popes
Infallibility, (such as Bellarmine and Baronius) have endeavored to excuse
Honorius, and question the Authority of the Council, and the Truth of those
things, which in the Council were urged against him: yet the evidence on which
they condemned Honorius for an Heretic, was undoubtedly good, even his own
Epistles read in the Council (which Bellarmine pretends were fictitious) But
both the Authority of the Council, and of Honorius his Epistles, (which were
the Evidence on which they condemned him) are so fully and evidently justified
(to omit many others) by a Vid. Ed. Ricberium in Historia Council. Generalium,
cap. 10. per tot^m: praecipue Number 15, etc. and Number. 25. Vbi objectionibus
Bellarmini and Baronii respondet.
Learned Sorbon Doctor, and a Roman Catholic, that I neither need, nor shall
say any more of this particular, but refer the Reader (who desires more
satisfaction) to that Judicious and learned Author.

I shall only add (in short) two things, which to me seem very material.

1. That notwithstanding, that Sixth General Council condemned Honorius for an
Heretic, yet it was approved and received as a General Council by Pope Leo the
second, (the next Successor (save one) to Honorius) as evidently appears by his
own Epistle Extat apud Jov* rium Conc. part. 1. p. 84 col. 4. in sine Synodi 6.
In editione Conciliorum Romana and Surianae.
to the Emperors, and In festo Leonie Papae Junii 28. Lection. 3. Sanctus Leo
probavit Acta 6. Synodi: Ergo damnationem Honorii baeretici.
their own Roman Breviary, of their most Brev. Romans ex Decreto Concilii
Trident. restitutum, a Pio 5. editum, a Clemente 8. and Vrbano 8 recognitum,
Antwerp. 1660.
correct Edition. And to make it more evident that the Sixth Synod, and the
condemnation of Pope Honorius for Heresy, was anciently approved even in the
Church of Rome; their own General Council, the Second of Nice, is a witness
beyond exception, as by the words and place in the Margin Pradicamus
quemadmodum sexta Synodus definivis, detestamurque cum ea, Sergium, Honorium,
etc. impios istos Pietatis impugnatores Anathematizamus, Synodus Nicena 2. apud
Joverium de Conciliis part. 1. page 106.
may evidently appear.

2. But that which may seem strange, (though it be most true) by the Decree of
the Council of Constance, every Pope at his Consecration, was to take a solemn
Oath to believe and maintain (amongst other Councils) the Conc. Constable. in forma
professionis fidei a Papa facienda, sess. 39. Ego N. juro me credere and
tenerefidem cath. Sanctorum 8. Conc. Niceni, Constant. etc. quinti and sexti,
etc. and illam fidem usque ad unum apicem immutilatam servare. Decretum hoc, de
Professione fidei a Papa facienda condium est Anno 1417.
6. Synod (of which we are now speaking) and every part and particle of it; and
consequently they were bound to approve that Synod, and their Condemnation of
Pope Honorius, as an Heretic. For this condemnation of Honorius it was
evidently an Act of the 6 Synod; and the Popes (by the said Decree of the
Council of Constance) were bound (amongst other Councils mentioned in the
Decree) to believe and profess the Acts of that sixth Synod, Vsque ad unum
Apicem, for so the Decree expressly says.

The Premises considered, I believe it may, and will appear to all intelligent
and impartial Judges, that the Opinion of the Popes Infallibility, is not only
without, but against manifest reason. For,

1. It Is certain, that the Greek, Asiatick and Aethiopick Churches never
believed, but expressly opposed it.

2. For the Western or Latin Church, it is evident, by their General Councils
of Nice, Pisa, Constance and Basil (in which several Popes have been declared
Heretics) that they were so far from believing it, (though Pope Gregory the 7 th
was for it) that they condemned, and Synodically declared against it, for 1500
years, till Leo the 10 th in his Lateran Council, in the year 1513. did again
set on foot that Apocryphal opinion of the Popes Infallibility: So that it is
not only erroneous, but a very late and novel invention.

2. A General Council not Infallible.
That a General Council is not Infallible, is a truth (from many cogent and
undeniable reasons) so evident, that as there is no need I should, so it is not
my purpose to say much: only I shall (in short) say a few things, and refer
them to your prudence, to make use of all, or any of them, as to you
(circumstances considered) may seem convenient. Here then I desire it may be
considered,

1. That a General Council is never so much as named in Scripture, nor any
promise of Infallibility given it. The Acts 15.28.
Council of the Apostles (which was no General Council) was Infallible, and
might truly say Acts 15.28.
Sic visum est spiritui sancto and nobis. Because the Apostles had the
Infallible Assistance of the Holy Ghost. But that any General Council had any
such Assistance, truly to say, after their Decrees, Sic visum est Spiritui
Sancto and nobis; (Though that of Deus ad Ecclesiae suae directionem Sanctis
Patribus inspirare dignatus est, etc. Ita Pius 4. in Bulla super forma
Juramenti Professionis fidei in Council. Trident. Ed. Antw. 1633. p. 450. and
elsewhere, Synodus a Deo edocta statuit, etc. Vid. Conc. Trident* sess. 13. de
eucharistia in decreto, p. 121, 122. dictae editionis, and sess. 21. de
Communione, cap. 1. p. 203.
Trent, and others vainly pretend to it) is an Assertion without all proof or
probability.

2. But there is no necessity of such an Infallible Guide, as a General
Council; because Christians for several Ages, have attained Heaven and Eternal
Salvation, who never had any General Council to be their Guide. For it is
certain, and on all sides confessed, that the first Nicene Council, which was
held An. Christ. 325. was the first General Council, the Christian Church ever
had. Now I desire to know (and you may ask those who endeavor to seduce your
Parishioners) whether the Christians in those 325. years, (when there was no
General Council) were saved or not? If they were saved, then it is evident that
a General Council is not necessary to guide us to Heaven; seeing Christians for
325. years obtained Salvation, and yet in all that time, there was no General
Council to guide them.

But if it be said, Christians (for want of a General Council to guide them)
were not saved in those three Centuries; Then,

1. They contradict the sense of Christendom, and the constant testimony of
Fathers and Historians, who universally tell us of thousands, not only of pious
Christians, but of many hundred thousands of pious Confessors and Martyrs. Now
to say that they were not saved, who laid down their lives for Christ and his
Gospel, is such an uncharitable and unchristian Censure, as no sober Christian
ever did, or (I believe) ever will be guilty of.

2. They contradict their own Martyrologies, their Missals and Breviaries,
wherein they acknowledge many hundred Saints and Martyrs who lived and dyed in
those 3 Centuries, and in their Offices pray to them, as to glorified Saints
and Martyrs.

3. But to put the case (in short and) beyond dispute, it is certain there
never was any truly General Council, or any Synod wherein the Representatives
of the Universal Church did meet and determine Controversies. The greatest
Council the Christian Church ever had, was only Imperial, of the Roman Empire,
not Universal of all Christendom; few, if any, out of the Roman Empire being
ever called, or coming to any of those Councils we now call General or
Ecumenical. It Is true, there are several Councils (as the first of Nice, that
of Constantinople, that of Ephesus and Chalcedon, etc.) which we commonly call
Ecumenical or General Councils; but then the word (...) (whence we call a
Council Ecumenical) must be taken in that signification it has in Luke 2.1.
St. Luke, There came a Decree from Augustus, that ((...)) the whole World
should be taxed. Now it is evident, that by (...) there, the Roman world only
must be meant, or the Roman Empire; for Augustus had neither intention, nor any
Authority to tax any, but his own Subjects. So when the Emperors called
Councils (as is evident they did call all the first This is confessed, and
learnedly proved by a Roman Catholic and Sorbon Doctor, Edmund. Richerius in
Hist. Conc. Genesis Ed. Coloniae 1680. cap. 1. Sect. 7. p. 6. And what he says
there, he afterward particularly proves.
Ecumenical Councils) they had neither Intention, nor any Authority to call
those Christians which were out of their Empire, and none of their Subjects.
Now it is evident that when the Nicene Council was called, and others after it,
a very great part of Christendom was without the bounds of the Roman Empire,
whose Bishops as they were never called, so they never came, as may appear by
the Subscriptions to the Councils themselves.

4. Is it not irrational for them to boast of the Infallibility of their
General Councils? when their greatest Vid Bellarm. de Council. etc. lib. 1. cap.
6, 7.
Writers, and Publishers of their Councils, ridiculously contradict themselves,
and give us this distinction of General Councils. 1. Generalia Concilia
approbata. 2. Concilia Genesis reprobata. 3. Concilia Genesis partim approbata,
partim reprobata. 4. Concilium Genesis nec approbatum nec reprobatum. They mean
the first of Pisa, about the year, 1409 which they will not Vid. Longum a
Coriolano in compendio Conciliorum Romans 1624. p. 290, 291. They will not
approve it, because it condemned and deposed 2 Popes, as Schismatics and
Heretics, and they dare not condemn it, because it made Alexander the 5 th
Pope, whom they reckon in the Series of their true Popes; which he could not
be, if that Council had not a just power to make him so.
approve nor reject. In short, if General Councils may be reprobate and
rejected, then sure they are not Infallible.

5. It seems your Emissaries (to persuade your People to desert the Church of
England) tell your Parishioners, that the Church of England is in a miserable
condition for want of (what they have) an Infallible Guide and Judge of
Controversies.

For hence it is (say they) that our Church is divided into so many Sects and
Factions, some being Presbyterians, some Independents, some Quakers, etc. To
this you may with great reason and truth reply; That they have in the Roman
Church, more Sects and Factions, than we have in England; and they differing in
things of an higher nature, such as concern the Being of the Papacy.

For, to say nothing of the late great, and hot differences and disputes
between the Jansenists and Molinists, between the Dominicans and their
Adherents on the one side, and the Jesuits and Franciscans on the other: Their
Church is divided into great Sects and Factions, which differ in things which
concern the foundation of their Church and Papacy.

For, (to omit others) many in their Church publicly affirm and maintain, 1.
That the Pope is Infallible. 2. That he is the Supreme Head of their Church
above all General Councils, and that no Appeal lies from him to the Council. 3.
That his Supremacy is not only in this Ecclesiastical, but (at least indirecte)
in temporals too. 4. That he has power to depose Kings, (as for other causes
so) for Heresy; 5. and to absolve their Subjects from their Oaths of
Allegiance, and give away their Kingdoms.

And although these Opinions pass (with approbation) at Rome, yet they are all
(of them) denied and condemned by the Church of In their Declaration of March
23. 1662.
France, and thousands more, who publicly and in Print declare against them as
Erroneous and Impious, highly prejudicial to the Rights of Kings and temporal
Princes, and Inconsistent with the Peace of Christendom. Now if our Sects in
England, have risen and continued, because we have no Infallible Judge to
determine the Controversy; Then (by a parity of Reason) seeing their great
Sects and differences in the Church of Rome, remain undetermined, it must
follow, that they want an Infallible Judge to determine those Controversies. So
that it is (to give it no worse name) a very strange confidence in your Roman
Emissaries, to think they can persuade Protestants to desert the Church of
England, because there are some Sects and Divisions in it; and yet persuade
them to Communicate with the Church of Rome, in which there are far more and
more material Sects, and undetermined Divisions: for this were (as the Country
Proverb is) to persuade us out of the Frying Pan into the fire, and (instead of
bettering it) to put us in a worse condition.

Let them make it appear, that they are indeed at Unity amongst themselves, and
no Sects or Divisions amongst them; then this Argument may have some more show
of Probability; but (as the case now stands) it is not only irrational, but
ridiculous. I say, some more show of Probability, yet no just proof. For admit
they were at Unity amongst themselves, yet there are many other gross Errors
and Superstitions, which (while retained by their Church) makes all Communion
with them impossible; but enough of this (if not too much) for nothing can be
(to an Intelligent and Impartial Judge) more evident than this; That since the
decease of the Apostles, there never was any Man or Congregation or Council of
Men, who pretended to Infallibility for above a thousand years after our
Blessed Savior.

But the Roman Church is so far from having (what she commonly and vainly
boasts of) Infallibility, that there neither is, nor ever was any Christian
Church in the world in such a miserable condition; for the great incertainty of
her Faith and Religion; which incertainty arises from her own Principles,
approved and received by the Supreme Authority of that Church, and they are
two, 1. From their requiring the Intention of the Minister, as necessary to the
real Being of every Sacrament. 2. Their denying the certainty of our Senses.


1. For the first, that the Intention of the Minister is necessarily required
to the real Being of any Sacrament; We have the Decree of Sacramentum
tribusperficitur, Materia, Forma, and Intention Ministri. Quorum si aliquod
desit, non perficitur Sacramentum. Apud Binium Council. Tom. 8. p. 865. col. 1.
Ded. Paris. 1636.
Pope Eugenius expressly affirming it; and he says (though Vid. D. Crakanthorp.
contr Spalateus. cap. 72. p. 530, 531. and Christoph. a capite Fontium de
neces. correct. Theol. Scholasticae, p. 51.56.
untruly) that it was approbante Concilio; Their Council. Trident. Sess. 7. de
Sacramentis, can. 11.
Trent Council confirms the same, as do other of their Rituale Romans Antw. 1652.
p. 6. Missale Romanum Antw. 1619. in principio, de defectibus circa Missam. 7.
Authentic Books. Now this Principle being (as it is) by them granted, it
evidently follows,

1. That no man in their Church can be certain that he is a Christian, or that
there is any one true Christian in the whole Church of Rome. For if they be not
baptized, then it is certain they are no Christians, nor Members of the Visible
Church; and that they are truly Baptized is impossible for man certainly to
know. For if the Minister who Baptized him, did not intend it, he is not
Baptized; and what the Minister intended, God only (who knows the heart and our
Intentions) can certainly know.

It is true, if I Baptize any Person, I may certainly know my own Intentions,
that I did intend to baptize him; and so I may be certain he is truly Baptized;
but whether he who Baptized me, did intend it, is impossible for me certainly
to know. So that although I may certainly know that another man is truly
Baptized, yet no man in the Church of Rome, can be certain that he is so. All
the assurance I can have, that I am truly Baptized, and a Member of the
Christian Church, is, from the Minister who Baptized me. But he being always
Fallible, and (for ought I do or can know) may be false; such a testimony
cannot assure me that I am truly Baptized, and indeed a Christian, within the
Church; and then seeing -- Extra Ecclesiam non est salus, it follows, that (for
ought I do or can know) I am in a miserable and damnable condition.

Now suppose a General Council, called by the Pope or Emperor, if they are not
Christians, I may be sure they are not Infallible Judges; God (as is and must
be confessed) having never promised Infallible assistance to any without the
Christian Church: and that they are Christians I can never certainly know,
because it is impossible for me to be assured that they have been truly
Baptized, by any Minister really intending it.

Now admit they were Infallible Judges, yet they cannot be so to me; who can
never be sure they are so. For I can have no more Assurance of their
Infallibility, than I have of their Christianity, of which it is impossible for
me to be assured, seeing it is impossible for me certainly to know, whether
they be Baptized.

2. Upon the same Principle it is impossible for any certainly to know, whether
there be any one true Priest in the whole Papacy; and consequently that there
is any true Bishop, (for it is certain, every true Bishop must be a Priest) now
if none can be certain that there is any true Bishop or Priest in the Roman
Church; then (seeing it is certain, that Bishops and Priests, and true Orders
are necessary to the Being of a True Church) it evidently follows, that they
are so far from being certain, that their Church is Infallible; that they
neither are, nor can be certain, that their Church is any True Church at all.

3. Upon the same Principle, (Marriage being with them a Sacrament, and the
Intention of the Minister who marries any, being necessary to make the Marriage
good and valid) all married People in the Church of Rome, for ought they do, or
can know (not knowing the Intention of the Priest who married them) may live in
perpetual fornication, and their children (if they have any) illegitimate, as
begot by Fornication, and not in lawful Marriage.

4. And on the same Principle, none in the Church of Rome, can be certain, that
the Bread in the Eucharist is truly Consecrate, (because the Priests intention,
who Consecrates, cannot possibly be known to them) and if it be not truly
Consecrate, it (as is confessed) remains Bread, and then (as is confessed too)
they in Worshipping it, are most impious Idolaters, worse than they of Si in
Eucharistia, Verum Corpus Christi noncontineatur, Adoratio ejus talis erit
Idololatria, qualis in orb terrarum nunquam audita erat. Tolerabilior enim
erit eorum error, qui pro Deo colunt statuam auream, vel pannum rubrum in hasta
elevatum, quod de Lappis narratur, etc. Ita Costerus in Enchiridio
controversiarum, Colon. Agrip. 1587. cap. 8. page 301.
Lapland, who worship a piece of Red Cloth, etc. So that this is the miserable
condition of all Communicants in the Church of Rome, that (for ought they do,
or can certainly know) they are most impious Idolaters.

Now let any intelligent and pious Person judge, whether our most wise and
gracious God has left his Church in such a miserable condition, that it should
be in the power of wicked Ministers, to make all his People abominable
Idolaters.

2. The Second thing I named, from which the great incertainty of the Roman
Churches Religion (though they vainly brag of Infallibility) arises, is their
denying the certainty of our Senses. For this being denied, it will evidently
follow, that the Roman Catholics neither have, nor can have any certainty of
their Religion: That this may appear, consider,

1. That our Blessed Savior ordained his Apostles to be Luke 24.48. Act.
1.8.22.
Witness of his Resurrection, and that he had a real Body, and was not a Spirit.

2. And that they might be sufficient Witnesses, He appeared several times to
them, that they might Luke 24.39. Joh. 20.27.
see, and touch, and handle Mar. 16.14.
him; blames them for not believing those who had seen him after his
Resurrection; and S. Luke tells us, that these Act. 1.3.
were infallible proofs of his Resurrection, etc. and so thinks S. 1 John 1.1.
John too.

3. The Roman Catholics deny this certainty of our Senses, and tell us; that
the Bread in the Eucharist after Consecration, is not Bread, but the very
glorified Body of our Blessed Savior; (though all our Senses assure us, That
it is Bread still) and tell us that we must not trust our Senses, but believe it
to be his Body. Well, ask them how they know it is his Body? they say by Faith;
but how came they by that Faith? They say (as the Text says) by Romans 10.17.
hearing: But then 1. Sense (they say) is no certain Assurer of what we have by
it. 2. If all my five Senses may be deceived, in judging the Wafer to be Bread,
certainly their Hearing, (which is but one) may be deceived: And then all their
Faith, and the certainty of it, depending upon their Hearing (none of the
Senses according to their Principles, being to be trusted in matters of Faith,
because they may deceive us) it manifestly follows, That they are so far from
Infallibility, that they neither have, nor can have any (so much as moral)
certainty of any thing they Believe. But (if not too much) enough of this. For
indeed, their pretenses to Infallibility are so weak, that they deserve no
confutation.

I come now to the second thing, which you desired me to do; that is, to give
some Reasons to justify our Separation from Rome, that it may appear, that we
are not (what they commonly miscal us) Schismatics. And here it is to be
considered,

1. That Schism (to pass by all other significations of the word) is a Criminal
or sinful violation, or a breach of Ecclesiastical or Church-Union, which Union
is two fold, 1. Internal, consisting in an Union of Judgment, and that mutual
Love and Charity which Christians ought to have mutually one to another. 2.
External, consisting in an outward profession of the same Faith, Communion in
the same Liturgies and Sacred Offices and Sacraments.


2. Schism, (as now we speak of it) does not consist in a violation or breach
of that Internal Union of Judgment and Love (though this may, and is called
Schism 1 Cor. 1.10. where (...) refers to the mind, and (...) to the will, (for
the word does properly and usually signify the will) and so, some Learned
Papists render the words; In eadem sententia, and eadem voluntate So Hen.
Holden, a Sorbon Dr. on this place, 1 Cor. 1.10. in his Notes.
in Scripture, and is a sin) for such Internal Divisions, and breach of the
Union of Love and Judgment, are not of humane cognizance, nor can the Church
know who are, or censure, such Schismatics.

3. But Schism (in the sense we now speak of) consists in a Violation or breach
of the External Church-Union, when men refuse to Communicate with their
Fellow Christians, in the Belief of the same Creed, coming to the same public
Prayers, and receiving the same Sacraments, etc.

4. This Schism must be a Criminal or Sinful Separation; when those who
separate have no Rational and firm grounds to justify their Separation. For if
any Church has Apostatized from the Ancient and true Christian Faith, and (as
necessary conditions of her Communion) require of her Members, to believe any
thing in fide erroneous, or to do any thing in facto impious; then Separation
from such a corrupted Church, is so far from being Schismatical and sinful
Impiety; that it is a Vid Rev 18.4
necessary duty. This is on all sides Sine Schismate decedere possumus ab iis,
qui a veritate deviant -- vid. Joverium de Conc. part. 1. p. 203. col. 2.
confessed, that it is no Schism to Separate from an erroneous Church; It being
evident that no Christian can be bound to Communicate with any Church in Errors
or Impieties; and therefore may without any Schism, lawfully Separate from such
Churches, whether that Church disbelieve and deny any Articles of the Ancient
and True Christian Faith, or (which the Pope and his party do) add new ones,
inconsistent with it, and the truth of the Gospel, and that Faith which our
Blessed Savior and his Apostles delivered to the Christian Church.

The Premises concerning the Nature of Schism, considered, and (as they are
and must be) granted: I say, That the Errors of the Church of Rome, are so
many, and grievous, that they are a just ground to condemn Her, and to justify
our Separation from her. I shall only instance in some few; and the first 1.
Reason, From their vilifying and prohibiting the Scripture in any vulgar tongue.
concern the Sacred Scripture; which,

1. Many of her Writers speak most irreverently of the Sacred Scriptures (though
they be on all sides confessed to be the Holy Word of God) calling them nasus
Vid. Fighium, controver. 3 de Ecclesia, p. 71. col. 2. ed. 1542. And there his
impious Blaspheming of the Holy Scriptures.
Cereus, Regula Lesbia, Vnsens'd Characters, etc. These and many more such
occur in their greatest Writers, as is notoriously known, and cannot be denied.
Sure I am, that She her self Vid. Indicem Librorum prohibitorum ex Cone.
Trident. praescript. etc. and ibi Regul. 4. Si Sacra Biblia vulgari lingua
passim sine discrimine permittantur, plus inde ob hominum temeritatem
Detrimenti quam Vtilitatis oriri.
tells us -- That the reading of Scripture in any Vulgar tongue, has (by reason
of men's rashness) done more mischief than good. And therefore the Church of
Rome forbids all Reading the Scriptures in any Vulgar Tongue; which consequence
(notwithstanding her Infallibility) is most irrational, and not better than
this -- None shall drink any Wine, because many, through their temerity and
drunkenness abuse it, to their great hurt and detriment. But this is not all,
nor (though bad enough) the worst of it. Other The Authors, and their words and
Books where they are to be found, are punctually (and truly) quoted to my hand,
by D. Crakanthorp cont. Archiep. Spalat. c. 13. S. 13. p 61. vid. Azor. Inst.
moral. Tom. 1. lib. 8. cap. 26. p. 83.
of their Authors (approved at Rome) tell us; That the reading of Scripture in
a vulgar Tongue, is so far from being profitable, that it is pernicious to the
people: Nay ( horresco referens) They farther say -- That the permitting of the
People to read the Bible was the Invention of the Devil, and a likelier means
to build Babylon, than Jerusalem. Having thus given so foul a character of the
Holy Scriptures, to fright men foom reading them as dangerous, and to the
People pernicious; they do in the next place

2. Absolutely vid. Regulam 4. Indicis dicti, supra citatam, and observationem
ad dictam Regulam, and Bullam Clem. 8. datam Tusc. 17. Oct. 1595.
prohibit the reading or hearing the Bible, or any Summary or Compendium of it,
in any vulgar Tongue, understood by the People; and if any have any prohibited
Books, they are to bring them to the Bishop or Inquisitor, who are presently to
see them burnt, V. Bull. Greg. 15. dat. Romans dec. 30. A. 1622.
(the Bible not excepted) for it is, all Libros quomodolibet prohibitos; So the
title of that Bull, and the Bull it self.
prohibited Books whatsoever, etc.

Now this giving such an irreverent character of Holy Scripture, and
prohibiting the reading or hearing it in any vulgar Tongue, is not only
erroneous, but highly unjust, and (to the People, who are denied the Rom 15.4.
benefit and comfort they might receive by reading the Scriptures) pernicious,
which will evidently appear; because such prohibition of reading or hearing the
Bible, in any vulgar Language, is expressly contrary 1. To the Scripture it
self. 2. To the command and precepts of God in It. 3. To the practice of the
Church of God, (both Jewish and Christian) as may and (to intelligent and
impartial Judges) will evidently appear.


1. For the Jewish Church; it is undeniably certain, 1. The Jewish Church.
That the Sacred Books of the Old Testament, were (either immediately by God
himself, or mediately by his Prophets*) given to the Jews in their own vulgar
Tongue.

2. That they were not given only to the Levites, or learned amongst the Jews,
but to Mal. 4.4.
all Israel (Levites or Laity) Remember (says the Prophet) the Law of Moses,
which I commanded in Horeb for all Israel, with the Statutes and Judgments.

3. And by the express Deuteronomy. 31.11.
command of God, they were bound to read that Law, in that vulgar Language, to
all Israel, men, women, and children, and to that end, that they might verse.
12.13.
learn to fear the Lord, and keep his Statutes.

4. And accordingly ( in praxi and de facto) it was read in their vulgar
Tongue, to men, Neb. 8.2, 3.
women and children; and afterward both the Law and Prophets were read in
every Synagogue, every Act. 13.15.27.
Sabbath day.

5. And that they had the Scriptures in the vulgar Tongue, and could read and
be directed by them (as divine Oracles) was the Romans 3.1, ^.
greatest and most profitable privilege, and the Psalm. 1.1, 2. Joshua 1.8 See
that signal place to this purpose. Hosea 8.12. condemning their neglect of
reading Scriptures, which God gave them for that end, that they should read and
consider them.
man is Blessed, who read and did meditate in them day and night, etc.

The Premises considered, I think it is evident, that their undervaluing the
Scriptures, and prohibiting the reading them in any vulgar Tongue, is directly
contradictory to the express command of God, and practice of the Jewish Church
(the only true Church then) before our Blessed Savior had constituted the
Christian Church of Jews and Gentiles.

2. The Christian Church.
2. Concerning the Christian Church; That the Scriptures were had and read by
Christians, (either in the Originals, or in Versions, and Translations into
other vulgar Tongues) is an undeniable truth, and indeed confessed. For it is
manifest, that all Churches in Christendom Vid. Brerewood's Inquiries, cap. 26.
p. 190, 191. etc. ed. Land. 1633.
anciently had, and (except the Roman) to this day have the Scriptures, and
read them, in their vulgar Tongues; and the Church of Rome had, and read the
Scriptures in Latin, (which was for many ages their vulgar Tongue) till it did
degenerate into Italian. 2. The Apostle commends Timothy, that he had known the
Scriptures from a 2 Timothy 3.15. (...), statim ab Infantia.
child, and that they were able to make him wise unto Salvation; or (as S.
James expresses it James 1.21.
) able to save his soul. The Scriptures, which Timothy is said to know from a
child, were the Scriptures of the Old Testament, (little, if any, of the New
being then writ, when he was a child) which he had and read in vulgar Tongue;
and such reading was so far from being (what the Popish Writers, and the Popes
themselves say of them) dangerous and pernicious to his Soul; that (if we will
believe the Apostle) it was a happy and powerful means for the Salvation of it.
3. St. Paul Acts. 7.11, 12.
preaches the Gospel to the Jews at Berea: they had, and daily searched the
Scriptures, whether those things which Paul preached, were so. The Apostle
commends them for it, and shows them the great benefit and blessing they gained
by doing it. They daily searched the Scriptures, Therefore (says he) Many of
verse. 12.
them believed. Their having and reading the Scriptures (the Old Testament) in
their vulgar Tongue, was a happy and powerful cause and means of their
Believing the Gospel, which S. Paul preached. 4. S. John assures us, that the
Gospel was by him writ to that very end, That Joh. 20.31.
we might believe, and have eternal Life.

The Reading and Knowing of the Scriptures was the means God himself had
appointed to bring us to true Faith and Salvation: and therefore to forbid all
reading or hearing the Scriptures in a vulgar and (to the People) intelligible
Language, is to contradict God and his Apostles, and to deprive men of the
great and effectual means of their Salvation. 5. S. Peter writing to the
dispersed Jews (who by God's appointment had, and read the Scriptures in their
vulgar Tongue) he admonishes and requires them; That as newborn babes they
should 1 Pet. 2.2. and Vide Occumenium, Pareum, Estium, Gagnaeium in Locum.
desire the sincere milk of the word, that they might grow thereby. As the
Mothers milk is a wholesome nourishment for young Children, to preserve and
promote a temporal life; so (in S. Peter's Judgment) the Scriptures are a
wholesome nourishment for young Christians to preserve and promote a Spiritual
Life, and therefore he exhorts them to desire the sincere milk of the word,
that they may grow thereby: And farther, as to take away Milk from newborn
Children, were evidently injust in it self, and pernicious to the Children; so
to take away the Scriptures from young Children in Christ, would be equally (or
rather more) impious in him who should take them away, and more pernicious to
them from whom they are taken. Because taking away the Mothers milk from
Infants, and young Children, is only prejudicial to the Body, and a temporal
Life; but to take away the Scriptures from young (or any) Christians, is
prejudicial to their Souls and Salvation. 6. But although S. Peter exhorts the
Jews to desire the sincere milk of the Word, that is to read and understand it,
for the benefit of their Souls; for he well knew that they had the Scriptures
given by God himself, in their vulgar Tongue, and that there was none then, who
would hinder them to read them. And though our Blessed Savior Joh. 5.39. Joh.
10.25, 26, 28.
commanded the Jews to search the Scriptures, to bring them to the knowledge
and belief that he was the true Messiah, and so to eternal Life. And although S.
Paul commands the Colossians that Col. 4.16. The Epist. to the Coloss. was
writ, An. Christ. 60.
his Epistle to them be read to the Brethren in Laodicea, and that the Epistle
from The 1. Epist. to Timothy was writ from Laodicea (A. Chr. 52.) Vide
subscriptionem, 1. Ep. ad Timoth.
Laodicea be read to the Colossians. Now though those Epistles were writ in
Greek, a vulgar and well known language to the Colossians, and Laodiceans; yet
S. Paul commands that they be publicly read in both Churches. But let Peter
and Paul, and our Blessed Savior himself, say what he will for diligently
reading and searching the Scriptures in any vulgar, and (to the people) known
Tongue; his pretended Vicar, in contradiction to our Blessed Savior and his
Apostles, does absolutely condemn all such Reading of Scripture, as dangerous,
and (to the people) pernicious.

Lastly, you may (if you think it convenient, and have an opportunity) propose
this case to your Popish Emissary (who ever he be) that endeavors to seduce
your Parishioners from truth, and the Church of England. Suppose Sempronius, a
great and very rich man, make his last Will and Testament, and divide his
estate amongst his Children, and give many considerable Legacies to his Friends
and Servants; and in his Will particularly expresses what, and to whom, and
upon what conditions his Legacies are bequeathed: now Sempronius dies, and some
great man has got his Will into his hand and keeping, and (it being a Will in a
Language not understood by the Legatees) will neither let them have the Will,
nor a true and attested copy of it, in a Language they understand: So that they
cannot be assured, nor any way certainly know, either who are (by the Will)
Legatees, or what the Legacies are, or upon what conditions they are given;
save only, as he who keeps the Will, shall be pleased to signify to them; who
(if he be not an honest man) may cheat and cousin them, and they have no remedy
to secure their right, especially, if he who keeps the Will be, or pretend to
be a supreme Power, from whom lies no appeal to any superior Judge, who might
examine the cause, and do them justice. In this case, it is most evident, that
he who keeps the Will is unjust in himself, and injurious to the Legatees, in
keeping them from the knowledge of the Testators Will, and so from the knowledge
of what he has given them. This being granted, (as of necessity it ought and
must) you may desire him (as a like case) to consider,

1. That our Blessed Savior even as Man, and our Mediator was very Matthew.
28.18. Phil. 2.8, 9, 10.
great, the Prince of Peace, and head of his Church.

2. That he lived and died for his Church, and in his Will, left exceeding
great Legacies to his Saints and Servants, with the conditions he required of
the Legatees, to make them capable of those Legacies.

3. That the Gospel was his last Will and Testament, in which, who are
Legatees, and upon what conditions their Legacies become due, are particularly
expressed.

4. His Will was writ in a Language the People do not now understand; and the
Bishop of Rome having got it into his hand, and pretending that he (as Vicar of
Christ) is the sole See that signal Bull of Pope Clement the 9th dated at Rome,
An. 1668. in which we have these words, -- Debitum Pastoralis Officii, quo
Ecclesiae Catholicae per Universum orbem diffusae regimini, divina dispositione
presidemus, exigit, ut Sacras Scripturas in puritate illibatas custodire
satagamus* etc. In which Bull be condemus the Translation of the vulgar Latin
into French, because the differences of the vulgar Latin from the Greek are
noted.
Supreme keeper of it, does absolutely deny the People any copy of it in any
vulgar Language, by them understood; and so deprives them of the knowledge of
their Blessed Savior's Will and Testament, of the gracious Promises, and great
Legacies given in it, and of the holy Precepts and conditions required of the
People, to give them a right to those Legacies. So that (in contradiction to
our Blessed Savior's express command) they must neither search or read, or
have the Gospel (in any vulgar Tongue by them understood) upon pain of
Excommunication. They are not permitted to read the Gospel, nor must they trust
to their own eyes and understanding, (though given them by God for that purpose)
but they must believe the Church, and the Pope (or rather an ordinary Priest
from him) must tell them, what Legacies are given, and what Duties are required
by our Blessed Savior in the Gospel. Now in the former case, if the keeping
Sempronius his Will from the Legatees was evidently unjust, and injurious to
the Legatees: much more will the detaining our Blessed Savior's Will from his
People (the Salvation of whose Souls, are so highly concerned in it) be unjust
in the Pope and his party; and not only injurious, but pernicious to the
People. For in Sempronius his Will, the Legacies were only temporal things, and
so the loss of them less considerable: But in our Blessed Savior's Will and
Testament, the Legacies are Spiritual, the promises of Grace here, and eternal
Glory hereafter; and therefore to take away the Gospel from the People in any
Language understood by them, so that they cannot certainly know the Promises,
or their duties required for the attaining of them; is (as I said) not only
injurious but pernicious to the poor people, detained from the only means to
know those things, which (in order to their Salvation) they are (by the Law of
God and the Gospel) bound to know. For 1. Without the knowledge of Christ, and
belief in him, there is no possibility of Salvation, ( Joh. 3.16. Act. 10.43.
Joh. 17.3.) And 2. such knowledge of our Blessed Savior, whereon we may
fiducially, and with certainty rely, can no where be had but in Scripture, the
only Infallible rule of our Faith. 3. Now the Pope and his party, severely
prohibiting the People to read, or have the Scriptures (or any part of them) in
any vulgar Language which they understand, do by consequence deprive them of
the only sure, and certain means of their Salvation. Which how unbecoming it
is, the pretended Successor of S. Peter (who was commanded by our Blessed
Savior, to feed his Sheep, not to famish them, by taking the Scriptures from
them) and how pernicious to the poor People, let the Reader judge. 4. And that
the Pope ( quantum in se est) deprives the People of the knowledge of Scripture
(besides what is above said) I shall only add a signal passage out of a late
Popes Bull, wherein he condemns a French Translation of their own vulgar Latin
in these words, See the Bull of Clement the 9 th. cited a little before, where
the Pope says -- Librum Versionis Gallicanae N. Testamenti, ubicunque
impressum, vel imprimendum, tanquam temerarium, damnosum, a vulgata editione
deformem, and offendicula simplicium continentem, authoritate Apostolica
damnamus, and prohibemus: ita ut nemo deinceps, cujuscunque gradus aut
conditionis existat, sub poena Excommunicationis latae sententiae ipso facto
incurrendae illum legere, retinere, vendere, aut imprimere, vel imprimi facere
audeat vel praesumat; sed sub eadem poena, quicunque illum habeat, locorum
ordinariis, seu inquisitoribus, statim exhibere teneatur: In contrarium
facientibus non obstantibus quibuscunque. Bulla data est Romae 20 April. 1668.
The said Gallican Version of the New Testament, wheresoever Printed, or
hereafter to be Printed, as rash, and mischievous, differing from the vulgar
Latin, and scandalous to the ignorant; We (by our Apostolical Authority)
condemn and prohibit: so that hereafter, none, of what Degree or condition Even
Kings and Princes are forbid (under pain of Excommunication) to have, or read
the Scriptures in any vulgar Tongue: contrary to the express command of God,
Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19.
soever he be, under pain of Excommunication, shall dare, or presume to read,
have, sell* print, or cause it to be printed: and whosoever has that French
Translation of the N. Testament, he is bound under pain of Excommunication to
deliver it presently to the Ordinary of the place, or the Inquisitors,
notwithstanding any thing whatsoever, which may be to the contrary. Thus Pope
Clement the 9 th. (about 20 years since) condemns and prohibits the Gospel of
Jesus Christ in French, (a vulgar Tongue) and we are told by a great and
learned Casuist of their own, that long before him, Innocent the 3 d.
condemned, and prohibited a French Translation of the Bible. Azorius
Institutionum moral. Tom. 1. lib. 8. c. 26. quaest. 4. page 830, 831.
Azorius (in the place cited) gives the reasons, why the Scriptures are not to
be permitted to be read, or had in any vulgar Tongue; where his irreverent
speeches of the holy Word of God, are so many and horrid, that I shall not
offend the pious Reader, nor pollute these papers with them: he, who would be
satisfied, may see them in the place And much more in many others, especially
in Alphonsus a castro adversus Haereses, lib. 1. c 13. a p. 78. ad p. 83.
inclusive, edit. Paris. 1571. and vide Hosium de Expos Dei verbi, p 640. Where
he says, that to permit the people to read the Scripture, est margaritas orcis
conculcandas projicere -- But though Hosius (and the Pope too) be of that
opinion, that the people are Hogs and Swine -- yet S. Peter was of another
opinion, 1 Pet. 2.9.
cited.

The Premises considered, I believe that intelligent and impartial Judges,
(who love and seek truth) will think, that we had just reason to forsake the
Church of Rome, which unjustly (in contradiction to Scripture and the practice
of all Christian Churches, (except her self) took the Holy Scriptures from us,
and consequently deprived us of the happiness which God himself had given us,
to be a sure and sufficient ground of our spiritual comfort, and hope of
Heaven. For (though they are pleased to contradict it) the Apostle Romans 15.4.
assures us, That whatever things were written aforetime, were written for our
Learning, that we through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures, might have
hope. The Scriptures were dictated by the Holy Ghost, and given to the Church
(not to be locked up in an unknown Language, but) for our Learning, and a firm
foundation of our comfort and hope of Heaven.

2. The Gospel was dictated by the Holy Ghost, and given to this very end, that
it might be an effectual and powerful means to bring us to true Faith, and by
it to eternal life; So the Job. 20.31.
Apostle (or Holy Spirit by him) tells us -- These things are written, that you
might believe that Jesus is the Christ, and believing them might have life.

3. Nor is the Scripture an imperfect and defective means, or (without
Traditions) unable to beget such a Faith, as will bring us to eternal life: For
the Apostle (who knew better) expressly tells Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.15.
That the Scriptures were (...), Ib.
ABLE to make him wise unto Salvation.

4. Lastly, Nor are the Scriptures so obscurely penned, (as they are commonly,
and most unjustly slandered by our Adversaries) that to ordinary people, and
understandings they are unintelligible. I shall not go about to prove this,
(being abundantly done by many of our Protestant Divines already,) I shall only
add one testimony of a Cardinal (I mean Bessarion) who at the Council of In
Sacris Scripturis omnis fidei veritas aut plane explicata est, aut Iarcus, sine
difficultate exui potest, vid. Joverium, Conciliorum Part. 1* p. 203. col. 3.
Florence, in a Speech to his Contrymen, expressly says; That in Scripture
ALL Doctrines of Faith, are either plainly explained, or if they be hid, they
may without difficulty be found out. This Assertion of Bessarion, is (to me and
all Protestants) an evident and clear truth; and is more considerable, in that
a Roman Cardinal dares, and does publicly attest it, in contradiction to the
received Doctrine of the Church of Rome. And while I am writing this, there
providentially comes in my way, something concerning the taking away the
Scriptures from the people, which (if I mistake not) is very pertinent to our
present purpose. For,

1. I find that Eusebius Hist. Eccl. i. 8. c. 2. p. 293. edit. Vales.
Dioclesian in his Bloody Persecution of the Christians, published an Edict;
that the Christians should bring in their Bibles, to be (...), Ib. p. 294. See
Nicepborus, lib. 7. cap. 3.
publicly burnt. They knew (by the suggestion of Satan and their Pagan
Priests) that the Scriptures were the great and most effectual means to convert
Pagans to Christianity, and confirm them in it; and therefore they did
cunningly and impiously endeavor to deprive the Christians of the Benefit of
those Sacred Books; because no other Books were so destructive of their Pagan
Religion, and therefore they might not read them.

2. And let sober and pious men consider, whether the Pope does not for the
same reason forbid the Scriptures to the People; because no other Books make a
clearer discovery of their Errors. For they absolutely Vid. Indicem librorum
prohibitorum Alexandri 7. Romae, 1664. verbo Biblia. Ubi prohibentur
Bibliaquocunque vulgari idiomate scripta.
forbid the Bible in any vulgar Language whatsoever; so that none of their
Superiors could Vide Regulas Indici librorum Prohibitorum Tridentino praesixas,
in observatione ad Reg. 4.
License them to have it, and yet Vide dictum Indicem Alexandri 7. Romae, 1664.
verbo Alchoran' (ubi sic habetur -- Alchoranus Mahometis Lingua vulgari ex
concessione Inquisitorum liaberi possit.
permit the abominable Turkish Alcoran to be read in a vulgar Tongue. This may
justly seem strange, that the Gospel of our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ, shall
be absolutely prohibited, and yet the Turkish Alcoran permitted to be read in a
vulgar Tongue.

3. Though the Pagans permitted not the Christians to have the Scriptures, yet
never any Christian Church (no not the Roman) for above 1000 years after our
Blessed Savior, deprived the People of the use and benefit of the Sacred
Scriptures. In Vid. Azorium Just Moralium. Tom. 1. l. 8. c. 26 Quaest. 4. p.
830. Ed. Lugd. 1625.
France they had the Scriptures in their vulgar Tongue, till Pope Innocent the
third, (which was somewhat above 1200 Pope Innocent the third was made Pope,
An. 1198.
years after our Blessed Savior) condemned and prohibited the reading or
hearing the Scriptures in any vulgar Idiome. And amongst impertinent things
(which they mis-call reasons) which they then (and others since) alleged
against reading Scripture in a vulgar Tongue; this was one; -- That such Variae
haeresium and errorum causae nascerentur, ac infinita propemodum alia incommoda
ac mala provenirent, Azorius before cited, p. 830, 831.
reading of the Scriptures would be the cause of several Heresies, Seditions,
Schisms, and almost infinite other mischiefs. Certainly all good Christians,
who (as surely they are bound) love God and the Gospel of Jesus Christ, will
judge this to be (what indeed it is) not sober reasoning, but railing at, and
reviling the Holy Scriptures, and that Holy Spirit who did dictate them, to be
a proper and powerful means, to bring us to the knowledge of the truth, and
Joh. 20.31. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. Jam. 1.21. Act. 17.11, 12.
Salvation by it. For if the Scripture be not a good means to procure such an
end, then they must say, (which if they do, it is no better than blasphemy) That
the Holy Spirit could not, or would not give a good means for that end, for
which he intended it. But it is certain, that the Holy Scriptures are so far
from being (what they untruly say) a cause of Heresy, Sedition or Schism, that
no Book in the world, does, or can condemn those crimes, with that clear
evidence and Authority, which the Bible does. Especially seeing the Scripture
is the sole authentic Rule to know, what Doctrines are de fide, and what
heretical; and therefore I have often wondered, what Heresies they mean, when
they say that reading the Scripture, is the cause of Heresy; seeing no
Doctrine is, or can be de fide, a Doctrine or Article of our Christian Faith,
which is not contained in Scripture (that being the adequate Rule and measure
of our Christian Faith) nor can any thing be truly and properly Heresy, which
is not contrary to some Divine truth revealed in Scripture: But Quares, quid
nomine Fidei catholicae veniat? Respondeo, Quicquid est in Ecclesia propositum
tanquam fide credendum, quales sunt Articuli fidei. and quae sacrae lite^ae
tradiderunt; aut quae generalis Ecclesiae consensus definivit. Azorius Iustit.
Moralium. Tom. 1. lib. 8. cap. 26. page 828. D.
Azorius (and others) tell me, that Articles of Faith and Heresies are not to
be measured and defined by their agreement or disagreement with Scripture only,
but also by their agreement and disagreement with the Doctrinal definitions of
the Church of Rome. So that not only the Articles of the Apostles Creed, of
that of Nice, of Constantinople, and Chalcedon, are de fide, and all contrary
Doctrines, Heresies: (in which we and they agree) but also all the Articles of
their new Trent This new Trent. Creed in most editions of that Council, is
placed at the end of that Council; But in the Edition at Antw. 1633. it is
placed (and most properly) Sess. 24. de Reformatione cap. 12. at the end of the
chap. page 450, 451.
Creed, (first published by Pope Pius the 4 th. in the year 1564.) are at Rome
Haec est Fides Catholica, extra quam non est salus; contraria omnia and
haereses ab Ecclesia damnatus, pariter damno. Ibid. page 452.
de fide, and all Doctrines contrary to any Article of that new Creed, they
call Heresies, and condemn them. Here I consider,

1. That all Protestants do believe and profess many Doctrines contradictory to
the Articles of their New Trent-Creed, as is confessed.

2. And the Sacred Scriptures are the reason and ground why we do so; which (in
express terms, or by evident consequence) condemns many of their Doctrines (as
their worshipping of Images, denying the Cup to the Laity, and to Priests, that
do not Consecrate, forbidding the Clergy to marry, etc.) And yet they mis-cal
us Heretics, and our Doctrines maintained against them (though consonant to the
Sacred Scripture) Heresies, and accuse Scripture as the cause of Heresies, not
that it is the cause of Heresies properly and truly so called, which are errors
contrary to the infallible Rule of Faith, (for this would make Scripture
contradict it self) but because it is the true ground and reason why we believe
and profess many Doctrines, which are contrary to the erroneous definitions of
their Church; so that we confess the Scripture is the cause of those things,
which (though real truths) they mis-cal Heresies. But to deprive the People of
the benefit, and comfort of the Scriptures, upon so irrational and frivolous a
pretense, is evidently injust in them, and not only dangerous, but pernicious
to the people. So that, had we no other reason but this (the depriving the
people of the use and benefit of the Scriptures) it were abundantly sufficient,
to justify our Separation from Rome.

Rome does not only deprive the People of the benefit and comfort of Scriptures
(prohibiting the reading or having them in any vulgar Language by them
understood,) but, for the same reason they deprive them of the benefit, and
Edification, they might, and ought to have had, in the public service of God;
all their Liturgies, and public Sacred Offices (Missals, Breviaries, etc.)
being in Latin, a Language not understood by the people (and many times not by
the Which evidently appears by this, that now of later times, the words in
their Missals and Breviaries are accented, that their Priests might pronounce
the words right, which otherwise, it seems, they could not. So they print
Hominis, lest the Priest should call it Hominis.
Priests themselves) who not understanding the Language in which the Public
Service of God was celebrated, could not possibly know to whom, (whether to
God, or Saint, or Angels) or for what, the Priest prayed; and so could not
(which the Apostle thinks they should in public Prayers and Thanksgiving,) say
1 Cor. 14 16.
Amen to any thing said by him, who did officiate. For this practice of the
Church of Rome (in having their Liturgies in a Tongue not understood by the
People) that it is unjust in them, and pernicious to the People, I shall only
say two things:

1. That it is expressly against Scripture, and the directions 1 Cor. 14.
the Apostle has given against it. He spends a whole Chapter to this purpose,
and with so much zeal, and so many reasons demonstrates, that public Prayers,
and Divine Service ought not to be in an unknown Language; that it is a wonder,
that any, who pretend to be Christians, should (as they of Rome do) dare to
contradict an Apostle of Jesus Christ, and that Holy Spirit by which he spoke.
I know, that some of the greatest Vid. Azorium Just. Moralium Tom. 1. lib. 8.
c. 26. p. 830. A B. Sure I am (to say nothing of Erasmus, Cassander, etc.)
Card. Contarenus in Catechis. Interrogat. ultima, operum, p. 545. and Card.
Cajetan on this Chap. confess, that to have public Prayers in a known tongue*
is more for the edification of the People: and after the year 1215, Innocent
the 3 d. is of the same opinion, vid. Council. Lateran. sub Innocentio 3. Can. 9.
Writers for Rome, and the Vindication of their Sacred Offices in an unknown
Tongue, endeavor to Answer the Apostles reasons in this Chapter, but with such
insignificant, and miserable shifts, that you will easily see that they
endeavor that which they cannot possibly do.

2. And that it was as manifestly against the practice of the Church of God
(Jewish and Christian) in all Ages, is as manifest, and by sober and ingenuous
persons of the Roman Communion, confessed. Now do you consider, how pernicious
this must needs be to the People to deprive them of that great comfort, and
edification, which they might, and ought to have had by the public Service of
God in a Language by them understood; especially seeing Cardinal Contarenus and
Cajetan (convinced of this truth) confess in the places now cited; that if the
Sacred Offices, and public Prayers were in a known Tongue, it would tend much
more to the Edification and benefit of the People.

Rome, the one half of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was taken from us;
therefore we had good reason to separate from their Communion. The Cup in the
Eucharist, was taken from the Laity, and all Priests too, (save him who did
Vid. Council. Constable. Sess. 13. p 65. edit. per Job. Petit. Paris. 1514.
Consecrate) and this is most unjust and illegal: 1. Because it is against the
express Institution, and Command of our Blessed Savior, who says, Matt. 26.27.
Drink ye All of this; and S. Mark particularly observes, that they did Mark
14.23.
All drink of it. So that they might (though with no just reason, yet) with more
pretense, have taken away the Bread; For it is never said, Eat ye All of this,
nor expressed that they did all eat of it. And the Decree of the Council of
Council. Constable. Sess. 13. Junii 15. 1415.
Constance (the first Council that took away the Cup from the Laity, in the
year 1415.) is most intolerable; for they command (upon pain of
Excommunication) that none should Communicate the Laity in both kinds) in
express contradiction to our Blessed Savior's command. Licet Christus tossed
coenam instituerit, and Discipulis sub utraque specie administraverit, hoc
tamen non obstante, etc. Where the giving it after Supper is only an
indifferent circumstance, no part of the Institution which consists in these
words -- Drink Ye All of This.
Non obstante Institutione Christi. They say indeed, that the whole Non
dubitandum integrum Christi corpus and sanguinem, tam sub specie vini,
veraciter contineri. Ibid.
Body and blood of our Blessed Savior, is truly contained as well under the
species of Bread, as the species of Wine. But admit this (which is a great
error) that the whole Body and Blood be really and truly in the Bread, so that
the Laity in their Wafer receive both the Body and Blood; then

1. Why did our Blessed Savior institute it, in both kinds? if the Apostles
received his body and blood in the Bread, why did he give the blood a second
time in the Cup?

2. If the Laity receive the whole Sacrament (the body and blood of our Blessed
Savior*) in the Wafer, why needs the Priest who Consecrates, receive any more?

3. But admit that our Blessed Savior's blood were wholly in the Wafer, and
the Body in the Cup (as the Fathers of Constance say,) yet by their own
received Principles, the blood is not Vid. Missale Romanum in Canone missae,
and Catechis. Trident. part. 2. cap. 4. de Eucharistia Sect. 19. where the
Consecrating of the Bread, is in these words, Hoc est Corpus meum. But the
Consecration of the Blood is in many more, and other words (Sect. 21.) To wit
in these, Hic est calix Sanguinis mei, novi and aeterni Testamenti, mysterium
fidei, qui pro vobis. and pro multis effunditur in Remissionem Peccatorum.
Consecrated in the Wafer, nor his Body in the Cup: (their form of Consecrating
the bread in the Wafer, being different from the form of Consecrating the blood
in the Cup) and then admit, that the blood were in the Wafer, yet it is not
Consecrated in the Wafer, and therefore is not Sacramental blood, or any part
of the Sacrament as it is in the Wafer, and therefore the Laymen who receive
only the Bread or Wafer, do not receive the whole, but only one part of the
Sacrament, and so (contrary to our Blessed Savior's command) are deprived of
the Blood, the other part of the Sacrament.

4. But however it is most certain and evident, that they do not drink the
blood in the wafer, and therefore disobey our Blessed Savior's command, who
expressly says, Drink ye All of this.

By the Premises, I think it may and (to impartial Judges) will appear, That
the taking away the Cup from the Laity, is a kind of Sacriledg in the Church of
Rome; as being against the Institution, and express command of our Blessed
Savior: Nor is this all, for it is as much contrary to the practice 1. Of the
Apostles; and 2. Of the Christian Churches after them.


For the first, S. Paul has two signal things concerning this Subject. For
writing to the Corinthians about the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, (and he
tells them that he had 1 Cor. 11.23.
received of the Lord, what he writ to them) he says,

1. That the Host (to use their word) was only Bread, and not the very Body and
Flesh of our Blessed Savior. For in two Chapters to the Corinthians he calls
it Bread 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. and 1 Cor. 11.26, 27, 28.
five times after Consecration; and we may be sure, he called it what he
thought it was; and what both his own, and all their Senses manifestly saw, and
judged it to be. It is true, the Apostle in the same Chapter says; That the
eating of the Bread is the Communion of the 1 Cor. 10.16
Body of Christ. Not Communio propria and substantialis, as if they had really
eaten the very substance of our Savior's flesh; but Communio typica and
Sacramentalis; they eat his Body in eating the bread which was a Sacramental
sign of his Body. So a little before in the same Chapter, he says, that the
Jews (in Moses his time) eat the same 1 Cor. 10.2, 3.
spiritual meat, and drank the same spiritual drink, for they drank of the
spiritual Rock, which was Christ. Not that they did, or could then, really and
properly eat or drink his Flesh and Blood (for it was above 1400 years before
our Blessed Savior had any flesh or blood) but they eat his flesh, and drank
his blood in signis and typis Sacramentalibus. They eat our Blessed Savior's
Body in the Manna, which was a type only, and our Savior himself the true Joh.
6.31, 32.
Manna, Sacramentally signified by it; so he says, the Rock was Christ, that is
(the Sign having the Name of the thing signified, as is most usual) a type of
Him.

2. It is evident by the places 1 Cor. 10.16, 17, 21. and 1 Cor. 11.26, 27, 28.
Vide Lyraenum in dictum ver. 28.
cited) that the Corinthians (by the Apostles directions) received the Cup as
well as the Bread. But besides our Blessed Savior's Institution of the
Sacrament in both kinds, and the Apostles directions (which are obligatory and
commands) that it should be so received; there is one thing more which
aggravates the error and injustice of the Church of Rome in taking away the Cup
from the Laity, which they do in contradiction to all other Christian Churches,
which (ever since the Apostles time to this day) have approved and practiced
the receiving the Sacrament in both kinds. Nay in the Church of Rome itself for
above 1200 years after our Savior, all (both Lay and Clergy) received in both
kinds. I shall not take any pains to prove this, because it is a truth so
evident, that many Roman Catholics, and they (both for Learning and Dignity)
eminent persons have confessed it. Cardinal Certum est omnes Clericos and
Laicos, viros and mulieres, sub utraque specie Sacra mysteria antiquitus
sumpsisse, cum solenni little celebrationi aderant, and offerebant, and de
oblatis participabant: nec hoc negare potest, qui vel levissima rerum
Ecclesiasticarum notitia imbutus sit* semper enim and ubique ab Ecclesiae
primordiis usque ad ^eculum 12. sub specie Panis and Vini communicarunt
fideles. Card. Bona rerum Liturgicarum. lib. 2. c. 18. p. 491* 492* Ed. Paris.
1672. vid. ib. in Append. p. 555. in Liturgia Romana Antiqua.
Bona, in a book by him lately published, has a signal passage to our Purpose;
his own words you have faithfully cited in the margin. And for the meaning of
the words in the Margin -- Cum offerebant, and de oblatis participabant, if you
consult Vid Ordinem Romanum de Officiis Miss apud Cassandrum, operum p. 106.
Cassander, he will tell you; Quod omnes Laici qui aderant Ibid. page 107.
offerebant, and Diaconi Ibid. page 112, 113, 124.132. vid. G. Watsii
adversaria ad Matthew. Parisiensem, ad Hist. page 9. lin. 6.
and omnis populus de calice communicabant.

For farther confirmation of this truth, that anciently in the Roman Church,
the Laity had the Cup for above 1200 years; I shall refer you

1. To the 27. Canon Apud Pet. Craeb. Conciliorum, Tom. 2. page 843.
of the Lateran Council, under Alexander the third, in the year 1180.

2. Can. 28. Concilii Apud Binium Conc. Tom. 7. part. 1. p 507. col. 2.
Claromontani celebrati, anno 1095.

3. Petrum de Marca, de Primatu Lugdunensi, page 441, 442, etc.

4. Cassandrum vid. in Consultatione, de utraque specie Sacramenti, page 182.

5. Lindanum vid. Panoptiae lib. 4. page 342.

6. Lastly, Greg. Consuetudo communicandi sub Altera tantum specie, in Ecclesia
Latina coepit esse generalis, non multo ante tempora Concilii Constantiensis.
de Valentia goes farther than some of his followers will, and plainly
confesses, That the custom of Communicating in one kind only Et vid. Synodicon
Ecclesiae Parisiensis. Paris 1674. p. 6. inter decreta Odonis de Soliaco qui
floruit circa An. 1208. quo tempore Laici calicem habebant.
began to be general, a little before the Council of Constance, (in his Tract
de legitimo usu Eucharistiae, cap. 8. and 10.) and that Council sat, and made
that bold Decree, to take away the Cup, An. 1414. And here it is very
observable, that although it was the express command of our Blessed Savior, and
of the Apostle S. Paul from him, that all should receive the Cup, as well as
the Bread; and although it was the practice and custom of all other Christian
Churches in the World to this day, to receive it so, and (as Greg. de Valentia
confesses) of the Roman Church, till a little before the Council of Constance;
yet that Council (in Hoc non obstante, Canonum Authorit^s laudabilis, and
approbata consuetudo Ecclesiae, servat and servavit, etc. Sess. 13.
contradiction to all this) Vnde cum bujusmodi consuetudo ab Ecclesia and
Sanctis Patribus rationabiliter introducta, and diutissime observata sit,
habenda est pro Lege, etc. Concilium Constan. Ibid. Sess. 13.
grounds the prohibition of the Cup, upon (which is most false) a most ancient
and approved custom of the Church, to receive only in one kind; which custom
(they say) has the obligation of a Law, and ought to be observed. This Decree
of the Council (to say no worse) is highly irrational. For can any intelligent
person think, that a late custom of a particular (the Latin) Church, should be
sufficient to warrant Communion in one kind, and taking away the Cup from the
Laity; when the institution, and express command of our Blessed Savior, and
his Apostles, did (as it is evident S. Paul did) require the People to receive
in both kinds; and the perpetual practice and custom of the Universal Church
of Christ, (even of Rome herself) for above 1200 years, was to give the
Sacrament in both kinds: However what was most erroneously decreed at
Constance, is confirmed at Trent, and the Cup taken from the Laity, though both
the Sea the History of the Council of Trent, by Father Paul of Venice, sub Pio
4. ad An. 1561. p. 458. of the Translation, (if you have not the Original) and
page 459.
Emperor and the King of France (by their Bishops in that Council) earnestly
desired that it might be restored. Seeing then, that (the Premises considered)
it is, or (^o Impartial Judges) may be evident; That the Church of Rome
injuriously forbids the Laity and all Priests (save he who Consecrates) to
drink of the Cup in the Sacrament, and our Blessed Savior expressly commands
the contrary, saying, -- Drink ye Matt. 26.27.
All of this, and in obedience to his command they did All Mark 14.23.
drink it. I suppose we may justly say to the Pope Vid. Council. Trident. S^ss.
22. de Reformat. cap. 11. Where the Council refers it to the Pope, to consider
of the restitution of the Cup to the Laity; who has been considering above 120.
years, and as yet nothing done, to give satisfaction to the Church.
and his party, what the Apostles (on the like occasion) said to the high
Priest, and the Council of the Jews: It is better Act. 4.19.
to obey God than men, and to separate from the Communion of that Church, which
(with great wrong and Iniquity) denies us the Communion of the Cup, which our
Blessed Savior commands us to drink in Remembrance of him.

Rome; a Matrimonio Clericis prohibito.
that it was not Sinful nor Schismatical, may be taken from their denying
Matrimony to the Clergy; against the light of Nature, of Scripture, and the
Judgment, and Practice of the Church of God, (Jewish and Christian) in all
Ages. Concerning this, I shall only set down some few particulars, in short;
and leave them to your prudence, to use these, or add such other particulars,
as (circumstances considered) may seem to you more convenient. And here I
consider

1. That here in England, not only in the Saxon, but also in the Norman times,
the Secular Clergy were married; concerning which, we have a signal passage in
Matthew. Matthew. Par. ad An. 1074. p. 9. in edit. Watsii, Iste Papa ( Gregorius
7.) in Synodo Generali Sacerdotes Uxoratos a divino officio removit, and Laicis
missas eorum audire interdixit. Novo exemplo, and ut multis visum est.
Inconsiderato judicio, contra Sanctorum Patrum sententiam. Ex qua re, tam grave
oritur scandalum, ut nullius haeresis tempore Sancta Ecclesia graviori
schismate sit discissa.
Paris. (out of Rog. Wendover) as also in our Vid. Tho. Walsingham Hypodig.
Neustria ad An. 1074. p. 439.
other Historians. Matthew. Paris. tells us,

1. That Pope Gregory the 7 th. in a General Council, prohibited all married
Priests to celebrate any Divine Offices, and forbid the Laity to hear any of
their Masses, which was in the year 1074.

2. That this was a New thing, and an Innovation brought into the Church by
that Pope.

3. That many believed it to be a rash and inconsiderate act of that Pope
against the Judgment of the Holy Fathers.

4. And then he tells of the horrid effects and ill consequences which follow
upon it. However (to say nothing of the Ethiopick or Greek Churches, who never
did receive the Doctrine of the Roman Church concerning the Celibacy of their
Priests) by the Premises, it is certain, that even in the Roman Church, for
above 1000 years after Christ, Priests were some of them married, and
afterward when they were prohibited to marry, it was judged to be (as the
Historian tells us) 1. An Innovation. 2. A Rash and Inconsiderate act. 3.
Against the Judgment of the Holy Fathers. 4. And that it had mischievous
consequences; scarce any Heresy having made a greater Schism in the Church,
than this Prohibition of Priests marriages.

2. But however the Popes prohibition of Priests marriages was censured then;
yet it prevailed afterward in the Roman Church, as may appear (to omit others)
by the Council of Trent. For that Council (though the V. Hist. Conc. Trid. sub
Plo 4. versionis Angl. p. 677. ad Ann. 1563.
French were earnest for the marriage of the Clergy) condemns all those, who
say that the Priests Conc. Triden. Sess. 24. de Sacramento Matrimonti, in
Initio can. 9.
marriages are lawful, or valid if they do marry. This (they know) all
Protestants say, and (as they have good reason) believe, and so they lie under
the Councils Anathema. But though they are so fierce against their Priests
Marriages; yet their Canon Law will allow him who has no wife, to keep a Is qui
non habet uxorem, and pro uxore Concubinam habet, a communione non repellatur;
si una concubina sit contentus, Can. Is qui 4. Diss. 34.
Concubine, and it shall be no hindrance to him, but he may receive the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, in contradiction to the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.11.
But of late, they will not allow (at least they will not publicly own it) the
keeping of Concubines, yet they do say, that Sacerdos si fornicetur, aut domi
concubinam foveat, tametsi gravi Sacrilegio se obstringat, gravius tamen
peccat, si contrabat matrimonium. Cost. in Euch. c. 15. propos. 9. p. 459.
if a Priest keep a Concubine, and commit fornication, (though it be a sin, yet)
it is a less sin, than to have a wife of his own; that is (in plain and true
English) it is a greater sin with them, to disobey the Pope and his party, who
disapprove and prohibit Priests Marriages; than to disobey our Blessed Savior
and his Apostles, who approve, and in some cases (as to avoid 1 Cor. 7.2, 9.
burning, and preserve Chastity) expressly command it, as shall hereafter
evidently appear.

3. And here it will be worth our time and pains diligently to consider, what
the reason and cause is, why the Pope and his party so severely forbid the
Marriages of their Clergy. For

1. It cannot be for Religion, and Reformation of their Clergy, to make them
and their lives more conformable to the Gospel, and the Laws of the primitive
and purer Christianity. For it is evident, that the Gospel approves the
Marriages of the Clergy, and several of the 1 Cor. 9.5.
Apostles themselves were married, and so were the Bishops and Priests in the
Primitive and purest times of Christianity; as is both in itself evident, and
Antiquissimis Ecclesiae temporibus, viventibus adhuc Apostolis, and post
Apostoles aliquot adbuc annis admissi sunt ad sacros ordines viri conjugati.
Costerus Jesuita in Euch. c. 15. propos. 2. p. 448. ed. Col. 1587.
confessed by our Adversaries, even by the Jesuits, the most zealous Advocates
for the Errors of the Roman Church. So that the disapproving and prohibition of
Priests Marriages, is so far from being a matter of True Religion, and
Reformation of them and their lives, according to the Gospel, and purest times
of Christianity; that it is directly contrary to it.

2. Nor can the Prohibition of Priests Marriages be for this end and reason, to
make their Clergy better men and more pious Christians. For (upon our
Adversaries own principles) it deprives them of the good means, which God
himself has instituted, for their Justification and Salvation. For, First, The
Trent Fathers tell us; That all Per Sacramenta omnis vera justitia vel incipit,
vel coepta augetur, vel amissa reparatur. Conc. Trid. Sess 7. de Sacramentis in
Prooemio, and Can. 6.7.
true justice is either begun, or increased, or repaired by the Sacraments.
Secondly, They say, that Matrimony is a Sacrament instituted by our Blessed
Savior, and Si quis dixerit Matrimonium non esse vere Sacramentum a Christo
institutum, neque gratiam confer, Anathema sit. Conc. Trid. Sess. 24. de
Matrim. Can. 1.
confers grace. And therefore the forbidding the Clergy to marry, deprives them
of that means, which (by their own confession) our Blessed Savior instituted
to confer Grace; and therefore the Celibate and single Life of the Priests
cannot be a means to make them better men, or more pious Christians; seeing it
deprives them of the means which our Blessed Savior instituted to make them
such. If it be said, that Matrimony was not a Sacrament instituted for Priests,
as the Sacrament of Orders was not for the Laity. To this I say, First, If
Matrimony was (as they say) a Sacrament instituted by our Blessed Savior to
confer Grace, then whoever was legally married, according to the mind of
Christ, and the Law of the Gospel, received Grace by it Secondly, Several of
the Apostles and Primitive Bishops and Priests were so legally married, and so
had the Sacrament of Matrimony, which (in the judgment of the Church of Rome)
did really confer Grace to all, qui non Sacramenta novae legis gratiam quam
significant omnibus, obicem non ponentibus conserunt. Conc. Trid. Sess. 7. in
Decreto de Sacram. Can. 6.
ponebant obicem, who by their own Impiety did not hinder the gracious effect
of that Sacrament. Whence we may evidently conclude; that if the Sacrament of
Marriage did (as our Adversaries say it did) confer Grace on all, whose impiety
did not hinder the effect of it; then certainly it conferred Grace on the
Apostles, and the Apostolical Bishops and Priests in their time; it being
irrational and uncharitable to think, that the impiety of those excellent and
Divinely inspired Persons, should be so great, as to hinder the effect of that
Sacrament. Now if the married Apostles did receive Grace signified and sealed
to them by that Sacrament, so might their Successors too, to this very day, had
not the Church of Rome by prohibiting Priests to marry, deprived them of that
Sacrament, and so of that Grace and Spiritual Benefit they might have received
by it. So that although the Pope and his party might pretend the pious ends
above mentioned, for their prohibition of Priests marriages, (as they want not
fair pretenses for foul Actions) yet it is evident, they were but vain
pretenses, seeing the prohibition of those marriages, is so far from being a
means to attain those ends, that it utterly overthrows them both.

3. But the true reason why at Trent they prohibited the Clergy to marry, was;
because the Popes greatness and interest in all Countries where Popery
prevailed, would be lost, if Priests were permitted to marry; as evidently
appears, by the reason given in the Trent Council, by the greatest Advocates
for Rome, why the marriage of the Priests was denied (though the Sea the Hist. of
the Council of Trent. ad An. 1563.
Emperor and the French desired it) for Father Paul of Venice, thus expresses
it, See the said Hist. ad dictum An. 1563. page 680.
It is plain (say the great Advocates for Rome, and the Popes Authority) that
married Priests will turn their affections to their Wives and Children, and by
consequence, to their house and Country, so that the strict dependence which
the Clergy has upon the Apostolic See, would cease; and to grant marriage to
Priests, would destroy the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and make the Pope to be
Bishop of Rome only. So that their prohibition of marriages was to make the
Clergy faithful The Popish Bishops take an oath of absolute Allegiance to the
Pope. Vide Pontif. Rom* de Consec. Episc. p. 57. edit. Romae Anno 1611.
subjects to the Pope, and to depend upon him, and not on their King and
Country where they were born and lived. And hence came the Papal exemptions of
the Clergy from the Jurisdiction of all temporal Princes; so far, that they
deny the Clergy to be Subjects to Kings, and therefore cannot be guilty of any
Treason against them. They condemn this Proposition as erroneous (if not
Heretical) So the Spanish and Portugal Indices Librorum prohibit* command this
Proposition to be blotted out of the Index of Chrysostom.
Sacerdotes Principibus Jure Divino subditi. But this Rebellious doctrine is so
generally and publicly aspersed by their Canonists, Casuists, and other
approved Writers of the Church of Rome, that I neither need, nor shall say any
more to prove it.

By the Premises it may appear, that the Doctrine of the Church of Rome in
disapproving Priests marriages (especially, for such unjust and unworthy ends)
is erroneous, and their practice the occasion Their own sober Authors sadly
complain of the impure lives of their unmarried Clergy; Hanis. Orichovius in
oratione de coelibatu page 108, 110, 189. has these words -- Scorta Romae
quotannis tributa conferunt; earum censum cum anno abhinc sexto ageret
Praefectus Lictorum urbis, censa sunt merotricum capitae 55000. and Honorius
Augustodunensis, Dialogo de praedestinat. and libero arbitrio, ait, Verte te ad
Clerum, videbis in eis bestiae tentorium, Sacerdotium per Immunditiam polluunt.
Contemplare Monachorum conciliabula, immunditiae sordibus computrescunt, Aspice
habitacula monialium: hae a tenera aetate impudicitiam discant, etc. But you
may see this, and much more in Dr. Crakanthorp's Logic, de Syllogismo
probabili, cap. 12. Sect. 18 p. 414, 415. edit. London, Anno 1641.
of great scandal. Which will farther appear, because our infinitely good and
gracious God has ever approved, and his Church in all Ages practiced the
contrary. And here consider,

1. That Marriage was instituted by God himself before the Fall, while Adam was
in Innocence; so that the Institution of Marriage is divine, whereas the
Prohibition of it, is only humane (as is confessed) and for unjust and unworthy
ends.

2. In the Patriarchal Ages before Moses and the Law, there were Priests as
well as Lay people; and the Primogenitus, or Firstborn (as is known and
confessed) had Imperium and Sacerdotium, was both Prince and Priest. So that
the Priests (in that interval of time) were certainly married.

3. Under the Mosaical Law, it is as certain (and confessed) that the Priests
and Levites were married, and the Succession of them continued per Generationem
Naturalem. For had their Marriages been prohibited, one Tribe had necessarily
perished.

4. In the time of the Gospel the Marriage of the Clergy was 1 Timothy 3.2. 4.12.
Titus 1.5, 6.
approved by God, and (as is, and must be confessed) was practiced by the 1
Cor. 9.5.
Apostles, and Apostolical Clergy. Nor are such Marriages only approved, but to
avoid Fornication, expressly 1 Cor. 7.2, 9.
commanded in the Gospel. Continence is Dei donum, a gift which he has not 1
Cor. 7.9.
given to all, (as is evident and confessed) and then Marriage is the 1 Cor.
7.9.
Means appointed by God to preserve Chastity, and where that is forbidden (as
in the Church of Rome it is) abominable pollutions will be the fatal
consequence; seeing nothing can be more irrational, than to think, that of so
many hundred thousands to whom Marriage is forbid in the Church of Rome (men
and women in the strength and flourish of their Age) all should have ability to
live Chastely, neglecting the means which God himself has appointed to preserve
it.

To conclude this point, This Prohibition of the Clergy to Marry (had we no
other reason) were sufficient to justify our Separation from the Roman
Communion; especially, seeing such Prohibition of Marriage is declared to be a
mark and indelible 1 Timothy 4.13.
character of Antichrist, from whose Communion we are Rev. 18.4.
commanded to separate.


