Memorials OF Alderman WHITMORE, Bishop WILKINS, Bishop REYNOLDS, Alderman
ADAMS.

Clemens Romanus.

Seditio paucorum hominum insolentia and audacia in tantam vesaniam exarsit, ut
honorificum and illustre nomen vestrum, and ab omnibus amari dignum, vehementer
blasphemetur. Epist. ad Cor. p. 2. LONDON, Printed by J. Redmayne for John
Barksdale Bookseller in Cirencester 1681.

To the Reader.
GOod Reader, be pleased to know, that the Collector of these Four Memorials
(chosen out of many) has formerly set forth Four Decads; and if this little
piece be well accepted (i. e. be of quick sale) he intends to make them up
seven Decads, to be Printed all together in one fair Volume. Wherein you shall
receive some of the best Flowers of that sort of History, which is esteemed the
best of Histories, that of Lives. In these Four excellent Persons, as the
present Bishops of the Church; and the present Magistrates of the Great City,
may (perhaps) vouchsafe to note some things worthy of their Imitation; So the
People may (I hope) be excited to a greater reverence, both to Magistracy, and
Episcopacy. Faxit Deus!

C. B.

To the Dean of Gloucester Bishop Elect.
HEalth to the Dean of Gloucester,
Contented with his meaner Chair,
May he possess the Bishops Throne,
For public Good and for his own!
A good work's fit for a good Man:
But this so great a work who can
Well manage? He that sees the vast
Reward, the Crown bestowed at last.
Take courage Sir, and do not fear:
Your helper the great God is near.
Long may you live, who Gloucester please!
Gloucester? Nay the whole Diocese.
We all, that to the Church are true,
Esteem our selves much blessed in you.
But you above all others we may bless,
Who to so many impart Happiness.
What Blessed Dostrine have we heard
From your Pulpit? And when we jarr'd,
What industry, what have, what pain
You took, to make in one agrin!
Propagate your sweet violence
Through all our Country, and from hence
To your Aleppo send the Influence:
Aleppo made more famous by your deeds:
My Men to tell them neither can nor needs.
What my Verse wants, my vow supplies:
May you live gracious in Gods eyes:
May King and People love you still,
And you Preach unto them Gods will:
Your Clergy guide with Holy Discipline;
Make them in life, as in their Name Divine.
Sir G. Whitmore, Sometime Lord Major of London, (obiit 1654. December. 12.)
From Mr. Anthony Farindon's Sermon on Psalm. 119. 19. I am a Stranger in the
Earth, hide not thy Commandments from me.
1. NOw turn your Eyes and Thoughts upon this Pilgrim here, this Honored and
Worthy Knight, who has passed through the busy Noise and Tumults of this
World to his long home and rest. In which passage of his he has so exactly
performed the part and Office of a Stranger and Pilgrim, that he is followed
with the applause of them that knew him. And as in his Death he is become an
argument to prove the Doctrine which I have taught, so in his Life he made
himself a great example for them to look upon, who are now Traveling and
Laboring in the same way.

2. Look upon him then in every capacity and relation, either as a part of the
Commonwealth, or a Member of the City, or a Father of a Family, and you shall
discover the Image and fair representation of a Stranger in every one of these
Relations. For no Man can take this Honor to himself to be a good
Commonwealths Man, or a good Master of a Family, but he who is as David was, a
Stranger. All the ataxy and disorder, all the noise we hear, and mischief we
see in the World, are from Men who love it too well, and would live and dwell
and delight themselves in it for ever.

3. For the First, I may truly say as Lampridius did of Alexander Severus, He
was vir bonus and reip. necessarius, a good Man and of necessary use in the
Commonwealth. He laid all the strength he had to uphold it, and preferred the
Peace and Welfare of it to his own, as well knowing that a private house might
sink and fall to the ground, and yet the Commonwealth Stand and Flourish; but
that the Ruin of the whole must necessarily draw with it the other parts, and
at last bury them in the same grave. And here he found as rough a passage as
Rufus in Tacitus did in a public Commotion: who was pulled out of his Chariot,
laden with Scoffs and Reproaches, etc. So was this Worthy Knight taken from
his Wife whom he entirely loved, and from his Children those pledges of his
love, and conveyed to Ship, and by Ship to Prison in a remote City (where he
found some Friends) and then was brought back again from thence to a Prison
nearer home; where, if the Providence of God had not gone along with him and
shadowed him, he had met the Plague.

4. But it may be said, what praise is it to suffer all this, if he suffer as
an evil doer, and not for Conscience toward God? I come not hither to dispute
that, but am willing to refer it to the great trial, which shall open every eye
to behold that truth, which now being dazzled with fears and hopes, and even
blinded with the love of the World, it cannot see. But if it were an error, and
not knowledge but mistake, that drove him upon these Pricks; yet sure it was an
error of a fair descent, begot in him by looking steadfastly on the truth, and
by having a steady Eye on the Oath of God. And if here he fell, he fell like a
Christian, who did exercise himself to keep a good Conscience. For he that
follows not his Conscience when it erreth, will be as far from harkening to
it when it speaks the truth; for even error it self shows the Face of truth
to him that erreth, or else he would not err at all: And yet (I need not fear
to say it) it is an error of such a nature, that it may rather deserve applause
than censure, even from those who call it by that Name. For we do not use to
fall willingly into so dangerous, vexatious, and costly errors, errors which
will strip us and put a Yoke upon us, Errors which will put us in Prison. No;
to fly from these we too often fly from the truth it self, when it is as open as
the day, and commands our Faith though not our Tongue, and forces our assent
when we renounce it.

5. Again, take him in the City; in this he bore the highest honor, and fitted
the greatest place, yet was rather an ornament unto it than that unto him. For
he sat in it as a Stranger and a Pilgrim; as a Man going out of the World; nor
did so much consider his Power as his Duty; which looked forward, and had
respect to that which cannot be found in this, but is the Riches and Glory of
another world. Therefore this world was never in his Thoughts, never came in to
sour Justice; to turn Judgment into Wormwood by corrupting it, or into Vinegar
by delaying it. There were no Cries of Orphans, no Tears of Widows, no loud
Complaints of the oppressed to disquiet him in his passage, which use to follow
the Oppressor even to the gates of Hell, and there deliver him up to those
howlings which are everlasting. How often has he been presented to me, and that
by prudent and judicious Men, as the Honor and Glory of the City? And thus he
went on his way, full of Temptations and Troubles, and full of Honors, even of
those Honors which he refused. For you may remember how he bore that great
Office, and you may remember how he refused it, and gained as much Honor in
the hearts of Men by the last as by the first, as much Honor by withdrawing
himself and staying below, as he did formerly in sitting in the highest place
with the Sword in his Hand. For the state and face of things may be such, as
may warrant Demosthenes Wish and Choice, and make it more commendable in
exilium ire quam tribunal, to go into Banishment then to ascend the Tribunal.
And he best deserves Honor, who can in wisdom withdraw himself: And he can
best manage Power, who knows when to lay it down.

6. Bring him now from the public stage of Honor to his private House, and
there you might have seen him walking, as David speaks, in the midst of his
House in Innocence and with a perfect Heart; as an Angel or Intelligence moving
in his own Sphere, and carrying on every thing in it with that order and
decorum which is the glory of a Stranger; whose moving in it is but a going out
of it, to render an account of every Act and Motion. You might have beheld him
looking with a settled and immovable eye of Love on his Wife, walking hand in
hand with her for forty four years, and walking with her as his Fellow
Traveller with that love which might bring both at last to the same place of
rest. You might behold him looking on his Children with an Eye of care as well
as of affection, initiating them into the same Fellowship of Pilgrims; and on
his Servants, not as on Slaves, but as his humble and inferior Friends, as
Seneca calls them, and as his Fellow-Pilgrims too. And thus he was a Domestic
Magistrate, a lover and example of that truth which Socrates taught: That they
who are good Fathers of their Family will make the best and wisest Magistrates:
They who can manage their own Cock-boat well, may be fit at last to sit at the
Stern of the Commonwealth. For a private Family is a Type and Representation
of it, nay (says Eusebius in vit. Constable.) of the Church it self.

7. I confess, I knew him but in his Evening, when he was near his Journeys
End, and then too but at some Distance, but even then I could discover in him
that sweetness of disposition and that courteous affability, which by Sr. Paul
are commended as virtues, but have lost that name with Hypocrites, with Proud
and Superstitious Men; who make it a great part of their Religion to pardon
none* but themselves, and then think they have put off the old Man when they
have put off all Humanity. In these Homilitick Virtues I could discern a fair
proficiency in this Reverend Knight; and what my Knowledge ledge could not reach
was abundantly supplied and brought unto me by the joint testimony of those who
knew him, and by a Testimony which commends him to Heaven and to God Himself,
the Mouths of the Poor which he so often filled.

8. Thus did he walk on as a Stranger, comforting and supporting his
Fellow-Pilgrims, and reaching forth his Charity to them as a Staff. Thus he
expressed himself Living, and thus he has expressed himself in his last Will,
which is voluntas ul^ra mortem, the Will, the Mandate, the Language of a
Dead-man: Speculum morum (says Pliny) the Glass wherein you may see the
Charity, that is, the Face, the Image of a Pilgrim; by which he has bequeathed
a Legacy of Comfort and supply to every Prison, and to many Parishes within
this City. He remembered them who are in Bonds, as one who was sometimes a
Prisoner.

9. I know, in this World it is a hard thing justum esse sine infamia, to be
good and not to hear ill. Expedit enim in malis, neminem esse bonum: For evil
Men make it their work to deface every fair Image of Virtue, and then think
well of themselves when they have made all as evil as themselves. But it was
this our Honored Brothers happiness to find no Accuser, but himself: I may
truly say, I never yet heard any. Report has given him an Honorable Pass. The
Voice of the Poor was, He was full of good works: the Voice of the City, He was
a good Magistrate; the Voice of his Equals, He was a true Friend; the Voice of
all that I have heard, He was a just Man; and then our Charity will soon
conclude, He was a good Christian. For he lived and dyed a Son of the Church,
of the Reformed; and according to the way which some call Heresy, some
Superstition, so Worshipped he the God of his Fathers.

10. And now he is gone to his Long Home, and the Mourners go about the
Streets. He is gone to the Grave in a full Age, when that was well near expired
which is but Labor and Sorrow, (...) (as Cyril speaks) grown in Wisdom and
Grace; which is a fairer Testimony of Age, then the Grayhairs or Fourscore
Years. His Body must return to the dust, and his Soul is returned to God that
gave it; and being dead he yet speaks, speaks by his Charity to the Poor;
speaks by his fair Example to his Brethren of the City, to honor and
reverence their Conscience more than their Purse, vitamque impendere vero; to
be ready to resign all, even life it self, for the truth: He speaks to his
Friends, and he speaks to his relict, his Virtuous and Reverend Lady, once
Partner of his cares and joys, his Fellow-Traveller; and to his Children, who
are now on their way, and following apace after him; Weep not for me? Why
should you weep? I have laid by my Staff, my Scrip, my Provision, and am at my
journeys end, at rest. I have left you in a Valley, in a busy tumultuous World:
But the same Hand, the same Provision, the same Obedience to Gods Commands will
guide you also, and promote you to the same place, where we shall rest and
rejoice together for evermore.

Dr. John Wilkins, Lord Bishop of Chester. (Oblit. 1672.)
From Dr. William Lloyd.
1. TO begin with the Natural Endowments of his Mind: He had an Understanding,
that extended to all parts of useful Learning and Knowledge; a Will always
disposed to great and public and generous things. He had a natural aversion
from all idle Speculations, and from the eager pursuit of small and frivolous
designs. In great matters he judged so well, that he was not usually surprised
with events. He pursued his Intentions with such Equalness of Mind, that he was
never carried beyond the calmness of his natural Temper, except through his
zeal for public good, or where his Friend was concerned.

2. What he was in his Studies, I have reason to know, that have often been
tired with studying with him. He was indefatigable, and would have worn himself
out, if he had not been relieved with multiplicity of business. However, he
impaired by it, a Body which seemed to have been built for a long Age, and
contracted those infirmities that hastened his Death. The effect of his
Studies, in his Preaching and Writings, are sufficiently known, and would have
been much more, if God had given him Time.

3. As for his Preaching, it was sometimes Famous at St. Laurence, London;
though he sought rather the Profit than the Praise of his Hearers. He spoke
solid Truth, with as little show of Art as was possible. He expressed all things
in their true and natural Colors; with that aptness and plainness of Speech,
that grave natural way of Elocution, that showed he had no design upon his
Hearers. His Plainness was best for the instruction of the Simple; and for the
better sort, he applied himself rather to their Understanding, then Affections.
He saw so much of the Beauty of Goodness himself, that he thought the bare
showing of it was enough, to make all Wise Men (as it did him) to be in love
with it.

4. In his Writings, he was judicious and plain, like one that valued not the
Circumstances, so much as the Substance. And he showed it in whatsoever
Argument he undertook; sometimes beating out new untravel'd ways, sometimes
repairing those that had been beaten already. No subject he handled, but I dare
say is the better for him, and will be the easier for them that come after him.

5. If in these he went sometimes beside his Profession, it was in following
the Design of it, to make Men wiser and better: which I think is the business
of Universal Knowledge. And this he promoted with much zeal and sincerity, in
hope of the great Benefit that may accrue to Mankind. It was his aim, as in all
things, so especially in that, which (I conceive) is much more censured than
understood: I mean, in the design of the Royal Society. He joined himself to
it, with no other end, but to promote modern knowledge, without any Contempt or
lessening of those Great Men in former times. With due Honor to whom, he
thought it lawful for others to do that which, we have no reason to doubt, they
themselves would have done, if they were living.

6. His Prudence was great: I think, it never failed in any thing to which he
applied himself. And yet he wanted that part, which some hold to be essential;
he so wanted Dissimulation, that he had rather too much openness of Heart. It
was Sincerity indeed that was natural to him; he so abhorred a Lie, that he was
not at all for show; he could not put on any thing that looked like it; and
presuming the same of other Men, through excess of Benignity, he would be
sometimes deceived, in believing they were what they seemed to be, and what he
knew they ought to have been.

7. His Greatness of Mind, was known to all that knew any thing of him. He
neither eagerly sought any Dignity, nor declined any capacity of doing Good. He
looked down upon Wealth, as much as others admire it. He knew the Use of an
Estate, but did not covet it. What he yearly received of the Church he bestowed
in its service. As for his Temporal Estate, being secured against want, he
sought no farther, he set up his rest. I have heard him say often, I will be no
Richer, and I think he was as good as his Word.

8. As for Revenge, how could it enter into the Breast of him, that hated
nothing, but that which makes us hateful to God? I say not, but he had a sense
of Personal Injuries, and especially of those that reflected upon his Name,
when they proceeded from those that had good Names of their own: What others
said, de despised; but by those, he would often wish, he had been better
understood: That he was not, he bore as his misfortune: He would not requite
them with the like, but mentioned them with all due respect, and was always
ready to oblige them, and to do them good.

8. Yet it was not so desirable, to be at those terms with him, as to be his
Acquaintance or Friend. They that were never so little familiar with him, could
not but find, as well benefit as delight in his Conversation. His Discourse was
commonly of useful things: it never caused trouble or weariness to the Hearer.
Yet he would venture to displease one for his good: and indeed, he was the Man
that ever I knew, for that most needful and least practiced point of
Friendship. He would not spare to give seasonable reproof, and wholesome advice,
when he saw occasion. I never kn^w any, that would do it so freely, and that
knew how to manage that freedom of Speech so inoffensively.

9. It was his way of Friendship, not so much to oblige Men, as to do them
good: he did this; not slightly and superficially, but like one that made it
his Business: He durst do for his Friend, any thing that was honest, and no
more: He would undertake nothing, but what well became him; and then he was
unwearied til he had effected it.

10. It has been spoken by some, that he had not that zeal for the Church,
that they would seem to have that object this: He seemed to look upon
Dissenters, with too much favor to their persons and ways.

11. As for the Persons, no doubt that Goodness of Nature, that true Christian
Principle, which made him willing to think well of all Men, and to do good, or
at least no hurt to any, might and ought to extend it self to them among
others. But besides he was inclined to it by his Education, under his
Grandfather Mr. Dod, a turly pious and learned man, who yet was a Dissenter
himself in some things: Not, that he had any delight in contradiction, or could
find in his heart to disturb the Peace of the Church for those matters: He was
so far from it, that when some thought their dissents ground enough for a War,
Mr. Dod declared himself against it, and confirmed others in their Allegiance,
professing to the last a just hatred of that horrid Rebellion. Now his Relation
to this Man, and Conversation with those of his Principles, might incline him
to hope the like of others of that way, and vehemently desire to reduce them to
the Unity of the Church, in which his Grandfather lived and dyed.

12. As for himself, He was so far from approving their Ways, that in the
worst of Times, when One bewailed to him the Calamities of the Church, and
declared his Obedience, even then, to the Laws of it; He encouraged him in it,
he desired his Friendship, and protected both him and many others, by an
interest that he had gained, and made use of chiefly for such purposes.

13. How he demeaned Himself then, is known in both Universities; where he
governed with praise, and left a very grateful Remembrance behind him: How in
the next Times since, is well known in London. And having named this City and
the two Universities, I think he could not be placed in a better light in this
Nation. There were enough that could judge, and he did not use to disguise
himself: I appeal to you that conversed with him in those days: what zeal he
has expressed for the Faith, and for the Unity of the Church; How he stood up in
defense of the Order and Government: How he has asserted the Liturgy and the
Rites of it. He conformed himself to every thing that was commanded: beyond
which, for any Man to be vehement, in little and unnecessary things, whether
for or against them, he could not but dislike, and as his free manner was, he
has often been heard to call it Fanaticalness. How this might be misrepresented
I know not, or how his Design of Comprehension might be understood.

14. Sure I am, that since he came into the Government of the Church (to which
he was called in his Absence) he so well became the Order, that it out did the
expectation of all that did not very well know him: He filled his Place with a
Goodness answerable to the rest of his Life, and with a Prudence above it;
considering the two extremes, which were no where so much as in his Diocese.
Though he was, as before, very tender to those that differed from him; yet he
was, as before, exactly conformable himself, and brought others to Conformity,
some eminent Men in his Diocese. He endeavored to bring in all that came
within his reach, and might have had great success, if God had pleased to
continue him. But having given full proof of his Intentions and Desires, it
pleased God to reserve the Fruit for other Hands; from which we have cause to
expect much Good to the Church.

15. He was in perfect Health in all other respects, when a known Infirmity,
from an unknown Cause (that had been easier to cure then it was to discover)
stole upon him, and soon became incurable. He was for many days in a prospect
of Death, which he saw as it approached, and felt it come on by degrees. Some
days before he dyed, he found within himself, as he often said, A sentence of
Death. In all this time, who ever saw him dismayed? who ever found him
surpised; or heard a word from him, unbecoming a wise man and a true
Christian. At the times I was with him, I saw great Cause to admire his Faith
towatds God, his Zeal for his Church, his Constancy of Mind, his Contempt of
the World, and his cheerful Hopes of Eternity. That the Memory of this Worthy
Prelate may not be abused, I declare, and that upon most certain Grounds: That
he dyed in the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in the Communion of the
Church of England, as it is by Law established.

16. He dyed only too soon for the Church, and for his Friends; but for Himself
he had lived long enough. He has lived long enough that dies well. As for us we
must submit to the Will of God: Our Comfort is, that we shall follow, and come
together again in due Time.

Doctor Edward Reynolds Lord Bishop of Norwich. (Obiit. 1676.)
From Mr. B. Riveley.
VIr nec tacendus, nec dicendus: A Man of whom I cannot be silent, without
detriment to the Church, and dishonor to God; and yet a Man of whom I cannot
speak, without loss to his Merit, and diminution to his Worth.

1. He was a Good Man. He was of a most sweet and obliging temper, of great
Candor and Integrity: He had a comely Countenance, a gentle Disposition, a
pleasantness of Conversation. Reason sat as Queen in his Soul, Passion and
Appetite were as Handmaids.

2. He was a Good Christian. Revelation was a great Mistress with him, and he
was a great Adorer, as well as Practicer of the will of God. Religion
sanctified his Reason, and Grace his Nature; and of all Accomplishments, he
accounted it his Glory to be a Disciple of Christ* The Fear of the Lord was to
him the top of his Wisdom. He endeavored that his ways might be found perfect
before God. He was careful to maintain good Works (I speak it knowingly) as
the necessary Fruits of Christian Faith; and such Works as are due to Men, as
well as those that have a more immediate respect to Cod. To honor his King, to
speak well of his Superiors, to be obedient to Laws in Church and State; to
govern his Tongue, to love his Neighbors, and to take the worst Enemies he had
in the world into the number; This was his Religion. 'Twas a piece of his
Conscience to do these things; as well as to preach and to pray, and to
frequent the worship of God.

3. He was a good Minister of the Gospel. For this he had a great name, all his
undignified time; and when he came to the high place, he did not make an end of
prophesying. He was built and framed on purpose, to be an Instructor and Curate
of Souls: For he was sober and wise, able to salve difficulties, to determine
cases, to quiet consciences. He was an Interpreter, one of a thousand; another
Apollos mighty in the Scriptures. He was of a sedate mind, of a tender
Compassionate Spirit, heartily desirous of Men's eternal Good; and not only his
Industry, but his delights run out that way, how to bring it about.

4. He was a good Bishop. There are two sorts of People, and they differ among
themselves toto coelo, that can hardly allow him to have been a good Bishop:
The one sort think him not good, because a Bishop at all, making those terms
Good and Bishop inconsistent, but these are absurd and unreasonable Men, and
their tongue is no slander, and I trouble my self no further with them; the
other cannot afford him to be good in his capacity, because he was not so much a
Bishop, as they would have had him: that is to say, because he would not drive
their pace, he would not govern by their Rules, not execute censures at their
heights, nor interpret Canons in their sense. What truer Indication would you
have of wise and good Government, then from its natural and proper effects? And
for that matter I dare appeal to your own observation, whether in any Diocese
in the Kingdom (caeteris paribus) there be to be found a more sober, regular,
and loyal Clergy, a more conformable People, more decent and well repaired
Churches, and a greater alteration both of Judgment and Manners of Men, since
the late Times of Anarchy and Confusion (which is especially visible in matter
of the Sacrament) then in this Diocese. Resolve this into the true Reason, and
continue malevolent to the Memory of him that is gone, if you can.

I pass on, to his Learning, Writing, Preaching, Living.

1. He was an excellent Scholar: He had a great stock of natural Parts, and
endowments, to which he added an indefatigable Industry, and God gave a
plentiful Benediction. His skill in the Greek Tongue got him his Fellow-ship in
Merton College in Oxford, in Sir Henry Savils time. And what a rare Humanist he
was, and how well vers't in the Polite parts of Learning, his juvenile piece
upon the Passions abundantly testifies.

2. And indeed he was an admirable Writer for wit, judgment and fancy; of all
which there seems to be a curious mixture in his Books.

3. Moreover he was a Great Divine, and in his Time a most celebrated Preacher.
For his Divinity I need only say He was a true continuer of the name of
Reynolds, in the Church of England; and for his Sermons they met with the
Approbation, both of Prince and People, Scholars, Gentlemen, and Citizens; all
ranks of Men have given their honorable Testimony to them. He was a Man of God,
throwly furnished to every good word and work: He had the Art of saving Souls,
if ever any had.

4. But above all I must not forget the Virtues and Graces wherein he did
excel. For he was as good a Liver, as he was a Preacher or a Writer. All his
other good qualities were adorned, and both greener and riper years were
seasoned with the Piety of a Saint. His youth was not observed to be stained
with the vices of that Age, and when the Church brought him her Miter, God had
Crowned his Head before, according to that of Solomon: The hoary head is a
Crown of Glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness.

But more particularly, his Humility, Meekness, Patience, Charity are
remarkable in him.

1. He was clothed with Humility, and 'twas his upper Garment, and covered all
the rest of his Accomplishments. He had mean thoughts of Himself, and was
content that others should have so of him too; and though his face shone yet he
would not know it. There was no leven of Pride, or ill Humor, or Surliness, or
Ambition in him; no difficulty of access nor affectation of distance; if you
had but the face of a Gentleman, or the habit of a Clergyman, all Ceremony must
be laid aside in order to Converse. Doubtless, he was a great Judge of
Learning, and yet the most candid Auditor of Sermons in the World: he was never
heard to censure any body, though he himself has not been spared.

2. Neither was there wanting in him the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit,
whereby he became a true Copy of the Grand Exemplar, and Bishop of our Souls.
It Is an usual saying among some, such a thing would vex a Saint: but truly what
would vex or ruffle, or discompose this holy Man was a hard matter to determine.
It Is scarce remembered, that ever he was seen in Passion. For forty nine years
together, wherein He and his Consort lived in married state, not many words,
worthy of the denomination of Angry, have been observed to drop from him. This
I can assure you, He had his share both of Injuries from Men, and of
Afflictions from God, and he was sensible of them; always with the preservation
of his Religious Integrity, and the exercise of Meekness toward Men, and of
Patience toward God.

3. And I may truly say that in him Patience had her work. Though toward the
latter end of his Life his days were full of pain, nights of weariness, yet he
knew that by Patience he was as well to wait, as to endure; and that he was to
honor the Sovereign of his Life and Death, as well by tarrying his leisure, as
by bearing his hand. His repeated Prayer to Heaven was, that in his utmost
Extremities he might not be provoked to speak dishonorably of God; and when
through some fierce exacerbation of his disease, he was constrained to make
some noise and outcry, he would presently subjoyn, Though he did roar, he did
not murmur.

4. As the Complement of all the rest; His Universal Charity to the Persons and
Souls of Men was so conspicuous, that the world could not deny it, but was
forced to call it Compliance. All the doubt may be concerning his Charity to
the Poor and Needy, because the excellency of this Virtue lies in the secrecy
of its Practice. Daily and hourly were the Emanations of his Charity, while he
lived, but most of them running like streams under ground, til he was dead.
Many were the Gifts he scattered to the bringing up of poor Children at School,
to the maintenance of poor Scholars in the University: to the supportation and
encouragement of ancient foundations of Piety and Learning: to the relief of
visited places in his Diocese: to the supply of the wants of poor Ministers
Widows: to the Augmentation of small Vicarages in his Gift Add the several
shares that Southampton, the place of his Birth, Merton College the place of
his first Preferment, Northhampton the place of his first Ministerial
Employment, Norwich* where he departed had; you cannot want a sufficient
evidence of his abundant Charity.

Lastly, God was pleased to do him an extraordinary kindness, an (...), a
gentle Death, the last sand in the Hourglass falling with no less difficulty,
than wherewith he expired.

IV. Sir Thomas Adams Alderman of London. (Obiit. 1667.)
(From Doctor Hardy.)
1. THere is no less then a Threefold obligation laid upon us of publishing
the excellencies, of those who have done worthily and been Famous in their
Generations. Hereby we glorify the Lord in his Servants, and that is Piety; we
honor the Dead in their Memory, and that is Equity; we benefit the People by
their Examples, and that is Charity. I shall not say more of this Worthy
Person, then what not only very credible Information, but (for the most part)
my own personal knowledge will warrant me, having had the honor of more than
Twenty Years acquaintance with him, Fifteen whereof he was the Chief Inhabitant
of that Parish, wherein I was an Unworthy Laborer.

2. His very outward aspect was amiable, nay venerable, and his presence as the
appearance of some bright Star, having a pleasing influence upon all that
looked upon him. But could you have viewed his inside, beheld that virtuous
Soul which inhabited his comely Body, how would it have ravished you, and yet,
though we could not directly, we might reflexively, and that both from his
words and works, The Lips of the Righteous feed many; to wit, with wholesome
Counsels and Comforts; keeping as it were an open Table for all Comers; such
were his Lips, with which (as well, nay better than with his Bountiful Table)
he fed not only his Children and Servants, but all who conversed with him.
Among whom I can truly say, I never went to him, but I did, or might come away
bettered by his gracious and prudent discourse. Nor was he only a Man of words;
his goodness was not only at his Tongues end, but at his Fingers ends. That of
our Savior concerning himself, is (in an inferior way) verifyed of him, My
Works testify of me. So that, he was not only, in respect of his words, a
sweet and pleasing Voice, but of his works, a Burning and Shining Light.

3. God was pleased so far to bless his honest endeavors, in that calling
wherein his Providence had placed him, that he enjoyed a liberal Portion of
this Worlds goods, nor did he want those honors which were suitable to him.
Whatsoever honor in the City he was capable of, he was chosen to; Master of his
Company, Alderman of a Ward, President of St. Thomas Hospital, several times
Burgess in Parliament (though the iniquity of the times would not permit him to
sit) Sheriff and Lord Major. After which he at length became, and so continued
for some Years the first among the Twenty Six, the Elde^ Alderman upon the
Bench that had served in the Office of Lord Major; to whom is given that
Honorable Title The Father of the City. Nor had he only this Honor from the
City, but his King also gave him the greatest Honor he was capable of in his
Station, making him not only a Knight, but a Baronet; which descends upon
Posterity. I mention these, in as much as they are Instruments of Virtue, and
so they were to him, he being a bountiful Steward of his Riches, nor did his
Dignities so much Honor him as he them.

4. Throughout the Age of his Life he was by God's Providence instated in
manifold Relations, entrusted with various Offices, conversant in several
employments; in all which he had no cause to complain with him who said; Omnia
fui, nihil profuit; All of them being as so many Channels, through which run
his several Virtues and Graces.

5. I will begin with that which is the beginning of Wisdom, the Fear of the
Lord. He was eminent for Religion and Devotion. That Orthodox Religion which is
professed in the Church of England, he faithfully adhered to, cordially owning
Her Doctrine and Discipline, Hierarchy and Liturgy: and though he lived in an
unconstant Age (wherein it was the mode to change Religions as Women do
Fashions) he proved not a Reed or a Willow, but an Oak, steadfast and immovable.
Great was his respect to the Orthodox and Orthoprax Clergy: Those who were
sufferers, he charitably relieved: Those who were Laborers, he bountifully
encouraged: Schismatical Conventicles he abhorred, but duly frequented the
Church Assemblies, a Judicious Hearer of Gods Word, a diligent Receiver of the
Lords Supper: and though it was an Age wherein irreverence was in Fashion, and
devotion decryed as Superstition, he was exemplary for his reverent behavior in
Gods House. Nor was he only Religious in the Church, but in his Family,
resolving with Joshua, I and my House will serve the Lord, and daily setting
apart time for his private Meditations and Prayers, beginning and closing up
every day with God.

6. Thus served he God, and no less careful was he to serve the King,
remembering that Fear the Lord and the King are joined together. He was a
strenuous assertor of Monarchical Government; nor can I pass by one Argument,
which he often used upon that account, where Almighty God by his Prophet
Ezekiel (16. 13.) reckoning up the manifold Blessings he had conferred upon his
People Israel, mentions this among other, as none of the least: Thou did
prosper into a Kingdom; by which is clearly intimated, that those Nations are
most prosperous which are under Kingly Government; nay, that Kingly Government
is the prosperity to a People.

7. Upon the account of his Loyalty to Charles the first of Blessed Memory,
when Lord Mayor, his House was searched by those in Power, supposing there to
have found the King; the Year after, he was cast into the Tower, and there kept
a Prisoner, and for several Years put by all Offices and Employments. Upon the
account of his Loyalty to Charles the Second, during his Exile, he hazarded his
Estate and Life, by sending him considerable Sums of Money beyond Sea; and when
the Blessed time came of his joyful Return to his Throne, though he was in the
Seventy Third Year of his Age (which might have been a just excuse for his
staying at home) this Aged Barzillai went, not only over Jordan-river, but
crossed the Sea to attend his Sovereign home.

8. Next to God and the King, I dare say, the City of London was written upon
his Heart, wherein he spent by far the greatest part of his Life, and has now
breathed his last. Here, through Gods Blessing he got, and here he spent a
considerable part of his Estate in the Cities Service. He was of so public a
Spirit, that when his Son in Law brought him the first news of his being chosen
Sheriff of London, he immediately dismissed the particular business about which
he was, and never after personally followed his Trade, but gave himself up to
the City Concerns. It was his Study to know the Customs and Usages, the
liberties and privileges of the City, and accordingly his endeavor in his
several capacities to preserve and maintain them. He was not only in Word but
in Deed, an Assistant, a Guardian, yea a Pillar of the Company of Drapers. He
was a Vigilant President of St. Thomas Hospital; which probably had been ruined
before this, but that his sagacity and industry discovered the fraud of an
unjust Steward. In the Court of Aldermen, he was as an Oracle, very subservient
by his Grave and Prudent Counsels to the Cities Government. He was so far from
self seeking, that when he was Lord Mayor, he did not make those advantages
(which usually are) by selling the vacant places. Whilst a private Tradesman,
he was exact (so far as I ever heard) in Commutative Justice, in his Bargains
and Contracts of buying and selling; and when a Public Magistrate; he was no
less Conscientious of Distributive Justice between Man and Man.

9. At the Town, where he received his first Breath, he Built a Free School,
endowing it with a considerable maintenance, for the Education of Children. In
the University of Cambridge, he erected an Arabic Lecture, and settled upon the
Lecturer Forty Pounds per annum, for his pains in Reading it. Nor were these
munificent works to bear the date of their beginning from his Death, but the
one began Twenty, and the other Thirty Years ago; nor is their maintenance only
settled for some term of Years, but (as we usually express it) for ever. He was
at the charge also (at the desire of the Reverend Mr. Wheelook, now with God)
of Printing the Persian Gospels, and transmitting them into the Eastern parts
of the World. By these ways he endeavored to promote the Christian Religion,
throwing a Stone (to use his own Language) at the Forehead of Mahomet that
grand Impostor.

10. His Hands were frequently open, whilst he lived, upon all occasions, and
notwithstanding many late great damages to his Estate, he has given
considerable Legacies to the Poor of several Parishes, to Hospitals, to
Ministers Widows, and such like at his Death.

11. To the rest of his Graces and Virtues I add his Patience, whereby he
served God in Suffering. The truth is, this good Goat (like Joseph's) was
particolor'd; his Wine mixed with Water, nay with Gall and Wormwood; such
Crosses as he could not have born, were it not (said he) for this Book,
pointing to the Bible which lay before him; frequently (among others) making
use of that passage of Job; Shall we receive good at the Hands of God, and
shall we not receive Evil?

12. He Dyed of the Stone; a Stone so weighty, that it exceeded Twenty Five
Ounces; so grievous, that a little before his Death it made him roar, but yet
not murmur, God Graciously sustaining him under the Pain of it. And had there
not been a Channel (by a remarkable Providence) cut through the Stone for his
Water to pass, the stoppage of it must of necesssity have very much added to
his smart and lessened his days. But now he has taken his leave of this World;
and I may well say with St. Ambnose, In illo uno etc. In this one Person there
is a manifold loss. The King has lost a loyal Subject, the Church a Faithful
Son, the City a Prudent Senator. He is departed from the Inn of this World to
the home of his Grave, of which he was before mindful, frequently saying, Solum
mihi superest sepulchrum, where he shall sleep in the dust, till he awake and
arise to Glory.

FINIS.

