No Frontispiece my Verses have,
But what kind Readers fansyes grave.
THe Shadow of a spreading ^ree
From S^r^^^ does the ^^^pheard free,
He listens to a silver Spr^^g,
Who^e wa^e^, as they (...) do sing,
A little House (...) is near
A Pal^ce, when her (...) i^ there;
The Gentle Lamb^ are feeding by;
The (...) app^o^ching* with fa^ Eye.
Offers her (...) Hand* and ^^yes,
Shepherd* here take this (...) of ^ayes,
Embrace m^ ^^^gin, An^wers He,
I care not for thy Bays but Thee,
He was too bold: The M^se too C^y.
(...) f^own'd* and threw the sprig away.
NYMPHA LIBETHRIS: OR THE COTS WOULD MUSE, Presenting some extempore Verses to
the Imitation of young Scholars.

In four Parts.

Quis me rep^chendat, aut quis mih^ jure su^censeat, si quantu^: ^ae^^^s ad
^uas res obcundas, quantum ad f^stos d^es ludorum cel^b^andos, quantum ad ^lias
voluptates, et ad ipsam requi^^^ animi et corpo^is conceditur temporis; qu^ntum
alii tribuun^ (...) pest^vis convivi^s, quantum deni^^ ^l^ae, quantum pilae;
tantum mihi egomet ad haec studia ^^colenda sumjero?

LONDON. Printed for F. A. at Worcester. 1651.

C. PLIN. Epist. 1. 13.
SEd ta^to magis laudandi probandiq sunt, quos a scribendi recitandique studio,
haec Auditorum vel desidia vel superbi^ non retardat.

Idem, VII. 8.
FAs est et Carmine remitti: non dic^continuo et longo (id enim perfici nis^ in
o^io non potest* sed hoc arguto et brevi quod apt quantaslibet occupationes
distinguit. Lusus vocantur: sed hi lusus no^ minorem interdum gloriam, quam
seri* consequuntur.-Itaque summi Oratores, sum etiam viri, sic se aut
exercebant aut delectabant; imo delectabant, exercebantque

Adolescentibus bonae spei,
SACKVILLO, STRATFORDIIS fr. GULIELMIIS fr. HACKETTIS fr. AEARAO, Nec non,
COMMELINIS fr. Contubernalibus suis S.
VIctus Amore vestrum, videtis quo feror. In hac aetate, cum maturum aliquid
(si quid) edere deberem, et quod viris placere posset, Flosculos nescio quos
parturio, et cum pueris cano. Sed been habet, si vobis, Auditores lectissimi,
quocunque modo, ad Humanitatis studia praeire potero. Nam, ut magnopere laborem
de fama, non est tanti. Etiam me liora Ingenia quam est hujus hominis, sine
venia non placent* Vos vero valete, et Musam vestram, quod facitis, amate.

Vester C. B.

The Chief Names honored by the Muse.
CHANDOS. Beale. Bellers. Bosworth. Bowr. Bridges. Brown. Burton. Carew.
Charlton. Collier. Commelin. Constable. Critton. Crofts. Falkland. Freeman.
Fuller. Godwin. Greenwood. Green. Hacket. Hammond. Higford. Hill. Howell. Kery.
Laws. Lingen. Luther. Merret. Mynn. Palmer. Parry. Philips Pinke. Powell.
Prideaux. Reading. Rogers. Rusell. Samwayes. Savage. Skynner. Stapylton.
Stratford. Tailor Thomas. Tours. Turner. Warren. Williams. Whear. Womock.
Wright. Wroughton. Zuinglius.
The Consecration of all.
TO MY LADY CHANDOS.
MADAM, See here, your Roell Muse
Exults for Joy your Name to use;
(Fair, Noble, Good, all Titles due,
Are understood, when I name you:)
Well knowing every Thing is graced,
That Is under your protection placed.
She Is innocent yet fl^es to Your wing,
To Avoid Suspicion. She does bring
Some Men of Arms, and Other some,
Whose praises do from Learning come.
To Ladies, She has Honor done:
And above All* Your self are One.
She has inserted a few Toys,
To please and profit the School-boyes.
I charge her, not disturb your pra^'r,
(Though sometime she breaths holy air,
And sings the LITURGY in verse:)
Nor unseasonably rehearse:
B^t wait* til, at you vacant time,
Y^u please to listen to her Rhyme.
When you, THAT IS GOOD, vouchsafe to say;
That, o that word's the Poets Bay.
To the same.
MAdam your Muse has been in Labor too;
And she is now delivered, after you.
Her Off spring has it is Fate, as you desire,
To live or* if you favor not, expire.
B^t may Yours last, and in all Grace-excell;
And be -- what? The fair Mothers parallel.
Praeceptori Suo, Mro C. B.
CAntas, non tener as Amationes:
Nullus Carminibus tuis Priapus.
O factum been! Sanctiore Musa.
Tu Casus modo fortium Virorum,
Et Libros canis eruditiores:
Phaedri pellepidam modo et Fabellam,
Et donas Epigramma Sarbievi.
Nulla est Pag^na de tuo Libello,
Qua non sim meliorque doctiorque.
Haec, inter trepidos Scholae susurros,
Condis Carmina, idoneum levamen
Curarum. Domini die vocante,
Volvis majus Opus, sacrosque libros
Interpres populo Eloquentia apta
Exp^nis, Grege non tumultuante.
Humana et sacra quando miscuisti
Felix, atque Homim Deoque se^vis;
O sis aeque Homini Deoque carus!
Vive, et scribe diu, venustiores
Arts et sapiens severiores.
Hackettu^.

VEster Amor, mi Praeceptor, sit Nympha Libethris
Non solum: Haec eadem sit quoque noster Amor.
Thorn.

PRithee, what Virgin's that, so fine, so sweet,
That trippeth ore our Hills with her fair feet?
Such Beauties we in Cotswold do not use
To see o^t. Ha^ It is my Master's Muse:
The Mountain-Muse. She Is Gentle, if she is His:
Let Us all ^un after her, and get a kiss.
Sackvill.

IF your Muse hither make her often resorts,
She Will be as much loved, as were Dovers sports.
Stratford.

NYmphae (si^ Te semper ament) Libethrides adsint
Semper Virgineo, sic precor una, choro.
A. S.

Daphnis. Amyntas.
D. A Myntas, ho! Did thou espv, t^ day,
A m^untain-Ny^ph pass nim^ly by this way?
Her Garments handsome were, though nothing brave
Her Cheek and Eye, such as thy P^y'lis have.
A. Daphnis, to Roell house early she went,
To her brave Lord, some Token to present.
D. Amyntas, Thanks: No better news I Would hear:
I know, she will find a noble-welcom there.
Tounsend.

On the Poems of Mr C. B. sometime of Gloc. Hall.
SIr, He that reads your verse will say, In it
There is some Learning too as well as Wit.
Although it now ly desolate, Gloucester Hall
Was surely sometime more than a bare wall:
And among more Ingenious Fellows there
You conversation had with learnd Will. Whear.
Your so^e^ Muse, not puffed with Wine and Ale,
Shall b' entertained both in the Hills and Vale.
T. B.

To Zoilus.
POor Zoilus! I do already know,
Because tho^ think me Friend to Cicero,
(And I Will prevent thee in it) I ^is thy G^be is,
Even old Ma^tial's, Car^ina quod scribis.
I care not for thy censure, but c^nclude,
Cause it displeases thee, my Ve^se is good.
A MICO.
BArksdallii hic Imaginem videas Tui,
Musaeque cantus audias gratis suae,
At audiens vidensque praedices been,
Ut Ille semper p^aedicat de Te optime.
NYMPHA LIBETHRIS OR THE COTSWOLD MUSE.

I. Part.

VIRG II. Nymphae noster Amor Libeth^ides.

The Nymphs, that dwell above
Oth' Mountains, are our Love.
LONDON, Printed for F. A. at Worcester. 1651.

C. PLIN. 1. 3.
E^finge aliquid et excude, quod sit perpetu^ Tuum. Nam reliqua rerum t^arum
post ^^ alium atque alium dominum sortientur: hoc nu^ quam tuum desinet esse si
semel caeperit.

Idem 7. 28.
NEc sunt parum multi, qui carpere amic^ Suos Iudicium vocant.

Nympha Libethris, OR The Cotswold Muse.
I. To the Reader.
THe Cotswold Muse so called, to do her right,
For rustic plainness, not for any hight;
Humbly c^aves pardon, if she chance to meet
Some delicate Reader, on her tender feet.
She ^une^ her innocent Notes for pupils young,
Whose fansy cannot digest a verse too strong:
High Poems will de^^r them; these may teach
And animate, because so near their reach.
II Ad Mag^strum Jonesium Coll. Aen. Socium.
C^^^or meorum Carminum, si vis, peto;
^i quid merentur, calculum adjicias tuum.
^^d non merentur; talis est candor tameu,
(...), ^c erga ^e amicum Amor tuus;
(...) ^aec apta, quae pueri legant,
(...) d^^^is posse non sperni viris.
Doctori Greenwood Procanc. Ox.
OXoniensem qui Inventutem regis,
Refrixit erga me vetus Amor tuus?
Si non refrixit, nostris Tu Musis save,
(Nam leniunt miserias hae cantu meas)
Istum lapillo m^liore and signa Librum:
Quem vestra pubes, and pueri nostri legant.
Sic prospere Regiminis Annus exeat Tibi,
Et Sylva semper viridis florescat Tua.
III. To Dr. Warren, why he makes verses.
WHen I am weary of prose, and Grotius
H^s Gravity is to my stomach nauseous:
Then call I up my Cotswold Muse, to string
Her Instrument, and (though but hoarse) to sing.
She sits with me, since we familiar grew,
Wh^n^ ere I want such company as you.
Often she brings my ^riends in, on her feet,
And renders their sweet Memory yet more sweet.
I smile at her, if she do chance to hit
On a good expression, or some point of wit:
And if she barbarise, like boys at school,
I smile too, and then chide, Away you fool.
IV. On the Death of Mr. Charles Parry Physician of Hereford.
YOu that have c^edited your heavenly Art
By your long life, and health of every part:
You that have thousand patients yet alive,
New life unto your Memory to give:
You that could a lived still, but that you would die
Seeing the Church and College va^ant lie:
You that did ^lesse your Physic with much prayer,
By which I think, we so soon cured were:
You that, when living, would not take from me,
One small piece; now you are dead, accept this Fee:
This my remembrance of your worth you have,
A mean, yet grateful verse, to adorn your Grave.
V. To Mris. Elizabeth Williams, Jan. 1. with Fragmenta Regalia.
SOmetime, in Littl's Much:
I think this Book is such.
Great Elizabeth is he^e,
And many a Noble Peer.
Here in a Model true,
Y^u may their pictures view:
Pictures, that represent
The Face, and Minds intent.
Is It not a great Gift then,
The Queen and all her Men!
It Is not enough; to you
Much more, from me, is due.
The rest in prayer I give,
That you and yours may live.
VI. Upon an obscure hard Book.
WHat meanst? The Volums open, and I look
With strict intent on; yet to me the Book
Is closed st^ll, and ty*d. I am as blind
In The sense as if, when scat^er'd by the wind,
Sybilla's leaves I w^^e to reco^pose;
These leaves are ^s unknown to me as those.
Let others purge their ^r ^ins, with some rare drug,
To pier^^ t^y meanin^. The Italian shrug,
Or nod, or any sign ^nstead of speech
I Will rathe^ hea^^en to. Thou do not teach,
But puzle me: And I have cause to doubt
The Aut^or, to am^se us, put ^t out.
Well, Go^ thy ways. Ce^tain, thou a^t less good,
Because thou wr^^'st not to be understood.
VII. To Mrs. Abigail Stratford standing silent.
YOur Silence speaks your Virg'n Modesty:
Your sil^nce speaks against our loquacity:
Your silence te^s us, that you med^tate,
And treasure what your M^t^er does relate.
Silence, the g^acefull ^rn^ment of a Maid,
Is the wifes ^est def^nce. When all is said,
The Husbands wrath ^akes place; for her own sake,
And for his too, let silence answer make.
Now, since so many gifts in silence are,
What language with sweet silence can compare?
VIII. Preface to a paraphrase of Grotius de veritate, etc.
WHat learned Grotius, in Dutch Verse,
To Holland Merchants did rehearse,
My Muse would to the English send,
For this, which was the Authors end:
That, among all things bought and sold,
And pu^c^as^ of the Indian gold,
To make amends for what they ^e thence,
They may transport one pea^l from hence;
And pla^t Religion in those lands,
Where Reason has any commands.
Go on my Muse: see yonder Ray
From Heaven, to light thee on thy way!
IX. Upon the English Liturgy put into Verse.
EXcuse me for my pains: I thought it meet,
T'erect our cast book on P^etic feet.
Happly, in Verse it will be read by th^se,
That would not use it in the revere^d prose.
And i^ the Book must needs to G^ave be sent,
The Verse may serve ^t for a Monument.
X. To Mr. David Williams with the Instructions for travel. Kal. Jan.
OBlations take their worth from the Altar, where
They Are laid. Although profane before, yet there
They become sacred. Sir, if that be true,
This now is somewhat worth, being given to You.
The Authors name some Reputation
Adds to the w^rk, describing every Nation:
Not that you should a Traveller become,
Your Travel is to do much good at home.
XI. To my La. C. with some Papers.
MAdam, These leaves, in stead of Fruit, entreat
Admission, to confess, not pay my Debt.
Great Debt! The more I pa^, the more is due:
'Cause my Abil^ty I owe to You.
Pray, let these Notes attend on Your commands,
Until my Grotius come to kiss your Hands.
XII. Another.
MAdam, I know y'abound with your own store
Of Observations. But as the Poor,
At N^^ y^^r, bring their Apples and their Nuts
T^ L^rd^ of Woods and O^^hards; and none shuts
The door against t^em: So may your Servant fare,
And these Notes enter where rich Volums are.
XIII. Upon the Picture of H. Grotius, in the front of one of his Books, put
into English.
THe Grace (and Shame) of Holland, Friend of France,
Sweds Orator, ^he Conqueror of Chance;
Poet, Historian, Lawyer, and Divine,
(See and admire Him) all in One combine.
The learned Latin wo^ld long since, now you
Of Britanny may entertain him too.
XIV. Upon H. Grotius, and his principal works, particularly De Imperio, etc.
HE, who the Greek wise Sayings did translate,
With equal Pen, to Latium; Vindicate
From Jew, ^urk, Pagan, our Religions Truth,
As learned, as the Aged, in his Youth:
He, who the Hollandian States Piety
Presented unto every impartial eye:
Who in the Laws of War and Peace all Nations
Has well instructed: And, in's Annotations
On the whole Book of God, has made that Light
Shine to unprejudiced minds more bright:
He that was studious how to reconcile,
This and that Church, in mild Cassanders style:
Has shown, what Doctrine was Pelagius;
Who's older Calvin or Arminius;
Is ever like Himself. Here, which is much,
He Is Moderator 'twixt the State and Church;
And clearly tells you, when you may prefer,
To The Ancient Rish^p, the y^ung Pre^byter;
And when that new Invention may please,
By Elders Lay, to give the Pastor case.
XV. Against lascivious Poets.
INdeed they are not Poets: Creatures of wine,
And w^nches; and not of the siste^s nine,
The Virg^ns of the Water. I abuse
That sacred Title. ^enuine Poets use,
Like Father Homer, to make, not to m^r
M^ns manners, better than Chrysippus far.
He that cannot tempe^ Modesty with wit,
Let him away, with Ovid, to the Get.
XVI. Ad Jacobum Commetinum med. cum operibus Cratonis.
Qui (toties non est miserum aegrotare?) quotannis
Sanasti officio Meque M^osque tuo;
E^ ti^i Cratonem Magnum! i^ feliciter Ille,
Et tu rem medicam (sic voveo) facias.
Sic facis; and salvum te semper p^aestet Apollo:
Vt possis medicam porrige^e usque manum.
XVII. Ad Thomam Carew, apud J. C. cum Davenantii Poematiis.
TEque meum, cum triste fuit mihi tempus, amorem,
Offi^iis dico demeruisse tuis:
Meque tuum, si sort occasio detur, amorem,
Officiis dices demcruisse meis.
Si placet, interea, hoc graudis non grande Po^tae,
Ingenii dignum munus habeto tui.
XVIII. To Mr. T. S. at his Generals Funeral, Colonel Mine.
SIr, could I tune my song as sweetly o'r
Your Generals hea^se, as does the Swan before
He dies, you might expect, at the Funeral,
Something from Me, worthy your General.
Let others, in He^oic Poems, sing
His praise, and worthily. I Will only bring
Some sighs and tears, not from dissembling Art,
But such as rise from a dejected Heart.
When you shall mention, how he did excel
In valor and fidelity; how well
The soldier and the city loved him; there
From my sad melting eye shall drop a Tear.
When, at your Periods, some, amongst the Crowd*
TO approve you^ gr^tefull Se^mon, hem a loud;
Though I extremely love your piety,
My Commendation shall be a sigh.
Thus, in rude sighs and Tears, I celebrate
The Dead. True Grief is not elaborate.
XIX. To Mr. Laurence Womock, after the taking of Hereford, 1645.
IF Preachers may be crowned, as Poets may,
You as your Name, shall surely wear the Bay:
But Laurence, when so many now make suit,
And preach long Sermons, who before were mute;
Why are not you employed? You preach as long:
But this weakens your Cause, You preach too strong.
And you are put back, now I more nearly see,
Because you have a spice of Prelacy.
No matter* Fr^end; contentedly forbear:
Your eloquence shall find a Lady sear.
XX. To Mr. Turner, when the Governor had given him one of his Livings.
SEe how it goes! I that do preach and teach;
Though your perfection I cannot reach,
In chair or Pulpit; here amuselesse now,
And, for our facul^^es sake, I think, on you
Am c^st. The Question 'twixt us shall soon end:
I Will be your Curate, and so keep my Friend.
XXI. Ad D. To. Bosworthium, cum invitatus non veniret.
TEque, tuosque velim, mitis Bosworthe, sodales,
Innocuis mixtas salibus esse dapes:
Ceciliusque, Philippusque, and quo^ ^atsius ille,
Powellu^que tuus, Vinaliusque ferunt.
Illis pr^ largo, cum caetera reddis, amore,
Quid mihi das? Veniam, dulcis Amice, dabis.
XXII. On the translations by Sir To. Stapylton.
WIse Juv'nal, neat Musaeus, Ovid sweet,
The Belgic bellic History, in meet
And equal phrase to the Greek and Latin, all
English^! You by what Title shall we call?
A polite Courtier, Grave Philosopher,
Poet, Historian, and Soldier.
The Authors, you translate, have the Great Seal,
To make them free of the Engiish Common weal.
XXII. On Mr. Howels Vocal Forest.
You Have made the Oak, Vine, Olive, and the rest,
Discourse rare passages, as became them best:
The Laurels, you have h^ghly honored too;
And it is their Gratitude to honor you.
A sprig or Branch is not enough. If we
May have a Vote, you shall have a whole Tree.
XXIII. Upon a Visit of my La. C.
IT calls to mind the times Heroic, when
Angels descended to converse with men:
It calls to mind the Day, when Angels sung
Gods glory, earths peace, Good w^ll men among.
The Prince of Glory, to save man from sin,
Made h^s first Visit to the poorest In;
And to the wilderness he took his way,
To reduce home the sheep, was gone astray.
This lowliness and Meekness did fore-^un,
And c^use his glo^^ous exaltation.
Even so, Great Persons a^e not of less Rate,
This divine Goodness when they imitate.
By these their high Humi^ities, they are,
And Condiscensions the Greater far.
Our Visit was not silent: She did say
Words, that are Music to me every day:
They dwell in m'^ar and memory: to express
Them on this paper, were to take them less.
XXIV. Upon the D^cease of my Infant-Lady.
EVen so, the nipping wind in May does come,
And b^ast the choicest fruit, in the first bloom:
Yet shall this Blos^om of Nobility,
Preserved by Ang^ls care, ^mmortal be:
Such delicate Bodies sleep, and are la^d by,
In their R^positories. I hey do not die.
XXV. Upon the S^hol^rs succeeding S^uld^ers at Sudeley Castle. To my Lo. C.
MY Lord, If we kept Garrison in your House,
^e should perhaps, after the Soldiers use,
Welcome your H^nour with Artillery,
As now we do w^^h o^r Poetry.
But, we believe, your L^r^ships better pleased,
The Castle's of the Ga^rison now eased;
And will prefer the Gentle M^ses Lyre,
Before the thundering Ma^s his smoke and fire.
You Are our Good Angel; to your Gracious eyes,
We offer up this Paper-sac^^fice.
Nor make we any excuse, for, in our s^nse,
The Pardon's sure, where Duty's the offense.
XXVI. Sudeley to Rowill.
ROwill, the Hills, on which thou sitst, do not
So much exalt thee, as my Lord, thou'st got
Into thy bosom, when I desert ly,
Vouchsaft perhaps a glance of's passing eye.
I must confess, at present thy low roof
(The Hills too're fitter for his Horses hoof)
Excels my Turr^ts, and whilst He is there,
Sudeley is scarce said to continue here.
The time will come, if our Hopes be not vain,
When Sudeley shall be Sudeley once aga^n:
And Thou, my envied Rowill (no more harm
I wish thee) shall return into a Farm.
XXVII. Rowill to Sudeley.
WHat if my Lord well knowing the unrest
Of Palaces and Courts, does think it best,
Sometimes to choose a sol^tary place,
And it with his beloved presence grace?
Envy not, stately Sudeley, it is not thy Crime,
That is the cause, but Troubles of the Time.
Peace, banished from Great Houses, is retired
To Me, and such like Corners. I desired
My Lord should breath himself a w^^le with Me;
When War is ended, let him dwell with Thee.
XXVIII. Amico nobili D. Gul. Higford, cum elogiis Thuan.
QVid me non dignum tanto digna^is honor,
O decus, o ^atriae gloria magna tuae!
Scilicet, ingenii cum praeste^ ipse vigore:
Obscuro lucem conciliare placet?
Sim vanus, nisi me lauds meruisse negaro,
Quas tua facunde Musa benigna dedit.
Nec tamen immeritas aspernor: non mihi ^ale
Ingenium, nec ita est cornea fibra mihi.
En, ^^bi Docto^um Elogia (at ne s^erne) virorum
Do: Tibi par nullum scribiter Elogium.
XXIX. Men's regnum bona possidet, etc. Sen.
RIches exalt not men on high,
No^ costly clothes of Tyrian die:
Nor Court, no^ Crown, nor other thing,
Is the mark proper of a King.
He, that from all base fears has rest;
That banishes vice from his breast;
Whom no Ambition does move,
Nor the unconstant peoples l^ve;
Whose Mind's his best Dominion,
Free from unruly passion;
He Is truly King. Thus if you live,
A Kingdom to your self you give.
XXX. Answer to one, that asked why he loved a Gentlewoman, not extreme
handsome.
THe Reason, Sir, is, if you would needs know,
That which the Poet has expressed so:
There Is no such thing as that we beauty call,
It is mere cousenage all:
For, though some long ago
Liked certain colors mingled so and so,
That does not ty me now from choosing new?
If I a fancy take
To black and blew,
That fancy does it Beauty make.
XXXI. His Love.
HOw can I choose but place my highborn Love,
Where I these Graces find come from above?
Humble in Heart, in mind discerning, chaste
And temperate in Body, without vast
Unlimited Desires; whose passions all,
At their Queen Reasons voice, both rise and fall:
Cou^teous in speech and gesture: of a Face,
Which Modesty and Mildness sweetly grace:
Ears und^fil'd: Rest^ained Eyes: a Tongue
Well governed, ^eady to defend, not wrong:
To God dev^ut: a Friend unfeigned: prone
To give and forgive* Good to all; Best to One.
These beauties ^nvy cannot see; cannot approve:
I see, and seeing cannot choose but love.
XXXII. At the Funeral of his School-fellow C. M.
COme Scholars, I invite you all,
Unto your Fellows Funeral;
Not to afflict your selves and gr^eve,
But take a lesson how to live:
Of the Dead learn Humility,
Obedience, love, modesty:
Learn, what to Scholars learning gains,
Assiduous Industry and pains:
Learn, above all, to think upon,
How soon a mortal life is gone:
And seeing this life is perplexed,
Esteem him blessed, whose turn is next:
Whilst we with toil do con our parts,
He Is raised above all humane Arts:
He needs no more Tuition;
For lecture, he has Vision.
XXXIII. Another.
ANd shall we never meet again? no way?
Neither a^ Sc^oo^, nor Field; at Books, nor play
Is death so envious to our harmless Age,
To cal^ ^^ thus untimely off the stage?
Or is it not envy, but more pity; 'cause
Such T^agedies are acted here: the Laws,
And Learning silenced by the Drum* It Is so;
I see what is best; come all away, let us go.
Let Us leave this evil world, while we are Young,
Untain^ed by this Generation.
XXXIV. Vp^n the Death of his Brother C. M. to his Uncle R M.
I Have heard that Man himself is only spirit,
And does no die, but only goes to inherit
A better ^ife; that he ^s then set free,
And rescu^d from the Bodies Custody.
If this be all the hurt that Death can do us,
Why should we fear our Death, when it comes to us,
Or, grieve our Friend-departure? It Is no cros^,
Unless we think our Friends gain is our loss,
^et am not I so wife to moderate
The sorrow for my Brothers ea^ly fate,
On such Considerations. If I st^y
The Cu^rent of my Tea^^, I must needs say,
It Is through a childish in adve^tency,
And want of w^t, sadly to weigh, what I
Have lost in such a Brother: how I am
Half dead, at least, in him. Brother's a name
More near than Friend: and Friends are styled the same.
This would pierce de^p, did I not find in you,
Brother and Uncle, yea and Father too.
XXXV. Epitaphium Magistri T. Reading.
Qui potuit fel^ce Scholam formare Minerva;
Cujus ab o^e ^ios pulpita docta sono^;
^ui mores, simul Jugenium praeclara dedere
No^ina, Quem vivum to^ coluere ^oni*
(...) E^^^viae hic compostae pace quie^^unt:
Ipse sed est coelo redditus ante sue.
XXXVI. An Epitaph upon Mr. Jo. Thomas.
VAin Mortal, bid conceits Ad^eu:
Happiness lost was never true.
Art thou ^orn in noble place?
^^ thy' Education like thy Race?
Have thou of Land, and Wealth such store,
That thou would desire no more?
Have thou a wise virtuous and fair,
Ready to bless thee with an hei^?
Have thou Honor? Have thou Friends?
Have thou all that Fortune lends?
Pride not thy self. Lo, here lies One,
Who had all these: and He is gone.
XXXVII. Upon the same.
RUde Death was it fit, that thy pale hand should light
Upon that Face, and in eternal night
Close up those eyes? H^dst thou but a while stood,
And v^ew'd him first, his youth, his beauty, his good
Graces and virtues: Th^se might mitigate,
If ought could move inexorable Fa^e.
But thou, greedy of a rich prize, in have
Our Friend in thy cold killing arms embraced.
Keep what thou can of him: but know, thou must
Be accountab^e for that precious Dust.
XXXVIII. Upon the Death of Mris. Dorothy Thomas.
A Divine Gift, is expressed in her Name.
And in he^ l^fe and death she was the same.
A divine Gift, she was first in her Birth,
Blessing her parents, and adorning e^rth:
A divine Gift unto her Husband dear,
When Marriage made them a most happy pair:
A divine Gift in Death, where in She is
Returned unto everlasting Bliss.
Her Name she does in life and death maintain,
First Given by God, then Given to God again.
XXXIX. Upon her Dying few days after her Husband, Great with Child.
WAs not the noble Husband sacrifice
Suffi^ient to please the angry eyes
Of cruel Destiny, but the wif^ too,
So virtuous, so young, so fair, so true.
Must with him to the Grave* Were not they twain,
Enough for Death, but they must dye again
In their young child, and that in the very womb,
Taking the Mothers body for h^s Tomb.
A^ Death! thrice cruel Death! Can we
That could not bear one b^ow, bear three?
XL. Upon my La. C. and her sisters coming into the Country, in a very rainy
'Day.
WHy do the Heavens thus melt in streams to day,
At the approach of Virtuous Ladies, say:
It Is not for so^row at so fair a sight;
They Are tears of ^oy that thus eccl^pse the light.
And see, the Fit being past the Heavens look clear,
Opening their flaming eye to see them here.
Here may they pass time with content, and stay,
Lest Heaven weep sadly when They go away.
XLI. Pro Schola reparata: Ad Maecenates.
EIoquar? at tenerae vix est audacia linguae.
Eloquar: and liceat cuilibet esse p^o.
Me pietas gratum esse jubet: nam me quoque tangit
Ornatae vestro munere cura Scholae.
Quas possum Grates habeo, persolvere dignas
Non opis est: Tenuis Gratia grata Bonis.
Pergitevos gratas Musas decorare, patroni:
Et pergent Musae vos decorare piae.
XLII. In Crastinum Beatae Luciae.
Quis clamor turbat tranquilla silentia noctis?
Cur, Pueri, multa curritis, ecce, face?
Agnosco; fulsit Puerts sanctissima, dulcis
Lucit; Grata Scholae Lucia luce magis.
XLIII. In D. Doctorem Kerry, and Uxorem ejus piae Memoriae.
UNus Amor vinxit concordia pectora: and una
Alimenta p^aebui^ pauperibus Charitas.
Ambos una dies g^andae vos Justu^it: U^a
Recondit (o Beatos!) u^na, Cineres.
XLIV. In Sholam torridam.
HE^^! Q^antus no^aestus habet! Pater, audis, Apollo,
Ig^^^^n (...) ^^b^es mi^^us e^adi^s.
Musarum, nosti, D^^^us est haec culta tuarum;
Ft per (...) sonare melos.
Insuper, ^ic planta florescunt, ecce, ten^llae:
C^udelis fruct^^ ^^ere, Phaebe, potes?
XLV. Aliter.
PErvida sole calet nimio Schola, Maxim Phaebe,
M^^^us in terras rad antia lumina sparge!
Nec Te adeo fallit; no sti namque omnia Phoebus;
Haec sibi caelestes assumunt limina Musae:
Sunt and adhuc tenerae plantae (audi mente paterna?)
Nec sufferre valent servorem solis iniqui.
P. S.

XLVI. Upon the School extreme hot in the Summer.
IS it not wondrous hot! O dear
Father Apollo, shoot thy Rays
More gently: know thou not that here
Thy loved Muses make their lays?
Besides, O hear!
Our plants are young,
And cannot bear
The scorching Sun.
XLVII. De Euryalo and Niso: Aen. 9.
Quis Deus, O Juvenes; quae vos tam dira cupido
Excitat ad Martis praelia non parilis?
Nise, cur Furyalum Tu in tanta pericula ducis?
Eu* yale, ah! Nisum cur velis ipse sequi?
Est ea vis animis. Tendunt in praelia. Somno
Co^pora pressa gravi multa dedere neci.
Ambobus fuit unus Amor, Victoria and una;
Sorsque una, h^u! nimium ^^ortis acerba suit.
XLVIII. Aliud.
NIsus ut hostili morientem cuspide vidit
Euryalum, in medios percitus, ecce, ruit.
His fuit idem animus diverso corpore clausus:
Pa^te h^c sublat^, ^am fugit illa simul.
P. S.

XLIX. Upon the loss of some Copies.
ALa^ poor Verses? -- why do I complain?
No matter ^f they never be found again.
Lament the loss, the irreparable loss
Of ^i^^ie's De^ads, Tullies Hortensius,
Or his Republica! Terent's Comed^e,
Or his M^nanders; Ovid's Fas^^ be,
And such like Poems worth the naming: These
Ex tempo^e Vers^s may be repaired with ease.
Unless the Reader take all to the Best,
You may complain, you did not lose the Rest.
L. To ^is S^holars.
AS tender parents, with their Children, may
Go^ to Hide and Seek, and other childish play:
So I, that should have closed this youthly vein
Long since, for your sakes open it again.
Non erit grave, si adjecero hanc Praeceptoris Responsionem ad Valedictoriam
Petri Smithi, ad pueros itidem excitandos.
GRa^^lo^ ^i^i, mi Fili, te talem genuisse. Eum te indicat O^atio tua, de quo
liceat paulum gloriari. Nec aequum est probum dimittere Discipulum, nisi merito
Elogio honestatum. In moribus tuis pietatem agnosco, and modestiam, assiduam in
studiis d^ligentiam. Literis Graecis pariter ac Latinis ita excultus e^, ut
nemo antecedentium, meo quidem tempore, fuerit magis. Grammaticus, Poeta,
Rhetor, Historicus, logices etiam elementa and Mathematices primis, quod a^unt,
labris d^gustati. Et nunc pleniori haustu sitim tuam explebit Oxontum. Plura
di^e^^m in laudem tuam, nisi te laudanda facere, quam lauds audire mallem.
Itaque, quod reliquum est, te hortor erudite ac dilecte Adolescen^, ut laudibus
te semper dignum praebeas: ut Scholae nostrae idem evadas and ornamentum and
exemplum. Habebis in Tutorem, ^uvenem doctum, probum, pium, olim ex hac
Schola^^ta, cum Tutorem huic Scholae debeas, cogitate and Philosophi^m
debiturun. In Aulam B. Mariae cooptandus, ex me scias, Romanensibus in more
positum, ut Opera sua Mariae dedicent: Tu vero teipsum and tua omnia Soli Deo
Opt. Max. Consecrare debes. Cujus Gratiae innixus (...). Quod ut fiat, precor,
non Sancta Mariatibi ad sit propitia, sed Christus.

FINIS.
THE COTSWOLD MUSE.

II. Part.

MARTIAL. Sunt bona, sunt quaedam mediocria; sunt mala plura Quae legis: hic
aliter non fit, A^ite, liber.

Some Epigrams are good, some are so so:
(This is the fate of books) the bad are mo.
LONDON, Printed for F. A. at Worcester. 1651.

DEDICATION.
To the Hopes of Hawling, Mr. Henry and Mr. Richard Stratfords.
YOu, although yet but very young,
Perhaps will listen to my song:
On your Hills does the Shepherd keep,
As good as any Cotswold sheep.
And seeing your pastures fruitful are,
My Muse, I know, shall not go bare.
May Both of you live long and thrive,
And your learned Fathers name revive.
SECOND PART.
I. To Mr. Fra. Powell of Chapter Chapter
FRanc, I was writing to you, and bit my pen,
And scratcht too for a Verse, once and again:
But then my tender Muse told me, she knew,
You were too much a Critic, and withdrew.
II. The Muse craves entertainment.
GEntlemen, I have traveled far; and now,
Some Bonus Genius guided me to you:
I do not come, to put you to much cost,
Provide for me, neither your baked nor roast.
Give leave to rest my ^eet, weary and bare;
A hard Bed contents me, and harder Fare.
III. Cornelia Mother to the Gracchi, e Jul. Scaligero.
SCipio me genuit; genui Cornelia Gracchos:
Quid mirum est, genitam fulmine far faces!
Scipio got me, I Graccbies bare. No wonder:
If fi^y brands came from One begot of Thunder.
IV. To Mris. Jane Commelin, upon the birth of her second Daughter, at the
burial of the first.
Cousin, See what reward from Heaven you have!
So soon as your loved Daughter was in the Grave,
Whom God took from you, for Correction
Of your excessive love; a resurrection,
To recompense your patience, from the Tomb
Is g^anted her, thorough your fruitful womb.
You may conceive, that as the languisht here,
She, by degree, did take a new growth there.
Nor need you call this child another name;
But fansy it to be the the very same.
So, when you pluck a fresh Rose; where it stood,
There presently springs up a second Bud.
V. To Dr. Rogers Canon of Hereford, at his first Residence.
THe Persian Magi, to the new born King,
Present their Gold, as the first offering:
Duty commands me, give somewhat of mine
To our new born Canonical Devine.
It Is a small piece. Had I the rich man's store,
My learned Doctor, I would give you more.
I Would give you as large presents, as the rest,
Whom you now entertain at your Great Feast:
Not so great as your lectures. We had in Them,
Dainties from Athens and Jerusalem.
VI. A new years Gift to Dr. Bosworth, Physician of Hereford.
DOctor, This is the only piece of Gold,
Brought me this good Time. Gratitude grows old,
And fa^nt, in Scholars. No reward has He,
That is an Informator of School-free.
Nay, which is more: In all my Parish, none
Has vouchsalt me a Church-oblation.
Did I perhaps a School unlincens'd teach;
Or some new lecture to the people preach;
I should then at their Feasts, my fingers lick,
Have Gold in purse, and Cassok wear of silk.
Be it as it is. You will this Fee approve,
In stead of more Gold, a true Golden Love.
VII. A present to an oblivious Friend.
DEar Sir, Two new books of the same I send,
That when, as you are wont, the One you lend,
The Other may constantly upon you wait,
As Monitor, lest you forget me strait.
VIII. To the same.
I Understand, it is somewhat grievious,
That my rude Muse called you Oblivious;
Frown not, my Friend, your Memory I will spare;
If, at my need, mine your Affections are.
I give you leave never to think on me,
Till, by some Office, you may useful be.
It Is not the often Remembrance shows a friend,
But friendly Office. So let the Quarrel end.
IX. To one that loved not Verses.
WHen, with ingenuous freedom, I rehearse
My, not amorous nor fair, yet comely Verse:
With wrinckled face, thou cry'st out, Vanity!
Now prithee, what is all that is done by thee?
X. Upon his seven Children: two Girls dead, one alive, and four Boys.
THe divine Goodness! which I have often tried;
A pair to seven is quickly multiplied.
Two that were wisest, quickly made return,
(Pardon me this one te^^, falls on their Urn:)
The female remanent, with observant eye,
I Would have to learn her Mothers hu^wifry.
To the four boys, I Would leave th^s ^egacie,
(God giving) my Arts and Theology.
If I can breed them Scholars, there is none
Can say, I gave them not a portion.
In ^he mean time, I heartly wish, The Quorum
Would grant me, but Jus trium liberorum.
XI. On the Death of Mr. Fr. Pink.
ARe thy eyes closed, my learned Oculist,
And t^y clear light extinguished? What, is it
No herb, within thy spacious knowledge, can
Cur^ the D^se^se of the Physician?
I know wha^ shut thine e^es; thine eyes did see
Much which thou wou^dst ^^t: And thy Grief
For public Evils, weighed down thy life.
Go, and find Simples now, (until we come
And meet there,) in the Groves of Elysium.
XII. To Dr. Charlton.
BRother, Thy Helmont's deep mysterious Art
I will not censure. But, in every part,
I saw such wit, and bright new language shine,
Without the Title, soon I judged it Thine.
One thing I blam*d (yet I know 'twas well meant)
With too la^ge an Elogium it was sent.
XIII. Upon Dr. Croft, Dean of Hereford, his first Residence.
THe people looked for their good cheer and wine,
According to the old Custom: By a fine
Devise you do ev^de (though the sad days
May well excuse not feasting, many wa^s)
You, in your Grave and learned l^ct^res* bring,
To feast us, Great Melc^iz^dec the King;
Your Auditors, intent on you, still seed;
And taste the wine, He brought for Abrams need:
This when the Townsmen heard the ^hu^ch-^en say,
They envyed our good cheer and went their way.
XIV. To Sir William Croft, with Thuani P^incipes.
WIse Sir, when I considered, how I might
Th^nk you for the Letter you were pleased to write,
In favor of me, to that Prelate, who
Thinks it reward enough of Good, to do:
This Manuscript was ^eady at commmand,
And all my Princes haste to kiss your hand:
Here you have diverse Knights and Prelates too,
Some few like Him, and fewer such as you.
XV. Upon Dr. Brown Dean of Hereford, Preaching.
YOnder he is* prepare and purge your care;
You shall a Chrysostom or Ambrose hear;
With heavenly st^eins of divine Nazianz^n:
Such voice, such style, such gesture as those Men,
(We believe) used, when in their Homili^s,
They drew so many Tear^ from sinners eyes:
Not more than This, by his sad sacred Theme
Of De profundis, and Jerusalem.
XVI. D. M. Godwino, Praelectori Heref.
VIs'n verum? mi Praelector doctissime, vestra
Lectura est Clero plurima, nulla poplo.
XVII. Mr. Stephano Philips Praelectori Electo, Paulo ante urbem captum. 1645.
AHduros hosts* tua quod Facundia mollis,
Quam vota exposcunt nostra, reclusa fuit.
XVIII. To Mr. John Beale.
YOu that have read Socinus, Crellius,
And the Interpreter Volkelius,
Yet to the English Church have given your name,
Led by a discreet judgment; not by fame,
Or 'cause you knew no other, from your Youth
Bred up in this: They that embrace the Truth,
On such weak Gr^unds, are still in error: Friend,
I call you without scruple, without end:
Nor w^ll I care for their unlearned mocks,
That, beside Calvin, think naught Orthodox.
I mention Him not for dishonor, but
I think all Truth was not in one brain shut.
XIX. To the religious pair of widows Mris. P. Green, and Mris. M. Russel, with
the La. Falklands life.
I Know, when you have once perused it,
You must confess the Book a present fit.
This Lady was composed of Alms and Prayer:
You live in Imitat^on of Her.
Truly Religious, yet was she timorous too:
In this is no disparity: so are you.
By advise of Holy men, she still o'recame
Her fears and scruples: Do not you the same?
She dyed with comfort, partakes heavenly joy:
That you may do so too, at last, I pray.
XX. To Dr. Warren, with return of his Henry. VIII.
THe Book you lent, writ by Cherbery's Lord,
Much satisfaction did me afford:
I now am more in love with that brave Prince,
Since we received this true Intelligence.
This Author gives, not the reports of Fame,
But the Records. Therefore record his Name.
All Pamphlets that have blurd this King, are not,
Compared to this Work, worth an old Harry groat.
XXI. An Apology, for naming some Honorable and Reverend persons, in his
verses.
BUt, now I think on it, I Will make no excuse,
For that some honorable names I use
In my poor Rimes. It Is a small fault, in an Age,
So many Great Ones are hist off the Stage.
People are bold: yet presume would not I,
To name them, but in honor to their Memory.
XXII. Upon a new Book of justification, promised by my L. C.
MAdam, you promised, and I did believe,
After you had read the Book, you would it give.
I heard you left it for me: and I do,
With a most easy Faith, believe that too.
It met with some deceitful hand, I fear;
His faith will never justify, I Will swear.
XXIII. Upon Verses made in his sleep.
ME thought, I said, They are very well, and so!
They shall continue. Then I wak't, and, O!
I cried They vanish! where do you take your flight!
Stay! Now I have them. Now the are out of sight.
A while they do thus on my Fansy wave:
A piece or two, but now; now, none I have.
Waking, I never shall recover them. Once more
I Will sleep: They Will come, as they did come before.
XXIV. Upon Zuinglius. e Thuani Elogiis.
ZVinglius was slain in the Front, my Author says;
A stout Defender of Reformed Faith.
God took his soul: His Body, the enemies Ire
Consumed, as hereticail, with fire;
All, but his Heart. His hearty Faith, his name,
And pious Memory, dye not in the flame.
XXV. Upon Luther. ex eodem.
HE died not borribly, as the Papists say;
But, in a quiet manner, went away
To a better life: And, but the Night before,
To his friend Justus Jonas, and some moro,
D^scours'd of life eternal. Where, says He,
I nothing doubt, again I shall you see.
Being dead, Two Princes for his Body strave,
And carried him with honor to the Grave.
XXVI. On the Snow, on Newyears day.
SUre the celestial Swan, to make a Feast,
Is plucked this Morn, for Jupiter and the rest
Of's company. None of the flesh is meant
For us; only he has the ^eather sent.
Good Omen! though the Token be but light:
The following year shall not be black, but white.
XXVII. To Mr. Tho: Williams, at the ^emple.
SIr, if my Muse come before the Terme's begun,
And can get leave o^ Cook and Littleton,
To speak with you, but a few minutes, know,
Here are in Cotswold, those that think on you.
And so we shall, as long as air, we draw,
'Cause in our Cases, you give us the Law.
XXVIII. To Mr. Ant: Stratford.
YOu, who are ready, both to gac, and ride;
And spea^, and do for me; I must not hide,
Nor your Love, nor my Gratitude; but here
I fix it, though but in a little sphere.
XXIX. M. Georgio Stratford T. B. CCC.
SI forte Oxoniae Musam Tu videris alma
Errantem, hospitio suscipe, Amice, tuo.
Auribus indigna est vestris? Ignoscite; nostra
(Non vobis) pueris rustica Musa canit.
XXX. Mr. R. Samasio, CCC.
QVando immemor sui, Tu meministi mei;
Et me suavi alloquio tenuisti Tuo:
Ipse igitur immemor, mi Samasi, Tui
Non sum, Mei nunc memor; at nec vivens ero.
XXX. To Mr. Fra. Thorn.
Cousin, I thank you, you did send to Me,
Shoulder and Vmbles fat, the Keepers Fee:
That I who daily live by my Lords meat,
Might sometime some of Sudeley Venson eat.
One favor more I pray do not deny,
Now it is well baked, come and take part of the pie.
XXXII. To Mr. Tho. Bridges.
SIr, in your last sweet Letter, you did tell,
My Lady has been ill. Whence, She is well,
By an easy Figure I collect, and p^ay,
At due time, she an Heir, and with him joy,
May bring her noble Lord, and Ours. But then
You go on, and are pleased to say, My pen
You honor. So you do indeed, when thus,
Out of your Courtesy, you Answer us.
I wish, such praise to my poor pen were due,
That it might worthy be, to serve and honor you.
Your Book shall be returned which you sent white,
Blur'd with some Notes, se'ing you force me to write.
XXXIII. To Mr. Powell for the fair wax-light he sent me.
A Welcome token! Since, in the Holy Quire,
I filled one Stall, at the harmonious Prayr,
I have not seen the like. This I shall use,
Not for to fire my pipe, nor yet to choose
My morsels. But, when, like the laboring Be,
I view my learned Autho^s, and would see
To gather Honey from them, then your wax
Shall gild my si^ent Night. Now, lest you tax
Me for ungrateful, I this paper write,
A light requital, for your better light.
XXXIV. To Mris. Sufanna Charlton, On the death of her Mother, May, 23. 1649.
THe sun was at his Rise, and did begin
To gi^d the earth, when that pure soul, kept in
Her mortail case by Nights cold hand, her strength
Put forth, and raising up her self at leng^h
Took flight to heaven: Heaven, a far fitter place
For souls endued with celesta^l Grace.
And will you weep, now ^he ^s happy? will
You envy heaven that new-come star? and still
Deject your m^urnfull eye to earth, as if
There were no other but this dying life!
But you have lost her Company: You know
A way to find her out again, and so
Revi^e your Conversation. It Is this;
Let your Thoughts dwell in heaven for there she is.
XXXV. To Mr. William Burton, upon his Clemens Romans
WIll, I received the Title of your Book,
And for the Book it self I long did look.
Why sent you 't not? Unless you think indeed,
That I, not Books, but only litles read.
Well, though I purchased it, at a dead lift,
For money, I will set it down, Thy Gift.
And, for Names sake, though he a Bishop be,
Yet I will much esteem him, and for Thee.
XXXVI. In morte Gulielmi Fratris.
CVr adco (quaeris) libet indulgere dolori?
Est mortuus uno funere Frater-Pater.
XXXVII. Grotius de verit. Relig. Englished. To John and Richard Hows,
COsins, I will deal plainly, some do say;
Because they are so loath their Tith to pay,
Our Yeomen sure think not Religion true:
(Although this Crime I don't impute to you:)
This Book, though written in a higher strain,
Than what they use to read, does not disdain
It self to offer to their rougher hands
Entreating gentle usage; and commands,
By strong^st Reasons, They henceforth believe
There is a God, and so no longer grieve
His servants, and deny their old Rewards:
Themselves shall gain by it: if they cast their cards
Rightly; Gain, what they love with all their heart,
Good Harvests, when the Parson has his part
XXXVIII. To a Gentlewoman, with Dr. Featly's Handmaid.
A Handmaid I present to wait on you:
Accept her to you^ service; and with true
Devotion serve your God. His service is
Our freedom: His Reward will be our bliss.
Your piety has a p^esent fit: If small;
Know, He that sent you This, would give you All.
XXXIX. Of Beauty.
IN love, if I do rightly measure it,
That is most beautiful that is most sit.
Why else would lusty Jack, before every one
Of the fair Ladies, prefer homely ^one?
XL. Upon Dido. Ausonii.
INfelix Dido, nulli been nupta marito!
Hoc pereunte fugis, hoc fugiente peris.
Wife, twice unhappy in thy Genial Bed!
Thou fled'st when one died: Dyd'st when the other fled.
XLI. Upon the Histories of the late Wars.
AS the Armies did against each other fight;
Even so do our modern Historians write:
Each for his side. The Stationer says, Buy both:
Compare them, and you may pick out the Truth.
XLII. To Mr. Savage.
SIr, Though your Name be noble, yet your parts
Make you more noble, Your ingenious Arts,
Your piety, your liberality,
And (though now private) Hospitality.
Before the late Decay, (if that I can
Judge right) such was the English Gentleman.
XLIII. To Mr. Edward Carew.
I Think upon, what once I heard you tell,
Your newborn Daughter was so extremely well
Composed and featured, that you never did spy
So pure a B^auty wi' your impa^tiall eye.
But then, you said, within a little space,
Was lost and vanished that exceeding Grace.
That Grace, Sir, is not lost: It is retired:
An dill appear again, when She Is a Bride.
Yet if we this observe, it is very Right:
No credit's to be given at first sight.
XLIV. To Squire Higford, upon his Grandfathers Book.
THe English Gentleman, and the Complete,
I have read long since, but this Book, of your great
And l^arned Fat^er, does surpass them all;
We justly may, Him the Grandfather call.
Precepts, which he so learnedly does give,
And lovingly, How can you choose but live!
XLV. The wolf and the Lamb. Phaedri.
ADrivum eundem lupus and Agnus venerant,
Siti compulsi: superior stabat lupus,
Longeque inf^ri^r Agnus. Tunc fauce improba
Latro in^itatus ^urgi^ causam intulit.
Cur, inquit, turbulentam fecisti mihi
Aquam bib n^i? Laniger contra timens;
Qui possum, quaes^, f^cere quod quereris, Lupe?
A te decu^rit ad meos ^austus liquor.
Repulsus ille veritatis vi^ibus,
Ante hos sex menses, ait, maledixisti mihi.
Respondit Agnus: Equidem natus non eram.
Pater hercle tuus, inquit, maledixit mihi.
Atque it a c^rreptum lacerat injusta nece.
"Haec propter illos scripta est homines fabula,
"Qui fictis causis innocents opprimunt.
Upon a time, to one fair stream,
The revenous Wolf, and soft Lamb came;
Both thirsty. The Wolf, he drank there
Above; below, the Lamb drank here.
But when the Thief with his greedy eye
The trembling Wool-bearer did spy:
Thou art, says he, in danger brought,
Because thou have disturbed my draught.
He answers meekly; How cannot be?
I drink at distance as you see.
It was so evident, that thence
The Wolf goes, and seeks new pretense.
You did revile me with your Tongue
Six months ago. Alas! not so long
Have I lived yet. Then 'twas your Dam:
And so devours the silly Lamb.
"Thus Men, when they oppress by might
"Do never want pretended Right.
XLVI. The Fox to a head of P^aister. Phaedri.
PErsonam Tragicam forte vulpes viderat:
O quanta species, inquit, cerebrum n^n habet!
"Hoc illis dictum, quibus honorem and gloriam
"Fortuna tribui^, sensum communem abstulit.
It is a very handsome face and head, that's plain,
The Fox said: But where, O where is the brain!
"Outward Adornment is not it;
"When within is wanting wit.
XLVII. To Mris. Abigail Stratford.
I Once thought it had only a Jest been.
That Maids are marriageable at fourteen.
But now I see it is Truth. You don't begin,
Till July next, your fifteenth year: yet in
Your person we see fitness. Not to seek
Your praises from the Latin, or the Greek,
Or the Arts your Father taught: you are grown tall,
As is your gentle Mother; and withal,
From her assiduous Exemplar, You
Discretion have to govern the House too.
Phoebus, at your last w^lk, when he well eyed
Your person, said, That Virgin's like a B^ide.
My Muse had d^ne: I w^sht, she had forborne
Your Cheek blush't, fair as is the Ro^y morn.
XLVIII. D. Doctori Skynner. Cancel. Heref.
Qui toties mensa es, toties dignatus amicis
Hunc hominem dictis; Nemo alius quoties:
Absit, u^ eximum patiar vanescere Nomen,
Aut long distans immemor esse Tui.
Inter Amicorum tot nomina (^t grave) Nomen
Tu patere, ut prostet, Doctor amice, Tuum.
XLIX. D. D. Wright Doct. Medico.
NOn adeo nostram obscurant oblivia mentem,
Quia mem^ni q^an^um debeo, Amice, tibi.
Debeo, sed non sum so^v^ndo. Forsitan olim
Rem dedero, nunc jam non nisi verba dedi.
L. Mr. Tho. Jamesio Col. O. A.
NOn ubi terrarum legis, Ingeniose Jamesi,
Scio: attamen Te esse in libris meis scias.
Postremus quanquam legeris Tu carmine nostro;
Audi Amicorum non post^emus tamen.
Upon the new-Printing.
THis Print's so fair and bright, in the others stead,
The Letter now invites and cries, Come, read.
My little Boys are so taken w^th't, that They
Printers will be and Stationers, they say.
I bid them, be good Scholars: To Write well,
Is better, than either to Print or Sell.
Conclusion.
JOhnson and Fletcher! Davenant and the rest!
Why have you so my Fantasy possessed,
That I cannot choose but pass away in Rhyme,
What I must give a strict account for, Time?
What should I do? My Head ak't and about
To break, has much ease gotten, now it is Out.
Now I am fit, being freed from this short pain,
To translate the wise Grotius again.
Jan. 11.

THE END.
THE COTSWOLD MUSE.

III. Part.

TERRENT. Homine imperito nunquam quicquam injustius:
Qui nisi quod ipse facit, nil rectum putat.
An empty fellow, puffed up with conceit,
Beside his own, thinks no man's Verse is streit.
LONDON, Printed for F. A. at Worcester. 1651.

The Dedication of the Third Part.
To my Nephew J. B.
THe care thy Father once bestowed on Me,
I very gladly would return to Thee.
What I to Thee (thus love in a blood runs)
Do thou communicate unto my Sons.
I have no land to give, such is my Chance:
Take this Poetical inheritance.
A little here is best: because much more
Of Poetry, perhaps would make you poor.
THIRD PART.
I. Lupus ad Canem.
"QVam dulcis sit libertas breviter proloquar.
Cani perpasto, macie confectus Lupus
Forte occurrit: salutantes dein invicem
Vt restiterunt; Vnde sic quaeso nites,
Aut quo cibo fecisti tantum corporis?
Ego qui sum long fortior, pereo fame.
Canis simpliciter: Eadem conditio est tibi,
Praestare domino si par officium potes.
Quod? inquit ille. Custos ut sis liminis,
A furibus tuearis and noctu domum.
Ego vero sum paratus: nunc patior nives,
Imbresque, in sylvis asperam vitam trabens:
Quanto est facilius mihi sub tecto vivere,
Et otiosum largo satiari cibo?
Veni ergo mecum. Dum procedunt, aspicit
Lupus a catena collum detritum Canis.
Vnde hoc, amice? Nihil est. Dic quaeso tamen.
Quia videor acer, alligant me interdiu,
Luce ut quiescam, and vigilem nox quum venerit:
Crepusculo solutus, qua visiem est vagor.
Adfertur ultro panis, de mensa sua
Dat ossa dominus, frusta jact^t familia,
Et quod fastidit quisque pulmentarium:
Sic sine labor venture impletur meus.
Age, si quo est abire animus, est licentia?
Non plane est, inquit. Fruere, quae laudas Canis.
Regnare nolo, liber ut non sim mihi.
The Wolf to the Mastif. Phaedro. 3.
"HEre you shall briefly see,
"How sweet is Liberty.
THe starved Wolf a full fed-Mastif met.
After salute, the Wolf sa^d, Where do get
Such flesh about thee? I that have more might,
And b^te more sharply, am thus hunger bit.
Thou shall be welcome Wolf (he does reply)
And fare, if thou can serve, as well as I.
What service? Keep the door safe: and by night
With thy loud barking put the Thieve^ to flight.
Content: now in the snow, rain, woods I live;
It Is far more easy sure with thee to thrive,
Lie idle, and in the dry. Then come away.
He sp^es his neck worn with the Collar: Pray
How came this? It is nothing. Pr thee tell.
Cause I am fierce, by day they chain me well:
And in my kennel let me take mine ease:
In the evening loose I wander where I please:
I wait at Table, and have many a bone
And meat too from my Master. Every one
Casts to me, what is on his Trencher left:
So I grow fat, without or pain^ or theft.
That's good. But cannot you go when, where you will?
No, by no means. Then Mastif take thy fill.
I for my part would not a Kingdom have
(I Am sorry for thee) to be such a slave.
II. To. Mr. To. Scudamoore.
THink not, I only prattle with my Muse:
Sometime I draw Pitiscus Hypo^enuse:
Sometime I fathom the deep Stagyri^e:
Sometime I read Historians that write
Of States and Princes, and their bloody Wars,
And am, methinks, embroyled in their jars.
But, where the Golden letter is, that day,
Scripture I read alone, and preach and pray.
III. To L. Hedworth.
WOuld I had broke my shins, before I had gone
Thither (men use to say) or That had done!
When you came with your s^uldiers to possess
The Castle Sir, In courtesy, I conf^sse,
To lodge by Potmans tow^, I brought you at night,
(Beshrew the wench that brought me not more light)
I say not whether I well or ill did do,
But sure I broke my shins, and did it too.
IIII. Upon Mr. William Laws. To Mr. Will. Broad.
HE that made Music for a Prince's ear,
Composed by nature for the pen, not spear;
Whose band nor voice had never made a ^ar,
Breathed out his last note in this fatali War.
Farewell sweet Will: since thou our Chief did dye,
We have no Music now, but Elegy.
V. Upon Mr. Henry Laws. To Mr. Jo. Philips.
HArry, if ever Brothers did agree,
Thou and thine did most harmoniously.
You have so excellently done your parts,
Y' have won all that delight in the sweet Arts.
And, we of the Quire praise you the more for this,
Because your well set Music sacred is.
We Will make much of your Works; for who shall see,
In aftertimes, two such as Will and Thee?
The Ghost of Sandys in Elysium longs
To have his joy increased by His-Your Songs.
VI. Upon Beggars lodged in the Col. Heref. 1645. To Col. B.
SIr, we are not so bold to fight with God,
But meekly do submit unto his Rod.
Yet we may ask, why thus you do give le^ve,
The nasty Begge^s should our Chambers have.
Do strangers spoil's for Incivility?
All strangers drunk of our Humanity.
Do the poor possess All, cause we did not give
Due Alms? poor people we did still ^elieve.
D' ye mean, because you think that we want grace,
To turn us out into the Beggars place,
As they are in Ours? What ere it is, We go Hence:
^^ligion has taught us patience.
VII. Upon the taking of Hereford, December. 1645. To Col. James Wroughton.
WHy don't they break the Ice? I heard you say,
The night that did precede that fatal day:
(The day when the stout Judge was Prisoner, and
So many Knights and Gallants, at command
Of star^'d Soldiers, their Gold delivered) when
The faithful Town was sold to Morgan's Men.
And plundered Norm^n cried out, It had not
Been worse, if we had yielded to the Scot.
'Twas well, they did not break the Ice. For why?
Sir, you remember, who escaped ore the Wy.
VIII. To bald Men. Phaedri. 5.
JN veni^ Calvus forte in trivio pectinem:
Accessit aliter aeque defectus pilis:
Heja, inquit, Est commune quodcunque est lucri.
Ostendit ille praedam and adjecit simul:
Superum voluntas favit, sed fato invido;
Carbonem, ut aiunt, pro thesauro invenimus.
"Quem spes delusit, huic querella convenit.
By the way, a certain Man, who had no hair,
A Comb took up. Another full as bare
Seeing H^ad sound something, cries out Half is mine.
I Am willing, said the first, Half should be thine:
But neither of us can make use of this;
(A coal for treasure) bad our good luck is.
"So may every one complain,
"That Is disappointed of his gain.
IX. To his Friends omitted.
YOu ask me, why I do your Names forbear?
Others do qua^^ell 'cause their Names are here.
These only on my too much l^v^ complain:
You I Will remember, when I w^ite again.
To the Printer.
I Pray, take care; The Erratas are enough
In The Book it self, although you Print it true.
XI. Ad Guil. Turrium T. B.
TE dono doct^ Versibus Turri meis:
Non ut premantu^ tristi censura tua;
Sed ut legantur Dominae Heydonae liberis,
Quos Tu gubernas ^ite^, and mi^i manu.
Tu maximo (ni grave) me commendatum habe,
Meo Roberto pridem Auditori, precor.
Sic Tu tuorum compos votorum sies,
Ut nunc ^ibenter huic voto faves meo.
Audis? Amicum quando vacabit visere?
Nam nemo erit Ba^ks dallo gratior Tuo.
Uxorculae* si place^t, nunti^s tuae,
Quam pl^rimam salutem a me, ac etiam mea.
XII. Mr. Freeman, Theologo Seni.
QVantum dolebam nescis, quando aures mea*
Pulsavit ille rumor, Hominem perditum,
Quem uescio, calcasse pedibus suis
^enem verendum, faedasse and canos tuos.
Flammis piandum scelus ultricibus! Vides,
Quae Tempora (heu!) Clerum nunc vexant impote^^.
Qui Te modis indignis tractavit Senem,
Credo, tremuisset ad tua verba Juvenis.
Quid debeas, novimus, ingenio libero:
Vicunque ^i^er, posthabitis illis, mane.
Nec anxius mentis, quaeso, nimium sies,
Quod rustici Te Decimis defraudant Tuis.
Qui pascit omnia, and Viduae auxit Oleum,
Qui nec volucres unquam destituit cibo;
Noli timere; Familiam pascet Tuam:
Nolo timere; Fami^iam pascet Meam.
XIII. In Phaedri Rigaltiani editionem Novam.
Quis Aulicus hic vest recenti ambulans?
Quos ore melleo pul^ros fundit ^ocos?
Quae miscet ultilissima, and peridonea
Praecepta vitae? Agnosco nunc Phaedrum Meum.
I Phoedre, and osculetur omnis Te Puer:
Omnisque Libros facundos terat Schola;
Omnisque grates Slatero reddat Schola.
XIIII. Oleum non deficiet 1 Reg. 4.
THou have Gods bl^ssing. Power out still. The Oil,
Till thou shall cease to power, will never fail.
So does the Poet and the Preacher spend
A little stock: and it grows without end.
XV. Ad Mr. Collierum.
MI Colliere, si facundia tua
Sim praeditus, Candorem nunc laudem tuum,
Nec non Amorem in hunc hominem, quem Tu libens
Amplexus es, latasque aperuisti fores
Optatae Amicitiae: quam perpetuo colam,
Et propagabo ad na^os, si potero, meos.
Tu vive l^^^um, pelle nec Musam for as;
Namque illa non molesta, si vacas, erit.
XVI. Ad Mr. Palmerum.
PAlmere, nomen si excidat Musae tuum,
Si saepe non ego Te recolam animo meo;
Tunc excidat mihi penitus nomen meum:
Musam benigna Hallinga nec recolat suam.
Si forte sacris non studes concionibus,
Tibi ho^ Amoris Versus (...) habe.
XVII. To Mris. Eliz. Williams, for Dr. Tailors Rule.
YOur Book imprinted and bound by Franc Ash
So finely well, has given me, not a flash
But fire from the Altar. It will spoil the Sale
Of Handmaid, Pra^lice, Crumbs, and Posies all.
Tailor, by's Samplar, and this Rule to live,
Is Master of Devotion Vnitive.
Add to this Doctor Him that of Conscience wrat,
The are fit all Christendom to regulate.
Thus I my Debt to you do raise,
While your fine gift I daly praise.
XVIII. Upon Dr. Hammonds works. To Mr. John Beale.
THe first came to our hands was Conscience,
And of Resistance: whose great excellence
So took, that you persuaded us in Wales,
No man could write such things but only Hales:
And you remember Stedman, on his name,
Wrote the word Sclah, for an Anagram.
The genuine Author's not long hid: Out comes
At last his learned Works in two fair Tomes.
And (which is much) they truly printed were,
By the care and cost of a Roy -- Stationer.
How shall I honor with deserved praise,
The Defense of noble Falkland, or the Keys?
His Tracts of Will Worship and Supe^stition,
Scandal, Idolatry, and Admonition?
I know you prize his Catechism alone,
Above great Calvin's Institution.
And for his Sermons, I cannot tell you whether
I would read Chrysostom's or Hammonds rather.
Take this from me, read it with favor, then
Finish the Elogium with your stronger Pen.
XIX. Jo. Warreno suo LL. Doctori.
VErsus agrestes nunc Tibi mitto meos,
Absentiae ut veniam mihi libenter dares.
Videbis ipsum me, cum longior dies;
Atque interim non immemor vivam Tui.
Ridere paulum, Uarrene, si vis, Te volo:
N^^que esse ego non optimum Civem puto,
Ridere multum tempore qui tali potest.
XX. V. Cl. Herberto Crofto. D. H.
TU qui peritissimus es doctarum Artium,
Et Fautor, and (meministi?) Patronus meus,
Dignare Carmina haec, quae sc^ibuntur Tibi
Rudi Minerva, noscere ac ignosce^e.
O quando verba audire ex ore melleo,
Tuoque Crofte licebit aff^ta f^ui!
Ne sperne, quaeso Amiculi munusculum:
Is plura debet, paucula haec qui nunc dedit.
Quod deesse novit, voto supplebit pio;
Tuque and sorores suaves vivatis diu!
XXI. To D. Rogers C. R.
YOu do remember Sir, after that l^st
And fatal Na^by Fie^d, you kept a Fast.
And in your eloquent Sermon, you were wroth,
The Soldier stole Lester- Communion-Cloth.
Therefore He fled. But pr^y, Sir, do not some
Despoile whole Churches and yet overco^e?
Scots, I con^esse, that once did Hereford guard,
Stole my Church-cup, were buried in the Churchyard.
XXII. To Dr. Higs D. L. upon L. Verulams Motto.
YOu told me Sir, you did a long time look
To please your Curi^sity, out of what Book,
The Ph^losophic Lord, that so famed was,
Had taken his Viderit Vtilitas,
You turned many Volumes in each part;
At length you found it. Where? In Ovids Art.
Let P^ofit see to it self, the Poet ^ryes;
What ever come, I Will pursue my ente^prize.
Great Verulam also cared not what he lost,
That in's Exper meant he might not be crossed.
At last grown poor He said; My Sovereign, give:
I Have lived to study; no^ studied how to live.
XXIII. To D. Critton, C. R.
YOu quartered with me, but did seldom eat,
U^lesse from Court they brought you your own meat.
'Twas roasted well and cleanly at my hirth,
The sauce your self made with your learned mirth.
To quarter you, what Scholar would not seek,
Who so abound in Latin and in Greek?
Think on your Landlord, pray Sir, by this hint,
When you your M S. long much-expected Print.
XXIIII. Upon the Death of B. Prideaux.
NO time else, to vote Bishops down, but when
We had in the Throne such eminent and good Me^;
Laud (give leave to name him first for St. John:)
Great Treasurer, the Great King's Confessor Juxon,
How'l, Tours, Frew'n, Dupp', Hall, Prid'aux. 'Twas no doubt,
Decreed, Episcopacy should go out
Like the Holy Lamp. When it had burnt enough,
It was extinct, but died not in a snuff.
P^ideaux his Memory lives in the Oxford chair,
More than at Woster. Where he begat so fair
A Progeny of Divines, that (as they say)
A hundred of his sons did meet that day,
To the Fathers he was gathered, There was One
Preached a sad Sermon in harmonious tone,
Another made the Oration, and all gave
Him Reverence, as he passed to his Grave.
Hospital Bredon does his Corpse confine:
His Learning over all the Land will shine.
Exeter and all Oxford, when for Fame
They will dispute, shall revive Prideaux Name.
And though the B^shop's dead, The Doctor will
Survive in his laborious Lectures still.
XXV. Cancer occultus.
THere is amongst humane Diseases one,
Cancer occultus, the Physicians call it,
Whose safest Cure is to be let alone,
Lest a more grievous malady befall it.
If we may judge by the actions of late,
The same is sometime verified in the State.
XXVI. Upon Dr. Kery and his wife.
ONe love conjoind them in the nuptial Bed:
One charity with alms poor people fed:
One day (both very aged) cut their thread:
One grave keeps them together buried.
XXVII. Priscininus Vapulans Frisclim. Upon Vossius de Art Gram.
WHen Priscians Head was broke by Quiddities,
And by Scotisticall Haecceites,
And the poor Pedant's spirits were almost spent,
Erasmus Books relieved him with their sent.
If he be hurt again in any pars,
Now let him only smell to Vossy's Ars.
XXVIII. Upon Mr. Shirly's Gram. Anglo. Lat.
THe Child that would learn Latin very early,
Let him, at first, acquaintance get with Shirley.
He will allay the tediousness of School,
In sweetest Verse composing every Rule.
Thanks learned Shirley for the ingenious pains.
Thou shall have place before Farnaby and Danes.
This is so good, I prithee lets have all,
And hasten the other part Poetical.
We are in hope, that we shall quickly see it.
Because it runs upon such nimble Feet.
XX^X. An English Library. To Ri. Sackvill.
SIr, you are my Scholar, and desire that I
Should choose you out an English Library:
Not that you do despise Latin or Greek,
But Knowledge also in your own Tongue seek.
Too many Books distract the mind: a dozen
Are worth a Hundred, if they be well chosen.
I commend These to you, not that I would
Disparage others: They may be as good.
First Hammonds Catechism, if to guide your life,
You Will read Divinity, and not for strife.
With whom (sending disputes to the School)
Join Tailors Samplar Jesus, and His Rule.
That Ancient Worthies footsteps you may tread,
The General History of R^leigh read:
In special, your own Countries actions make
Your study, where Camden and Baker take.
That you may raise such Observation,
Peruse the Aphorisms of Dabington.
Church-story, when she was pure, when vicious,
You Will shortly see in my severe Sulpiti^s.
The Mathematics a noble study be,
Read Euchid Englished by Doctor Dee.
Add, if you please to be led further on,
Maest^in and my Pitiscu^, when they are done.
The Globes admired use, I Would have you know;
And that the learned Gregory will show.
For Moral precepts to your Senault soon
The Author add, Of Wisdom writes, Charon.
When weary you throw the Graver P^ose away
Refresh your spirits with witty Fletcher. play.
Sometimes run ore the books of modern news,
And do not scorn the Verse of my plain Musc.
But now, because among all cares, but One
Is needful, I Will end with Religion.
The Bible is God's book. Like Borromee,
Read every day the Gospel on your knee.
To give you light in places dubious,
I do prepare some Notes of Grotius.
That you may not be abused by Schismetics,
Read Hookers 'Clesiastic Poetics.
You Will know the Rights both of the Church and state,
By studying Grotius, whom I tranflate.
'Tother rare piece, De veritate, can
Against Jew, Turk, Pagan prove Truth Christian
And, though it is hard to allow it in his sense,
Read Doctor Hackwill of Gods providence.
When you have read these Authors, for the ^est,
I leave you to your self, to choose what is best.
This precept, pray take from me for a Close,
Confer, and what you read you will never lose.
XXX. Cuidam.
YOur Man ask't, whether I did Preach next day,
At Sudley Chamber. It was answered Ay.
I came in time and Pr^acht: You absent were:
Did you ask, When? That you might not be there?
XXXI. Upon a Brother of his.
I Do confess my Fortune is but low,
Yet I was willing freely to bestow
A Gift upon a Brother. 'Twas a Boy;
That wants no form, nor wit, a his friends say.
I wrote so twice: but He no answer gave,
Thinking perhaps I do not give, but crave.
XXXII. To old Mr. Tho. Hacket.
YOu did not only do well for your Son,
But when the Glass of's too short life was run,
You took his Orhhan-Children to your care;
And thus you truly the Grandfather are
Now since your loved Sons my pupils be,
Sure you have some Relation unto Me.
Among your Relatives, if in your Will
I should be one, who will say you did do ill?
You Will do what never was done before; for I
In all my life never yet had Legacy.
XXXIII. Chr. Merretto suo, Doct. Med
INgratus essem, si non been merito darem,
Quod otium peperit nostrum; cum Tu mihi
Industrii ingenii soleas partus tui
Donare promptus. Quaeso non aegre fer as,
Tot nomina inter, and Tuum Nomen legi.
Sic tua perita semper sit felix manus;
Et Phoebus herbas porrigat laetus suas:
Vt tu favere nunc voles Musis meis.
XXXIIII. Upon Lividus and Candidus. To the Stationers.
MY verses Livid in the worst sense takes:
Candid of all a fair Construction makes.
This is the cause, my verse to the One is good,
To the other bad: just as I Am understood.
Thus do all Books higher or lower stand,
Placed by the Reader's, not the Writer's hand.
And mine, as it finds favor in his eyes,
You Will sell, my friends, at more or at less prize.
THE END.
THE COTSWOLD MUSE.

IV. Part.

MARTIAL. Cum tua non edas, carpis mea Carmina Laeli;
Carpere vel noli Nostra, vel ede Tua.
Thou setst out none, but say my Verse is naught:
Carp not, or tell me where Thine's to be bought.
LONDON, Printed for F. A. at Worcester. 1651.

The Dedication of the Fourth Part.
To my Noble Friend. Mr. Tho. Bridges.
MY Muse is now in four parts. Would they were writ,
With full as much dexterity and wit,
As Harry and Will Laws did once compose,
Or you, my sweerest friend, can write in prose.
Yet, Though my Muse be not urbane, but rough:
As Cotswold folks, you know, are hard and tough:
At stately Harvell, when you do her meet,
You Will bring her in, to kiss The Ladies feet.
FOURTH PART.
I. To Mr. D. W.
POet, as Fiddler, when he once begins,
Will never leave, until you cut his strings.
II. To Sir W. C. of Glo.
AFter a chilling blast took me elsewhere,
My little family is replanted here,
Whom CHANDOS noble bounty now maintains;
And by Your Government, who hold the reigns
So gent^y, yet with skill and care, I have
For my innocuous Muse leisure and leave.
She is ambitious now to send you health,
And prepares for you, The Ebrew Commonwealth.
Why should not my poor studies honor you?
Where the Tree grows, sure there some fruit is due.
V. To Mr. Fra. Powell of Chapter Chapter
I Have not seen fair Oxford since that year,
When you the Replicans Magistir were;
And I with you and Digs, and Lecturers rest,
Fared better then at Doctors Evan's feast.
Though absent, yet I cannot choose but love:
And now my Muse would your Affection prove.
She once drank at your W^ll: but now she sings
Her plainer Notes by the cold Cotswo^d spr^ngs.
With Cou^teous Auditors her song may pass,
Though not such as Main's, Cartwright's, Waring's was.
VI. That he makes verses after forty. To Amusius.
FLato's great M^ster, being post threescore,
The Music he neglected had before,
'Gain p^actice. Pray S^r, wherefore should not I
At forty hear my Muses Melody.
I know the worst of Censurers are They
That drink or drab, 'stead of ingenious play.
VIII. That he makes verses in sad times. To Bibax.
ANd this is also laid amongst my Crim^s,
That I make Verses in these mournful times.
Why, I can mou^n in veise; and if I laugh;
It Is more excusable, then (with thee) to quaffe.
VIII. Quicquid conabar dicere, (...)*
WOnder of nature! Ovid so sweet, so terse,
Opens his l^ps, and there leaps out a Verse;
When others cannot work out any: yet
Their thicker skuls continually they beat.
They lab^u^, but effect not: whose dull Art
Cannot supply ingenious Natures part.
IX. To Dr. Fuller.
NOr Holy War, nor yet thy Holy State,
Our H^lu^es Appetite can satiate:
But we expect (not vainly) after all,
Thy History Ecclesiastical.
Some say, it is now come out: sure it has been
Long promised, and it is high time 'twere seen.
Yet 'twere ingrate to charge Thee with delay;
Though slow, yet sure, in weighty Gold thou't pay.
And this thy Glorious recompense shall be,
Fame shall perpetuate thy large Memory.
X. The saying of a King of France.
THe King once in a Church a Tomb did see,
Stately and rich, over an enemy,
An English Knight. Sir, said ^ Courtier will
You have it razed; for, it is very ill
An En'my should ly thus. The King said, No:
Would all mine Enemies were buried so.
XI. On the Death of Sir William Croft, To Col. Wroughton.
^Roth, I have quite forgot the Castle now,
Where Skydmore's Men met such an overthrow.
The wisest are not (as we see of late)
Nor valiant'st, ever the most fortunate.
But perish may the place, perish the Day,
When Sober CROFT came to so mad a fray.
Name me not subtle Birch or Morgan. There
When Croft was slain they conquered Herefordshire.
There was more wit and ^alo^ in that One,
And One more, Pris^ner, than in All that run.
You were preserved a Prisoner, to tell,
How sadly Croft, yet honorably, fell.
Let not the virtuous pair of Sisters hear,
Till the Good Deane his Cordials p^epare.
XII. The Desence. To Mr. Fr. Powel of Chapter Chapter
A Careful friend told me my Verses do
Look like Delinquents. Franc, I Will be judged by you.
So long as my poor Muse makes no debate,
Nor fancies ought that is dangerous to the State,
Though I Am not bold, yet I no censure fear,
Neither of potent Commoner, nor Peer;
For naming excellent Croft, a Knight, or Dean,
In this or that page of my Verses mean.
One is, the other was, once of such Grace,
That they may look each Reader in the face:
Nor yet for valiant Mine, at Marly dead,
Whose blood that Field ashamed of looks more red:
Nor for the hardy Knight, Lingen, whom I
Call noble. Virtue's praised in the enemy.
I Would call him so, did I again begin;
And more; I Would put his Invict Lady in.
(Somewhere I said, The Presbyter is new,
But I don't say, his Disciplin's not true:)
Learned Hammon, devout Taylor's an eyesore*
O that we had twenty such Doctors more.
Hammon for's Catechism and Tracts, pray make
Your friend; and Tailor, for his Jesus sake.
Prideaux the Doctor does deserve to live,
If pardon to the Bishop you will not give.
Victors of ignorance! I could live and dye,
In writing your deserved Elogy.
Such worthy Persons, both in Camp and Schools,
Though opposite, are praised by all but Fools.
And this my only blame is (Truth to tell)
I have not set forth their just p^aise^ well.
If this suffice not, then my Muse do you kick:
I Am not so fond as Heliodore of Tric^.
XIII. Dr. Kery's Counsel.
WHen for some time (I thankful make relation)
God gave me up to Satan's sly Temptation:
He that saved many Souls, Kery divine,
Was pleased to see me, hoping to save mine.
My Thought! my Thought* I cried. Doctor, my Thought!
I dare not tell you: it is hideous naught.
The Doctor gravely: Mark my Counsel well:
And thy bad Thought, with a good thought expel.
Since that I find, Ill Thoughts best quenched are,
If, at their Rise, I forthwith fall to Prayer.
XIV. Upon Pompey and his Sons. Martialis.
SOmpeios Juvenes Asia atque Euhopa; sed ipsum
Terra tegit Libyes, si tamen ulla tegit.
Quod mirum, toto si spargitur orb? Jacere
Uno non poterat tanta ruina loco.
Europe and Asia have Pompey's Sons: but He
In Af^ic's bur^ed, it he bu^ied be.
In every part o't'h wo^ld dispe^st they dye;
So great a Ruin could not in one part lie.
XV. To Mris. Stratford.
YOu sent me Maull, because my Brink was small:
You send me now fine Cups, to hold my Ale.
Your Courtesy runs o'^e. And, I hope, now
My slender Cotswold Muse will stronger grow.
A water-drinking Muse is flat: but Mine,
Fresht with gooe Ale, will last, as those with wine.
XVI. Guil. Turrio, cum non responderet.
QVid? Despicis Tu Amiculi munusculum?
Etiamsi Ego sim dignus Contumelia;
Humanitatem non decet, Turri, tuam.
Novissimam recipito nunc vocem, Vale:
XVII. Upon the Death of Mr. William Whear fellow of Merton on St. Matthew. day
Mat. 9. 9.
JesUs DIXIt eI seqVere Me. and seCVtVs est M.DCXXXIV. To Mr. Sam. Whear.
IN's first degree, He graced Gloster-Hall;
In's next, that College, that picks out of all,
And adds them to the learned Magazine,
By strict and ceremonious Discipline.
Often had he, in Philosophic fights,
With Cheynel, Nevil, wright past the black nights.
Often had he, to the Library confined,
Greek Sbositers with Aristotle joind.
Often, in Problems of the Mathematics,
Had he conferred with Bainbridge and with Brix.
Fair knowledge, in all sorts of History,
He had from his learned father, Degory.
Di^inity-doubts, when any did propose,
He could with Reynolds, Doughty, Cressy close.
Such mature Progresie had He made, that He
(Some thought) would Burly or second Occham be.
But as his study gave strength ^o his mind:
So by Consumpt^on his body pind:
While he read Chrysostom: on ^t. Matthew's day,
His ^aviour called him: Scholar, come away.
This I have writ for you, Sam, who survive;
In whom Will, Charles, and John seem still alive.
XVIII. To his Wife at last a Nurse.
AFter six nourc'd by others, youl'd never rest
Until the seventh Child drew out your own Breast.
The seventh some secret virtue has, they say:
This then, I hope will prove a fortunat Boy.
And as in this (your Breast being often sore)
Your labors were; so will your Joys be more.
Children would all be more obedient sure,
Knew they what pains their Mothers did endure.
The Proverbs false: Once Nurse, sev'n year the worse:
Best Nurse is Mother; and best Mother's Nurse.
XIX. To the Reader.
BLame not, that every obvious thing I take,
And on it presently do verses make.
To me alone a Contumacy is it?
The manner of each Epigrammatist.
Thus Harrington, thus Johnson; and before all,
The Poet to be gelded, Martial.
XX. The prick of a Thorn. To E. T.
NEd, you did say, my Epigrams will not sell:
Sure it is because (although writ pretty well)
They are not salt with such unsavory jests,
As make our Country folk so laugh at feasts.
Your Censures I confess went to the Quick,
And (now at last I Am bold to put in) prick.
Yet, I had rather my book should, on your stall,
Lie dead, than once to obscene language fall.
XXI. That poets are rich.
SMo^th Rand^l, I remember well, does say
In The Pistle, to a Good, but his Wo^st Play;
Among the Arts Poetry has got a place,
Upon set purpose t'u^doe all the race.
Are Poets poor, having such copious Themes?
I say, They Are rich: at least in Golden dreams.
XXII. A parley 'twixt a Citizen and Soldier, at Hereford-Siege. Sept. 1. 1645.
AS at Throckmortons sconce I went to pray,
(Prayer is the Cities best Defense, we say,)
A Soldier from the Trenches loud did call;
Norman the Citizen answered from the wall.
I. See my bright Sword, Lesty commanded, scour!
None of you men has, to live, many an hour.
And then Skeins whet, our lusty wenches will,
Your women all, and all your barnes to kill.
N. Tame locky, why 'oth' Sudden art so cursed?
Thou know, that hither to You 've had the worst.
If you can leap our walls, as over a style,
Why have you not assalted all this while?
Since you sat down it is now almost five weeks:
You Have little done, but gatherd suburb-leeks.
I. I tell thee sirrah, long af^re this we' had come,
But by the way we met your leaden plum.
N. Pure lead to send to you, we do not fail:
But you to us return the lead with nail.
And, against the law of nations (fie on it)
Your lead is poisoned with your venomous bit:
But, thanked be our God, it cannot hit.
I. Upon our pikes we would you quickly toss,
Were it not for that reprobate Mountrosse.
He spoils our Country with fire, sword, and spear,
While we, to little purpose, linger here.
XXIII. Upon his son C. B.
AS I a bed, before day, did verses make,
My Bed fellow, my little Boy, did wake.
Father, you write on every thing, said He,
Let me entreat you, make one Verse for me.
I presently replied (He cannot say black:)
Thou 'rt my white Boy, although thy eyes be clack.
Thou bringst my Book; my Candle thou do light;
I love thee next unto thy Sister bright.
If thou will learn thy Book, I Will leave to thee,
Not one verse, Boy, but all my Poetry.
XXIV. The Frogs asked a King. Phaedri.
A Thenae cum storerent aequis legibus
Procax libertas, etc. vide Veteratorem:
At Athens gentle Laws had bred,
Wanton liberty: They took head,
The reigns being loose, till the most part
Strengthend the Tyrant Pisistrat.
They ha^ no sooner underto^k,
But presently complained oth' yoke.
Not tha^ the King was cruel; but
'Cause their so't Nec^s were not used to it.
Esop beholdi^g thi^ their St^te,
This Fable to them did relate.
The Frogs, at freedom, leapt about the lake,
And l^ud to Jupiter for a King they cr^ke:
A King to or^er them with p^w^rful hand.
Jove smiled, and to the Raf^e^ gave command
To reign. It fell^w^th force unto the Poole,
And wi^h the nois^ affrighted the poor fools.
The Rafter lay ^ while all in the m^d,
At length one of the b^lder Frogs up stood:
And seeing the wo^den King, did the rest call.
Their fright being n^w past, out they marched all,
Insulting o'^e the Ra^te^ with much scorn.
Jove give's a ^etter King, or wee'^ forlorn.
The Se^pent, ^upiter in the next place sent;
Who with sh^rp teeth them all to pieces rent.
Some few escape by flight, but dare not speak:
By Mercury they send ^o Jove to wreak
Their Cause. ^his Answer they received from God:
You woul'd not bear your Peace, now bear your Rod.
And ye my Countrymen, be Content, for fear
You be in enforced some greater harm to bear.
XXV. Upon D. Tailors Funeral Sermon. To Mr. Savage.
HAving received your Sermon, I fell to 't,
And stirred not out of the place one foot,
Til I had with intentive eye survaid
All the celestial Treasures there are laid.
There is expressed, how short is every Breath;
And what the Souls estate is after death;
What the Felicity of the Saints each one,
Completed at the last Reunion:
And all in such a pure and pious way,
As if the Book were written with heavens ray.
But th^n, the N^rrative of the Lady's life,
How discreet Mother, how observant Wife;
This and the rest's so well described, that you will
Say right, to call it Tailors Second Rule.
And though the Ladies Tomb, t'hir Lords content,
Be stately built, This is her Monument.
How happy was that Noble Lord in's love,
To shelter such a Man at Golden-Grove.
XXVI. To my Sister Barksdale.
NO end of Tears? but, weep yourself to Night,
And lose your Eyes, because you have lost the sight.
Of your beloved son? Can you think now,
By watring a dead plant, to make it grow?
At the last d^y, the dead shall have a spring,
And live again: but before, no such thing
Is possible. The Corruptible Body must
Take up his Habitation in the dust.
The Soul which of the parts is far the best,
Is gone to God to everlasting rest.
Clear up, I pray, those fairest Eyes, and see
How mercifully God has dealt with'ee.
One child H^ath taken, and has left the other
To comfort you in the place of her Brother.
But, if we will power out our Tears, lets learn
Their Current in the Proper Course to turn:
And then let Tears flow from us night and day,
Til we have wept, and washed our sins away:
Nor can our Crosles sufferd, nor our Fears,
But our Sins may be cured by our Tears.
XXVII. To the same.
YOu grieve, and say, There was scarce ever any
Has buried her sweet Children young so many.
That you to God so soon your Children sent,
This is your Privilege, not Punishment.
Mothers, who thus their Infants back have given,
Bare them, not so much for themselves, as Heaven.
Happy, thrice happy are those little O^es
Who are advanced per saltum, to their Thrones.
XXVIII Upon the Book of Justification, written by I. G. sent me by my Lady
CHANDOS.
Welcome the Book, expected so long time,
Now sent me from the hand of one oth' prime
Ladies of England. Welcome, for her sake,
Who by this favor has bin pleased to make
Me more obliged. Welcome, for its own worth:
For here I find perspicuously set sorth,
The work, which only by Free Grace is done,
That sweetest Act, Justification.
I have but tasted yet, but this short Taste
Is far beyond some whole Books. (The Author's last
Writings I will not speak of) I don't fear
To praise his Learning and his Temper here.
And were the rest not worthy of a look,
I will rejoice to dwell on this fair Book.
XXIX. Of Love. Casimiri Sarb.
QUid nocti lumen* luci quid quae^imus umbram?
No^te dies nob^s est Amor; umbrad^e.
Why seek we shade so day; for darkness light?
Love is our shade in the Day; our day, in the Night.
XXX. A garland of Roses over a sweet Child. ^^usdem.
IPsa Corona Rosa est Puero? Puer anne C^onae
Ipsa Rosa est? pue^ est ipsa Corona Rosae.
Does the Rose crown the Child? or, the Child is
The Rose in the Crown? ^^ Crowns the Rose? So it is.
XXXI. An Angel painted by a fair Child. Ejusdem.
ANgele, Gonza^a es, sipictas exuis alas:
Si Gonz^ga alas indu^s, Angelus es.
The Angel the Chi^d is, let th'Wings alone;
The Child the Angel is, put the Wings on.
XXXII. Non NOBIS DOMINE, etc. In the Great Chamber at Sudeley. To my Lo. C.
CHANDOS, wh'adorn'd the Princely Chamber, where
So many Friends and Tenants welcomed were,
Caused the Artificer on the wall to write
This Sentence, and expos't to all men's sight.
So when our works are brought to end, must we
All sing aloud, Non nobis, Domine.
And I, my Lord, that for my Muse I may
Favor obtain, must Kyrie Elcison say.
It Was her Ambition her Notes to sing
To the Great-Grandson of the Cotswold-King.
XXXIII. Of Faith.
THe Divine Mysteries, as the Scripture says,
Above our Reason, objects are of Faith.
We taste the sweet, without the Theory:
So Children suck the milk they do not see
XXXV. In Stapyltonum Equi^m Anglum Interpretem Stradae Romani.
ANglos Vexavit quondam male Stapyltonus:
Et merito nata est Anglia (Roma) Tibi.
Anglos ornavit nunc ^am been Stapyltonus:
Et merito grata est (Anglia) Roma Tibi.
XXXVI. To my brother D. Charlton.
The Other hard work have Elzi^^rs the Lei
Den Printers finished, De ^ith^ali:
Or have they faild? Then, let the books disease,
Frequent with writers, on the Printers ceaze.
What to the pious Father Death did give,
Will make the Son, amongst b^st Authors, live.
XXXVII. Eidem Domino Gualt. Charltono. M. R.
CHarltonus, is qui Helmontium pridem dedit
Nuperque nobis reddidu Helmo^tium;
Hunc pul^ ^ris miranda Sympathet^^i,
Hunc eruditis exprimentem pag^^s
Medentium, de Fluxibus, Lapsus gra^es:
Iam nunc Suum, de Lapide secreto, librum
Don^ss^ luce publicum gaudet Borum.
O Author annumerande Cha^ltonis ^u^s!
O abdita praclarcor Gemma ^^ber!
Et Vivat Author, et liber V^^at diu*
XXXVIII. To Mr. Edmund Bower.
SO many Friends named, yet not til this hour
One verse bestowed upon my honored Boner?
Sir, I am glad, you again feed the Ox,
And ventured not upon the Irish rocks:
No Ground for y^u (though the beyond sea sun
Shine clear) can be so fit as Alverton.
Long live there! you are a Man the Scriptures bless,
A faithful Truste^ for the Fatherless.
XXXVIII. To the worthy Persons mentioned in these papers.
AN ancient writer flatterd himself, that He
Should give his Friends an Immortality,
Whom in his Books he mentioned. Be it far
From me, to glory thus. Your Good Names are
Immortal of themselves. If my Muse live,
Your Names her life and estimation give.
XXXIX. Mro. Ric. Hillo T. B.
SEntentias qui veterum been memor tenes:
^^qus Cor, a^cem, nulla nunc possunt mala
Penetrare ^^^ctas sed manes, recti tenax:
Si quando samis Hilaritatis poculum,
Admit, quaeso, Musas in Coetum, ut soles:
Has sobrtas, in ^^am, et siccas Musas meas.
Sic Hilariores floreant Musae Tuae.
XL. To Mr. Edmund Waller.
A Wit and Poet'^ no reproach. To you
Both Titles, if no an^ One, are due.
Your N^me shall be enrolled Sir, among
Best English Poets, who write smooth and strong.
I know a man, had rather, with your wit,
Be the happy Author of a Po^m (yet
He studied ^ong by the fair stream of Ouse)
Than be some potent Prince, or One oth' House.
XLI. A physic Note.
A Son of Galen's in a Physic book
Bids the physician for a Med'cin look
In the next hedge to's patunt. Ready ease
Nature provides for every climes disease.
If s^: our Hawling-Men, when sick, may see
In ^nula campane the^r Remedy.
Here Is enough of it: which does uselessly;
For They Are s^arce sick til by mere Age they die.
XLII. To Mr I. C. physician.
When once I walked with you thorugh Gloucester street,
Some of the poorer sort we chanced to meet.
My life you saved, Good Master Comberline,
God bless you, said another, You saved mine.
If we did know all your poor patients names,
How should we magnity your Goodness, James?
The Rich from you have dear Health cheaply bought:
The Poor have skill and Medicin too for naught.
XLIII. To D. Merret.
MY Garden, Sir, is yet or'e-spred with weeds:
Please you to send me some of your rare seeds,
I shall prepare the Ground. But send in time,
And of such Plan^s, as love a colder clime.
That I may know the plant, not seed alone,
P^^y send me Spigels Introduction.
It Will be Entertainment for a Friend, to tell
In what Disease my Herbs will make him well:
And walking by the banks to describe what
They are: One's good for this: The Other for that.
At last, I Will add, when the best Herbs I show,
Al these I to my Merrets bount* owe:
Merret, who runs the names and virtues over
Of these plants, yes, and of a thousand more:
And can declare, which, what disease will cure,
At the first sight, even by the Signature.
XLIV. To M Alex. Weld.
When you were in our Country last Rent-day,
You pleased to say, Sometime you would take your way
By my House. Pray Sir, when you come down next,
Perform, and make your promise true as Text.
Though my Avaro's pay not well their Dues,
You shall be f^asted by my bounteous Muse:
And what you find deficient among
The fr^gal Dishes, shee'^ supply with song:
That you may say, when you retu^n, at ware
Though not your palate, I did feast your Ear.
XLV. To Mr F. B.
FU^co, I know, albeit you are wise and Grave,
You so much of your old Humanity have,
To let me tell you of the time, when You
And w^ll, and Robin, and I, and 'tother Crew
O^ fellows bony fire-night^ past in the Hall,
They from our now-strong-garrison'd City call.
Often have we discoursed 'ore ^ Zegedine
Of D^^ble, and now and then a pot of wine.
Often have we made a ^unto over the Can,
Offending nor the State, nor Priscian.
For in our Mitth, we ever careful were
To please the Historical Prelector Whear.
Now we 'r dispersed, and perhaps grown more wise,
Yet our old merry Meetings recognize.
Our present Gravi^y will not go less
Though we our youthly vanity confess,
The Enemy can find naught, if he will
Search for it, but what he may preach at Corn hill.
XLVI. Upon Lent.
OUr Country folk are very retinent
Of some old Customs, yet will not keep Lent.
Upon Shrove-Tuesday they do feast and play:
But on Ash Wednesday they will not fast and pray.
So prone we are our wanton flesh to please:
But care not much to cure the Souls disease.
XLVII. To Mr W. T.
"NOli timere; familiam pascet tuam:
"Nolo timere; familiam pascet meam.
Will. you did say, There is no hurt in the rest:
But of my vers^s, these two are the best.
If Grotius, whose verses finely go,
Were 'live again to write, he would write so.
O say not G^otius would write like me:
It Is too much praise, to write two lines as HE.
XLVIII. To the same. A Sermon Note.
WIll. I remember (eight years now are past)
Preaching at Hereford great Church, at last
You did infer, by way of Application,
Out of judicious Hooker, this Citation.
"The time will come, a word with Meekness fit,
"Shall be preferred to a volum of sharp wit.
For the use of all the Brethren of our Coat,
I have revived here this good old Note.
XLIX. To the Critics.
I Am not as the Lord Mountaigny, He
In whose Essays so large Impressions be
Of his peculiar, disposition:
Yet have I given my poor Muse a Commission,
To tell some private ^ales; and made no doubt,
To put my own Pedantic humors out.
Kind Readers think not mine the dullest Pen
That writes, if they meet one good Verse in ten.
Ye sons of Priscian, pray, with favor read:
Lest my bold Scholars break your Father's Head.
L. An excuse.
OFten I ride over Englands coldest Hill,
And meet with many a blast enough to chill
A stronger Muse: nevertheless, my dame
Keeps company, and remains still the same.
She shorts my way, and, when no other's lent,
Her own self is sufficient Argument.
Now she would excuse some Verses hard paced are,
Because made on my poor old trotting Mare.
LI. Herbert and Crashaw.
WHen into Herbert's Temple I ascend
By Crashaws Steps, I do resolve to mend
My lighter Verse, and my low ^ot^s to raise,
And in high Accent sing my M^k^rs pra^se.
Mean while these s^cred Poems in my Sight
I place, and read, that I may learn to write.
LII. Come from Lebanon my Spouse. Cant. M. ^asim. Sarbie.
ET fugis, et fugiens (...), Quid Sponsa moraris?
Non fugis, ut (...); ut ^apiare, (...).
Thou fl^'st, and flying call'st: Away, my Spouse!
Thou fly'st not to avoid her, but to ^ouse.
LIII. St Magdalen weeping under the Cross.
AH sitio, clamas. A^sunt (...) ^upibus undae.
Sola sluunt ocul^s ^l^mina* sola b^^e.
Thou christ, I thirst. But Those are Rocks, not men;
These Eyes yield Crystal waters. Lord, drink them.
LV. Upon Chrysostom.
You that vouchsafe to read these Verses, know,
I may a Chrysostom to y^u^ favor owe.
Great Chrysostom Constantin' politan,
Of the G^eec Edit^on Savilian;
The stationer, for my De Imperio
Has promisd it as my Reward. But so,
The sumtuous Impression do not ly
Upon his hands; pray, Gentle Readers, Buy.
It Is Grotius. Enough. Discourses wise
Of State and Church take at two shillings price;
What though he ask you for it half a Crown*
You spend more at one Sitting in the Town.
Is It not a thrifty bargain for the Truth?
Expect a better of the Golden-Mouth.
Give me my Chrysostom, I will d^spense,
To all our Countrymen his Eloquence.
And first, the sweet-short Sermons you shall hear,
Preached, where They first the Christian Name did bear.
LV. To the Printer.
DId I effuse a little more of brine,
On m' Epigrams, in such and such a line;
Or could I write, as well as you can Print,
Unless there be a fatal disaster in it,
(Although my Thuan were not of quick sale)
The Muse will roundly off like Cotswald Ale.
Pray, tell the Bookseller, if he will see it,
The Epigram, though not very salt, is sweet.
No obscene Jests, no jeeres fall from my Pen:
But it delights in praise of Books and Men.
LVI. To the Book-binder.
HAs my Muse made a fault? Friend, I entreat,
Before you bind her up, you would her beat.
Though She Is not loose and wanton, I can tell,
Unless you beat her, you will never bind her well.
LVII. To F. A. Stationer.
FRanc, you admire, what should the meaning be,
That my unknown Muse printed is for Thee.
Here in the end, Thou shall the Reason find:
It Is printed (take it not ill) for thee to bind.
None can compare to you, so finely well
You bind, that your books for the outside sell:
If, by your close Art, you will set it forth,
My Cotswold Muse will sell, though Nothing worth*
And though the writers wit give no great flash,
Readers will think, it is Good, cause bound by Ash.
LVIII. To the Readers.
Conclusion.
MY verse, because they are not hard and rare,
As some of Dav'nant's, Don's and Cleveland's are,
You censure. Pray Sir, must all men write so?
Or can we all unto fair Corinth go?
But, Truth is, I Would not write so, if I could:
I write, just as I speak, to be understood.
Whose sense will not without much study come,
Let him, for me, be altogether dumb.
No Persius be my Reader; but such may,
As He, who once threw Persius away.
Ohe, jam satis est, ohe Libelle.
Errata.
PAge. 2. l. 7 dele Tibi 31. 7 unlicens'd 32. 22, heavy grief 34. 15 Vis, urbem
captam 39* 4. suavi. 45 two bald. p. 46. v. 15. eximium. 47. 4. Audis. 62. 6.
affatu. 65 Priscian. Frischlin. 68. 7. disputers. ult. politics. 76. 21 or
Knight. 80. 13 Contumely.


