PARERGA.

I. Suffolk and Gloucestershire. ii. An Oxford-Conference. iii. A Winter-nights
Exercise. iv. ELOGIA CAMDENIANA. v. A Paper-Monument.
Prodesse and Delectare. An. MDCLX.

A SHORT VIEW OF SUFFOLK AND GLOUCESTERSHIRE.

Tecum habita. Printed An. Dom. MDCLX.

A Short View OF Suffolk and Gloucestershire. Ex Illustri Autore GUIL. CAMDENO.
SUFFOLK
1. ON the South of Norfolk, has Cambridge on the West, divided from Essex
Southward by the River Stow, the German Ocean beating on the East; two Rivers,
little Ouse and VVaveny, running several ways from the same Springs between
Norfolk and it.

2. A Region large, harborous, of a rich soil except Eastward, fruitful
corne-fields, and good pastures, and meadows for fatting cattle, abounding in
cheese, and not without woods, and many Parks for Deer adjoining to Noble
Houses.

3. The politic or civil Distribution of this County is into 3 Parts, The
Geldable, St. Edmunds Liberty, and St. Etheldreds.

3. Near Cambridg-shire is seated Ixning, of lesser fame now then heretofore,
by reason of the vicinity of New Market, whither the Trade is carried.
New Market Heath is a large and spacious Plain, barren and sandy, but green;
here men admire at Devils dike, as if the Devil had made it, whereas no doubt
it was but a Trench made of old by the Inhabitants of this Country, against the
Incursions of their Enemies.

5. Onward is St. Edmunds Bury, a famous Town, so called from Edmund, a most
Christian King, whose body, after he was cruelly slain by the Danes, was here
interred. It flourished much, which K. Canute had repaired, and new built the
Church, offered his Crown to the holy Martyr, brought in Monks with their
Abbot, and bestowed many Lands upon them, and among the rest, the Town it self.
Of the Town and Monastery, while it stood, hear Lelands Testimony, an
Eyewitness, Sol non vidit urbem situ elegantiorem, sic molli delicata pendet
in clivo, and ridulus ad Orientem defluit; aut Coenobium illustrius, etc.

6. Near unto Bury appears Rushbrook, the Seat of the noble Family of the
Iermins: and not far off Ikesworth, and more on the North Fernham; and near it
Lidgate, a Village not to be passed by in silence, being ennobled by the birth
of John Lidgate Monk, whose wit the Muses themselves framed and adorned, his
English Poems are of such grace and elegancy. Thus of the Western part,

8. On the South, Stour, nigh the Fountain, overflows, and makes Stour-mere,
and then collecting his waters within banks, visits Clare, a noted Town, which
shows you the ruins of an old Castle. Thence by long Melford rejoicing to see
the fair Hospital built there by Sr. William Cordall, he passes on to
Sudbury (Southbury) once the chief Town of this Shire, and yet will not easily
yield priority to any other: for it is populous, and a rich clothing Town,
governed by a Major yearly chosen out of seven Aldermen.

8. Edwardston is not far off, a Town of small note now, and after a few miles
Stour is increased by the access of the little river Breton, which, in no long
course, washes two Towns of ancient Names; near the springs, Bretenham, now a
little one, and having no face of a City; and somewhat Eastward, Ofton, i. e.
the Town of Offa K. of Mercians; beneath which is Hadley, a Town of good note
for clothing.

9. Stour having received Breton runs down with it, not far from Bentley, and
after a few miles near Arwenton, the Seat of the illustrious Family of the
Parkers, drowns himself in the Ocean, meeting with the river Orwell or Gipping.

10. Orwell flows even out of the belly of this Country, from two Fountains,
the one near VVulpet, a Market Town (Luporum fossa) the other at Gipping a poor
Village. At Norton, by it, K. Henry 8. sought for Golden Mines in vain, and the
pits speak as much.

11. Along the same River are seen Stow, and Needham, two Market Towns, and
Himingston almost on the bank of it, where Baldwin le Petture held Lands by a
strange merry Tenure, per saltum, sufflum, and pettum.

12. Nearer the mouth of it appears Ipswich (of old Gippewich,) of an humble
site, the eye, as it were, of this County, a commodious Haven, a great
Market Town of trade, a great multitude of Inhabitants, beautified with
Fourteen Churches, and many fair and magnificent Buildings. The Corporation
consists of Twelve Burgesses (called Portmen) of which the chief are two
Bailieffs chosen yearly, and as many Justices out of Twenty-four others. Thus
for the Southern part.

13. The Eastern Coasts upon the Sea, running toward the North. The River Deben
rises near Mendlesham a market Town, thence visits and gives name to
Debenham, from the deep ways round about it: afterward it runns by Vfford and
Rendolesham on the other side, and so to VVoodbridge, delighted with the
neatness of the Town; and then after a few miles is entertained by the Ocean,
at Badsway Haven.

14. Now the Shore advances a little Eastward, at the mouth of the river Orns,
which has its rise near Framlingham Castle, and presently spreads it self as
it were into a Lake, on ^he West side thereof. This is a very fair Castle, and
well fortified, with thirteen Turrets in a great thick wall, and within are
many convenient handsome Lodgings. Orns having washed a little Town Parham, and
then Glemham, gives name to Oreford, and near it falls into the Sea,

15. Oreford was a large and populous Town, but now complains of the
ungrateful Ocean, for withdrawing himself, and envying her the commodity of
her Haven by little and little. In the time of King Henry, there is a story,
how the Fishermen here caught in their nets a wild creature, representing in
all parts the shape of a man, with a long beard, and much rough hair on his
breast; who, at last secretly escaped to the Sea, and was seen no more.

16. Not much higher, in a safe and pleasant Site, lies Alburg, between the
Valley Slangden, where the Sea beats on the East, and the River on the West; a
Station for Mariners and Fishermen not incommodious, nor unfrequented: Hard by,
when the Harvest was spoiled all England over by unseasonable weather, in the
Year 1555. Peale grew up miraculously, without any earth, amongst the stones,
in the beginning of Autumn, and abated the price of Corn, as the Inhabitants
relate; Some conjecture, that Pulse by shipwracks is cast upon the shore, and
so uses to grow without any miracle. But the like spontaneous Harvest we have
observed to be on the shore of Kent every year.

17. Ten miles further, along the Seacoast you come to Dunwich, where An. 630.
Felix the Burgundian fixed his Episcopal See, and his Successors a long time
governed all the East of England; but now the violence of the waves having
carried away the greatest part of it, the Bishops having many ages since
removed their Chair thence; It sits in sadness, and almost in solitude. A
little higher the River Blithe emptieth it felf into the Sea, on whose bank is
seated a small Town, Blithborow, which has a Market by favor of John Lord
Clavering.

18. Here runns farther into the East, the Promontory Easton-ness, esteemed the
most Eastern point of all Britain; and is called by Ptolomy, Extensio. On the
South of it lies Southwold in a plain open to the Sea; a Town frequented for
the Havens sake, which the river Blithe entering the sea, makes there; and when
the Tide comes, so surrounded with the waters, that it seems an Island, and
you would wonder it is not overflown. More inward you have VVingfield and
Dunnington: and not far off Huntingfeild; and nearer it Heveningham, the seat
of a Noble Family that have their name thence: at a little distance is
Halesworth, now the Seat of the Alingtons.

19. On the North; this Province, as we said, is divided from Norfolk by two
small Rivers, Ouse and VVaveney; both which issuing out of a plashy place at
Lophamford, their springs being very little distant, drive their shallow
streams diverse ways. Upon Ouse, which runs West, nothing offers it self on
this side worthy of memory: upon VVaveney, that runs East, you shall see
Hoxon first, enobled by the Martyrdom of K. Edmund. Near it, at Broom, has
long dwelt the noble Family of Cornwallis. Lower is Eay, i.e. Isle, so called,
because it is watered round about.

20. Thence Waveney runns down by Flixton (for Felixton, from the first Bp.
Felix, as many other places were also named from him) and almost encompasseth
Bungey. A little below near the Bank, you shall see Mettingham. And now Waveney
approaching to the Sea, and attempting in vain to go two ways thither, one by
the River Garienis, another by the Lake Luthing, makes a fair Peninsula, named
by some Lovingland, by others, more truly, Luthingland, from that long and
diffused Lake, which beginning at the shore of the Ocean reaches to the river
Garienis.

21. At the entrance of which Peninsula a little Town Lestroffe lies upon the
Sea, at the end of it Gorlston. Inward upon Waveny is seated Somerly, and
higher, where Garienis and Waveny mingle themselves Cnobersburg, which we now
call Burgh-Castle, being only ruined walls, enriched with Roman Coins often
found there.

Parishes 775.

GLOUCESTER -- SHIRE.
THe primary Seat of the Old Dobuni, has Monmouth and Hereford-shire on the
West, Worcestershire on the North, on the East, Oxford and Warwickshire;
Wilt-shire and Somersetshire on the South: a Country pleasant and fertile,
stretched forth from the Summer-rising of the Sun to wintersetting.

2. The more Eastern part raising it self in Hills is known by the name of
Cotswold; the midst is sunk and fallen into a most fruitful Plain, and watered
by the most noble River Severn, that gives a vital force and verdure unto the
Felds: the more Western part beyond Severn is all shaded with Woods.

3. The Region, says Malmesbury, is called from the principal Town, The Vale
of Gloucester; all the Land rich in Corn, and abounding in fruit: You may behold
the Highways apparrelled as it were were with Apple Trees and Pear Trees, not
by the industry of Plantation, but by the very nature of the Soil. A Region,
more than any other Province in England, plentiful in Vines, of a more
delightful taste, the wines being very grateful to the palate, and not much
inferior to your French wines in sweetness, etc. No marvel so many places in
these parts retain the name of Vineyards, yielding wine heretofore; and it is
rather to be imputed to the ill-husbandry of the Inhabitants, than the decay of
Nature, that there is none pressed at this day.

4. The more Western part, on the other side Severn (possessed of old by the
Silures) even to the Wye (a River running betwixt Wales and England) is full of
deep woods, the Forest of Dean, so called, either from a little Town of that
name, or, as I conjecture, from Arden, signifying both among the Galls and
Britains, a wood: the Forest is now, since the Ironworks there, grown thinner
than heretofore.

5. Here is Avone, of most ancient memory, mentioned by Antoninus, now called
Aventon, a little Village, probably so called from Avon, which to the Britains
signifies a River.

6. The river Severn (Brit. Huffron) having gone a long journey in a narrower
channel, where it first enters this Shire, receives the river Avon, and another
little stream from the East, between which is seated Tewkesbury, so called from
Theoc the Hermit here, a large and fair Town, having three Bridges, noted for
clothing, and whose Mustard for biting is become Proverbial, being made up in
balls.

7. Lower, on the bank of Severn, lies Deorhist, and suffers much damage by the
overflowing of the river, when it swells. Here in the midst of Severn is At^ey,
now the Eight, i. e. Island, famous for the single Combat of Edmund the
English King and Canute the Dane.

8. Severn goes on in a winding course, and dividing it self, to make an Island
of the green and fertile meadows, washes the City Gloucester, which Antonine
calls Glevum, the Britains Caer Glowi, i. e. The Fair City. It was built by the
Romans, to awe the Silures, and a Colony was brought thither, named Colonia
Glevum. The City is built along upon the river, and the other side is in part
fortified by a very strong wall. The Streets are indeed very neat; and they
were adorned with many Churches: The principal Church, or College, was built
by Aldred Archbishop of York, and had a Dean, with 6 Prebendaries: above the
Quire, there is a semicircular vault, a Whispering-place, built with that
artifice, that a very soft voice is conveyed between the walls, from one end to
the other, to the admiration of the hearers.

9. Severn bidding farewell to Gloucester, uniteth her divided forces, and
fights often with a violent Tide, and bends her course to the Ocean, on the
way visiting Barkley, a Town of good note, having a Major to govern it, and a
Castle, honored by the ancient Nobility of her Lords, the Barons of Barkley.

10. Near unto this, a little rivet Aven runs into the Severn Sea, at whose
springs, scarce eight miles off the shore, near the Village Alderley are bred
stones in the shape of Cockles and Oysters, which, whether they were living
creatures once, or are only the sports of wanton nature, let the Physiologers
enquire.

11. Now let us climb the Hills, and view Cotswold, so called from the hills
(for would signifies a Hill, and the Cotes or Folds of sheep, famous for their
soft and fine wool through all Nations. Under these hills are sheltred several
places of especial mark.

12. Campden, or Camden, a Market Town of of note: Hales, once a most
flourishing Monastry, famous for that Alexander of Hales, the Coryphoeus and
chief of Schoolmen: Sudeley, a most elegant Castle (the stately House of the
Illustrious Lord George, late Lord Chandos Baron of Sudeley:) VVinchcomb, an
ancient populous Town (but very poor now, were it not for the Plantation of
Tobacco) where Kenulph the Mercian King erected a fair Monastry, famed for the
Relics of Kenelm, a Child traitorously made away by his Sister, and inserted
into the Catalogue of Ma tyrs.

1r3. Near the Eastern bounds of this County is to be seen that celebrious
Roman way, called the Fosse, which comes from Warwickshire, by Lemington, a
Station of the Romans, (as the Roman Coyns there found seem to testify) and
then by Stow on the would, exposed to the cold winds, and Northleach (washed by
a rivulet of the same appellation) to Cirencester or Ciciter.

14. Ciciter, a Town of very great Antiquity, Corinum in Ptolomy, exactly 15
Miles from the Gloc, taking the name from the river Corinus, or Churne (which
runns on the South of it, and affords opportunity of Mills) was a place of
great dignity, as the Roman coyns, Marbles, and other Monuments often found
there, do prove. The Fourth part scarce is now inhabited, the rest turned into
Fields, and ruins of an old Religious House, built as they say by the Saxons.
The Inhabitants are enriched by clothing, and thankfully remember the bounty of
K. Richard the first, who gave them power over 7 adjacent Hundreds, to hear
Causes, and receive Mulcts and other Emoluments thereby.

15. Among the Dukes of Gloucester most memorable is Humphry brother to the
renowned King Henry the fifth; a man of high desert toward the Commonwealth of
Learning:

FINIS.

