Some things of weighty concernment Proposed in Meeknes and love by way of
Queries to the serious consideration of the inhabitants of Aberdeen, which also
may be of use to such as are of the same mind with them, elce where in this
Nation.
Added by way of Appendix to a Book entitled TRUTH CLEARED OF CALUMNIES.
Question 1.

WHether it be a thing any wise warrantable in common equity, or true
Christianity, for any person, or persons, to take liberty, both in Pulpit, and
print, to speak against a people as dangerous, and Heretical, and yet wholly
to debar that people from vindicating themselves, in either of these ways, so
far as they can? Or whether it can be supposed, that any persons, except they
wholly give up themselves Implicitly, to believe the accusers can make a true
Judgment, in that case, upon the accused, especially considering that maxim
of law. Quicunque inaudita altera part, etc. i. e. He that without hearing
both parties, pronounces judgment, though he decide the right upon the
matter, has not (...) the part of a just Judge, to which ad the consideration
of these passages of Scripture. 1 Thessalonians: 5.21. Prove: 18.13. Isayah 41:21.

Qu. 2. Whether then it was not contrary to the laws both divine, and humane,
for the Priests in Aberdeen, to importune the Magistrates to make search for
that Book lately published in vindication of the people called Quakers? Or
whether such a practice has any warrant, except what flows originally from
the Spanish Inquisition, as being directly contrary to equity, and to the
Scriptures above mentioned?

Qu. 3. Whether also it was not both Antiscripturall and Popish in G. M. to
prohibit his hearers from reading of that Book, by compareing it with Poison?
Whether that was not to keep people in darkness, and dependence upon him? or
with how little reason could he desire such a thing considering he asserted it
to contain, an ample Confession, of all those Errors he had (...) them with?
And if so, whether it be likely, that it could prove dangerous* the Errors
being so gross and monstrous, which by him, and his Brethren, are charged upon
that people, that their confessing them, would rather scare people, then engage
any to like them?

Qu. 4. And whether H. M. his bidding people abstain from that Book as poison,
without trial of what is in it, be not like unto the Papists way, who bid
their neighbors abstain from the Protestants books as poison? and whether may
not even poison be tried (though not by eating it) in a way that is not
hazzardous to the tryer, especially seeing that which some may call poison, may
be afterward found by sound trial, to be good and wholesome food, yea Medicin
te expel such poisonable Doctrines, as your Priests infuse into people?

Qu. 5. And seeing G. M. bids his hearers abstain from the Quakers words as
from poison, does he not endanger such to be poisoned, whom he sends, or
allows to come to our meetings, to hear what is spoke? and what knows G. M.
but his spies, may be touched, so that it may be said, as it was then, is Saul
also among the Prophets?

Qu. 6. And seeing G. M. counts our words as poison, why does he bring them
forth so much among his hearers, if he thinks he gives strong Antidots
against them, I have heard some of his own hearers say, that, that which he
calls the poison, wrought more effectually to persuade, even out of his mouth,
then all his Antidots could do to diswade?

Qu. 7. Whether the latter part of that allegance of G. M. (viz. that all they
had charged on the Quakers, was confessed to, in that book) be not a manifest
untruth, in respect the greatest charges alleged by him, against the Quakers,
are therein utterly denied. As for instance, the matter of Pelagianisme in page
25. the matter of Popery in page 34. and of Arminianisme page 65, etc.

Qu. 8. Whether the said G. M. has not manifested very much deceit, in saying
also publikly, that the said book asserts it, not only to be a thing easy, but
pleasant for wicked people, to keep holy the Sabbath day, and to perform the
spiritual duties commanded to be performed thereon, unles he understands them
to be, simply the dispensing to hear a man talk an hour or two, and to have
all the rest of the day to spend in idleness, vain communication, and
frequenting the alehouse, etc. Which are the words mentioned page 72.

Qu. 9. Whether it be any way unsuitable to the law of charity, or to the meek
Spirit of Christ, to use plain, and downright dealing calling a Ly a Ly? or
whether any be to be blamed, for so doing, considering the practice of all the
Prophets, and of Christ's and of his Apostles, how sharply they dealt with false
teachers as may appear by these Scriptures? Isai. 56.11. Lev. 23. to verse. 33.
Ezekiel. 34. Hos. 4. from 6. to 10. ibid. 5.1. Mich. 3; 5. Mat. 3.7. Joh 8.

Qu. 10. Whether then they be not prejudiced, who accuse the Quakers for useing
the same terms, seeing they are willing to make the application manifest, by
comparing the fruits of the present pretended Preachers, with those that were of
old? As for instance, whether it be a breach either of moral civility, or
Christian meeknes to say John Menzies lied in asserting Robert Barclay to have
been educated in a Jesuits College, seeing it is utterly false?

Qu. 11. And whether David Lyall, may not be judged more guilty of foolish
rashness and envy, then any of us of the breach of civilitie to reprove him for
it, who that he might not want something to say, against the Quakers, alleged
a notorious untruth upon God, in saying, that the God of Heaven shut the mouths
of all the Quakers, that not one word was spoke among them, as their last
monthly meeting, the 3. of the 11. month; which diverse of their own Church
Members, can witness to be a ly?

Qu. 12. Whether it be not a far greater breach of Charity in the Priests of
Aberdeen, not only to speak all manner of evil falsely against that people in
the Pulpit, but also there to stir up both Magistrates and people to imprison
and persecut them? Whether that be not more like the Practice of the Pharisees
and of Demetrius the Silver Smith then the Ministers of Christ?

Qu. 13. Whether beating, striking, punching, pulling out of hair, and that
openly in the streets, threatening to stone and pistol their sober innocent
Neighbors, and boasting that tho they should do so, they should be under no
hazard of the law, be like the fruits of Christ's flock? Or whether such
practices, and boastings, be not more abusive of, and destructive to
Magistracy, then meeting together in sobriety, and Gods fear, to wait upon
him, and edify one another, which is expressy commanded, Heb. 10. or if such
actings be not liker John a Leyden, and the tumults, and cruelties of Munster,
then any thing that can be proved against the Quakers.

Qu. 14. Whether singing, dancing, swearing, asking if the spirit be come,
whistling and saying the spirit's upon them, in the Quakers meeting, be not
Barbarous, and Atheistical and interruptions far of another nature, then for
honest men in seriousnes to stand up in your meeting houses, after your
preaching is ended, and preach Repentance, seeing these practices above
mentioned evidence how much ye stand in need of such an Advertisment, and both
Reason and Christianity would say, it deserved, more civil and Christian
usage, then Imprisonment or a pair of stocks?

Qu. 15. Whether David Lyall, his expressions, intimating his fears of the
increase of Preachers, does not show him contrary to the Spirit of Moses who
wished all the Lords people might be Prophets, and to the Apostle Paull 1. Cor.
14:29. Ye may all Prophecy one by one, and to Luther and many of the first
Reformers, and Martirs, who held preaching to be the commen privilege af
Christians, and so many of them being Tradesmen did preach, judging it no
inconsistance, though this generation of lofty Priests, (who may well be
compared, in many things to those idle Shaveli^gs, whom Luther reproves) are
loath to admit of any such thing? knowing if it once should be supposed, that
Trad^smen* or Ploughmen should preach, it would also follow that Preachers
might be Tradesmen, and so win their living with their hands, as did the
Apostle. 2. Cor. 4:12. ibid. 9:18. Whether if so, it be not probable fewer
would be ambitious of that office, then now are, and that there would be no
such gapeing for presentations, the desirable baits of Stipends being
removed, and as it would abate the pride and sumptuousnes of the Priests, so it
would clip shorter the strypt silk petticoats of their wives, and other gaudy
apparel of their children?

Qu. 16. Whether it can then pertinently be objected as a token of pride
against the Quakers, that they preach Repentance especially against their
doing it without study, or premeditation, as if trusting to the Spirit of God
for utterance were pride, which is expressly allowed commanded, and practiced
in the Script. Luc. 21:14, 15. Acts 2:4. 1. Cor. 2:14. and 1. Cor. 14:29. 1.
Pet. 4:11?

Qu. 17. Whether that does not homologate the Popish argument for a Liturgy
alleging it to be pride for men to address themselves in Prayers framed Ex
tempore, seeing there are Prayers framed by the Church, and by learned men,
heertofore (as they say) better then private men can make off hand, containing
what ever is applicable to the condition of any Soul? Or whether it may not by
the same argument be pressed upon David Lyall, as a point of pride, for him, or
his Brethren, to use any Prayer, except that examplar, left by Christ, commonly
called the Lords Prayer, seeing they themselves make the extent of it so large,
as there can be no condition of any particular person, which they will not
reduce to some of the heads of it, and that enlargements, and Tautologies to
God, are not only vain, and needles, but also by himself prohibited?

Qu. 18. And whether it savours more of pride, to preach without premeditation
which is but a speaking unto man, then to pray without premeditation, which is
a speaking unto God? And seeing David Lyall and his Brethren pray ex tempore,
and without premeditation, of any conceived form of prayer, may it not be laid
at his and their door, first to clear themselves of pride, as to this matter,
especially when they do not pretend to pray by the immediate teaching and
leading of the Spirit, in which the only true Prayer is framed, that is
acceptable unto God?

Qu. 19. Whether or no it did not as well express a mind filled with Pride as
contain a manifest impertinency, for the same David Lyall to allege as a
token of the Quakers pride, that a little black fellow came into the Church (
such were his expressions) whether these words I say savor not as little of
Humility, as the thing it self is void of Reason, that either littlnes of
body, blacknes of feature, or meannes of outward Extract (for so I think he
means by fellow) are inconsistant with the esse, or being of a Preacher, which
if they had its probable himself could hardly have been admitted to be one?

Qu. 20. Whether if such words and expressions be the fruits of premeditation
and study, (which these men cry up so much, and judge so needful) it deserves
that esteem they would have put upon it, or upon themselves because thereof;
especially considering, many more impertinencies, and inconsistencies used by
them, in their Pulpits, witness that one mentioned upon the same occasion, by
the aforsaid D. L. to wit that its better to be an humble Devil, then a proud
Saint* which if used by a Schoolboy, would have deserved hissing, if not
whips, as being Repugnantia in adjecto.

Let David Lyall, George Meldrum, John Menzies, three Priests in Aberdeen, who
have lately most appeared in Pulpit against them called Quakers, and among all
their fellow-preists are here in mostly concerned, answer these Queries, if
they can, without using those shifts and tergiversations, which the Papists
used against the Primitive Reformers.

Given forth the 11. Month 1670, by R.B.


