PEGASUS, OR THE FLYING HORSE from Oxford.

Bringing the Proceedings of the Visitours and other Bedlamites there, by
Command of the Earl of Mongomery.

ACADEMIA OXONIENSIS
SAPIENTIA ET FELICITATE


PRINTED, At Mongomery, heretofore called Oxford.

TUESDAY April the eleventh, The long-Legg'd piece of impertinency which they
miscall Chancellor) was to be brought with State into Oxon: To this end, these
few inconsiderable, and ill faced Saints hired all the Hackneyes in Town
(which were basely bad, yet good enough for them) Out they went and met the
Hoghen Moghen I told you of; What Courtship passed between them at meeting, how
he swore at them, and they said grace at him; how many zealous faces and ill
legs they made, and at what distance, I know not; a long time they were about
it. At last they come, and the Governor and his Regiment meets them at Friar-
Bacons study, where you might have seen the Presbyterian and Independent
agreed against the poor Christians of Oxon: In the mean time Tho. Smith of
Magdalen College had an excellent Design; He would ride in with them too,
and that he might have suitable accommodation, would needs borrow an Ass, nay
an Ass he would have, and ride in next before the Chancellor, and when they
told him it was a mad trick, he told them noe, for he knew there would be
many Asses besides his. Now they come, they come! And indeed it was such a
miserable Pageant as I never saw. Had you seen tall Pembroke in the amidst of
those little inspired Levites, you would have sworn you had seen Saul, once
more amongst the Prophets. Along they come without any respect from those in
the Streets (which were not many) not a Cap or Knee from them, but frowns and
curses; and 'twas a wonder (but that the Soldiers guarded them) if they had
not welcomed them with old Eggs and Apples. Aaron Rogers, Langley, and squint
eyed Greenwood, were the chief men (what the worst were when these were best,
you may judge) and with them about some ten or twelve Scholars more, freshmen
and all, only they were interlarded with some few Country Parsons who brought
their sons for Fellowships, and so worshipped the Beast for their profit.

All that saw these Dragooners in Divinity, upon those miserable Hackneyes,
with suitable looks and gestures, imagined that some ill-fac'd Major of some
beggarly Town had been brought in by the mechanical Clownes of the place.
They are now almost at Merton College gate, where Master Cheynel begins an
Oration in English (they cannot speak Latin by the Spirit) delivers him, in
the name of the University (a lying Levite, whom the University sent not)
First, a Key of the Convocation. Secondly a Seal (a counterfeit one, for the
true ones are safe enough.) Thirdly, a Bible; and when he came to that, he
was inspired and spoke fast, and much of it; and you may easily believe that
he would not quickly have done with the Bible, who will hold out three hours
on one poor Text. He sadly complained to his Lordship, of all sorts of
People, especially the Beedles, for neglecting their duty, that they came not
and bowed their knee to Baal, nor worshipped the Calfe which they had set up.

He told his Lordship that they were very Malignant, and their staves stained
with a double Guilt (witty Master Cheynel I) Well, think what you will, I am
sure that was intended for a jest. Dixit, Master Chaynel has done; my Lord
bows his body, but wisely said nothing. Then down comes my Lord, goes into
the College; at the entrance their designed Proctor Button makes a Latin
speech to his Lordship, which he understood as much, as his horse Master
Cheynels English one. This done my Lord for his Chamber, and those Levites who
on Hackneyes manned him down the street ride back again through the
highstreete, where they were hissed and houted at.

Next morning they are for Execution, and to Christchurch they go; the
Visitors and Chancellor (falsely so called) enter the Hall, call for the
Buttery-booke, dash out the Deane and all the Cannons, put in their own new
named things, and subscribe their names to the fact; then Mistress Fell (a
gallant woman) her children and servants are turned out, and the possession
given to Reynolds.

Afternoon a Convocation is called by a (fellow they call Beedle, he came
into our College, with his hands in his pockets (staff he had none) in the
middle of the Quadrangle, pulls out a paper, puts on his spectacles, and read
the form in Latin, (though it is certain he understands noe good English (
Langley was the man, a Tailor) and instead of per sidem, per sidem, per sidem;
called it provided; provided, provided. Afternoon they advance toward the
Schools, there marched before his Lordship, four fellows in gowns,
ill-fac'd, heads bare, hands in their pockets, these went for Beedles, after
these my Lord and the rabble; to the Convocation they come, where there
appeared not above thirteen or fourteen who had votes (Doctor Pellam, and
Master Williamson were two, Zouch and Paul Hood have appeared too,) yet the
House was full of people, Batchelours, Freshmen, Townsmen, Servingmen, all
came in, and sat where once gallant men did.

Never such a Conventicle (or Confusion rather) carried the name of a
Convocation, there they make Reynolds Vice Chancellor, Button and Cross
Proctors, Reynolds, Harris, Rogers, Corbet (who as University Orator made a
Speech to the Chancellor in the passage by the Divinity-Schooles) Garbrand of
New-Iun, Palmer (the designed Warden of All-Soules) are Created Doctors,
Langley, Cornish, Cheynel. Batchelors, of Divinity, and Masters, and
Batchelors, God knows how many! The most that was spoken there was English,
and all that was done was irregular capa pe; no Statute observed, or regarded,

Thursday April the thirteenth, my Lord and the Visitors and a great guard of
Musketeers (where ever they went, even at Convocation, they had a great guard
still) are for Magdalens, they had before summoned all the fellows, etc. to
meet them in the Hall, but none did heed or obey, (only Master Dayle Junior
was there) there they sat, and by and by bonny Thom. Smith comes into the Hall
up to my Lord, confidently asked him, by what Authority he sat there? My
Lord was troubled at this, till Cheynell told my Lord, that the man was mad,
(Clodius accusat Maechos) but Smith heard him, and told him that he was no so
mad as he -- etc. Then they call for the Buttery-booke, dash out Doctor
Oliver, put in John Wilkinson, go to the Lodgings, violently break open the
doors, imprison Doctor Oliver's man, give Doctor John and Kate possession;
She presently lays in a Barrel of Beer, and the Doctor sends to the Cook
and commands him to dress no Supper, but he obeyes not but dresses Supper,
and some very honest men eat it in their own defense.

After dinner my Lord (now grown skillful at breaking open doors) marches to
All-soules, and all the rabble with him; they had summoned the Fellows to
meet them in the Hall but not one man would appear; there they fret, but to
no purpose, send for Doctor Sheldon (the honor of our Town, and his Coat) he
quietly asked by what authority they summoned him; the Authority was shown, and
read; Doctor Sheldon told them it concernd not him at all, for it was Dated
March the eighth (or thereabouts) and gave the Chancellor and Visitors power to
give possession to those which were Voted into the places of those then
removed, but Doctor Sheldon told them he was not then questioned, nor voted
out till March the thirtith so that it was manifest they had by that no power
to meddle with him. This puzzeld them all, nor was there any answer, my Lord
asks Pryn (who was there) what he said to it, but (at present) William said
nothing. The Doctor leaves them, they consult almost an hour; Pryn confesses
they had no power by their Commission to do it, but the Parliament must not
be baffled, and that they might do many things exofficio, agreeable to the
mind of the Parliament; though not in their Commission. Oraculous William!
Well to it again they go, break open his doors; enter, give Master Palmer
possession, write a mittimus to send Doctor Sheldon to prison; in which they
used base, aggravative language against him, the Doctor desired my Lord to
read it, telling him, that his Lordship was pleased two or three times to say
that his answer and carriage were very civil, and desired to know whether that
language was fit to be given to one who had so demeaned himself.

My Lord said, they were hard words, and when they told him that the Lawyers
drew it ( Pryn and Cheynel were the men) my Lord replied who ever drew it, it
had very hard language in it; In the carriage and debate of the business, my
Lord asked Doctor Sheldon pardon three or four times, and told him openly,
that what he had done in breaking open doors he knew not, let the Lawyers
look to that, so Doctor Sheldon is for prison, and they for Wadam where they
summoned the Fellows, none appear, go to the Buttery book, put out the
Warden, put Willkins of Magdalen-Hall (the Prince Electors Chaplain) in his
place; then to Trinity, break open all, put old Harris in possession. Then for
Saint John's and because there were little children had Agues they give him time
to remove, who never will remove till compeld by violence. Then to Brasen-Nose
summon the fellows, none appear, call for the Buttery book, raise out the
Principalls name, put in Greenwood. Friday morning to Christ-Church again, for
they heard the new Deane, and Cannons names were torn out, they put them in
again. They have sorely whip't a mad woman for calling them Roundheads, and
Rebels, (should all mad men be whip't it would go hard with some) and Thom.
Smith of Magdalens is last night carried to Bridewell, and Master VVebbirly
too; farewell, remember me to all my friends, honest T. T. D. S. the Gentleman
with the sword, Mr. F. Mr. LL. Mr. L. and excuse me to Mrs. Ba. I am in her
debt for many things besides a letter, pray for us, not that we may keep our
places, but our courage and conscience; If this world go on, 'twill be a
shame to be out of prison, or in a Felloship. What I have writ is true whether
sense or no, I know not, what ever it be, accept of my willingness to serve
thee, and pardon the faults, of

Oxford April. 18 1648. Thine etc.

A LETTER from Oxford.
SIR,
I Have been unjsut to you, That I have so long deferred to give you an
account of this last Act of the Tragedy here in Oxford: I shall now labor to
expiate my fault by some kind of restitution, and hasten to tell you, that the
first entrance was on this manner. Some few weeks before Easter, the
Visitation, which had been for some time the sleeping Lion, began to rouse it
self up again, and as the passion week grew on, designed this University to
that honor of Conformity with the Image of our Savior (I mean in suffering.)

And first let me tell you. that if there were any difference among them,
betwixt Legal and Illegal, betwixt Valid and Null; this Rallying of the
Visitors after so long an intermission, and that without so much as formality
of Adjourning de die in diem (as their Commission, and the manner of all Courts
requires) were sufficient, according to their own Principles, to pronounce all
Null which they have done since this last Session of theirs: But such nicities
you will not expect they should consider; though that they, which live by no
other Law but that of Ordinance, should despise even that by which they
subsist, is a pretty degree of unkindnesse and ingratitude in them; and such as
the Jews would not be guilty of; but at the time when they were Crucifying of
Christ would not yet enter into the Praetorium, lest they should be defiled by
the heathen Soldiers there, and so be made incapable by Moses's Law, of
receiving the Passover approaching; It being most unreasonable and inconsistent
with their Principles to Crucify the true Law of Heaven, on pretense it was
contrary to their Ordinances by which they Acted, and at the same time to
despise those very Ordinances, whose Advocates they undertook to be so
zealously. But these are men who are to make Laws for others, and not to be
ruled by any themselves: And therefore I do not expect you should at all stand
still and gaze or wonder at this, though in all reason it have a great
influence on all that follows, which can have no greater validity in it, then
what this null foundation can help it to. But it is in vain to wound a
Carcass, and to take pains to let out life from the Trunk that never had the
honor to have any: And therefore let that pass. When they came down to this
new and strange work, the Persons which entered were five in appearance, though
the truth is, but one Soul to animate them all; that Spirit that was once in
Chains at Salisbury (you know whose Periphrasis that is.)

The first of the five was Sir Not. Brent, that known old visitor, that took
such care in my Lord of Canterburies days to have the Ceremonies observed, the
Table rayled in, etc. and now can lie in curtaynes fetched out of his
Colledge-Chappell formerly thought fit to adorn the East end of that, but now
found more commodious for his bedchamber.

The second was Dr. John Wilkinson, that illiterate, testy old Creature, that
for forty years together has been the sport of the Boys, most constantly
yoaked with ^^ctor Kettle) which in this age of Idolizing of Sermons, is
sufficiently known never to have preached above once in forty years, and
having now outlived all the little learning he had, and his every thing but
Sugared drink, and Possets; is thought fit to be Sir Nathaniel's Second, in
being revenged on learning which has brought them so much reproach.

The third is Master Rogers of New-Inn, famous for Adam the Protolaspus, when
many years since he ventured to be a Preacher, and attempted to imitate that
sound (which he might often have heard) of (...), which it is supposed he
thought compounded of the Greek (...), (if he ever knew so much of that
Language) and the Latin Lapsus, which yet he was not so much Master of, as to
give it a more perfect sound then that of Protolaspus which I mentioned.

The fourth man was Master Harris, good man, that has but the possession of so
many Benefices ( Hanwell, his old Love, one hundred and sixty pounds per annum,
beside grazing, etc. Bishopsgate toward four hundred pounds. Hanborough,
toward three hundred pounds. Beriton and Petersfield, in Hampshire, not above
five hundred or six hundred pounds more; beside the four shillings a day for
the Assembly Membership; and ten shillings for Apostleship in Oxford) but
assured us in his late Visitation-Sermon, last June; that he had not the
Pro-fits of them (quite contrary to Master Greenewood the new Principal of
Brasen-nose, who being accused of the like Plurality, professed that he had not
the Livings but only the Profits of them.)

And in the fifth and last place Master Chayn^el, I shall but name him Caetera
fama dabit. Well, of the four and twenty Visitors, any five of which (none
being of the Quorum) may by the Ordinance make a Court; These five met together
at Merton College, and, for ought any man can take cognizance, three fives or
sixes more might be a sitting in three other places of this Town, and
Decreeing the quite conttary (varied in three several shapes) to what these
five did in that one place. And so if nullities in their Proceedings would do
any good, sure there were a sound one in that Commission; which, by putting
none in the Quorum, makes no provision agaisnt this strange absurdity. But
beside this, if Acts even of this Parliament are worth heeding, or any thing
but the Will and Force of resolved Men, then sure that Act that made Clergy men
incapable of any place of Judicature, would make four of these five incapable.
For though as we see them four, and Master Reynolds, and Master Corbet, etc.
named in the Ordinance, we could not say there were any Divines (contrary to
the Act) invested with power of Oier and Terminer, because those names might
signify some other non-Divines, which we knew not; yet when we see them
sitting at Merton College in Gowns, we cannot mistake, or distrust our eyes,
but are forced to resolve that either Presbyterian-Divines are no Divines, or
that these four are excluded by Act of Parliament; and then Sir Nathaniel, and
Brem, and Warden of Merton, and Vicar-Generall, and Judge of the Praerogative
must make up the five (and some of them if not Divines, are Ecelesiastick
Persons also) or else we cannot possibly rear a Committee.

And again if there be any sense in that old Maxim, that Parties must not be
Judges, and that it is only the Hangmans fee to have the dead man's cloths to
wear after him (and it has not been often seen that the Judge has seized
upon them for his own body, and appeared in them all the rest of his Circuit)
then sure these five will not be able to make up one tolerable Commissioner,
or piece of a legall-Judge, for this one Cause, if there were no other nullity
in it; for it is notorious that old Wilkinson was then Voted, and now thrust
into Doctor Olivers Presidentship of Magdalens; old Rogers into Doctor Gardners
Prebendary of Christchurch; Harris into Doctor Potters Presidentship of
Trinity, and one living more, that of Gazington annexed to that place; Chaynel
into Doctor Raylies of Saint John's; And Sir Nat's son Corbet (the old
Gentleman being full and incapable of more Spiritual Preferment) into Doctor
Hammonds Prebendary of Christchurch, and Oratorship of the University, which
are both very reconcilable with Hasely, of toward four hundred pounds per
annum, which he deprived Doctor Soame of, a year and half since; poor modest
Gentleman, how the wealth of the world crowds in upon him, and he cannot look
any man in the face he is so bashful at it. These five men have had the
honor of going through all the last part of the work, as far as it was
acted here.

Their first business was to summon Dr. Sheldon, and Dr. Hammond, which had not
before come into their fanges, and all the other Heads who had any way escaped
the former impression of their malice; Their questions to them were the same
Engine that the Praesidents of old made use of to dismount Daniel, knowing that
they had no crime to lay to their charge, nor other occasion but only that they
would not perjure themselves in doing any thing conttary to their allegiance to
the King, or the Privileges of the University; And therefore their common
Question to them both, and all others was, whether they would submlt to this
visitation, and did own the power of Parliament therein. Dr. Sheldon's Answer
was, that he was not satisfied that he ought to submit to this visitation. Dr.
Hammond had two other questions added to that, viz. If he were not one of the
Delegates of this University, and helped not to frame and pass those Reasons
presented in Convocation, June 1, against the power of Parliament to visit?
Then whether he as Subdeane of Christ Church had published the Orders sent by
the Committee of Lords and Commons to remove some of that Society, according to
the said Orders: His answer was that he did not conceive that he was obleiged
to answer those questions thus proposed to him; I am told by some that have
talked with that Dr. that the reason of his giving his answer in those wary
restreined terms, was to make it impossible for them, proceeding (as he
expected) according to their own principles, to charge any thing upon him; For
this answer being made to those three questions together, would be justified,
if any part of any of the three were such, as to which he was not obliged to
give answer.

And sure many parts there were in the questions confestly of this nature. For
not to mention an exception to the first. That sure no man is bound to accuse
himself, or to answer any question which may be to his own prejudice; as
'twas clear it would be, if he answered that he could not submit to their
visitation, which his Oaths bound him to answer, (if he answered at all) if
he took the Parliament in their sense for the two houses (and this was the
very thing for which the Oaths ex Officio were by them formerly so complained
of as unlawful) to omit that first question, or rather snare. I say; the
second contained in it an absolute falsity, which he must have granted a
truth, if he had answered to it either affirmatively or negatively. For there
was never any such thing in the world, as is there pretended, viz. Reasons
presented June the first against the power of the two houses, or Parliament to
visit, with those reasons which were then presented, is sufficiently known in
the publishing of them; namely the scruples of rational men against the taking
of the Covenant and Negative Oath, and submission to the Ordinance for the
directory; and what is this I pray to any bodies power of visiting? especially
when now it is confessed by these men that they do not mean in their visitation
to press the Covenant.

The truth is these reasons have not been answered by any, though instead of
answering them, there was by an anonymas (Master Cheynell the spirit bespeaks
the Author) a promise made long since, that it should be taken in pieces, and
the theological part answered by the Assembly, the Law part by able Lawyers,
and the prudentiall part by prudent men, but now it seems by this question,
that the far easier course is to put the honest Christian in a wild beasts
skin, and then to tear him to pieces; I mean to entitle these reasons a
new, Reasons against the power of Parliament to visit, and then to turn out
all who had to do in the composing them; and that should be full as
profitable to those who meant to succeed them in their places, as if they had
answered all their scruples. Mean while this makes it not only unreasonable,
but impossible for the Doctor to give any positive Answer to that question,
which was fallacia plurimum interogationum; and so, sure, he was not obliged
to answer it being thus proposed. For the third he was able to make this
Dilemma to himself, If he should answer that he had not published those
orders against his brethren, he had confessed himself guilty of a Contempt of
those who made those Orders; if that he had published it, he had confessed
himself the accuser (and as much as in him lay, the executioner) of his
brethren: The Accuser of them if they did not obey upon his publishing of them:
The Executioner if they did. And sure he was not bound either to acknowledge
himself a fool, or a divill; A fool by confessing those omissions, which must
be his rume under such Judges; a devil in having acted under such bloody
censors. Well to hold you no longer in these discourses (when reasons is become
so useless a solicitor) the answers of those two, and some other the like,
being given on Monday before Easter, made such haste from hence to London, to
the obedient Committee there, and from thence with such full speed came back
again, that they brought down that very week from London against Doctor
Sheldon, Doctor Hammond, Doctor Wall, and Doctor Pain votes of removing them
from their places, upon pretense of high contempt of authority of Parliament.
Was there ever such a conclusion from such praemisses? But this will not much
amaze you, if you consider the modern practices, and that, as once there was a
law somewhere, that no crime should be punishable but treason, but then by the
malice of interpretation care taken, that every thing that any man did, should
be improved into Treason; So now among us the contempt of authority of
Parliament is the only mortal Crime, but then the giving a wary answer or such
as Master Cheynell himself could pick no hole in, must be the contempt of
that authority; which I confess it was in one of those Doctors in some sense;
The Committee having long since voted that one Master Palmer of the house of
Commons should succeed in the Wardenship of All-soules, when he should be
guilty of contempt; whereupon his not throwing himself into that crime, which
they decreed he should be guilty of, was an affront to the voters, a denial
of their Prophetique faculty, and sure a contempt of their authority, who had
so absolutely decreed, ante lapsum, that he should contemn, and perish for it.
Well the fury of these impatient teazers was such, that they could not
celebrate Christ's Resurrection in any Charity, till they had Executed their
joyous sentence upon some of these Doctors and therefore the next minuit after
the arrival of the Carryer, and the votes on Easter Eve, they ran presently to
Christ-Church Hall with a full guard of Musketeers, send their mandatary and
soldier for Doctor Hammond; and would hear no reason but he must upon utmost
perrill come to the hall to them and hear himself pronounced neither Orator
nor Praebend before Easter; that so if it were possible he might want Charity
to fit him for the next days Duties; but the honest Doctor had better learned
and taught the duties of the fifth of Matthew, then to be in the power of such
provokers. The same sentence was soon after on Easter Monday affixt on Doctor
Sheldons walls, and his subwarden required to be his Executioner, and woe be
to him that he has not thought that act of parricide his duty. But; Sir, all
these have been yet but umbratiles pugnae, the real fury of the impression is
reserved for nobler hands. The Earl of Pembroke must be fetched from Ramsbury
to break open the doors and to that purpose, according to an Order procured
in the Lords hosue, March the eighth, Master Cheynel, which knew the way
perfectly into those parts toward Salisbury posts presently to his Lordship to
Ramsbury, obteynes a promise that the week after Easter week he would serve
them.

Then all care is taken to get in Beedles Staves, and the in^^gnia of the
University, to prepare for his Lordships coming, the Deane of Christ-Church
the Vice-Chauncellor his doors are broken open by assistance of Soldiers, but
nothing found there, the Presidents of Corpus-Christi the pro-Vice-Chancellor
his in like manner, but nothing there: At last when the Earl comes most
pitifully fetched in with a few visitors and a sorty Company of expectant Boys,
Master Cheynell entertaynes him with an English speech, and tells him that the
Beedles staves had a double guilt, (the wit of the new University) and
therefore could not be had to attend him: only exhorts him to believe and to
be confident, that the more vigerous he should be in that designed
execution, the more acceptable it would be in the sight of God, and if he
would not take his word for it, he should take Gods word, and so presents to
him a great Bible without Liturgy or Apocrypha, which was to supply the place
of the Beedles staves to conduct him to his lodging. The employment that now
they set this Earl, when they had him amongst them, 'twould even grieve you to
think of; That honorable office of a petty Constable general from College
to College is bestowed on him, first to break open the hall-doore of
Christ-Church, Then to carry out Mistrisse Fell and all her children and family
(some fourteen, women and children) in chayres and set them in the Quadrangle,
that Master Reynolds might have quiet possession of that lodging; which
assuredly he will never enjoy one quiet hour, as long as he lives, if he
were in earnest when he wrote the sinfullnesse of sin; and believe any of the
aggravations of sin, which he labored there to teach others. Then Magdalens
has the next part of the impression, the Presidents lodgings are broken open,
the Servants sent to the Jayle for not betraying their Master, Doctor John bid
to be president and he presently commands the whole society to be sterved,
that is, commands no more Commons to be dressed for his new family, who must be
brought up now, like Scholasticus his horse, to live without eating.

Then up to All-Soules, and Doctor Sheldon being in his garden and refusing to
give up the keys of his house, and pleading that the vote for his ejection was
twenty two days after that Order of the Lords, that the Earl etc. should
execute their (then past but not future) Votes, his doors were used as the
rest of his friends; but himself far worse, for that crime of urging reason
for himself, least, as some of them confessed, they should be affronted, or
baffled by him. Pray Sir warn your friends to brware of this dangerous thing,
called speaking of sense, or as the Earl styles it, being Scholars, or witty
men: for it is a fault can never be allowed impunity. That worthy Doctor is
committed to the Marshall for that only crime, and there like to continue,
till he lose or allay the reputation of being rational or honest, by
delivering up the keys and books, which is, to be perjured; and that the
only condition yet talked of to make him capable of release. In his place is
admitted the aforesaid Member Master Palmer, and all required to submit to him
as Warden, though neither chosen by the College, nor entered by taking any oath
to be true to it, or to govern by Statute; any of which omissions make it
direct prejury for any Fellow to acknowledge or submit to him, as it does also
in all the other Colleges, where these invaders are placed: the whole body of
legal rights of Governors and Corporations being by this una litura
abolished, and turned into most perfect arbitrary Government, under a Mufty
Vice Chancellor, and two Janizary proctors in the University; (which therefore
walk with swords and pistolls instead of civil hoods) and a Bashaw in every
college; A signification of the new model for the whole Kingdom.

From All-Soules they run with full speed to Wadam-Colledge and there the
Warden's doors are by his Lordship fore't again, and one Wilkins the writer of
the man in the Moon dropped thence into his place. Then Trinity College is laid
open, by the same noble violence, to Master Harris; and Saint John's to Master
Cheynel, though there they acknowledged some civility, and for a reward of not
putting the Constable to do his duty, the Praesident is permitted to live in
his lodgings for a month longer. The same fate befell the old Principal of
Brazen-Nose, and Master Greenwood that well looked Gentleman can swallow the
Profits of that also: and so now well nigh all the godly are possessed of the
good things of this life, and presently mistake possession for propriety, and
so Master Cheynel can pray very confidently at Saint Maryes, that every man may
enjoy his own. What was done in the Convocation house would be too long to
relate particularly, many speeches addressed by the new Orator, Proctor,
Vice Chancellor, to their golden Idol, and upon his giving to the Library the
great Bible lately printed in France, the whole fabric new christened by Master
Corbet, from Bodleiana to Pembrokiana, upon the same depth of reason, that
their mock Proctor, goody Buttons son, had told him, that he was
literatissimus omnium qui Accademiam unquam intrarunt. Then to Creating of
Doctors and Bachelours of Divinity, and for three days together all degrees
most liberally distributed among themselves, and their clients, there being no
way imaginable to get a sufficient number to make a convocation or an
University hereafter, when the subsidiary Country Parsons are gone home again,
unless such creations pure ex nihilo were thus allowed them, for we hear but
of three complyers present in their Convocation in the whole University, old
Rouse the Rimmonist, as he has named himself, old Williamson that has
drank out all but his telling of lies and love of monyes to provide for more
drink, and Pelham the mock-speakers brother, which confesses he can do any
thing but deny the Trinity, rather then loose a fellowship; and some add Doctor
Zouch also, who, they say, is told by the Earl, that it is too late; his place
being otherwise designed already; and so it is certain that Doctor Wall having
made some civil motions toward compliance, was as civilly treated; only his
Prebendary voted from him and Cornish one of the Apostles put into it, who will
not be put out again by such a trick, I warrant you.

Thus having erected a strange Chimaera called the new Model of the
University, and removed as many heads of Colleges as was thought necessary
for their present business, the Earl has an honorable Exit, and is
dismissed from his Constables Office under Justice Cheynel, until the
stubbornness of some Pretenders to thense of reasonable Souls (who shall
thereupon refuse to throw their doors open to the spoylers) require him to be
recalled to the execution of his Office again. Mean while we have not yet
discovered the reason,, why the execution of his God-sonne Doctor Hammond, and
his old acquaintance Doctor Morley, and the rest of the Prebends of
Christchurch is deferred, so far as belongs to the possession of their
lodgings; for they say their names are struck out of the Buttery-booke, and
Successors put in instead of seven of them, and only Doctor Sanderson
respited by occasion of his not being in town at the sending the last summons
for him: But if they have any man so ventrous as to dare to approach a
Divinity-Chayre and Latin he is sure enough to survive a very little time.
And so farewell Honesty, Civility, Learning, Piety, Christianity; and welcome
Bedlam, and Barbarism, and oppression, and Hell, the only Jewels we are to
receive in Exchange for a flourishing University. These things are too sad to
be enlarged on, but will appear rarely in a full History of the times.

And this is all the revenge which is meditated here against these men, and of
that they are sure enough by the peculiarity of their condition who are the
sufferers in the Tragedy. And so this Earle's Posterity will be able to see
their Ancestour set out in a full immortal shape, his Memory as sure not to
die, as Erestrarus's was, that burnt a Temple, on purpose to perpetuate it. And
when that Picture is drawn at length, you need not fear but his Encourager
and Director Olsworth, will find some room (though it be but as a Negro, or
Zany, or Sancho) in the Table.

Oxford April. 17. Your Mournful but Christian Servant. BASILIUS PHILOMUSUS.

Fiat voluntas Domini.

