THEOLOGO-HISTORICVS, Or the True LIFE OF THE Most Reverend DIVINE, and
Excellent HISTORIAN PETER HEYLYN D.D. Sub-Dean of Westminster.

Written by his Son in Law JOHN BARNARD D. D. Rec. of Waddington near Lincoln.

To correct the Errors, supply the Defects, and confute the Calumnies of a late
Writer.

Also an Answer to Mr. BAXTERS false Accusations of Dr. HEYLYN.

Quisquis patitur peccare peccantem is vires subministrat Audaciae. Arnob. L.
4.

LONDON, Printed for J. S. and are to be sold by Ed. Eckelston, at the Sign of
the Peacock in Little-Britain. 1683.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD NATHANIEL Lord Bishop of DURHAM.
My Honored Lord,

I Here present to your Lordship the true Effigies of Dr. Heylyn (drawn to the
Life, so far as my Pen is able, to preserve the memory of his person among the
number of worthy men, for his extraordinary merits, I hope, may be truly said
to this Church and Nation, wherein he labored while he lived to promote the
public Good of both; that his Name will never be forgotten, whilst his Books
are extant, if we may believe the words of St. Jerome in this particular. Vir
sapiens (says S. Jer. Com. in cap. 2. Esdr.
he) diebus and noctibus laborat and componit Libros ut memoriam suam posteris
derelinquat; so the Works which this painful Presbyter has published to the
World, the Catalogue of them being not ordinary with the Writers of our Age,
and the matter in them upon several Subjects not vulgarly handled, I doubt not,
will perpetuate his Memory to future Posterity; especially among all good men,
who are sincere Lovers of Monarchy and Episcopacy. I am sure for his Religion
and Loyalty, for the Cause of the King and Church of England, no man could
declare himself a more faithful and zealous example, by constant writing and
sufferings. And for his conversation, not only as a good Christian, but as
becomes a Clergy man, it was so unblameable, that his most inveterate enemies
could never throw dirt in his Face for the least Immoralities.

Therefore for his sake, whom your Lordship has seen in his house at Abingdon,
where he made you heartily welcome in those days, when I had the honor
(though so unworthy a person) to dictate the first Principles of Academical
Learning to you, which God has since well blessed, that you are one (and I wish
may long continue so) of the Chief Prelates in this Realm: I doubt not, I say
for this Reverend and Learned Man's sake more than mine, your Lordship will be
pleased to take into your Patronage the Narrative of his Life, which I have
faithfully composed and retriv'd from the Ignorances and unpardonable
deficiencies of a late Writer. I am the more nearly concerned for my Relation
sake, because Dr. Heylyn was not an ordinary common Clergyman, though he acted
in a lower Sphere than the highest Dignitaries in our Church; its sufficiently
known he was singularly well acquainted above many others, with the principal
motions and grand Importances in his time both of Church and State, as any man
may perceive, who will take the pains to peruse his Writings. And that he had
not only a speculative Science in the Civil and Ecclesiastical Polity of this
Nation, but was oftentimes employed an Agent by the late King and Archbishop,
(the two blessed Martyrs of this Land) in several matters committed to his
particular Charge; for which he incurred the odium of the Mobile and especially
of those Factious People, then called Puritans, but now Fanatics; a Name
though seems new and strange to them, was Instit. lib. 1. cap. 9.
of old, first given by Calvin himself to those who deserting his, and the
Lutheran way of Reformation, out of an aversion to Popery fell upon a contrary
extreme. Their hair-brained zeal without understanding, and accompanied with
invincible obstinacy in their Enthusiastical Dotages, if Power was answerable
to their Wills, would bring a second desolation upon our Church, and confusion
in the Kingdom. Both which God and his good Angels evermore protect, that we
may enjoy the inestimable comforts of Peace and Government, our true Religion
established by Law and Scripture, our sacred Ministry second to none for
Learning and good Life generally, and the ancient Order of Episcopacy derived
from the pure Fountain of Apostolical Times, heartily prays

Your Lordships most faithful Servant

JOHN BARNARD.

Errata
PAge 3. line 10. read acquainted p. 5. l. 16. r. transcriptions for
transcription p. 10. l. 10. r. multavit for mulcavit p. 12. l. 15. r. volumes
for volumnes p. 17. l. 2. r. E. p 19. l. 6. dele to p. 20. l. 7. r. joculari
for voculari p. 20. l. 19. dele the p. 28. l. 8. r. two for too ibid. r.
extremes for extremes p. 24. l. 28. r. thought for think p. 25 l. 4 dele which
I sup. p. 26 l, 20 r. temerarius for tene^arius p. 28 l. 14 r. believe for
believed p. 29 l. 20 r. incesserat p. 31 l. 29 r. (...) for (...) p. 40 l. 23
r. supra for supera p. 32 in the marg. r. Mileu. p. 53 r. Eusebius, for Eusib. p.
54 l. 2 r. horresco for honesco ib. r. nefanda for nefranda p. 55 marg. r.
Suid. for Suida p. 57 l. 13 r. tends for bend p. 57 l. 24 r. Optatus for
Oplatus p. 58 l. 25 r. Presbyterians for Presbiteriaas p. 93 l. 27 r. for p. 95
l. 21. r. manifestaque for manitestaque p. 101 l. 29 r. Levit. for Lenit p. 109
l. 20 r. Antagonist for Antogonist ib. marg. r. And. for And p. 115 l. 11 add
Justice of Peace for the County of Oxon. p. 123 marg. r. in for tae p. 125 l. 3
r. Allegations for Accusations ibid r. Retractation for Retraction p. 139 l. 21
r. conference for conferrence p. 143 l. 29 r. where for when p. 144 l. 29 r.
Turret for Tower p. 151 l. dele and p. 153 l. 20 r. sitting for sitting p. 186
l. 21 r. rights for right p. 157 l. 15 r. ut for and p. p. 191 l. 18 add
afterward p. 198 l. 3 r. commended for commanded p. 199 l. 8 r. he for be p.
209 l. 10 r. was for were p. 226 l. 9 r. himself for he p. 228 l. 15 r. there
for their p. 255 l. 16. r. the Doctor lived p. 268 l. 23 r. faces for face. p.
246 l. 28 dele Lux. r. (...).

There are more Errors than in the Errata, which the good Reader is desired to
pass by.

A Necessary Vindication OF Dr. HEYLYN AND THE AUTHOR of the following LIFE.
I Had never put my self to the trouble of writing* and the Reader to his pains
in reading the third Publication of Dr. Heylyn's Life, but that I have been
most grossly abused in the first and second, upon the same Subject. At the sight
of both which, I was not a little amazed, but ashamed: First to see an
anonymous piece printed before the Doctors works, which I had ordered
otherwise: And lately a little Book crept forth with the Name of its Author.
Therefore I must crave leave of the Reader's Patience to show how I come
concerned, and have been uncivilly dealt with by George Vernon (as he writes
himself) Rector of Bourton on the Water in Gloucestershire; a Man utterly
unknown to me before this affair. Nec bene^icio, nec injuria mihi notus.

About four years ago hearing that Mr Hen. Heylyn my Brother in law, did
intend to print his Fathers life before some miscellaneous pieces of his
Writings, I made a tender of my service to that work; for which I could propose
no other advantage to my self than my labor for my pains? and only to testify
my real reverence and hearty affection to his Father and mine, whom I ever
honored for his learning and good life: And because I thought such a duty
might be more reasonably expected from me, his Son-in-Law, than any other who
was a stranger to him; especially, when he was pleased to put several papers
into my hands to transcribe, and had often discoursed various passages of his
Life to me, which I know none in the world can give an account of but my self.
Yet since his Sons fancy led him to make choice of another before me, I was
satisfied, and did patiently expect the coming forth of the work, not only Term
after Term, but year after year, a very considerable time for so small a Tract.
But at last instead of the Life came a Letter to me from a Bookseller in
London, viz. Mr. Chr. Wilkinson at the sign of the black Boy in Fleetstreet, to
desire my assistance, for the thing (as he writ) was at a stand: The printing
of which Mr. Harper his Friend would not have undertaken had not Mr. Heylin
assured him, that I was engaged in it, because it must needs be (as he said)
lame and imperfect if it was done without my knowledge, who was ^quainted with
all the transactions of the Doctors Life.

But to those Letters I returned several flat denyals, thinking it below me to
meddle in that, which another had before undertaken, much less to be his journey
man to patch up what I should have made new. Besides I had no confidence in the
Man, so bold and forward in the work, because he was a mere stranger to my
Father Heylyn (as he now publicly confesses) and I believe never saw the
Doctors face in his Life. Yet still I was importuned, and his writings were
sent down to me, withal to let me know the Writer was willing I should make
what alterations in them and additions to them, I pleased, for which I have Mr.
Wilkinsons letter by me in his verbis. a person so honest as will not deny his
own words.

Reverend Sir.
I Received your Letter, and am again troublesome to you. Mr. Harper assures me
that he thought you had been first concerned in writing your Fathers Life by
Mr. Heylyn's recommendation; But afterward he found that one Mr. Vernon of
Gloucester has collected the papers which compose the Life, whom Mr. Heylyn
desired to perfect; the said Vernon has desired Mr. Harper to communicate the
papers to whom he pleases, and cross out or add what is thought convenient, to
which purpose he designs to send the said Life down to you, and do with it, as
you think good, and if you think ^itting put your own Name to it, for Mr Vernon
will not have his name made use of: I thought good to acquaint you hereof, and
desire you will be pleased to give me a line or too. Sir I am

Your obliged and humble Servant Christopher Wilkinson.
London February 18. 1680

At the receipt of this Letter I was unwillingly persuaded by some Friends to
send to Lincoln for the Gentleman's Manuscript which had laid at the Carriers
house above three weeks: And when it came into my hands I found it indeed
according to the Booksellers description; (in another Letter) lame and
imperfect. And I must say ill begun, and worse carried on, and abruptly
concluded. Nay some things false and scandalous tending to the disreputation,
and not the honor of my Father: Besides half the Life, for want of other
matter, when those few old Notes failed him, which Mr. Heylin had lent him, was
stuffed out with a long story of Westminster, and a farrago of needless
transcription out of Dr. Heylins Books, for no other purpose, then to prove the
Doctor was no Papist. Quorsum haec perditio: For did ever any lay this to his
charge, but the Puritan Sectaries, who were his professed Enemies? I will call
Doctor Burnet, his very good Friend; who I am sure will stand his second in
this challenge, for he says, I doubt not but Pref. to Hist. of Ref.
he was a sincere Protestant. But this only was his mishap, first to write the
History of Reformaaion, and his second has so far outgone him, that ever since
the poor Doctor has suffered in his Reputation, and the Church of England
nicknamed with Popery, which odious name first took its epoch, (and God be
thanked is of no elder date) from the beginning of the late History of
Reformation, and the thankful Parliament to the Historian. Since then, our
Religion and Hierarchy has been hunch'd at by every Clown and Fanatic. Others
more unnaturally, like Nero to Agrippina, have searched into the secret Entrals
of their Mother, ripped up her Bowels to see if they could find a Pope in her
Belly: Therefore the good old Doctor lies no more under the malicious slander
and suspicion of Popery, than our dear Mother, the Church of England, for her
excellent Wisdom in keeping up a medium be^wixt the two extremes of Popery and
Fanaticism.

B^t to return to my Gentleman again, out of respect to my Brother, because he
was his Acquaintance, I dealt most ingenuously with the Life, made several
Additions to it, corrected many mistakes* abated only the Harangue of
Transcriptions and such passages, as I thought were disgraceful reflections on
my Reverend Father; I put it into a method, which was before very confused --
Cui lecta potenter ^rit res.

Neo facundia deseret hunc, nec lucidus ordo. Hor. de Ar. po.
as the Poet said. I also disposed both his and my own Discourses into distinct
Paragraphs, that the one might be known from the other: And finally I writ this
civil Letter of Thanks to him, which I sent up to the Bookseller, and ordered
to be printed before the Life, and it is as follows.

Sir,
THough I have not the good Fortune to be aequainted with you, nor in all
probability eve^ shall, at so far a distance as we live asu^; yet I cannot but
express a most hearty thanks for your reverence and high esteem of Dr. Heylyn,
and for the pains you have bestowed about his Life. In the carrying on of
which, notwithstanding I have taken the greater Task upon my self, and should
have undertook it wholly, if I had been first engaged in it, because I am
related to the Family, and know more material circumstances for this purpose
than any man now living, which I have heard from his own mouth; yet still I
acknowledge my self a Debtor to you for his sake; whose Memory whatsoever it
meriteth among others, I have most reason to honor, and say as S. Bernard did
in his Epistle ad Petrum Ber^. Epis* 135.
Papiniens. Quis mihi det unquam memoriam tui deserere, Nunquam ab ipsa deseri?
And for the whole History I have so ordered it* as in Reason and Justice it
ought to be, being written by us both, that our Parts are divided by a Line,
and first Letter of our Names, that the Reader may be satisfi^d which is mine
and yours: And I hope betwixt us both by such as are not prejudiced, the Work
will be judged perfect* So with my due Respects I shall conclude with the same
good Father, Utinam quod minime spero, nostra vobis in aliquo possit esse
officiosa rusticita^

Waddington, April the 9th. 1681. Sir, your Servant John Barnard.


To this Letter I expected no less than civil thanks, for the trouble and pains
I had undergone in my new employ, not sought by me, but importuned by others,
that I can say, Non lecta est operi, sed data causa meo. But instead of thanks
from him, and the return of common civility; he disfigured my Papers, that no
sooner came into his hands, but he fell upon them as a Lion rampant, or like
the Lioness: The Cat, upon the poor Cock in the Fable, saying, Tu hodie mihi
discerperis. So my Papers came home miserably clawed, blotted and blurred,
whole Sentences dismembered, and Pages scratched out, several Leaves omitted
which ought to have been printed, especially if he met with any passages in the
Life that seemed an Ornament to it, he would give no fair Quarter to them. Such
an Interpolator he was, as I hope not to meet with his Fellow. Whereas the
Reader may think I did the like with his Manuscript: No, I sent it up whole and
entire, took the pains to transcribe out of it what I thought fit to be
inserted into the Life, and set his Name thereto. I did him no wrong; but on
the contrary he most shamefully used my Copy, that before it was carried to the
Press, he swooped away the second part of the Life wholly from it; in the room
of which, he shufled in a preposterous Conclusion at the last Page, which he
caused to be printed in a different Character from the other, and therein could
not keep himself honest, but as the Poet says,

Dicitque tua pagina fur es. Mart.
For he took out of my Copy Doctor Heylyn's Dream, his Sickness, his last Words
before his Death, and left out the burning of his Surplice, which the Doctor
thought ominous, but he judged superstitious. Finally he so mangled and
metamorphised the whole Life I composed, that I may say as Sosia did, Egomet
Piaut.
mihi non credo, ille alter Sosia, me malis mulcavit modis.

Notwithstanding all which malicious practices, misbecoming any generous man,
much more a Scholar and a Divine. I did intend to trouble my self no further
about him, but patiently endured the wrongs, because the writing of a Life is
an exercitation of no such mighty consequence; but since he has provoked me
again, by presuming to publish a Second Life after he had so macerated the
first, and endeavors to asperse my Name in these words, viz. Many passages
were excerpted out of his Papers, the very words His Preface
as well as matter, when he had them in his Custody. Quis tulerit Gracchum? I
must retort the poisoned weapon upon his own breast, that himself is the
Plagiary both of my words and matter; even by his own confession, what he has
taken out of the printed Folio, and other materials, I can make evidently
appear, out of my private Manuscript, that I have given him Horns to gore me
withal: And let the World judge betwixt us, which is most likely, that I am
beholding to him, or he to me, for he was a mere Ignotus to my Father in Law.
as he acknowledges. For my own part Preface.
(says he) I never had the honor either to know Dr. Heylyn, or to be known by
him. Therefore of all others, I think, the most unfit man in the World to write
his Life, but that he is a (...), who loves to busy himself where he has
nothing to do, and undertake things above his knowledge and ability.

But for those words with which he charges me, he should have been more
positive; whether they are Doctor Heylyn's or his own? If the former, certainly
I can claim as good a right to them as any man living, and with much more
^eason than he: I confess from the Doctor's Papers, of which I had a prior
possession and perusal of them before him; I have faithfully drawn the Lines
(to which I have added the last Period) of his Life, and something out of
Prudence I have purposely omitted, because this censorious and critical Age
will not bear them: But for other things, both in words and matter, which is
purely the Doctors own, and without them none would presume to write on such a
Subject: I have made no further use of them than the Calumniator himself has
done, and they cannot be said to be either his or mine, but must be attributed
to the right Owner; viz. the Doctor himself, who left them for a Rule to guide
the Writer of his Life. However I have not been surreptitious of whole pages
together out of Page 59, 60, 61, 62, 63. Page 101. 102. 103. 104.
the Doctors printed volumnes, and appropriated them to my self without any
Mark or Asterism as he has done. I am no such Excerptor: But he is in the
pretty humor of the man who took all the Ships in the Attick Haven for his own,
and yet was not Master of any one Vessel.

But all this while I misunderstand him, for possibly he means his own dear
words I have excerpted: If it be true, why does he not speak in plain down
right English, that the World may see my faults? For every one does not know
what is excerpting. If I have been so bold to pick or snap a word from him, I
hope I may have the benefit of the Clergy. But he would have done well to have
particularized them, and set down my Crime in capital Letters; and then I
should have demonstrated with better evidence, how he has been injurious to
me: But I stand in justification of my self; what words have I robbed him of,
and am become the richer for them? Truly I was never so taken with him as to be
once tempted to break the Commandments, because I love plain speaking, writing,
and dealing, which he does not: I hate the word excerpted, and the action
imported in it: Howsoever he is a fanciful man, and thinks there is no Elegancy
nor Wit, but in his own way of talking at this rate. I must say as Tully did,
Malim equidem indisertam Cic. de orat*
prudentiam, quam stultam loquacitatem.

But how have I excerpted his matter? Then I am sure to rob the Spittle-house;
for he is so poor and put to hard shifts, that he has had much ado to compose a
tolerable Story, which he has been hammering and conceiving in his mind for
four years together, before he could bring forth the pretty Faetus of
intolerable Transcriptions to molest the Readers patience and memory. How does
he ftom p. 67, to 89.
run himself out of breath; sometimes for twenty Pages together and more, at
from p. 212 to p. 227.
other times fifteen, ordinarily nine and from p. 228 to 236.
ten, collected out of the Doctors old Books verbatim, before he can take his
p. 61, to 174.
wind again, to return to his Story. I never met with such a Transcriber in all
my days: For want of matter to fill up a Vacuum, of which his book was in much
danger, he has set down the Story of Westminster, as long as the Plowmans Tale
in Chaucer, which to the Reader would have been more pertinent and pleasant. I
wonder that he did not transcribe bills of Chancery, especially about a tedious
Suit that my Father had for several years about a Lease at Norton, that would
have furnished him with matter enough. I dare boldly affirm, abating this of
Westminster, and his unmerciful Collections out of Certamen Epistolare and
Theolog. Vetr. his Book would not have exceeded the bulk of the nine Worthies.
After his writing out folio upon folio, he endeavors to excuse page 241.
himself after this manner, I hope (says he) the perusal of those things, will
be no less acceptable to the sober Reader, than the transcribing of them has
been to my self. What if he has a mind to transcribe over all Dr. Heylyn's
Writings? Must he to please his own fancy of scribbling, obtrude them upon the
Reader? He was to write the Doctors Life and not his Books. Must he spend his
time and paper in needless excursions, from page to page, for nine, ten, and
twenty pages together? No sober Reader can endure an historical Narrative that
has so many out-leaps. Plat. in Parmen.
Such a Writer he is as Plato describes, (...), who flurts up and down, now
returning, and anon gone; sometimes in the way, but for the most part out of
it, and at last sticks fast in the deep Mire. Transcriptions are so many
digressions from the Theme or Subject, to which we must make a speedy return.
For my part I must confess, that I have made use of several choice Collections
out of my Fathers Treatises pro re nata, but they are brief and necessary, not
superfluous nor nauseous; I appeal to the Reader, whether they clog his
Stomach, or beget a fresh appetite to what follows? much less do they confound
his Memory to what is precedent. In other things I have offered some discourses
of my own where I saw occasion, to vindicate my Learned Father: In all I doubt
not, but it will manifestly appear there is a multitude of more occurrences
than can be found in the late Life-Writer, which will blow away his most
malicious slander of my excerpting his matter.

But what is all this to the obliquies against the most reverend Doctor
himself; whose Name and Reputation he has injured more than mine, by conjuring
up old Ghosts, and malignant Spirits of detraction, that has been allayed and
charmed down above thirty years ago, and now are raised up again to disturb his
Ashes, and traduce his Name, opprobious reports (though insignificant among
wise Men) looks scandalously with the vulgar, that they had better been buried
in oblivion, and perished in everlasting silence, than remembered. For nothing
ought to be recorded against the party whom we love and honor, that may give
his adversaries the least occasion to reproach his Name. Therefore no Man of
prudence who pretends so high a reverence of Doctor Heylyn, (as the Author
does) would have published to the world those particulars following. 1. the
Earl of Derbies p. 38. p. 35. p. 123. p. 31. p. 120.
speech to him. 2. The rude usages he found in Court. 3. His writing Mercurius
Aulicus. 4. His clandestine Marriage. 5. His Marrying a Wife without a Portion.
6. His Parishoners of Alsford persuaded, they should never fix eye on him,
unless they took a journey to a Goal or a Gallows. All which matters true or
false are unworthy to be mentioned in the Life of so venerable a person as
Doctor Heylyn: but they are scandals, and, for the most part, untruths, as
shall appear hereafter.

Concerning his Marriage though he was my Father-in-law, I cannot excuse it
from being clandestine, much less justify the contrary (as the Author does
boldly) against a general known Truth, believed by every one in the University,
affirmed by all, and not denied by the Doctor himself. I have reason to know it
above others, because this was wrongfully charged upon me by Doctor Hood of
Lincoln College, as if I had intended to have done the like, when I desired to
hold my fellowship a longer time than the year of Grace which had been granted
to others, perticularly to Mr. Cross, Rector of Great Chue in* Somersetshire,
but denied to me for this reason, which the Rector alleged against me, saying,
You are to marry Doctor Heylyns Daughter, (we hear) and you will do as he did.
The good Man then forgetting himself that one of his own Daughters was married
to a Fellow of Lincoln-Colledge the Marriage was kept private, and the profit
of the Fellowship received by his Sonin-Law, who shall be nameless. It is more
ingenious to confess an Error, then make a weak defense or Apology for it,
that does rather aggravate than extenuate the crime: While the Author sweats to
prove the Doctors Marriage was not clanculour, because he ordered it to be
performed upon St. Simon page 13.
and St. Judes day between ten and eleven of the Clock in the morning in his
own College Chapel, in the presence of a sufficient number of witnesses of
both sexes, the wedding dinner was kept in his own chamber, etc. Yet all this
while it was a Marriage clancularly, a Marriage in Masquerade, a Marriage
incognito to the College, because the President and Fellows neither knew, nor
believed there was a true solemnization of Marriage in their Chapel; and
though some of them were invited to the wedding Dinner, they took the
invitation to a merriment, and not to a Marriage. Indeed it was not clandestine
against the Laws of our Church and Realm, because the usual ceremonies and
formalities of both were performed in the solemnization betwixt the parties,
but such Marriage was expressly against the Laws and Statutes of the
ColledgFounder; and much more for a married Fellow to keep his Fellowship
after. He is an absurd Writer that will start into circumstances, and not
prove the main matter which is controverted. But what mattereth it or avails,
whether the Doctors Marriage was clandestine or no? was he only the first
example of this kind in the University? was not this done in his youthful
days? In amore haec insunt vitia. Aristotle will excuse a young Man's faults,
that cannot be Arist. Eth. lib. cap. 10.
so happy either in his judgment or practice as his Elders, (...). How many
Breakers are there of College Statutes besides Doctor Heylyn? I believe very
few Fellows, but they are faulty in some kind or other. Yet I will not go about
to accuse or condemn them, nor Apologize for him further than the rule of
Rhetoric will allow, and that is, Quod negari non queat, responsione voculari
eludas, and rem facias risu magis dignam quam crimine. that which cannot really
be denied must be put off A. Gell. lib. 12. cap. 11.
with a Jest, and so it will seem a laughing matter rather than a Crime, for
which we have the Example of Cicero, when he was accused about Money: And so it
was the Doctors case about Matrimony; the whole affair and management of it was
a most pleasant humor, which he he was resolved to carry on dramatically under
a disguise, and yet the same was real. Mrs. Bride placed at the the head of the
Table, the Town Music playing, himself waiting most part of the Dinner, and no
formality wanting, all which circumstances were contrived Fallacies and yet
most undeniable truths. Notwithstanding the Writer of his Life is most
greivously offended, with any one that is not of his opinion about the Doctors
Marriage, and the College dividend, which he received betwixt that time and
the Resignation of his Fellowship. Says he most Davidically, But what shall be
given to thee, or what shall be done unto thee, thou false tongue, I think
still it was a Clandestine Marriage, and the Doctor was after bound to restore
all emoluments from that time, but the College did easily forgive him, and in
testimony of their Love and extraordinary respect, many years after his
Marriage, did accommodate him for some time of the War with convenient Lodgings
for himself, Wife, and Family, when they were driven out of all House and
harbor from his two Livings, Alsford and Southwarnborough. Why then the Writer
should be so rugged as to fall into uncivil terms with that noble Foundation? I
see no cause for it; much less to charge them with odious things to which they
themselves can best answer, if he will hearken to any reason: But he seems to
me, for a time deprived, and (as it were) in a fit of Quakerism while he
Canteth so dolefully, saying. They take Bread out of the mouths of Young
Students, and send them to page 32.
wander in solitary ways, being hungry, and thirsty, and their Souls ready to
faint in them

Notwithstanding I cannot but* commend his h^arty zeal and affection toward my
Father-in-law, if he knew how to guide these two good passions with reason, and
common discretion: But for the most part he is a high flyer into hyperbolical
comparisons, and never observes a mediocrity betwixt too extreems, for one
while he likens the Doctor to Joseph the Patriarch, another while to Moses the
Prophet, and afterward sets him down in the office of Mercurius Aulicus, or the
Kings Diurnal-maker; in which last though he endeavors to bring him off again,
as well as he can, I Will warrant the cutting of Alcibiades Dogs tail could not
cause more talk in Athens, then this will, among our Fanatiques. And what was
the ground work of those comparisons? The Doctor is like unto Joseph because he
lost a trial at Law by a Jury page 14.
of Taly-men. It was not the first time (says* he) that a poor man was
oppressed, and a righteous cause miscarri^d, but Joseph had never met those
signal honors and dignities in Pharoahs Court, had he not been first sold by
his Brethren for a bondslave into Egypt. The good Doctor was like unto Moses
for getting, a Prebendary in Westminster, because (says he) when Moses was
deserted by his Parents (which Page, 43.
was never the Doctors case, no more than the other of a bondslave) for fear of
Pharaohs fury, God was pleased to provide him a Savior and a Nurse, when he was
taken out of the bulrushes. Again the issue of the Doctors brain (because Books
and Page
Children are issues) was far more numerous than that of his Body: Methinks
that also is no sweet nor savory comparison. Nay himself is like the Doctor,
for who should give an account of the Epist. deep
actions of Doctor Heylyn, besides Doctor *Heylyn, or at least such an one who
inherits his natural, if not his acquired accomplishments. The man has a
strange opinion of himself, that he is Doctor, Heylyn, because he writes his
Life, that he has his natural parts, if not acquired. The Soul of St.
Augustine (say the Schools) was Pythagorically transfused into the corpse of
Aquin. So the Soul of Doctor Heylyn into a narrow Soul: Who can believe it the
more for his saying, that an equal, if not a double portion of his Spirit is
imparted to him? I know there is a question in Philosophy An Animae sint
aequales? Whether Souls be alike? But their's as much difference betwixt those
two, as between the Spirits of Elijah and Elisha. I stand amazed at his
similitudes and dissimilitudes, his presumption and high conceit of himself;
that so small a Prophet should go hand in hand with Doctor Heylyn, who is not
worthy to hold water to the hands of so great an Elijah. He has other examples
of most wide comparison I could instance in which there ought to be Comparatio
aequalitatis vel similitudinis' but I can find no anological matter in them,
but what is strangly hooked in, or fetched as far as the Antipodes,

But he is both an Astrologer and a Divine that he undertakes to calculate the
Doctors Nativity, and give his Judgment thereupon? although he knows Judicial
Astrology is not well approved of among Divines, and that such Astrologers are
no more to be believed than Gypsies, and Fortune Tellers, whose art is
impudence and lying: As the Chaldeans affirms that the world has continued
above forty thousand years, Lactantius therefore Jact. lib. 7. c. 14.
says of them. Se quia posse argui non putabant liberum sibi crediderunt
mentiri: because they think none can contradict them, they took the liberty to
lie, and now let us see his art and wonderful skill in Figure flinging. The
Birth of page 1.
Doctor Peter Heylyn (says he) according to the rules of our Astrologers,
(which I supwhich I suppose he means the Almanackmakers) presaged firm
constitution of body, and prosperous success in the civil affairs of humane
Life. For it was November 29. 1599. at Burford in the County of Oxon, between
eight and nine in the morning. A most excellent Astrologist! Quem mea non totum
Bibliotheca capit. Who hit the hour so exactly, on which depended all the
Doctors good Fortune, between eight and nine a clock in the morning, only he
forgets, the rapid motions of the Heavens in that time, which might cause great
alterations: I expect he will be more satisfactory in the next horary question
he publishes, for in this the rule and the example does not agree; because the
Doctor had not firm Constitution of body, but many ill fits of Sickness, a very
bad head, (for he must needs tell all he knows of him) that the flesh in the
forepart page 7.
of his Head rotted to the Scull, where never any hair came afterward, he was
sent to London, and kept to a strict Diet and ^requent sweatings. God be
thanked this was in the Doctors childhood, or else the World would think
strange things of him. It seems some unlucky Star had a malevolent aspect upon
his head, which the the Writer of his Life (though an Astrologer) did take no
notice of in his Nativity, and much worse Fortune had the Doctor in the affairs
of humane Life, which if they had been prosperous according to Prognostication,
no doubt he had been a Bishop, and not only a sub-Dean of Westminster, and
probably he would have preferred this Author, whom his Son designed to write
his Life. But still he persists in his Astrology, At which time (says he) the
Sun was in the Horoscope of his Nativity, and the Houses very well page 2.
disposed. But I affirm the contrary, who think my self as great an Astrologer
as he, Non tu plus cernis, sed plus tenerarius audes. That the Houses were very
ill disposed that time, not only for the reasons I have already given, but to
speak more judiciously upon the point, I find the Planets then were combust of
the Sun, under a fiery triplicity, and the Lord of the ascendant in his
Nativity was out of his essential dignities, the moon also Cadent and
unfortunated by those Planets that had dominion in the sixth or eighth House,
besides not a good Planet was then in Cazimi or the heart of the Sun; both the
promittors and significators weak in the Radix of his Nativity; all which did
signify but indifferent good Fortune to the Doctor, sometimes prosperous and
improsperous, good health and bad, no firm Constitution of body (as he says)
but infirm; often crazy, never ill but once of his Head when he was a Boy,
which the Writer would for no good omit.

But I have found him out all this while where he has been tampering, and that
is in Mr. Lillys Book of introduction to Astrology, who has learnt him his
celestial Art, That the presents a Man of good corporature, of healthful
constitution, very humane, etc. his head quickly bald, and so the Life-Writer
says, never any hair Chr. Astrol. lib. 1. cap. 11*
came afterward, when the flesh was rotted to the Scull. But Mr. Lilly is not
at all so absolute and positive in his judgment upon Nativities between the
hours of eight and nine in the Morning. Indeed he is the more subtle
Astrologer, for he has outdone Mr. Lilly in Christian Astrology, because he
can prognosticate and foretell from the Stars, whether a Child, when it is born,
shall be baptized or no? and whether then it shall be Christened by the
Minister with the sign of the cross? for (says he) this reverend man was in
this particular fortunate, page 2.
that he had the honor to carry the mark of the Cross, which was imprinted on
him at the Font. Oh strange! under what a happy constellation was the Doctor
born above other Christians. I thought it had been ordinary, but this was
extraordinary, because he fell not into the hands of a Nonconformist: I
believed he was signed with the Cross, because I am sure the Heavenly Houses,
which first set out the Cross to Constantine, are always well disposed to
this good sign, but whether he was Christened at home, or in Church, I am not
fully satisfied, and if I should hold the contrary, he cannot confute me, for
according to my Albumazar, and other learned Authors, the Heavens were then in
that positure, that the Sun was separated from a square of Jupiter, and applied
to the square of Saturn, which often gives strange disappointments to things
expected, so that still it remains a Question whether the Child was Christened
in the Font. For my part I durst not pry so far into the Doctors Nativity, much
less into the Baptism or Holy Font, but that the Author incites me to it; For I
meddled no further, but that he was born in a happy year with Augustus Thuanus
the famous Historian, which I wonder escaped his dash in the printed Folio.
Therefore for that kindness I will give him this counsel, and I wish he may
follow it hereafter, That he would study the Doctors Books, and not his Birth;
and leave poring on his Astronomical Tables, and gazing up Diog. Laer* in vit.
*to the Stars, lest he should happen some ill mischance, not minding his
foothold, like Thales Milesius fall into a pit, Tacit. Annal lib. 6.
or meet with some worse disaster, some trap-door, which Tiberius Caesar
provided for his Astrologers, si vanitatis aut sraudis suspicio in cesserat. If
any jealousy came into his mind they were false and treacherous.

I cannot also but take notice of the Authors high opinion and conceit of
himself, because he is a little Writer, All Men (says he) have not the
abilities to write Books, so neither to pass sentence on them when written. And
is it not a Truth as undeniable, Scribimus indoctique? Are there not more
Scriblers than learned Writers? The World is pestered too much with them, that
swarm like Gnats and Flies to buz the Head, and ^urt the Eyes, and yet have no
Honey or sweetness in them. I am of opinion, if there were fewer Books, there
would be more Learning, and much better Scholars in every Age; for Authors then
would be well read, digested and turned into good nourishment: Whence Petrus
Comestor, who writ the Historia Scholastica, took his Name, Comestor Trith. de
Scrip. Eccl. page 86.*
sive manducator librorum, says Trithem, quia scripturas quasi in ventrem
memoriae manducarit. An Eater of Books and good Digester of them: Now they are
hastily swallowed down without chewing, and, by reason of the gross stuff, and
mean feeding in most Books and Writers are converted into excrementitious
matter that passes away per latrinam; and as Martial says of a bungling
Versifier in his time, Scribit Carmina, and quae legunt cacantes. Socrates was
looked upon as the chief Oracle among the Philosophers, yet he left not one
Book of his own writing to Posterity, says Suida^* Suid. Hist.
No doubt there has been, and is still in the World, most worthy, wise and
learned Men, as those who have written many vast Volumes: For modesty in some,
weakness of Body (and not of Mind) in others, fear of the Worlds censure; nay,
continual study and reading of Books, with which the mind of a Scholar is never
satisfied, has hindered many a good Writer, so that it is no want of Faculty but
Will: No Imperfection ought to be charged on Men's Abilities, who are known
Scholars; but if every one of them should undertake such a work, in a short
compass of time, there would be more Writers of Books Luth. colliq.
than Readers. It was a Saying of Luther, All of us have a* Pope ^red in us.
That is, an opinion of our own works, though there be no merit in them, which
we may apply in this Case, that most Writers are in love with their Paperworks;
but the World should first judge whether there is any excellency or real worth
in them, otherwise it is a fond fancy, Narcissus like, for any one to be
inamoured with his own Shadow. But that which is worse than all this,

I perceive the Writer is not consistent with himself, but a (...) according to
the Poets words, difficilis, facilis ju^undus acerbus es idem. Because one
while he plays the Satyrist against the Fanatics, and afterward turns Factor
for the Papists, whose cause he could not plead better to please the holy
Fathers of the Ignatian Society founded since Luther's time, than to render the
Name of Protestant odious: `A Name ` (says he) that imports little in it of
`the positive part of Christianity. God forbid, and let us then put this into
our Litany; Lord have mercy upon our Souls who profess our selves to be
Protestants and not Papists, if the positive part of Christianity be wanting
among us: For by Name, what does he or can he* mean, but our Religion and
Christian Profession? For the Name of Protestant it self, is but Thema simplex;
I may say, vox and praeterea nihil, no more is Catholic, Christian, Orthodox,
or any other Name: Nomina imponuntur rebus, Names are given to things to
diversify and distinguish them one from another, or else how are they
significative of themselves? While he goes about to unchristian the Name
Protestant, or at least makes it Terminus diminu^ns, a very slighty Name
indeed, he endeavors to overthrow the true Protestant Religion.

For ever since the first Reformation and change of Religion wrought among us,
by our just and necessary separation from communion with the Church of Rome, we
and our Forefathers have constantly gone under the Name of Protestants, though
originally I acknowledge this Name was taken up by those Princes of Germany,
who adhering to Luther's Doctrine made their Protestation at Spires (the
imperial Chamber) and afterward set forth the Augustane Confession; since which
time, the Church of England having cast off the Papacy, this Name has been the
(...) or remark of distinction betwixt us and Papists. Our Kings and Princes
not only acknowledging the same, but have defended the Protestant Religion, his
most sacred Majesty (whose Life God long preserve among us) in most or all his
Speeches unto his High Court of Parliament, has graciously declared to secure
and defen^ the Protestant Interest and Religion. His Royal Father, the most
glorious Martyr of our Church, but two days before his Death, told the Princess
Elizabeth That he should die for the maintaining the true Protestant Religion;
and charged her to read Archbishop Laud's Book against Fisher to ground her
against Popery. And why were the Jesui^s so active about his Death, that some
of them became Agitators in the Independent Army, but because it was agreed
before by the Pope and his Council (says Dr. du Moulin) that there was no way
Vindicat. of the sincerity of the Prot. Rel.
for advancing the Catholic Cause in England, but by making away the King, of
whom there was no hope to turn from hi^ Heresy, because he was a Protestant. I
cannot omit Archbishop Laud's words p. 11, 12.
at the time of his Trial before the Lords, Anno Dom. 1643. Says he, Not to
trouble your Lordships too long, I am so innocent in the business of Religion,
so far from all Arch Bish. Life p. 5, 6.
practice, or so much as thought of practice, for any alteration unto Popery or
any blemishing of the true Protestant Religion established in England, as I was
when my Mother first ^are me into the World* In his Speech upon the Scaffold
before his Death, he says thus of the King, I shall be bold to speak of the
King, our gracious Sovereign; He has ^een m^d traduced for bringing in of
Popery* ^ut on my Conscience (of which I shall give God a very present account)
I know him to be as free from this Charge as any Man living, and I hold him to
b^ as sound a Protestant (according to the Religion by Law established) as any
Man in this Kingdom.

And now has not this Name Protestant, which imports our Religion, been owned
by all our Judges and Lawyers, the Lord chief Justice speaking of Papists; At
the Trial of Pickering, Gro^ and Ireland, 1678.
If they cannot (says he) at this time live in a Protestant Kingdom with
security to their Neighbors, but cause such fears and dangers, and that for
Conscience sake; then let them keep their Conscience and leave the Kingdom. Mr.
Justice Wild, in like manner, Had such a thing as this been acted by us
Protestants in any Popish Country in the World, I doubt there would not have
been scarce one of us left a live. I might bring in here Sir William Jones, Mr.
Finch, Mr. Recorder of London. And truly if we are ashamed of our Name, we may
be of our Religion, and cannot blame Popish Plots to subvert it, if we hold not
fun^lamentals, which are the positive parts of Christiani^y. The Jesuit hawketh
not for ^parrows; his zeal to destroy our Religion carries him through Fire and
Water, Sea and Land, over Rocks and Mountains to gain a Proselyte, according to
those Verses I find in Pareus, alluding to the Pharisee, and Hor* the Poet.

Impiger extremos Jesuita excurrit ad Indos
Per mare discipulum quaerens, per saxa, per ignes, David Par. Comment. in
Evang. S. Mat. Cap. 23.

Juventumque facit, se duplo deteriorem.
Sea, Land, Fire, craggy Rocks and Indian Shore
A Jesuit's frantic zeal transports him over,
One Romish Proselyte to make, once made
Child of the Devil twice then before* he is said.
Nay, he has the patience to stay at home, and there no dull Stoic can excel
him in this Virtue; if he be once commanded by his Superior, he will Maph. in
vita Ign.
obey though his work be no other, says Mapheus, than to water a dry log of
Wood for a year together* he will not presume to ask the reason why, but does
it: Then how much more ready is he to propagate the Gatholick Cause, and in
order thereto adventure upon any action, if it be to the hazard of his Life,
while he is commanded by his Father General at Rome, and the Congregatio de
Propaganda fide: What will not he undertake to extirpate the Name of
Protestant, and think he does God Service; for if positive Christianity be not
imported in it, then we are Negatives; we are Jews, Infidels, Pagans, and
cannot be denominated Christians, for Positive and Negative are contradicentia:
there can be no reconciling or tacking them together, and acco^ding to my
Logic a Contradiction is omnium oppositorum fortissima, the strongest and most
forcible of all oppositions: But I would know what are the Principles of
Protestantis^, that are so contradictory to Christianity; they must be either
credenda or facienda, matters relating to Faith, or Christian practice: Do we
hold any points of Faith contrary to the Primitive Catholic Church? Or deny
Obedience to the Commands of God either in his Law or Gospel? In a word, are
Protestants Christians or no? Or only nominal and not real? I think they are
the best and purest sort of Christians ever since the Apostolic times, that
they come nearest the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and the
example of them at Antioch, who were first called Christians. We do not know
how to distinguish men of the Church of England from the Church of Rome, but by
this characteristial Name or Appellation, because in the times of Popery, as
appears not only by Linwood, but by the constitutions of Otho and Othobon: The
Ecclesiastical Body of this Nation was anciently called the Church of England,
Ecclesia Anglicana, and so it continues to this day, but with this
discrimination only, that we are Protestants in the Church of England and not
Papists.

I know it will be objected this Name is abused by Fanatics, who impudently
dare arrogate it to themselves, and are ordinarily now called Protestants What
then? Abusus non tollit usum; they are Protestants Catachrestice, as Papists
call themselves Catholics: And if they will boldly usurp the Name, which no
way belongs to them; their Tongues are their own, and they will speak: Who is
Lord over us? (say they) And who can hinder them? The Heretics of old time,
who were ex part Donati, of Donatus side, did the like, and yet the Orthodox
deemed themselves never the worse for their Pride and Usurpation. The Name of
Christian was common both to them and the Orthodox, as Optatus the good Father
tells them. Pro utrisque illud est, quod and nobis commane Oplat. l. 5. c. 29.
est and vobis. Such Scandals are unavoidable, therefore with patience must be
born. And it was the like complaint of Lactantius, but what Remedy? The
Novatians, Valentinians, Marcionites, and Arrians says he, Quilibet Lact.
Instit. lib. 4. cap. 30.
alij nominantur Christiani, and Christi^i esse des^runt, any other Heretics
were called Christians, though they were none. So that it is no wonder the
Sectaries of our Age will confidently take upon themselves the Name of
Protestants,; they do but as other Schismatics, who were their ancient
Predecessors, -- Mutato nomine de te Fabula narratur -- Yet some of the baser
sort of them, as Quakers and Independents despise the Name of Protestant, and
hold it in as great derision as the Papists do, and no doubt have learned from
the soul Mouth of Father Doleman alias Parsons, and from Watson in his
Quodlibets, to call us of the Church of England, Queen Besses Protestants:
However it does not become any Son of the Church, much less the Rector of
Bourton, to bite and snarl at the Name of Protestant which distinguishes him
from a Mass-priest, especially in such times as ours, when Papist and Fanatic
join hand in hand, mouth and tongue together against us, because our Church is
of Queen Elizabeth's Religion and Reformation. A Queen notwithstanding the
malicious slanders of her Enemies, the Popes Bull of Damnation against her, and
the Non-Conformists now Condemnation of her: She was the most admired Princess
of Europe in her time, the glory and wonder of her Sex, etiam supera Sexum,
says Thuanus, Thu. Hist. l. 22.
though himself a Papist; and Beza the Successor of Calvin at Geneva gives her
this Character of high praise, which methinks our Dissenters should assent
unto, that she was a Queen God sent from Heaven to be a Nursing Mother at home
unto the Church of England, and to Protestant Churches abroad. Let us hear his
words more fully, In Anglia opus Domini qui serenissimam illam* and ecclesiarum
non tantum Anglicanarum Theod. Bez. de Minist. Evang. Grad. Page 91.
fortissimam instauraticem verum etiam peregrinarum religiosissimam nutricem
Flizabetham instaurandae suae Domui quasi sua ipsius manu coelitus demisit. God
be thanked also the Reformation of Religion, and the Church of England became
Protestant before her time: Our Religion being established by Law in the Reign
of her young Brother the most excellent Prince, Edward the 6th. whose Laws were
written in Milk, and not in Blood, like those of Queen Mary his Sister who
succeeded him. Our Religion and Ecclesiastical Government by Archbishops and
Bishops, etc. is still the same as was in the Reigns of Edward the Sixth, and
Queen Elizabeth of blessed Memory, in whose time this Kingdom was accounted
Regnum Evangelii, Thu. Hist. ^ 13.
the Kingdom of the Gospel. Now why our Dissenters should dissent, why they
should be so averse to the Protestant Religion then established by Law, and is
now the very same in all Articles of Faith, Form of Worship, and Ecclesiastical
Discipline; and yet they are not satisfied: I must profess that I see no reason
for their dissatisfaction but Will and Humor; that they are as they have been,
and still resolve to be of a perverse and democratical Spirit, in all matters
relating to Church and State, much less cause have they to reproach the Name of
the most Renowned Queen Elizabeth, which has been held in exceeding great
veneration among all Protestants in foreign Kingdoms* whose incomparable
Virtues of* Learning, Piety, Prudence, Modesty, Meekness, Stoutness, and other
rare Perfections are described by a Poet living in her days, and are as
follows.

O (...) solum sapias (...) Anglia part Chr. Ocland.
hac (...). sive Elizab.

Ut grate agnoscas Jovis benefacta (...)
En dedit affectam divina mente (...)
Imperij, quae ^um docta, ingeniosa severa
Et (...), veneranda, pudica, animosa venenda
(...) tenera (...), commoda (...),
Tot tibi contulerit, quot (...) nemo priorum
Et quae vera Dei sit religione fruare
Papa fugit solio Patris Regina locatur.
May be Englished thus,

O England, native Soil of mine, pay thanks to Jove
The great and powerful God of Heaven above:
No one with larger gifts he could inspire,
Than such a noble Princess for Empire;
Learned, ingenious, modest, meek, and bold
England's great Scepter in her hand to hold.
Queen of all Blessings to this Nation, more
Has brought than all her Ancestors before:
Gods true Religion flourished, Pope he is gone,
When she ascended to her Father^ Throne.
Let us then* not be ashamed of our Religion, nor judge the worse of it, much
less deny our Christian Name, since our departure from the Church of Rome,
because Papists and Fanatics nickname us Queen Besses Protestants. Such dirt
flung upon Majesty, rebounds back with shame on their own Faces, and will
hereafter to their eternal confusion, who dare reproach the Lords anointed. The
Pope himself first played (...) part to throw Dirt and Stones at her, by
calling her misera Faemina a wretched Woman; afterward followed many
Rabs^eka's, especially Sanders and Rishton, who termed her Lupam Anglicanam,
the Wolf-Bitch of England, though she had more of the Lamb than the Wolf, for
she thirsted not after Blood as her Sister Queen Mary did: Finally Parsons
alias Cow-(...), a Priest's Bastard, writ a Cart-load of Libels against her.
These were the Popes Birds, and many other of the same Feather employed by his
Holiness, as the Alexandrians kept their Ibides to devour the Garbage of the
Diodor. Sicul. l. 3.
City, and to cleanse their Streets, but they left more noisome filth of their
own behind them.

Gods holy Law strictly charge, Principem populi tui non maledices, Thou
shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy People. So it was Tiberius care (says
Tacitus) ne memoria Augusti, ne nomen Tacit. l. 6.
Caesarum in ludibria and contumelias verterat, that the Memory of Augustus,
and the Name of Caesar's, might not be turned into contempt and reproach: For if
Princes once are set down in the Chair of the Scornful, they will not sit long
upon their Thrones; their Authority and Government is quickly despised when
their sacred persons are vilified, and by every foul mouth that speaks evil of
Dignities, the holy and reverend Name of King, who is a Vice-God upon Earth,
shall be commonly profaned and reviled with such Antimonarchical Men. King
James, Queen Elizabeth's Successor, the first Monarch of great Britain, and
second Solomon for Wisdom, lived a most vexatious Life* that never poor King
was so harassed with a company of unreasonable persons, both of the Popish and
Puritan Faction, the one working under Ground by secret Plots and Conspiracies
against him, for which reason he commanded the Dialogue between Theodidactus
and Philalethes to be composed and printed; the other was not ashamed to play
above Board, in audacious and open practices, that he never could have an
Inter-regnum of peace and quietness for them, but they were continually Thorns
in his Eyes, and Pricks in his Side; for no other reason, as he sadly
complains, but because he was their King. Crebrae Bas^l. Dor. page 147.
adversus me (says he) in tribunitiis concionibus calumniae spargebantur, non
quod crimen aliquod designassem, sed quia Rex eram, quod omni crimine pejus
habebatur. There were frequent calumnies scattered against me in their popular
Sermons, not that I had committed any crime or fault, but that I was their
King, which was esteemed worse than all crimes: Their Principles we have seen
by woeful experience, tend to Anarchy and Confusion; which as that wise King
foresaw, so he put a Hook into the Nose of the Leviathans or chief Leaders of
that Faction, and counseled his Son King Charles the First, to hold the Reins
strictly: and not remissy over them; for by tolleration their insolences will
grow intolerable: Therefore I cannot omit the solemn Protestation which at
last he made, and certainly will ever be remembered by the R^yal Family Testor
illum magnum Deum, nec testamentum (says he) (...) fas est mentiri, nunquam
inter montanos aut limitaneos nostros latrones majorem ingratitudinem Basil.
Dor. page 148.
aut perfidiam reperiri posse, quam inter hos phanaticos ne^lones, nec patere;
si pacate vivere decreveris, and hi eadem tecum patria fruantur, nisi forte
p^tientiae experiendae ergo, ut Socrates vixit cum Zantippe. I take the great
God to witness, as if I were making my last Will and Testament (and it is not
lawful for him that makes a Testament to lie) that there can never be more
unthankfulness or perfidiousness found among our High-land bordering Robbers,
than among those Fanatic Knaves; (so the King speaks in plain terms) neither
do thou suffer them to enjoy the same Country with thee, if thou purpose to
live peaceably, unless perhaps for the exercise of thy patience, as Socrates
lived with Zantippe.

And had not the good King reason for all this, who knew well the Geneva
Bibles, and seditious Notes upon them; some of them not only teaching
disobedience to Kings and Princes, but the execrable Murder, of them, if they
were Idolaters; and others did not only teach the lawfulness of breaking faith
and promises, when it might conduce to the hurting of the Gospel, but ranked
the Archbishops and Bishops, and all men in holy Orders of Academical Degrees,
amongst those locusts in the Revelation which came out of the Pit.

And now I heartily thank the Author my Adversary, for his Narrative of Mr.
Baxter, the Head of all the Tribes among our Non-conformists; but I wonder, he
being so famous an Astrologer could not by Talismanical Figures of Gaffarel,
without the help of other Witnesses, read Mr. Baxter's name in the Stars, and
see ^ow he pulled off the Picture from the Majors Neck, telling him then as he
was swimming in his gore, that he was a Popish Rogue, and that was his
Crucifix. I admire this discovery was not made before by Art; for the proof of
which the Narrator has taken a great deal of pains in getting the Majors Hand
and Seal, and Witnesses, for all which I commend him, that he has made sure
work, according to the saying, Plus annulis creditur, quam animis, the Seals of
men are more to be trusted than their Souls. Indeed the Narrative at the first
sight of it, seemed to me most strange and incredible, especially those words
following the Story of the Picture, viz. restored to the Poor-man now alive a^
Wick near Parshore in Worcestershire, although at the Fight supposed to be
dead, being after the wounds given him, dragged up and down the Field by the
merciless Soldiers. Mr. Baxter approving of the inhumanity, by feeding his
Eyes with so bloody and barbarous a Spectacle. I was very much inclined to
suspect the truth of the whole Narrative; insomuch that I then said to a
Friend, that I gave the same credit to it as to the story of Father Garnet;
That his forhead received Joh. Heigh. Chr. Cathol
a blow, as he was dragged upon the Stones, and where the wound was, the sign
of the Cross appeared; and the Blood dropping down the Straw in the Hurdle, his
Face and full Feature was printed upon the Straw, for which the Papists could
produce Hands and Seals* also for Judge Seth's Finger bleeding through his
Glove, while he pronounced Sentence against Campian the Jesuit.

But now I crave pardon of the Narrator for my unbelief, and confess my self
abundantly satisfied in the truth of all the premises concerning Mr. Baxter,
because they have been publicly attested, and more fully confirmed than
before, Therefore let Mr. Baxter look to him self and his own Conscience, and
not accuse or condemn others, much less Doctor Heyl^, as one who speaks of
blood with pleasure When the Baxt. Pref. to the Ab^idgm of Chu^. Hist.
Sin of blood-guiltiness of a high and barbarous nature lies crying at his own
door; and I am ^ure a more than ordinary Repentance must expiate the guilt of
so ^oul a crime; for it is peccatum (...), (...) crying sin, of which there be
four ^or in Scripture, as Aquinus tells us in a distich.

(...) in caelum, vox sanguinis and Sodo^. Aquin. in Epist. S. Jacob cap. 5. v.
4.

V^x oppressorum, merces retenta laborum.
Oppression, blood, Hirelings unpaid, So^.
From earth to Heaven sends a doleful cry.
Although the good Major through Gods mercy is yet alive, the Savage and
inhumane dealing he found at the Hands of Hurdman and Mr. Baxter, his innocent
blood most unjustly spilt upon the ground after so many years silence of it;
now to the shame of Mr. Baxter makes a hideous cry: As Murder it self cannot be
concealed, no more can those Actions that border upon it, but Divine Vengeance
will pursue whosoever is guilty of either; which the very Heathen took notice
of, when he says Hor. car. lib. 3. Ob. 2.
Raro antecedentem scelestum deseruit pede paena claudo. The innocent Doctor is
falsely accused of words, but now his Accuser is truly arraigned, and upon his
indictment found guilty of bloody deeds: For he that is a Partizan with cruel
men, or an Abettor and Encourager of them, is certainly a Pertaker with them,
and not only an Accessory to the Fact but a Principal; as in all Sanguinary
Causes according to our Statute Laws, there are no Accessaries but Principals;
and I am sure in Foro poli, or the Court of Heaven, such Offenders are alike.
But the Man is still alive! What then, the intention of killing him, and their
leaving him for dead, is a breach of the sixth Commandment, as if it were
actual homicide: Murder was intended, Mr. Baxter standing by, not once
reproving Hurdman, but setting him thereon by his own example, calling the
Major Rogue; I say it had been Murder with all cruelty to the height, (if the
poor man had dyed) because it is against the Law of Arms, after a Battle
fought, to kill our Enemy in cold blood. And as the Case now stands aggravated
with all the Circumstances alleged, Mr. Baxter can no ways acquit himself,
because he cannot be ignorant of this Rule, Nullum Praeceptum consistit in
indivisibili, that no Precept of Gods Law is tied up to one single or
individual act, but has a greater latitude in it; as all kinds of Murder is
forbidden, whether of the beart, tongue or hand, unmercifulness, cruelty,
revenge, hatred, malice Quid interest an gladio teneas, an lingua percutias,
indubiranter ^icida est? Optat. Milen. lib. 2. p. 69.
is Murder; Whosoever hates his Brother (says the Apostle) he is a
Murderer, and you know that no Murderer has eternal Life in him. Also every
Precept of Gods Law is both affirmative and negative; under the affirmative,
all duties that possibly can be reduced to it are employed, and under the
negative, which is of greater force, because it binds ad semper (as the Schools
say) all things which come within the verge of it, as cruelty, inhumanity, etc.
are absolutely forbidden.

Mr. Baxters personal presence gave countenance to the bloody action, much more
in being a delightful Spectator of it, which ought to have been abhorred by
him. Nero himself could not behold bloody Tragedies though he commanded Tacit.
in vita Agric.
them, says the Historian, Et jussit scelera Nero non spectavit: Much more
barbarous actions are hateful to the Eyes of all Christians; that Constantine
after his Conversion, by public Edict, did forbid all monstrous and bloody
Eusib. in vit. Constable.
Spectacles in the Amphitheater. For a Minister of Jesus Christ, (as he calls
himself) who preaches against hardness of heart, to be so cruel hearted
himself, as not to pity a poor Christian weltring in his blood and wounds, for
the cause only of his King and Country; to show no mercy, nor Cristian
compassion toward him, not so much as we would do to a Turk or an Infidel, but
call him Rogue, Popish Rogue, violently pulling from his Neck the Kings
Picture, and seeing him dragged up and down in the Fields by merciless
Soldiers. Honesco referens. It was a more lamentable sight than the Spectacula
nefranda, when Christians were torn in pieces by wild Beasts in the Roman
Theater.

I must therefore say to Mr. Baxter, Acts 7. 1.
as the High Priest, (...), Are these things so? I sincerely wish from my heart
that he may, and I hope he will repent, and ask God and the Major forgiveness,
which is the lest part of penance and satisfaction he can perform for so
heinous an Offense; and till then, with what confidence can Mr. Baxter preach
to his Auditors? being a silenced Minister both by the Laws of the Land and his
own Conscience, that must needs fly in his face, and sorely exagitate him, as
it was once the Case of Origin, who sinned not maliciously, but out of fear and
cowardice to save his life: This Scripture struck him to the heart; Why do
thou preach my Laws, and take my Covenant in thy mouth, whereas thou hate
to be reformed, and have cast my words behind thee. If Mr. Baxter will look out
of his broken Church History, into true Ecclesiastical History, he shall find
Origen's Suida Hist.
Repentance set forth by Suidas for a most excellent Example to imitate. He was
called Syntacticus for compiling many Books, in which Mr. Baxter does strive to
follow him, in writing many Books, full of Errors, but not so learnedly erreth
as Origin did; and and probably if he will not leave the odious quality of
abusing reverend and worthy men, his Books may hereafter run the same fortune
with Origens, to be publicly condemned. For

He cannot forbear railing upon Dr. Heylyn, after he has laid in his Grave
near twenty years: Speaking of the Baxt. Pref. to his Abridgment of Church Hist.
late Wars, says he, Not only Lads that knew it not, but Heylyn, the great
Reproacher of Reformers, would make men believe that it was Presbyterians in
England that began the strife and War. What Heylyn? There be many Heylyns in
England; which of them? So professed an Enemy he is to Degrees, because he was
himself (I hear) never a Graduate or an University-man, that he is a Despiser
of those Dignities in others: For his insolency in this kind, and errors in
other matters, he was once soundly swinged by the Doctor and the Correction put
an end to all the Epistolary Controversies between them, that he was fain then
to lower his Top-sail, and durst never appear in the Doctors time, top and top
gallant: In revenge of which, and therein he thinks he has done a great Act,
not to call him so much as Peter Heylyn, Mr. Heylyn, or Good Man Heylyn; nay,
he will not allow him a Christian Name, because he will be out of Charity with
him both alive and dead. This is the man that prefesseth so much mortification,
humility and self-denial: Yet no man swells with more spiritual pride, Mare
Adriatico superbior. But why is Heylyn a Reproacher of the Reformers? I cannot
tell, unless this be accounted a reproach (which rather tends to his credit)
that he is an impartial Writer of Histories, relating the naked Truth of things
without respect of Persons, and chiefly, because he utterly dislikes such a
Reformation of Religion, that is carried on in a popular and tumultuary way,
which I think cannot be justifiable neither by Law, Reason, nor Scripture, nor
by all the Learning Mr. Baxter has, or ever shall have to prove the contrary.
I appeal to the ancient Fathers, and the primitive Christians in the first
Centuries, whether this was judged by them, an approvable way of Reformation,
that is effected by the vulgar sort, (who are not competent Judges of Religion)
but by the Authority of the Christian Magistrate, with the advice and good
counsel of the Clergy, which is the only regular and most Scriptural way; the
other bends to Sedition, Bloodshed, and Confusion, if it be left to the
Multitude: Which caused the good Father to complain of the Donatists. Basilicas
Oplat. Milen.. l. 2. p. 54.
invasistis, multi ex numero vestro, per loca plurima, cruentas operati sunt
caedes. And what outrageous acts were done by the Donatists, against Churches,
Altars, consecrated Vessels, and necessary utensils for the Sacrament? Haec
omnia furor lib. 6. p. 154
vester aut rasit, aut fregit, aut removit, says Oplatus. All these things
your fury has razed down or defaced, or taken them away. And has not this
been the practice of some Reformers? God be thanked not in the Church of
England, and let other Churches of the reformed Religion look to themselves; I
am sure it is a detestible Principle, which the Primitive Christians from their
hearts did abhor, that if the Magistrate will not reform the Church and State,
then the people must. Their Piety and Patience is most exemplary to us; that we
should rather suffer for true Religion, than make resistance or Reformation by
rebellion. It was a seditious saying of Donatus. Quid est ibid. lib. 3. page 81.
Imperatori cum Ecclesia? What has the Emperor to do with the Church? But be
he either Heathen or Christian, and if Christian, either Orthodox or Heterodox
in the Faith, the good Catholics did not then seek to establish their
Religion, vi and armis, much less without his Authority, or at least connivance
of their Emperors, publicly exercise their Religion.

Secondly that which so imbitters Mr. Baxter against Dr. Heylyn, is, (says he)
That Heylyn would make men believe, that it was Presbyteriaas in England, that
began the late Strife and War. And who believes otherwise, but they who have a
bloody mind to War again? Have we not seen it with our Eyes, and others who
were unborn then, have heard with their Ears the same, by many Witnesses and
Writers besides Dr* Heylyn. What, must men deny their senses? It is not in the
power of the Doctor, nor any other, to possess people with a belief and
persuasion of things, whether they will or no; but as they appear evident to
sense, reason or understanding, they give credit to them accordingly. Mr.
Baxter imitates the Papists; He thinks of the War, as they do of the Gunpowder
Plot, that it is so long ago, it must be either forgotten, or cannot be proved:
He and those of his Tribe, would be blowing their Trumpets again for a second
War, and cry out, to your Tents O Israel; but God in his mercy I hope will
preserve the Land, that is grown more wise by sad experience of the late
troubles, than to be twice deceived. The pretense of Reformation and Reformers,
(whose Credit Mr. Baxter would still hold up, he cannot endure they should be
touched) was the Pulchra Laverna of Rebelion, both in England and Scotland. Who
were the first Reformers but the Presbyterians? Who was it? An Episcopal man or
a Presbyterian, that said Strike (...) Plea p. 196.
the Basilick vein, for nothing else will cure the plurisy of our State? and
after followed the fatal stroke given upon the Lords anointed, to the terror
and consternation of the whole Kingdom, but much more to the shame and
confusion of it. And how many years after was this Nation ridden with the
Reformers? That it might have been called instead of France, Regnum Asinorum,
for the unmerciful loads of Oppression it groaned under; till at last wearied
and tired out with them, it kicked off her Riders, and I am confident will never
take to them again. For what were the fruits of the godly Reformation?
Sacrilege and a continued Rebellion, Church and Crown Robberies; the King
deprived of all his Right and Revenues, and the Church of her ancient Demeans
and Dignities; from both which (as no good consequence any one might conceive)
did follow a horrible Anarchy and confusion; not only Dr. Heylyn, but the World
it self is judge of these things, whether the Presbyterians were not the
Principal, and I may say the only causes of the late Wars, and those evils
attending them. I think the Doctor set the Sadle upon the right Horse.

But I am sure Mr. Baxter does not, when he puts Lads and Dr. Heylyn together,
who are (...), and very irreverently conjoined together; yet perhaps those Boys
think themselves as good Men as Mr. Baxter, and possibly to have as much
Learning, however more discretion in them than appears in him, who shamefully
complains of his feebleness to his Wife: For modesty sake I dare not set down
the Mr. Baxt. Breviat. of her Life p. 73.
words, written at the end of his Letter to her, which he has printed in his
Narrative of her Life. But who are these Lads that knew not the War, and yet
will be talking of it? I very well apprehend his meaning, and confess I was
then but a Youth, but now am old and gray headed, that what I have written I
hope to make good, and fear not to meet Mr. Baxter upon a fair Challenge any
where in the halfway, except between Lynsel and Longford. In the mean while,
he who Styles himself so proudly in the Title page of his Church History,
Richard Baxter a Hater of false Histories: Let him not falsisie Dr. Heylyn, nor
others, who approve themselves truer Historians than himself, whom I now attach
for falsehood in saying this scandalous story of the Doctor. That he himself had
laid much of the Baxt. Pref. to Chapter Hist.
War on the Archbishops and Bishops, and on the Parliaments complaints of
Popery, Arminianism and arbitrary illegalities. In his Hist. of Presb. page
465. page 470. In all which pages ne (...) quidem, there is not a word or
syllable can be found of these things, nor to such purpose; that I wonder he
has the face to charge Dr. Heylyn with them, when he pro fesseth himself to be
a Hater of false Histories, no sooner the word is out of his mouth, but within
a page or two he makes this abominable falsity. I do suspect him now more than
ever about Major Iennings business, and conclude him to be guilty. Could any
one rationally think, that the Doctor (who in all his Time and Books, appeared
a most zealous Champion for the Bishops; and in that cause I may say was Dr.
Irrefr agabilis) would lay to their charge much or little, that they were
procatarcical causes of the War; especially when he vindicates them in all his
Writings from this malicious aspersion, which the Puritan Faction would have
thrown upon them. He was not a man of contradictions like Richard Baxter in
most of his Writings, for which every Lad is apt to lug his Beard, as the Poet
said of the Stoic, vellent tibi barbam lascivi pueri -- No, no, he had a wiser
Headpiece, and better Memory than any Baxter: That he never exposed himself to
shame or censure for any contradiction that could be fouud in all his Writings.
Qualis ab in^epto processerit, and sibi constet.

Instead of Mr, Baxters Allegation, the Doctor tells us in the same page 464,
465. that the Assembly of Divines (so called) in their Confession, larger and
lesser Catechism, held forth such a Doctrine touching Gods Decrees, that they
gave occasion of receiving the old Blastian Heresy, in making God to be the
Author of Sin; that the Bill against Bishops he observes took date from the
fifth of November, the day defigned on the blowing up of the Parliament by the
Gunpowder Traitors, that notwithstanding the House of Commons had taken the
Scotch Covenant, they never intended to set up Scotch Presbytery, only held.
fair quarter with them for a time, because in April, 1646. They published this
following Declaration. That they were not able to consent to the granting of an
arbitrary and unlimited Power and Jurisdiction to near ten thousand
Iudicatories to be erected in the Kingdom, which could not be confistent with
the fundamental Laws and Government of it, and which by necessary conse. quence
did exclude the Parliament from having any thing to do in that Jurisdiction.
Page 470. the Doctor tells us again, That the English Puritans laid their heads
and hands together to embroil the Realm, out of a confidence, that having
alienated the greatest part of the Tribes from the House of David, they might
advance the golden Calves of Presbyterians in Dan and Bethel, and all other
places whatsoever in the Land; and for the maintenance thereof, had devoured in
conceit all Chapter Lands, and parcelled them amongst themselves into
Augmentations: But no sooner had they driven this bargain, but a Vote passed
for selling those Lands, toward the payment of those debts of the
Commonwealth. Nor have they lived to see their dear Presbytery settled, or
their lay Elders entertained in any one Parish of the Kingdom.

Now I have recited all those passages out of the pages Mr. Baxter refers us
to; what has he gained to his cause, but a confutation of it? As it wa said of
Caesar's Conspirators, iisde^ ^bus, quibus Caesarem foderunt (...) occiderunt.
With the same Daggers they stabbed Julius Caesar, they killed themselves, So
Mr. Baxter has destroyed himself and the good old Cause with his own Weapons,
by reciting Dr. Heylyn against Dr. Heylyn: The Dr. though dead, he yet
speaks, and has vanquished his living Adversary: For what man out of these
premises could draw a conclusion, except Mr. Baxter by his Kederminster Logic,
that Heylyn had laid much of the War upon the ArchBishops and Bishops, etc.
when there is no mention of War or Bishops in the Case: No quantum to be found
of much or little in it; no minimum quod sic: Nay, nothing at all to prove Mr.
Baxter's position and scandalous defamation of the Doctor: Therefore I must say
to him the words of the old Comedian. Dehine and quie^, porro moneo, and
desinat maledicere, ne ma^cta noscat sua. If the Dr. himself had been still
living, (as some of his Elders are) neither Mr. Baxier, Mr. Hickman, nor M.
Burnet, no one of them durst have adventured a single Duel with him in any
point of Learning; but he would have said to every such Gladiator, as Cicero
did to Mark Antony. Catilinae gladios contempsi, non pertimescam tuos. But now
he has neither hand nor sword, but is disarmed by Death. -- miserandum and
flebile corpus, it is no sign of true Virtue, or noble Valor in them; much
less of a good Cause on their side, to insult ignobly over a dead Lion. As for
Mr. Baxter, who will not let him rest quietly in his Grave, if my fraternal
correption cannot amend him, I wish he may remember his good Wifes rebuke and
deserved correction, she gave Baxt. Brev. of her Life page 89.
him, by his own confession. That he should make fewer Books, and write them
better.

And I think this good counsel had not been unseasonable to the late Writer of
Dr. Heylyn's Life, to have transmitted that Task to any other person, who had
been an ancient Friend and Acquaintance of the Doctors, rather than ambitiously
assumed it upon himself, who was a professed Stranger to him; by reason of
which, no better account could be expected from him than what he has given, and
that is unsatisfactory, a Life to the half, an imperfect Creature, that is not
only lame, (as the honest Bookseller said) but wantteth Legs, and all other
integral parts of a Man, nay the very Soul, that should animate a Body like Dr.
Heylyn. I am sure no man except himself, who was totally ignorant of the Dr.
and all the circumstances of his Life, would have engaged in such a work, which
was never primarily laid out or designed for him; but by reason of some unhappy
differences, as usually fall out in Families, and he who loves to put his Ore
in troubled matters, instead of closing them up has made them wider: Otherwise
it is not material who had writ the Doctors Life, so it had been done by an
able hand of a more knowing person; therefore I must say of him as Plutarch
does of Tib. Grac^us, Plut. in vit. Gra^
(...), he is a bold Undertaker, and rash Talker of those matters he does not
understand: And so I have done with him, unless he creates to himself and me a
future trouble.

Now I hope any ingenious Reader will plainly see, I am forced to a just and
necessary Vindication of my self.

Si quis me atro dente petiverit inultus, ut Hor. Epod.
flebo puer? and chiefly of my Father in Law; to whom as I am bound in
gratitude for the favors I received from him in his Life time, so I could do
no less than perform this little Task of writing his Life, and that without
passion and partiality, being free from motives of both, Cor. Tacit. lib. 1.
as the Historian said, Quorum Causas procul habeo. However for holding the
Reader in so long suspense, I have endeavored to make a mends in the following
Life, which in a manner I have composed new, retaining only what I had before
written, and still remains in the printed Folio, entitled Keimelia
Ecclesiastica; but now with that (which was so shamefully abused) I am sure the
Work is complete and perfect, and I hope will afford this general benefit;
First to encourage all young Scholars in the Love of Learning by the Example of
so Reverend a Divine, and excellent Historian as Dr. Heylyn. And secondly, to
remind others of some principal transactions both in Church and State during
his time. And so I conclude in the words of Salus. Jug.
Salust. Age nunc, illa videamus Judices, quae consecuta sunt.

THE LIFE OF THE Most Reverend and Learned DIVINE, Dr. PETER HEYLYN.
TO write the Lives of worthy Heathens: For to perpetuate the Memory of the
Dead, who were eminent in Virtue, did manifestly conduce to the public benefit
of the Living; much more the Ancient Christians in their time, both solemnly
retained this Practice, and adjudged it an Act of Piety and Justice to the
Deceased; If they were Men of Fame for Learning or other Virtues, to celebrate
their Praises to Posterity; and by this means stirred up Emulation in others to
follow so noble Precedents before them.

For which Cause,. St. Jerome writ Catalogus illustrium Virorum, before whom
also Eusebius with others in short recorded to future Ages, the holy Lives of
those Primitive Fathers, who were signally active or passive for the Christian
Faith. Suum cuique decus posteritas Tacit. lib. 4.
rependit, (says the Historian) Posterity does render to every man the
Commendation he deserves.

Therefore for the Reverend Doctor's Sake, and in due veneration of his Name,
which I doubt not is honored by all true Sons of the Church of England, both
for his learned Writings and constant Sufferings, in defense of her Doctrine
and Discipline established by Law: Here is faithfully presented to them, a true
and complete Narrative of his Life; to answer the common Expectations of men in
this Case, who would read his Person (together with the ordinary and
extraordinary occurrences of Providence that befell him) as well as his Books,
that were long before published to the World.

To give satisfaction in the former, here is nothing inserted but the Relations
of Truth, which has been often heard from his own Mouth spoken to his dearest
Friends, or written by his Pen in some loose fragments of Paper, that were
found left in his Study after his Death; upon which, as on a sure Foundation,
the whole Series and Structure of the following Discourse is laid together; but
would have been more happily done, if he had left larger Memoirs for it.
Nothing was more usual in ancient times, than for good men (says Tacitus) to
describe their own Lives. Suam ipsi vitam narrare, In vita Jul. Agricol.
fiduciam potius morum, quam arrogantiam arbitrati sunt, upon a confidence of
their right behavior, rather than to be supposed any arrogance or presumption
in them.

First of all I shall begin with his Birth. enobled with the famous seat of the
Muses, to which he was a constant Votary; By Cambden Oxford is called the Sun,
Eye, Cambd. Brit.
and Soul of Great Britain; by Matthew Paris the second School of the Church,
Cosmog. fol. 306.
by the Reverend Doctor, co-eval to Paris, if not before it, the glory of this
Island and of the Western parts: Yet it cannot be denied, as high praises have
been attributed by Learned Men to the most famous University of Cambridge, that
I dare make no comparisions betwixt those two Sisters of Minerva for the Love I
owe to either of them, who were both my dear Nurses: However the University of
Oxon was long since honored with the Title Ex Angel. Rocha page 214.
of Generale Studium in nobilissimis quatuor Europae Academiis, and this
glorious Title conferred upon none else in former times, but the Universities
of Paris in France, Bononia in Italy, and Salamanca in Spain. Near which Oxon
or noble Athens, he was born at Burford, an ancient Market Town of good Note in
the County of Oxford, upon the 29th. day of November, Anno Dom. 1600. In the
same year with the celebrated Quenst. Dialog. de Pat. illust. vir.
Historian Jacob. August. Thuanus, on both whom the Stars poured out the like
benign influences: But the former, viz. Peter Heylyn, had not only the faculty
of an Historian, but the gift of a general Scholar in other Learning, (...), as
will appear to any one that reads his laborious Writings.

He was second Son of Henry Heylyn descended from the ancient Family of the
Heylyns of Peutre-Heylyn Cosmog.
in Montgomeryshire, then part of PowisLand, from the Princes whereof they were
derived, and unto whom they were Hereditary Cup-bearers; for so the word Heylyn
does signify in the Welsh or British Language; an honorable Office in most
Nations, which we find in Divine as well as Profane History; whereby Nehemiah
became so great a Favorite with Artaxerxes, that he obtained a Grant for the
rebuilding of the holy City. Magni honoris erat Pincernae munus apud persas,
says Alex. ab Alex.

If Camden Clarencieux be of good Authority, Grono-ap Heylyn, who descended
from Brockwel Skythrac, one of the Princes of Powis-Land, in whose Family was
ever observed, that one of them had a Gag-tooth, and the same was a notable
omen of good Fortune; which Mark of the Tooth is still continued in the Doctors
Family. These and such like signatures of more wonderful form, are indeed very
rare yet not without Example: So Seleucus and his Children after him, were born
with the Figure of an Anchor upon their Thigh, as an infallible mark of their
true geniture, (says Justin) Origenis hujus argumentum etiam posteris mansit,
si quidem filij, nepotesque ejus anchoram in femore Justin. lib. 15.
veluti notam generis naturalem habuere.

The aforesaid Grono-ap Heylyn, from Descendents, was a man of so great
Authority with the Princes of North Wales, that Llewelleu the last Prince of
the Country, made choice of him before any other, to treat with the
Commissioners of Edward the First, King of England, for the concluding of a
final Peace between them, which was accordingly done; but afterward Llewellen,
by the persuasion of David his Brother, raised an Army against the King, that
were quickly routed, himself slain in Battle: and in him ended the Line of the
Princes of North Wales, who had before withstood many puissant Monarchs, whose
attempts they always srustrated by retiring into the heart of their Country,
and (as the Doctor says) leaving nothing for their Enemies Cosm. fol. 326.
to encounter with but Woods and Mountains after they had reigned Princes of
North Wales for the space of four hundred and five years. A goodly time, that
scarcely the greatest Monarchies in the World have withstood their fatal period
and dissolution, as Chronologers usually Alsted. Chr. Synch.
observe. Anni quingenti sunt fatalis Periodus Regnorum and rerum publicarum,
says Alsted.

But this little Monarchy of Wales, indiscernable in the vast Body of the four
great Empires, and yet withal shows the mutability of them, and all worldly
Powers: That Time will triumph in the Ruin of the strongest States and
Kingdoms, as is most excellently represented to us by Nebuchadnezzar's Image of
Gold, Silver, Iron and Brass, that mouldred away, though durable Metal,
because it stood upon feet of Clay: So unstable are all mortal things. And of
no longer duration (are the most high and mighty Powers under Heaven) than the
British Monarchy; which caused the Historian to complain, that the more he
meditated with himself of things done both in old and latter times, tanto magis
ludibria rerum mortalium cunctis in negotijs obversantur. So much the more
(says he) the uncertainties and Tacit. lib. 3.
mock Vanities of Fortune in all worldly Affairs came to his remembrance.

Notwithstanding those great alterations Wales, no longer a Kingdom of it self,
but annexed to the Crown of England, the Family of Peutre Heylyn, from whom the
said Grono-ap Heylyn descended in a direct Line, removed not their station for
all the Ages past, but continued their Seat until the year An. Dom. 1637. At
which time Mr. Rowland Heylyn, Alderman and Sheriff of London, and Cousin
German to Dr. Heylyn's Father, dying without Issuemale, the Seat was
transferred into another Family, Into which the Heiresses married. This Mr.
Rowland Heylyn was a man of singular Goodness and Piety, that before his Death,
caused the Welsh Arch-Bish. Life. p. 152.
or British Bible to be printed at his own charge in a portable Volume, for
the benefit of his Country men, which was before in a large Church Folio; also
the Practice of Piety in Welsh; a Book though common, not to be despised;
besides a Welsh Dictionary for the better understanding of that Language: All
which, certainly was a most pious Bellar. de verb. d. l. 2. c. 15. Populus non
capit fructum sed detrimentum.
work, notwithstanding their opinion to the contrary, who think that the Bible
in a vulgar Tongue, is not for Edification but Destruction. Yet God has been
pleased in all Ages, to stir up some devout men of public Spirits, as Sixtus
Senensis the Monk, confesses Six. Sen. Bib. l. 6.
that Christians may read the holy Bible (...) their own Edification and
Comfort, and not be kept hood-winked in blindness and heathenish ignorance. Not
to mention what other Nations has done, King Alfred caused both the Old and
New Testament to be published in the vulgar Tongue for the benefit of this
Land; and in the Reign of Richard the Second, the whole Scripture was set forth
in English, as Polyder Virgil Polyd. Virg. Hist. Ang^. 120.
testifies, that when the Parliament endeavored to suppress the same, John
Duke of Lancaster stood up in defense thereof, saying, We will not be the
refuse of all men, for other Nations have Gods Laws in their own Language, so
ought we. Therefore seeing such noble Precedents of godly Zeal, for the general
instruction of the People; it was a most excellent work of the good Alderman
Mr. Rowland Heylyn, to print those Welsh Bibles, which were before rare and
costly, but now grown common in every man's hand, and in his own Mothers Tongue.

As the Doctor was of honorable extraction mean and contemptible, but answered
the Quality of her Husband, being a Gentlewoman of an ancient Family, whose
Name was Eliz. Clampard, Daughter of Francis Clampard of Wrotham in Kent, and
of Mary Dodge his Wife descended in a direct Line from Peter Dodge of Stopworth
in Cheshire, unto whom King Edward the First gave the Seigniory or Lordship of
Paden hugh in the Barony of Coldingham, in the Realm of Scotland; as well for
his special Services that he did in the Seige of Barwick and Dunbar, as for his
valor showed in several Battles, Encontre son grand Enemy, and Rebelle Le
Baillol Roy d' Escose and Vassal D. H. Cosm. fol. 339.
d' Angle terre. as the words are in the Ibid. the Dr. says he has this
Charter in his custody:
original Charter of Arms given to the said Peter Dodge by Guyen King of Arms,
at the Kings command, dated April the 8th. in the 34(...). year of the said
King Edward the First. One of the Descendants from the said Peter Dodge was
Uncle to Dr. Heylyn's Mother, and gave the Manor of Lechlade in the County of
Gloucester, worth 1400 l. per An. to Robert Bathurst Esquire Uncle to the Doctor,
and Father to the Loyal Knight and Baronet Sir Edward Bathurst lately deceased.

The Doctor in his green and tender School at Burford (the Place of his
Nativity and Education) under the care of Mr. William North, then
Schoolmaster; by whose good Instructions and his own wonderful Ingenuity, he
grew up to that proficiency in Learning, that he was admired both by his Master
and Scholars; because his entrance into the Free School, was at the time of
Childhood, when he was but six years old; betwixt which time and the space of
four years after, he plied his Book so well, that he appeard more than an
ordinary Latinist, being Composer of several Exercises both in Prose and Verse,
particularly a Tragy-Comedy upon the Wars and Destruction of Troy, with other
exercises Historical, which foreshewed what an excellency he would after attain
unto in all kind of generous Learning.

Such early Blossoms are for the most blasted, or seldom bring forth fruit to
ripeness and perfection; that few Examples can be named of precocious Wits, as
have been long Lived, or come near to the years of Old Age, as the Doctor did;
excepting one famously known above others, Hermogenes the Rhetorician; of whom
it was said, (...). He was Suid. Hist.
an old Man when he was a Child, and a Child when he was an old Man: In his
Childhood he was often brought before Marcus Ant. the Roman Emperor, Suid.
who delighted to hear his Talk, for the natural Eloquence that flowed from
him: But though he lived long, his Wit and admired Parts soon decayed; and for
his long Life, says Rhodiginus C. Rhodig. ^ct. Antiq. l. 21. 16.
of him, ut unus ex multis he was one (as it were) of a thousand. Yet a
Reverend Father of the Christian Church the glory of his time, St. Augustine,
did far excel Hermogenes the Orator; for he tells us in his Confessions, that
in secunda pueritia, that is about the Age of twelve, Legisse and intellexisse
Logicos and Rhetoricos Aristotelis Libros, he read and understood the Books of
Aristotle's Logic and Rhetoric; by which S. August. Confess. l. 4.
Learning and Study of Divinity, well managed together, St. Augustine appeared
the only Champion in the Field for the Orthodox Faith, confounded the
Manichees, Donatists, and other Heretics; and finally he lived to a great old
Age, a Blessing which ordinarily accompanied the Primitive Bishops and holy
Fathers, and still is continued, as may be observed, to the worthy Prelates of
our Church: But to find many of prodigious Wits and Memories from Childhood,
and for such Persons to live unto extraordinary years, and keep up their wonted
Parts, most Vigorously after they are turned Sixty, which is the deep Autumn
of Man's Life; I believe Dr. Heylyn had the happy Fortune in Youth and Age above
many others, that his Virtues and excellent Abilities kept equal balance
together for all his Life, primus ad extremum similis sibi -- that as he began
happily, so he went on; like Isocrates his Master, who being always the same,
could say, Nihil habeo quod senectutem meam accusem. He had nothing Valor. Max.
l. 8. c. 13.
to accuse his old Age with.

After he was first diciplin'd under North, whom Death took from the School to
another World, he was committed to his Successor Mr. Davis, a right worthy Man
and painful Schoolmaster, who trained him up in all points of Learning
befitting a young Scholar for the University; where he was admitted at the
fourteenth year of his Age Commoner in Hart-hall, and put under the Tuition of
Mr. Joseph Hill an ancient Bachelor of Divinity, and formerly one of the
Fellows of Corpus Christi College, but then a Tutor in Hart-hall: After whom
Mr. Walter Newbery, a zealous Puritan in those days, undertook the Charge of
him, who little thought his Pupil would afterward prove so sharp an Enemy to
the Puritan-faction: But by the help of his two Tutors, who faithfully
discharged their Office in reading Logical Lectures to him, and other kind of
Learning; his own Industry also, and earnest desire to attain unto Academical
Sciences, setting him forward beyond his years and standing, he was encouraged
by his Tutor and good Friends (who saw his Parts were prodigious) to stand for
a Demy's Place in Magdalen College at the time of their Election: But he being
very young, and the Fellows already preingaged for another, he missed the first
time, as is usual in this Case; with which disappointment he was not at all
discouraged, but cheerfully followed the course of his Studies; and among other
Exercises for recreation sake, and to show his Wit and Fancy, he framed a Copy
of Verses in Latin, on occasion of a pleasant Journey he took with his two
Tutors to Woodstock, which Verses he presented to the President and Fellows of
Magdalen College, who at the next Election in the year 1615. unanimously chose
him Demi of the House, where soon after he was made Impositor of the Hall,
which Office (no small honor to him being then but fifteen years of Age) he
executed with that trust and diligence, that the Dean of the College continued
him longer in it than any of his Predecessors; for which he was so envyed by
his Fellow Demies (as that malignant passion is always the Concomitant of
honor) that they called him by the Name of perpetual Dictator. About the same
time, being very eager upon his juvenile Studies, he composed an English
Tragedy, called by him Spurius, that was so generally well liked by the
Society, that Dr. Langton the President, commanded it to be acted in his
Lodgings.

After those and many other Specimina Ingenii, fair Testimonies of his Wit and
Schollarship, he easily obtained his grace for the Degree of Bachelor of Arts
in the year 1617. Then according to the College Statutes and Custom, that
requires some Exercise to be performed by a junior Bachelor in the long
Vacation; he read several Lectures of Geography to which his Genius naturally
led him, and carried them on so pleasantly in a new Method not observed by
others, by joining History with Cosmography that made the Work very delightful;
For scarce any memorable Action done in any Nation, Country, or famous City in
the World, but he has recorded it, which was a wonderful Task for a Youth of
his years; that all his Auditors, grave Fellows as well as others, was struck
into deep admiration of his profound Learning and Wisdom; that forthwith the
whole Society, nemine contradicente, admitted him Probationer Fellow in the
Place of Mr. Love, and that before such time he had fully finished the reading
of his Lectures: And for a further encouragement of him in his Studies, being
also a good Philosopher as well as Geographer, the College chose him Moderator
of the Senior Form in the Hall, that brought both credit to his Name and profit
to his Purse; for which in Gratitude to them, as he ever showed a grateful mind
to his Patrons and Benefactors, he presently writ a Latin Comedy, called by him
Theomachia, which he finished and transcribed in a Fortnights time, and
dedicated the same to the Fellows, who were so highly pleased with his
Ingenuity and Pains, that on July the 19th. 1619. he wa^ admitted Fellow in
that honorable Society according to the usual Form. In verum and perpetuum
Socium. After which followed a new honor upon him, as all Degrees in the
University are honorable, and but the just reward of Learned Men; that in the
year 1620. the University conferred on him the Degree of Master of Arts; and
surely a young Master he was, that not one of twenty is capable of this Degree
at his years, but more remarkable it was at that time, because he was one of
those Masters that first sat with their Caps on, in the Convocation-house, by
Order of the Earl of Pembroke then Chancellor of the University, who signified
his Lordships Pleasure by his especial Letters: That from that time forward,
the Masters of Arts, who before sat bare, should wear their Caps in all
Congregations and Convocations; which has been ever since observed.

He now a Master of Arts in the University, audacity into them, to show their
Parts, especially when they have gained by their Learning and Merits both
Preferment and Honor: He was persuaded by several Friends, to publish those
Geographical Lectures which he read in the long Vacation, that others might
taste the sweetness and pleasure of those Studies, besides his own Fellow
Collegians: Accordingly having got his Fathers consent for the printing of
them, and the perusal and approbation of his Book by some Learned Men, at the
Age of twenty and one years, the young Writer comes forth November the 7th.
Anno Dom. 1621. Whose ingenious Writings found such general Acceptance, manibus
omnium teruntur, that scarce any Scholars Study was without them; and to this
day, since their enlargement by several Editions, are as commonly cited upon
occasion, as any Authentic Author that is extant. The First Copy was presented
to his Royal Highness King Charles the First, then Prince of Wales, unto whom
the young Author dedicated his Work, and by the young Prince, was as graciously
received, being brought into his Highness presence by Sir Robert Carr,
afterward Earl of Ancram, but then one of the Gentlemen of the Princes
Bedchamber.

Having so fortunate a Beginning to Geography, and proceeded to higher Studies,
that might capacitate him for greater Services hereafter, both in Church and
State: In order thereto, first piously he took along with him the Episcopal
Blessing of Confirmation, by the Hands of Bishop Lake, in the Parish Church of
Wells, September the 15th. Anno Dom. 1623. the fruits of whose Fatherly
Benediction, devout Prayers, with imposition of Hands, did manifestly appear in
this true Son of the Church; Whom the Almighty did bless, and daily increase in
him the manifold gift of Grace, bestowed on him the Spirit of Wisdom and
Understanding, etc. And certainly such singular benefits does accompany this
Apostolical Institution, mentioned in Scripture constantly used in the
Primitive Church, that the neglect or contempt thereof from the hands of Gods
Bishops, no doubt deprives us of many good Blessings which we should otherwise
receive from the hands of God. Being thus confirmed by the Bishop, according to
the Order of the Church of England; he afterward applied himself to the Study
of Divinity, St. Basil. Hex^m.
which St. Basil calls (...), the Theory or Contemplation of the Great God,
or his Being, so far as he has revealed himself to us in the Book of Nature
and Scripture. This Knowledge excels all other, and without it who knows
not the saying, Omnem Scientiam magis obesse quam prodesse, si desit scientia
optimi, that all other Knowledge does us more hurt than good, if this be
wanting: Notwithstanding he met with some discouragements to take upon himself
the Profession of a Divine, for what reasons it is hard for me to conjecture;
but its certain at first he fonnd some reluctance within himself, whether for
the difficulties that usually attend this deep mysterious Science, to natural
reason incomprehensible, because containing many. matters of Faith, which we
ought to bel^eve and not to question, though now Divinity is the common mystery
of Mechanics, to whom it seems more easy than their manual Trades and
Occupations; or whether because it drew him off from his former delightful
Studies, more probably (I believe) his fears and distrusts of himself were very
great to engage in so high a Calling and Profession, and run the hazards of it,
because the like Examples are very frequent, both in Antiquity and modern
History; however so timorous he was upon this account, lest he should rush too
suddenly into the Ministry, although his abilities at that time transcended
many of elder years, that he exhibited a Certificate of his Age to the
President of the College, and thereby procured a Dispensation, notwithstanding
any local Statutes to the contrary, that he might not be compelled to enter
into holy Orders till he was twenty four years old; at which time still his
fears did continue, or at least his modesty and self-denial wrought some
unwillingness in him, till at last he was overcome by the Arguments and
powerful Persuasions of his Learned Friend Mr. Buckner; after whose excellent
Discourses with him, he followed his Studies in Divinity more closely than
ever, having once tasted the sweetness of them; nothing can ravish the Soul
more with pleasure unto an Ecstasy, than Divine Contemplation of God, and the
Mysteries in his holy Word, which the Angels themselves prye into, and for
which reason they love to be present in Christian Assemblies when the Gospel is
preached, as the Apostle intimates to us: That by continual study and
meditation, and giving himself wholly to read Theological Books, he found in
himself an earnest desire to enter into the holy Orders of Deacon and Priest,
which he had conferred upon him at distinct times in St. Aldates Church at
Oxon, by the Reverend Father in God Bishop Howson: At the time when he was
ordained Priest, he preached the Ordination Sermon upon the words of our
Savior to St. Peter, Luke 22. 32. And when thou art converted, strengthen thy
Brethren. An apposite Text upon so solemn Occasion. Being thus ordained to his
great satisfaction and contentment; the method which he resolved to follow in
the Course of his Studies was quite contrary to the common Rode of young
Students; for he did not spend his time in poring upon Compendiums and little
Systems of Divinity, whereby many young Priests ^hink they are made absolute
Divines, when perhaps a Gentleman of the ^ish does oftentimes gravel them in an
ordinary Argument; But he fell upon the main Body of Divinity, by studying
Fathers, Councils, Ecclesiastical Histories, and Schoolmen, the way which King
James commended to all younger Students for confirming them in the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church of England, that is most agreeable to the Doctrine of
the Primitive Church.

By this time, his Book of Geography pleasantness of its reading, was reprinted
and enlarged in a second Edition, and presented again to his Highness the
Prince of Wales, who not only graciously accepted the Book, but was pleased to
pass a singular Commendation upon the Author; But afterward the Book being
perused by his Royal Father King James, the second Solomon for Wisdom, and most
Learned Monarch in Christendom, the Book put into his Majesty's hand by Dr.
Young; then Dean of Winton, and Mr. Heylyn's dear Friend; the Kings peircing
Judgment quickly spyed out a fault, which was taken no notice of by others; as
God always endows Kings his Vicegerents with that extraordinary gift, (the
Spirit of discerning) above other Mortals, Sicut Angelus Dei est Dominus meus
Rex, (says the holy Scripture) as an Angel of God, so is my Lord the King, who
lighting upon a Line, that proved an unlucky Passage in the Author, who gave
Precedence to the French King, and called France the more famous Kingdom; with
which King James was so highly displeased, that he presently ordered the Lord
Keeper to call the Book in, but this being said in his Anger and Passion, no
further notice was taken of it: in the mean time Dr. Young took all care to
send Mr. Heylyn word of his Majesty's displeasure; the News of which was no
small sorrow to him, that he was now in danger to lose the Ovid. I. 2.
Kings Favor, Nil nisi peccatum manitestaque Eleg. 1.
culpa falenda est. Paenitet ingenij, judiciique mei -- that Mr. Heylyn could
have wished them words had been left out: Dr. Young advised him to repair to
Court, that by the young Prince's Patronage, he might pacify the Kings Anger,
but not knowing wheth^ the Prince himself might not be also offended, he
resided still in Oxford, and laid open his whole grief to the Lord Danvers,
desiring his Lordships Counsel and best advice, what Remedy he should seek for
Cure; according to the good Lord's Counsel, he sent up an Apology to Dr. Young,
which was an Explanation of his meaning upon the words in question, and then
under Condemnation: The Error was not to be imputed to the Author, but to the
Errata of the Printer, which is most ordinary in them to mistake one word for
another; and the grand mistake was, by printing is for was which put the whole
Sentence out of joint, and the Author into pain, if it had been of a higher
Crime than of a Monosylable, it had not been pardonable, for the intention of
the Author was very innocent. -- Quis me deceperit error?

Et culpam in facto, non scelus essemeo. The words of his Apology which he sent
up to Dr. Young for his Majesty's satisfaction, are these that follows.

That some Crimes are of a nature so injustifiable, that they are improved by
an Apology, yet considering the purpose he had in those places, which gave
offense to his sacred Majesty, he he was unwilling that his Innocence should be
condemned for want of an Advocate. The Burdens under which he suffered, was a
mistake rather than a Crime; and that mistake not his own, but the Printers:
For if (in the first Line of Page* 441.) was be read instead of is, the Sense
runs as he desired it: And this appears from the words immediately following,
for by them may be gathered the sense of this corrected reading: When Edward
the third quartered the Arms of France and England, he gave precedence to the
French. First, because France was the great and more famous Kingdom. 2. That
the French, etc. These reasons are to be referred to the time of that King by
whom the Arms were first quartered with the Arms of England, and who desired by
honor done unto their Arms, to gain upon the good Opinion of that Nation, for
the Crown and Love thereof he was then a Suitor: For at this time (besides it
may seem incongruous to use a Verb of the Present-Tense in a matter done so
long ago) that reason is not of the least force or consequence; the French
King having so long since forgot the Rights of England, and our late Princes
claiming nothing but the Title only. The Place and Passage so corrected, I hope
I may without detraction from the Glory of this Nation affirm, That France was
at that time the more famous Kingdom, our English Swords, for more than half
the time since the Norman Conquest, had been turned against our own Bosoms;
and the Wars we then made, except some fortunate Excursions of King Edward the
First in France, and King Richard in the Holy Land, in my Opinion were fuller
of Piety than of Honor; For what was our Kingdom under the Reigns of Edward
the Second, Henry the Third, John, Stephen, and Rufus, but a public Theater,
on which the Tragedies of Blood and civil Dissentions had been continually
acted: On the other side, the French had exercised their Arms with Credit and
Renown, both in Syria, Palestine, and Egypt, and had much added to the Glory of
their Name and Nation, by conquering the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicilia, and
driving the English themselves out of France, Guyen only excepted. If we look
higher, we shall find France to be the first Seat of the Western Empire, and
the forces of it to be known and felt by the Saracens in Spain, the Saxons in
Germany, and the Lombards in Italy: At which time the Valor of the English was
imprisoned in the same Seas with their Island. And therefore France was at that
time, when first the Arms were quartered, the more famous Kingdom. It Is true
indeed, that since the time of those victorious Princes, those duo fulmina
belli, Edward the Third and the Black Prince his Son, the Arms of England have
been exercised in most parts of Europe: Nor am I ignorant how high we stand
above France and all other Nations in true fame of our Atcheivements: France it
self diverse times over run, and once conquered: The House of B^rgundie upheld
from Ruin: The Hollanders supported: Spain awed: The Ocean commanded, are
sufficient Testimonies, that in pursuit of Fame and Honor, we had no Equals,
That I always was of this opinion, my Book speaks for me, (and indeed so
unworthy a Person needs no better Advocate) in which I have been no where
wanting to commit to Memory the honorable performances of my Country. The
great Annalist Baronius pretending only a true and sincere History of the
Church, yet tells the Pope in his Epistle Dedicatory, that he principally did
intend that Work, Pro Sacrarum Traditionum Antiquitate and Authoritate Romanae
Ecclesiae. The like may I say of my self, though not with like imputation of
imposture. I promised a Description of all the World, and have according to the
measure of my poor Ability, fully performed it; yet have I apprehended withal,
every modest occasion of enobling and extolling the Soldiers and Kings of
England. Concerning the other place at which his most sacred Majesty is
offended, viz. The precedence of France before England; besides that I do not
speak of England as it now stands augmented by the happy Addition of Scotland,
I had it from an Author, whom in my poverty of reading I conceived above all
Exception, Cambde^ Clarenceux, that general and accomplished Scholar, in the
fifth page of his Remains had so informed me; If there be Error in it, it is not
mine but my Authors. The Precedence which he there speaks of, is in general
Councils. And I do heartily wish it would please the Lord to give such a sudden
blessing to his Church, that I might live to see Mr. Cambden confuted by so
good an Argument as the sitting of a general Council. Thus Mr. Heylyn
apologized for himself, in his Letter written to the Dean of Winton, who showed
the whole Apology to the King, with which his Majesty was fully satisfied as to
the sincere intention and innocent meaning of Author; yet to avoid all further
scruples and misconstructions that might arise hereafter, Mr. Heylyn, by the advice of his good Friend, the wise and most worthy Dean, took order that whole
Clause which gave so much offense, should be left out of all his Books, It a
plerique ingenio sumus omnes, nostri nosmet paenitet, as once the Comedian said.

Having undergone such troubles about France, he was resolved upon a further
Adventure, to take a Voyage thither, with his faithful Friend Mr. Leuet of
Lincolns Inn, who afterward, poor Gentleman, through misfortune of the Times,
lived and dyed Prisoner in the Fleet. They both set out An. Dom. 1625. and
after their safe arrival in France, took a singular interview of the chief
Cities and most eminent Places in the Realm, of which Mr. Heylyn gives a more
accurate account, and description (though his stay was not there above five
Weeks) than Lassel the Priest does of his five years Voyage into Italy. And now
Mr. Heylyn was sufficiently convinced with his own Eyes which was the more
famous Kingdom, that after his return home, he composed a History of his
Travels into France, and being put into the Hands of several Friends, was at
first printed by a false Copy, full of gross Errors and insufferable mistakes,
that he caused his own true Copy to be printed, one of the most delightful
Histories of that nature that has been ever heretofore published; wherein is
set out to the Life, the Monsieurs and the Madams, the Nobility and the
Pezantry, the Court and Country; their ridiculous Customs, fantastical Gate,
Apparel and Fashions, foolish common Talk, so given to levity, that without
singing and dancing they cannot walk the open Streets; in the Church serious
and superstitious, the better sort horridly Atheistical.

Besides all he has written in that ingenious Book, I think he has in short
most excellently deciphered them in his Cosmography, where he makes a second
review of their pretty Qualities and Conditions; as thus, if the Reader has a
mind to read them. They are very Cosmog. fol. 176, 177. printed A. D. 1655.
quick witted, of a sudden and nimble apprehension, but withal rash and
hair-brained, precipitate in all their actions, as well military as civil,
falling on like a clap of Thunder, and presently going off in Smoke, full of
Lawsuits and Contentions, that their Lawyers never want work; so litigious,
that there are more Lawsuits tried among them in seven years, than have been
in England from the Conquest: Their Women witty, but Apish, sluttish, wanton,
and incontinent; generally at the first fight as familiar with you, as if they
had known you from the Cradle, and are so full of Chat and Tattle, even with
those they know not, as if they were resolved sooner to want Breath than Words,
and never to be silent till in the Grave: Dancing such a sport to which both
Men and Women are so generally affected, that neither Age nor Sickness, no nor
Poverty it self, can make them keep their Heels still when they hear the
Music, such as can hardly walk abroad without Crutches, or go as if they were
troubled all day with a Sciatica, and perchance have their Rags hang so loose
about them, that one would think a swift Galliard might shake them into their
Nakedness, will to the dancing Green howsoever, and be there as eager at the
sport, as if they had left their several infirmities and wants behind them:
Their Language is very much expressed by their Action, for the Head and
Shoulders must move as significantly when they speak, as their Lips and Tongue,
and he that hops to speak with a grace, must have in him somewhat of the
Mimick: They are naturally disposed for Courtship, as makes all the People
complemental, that the poorest Cobbler in the Parish has his Court cringes, and
his Eau beniste de Cour, his Court-holy water (as they call it) as perfectly as
the best GentlemanHuisher of Paris. They wear their Hair long, goes thin and
open to the very Shirt, as if there were continual Summer; in their Gate, walk
fast, as if pursued on an Arrest. Their humor is much of scoffing, yea even in
matters of Religion as appears in the story of a Gentleman that lay sick on
his Bed, who seeing the Host brought unto him by a Lubberly Priest, said that
Christ came to him, as he entered into Jerusalem, Riding upon an Ass. I cannot
forget another of the like kind, a Gentleman lying sick upon his Death Bed, who
when the Priest had persuaded him, that the Sacrament of the Altar, was the
very Body and Blood of Christ, refused to eat thereof, because it was Friday.
And so far the good Geographer, who has pleasantly and truly described them.

But now we must come to him as a Cosmographer, when he was called unto the
Divinity School to dispute in his turn, according to the Statutes of the
University, on April 18th. A. D. 1627. He comes up as opponent, and on Tuesday
the 24th. following he answered pro forma, upon these two Questions.

An Ecclesia unquam fuerit invisibilis? An Ecclesia possit errare?
Both which he determined in the Negative. Upon occasional discourse with him
at Abington, he was pleased once to show me his supposition which I read over
in his House at Lacyes Court; but I had not then either the leisure or good
luck to Transcribe a Copy of it, which would have been worth my pains, and more
worthy of the Press, to the great satisfaction of others; for my part, I can
truly say, that I never read any thing with more pleasure, and heart delight,
for good Latin, Reason, and History, which that exercise was full of; but since
both it, and many other choice Papers in his Study, through the carelessness of
those, to whose Custody they were committed, I suppose, are utterly lost and
gone, ad blattarum and tinearum epulas.

In stating of the first Question that Appendix to the Advice on Mr. Sa. Hist.
himself; I fell upon a different way from that of Doctor Prideaux, the
Professor, in his Lecture De Visibilitate and other ^ractates of and about that
time, in which the Visibility of the Protestant Church (and consequently of the
Renowned Church of England) was no otherwise proved, than by looking for it in
the scattered Conventicles of the Bere^garians in Italy, the Waldenses in
France, the Wickliffs, in England, and the Hussites in Bohemia, which manner of
proceeding not being liked by the Respondent, as that which utterly
discontinued that Succession of the Hiearchy which the Church of England claims
from the very Apostles and their immediate Successors: He rather chose to find
out a continual visible Church in Asia, Ethiopia, Greece, Italy, yea Rome it
self, as also in all the Western Provinces than subject to the power of the
Roman Bishop, when he was the Chief Patriarch. Which Mr. Heylyn from his great
knowledge, and more than ordinary abilities in History, strenuously asserted
and proved, to which the Professor could make but weak replies (as I have heard
from some knowing persons who were present at that Disputation) because he was
drawn out of his ordinay bias from Scholastical disputation to Foreign
Histories, in which encounter, Mr. Heylyn was the invincible Ajax -- Nec
quisquam Ajacem superare possit nisi Ajax. But chiefly the quarrel did arise
for two words in Mr. Heylyns Hipothesis, after he had proved the Church of
England received no Succession of Doctrine or Government from the Berengarians,
Wickliffs, etc. Who held many Hetordoxes in Religion, as different from the
established Doctrine of our Church, as any points that was maintained at that
time in the Church of Rome; that the writers of that Church, Bellarmine
himself, has stood up, as cordially in maintenance of some fundamental points
of the Christian Faith against Anti-Trinitarians, Anabaptists, and other
Heretics of these last ages, as any one Divine, and other learned Men of the
Protestant Churches, which point Mr. Heylyn closed up with these words. Vtinam
quod ipse de Calvino sic semper errasset nobilissimus Cardinalis. At which
words the Reverend Doctor was so impatient in his Chair, that he fell upon the
Respondent in most vile terms, calling him Papicola Bellarminianus,
Pontificius, etc. To draw the hatred of the University upon him, according to
the saying, Fortiter calumniare and aliquid adhaerebit, grievously complaining
to the younger sort of his Auditors, unto whom he made his chiefest addresses,
of the unprofitable pains he took among them, if Bellarmine, whom he had
labored to confute for so many years should be honored with the Title of
Nobilissimus.

Notwithstanding the Respondent acquitted Bellarmine, then for his deserts in
learning, and integrity in that particular point before spoken of, which any
generous Man would give to his Learned Antogonist. For many Lutherans and
Calvinists, I may say ( pa^e tanti viri) so angry at a word, have not grudged,
much less judged it any Crime to praise the Cardinals Learning. Doctrinam and
nos in ipso Commendamus Joh. And. Quensted. in dial. de pat. Illust. vir.
says a rigid Lutheran, and St. Paul himself would not stick to call him who
was an inveterate Enemy of the Christians, most noble Festus. And though
Cardinals we know were originally but Parish Priests, by Pride and Usurpation
have made them^lves Compeers to Kings; that which is unjustly once obtained, by
time grows common and familiar, that none will refuse to give such their
ordinary* Titles of Honor, although they com^ by indirect means, and not by
merit to them. Bellarmine also was of no poor and base extraction, but better
than his Fellows; for which reason he was created Cardinal by Clement the
Eight. Hunc eligimus (says he) quia est nepos optimi and sanctissimi Quensted.
page 327.
Po^tificis, because he was the Nephew of Marcellus the Second, who said, that
he could not see how any could be saved who sat in the Pontifical Chair: Non
video quomodo qui locum hunc altissimum Onuph in vit. Marc.
tenent salvari possunt.

After those heats of disputation were Heylyn took a Journey to London, where he
waited on Bishop L^d, then Bishop of Bath and Wells, who had heard of all the
passages that had happened at Oxford, of which Mr. Heylyn gave a more perfect
account to his Lordship, who was pleased to read over the Supposition, at which
Dr. Prideaux was so highly offended; but the good Bishop on the other side
commended it, and encouraged Mr. Heylyn in his Studies; saying that he himself
had in his younger days, maintained the same Positions in a disputation, in
St. John's College, that Mr. Heylyns Hypothesis could not be overthrown in a
fair way, exhorting him to continue in that moderate course: And that as God A.
B. Lauds. Life page 166.
had given him more than ordinary gifts so he would pray to God, that he and
others might employ them in such a way and manner as might make up the breaches
in the Walls of Christendom. Mr. Heylyn to clear himself from the suspicion of
Popery, which Dr. Prideaux had most unjustly branded him with, in November next
following, Preached before the King, on those words, Joh. 4. ver. 20. Our
Fathers Worshipped on this Mountain, etc. In which Sermon he declared himself
with such smart zeal, and with as quick Judgment against several errors and
corruptions in the Church of Rome, that his Sermon was otherwise resented by
the King and Court, then his supposition by the Kings Professor at Oxon.

And when that clamor was revived again by his Enemies, that he had some
inclinations to the Romish Religion, he gave such satisfaction in his third and
fourth Sermon Preached at White Hall, in the year 1638. Upon the Parable of the
Tares, on these words, Matthew. 13. verse. 26. Tunc apparuerunt Zizania. Then
appeared the Tares also, that some of the Court did not stick to say that he
had done more toward the Subversion of Popery in those two Sermons, than Dr.
Prideaux had done in all the Sermons which he had ever Preached in his Life.
For that Doctor was a better disputant than a Preacher, and to give him his
due, a right Learned*Man in his place of Regius Professor, yet withal so
Dogmatical in his own points, that he would not abide to be touched, much less
contradicted by Mr. Heylyn -- Non aliam ob causam, nisi quod Virtus in vtroque,
summa fuit -- More especially being a Great Man, at that time very popular in
the University, profoundly admired by the Junior Masters, and some of the
Seniors inclined to Puritanism, his own College then observed to be ( Communis
pestis Adolescentum) the Common Nursery of West Country Men in Puritan
principles, so that Mr. Heylyn could expect no favor nor fair dealing in the
way of his disputation, when it ran contrary to the Professors humor.

After these Academical contests, Obs and Sols in Scholastical disputations,
which was ever opposite to his Genius, and for this purpose being unwilling to
be always Cloystred up within the Walls of a College, where he must be tied
to such Exercises; besides a Man of an Aerie and active Spirit, (though
studious and contemplative,) would not be perpetually devoted to a Melancholy
recluse Life; also emulation and envy, the two inseparable evils that accompany
Learned Men in the same Society, has frequently stirred up animosities and
factions among them. That I have known some ingenious persons, for this reason,
have been wearied out of a Collegiat Life; resolved therefore he was to Marry,
and alter the condition of his Life, which he thought would prove more
agreeable to the content and satisfactiof Tacit. His^ lib. 4.
his mind. Neque aliud probis quam ex Matrimonio solatium esse, says the good
Author, because Marriage is the only comfort of minds honestly given;
accordingly a fair Fortune was offered to him, a Wife with a thousand pounds
Portion, and a Gentlewoman of a very Ancient Family, and of as excellent
Education, Mrs. Letitia High-Gate, third Daughter of Thomas High-Gate of Heyes
Esquire one of his Majesty's Justices of Peace for the County of Middlesex, (who in
his younger days, whilst his Elder Brother was alive, had been Provost Marshal
General of the Army under the Earl of Essex at the action of Cales) and of
Margery Skipwith his Wife, one of the Daughters of that Ancient Family of the
Skipwiths in the County of Leicester, of which Family still there is a Worthy
person living, Sir Thomas Skipwith Knight, a Learned Sergeant in the Law: Which
said Thomas High-Gate the Father beforementioned, was second Son of that Thomas
High-Gate, who was field Marshal General of the English Forces, before St.
Quintine under the Command of the Earl of Pembrook, Anno Dom. 1557. And of
Elizabeth Stoner his Wife a Daughter of the ancient Family of the Stoners in
the County of Oxon.

To this young Gentlewoman, Mrs. Letitia High-gate aforesaid, Mr. Heylyn was no
stranger, for his Elder Brother Mr. Edward Heylyn had married some years before
her eldest Sister. His Seat was at Minster-Lovel in Oxfordshire, where his Son
(to whom Dr. Heylyn was Uncle) now lives, viz. Hen. Heylyn Esquire an ancient
Colonel, and an excellent Commander in the Army of King Charles the First, and
a most accomplished Gentleman in all respects to the honor of his Family.
Another of the Sisters of* Mrs. Letitia High-gate, married Robert Tirwhit Esquire
one of the ancient Family of the Tirwhits in the County of Lincoln, Master of
the Buck-hounds in the Reign of King Charles the First, a Place of honor and
of great Revenue: Finally to the honor of that Family Sir Henry Bard of Stanes
Knight, who afterward was created Viscount Lord Bellamount, did marry the
Daughter of Sir William Gardener, whose Lady and Mrs. Letitia High-gate were
Sisters Children, that unfortunate Lord, (who is mentioned in the Marquess of
Worcesters Apothegmes) for a brave Commander and Governor of Camden House in
the time of War, did attend his sacred Majesty all the time of his Exile until
the Treaty at Breda, when he was sent (as I have heard) on some Embassage into
the Eastern Countries, where traveling in Arabia deserta, for want of a
skilful Guide, was swallowed up in the Gulf of Sands. These were the Relations,
and many others of Quality (which I forbear to mention) of Mrs. Letitia
High-gate. And whereas the late Writer disparages the young Gentlewoman, that
her Portion was never paid; I am sure he has done her that Wrong which he can
never recompense, for her Elder Brother did both pay her and the other Sisters
Portions, who were all married to Persons of Quality; himself had an Estate
left him by his Father to the value of 800l. per Annum. he married an Heiress,
whose fortune added to his Estate, on which they lived nobly for many years,
before he fell into losses and misfortunes, caused by his own extravigant
Pleasures, and chiefly of Gaming at Dice and Cards. Quem dam^osa Venus, quem
Praeceps alea nudat. To the said Letitia High-gate, Mr. Heylyn was an earnest
Suitor, For indeed he could not make a better Choice, for the excellency of her
Person, Wit and Friends, all concentring together for his more happy
Contentment, she being also a discreet, Religious young Lady, which is a
Blessing to a Clergyman: his Courtship of her was not after a Romantic
manner, nor as a Gallant of the times, but like a Scholar and a Divine, as
appears by a Copy of Verses, written upon a rich gilded Bible, which he
presented to her; and the Verses are as follows.

Could this outside beholden be
To cost and cunning equally;
Or were it such as might suffice
The Luxury of curious Eyes;
Yet would I have my Dearest look,
Not on the Cover, but the Book.
If thou art merry, here are Aires;
If melancholy, here are Prayers;
If studious, here are those things writ,
Which may deserve thy ablest Wit;
If hungry, here is Food Divine;
If thirsty, Nectar, heavenly Wine.
Read then, but first thy self prepare
To read with zeal, and mark with care,
And when thou read'st What here is writ;
Let thy best Practice second it:
So twice each Precept read shall be.
First in the Book, and next in thee.
Much reading may thy Spirits wrong;
Refresh them therefore with a So^g;
And that thy Music Praise may merit,
Sing David's Psalms with David's Spirit:
That as thy Voice do pierce Men's Ears,
So shall thy Prayer and Vows the Sphaears.
Thus read, thus sing, and then to thee
The very Earth a Heaven shall be:
If thus thou read, thou shall find,
A private Heaven within thy mind;
And singing thus before thou dye,
Thou sing'st thy Part to those on High.
The Verses with the Bible were most Happiness betwixt them, that was now begun
so Religiously with the Book of God, which they both intended to make the Rule
of their Life and Love. Soon after the Solemnization of Marriage followed, by
the consent of Friends on both Parties; in the presence of whom and other
Witnesses, they were married by Dr. Allibone his faithful Friend, upon the
Festival day of St. Simon and St. Jude, in Magdalen College Chapel, where he
was Fellow, but now the Husband of a good Wife; of whom we may say as the Poet,

-- Felices
Quos irrupta tenet copula, nec malis
Divulsis querimoniis
Suprema citius solvet die.
Most happy is the Marriage-tye,
Where Love abides ^onstantly;
No sad Complaints or Cries, whilst Breath
Remains, but true Love unto Death.
At his Marriage with this virtuous the World with; for he had a Rent Charge of
Inheritance paid him out of the Manor of Lech-led in the County of Gloucester,
and the Adv ousan of Bradwel living near Lech-led, both which were left him by
his Father, as a Competent Portion for a younger Brother; but he wisely parted
with the Advousan, resolving not to bury his Parts in a Country Parish; where
if he had been once settled, possibly his Fortune might have proved like other
Men's, never to have been Master of more Lands or Goods than the Tithe or Glebe
of his own Parsonage: Therefore he took the first opportunity offered to him,
as a more probable means of his future preferment; and that was to attend the
right Honorable the Earl of Danby, to the Isles of Guernsie and Jersie: (of
which afterward he writ a Description) And for this goo^ Service he so much
endeared himself to his Lordship, who took great notice of his extraordinary
merits, that at their return back, the Noble Lord commended him, not only to
some Lords in Court, but presented him to ArchBishop Laud, then Bishop of
London, who had cast a singular Eye of favor upon him before, but now reminded
by the Earl, he presently got him admitted Chaplain to the King, knowing that
step. to Preferment would carry him on further, because the rise of the Clergy
is either from the Press or the Pulpit, in both which Mr. Heylyn was exercised.
The good Bishop instructed him with Counsel and wise Cautions, how to behave
himself in all Circumstances suitable to the Calling and Dignity of his Place;
telling him amongst other things, That the King did not love Silk nor Satin
Chaplains; which Mr. Heylyn ever observed both young and old, never ruffling in
Silks like some of his Brotherhood: but went always in a plain, grave, and
decent habit.

In humble gratitude to the Earl his acquaintance with Noblemen, among whom he
found such a general love and respect, that their Lordships would often call
him to a familiar Conversation with them; by which means Mr. Heylyn acquired
more than an ordinary Interest in Court: He could not study out a more
ingenious way to please and oblige all their Lordships, than the Vindication of
the most noble Order of the Garter, and that by writing his History of the
famous Saint and Soldier of Christ Jesus St. George of Cappadocia; which Work
he performed so admirably well, for History, Learning and Language; all these
not vulgar, but incomparable in their kind, that I would fain see the Fellow
that can second it; especialy considering that never any one before Mr. Heylyn
durst attempt the work, by reason of the many difficulties occurring in Story:
But what could re* sist the Authors Ingenuity and Industry, who had importunum
Ingenium, a restless working Head, and a Mind indefatagable for Study. Perrupit
Acheronta Herculeus labor -- Hor. So various and perplexed are the infinite
stories that go of this Saint, that one would think it were an impossible thing
to find out the Truth. Great care was taken by Anterus Bishop of Rome An. Dom.
*238. (who was a Martyr himself) to preserve the Memory of the Christian
Martyrs, by causing all their Acts and Passions to be written by public
Notaries, and afterward laid up in the Register of the Anterus Statuit primus
ut omnes res gestae Martyrum a notariis scriberentur, conscriptas recondi, in
aerario Ecclesiae mandavit Platin. tae vit. An. Greg. l. 7. 29.
Church, as Platina tells us; and we find in Gregory's Epistles, that in the
Ancient Martyrologies the time of their death, and place where they suffered is
described, but not the circumstance and manner of their deaths, whereby has
risen so many Fables, and incredible stories, especially of St. George which
the Monks of old has filled their Legends with: And on the other side, some
because they would be contradictory to them, do run into another Extreme of
things, not regarding whether they a^e true or false, they stigmatize St.
George with all the reproaches imaginable, making him not a Saint but a Devil,
at the best the bloody George of Alexandria, who was a Butcher rather than a
Bishop, that caused the slaughter of so many poor Christians for being Orthodox
and not Arrians, more kind and favorable are they, that condemn him for a
fiction a mere Chimera, and Dr. He^lyns Epist. before his History*
Non Entity, and will allow him no place (as the Historian says) on Earth, in
heaven, nor hell it self.

From all which slanderous Accusations Superstitions and Forgeries of the
other; Mr. Heylyn has redeemed, St. Georges Honor and Reputation proving by
undeniable Authorities, that St. George was a blessed and glorious Martyr for
Christ, so believed and owned in all Christian Nations, a Canonized Saint
through Christendom, the Patron both of our English Nation anciently deemed,
and of the most Honorable Order of Knighthood in the World. The History was at
first presented to his Majesty by the Author, and afterward to the Knights of
the Noble Order, by his Majesty it was most graciously accepted, and by the
Nobility highly praised. Notwithstanding Dr. Hackwel, the intimate friend of
Dr. Prideaux for whose sake to revenge the old quarrel, appeared against the
Author, and Append. to the Histo.* of K. Chapter
treated him neither with that ingenuity which became a Scholar, nor that
Charity, as becomes a Christian. The King hearing of Dr. Hackwels sharp reply
to this History of St. George, sent for Mr Heylyn, Commanding him to consider
the Arguments of his Adversary, and for this purpose to go to Windsor, and
there search into the Records of the Order. But there was little need for that,
because all Dr. Hackwels Arguments and Accusations were Idem per Idem, the very
same repeated over, which Mr. Pryn had before laid down in his Book called
Histriomastix, which occasioned a second Edition of Mr. Heylyns History,
wherein he answered the Arguments of both his Antagonists, who never troubled
him more upon that point, and Dr. Hackwell for his part, in the next Edition of
his book about the decay of Nature made an ingenious retraction of the passages
relating to St. George. Which blessed Saint and Martyr, Mr. Heylyn the more
zealously defended with his pen, not only for the reasons before mentioned, but
from a particular obligation, wherewith he thought himself bound above others
to prosecute the History. Because several Churches being Dedicated to the
Honor of God by St. Georges Name, perticularly St. Georges Church at Burford,
Hist. of St. George cap. 8. par. 2.
where it pleased God ` (says he) `to give me first my natural being and `and
afterward my Education, in which `regard I hold my self bound in a manner to
vindicate St. George his Honor where his memory was anciently precious, and
the only Church in it Dedicated by his Name. Finally the memory of this Saint
shines in our Calender, prefixed before the public Liturgy of the Church of
England, where he is specially honored with the name of Saint, as is not any
of the rest excepting those which saw our Savior in the Flesh.

Let me finally add what the Author of the Present State of England, in Honor
of St. George has written, The greatest Angl. No. tit. cap. 19.
Monarchs (says he) of Christendom, have been enrolled, and have taken it for
an honor to be of this Order: a Saint so univers^y Received in all parts of
Christendom, so generally attested by the Ecclesiastical Writers of all Ages
from the time of his Martyrdom to this day, that no one Saint in all the
Calendar (except those attested by Scripture) is better vindicated.

The publishing of this History met Bridges, out of a real respect and Love to
the Authors Learning, presented him to the Parsonage of Me^sie Hampton in
Gloucestershire, to which if things had happened successfully, Mr. Heylyn had
then been Successor to the Reverend Sebastine, D. D. Rector of that Living, and
Margaret Professor in the University of Oxon. But contrary to his Patrons and
his own expectation it proved a Living of most litigious Title, from whence
followed a chargeable suit in Law, occasioned by Bishop Goodman, the worst of
all his Predecessors, that sat in the Sea of Gloucester, who outwardly
pretended great kindness to Mr. Heylyn, for his Learning sake, but like the Fox
in the Fable, (when he praised the Crows singing,) to get the meat out of his
mouth, for after he had persuaded Mr. Heylyn to leave his presentation in his
hands, and enter a Caveat in his Court, and promising, that he would grant no
Institution to any person till the Title was cleared, his Lordship immediately
after gave Institution to another, (who was his friend) one Mr. Jackson, who
was presented by Corpus Christi College in Oxon, that pretended the right of
Patronage and presentation to that Parsonage. And no wonder Mr. Heylyn found
such base dealing, when this Spiritual Father so prevaricated with his Mother
the Church of England, from which he Apostatized most shamefully. No doubt he
was a Jesuit in voto, or had a Pope in his Belly before he crept into the
Bishopric, His Lordships Hypocrisy was detected in a Sermon afterward
Preached, for which he was not only questioned, but sentenced to a Recantation
before the King. But much more scandal he gave at the time of his Death, a
scandal so unseasonably and untimely (says Dr. Heylyn) as if the Devil himself
had watched an Observator reseued p. 222.
opportunity to despite this Church. Because some have gladly cherished this
occasion to draw the rest of our Prelates into a General suspicion, yet
Christian Charity should instruct them not to think evil of all for the fault
of one, or prejudge any one Man much less the whole Body of the Clergy for the
fault of another. It rather should be wondered at by all moderate and discreet
Men, that notwithstanding so many provocations of want and, scorn, which have
of late been put upon them, there should be found but one of that sacred order
to fall off to Popery, though to say truth, it was not in this Bishop a late
falling off, but a pursuance rather of some further inclinations, which he had
that way, that being thought to be the reasons why he refused Subscription to
the Canons in Convocation.

Seldom misfortunes go alone, but one Prologue to another; though in conclusion
of all, the Scene may end with a pleasant Epilogue: And fo it fared with Mr.
Heylyn, who met with a second disappointment by the hand of Fortune, he being
yet neither Parson, Vicar, nor Curate, but one of his Majesty's Chaplains in
ordinary; he was now presented to another Living, of which he missed his aim,
but thereby was fortunate in his very misfortune. For having attended the King,
and preaching in his course at White Hall, his Majesty was so well pleased with
his Sermon, that within a few days after Mr. Heylyn was presented by the King
to the Rectory of Hemingford in the County of Huntington: Soon after he applied
himself to the Bishop of Lincoln for Institution, which was not only denied
him, but the Bishop, more boldly than did befit his Lordship, disputed his own
Title against his Sovereign, and fell upon Mr. Heylyn with most foul
opprobrious Language, because he presumed to defend the Kings right against his
Lordship, which he proved by the Instruments of Conveyance made from the other
Party; at which the Bishop was the more highly offended with him, that such a
young Divine should have so great knowledge of the Law, and especially to argue
the Case with his Lordship: But this was not the main business, Latet Anguis in
herba, there was a Snake in the Garden; for his Lordship had a subtle design
under disguise, or otherwise he would have easily waved his right of
presentation, pro hac vice, to pleasure the King in the preferment of his
Chaplain, or at least preserving his own right, bestowed the Living upon Mr.
Heylyn; But then here lies the matter, his Lordship had been crossed in his
wonted method, that is, to give with one hand and take away with the other,
which he could not for shame do with a Kings Chaplain; For when he bestowed a
Living upon any Person, as he had many in his Gift, being both Lord Bishop and
Lord Keeper, he would tie the Incumbent to pay an annual pension out of it, to
be disposed to such charitable and pious uses as he thought fit; so that the
stream of his Charity flowed out of other men's Purses, and not his own; at the
best he robbed Peter to pay Paul, which the Incumbents felt by dear Experience,
whom he kept at a low pittance, that for the most part they lived but poorly,
for the heavy Taxations laid upon them. By this means he had more Pen^ers* than
all the Noble men and Bishops in the Land together: And though he made no
particular benefit to himself out of those Livings, then his Name cried up for
a noble Benefactor, in all other things to fill his own Coffer, he was so
covetous and extremely tenacious, that he would never let go what once he had
laid hold on; for at the same time, he was both Bishop, Dean, Lord Keeper,
Parson of Walgrove, and held the poor Prebendary of Asgarby, in which last I
have the honor to succeed his Lordship.

The King hearing the News of Mr. Heylyn's rough Entertainment at Bugden, how
his Royal Presentation was slighted, and his Chaplain with ill words abused;
was not a little offended with the Bishop, on whom he had heaped so many
Dignities one upon another both in Church and State, I will not say
undeservedly, if his Lordships Loyalty and Integrity had been answerable to his
other great Abilities. But his Majesty was pleased for the comfort of his poor
Chaplain so disapointed and badly treated by the Bishop, to send him this
gracious Message by the Attorney general Mr. Noy: (not usual with Kings to
private Persons) That he was sorry he had put him to so much charge and trouble
at Bugden; but it should not be long before he would be out of his Debt: Nor
long it was, for within a Week after a Prebendship in the collegiate Church of
Westminster (where the Bishop of Lincoln was Dean) fell void, by the Death of
Mr. Darrel, which the King bestowed upon Mr. Heylyn, and with it sent a most
gracious message by Mr. Noy again: That he bestowed that Prebendary on him to
bear the charges of his last Journey, but he was still in his Debt for the
Living.

So that he is now entered into one of accommodations and pleasures, which a
Scholars heart can wish; a learned Society; a well furnished Library; a
magnificent Church, that has an excellent Quire in it for a Chorus of heavenly
Voices; the one enough to stir up the coldest heart to Devotion, and the other
to the veneration of Antiquity, where so many ancient Monuments of Kings and
Queens in Henry 7. Chapel have their Sepulture: The most accurate pile of
building in Europe, by some called the wonder of the World; near which the
Courts of Judicature, the High Court of Parliament, and not far from thence,
his Majesty's Pallace-royal at White Hall; that if one would converse with all
sorts of famous Men, Divines, Lawyers, Statesmen, and other Persons of
Quality, he could not find out a Place more suitable to the hearts desire;
besides situated healthfully upon a firm gravelly Foundation, and pleasantly on
the River Thames, about whose Banks may be seen along that River for many
Miles, most princely Buildings, stately Palaces, fair Towers and Fields, as an
old German Poet describes, whose Verses are thus translated by the Doctor
himself in his Cosmography.

Tot campos, silvas, tot regia tecta, tot hortos Cosmog. fol. 295.

Artifici excultos dextra, tot vidimus arces
Ut nunc Ausonio Thamesis cum Tibride certet.
He saw so many Woods, and princely Bowers
Sweet Fields, brave Palaces, and stately Towers:
So many Gardens dressed with curious Art,
That Thames with Tyber, strives to bear a Part.
Therefore Mr. Heylyn was happily Chaerea did, Ecquis me vivit hodie
fortunatior? cui tam subito tot congruerint commoda? Or rather in the Scripture
words, The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places, yea, I have a goodly
Heritage. for certainly he could not be seated in a better manner, all those
delightful conveniences considered; and yet to add more pleasure to them, he
spared no cost to beautify and enlarge his Prebends house, in the mean time
his Wife lived in the Country with his Brother Mr. Edward Heylyn at Minster
Lovel in Oxfordshire, and sometimes with his Uncle Raynton at Shilton in
Barkshire, a man of a good Estate, who was afterward High Sheriff of the same
County.

So soon as he was settled in his Prebends attendances in White Hall, the right
Honorable Lord Falkland was pleased first to honor him with a Visit, and
brought along with him a Miles gloriosus, one Mr. Nelson, an old Sea-Captain,
with whom his Lordship seemed to be mightily delighted, for his new way of
Discovery to find out the Longitude of the Sea, with which the Captain had
troubled all the Mathematicians about Town, who generally dissented from his
Opinion, that at last by his Majesty's Order the decision of this Sea-question
was referred to Mr. Heylyn, as a Person thought fit to determine it; but he
could neither satisfy the Captain, nor the Lord with any further answer at
present, than That his Majesty was mistaken in him, for his skill and knowledge
did lie more in the historical than philosophical part of Geography: At which
the Lord Falkland seemed to be much displeased, thinking that he had spoken
thus, either out of slight to his old Captain, or through some aversness in
himself to be engaged in the business; but Mr. Heylyn quickly satisfied his
Lordship to the contrary, that he intended to use all possible means by his own
study, and consult with others more learned than himself in this point, non
conamur tenues grandia and afterward give the King and his Lordship a full
account of the whole matter.

Several Letters passed betwixt his Lordship and Mr. Heylyn, but in one his
Lordship commended the honest old Captain to his judicious care and
consideration, telling him that in the credibility of that phenomenon his
Majesty's resolution would be much guided by his judgment; which he found would
be of special Authority with him; that he pressed the point oftener to him,
because he conceived it a Duty which he owed to the Truth it self, to have it
made manifest one way or other, that is either to be freed from the Captains
imposition and pretense, if upon Trial it appeared to be fallacious, or else to
be approved and declared for right and perfect, (if such it be) to the
silencing perpetually of all milicious Impugners thereof, that the World may be
deprived no longer of the participation and use of so public and common a
benefit.

After the receipt of his Lordships Heylyn, who was ever forward to promote any
probable Notion. in Learning, and as ready to obey his Lordships Commands, he
both studied the point himself, and conferred with the learned Mr. Oughtred,
who was a person most likely for his admired abilities in this kind of Learning
to give satisfaction; but his Judgment ran quite contrary to the Sea-Captain,
with whom he discoursed about his Hypothesis, and ^wed him his Error, of which
he gave a full account to Mr. Heylyn in a Letter as follows.

I asked him the Ground whereon he went, and told him the difficulties which
others found. His Ground ( he said) was by the Nodes of the Moons Circle,
because the Moon accompanied the Earth, having it the Center of her Orb. The
difficulties which others imagined, was the finding out the place of the Node
or upon the Superficies of the Earth. His Principle I determine to omit till
more leisure, for I had but one whole day to stay in London. The difficulty of
the place of I saw factible at Sea, and accordingly let him understand it. Now
being at London, I desired conference with him, and thus I proceeded. You
require for the Discovery of the Longitude, the distance of upon the Earth;
Well, imagine you were now at Sea in an unknown place, and that I gave you in
degrees of Longitude the distance of from that Place where you are; what, will
you conclude? He was entering into I know not what, by demands of, if this, and
if that: But I held him to the Question in the Hypothesis, telling him, he had
what he required. At last he answered; Why? methinks you have already done it
your self? You have the distance of in the degrees of Longitude of the from an
unknown place, and therefore the difference of the is also unknown, except in
that place only: But we require the distance from the other known place which
you promised to argue? At last he began to be sensible of his mistake, and I
advised him to desist from such undertakings; and being of so great an Age, to
labor the discovery of another Voyage, or rather only labor to attain to the
blessed end thereof, being already opened to us by our Savior. And this was
the end of our Communication, and will be I suppose of that business also. I
wonder how for these twelve years, wherein he has mused upon this Subject, and
has had conferrence with so mamy learned men, would receive no Answer: But it
seems they gave him too much liberty of digression; and he having a very ill
expression of his confused conceits, entangled himself more and more in
perplexities.

Thus at last the old Captain was weaned from his dear Opinion, which he had
doted upon for so many years; but to his further grief, and worthily to be
lamented by others, followed the Death of his Friend and learned Lord, who was
the honor of his time and degree. And had his Lordship but lived unto these
times of ours, since the Institution of the Royal Society, unto whom he had
commended the Hypothesis, their profound Learning and exquisite Knowledge, rare
Invention and Judgment, by which they have made so many wonderful Discoveries
of things, would have quickly satisfied his Lordships scrupulosity, which was
more to be regarded than the Captains Fancy: For this noble Society has made
particular Enquiries of Tides, Currents, Notit. Angl. Cap. 23.
and Depths of the Sea, since their first foundation, having a vast number of
Experiments, a new Instrument (says Dr. Sprat) to sound the Depth of the Sea
without a line. The Seas longitude Dr. Sprats Royal Soci.
is easy, once taken under their consideration.

Mr. Heylyn being released of this Heylyn's reach, and proper Element; he
thought it more useful and necessary, to study the Statutes of the Land, the
Laws and Customs of this Nation, Acts of Parliament, old Statutes and Records,
to compare them with the times and circumstances occurring in story, whereby he
might enable himself by this means to do better service both to Church and
State. And this was a most profitable, as well as delightful diversion from his
other studies. His Improvements appeared to be so great therein, that afterward
he utterly confounded the utter Barister and Scribler against the State, Mr.
William Pryn of Lincoln's Inn, who being called to question for his
Histrio-mastix, Mr. Heylyn was sent for to the Council Table, where his Majesty
commanded him to read over that seditious Book, and collect thence all such
passages, as were scandalous and dangerous to the King and State, and write
them down in such Logical Inferences as might naturally arise and follow upon
the Premises: All which Mr. Heylyn exactly performed, and delivered his Copy to
the Attorney General Mr. Noy, who presented the same to the King and Lords of
the Council, of whom it was observed that they urged not any thing against Mr.
Pryn upon his Trial, but what was contained in Mr. Heylyns Papers of
Collection, who took occasion at the same time, to publish a Book touching the
punishments due by Law, and in point of Practice against such notorious
Offenders, as Pryn, Bastwick, and Burton, the Triumviri of Sedition.

For this and other good services which Heylyn faithfully performed; his
Majesty was graciously pleased to requite him, as Caesar did those Servants who
best merited, he bestowed upon them Riches and Honors, says Sueton, Quanto
quis servitio promptior opibus and honoribus extollebantur. Therefore the
Parsonage of Houghton in the Bishopric of Durham, worth near 400 l. per Annum,
being made void by the Preferment of Dr. Lindsel to the Sea of Peterborough,
the King bestowed upon Mr. Heylyn, which afterward he exchanged with Dr.
Marshal, Chanter of the Church of Lincoln, for the Parsonage of Alresford in
Hampshire, that was about the same value; to which exchange Mr. Heylyn was
commanded by his Majesty, that he might live nearer the Court for readiness to
do his Majesty service. Neither was he envyed for this or his other
Preferments, because every one knew his merits was the only cause of his
promotion. For men of eminent Worth and Virtue, when they are advanced, says
my Lord Bacon, Their Fortune seems but due to them, for no Bacons Essa* cap.
9.
man envyeth the Payment of a Debt. That as his Majesty was pleased most
graciously to express upon his loss of the Living by the Bishop of Lincoln; so
according to his Royal Promise, he doubly repayed that Debt by a Living of
twice the value; into which he was no sooner instituted and inducted, but he
took care for the Service of God to be constantly performed, by reading the
Common Prayers in the Church every morning, which gave great satisfaction to
the Parish, being a populous Market Town; and for the Communion Table, where
the blessed Sacrament is consecrated, he ordered that it should be placed
according to ancient Custom, at the East end of the Chancel, and Railed about
decently to prevent base and profane usages; and when the Chancel wanted any
thing of Repairs, or the Church it self, both to be amended.

Having thus showed his care first for order, the next work followed, was to
make his own dwelling house a fit and convenient Habitation, that to the old
Building he added a new one, which was far more graceful; and made thereto a
Chapel next to the Diningroom, that was beautified and adorned with Silk
hangings about the Altar; in which Chapel, himself or his Curate read Morning
and Evening-praye^ to the Family, calling in his Laborers and Work-folks, for
he was seldom without them while he lived, saying, that he loved the noise of a
Work-mans Hammer: For he thought it a deed of Charity, as well as to please his
own fancy by often building and repairing to set poor people a work, and
encourage painful Artificers and Tradesmen in their honest Callings. He built a
Hall in the middle of the House, from the very Foundation, upon the top whereof
was a high Tower of Glass; on one side of the Hall a fair Garden with pleasant
Walks, Cypress Trees, and Arbours; on the other side upon the Front a spacious
Court, at the Gate, of which next the Street, a high wooden Bridge that went
cross over the Street into the Churchyard, on which himself and Family went to
Church, to avoid the dirty common way, which was almost unpassable. Besides he
made many new Conveniences to the Outhouses, and Yards belonging to them; all
which was no small charge to his Purse; for I have heard him say, it cost him
several hundreds of Pounds in Alresfords-house, where he in a manner buried his
Wifes Portion; yet after his Death, his Eldest Son was unreasonably sued for
dilapidations in the Court of Arches, by Dr. Beamont his Fathers Successor; but
the Gentleman pleaded his Cause so notably before Sir Giles Swet, then Judge of
the Court, that he was discharged, there being no reason or justice he should
be troubled for dilapidations occasioned by the long War, when his Father was
unjustly turned out of his House and Living.

After so much cost bestowed upon Alresford, and his Prebend-house in
Westminster he constanly resided in one of those places, where he kept good
Hospitality, and took care to relieve the Poor, following also his wonted
studies, not only in History, but Fathers, Councils, and Polemical Divinity,
the better to prepare himself for a new encounter with the old Professor Dr.
Prideaux, for he resolved to go on in his Universit^ Degrees, notwithstandiug
his removal from Oxon, and to perform those Exercises required in that Case, in
which he always came off with credit and applause. Being now to take his Degree
of Bachelor in Divinity, in July, An. Dom. 1630. Upon these words Mat. 4. 19.
Faciam vos fieri Piscatores hominum. Upon the Sunday after he preached the Act
Sermon, upon this Text, Mat. 13. 14. But while men slept, his Enemy came and
sowed Tares among the Wheat, and went his way. Where he made a seasonable
Application of this Subject, (as the Times then stood) of the danger of
Lay-Feofees in buying up Impropriations. A godly project it appeared at the
first sight, but afterward a Tare fit to be rooted up.

-- Pulchra Laverna Da mihi fallere da justum sanctumque videri. The Pretension
of those Feofees seemed to be very just and pious, but their Intention and
Practice was quite contrary, by planting many pentionary Lectures in many
places, where the Preachers were Non-conformists, from whom could be expected
no better fruits than the overthrow of Episcopal Government. The words of Mr.
Heylyn's Sermon as to this particular, are as follows.

For what is that which is most aimed Feofees for buying in Impropriations to
to the Church, does it not seem in appearance to be an excellent piece of
Wheat, a noble and gracious part of Piety? Is not this Templum Domini, Templum
Domini! But blessed God that men should thus draw near to thee with their
mouths, and be so far from thee in their hearts? For what are those entrusted,
in the management of this great business? Are they not most of them the most
active and best affected men in the whole Cause, and magna partium momenta, and
chief Patrons of this growing Faction? And what are those that they prefer? Are
they not most of them such men, as are and must be serviceable to their
dangerous Innovations? And will they not in time have more Preferments to
bestow, than all the Bishops of the Kingdom? And so by consequence a greater
number of Dependents to promote their Interest? Yet all this while we sleep and
slumper, and fold our hands in sloth, and see perhaps, but dare not note it.
High time it is assuredly you should be awaked, and rouse your selves upon the
apprehension of so near a danger.

If we look further upon this new devise and holy project, it being observed
Full. Chapter Hist. Fol. 195.
(as Fuller says) that those who hold the Helm of the Pulpit, always steer the
peoples hearts as they please. The Feofees therefore placed their Lecturers in
Market Towns and Corporations, that were most populous where they might carry
the greater sway of electing Burgesses to serve in Patliament; or for the most
part these zealous Preachers were such as had been silenced and suspended in
the Ecclesiastical Courts, or those that were well Wishers to Non-conformists.
The Parties themselves trusted in this design of buying Impropriations; were of
such affections as promised no good unto the peace and happiness of the Church
of England, being twelve in number, four Ministers, four Full. Chapter Hist. Fol.
136.
common Lawyers, and four Citizens; all of them known to be averse unto the
Discipline of the Church, that as Dr. Heylyn says, If such public mischiefs
be presaged by Astrologers from the Conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn; though
the first of these be a Planet Exam. Hist. p. ^09.
of a most sweet and gentle influence, what dangers, what calamities might
might not be feared from the Conjunction of twelve such persons, of which there
was not one that wished well to the present Government. And therefore I may say
of them as Domiti^s Aenobarbus said unto his friends when they came to
congratulate with him for the Birth of Nero. Nihil ex se and Agrippina nisi
detestabile and malo publico nasci potest.

But now we must come to the Divinity Heylyn must undergo the public exercise
of disputation for his degree of Doctor, and appear before his severe Judge and
Moderator Dr. Prideaux, whose animosities and angers since the former
Disputation, in all the tract of time from the year 1627. to 1633. were not
abated, or in the least cooled, but more inflamed; that the Professor took upon
himself the Office of an Opponent rather than of a Moderator, so that those to
whom the Opponents part belonged, could hardly put in an Argument for his
passion. In the former Disputation Mr. Heylyn asserted the visibility and
infallibility of the Church; but now he insisteth upon its Authority; and his
Questions were these following.

1. An Ecclesia habeat authoritatem in determinandis fidei controversiis? 2.
Interpretandi S. scripturas? 3. Discernendi ritus and ceremonias?
All which he held in the affirmative. Append. to the Adver. in Mr. Sa. Hist.
p. 214, 215.
whole disputation) according to the plain and positive Doctrine of the Church
of England, in the twentieth Article, which runs thus in terminis, viz, Habet
Ecclesia ritus sive ceremonias statuendi jus and in fidei controversiis
authoritatem, etc. But the Doctor was as little pleased with these Questions,
and the Respondents stating of them as he was with the former; and therefore to
create to the Respondent the greater odium, he openly declared that the
Respondent had falsified the public Doctrine of the Church, and charged the
Article with that Sentence, viz. Habet Ecclesia ritus sive ceremonias, etc.
Which was not to be found in the whole Body of it: And for the proof thereof,
he read the Article out of a Book which lay before him, beginning thus, Non
licet Ecclesia quicquam instituere quod verbo Dei scripto adversetur, etc. To
which the Respondent readily answered, that he perceived by the lines of the
Book which lay on the Doctors Cushion, that he had read that Article out of the
Harmony of Consessions published at Geneva, Anno 1612. which therein followed
the Edition of the Articles in the time of King Edward the Sixth, Anno 1652. in
which that sentence was not found, but that it was otherwise in the Articles
agreed on in the Convocation, Anno 1561. to which most of us had subscribed in
our several places; but the Doctor still persisting upon that point, and the
Respondent seeing some unsatisfiedness in the greatest part of the Auditory, he
called on one Mr. Westly (who formerly had been his Chamber-fellow in Magdalen
College) to step to the next Booksellers-shop, for a Book of Articles; which
being observed by the Doctor, he declared himself very willing to decline any
further profecution of that particular, and to go on directly to the
Disputation: But the Respondent was resolved to proceed no further, usque dum
liberaverit animam suam ab ista calumnia, as his own words were, till he had
freed himself from that odious calumny; but it was not long before the coming
of the Book had put an end to the Controversy, out of which the Respondent
read the Article in the English tongue in his verbis, viz. The Church has
power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and Authority in controversies of Faith,
etc. which done, he delivered the Book to one of the standers by who desired it
of him, the Book passing from one hand to another till all men were satisfied.
And at this point of time it was, that the Queens Almoner left the Schools,
professing afterward that he could see no hope of a fair Disputation from so
foul a beginning. The Doctor went about to prove that it was not the
Convocation, but the High Court of Parliament which had the power of ordering
matters in the Church, in making Canons, ordaining Ceremonies, and and
determining Controversies in Religion; and could find out no other medium to
make it good, but the Authority of Sir Edward Cook (a learned Appendix to the
Adv. p. 218.
but mere common Lawyer) in one of the Books of his Reports. An Argument (if by
that name it may be called) which the Respondent thought not fit to gratify
with a better answer than Non credendum esse cuique extra suam artem. And
certainly a better answer could not be given by Mr. Heylyn (I may say) Non
Apollinis magis verum atque hoc responsum.

This last exercise completed him in returned home with honor; where shortly
after news was sent him that the King had bestowed upon him a Prebendary at
Windsor, by the intercession of Dr. Neale, then ArchBishop of York; but it
proved otherwise, for that Prebendary was promised to Dr. Potter, when he
presented to the King, his Book called Charity mistaken; and he also went
without it, by reason of the Bishop of Gl^cester, not being translated to the
Church of Hereford (as was then commonly reported) who kept the same Prebend in
his hands, by which means both the Candidates were disapointed. This Goodman
Bishop of Gloucester at that time affected a remove to the Sea of Hereford, and
had so far prevailed with some great Officers of State, that for money (which he
offered like Simon magus, and it was taken) his Arch-Bish. Life p. 248.
^onge d' eslir issued out, and his Election passed: But Archbishop La^d
coming opportunely to the knowledge of it, and being ashamed of so much
baseness in the man, who could pretend no other merit than his money; the
wretched Bishop was glad to make his Peace, not only with the resignation of
his Election, but the loss of his Bribe. While these things were agitated, the
the young Doctor new come from the University, where he had run through so hard
a Task with the Regius Professor, though he missed Windsor, took this occasion
to make himself merry as the Poet did; musa jocosa mea est -- Ov. And so fell
into this vein of Poetry.

When Windsor Prebend late disposed was,
One asked me sadly, how it came to pass
Potter was chose, and Heylyn was forsaken?
I answered 'twas by Charity mistaken.
But this Fancy was soon turned into a Attorney General Mr. Noy, whose memory he
could never forget for the honor of delivering to him the gracious message
from his Majesty, and for the intimacy he was pleased to bear to him as a bosom
friend; that he imparted to the Doctor all the affairs of State, and
transactions of things done in his time; which made him so perfect an Historian
in this particular; and showed him his papers, manuscripts and laborious
Collections, that he had gathered out of Statutes and ancient Records for the
proof of the Kings Prerogative, particularly before his death at his house in
Brainford where the Doctor kept Whitsontide with him in the year 1634. he
showed to him a great wooden Box that was full of old Precedents, for Observe.
on the Hist. of K. Chapter p. 121.
levying a Naval aid upon the Subjects, by the sole Authority of the King
whenever the preservation and safety of the Kingdom required it of them. Mr.
Hammond L' Strange acknowledges that Mr. Noy was a most indefatigable plodder
and searcher of old Records. The learned L' Str. fol. 131.
Antiquary Mr. Seldom (though no friend to the King nor Church) confesses in
his excellent book, entitled, Mare Clausum, That the Kings of England ^sed to
levy money upon the Subjects without the help of Parliament, for the providing
of Ships and other necessaries to maintain that Soveraignity which anciently
belonged to the Crown. Yet the honest Attorney General for the same good service
to the King and Country, is called by Hammond Le Strange, The most pestilent
ibid. fol. 131.
vexation to the Subjects, that this latter Age produced. So true is the old
Proverb, some may better steal a Horse than others look on. For it is usual
with many, not to judge according to the merits of the cause, but by the
respect or disrepect they bear to the Person, as the Comedian once said.

Duo cum idem faciunt, saepe and possis dicere
Hoc licet impune facere huic, illi non licet
Non quod dissimilis res sit, sed quod qui facit.
When two does both alike, the self same Act,
One suffers pain, the other for the Fact
Not the lest shame or punishment; and why?
Respect of persons makes Crimes differently.
The death of Mr. Noy, the more sadly differences brake out betwixt the Dean of
Westminster and the Prebends of that Church, but all things were carried on
smoothly by his Lordship, because he knew well that Dr. Heylyn had a sure
Advocate in Court, both in behalf of himself and his Brethren, if they stood in
need of help; that no sooner this worthy person departed the World, but the
Bishop so extremely tyrannized over the Prebendaries, infringing their
Privileges, violating their Customs, and destroying their ancient Rights;
that for the common preservation of themselves and their Successors, they were
forced to draw up a Charge against his Lordship, consisting of no less than
thirty six Articles, which were presented by way of complaint and petition of
redress to his sacred Majesty, who forthwith gave order for a Commission to be
issued out unto the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, the Earl of
Manchester, Lord Privy Seal Earl of Portland, the Lord Cottington, the two
Secretaries of State, Sir John Cook and Sir Francis Windebank: Authorizing them
to hold a Visitation of the Church of Westminster, to examine the particular
charges made against John Lord Bishop of Lincoln, and to redress such
grievances and pressures, as the Prebends of the said Church suffered by his
misgovernment.

The Articles were ordered by the Latin by Dr. Heylyn, (which accordingly he
performed) to avoid the common talk and scandal that might arise, if exposed to
the public veiw of the vulgar; on April, 20. A. D. 1634. the Commission bore
date, which was not executed but lay dormant till December 1635, the Bishop
expecting the business would never come to a hearing, he raged more vehemently,
dispossessed the Prebends of their Seats, refused to call a Chapter, and to
pass their Accounts, conferred holy Orders in the said Church without their
consent, contrary to an ancient Privilege, which had been inviolably retained
from the first foundation of the Church; he permitted also Benefices in their
gift to be lapsed unto himself, that so he might have absolute power to dispose
them to whom he pleased, Quo teneam nodo? With many other grievances, which
caused the Prebends to present a second Petition to his Majesty, humbly
beseeching him to take the ruinous and desperate estate of the said Church into
his Princely consideration.

Upon which the former Commission Westminster, for the Bishops and Prebends to
appear on Jan. 27. Upon the 25th. instant. The Prebends were warned by the
Subdean to meet the Bishop in Jerusalem Chamber, where his Lordship foreseeing
the Storm that was like to fall upon his head, carried himself very calmly
toward them, desiring to know what those things were that were amiss, and he
would presently redress them, (though his Lordship knew them very well without
an Informer) to which Dr. Heylyn replied, that seeing they had put this
business into his Majesty's hands, it would ill become them to take the matters
out o^ his into their own. Therefore on Jan. 27th. both Parties met together
before the Lords in the Inner-star Chamber; where by their Lordships Order; the
whole business was put into a methodical course; each M^day following being
appointed for a day of hearing till a Conclusion was made of the whole affair.
On February the 1st. The Lords Commissioners, with the Bishop and Prebends met
in the Council Chamger at White Hall, where it was first ordered that the
Plaintifs should be called by the name of Prebends supplicant: Secondly, they
should be admitted upon Oath as Witnesses: Thirdly they should, have a sight of
all Registers, Records, Books of account, etc. which the Bishop had kept from
them: Fourthly, that the first business they should begin with, should be about
their Seat, because it made the difference or breach more visible and offensive
to the World, than those matters which were private and domestic: And lastly
it was ordered, that the Prebends should have an Advocate to plead their Cause,
defend their Rights, and represent their Grievances. Accordingly the Prebends
unanimously made choice of Dr. Peter Heylyn for their Advocate.

The business now brought on so fairly, February the 8th. following, before
whom the Bishop put in his Plea about the Seat or Great Pew under Rich. 2. from
which he had disgracefully turned out the Prebends, and possessed it wholly to
himself, or the use of those Strangers to whom he had a special favor;
thinking scorn, that honored Society should sit with him, a Bishop. But the
Prebends Advocate proved their Right of sitting there by these particulars.
First their original Right. Secondly their derivative Right. Thirdly their
possessory Right. How excellently he managed their Cause, and what a mean
defense the Bishop made for himself, would be too tedious and impertinent to
insert here, concerning none but the Church of Westminster. Finally upon
hearing the matters on both sides, it was ordered by general consent of the
Lords Commissioners, That the Prebends should be restored to their old Seat,
and that none should sit there with them, but Lords of the Parliament, and
Earls eldest Sons, according to the ancient custom.

But what were those differences about Sabbath? In the History of which Dr.
Heylyn was then engaged, and in a short time he perfected it, to satisfy the
scrupulous minds of some misguided Zelots, who turned the observation of the
Lord's Day into a Jewish Sabbath; not allowing themselves or others the ordinary
Liberties, nor works of absolute necessity, which the Jews themselves never
scrupled at. Against which sort of Sabbatarians, the Doctor published his
History of the Sabbath. The Argumentative part of that Subject was referred to
Dr. White Bishop of Ely; the Historical part of it to Dr. Heylyn. Huic nostro
tradita est provincia: Both of their Books never answered to this day; but
pickird at by Mr. Palmer and Mr. Cawdrey, two Divines of the Smectymnian
Assembly, and by some other sorry Writers of less account: But the foundation
and superstructure, both in the logical and historical Discourses of those two
Pillars of our Church, stand still unmovable; the latter though an Historian
upon the Subject does fully answer all the material Arguments of the
Adversaries side brought out of Scripture, as well as History: Neither does the
Bishop nor the Doctor in the least encourage or countenance in all their
Writings any Profaneness of the Day, when Christian Liberty is abused to
Licentiousness: Nor on the other side would they have the Religious Observation
of the Day brought into superstition: For Sunday amongst some I have known,
has been kept as a Fast Day, contrary to the ancient Opinion and Practice of
the primitive Church; who judged it a Heresy and not an Act of Piety. Nefas
est die D^minica jejunare, that the day should be spent from Morning to Evening
so strictly in preaching and praying, in repetition upon repetitions, in doing
works of superogation which God never required at their hands, nor any
Christian Church commanded, to make the Sabbath a burden, that ought to be a
Christians delight, is new Divinity among the reformed Churches; in Geneva it
self, before and after Divine Service, the People are at liberty for manly
Recreations and Exercises.

Upon complaint made before Lord chief Justice Richardson of some disorders by
Feasts, Wakes, Revels, and ordinary pastimes on Sundays; perticularly in the
County of Somerset. His Majesty ordered that the Bishop of Bath and Wells
should send a speedy account of the same.

The Bishop called before him seventy two of the Orthodox and ablest Clergy A.
L. Life page 242
men among them, who certified under their several hands, that on the Feasts
days (which commonly fell upon Sundays) the service of God was more solemnly
performed, and the Church was better frequented both in the forenoon and
afternoon, then upon any Sunday in the year.

To decry the clamours of the Sabbatarians, a Lecture read by Doctor Prideaux
at the Act in Oxon, Anno 1622. was translated into english, in which he solidly
discoursed both of the Sabbath and Sunday, according to the judgment of the
ancient Fathers and the most approved Writers of the Protestant and Reformed
Churches. This Lecture was also ushered with a preface: In which there was
proof offered of these three propositions. First that the keepiug holy one day
of seven is not the moral part of the fourth Commandment. Secondly that the
alteration of the day is only an humane and ecclesiastical constitution.
Thirdly that still the Church has power to change the day, and transfer it to
some other. The name of Prideaux was then so sacred, A. B. life page 16
that the Book was greedily bought up by those of the Puritan faction, but when
they found themselves deceived of their expectation. The Book did cool their
colors and abate their clamor.

Since our Saviors reproof of the Jews, for their superstitious fear of
transgressing the traditions and Commanddements of their Fathers by which they
kept the Sabbath with more rigor than God had commanded, they are now bent
upon the other extreme as Buxtorf Buxt. Synag. Jud. Cap. 11.
tells us, so hard a thing it is to keep a medium between two extremes. Quanto
voluptatis isti percipiunt (says he) tanto se devotius Sabbatum colere
statuunt. The more pleasures they take on the Sabbath day, the more devoutly
they thought that they keep the Sabbath. So that the rigid Sabbatarian has no
example of Jew or Christian, and I am sure no Command of God in Scripture, nor
President in Antiquity or Ecclesiastical History, but will find there the
Lord's Day is from Ecclesiastical Institution. I speak not this (I abhor it) to
animate, or the least encourage people in looseness and debauchery, to neglect
the Duties of Religion, or the Worship and Service of God upon this holy day,
which they ought as they tender their Souls, with singular Care and Conscience
to observe; but hereby I think my Father in Law is justified, (though his own
Book is best able to vindicate himself) that his Opinion is orthodox, both
according to the Doctrine of the Church of England, and the judgment and
practice of Protestant Churches, that the Lord's Day should be Religiously
observed; and yet withal, the lawful liberties, and urgent necessities of the
People preserved, and not to be so tied up, and superstitiously fearful, that
they dare not kindle a Fire, dress Meat, visit their Neighbors, sit at their
own Door, or walk abroad, no nor so much as talk with one another, except it be
in the Poets words.

-- Of God, Grace, and Ordinances,
As if they were in heavenly Trances.
To which I may add a more smart and witty Epigram, upon the scruple and
needless disatisfaction in them, not onl^ Observe. on the Hist of K. Chapter page 90.
about the Sabath but our Church and Religion; in those Verses of Dr. Heylyn to
Mr. Hammond L' Estrange, as follows.

A learned Prelate of this Land,
Thinking to make Religion stand
With equal poise on either side,
A mixture of them thus he tried;
An Ounce of Protestant he singleth,
And then a Dram of Papist mingleth,
With a Scruple of a Puritan,
And boiled them in his Brain pan;
But when he thought it would digest,
The Scruple troubled all the rest.
Notwithstanding this scrupulosity in honesty and plain dealing; they are too
much like the Scribes and Pharisees, who by godly shows of long Prayers, sad
Countenances, Justification of themselves, that they were the only Righteous,
and all others Sinners; played the Hypocrites most abominably; to deceive the
vulgar sort, they made Religion a mere mock and empty show (...), says our
Savior, to be seen like Stage Players in Erasm. Annot. in loc.
a Theater, Nam tota actio est histrionica, as Erasmus well observes, their
whole carriage was dramatick, to make a feigned Pageantry and Ostentation of
Piety. Yet John Lord Bishop of Lincoln, in compliance with this Sect, out of
discontent and revenge, because deprived of the great Seal, and commanded by
the King to retire from Westminster; transformed himself into one of these
Angels of new Light, and made himself the Archangel and Head of their Party.
First of all by writing his pretended Letter to one Titly Vicar of Grantham,
against the holy Communion Table standing Altar-wise; to which Dr. Heylyn made
a sudden and sharp reply, in his Book entitled, A Coal from the Altar; to
which the Bishop within a Twelvemonth after (he took time enough for the Work)
did return an Answer under Arch Bish., Life p. 311.
the Title of The Holy Table, Name and Thing, pretending withal that this was
written long ago by a Minister in Lincolnshire, against Dr. Cole, a Divine in
Queeu Marys Reign. No sooner the King heard of this new Book, but he sent a
Command to Dr. Heylyn, to write a speedy Answer to it, and not in the least to
spare the Bishop; Neither did the Doctor baulk the grand Sophos, but detected
all his false Allegations, and answered them that were true, which the Bishop
had wrested to a contrary sense, if we will look into the Doctors Book, called
by him Antidotum Lincolniense. All this while the Bishop (as it must be confessed
being a man of Learning) writ against his own Science and Conscience; so dear
is the passion of revenge, to gratify which, some men wilfully sin against the
Light of their own Souls; therefore the Bishop, according to the Apostles word
was (...), condemned of himself: For look upon him in the point of practice,
and we shall find the Communion Table was placed Altar-wise in the Cathedral
Church of Lincoln, whereof he was Bishop, and in the Collegiate Church of
Westminster, of which he was Dean; and lastly in the private Exam. Hist: page
278.
Chapel of his own house, (as Dr. Heylyn says) in whieh it was not only
placed Altar-wise, but garnished with rich Plate and other costly Utensils, in
more than ordinary manner. By all which, the Bishop needed no further
refutation of his Book, than his own Example, that in those places where he had
Authority, the Holy Table did not stand in Gremio and Nave of the Quire as he
would have it fixed, but above the Steps upon the Altar, close to the East end
of the Quire, ex vi catholicae consuetudinis, according to the ancient manner
and custom in the Primitive Catholic Church. But hinc illae lachrymae ever
since, this mischief followed his Book, that in most Country Churches to this
day, the Table is set at the hither end of the Chancel, whithout any Traverse
or Rails to fence it; Boys fling their Hats upon it, and that which is worse,
Dogs piss against it; Country Juries write their Parish accounts, Amerciaments,
Bylaws, etc. all which is a most horrible profanation, and not to be suffered.

But now John Lord Bishop of Lincoln, Anno Dom. 1637. thrown out of his
Episcopal Chair, by sentence of the Star Chamber, for endeavoring to corrupt
the Kings Evidence in a Cause of Bastardy brought before his Majesty's Justices
of Peace, at Spittle Sessions, in the County of Lincoln; which business
afterward came to a hearing before the Lords in Star Chamber, by whose
definitive sentence, the Bishop was suspended ab Officio and Beneficio,
deprived of all his Ecclesiastical Preferments, deeply fined, and his Accomplices
with him; and afterward committed to the Tower of London, where he continued
Prisoner for three years; and in all that space of time, his Lordship did never
hear Sermon Arch-Bish. Life p. 324.
or public Prayers, to both which he was allowed liberty; but instead thereof
he studied Schism and Faction, by his own Example, and his Pen disguisedly.

During the time of his Lorships Imprisonment, Heylyn was chosen Treasurer for
the Church of Westminster; in which Office he discharged himself with such
diligence and fidelity, that he was continued in it from year to year, till the
Bishops release out of the Tower, and his removal back again to Westminster.
While he was Treasurer, he took care for the repairs of the Church, that had
been neglected for many years: First of the great West-Isle that was ready to
fall down, was made firm and strong; and of the South Side of the lower
West-Isle much decayed, he caused to be new timbred, boarded and leaded; but
chiefly the curious Arch over the preaching place (that looks now most
magnificently) he ordered to be new vaulted, and the Roof thereof to be raised
up to the same height with the rest of the Church; the charge of which came to
434 l. 18 s. 10 d. He regulated also some disorders of the Quire, perticularly
the exacting of Sconses or perdition money, which he divided among them that
best deserved it, who diligently kept Prayers, and attended upon other Church
Duties.

Whilst he was Treasurer, his Brethren good affections to him, presented him
to the Parsonage of Islip near Oxford; a very good Living, worth about 200l.
per Annum, then by the death of Dr. King made void; but by reason of the
distance from Alresford (though standing most conveniently to taste the sweet
pleasures of the University) he thought fit to exhange it for another nearer
hand, the Rectory of South-warnborough in the County of Hampshire, that was in
the gift of St. John's College in Oxon, to which exchange he was furthered by
the Archbishop, who carried a great stroke in that College, of which he had
been President. It pleased God soon after, to visit him and his Family at
Alresford with a terrible fit of Sickness, of which none escaped (the Disease
was so contagious) but the Cook's boy in the Kitchen, who was then Master Cook
for the whole Family; and he performed his part so well, in making their broths
and other necessaries, that he was the best Physician among the Doctors, for by
his Kitchen Physic the Sick was cured. No sooner Dr. Heylyn recovered of the
distemper, but he betook himself from his Bed to his Book, and fell upon a more
than ordinary piece of study. The History of the Church of England since the
Reformation. An easy matter for others to tread the Path when he had found out
the Way. Though he is dead, he yet speaks, and the truth of things without
respect of persons; not to ingratiate himself with the Parliament, and
Presbyterian party, to make our Religion it self Parliamentary, which Papists
and Presbyterians affirm; he spared no pains nor cost to search into old
Records, Registers of Convocation, Acts of Parliament, Orders of Council Table,
and had the use of Sir Robert Cottons Library to take out what Books he
pleased, leaving a pawn of Money behind for them. In all his other Writings what
a faithful Historian he has appeared to the World, is sufficiently known, and
will be showed in this particular. In the mean while let not men be too
credulous of another Transcriptions, that are under question, an verbum de
verbo expressum extulit? Whether they are copyed out exactly from the
originals, (wherein lies the main controversy in matter of fact) which I am
not bound, nor other men, to believe till we are convinced by our own Eyes;
besides it is an inglorious encounter to fight with a man's Ghost, after he has
been dead near twenty years, with whom the late Historian, nor any other whilst
he was living, durst venture with him in the point. The Heathens scorned to
rake in the Ashes of the dead, Tacit. in vit Agric.
but as Tacitus says of Agricola, ut in loco Piorum manibus destinato placide
quiescat, that he might rest without disturbance in the place appointed for
Souls. However the Doctors Learning and Fidelity in History is so publicly
known, that it is not in the power of any Scot or English Aristarchus: to blast
his good Name. And let this suffice at present.

Magnus Aristarcho, major Homerus erat. Whilst he was so intent upon the
History encouragement to go on in these studies; for the discontents that
boiled in this Nation, and the Commotions then begun in Scotland, upon pretense
of the Common Prayer imposed upon them: And a mere pretense indeed it was; for
herein was nothing done, but with the consent and approbation of their own
Scottish Bishops, who made what Alterations in the Liturgy they pleased, to
which they had his Majesty's Royal Assent; but the blame was wholly laid upon
the Archbishop of Canterbury, who only commended the Book to them, spe quidem
Elench. mot. nup.
laudabili sed eventu pessimo, as the learned Dr. Bates said, the success being
improsperous, though the enterprise commendable, the Archbishop unjustly
censured for it; he caused Dr. Heylyn to translate the Scotch Liturgy into
Latin, and his Lordship intended to set out his own Apology with the Book, to
vindicate himself from those aspersions thrown upon him, that the World might
be satisfied with his Majesty's Piety and Goodness, and his Lordships own care
and readiness to serve that Nation; but their hasty Rebellion (to which they
were ever precipitant) put an end to the Bishops Apology, and the Doctors
Translation.

Hamilton whom Dr. Burnet does so highly applaud, had a party that not only
opposed this Liturgy, but betrayed the King on all occasions; nay some of the
Bedchamber who were Scots, were grown so saucy and impudent, that they used to
ransack the good Kings Pockets when he was in Bed; to transcribe such Letters
as they found, and send the Arch-Bish. Life p. 355.
Copies to their Countrymen in the way of Intelligence. To speak the matter in
a word, he was grown of Scots in Fact a King, though not in Title, His Majesty
being looked on by them as a Cipher in the Arithmatick of State.

The Scotch Covenanters, after the unhappy War was begun, called it Bellum
Episcopale, the Bishops War, raised only to uphold their Hierarchy; but the
truth is as the Doctor proves, Though Liturgy and Episcopacy, were made
Observe. on the Hist. of the Reign. of K. (...). p. 151.
the occasions, yet they were not the causes of the war, Religion being but the
Vizard to disguise the business; which Covetousness, Sacrilege, and Rapine had
the greatest hand in; for the King resolving to revoke all grants of Abbey
Lands, the Lands of Bishoprics and Chapters, and other Religious Corporations,
which have been vested in the Crown by Act of Parliament, were conferred on
many of the Nobility and Gentry in his Fathers Minority, when he was under
Protectors; whence the Nobility. of Scotland made use of discontented and
seditious Spirits, (under color of the Canons and Common prayer) to embroyl
that Kingdom, that so they might keep their Lands, and hold up their Power and
Tyranny over the people.

To appease the Tumults in Scotland, Sedition, that began to kindle in England,
the King called a Parliament, and issued out his Writ for Clerks in
Convocation; at which time the Doctor was chosen by the College of
Westminster, their Clerk to sit in Convocation, where he proposed a most
excellent expediency, (which would be of happy use if still continued) for the
satisfaction of some scrupolous Members in the House of Commons, about the
Ceremonies of our Church; That there might be a mutual conference by select
Commitees between the House of Commons and the lower House of the Convocation,
that the Clergy might give the Commons satisfaction in the point of Ceremonies,
and all other things relating to the Church; which motion from him was well
accepted and generally assented thereto; And no doubt a most happy success,
would have followed upon it, not only to take away all scruples, but to beget a
Reverence and Love from the Commons to the Clergy, by such a mutual Conference
and Conversation. But this Parliament being then suddenly dissolved put a
period to that and all other business, at the news of which, brought
unexpectedly to the Doctor, while he was bufie then at the election for the
School of Westminster his pen fell from his hand, himself struck dumb with
admiration.

Obstupuit, steteruntque comae, vox fancibus haesit. A sad and unfortunate day
it was, says the Doctor and the news so unpleasing, Obser. on the His. of K.
Chapter page 176.
brought hi^ by a friend, whilst he was writing some dispatches, it so
astonished him (though he ^ad heard some inkling of it the night before) that
suddenly the Pen fell out of his hand, and long it was before he could
recollect his Spirits to give an answer.

The Convocation usually ends in course the next day after the dissolution of
Parliament: But the Doctor well knowing that one great end of calling
Parliaments is to raise the King money for the public concerns, he therefore
went to Lambeth and showed the ArchBishop a preced ent in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth for granting subsidies, or a benevolence by Convocation to be levied
upon the Clergy, without the help of a Parliament; whereby the Kings
necessities for money might be supplied, and so it successfully fell out, the
Archbishop acquainting the King with this present expediency the Convocation
still continued sitting, notwithstanding the dissolution of Parliament. And
when this was scrupled at by some of the house, the Doctor resolved their
doubts, and rid them of their fears by showing them the distinction betwixt the
Kings Writ for calling a Parliament and that for assembling a Convocation.
Their different forms and independence of one upon another. Finally it was
determined by the King himself, and his learned counsel in the Law, That the
Convocation called by his Majesty's Writ, was to be continued till it was
dissolved by his Writ notwithstanding the dissolution of Parliament. This
benefit the King got by their fitting, six subsidies under the name of
Benevolences, which the Clergy paid to him.

On Friday May 29 the Canons, of that Convocation were unanimously subscribed
unto by all the Bishops and Clergy. No one of them dissenting but the Bishop of
Gloucester for which he was deservedly suspended, who afterward turned Papist,
and was the only renegado Prelat of this Land Of this Convocation. Sir Edward
Deering to show his wit (which he dearly paid for after) in one of his speeches
to the house of Commons, was pleased to say, that every one, that had a hand in
making their Ganons should come unto the Bar of the Collect of Speeches by Sir
Edw. D^ering printed, 1642.
House of Commons with a Candle in one hand, and a book in the other, and there
give fire to his own Canons, which good fortune afterward fell upon his own
book of speeches. NecLex est justior ulla, which by order of the House of
Commons was burnt in the Fire by the hand of the common Hangman. A public
disgrace that he worthily deserved for his proud Eloquence, in often prattling
against the King and Church. In another of his speeches he tells them, That if
they c^uld bring the Lords to sit in the House of Commons, and the King to be
but as one of the Lords then the work was done. And finally in a another
Collection of Speeches, page 151.
he so abuses all the Cathedrals in the Kingdom with so foul a mou^, as if he
had licked up the filth of all the former Libells, to vomit it at once upon
them. And yet this Gentleman afterward (as Doctor Heylyn Obser. p. 178.
says) made it his earnest suit to be Dean of Canterbury, which being denied
him by the King, in a great discontent he returned to the Parliament etc. But
lastly to consider the sad condition of that Convocation before they were
dissolved, the Doctor as one of their fellow members speaks most feelingly,
during all the time of their sitting, they were under those horrid fears, by
reason of the discontents falling upon the Parliaments dissolution, that the
King was fain to set a Guard about Westminster-Abby for the whole Ibid. p. 181.
time of their fitting. Poor men to what a distress were they brought, in
danger of the Kings displeasure if they rose, of the peoples fury if they sat;
in danger of being beaten down by the following Parliament, when the work was
done; and after all, obnoxious to the Lash of censorious tongues for their good
intendments for notwithstanding their great care, that all things might be done
with decency and to edification, every one must have his blow at them.

For Pryn published the unbishoping of Timothy and Titus, and his other Libel
of news from Ipswich, wherein he called the Archbishop of Cant. ArchAgent of
the Devil, that Beelzebub himself had been Archbishop, and all the Bishops were
Luciferian Lords. The like reproaches were thundered out Arch-Bish. life. ^. 4.
page 309.
of the Pulpit by Burton in his Sermon on Pro. 24. v. 22. where he abused the
Text, and Bishops sufficiently calling them instead of Fathers, StepFathers;
for Pillars, Cater-Pillars, limbs of the Beast Factors for Antihcrist, and
antichristian Mushromes. Bastwick laid about him before in his Flagellum
Episcoporum Latialium, when he had worn out that Rod, took another in his
Litany. Finally the Rabble had a cursed Song among them, to affront the poor
Clergy with, as they met them; saying

Your Bishops are bite-Sheep.
Your Deans are Dunces.
Your Priests are the Priests of Baal.
The Devil fetch them all by bunches.
And now the Fire smothering in the Embers at last broke forth into an open
flame at the Session of the next Parliament, which was fatal both to Chureh
and State: and finally to themselves that with scorn they were turned out of
doors by their own Servants who became their Masters. The first fitting of
them, was on a dismal day Masons Book of Martyrs page 202.
notable and infamous, November. 3d. when Henry 8 began the dissolution of Abbyes
and Papists with Protestants were laid both on one hurdle and burnt together at
the same Stake, the King then promised his people should for ever be acquitted
of Taxes, ut facilius illi monasteia Sand. de Sch. Augl. p. 202.
concederentur, says Sanders, that Monasteries and Religious houses might be
more easily granted to him. The Parliment opening on that critical day
ArchBishop Laud was advertised in a letter to move the King, that for good luck
sake their Session might be put off to another day, but this being looked upon
by his Lordship as a superstitious conceit he waved the motion of it to the
King, which proved afterward the fall of himself and the Hierarchy. At the
opening of this long Parliament, a general Rumor was spread abroad that Doctor
Heylyn was run away for fear of an approaching storm, that was like to fall on
his own head, as well as on his Lordships Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury,
but he, who was ever of an undaunted Spirit, would not pusillanimously desert
the Cause of the King and Church then in question, but speedily hastened up to
London from Alresford to coufute the common Calumny and false report raised on
him by the Puritan faction, that he appeared the next day in his Gown and
Tippet in Westminster Hall, and in the Church, with his accustomed formalities
of Cap, Hood, and Surplice, employed also his Pen boldly in defense of the
Bishops right, when the temporal Lords began to shake the Hierarchy in passing
a vote, that no Bishop should be of the Committee for examination of the Earl
of Strafford, being causa sanguinis, upon which the Doctor drew up a brief and
excellent discourse full of Law and History, entitled de jure paritatis
Episcoporum. The Bishops right of Peerage, (so consequently that they ought to
sit in that Committee) their privilege and right are maintained by him, which
by Law or ancient custom does belong unto the^.

It is worth our while, to see what Blood many years after the first discourse
of the Bishops Peerage when there was little hopes of ever their returning
again into the House of Peers. That the Bishops were disabled Obser p. 224.
by some ancient Canons (says he) from sentencing any man to death, and (it
may be) from being present when any such sentences was pronounced, I shall
easily grant; but that they were disabled from being assistants in such case,
from taking the examinations or hearing the depositions of Witnesses, or giving
counsel in such matters, as they saw occasion, I believe not: Certain I am,
that it is, and has been otherwise in point of practice. And that the Bishops
sitting as Peers in an English Parliament, were never excluded before this time
from any such assistance, as by their Gravity and Learning, and other abilities
they were enabled to give in any dark or difficult Observator rescued, p. 283
business (though of blood and death) which were brought before them: As for
the Council of Toledo it says nothing to their disadvantage, the Canon is, si
quis sacerdotum discursor in alienis periculis extiterit apud Ecclesiam
proprium perdat gradum, that if any Priest shall intermedle in Cases
endangering the Life of others, let him be degraded. Hereupon I conclude, (as
to the present business in hand) that the Bishops were to be admitted to all
preparatory Examination, because their counsel and assistance would have tended
rather to the preservation, than conduced to the endangering of the Parties
Life. I saw about that time Observe. on the Hist. of K. Chapter pref.
(says he) a little Manuscript Tract, entitled, De jure paritatis
Episcoporum, that is to say, of the right of the Peerage of the Bishops, in
which their Privileges were asserted, as to that particular: But they not
willing to contend in a business which seemed so little to concern them; or
else not able to strive against the present stream which seemed to carry all
before it, suffered themselves to be excluded at that time, without protesting
to the contrary, or interposing in defense of their ancient Rights. And this I
look on as the first degree of their Humiliation; For when it was perceived
that a business of sogreat consequence might be done in Parliament without
their counsel and consent; it opened a wide gap unto their Adversaries: First
to deprive them of their Votes, and after to destroy even the Calling it self.
But this was not the main point which the Commons aimed at; they were resolved
to have a close Commitee, to take Examination in the business of the Earl of
Strafford, and were not willing any Bishops should be of it; for fear, lest
favoring the Earls cause or person, they might discover any part of those
secret practices which were had against him, and thereby fortify and prepare
him for his just defense, when the Cause should come unto a Trial. Thus far the
Doctor writ of this Subject, when he lived in Lacyes Court at Abingdon. What he
presented to the Bishops themselves at the time of Strafford's Trial,
concerning the right of Peerage, deserved a rare commendation, especially at
that conjuncture of time, that he could command his Parts and Pen of a sudden
to write on this Subject, or any other if there was need that did conduce to
the public good either of Church or State; and above all, make a quick
dispatch in accomplishing what he had once undertaken and begun; a Virtue for
which Q. Curtius praises Alexander among other excellent qualities, Nullam
virtutem regis istius, magis quam celeritatem laudaverim, I can commend no
Virtue more in this King than speed. So Lucan of Caes^r.

-- Nam Caesar in omnia praeceps
Nilactum credens, si quid superesset agendum.
But for those quick dispatches, the backs of Commitee men in that Parliament,
especially in the business of Mr. Pryn, about his Histrio-mastix, for which he
was kept four days under Examination, because he had furnished the Lords of the
Privy Council, with matters out of that Book, which Mr. Pryn alleged was the
cause of all his sufferings, Observator resc. p. 56.
having joined him in a Petition with the Lord Archbishop, as the chief Agents
and Contrivers of the troubles he had undergone. Great hopes had the Committee
by his often dancing attendance after them, to sift the Doctor, if they could
gather any thing by his speeches, whether the Archbishop had moved him to draw
up those Exceptions against Pryn's Book; which he denied, or at least was not
bound to confess; for as he was faithful to his Sovereign, so he would never
prove himself unfaithful to his chief Minister both in Church and State: For
they would have been glad of any matter to put into their charge, against that
worthy Prelate, against whom Mr. Pryn and others of his Enemies never ceased
prosecuting, till the Parliament took of his head; and the Ax having once
tasted of Blood, had a keen Appetite for more; went on to the Supreme Head of
all.

Whilst the Doctor was thus harassed Lincoln, in great favor with them and the
whole Parliament, was set at liberty from his Imprisonment, and returned from
the Tower to the Church (after so long a time of his suspension and indevotion)
to say his Prayers, and hear his Brother Peter Heylyn preach in his course at
the Abbey in Westminster Where notwithstanding the holiness of that place, (to
which his Lordship had no regard or reverence, but only to the Name and Thing
of it) he was resolved publicly to revenge himself for old done deeds, that
ought to have been forgotten; by disturbing the Doctor in his Sermon before all
the Congregation, contrary to the Laws of this Realm, and with Reverence to his
Lordship, against all good Manners, and the common Rules of Civility.

-- Mala meus furorque Vecors
In tantam impulerit culpam.
Cat. Strange! That a Bishop could not passions for one hour, when no
provocation was given by the Doctor, whose Sermon from the beginning to the end
of it, throughout the whole Discourse, was pacificatory, exhorting Christians
to Moderation, Love and Charity among themselves, for the preservation of the
public Peace, although they differed in some Opinions: For satisfaction of the
Reader, I will set down the Doctors own words, viz.

Is it not that we are so affected with our own Opinions, that we condemn
whosoever shall opine the contrary; and so far wedded to our own Wills, that
when we have espoused a quarrel, neither the Love of God, nor the God of Love
shall divorce us from it: Instead of harkening to the voice of the Church,
every man hearkens to himself, and cares not if the whole miscarry so that
himself may bravely carry out his own devices. Upon which stubborn hight of
Pride, what Quarrels have been raised? What Schisms in every corner of this our
Church? (To enquire no further) some rather putting all into open tumult, than
that they would conform to a lawful Government, derived from Christ and his
Apostles to these very Times. At the speaking of which words, the Bishop of
Lincoln sitting in the great Pew, (which was before the Seat of Contention)
knocked aloud with his staff upon the Pulpit, saying, No more of that point, No
more of that point, Peter. To whom the Doctor readily answered without
hesitation, or the least sign of being dashed out of Countenance. I have a
little more to say, my Lord, and then I have done. Which was as follows, viz.
Others coming into close and dangerous Factions, because some points of
speculative Divinity are otherwise maintained by some than they would have
them: Also regardless of the common Peace, that rather than be quiet, we will
quarrel with our blessed Peacemaker for seeking to compose the differences,
though to the prejudice of neither party. Thus do we foolishly divide our
Savior, and rent his sacred Body on the least occasion; rarely conceiving that
a difference in a point of Judgment, must needs draw after it a disjoyning of
the affections also, and that conclude at last in an open Schism. Whereas
diversity of Opini ons, if wisely managed, would rather tend to the discovery
of the Truth, than the disturbance of the Church, and rather whet our industry
than excite our passions. It was S. Cyprians resolution, Neminem, licet alicui
senserit, a Communione amovere, not to suspend any man from the Communion of
the Church, although the matter then (...), was (as I take it) of more weight
than any of the points now controverted; which moderation, if the present Age
had attained unto, we had not then so often torn the Church in pieces, nor by
our frequent broils offered that injury and inhumanity to our Saviors Body,
which was not offered to his Garments.

At this, and all the other parts of his Sermon, the Auditory was highly
pleased, but the Bishop in so great wrath that his voice, and the noise of his
Pastoral Staff, if I may so call it had liked to have frighted the whole Flook
or Congregation out of the Fold. Considering the ill posture of Affairs, in
which the Nation then stood overflowing with seditions and schisms. Navem
Reipub. Fluitantem in alto tempestatibus seditionum et discordiarum, as Tully
once said: I think a more seasonable Sermon could not have been preached, to
move men of different persuasions unto Peace and Unity one with another, which
is a most Christian Doctrine. After the Sermon was ended, he took St. Robert
Filmore, his learned Friend with some other Gentlemen of quality, that were his
Auditors, out of the Church along with him to his House, where he immediately
sealed up the Book that contained this Sermon and other Notes, to which they
also set their Seals, that so there might not be the least alteration made in
the Sermon, nor any ground to suspect it, which was presently after sent to the
Bishop, who kept it in his hands for some days, in which time his passions
allayed, being more calm at home than in the Church; sent the Book untouched
back again to Dr. Heylyn; in whose Study it had lain dormant for the space of
fifteen years; (when the danger of an old Sermon being called in question, must
needs be over) by my persuasion and his con^ent, he was pleased to give me
leave to open that Apocalyptical Book, that I might read and see the mystery
that lay hid under the Seals for so many years, which indeed only proved a
pious and practical Sermon for Edification, to moderate the heats of those
fiery Spirits, that were like to make a Combustion in the whole Kingdom. The
Bishop deserved a sharper rebuke for his own Sermon, which about that time he
preached before the King, when he made a strange Apostrophe from his Text to
the Sabbath, falling down upon his knees in the Pulpit at the middle of his
Sermon, beseeching his Majesty in most earnest and humble manner, That greater
care might be taken, for the better Observation of the Sabbath day: Which was
looked upon by many as a piece of most grand Hypocrisy, who knew his opinion
well by his practice, for he did ordinarily play at Bowls on Sundays, after
Evening Service; shot with Bows and Arrows, and used other exercises and
recreations according to his Lordships pleasure. Nay, more than all this, as
the Doctor informs us in his Animadversions on the Church History of Britain,
he caused a Comedy to be acted before Animad. page 243.
him at his house at Bugden; not only on a Sunday in the Afternoon, but upon
such a Sunday also on which he had publicly given sacred Orders both to
Priests and Deacons: And to this Comedy, he invited the Earl of Manchester, and
diverse others of the Neighboring Gentry; though on this turning of the Tide,
he did not only cause these Doctors to be condemned for some Opinions which
formerly himself allowed of, but moved at the Assembly in Jerusalem Chamber,
that all Books should be publicly burnt, which had disputed the Morality of
the Lords Day-Sabbath. But the Bishop now restored to his dignity, by means of
that unhappy Parliament with whom he was in high favor, expected that Dr.
Heylyn should have submitted himself to his Lordship, and particularly
acknowledge his Error in putting out the Antidotum Lincolniense, which he
commanddend him to call in; to which the Doctor replied, that he received his
Majesty's Royal Command for the writing and printing of that Book, in which he
had asserted nothing, but what he was still ready to justify and defend
against the Opposers of it. And how could it be imagined otherwise, but he
would vindicate his own Writings? For men of known Learning and Integrity,
satisfied with the truth and right of their Cause, its impossible to bring them
over to a Retractation against their own Conscience. The Case ran thus betwixt
St. Jerome the Presbyter, and St. Augustine the Bishop. Hortaris me ut (...)
super quodam Apostoli Capitulo Canam, absit. -- unusquisque J^r. Epist. 18.
abundet suo sensu.

No sooner was the Doctor out of the Chair of the old Committee, to answer unto
new Articles that Mr. Pryn had drawn up against him; more especially for a
Sermon that he had preached many years ago; which Mr. Pryn (who had then Ears)
heard himself, and brought along with him some other Auditors, a Company of the
Rabble sort to vex him. Urgeris turba circum te Stante -- thrusting and
justling the Doctor in the Crowd, and railing against him with most vile
speeches; to which be made no reply in this sorry Condition, but patiently
endured all their affronts and injuries; for it was to no purpose to take
further notice of an ungoverned Multitude. Non opus est argumentis sed
fustibus, with whom nothing can prevail but Club-Law: But contrary to all their
expectation he got the victory of the day, and was dismissed with a Quietus
est, by reason of a Letter which he had wisely sent before hand ( Ingenium res
adversae nudare solent) to a leading Gentleman of that Committee, who was
before his most bitter Enemy, but now mollified with the Letter, he allayed the
fury of his Brethren. And glad was he to be so delivered out of the Lions
mouth, telling his Friends, that he would now go to Alresford with a purpose
never to come back to Westminster whilst these two good Friends of his abode in
it, viz. the House of Commons and the Lord of Lincoln. Accordingly he hastened
down to his Family and Parishoners, to solace his Soul with peace after his so
long patience under Westminster troubles.

O Quid solutis est beatius curis
Cum men's onus reponit, ac peregrino
Labor fe^i, venimus ad Larem nostrum Val. Cat.

Desideratoque acquiescimus Lecto --
That is to say

O what is more happy than a patient Mind,
Loaded with cares and fears, relief to find:
Sore Labors first to suffer; than retire
To our own Home and Bed; the hearts desire.
Welcome was he to his Parishoners in Prosperity and Adversity, because of his
affable and courteous behavior; his Hospitality among them, and Relief to
their Poor; his readiness to do his Neighbors any kindness, by Counsel or
other assistance; his constant preaching during all time of his abode with
them, and in his absence when he was called to Court, supplied them with an
able Curate; he was resolved now to spend his days among them, and his
Parishoners at South-warnborough, where he had the same respect and love. But
the good Shepherd was soon driven away from his Flock by the unhappy Wars
following; for the Seeds of Schism and Separation amongst the Saints, taking
Root, quickly sprang up into open Rebellion, put all into disorder, dispersed
Families asunder, parted nearest Relations, forced people from their Houses,
and Ministers out of their Churches; necessitated him to fly for his own safety
and preservation, (as Elijah persecuted by Ahab) being sent for by a party of
Horse, under the command of Sir William Waller, to bring him Prisoner to
Portsmouth; he fairly escaped their hands, but continually disturbed with new
Alarms of Drums and Trumpets sounding about him; he could find no other way of
safety like going to Oxford, there to take Sanctuary with his Brethren the
persecuted Clergy, who in the words of the Historian, Adversum fortuita aspectu
principis Tacit. Hi^. lib. 15.
refoveri, were only comforted with the sight of their Prince in the sad time
of their Crosses and Adversities.

The news of his flying to Oxford quickly took Wings to the old Committee in
London, who forthwith voted him a Delinquent, and sent down an Order for
Sequestration of all his Goods and Chattels. And first they fetched away his
Library, (for they thought he was too great a Scholar) the plunder of which he
took deeply to heart, and ever accounted it the greatest of his Losses: For
nothing is dearer to a good Scholar than Books, that to part with them, goes as
much against his Nature and Genius, as to lose his Life; for he spends his
days wholly in them, and thinks that a horrible night of Ignorance, worse
than Egyptian darkness would overshaddow the World without their Learning.
Omnia jacerent in tenebris, says Cicero, nisi literarum lumen accenderet. Yet
neither had he suffered the loss of his Library nor household Goods so suddenly
as he did, but for Colonel Norton his Neighbor, a Gentleman of the Parliament
party; by whose Command, his Soldiers seized on all that he had in Alresford
for the use of the Parliament, (as they pretended) but sold as they passed
along to any Chapman at inconsiderable rates, Robin Hoods penyworths, what they
had a mind to; some of which Goods, his honest Neighbors bought on purpose to
restore them again to him, except the best of his Hangings, Beds and other
costly Furniture, which with his Plate, Coll. N^rton took to his own use, as
the Doctor was informed. His Books carried away to Portsmouth; many of them
were sold by the way, as Folio's for a Flagon of Ale a piece, which some of his
good Parishioners bought of the Soldiers, that the right Owner might come to
them again. The Carters, and such Fellows, as were employed in the carriage of
his Library and household Goods, were paid off in Books instead of Money; for
the Parliament Soldiers loved that, as they hated Learning: Yet notwithstanding
the Books were so embezell'd and wasted by them, they were appraised at near a
thousand Pound, and put into a public Library, from whence they could never be
redeemed.

After the loss of them, those Sabeans drove away his Goods and Chattels; they
seized upon his Corn and Hay, for immediately by order of the Committee, the
Tyths of both his Livings were sequestered and the profits of his Prebendary in
Westminster, and what temporal Estate he had within their reach, taken from him
that being asked by one of his acquaintance, how he lived? He answered him
readily. By Horseflesh and old Leather; which seeming a Riddle, he explained
afterward his meaning. That he saved only his Coach and Horses which brought
him to Oxford, which he was forced to sell, and live upon the Money. But that
being spent -- Non aetherea vescitur aura, as the Poet said he could not live
like a Camelion upon the Air, he must find out some way of subsistence for
himself and Family. And that was first of all to live upon Credit which seldom
holds long, without an Estate to support it; and afterward upon the Charity
of Friends, which is shorter lived for the heat of that Love, soon grows
cold, being put to hard straits, that he never knew before. Indocilis pauperiem
pati, he must now learn a new Lesson how to shift in the world for a mere
Livelihood. And more miserable he was that having been Master of a plentiful
and noble Estate 800 l. per Annum in ecclesiastical Preferments, as he Extran.
(...) p. 16.
tells us himself, besides his own temporal Estate the Wheel of fortune should
bring such a sudden alteration to turn him down from the Top of her to the
bottom, as to be in so low and poor a condition, that he might justly complain
of her, with the man in the Tragedy. Senec. in Oct. Trag.


Quid me potens fortuna, fallaci mihi
Blandita vultu, sort contentum mea
Alte extulisti! gravius ut ruerem.
May be englished thus,

*Why powerful Fortune? Do thou (frown and smile,
With thy deceitful looks, me to beguile
Of my content, thou sets me up on high
To throw me down in deeper misery.
Yet now he is but in the beginning of his misfortunes, and he has a long race
to run thorough them with Patience, not being able to maintain himself, and
Family in Oxford, he sent his Wife to London; to get what money she could
amongst her nearest Friends and Relations, himself went out of Oxford An. Dom.
1645. walking as a poor Traveller in the Country not knowing well, whether he
should go, Ego herele Enuch. Act. 2. Sc. 3.
nescio, quorsum eam: Ita prorsum oblitus sum mei. Quo me miser conferam.
Disguised both in his Name, and Habit, he sometimes went under the name of
Barker, at other times took the name of Harding by which he was well known
among his Friends, and not discovered by his Enemies; his Habit changed from a
Priest to a Layman, and in the likeness usually of an honest Countryman, or
else of a poor decayed Gentleman, as indeed he was. The peril of the times made
him such a Proteus in his Garb, because the Parliament was resolved, if they
could take him, that he should follow his good Lord of Canterbury to another
World, than that described in his Cosmography; but he happily outlived most of
them, and died in Honor, which they did not. He wandered like a Jew, ^vith a
Groat in his Purse, and sometimes without it, till he got to some good Friends
House.

At his first setting out he was be^ trayed by a zealous she- Puritan, one
Monday at her House in Oxfordshire; her Husband was a true hearted Cavaleir,
unto whose protection he committed himself: He being one day gone from home,
she Saint-like, unfaithful to her Husband and his Friend, sent Intelligence to
some Parliament Soldiers, that there was a Cavaleir Doctor in her House; of
which he had notice given him by two of her Husbands Sisters, who hated her
pure qualities; that as soon as the Family was all in Bed, he went out at a
back door, down a pair of Garden-stairs, from whence he took his March that
Night, Factum est peric'lum ^am Pedum visa est via, (as Phormio said) made what
haste he could; and by the help of God Almighty and the good S^ars; he got
sa^ely to another Friends house by morning; at which time the Soldiers beset
Mrs. Mundays house, as the Country men did the Mountain; but the Cathedral Rat
(as they then called him, and the dignified Clergy) was run away, that Mrs.
Mundays Plot with the Soldiers proved a silly Fable. Ever after, the Doctor
observed it for a Rule, never to come within the doors of a Holy Sister, whose
house may be compared to that which Solomon describes, Is the way to Hell,
going down to the Chambers of Death; that had not Divine Providence protected
him from the treachery of that base Woman, he had fallen into the hands of
those Nimrods, that hunted after his Life. From pla^ to place he shifted, like
the old Travels of the Patriarcks; and in pity to his necessity, found a hearty
entertainment amongst his Friends of the Royal Party, at whose Tables he was
fed, for he had none of his own. His Children disposed of into several Friends
hands; his Wife among her Relations; himself depending upon the courtesy both
of Friends and Strangers till he grew weary, and tired out with this kind of
Life, for Vilis est Amicorum annona.

It pleased God afterward to send him Money, that he settled himself, Wife and
eldest Daughter at Winchester, in the house of a right honest man, one Mr.
Lizard, with whom they Tabled a good while, where he had a comfortable time of
breathing and rest after his former troubles, and to his hearts delight, the
sweet enjoyment and conversation with Loyal Persons; for Winchester was then a
strong Garrison for the King; and being near Alresford, he would go sometimes
in disguise to visit his old Neighbors, whom he knew were true and faithful to
him. But those Halcion days quickly vanished; as seldom Prosperity continues so
long a time as Adversity; for that Town and Castle especially, which was
thought invincible, to be taken by force of Arms were most treacherously
delivered up to their Enemies in three days time: And now every house full of
Soldiers quartered amongst them. Poor Dr. Heylyn was in more danger than ever,
(had not Mr. Lizard took care of him as his dearest Guest, and ^id him in a
private Room (as Providence ordained) to save his Life; which Room was supposed
to have been made formerly for the hiding of Seminary Priests and Jesuits,
because the house heretofore belonged to a Papist Family; and indeed it was so
cunningly contrived, that there was no Door to beseen, nor entering into it, but
behind an old Beds-head; and if the Bed had not been there, the Door was so
neatly made like the other Wainscot of the Chamber, that it was impossible for
a Stranger to find it out: In which Room, instead of a Papist, a right
Protestant Doctor, who was a professed Enemy both to Popery and Puritanism, was
now secured from the rage and violence of the Soldiers, who sought after him
with no less eagerness, than if he had been a Heretic followed by the Spanish
Inquisition, when he good man, was in the very next Room to them, adjoining to
the Dining* Chamber, where he could hear all their raillery and mirth; their
Gaming at Cards and Dice; for those idle Lurdains spent their time only in riot
and pleasure at home; and when they went abroad they would tread the Maze near
the Town. He took his opportunity on the Market day to put on his traveling
Robes, with a long Staff in his hand, and so walked out of the Town considently
with the Country Crowd, bidding adieu to the Conclave or little Room, that he
left for the next distressed Gentleman; in the mean while his Wife and Daughter
he entrusted to Mr. Lizard's care, his faithful Friend.

And now he must again seek hi^ with a hard Adventure not many Miles from
Winchester, where some straggling Soldiers lighting on him, and catching hold of
his hand, felt a Ring under his Glove, which through haste of his escape, he
forgot to pull off; which no sooner discovered, but they roughly swore he was
some Runaway Cavaleir: The Ring being hard to get off, the poor Doctor
willingly help^d them; in which time came galloping by some of the Parliaments
Scouts, who said to their FellowSouldiers, look to your selves, the Cavaleirs
are coming; at which words being a^righted, they took that little Money that was
in his Pocket, and so rid away without further search; and he good man jog'd on
to the next Friends house, with some pieces of Gold that he had hid in his high
Shoes, which if the Rogues had not been so hastily fri^ed away, would have been
undoubtedly found, and might have cost him his Life by further suspicions of
him, as it did the poor Jews (though not in the same manner) at the Seige of
Jerusalem, who flying from their City fell into a worse Calamity, by one of
them swallowing Gold, hid it in his Belly, which he was afterward seen to take
out of his Dung when he exonerated himself; that caused the ripping up several
of their Bellies, according to Josephus. Had Joseph. l. 6. cap. 15.
the Doctor been then apprehended by the Soldiers, and sent up Prisoner to
London; or could they have taken him at at any time (he had Intelligence from a
Friend in the House of Commons) that the Parliament designed to deprive him of
his Life, in revenge of the punishment inflicted upon Pryn, who for his
seditious Libels written against the King and Church, was sentenced not only to
lose his Ears, but was stigmatized also upon his left Cheek with the Letter S.
to signify he was a Schismatic. Whence Cant. the zealous Preacher at Glasgow,
prayed to God after his Sermon to take away the Kings Idolatry, and said, that
the dear Saints in England had their Nose Lysim. Nican. p. 43.
and their Ears slit, for the profession of the Gospel. The Parliament then
might pretend the revenge of Mr. Pryns sufferings, by a retaliation of a worse
punishment upon Dr. Heylyn; but the real cause that exasperated them, was the
good Doctors Loyalty to his King, and fidelity to his Archbishop, the two
great Pillars of the Church, to whom all true Sons of the Church of England
ought to be faithful. And finally the many Books the Doctor had written, and
still likely to write more against the Puritan Faction, was the grand cause of
all his flights and sufferings in the time of War.

Est fuga dicta mihi, non est fuga dicta Libellis. Ovid.

Qui Domini paenam non meruere sui.
Though I am forced to fly, my Books they are not fled,
No reason for my sake, they should be punished.
At what Friends house he was now Kingsmil, a Loyal Person of great worth, and
ancient Family, where he continued, and sent for his Wife and Daughter from
Winchester to him; and from thence removed to Minster-Lovel, (in Oxfordshire)
the pleasant Seat of his elder Brother, in the year An. Dom. 1648. which he
farmed of his Nephew Colonel Heylyn for six years. Being deprived of his
E^astial Preferments, he must think of some honest way for a Livelihood.

-- Fruges lustramus and agros Alb. Titul.

Ritus ut a prisco traditus extat aevo.
Yet notwithstanding he followed his (...) Powers had silenced his Tongue from
preaching, they could not withold his Pen from writing, and that in an acute,
and as sharp a style as formerly, after he had done with his frequent visits of
Friends, and long perambulations. For the public good of the Church, to uphold
her ancient maintenance by Tithes, being robbed then of all her other dues and
dignities, though himself was sequestered of both his Livings, and made
in^apable of receiving any benefit by Tithes; yet for the common cause of
Christianity, and in mere compassion of the Presbyterian Clergy, (though his
professed Enemies) he published at that time (when Tithes were in danger to be
taken away from them) an excellent little Tract, to undeceive the People in the
point of Tithes; and proves therein, That no man in the Realm of England,
pays any thing of his own toward the maintenance of his Parish Minister but
his Easter Offerings.

At the same time, he enlarged his Book of Geography into a large Folio, which
was before but a little Quarto, and intit^led it with the name of Cosmography;
of which it may be truly said, it does contain a world of Learning in it, as
well as the Description of the World; and particularly shows the Authors most
excellent Abilities, not only in History, and smoothness of its style, that
makes the whole Book delightful to the Reader; but in Chronology, Genealogy,
and Heraldry; in which last any one may see, that he could blazon the Arms, and
describe the Descent and Pedigree of the greatest Families in Europe. In which
pleasing study while he spent his time, his good Wife, a discreet and active
Lady; looked both after her Housewifery within doors, and the Husbandry
without; thereby freeing him from that care and trouble, which otherwise would
have hindered his laborious Pen from going through so great a work in so short a
time. And yet he had several divertisements by company, which continually
resorted to his House; for having (God be thanked) his Temporal Estate cleared
from Sequestration, by his Composition with the Commissioners at Goldsmiths
Hall, and this Estate which he farmed besides, he was able to keep a good
house, and relieve his poor Brethren, as himself had found relief from others
Charity; that his House was the Sanctuary of sequestered men turned out of their
Livings, and of several ejected Fellows out of Oxford; more particularly of
some worthy persons I can name, as Dr. Allibone, Mr. Levit, Mr. Thornton, Mr.
Ashwel, who wrote upon the Creed, who would stay for two or three Months at his
House, or any other Acquaintance that were suffering men, he cheerfully
received them, and with a hearty welcome they might tarry as long as they
pleased. The Doctor himself modestly speaks of his own Hospitality; how many
(that were not Domestics, had eaten of his Observe. rescued. p. 51.
Bread and drunk of his Cup.

A Virtue highly to be praised, and most worthy of commendation in it self; for
which Tacitus gives this Character Tacit. lib. de mor. Ger.
of the old Germans, Convictibus and Hospitiis, non alia gens Effusius
indulget. Greater Hospitality says he, and Entertainment, no Nation showed
more bountifully, accounting it as a cursed thing, not to be civil in that kind
according to every man's ability; and when all was spent, the good Master of the
House would lead his Guest to the next Neighbors House, where he, though not
invited, was made welcome with the like courtesy. Among others kindly
entertained, Mr. Marchamont Needham, then a zealous Loyalist, and Scourge to
the Rump Parliament, was sheltered in the Doctors House, (being violently
pursued) till the Storm was over; the good Doctor then, as his Tutelar Angel,
preserved him in a high Room, where he continued writing his weekly
Pragmaticus; yet he afterward, like Balaam the Son of Beor, hired with the
wages of Unrighteousness, corrupted with mercinary Gifts and Bribes, became the
only Apostate of the Nation, and writ a Book for the pretended Commonwealth,
or rather I may say, a base Democracy, for which the Doctor could never after
endure the mention of his name, who had so disobliged his Country and the Royal
Party, by his shameful Tergiversation.

The good Doctors Charity did not Friends and Acquaintance, but to mere
Strangers, by whom he had like to run himself into a Praemunire: For word being
carried to him in his Study, there was a Gentleman at the door, who said he was
a Commander in the Kings Army, and car^estly desired some relief and harbor;
the Doctor presently went to him, and finding by his Discourse and other
Circumstances, what he said was true, received him into his House, and made him
very welcome: the Gentleman was a Scotch Captain, who having a Scotch Diurnal in
his Pocket, they read it, fearing no harm thereby, but it proved otherwise; for
one of the Doctors Servants listening at the door, went straight way to Oxford,
and informed the Governor Colonel Kelsey, that his Master had received
Letters from the King; whereupon the Governor sent a Party of Horse to fetch
him away. Strange News it was, knowing his own Innocence, to hear that Soldiers
had beset his House so early in the Morning, before he was out of Bed; But go
he must to appear before the Governor; and when he came, that treacherous
Rogue his Man did confidently affirm, that he heard the Letters read, and was
sure he could remember the very words, if his Master would produce the Letters:
Upon which the Doctor relates the whole story to the Governor, and withal
shows the Diurnal, which the Governor read to the Fellow, often asking him, is
this right? Is this the same you heard? To whom he answered, Yes Sir, yes; that
is the very thing, and those words I remember: Upon which, the Governor caused
him to be soundly whipped, instead of giving him a reward for his Intelligence;
and dismissed the Doctor, with some Complements, ordering the same Party of
Horse that fetched him, to wait upon him home.

Being thus delivered from the treachery Wainman, his Neighbor hearing of,
commended to him one of her own Servants, whom Sr. Francis her Husband had bred
up from a Child, whose fidelity he need not fear in the Worst of times, when a
Man's enemies Tacit. Hit ib. 4.
may be of his own Household, as Q. Vibius Serenus was betrayed by his own Son,
Reus pater, accusator filius, idem Judex et Testis says the Historian, the Son
was both Acuser, Judge, and witness against his Father.

After he had lived many years in Minster-Lovel, he removed from thence to
Abingdon, where he bought a House called Lacies-Court, of which he bestowed
much cost in repairing and building some Additions to it, particularly of a
little Oratory, or Chapel, which about the Altar was adorned with Silk
Hangings, the other part of the Room plain, but kept very decent, wherein
himself and his Family went to prayers, most Rooms of his house were well
furnished, and the best Furniture in them, as in the Dining-Chamber, and next
Room to it, were saved by his good Neighbors at Alresford, who were so far
from thinking, (except some malicious persons among them) that they should
never fix eye on him more unless they took a journey (which I hate to mention)
to a Gaol or a Gallows that they questioned not his return again to Alsford,
and the enjoyment of his plundered goods. This house in Abingdon he purchased
for the pleasantness of its situation, standing next the Feilds, and not
distant five Miles from Oxford, where he might be furnished with Booksat his
pleasure, either from the Booksellers Shops, or the Bodlean-Library,
perticularly he was beholden to his Reverend and Learned Friend Doctor Barlow,
now Lord-Bishop of Lincoln who sometimes accommodated him with choice Books,
of whom I have heard the Doctor say, if the Times ever altered, he was
confident, that man of learning would be made a Bishop, which indeed is now
come to pass. Such a fresh appetite to Study and Writing, he still retained in
his old Age, that he would give his mind no time of vacancy and intermission
from those Labors, in which he was before continually exercised, Ju. Scalig.
Epist. de Vetus. et Splend. Gent. Scal. p. 47.
it is said of Julius Coesar Scaliger an indefatigable Student as his Son Writes
of him. Nullum tempus a Studiis Literarum et lucubrationibus relinquebat, but
he was then forty years of Age before he began the course of his Studies,
having spent his former days in the Camp of Mars and not of the Muses: The
Doctor from a Child devoted his whole Life to painful Study, not allowing
himself ease in the worst of times, and in the midst of his troubles.

For at the time of his sad Pilgrimage Sanctuary at any Friends House, his
thoughts were not extravagant, but studiously intent upon these matters, which
he digested afterward into Form, and Use, when he came to a settled condition.
And in the beginning of his troubles, being under the displeasure of the House
of Commons, on the complaint of Mr. Pryn, when his Enemies took the advantage
some to Libel and others to write against him, perticularly Doctor Hackwel
(before mentioned) at such an unseasonable Appendix in Advert. p. 10.
time, with whom Doctor Heylyn says he would not refuse an encounter upon any
Argument, either at the sharp or at the Smooth, afterward when Monarchy and
Episcopacy was trodden under foot, then did he stand up a Champion in defense of
both, and feared not to publish, the stumbling Block of Disobedience, and his
Certamen Epistolare; in which Mr. Baxter fled the Field, because there was
impar congressus betwixt him, and (as I may say) an old Soldier of the Kings,
who had been used to fiercer Combats with more famous Goliahs. Also Mr. Thomas
Fuller was sufficiently chastised by the Doctor for his Church History, as he
deserved a most sharp correction, because he had been a Son of the Church of
England in the time of her prosperity, and now deserted her in her adverse
Fortune, and took to the Adversaries side: And it was then my hap, having some
business with Mr. Tailor my fellow Collegian in Lincoln-Colledge, then Chaplain
to the Lord Keeper, Mr. Nathanial Fines, to see Mr. Fuller make a fawning
address to my Lord with his great Book of Church History, hugged under his Arm,
which he presented to the Keeper after an Hor. Ep. 13.
uncouth manner, as Horace describes -- Sub ala fasciculum portas librorum ut
rusticus agnum. The many falsities, defects and mistakes of that Book the
Doctor discovered and refuted; of which Mr. Fuller afterward being ingeniously
ashamed, came to the Doctors House in Abingdon, were he made his Peace, both
became very good Friends, and between them for the future was kept an
inviolable bond of Friendship.

In the Year 1656. the Doctor printed Charles, published by H. L. Esquire: with
whom the Doctor dealt very heartily, and modestly corrected some of his
mistakes in most mild and amicable terms, telling him, viz. Between us both the
History will be Epistle dedicatory.
made more perfect, and consequently the Reader will be better satisfied, which
makes me somewhat confident, that these few Notes will be so far from making
your History less vendible then it was before, that they will very much
advantage and promote the Sale: And if I can do good to all, without wrong to
any, I hope no man can be offended with my pains and Industry, In answer to
which Mr. Hammond L' Estrange led by his passion, and not by reason, fell upon
the Doctor in such uncivil words, unbecoming a Gentleman that as the Doctor
says, he never was accustomed to such Billings-gate Language. There was indeed
a time (says Extran. Vapulans. Epistle to the Reader*
he) when my name was almost in every Libel, which exercised the Patience of
the State for seven years together, and yet I dare confidently say, that all of
them together, did not vomit so much filth upon me, as has proceeded from the
Mouth of the Pamphleter, whom I have in hand. Therefore the Doctor returned a
quick and sharp reply to him in his Book, Entitled Extraneus Vapulans, wherein
with admired Wit and Eloquence he gave Mr. L' Estrange a most severe, yet civil
correction. His Brother Mr. Roger L' Estrange a most Loyal Gentleman, has
since made amends for his Brothers Faults, by his good service done both to
Church and State.

The next Book which the Doctor published, An. Dom. 1657. Ecclesia Vindicata,
or the Church of England justified, he de^ted it, (as a gratefu^ Testimony of
his mind) to his Master then living, Mr. Edward Davis, formerly Schoolmaster
of Burford, and now Vicar of Shelton in the County of Berks, to whom he ever
showed a Love and Reverence: and had the Doctors Power been answerable to his
will and intention, he had designed more considerable Preferments for him, but
the sudden and unexpected alteration in his own affairs prevented, (so soon
almost as he was preferred) that he could show no other Specimen of his
gratitude. What says the Heathen? Diis parentibus and Precaeptoribus non
redditur aequivalens. An amends can never be made to God, our Parents and
Tutors; and certainly he has but little of a Christian in him that can forget
this Lesson.

About the same time he was harassed Olivers Major General for the Decimation
of his Estate, hoc novum est aucupium: For he thought there had been an end of
all further payments, and punishment for his Loyalty, by compounding for his
Estate in Goldsmiths-Hall, that he argued the Case notably with them, but all
in vain, for Arguments though never so acutely handled, are obtuse Weapons
against the Edge of the Sword. He tells us that his temporal Estate was first
brought under Sequestration, and under Observe. resc. p. 50.*
a Decimation since, only for his adhaesion to those sacred Verities to which
he has been principled by Education, and confirmed by Study. While he was
arguing his cause before the Major General and his Captains, one Captain Allen
formerly a Tinker, and his Wife a poor Tripe-Wife, took upon him to reprove the
Doctor for maintaining his Wife so highly, like a Lady; to whom the Doctor
roundly replied; That he had married a Gentlewoman, and did maintain her
according to her quality; and so might he his Tripe-wife: Adding withal, that
this Rule he always observed, For his Wife to go above his Estate; his Children
according to his Estate, and himself below his Estate; so that at the years end
he could make all even. Soon after these things, came out the Order of
Decimation against him; a Heathenish Cruelty in this Case; if Men's Estates are
as dear to them as their Lives, (because the one without the other renders them
miserable) may be compared to that of Maximian, the Tyrant and cruel Persecutor
of the Church, that put the Christians to such a bloody Decimation, that every
tenth man of them was to be killed: And this other was barbarous enough in its
kind, that all the Gentry of the Nation, (not only the tenth part of them) who
had engaged in his Majesty's Service; should first be compelled to compound for
their own Estates, and afterward without mercy Decimated; that brought an utter
ruin upon many of their Families.

Notwithstanding all this, the Doctor crescit sub pondere virtus, the more he
was pressed with their heavy loads, did flourish and grow up in his Estate;
that through the blessing of God, being neither the Subject of any man's Envy,
nor the Object of their Pity; he lived in good Credit, and kept a noble House;
for I my self being often there, can say, I have seldom seen him sit down at
his Table without company; for being nigh the University, some out of a desire
to be acquainted with him, and others to visit their old Friend, whom they knew
rarely could be seen but at Meals, made choice of that time to converse with
him: And likewise his good Neighbors at Abingdon, whom he always made welcome,
if they were honest men, that had been of the Royal party, and was ready to
assist them upon all occasions; particularly in upholding the Church of St.
Nicholas, which otherwise had been pulled down, on pretense of uniting it to
St. Ellens; but in truth, to disable the sober party of the Town, who were
loyal people, from enjoying their wonted Service and Worship of God in their
own Parish Church, of which they ^ad a Reverend and Orthodox man, one Mr.
Huish, their Minister; and in his absence, the Doctor took care to get them
supplied with able men from Oxford. Great endeavors were on both sides; the
one party to preserve the Church, and the other to pull it down, because it was
thronged with Malignants, who seduced others from their godly way: Religion
always has been the pretense of factious minds, to draw on others to their
party, as one says well, Sua quisque arma Ubbo. * 4. His. F^s.
sancta praedicat, suam causam Religiosam, Deus, Pietas, cultus divinus
praetexuntur. Every one proclaims their own Quarrels to be a holy War; the
cause Religion, God, Godliness, and Divine Worship must be pretended.

Several Journies the good Doctor took London, sparing neither his pains nor
purse, in so pious a cause; for the managing of which, he employed diverse
Solicitors; sometimes before Committees, at other times before Oliver's
Council, where it was carried dubiously, and rather inclining to the other
side; at which the Presbyterian party caused the Bells to be rung, and made
Bonefires in the Town, to express their Joy, triumphing in the Ruin of a poor
Church; but the day was not so clearly, their own as they imagined, Dum res
quamvis afflictae, nondum tamen perditae forent, as the Orator said; for the
Church yet stood against all its Enemies, God protecting his own House, and his
zealous Servants for it, in a time when they could look for little favors from
the Powers that then ruled, who had not so much respect for Gods House, as the
Heathens had for their Idol Temples, and for those that vindicated them, as
Justin says on this occasion. Diis proximus Justin. l. 8.
habetur per quem De^rum majestas vindicata sit. For which he praises Philip
of Macedon, calling him, Vindicem Sacrilegii, ultorem Religionum, etc. During
those troubles about the Church, Mr. Huish the Minister thereof, durst not go
on in his ministerial Duties, which no sooner the Doctor heard of, but to
animate and encourage him, he writ a pious Letter; a Copy of which I then
transcribed, which is as follows, and worth the inserting here.

Sir,
WE are much beholden to you for condiscending unto our desires, so far as the
Lords-days Service, which though it be Opus diei in die suo, yet we cannot think
our selves to be fully Masters of our Requests, till you have yielded to bestow
your pains on the other days also. We hope in reasonable time to alter the
condition of Mr. Blackwels pious gift, that without hazarding the loss of his
donation, which would be an irrecoverable blow to this poor Parish, you may sue
out your Qietus est from that daily Attendance, unless you find some further
motives* and inducements to persuade you to it; yet so to alter it, that there
shall be no greater wrong done to his Intentions, than to most part of the
Founders in each University, by changing Prayers for the Souls, first by them
intended, into a commemoration of their bounties, as was practiced. All
dispositions of this kind must vary with their changes which befall the Church,
or else be alienated and estranged to other purposes. I know it must needs be
some discouragement to you to read to Walls, or to pray in public with so thin
a company, as hardly will amount to a Congregation; but withal I desire you to
consider, that magis and minus, as Logicians say, do not change the species of
things; that quantities of themselves are of little effica^y, (if at all of
any) and that he who promised to be in the midst of two or three when they meet
together in his Name, has clearly showed, that even the smallest Congregations
shall not want his presence; and why then should we think much to bes^ow our
pains where he vouchsafes his pr^sence, or think our labor ill bestowed, if
some few only do partake of the present benefi^? And yet no doubt the benefit
extends to more than the Parties present; for ^ou know well that the Priest or
Minister, is not only to pray with, but for the People; that he is not only to
offer up the Peoples Pra^ers to Almighty God, but to offer up his own Prayers
for them; the benefit whereof may charitably be presumed to extend to, as well
as it was intended for, the absent also. And if a whole Nation may be
represented in a Parliament of ^our hundred persons, and they derive the
blessings of peace and comfort upon all the Land, why may we not conceive, that
God will look on three or four of this little Parish, as the representation of
the whole, and for their sakes, extend his Grace and Blessing unto all the
rest; that he who would have saved that sinful City of Sodom, had he ^ound but
ten righteous persons in it, may not vouchsafe to bless a less sinful people
upon the Prayers of a like or less number of pious and religious persons. When
the High Priest went into the Sanctum Sanctorum to make atonement for the Sins
of the People, went he not thither by himself? None of the people being
suffered to enter into that place. Do not we read, that when Zacharias offered
up Incense, which figured the Prayers of the Saints, within the Temple, the
people waited all that while in the outward Courts; or find we any where, that
the Priest who offered up the daily Sacrifice, and this comes nearest to our
Case, did ever intermit that Office by reason of the slackness and indevotion
of the people in repairing to it: But you will say, there is a Lion in the way,
there is danger in it. Assuredly I hope none at all, or if any, none that you
would care for. The Sword of the Committee had as sharp an edge, and was
managed with as strong a malice, as any Ordinance of a late date can empower
men with. Having so fortunately escaped the danger of that, why should you
think of any thing, but despising this, as Tully did unto Mark, Antony.
Catilinae gladios contempsi, non timebo tuos. Why may you not conclude with.
David in the like sense and apprehensions of Gods preservation, that he who
saved him from the Bear and from the Lion, would also save him from the Sword
of that railing Philistine: And you may see that the Divine Providence is still
awake over that poor remnant of the regular and othodox Clergy, which have not
yet bowed their knees to the Golden Calves of late erected, by putting so
unexpectedly a Hook into the Nostrils of those Leviathans which threatened with
an open mouth to devour them all: I will not say as Clemens of Alexandria did
in Case much like that, it is (...), to indulge too much to apprehension of
this nature, in matters which relate to Gods public Service: All I shall add,
is briefly thus, that having presented you with these considerations, I shall
with greediness expect the sounding of the Bell to morrow morning, and in the
mean time make my prayers to Almighty God, to direct you in this business, as
may be most for his glory, your own particular comfort, and the good of this
people, with which expressions of my Soul, I subscribe my self,

Your most affectionate Friend and Brother in Christ Jesus Peter Heylyn.


After this good Letter, Mr. Huish batteries and fierce assaults of its
Enemies, who were never able to demolish it, or unite it to St. Ellens, so well
had the Doctor managed the business for the public good and the benefit of the
Parish; for as to his own particular, he might have spared that pains and
charge, having (as we said before) a Chapel in his own house, where he
constantly used the Common Prayer for his Family devotions, being no lover of
other Forms, much less of extemporary Effusions, for the impertinencies,
tautologies, and irreverent expressions that usualy attends them, though such
Prayers are most admired by the Vulgar, because some of them think themselves
excellently gifted that way; as the Doctor tells us a story of a Puritan
Tradesman, Meeting ^ne time (says he) by chance, my old Cha^r-fellow Mr. L. D.
at Dinner, my Chamber-fellow being the only Dr. Heylyns Discourse touching the
Form of Prayer. p. 161.
Scholar in the company, was requested to say Grace, which he did accordingly;
and having done, the Tradesman lifting up both his Hands and Whites to Heaven,
calls upon the company saying, dearly beloved Brethren, let us praise God
better; and thereupon began a long extempore Grace of his own conceiving.

But to return again, As he had a respect to the Cause of the Church, so he was
careful of his own concern, to answer Dr. Bernard, an Irish Dean, but now
Chaplain to Oliver, one of his Almoners, and a Preacher in GraysInn, who had
put forth a Book entitled The Judgment of the late Primate of Ireland, etc.
in reply to which, the Doctor published, Respondet Petrus, and an Apendix in
answer to certain passages of H. L' Est. History of the Reign of King Charles:
In the one, he treats learnedly about the Sabbath: the other relating to the
Lord Primate, the Articles of the Church of Ireland, and the Earl of Strafford;
to neither of which his Adversaries could make a Reply; but instead thereof,
Dr. Bernard endeavored to procure an Order from Olivers Privy Council, to burn
the Book, which caused a common report, that Dr. Heylyn's Book of the Sabbath,
was publicly burnt; but according to the old saying, Fama est mendax, for the
Book never saw. the Fire, nor any Answer to it; and if it had been martyred in
the Fire, it would have proved more for the Authors credit than disgrace, as
Tacitus tells us in the like Case of Cremutius Cordus, whose Book was decreed
by Tac. An (...)
the Senate to be burnt, punitis Ingeniis (says he) gliscit authoritas, when
good Wits are punished, their credit grows greater.

An ordinary Scandal has been thrown upon learned men, who have been zealous
Defenders of the Church of England, to brand them with the ignominious name of
Papists, or being Popishly affected, because they have abhorred the other
extreme of Puritanism, in which kind of Slanders the Doctor has sufficiently
received his share; that Hammond L' Estrange Apend. to the Adv.
called him, An Agent for the Sea of Rome. A heavy charge this is, if it
carried the least semblance of Truth; but what honest man may not be so belyed:
Si accusare suffecerit, quis innocens erit? When the Doctor in all his
Writings, (and no man I may say more) has declared his judgment against the
Church of Rome; and upon every occasion, as* he meets with her, whets his Pen
most sharply, to lance her old sores, and and let the World see what filthy
corruptions and errors abound in her; more particularly in his Book of Books,
Theologia Veterum upon the Apostles Creed, the Sum of Christian Theology,
positive, polemical, and philological; and in all his Court Sermons upon the
Tares, especially the fourth Sermon; also in his great Cosmography, where he
sets out the Popes of Rome in their pontifical Colors: Therefore for the
Vindication of him from this foul aspersion, with which some have maliciously
bespattered many of our excellent Divines; I particularly thank the Reverend
and Learned Dr. Stillingsleet for his Answer to T. G. who would have made use
of the Puritans accusation for the Papists purpose, but the worthy Doctor
quickly refuted him, and ever after put him to silence, in citing Dr. Heylyns
fourth Sermon upon the Tares, where he lays at the Door of Papists, the most
gross Idolatry, greater than which, was never known among the Gentiles. This
being brought into discourse at such time as the Archbishops Book against
Fisher the Jesuit was newly published, it was affirmed by some, that the Doctor
in his Sermon had pulled up Popery by the Roots, yet one of the Company most
maliciously replied thereunto: That the ArchBishop Arch-Bish. Life p. 339.
might print, and the Doctor might preach what they pleased against Popery, but
that he should never think them, or either of them to be the less Papists for
all that. A Censure of so strange a nature, (says the Doctor himself) that he
believed it is not easy to be paralleled in the worst of times. But what need
is there of producing Sermons or other Testimonies in his behalf, when his
general Conversation, more severe than ordinary, fully attested, that as he was
a strict Observer of all the Rites and Orders of the Church of England, so a
perfect Abhorrer of Popery and Roman Superstitions, that he would not so much
as hold correspondency with a Papist, or with one so reputed; as I can instance
an Example of one Mr. Hood whose Family and the Doctors were very kind, when he
lived at Minster, being near Neighbors; but the Gentleman afterward changing
his Religion, and turning Papist, came to Abington, to give him a Visit in his
new House; the Doctor sent his Man Mr. Gervis, who was his Amanue^ to bid the
Gentleman be gone, and ^t the Doors of him; saying, that he heard he was turned
Papist, for which he hated the sight of him, and so my Gentleman went away,
never daring to give him another Visit. In which he followed the Example of his
Lords Grace of Canterbury, that when Con was sent hither by the Pope to be
assistant to the Queen in her Religion; the wise Bishop kept himself at such a
distance with Arch-Bish. Life p. 386.
him, that neither Con nor Panzani before him, (who acted for a time in the
same capacity) could fasten any acquaintance on him; nay, he neglected all
intercessions in that Case, and did shun (as it were the Plague) the company
and familiarity of Con.

THEOLOGO-HISTORICVS, Or the True Life and Death OF THE Most Reverend DIVINE,
and Excellent HISTORIAN PETER HEYLYN D.D. Sub-Dean of Westminster.

Written by his Son in Law John Barnard D. D.

Part. II.

BEATI MORTUI, qui in Domino Moriuntur Apoc. Cap. 14. v. 13.

LONDON, Printed 1683.

THE TRUE LIFE and DEATH OF THE Most Reverend and Learned DIVINE Dr. PETER
HEYLYN.
Part. II.
LIKE a true Christian and obedient Son of the Church, the good Doctor did
patiently undergo all the persecutions, reproaches, and clamorous speeches,
both of Papists and Puritans; not regarding what the height of their malice
could speak, or their virulent Pens could write against him; because he was
able to defend himself. But that which drew all the odium and inveterate malice
upon him, from the several Factions then prevalent, was his Loyalty, Learning,
and Conscieuce, that he constantly asserted the Kings Prerogative, the Churches
Rights, (not infringing the Peoples privileges,) in the defense of which he
was continually employed until his Majesty's most happy Restoration, which
was the longed hope and earnest desire of this poor distracted Nation. Quia non
aliud patriae discordantis remedium Tacit. An. lib. 1.
fuisse, quam ut ab uno regeretur, As the Historian said, which cannot be
Englished better than in the words of his Majesty's late gracious declaration.
That Religion, Liberty and property were all lost and gone, when the Monarchy
was shaken of, and could never be revived till that was restored. Therefore the
Peoples Representative in Parliament, induced by necessity as well as duty, did
unanimously vote, like the Elders of Judah, to bring home their Lord the King
to his native Kingdom, of whose wished return we did then all sing, as the Poet
of Augustus.

Custos Gentis, abes iam nimium Diu
Maturum reditum pollicitus Patrum Hor. car. l. 4. od. 5.

Sancto Concilio
Lu^m read lux Dux bone, Patriae
Instar veris enim vultus ubi tuus
Affulsit populo, gratior it dies
Et Soles melius nitent.
That is to say

Most Sovereign Guardian of this Nation
Thy absence all lament
Return to joy the expectation
Of thy whole Parliament
Good Prince, the Glory of our Land
Shine with thy Beams of Majesty.
Thy countenance like the Spring at hand
Cheers up thy People merrily.
Our days now more delightfully are spent
The Sun looks brighter in the Firmament.
And now the Sun shone more gloriously Hemisphere then ever; the Tyrannical
powers being dissolved, as the historian said Non Cynnae, non Syllae dominatio
and Pompei Crassique potentia in Caesarem -- The Kingdom ruled Tacit. lib. 1.
by its own natural Prince, and only lawful Sovereign; the Church restored to
her ancient Rights, and true Religion established among us; every man sitting
under his own Vine with joy, who had been a good Subject and a Sufferer; the
Doctor was restored to all his former preferments, of which he had been
deprived for Seventeen years. After his re-entrance into his Pre^dary of
Westminster, he had the Ho^r to attend his Sacred Majesty at the ^e of his
Coronation, in the So^y of which, according to his office and place, (as
Subdean of the Church) he presented upon his knees the Royal Scepter unto his
Majesty, in whose exile ^o the utmost of his power he had exercised his Pen in
the def^nce both of the Crown, Scepter, and Miter, his Soul then transported
with joy, that he should survive the usurped powers, and see with his old bad
eyes, the King settled upon his Fathers Throne, and peace upon Israel. In the
Evening after the Ceremonies of the Coronation were over, while the Ordinance
was playing from the Tower, it happened to thunder violently, at which some
persons who were at supper with him, seemed much affrighted. I very well
remember an expression of his upon the same, according to the Poets word
Intonuit laetus, that the Ordinance of Heaven answered those of the Tower,
rejoicing at the solemnity, with which the Company being exceedingly pleased,
there followed much Joy and Mirth.

Thus being settled in Westminster, he Successors, that live in another Age; as
Cicero said of them who took delight in planting Oake-Trees, Serunt Arbores,
quae prosi^t alteri saeculo. He enlarged his Prebends House, by making some
convenient Additions to it; perticularly, he erected a new Dining Room, and
beautified the other Rooms, all which he enjoyed but for a little time, of
which he made the best use while he lived, to serve his God, and seek after the
Churches good; in which work he was as industrious after his Majesty's happy
Restoration as he was before, to testify his Religious zeal and care, that
all things might run on in the old right Channel; for which reason, he writ a
fervent Letter to a great Statesman of that time, earnestly pressing him to
advise the King, that a Convocation might be called with the present
Parliament, which was a thing then under question; his Letter is as follows.

Right Honorable, and my very good Lord;
I Cannot tell how welcome or unwelcom this Address may prove, in regard of the
greatness of the Cause, and the low Condition of the Party, who negotiates in
it: But I am apt enough to persuade my self, that the honest zeal which moves
me to it; not only will excuse, but endear the boldness. There is (my Lord) a
general speech, but a more general fear withal amongst some of the Clergy, that
there will be no Convocation called with the following Parliament; which if it
should be so resolved on, cannot but raise sad thoughts in the hearts of those,
who wish the peace and happiness of this our English Sion. But being Bishops
are excluded from their Votes in Parliament, there is no other way to keep up
their honor and esteem in the Eyes of the People, than the retaining of their
places in Convocation: Nor have the lower Clergy any other means to show their
duty to the King, and keep that little freedom which is left unto them, than by
assembling in in such meetings, where they may exercise the Power of a
Convocation, in granting Subsidies to his Majesty, though in nothing else. And
should that Power be taken from them, according to the constant (but
unprecedented) practice of the late long Parliament; and that they must be
taxed and rated with the rest of the Subjects without their liking and consent?
I cannot see what will become of the first Article of Magna Charta, so
solemnly, so frequently confirmed in Parliament; or what can possibly be left
unto them of either the Rights or Liberties belonging to an English Subject. I
know it is conceived by some, that the distrust which his Majesty has in some
of the Clergy, and the diffidence which the Clergy have one of another, is
looked on as the principle cause of the Innovation. For I must needs behold it
as an Innovation, that any Parliament should be called without a meeting of the
Clergy at the same time with it. The first year of King Edward the Sixth, Qeen
Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, were times of greater diffidence and distraction
than this present conjuncture: And yet no Parliament was called in the
beginning of their several Reigns without the company and attendance of a
Convocation, though the intendments of the State aimed then at greater
Alterations in the face of the Church, than are now pretended or desired: And
to say truth, there was no danger to be feared from a Convocation th^ugh the
times were ticklish and unsettled, and the Clergy was divided into sides and
Factions, as the Case then stood, and so stands with us at the present time.
For since the Clergy in their Convocations are in no Authority to propound,
treat, or conclude any thing, (more than the passing of a Bill of Subsidies for
his Majesty's use) until they are empowered by the Kings Commission. The King
may tie them up for what time he pleases, and give them nothing but the
opportunity of entertaining one another with the News of the Day. But if it be
objected, That the Commission now on foot for altering and explaining certain
passages in the public Liturgy, shall either pass instead of a Convocation, or
else is thought to be neither competable nor consistent with it; I hope for
better in the one, and must profess that I can see no reason in the other. For
first, I hope, that the selecting of some few Bishops, and other learned men of
the lower Clergy, to debate on certain points contained in the Common
Prayer Book, is not intended for a Representation of the Church of England,
which is a Body more diffused, and cannot legally stand by their Acts and
Councils; and if the Conference be for no other purpose, but only to prepare
matter for a Convocation, (as some say it is not) why may not such a Conference
and Convocation be held both at once? For neither the selecting of some learned
men out of both the Orders for the composing and reveiwing of the two
Liturgies, digested in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, proved any hindrence
in the calling of their Convocation, which were held both in the second and
third, and in the fifth and sixth years of the said Kings Reign: Nor was it
found that the holding of a Convocation together with the first Parliament
under Queen Elizabeth proved any hinderance to that Conference in disputation,
which was designed between the Bishops and some learned men of the opposite
Parties. All which considered, I do most humbly beg your Lordship to put his
Majesty in mind of sending out his Mandates to the two Arch*Bishops, for
summoning a Convocation according to the usual Form, in their several
Provinces, that this poor Church may be held with some degree of veneration
both at home and abroad. And in the next place, I do no less humbly-beseech
your Lordship to excuse this freedom, which nothing but my zeal to Gods Glory,
and my affection to this Church could have forced from me. I know how ill this
present Office does become me, and how much better it had been, for such as
shine in a more eminent Sphere in the holy Hierarchy to have tendered these
particulars to consideration; which since they either have not done, or that no
visible effect has appeared thereof, I could not choose but cast my poor Mite
into the Treasury; which if it may conduce to the Churches good, I shall have
my wish; and howsoever shall be satisfied in point of Conscience, that I have
not failed in doing my duty to this Church, according to the light of my
understanding, and then what happens to me shall not be material. And thus
again most humbly craving pardon for this great presumption, I subscribe my
self,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant to be commanded, PETER HEYLYN.


Soon after, a Convocation was called Visitors from them, who constantly upon
occasion, came to him for his Advice and Direction in matters relating to the
Church; because he had been himself an ancient Clerk in the old Convocations.
Many Persons of Quality, besides the Clergy, for the reverence they had to his
Learning, and the delight they took in his Company, paid him several Visits,
which he never repayed, being still so devoted to his studies, that except
going to Church, it was a rare thing to find him from home. I happened to be
there when the good Bishop of Durham, Dr. Cousins, came to see him; who after a
great deal of familiar discourse between them, said, I wonder Brother Heylyn
thou art not a Bishop, for we all know thou have deserved it. To which he
answered, much good may it do the new Bishops, I do not envy them, but wish
they may do more than I have done. Although he was but a Presbyter, I believe
their Lordships thought him worthy of their holy Order; I am sure he was
reverenced by some of them as St. Jerome was by St. Augustine. (Quamvis
Episcopus major est Presbitero Augustinus tamen minor est Jeronimo.) The one of
which was an old Presbyter, the other a young Bishop, but both of incomparable
Learning and Virtues. The old Presbyter writes thus to St. Austin the great
Bishop of S. Jer. Ep. 18. ad Aug.
his time. In scripturarum campo juvenis, non provoces senem. Nos nostra
habuimus tempora: nunc te currente, and longa spatia transmeante nobis debitur
otium. For the good Doctors indefatigable pains and continued industry, he was
second to none. For his Writings and Sufferings in the Cause of Monar^by and
Episcopacy, he did spend himself, and was spent: For the sad Persecutions he
suffered in the time of War, his Enemies hunting after his Life, as Ahaziahs
Captains did for the man of God; the woeful shifts and straits he was put to, to
secure himself from violence; how many times he narrowly escaped death from the
hands of his Enemies, as a Bird out of the Snare of the Fowler? What fears and
distractions were often upon him, that he might say, O si nescissem Literas, I
would to God I had not known a Letter of the Book; for his Learning and Loyalty
were the cause of all his Calamities, yet notwithstanding he lived in an
ungrateful Age, that no respect was showed to him or his: But he returned only
to his own in Peace, which he enjoyed a little while before the War, and less
time after the Churches setlement. It has been the Lot many times of great
Scholars, to be neglected, which made his Enemies rejoice, and not a little
insult over him, to see him only passed by, and of all others remain in Statu
quo, in the same Condition he was in before, which after the happy revolution
of public affairs neither Law nor Justice could hinder him of. I will not say
of him as the Cardinal did of Melancton, that most Learned Divine of the
Reformation. O ingratam Germaniam quae tanti Melch. Ad. in vit. Mel.
viri tantosque labores non pluris aestimet. It fa redalso ill with Luthers
Memory after his Death, whose Widow hoping some favors would be showed to her
for his merits, was shamefully disappointed. Praeter viduitatis incommoda quae
mutiplicia, experta est magnam ingratitudinem ibid. in vit. Luth.
multorum pro quibus sperans benesicia ob ingentia mariti in Ecclesiam merita
turpiter frustrata est. So ordinary it is for men of admired worth, who have
done public service either in Church or State, to be soonest forgotten.

Now having run through the principal

For his Person; he was of a middle Stature; a slender spare man; his Face
oval, of fresh complexion, looking rather young than old; his Hair short and
curled, had few or no gray hairs; his Eyes quick and sparkling, before he had
the ill fortune to loose his Sight: His natural Constitution being hot and dry:
It was conceived by skilful Oculists, his Brain, heated with immoderate study,
burnt up the Christaline humor of his Eyes: And this was most probable, he
being continually engaged in writing either for Church or State; his Brain was
like a Laboratory kept hot with study, decayed his Eyes, if there be any truth
in the Naturalists Observation, magna Plin. Not. His. lib. 11. cap. 36.
cogitatio obcaecat, abducto intus visu. And this he looked upon as the saddest
affliction that ever befell him in his whole Life: Yet no doubt he was
comforted, with the words (which he had often read in Socrates) of Anthony the
good Monk unto Dydimus that learned man of Alexandria. Let it not grieve thee
at all (says he) O noble Dydimus, that thou art bereaved of thy corporal Eyes,
and Socrat. ^. 4. cap. 20.
carnal sight; for though you want such Eyes as commonly are given to Flies and
Gnats, yet have thou greatly to rejoice that the Eyes wherewith the Angels do
behold their Maker, wherewith God is seen of Men are not taken from thee.

Our blessed Savior said, the light of the Body is the Eye; for without these
two Luminaries which God has placed in the Microcosm of man: None can be said
in this World to live a true happy Day, who are under such a continual Night of
Darkness; but that the intellectual Light of the Soul, the Candle of the Lord
within us, supplies that miserable defect with a far greater felicity by
extraordinary endowments of the Sen. lib. 10. Not Quest.
mind, which Seneca calls, melior pars nostri; and it is the best part of man
indeed: though all the Members and Parts of our Bodies are so excellently
compacted together by the Wisdom of the Creator, and have such a necessary
depence upon one another for the exercise of their several Offices, that the
Compositum of Man cannot be complete without them; and chiefly the Eye being
the guide of the whole Body, has pre-eminence over the rest of the Members,
says the Philosopher, (...), Arist. lib. 1. Met.
because by it we receive the greatest share of Knowledge and Understanding, it
being the principal Organ of sens^ for that use.

But the loss of his Eyes, considering the Cause, was no blemish to his Person,
but rather a Mark of Honor, as the Caeci among the Romans, a noble Family were
so called, because of the notable service they did for the public Alex. ab
Alex. lib. 1. cap. 9.
good, Claros and illustres viros, militiae domique ex oculorum vitio
cognomenta invenere, says Alex. ab Alexand. Thus Constantine the great, in
honor of Paphnutius sufferings for Christian Religion, kissed the hole in his
face, out of Holy State. l. 3. c. 15.
which the Tyrant Maximinus had bored his eye: the good Emperor making much of
the Socket (says Mr. Fuller) when the Candle was p^t out. These outward
Windows being shut, the Doctor enjoyed more perfectly the sweet and seraphical
contemplations of his own Mind, without ^ disturbance from other Objects; which
^eing removed, he did take a complacency and delight only in himself, as Tully
says, Habet animus quo se delectet, Tull. lib. 5. Tusc.
etiam occlusis sensibus. I may say truly of him thus, (though he was my Father
in Law) that he was the venerable Bede of our Age, for many excellent Tractates
he published which he never saw with his own Eyes, and they were done in as
exact a manner, as when he had his faculty of sight at the best. The like
Socrates says of Dydimus when he was Socr. Eccl. H. l. 4. c. 20.
blind; he not only interpreted Origens Writings, and made Commentaries upon
them, but set forth excellent Treatises to defend the Orthodox Faith against
the Arians. The Doctors Cosmography was the last Book he writ with his own
hand, after which voluminous work, his Eyes failed him, that he could neither
see to write nor read without the help of an Amanuensis, whom he kept to his
dying day; yet he was not so totally deprived of his sight, (as some imagine)
but he could discern a Body or Substance near hand, (though not the Phisiognomy
of a Face) so as to follow his Leader, when he walked abroad.

He macerated his Body with the immoderate Sceleton; yet then he was also of a
cheerful Spirit. He followed no exercise for his health, but walking in his
Garden, and then he used a kind of low whistling with himself, either to
recreate his Spirits, or else (as it were) to sound an Alarm against his
Enemies; like the old Germans, who affected a such like Tone, asperitas soni,
and fractum murmur, when Cor. Tac^. de mor. Ger.
they went to War. All this while he was in deep Meditation, preparing for an
encounter with his Adversary in some polemical discourse: The Pen being his
only Weapon, in which he was as fortunate, as Alexander with his Sword; of whom
its said, Cum nullo Just. Hist. lib. 12.
hostium unquam congressus est, quem non vicerit, He fought with none of his
Enemies, but he overcame them; so the Doctor had the same good fortune in all
his Pen-Combates to be Conqueror: For which cause he was ordinarily called the
Primipilus, and chief Defender of Prelacy; by Smectymnus, the Bishops Darling,
by others, the Puritan Episcopal man. For his Zeal and Courage, I may truly say
of him, he was a right Peter, of whom Casaubon observes out of the Greek
Fathers, Petrum suisse Casaub. Exer. Cont. Baron. l. 4. c. 6.
(...), ^ervido ingenio virum. St. Peter was a man of a hot temper and
disposition, that set him forward on all occasions, more than the other
Disciples; So the Doctor was of the like disposition naturally, and inclined
the more by study, much watching, and sitting up late at Nights, that threw him
often into Fevers, to which he was very subject; not withstanding his hot*
temper and constitution, he did so wisely correct and govern it, that he never
fell into those Paroxisms, as to suffer his reason to be extinguished with
passion, but his most fervent zeal was ever attended with deep knowledge, for
he had an acute Wit, a solid judgment, and exuberant fancy, to which was
adjoined, (that which is rare to be found in all these excellences together) a
most prodigious, and yet faithful Memory; that he did not usually take Notes,
or make Collections of Readings out of Authors, (as most Scholars do) but
committed what he read to his own Memory, which I believe never failed him, in
whatsoever he treasured up to make use of hereafter: Therefore it was a
pitiful charge of Mr. H. L' Estrange against him, that he misreported the
words of Pareus, in putting down quomodo for Extra. vap. p. 131.
quando; to which the Doctor answers thus for himself, whereby we may see what
a true* Repository of things his Memory was. I must tell you, (says he) for
him that is plundered of his Books, and keeping no Remembrances and Collections
of his Studies by him, he cannot readily resolve what E^ition he followed in
his consulting with that Author. He always thought that Tenure in Capite, was a
nobler, and and more honorable Tenure than to hold by Copy; and therefore
carelessly neglected to commit any part of his Readings unto Notes and Papers,
of which he never found such want, as in this particular which you so boldly
charge upon him.

When the Esquire taxed him again C.
for having many Helpers, as if he were beholden to other men's studies and
pains about the composing of his Books, that was such a notorious Scandal, that
every one who knew him, could confute; he in modest and most pious manner,
replied thus, Though I cannot say, that I Exam. His. p. 206.
have many Helpers, yet I cannot but confess in all humble gratitude, that I
have one great Helper, which is instar omnium, even the Lord my God; Auxilium
meum a Domino, my help comes even from the Lord which has made Heaven and
Earth as the Psalmist has it. And I can say with the like humble
acknowledgements of Gods mercies to me, as Jacob did, when he was asked about
the quick dispatch which he had made in preparing savory meat for his Aged
Father; Voluntas Dei fuit, and tam cito occurreret mihi quod volebam. Genesis 27.
20. It is Gods goodness, and his only, that I am able to do what I do: And as
for any humane Helpers, as the French Courtiers use to say of King Lewis the
Second, That all his Council rid upon one Horse, because he relied upon his own
Judgment and Abilities only: So I may very truly say, that one poor
Hackny-horse will carry all my Helpers used, be they never so numerous. The
greatest help which I have had (since it pleased God to make my own sight
unuseful to me) as to writing and reading, has come from one, whom I had
entertained for my Clerk or Amanuensis, who though he reasonably well
understood both Greek and Latin, yet had he no further Education in the way of
Learning, than what he brought with him from the School, and a poor Country
School.

His adversaries accused him sometimes for se^erity in his writings, but
virulency, no, not the strict Sabbatarians who were chiefly offended with him,
for his History of the Sabbath. The Ministers of Surrey and Buckinghamshire
returned him thanks in the name of themselves, and their party for dealing so
Heartily with them by all meek and loving persuasions, when he writ upon that
Subject, and especially for his preface before the History. He once met with
some rude usages in Court, though that is the place ordinarily of best
breeding, and most civility, no other reason could be imagined but because he
was envyed by his Fellow Chaplains, who saw him then a rising man, and most
likely to be an Ascendant over them, if the old King and Archbishop had lived.
As to the Earl of E. Speech, calling him a begging Scholar, such great Persons
do take the Liberty to say what they please of their Inferiors, and none must
control them; how ever the young Scholar came not to his Lordship as a
Mendic^nt, for he asked nothing at his hands but to accept the Vindic^tion of
his order, which the Earl was bound to defend for his Honor sake, but could
not with that Learning as the Historian had done. In the height of his
prosperity, he abated nothing of his wonted Studies, but rathet increased them,
as it was said of him, Ego quo major fuero tanto plus laborabo. His Capitolin:
cap. 2.
whole Life (I may say) was a continued Study unto death for all his delight,
time, thoughts and business was taken up in his Books, that he lived no longer
then he could be an Author, and that at the last a most profitable one to his
King and Country, as in his History of the Presbiterians which was his Farewell
Book to the World, which no sooner he had prepared for the Press but he dyed
like the ancient Romans, of whom Tacitus says cecidere omnes versi in hostem,
thy fell with their faces turned toward the Fnemy. Finally An. lib. 15.
he worthily deserved that Character of praise and thanks, which the good
Emperor A. Severus bestowed on them, who discharged their office well, saying,
Gratias tibi agit Respublica, Lamprid. cap. 4.
but it was his ill Fortune to live in such ungrateful times, that according to
the French proverb, Qui sert commun null ne le pay, and Sil defaut chacun
labbaye. He that serves the good of the Community, is controlled by every one
and rewarded by none. Yet however to his perpetual Honor, it may be said of
him truly as was of the famous Scaliger, and whosoever reads his Life will
confess the same. Viz.

Clarissimi and illustrissimi sumus, Principibus Jul. Caesar Scalig. vet. page
63.
and proceribus noti sumus. Literarum amantissimi sumus, Ab omni ambitione and
invidia remotisumus, inimici nostri virtutem, non vitium in nobis hactenus
insectati sunt. We are descended of an illustrious family; to Princes and
Nobles we are well known, most lovers also of Learning, far from Ambition in
our selves, and the envy of others. Our Eenemies may rail at our Virtues, but
they cannot reprove us for Vice.

Therefore in the next place we shall Conversation, that was free from all
Scandal, or common imoralities which none of his most inveterate Enemies could
tax him with, but only for his Religion and Loyalty, in which they thought he
was too forward and more Zealous than many others, but that was no Crime, but
Conscience. He was strict in the Education of his Children to train them up in
Religious exercises, especially to get the Scripture by heart; that one of them
having a singular memory like her Father, could give an account of all the
Historical passages methodically from Chapter to Chapter, through most of the
Bible, which an old Presbyterian Minister in Lincolnshire desiring to hear from
her, she performed accordingly, at which the good man stood amazed, saying. I
did not think Episcopal men brought up their Children in this manner, for
Doctor Heylyns sake I shall have a better opinion of them then ever I had. So
strangely is that party prepossest with prejudice, and unchristian thoughts, as
if the Episcopal Clergy did not Educate their Children in the Fear of God,
whose care and conscience is, and has always been, to instruct them in this
Lesson, To fear God, and honor the King, which whole sentence, and sometimes
only the latter clause of it, for fear of Popery and arbitrary Power, some
zealous Presbiters have caused to be razed out of their Churches painting. At
last this man had the good luck to meet with Dr. Heylyn at his own Parish of
Laceby in Lincolnshire, where after some discourses, the Doctor so well settled
him in all points, that he lived and dyed a true Conformist to the Church of
England. His chief pleasure was to converse with Scholars and Divines, from
whose company his house seldom cooled, and they were as much delighted with his
learned Society for their own improvements; that any one might say of him in
this Case, who familiarly communed with him, Nunquam accedo ad te, quin abs te
abeam doctior. If he had no such company, his ordinary conversation was very
pleasant at Meals with his own Family; but if he was disturbed o^t of the^
times, by them or Strangers (excepting Scholars) whereby he was taken off from
his usual studies, indeed he was morose, and somewhat peevish for a while, till
he diverted his thoughts from his Book, and then no man could be more
complaisant, and very jocular; yet withal keeping up the gravity that became
his degree. For an hour after Dinner he would stay with ordinary Guests, and
then no more to be seen of him till Night; but like Diogenes in Dolio, he was
musing in his Study. He made seldom visits to his Friends, but loved to be
visited himself, at which they took no exception, knowing his i^rmity of fight,
rendered him unable to stir abroad or otherwise he could have repayed the like
ceremonies. I have known several Reverend Persons, who were old Bishops before
the War, have honored him with visits in Abingdon, and some new ^shops now
living, as the right Reverend Fathers the Bishop of Durham, the Bishop of
Lincoln, and the Bishop of Exeter. And he wanted not good campany amongst his
own Neighbors in Abingdon, per^ularly Doctor Tucker a Civilian, Mr. Jennings an
ingenious Person, and ejected fellow of St. John's C. in Oxon, and Mr. Blower a
witty Lawyer, Visitors, and in whose company he was extremely delighted at all
times.

For his generosity on all occasions (as well as free Hospitality) to help the
public concerns at the time of any royal aid or Benevolence, to serve his
Prince and his Country, no man could show himself more active and forward to
contribute according to his Power, and sometimes above it, when he was s^arce
warm in his Ecclesiastical Preferments; soon after which, the sad Wars broke,
forth, that despoiled him and the regular Clergy. In the year 1639. when his
Majesty began his Journey against the Scots, upon the liberal contribution of
the Clergy, he gave fifty Pounds out of his Parsonage in Alresford, and for
Southwarn-borough, thirteen pounds thirteen shillings and four pence; at the
same time when he had not paid of his first Fruits for this Living. He was the
first of all the Clergy that subscribed in Hampshire; being a leading man; his
good Example so moved others, that the Clergy of that County exceeded their
other Brethren; they raised for the Kings use the sum of 1348l. 2s. 4d. After
his Majesty, King Charles the Second most happy Restoration; toward the Royal
Benevolence he gave fifty Pounds, for his Parsonage of Alresford, besides his
share of a thousand Pound, as he was Prebendary of Westminster. I should have
added also, (which I had almost forgotten) in the beginning of the War he gave
to the Old King, Money and Plate to the value of an hundred Pounds; by all which
freely parted out of his Purse, and more than his Estate could well bear,
having many Children to provide for; he sufficiently confuted the Calumny of L'
Strange, who said, according to his gentile and new mode of writing hard words,
the Doctor was L' Strange Hist. fol. 45.
Philargurous, when poor man what he parted with, and what he was plundered of,
he had scarce enough left to insconse his Person from frigidity, according to
the good squires Language.

For his Charity to the Poor, he had cast, that is, when he was in a condition
to relieve others; at which time he gave Alms to his Enemies, as well as to the
honest Poor of the Kings Party; for being asked the question when he lived in
Abingdon, whether he would serve St. Ellens poor, being of the adverse Party
against the Royalists? He answered, no exception ought to be made in the Case
of Charity. Wherein he followed the Example of our blessed Lord, who had
compassion on the poor Samaritans as well as upon the Jews, to whom he showed
many acts of piety and goodness, besides the Cure of their bodily infirmities;
its probable he gave them an Alms-peny, for which reason Judas carried the Bag,
that had a common stock in it for the Poor, to be used, as occasion served. The
good Doctor has sent Meat from his own Table to the Prisoners in Goal, and at
Abington such as were condemned to dye, he took pains to instruct and prepare
them for Death, and to administer the holy Sacrament unto them before their
Execution, particularly to one Captain Francis, and his Company condemned with
him, at Abingdon Assizes, the Captain being a known Royalist, for which reason
it was thought, the Judge was so severe against him upon his Trial, and plainly
partial in the Examination of Witnesses of both sides. The Doctor after the
Sentence of Condemnation, went to Prison to pray with him, and administered the
Sacrament to him and the other Prisoners, who were penitent; provivided Bread
and Wine for them at his own Charge; all which certainly was the most Christian
Act of Piety and Charity that could be showed to those miserable Souls. I could
instance many other particulars, which manifested his goodness, wherein he
ought to be followed as a worthy Example, but that its time now to draw near to
his End.

For do the Prophets live for ever? as the good Prophet himself said. No, it is
the deplored Condition of Mankind to live a while, for to dye; after the holy
men of God, had served God in their Generation, they must fulfill the end of
their Prophecy with their Lives; as God said to Daniel. Tu autem abi ad
termiuum. Go thou thy way till the end be, for thou shall rest and stand in the
Lot at the end of the days; on which, Geierus and Junius* Comment thus.

Compara te ad mortem, disposita domo ^ua, and contentus hac revelatione, non
ultra labores and requiesces a laboribus, corpore Geicr: and Jun: in loc:
in Sepulchro, Anima vero in sinu Abrahae, stabis in haereditate tua caelesti
and aeterna, vel illa ejus part quae tibi ex decreto Dei continget.

Prepare thy self for Death, set thy house in order, be content with this
Revelation; thou shall labor no more, but rest from all thy labors and
troubles, with thy Body in the Grave* but thy Soul in Abra^ams Bosom; thou
shall abide for ever in thy caelestial Inheritance, and in that degree of Glory
which God has decreed for thee. So all these things happened to this good man;
and I may call him prophetical, because he strangely foresaw his own Death, set
his house in order, and prepared himself accordingly, and an end was soon put
after to his Days, and of making many Books because much study, as Solomon
^aith, is a weariness of the flesh, though the Mind or Spirit of a Man is never
tired out or can be satisfied, because Knowledge is no burden. By the
Almighties good pleasure and providence, he was now removed from his House in
Abingdon to his house in Westminster, (where he lived not long) and from thence
to the House of Darkness, where all must take up their last Lodging. The Grave
is mine house (says Job) I have made my Bed in the Darkness. What Man is he
that lives and shall not see Death? Shall ^e deliver his Soul from the hand of
the Grave? Is not this the House appointed for all Living? According to the
French Proverb, three things carry away all with them.

L'Eglise, la Court and la Mort
L'Eglise prend de vif and mort
La Court prend le droiet and le tort
La Mort prend le foible and le fort.
The Church, the Court, and Death take all;
The Church both Living and the Dead install:
To Court all Causes come, either right or wrong,
But Death destroys all Mortals weak or strong.
Therefore we shall speak of the Circumstances foregoing his Death, and the
memorable Accidents happning to him about the same time. He had before been
greivously afflicted with a Quartan Ague, that deadly Enemy unto old Age, and
seldom cured by the Physician. Febris quartana opprobrium medici. The poor
Doctor had wrastled with the Disease a long time, and seemingly got the victory
of it, for the paroxysms or usual fits of this sore distemper had departed from
him, but withal so violently shaken him, and left such a weakness behind them,
so exhausted his strength and vital Spirits, that any one might perceive what
strange alterations his sickness had wrought in him; for he was before of a
fresh lively complexion; a man vigorous in action, but now grown feeble and
weak, of a pale discolored countenance, the forerunner of Death, his Cheeks
fallen, his Eyes a little sunk within his Temples, and leanness of Face and
whole Body, that showed he was hastening on fast to the end of his Pilgrimage:
Yet I dare not say there is such a predetermined Term of every man's Life, which
is immutable, but the great God of Heaven from whom we derive our Being, can
lengthen or shorten our days, as his Wisdom pleases; and on the other side,
this is a Decree most absolute and irrevocable, Statutum est* omnibus ut semel
moriantur. It is appointed for all men once to die. In reverence of which
Decree, such a heavenly man as the Doctor was, could not but be prepared (as
every religious Soul is) for to dye, or put off his mortal Body.

Before which time two Accidents suddenly after the other, which he looked upon
as presaging Providence of his Death; for he was a man very critical in his
observation of unusual things, and I may say in this particular, prophetical:
For on the Saturday Night before he sickned, he dreamed that he was in an
extraordinary pleasant and delightful Place; where standing and admiring the
beauty and glory of it, he saw the late King his Master, who said to him Peter,
I will have you buried under your Seat at Church, for you are rarely seen, but
there or at your Study: Which Dream he told his Wife the next Morning; saying,
it was a significant one, giving her charge, when he dyed, there to bury him. A
few hours after, his Maid holding his Surplice against the Fire to air it, one
of the Billets upon the fire, tumbled down, the Flame of which catched hold of
the Surplice and burned it; at which Accident, so soon following his Dream, he
said, That was ominous, and he should never wear Surplice more, as indeed he
did not; like Aa^on the high Priest when he was stripped of his priestly
Garments by Gods own appointment, he must certainly dye. These two Accidents
falling out together, made such a strong impression upon his mind, that on the
same day (though he was seemingly well as he used to be) he did not go to
Church, but on the Monday following went forth in the Morning, stayed out all
the Day, in which time he bought a House of one Mrs. Floyd in the Almonry,
paid his Money for it, renewed the Lease of it, and brought home the Writings;
and then told his Wife, the reason of his being from home all that time (which
was an unusual thing with him) was, because he had bought her a House to live
in, near the Abbey, that she might serve God in that Church, as he had done, All
which she not knowing before, seemed strange and terrifying to her, not
thinking the precedent Accidents of the Dream and Surplice could have wrought
such an indelible impression on his fancy, she urged all the arguments and
persuasions she possibly could, to drive away this Melancholy humor, but all in
vain, for he still persisted in his opinion, which proved too sad a truth:
Because he was a man, who rarely dreamed in his Life, and when he did, he could
remember no circumstances of it, which puts me in mind what Pliny has written
to this purpose, that there be some persons of so curious and excellent temper,
who are seldom or never disturbed with Dreams, but if it so happen to them at
any time, it is a deadly sign. Pli^. Hist. ^at. l. 10. c. 75.
Quibus mortiferum fuisse signum (says he) contra consuetudinem somniorum in
venimus exempla.

That there is a truth in some Dreams question; though I would not have men too
credulous of them: Because this is not now Gods economy or his ordinary way of
dispensation under the Gospel, to manifest his mind to us, as he did to the
Patriarchs before the Law, and afterward to the holy Prophets, to whom he made
known himself (...), at sundry Heb. cap. 1. 17.
times, and in diverse manners, and particularly in this way and manner of
Dreams; yet as God cannot be limited in his Will and Power at any time, when he
has a mind to do an extraordinary thing: I would therefore not too rigidly
condemn all Dreams for delusions, that are ascertained to us by the Testimony
of wise and credible Persons, whom we know are no way inclined to be either
fanciful or fanatic. Omiting what Artemidorus has written in his
Oneirocriticks, I Rhodogin. l. 27. c. 9.
take Caelius Rhodoginus for a most learned and faithful Author, who reports of
himself, that when he could not explain a hard passage, he met with in Pliny,
that puzzled his Brain, it was made known and revealed to him in a Dream, if he
did look in such a Book he should find it. Librum arripui (says he) sicut
somniaveram sic comperui. `I took up the Book, and `found the same accordingly
as I `dreamed. Neither was that less wonderful, which Joseph Scaliger tells us
of his Fathers Dream, who in his Sleep read an Epitaph which he never saw with
his Eyes, or ever heard of before, yet proved most true; whence he infers by
this Example, the Jul. Caes. Scal. vita page 48.
prodigy, and yet certainty of some Dreams. Prodigiosa etiam usque ad miraculum
ex somniis vaticinatio. We may believe his Relation; for he was a man of that
Integrity, and great Spirit, as he would scorn to tell a Lie. I cannot omit
what Dr. Heylyn himself has written of Archbishop Laud, That he was much
given to take notice of Dreams, and commit them to writing. Amongst which I
find this for one; that on Friday Night, the 24th. of January 1639. his Father
(who died six and forty Arch-Bish. Life p. 422.
years before) came to him, and that to his thinking, he was as well, and as
cheerful, as evel he saw him; that his Father asked him what he did there; and
that after some speec^, he demanded of his Father, how long he would stay
there? And his Father made this Answer, that he should stay till he had him
along with him. A Dream which made such impression on him, as to add this Note
to it in his Breviate, that though he was not moved with Dreams, yet he thought
to remember this.

I know many impute those Dreams in our Sleep to a melancholy temper, which the
Doctor was never subject to, either in time of Sickness or Health, but was a
Man always of most cheerful Spirit. I confess that black humor presents
strange things to the Imagination and Fantasy of some Persons, that Aristotle
in his Problems ascribes the Prophecy of the Sybil Women thereto, and
Cardanus, the Revelations of Hermites, because living in solitude, and on bad
diet. Quantum Card. de Subtle. l. 18. p. 1187.
poterat (says he) in illis humor melancholicus. The old Philosophers also
were of opinion, that all Prophecy did proceed from the strength of
Imagination, by the conjunction of the Understanding; which they call
Intellectus possibilis, with the other faculty of the Intellectus agens;
whereby they concluded, (contrary to the holy Scripture) that old men were not
capable of prophesying, by reason of the weakness of their imagination, and
other natural faculties decayed in them, through Age; but the quite contrary
appears in Scripture Examples, that that they were generally aged men, or
well stricken in years, who had the gift of prophecy, though their eye sight
failen them, as did with Jacob, yet they were called Seers, because they
foresaw future things, they were so old, that for their Age and gravity they
were sometimes upbraided, so Elisha by the Children was mocked, who undoubtedly
were so taught by their ungodly Fathers, to say of him go up thou baldhead.
Neither does a melancholy constitution (as some have imagined) make men
prophetical either in sleeping or waking, but on the contrary renders them
incapable, as is evident by the examples of Jacob, and Elisha; the first of
whom being in deep sadness, (which is the inseparable Companion of melancholy)
for the loss of his Son Joseph, was at the same disabled from prophecy or
otherwise he could have told what Fortune had befallen his Son, who, was not
dead, but sold by his Brethren. Hence Mercer tells us it was an ordinary saying
among the Rabbines Men. in Genesis c. 31.
Maeror prophetiam impedit, In like manner the Prophet Elisha for the sorrow of
Elijah his Master, taken away from him, and the anger he had conceived against
Jehoram that wicked Prince, whilst these two passions were predominant over
him, he could not prophecy, till the Minstrel played with her Musical
Instrument, to drive away his melancholy sadness, and then the hand of the Lord
(its said) came upon him, and he prophesied saying, Thus says the Lord, etc.

By all which I hope it is evident, that hypocondriacal persons, who are
grievously afflicted with melancholy are not thereby disposed to prophecy, and
then by necessary consequence it follows, that Dreams arising from the same
natural cause cannot be said prophetical, no more then that of Albertus magnus
who dreamed that hot Scalding Rhodig. lib. 27. lcap. 7.
Pitch was poured upon his Breast, and so soon as he awakned from his sleep, he
vomited up abundance of adust Chollar. Such Dreams certainly arise from the ill
habitude of the Body, through fullness of bad humors.

But there is another sort of Dreams divine or supernatural, which are
imprinted on the mind of man, either by God himself or his holy Angels, from
which necessarily follows prophecy; because such extraordinary impressions are
usual for those ends. And this I take to be the Reverend Doctors Dream, who was
a man of so great Piety as well as Study, that I cannot think otherwise, but
that he was able to discern the different motions of his Soul, whether they
were natural or supernatural, of which last he was so firmly assured by his own
reason and great Learning, that no arguments could dissuade him to the
contrary, St. Austiine says. Animam habere quandam vim divinationis in seipsa.
That the Soul of man has a certain power of Divination in it self, when it is
abstracted from bodily actions, I confess then it must needs be drawn up to
higher Communion with God than ordinary; but more immediately I rather think
with Tertullian, a little before death, about the time of its separation from
the Body, because many dying persons have wonderfully foretold things which
afterward came to pass, the reason of which, that good Father gives (and
therein I judge he Tertull. lib. de An. cap 53.
was no Montanist) when he says. Quia Anima in ipso divertio penitus agitari
enunciet quae vidit, quae audit and quae incipit nosse^ Because the Soul then
acts most vigorously at the last Broth, declares what things it sees, it
hears, and what it begins to know, now entering into Eternity.

So the heavenly and pious Doctor according to the prenotions of his Death
forseeing his time was short, gave his Wife strict charge again (that very
night as he was going to Bed and in appearance well) that she should bury him
according to his Dream, she affrighted with this dreadful charge, sat by him,
while he fell into a Sleep, out of which he soon awaked in a Feverish
distemper, and violent Hick-up, which she taking notice of said, I fear Mr.
Heylyn you have got cold with going abroad to day, but he answered very
readily, no, it was Death^ Hick-up, and so it proved, for he grew worse and
worse till he dyed. Now some I hear impute the cause of his sickness to the
eating of a Tansey, but this is false, for I heard the contrary relation from
her own mouth, his Dream was on the Saturday night, his Surplice happened to be
burnt on Sunday morning all which day he passed in private mediatation in his
Study, and on the Monday, what time he had to spare he spent in providing a
Settlement for his Wife as aforesaid.

But to return again to his good quartane Ague not purged out by Physic, to
which he was always averse, threw him into a malignant Fever^, in which ^he
remained insensible till some few hours before he dyed, but when it pleased God
to restore unto him his Senses again, he most zealously glorified his Name with
praises and thanksgivings for his mercies toward himself and Family, earnestly
praying for them, and often commending them to Gods Heaveuly care and
protection, at the same time he left ^ little Book of Prayers with his dear
Wife for her devotion, which she showed afterward to me, being a Collection of
many, Collects out of the Common Prayer, to every one of which he had added a
most fervent Prayer of his own composure, that little Book she said should be
the Prayer Book of her Devotion while she lived. Finally as his time grew
shorter and shorter, he prayed with more vehemence of Spirit sometimes to God,
sometimes to his Savior, and to the blessed Comforter of his Soul, rejoicing
exceedingly, that he should live to Ascension day, uttering forth most heavenly
expressions to the sweet Comfo^t of others and principally of his own Soul with
a (...), or full assurance of his Salvation, through Christ Jesus, which last
unspeakable joy and consolation above all other, God is pleased to be bestow
upon the faithful, and seal it to them with the earnest of his Spirit at the
hour of Death. At which time, his Soul now ready to depart, and be with Christ
his Savior, one Mr. Merrol a Verger of the Church coming into his Chamber to
see him, he presently called him to his Bed side, saying to him. I know it is
Church time with you, and I know this is Ascenfion day, I am ascending to the
Church Triumphant, I go to my God and Savior, unto joys Caeleftial, and to
Halleluja's eternal, with which and other like expressions he dyed upon Holy
Thursday An. Dom. 1663. in the Climacterial year of his Life, threescore and
three, in (...) number the Sevenths and ninths do often fatally concur. He
was afterward buried under his Sub-Deans Seat according to his Dream and
desire. His Death lamented by all good men, because there was a Pillar, though
not a Bishop falln in the Church, of whom I may say in the Poets words.

Quando ullum invenient parem? Hor. l. 1. Od. 24.

Multis ille bonis flebilis occidit
Nulli flebilior quam mihi.
When will they find another such? his Fall
Was most by me lamented, much by All
God Almighty had blessed him with eleven Children, four of which are still
living. His Monument is erected on the North side of the Abbey in Westminster,
over aganst the Sub-Deans Sea^, with this following Epitaph which the Reverend
Dean of the Church then, Dr. Earl did himself compose in honor of his Memory.

DEPOSITUM MORTALE.
PETRI Heylyn. S. ^. P. Hujus Ecclesiae Prebendarii and Subdecani^s.
Viri plane memorabilis.
Egregiis dotibus instructissimi.
Ingenio acri and faecundo
Judicio subacto.
Memoria ad prodigium tenaci;
Cui adjunxit incredibilem in studiis patientiam,
Quae, cessantihus oculis, non cessarunt.
Scripsit varia and Plurima
Quae jam manibus hominum teruntur
Et argumentis non vulgaribus,
Stylo non vulgari suffecit.
Constans ubique Ecclesiae
Et. Majestatis* Regiae assertor
Nec florentis magis utriusque
Quam afflict^:
Idemque perduellium and Schism^ticae factionis
Impugnator acerrimus
Contemptor invidiae
Et animo infracto.
Plura ejusmodi meditanti
Mors indixit silentium
Ut sileatur,
Efficere non potest.
Obiit Anno Etat. 63. In English.
A Monument of Mortality. Of Peter Heylyn Doctor of Divinity. Prebendary and
SubDean of this Church. A man truly worthy of remembrance. Endowed with
excellent parts. Of sharp and pregnant Wit. A solid and clear Judgment. A
memory tenacious to a Miracle. Whereunto he added an incredible Patience in
Study. And therein still persisted, when his Eye sight ceased. He Writ many
Books, upon various Subjects, (that are now in men's hands) containing in them
nothing that's Vulgar either for Style or Argument. On all occasions he was a
constant Assertor of the Churches Right, and the Kings Prerogative, as well in
their afflicted as prosperous estate. Also he was a severe and vigorous opposer
of Rebels and Schismatics. A despiser of Envy, and a man of undaunted Spirit.
While he was seriously intent on these, and many more like Studies Death
commanded him to be silent, but could not silence his Fame.

He died in the Sixty third year of his Age.

A Catalogue of such Books as were written by the Learned Doctor.
SPurius, a Tragedy, M. S. 1616. Theomachia, a Comedy, M. S. 1619. Geography
printed at Oxon twice, A. D. 1621. and 1624. in Quarto, and afterward in A. D.
1652. enlarged into Folio, under the Title of Cosmography.

An Essay, called Augustus. 1631. since inserted into his Cosmography. The
History of St. George, Land. 1631. reprinted, 1633. The History of the Sabbath,
1631. reprinted, 1636. An Answer to the Bishop of Lincoln's Letter to the Vicar
of Grantham, 1636. twice reprinted. An Answer to Mr. Burton's two Seditious
Sermons, A. D. 1637. A short Treatise concerning A Form of Prayer to be used
according to what is enjoined in the Fifty fifth. Canon, written at the request
of the Bishop of Winchester, 1637. Antidotum Lincolniense, or an Answer to the
Bishop of Lincolns Book, entitled Holy Table, Name, and Thing. 1637.
reprinted, 1638. An uniform Book of Articles, fitted for Bishops and
Archdeacons in their Visitations, 1640. De Jure paritatis Episcoporum, or
concerning the Peerage of Bishops, 1640. M. S. A Reply to Dr. Hackwel,
concerning the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, M. S. 1641. The History of
Episcopacy first under the Name of Theoph. Churchman, afterward in his own
Name, reprinted, 1657. The History of Liturgies written, 1642. A Relation of
the Lord Hoptons Victory at Bodmin. A View of the Proceedings in the ^est for a
Pacification. A Letter to a Gentleman in Lincolnshire about the Treaty. A
Relation of the Proceedings of Sir John Gell. A Relation of the Queens Return
from Holland, and the Siege of Newark. The Black Cross, showing that the
Londoners were the Cause of the Rebellion. The Rebels Chatechism: All these
printed at Oxon. 1644. An Answer to the Papists groundless Clamor, who
nickname the Religion of the Church of England by the Name of a Parliamentary
Religion, 1644. A Relation of the Death and Sufferings of Will. La^d.
Archbishop of Canterbury, 1644. The stumbling Block of Disobedience removed,
written, 1644. printed 1658. The Promised Seed in English Verse. Theologia
Veterum, or an Exposition of the Creed, Fol. 1654. Survey of France, with an
account of the Isles of Guernsey and Jersey, 1656. Quarto. Ex^men Historicum,
or a Discovery and Examination of the Mistakes, Falsities, and Defects in some
Modern Histories. Land. 1659 Certamen Epistolare, or the Letter-Combat managed
with Mr. Baxter, Dr. Bernard, Mr. Hickman, Oct. Land. 1659. Historia
Quinque-Articularis, Quarto, Land. 1660. Respondet Petrus, or the Answer of
Peter Heylyn, D. D. to Dr. Bernard's Book, entitled the Judgment of the late
Primate, etc. Quarto, Land. 1658. Observations on Mr. Hamond L' Estrange's
History of the Life of King Charles the First, 1648. Extraneus Vapulans, or a
Defense of those Observations. Land. 1658. A short History of King Cbarles the
First, from his Cradle to his Grave, 1658. Thirteen Sermons, some of which are
are an Exposition of the Parable of the Tares, printed at London 1659. and
again, 1661. A Help to English History, containing a Succession of all the
Kings, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Bishops, etc. of England and Wales, first
written in the year 1641. under the (...) of Robert Hall; but now enlarged, and
in Dr. Heylyn's Name. Ecclesia Vindicata, or the Church of England justified,
etc. Quarto, 1657. Bibliotheca Regia, or the Royal Library, Octavo. Ecclesia
Restaurata, or the History of the Reformation Folio. Land. 1661. Cyprianus
Anglicus, or the History of the Life and Death of William Laud Archbishop of
Canterbury, Folio. Aerius Redivivus, or the History of the Presbyterians,
Folio.
FINIS.

