Theses Theologicae: OR THE Theological PROPOSITIONS, Which are Defended By
ROBERT BARCLAY, In his Apology for the True Christian Divinity, as the same is
held forth and Preached, by the People called QUAKERS.

First Printed about the Year, 1675. And since then, Reprinted several Times,
to prevent Mistakes concerning that People.

The First Proposition. Concerning the True Foundation of Knowledge.
SEEING the height of all Happiness is placed in the True Knowledge of God,
(This is Life Eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ Joh.
17. 3.
whom thou have sent) the true and right Understanding of this Foundation, and
Ground of knowledge, is that which is most necessary to be Known and Believed
in the first place.

The Second Proposition. Concerning Immediate Revelation.
Seeing no Man knows the Father but the Son, Matt. 11. 27.
and he to whom the Son reveals him; and seeing the Revelation of the Son is
in and by the Spirit; therefore the Testimony of the Spirit is that alone, by
which the true Knowledge of God has been, is, and can be only revealed; who,
as by the Moving of his own Spirit, converted the Chaos of this World into that
wonderful Order, wherein it was in the beginning, and created Man a Living
Soul, to Rule and Govern it; so by the Revelation of the same Spirit, he has
manifested himself all along unto the Sons of Men, both Patriarchs, Prophets
and Apostles; which Revelations of God by the Spirit, whether by outward Voices
and Appearances, Dreams, or inward objective Manifestations in the Heart, were
of Old the formal Object of their Faith, and remains yet so to be; since the
Object of the Saints Faith is the same in all Ages, though set forth under diverse
Administrations. Moreover, these Divine Inward Revelations, which we make
absolutely necessary for the Building up of True Faith, neither do nor can ever
contradict the outward Testimony of the Scriptures, or right and sound Reason.
Yet from hence it will not follow, that these Divine Revelations are to be
subjected to the Examination, either of the outward Testimony of the
Scriptures, or of the Natural Reason of Man, as to a more noble or certain Rule
or Touchstone: For this Divine Revelation, and Inward Illumination, is that
which is evident and clear of it self, forcing by its own evidence and
clearness, the Well-disposed Understanding to assent, irresistably moving the
same thereunto, even as the common Principles of Natural Truths move and
incline the Mind to a Natural assent: (Such as are these, That the whole is
greater than the part; that two contradictory Sayings cannot be both true, or
false) which is also manifest according to our Adversaries Principle, who
(supposing the Possibility of Inward Divine Revelations) will nevertheless
confess with us, that neither Scripture nor sound Reason will contradict it:
And yet it will not follow, according to them, that the Scripture, or sound
Reason, should be subjected to the Examination of the Divine Revelations in the
Heart.

The Third Proposition. Concerning the Scriptures.
From these Revelations of the Spirit of God to the Saints, have proceeded the
Scriptures of Truth, which contains, 1. A faithful Historical Account of the
Actings of God's People in diverse Ages, with many singular and Remarkable
Providence attending them. 2. A Prophetical Account of several things, whereof
some are already past, and some yet to come.

3. A full and ample Account of all the chief Principles of the Doctrine of
Christ, held forth in diverse precious Declarations, Exhortations and Sentences,
which, by the Moving of God's Spirit, were at several times, and upon sundry
occasions, spoken and written unto some Churches and their Pastors.
Nevertheless, because they are only a Declaration of the Fountain, and not the
Fountain it self, therefore they are not to be esteemed the Principal Ground of
all Truth and Knowledge, nor yet the adequate primary Rule of Faith and
Manners. Nevertheless, as that which gives a true and faithful Testimony of
the first Foundation, they are and may be esteemed a secondary Rule,
subordinate to the Spirit, from which they have all their excellency and
certainty; for as by the Inward Testimony of the Spirit we do alone truly know
them, so they testify, that the Spirit is that Guide, by which the Saints are
led into All Truth; therefore, according to the John 16. 13. Romans 8. 14.
Scriptures, the Spirit is the first and principal Leader. And seeing we do
therefore receive and believe the Scriptures, because they proceeded from the
Spirit, therefore also the Spirit is more originally and principally the Rule,
according to that received Maxim in the Schools, Propter quod unumquodque est
tale, illud ipsum est magis tale. Englished thus: That for which a thing is
such, that thing it self is more such.

The Fourth Proposition. Concerning the Condition of Man in the Fall.
All Adam's Posterity (or Mankind) both Jews and Gentiles, as to the first Adam
(or Earthly Man) is Fallen, Degenerated, and Dead; deprived the Sensation of
(or feeling) Romans 5. 12, 15.
of this Inward Testimony, or Seed of God, and is subject unto the Power,
Nature, and Seed of the Serpent, which he sows in Men's Hearts, while they abide
in this Natural and Corrupted State: From whence it comes, That not their Words
and Deeds only, but all their Imaginations are Evil perpetually in the sight of
God, as proceeding from this depraved and wicked Seed. Man therefore, as he is
in this State, can know nothing aright; yea, his Thoughts and Conceptions
concerning God, and things Spiritual (until he be dis-joyned from this evil
Seed, and united to the Divine Light) are unprofitable both to himself and
others. Hence are rejected the Socinian and Pelagian Errors, in exalting a
Natural Light; as also the Papists, and most of Protestants, who affirm, That
Man without the true Grace of God, may be a true Minister of the Gospel.
Nevertheless, this Seed is not imputed to Infants, until by Transgression they
actually join themselves therewith; for they are by Nature the Children of
Wrath, who walk according Ephesians. 2. 2.
to the Power of the Prince of the Air.

The Fifth and Sixth Propositions. Concerning the Universal Redemption by
Christ, and also the Saving and Spiritual Light, wherewith every Man is
Enlightened.
The Fifth Proposition.
God, out of his Infinite Love, who delights Ezekiel. 18. 23. Isai. 49. 6. Joh.
3. 16. and 1. 9. Tit. 2. 11. Ephesians. 5. 13. Heb. 2. 9.
not in the Death of a Sinner, but that all should Live and be Saved, has so
loved the World, that he has given his only Son a Light, that whosoever
believes in him should be Saved; who Enlightneth every Man that comes into
the World, and makes manifest all things that are Reprovable, and teaches all
Temperance, Righteousness, and Godliness. And this Light Enlightneth the Hearts
of all in a Day, in order to Salvation, if not Resisted. Nor is it less
Universal than the Seed of Sin, being the Purchase of his Death, who tasted
Death for every Man. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ all shall 1 Cor.
15. 21.
be made alive.

The Sixth Proposition.
According to which Principle (or Hypothesis) all the Objections against the
Universality of Christ's Death, are easily solved; neither is it needful to
recur to the Ministry of Angels, and those other Miraculous Means, which, they
say, God makes use of, to manifest the Doctrine and History of Christ's
Passion, unto such who (living in those places of the World, where the outward
Preaching of the Gospel is unknown) have well improved the first and common
Grace: For hence it well follows, that as some of the Old Philosophers might
have been saved; so also may some now (who by Providence are cast into those
remote Parts of the World, where the Knowledge of the History is wanting) be
made Partakers of the Divine Mystery, if they Receive and Resist not that
Grace, A Manifestation whereof is given 1 Cor. 12. 7.
to every Man to profit withal. This certain Doctrine then being received (to
wit) That there is an Evangelical and Saving Light and Grace in all, the
Universality of the Love and Mercy of God toward Mankind (both in the Death of
his Beloved Son, the Lord Jesus Christ, and in the Manifestation of the Light
in the Heart) is established and confirmed, against all the Objections of such
as deny it. Therefore Christ has tasted Death for every Heb. 2. 9.
Man; not only for all kinds of Men, as some vainly talk; but for every one of
all kinds: The Benefit of whose Offering is not only extended to such, who have
the distinct outward Knowledge of his Death and Sufferings, as the same is
declared in the Scriptures; but even unto those, who are necessarily excluded
from the Benefit of this Knowledge by some inevitable Accident. Which Knowledge
we willingly confess to be very Profitable and Comfortable, but not absolutely
Needful unto such, from whom God himself has withheld it; yet they may be
made Partakers of the Mystery of his Death (though Ignorant of the History) if
they suffer his Seed and Light (Inlightning their Hearts) to take place (in
which Light, Communion with the Father and Son is enjoyed) so as of Wicked Men
to become Holy, and Lovers of that Power, by whose inward and secret Touches,
they feel themselves turned from the Evil to the Good, and learn to do to
others, as they would be done by; in which Christ himself affirms all to be
included. As they have then Falsely and Erroneously Taught, who have denied
Christ to have Died for all Men; so neither have they sufficiently Taught the
Truth, who affirming him to have Died for all, have added the absolute
necessity of the outward Knowledge thereof, in order to the obtaining its
saving Effect: Among whom the Remonstrants of Holland have been chiefly
wanting, and many other assertors of Universal Redemption; in that they have
not placed the Extent of his Salvation in that Divine and Evangelical Principle
of Light and Life, wherewith Christ has Enlightened every Man that comes into
the World; which is Excellently and Evidently held forth in these Scriptures,
Genesis 6. 3. Deuteronomy 30. 14. John 1. 7, 8, 9. Romans 10. 8. Titus 2. 11.

The Seventh Proposition. Concerning Justification.
As many as resist not this Light, but receive the same, in them is produced a
holy, pure and spiritual Birth, bringing forth Holiness, Righteousness, Purity,
and all those other blessed Fruits, which are acceptable to God; by which holy
Birth (to wit) Jesus Christ formed within us, and working his Works in us, as
we are Sanctified, so are we Justified in the sight of God, according to the
Apostle's Words, But ye are Washed, but ye are Sanctified, but ye are Justified
in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Therefore it is
not by our Works wrought in our Will, nor yet by Good Works, considered as of
themselves; but by Christ, who is both the Gift and the Giver, and the Cause
producing the Effects in us; who, as he has reconciled us while we were
Enemies, does also in his Wisdom save us, and Justify us after this manner; as
says the same Apostle elsewhere, According to his Mercy he has saved us, by
the Titus 3. 5.
washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost.

The Eighth Proposition. Concerning Perfection.
In whom this Holy and Pure Birth is fully Romans 6. 14 Ib. 8. 13. Ib. 6. 2, 18.
1 John 3. 6.
brought forth, the Body of Death and Sin comes to be crucified and removed,
and their Hearts united and subjected unto the Truth, so as not to obey any
Suggestion or Temptation of the Evil One, but to be free from actual Sinning,
and transgressing of the Law of God, and in that respect, Perfect. Yet does
this Perfection still admit of a Growth; there remains a Possibility of
Sinning, where the Mind does not most diligently and watchfully attend unto the
Lord.

The Ninth Proposition. Concerning Perseverance, and the possibility of falling
from Grace.
Although this Gift, and inward Grace of God, be sufficient to work out
Salvation; yet in those in whom it is resisted, it both may, and does become
their Condemnation. Moreover, in whom it has wrought in part, to Purify and
Sanctify them, in order to their further Perfection, by disobedience such may
fall from it, and turn it to Wantonness, making Shipwreck of Faith, and after
having tasted of 1 Timothy 1. 6 Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.
the Heavenly Gift, and been made Partakers of the Holy Ghost, again fall away.
Yet such an increase and stability in the Truth, may, in this Life, be
attained, from which there cannot be a total Apostasy.

The Tenth Proposition. Concerning the Ministry.
As by this Gift, or Light of God, all true Knowledge in things Spiritual is
received and revealed; so, by the same, as it is manifested and received in the
Heart, by the strength and power thereof, every true Minister of the Gospel is
ordained, prepared, and supplied in the Work of the Ministry: And by the
leading, moving, and drawing hereof, ought every Evangelist and Christian
Pastor to be lead and ordered in his Labor and Work of the Gospel, both as to
the place where, as to the Persons to whom, and as to the Times when he is to
Minister. Moreover, who have this Authority, may and ought to Preach the
Gospel, though without Humane Commission or Literature; as on the other hand, who
want the Authority of this Divine Gift, however Learned or Authorized by the
Commissions of Men and Churches, are to be esteemed but as Deceivers, and not
True Ministers of the Gospel.

Also, who have received this holy and unspotted Gift; as they have freely
received, so are Matt. 10.
they freely to give, without Hire or Bargaining, far less to use it as a Trade
to get Money by it: Yet if God has called any from their Employments, or
Trades, by which they acquire their Livelihood, it may be lawful for such
(according to the Liberty which they feel given them in the Lord) to receive
such Temporals (to wit) what may be needful to them for Meat and Clothing, as
are freely given them by those, to whom they have communicated Spirituals.

The Eleventh Proposition. Concerning Worship.
All true and acceptable Worship to God, is offered in the Inward and Immediate
Moving and drawing of his own Spirit, which is neither limited to Places,
Times, or Persons. For though we are to Worship Him always, in that we are to
Fear before Him; yet as to the outward Signification thereof in Prayers,
Praises, or Preachings, we ought not to do it where and when we will, but where
and when we are moved thereunto by the secret Inspirations of his Spirit in our
Hearts, which God hears and accepts of, and is never wanting to move us
thereunto, when need is; of which He Himself is the alone Proper Judge. All
other Worship then, both Praises, Prayers and Preachings, which Man sets about
in his own Will, and at his own Appointment, which he can both begin and end at
his Pleasure, do or leave und one, as himself sees meet; whether they be a
prescribed Form, as a Liturgy; or Prayers conceived extemporarily, by the
Natural Strength and Faculty of the Mind, they are all but Superstitions,
Will Worship, Ezekiel. 13. Mat. 10. 20. Acts 2. 4, 18, 5. John 3. 6. and 4. 21.
Jude 19. Acts 17. 23.
and abominable Idolatry in the sight of God; which are to be denied, rejected,
and separated from, in this Day of his Spiritual Arising. However it might have
pleased him (who winked at the times of Ignorance, with respect to the
Simplicity and Integrity of some, and of his own Innocent Seed, which lay as it
were buried in the Hearts of Men, under the Mass of Superstition) to blow upon
the dead and dry Bones, and to raise some Breathings, and answer them; and that
until the Day should more clearly dawn and break forth.

The Twelfth Proposition. Concerning Baptism.
As there is One Lord, and One Faith, so there Ephesians. 4. 5. 1 Pet. 3. 21. Romans 6.
4. Gal. 3. 17. Col. 2. 12. Joh. 3. 30.
is One Baptism; which is not the putting away the Filth of the Flesh, but the
answer of a good Conscience before God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.
And this Baptism is a pure and spiritual Thing; to wit, the Baptism of the
Spirit and Fire, by which we are buried with him, that being washed and purged
from our Sins, we may walk in newness of Life; of which 1 Cor. 1. 17.
the Baptism of John was a Figure, which was commanded for a time, and not to
continue for ever. As to the Baptism of Infants, it is a mere Humane Tradition,
for which neither Precept nor Practice is to be found in all the Scripture.

The Thirteenth Proposition. Concerning the Communion, or Participation of the
Body and Blood of Christ.
The Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ is Inward and Spiritual, which
is the Participation 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17.
of his Flesh and Blood, by which the Inward Man is daily Nourished in the
Hearts of those in whom Christ dwells: Of which things the breaking of Bread by
Christ with his Disciples was a Figure, which they Joh. 6. 32, 33, 55. 1 Cor.
5. 8.
even used in the Church for a time, who had received the Substance, for the
cause of the Weak; even as abstaining from things strangled, Acts 15. 20. Joh.
13. 14 Jam. 5. 14.
and from Blood; the washing one another Feet, and the anointing of the Sick
with Oil; all which are commanded with no less Authority and Solemnity than the
former: Yet seeing they are but the Shadows of better things, they cease in
such as have obtained the Substance.

The Fourteenth Proposition. Concerning the Power of the Civil Magistrate, in
Matters purely Religious, and pertaining to the Conscience.
Since God has assumed to himself the Power and Dominion of the Conscience,
who alone can rightly instruct and govern it; therefore it is not lawful for
any whatsoever, by Virtue of any Authority or Principality they bear in the
Government of this World, to Luke 9. 55, 56. Mat. 7. 12, 29. Tit. 3. 10.
force the Consciences of others; and therefore all Killing, Banishing, Fining,
Imprisoning, and other such things, which Men are afflicted with, for the alone
Exercise of their Conscience, or difference in Worship or Opinion, proceeds
from the Spirit of Cain, the Murderer, and is contrary to the Truth; provided
always, that no Man, under the pretense of Conscience, prejudice his Neighbor
in his Life or Estate, or do any thing destructive to, or inconsistent with
Humane Society; in which Case the Law is for the Transgressor, and Justice to
be administered upon all, without respect of Persons.

The Fifteenth Proposition. Concerning Salutations and Recreations, etc.
Seeing the chief End of all Religion, is to redeem Man from the Spirit and
vain Conversation of this World, and to lead into inward Ephesians. 5. 11. 1 Pet. 1.
14. Joh. 5. 44. Jer. 10. 3. Acts 10. 26. Mat. 15. 13. Col. 2. 8.
Communion with God, before whom, if we fear always, we are accounted Happy;
therefore all the vain Customs and Habits thereof, both in Word and Deed, are
to be rejected and forsaken by those who come to this Fear; such as the taking
off the Hat to a Man, the Bowings and Cringings of the Body, and such other
Salutations of that kind, with all the foolish and superstitious Formalities
attending them; all which Man has invented in his degenerate State, to feed his
Pride in the vain Pomp and Glory of this World; as also the Unprofitable Plays,
Frivolous Recreations, Sportings and Gamings, which are invented to pass away
the Precious Time, and divert the Mind from the Witness of God in the Heart,
and from the Living Sense of his Fear, and from that Evangelical Spirit,
wherewith Christians ought to be leavened, and which leads into Sobriety,
Gravity, and Godly Fear; in which, as we abide, the Blessing of the Lord is
felt to attend us in those Actions, in which we are necessarily engaged, in
order to the taking care for the Sustenance of the outward Man.

FINIS.

