Natural Theology, OR, THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD, FROM THE WORKS of CREATION;
Accommodated, and Improved, to the Service of CHRISTIANITY.

By Matthew Barker M. A. Minister of the Gospel.

Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you;

Act. 17. 23. He that comes to God must believe that he is,

Heb. 11. 6. LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Ranew, at the Kings Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1674.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
To whom I should Dedicate this mean Script I know not, unless To this present
AGE.
EVery Man owes something to the Age wherein he lives; And as he will give but
a bad account of his Life, that has been Instrumental to make it Worse; So he
will not be able to give a good account of it, that has not been an Instrument
in making it better: Though Men have their several Sphaeres to move in, as the
Stars in their several Orbs; yet This motion should be Common to all to be
doing good in the World: And the known saying of that sage Heathen, Cato.
Toti Genitum se credere Mundo, should shame Christians out of that private
Spirit, whereby they live only to themselves, and much more out of those
unworthy practices whereby they do hurt unto others.

And I can truly say, the design of this Treatise is for General good; what
success it may find I know not, or what Censures it may pass through in this
Critical Age through the weak management of it. But as to its Subject, I cannot
but promise my self fair Quarter from every Reader, seeing it treats of
Principles that are owned by the Light of Nature, and such as are approved of,
in the higher Light of Christianity.

My thoughts in the course of my Studies have been exercised upon various
Subjects; and yet I could never obtain of my self to expose any thing to
public View, unless that which is not worth the mentioning; And why I should
make an Essay now, and why upon this Subject rather then another, I can give
little Account, but only that after my Conceptions about it had been
Communicated in the hearing of some, it was suggested to me, such a Discourse
might be useful in this present Age; wherein Atheism is secretly insinuating
it self into the Hearts of Men, and getting ground Considerably more then in
former Ages.

Not that we have many that deny his Being, but the Conviction of it upon their
Hearts does grow very weak and languid, and the imbred Character of it in Men's
Consciences are much obscured and sullied through the defilements of sin. Now
to brighten these Characters, and to convince Men's Reasons, to awaken their
sleepy Souls, to a Practical acknowledgment of his Being, is the chief design
of this small thing: And the smaller, because it is but the lesser half of what
I intended, and of what I have lying by me in Papers upon this Subject: And
which does better justify and explicate the Title, then what is here presented
unto public view. But whether I may have opportunity and leisure to Transcribe
them for others use, I yet know not: I find Writing is tedious, and takes up
more time then I can well spare from other employments that daily attend me.

I have for some time, by the help of a Friend, had some Meditations upon
another Subject transcribed into a legible Hand, which to satisfy the desires
of some, it may be, may in time come abroad, if they may be of any use; but my
thoughts having been more lately exercised upon this present Subject, I thought
method required they should march in the Van, seeing they proceed upon the most
Fundamental Principles in all Religion.

And being convinced by mine Observation, as well as the Information of others,
that the present Age is sinking a pace into the dreggs of Atheism, by
debauching their Consciences, and stifling the very Light and Law of Nature,
that preach a Deity to all Men; I thought no better way to recover it, then to
set God before Men's view in the Works of his Creation. And from thence to
demonstrate the necessity of his Being, and the several Attributes of his being
visible therein: And from thence to gather strength to the enforcing of that
respect that Men owe to the Great Creator of the World, and the Author of their
Being: And not only in those Duties that are Cognoscible to the Light of
Nature, but even those that are made known by Supernatural Revelation in the
Word. Specially considering that the Creation of the World is attributed to him
that is the Redeemer of it; and who is that Eternal Word whence the whole
Written Word derives its Original, as well as this visible World.

So that I pitched upon this Subject, not because it is the most Sublime, but
because it is the most Radical and Fundamental to all Religion, and most
convincing to the Reason of all Men. And while I have sought to improve Natural
Light to the utmost extent of it; I have also showed the Deficiency of it, that
no Man might rest in it. And have considered the Creation, not only in its
first state under the first Adam, but as elevated into an higher state, and
higher improvement under the second Adam: Though considering the smallness of
this, I had almost said, Pamphlet; It cannot be expected I should be able to
Enlarge upon any particular herein: And I was the willinger to Contract,
because I find few Men can, or at least will find Time or Money for larger
Volumes.

Though I have always thought that good Books are the best part of a man's
Furniture in his House, and the best Ornaments for Ladies Closets. Certainly
what does enrich the mind is to be valued far above those things that only
please the Sense.

And if Men object, what needs any more Writing, the World is full of Books;
and what can be more Printed then already is? Yes verily, new Books in every
Age excite people to Read, when they will not regard the very same things in
old Authors. And hereby old Truths come to be newly minted as it were in every
Age, and so they pass off the more currently with Men; besides what further
improvements are made of them in every Age.

And sometimes respect to the Author makes people read Books, which else they
would not concern themselves about. And it is not amiss to please Men to their
Edification. And if some Writings do not match men of the higest Parts and
Learning, let them not despise them, they may match men the better that are a
degree or two below them, who have also most need of Instruction.

And though high Speculations may please best the Fancy, yet Practical Writings
do best tend to make a better World. And I would account it no burden, but
rather an honor, and advantage to the Age to be well furnished with them; if
they be not slight and trivial. It is a mercy to this Nation that the Press is
so open for the propagating of Knowledge; for it is observed in those Centuries
wherein Popery was in its highest Elevation and widest extent, there was the
least written, and so there is the least account given of those times,

But to Conclude with respect to this Treatise now presented to this present
Age; If any say, Other Pens have been Employed upon the same Subject with it: I
would answer, It is not easy to pitch upon any Theme that has never had an
exercise upon it, or, to walk in any path wherein are not found the Traces of
any Man's foot. But this I can say, I have not knowingly followed any Man that
went before me; And though there are some Learned discourses in the World about
Atheism, yet I find them too abstruse for Common understanding; and meddle
little with the Practical Improvements which are to be made of that which is
styled Natural Theology; which I chiefly aimed at in this undertaking; though I
have performed it but in part in what is now Published: Having in a Reserve by
me in my Papers, an account of those several Attributes of God that are
Evidenceable from the Works of his Creation, with Practical Inferences upon
them for the advancement of true Gospel holiness: But I cannot reach so far at
present. I have taken some spare hours to Transcribe these few Meditations for
the Press; wherein I have Inserted a few Quotations as they did occur to me;
for my Reading has been but small: Though it may be what I have Inserted may
make what I have written not more acceptable to many Readers: How ever, Printed
Books being exposed to the view of all, let every one take the benefit as he
can.

I have nothing farther to offer here, but to beg of the Reader to pardon the
Errata's both of the Author, and the Printer; and to pray that God would both
pardon and amend the great Errata's of the Age; That the Supreme Deity of
Heaven and Earth, and true Religion, that is relative to him, may find more
Cordial and Practical respect from this present Age; wherein is wrapped up Men's
Eternal Interess, and the present Interess of our own Nation. And that any
Essays to this end may be attended with a Divine Blessing, and particularly
this, that is sincerely intended toward it, how ever weakly managed, by a poor
unworthy Instrument.

November. 17. 1673. Matthew Barker.

Natural Theology: OR, The Knowledge of God from the Works of Creation;
Accommodated and improved to the Service of Christianity.
ROMANS 1. 20. For the Invisible Things of Him from the Creation of the World are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal
Power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse.
CHAP. I.
The Scope of the Text. How the Gentiles though without the written Law yet are
under Sin. What the Law of Nature is. How Adam had the knowledge of his
Creator. What meant by the Invisible Things of God. Though Invisible, yet how
seen. What meant by the Creation of the World. What difference betwixt the
Creation of the World, and things made. Why the Apostle only mentions God's
eternal Power and Godhead. How the Gentiles are without excuse by the Light of
Nature.
THe Scope of the Apostle in the first part of this Epistle, is to assert and
prove the great Doctrine of Justification by Faith, and not by the Works of the
Law. And to make his way to it, He first proves all men to be under sin. And
all Mankind being divided into Jew and Gentile; he first proves the Gentile to
be under sin, in this first Chapter; and the Jew in the Second. And those that
are under Sin, cannot be justified by the Works of the Law, and therefore must
of necessity have recourse to the Righteousness of Faith, being convicted of
Sin by the Law.

Now lest it might be argued, How could the Gentile be under sin, not having
the Written Law made known unto them? Understand it of Gentiles without the
Church.
for it was the Jew to whom were committed the Oracles of God; and where there
is no Law, there is no transgression. The Apostle therefore in this Chapter
tells us, they had the Law of Nature, which was God's Law; which though it is
not written in Ink and Paper, yet it is written in the Hearts of all Men, and
in the visible Works of God's Creation: and the Gentiles thereupon are
convicted to be under Sin, not following the Light and Conduct of that
Universal Law.

For as a Law is Directive and Preceptive, it ministers Knowledge, and
commands Practice: So was the Law of Nature to the Gentiles; it had a Light
in it whereby they might attain some knowledge of God; and it had a force in it
to urge them upon the performance of Duty and Service to Him, answerable to
that knowledge.

But because they darkened this Light in themselves, as in verse. 21. Their
foolish heart was darkened, and they did not follow the conduct of it, but
retained the Truth in unrighteousness; hereupon they are convinced of Sin; for
they did neither take up those worthy Conceptions of God's Being, which the Law
of Nature might direct them to; as the Apostle speaks in verse. 21, 22. neither
did they manage their conversation toward men, with that justice, sobriety,
equity, and charity, as that Law did both direct and urge them to; as the
Apostle does at large declare in the enumeration of those several Vices, which
they lived in the practice of, in the last part of the Chapter.

Now this Law of Nature, as written in the Hearts of Men, he speaks of in the
Verse before the Text; calling it (...): That which may be known of God,
manifest in them. And as written in the Works of Creation, he speaks it of
these words of the Text; For the Invisible Things of Him from the Creation of
the World are seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
eternal Power and Godhead: And hence he infers they are (...), without excuse.
And so I am come to the Text.

I having already spoken from another Scripture at large of the Glory of God,
as manifested in Christ; and of the Glory of Christ, as manifested in the
Gospel-Ministration; my intention from this Text is, to set forth the Glass of
the World's Creation; wherein we may behold, and from whence we may evince,
both the Being of God, or his Deity; and many Attributes and Properties of his
Being.

And whereas all Theology consists of two Parts; either that which is called
Natural, or that which consists of Supernatural Revelation; the former I
shall here speak of.

By Natural Theology, that all may understand, I mean that knowledge of God,
and our duty to Him, which the Light of Nature may lead Man up to, and which is
concreat with his Soul. The Image of God upon Man in his first Creation,
consisted in Knowledge as well as Holiness; and the knowledge Adam had of his
Creator, was partly by the Character of his Being engraven upon his Soul, which
is by some styled verbum (...), an implanted Word; and partly by what the large
power of his intellectual Faculty might gather from the Works of Creation; by
both which he was led to God as his ultimate end. Now the Light of Nature, as
it is now found in Man, is the (...), or the dark and weak remainders of this
Image still; which the Apostle says the Heathens had, who had nothing of the
verbum (...), or the external Word, either by Writing, or any other way of
Revelation.

The Text may seem a Paradox; for it speaks of things Invisible that are seen:
If seen, how are they Invisible? And if Invisible, how are they seen? And
therefore I must explain the Text.

1. And first I shall show what are the Invisible Things of God, spoken of in
the Text.

2. How these Invisible Things are seen, and understood, from the Creation of
the World; and the things that are made.

3. How upon the account thereof, the Gentiles are said to be without excuse.

1. For the First: (...).
By the Invisible Things of God are meant his Being, and the Properties and
Attributes of his Being; and which is expressed in the Arabic Version. These are
called the Things of God; Proprietates ejus quae non sunt visae. Arab.
not as if in God there was Thing, and Thing, or any multiplicity, diversity,
or variety in his Being, as there is in the Beings of Men; where the Mind is
one Faculty, and the Will another: the Faculty is one thing, and the Act
another; Wisdom is one thing, and Power another; Habit is one thing, and
Operation another; the Whole is one thing, and Parts another: For the Nature of
God is perfect Unity, Identity, Simplicity, without any division or
composition; Men's soluta and libera, segregata ab omni Concretione. As Cicero
speaks of God. Tusc. q. lib. 1. p. 118.
where Mind is the same with Will, Act with Power, Wisdom with Goodness, etc.
but God speaking to Men, speaks of himself, as we are able to understand. And
therefore we read of Attributes and Properties in his Being, as if these were
distinct things; which yet are all one in Him; and are his Essence and Being,
rather than the Attributes of it. Now these are the Invisibles of God.

As God himself is said to be the King Eternal, 1 Timothy 1. 17. 1 Timothy 6. 16.
Immortal, and Invisible; and to dwell in Light Inaccessible, Operationes Dei
descendunt ad nos, essentia tamen manet inaccessa.
whom no Eye has seen, or can see: So are all the Attributes of his Being, in
themselves invisible. Though his Goodness, Power, and Wisdom, are visible in
their Effects; yet as they are in God they are invisible. For God being a
Spirit, cannot be seen by a corporeal Faculty; for all sensation is made by a
suitableness of the Object to the Sense: Nay, the Soul it self, though it is a
Spirit, while it dwells and acts in the Body, cannot see God as he is, because
it acts here according to the Law and capacity of its present state: Which is
to understand, and see things by those Species and Images which are presented
to it from the Fancy, and conveyed to the Fancy from the Sense. But how it
may see God, and understand in its separate state, is not my present work to
enquire; for the Apostle speaks in the Text, of Man in his present state; and
so these things of God are invisible to him, as to any immediate and intuitive
sight of them. For they are not absolutely invisible; for the Soul, when it is
fortified and fitted, may be capable of seeing them but it cannot in its
present state; Propter excessum intelligibilis supra intellectum. Aquin.
For the excess of the Object above the faculty, as the light of the Sun is to
the eyes of a Bat.

2. How are these Invisible Things of God said to be clearly seen from the
Creation of the World? The Greek word (...), The Greek word may be best
rendered, Despiciuntur; Are seen here below.
which we render, clearly seen, will not well bear that interpretation: neither
can I find it so in any other Translation. For the clear sight of God, and of
his Attributes, is rather to be seen in Christ, than in the Works of Creation;
who is called, the brightness of his Fathers Glory, Heb. 1. 3. Or, it is rather
reserved for the future, than attained in this present state. But yet these
Invisible Things of God, though more darkly, may be seen from the Creation of
the World, and the Things that are made; as the Apostle here asserts.

Now by the Creation of the World, (...).
is either here meant the beginning of its Being, and so the beginning of Time;
and then the Apostle means, that those Invisible Things of God have been
discovered and seen, a constitutione Mundi, from the first beginning of the
World, in the things that are made. Those Attributes of his that were
Invisible, did then manifest themselves in visible effects, and not before.

And this sense the Syriac, The beginning of the World is sometimes expressed by
(...), Ephesians. 1. 4. or by (...), Mar. 13. 19. but not by (...).
and some other Translations do seem to follow; though disapproved by most of
others: As also by most of our Modern Expositors; Doctor Hammond excepted.

Therefore by the Creation of the World, I conceive, is meant the Things
created, especially the first Mass and Chaos; which alone was properly and
strictly, the effect of God's Creating Power. Creatio est emanatio universalis
entis ex nihilo. Aquin.
Now here is seen God's Eternal Power, considering that he did Create, not with
labor and difficulty, but by his Word; not out of praeexistent Matter, but out
of Nothing.

Quest. When the Apostle speaks of these Invisible Things as seen; Does he
speak of the sight of the Body, or of the Mind?

Answ. He speaks of both, though chiefly of the latter; For the Eye of the
Body beholding this Visible World, the Mind thence, by the help of the Sense,
is enabled to infer and conclude, that this must be the Effect of some Infinite
Power; and so the Mind does see this Power: For when the Mind, by reasoning,
has found out Effects in their Cause, it has an intellectual sight of what it
has discovered. And that [Seeing] is here to be chiefly taken for the Sight of
the Mind, the next words more clearly show; [ being understood by the Things
that are made] which run thus in the Greek, (...). And (...) implies the Acts
of the Mind, as it does raise it self up to the knowledge of things, by its
agitations and exercise: And so it sees the Invisible things of God, in the
Things that are made, as it ascends from Finite, to that which is Infinite;
from Visible, to that which is Invisible; from Corporeal, to that which is
Incorporeal; from Temporal, to that which is Eternal. And by the next words,
[the things that are made] in the Greek (...), we may understand the Works of
Creation, as they were formed out of the first Chaos, which was the proper
Object of Creation. So that we may distinguish in the Text between the Creation
of the World, and the Things which are made; taking the word [(...), or
Creation] as expressing the first Matter of all Things, and [(...), things
made] the several Creatures, both Animate, and Inanimate, that were educed out
of that first Matter.

Or, A work curiously wrought, is either properly called (...), if we derive it
from (...), as some do; or else (...); and so words and syllables set together
in meeter, are called (...), or a Poem; or the producing of any work, secundum
praecepta artis, according either to the Precepts of Rhetoric, Music,
Architecture, etc. as Critics tell us.
as the former word does properly express, the producing of all things out of
nothing; so the latter word, the curious frame and order, wherein all things
were made.

As when the Apostle speaks of the New Creation, which Believers have in
Christ; he makes use of both these words of the Text; Ephesians. 2. 10. We are his
Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works. To show the excellent
frame of this spiritual Work, (...), etc.
it is called (...), the Workmanship of God. And to show the Power of God
manifested therein, it is said to be Created.

Quest. But why does the Apostle only mention God's Eternal Power? Are not
other Attributes of his Being to be seen in the Works of Creation, as his
Wisdom and Goodness, as well as his Eternity and Power?

Answ. The Apostle mentions the Power of God, because of all God's
Attributes, that seems to be most eminent and conspicuous in the Work of
Creation. For it was properly an Act of Power, to make all things out of
Nothing; though his Wisdom was seen in the guiding of his Power, and his
Goodness in making all things good. And the Apostle mentions God's Eternity in
the Text, which is another Attribute, when he calls his Power Eternal: And by
this he shows, that as the World had its being in Time, so that God who made
it, was before it, or else he could not have made it, as the Cause must needs
be before the Effect; And what is before the Creation of the World, and every
thing that is made, must needs be before all Time, (which came in with the
Creature, as the measure of its duration) and so be Eternal.

But yet though only God's Power and Eternity be here mentioned; yet, as a
Learned Expositor Observes, Estius in Loc.
his other Attributes are included in the Word Godhead. As if the Apostle
should have said, In the Creation of the World are seen God's Power, and God's
Eternity: But what need I particularly mention any more Attributes of his
Being, when his Godhead it self, which comprehends them all, is manifested
therein.

The last particular to be explained is, How the Gentiles are hereupon said to
be without excuse?

A man may be said to be without excuse, when he has no Apology to make for
himself, as the word in the Text signifies; and that either with respect to
malum culpae, the fault committed by him: Or, malum poenae, the punishment
inflicted upon him. In both, the Gentiles were without excuse.

1. As to the malum culpae, or the evil of sin they were guilty of: For they
had such means of knowledge ministered to them, by the Light and Law of Nature,
that might have led them to more venerable thoughts of God, and a more
honorable worship of him, than was practiced by them: And also to a more
righteous and blameless conversation amongst men: So that thereupon they were
without excuse.

2. And then as to the evil of Punishment, inflicted for their sin; God would
be justified therein, and they left without excuse, when he should proceed to
Judgment.

For God does, and will manage his Judgments in such Righteousness toward all
men, with respect to their several capacities and conditions in this World,
that every man may be found without excuse that falls under them.

How far the Light and Law of Nature may lead a man toward his Salvation, I
shall not here dispute: All that the Apostle asserteth here concerning the
Gentiles, is, That they were (...), or without excuse thereby.

And the Apostle Paul deals with the Gentiles thus particularly, because the
Ministry of the Uncircumcision was more peculiarly committed to him than the
other Apostles. And he does it rather in this Epistle to the Romans, than in
any other, because Rome was the chief Seat of the Gentiles Empire in the
Apostles time; and where Idolatry and moral Wickedness also did most abound, as
it usually does in such great Cities; and as their own Historians do abundantly
declare concerning it.

CHAP. II.
The two Doctrines that result from the Text. The two ways of Demonstration.
The Being of God three ways made known. Several Arguments to prove God's Being
from the Works of Creation.
THus having explained the parts of the Text, I shall raise out of them these
two general Doctrines.

DOCT. I. 1. That the Being of God, and several Attributes of his Being, may be
seen and understood from the Creation of the World, and the things that are
made.

DOCT. II. 2. That to fall short in knowledge or practice, of what the Light and
Law of Nature may lead men up to, will render them inexcusable, though they
have not the written Word.

I shall first speak of the former; and first show how the Being of God, and
then the Attributes of his Being, may be demonstrated therefrom.

Now there are two sorts of Demonstrations, one is, (...).
a Priori; when Effects are demonstrated from their Cause. Now the Being of God
cannot be thus demonstrated; no man can demonstrate the necessity of such a
Being from any Antecedent Cause.

And the other is a posteriori; (...).
where Causes are demonstrated from their Effects. And so the Works of Creation
do demonstrate God's Being. When a Man shall seriously consider this great
Fabric of Heaven and Earth, his mind may thence gather the Being of God. There
is enough written in the Book of God's Creation, to declare his Being to us;
though there was nothing written of it in the Book of the Scriptures.

The Being of God is three ways made known to men.

1. By the Light of Natural Conscience. There are some Characters and
Impressions of his Being within all men; for Man being made for God, he has
put a peculiar impression of his Being upon his Soul, which the brute Beasts
have not. Though they have some resemblance of reason, yet they have nothing of
the impression of a Deity, because they are not made to the immediate praise
and glory of their Creator, as Man is: Which is the reason why all Nations have
acknowledged, and worshipped a Deity. When the Apostle went forth in the
execution of his Commission, to preach the Gospel in the Nations of the Gentile
World; wherever he came, he found the People performing Worship to some Deity
or other. When he came to Athens, he found there that (...), or superstitious
fear, and reverence of their Gods; which Luke mentions in Acts 17. 22. Yea, not
only at Athens, which was a place of Learning, but even amongst the barbarous
people: Which we read of in Acts 14. how they brought Garlands, and would have
offered Sacrifices to Barnabas and Paul, which shows they had upon their hearts
the sense of a Deity; and some kind of religious Worship was found amongst
them. And their Learned Men have all along asserted, the worship of a Deity to
be the chief part of the Law of Nature, God having a Witness for himself in
every Man's Conscience. But this I shall speak more of afterward.

2. The Being of God is made known by the Scriptures, which throughout declare
to us that God is: And this is the evidence of Faith, as in Heb. 11. 3. Through
Faith we understand that the Worlds were framed by the Word of God; so that the
things which are seen, were not made of things which do appear. A Text somewhat
parallel to that which I am now discoursing upon. For both of them speaks of
the Visible Things of Nature, and the Invisible Things of God. Both do speak of
these Invisible things of God, evidenced to the mind of man. But with this
difference, the one does speak of the evidence that Reason gathers from Nature,
the other of the evidence of Faith from the Word of God. So it follows in the
sixth Verse; He that comes to God, must believe that he is. Faith believes it
from the Scriptures, which give witness of him, being the proper Object of
Faith. And God has written his Name in clearer Characters in these, than what
is found in the Book of Conscience. Had Natural Conscience been sufficient,
there had been no need of the Scriptures, which were written to inform,
rectify, and guide Conscience, wherein it is defective or erroneous: So that,
as it is said, Ideo scribuntur omnes Libri ut emendetur unus; All Books are
written to amend the Book of Conscience. So especially we may say it of the
Book of Scriptures. Conscience has thence a clearer account, not only of the
Will and Counsels of God, but even of his very Nature and Being, than by any
Characters thereof it can discover within it self.

3. The Being of God is also made known to us from the Works of Creation. All
these Works of God do preach a Deity. As the Heavens are said to declare his
Glory, and the Firmament to show his Handiwork, Psalm. 19. 1. so his Name is
said to be excellent in all the Earth, Psalm. 8. 1. The Beams of his Divinity
shine through the Latitude of all Created Beings. And if you lay your eye in a
Beam of the Sun, it leads it to the Body of the Sun. As in every Creature there
is aliquid nihili, something of nothing; so there is aliquid Dei, something of
God.

Praesentemque refert quaelibet Herba Deum. The Herbs we see, show God to Be.

As the Philosopher being asked, where his Books were, answered, His Books
were, Totius Entis naturalis Universitas; The University of all natural Being.
And verily those that have no Books, and never were at any University of
Learning, may in the Book of Nature, and the University of created beings, read
and understand the Being of God.

Now this is the Evidence of his Being that my Text speaks of, and therefore is
to be the subject of my present Discourse. Which I shall explain by these
following Arguments.

Arg. 1. It is impossible for this Creation to give itself a Being. The Heavens
could not make themselves, nor the Earth itself, for then they should be before
themselves. Their acting before their existing, which is impossible to Reason.
For it is a true saying in Philosophy, Operari sequitur esse; Operations do
follow the Creatures Being, both as to time, and the manner of working. As
also, Nihil producitur in actum nisi per ens in actu; Nothing is produced into
actual being but by some Being that does actually exist. And therefore this
Creation must be brought into being by some actual Being that was before it:
Nil se gignit, nil provenit a se. Paling.
And what can that be but God alone.

Should we assert the World was made by Angels, as the Carpocratians said of
old; yet who then made those Angels. Much less could it be made by Men, for
they understand little of the works of it how it is made. And how came Man
himself first to be? Its true what we read Act. 17. Of one Blood were made all
Nations; but not by Creation, but Generation. And what gave being to that one
Blood? There we must have recourse to a first Being; and who that is, the Text
tells us, God made of one Blood all Nations.

Or, should we say according to the ancient Philosophy, now revived by some,
That the Universe was framed by the fortuitous concourse of innumerable Atoms
of several Forms, Figures, and Qualities, that from Eternity danced up and down
in an infinite space. And those that were heaviest fell lowest, and made the
Earth; And those that were lighter took their place above them. Those that were
moist did coalesce into Water, and those that were thin and rare into Air and
the superior Elements. Which was the fond and irrational Opinion of certain
Philosophers of old, The account of this Opinion we find at large in Gassendus.
as Leucippus, Lucretius, and especially Epicurus.

But of this Opinion we need no other confutation than the exact Order of all
things in Nature; which could not be so by some chance or accident. No more
than an House exactly built could come into such a frame by the Casual meeting
together of Stones and Timber. And why did those Atoms fall together then, and
not sooner? And whence is it that the course of Nature is now so fixed and
constant? if all things came together at first by chance, all things still
should fall out by chance. Or if we should admit a possibility of such an
orderly concourse of these Atoms, yet how came these Atoms into being? Did
they make themselves? That I showed was impossible. Were they Eternal? How come
they then to be changed from what they were. For whatever is from Eternity m^st
needs be the same to Eternity. But he that desires a further confutation of
this fancy, may read what is written against it by a learned Knight in his Book
against Atheism. Sir Char. Wolsely.


There were some other Philosophers that said, All things did arise out of
Number; as the Pythagoreans. But it is supposed, they meant all things did
arise out of Unity; that is, from one first Being; from that Unity which is,
Unitatis omnis effectrix, as one speaks; that has produced all creatures, in
the several Unities of their individual Beings.

Others of them thought that all things did at first spring out of Contraries.
It Is true, All compound Bodies are made up of contrary Elements. Frigida
pugnabant calidis, humentia siccis. Ovid. Met. l. 1. p. 2.
And the opposition of two Contraries in Nature may produce some third thing
different from them both. But these Contraries must have an existence in their
distinct natures before any compound can result from them. And so though they
be the material or formal cause of any effects in Nature, yet they themselves
could not have existence without some efficient cause; and this does
necessarily lead us up to God, who is the first Cause.

Or, could we conjecture with Pliny, (for it was but his conjecture) that the
World itself is an Eternal Deity. Plin. Not. Phil. Lib. 1. c. 7.
For so he speaks; God, whosoever he be, if happily there be any other but the
very world, he is all Sight, all Hearing, all Life, all Soul, all of Himself.

But he speaks more positively concerning the Sun, Verily, says he, it is the
Life and Soul of the World, the principal Governor of Nature, Lib. 1. cap. 6.
and no less than a God, or Divine Power, considering his work and operation.

Or, can we say with Aristotle, That the World is eternal; which Opinion he
grounded upon this Principle, Ex nihilo nil fit; Out of nothing nothing is
made. Which is true, if we speak of nothing as it imports matter out of which
things are made. But if we mean by nothing only the term from whence Creation
began, so it is not true; For all things did so arise from nothing as their
term. It is also true in Philosophy, that nothing can bring forth nothing in a
natural course; but it is not so in Divinity, that treats of God and his
Infiniteness; For He can produce being out of non-being, as He has done in the
Worlds Creation. And as we read in Genesis 1. 1.

But it is as well against Reason as against Scripture to assert the World to
be Eternal. For as there could be no Progress in Number, if there was no unit
out of which all Number springs: For Number is greater or lesser as it is
nearer to, or farther off from Unity: So there could be no computation of time,
if there was not some first moment. For Time is nothing else but a succession
or flux of moments; as one gives this description of it it is Nunc fluens. So
that all time must be computed according to its nearness to, or remoteness from
the beginning of time. If there was no beginning of time, there could be no
Prius and posterius. We could not reckon Ancient and Modern. And there could
properly be no such thing as Antiquity. For this present moment would be as
ancient, with respect to Eternity, as a thousand years ago. And therefore
seeing there is prius and posterius, sooner and later in time, there must of
necessity be some beginning of time.

And if there be a beginning of Time, there must be a beginning of the World.
For Time and the World were always together.

Arg. 2. We see in Nature every thing is serving a rational End. As the Sun
enlightens the World, which else would be but one great Dungeon, and unfit for
habitation. The Clouds and Rain serve an end, which is to cool and mo^sten the
Earth, which else would be dry and barren. The Winds do serve an end, which is
to purge and purify the Air, that for want of motion it might not corrupt and
putrify. And the Earth is endued with a Seminal virtue to bring forth Herbs
and Fruits of several kind for the use of Man and Beast.

And as all things in Nature serve an End, so they are wonderfully fitted to
their several Ends. Now whence is this but from some wise Agent that fitted
things thus to their end. As Philosophers tell us of four sorts of Causes in
Nature, the Efficient, Formal, Material, and Final, and the one has dependence
upon the other: If there was no efficient there could be no matter, if no
matter no form, if no form no end; for the form is given with respect to the
end. But where we see matter, and that matter invested with form, and that form
serving an end, we may then conclude this could not be without an efficient. As
when we see a Clock or Watch, and see how every Wheel, yea every Pin therein
does serve an end, and these fitted to that end, we conclude this was not by
chance, but by the workmanship of some skilful Artist. Or, had we seen
Archimedes his Sphere, artificially framed to represent the several Motions of
the Heavenly Orbs, we should conclude, this was not thus framed of it self. So
when we see all things in Nature in motion, and every wheel of Nature moving to
a rational end, we may conclude, this was done by some Infinite Intelligence.
Which the Heathen Philosophers did acknowledge, when they called God, or the
Maker of all things, (...), Mind, and Reason, as we read in Plato. Anaxagoras
so freq^ently called God Men's, that in derision they gave him the name of Men's.
And as Virgil, as I remember speaks,

Totaque infusa per artus
Men's agitet molem, etc.
A Mind this Heap does actuate,
And through its joints does penetrate.
By which we may perceive that they apprehended the World had a Maker, and that
He that made all things, was an Intelligent Being. Lactantius quoting the
several descriptions the Heathen Philosophers made of God, Lib. 1. cap. 5.
among the rest, quotes Chrysippus describing him to be, Naturalem vim divina
Ratione praeditam. A natural Power endued with Divine Reason. For they
evidently saw a Divine Wisdom joined with Power in all the works of Creation.

Argum. 3. We see in the Creation the excellent proportion and usefulness of
one part to another for the preservation of the whole, and the suitableness of
the whole to Man that is made the Lord of it. The Life of Man or Beast cannot
be preserved without Food; Food they cannot have unless the Earth bring it
forth; bring it forth it cannot unless it be watered with Showers from Heaven;
Showers there cannot be without Clouds; Clouds cannot be without Vapors;
Vapors there cannot be, unless they are exhaled by the Sun from the Waters;
and for this end the Sunbeams do not only bring down Light and Heat to the
Earth, but attract Vapors from it toward Heaven, and all for the service of
the Earth. Wherein we see the Heavens hearing the Earth, and the Earth hearing
the Corn, Wine, and Oil, and other Fruits, and all hearing Man. And as in this
lower World one part of the Creation is supported by another, as the Earth by
the Waters and Air, so this whole lower World is preserved by the superior
World, and under the dominion of it, which shows the excellent Order of things
in Nature; each part tending to preserve the whole, which the Philosophers call
the Harmony of the Universe. As one of them speaks, Natura est perfectissima
Harmonia; There is no Harmony better than the Order of Nature. For as in
Harmony, though there are several Sounds, yet are they so tempered and
modulated, as to make pleasant Music. So the several parts of the Universe are
so adapted and fitted to each other, as that they all do constitute an
harmonious Order. And as Harmony arises out of Discords, so there is in the
Universe, Concordia discors, Creatures of contrary Natures and Qualities, yet
so mixed and proportioned, as that they sweetly agree together, and harmonize
with each other, and serve mutually to the preservation of one another.

And if we consider how the Creation is fitted to the use of Man, and Man is
fitted to it, who was made the Lord of it, we may easily discern this was done
by some wise Agent. As there are many pleasant qualities in natural things, so
man has several bod^ly Senses, whereby to discern and enjoy the pleasantness
of them. To what purpose was there sweet Smells, beautiful Colors, pleasant
Tastes in the Flowers and Fruits of the Earth, if there were no such Senses, as
Seeing, Tasting, or Smelling. And so to what purpose would these Senses be in
the Bodies of Men, if there were not suitable Objects provided in Nature for
them. And so when we observe in these fruits of the Earth such virtues and
qualities that are both nourishing and medicinal to the Body of Man, and some
of them have Signatures and Characters upon them that declare their virtue, and
what part of Man's Body they are useful to, it shows they were created for the
use of Man. As we see a Man that builds an House for his use, he does fit it
with Rooms, Furniture, and Utensils, to make it a convenient Habitation. So
has God fitted this World to be an habitation for Man, who is made to be the
Inhabitant of it, Act. 17. 26.

And as the Nature of Man does affect variety, so has God furnished the World
with infinite variety of Creatures, for the gratifying of his Sense, and for
the delightful exercise of his Mind; and by all setting forth His own manifold
Wisdom; and commending Himself to Man by his great Goodness and Bounty herein.

And there is such a suitableness betwixt the World and Man, that Man is called
a little World. But the greater World does serve the lesser. After God had made
and finished the rest of his works, He then made Man, and epitomized them all
in him; and gave him dominion over them: And the exact fitness of the several
parts of the Creation to his use, does show that it is the Effect of some
Infinite Wisdom.

Arg. 4. Whence is it that those two Natural Principles of Self-preservation,
and Self-propagation, are so inviolably founded in the Nature of all living
Creatures; even those that have no Reason, as well as those that have: both
which are necessary to the preservation of the Universe. May not we hence
easily argue, that surely this was done intentionally for such an end. And if
intentionally, then it is done by Reason; and if by Reason, it must be by His
Reason that first made this Universe. For is it not rational, that when the
Creatures were made they should be preserved, both in the Individuals and the
several Species or kinds of their being; and what can do this better in a
natural course, than for them to have these two Principles inherent in their
several Natures.

And so we may observe in Vegetables, as Herbs, Flowers, Trees; they all have a
Seed in themselves, which Nature brings forth for the preservation of their
several Kinds in a continued succession of Individuals of the same kind. And
whence is this rational provision in Nature, but by some rational Agent, and
who can that be but the God of Nature, that was before it, and founded this
rational Law in it, and is the Natura naturans, as Philosophers speak: That
Nature that is the Original and Lawgiver of Nature.

Arg. 5. We may observe in the Creation there are degrees of being, and this
shows there is some chief Being. And there are degrees of Perfection, which
shows there is some chief Perfection. For else we could not compute degrees, if
there was no first, with respect to which such computation is to be made.

These degrees in Nature are by learned Men called the Scale of Nature; and we
must come to some top in the Scale or Ladder, and not ascend in Infinitum,
though we must into Infinity, which is the Infinite God. For, as I said before,
where there is prius and posterius, there is primum and postremum; So where
there is magis and minus, there is maximum and minimum; where there are degrees
of Perfection, there must needs be some greatest Perfection, and what can that
be, but that God who is Optimus and Maximus, who is the most excellent Being,
and the first Perfection. For instance; we see some knowledge in Brutes, but
more in Man, more in Angels, but there is a Being then that is perfect in
knowledge. And so I might speak of all Perfections, whether natural or moral;
The degrees of them show there is One First. Or, if you will look upon these
degrees of Being amongst the Creatures as several parts of being, we may again
argue, Where there are parts, there must be some whole; and where there are
particulars, there must be some universal. Now we see the Creatures Being is
but a particular being, and in their several kinds we see several parts of
Being, none of them having all Being in themselves, and therefore there must be
some totum of Being, or some Being that is universal, that comprehends in it
self all Being, and what can this be but God alone.

Argum. 6. We see in the Creation how Creatures that are without Reason, yet
act according to the exact Rules of Reason; which could not be, were they not
guided and acted by some other principle than their own respective Natures. For
no Nature can act of it self beyond its own Principle: As we see how the Be
does make its Comb, and the Spider its Web, and the Birds their Nests, and
Bevers their Houses in the Waters, consisting of several stories (as I have
heard from Eyewitnesses) according to the exactest Rules of Art and Reason.
And if you say, that these Creatures have Reason quoad hoc, as to those things
that belong to the benefit of their own natures, though not to other things;
Yet what shall we say to those Creatures that have not so much as Sense, or a
Sensitive life; as Plants and Trees in this lower World. Whence is it that the
Ivy, as if it did know it was a weak Plant, and could not subsist of itself
should naturally bend to the Wall or Tree that is near it, there to fix, and as
it were incorporate itself by a strange and firm in.hesion? Whence is it that a
Tree does fix its Roots with that strength and Art in the bowels of the Earth,
that no man can imagine how it could be done better, as if it did know what
blasts of wind it must encounter with, which threaten its subversion, etc.

And what Wisdom is that which guides and carries the Root downward, when the
Boughs and Branches ascend upward; as if it understood the need it stood in of
the fatness and moisture of the Earth, and therefore does send forth its roots
up and down through the Earth to forage, and fetch it in.

So also, If we consider how curiously the Embrio or Infant is formed in the
Womb of her that is with Child; the formative virtue that does this is ignorant
of what it does, and yet every part is formed to a rational End in Nature.

And whence is it in the upper World that the Sun is placed at such a
convenient distance from the Earth, and steers its motion by such a Line as is
most for the benefit of it. That when it is gone to its Tropic in the South, it
should return back again to the North, as if it did rationally provide for the
benefit of each part and region of the lower World? In so much that the
Psalmist does attribute Knowledge to it, Psalm. 104. 19. The Sun knows its
going down. And as Tully argues concerning the Heavens, Their motion is either
by Nature, Chance, or Prudence. Not by Nature, for if they were light, they
would move upwards; if heavy, they would move downwards; if neither, they would
stand still: Nor by chance, for they move in a constant and regular Order,
where there is nothing temerarium nec fortuitum, nothing rash nor accidental,
as he speaks Lib. 2. De Not. Deor. And therefore they move by Prudence: And
that not their own, as they were Gods, as some imagined, but by his Wisdom that
made them, by that Eternal Mind that superintends and guides their motions;
which he that denies, Ipse mentis expers judicandus est, as he there speaks:
that is, one void of Reason. If we yield these things are done by Nature, and
natural Instincts; yet still we must reply, Whence had Nature these several
instincts; and if it acts and moves by a Law, who put this Law first into it,
but He that made all things in Wisdom, and has left the prints and footsteps
of it in the several works of his hand. If we see an Arrow for the most part
hit the mark, no man will say, This is by chance; but it is guided by some
skilful hand. So Nature could never produce in so great a constancy such
admirable effects, if it was not guided by some invisible hand.

Argum. 7. We see this Order in Nature, that all Creatures do serve some end
above themselves; As Creatures without life do serve those Creatures that have
life, and those Creatures that have only a vegetative life serve the Creatures
that have a Sensitive Life, and those that have a Sensitive Life do serve Man
that has a superior Rational Life; and therefore Man also was made to serve
some end above himself: and what can this be but to serve his Creator. For
there is no end that Man can serve above himself, but serving God, which may
evidence to us that God is.

And as there is some Equity and Reason that those things in Nature which are
inferior should serve the superior, so it is the highest Reason in the world,
that Man should serve Him that is infinitely superior to him, and supreme over
all, and which is that End above Man which he was made to serve.

Argum. 8. Lastly, We see all things in Nature under certain bounds and limits.
As the Earth, the Waters, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the Heavens; So are all
living creatures bounded and limited in their several natures. And within these
bounds they still abide. Now how came all things to be thus circumscribed and
limited? Why are their several natures extended thus far and no farther, when
it is natural to the Creatures to be extensive of themselves toward some
further perfection in their Beings? Natural Bodies are under Limits, and so are
created Spirits, as Angels in their several Orders or denominations, and the
Souls of Men. Now who has set these limits, but that first Being, who is
unlimited, and has made all things in Number, Weight and Measure? It is He
that has given the Earth its dimensions, and confined the Waters within their
Banks, that comprehends the dust of the Earth in a Measure; that weighs the
Hills in Scales, and the Mountains in a Balance. It is He that has meted out
the Heavens with his Span, and appointed the number of the Stars, and calls
them all by name. Which the Grecians meant by calling their chief God Jupiter,
(...), or the Limiter; and the Romans called him Jovem Terminalem. As God has
given the Creatures their being, so He has set them the several Bounds of
their Being. And to make this yet more plain in a few Instances. Whence is it
that a Stone has not a vegetative Life as well as a Tree; and a Tree a
Sensitive Life as well as a Beast; and a Beast Reason as well as a Man; and why
are not Men intellectual Spirits as well as Angels? All Creatures are bounded
in their several natures, and what, or who could thus bound them, but the God
and Author of Nature. So that upon the whole I may conclude, That if the World
was a living Animal, as Plato fancied, and knew it self, it would readily
acknowledge its Beginning and Being from God alone.

CHAP. III.
The general Doctrine improved. Atheism unreasonable. The Degeneracy of Reason
about Divine Objects. Few professed Atheists, The reason why some attempt to make
themselves Atheists. The several Causes out of which Atheism springs. Why
amongst Christians, that live under the Gospel, there is found the greatest
Atheism.
THus we have demonstrated the Godhead, or the Being of God from the Works of
Creation; I should now proceed to Demonstrate thence also several Attributes of
his Being: but I shall first endeavor to reduce this Knowledge of God's Being,
arising from the light and Law of Nature, to the service of Christianity. For
my design is for Practice rather than Speculation.

Inf. 1. First, We may hence take notice, that Atheism is not only Impious but
Irrational. To deny a God, is to deny and contradict true Reason. The Psalmist
calls him a Fool that says in his heart, there is no God, Psalm. 14. 1. And a
Fool is one that is defective, or distempered in his Reason. (...). Tri^megist.
If Idolaters be charged with brutishness that worshipped false gods, Jer. 10.
14, 18. how much more the Atheist that denies a God? And if the Apostle says
of them, that their foolish heart was darkened, when they debased him in their
vain Rites and Modes of Worship, Romans 1. 18.
how much more are such dark'ned with folly that deny his Being?

Though Hell be the Seat of perfect Wickedness, yet this Speculative Atheism is
not to be found there. The Devils themselves believe and tremble. And what a
monstrous thing then is it, that it should be found upon Earth! And especially
in that part of the Earth, where Men have not only the Book of Nature, but the
written Word of the God of Nature as a Comment upon the works of it; for men to
think it an height of Wit, to be able to dispute against a Deity, and a piece
of Gallantry to live above the fear of it!

Men that are rational enough in other things, yet in this their Reasons are
strangely blinded; which shows the strange degeneracy of their Souls in things
that concern another World, while they are ripe and pregnant enough in things
that concern this World. For did Men exert their Reason in those things, as
they can and do in these, it would conclude nothing more strongly than that God
is. It is the proper Office of Reason to argue from the Effect to the Cause;
why should it not then argue, when it beholds the wonderful Works of this
Creation, these must needs proceed from some Infinite Cause, and thereby be led
up to the Being of God? As when a man sees a Tree that is extended into Boughs
and Branches, his thoughts are naturally led to some Root out of which it
springs; and so when he seeeth a River, his thoughts will lead him to some
Spring out of which it arises; why then should we not, when we see this
visible World, have our thoughts as it were naturally led up to a first Being?
God has sufficiently by his Works of Creation evidenced to Mankind his Being,
that they might seek after him; And therefore there will be no room left for
any such plea in the day of Judgment, for any people whatsoever in any part of
the world. If we had known there had been a God, we would have sought him,
served, and worshipped him. Does Man plead, I never saw his Being; Will we
believe nothing but what our eyes see? We never saw those Souls that dwell
within us, shall we therefore not believe we have Souls? do not their
operations sufficiently evidence their Being in us? Nay, we do not see the Air
in which we breath, and yet no Man denies but there is Air. And does not the
Text tell us of the invisible things of God, and therefore not to be seen? Or,
will Man plead he was not present when God made this World; how shall he then
know that he made it? If we see an House erected according to the Rules of Art;
shall we not believe it is the work of some skilful Artificer, though we did
not stand by and see him build it?

But of these professed Atheists we have not many instances; we read in Ancient
Writers of such as Protagoras, Diagoras, Theodorus, etc. who denied, or
disputed all Deity; whom I find quoted and confuted by learned Bradwardine, as
they were before condemned by the Athenians, Brad. lib. 1. Coral. 1. pars
secund.
and indeed such were exploded by the Heathen. And those that were so, yet were
not constantly so, as to maintain this Opinion to the end. In men's serious and
retired thoughts, especially if they be under some smart affliction, the Belief
and Sense of a Deity returns upon them. Nullus eorum in hac Opinione quod Dii
non sunt, ab adolescentia ad senectutem perseveravit. Plato. 1. 10. de legibus.
As a motion that is against Nature, will some time or other recur. And
therefore the Philosopher said that no Man persevered in this Opinion from
Youth to Old Age. Nature cannot utterly forget her first and fundamental
Lesson, that God is; and that first Verity, that is so deeply rooted in Nature
that it cannot be totally blotted out: Licet enim noster animus multis
inquinamentis abducatur a suo naturali proposito, frequens tamen illud
recurrit, ut exprimat innatos veritatis igniculos. Pamel. Adnot. in Tertul. C.
17. Apo.
As that Renowned Carver did grave his own Image into the Buckler of Pallas
with such singular Art and Cunning, that it could not be removed without
defacing the whole Work. For the Soul being from Divine Inspiration, God has
put the Character of himself upon it which cannot be utterly defaced, while its
Being continues. And therefore the Opinion that denies a Deity, is rather a
Frolic, a Fancy, a Dream, than a grounded Opinion. And when the Soul of Man is
itself, and converseth with it self, and beholds the Legible Characters of
God's Being written upon this whole Creation, such Opinion vanishes away.

But yet we find many have this sense of a Deity very weak, and the Notion of
it very dark in their Souls, and many staggerings in their minds about it. And
not only amongst Heathens, but even amongst themselves, where the Gospel is
professed and preached. Yea, we find in many that live under the Gospel less
sense of a Deity upon their hearts, than amongst the most barbarous Nations of
the World.

But of all others these are the most monstrous, who study to make themselves
Atheists, who set their wits on work to frame Arguments against a Deity. And
they do it to deliver themselves from Service; and from Fear. 1. From Service,
that they might be free from the Yoke of serving God; for if they own a Deity,
their Reason tells them, they ought to give him Worship and Service, and this
they account a Yoke and Burden. As those said in Malachi 1. ver. 13. Behold,
what a weariness is it, and ye have snuffed at it. They think they cannot be
perfect free men till they have freed themselves from all Belief and Sense of a
Deity. Aug. de vera Relig. C. 36. To. 1.
As Austin to this purpose, Quidam propterea putant nihil colendum esse, ne
serviant. Some think no Deity is to be worshipped that they might not serve.
And Lucretius boasts of Epicurus that he was the first that delivered the World
from the burden of Religion*

Humana ante oculos foede cum vita jaceret,
In terris oppressa gravi sub Religione;
Primum Graius homo mortales tollere contra
Est oculos ausus, etc.
But are not these Men much mistaken? when they have cast off the Service of
God, Deo parere libertas est. Sen. de vita beata.
which is the true Liberty of Man; are they not given up to the Service of base
Lusts, which is true Bondage? And made Drudges to the God of this World, who
will not be the servants of the true God? Though the Orator define Liberty to
be this, Libertas est facultas vivendi ut velis, Cicero.
Liberty is a power of living as a Man will: Yet to be obedient to a corrupt
Will, is Bondage not Liberty.

True Liberty is not as one well speaks; Sibi servire, sed sibi imperare; Not
to serve a Man's self, ^otherby. Atheomas^ix. p. 118.
but to rule over himself; So that in this they miss their end. 2. They design
to deliver themselves from fear. But they are not able to accomplish this end
neither. For though in their Cups, and Caresses they can discharge their fear,
Non quenquam vidi qui magis ea, quae timenda non esse dixit, magis timeret;
mortem dico, and Deos.
yet let them fall under some sharp affliction, or draw near the King of
Terrors, and their fears of God and Judgment will be ready to return upon
(...) As Tully observed of Epicurus, though he disputed against the Being of
God, and that Death ought not to be feared, yet says he, I never observed any
Man to fear more those very things which he said ought not to be feared,
namely, Death and the Godds.

Now the Causes that Men are led into Atheism by, are such as these.

1. Is, the Course and Efficacy of second Causes. They observe how all things
come to pass by some visible Causes, which are either Natural, or Voluntary. In
Natural Causes, if the Cause be sufficient the Effect follows, if not, the
Effect miscarries. So that it is not a God, say they, that governs the Events
of Nature, but the Natural Cause does all. So, in Voluntary Causes that depend
upon the will of Man; If it be a good thing that is designed and endeavored,
yet it falls short if the Cause be not sufficient; if it be a bad thing, it
comes to pass if there be sufficient means prepared for it. But let me answer
as I go along. 1. Is it an Argument against the Being of God, because there are
second Causes? Because inferior Ministers are made use of in the Affairs of
Government, does this prove thar there is no Supreme Governor? May there not
be second Causes, and yet the concurrence of a first Cause also, that does
steer and influence them in their Operations? 2. And it is not always that
these second Causes how sufficient soever they may seem, that they produce
their end. Sometimes Nature miscarries in her Productions, and none can give a
reason for it.

And so in Voluntary Causes, The Race is not always to the swift, nor the
Battle to the strong, nor Riches to Men of understanding, as Solomon observes.
Though for the most part, the second Cause does accomplish the Effect according
to to the Law and Ordinance God has settled in the World; yet sometimes it
miscarries and fails, that Men might not place their confidence there. 3. Where
the Effect miscarries through the Deficiency of second Causes, those
Deficiences are ordered and regulated by God, as well as the Efficacy of
Causes. When God intends an Effect, he will Order and Influence the second
Cause, so as to produce it, where he intends otherwise, he will so suspend or
divert it, that the Effect shall not succeed. And under this Head I may take
notice that the long cessation of Miracles may be some occasion of Atheism. For
Miracles are wrought above or against the course of second Causes; and when Men
see them, they are then even forced to say as Pharaoh's Magicians, Hic Digitus
Dei, Here is the Finger of God. But when men for a long time together have
observed that Nature keeps its course, and things come to pass by the use of
means, they grow into an Opinion that all things are by Nature, and that there
is no Providence, and so no God.

Object. But why does not God then in every Age work Miracles to convince the
World of his Being?

Answ. Because the ordinary course of Nature is sufficient to it, if men did
not shut up their eyes, and refuse to see. And God thinks it not meet to put
Nature out of its ordinary course that he settled at the beginning, unless on
some extraordinary occasions, and for some extraordinary end. But is it not as
wonderful in it self to see the Sun move in a constant Line, from one end of
the year to the other, as to see it stand still? And to see a watery Sap rising
out of the Earth to be turned into Wine, as to see Water in a Vessel turned
into Wine; as it was in the Miracle of Christ wrought at Cana, John 2. 3. Or to
see Bread brought of the Earth, as to have it rained down from Heaven, as it
was upon Israel in the Wilderness?

2. Another cause is, Guilt in the Conscience. Though it is not an immediate,
yet it is a remote cause of Atheism. For Guilt working in the Conscience, is an
immediate proof of a Deity and Judgment to come; but it proves a remote cause
of Atheism. For it makes men wish there was no God, and so are thereby the more
disposed to believe there is none. For the old Proverb is, Quod valde volumus,
facile credimus. What a Man earnestly desires might not be, he is inclinable to
believe it not to be. And hereupon are ready to extinguish those innate Notions
of a Deity that are within themselves, or such as may be gathered from without,
and to comply with any suggestions to that end, that may be administered either
by Satan, their own corrupt Hearts, or profane Men. Guilt begets Fear, Fear
begets Torment; this Torment does disquiet Men's Peace, and much allayes the
pleasure of Sin; That they may therefore provide a Remedy for themselves, they
are willing enough to believe there is no God. As Moralists tells us of an
Ignorance that is Ignorantia pravae Dispositionis, of a wicked Disposition:
Such is that, when men seek to darken that (...), that which they may be Nature
know of God; that they may sin with the greater freedom and peace. But this is
just as if a Man, to prevent a Danger, should hood-wink himself that he might
not see it. It Is true, if there was no Remedy provided Man of God against this
Guilt, and fear arising out of it, this might seem to be a rational course; but
seeing there is a Remedy provided, it is Man's Wisdom to seek after it, whereby
to have his fear and his Danger also removed together.

3. A third Cause is, The strange administration of things in the World. Men
cannot see Justice, Goodness, or Wisdom manifested therein. But it often falls
out to the Wicked, according to the Work of the Righteous; and to the
Righteous, according to the Work of the Wicked, as Solomon speaks. Hence Men
conclude there is no Government of the World; and if so, then no God.

Marmoreo Licinus tumulo jacet, and Cato parvo,
Pompeius nullo; Quis putet esse Deos?
As those said that were of Pompey's
Faction in Rome.
Base Licinus has a pompous Tomb of gaudy Marble Stone;
Wise Cato but a little One, the mighty Pompey none.
Yet all this while we dream of Godds, and dream we do I wis:
For Godds are none, or if there be, how can they suffer this?
Men cannot see a righteous and equal distribution of Rewards and Punishments.
Whereupon are ready to say with the Atheist, whom Tully mentions, Cic. de
natura Deorum, p. 196.
Vitam regit Fortuna, non Sapientia; It is Fortune, not Wisdom, governs the
Life of Man.

And as Ovid speaks, as some think, moved by the indignity of Tully's untimely
death;

Dum rapiunt mala fata bonos, ignoscite fesso;
Solicitor nullos esse putare Deos.
What are the Godds that bear the sway,
When bad Fates take good Men away?
And another of the Heathen Poets speaks of such in his Time, who thought there
was no Divine Providence, but all things came to pass by Fortuitous Causes.

Sunt qui in Fortunae jam casibus omnio ponunt,Juvenal.
Et Mundum nullo credunt rectore moveri,
Natura volvente vices and lucis, and anni:
Atque adeo intrepidi quaecunque altaria jurant.
Some now there be that deem the World,
by slippery chance does slide;
That Days and Years do run their round
without or Rule, or Guide,
Save Nature, and Dame Fortunes Wheeel:
and hence sans shame or fear,
Of God or Man, by Altars all
they desperately do swear.
Men deny Providence, and so thence step into Atheism.

But because Men cannot wade into the depths of God's Providence, shall they
therefore conclude there is no Providence, and no God? Was it not better for
Man, when he sees he cannot, with the short line of his Reason, reach the
bottom of God's Works, cry out with the Apostle, Romans 11. 33. (...), O the
Depth! But, let Men with David enter God's Sanctuary, and take a view of things
in the Light of Faith, and the Scriptures, and then they shall see the Reason
of those things that at present they are offended and stumble at.

There they may see Reasons why the Wicked for a while go unpunished, and why
the Righteous meet with afflictions in the World; there they may see the
Compass that Providence has taken about, before it finished its Work; there
they may see how Providence has brought one contrary out of another, and made
the Saints afflictions to usher in their mercies; and the prosperity of the
Wicked to be the forerunner of their greater fall. There they may also learn
the wise End that God has in the chastisements of his People, and suffering
the wicked to prosper, and to triumph a while over the Church, and the Cause of
Truth and Holiness in the World.

4. Again, Atheism arises in the hearts of men from the diversity of Opinions
that have been, and still are, in the World about Religion. As Polutheism of
old was an occasion of Atheism; For when men set up many ridiculous Godds to be
worshipped, no wonder though they caused many to deride them, and to cast off
all sense of Religion. So many now observing diversity of Opinions about
Religion, are hereby led to think there is no Religion; and if no Religion,
then there is no God; at least, there is little sense of a Deity upon his Heart
that has no Religion. As it fared in Philosophy, the many differences of
Opinions therein, made some at last turn Scepticks, and doubt of every thing.
And so in Divinity, according to that known and true Apothegm, Theologia
Sceptica tandem exit in Atheismo; Skeptical Divinity ends in Atheism. And men
by seeing the various Judgments that are about Religion, begin to question
every thing, and fix in nothing, till at last they settle in Atheism. But ought
not men rather argue, seeing that all do embrace some Religion or other,
therefore certainly there is a true Religion, though many mistake it? And
Religion is embraced by all with respect to a Deity. Will men say there is no
such thing as Pleasure, because one Man affects one kind of Pleasure, and
another another kind; and there is no such thing as Government, because some
people affect one kind, and others another kind; and no such Being as the Soul,
because Philosophers differed about its Definition? It rather proves the
contrary. The variety of Sentiments about Religion should make men to search
out the true, rather than to cast off all; and when they have found it, to hold
it fast, and observe it with all honorable respect to that God that is the
Object of it, and say with the Church in Mich. 4. 5. All Nations will walk in
the Name of their God, and we will walk in the Name of the Lord our God for
ever, and for ever.

5. It arises in some from pride of heart, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 10.
4. The wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek after God, God
is not in all his thoughts; or, as the Margent reads it, All his thoughts are,
there is no God.

A proud Man does secretly affect a Deity, would be a God to himself, and
therefore desires not to own a Deity, because he has no heart to stoop to him.

It was Pharaoh's Pride, as well as his Ignorance, that made him to disown the
true God, the God of Israel, and say, Who is the Lord, that I should obey his
Voice? Exodus 5. 2. And that pride of Senacherib, that made him think himself
superior to all the Godds of the Nations that he had conquered, and to the God
of Israel also, would easily lead him to cast off the sense and acknowledgment
of any Deity at all. As you read the Story of him, Isa. 36. 19, 20. And those
that we read of Psalm. 12. 3, 4. Whose tongue speaks proud things, saying,
with our tongue we will prevail; our lips are our own, who is Lord over us?
discovered herein the prevalency of Pride and Atheism in their hearts.

As Pride did first lead the Humane Nature to affect a Being like God, so it is
that also that leads men to disacknowledg him, and set up themselves in his
room. It was this Pride in the Prince of Tyrus, that made him say, I am a God,
and do sit in the Seat of God, Ezekiel. 28. 2. It was Pride in Herod that made him
take Divine Honor to himself upon the acclamations of the people to his
Oration; It is the Voice of a God, not of a Man, Acts 12. 22. And what was it
but Pride in Alexander, Caligula, Claudius, Domitian, and others, who would be
accounted Godds, when here upon Earth. And he that deifies himself, will soon
deny the true God.

6. Atheism springs from inconsideration. Men's minds are so alienated from God,
and Divine Things, and so immerst in the Affairs of the World, that they can
find no time to sit down and consider, what even Reason it self might suggest
to them concerning the necessary existence of a Deity. Though Reason cannot
lead men to the knowledge of Christ's Mediatorship, and the Mysteries of the
Gospel, the notice whereof we have from Divine Revelation; yet if stirred up,
and improved, it might lead men to the knowledge of a Creator, and a first
Being. The Creation of the World carries in it a rational evidence of a Deity
to the Reasonable Creature. As God calls upon Idolaters that worship the Work
of men's hands; An Image that they bore upon their Shoulders, and set him in his
place; to show themselves men, Isa. 46. 6, 7, 8. Had they but considered and
consulted with their reason as men, they would never have worshipped a dumb Idol.
And so God tells them, Isa. 44. 19. None considers in his Heart, neither is
there knowledge and understanding to say, I have burnt part of it in the fire;
yea, I have baked Bread upon the Coals thereof, etc. and shall I make the
residue thereof an abomination? shall I fall down to the stock of a Tree? So it
is in the present case; Did men consider the Creation of the World, and the
Characters of a Deity that are written upon it; and did they use their rational
faculty, and argue as men, and as they can do in other things, they would not
run into Atheism.

7. It arises also from that little regard that men see is had to God in the
World. When men observe how little the generality of Mankind do take notice of
him, so as to fear him, to honor him, to engage him with them in their
Affairs, they are tempted to think thereby there is no such Being. And though
men with their tongues say they believe his Being, yet men's actions speak
otherwise; and actions carry more evidence to the World than words, and so
Atheism is propagated by Example. And the innate notions of a Deity in the
hearts of men are much corrupted and stifled, by the general contempt of God in
the World. When Children observe that their Parents take little notice of God,
and Subjects observe the same in their Prince, and Tenants in their Landlords,
and the Unlearned observe the same in many that are Learned: Yea, when People
shall observe their Ministers debaucht, and regardless of God, how strangely is
Atheism propagated hereby! But if men well considered how all Mankind fell
from God in the first Adam, and how the minds of all men are now by Nature
darkened and alienated from him; and the dominion that sin has got in the
hearts of men, they need not hence haesitate in their minds about the Being of
God, because the generality of men have so little respect unto him. For till
the Grace of God renews Man's Nature, he will, by a course of sin, grow up into
that hardness and security, as to live, as it were, without God in the World,
especially if men live at ease, and enjoy outward prosperity. For the Sense of
a Deity is much excited in men by trouble and affliction: As in Jonah's Ship,
when the Mariners were in a Storm, Jonah 2. 14, 16.
every one then was calling upon his God, offered Sacrifice, and made Vows. And
the like account we have in the Psalmist, Psalm. 107. where men are in a stormy
Sea, reel to and fro like a drunken Man, and are at their wits end, then they
cry to the Lord in their distresses. But in prosperity men think they have no
need of God, and so cast off all respect to him. And David himself, who in his
prosperity said, My Mountain stands strong, I shall never he moved; when God
hid his Face, and he troubled, then says he, I cried unto the Lord, and to the
Lord I made supplication, Psalm. 30. 6, 7, 8.

8. Again, it arises from the Hypocrisy and Apostasy of some that have made
high pretensions to the ways of God, and Communion with him. When it shall
appear to the World that these have made use of the Name of God only to serve a
Carnal Design, and their Profession has been nothing else but Policy to
advance some selfish Interest. Many are ready hence to conclude, that all that
is talked about a Deity and Religion in the World, is but Pretene or Fancy, and
that Grace it self is but Nomen inane, as one said of Virtue, a vain Name. For
it is presumed, if any have found out God, and the good of Religion, it is such
as these; and if they had found them, and enjoyed them, they would never have
forsaken them.

Now this Apostasy is either General, from all Religion; when Men run into
downright Profaneness and Debauchery: Or particular, when men forsake their
particular Professions and Principles, that they have showed Zeal in, and do it
for Carnal Ends; many are apt to be shaken hereupon, not only with respect to
the Truth of the particular persuasions of such Men, but as to the Truth of all
Religion, and all Deity. For what sense any Man has of a Deity, will be
manifested in that particular Way of Religion that he is engaged in. And he
that forsakes that particular Way, whether in it self it be true or false, for
some corrupt end, as he will himself be in danger of running into Atheism, so
it will have a bad influence to draw others to it also.

Again, this Apostasy is either through a Man's own Corrupt Inclinations, or
else occasioned by some External Coaction. As when a Man, to avoid Fines,
Penalties, or other Persecutions shall practice contrary to the Dictates of his
Conscience. And a Three fold evil arises hence; one is, To them that thus
practice against Conscience. Another to them that urge them to it. And a third
to them that shall be scandalized; and hereupon prejudiced against Religion it
self, and so are upon the very Threshold of Atheism.

But may it not be replied, Shall all be judged by some? If some have been
false in their Profession, have not others been faithful? Are there not
Instances of thousands that have forsaken all, and laid down their Lives upon
the Cause and Conscience of their Religion, and confidence of this Principle,
that God is? Which should more confirm our belief thereof, than the Hypocrisy
or Apostasy of others shake it and weaken it. I know this Apostasy is a great
scandal to the World, and in all Ages it has been a Stumbling Block, and never
greater than at this day. And woe to the World because of such Offenses. And
they must needs come, as Christ speaks, Mat. 18. 7. And as Heresies must come
to make manifest men's Integrity and Soundness in the Faith, 1 Cor. 11. 19. so
these Apostasies come to try men's stability in the grand Foundations of
Religion.

9. Many are so drowned in the Life of Sense, that they cannot believe the
Existence of Invisible Things. They can believe the Existence of the Works of
Nature, because they are visible to Sense; but the Invisible Things of God, out
of which these Works spring, they cannot believe. A Sensualist, his Language
is, Tell not me of a God whom I never saw, of Heaven, and Invisible Powers, and
the Pleasures I never felt; give me Houses and Lands, Corn and Wine, and these
good Things that mine Eye can see, my Mouth can taste, and my Hands can feel.
These Invisible Things the Syriack Version renders (...), Recondita Dei, The
Hidden Things of God; and being hidden out of men's sight, they regard them not,
they believe them not. But what, O Man, will thou believe nothing but what
thine Eyes can see? Are there not Spiritual Beings in the Creation, as well as
Corporeal? Shall we with the Sadduces deny Angels and Spirits? And are not
Spiritual Beings out of the reach of corporeal Sight or Sense. And are not
these Spiritual Beings the most perfect and excellent; and therefore God being
the most excellent Being, he must needs be the purest Spirit, and so must be
thereby invisible to Sense: Do we not read of Moses, Heb. 11. He endured, as
seeing him that is invisible: And of Paul, 2 Cor. 4. Whilst we look not at
things that are seen, but at things that are not seen. And of those Believers,
1 Pet. 1. Whom having not seen, you love. And had men Faith, it would be to
them an evidence of Things not seen, it would lead them up to that which is
Invisible; but being immerst in the Life of Sense, they cannot reach so high,
and so God is to them as if he was not.

10. Philosophy and State Policy have been great Causes of Atheism. I put them
together, that I might not multiply Particulars.

1. Philosophy. Though in it self it is a good Handmaid to Divinity; yet the
Mistress has been wronged by her Maid. The courting of Nature has kept many
from espousing true Divinity. So long as they can find a natural cause of
things, they will not, at least heartily, own a Deity. And therefore it is
observed, that Atheism first began where Philosophy was in its highest
improvement, namely, among the Grecians. But I touched upon this before. As it
is said of Pliny, he being inquisitive to find out the Reason of the Smoking
of Mount Vesuvius, went so near to it, that he was choked in the Smoke. So
many by their curious enquiries into Natural Causes, have choked the Innate
Notices of a Deity within their Hearts. He that wrote a Discourse called
Philosophia Theologiae Ancillans, Baron.
Philosophy ministering to Divinity, set Philosophy in its right place; and to
make the Increase of the one, the Decrease of the other, is the highest abuse
of it.

2. State Policy. The Politician sees he shall never accomplish his Designs,
if he be overawed by Conscience, and Sense of a Deity. He must not be a slave
to his Promises, or stand in fear either of making or breaking an Oath. He must
not be confined within the narrow Rules of Religion or Righteousness. He may
see it his interest sometimes to seem Religious; but to be so indeed, is not
for his turn; which is according to the advice of Machiavel to the young
Prince. And hence arises Atheism.

11. It arises from a forgetfulness of God. As the Psalmist speaks of such,
Psalm. 51. 22. Consider this ye that forget God. Men do not exercise their Minds
in thoughts of God, and so forget him. And a Person, or Thing that are not in
our Thoughts, are forgotten; and being forgotten, are as if they were not.
Though men have additional knowledge to the Natural Notions of a Deity; yet if
this Knowledge be not stirred up and exercised, it will not prevent the growth
of Atheism in there Hearts. When men set not God in the view of their Minds,
look not on him either in Mercies or Afflictions, and carry on their Affairs
from day to day, without respect to him, this is forgetting him, whereby they
are indeed (...), without God in the World. As we know Fire, if it be not
stirred or blown up, will be ready to go out. So will the Notices of the Being
of God in the Soul, if they be not daily excited in us; and there is nothing
Man is more apt to forget than God. Whiles he remembers every thing else that
concerns him, he is most prone to a forgetfulness of him whom he should most of
all remember. Let Man but follow the natural bent of his own Heart, and he will
seldom have God in his Thoughts, and have little or no respect to him in the
Actions of his Life. And so God is forgotten, and is as if he was not. And the
great Adversary of God in the World, the Devil, will be sure to assist with his
Temptations, that men's thoughts may be diverted and alienated from the true
God, that he himself might reign as God in the World. He is said to be the
Ruler of the darkness of this World; and therefore seeks to propagate darkness,
not only by hindering the Light of the Gospel from shining into men's hearts, but
by extinguishing the very Light of Natural Conscience, and so to propagate his
own Rule and Government.

Lastly; Atheism arises from detaining the Truth of God in Unrighteousness,
the sin that is charged upon the Heathen. Men sin against the Innate Notion of
a Deity in their Hearts, till at last the force of it is quite lost; by giving
way to fleshly Lusts, against the Dictates of their Natural Light they smother
it. And it is at best but as a Spark covered in an heap of Ashes, that does
neither give Light or Heat. When men to gratify their Lusts will debauch their
Conscience, they will hereby by degrees sear it. For, Nemo repent fit
Turpissimus. And men grow up to a profligacy in sin, as they by sinning against
their Conscience do by degrees benum and stupifie it. As it is said of the
Gentiles, Romans 1. 18. they first detained the Truth that was naturally in their
Hearts, and then God gave them up to vile affections, etc. verse. 24. And not
following the Light of Nature, were given up to sins against Nature, verse. 27.
And Ephesians. 4. 18. the Apostle speaks of the Gentiles, they walked first in
vanity of Mind, and then came to be past feeling; there the Sense of a Deity is
gone, and then they gave up themselves to all uncleanness with greediness,
verse. 19.

Thus I have shown some of those Causes out of which Atheism grows, and is
cherisht in the hearts of men.

And was it only found in the dark parts of the World, where the Gospel shines
not, it was the less to be wondered at, but it is found even amongst our selves,
and is become a spreading Leprosy in the Heads, but especially the Hearts of
multitudes at this day. And I verily believe there is to be found less sense of
a Deity upon many Christians so called, that live in the midst of
Gospel Light, than in any part of the World. For if we look to the Heathens,
they all acknowledge some Deity or other, so they have a Religious respect to
it, and have some awful impressions upon their Hearts toward it, will lavish
Gold out of the Bag, and be at cost for Oblations, Temples, and Sacrifices; and
have Indignation against any that cast contempt upon it. As you know the cry
that was made at Ephesus, when they thought Paul did derogate from the Honor
of their Goddess, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, Act. 19. 28. And were
fearful of having their Godds charmed from them, and would put Chains upon them
to hold them fast; But alas, how many amongst us have not so much respect as
this to the true God; but in stead of vindicating his Honor, do blaspheme his
Name; find no awe upon their hearts toward him, can part with nothing of their
Estates to serve his Name, Worship, and People; are under no Conscience of
praying to him, praising of him, or depending upon him, are careless about
keeping his favor, or presence with them. As God complained of old that Israel
dealt more injuriously with him, than any Nations had dealt with their Godds,
Jer. 2. 10, 11.

I have sometimes considered with my self whence this should be; and have
thought of these things about it.

1. It may proceed from the just Judgment of God. When Men have the higher
Light of the Gospel, and refuse to walk in it; God does justly leave them to
fall below the Light of Nature. According to that saying of our Savior, To him
that has not, shall be taken away even that he has. Where Gospel Light does
not enlighten Men, it blinds them; and where it does not melt and soften, it
hardens Men: and where it brings not Men nearer to God, it sets them farther
off from him.

2. I have thought again, where the Gospel comes, Men take greater offense at
Religion; either at the strict Precepts of it, which cross the Carnal bent of
Men's Hearts; or the Distinction it necessarily makes amongst Men, taking some
out of others, and separating them both in Principles and Practice, which makes
Men take great offense, and think disdainfully of Religion that has such
Effects attending it; and thereupon to cast it off, to turn Scoffers, and then
Atheists.

3. When the Gospel comes, it does detect and condemn Superstition, which in
many is the whole of their Religion. And when that is taken away, their
Religion, and respect to a Deity does fall with it. Superstition is Religion
corrupted, blind Zeal, fleshly Wisdom, and the Arrogance of Reason; and the
evil of it lies rather in the Excess than in the Defect; and though it be a
corrupt Branch, yet it radically Springs from the Natural Sense of a Deity in
the Conscience. As when Paul came to Athens, and observed the many gods they
worshipped, and the many Rites attending that Worship, tells them, Acts 17. 22.
Ye men of Athens I perceive you are in all things too Superstitious. (...). I
see you too great fearers of Demons, which they looked upon as inferior
Deities; Now when such Superstitious fear is removed by the knowledge of the
Gospel, and no other true fear of God planted in the room of it, the Sense of a
Deity will decay and decline in such a Soul. As Micah said to the Danites,
Judge. 18. 24. Ye have taken away my Godds which I made, and the Priest, etc.
and what have I more? Some put all their Religion in a Form, or a Ceremony, and
when that is taken away, what have they more? where false Worship is removed
from a People, and they do not embrace the true Worship in its room, they will
come to no Worship, and so to no God.

Superstitious Worship presents Objects to the Eye of Man's devising to affect
the Heart; as it was in the Worship of the Heathens of Old; and so is now seen
in the Pictures and Images of the Romish Church; whereby some kind of Reverence
and Adoration is maintained in the Hearts of the People, that are yet mere
strangers to the Worship of God in Spirit. And let these be removed which
upheld their Worship and Devotion, and they will run apace into Atheism, when
all a Man's Religion is upheld by these Crutches, if you remove them, it falls
to the ground.

4. The great Truths of the Gospel, and the Principles of Christianity lie so
high above Man's Reason that they are foolishness to him; as the Apostle
speaks, 1 Cor. 2. 14. But the Natural man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him. Now these things of the Spirit
are the great Truths and Doctrines of the Gospel. As that God and Man should be
but one Person; that Life should come into the World by Death, and Redemption
by the Cross. That we should be justified in another Righteousness, by Faith,
and not by our own good Works. That a Man must be born again: That the Body
sown in the Dust, shall be raised again; and many such. Now when Men hear that
these are the Principles of that Religion that is accounted (as indeed it is)
the only true Religion in the World, because they seem so incredible to their
Reason, therefore they do at least inwardly in their Hearts reject them, and
account them foolishness. And when Religion is rejected, men will easily run
into Atheism. And hence it is, that sometimes Men of the strongest Reason are
the greatest Opposites to Religion; where the Heart is Carnal, it will
influence Reason, and engage it against it, both in the Practice, and
Principles of it: And the stronger Reason is, in this Case, the stronger will
the Opposition be. And the Apostle therefore tells us, Not many wise men after
the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called, 1 Cor. 1. 26. Their
fleshly Wisdom rejects the Principles of the Gospel as ridiculous to their
Reason, and their Might and Nobility the ways of it, because of their seeming
meanness.

CHAP. IV.
The Doctrine further improved by way of Exhortation. The best way of improving
the Works of Creation. How all wickedness springs from want of a through Belief
of God's Being.
I Shall proceed next to Exhort you to Improve the Works of Creation to the
strengthening this principle in you, that God is. Some arrive to no higher
Improvement of them, than what is Natural and Sensual to please and delight
their Sense, or satisfy their Appetite in the Natural Goodness of the
Creatures. As those Jews whom Christ reproves in the 6th of John, who followed
him because of the Loaves which they had eaten, and were filled with, but
regarded not the power of Christ which wrought the Miracles in the Loaves. So
Sensual Men are pleased with that good they find in the Creatures to satisfy
their Appetite, and gratify their Sense, but look not to that power of God
that gave these Creatures their Being, nor to that goodness of God that put
this good into them. The Philosophers of Old went higher, when they delighted
their minds in the disquisition of the secrets of Nature in the Works of
Creation. But we should ascend yet a step higher in a Theological use of the
Creation, to ascertain and discover thence the Godhead to us: So as to be led
up from the Visible to the Invisible, from Finite to that which is Infinite,
from Particular Beings to that which is Universal, and from Corruptible things,
to that which is Eternal. Of all Fundamentals of Religion; this is the most
Fundamental, and therefore should be most deeply ^ounded in us. It is as the
Spring whence all our Motions in Religion arise, and so they will be stronger
or weaker as our Belief of this great Principle is strong or weak in us. For as
God himself is Prima Veritas, the first Truth, so to believe his Being, is
Primum Verum, The first Truth to be received of us. And as Moses sets it down
for the first Commandment to be obeyed to have the true God for our God: So the
Apostle does deliver it as the prime Object of Faith, to believe that the
Worlds were made by God, Heb. 11. 3. That is, to believe him not only to Be,
but to be the first Being.

The Heathens beholding the Sun, Moon, and Host of Heaven, imagined them to
have some Deity in them, and Worshipped them as Godds, instead of ascending to
God by them, from whence they were called Tsabit. Bradward. lib. 1. cap. 1.
page 8.
And so in the lower World, whatever they found comfortable to Nature, they
were ready to Deifie. As the Poet speaks, Jupiter esse pium statuit quodcunque
juvatet. Hereupon the Caldeans worshipped the Sun and Fire, because they found
them beneficial. The Egyptians Worshipped the River Nilus, because it was
profitable to their Country. And others would Worship the very Leeks and Onions
in their Gardens upon that account; which one of their own Poets derides them
for, O Sanctas, Juvenal.
Gentes, quibus haec nascuntnt in hortis,
Numina, etc.
An holy people ye I trow,
Who have your Godds in Gardens grow.
And verily a God is he to a Man, that helps a Man, Plin. Lib. 1. Cap. 7.
said Pliny. And so these visible things of God that should have led them to
the Invisible, did hide God out of their sight. The acknowledgment of God to be
the Creator of the World, did continue with some Evidence and Power until
Nimrod's time, who taught the Babylonians to contemn God's Power and
Providence, as Josephus tells us; and after that Idolatry began to spring up
apace. And as our Apostle speaks, They worshipped and served the Creature, more
than the Creator. And as Philo to the same purpose, Philo. Lib. de mundi
opificio.
(...); more admiring the World, than the Maker of the World. For what was
their Apollo, but the Sun? their Diana, but the Moon? their Venus, but a Star,
etc. It Is true, there are some Footsteps of a Deity in all the Works of Nature;
but we should ascend by these Footsteps, as by a Footstool to the God of the
World, as Solomon by several steps ascended to his Throne; and by the Scale of
Nature ascend to the God of Nature. But because this Belief of God's Being, is
not so thoroughly rooted, or at least not excited as it ought, therefore so much
wickedness is practiced in the World, even at this day.

If you look upon the wicked and ungodly, that give up themselves to all kind
of Excess and Sensuality, do they, think you, verily believe there is a God?
Does not the Psalmist tell us that secret Atheism is the Root of that impiety
that is so visible in the World? Psalm. 41. 2. The fool has said in his Heart,
there is no God; and what follows? They are corrupt, they have done abominable
works, etc.

Or, if you look upon Men that are of a more sober Constitution, and it may be
under some outward Profession, 1. Whence is it that they are more careful to
please Men, than to please God; to have Man's favor, than God's? Or 2. Why can
Men take liberty to sin in secret, when they think no Eye of Man observes
them? 3. Why are Men more careful to engage the help of a Creature with them in
their undertakings, than God's assistance? 4. Why are Men so little Solicitous
about a future State, and a World, and Judgment to come? 5. Why are Men so
wholly bent upon a Finite Good, which is found in the Creature; and look so
little after their chief Good? 6. Why are Men so self-confident, and think
themselves to be self-sufficient to subsist, and act of themselves? 7. Why is
it Men make themselves their ultimate End, and look not to an higher End in the
several Designs and Actions of their Life? 8. Why are not Men thankful, and
give God the praise of what good they enjoy? Why is it when Men come to
worship, they worship as if they worshiped not? care not with what Slightness,
Dullness, Formality it is performed? care not to engage their Hearts in what
they do? Whence is all this miscarriage, and much more that I might mention,
but because there is a Root of Atheism still in the Hearts of Men? I say it
again. Did Men truly, and thoroughly believe the Being of God, do ye think they
would not prefer pleasing him before the pleasing of Men? Would they not be
afraid of secret, as well as open sins? Would they not principally endeavor to
engage him with them in their Affairs? Would they not be more Solicitous about
their Final Account, and Eternal Estate? Would they not seek after him who is
the chief Good, more then the Inferior Good of this world? Would they not put
their trust in him, and devote themselves to him; and look better to the manner
of their Worship, both as to Principle, Rule, and End, and show themselves
thankful for Mercies they enjoy? As the Apostle else the Ephesians, Cap. 2. 12.
that before their Conversion by the Gospel, they were not only without Christ,
but (...), Atheists in the World. And yet at Ephesus there was the Temple of
the great Goddess Diana, whom they all worshipped, and the Image which fell down
from Jupiter, Act. 19. 35. They knew not the true God, and the true Worship of
him, and so are said to be without God. And I may apply this to our selves;
whatever Men's Tongues may speak of God, and pretend of Devotion to him, yet it
is evident Men's Actions declare that they do not in their hearts believe his
Being. In their words they profess him, and in their works they deny him, Tit.
1. ult. And there is no greater Monster in the Creation, than the Speculative
Atheist, unless it be the practical; that says there is a God, and yet lives
without him: and God's own People who fear him, trust in him, seek after him,
obey him, etc. yet they would do all these with greater strength, integrity,
and freedom of Soul, if they did more Practically believe his Being, and had
the impression of it more powerful upon their hearts. When Ahaziah sent to
enquire of Baalzebub, whether he should recover or not, what said Elijah? Is it
not because there is no God in Israel, that thou sendest to enquire of
Baal-zebub? 2 King. 1. Yes, there was a God of Israel, but he was as if he was
not unto Ahaziah. Men cannot nullify God's Being in it self, but they may
nullify it to themselves. As the Heathen Idols they were (...) Nothings, as
the Apostle says of them, 1 Cor. 8. 4. yet when Men Worships them, trusted in
them, and gave Divine Honor to them, they made them Godds. So on the
other-hand, they not honoring, acknowledging, reverencing, and trusting in the
true God, do make him as nothing. For it is only those that glorify him as God
that do truly own and believe his Being. Yea, those Duties that are more
properly Evangelical, and not so expressly contained in the Law of Nature, yet
the belief we gather to our selves, of the Being of God from the Creation of
the World, may much influence us that live under the Gospel to the performance
of; and so Natural Divinity may be made subservient to Christianiry, whereof I
shall give account in the next Chapter.

CHAP. V.
Evangelical Duties are promoted by a true belief of God's Being. How the Light
of Nature may further the belief of the Scriptures, and Faith in Christ, and
Repentance. Whence Repentance first springs? what is it to take up Christ's
Cross. How helped therein from the belief of God's Being. What influence the
Light of Nature has upon Obedience to Gospel-Institutions. Inference from the
whole.
1. IT is an Evangelical Duty to believe the Scriptures; To receive them as a
Divine and certain Rule of Faith and Obedience. Now we may fetch some help from
the Light of Nature herein. Though I deny not but the Scripture is (...), and
has such Characters within it self, as may persuade the belief of it, and the
Testimony of the Spirit in a Man's Conscience is the surest bottom of Divine
Faith; yet some additional strength may be borrowed from the Light of Nature.
For that Light that declares to Man. There is a God that made the World,
declares also a Providence, that he governs the World. If he governs the World
he governs it in Wisdom; Etenim si Deus est, utique providens est ut Deus. Nec
aliter potest ei Divinitas attribui. etc. Lact. de ira Dei. Cap. 9.
if in Wisdom, then every Creature is governed according to the respective
Principles of their several Natures. And therefore Man must be governed as a
rational Creature. And he cannot be so governed but by a Law, and that Law
enforced by Rewards on one hand, and Punishments on the other. Now either this
Law thus enforced is found in the Scriptures, or no where,

There is no Book can pretend to stand in competition with the Scripture,
exstant in the World, fot the Turkish Alchoran, that is but of late years, and
Man has been under God's Government from the beginning. And most know by what
Impostures it obtained any credit; and the several Absurdities contained in it;
and what a sensual happiness it proposes to them that receive it. How it has
been from the beginning enforced upon people by the Sword. And never confirmed
by those many undoubted Miracles, which the Truths of the Scriptures have been.

But I need not enlarge on this Subject. There having been so many Learned Pens
already engaged herein, especially that Hononred Knight, whose worthy Book
concerning the Reasonableness of receiving the Scriptures for the Word of God,
does justly add new Honor to Himself, and a great Confirmation to the Truth.

2. The Gospel calls upon Men to come to Christ, and to believe in him as the
Savior of the World: Now the powerful Sense of a Deity upon the Heart, will
Excite and Influence Men thereunto. And the want of this I look upon as one
great Reason why Christ is preached so much in vain. When Conscience is
awakened, then the Innate Notion of a Deity that was before, as it were asleep,
begins to awake. And then Men begin to fear, and the Sense of Sin, and Judgment
to come, makes them enquire after a way of Reconciliation; and so Men are
brought to Christ as the way, according to the notice they have of him in the
Gospel. So that as he that comes to God, must first believe that God is, as we
read, Heb. 11. So he that comes to Christ, must be brought to him by an
operative Belief of the Being of God.

When Paul came to Athens to preach Christ to them, he first instructed them
concerning the true God, Act. 17. whom he declares to them to be the Maker of
the World, ver. 24. God that made the World, and all things therein, etc. Here
begins true Christianity. Men are Christians but in Name, till they come to
Christ by true Faith, and they come not to him till the Practical Belief of
God's Being does excite them to it. As the dark Notions the Heathen had
concerning God did lead them to offer Sacrifice to him, when they feared he was
offended; So much more will the clearer knowledge of his Being, and the fear of
his Wrath send those that live under the Gospel, to Jesus Christ the true
Sacrifice and Propitiation.

So that whiles I have been demonstrating a Deity from the Works of Creation, I
hope I have collaterally been serving the great Design of the Gospel of
bringing home sinners to Jesus Christ. As a Learned Man speaks to this purpose;
Dr. Jackson, Vol. 1. p. 874.
The ingrafted Notion is the Matter or Subject out of which God's Spirit
raises the entire and right frame of Faith, as it did the frame and fashion of
this visible World out of that Mass, which was first without Form, though
created by him.

3. So Repentance is hereby promoted also. When men are thoroughly convinced
that God is, they then begin to bethink themselves of their ways; how they
have carried it toward him; how observant they have been of his Law; how they
have answered his end in their Creation.

And hence now Repentance does take its first rise; What, says the Sinner, if
there be a God, as I now clearly find there is, woe is me that I have thus
sinned against him, and have taken no more notice of him! Alas, I have lived
without him in the World; I have been concerning my self about the Creatures;
and have little thought of God my Creator, and had as little belief of his
Being. Alas! what shall I do? How shall I possibly escape? I cannot flee from
him for he is God. I will now judge and condemn my self; I will mourn bitterly;
I will lament my Folly and Ignorance; I will go to him, and say, Lord, I have
sinned against Heaven, and before thee: I am thy Creature, and the Work of
thine Hands, yet have rebelled against thee. As Balaam went on confidently,
tlll his eyes were opened, and he saw the Angel with the drawn Sword; but then
says the Text, He bowed down his head, and fell flat on his face; Then he
confesses, I have sinned and if it displease thee, I will go back again, Numb.
22. 31, 34. When sinners eyes are so far opened that they can behold, and do
powerfully believe the Being of God, it is the first step toward their return
and repentance. And the Works of Creation may be serviceable to this end.
Though they cannot lead men of themselves either to that knowledge of God, or
knowledge of Sin, as might effect evangelical Repentance; yet the belief, and
sense of a Deity that may result from thence, may be the first step toward it.
And we know how God brought Job to abhor himself, and repent in dust and ashes,
by setting before him the glory and greatness of his Being in the several works
of Creation, and giving him a spiritual sight of himself therein; as we read in
the five last Chapters of that Book. So that Repentance may not only be helped
thereby, as to its first beginning in the hearts of the Impenitent, but
furthered also in the Hearts of true Saints.

4. Taking up the Cross of Christ; which we read of in the Scriptures, but not
in the Works of Nature. However the knowledge we have of God's Being from those
Works, will further this Christian Duty. For it is certain, whatever it is
that strengthens this grand Principle in us, that God is, will enable us the
better to suffer Persecution. And upon the full belief of this did so many
thousand Martyrs offer up their lives, as I said before, as knowing that it was
for God's sake, and from him they should have a reward.

Was there no God, it was madness and folly in them to have so suffered; and
had they not well believed it, they would not have been able to suffer. To you
it is given, says the Apostle, first to believe, and then to suffer, Phil. 1.
29. It is said of Moses, Heb. 11. 27. He endured as seeing him that is
invisible. And my Text says, The invisible Things of God, and his Godhead are
seen in the Works of Creation; so that the seeing of the Invisible God, even in
the Works of God, as well as his Word, may enable us the better to endure
suffering. And however Atheistical Men may account it folly to suffer, yet from
this Principle believed, That God is, a Christian can demonstrate his
sufferings for God to be most rational, upon the grounds of truest Reason.

And if you understand taking up Christ's Cross as some do, for the crucifixion
of the Flesh; though this be also an Evangelical Duty, yet it is furthered and
promoted by a practical believing the Being of God; to which the Works of
Creation do contribute much. As Atheism, and not believing God's Being, does
open a wide Door of Liberty to the Flesh; so the true believing it will engage
Man to restrain and crucify it. As when there was no King in Israel, Every Man
did that which was right in his own eyes; much more if men believe not there is
a God in Heaven. But now the setting of an Almighty Infinite God, the Creator
of the World, in the view of the Soul, How does this dash sin out of
countenance, as it did in Joseph? How can I commit this wickedness and sin
against God? What shall I sin against and before that God which made Heaven and
Earth? that God that has stamped the Characters of his Being round about me,
upon me, and within me? If there be a God, as I see the undeniable evidence of
it in his Works; Shall I maintain an Idol-Lust as a false god in mine own
heart? And shall he, who is the supreme Being, find any thing set up in my mind
above him? and he that is the chief Good, find any Good standing as Competitor
with him in my Affections? And that God that made all things for himself, shall
I not live unto him as my ultimate End, and live no more to my self in the
serving of the Lusts of mine own Heart and Mind?

4. If we speak of those Institutions of the Gospel, which are the Ordinances
of Divine Worship, and not made known by the Light of Nature, yet we may derive
strength from Nature's Light, to enforce their Authority upon our obedience.
Though we cannot do it ex antecedenti, because the Light of Nature does not
reveal them; yet we may do it a consequenti, seeing they are acknowledged from
the Scripture to be the Ordinances of God. For the Light of Nature tells men
there is a God, it then tells men this God ought to be worshipped; now the
Scriptures, that Christians receive as the Word of God, tell men that these
Institutions are his Commands and Rule for Worship; and therefore the very
Light of Nature that declares a God to us, does also thereby urge us to give
obedience, that therein we may give worship to him. I deny not but God is to be
obeyed and worshipped upon a newer and more Evangelical account, as our
Redeemer in Jesus Christ, and as we are purchased by his Blood; yet a Christian
may and ought to strengthen his Obligation to Obedience herein, from the
evidence he finds of God's Being, and so of his Sovereignty over his Creatures
from the Works of his Creation. For as when we find an Institution upon a moral
Duty evidenced by the Law of Nature, that Law is strengthened thereby; so we may
derive Strength from the Law of Nature, to make those Institutions that are not
contained therein, more obligatory to us. As God himself does confirm this
Truth when he speaks to Israel, Levit. 19. 30. Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and
reverence my Sanctuary, I am the Lord. The true owning God's Being, that he is
Jehovah, the Lord, will strongly oblige us to give obedience to Worship, that
is, of pure Institution. The first Commandment of the Law, well received, gives
life and vigor to the Second, that speaks of this Instituted Worship.

5. Or Lastly; The believing the fulfilling what God has spoken in his Word;
and that the Counsels of his Mind revealed therein shall take place, is another
Gospel-Duty. Now when we believe his Being from the Creation of the World, and
there see how his Word was fulfilled, when he said, Let there be Light, and let
there be a Firmament, etc. and it was so: We may hence strengthen our Faith
concerning the accomplishment of his Word that is written; whether the Word of
Promise to his Children, or Threatening to his Adversaries. When Sarah doubted
the fulfilling God's Promise to her; What, said the Angel, Is any thing too
hard for Jehovah? Which Name of God we do not read of until his Creation was
finished, and he had given being to all his Works; as appears by Genesis 2. 4.
being before that called Elohim. Now Jehovah, that gave being to the Works of
Creation, can he not also give being to his Word? Can there be greater
difficulty in the fulfilling of his Word, than in creating all Things out of
Nothing? After God had set before Job the Works of Creation, Job thence
concludes, I know thou can do every thing, Job 42. 2. And the Psalmist having
said, Psalm. 33. 6. By the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made, etc. And
Verse. 9. For be spoke, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast: He
hence makes this Inference; That his Counsel shall stand for ever, and the
thoughts of his Heart to all Generations. His secret Counsel shall take place;
but that is not the Object of our Faith, but his Counsel revealed in his Word;
And we may strengthen our Faith concerning it, by looking upon him as the
Creator of the World. For when and wheresoever God speaks, his Word never
returns in vain; when he spoke in the Creation of the World, his Word took
place; and so shall his Word in the Scripture, where he is speaking in every
Age of the World.

Inference.
Now from all this I have said, we may consider how much it does concern us to
revive and strengthen upon our Souls the impressions of God's Being. For though
these Impressions be fundamentally in every Man's Nature, yet in some they are
more lively and operative than in others. And it is no easy thing to preserve
the powerful Sense of a Deity upon our hearts; I mean, such a Sense as may be
prevalent to resist temptations, and overpower the corruption of Nature. For we
see, for the most part, how this Seed of Nature is choked in the hearts of
men. For this end let God be much in your sight; behold him in the Works of his
Creation and Providence, and in all your ways acknowledge him; Concern him in
all your Affairs; converse much with him in Prayer; endeavor to bring your
Reasons under more powerful Convictions of the necessity of his Being. And
especially let Christians strengthen their Faith in it from the Word of God,
and the Evidence of the Spirit in their Hearts. For it is an Act of Faith truly
to believe God's Being, as Heb. 11. 3. And it is one work that the Spirit is
conversant about in the Hearts of Saints to strengthen this belief, and to make
it more efficacious upon their Hearts. For this Faith has its degrees, as well
as that which has Christ, the Promise, or Heaven for its Object. And by
feeling the Divine Influences of the Spirit upon our Souls, we may be more
confirmed in this belief, than by any Arguments from Reason. He that would have
the Boughs and Branches thrive, does seek to cherish the Root; So all Religion
growing originally out of this Root, viz. the effectual belief of God's Being,
we should be daily strengthening it in our selves. And as the withering of the
Branches arises from the decay and rotting of the Root; so, if it be well
examined, men's decay in Religion, their neglect of Duty, and falling into
immoralities and vicious practices, does radically spring from the decay of the
belief, and lively sense of God's Being in their Souls.

CHAP. VI.
The several Moral Duties that result from Man to God, as the Creator of the
World. Self-Debasement. Dependence. Awful-Fear. Praise. Admiration; which is
described in the Ground, Kind, and proper Effects of it.
BUt yet further to improve the Doctrine in hand, I shall next speak of some
other Duties which are more expressly in the Law of Nature, and the great parts
of Natural Worship, and which a Christian, by considering God as the Creator of
the World, is obliged to perform.

1. Is, to humble and debase our selves before him: Considering him in the
greatness of his Works, which yet are but the shadow of his Greatness. And if
all Nations before him are but as the drop of a Bucket, and the dust of the
Balance; How humbly should this make us to walk before him, and come unto him?
When David looked upon part of God's Creation, in Psalm. 8. it had this effect
upon him, to make him shrink into a narrow compass of self-esteem; O Lord, our
Lord, how excellent is thy Name in all the Earth! thou have set thy Glory above
the Heavens. And verse. 3. When I consider thy Heavens, the Work of thy Fingers,
the Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained: What is Man that thou art
mindful of him, etc? And it was the course that God took with Job to take down
his Spirit and to lay him at his foot, to set himself before him as the Creator
of the World. Job 38. 3, 4. Gird up now thy loins like a man, etc. Where wast
thou when I laid the Foundations of the Earth? Who has laid the measures
thereof, if thou know? Or who has stretched the Line upon it, etc? and so
he proceeds in the following Chapters; and it had this effect, for he was
brought hereby to acknowledge himself vile, chap. 40. 4. and to ahhor himself,
and repent in dust and ashes. Job 42. 6. The words may be read, Wherefore I
despise my self; (...)
and that meant upon the account of his Parvity and Nothingness compared with
the great God, as well as his sinfulness and folly. And to lie in the Dust, is
the deepest expression of an humbled Soul. Or, as one glosseth upon the words;
It grieves me what I have spoke against the great God; Cum ipse pulvis sim and
abjectissimus, when as I my self am but Dust, and most contemptible.

Can a Man behold God in the vast Works of his Creation, and not be
self-debased, and as it were self-annihilated thereby; and say as one speaks,
Lord, thou art an Abyss of Being, and I of Nothing; especially considering how
infinitely his Greatness transcends them all. They tell us, that the Earth is
but as a Punctum, a small Point in comparison of the Heavens; but Earth and
Heaven both are less than a Punctum compared with the great God. For there is
some proportion betwixt Finite and Finite, but none betwixt Finite and
Infinite. And therefore the Prophet Isaiah, to express this infinite
disproportion, speaks thus, Chap. 40. 17. All Nations before him are nothing;
and they are accounted to him less than nothing, and vanity. Which is to show
that betwixt him and the Works of his Creation there is indeed no proportion at
all.

So that our minds may behold God's greatness in the greatness of his Works;
and much more in the littleness and nothingness of these Works compared with
his Greatness; and from both should lay us very low, and humble us deeply
before him. It made Solomon have a mean opinion of the great House he had
built, considering the great God that was to dwell in it; 1 Kings 8. 27.
Behold, the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee, much less this House that I
have builded. It is Man's unacquaintedness with the great Creator of the World,
that makes him admire any greatness in himself, or in the greatest things of
this World.

(...), said the Philosopher. Men that have true greatness of mind are not so
apt to wonder, as men of little Souls. So that this acquaintance with the great
God will greaten the Soul toward God, but will diminish and lessen it toward
a man's self, and the World in our estimation thereof.

2. We ought from hence also be led to a dependence upon him; for he that made
Heaven and Earth, must needs be sufficient to help us in all cases whatsoever.
The Heathens are said to trust in a God that could not save, Isa. 45. 20. And
the Reason is given, because their gods did not make Heaven and Earth, as we
read, verse. 18. He that brought all things out of the Abyss of nonentity into
Being, can raise us out of the lowest depth of affliction and misery. He that
said, Let there be Light, and made the Darkness vanish before it* is able to
bring us out of the greatest darkness of trouble. He that made the Waters
retreat from covering the Earth, can discharge us of the Waters of Sorrow and
Affliction, wherewith we sometimes seem to be covered or overwhelmed.

The Church of Israel comforts her self in such a prospect of God; Psalm. 124.
8. Our help is in the Name of the Lord who made Heaven and Earth. That is to
say, Our help is in one that is All-sufficient, and upon whom we may safely
depend.

One great cause of the Saints distrustful heart-fainting fears, is, the not
considering this: Have thou not known? Have thou not heard that the everlasting
God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the Earth faints not? Isa. 40. 28.
Why then does Jacob faint in his distress? And when we are afraid of Man, it is
because we forget the Lord our Maker, that stretched forth the Heavens, and
laid the Foundations of the Earth, Isa. 51. 13. Did we well remember this, it
would strengthen our Faith, and vanquish our Fears; and make us able, under the
greatest Difficulties, and Dangers, and Deaths, to commit our Souls to him as a
faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4. 19. For as in the Works of Creation, we behold him
a powerful Creator, so in Christ Jesus, and the Covenant made with us in him,
we may behold him also a faithful Creator, and so be encouraged to depend upon
him, and commit our selves to him.

3. Hereupon we ought to have an holy awe and fear of him. As the considering
God the Creator of the World should dispel distrustful fear, so it ought to
beget an awful fear of him. All appearances of God are tremendous to the
Creature. As when he appeared in Transient Visions to the Prophets, it struck
them with dread, as we read of Daniel, Chap. 10. And those Beams of Glory that
shone forth in Christ's Transfiguration made the Disciples fear, Matthew. 17. 6.
So verily his appearances in in the Works of Creation are wonderful and
dreadful. Aquin. 1. 2. q. 41. Art. 4.
Here we may first wonder and then fear, as the Schoolmen have made Admiration
one of the kinds of Fear. Greatness and Majesty are apt to strike this Heart
with Fear; and both these are visibly written upon God's Creation. What cannot
he do either for a Man, or against him that is the Maker of the World? what is
exceeding high has a dread in it. As in Ezekiels Vision of the Wheels, it is
said, Chap. 1. 18. As for their Rings, they were so high that they were
dreadful. In the Creation of the World we behold the sublimity of God's
Majesty; and his Wisdom, and Greatness in a Stupendous Elevation. As Bildad
tells Job, Job 25. 2. speaking of God, Dominion and Fear are with him. These
are joined together as Cause and Effect. And he shows Job this Dominion of God
in the Works of his Creation. He makes peace in his high places. All the
Creatures of the upper World, quietly subject to the Creator's Law. And verse.
3. Is there any number of his Armies? etc. which are the Hosts in Heaven and
Earth, as the Creatures are called, Genesis 2. 1. Here is God's Dominion, which
should strike us with an holy awe of him.

The Heathen beholding these glorious Works of the Creation, had thereby a fear
of a Deity impressed upon their hearts, which was the occasion of that
Atheistical Speech of the Poet; Primus in Orb Deos fecit timor.
Fear first made gods upon the Earth.


Yet this is a Truth; the Works of God's Creation should strike our Hearts with
a reverend Fear of the Creator; which the Psalmist exhorts men to, Let all the
Earth fear the Lord; let all the Inhabitants of the World stand in awe of him:
For he spoke, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast. Oh, how should
the whole World stand in awe of such a Being! Our very praises are to be mixed
with fear. He is therefore said to be fearful in praises, Exodus 15. 11. For
those Excellencies of his Works for which we praise him, have such Impressions
of his Glory and Power upon them, that may make men fear while they are
praising of them.

But because I would still make my Discourse to serve the Design of true
Christianity, I therefore add, That this Fear ought not to be afrighting, or
merely astonishing, to enslave the Soul, or drive Man into fond superstition,
as it did the Heathen, but such as may suit a state of Sonship, and may be
proper to him that is not only our Creator, but our Redeemer, and Father in
Christ Jesus. And by that Principle of Grace we have received of him as our
Redeemer, to fear him as our Creator.

Upon this account also we owe him Praise and Admiration. 1. Praise; It is the
ultimate end of these Works of Creation that the Creator may be praised in
them; and it is the ultimate end of Man to give Glory and Praise to him. After
God had made and finished the rest of his Works, he lastly made Man, that he
might have a Creature to contemplate the Works of his hands, and praise him in
them all, and by him reduce all his Works back again to himself. And without
question Adam, as soon as he had a Being, and was placed in the Theater of this
World, he saw the Creator in his Works, and found in himself a Principle that
naturally led him to adore and magnify him.

And as this Principle is renewed in any Man, and the Image of God restored to
him, so is he disposed to the performance of it. How often do we find David's
heart in a rapture of praise upon the contemplation of God's Workmanship in the
Worlds Creation; as we may find in Psalm. 8. 1. Psalm. 33. 6, 7. Psalm. 104. 24.
And when he calls upon irrational Creatures to praise their Creator, as in
Psalm. 148. Praise him Sun and Moon, praise him all ye Stars of Light: Praise
him ye Heavens of Heavens, and ye Waters that are above the Heavens: And thence
he comes down to this lower World, verse. 7. Praise the Lord from the Earth; ye
Dragons, and all Deeps, etc. All this is but to quicken up his own heart to
that Duty which was his, rather than theirs. And so all God's Works are said to
praise him, as they become to Man both the Motives and Subjects of his Praise.

Had this Creation sprung from God, as it were, by Natural Emanation, or
necessity of Nature, as some have said, as Light out of the Sun, or Water from
the Spring.

Or had he made it, as men build an House, because he needed an Habitation, or
some service from the Creatures existent therein, it might seem to be some
eclipse to the Glory due to him. But when he was led to it only by a most free
Act of his own Will, and the infinite goodness of his Nature; this renders him
therein infinitely praiseworthy.

Epicurus that did not believe God to be either the Creator or Governor of the
World, yet said he ought to be magnified for the excellencies of his Being; how
much more should he be adored by us, who know that all things were made by him,
and behold an infinite goodness manifested therein.

And we may from the Creation learn these three things concerning the Creator
to commend him to us. 1. Is, Self-sufficiency. For he existed of himself, and
is truly (...), Vide Lact. lib. 1. p. 29.
as the Oracle of Apollo once said of him, and was infinitely blessed in
himself before any Creature had a Being, and the Creation added nothing to him.
2. All Fullness and Perfection of Being existing in him; for the Beings of all
Creatures, Infinitum quodaam Essentiae Pelagus. As Damascen speaks of him.
with their several Perfections, did spring out of his Being, as Rivers out of
the Sea. And therefore he must needs have all Fullness and Perfection of Being
in himself; as whatever is in the Effect does either formally, vertually, or
eminently pre-exist in the Cause. Logicians that have reduced all natural
things under ten Heads or Predicaments, do well leave out God as Ens
transcendens, as a transcendent Being. For he is infinitely above all natural
things, and his Nature infinitely differing from theirs, though he comprehends
all their perfections eminently in himself. God is (...), etc. And much to that
purpose we may read in Dionys. Areop. De divinis nominibus.
He is Essence, Substance, Life, Light, Wisdom, Act, Power, etc. Yet not
according to what we apprehend of these things; And therefore we must take heed
of forming finite Images and Representations of him in our Minds; as the
Heathen did of old form visible Images of him to worship him by. But to whom
will you liken me? says the Lord, Isa. 40. Though God, speaking in his Word to
us finite Creatures, represents himself to us by finite Things; Se quasi
finitum finitis mentibus offert. Yet he is infinitely above all these things;
and it is a true rule, nothing can be predicated univocally of God and the
Creatures. 3. Allosufficiency to his People. For he that has all Good
eminently in himself, must needs be an All-sufficient Portion. For God, as one
says him, he is (...), He is all things that the Creature is, and yet nothing
that the Creature is. All things are in him as in the Fountain; and he that
abides with God, and enjoyes him, he drinks at the Fountain, whereas others
drink at the Stream; and at the Fountain the Waters are in their greatest
sweetness, fullness, and purity. And though he has communicated Being to such
innumerable Creatures, yet he is not in the least exhausted in his own Being;
no more than the Sun is exhausted in its Light, by those streams of Light it is
daily pouring forth upon the World. In our Metaphysics, we read a distinction
of Mundus Archetypus, and Mundus Emanationis: The former is the Eternal God
himself, and the other is the Created World. So that whatever is in the World,
was in God before as the Archetype. The Frame and Fabric of it was first in
his own infinite Mind; and all the Good, Beauty, Sweetness, that are scattered
abroad among the Creatures of the Universe, were all first transcendently in
himself; so that he must needs be All-sufficient to our Happiness.

For whatever is the first Original of any Good, has the whole of that Good
in it self; as the Sun that is the Original of Light, has all Light in it
self; and so the Sea, with respect to Water. Now God is the Original of all
that Good that is in the Creature, of whatever kind it is, and therefore the
whole of all Good is in himself. Here we have Unity bringing forth Plurality,
and all Plurality eminently comprehended in Unity. As Du Bartas divinely to
this purpose speaks; Ere Time, Du Bart. first week, p. 5.
Form, Substance, Place, to be themselves attained;
All God in all things was, and All in God remained.


And hereupon also we may sit down and be satisfied. Though we want many good
things that are in the Creature, and which others enjoy, yet we have them all
eminently in him that is the Fountain of all Good; and is the totum universale,
the Universal whole of that partial and particular Good that the Creatures have
in their several Beings. Omnia habeo, neque quicquam habeo, nihil cum est,
nihil deest tamen. Terent. Eunuch. Acts 2. This is true in Divinity.
So that we need not be overwhelmed with sorrow, when we meet with losses of
some created finite Good, if we have the Lord himself to be our God. That he is
a Good sufficient to make the Soul happy, appears in this, That the Angels are
happy in God alone, who are Spirits of wider Capacities than the Souls of Men.
Yea, God is his own Happiness, much more is he sufficient to be the Creatures
Happiness. Whereupon we ought to acquiesce in him.

Now (to reduce this Duty also to Christian Practice) let every true Saint that
is in Covenant with God, praise this God as his God. Let him look upon the
great Creator of the World, as standing in a particular Relation to himself in
Jesus Christ, and that infinite Goodness out of which all created Good does
originally spring, to be engaged to him, to satisfy him, and make him blessed
for ever; as the Prophet Jeremy calls the Former of all things the Portion of
Jacob, Jer. 10. 16. And by this he has an advantage of lift up the Praises of
God to an higher degree than the Light of Nature could ever raise Man to; when
he shall praise him, not only as a Creator, but as his God, and his Portion for
ever. So that Praise is due to him from us.

But, 2. we owe him also the Duty of Admiration. For seeing we cannot
comprehend him in the mysterious and glorious Works of his Creation, we should
therefore admire him. As one having read an obscure Author, and being asked his
Judgment about it, answered, (...). What I have understood in it is excellent,
and so I judge also is what I have not understood. Or rather, as one that
having read the Book of the Revelation, said this of it, Non Reprobo quod non
Intelligo, sed eo magis admiror, quo minus assequor; I do not reject what I do
not understand, but the less I can understand the more I wonder. By Admiration
we give God the glory of his Incomprehensibleness. (...). Dionys. Areop. De
Divinis nominibus.
Whereby (as one speaks) not only our Knowledge but our Ignorance turns to his
Praise. This is that Act of the Soul that best agrees to Infinity. While the
Soul is admiring God, it is as it were gone out of its own finitness into his
infinitness; Quando men's se ad Deum cum amore integre convertit, rationis and
Intellectus oculus reverberatus Caligat. Isagoge Corderii ad Mist. Theol.
where it is gone beyond its depth; as in the deep Ocean where men may swim but
cannot wade. And hence it is that the Works of God are so often said in
Scripture to be wonderful Works, which shows they are above Knowledge; and so
they, and much more their Maker, are the Objects of our Admiration.

Only, let me add here also, Let us admire him as Christians; not only to
astonish our Reason, but to the sanctifying our Hearts. 1. Let our admiration
of him lead us to love him; and that not only for what we know of him, but for
that also which is above our knowledge; and if possible, to love him infinitely,
which we come nearest to, when after all our love of him we are still wishing
we could love him yet more abundantly.

2. It should also lead us infinitely to esteem him, Hic nec videri potest,
visu clarior est, nec comprehendi, tactu purior est; nec aestimari, sensu major
est, and ideo sic eum digne aestimamus, dum inaestimabilem dicimus. Cypr. De
Idolorum Vanitate, p. 289.
and to despise all things in comparison of him, and account them as nothing;
for so indeed they are compared with him. Our highest esteem is of those things
which we do not comprehend. Any Excellency, the more we admire it, the more we
esteem it. As the Eye that has been gazing upon the Sun is darkened to the
sight of other things. So the Soul that is employed in the true beholding and
admiring the excellencies of God's Being, has thereby the glory of this World
darkened to it.

3. Again, it should lead the Soul forth with strong desires to the knowledge
and fruition of him.

1. Knowledge of him; As things that are wonderful are most desirable to be
known. The Mind of Man has a natural propension to Knowledge, especially to the
knowledge of things great and wonderful. (...). Arist.
And the Philosophers defined Wisdom to be the knowledge of things great and
wonderful. And admiration put them upon the study of them. First, They admired,
and then searched. And therefore it was well styled, Principium Philosophiae;
the Original of Philosophy. So God being the Object of our admiration, it
should excite our Minds to more diligent enquiries into the knowledge of him.
Although, he being an infinite Object, we cannot comprehend him, yet to search
after him so far as our finite capacity may extend, and then sit down and leave
the rest to an holy admiration. As the Apostle prays for the Ephesians, that
they may know the Love of Christ which passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 18. So
though the infinite Being of God passes Knowledge, yet we should search into
the knowledge of him.

2. The Fruition of him. For God is an Object, not only to be known, but
enjoyed. And to enjoy him so far as we are capable in this Life, and to send
forth our earnest Desires to the fuller fruition of him in the Life that is yet
to come, especially seeing he is best known by enjoying, as every good is. So
that as the Mind is to travel into the knowledge of him, as he is the most
excellent Object to be known, so is the will to pursue after him as the
chiefest Good to be enjoyed. The admiring any Good, satisfies not, without the
enjoying it.

CHAP. VII.
The Creation of the World considered with respect to Christ. How all Things
are said to be made by him in Scripture. Some places of it briefly vindicated
against the Socinians and Arrians. How the Creation is most properly attributed
to the Son of God. The Creator of the World is also the Savior of it. Many
great Considerations resulting thence. All things made for Christ, as well as
by him. A brief Account of those Works of Christ, with respect to which the
World was created. Some Inferences thence.
I Shall next consider the Worlds Creation, with a particular respect to Jesus
Christ, and our Redemption by him.

And herein consider. 1. That all things were made by Him. 2. For Him.

1. All things were made by him. So we have it made known to us by
Scripture-Revelation; as Joh. 1. 1. where the Apostle enters his Discourse of
Christ from his Divinity. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with
God, and the Word was God. All things were made by him, and without him was
nothing made that was made. This beginning is not the beginning of the Gospel,
as the Socinians speak, but the beginning of Time. And all things made by him,
are not the things of the New Creation, but of the First. But if they cavil at
this Text, because they own not Christ's Eternal Godhead, and any preexistence
of him to his Incarnation; what can they say to that in Colos. 1. 16. For by
him were all things created that are in Heaven, and that are in the Earth,
Visible or Invisible, whether they be Thrones, Dominions, Principalities or
Powers, etc. Where not only Things, but Persons, and Persons that are the chief
of the whole Creation, are said to be created by Jesus Christ; and it is spoken
of a proper Creation, for the Angels needed not a Restoration, as fallen Man
did, which is called by the name of Creation in an improper sense. And Heb. 1.
2. it is expressly said concerning Christ, By whom also he made the Worlds. Not
as by an Instrument, as the Arrians held, as if God first made Christ, and then
all things by him; but by him as the eternal Word and Wisdom of the Father.

And by Worlds (...), is not meant the new state of things under the Messiah,
which is called by the Apostle, according to the Jews usual appellation, the
World to come, Heb. 2. But by Worlds, he means the whole created Universe,
which the Jews usually expressed by (...), gnolamim; and the Apostle in Greek by
(...), signifying the World both in its succession and duration; or in the two,
or three, or four parts of it, according to the several distributions they
differently made of it, and so called plurally Worlds.

Does not the Psalmist speak of Christ, when he says, Ps. 95. 5. The Sea is
his, and he made it, and his hands formed the dry Land? And then adds, verse.
7, 8. To day if ye will hear his Voice, harden not your hearts. Which words the
Apostle quotes in Heb. 3. as referring to Christ; Moses verily was faithful in
all his House as a Servant, etc. But Christ as a Son over his House, etc.
Wherefore, as the Holy Ghost says, To day if you will hear his Voice, harden
not your hearts. That is, the Voice of Christ, verse. 5, 6, 7. to whom the
Psalmist had ascribed the Creation of the World. And in Heb. 1. 10. the laying
the Foundation of the Earth, and the making of the Heavens, is expressly
attributed to Jesus Christ. But I must not divert to that Controversy, only to
show how the Creation of the World has respect to Christ as its Creator; not
excluding the Father and the Holy Ghost; for in all Works, ad extra, they work,
as we say, indivisim: yet according to the order of their subsisting, is the
order of their working; so all things are of the Father, through the Son, by
the Spirit. And the Creation of all things seems most properly to appertain to
the second Person. For he being the First and Immediate Offspring of his
Father, it belongs to him to propagate and communicate of his Being in the
things that are made, which are therefore called the Offspring of God. As the
Apostle quotes the Heathen Poet, saying, Acts 17. We are also his Offspring:
And says it also himself in the next words, Forasmuch as we are the Offspring
of God. And not only Men, but all created Beings may be styled his Offspring,
as they are the Finite Emanations of his Infinite Being. Magne parens mundi, As
the Poet speaks of God.
And the Heathens therefore did style God the great Father of the World. Col.
1. 15. (...).
And Jesus Christ is called by the Apostle the Firstborn of every Creature, or
of all Creation. So called, as some conceive, with respect to his Eternal
Generation, and the Creation that in time sprung from him. He was brought forth
by an Eternal Generation, and then by him was the Generation of all the things
of Time. God communicated his Being Eternally and Infinitely to his Son, and
then by him communicates of his Being Finitely, and in time to the Creatures.
His communication of himself to his Son, is by an immanent Act, wherein God did
not go out of himself; and so by him gave Being to the Creation in those
Transient Acts, wherein God does work ad extra, and goes out of himself. Now
what may Christians observe from hence.

1. In general. That the Creator of the World is also the Redeemer of it. He
that made all things, is also the Restorer of all things. The collapsed ruined
World, is put into his hand to raise and renew it that first made it. As we
read Heb. 1. 2. He is appointed Heir of all things, by whom God made the
Worlds. He had an original Title to be Heir as Creator; but has a new Title
given him as Redeemer; and this he executes in the Government of the World.

2. More particularly. We may observe that it is the Infinite Creator of the
World who has clothed himself with the flesh of Man, and made it to subsist
personally in himself. Here we may behold this great Mystery, Finiteness, and
In^inity; Mortal, and Immortality; Divinity, and Humanity; the Creator and the
Creature united in one Person. As the Evangelist first speaks of Christ as the
Creator of all things, John 1. 3. and then as assuming our flesh, verse. 14. The
Word that made all things, afterward spoke and dwelt personally in humane
flesh.

And Man's Nature being a System of the whole Creation, he did in a manner
cloth himself with it, in his assuming our flesh. As one of the Ancients to
this purpose speaks; Incarnatio est elevatio totius Universi in Divinam
Personam; Incarnation is the lifting up the whole Universe into Divine Person.
Which taken in a qualified sense is true. And in assuming our flesh, How many
wonders do here meet together? To see the Divine Nature stooping so low, is one
wonder; to see the Humane Nature raised so high, is another; to see Man's
sinful Nature assumed without sin, is a third; to see the Angelical Nature past
by that stood nearest to God, and Man's Nature assumed that stood farther off,
is a fourth; to see the Creator assuming the Properties of a Creature, which is
to be finite, passive, dependent, etc. and the Creature assumed into the
Properties of the Creator, which is to be Infinite, Almighty, Omnipotent, is a
fifth, etc. So that God is hereby Humanified, (...). Athanas.
and Man, as it were, Deified, as one speaks.

3. We may further observe, and that with great delight, how it is the Creator
of all things that is become the Head of the Church. Which the Apostle suggests
in Col. 1. 16. and verse. 18. compared; By him were all things created, whether
Visible or Invisible, etc. and he is the Head of the Body of the Church; an
Head, not only by way of Government to rule over it, but by way of Spiritual
Union to influence it, and dwell in it as the Head in the Body. To see the
Infinite Creator humble himself, to look down upon his Creatures, is taken
notice of by the Psalmist as a great condescent, Psalm. 113. 5, 6. But to take
any of them into a nearness, into an oneness with himself, is yet far greater.

He first came into a natural Union with us in assuming our Nature, and into a
legal Union with us, by becoming our Surety; and then comes into a mystical
Union, by making us Members of his Body through the Spirit. And this Mystical
Union is also set forth by a Marriage Union, Ephesians. 5. 32. And is not this
wonderful, to see the Creator to match himself with a Creature, and that not of
the highest Order, but with Man; and not with him neither, when at his best,
but when degenerated and corrupted. Should we see a great King take a poor Maid
from the Dunghill and match himself to her, it could scarce be a shadow of this.
For our Maker to become our Husband, as it is said, Isa. 54. 5. our Reasons
cannot comprehend it. Ambition it self can hardly aspire to such a thing.

And now what an honor is this to the Church to have such an Head and Husband?
and what security also to be under the Headship and Protection of the Creator
of the World? He that created all things, can create Salvation for it, when
there is no visible matter or means out of which to bring it. And he that gave
Being to the first Creation, can and will raise up and perfect his New Creation
in his Church, which he will effect by this Union it has with himself as the
Head thereof. And the assurance hereof the Saints have in that light of the
Knowledge of God that has already shined into their hearts. For this New
Creation begins in Light as the first did, which the Apostle takes notice of 2
Cor. 4. 6. God who commanded Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined into
our hearts. And as he proceeded in the first Creation, till the whole was made
perfect, so will he do in the New; where he has begun a good Work he will
perfect it; he will proceed from that first Light of Grace wherein he shined
into the Soul to the perfection of his Work in the eternal Light of Glory.

4. Observe also that our Reconciler to God is he that made the World. As the
Apostle in Col. 1. 1. speaks of Christ as the Creator of the World; verse. 16.
and then as our Reconciler by the Blood of his Cross, v. 20. And having made
peace by the Blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile all things unto himself.
How may this strengthen our Faith in Christ's Blood, seeing it is the Blood of
him that made the World. As it does manifest stupendous love that the Creator
should die for his Creature; so it may assure us that his death must needs be
infinitely meritorious. Under the Law, the Blood of Creatures was shed for the
People, but that could of it self merit nothing; but now under the
New Testament there is the Blood of the Creator shed for us: Here is the Lord
of all Life himself dying, and he that gave Being to all things emptying
himself, and as it were, made nothing. What unspeakable Merit must hence arise
for us! Certainly, the merit of the Creator must needs infinitely exceed all
demerit of the Creature.

And as hence we may conclude an infinite merit, so we may observe the fitness
of him that was the Creator to make Reconciliation for us. Who so fit to look
after poor lost Creatures as he that made them? He had the greatest property in
us, and therefore was concerned most to look after us. As when the Sheep are
wandered, the Praprietor is the fittest Person to take care for the bringing
them home again. So that as our Creator, he had not only Jus Proprietatis, the
Right of Property to redeem us, but also Jus Idoneitatis, the Right of Fitness
also.

5. Lastly; We may hence take notice of the Bounty and Goodness of Christ Jesus
our Savior. We may see it in the Creation of the World, which is every where
filled with the Effects hereof. When he made the World, he showed not only his
Power, but the infinite benignity and goodness of his Nature. And this Nature
he has still, whereby we may encourage our selves to go to him for spiritual
Blessings, beholding the Creation filled with his common Blessings.

As from the Afflictions and Temptations of his Humane Nature, we may be
encouraged to go to him for succor when we are tempted and tried. So from the
infinite benignity of his Divine Nature shining forth in his Creation, we may
be encouraged to ask the things that are necessary for our Salvation. Has he
in his creating Goodness provided food for every Creature, when it was not
asked, and will he not give thee bread for thy Soul, when thou go and ask
him for it? Did his Goodness so freely flow out to his whole Creation; and has
that Nature no goodness remaining in it to his own People, that are nearer to
him than any other Creature? And are not only Parts of his Natural, but the
Subjects of his New Creation; which, as it is Spiritual, is the better part of
it.

But secondly; As all Things were made by Christ, so also for him, as the
Scripture in many places asserts, Col. 1. 16. All things were made by him and
far him. It was usually said by the Jews; All things were made for the Messiah.
Rev. 4. ult. Thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and
were created. The first Adam was set over the works of God's Hand, but he
sinning against his Creator, it came into the hand of the second Adam, and all
things were put under his Feet. But this fell out, not by chance or accident,
but according to the Counsel of God when the World was made. And accordingly
the management of the Creation has been in his hands from the beginning; as it
appears in the Records of the Old Testament. And when he came into our Nature,
our Humanity was invested in this power with the Divine Person of Christ,
especially at his Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven; and therefore he
speaks as if it was then given him, Matthew. 28. All power is given me both in
Heaven and Earth. And John 17. Thou have given him power over all flesh, etc.
Now this was in the Counsel of Heaven, and this was the end of this Worlds
Creation, that being put under the Dominion of Jesus Christ it might be
governed, and all things managed therein to the highest exaltation of the Glory
of God. For this Son of God,

1. He brings forth the Knowledge of the eternal Counsels of God concerning
Man's Redemption; wherein he shows forth the (...), the deep things of God.
Wherein the infinite Wisdom, Mercy, Love, Justice, and Holiness of God are
manifested in the World, in the most resplendent edition of them. And for that
end he has inspired men by his Spirit in the several Ages of the World,
whereby this great Mystery might be made known to the Glory of his Father. For
though there have been Prophets speaking of it ever since the World began, Luke
1. 70. yet it was by the Spirit of Christ that they so spoke, 1 Pet. 1. 11.

2. He has also delivered to men the Rules of Worship and Obedience, and such
as conduce more in the practice of them to the honor of God, than what was
performable in Man's Primitive State; the Conditions of Life under the
New Covenant being more to his Glory, than those of the ^ormer were.

3. He has in all Ages been gathering in some of the Children of men into a
state of Salvation, out of that lost and ruined state into which the sin of the
first Adam had cast them, acquainting them with the Counsel of God for that
end, giving them his Spirit to enlighten their Minds, and to sanctify their
Hearts; and so forming them to the praise of God, and as Vessels of Mercy
preparing them for his Glory. And this he did before his Incarnation.

4. In the fullness of time he came himself into the flesh of Man, and brought
forth upon the Stage of the World, that great Mystery of the Incarnation. When
also he declared the infinite Love, and the Counsels and Purposes of the Heart
of God more fully than had before been made known, encountered and conquered the
utmost Temptations of Satan and the World, and then offered up that great
Sacrifice of himself for to make atonement for sin, which had been signified
from the beginning of the World. And then being buried, he rose again, loosing
the Bands of Death and the Grave, and ascended triumphantly into Heaven, and
acquired a new Title to his Dominion over the World in his conquest of it.

5. And being now in Heaven, yet still the Creation is in his hand, and
bringing in revenews of Glory to God by him. He disposes of Kingdoms and
Nations as he pleases; sometimes throwing down the mighty from their Seats,
and then exalting the lowly and meek, as was prophesied of him, Luke 1. 70.
Sometimes straitning the Nations in his displeasure, and then enlarging them
again in his mercy and goodness.

He takes care for the upholding and propagating the everlasting Gospel;
accompanies it with his Spirit to the conversion of Souls to God, and building
them up an habitation for him; fits them for his Service and Praise in this
World, and then gathers them into the presence of his Father to stand before
him, and to minister to him for ever. He also orders their Trials and
Sufferings as he sees them requisite to the Glory of God, and their
preparation for Heaven; and then when he sees it meet, delivers them out of
them also.

6. After all this, at the time of the Consummation of all things, he will come
down from Heaven and judge the World, receiving some into the Kingdom of his
Father, and sending others into everlasting Fire, wherein the riches of God's
Grace and Mercy, and the clearness of his Justice will most illustriously shine
forth, to his eternal Praise and Glory.

And when this is done, he delivers up his Kingdom and Dominion to his Father
that he had received from him; having subdued all Enemies under his feet, and
put down all Rule, 1 Cor. 15. 28.
Authority, and Power, his Father becomes All in All.

Thus with respect to Christ, and to the accomplishment of these Glorious
Works, (which I have but briefly touched) was this Creation of the World
erected; and which are transcendently more to the glory of God than what could
have been under the first Adam, either by any obedience performed by him, or
the dispensation of God toward him under that first Covenant.

And from hence I shall briefly make three Inferences.

Inference 1.
That the Redemption of the World is a greater Work than the Creation of it,
seeing it was erected for the Son of God to transact that glorious Work in. The
end has a pre-eminence above all those means that are made use of in a
subserviency to it.

This lower World was made with respect to it, where the Foundation of this
Work is begun and laid. And the upper World also, where it is completed and
finished. On Earth God has the praise of it begun, and in Heaven it shall be
made perfect.

And if the Angels, that are the chief part of God's Creation, are made and
appointed with a subserviency to it, to be ministering Spirits to Christ, and to
the Heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1. ult. much more than sure the inferior part of
it. And when all the Elect, which are these Heirs, shall be inflated in their
Inheritance, and fully possessed of it, then comes the dissolution upon this
visible Creation, as having then served the end for which it was first erected.

Inference 2.
It also may be observed hence, How the Nature of Man is in Christ advanced to
the top of God's Creation. For the World was created, that it might be set
under the government of the Son of God in the Nature of Man. So that as I took
notice before of its advancement by its union with him, so here by the Dominion
it has over the whole Creation, by virtue of that Union, and the determination
of God therein. He first descended and assumed our Nature, and then ascended
and carried it up, far above all Heavens, Principalities and Powers (which are
the highest parts of God's Creation) being made subject to him. Ephesians. 1. 21.
Our Nature was advanced in the first Adam, into a great Dominion over the
Creatures; but it is advanced higher in the second Adam. There it had a dignity
upon Earth, but here it has a dignity both in Heaven and Earth. There it had
dominion over the Creatures of this lower World, that were of an inferior
Nature to it: Here it has dominion over the Angels in the upper World, that
are of a superior Nature and Order. Lord, what is Man, says the Psalmist, that
thou art mindful of him, and the Son of Man that thou visitest him? Thou have
made him a little lower than the Angels; Thou have crowned him with Glory and
Honor; Thou made him to have dominion over the Works of thine hand; Thou
have put all things under his feet. And the Psalmist had respect, not so much
to the dignity of Man's Nature in the first Adam, as in the Second. For these
words are in Heb. 2. applied to Christ, and the dignity God exalted him to.
Being first made (...), a little while lower than the Angels by his debasement
and suffering in this lower World, and then exalted into Power and Dignity
above them all in his ascending the upper World; being crowned with Glory and
Honor. Oh the mysterious depths of Wisdom and Goodness that here meet together
in the Man Christ Jesus! Oh the stupidity and blindness of fallen Man, that
takes so little notice of these great Works of God, with respect to which the
World was principally made! With what sacred astonishment should we behold
these Counsels of Heaven! With what thanks givings and adorations should we
celebrate this unspeakable Love! Especially if we consider Man's Nature to be
thus advanced, after it had transgrest the Law of its Creation, and corrupted
it self more than any inferior Nature.

Inference 3.
We may hence conclude, That the whole Creation being made for Christ, and put
into his hand, shall be managed to the highest exaltation of the Glory of God.
However the course of things may run for a while, and the reason of many things
hid out of our sight, yet all things will at last mere in this general Issue,
the universal end of all things, which is the Glory of God. The first Adam was
made and placed upon the Stage of the World, that through him God might have
the Glory of his Creation; but he being mutable, fell from his Station, lost
his Strength, and so could not serve the end of his Being. Therefore God has
now put all things into a surer hand; and his Glory stands upon a surer bottom.
For he that is both God and Man, is likely to bring in both higher and surer
glory to God than he that was but mere* Man. If he should fail in it, it should
be either because he wants ability, which cannot be, because he made all
things; or, because he wants love and good will to God, which cannot be
neither, because he is his only begotten Son.

And seeing the Work of Man's Redemption and Salvation was principally in the
eye of God when he made the World, as that Work wherein he will be glorified
for ever, we may be assured that it shall be carried on in the World. The
Gospel shall be preached, Sinners shall be converted, the Church shall be
preserved, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. And those
Enemies that stand in the way of this Salvation, whether the World, Satan, Sin,
Death, or Grave, shall be at last surely overcome.

CHAP. VIII.
The deficiency of Natural Theology compared with the Scriptures, evidenced in
sundry Particulars. The Work of Redemption not known by it. It reveals not the
way of coming to God by Christ. It gives not a perfect account of sin. It shows
not the way of Reconciliation, nor of Satisfaction in Man's chief Good, nor of
the right Worship of God. Conformity to God not attained by it. Nor the true
Tranquillity under Humane Calamities. One Inference from the Whole.
THus having considered the Creation of the World, in the great Efficient of
it, and also showed what use may be made of the Knowledge of God resulting
thence; I next proceed to show wherein this Knowledge is deficient, and falls
short of that which we have by Divine Revelation in the Word of God.

1. In General. The Mystery of Man's Redemption by Christ, is not made known by
the Works of Creation. All that the Apostle says in my Text was known
concerning God by it, is, his Eternal Power and Godhead. It would not have been
a Mystery hid in God for so many Ages, if the Works of Nature had declared it
to men. Adam might see God as a Creator, but not as a Redeemer in these Works
of Nature. He might see an infinite Power, Wisdom, Goodness shining forth
herein. But that Second and better Edition of these Attributes to be set forth
in the work of Redemption, he could not see. For though God made the World, in
order to the Work of Redemption, as I showed before, yet he did not make it as
a Redeemer. And therefore it has nothing directly written concerning Christ
upon it. The Tree of Life, Paradise, the making of Eve out of Adam's side, and
then joining them together in Marriage; yea, the making Adam himself, and the
dominion God gave him over the Creatures, and constituting him a common Person,
are applicable to Christ and the Church, and are figuratively so applied; but
yet it cannot well be imagined that Adam could read any thing of Christ, or the
Work of our Redemption herein. There was no need of God's revealing any thing
concerning the Worlds Redemption until Man's sin and fall. Therefore after the
Fall God revealed it to Adam. And the first intimation of it was, of the Seed
of the Woman breaking the head of the Serpent; and there was nothing in Nature
could have declared so much as this. And the farther discovery of it to the
World, was by Inspiration, or Visions, or by an audible Voice, etc. God needed
not have sent forth Prophets, and Christ Apostles to have preached this Mystery
to the World, if the Works of Creation could have declared it. It Is true, it is
said, Psalm. 19. 1. of the Heavens, and the Firmament, the course of Night and
Day, that they preach to the World. Their Line is gone forth into all the
Earth, and their Words to the end of the World. Which words are applied to the
Apostles Ministry, Romans 10. But yet they are not such Preachers as the
Apostles; for they tell the World of a Knowledge, which the greatest Searchers
of Nature were ignorant of. A Mystery that was hid in God, and in former Ages,
not made known to Men, no nor to Angels neither, that can read what is written
in Nature better than Man. And Athens was a stranger to it, when the Apostle
Paul came thither, as you read Acts 17. There was the Seminary of Humane
Literature, there he met with Learned Epicureans and Stoics, etc. but he found
nothing of the Knowledge of Christ there.

Well then, where is the Wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of
this World? As the Apostle speaks in a way of holy derision, or of triumph
rather, 1 Cor. 1. 20. Where is Socrates and Plato? Where is Xenophon and
Aristotle? Where is Seneca and Cato? Where is Demosthenes and Cicero? How is
all their Wisdom bafled and non-plust by the foolishness of Preaching? wherein
the way to Man's true Felicity, which they so anxiously sought after, is
declared to be by a Crucified Christ.

2. But more particularly. If you speak of Ma^^s coming to God; though Natural
Light may dictate this to be his Duty, yet coming to God by the Mediator, the
Man Christ Jesus, is above the reach of this Light. Here we must have recourse
to Scripture-Revelation, that tells us that Christ is the Way, the Truth, and
the Life; and no Man comes to the Father but by Him, John 14. And there is one
Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. 5. As a Ladder
standing up betwixt Heaven and Earth, as it was presented to Jacob. And the
Name Immanuel is not found written any where in the Book of Nature; who is the
way whereby God is with Men, and they with Him. For want of the knowledge
whereof, the Gentiles addressed themselves to their chief God, by their Demons,
or inferior Deities; by their Heroes, Men of renown, whom at their death they
deified and adopted into the number of their gods; many of whom they styled
secundi Ordinis Deos, Gods of the second Order. (...), (...), etc.
Yea, they had many Orders of them, distinguished either by the places of abode
they assigned to them, or the Offices performed by them. Now as these inferior
Deities did themselves address to the Supreme; so by them, as Mediators, did
the Pagans address themselves to him. To both of which the Apostle seems to
^llude in 1 Cor. 8. 5. when he says, There be gods many, and lords many. And
in opposition to which he adds, But to us there is but one God, the Father, of
whom are all things; and one Lord Jesus, through whom are all things. But this
Mediation of Jesus Christ they were wholly ignorant of. God has written
nothing of this in the Works of Nature. Though the Light of Nature could
instruct them in the necessity, or at least the expediency of going to God by
some Mediator or other, and therefore they invented such to themselves; yet
that the Son of God, in the Nature of Man, should be the Person by whom to go
to God, they knew nothing of.

3. If we speak of Man's Reconciliation to God. Though the Light of Nature
declares to Man, it is his great happiness to have the favor of God, and to
have that sin pardoned to him, which his natural Conscience does condemn him
for; yet how to obtain this Pardon and Reconciliation is only made known to us
by the direction of the Scriptures. It Is true, the Heathens made use of
Sacrifices of several sorts, as Bullocks, Lambs, Sheep, Goats, Swine; and in
some cases, Men and Children, as their own Poets, Virgil and Plautus, etc. and
so Plutarch and others of their Moral Writers affirm; and these they offered up
to appease their gods* when any Calamities fell upon them.

-- Illius aras
Saepe tener nostris ab ovilibus imbuet Agnus.
Haedum Neptuno, Taurum tibi Pulcher Apollo, Virgil.
And of their Humane Sacrifices, see Lact. lib. 1. p. 81, 82, 83. and Dr.
Owen's (...), p. 307. They offered Placatory Sacrifices to such gods of whom
they feared harm, and Propitiatory to such of whom they expected good, as Dr.
Jackson Observes. But these they used not with any respect to Christ, who was
the end of the Institution of all the Expiatory or Propitiatory Sacrifices, and
gave them their Virtue and Efficacy, and so they could not avail them to what
they designed; as the very use of them they borrowed either from the Sacrifice
of Noah, conveyed in the notice of it down to his Posterity, or from some
acquaintance they might have with the Jewish Laws, rather than from any
Dictates of Natural Light, howsoever improved by them. For whatever may be
said concerning Sacrifices, called Gratulatory, offered by way of Thanksgiving,
that a principle of Natural Gratitude might lead them to their use; by giving
part of the whole, to acknowledge the whole from God; yet who can imagine it
concerning Expiatory Sacrifices, that ever the Light of Nature could lead them,
to think that the slaying of a Bruit Creature, as a Sheep, or a Lamb, or a
Goat, etc. should be able to reconcile God to Man, or be a meet Satisfaction to
the offended Deity for his sin, or indeed be pleasing to God at all. And though
this was the practice of the Jews, yet they were led to it by God's
Institution, and not by the Light of Nature. And though some have said, that
the continuance of Nature in its course, and the benefits that are thereby
daily conveyed from God to the World, do declare to all Men, that he is
some-way reconciled, else Man's sin would either have dissolved, or at least
interrupted this beneficial course of Nature; yet this cannot lead Man to the
true Propitiatory, nor to the way of enjoying the benefit thereof. By these
common benefits of Nature, God left not himself without witness to the
Gentiles; and for which they ought to have been thankful; but by these they
could not understand that they had favor with God, were not under God's
displeasure for their sin, seeing the worst of men partaked of them as well as
others, and the Beasts as well as Men. It Is true, something may hence be
gathered of the benignity and goodness of the Nature of God, his long-suffering
and patience, whereby they might be encouraged to go to him for Mercy and
Pardon; but the way wherein God has appointed to bestow this pardoning Mercy,
they could not know by any natural Light. And what respect God may have to some
among the Gentiles that best improved that Light, and had recourse to his
general Mercy, without the distinct knowledge of a Savior, which they had not
means to attain, I shall rather leave it amongst the Secrets of God's Counsel,
than make determination therein.

But we that have the Scriptures, know that all Man's Reconciliation is by the
death of the Son of God. And that pardon of sin is by Faith in his Blood, which
things the Light of Nature is a mere stranger too.

3. As to the true knowledge of sin, the Scriptures give a more distinct account
than any that can be known by Nature. Some grosser sins may be known by it, but
the secret Obliquities of the Heart and Life are not detected but by a straiter
Rule than the Light or Law of Nature. The Apostle, ( Romans 7.) professes he had
not known Lust to be sin, except the Law of God had said, Thou shall not covet.
It is the Commandment of God* that David says is exceeding broad, can only
discover sin in the full latitude of it. And which made the Apostle say, By the
Law is the knowledge of sin. And therefore the Law was first briefly published
upon Mount Sinai, and afterward explained and urged upon the People by Moses,
as appears in the Book of Deuteronomy that they might, being under the
conviction of sin, look toward the Messiah for Salvation, who was yet to come,
which needed not have been, could the Law of Nature have given a perfect
Knowledge and Conviction. Of it the Scriptures resolve that great Question, unde
malum? discoursing of it in the first original of it; as also in the due merit
of it, and the punishment it leads to.

As for sins that are more strictly Evangelical, as Unbelief in Christ, etc. As
the Light of Nature does not discover the Gospel, so neither can it do sins
against it. For this, we must have recourse to the Word of Christ, and to his
Spirit. Whom he promised to send to convince the World of sin, because they
believed not on him; for the Light of Nature could not evidence it to be sin.

4. If we speak also of the satisfaction of the Soul in possessing the chief
Good; Here also Scripture Light excels that of Nature. There was nothing did
more exercise the Minds of the wiser Heathens than this; to find out and enjoy
this Good; and nothing were they more divided in their Judgments about. But the
Reason was, because they wanted the true knowledge of God, and knew not the way
to the fruition of him, who alone is this chief Good of Man. But here the
Scriptures again supply the defect of Nature's Light; which reveal to us, not
only that God is, and what he is, but that Everlasting Covenant of his Grace
made in Jesus Christ, wherein, and whereby he offers himself to Men to become
their God, and to take them for his People. And there we find this summum
Bonum. this chief good

The Philosophers of old, Yea, all Men are as Merchants seeking this godly
Pearl, but they find it not until they are by Scripture Light led to it. And we
may say of it as Job speaks of Wisdom; The Depth says, It is not in me; and
the Sea says, It is not with me: It cannot be gotten for Gold, neither shall
Silver be weighed for the price thereof, etc. (and therefore is not found in
Silver or Gold); Destruction and Death say, We have heard the same thereof with
our Ears. Those that are in the Grave, or Hell, may have heard of it; but where
there is no Good, there cannot be found this chief Good. But the Word of God
tells the Living of it, shows it to them, and invites them to the possessing of
it.

5. With respect to the Worship of God. The Light of Nature does dictate that
God ought to be worshipped; but Scripture-Revelation is requisite to guide us
unto the right way of Worship. I know there is Natural Worship founded upon the
Right of Creation, which is known by Nature's Light; but then there is other
Worship that is Instituted, with respect to the Work of Redemption, which is
made known only by the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament; as Plato once
said, The Maker of this universe, as it is hard to find out, so as hard to find
out the right way of worshipping him. Whereupon the Apostle, in Romans 1. speaks
of the Gentiles, That they became vain in their Imaginations, inventing to
themselves ways of Worship, some whereof were ridiculous, others obscene, and
all dishonorable to the Greatness and Holiness of the Supreme Deity. As the
late Author of the Book called Moral Virtue and Grace, quotes a memorable
Passage out of Jamblichus; which, by his leave, I shall here transcribe in the
English of it; It is not easy to know what God will be pleased with, unless we
be either immediately instructed by God our selves, or taught by some Person
whom God has conversed with, or arrived to it by some Divine Means or other.
And therefore the Worship the Heathens performed to their gods, how ridiculous
soever, they pretended to receive it, either Afflatu Numinis, by some kind of
Inspiration, or from their Oracles, or some other way of Revelation. And we
know what the Mohammedan Religion pretends to in this case. But because they
were strangers to the Authentic Revelation of the true God in the Word of
Truth, therefore they so grossly erred in the Way and Rule of their Worship.

6. Or, if we speak of tranquillity of Mind, under all the Calamities that
attend Man's Life. This the Philosophers of old industriously sought after as a
chief part of Man's Happiness, and proposed several ways to attain it. Some,
by looking upon all things as coming by an inevitable Fate, and an invincible
connection of second Causes. Others of them relieved themselves by looking upon
these Evils as such as are common to Men* and they must be content to bear the
common lot of all Mankind. Nihil humanum a m^ alienum put^, as one speaks. And
others, That they were sent to be the Trials of Virtue, and in patient bearing
them, men discovered true greatness of Mind, etc. But, alas, the Bed they made
was too short for the Soul to repose it self upon. But the Scriptures show the
true way of it. 1. By showing all these evils, as dispensed by the Sovereign
Hand of the only Wise God. 2. That they are the Discipline of God for the good
of his Family. 3. This also sets before us the great Example of Christ in
patient suffering. 4. As also an everlasting Rest in the World to come, assured
by the Promises of God, and entered into by Christ as a forerunner, having
first purchased it by his Blood; the true hope whereof, is the great relief the
Saints have under all their present troubles; and many such like. Which being
truly apprehended, will bring in that true (...), or tranquillity of Mind which
all Philosophy cannot reach. A Principle of Faith being able to do more for us
in this kind than any principle of Reason. Those few words of the Apostle,
recorded 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. Our light affliction, which is but for a moment,
works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, while we look
not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen, etc. is
more than can be found in all the Volums of Natural or Moral Philosophy, to
quiet and comfort the Soul of Man under all the Calamities of Life.

7. As to Conformity to God. The Light of Nature taught Plato, and some of the
wiser Heathens to say, That Man's Happiness did consist in his likeness to God;
but the way of growing up into this Likeness they did not understand. For to
this is requisite the mortification of fleshly Lusts, which the Precepts of
their strictest Philosophers could not effect. Some things they might do to the
subduing of the Passions to the Dominion of Reason, and thereby introduce some
moral tranquillity into the Soul of Man. But the radical Corruptions of Man's
Nature, which especially are Self-exaltation and Self-sufficiency they rather
did cherish than extirpate. The Stoics seem to proceed farthest toward this
subduing of Nature, upon the Fundamental Principle of their Philosophy, That
Man's Happiness lay in things that were in his own Power, as in maintaining a
constant serenity and evenness of Soul in all the Occurrences of Life, and not
in the things of Fortune, Vid. Epict. Enchirid.
which were out of his Power; but it reached rather to those Passions that they
perceived did disquiet Nature, than to those other evils that are pleasing to
it.

But to this Conformity is also requisite the introducing of a New and Divine
Nature; Now it is not any natural Knowledge of God can effect this. The Apostle
tells us, 2 Pet. 1. 4. That Believers are made Partakers of the Divine Nature;
but it is through the knowledge of Christ calling them to Glory and Virtue, and
through the great and precious promises given us in him. Hereupon also we read,
That Christ is made to us sanctification, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 30. And whoever is in
Christ is a New Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Which is all one as to partake of the
Divine Nature. So that this conformity to God results from partaking his
Nature; this we cannot have without communion with him; this Communion we
cannot have but in Christ; and Christ is not made known but by
Scripture-Revelation. So that Nature cannot make a Christian; as Tertullian
speaks, Apol. cap. 18. Fiunt, non nascuntur Christiani; Christians are made so,
not born so. And therefore that so noted Saying of the same Author, in the
foregoing Chapter, that seems to contradict this; O Testimonium Animae
naturaliter Christianae! is to be rightly understood in the sense he speaks it.
For speaking against the vanity of the Heathen, in making many gods to
themselves, he appeals to a practice that even Nature did lead them to, which
was to lift up their eyes to Heaven, and to say, Deus dedit, God gave me this
or that; and Deus videt, God sees. Whereby the Soul did, as it were, naturally
own but one God, as the Christians do. Whereupon he breaks out into that noted
Speech, O the testimony of the Soul naturally Christian! But to make us
Christians, in the partaking the Nature of Christ, and conformity to God; this
is above the reach of Nature. Though the Heavens declare God's Glory, day and
night utter speech; and the Sun comes forth as a Bridegroom out of his Chamber
every morning, etc. and nothing is hid from the heat of it; yet it is the Law
of God that converts the Soul, enlightens the Eyes, etc. and so brings Man into
conformity to God, Psalm. 19.

8. Or if we speak of the Immortality of the Soul, the Resurrection of the
Body, the Judging of the World, the future Rewards of Men in the World to come,
these are all made evident to us by Scripture Light, which were either not at
all, or but darkly known by any Light of Nature. How dubiously, and sometimes
ridiculously did the sagest of the Heathen write of these things. As to the
Souls Immortality, their great Orator Cicero doubted of it. As for the
Resurrection of the Dead, Plin. lib. 7. cap. 55.
their great Naturalist Pliny explodes it. As to Rewards and Punishments in a
future State, their Poets had ridiculous Fictions about them. Therefore Life
and Immortality are said to be brought to Light by the Gospel, speaking more
distinctly of the future State, and World to come, than what is found either in
the Dictates of Nature, or the Writings of the Old Testament.

Lastly; Yea, as to the very Nature of God, his Holiness, Unity, Simplicity,
Actuality of Being, Omniscience, Immensity, and other Attributes; these are
more clearly revealed in the Word of God, than in any Evidence of Nature. Which
though in this it is not wholly dark, as in some other Truths before mentioned,
yet even here it is not so distinct and clear as the Scripture is; which as it
is a System of Natural Truth, beyond any other Writing in the World; so it
contains those Supernatural Truths that could not else be known to the Sons of
Men.

And this is all I shall speak to this Head; which though it does not so
immediately result from my present Subject, yet I thought needful to interpose;
only in my leaving it shall add this Inference.

Inference.
We may hence evince the absurdity of casting off Scripture Light, Scholars may
read a more distinct account of the deficiency of this Natural. Theology, and
its inferiority to Gospel-Revelation, in Dr. Owen's Polite Discourse on this
Subject at large; in his Book called (...), etc. lib. 1.
and betaking our selves to the Light of Nature. Is not the Light of the Sun
above that of the Moon? the one Rules the Day, and the other the Night. Those
that have no Scripture Light, live under the Dominion of Nature's Moonlight,
Acts 7. 27.
and are but in the Night, feeling after God, as Men in the dark. It is
Scripture Light, through the Spirit, that makes the Day.

It argues also our great Ingratitude, that this great Mercy of God in the
Scriptures should be no more valued by us. Do we pity the poor blind Heathen?
and shall we cast away that Light without which we shall be as blind as they?
Has God dealt with us in such Mercy as with Israel of old, to give us his
Statutes and Judgments, when he has not so dealt with every Nation, and shall
not we be thankful above other People? Has God magnified his Word above all
his Name; Psalm. 138. 2.
and shall we put it below the other parts of his Name? or has God magnified
his Name upon his Word, as a learned Rabbin reads the Text; and shall we
despise it, and not magnify that Name of God which is there so eminently
written?

The great Masters of Wisdom among the Gentiles, as Pythagoras, Plato,
Socrates, Trismegistus, etc. got more knowledge of Divine Things from some
Fragments of those Truths that were made known by Divine Revelation to the
People of Israel, than from all their Studies of Nature. And much of the
Gentile Theology, Mr. Theoph, Gale.
both as to the Deities they worshipped; and the manner of their Worship was,
though corruptly, derived thence, as has been made evident by a Learned Author
of late, that has traveled in those Studies. Now we that have with us the
whole Body of Scripture, and Revelations of Supernatural Truths therein, are
highly concerned to give thanks to the Almighty for so great a benefit.

After the Psalmist had spoken of the common Benefits of Nature, for which God
is to be praised of all men, Psalm. 147. Who covers the Heavens with Clouds,
prepares Rain for the Earth, makes Grass to grow upon the Mountains; gives
the Beast his Food, etc. verse. 8, 9. He then speaks of his special Goodness to
Jacob; And wherein? He shows his Word unto Jacob, verse. 19. etc. And then
concludes the Psalm. Praise ye the Lord. Jacob, that is the Church of Israel,
had the special favor of God's Word, and therefore above all People and Nations
were obliged to praise him.

CHAP. VII.
God's Being Demonstrated from the Creation of man. Several peculiar things
spoken of about his Creation. How the Workmanship and Operations of of the body
declares Gods Being. The soul considered in its Capacity, innate principles,
immortality, operations; whence we have a further evidence of God's Being.
I Shall now proceed to speak to a further evidence of God's Being from one
special part of his Creation, which is the Creation of man. And therefore shall
speak to it by it self. And we may observe some peculiar things related about
it above what is said of the other works of God.

1. When God in the course of his works came to give Man his Being, He said
Come let us make Man. Of his other Works he only said let them be, as, Let
there be Light, and Let there be a Firmament etc. But as if himself was more
Concerned, and that in the Trinity of his Being, about making Man then any
other of his works, he says let us make Man.

2. Other creatures he speaks to the Earth and Waters to bring them forth,
whether Vegetables; as Herbs, Grass, Fruits, Trees, etc. Or Animals in the
several Regions of Air, Earth, or Water where they do Inhabit, But God sets to
his own hand in the making of Man, He himself forms him of the dust of the
ground, and then himself breathed into him the breath of life, Genesis 2. 7.

3. God says also of Man, Let us make Man, after our own Image, and our own
likeness. Genesis 1. 26. Which he said not of his other works, either the Light or
Firmament, or Sun, Moon, or Stars, which are all Glorious Creatures; Yet he
said of none of these, Let us make them after our own likeness. It may be
observed also that the Word Created is three times repeated, and that in one
Verse, with respect to Man's Creation. So God Created Man in his own Image, in
the Image of God Created he him, Male and Female Created he them. Genesis 1. 27.
Which some concieve refers to the plural term used about the making of Man. Let
us make Man. God Created him, that is God the Father; God Created him, that is
God the Son; God Created him that is God the Holy Ghost. And which is
remarkable, when God is called in Scripture the Maker or Creator of Man it is
still expressed Plurally, as 35 Job 10. and 149 Psalm. 2. 12 Eccles. 1. 54 Isa.
5. Where God is styled the Creatours, and Makers of Man in the Hebrew Text. Yet
the Creation of him was but one; and the God that Created him one also.

4. Man had this Preeminence also that he was Created last. God proceeding from
the more imperfect to the more perfect Works. Making Man last, shows he is the
most perfect part of his Creation. And God showed this respect to him also
herein, that he would not make him, till he had Built and richly furnished the
World, to be a fit habitation for him. And it is Evident that God had Man in
his eye when he was erecting, framing, and furnishing of it, for it is exactly
fitted to the nature, necessity, and delight of Man: as he had Christ in his
eye when he made Man. And indeed when God had finished the rest of his Creation,
he did Epitomize it all in Man; for in his constitution, we have Mortal, and
Immortal, Visible and Invisible, Corporeal and Incorporeal, Material and
Immaterial, the Superior and Inferior World joined together to the making of
one person. So that man is utriusque mundi nexus, as Scaliger speaks. And there
is not such a creature as Man upon this account in the whole Creation.
Whereupon David that knew well his curious frame, speaks largely of the
workmanship of God herein, Psalm. 139. v. 13. 14, 15. 16. verses. Thou have
possessed my Reins, thou have covered me in my Mothers Womb. I will praise thee
for I am fearfully and wonderfully made, Marvelous are thy Works, and that my
Soul knows right well. My Substance was not hid from thee when I was made in
secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the Earth. So that God
having impressed so much of his own Likeness, and bestowed such peculiar
Workmanship upon Man, he has laid a foundation for strong Arguments to evince
his Being to us therefrom.

If we look upon his body; How curiously and rationally are the several Organs,
Vessels, and Members thereof fitted to their several Functions in nature, and
each of them contributing in their several offices to one general End, which is
the life of Man. How do the Veins and Arteries meet about the heart; Nature
sending succor from all parts to it, as being the chief Seat of life. And
again the heart does by them convey Blood and Spirits to the whole Body, it
being the chief Fountain of life. And to give but one instance more in that
which seems to be the most contemptible part of the Body, which is the humors
of it. In these we may take notice of a Divine Wisdom. Choler that is hot, and
of a fiery quality is useful to quicken the body, and to stir up Nature to
'its proper Functions, and by 'its heat to prevent the coagulation and
corruption of the blood. And the Melancholic humor being thick and gross is
useful to retain the natural and Vital Spirits that they may not be too
Volatile and evaporate.

And the Phlegmatic humor, which is more watery, cool, and moist, is of use
to cool and attenuate the blood, and so make it fitter for Motion. Now if the
Wisdom of the Creator appears in these meanest things, which are as it were the
Excrements of Nature, how much more in the noble parts of the Body: But I must
not, nay I cannot speak of these things as an Anatomist or Physician. But we
may behold this frame, and admiring say, Oh how exquisitly are the Eyes turned,
the Ears, and Nostrils bored, the Fingers branched, the Joints coupled, the
Nerves extended, the Veins diffused, the Bones firmed and fastened. I remember
what I have long since read, in the Poet, concerning the several Parts of Man's
body.

Ossibus ex denis, bis Centenisque Novenis
Constat Homo, decies bis dentibus et duo denis,
Ex trecentenis, decies sex, quinqueque venis, etc.
And so he proceeds. And in the least part of man something may be seen of
God. In so much that Galen though before a mere Naturalist, and so an Atheist,
upon the observing the curious Structure of Man's Body, could not forbear the
giving an Hymn of Praise to the wise Creator and framer of it. And it is so
every way perfect that if a Man had an hundred years given him, as it is said
of one, to find out some defect in it he would not be able to do it. As among
the Heathens they had a God called Momus who made it his work to Carp at the
works of the other Gods. But let a Man study to find out something to Carp at
in this exquisite frame, he shall be able rationally to find nothing. Many
indeed will pretend there are Errata's in the Works of Providence which they
could correct, but it is because they understand them not. But what Errata's
can they find in the Works of Creation, and particularly this of the body of
Man? This is one of the (...) that my Text mentions, of the things that God
made wherein we may behld his Eternal power and Godhead. And if a Man would
play the part of Zoilus, to repreprehend this Poem, as he did Homers, he would
but show himself Ignorant and Impious at once. So that Man need not go far to
fetch an Argument for the Being of God, he carries an Evident one continually
about him in his own body; Especially if man did but know himself in this his
meaner part. Did he but know the curious frame of the eye, and the several
Tunicles and Humors belonging to it, whereby it is fitted for seeing: And did
he then but know how the eye does see; How the rays that come from one point
in the Object do meet in one point in the bottom of the Eye. Did he also know
the various Workmanship of the Ear, and understand how an Articulate voice
should pass through the fluid medium of the Air, and enter the Ear Articulated
as it comes from the mouth of the speaker.

To give but one Instance more, in that work of Nature which is proper to Man,
and that is, Speech. It is wonderful to consider how a little breath should be
modulated into so many distinct syllabical sounds, by the nimble touches of the
Tongue in the several parts of the Mouth, and by other instruments of Speech.
But these common works of Nature, we wonder not at; partly because they are
common, and partly because so little understood: yet if duly considered, they
carry in them a clear evidence of the Being of God.

But to pass to the more sublime part of Man, which is his Soul, which does so
much the more clearly demonstrate God's Being to us, by how much he has stamped
more of his own likeness upon it. And,

1. We may argue from the Capacity of the Soul, which manifestly extends beyond
the things of this World: And is capable of enjoying a greater good then any of
this Creation, in regard that no finite good does satisfy it. Now if it be
capable of a greater good, surely there is such a good, for there is no
Capacity in Nature in vain: As there is no Vacuity in Nature; Quaelibet
potentia appetit objectum sibi Conveniens. Aquin. 3. p. q. 78. Art. 1.
Appetitus and. appetitum sunt ut locum and locatum. Fotherb. Atheom. p. 196.
every place is filled with something. So if there was any natural Capacity in
the creatures, and no object to Answer to it, there would be a kind of vacuity
in the Creation: Those infinite and boundless desires of the Soul, show that
there is an infinite object to satisfy them. And therefore of all the
faculties of the Soul, that which the Philosophers call (...), or the Appetite
of the Soul, does best represent infinity, because it is infinite in its
Inclinations, though not in its Nature. And as it best does represent Infinity,
so it does demonstrate also that somewhere it is to be found. Now it is Evident
it is not found in the Creature, and therefore it is in God.

And as it had been (to speak with reverence) some deficiency in Gods Creation,
not to have made a Creature capable of knowing and enjoying the Creator: So
there being a Creature in the Universe of such a Capacity, it shows that there
is such an Object for which this Capacity is given.

2. It is evident that the Soul has within it divine inclinations, or, an Idea
of Divinity, as one speaks, and aspiring to higher things then those that are
Earthly and sensual, even toward Divinity, and therefore there is a Divinity,
As the Philosopher said, Hoc habet anima argumentum divinitatis quod eam divina
delectent. The Soul has this Argument in its self, that it is of a Divine
Nature, because Divine things are delightful to it: So it shows there are
Divine Beings, (or rather a Divine Being) because the Soul has inclinations
toward a Divinity: And as Aristotle once said, as I have somewhere read of
him, Though it be but little we know of Superior Beings, yet that little does
more delight us, then all that we know of things here below. I know that men
given up to a sensual life, little concern themselves about higher things then
of this lower World; But we are not to take the measure of the Soul from such
that so debase it, but rather from them in whom it has had its best
improvements. And though it is a true saying, Semen naturae non assurgit in
fructum gratiae; The Seed of Nature cannot rise up into the Fruit of Grace; yet
in some it has risen up to a greater height then in others, in whom we may
take the best measures of it: As Christ our Savior said to the man mentioned
in the Gospel, Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God: Of those that are out
of the Kingdom of God, yet some come nearer to it then others, that have made
better improvements of natural helps, and in whom we may take the best measure
of the principles of Nature.

3. Whence is it that the Soul brings an Impression of a Deity upon it into the
World? Even those people that have not had the benefit of any Institution in
Knowledge, yet have all acknowledged a Deity, which shows they had this from
Nature, and not from Education? So that in this sense, that saying of Theodoret
is true, Theodoret lib. de Angelis, Tom. 2. p. 498.
Divinity is first taught men by Nature, and then it is rectified and confirmed
to men by Scripture. And this Man's Nature has peculiar to it, that this
Impression is not found in any Creature of this lower World, but here alone;
because Man was made for an higher end then the Brutes. And if there was no
God, this Impression would be in vain, which yet of all others is most
generally engraven; Si enim anima divina, aut a Deo data est, sinc dubio
datorem suum novit. Tertul. Testimon. animae. p. 88.
Yea, Man would be herein more miserable then the Brutes, to have the fear of a
Deity upon his Soul, when there is no such object of his fear.

The greatest Travelers have not been able to out-travel this notion of a
Deity in the remotest Countries whither they have come: As is evident in that
account given by the greatest Travelers, as Drake, Candish, Hackluit, etc. One
of them tells us that the first thing he found amongst the Salvage people in
No^^a Albion, when he arrived there, was that he found them busied about
Offering a Sacrifice; and when he had bestowed some gifts of his liberality
upon them, they would have Sacrificed to him and his Company as Gods. And to
this I may add what I find in Scripture, Pass over the Isles of Chittim and
see, and send to Kedar and consider, has a Nation changed their Gods that were
no Gods? Jer. 2. 10. And the Prophet Micah to the same purpose, chap. 4. v. 5.
All people will walk every one in the Name of his God. All people, not only the
more civil, which some think, are meant by the Isles of Chittim, but the more
barbarous and undisciplined, as the Kedarens: They will none of them change
their Gods, but will walk in their Name. So that though the Heathen did differ
about the Number, Order, Nature, and Power of their Gods, yet all had some
Deity they worshipped; And the wiser of them did acknowledge one supreme Deity;
Multi de diis prava sentiunt, id enim vicioso more effici solet, omnes tamen
esse vim and naturam divinam arbitrantur. Cic. l. 1. Tusc.
the Maker of the World, and the other, but Deos populares, popular Gods.

And this acknowledgment of a Deity is not sprung up in Later Times, but has
been from the beginning; neither is it confined only to some one Nation, but is
in every Nation: So that what we can plead so Ancient prescription for, and the
suffrage of all mankind, is certainly a great Truth, and a Truth that is sown
in Nature it self. Now what an undeniable Evidence is this of the Being of God,
when it is so legibly written in every Man's Heart.

Not that the Notice hereof is so clear and operative, as it was in Man's state
of Innocence; yet something still remains of the old Inscription, which is
renewed and quickened by the Spirit, through the Written Word, where it does
inhabit. As an Ancient writing in Marble that still remains, though much
covered and obscured with dust; yet as the dust is rubbed off, so the Writing
appears Legible again: It Is true some Men seem to have no Conscience and sense
of a Deity; yet this is no Argument but that Conscience is Universal to Men:
Even as the Sottishness or Distraction of some Men's Reason, is no Argument
against Reasons being an Universal Principle in Men.

4. We may argue from the Souls Immortality: To what purpose should it Survive
the Body, if there be no God? For if it survive, as I shall afterward show, it
must Survive to some end; and this end cannot be with respect to any Creature,
and therefore it must be with respect to God. It does not Survive with respect
to the enjoyment of the sensual things of this World, for in its separate state
it has no need of them; neither with respect to any Homage and Service to be
performed to the Angels, for it owes no such thing to them; and therefore it
must be with respect to some other end: And he that denies the Being of God,
cannot imagine to what end the Soul should continue for ever.

But because there is a God, who is an Eternal Being, therefore are there
Creatures made by him that are of an Eternal duration, that in them he might
have glory for ever.

Now that the Soul is Immortal, appears, Because in the Creation of the World
there is distinction made in the Creatures; Those that were to have Corruptible
Natures, were formed out of Corruptible Matter; but those that were to abide
for ever, were by Immediate Creation, as Angels, as also the Souls of Men; of
which it is said, God breathed into Man the breath of Life, and he became a
living Soul. Which the Prophet Malachy refers to, in chap. 2. 15. And did he
not make One, yet had he the Residue of the Spirit: which shows the Divine
Original of the Soul, proceeding immediately from the Divine Spirit.

Was the Soul of Man Mortal and Corruptible, God could and would have educed it
out of those Sensitive Spirits that were Concreated with the Chaos, as he did
the Souls of Beasts, Fishes, and the Fowls of the Air; but because he did
immediately breathe it into Man, it shows that it is of a different Nature from
them, and does not, as they do, return to Corruption.

But to Demonstrate this from Reason, as well as from Scripture, which it may
be supposed an Atheist will deny.

1. It is Irrational to conceive, that there should never be a respect given to
Virtue more than Vice; to Righteousness than Unrighteousness: Seeing it is
written in every Man's Nature, that the one is better then the other. Now in
this Life we see it not; there is one event to the Righteous and the Wicked.
And even in the Deaths of Men it is not visible neither, For how dies the wise
Man? as the Fool, as Solomon speaks; And therefore it must be after Death; was
the Soul Mortal, wickedness would escape the hands of Justice, and Holiness
would never meet with the rewards of Grace: Seeing God made the World, he also
necessarily must Govern it, if he Govern it, it is in Wisdom and Righteousness.
If so, there must be different rewards to the Evil, and the Good: And therefore
the Souls of Men necessarily must survive to receive those rewards.

2. God has made but two sorts of Intelligent Creatures in the Universe,
Angels and Men: And these are more immediately made for the Glory of their
Creator, who as he is the King Eternal, and Immortal, so the Glory that is
suitable to him, must be Eternal and Immortal; which he cannot have but from
Immortal Creatures that live for ever; whether it be the Glory of Mercy or of
Justice. And as he has the Glory of both in the Angels, some always beholding
the Face of God, and the others that fell, cast down to Hell, and delivered
into chains of Darkness, 2 Pet. 2. 4. So will he have the same of Men, the one,
in those that are saved; and in them that perish, the other: And this could not
be, did not the Souls of Men abide for ever.

3. Whence is it that the Souls of Men have respect to a future state, which no
other Creatures have: Some have respect to it with fear, and terror; some with
hope, and joyfulness.

And however some Men that are wholly immerst in a Life of Sensuality, concern
themselves little about it, yet when they come to leave this World, they cannot
but have some thoughts concerning it; and then, though it may be too late, will
be making some provision for it.

And if we look to the Heathen Nations, that had only the Light of Nature to
see by, we shall find they had all some rude Notions of a future State: Hence
were their Notions of Olympus, Elysium, or a state of Happiness; of their
Pluto, Proserpina, Rhadamanthus, Cerberus, Styx, and their Dirae, or Canes
Stygiae; which showed the Notions they had in their Souls of a State of Misery
after Death. And the Poets fictions of Tantalus, Sisiphus, Ixion, and others,
that were suffering Torments of several kinds in Hell; which shows they had
some apprehensions of the Souls survival after it leaves the Body. And as
Tertullian argues against the Heathen, Imo cur in totum times mortem, si nihil
est tibi timendum post mortem, nec experiendum post mortem? etc. Tertul. Test.
animae, p. 88.
If there was no survival of the Soul, what need Men to fear Death; You may say
because it cuts Men off from the Commodities and Comforts of Life: But it
delivers Men from all the Sorrows and Troubles of Life, which usually exceed
the other. And therefore, for it self, it ought not to be feared: And when Men
fear it, it is an Argument of some state of Misery after it.

Object. But these were but some confused Notions, and uncertain Conjectures,
and so prove nothing?

Answ. Since the Fall of Man all those innate Notions of Knowledge, and
Principles of Righteousness, that were Concreated with the Soul are disordered,
and darkened; and amongst the rest, that Knowledge the Soul had of it self, and
its own Immortality. But those that yet remain, though Confused and Imperfect,
do show the prints and footsteps of what it once more perfectly was possessed
of. As the Ruins of some Ancient stately Edifice, do darkly show that there
has been formerly such a stately structure in Being.

When mere Nature did lead the Heathen to such (though very rude) Conceptions
of the future State of the Soul, it has a strong Argument in it for such a
State. And those Natural Principles and Characters in the Soul, that the Gospel
does Confirm and clear up to us, to be sure were Originally placed there by God
himself: As its of the Immortality is one, which we find the Gospel does give
abundant Light and Testimony to. And so it may be an Argument to us that have
the Gospel, though not to the Heathen that had it not.

Object. But these apprehensions that the Heathen had of the future State of
the Soul, were at first devised for Political ends, to keep people the better
under Government.

Answ. 1. Those Heathen that lived under no Government, had such apprehensions.
And 2. Such Political devices would have had but little Influence to such an
end, was there not a Natural (though but a confused) Notion of such a state
radically in the Hearts of Men: For no Man came from the dead so as to tell the
World of the state of separate Souls, and therefore for Men to have generally
some respect to a future state, it shows there is a Natural and Connate notice
thereof in the Souls of Men.

Neither is it an Argument to be slighted, whereby some have proved the Souls
Immortality from Men's Natural desire to Immortalize their Name; which shows the
Soul does look beyond its present state, which the Soul of a Brute does not: As
appears by Absolon's Pillar, set up by him to preserve his Name. And that
Fellow that is said to burn Diana's Temple, that he might perpetuate his Name.
And how did the Poets please themselves, that by their Poems they should have
their Names preserved after their death. Multaque pars mei vitabit Libitinam,
said Horace; A great part of me shall escape death, he means his Name shall not
die. As he says in the conclusion of his Odes, as I remember, Exegi monumentum
aere perennius, etc. He had raised, he says, a Monument, to his Name, more
lasting than Brass, whereby he should live in the World after death. And so
Ovid, with respect to one of his chief Poems adds this Conclusion.

Jamque opus exegi quod nec Jovis ira nec ignes,
Nec ferrum, nec possit edax abolere vetustas.
Not time, Joves wrath, not Sword, or fire,
Can ever make this work expire.
We see by this, the Natural desire of the Soul to Immortality. And because
these Heathen were without the Light of the Word to direct them to the true
Immortality of Heaven, therefore they sought it, by providing an Immortality to
their Names here on Earth. And Tertullian much Insists upon this Argument, lib.
de Test. animae, and Argues thus, Vnde anima hodie affectaret aliquid quod
velit post mortem, and tantopere praepararet quo sit usura post obitum si nihil
de postero sciret, etc. Why should the Soul be so solicitous to prepare for the
enjoyment of something after death, if it did not survive the grave. And he
instanceth in the Curtii and Reguli, who contemned their lives that they might
have a Name after death.

5. The Soul of Man is capable of framing a Conception of God, and that is an
Argument that God is: To what purpose should such a Capacity be in the Soul, if
there was no such Object? To what purpose was the faculty of seeing, if there
was no visible Objects in Nature? Had the Soul no higher end then to animate an
Earthly Body, and to guide Men about the affairs of this lower World, it needed
not to have a Capacity beyond them.

And though we know little of the Divine Being, and our highest Conceptions,
are but some low Adumbrations of it, yet the Soul is not altogether destitute
of them, though in a fallen state, And that may show that these Conceptions were
far higher in it before its fall.

I shall illustrate this Argument by Instances in several of the Divine
Attributes, that are Essential to the Being of God: Of all which the Mind is
Capable of framing a Conception, though not to comprehend them.

1. Is God's eternity; it is essential to his Being to be eternal: And the Mind
is capable of running back in its thoughts beyond the Beginning of time, which
is eternity, a part ante, and forward beyond the end of time, yea to an
endless duration; which is eternity a part post. It is able to lanch it self
out into that wide Ocean.

For whence is it that we have in Divinity a definition given us of eternity;
Interminabilis, Boethius.
perfecta, and tota simul vitae possessio; An endless, entire, and perfect
possession of life all at once; but that the Mind can frame some conception
about it?

2. Is Immensity, or Omnipresence. The Mind can enlarge it self to the utmost
Sphaere of the World's Circumference; yea it can imagine a Sphaere beyond that
Sphaere, and a space comprehended in no Sphaere; as some of the Philosophers
had Notions of an Infinite space before the World's Creation. It can also
conceive of a Being whose presence may be extensive to this vast space; and may
extend beyond the utmost Sphaere of the Universe, whom the Heaven of Heavens
cannot contain; yea it can conceive of God according to the Philosophers
description of him. He is a Being whose Center is every where, and his
Circumferance no where. Though I must say, this conception is according to the
Mind's finiteness, not God's Infiniteness.

3. Is Universality of perfection and Being. Though particulars and Individuals
are the only object of Sense, for Vniversalia non incurrunt in Sensum;
Vniversals do not run into the Sense; yet the Mind is able to frame an abstract
Notion of Universality: As of Light, Life, Beauty, Strength, Wisdom, etc. as
they are in themselves without respect to any Individual Subject wherein they
may exist. It can surveigh this whole Creation, and all the perfections of it,
and then can conceive of a Being that may have all these perfections eminently
in it self.

The Philosophers of old in their search of Nature did raise up their Minds
from Individuals to apprehend a Species containing all the Individuals; and
then by a more abstract thought, to apprehend a Genus that contained all the
Species. And from thence they raised their Minds to a Conception of Ens, or
Being it self, which is Genus Generalissimum. Now God is an Universal
Perfection, and Universal Being; and the Mind though in a low degree, can frame
a conception of his Universality. As Seneca a Moral Heathen, said of God, Totum
est quod vides, and totum est quod non vides; He is all that thou see, and
all which thou do not see; such an Universal Notion did his Mind frame of God.

4. Is Simplicity. Though our eyes never saw such a thing in any Creature,
neither can we find it absolutely in any Creature either in Heaven or Earth,
yet the Mind can frame a Conception of it; which is one of the glorious
Attributes of God, that he is without any Composition, or any diversity in his
Being, in the most abstract and refined Notion of it. As the Schoolmen have
given us a description of this attribute, which shows the Mind can conceive
something of it. 1. That God is without Parts, either Similar, or Integral, as
the Body of Man has. 2. That he is without matter and form, as we see in the
Constitution of Man, and other Creatures. 3. He is without general and special
Nature; as Man has a general Nature, as he is a living Creature; and special,
as he is a Man. 4. Without quality; as distinct from Essence; or Accidents, as
distinct from Substance: as may be found in all Creatures, the very Angels not
excepted. 5. Without Act and Power, as distinct things: That is, God cannot be
possibly any thing that he is not, or cease to be what he is. 6. Without any
distinction of Essence, and Existence, which some call Being, and
Individuation: As we can distinguish betwixt the common Nature of Man, which is
Humanity; and the existence of this Nature in Peter, or John, or any Individual
Person: So that there is no shadow of any composition, distinction, or as some
call it, Alterity in his Being: But he is all perfection of Being, not only
comprehensively, but in the greatest Purity, Unity, and Actuality: And so I
might proceed to speak of other properties of his Being, but these I only
mention to show the Capacity that is in the Mind of Man, to frame a Physical,
or rather a Metaphysical, conception of a Deity, and the several properties
Essential to it; and from hence to draw a rational proof of God's Being.

6. Lastly, We may Argue from those innate Notions of Good and Evil, that are
naturally in the Soul of Man; whereby that which is morally Good is approved,
and the contrary is disapproved: As we see it among the Indians, and other
Heathens, who have not only Natural Reason to discern, but have a moral
Judgment to approve the good, and to disprove the evil. And amongst many of
them Injustice, Fraud, Violence, Oppression, are severely punished, and the
contrary rewarded and commended. As the Apostle speaks of the Gentiles, that
though they were without the Law, yet they did by Nature the things contained
in the Law. Now whence is this? why should Justice be rather approved of then
Injustice, Honesty then Dishonesty? but that the Soul did Originally spring
from some Fountain of goodness, that did derive some resemblance, and imprint
some Characters of his own Nature upon it. The Relics of which the Schoolmen
call Synteresis, which are yet found in Man; And by Philosophers are called
(...), and (...); Common Principles, and Anticipations; preceding all acquired
Habits or Principles, by Education, Experience, or Custom.

How is it possible to believe a distinction of Good and Evil, and a Conscience
about them should be naturally inherent in every Man, as we find it is, unless
some Superior Power had fixed such Principles in us by our first constitution;
and left an indelible Testimony in our own Souls about them: So that no Man
can, if he would, in his sober Mind think Evil to be better then Good, and in
his serious thoughts prefer it before it: wherein we have Nature to be our
Mistress and Teacher. And who was the Teacher of Nature? Tertullian will Answer
for me, Magistra natura, anima discipula: Quicquid aut illa edocuit, aut ista
perdidiscit a Deo traditum est, Magistro scilicet ipsius Magistrae: Nature is
the Mistress, the Soul the Disciple; what ever the one has Taught, and the
other has Learned is derived from God, who is the Master of the Mistress her
self, Test. animae adu: Gentes. And from hence it was that the Barbarous people
mentioned, Act. 28. when they saw the Viper fasten upon St. Paul's hand, said,
This Man is a Murderer, whom, though he has escaped the Sea, yet Vengeance
suffers not to live. Nature it self taught them that Murder was not only in it
self an Evil, but that Vengeance would pursue the Murderer.

And though since sin entered the Nature of Man, fleshly lusts do precipitate
Men to acts of moral unrighteousness, yet it is because they offer Violence to
that Light and Law of Nature that is planted in their Hearts.

And hence it is that we find many of the Heathen loved Justice for its own
sake, without any respect to profit or praise of Men; as seeing a native
Pulchritude, and goodness in it, conform to the inward Rule and Principle that
was within themselves: Such as Socrates, Aristides, Fabritius, Licurgus, Solon,
and the like. It was once argued by an Heathen then Philosopher, If there be a
God, whence is it that we see Evil in the World; if there be no God, whence is
it that Good is in the World: He thought the good found therein might be an
Argument for the Being of God; though he doubted it, for want of knowledge how
Evil did first arise. But to us that know that Evil came not from God, but from
some other cause, the Argument is strong, There is a Natural Goodness,
therefore there is a God.

CHAP. VIII.
God's perfect knowledge of Man, Evidenced from his making Man. The several
duties Man owes to God as his Creator. Man's destruction whence it arises,
that the Creator destroys his own Creature.
THus I have endeavored to demonstrate the Being of God to Man, from the
Creation of Man, which methinks should be the most cogent Argument upon him,
being taken from himself. Argumentum ad hominem ab homine. And because I would
still make Natural Theology serve the Interest of true Religion, as the
Handmaid does her Mistress; I shall therefore draw several practical
Inferences that naturally arise from the Consideration of God as the Creator of
Man.

Infer. I. First, He that made Man must needs know him. He that made a Watch,
or Clock, knows every pin in it, and the motion of every wheel. So does God
know the Soul in all the faculties of it, knows what it can do, what it can not
do; What are the apprehensions, volitions, and inclinations of it; What are the
regular, and what are the oblique motions of it; What principles are in the
Mind, how resented by the Will, how they are entertained in the Affections: He
knows what it does, what it would do, what it will not do. So that as it is
said of Christ, he needed not that any should testify of Man, for he knew what
was in Man, Joh. 2. 25.

The Prophet David in the 139. Psalm, speaks of God's exact knowledge of him;
First, in General, O God thou have searched and known me, v. 1. And then
particularly, Thou understandest my thoughts afar off, v. 2. Thou compassest my
path, and art acquainted with all my ways, v. 3. There is not a word in my
mouth, but thou know it altogether, v. 4. As if he should say, Thou know
what I think, what I speak, what I do: And he gives a twofold reason of this
knowledge God had of him: One was, because he was every where present with him,
v. 7. 8, 9, 10. And the other, because he made him and formed him; Thou have
possessed my reins, thou have covered me in my Mothers womb, v. 13. My
substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret, v. 15. In thy Book
were all my members written, v. 16. God laid the draught of him, and made him,
and therefore must needs have a perfect knowledge of him.

And from this knowledge of God a Christian may form, to himself, matter both
of Caution and Consolation.

1. Caution, Ought we not then take heed to our selves, when God has such
perfect knowledge of us? Our actions are all known to him, y ea our words, yea
our thoughts: The very frame and constitution of our most inward man is known
to him: What neither Men or Angels know of us, or can know, that God knows. The
Anatomist that dissects the Body, and discerns all its secret Veins and
Arteries, and the smallest Fibrae's of Nature does not so exactly know it, as
God does know it that made it, and he knows also that Spirit that dwells in it,
it being the work of his own hand: Does the Spirit in Man know the things of
Man? yet God knows them better then the Spirit of Man; yea, he knows the Spirit
it self, and that better then it knows it self.

Let then Christians walk continually under an awful sense of this: And take
heed of all sin, because it is all known, especially that of Hypocrisy; an
Hypocrite pleases himself that he is not known to Men: But let him consider
that he is known to his own Conscience, and that condemns him; And he is known
better to God then to his own Conscience, and therefore God will condemn much
more, as knowing all things, 1 John 3. 20. And suppose a Man should be unknown
to himself, as we know the Heart of Man is deceitful not only to the deceiving
of others, but even of it self, yet nothing in the Heart is hid to God; So that
when the question is put, The heart is deceitful above all things, who can know
it? It is answered, I the Lord search the heart, etc. Jer. 17. 9, 10.

It should engage every Christian to search and know his own Heart, because it
is searched and known of God: That he that knows the Heart may find
uprightness, and truth in the inward parts, which he is said to Love.

II. Consolation, A true Christian may comfort himself in God's knowledge of
him.

1. That God knows the weakness of our Nature, carries comfort in it to his
people. As 103. Psalm 14. He knows our frame, he remembers that we are dust:
He knows he made us at first out of the dust, and he remembers it still, and as
he makes it to himself an Argument of pity, as the Psalmist speaks in the 13.
verse, so we may thence also frame an Argument to our own comfort in the daily
feeling we have of it.

2. That he also knows the Heart, is no small comfort to the upright in Heart.
And that 1. In respect of the obloquies, censures, and misjudgings of Men. 2.
In respect of the failings and defects that attend our Services: God can look
through them all, to that integrity that is in the Heart which is known to him:
Hezekiah was guilty of many failings, but he had this to comfort him, that his
Heart was upright with God, and that God knew this, for he prays God to
remember it, 38. Isa. 3. 3. In respect of Inability to perform what good we
desire: God does not only know what we act, but that desire of the Heart out of
which we act, and where the Desire is beyond the Act, as it is in all true
Saints, God knows that desire to accept it, though the Act falls short of it:
David was under such a deep sense of God's goodness to him, that he knew not
how sufficiently to express his thankfulness, but he comforts himself in this,
that God knew him, 2 Samuel 7. And what can David say more unto thee for thou
know thy servant.

Infer. II. If God be the Creator of Man, it follows that Man is not his own,
God has a supreme right to him as his Maker: He has made us, and his we are,
(...) for (...)
as those words may be read, Psalm. 100. 3. He has made us, and not we our
selves. And this Original Right of God cannot be alienated, either by any
extrinsick Power, or by any Compact made by our selves: Though Men sell
themselves to work wickedness as Ahab did, yet they cannot sell away God's
right to them as their Creator. As he that is the true proprietor will claim
his goods where he sinds them, though sold over and over by such as had no
right.

And therefore for Men to be their own, and live to themselves, has a manifold
Evil wrapped up in it.

1. It is Ingratitude; If it be Ingratitude not to improve, and devote the
additional Comforts of our Being to God, much more not to devote our Being it
self. Being it self is the greatest favor we receive from him, and therefore
it is the greatest unthankfulness, not to give him the Praise of it, by living
to him. If any of us should raise a Man into some good condition in the World,
and then should not be acknowledged by him that is thus raised, we should
justly brand him with Ingratitude: Much more Ingratitude is it not to
acknowledge God that has raised us out of Non-being into Being. When Paul
desired a favor of Philemon, with respect to Onesimus, he presses it by this
Argument that he could tell him, that he owed himself unto him, Philem. 19. It
would have been great ingratitude had Philemon denied his request, though he
did not owe himself to the Apostle in that Supreme and absolute Right as we owe
our selves to God. And he that made us reasonable Creatures could have made us
Brutes; ought we not then to be thankful to our Creator for making us such, and
no Man is truly thankful that is his own, and reserveth himself from him. Man's
service of God may be accounted reasonable, (...) cultus rationalis. Beza.
as making him a reasonable Creature, and not a Brute, Romans 12. 1.

2. It is Injustice; He that is his own, and lives to himself, detaineth from
God that which is His, and that is Injustice.

And as the Heathen Poet speaks, (...), etc. all Virtue is comprehended in
Justice, so injustice runs through the Nature of all sin, and all sin is
radically comprehended in this, In Man's being his own. The unprofitable servant
in the Parable was Condemned for not improving his Masters Talent to his use;
and the unjust Steward was cast out of his Office for imbezeling his Masters
goods: And there was injustice found in them both: For Man not to improve the
Talent of his Being to the use of his Creator is unjust, much more to imbezel
and waste it upon the service of his Lusts. For what are all the faculties of
our Souls and Bodies, but our Masters Goods, and to be devoted to his use.

Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? (...).
says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. 9. He mentions afterward several sorts of
sinner,s but in this they all agree, they are all unrighteous.

3. It is folly; should a Man live to himself, when he cannot make himself
happy? Happiness is that which all desire; why should then Man make himself his
End, when he cannot be his own happiness? was Man self sufficient he need not
go out of himself, but be his own Principle, Rule, and End, But seeing he is
not sufficient to his own happiness, it is folly for him to live to himself. If
Man in his fullest state of perfection was not his own happiness, how much less
can he be now in his Indigent empty state? When Man changes his ultimate end
from himself to God, he now returns to the true Wisdom, and is delivered from
that folly that sin had possessed him with. For Men imagine they can make
themselves happy, else they would not ultimately live to themselves.

Two things are requisite to Man's happiness in his present state. One is, That
he be delivered from those hurtful Evils that are injurious, or destructive to
it. And the other is, That he possess that positive good that is suitable, and
every way satisfactory to his Nature, as he is a rational Creature; But neither
of these can man effect for himself. For the former, Can he deliver himself
from sin, which is the worst of all Evils, and that Wrath, Curse, and Death,
which he lies obnoxious to upon the account of it? We see he cannot deliver
himself from Temporal Evils, which seems more in his power to do, much less
from those Eternal Evils which are inflicted by God's more immediate hand.

As to the latter, Can he of himself raise up his Soul to the wellhead of all
true felicity, and fetch thence those Living Waters, that shall quench the
thirst of his Soul, and satisfy all his desires? Can he, having extricated
himself from those chains of sin that held him in bondage, enfranchise himself
into a State and Spirit of true liberty? Can he enlighten his own mind, and
quicken himself into the life of holiness, when he is dead in sin? Alas, how
little is it Man can do for himself in any thing, much less in these great
things wherein his true happiness consists? Therefore is it not folly for Man
to be his own, and live to himself?

4. Hereby Man perverts the End of his Being. For God made Man for himself: He
is both the Efficient, and End of his Being. And making Man for himself, he
fitted him with Faculties to serve his End: As every Rational Agent does
propose to himself an End in what he does, and does form means suitable to
that End: Now if Man lives to himself, he serves not the End of his Creation;
And what is a thing good for, if it does not serve its End?

Would it not be a Monstrous thing in Nature, if the Sun should not shine forth
its light upon the World, which is the end God made it for? Or if the Earth
should imprison within it self its seminal virtue, and not send it forth in
those several fruits that it had a Commission to do for the use of Man and
Beast? But we see these inferior parts of God's Creation do serve their End,
and is it not sad that the supremer part of it, which is Man, should not serve
his? May not he look upon the whole Creation, and then blush at himself? And
the very Horse, Man rides upon, reproves the rider whiles he is serving of him.

This is the Harmony of the Creation, when every part of it keeps its place,
and serves its End; It is only Man's sin that has disturbed this harmony, by
making Man live to himself, and so not to serve his End.

5. Man's Being is profaned; As the devoting it to God does Sanctify it, so
not to do it leaves it Common; Those Beasts, those Fruits under the Law that
were given to God were Sanctified, and the rest were Common: Man does Sanctify
his Being when he cease from himself, and offers up himself to God: It is the
Apostles exhortation, 12. Romans 1. Present your Bodies, that is by a Synecdoche,
your selves as a living Sacrifice: And then it follows, holy. When Man makes
himself a Sacrifice to God, then is his Being Consecrated: As Lactantius tells
the Heathen, Lib. 5. p. 421.
that the Christian Sacrifice was bona men's, purum pectus, innocens vita; A
good Mind, pure Heart, innocent Life.

And as we are to offer our selves to God as a Sacrifice, so to dedicate our
selves to him as his Temple; That both Soul and Body may be his habitation: And
we know, under the Law, after the Temple was built, and dedicated, it was no
longer a Common structure. The Temple of God is Holy, In nostra dedicandus est
mente, in nostro consecrandus est pe^^ore. Cypr. de Idol. vanitat. p. 289.
says the Apostle, and then adds, which Temple ye are, 1 Cor. 3. 17. For
seeing that he dwells not in Temples made with hands, being the Maker of the
World, and all things therein, as we read Acts 17. 24. he now dwells in living
Temples made without hands, which are his people that separate themselves unto
him.

And least there should be wanting a Priesthood, with respect to the Sacrifice
and Temple; The same that are the Sacrifice and Temple are the Priesthood also.
The Priests under the Law were persons separated from Common men, and
Sanctified to God. So they that separate themselves from the principles and
practice of the Carnal World, and live to the service and honor of God, they
are his Priesthood. As the Apostle St. Peter writes to the believing Jews, 1
Pet. 2. 9 and styles them a Royal Priesthood, and so a peculiar, not Common,
People; for they were such as had been Converted to God by the Gospel, and so
were Sanctified to his service.

And seeing the same person is both Priest and Sacrifice, that which is off'red
up, must needs be a Free Will offering. For the Sanctified will offers up the
whole Man to God: And seeing it is the whole Man, it is an Holocaust also that
is off'red up, or as styled in the Law, a Whole burnt Offering.

Infer. III. But we may hence more particularly learn the several duties Man
owes to God as his Maker.

1. We owe him Love; We Love them that give us gifts, how much more should
thou Love him that gave thee thy self? when Job would reckon up what God had
done for him, he insists first upon God's giving him Being, 10. Job 10, 11.
etc. Thou have powered me out like Milk, crudled me as Cheese, clothed me with
Skin and Flesh, fenced me with Bones and Sinews, etc. Thou have granted me life
and favor.

And this favor of giving thee Being, is the first of God's favors; and it
must needs be favor, for no Man could merit of God to give him Being. And if
the preservation and accommodation of our Being in the World, should engage us
to Love God; how much more our Creation that gave us Being: And as every Man
does Love himself, because he is himself; much more should we Love him that
gave us our selves, and that more then our selves.

2. Fear; For he that gave thee Being can destroy it: And he is to be feared
above all, for as he alone could give thee Being, so he alone can destroy it.
The Body may be killed, and yet Man not destroyed; but to have Soul and Body
cast into Hell, this destroys Man: now this only God can do, as our Savior
speaks, and therefore he is to be chiefly feared: And this he will do, if thou
fear him not. He that made thee, will not have Mercy on thee, as it is said
27. Isa. 11. Elihu had an aw of God upon him, considered as his Maker, as
appears by his speech, 32. Job last, I know not how to give flattering titles,
in so doing my Maker would soon take me away. He that set me in a rank and
station of Being, would remove me, or rather throw me out of it again. He that
made Man has thereby Sovereign Power over him; By this Sovereign Power, he
has right to appoint Man a Law to govern him. And if Man transgress this Law,
he violates God's Sovereignty; And therefore it belongs to God, either to
pardon or punish the Transgression. And upon the account of both, God is to be
feared: As he has Power to punish, so we are to fear him; and as he has Power
to pardon, so we ought to fear him also, Psalm. 130. 4. There is forgiveness
with thee that thou may be feared. And as God's Sovereign Power over Man as
his Creator, gives him this Right, so his essential or Creating Power, gives
him ability to destroy the Creature which it gave Being to. The Prophet Jeremy
therefore bids the people not to fear the Heathen Idols, 10. Jer. 5. And why?
For they cannot do evil, neither is it in them to do good. But then speaking of
the true God, adds v. 7. Who would not fear thee, O King of Nations? for to
thee does it appertain: He can do Good and Evil, he can save or destroy Man
that made him, and therefore fear appertains to him.

3. Praise; As the Psalmist calls upon the most inferior Beings to praise God*
as Beasts, and all Cattle, and creeping things: how much more should Man praise
God that has so noble a Being. David considering himself as God's Creature and
Workmanship, breaks forth into his praise, 139. Psalm. I will praise thee, for I
am fearfully and wonderfully made. And then he speaks particularly, how God
drew out the Scheme of him in his Book, and then how his members were
fashioned, and curiously wrought, v. 15. 16. Now says David, I will praise
thee; Even as a curious piece of Work, every one is ready to commend and
praise: The Philosopher could thank his God that he made him a Man, and then
for the advantages he afterward conferred upon his humane Nature. Ought we to
praise God for our Food, that preserves Life? much more for Life it self, that
is better then Food, Matthew. 6. 25.

4. Submission; Will he correct and chasten thee, submit and give him
reverence: Do we so to the Fathers of our Flesh, that are but instruments to
give us our Flesh and shall we not much more do it to the Father of Spirits,
that is the Efficient and Creator of the Spirit? As the Apostle argues, 12.
Heb. 9. Has he made thee out of the clay, as Job expresses it, Chap. 10. Has
he given thee Being, and may he not dispose of it as he will: Has not the
Potter power over the clay to make it, and fashion it as he pleases? He that
built an House may alter it and change it; yea and pull it down if he please.

God has a twofold dominion over Man, Dominium jurisdictionis, and
proprietatis. A Dominion of jurisdiction, whereby to rule over us, and a
Dominion of property to dispose of us: And both these are founded upon the
highest and most Sovereign Right, which is that of Creation.

5. Dependence; Thou had thy Being of him, and thou have it still in him: As
the Apostle puts both these together, 17. Act. 28. We are his offspring, that
is, we have our Being of him; (...).
and says also, We live, move, and Be in him: Our preservation is but a
continued Creation. We subsist every moment in the first principle of our
Being; As the beams subsist in the Sun from whence they spring.

Thy Life depends more upon him, then upon the Bread: Man lives not by Bread
alone, but by every word that comes out of the mouth of God. That word that
first gave Man his life, is that upon which it still principally depends: And
it is that which Job acknowledges; Thou have given me life, and favor, and
thy visitation preserves my spirit, Job 10 9, 10.

Now this Natural dependence upon God, should teach Man a Moral dependence upon
him: Man's state is passively a state of dependence, and therefore his life
should be actively a life of dependence.

Should we not then in all our ways acknowledge him? And trust in him with all
our Hearts, and not lean to our own understanding? 3. Pro. 5, 6. what ever
means thou usest for the welfare of thy Soul or Body, yet depend not upon them,
but upon him that is the Creator of both: Let that infinite Power, Wisdom, and
Goodness, out of which thy Being flows, be the objects of thy dependence for
thy well being.

Especially seeing we have these engaged to us (if we are believers) in an
Everlasting Covenant, to be exerted for our succor and supply in every time of
need: So that we may now depend upon him, and commit our selves to him, not
only as a Wise, Good, and Powerful, but as a Faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4. 19.
Considering that the Soul and Body that were made by him, are not under his
care only by the common Laws of Creation and providence, but by special
Covenant.

6. Obedience to his Law, I mean his Written Law; I know this Law comprehends
in it all the foregoing duties, which are in themselves Naturally moral, and by
virtue of God's Law are made Positively moral; but yet this Law of God being of
further extent, I shall therefore speak of it under a distinct head.

God, as Man's Creator, has right to appoint him the Law and Rule of his Life,
and Actions; and so as his Creatures we owe him obedience. All Creatures are
passively under a Natural Law, which the Creator did appoint to them; and which
is observed by them, though many of them know it not; But Man is under a
Written Law, which he is actively to obey. He being a Reasonable Creature, he
is capable of knowing the rule and end of his being, which the other Creatures
are not: And both these are laid down in the Scriptures. Consider then, 1. God
is Man's Creator. 2. He Created him for an End. 3. He has given him a Law and
Rule to walk by in order to that End. And hereupon Man lies under the highest
obligation to Obedience, it being the Law of him that made him: And Man's
obedience to God ought to be absolute; Though it ought not to be so to Men,
because God's dominion over us is superior to that of all Men, and so may
supersede and overruled it.

And if we think it our duty to obey Magistrates and Parents that have some
inferior power over us, how much more that God who has a Supreme Power, and
that founded in the highest right, which is that of Creation.

And let us particularly show our obedience to his Law in our worship of him:
For as worship is due to God as our Creator, as the Psalmist speaks, 95. Psalm.
Oh come let us worship and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker; so
he has right also thereby by to set us the rule of our Worship. As not to
Worship him is Contempt, so to Worship otherwise then he has appointed is
Idolatry, or Superstition; yea it is a bold usurpation of the Creature upon the
Creator. The Apostle calls it Will worship, 2. Col. because it is founded in
Man's will and not God's.

And what though the worship God has instituted, has an outside meanness and
no external splendour in it, to affect the sense; yet we are to perform it out
of mere obedience. And obedience has a Comeliness and Beauty in it, though it
be in the least matters: And in such matters, wherein we can see no Reason for
them, but the will of God; as in Abraham's Offering up his Son, and Naaman his
washing seven times in Jordan, etc. And in these especially is Man's obedience
tried: All moral duties carry such equity and goodness in the Nature of them,
that right Reason does persuade obedience to them; but these that are duties
only by Institution, are to be obeyed though merely to comply with the
Creatours will. And that God might have this obedience from Adam as well as the
former, he forbad him to Eat of one Tree of the Garden. And why one, and not
two? why that and not another only depended upon God's Sovereign will: And such
Institutions we have still in God's written Word, to which we are to give
obedience, as they bear the stamp of God's Authority, though we should see no
other Reason for it. This is the third Inference.

Infer. IV. Hence we may take notice in the next place, that Man's safest and
happiest consistance is in God, he being Man's Creator, and the Fountain of his
Being: As we see every thing in Nature has its best existence in the principle
out of which it is derived, and the Original out of which it springs: As a
Branch has its best existence in the Tree, Rivers in the Sea, Fire in its
Element, Earthly matter in the Earth: So has Man in God; Here is his most
proper dwelling, and resting place: As every thing in Nature has its home and
center; But God himself is these to Man: And therefore hither ought his motions
tend, as every thing in Nature, is tending thither where it has its best abode.

Sin has separated Man from the principle of his Being, and cut of his
Communion with his Creator, and now no wonder though he finds no resting place,
being out of his Center; and that his Soul is withering, being cut off from the
root of its life.

Though it is true Man's natural Being is still upheld by the Power and
providence of God; yet as to his moral Well-being, sin has made an intercision
betwixt God and him.

But let him not continue thus; But as the Child that is carried from home,
cries to return back again; and taken from the Arms of its Parents, reaches
to come to them again; so let Man do, let him be crying after God, to return to
him as his true home, and the great Parent of his Being.

Go to him and tell him, thou art his Creature, and he thy Creator, if thou
can not yet call him Father; pray him to have pity on thee, as thou art the
work of his Hand: To receive thee, and pardon thee, and to deliver thee from
that sin which is none of God's work, yet has marred his work in thee, and
leads the Creature from his Creator, though it self be none of his Creatures.

And we that live under the Gospel have both direction and encouragement
herein: The Gospel tells us the way whereby we may come back to God again,
which is Jesus Christ; When as those that live without it, feel after him only
as Men in the dark (as the Apostle speaks of the Gentiles, 17. Act.) wanting a
guide to lead them to him.

It also does give great Encouragement to Men, by declaring God's infinite
readiness to receive his returning Creature: It tells us that Christ came from
Heaven to declare this readiness, and so he did it all along, when here upon
Earth; especially in the three Parables of the lost Sheep, the lost Drachme,
and the lost Son, 15. Luke But his suffering Death to make way for our return,
and to bring us to God, does above all abundantly declare it, as the Apostle
speaks, 1 Pet. 3. 18. Christ has once suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust, that he might bring us to God.

Infer. V. Hence it follows that if God is our Maker, Man has no Reason to
Glory in himself; For he has derived his Being, his Self from God: Have thou
Beauty, Strength, Parts, and Endowments of Mind, but why should thou Glory?
art thou not God's Creature, have thou any thing but what thou have received?
It is of him that thou art what thou art in every thing, except thy sin; And
will thou Glory in that? in that which is thy shame? in that will thou Glory
which has stripped Man of his Glory? Has he formed thee out of the Clay, raised
thee out of the Dust, clothed thee with Skin and Flesh, breathed into thee the
breath of Life; yea, brought thee out of the Abyss of nothing into being, (As
David speaks of his substance and members formed by God, when once there was
none of them, 139. Psalm. 16.) and will thou Glory in thy self? Especially will thou Glory in thy self against God, and say, who is the Lord? I have Strength,
Wit, Wisdom of mine own, and why should I be subject to him? or what need I
depend upon him. Thus Man comes to disown his Creator, and sets up himself as
God, and above him that made him: And as if he had his Being of himself, in the
pride of his Heart, says with the Prince of Tyrus, I AM; when as God's Name
alone is I AM, as God told Moses, Exodus 3. 14. And as the Greek word EI was
writ upon the gates of Apollo's Temple, which signifies, Thou art; which
intimates what Notion the very Heathen had of God; that he was Being it self,
and of himself; so that all other Beings must be of him. But Man forgets this,
and thinks he is of himself, and therefore is apt to lay aside all respect to
God, and exalt himself into his room.

And as Man was once nothing Negatively, till God gave him Being, and made him
something; so he would soon return to nothing again privatively, if he was not
continually preserved by an Influx of Being from the first Being.

So that, as a late Learned Writer speaks, if God should say to him, or to any
Angel in Heaven, Accipe quod tuum est, and abi; Take that which is thine one,
and be gone; they must depart into their first nothing: What has Man then left
him to Glory in?

Infer. VI. Lastly, The Saints may hence draw several Arguments to plead with
God by, and strengthen their Faith therein: Especially in these Cases.

1. To make provision for them; Has he given me Being, and will he not take
care of that Being he has given me? Has he given me Life, and will he not
give food to maintain that Life? and a Body, and will he not provide raiment to
Cloth it? We know these are Christ's Arguments to strengthen his Disciples
Faith against inordinate Cares; in the 6. Matthew. 25. Has he put this Instinct
into all living Creatures to provide for their young, that proceed from them by
Natural Generation; and is it not then eminently in God's Nature, that is the
Creator of all things? Hereupon he is said to feed the Ravens, cloth the grass
of the Field, take care of Sparrows, and to send rain for his Land, Job 37. 13.
And will he not take care of his people who are a more special part of his
Creation.

2. To redeem them from Sin, and Satan, and the World, the three great
Adversaries of their Souls. 1. From Sin, we may plead with God to redeem us
from it, that what is no part of his Creation, may not destroy that Soul that
is a chief part of it: That what hinders us from serving the end of our Being,
which is to Glorify our Creator, may not still be found dwelling in us his
Creatures. 2. From Satan; That we who are God's Creatures, may be delivered
from his Usurpation and Tyranny, who has no right to rule over us: That he who
is the God of the World, by permission and power only, not by any right, and to
whom we owe no service, may not hinder us in the service of him that is the
true God, the Creator, and rightful Governor of the World, and to whom we owe
all service. 3. From the World; Did not God make Man, and made him Lord of his
Creation, and made the Creatures to serve him? may not thou then plead with
God, that he would help thee to maintain thy Sovereignty over them, that they
may not enslave thy Soul, and make thee to be servant to them? That thou may
not only live as his Creature, but reign in that Station of Sovereignty wherein
God first set Man, over the World, and things thereof.

For as the Poet speaks of Money, Imperat aut servit, etc. It is either a Man's
Master or his Servant; so it may be said of all other things. A Man may have a
Natural dominion over them, and command them for his use, and yet be under a
moral slavery and subjection to them, by having his Heart captivated and
ensnared by them: And so Man is degraded of one great part of that Sovereignty
wherein he was first created.

3. To instruct and teach them in their way; As David prays, 119. Psalm. 73. Thy
hands have made me and fashioned me, give me understanding that I may learn thy
Commandments. As if he should say, Lord, thou have given me my Being, and will thou leave me; and not guide me and lead me, now thou have made me? Or as
others, thus, Thine hands have made me and fashioned me, therefore I owe thee
Obedience, give me therefore understanding that I may learn thy Commandments,
and so give obedience to thee: Or it may be David looks at God as his Father by
Creation, and therefore begs that, as a Father, he would instruct him, and
learn him his Commandments: And so may the Saints plead, that as God has given
them Being, so he would guide them in the way to their Well-being.

4. They may hence plead for support under their afflictions; That God would
have regard to the work of his hands, that no affliction may be above their
strength to undergo, least it prove destructive to the Creature that he has
made.

It was Job's complaint to God, though he went too far in it, 10. Job. 8. Thine
hands have made me and fashioned me, yet thou do destroy me: And hence he
makes his plea also with God, Remember I beseech thee, that thou have made me
as the clay, and will thou bring me to the dust again? And Job speaks this upon
the account of his sore afflictions.

And though the Saints may plead with God by a nearer relation to him then that
of Creation, as being his adopted Children, yet the former plea is not
antiquated, as the relation it self is not nulled. As appears, because God
himself from thence draws Arguments to pity and succor his people: As in the
57. Isa. 16. I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth, for
the Spirit should fail before me, and the Soul that I have made: And that which
is an Argument to himself, may be to us to plead with him by.

And I may add, we may hence also plead to be saved out of affliction, as well
as supported under it: For he that first created Man out of the dust, is able
to Create deliverance to us, when by afflictions we are laid in the dust, and
brought even to the dust of Death, as David's expression is, 22. Psalm. 15. And
we may believe he is willing as well as able, seeing our Creation was not the
effect of his Power only but of his Goodness also; and this goodness of his
continues still toward his Creature, whereby to be ready to give it a
Well-being, as he first gave it Being.

And hereupon, Job is thought to comfort himself, that God would raise his Body
out of the grave, it being his own Workmanship, 14. Job 15. Thou will call, and
I will answer; thou will have a regard to the work of thy hands. And from that
Power and Goodness of God that will raise up the Bodies of the Saints at the
last day, they may hope for a Resurrection out of the grave of any Temporal
affliction in this World (only with a submission to the Creator's will); As the
deliverance of the Jews out of Captivity is set forth by the opening of their
graves and making dry bones to live, Ezekiel. 37. 5, 13.

5. They may hence also plead with God to restore them into a state of holiness
and righteousness, seeing he made Man first in such a state: For who can
restore lapsed Man, but he that first made Man; God made Man upright at first,
and he alone can restore him to it again.

After sin had broke in upon the Nature of Man, and corrupted it; God is said
to repent of his work, that he had made Man; but in our Restoration God
rejoices in his work again: As our Savior tells us, That there is joy in
Heaven when a sinner repents, 15. Luke 7.

And this Restoration is called a Creation, for it brings Man into the Image of
God again; And being a Creation it cannot be effected but by God himself. And
he that made Man at first after his Image, of his own goodness, when none did
ask it of him; will he not be ready to restore it to us when we shall come, and
beg it at his hand?

There is a cry to God as the great Creator of the World, which is only vox
Naturae, the voice of Nature; So every Man is ready to cry to God in his
distress; Yea the very brute Creatures thus cry, The young Lions seek their
prey of God; and the Ravens cry to be fed, and God is said to hear them: But
the Saints cry is vox Spiritus, the voice of God's Spirit in their Hearts;
wherein they make a Spiritual and special improvement of their Common relation
to God as their Creator, in all the Cases formentioned: And though it be but
Common blessings they sometimes beg, and the good things of Nature, yet it is
by a principle that is supernatural.

Infer. VII. Lastly, We may hence take notice of the destructive and provoking
Nature of Sin; It provokes God to destroy the Creature that was made by him:
Yea that Creature which he has bestowed peculiar Workmanship upon. God loves
every Creature as it is his Creature, and much more Man among his Creatures;
how comes it then that any Man is destroyed? it is because sin has got into
his Nature, and his first armeth him against God his Creator, and thereby his
Justice comes to be armed against Man his Creature and he falls before it.

And therefore let no Man plead for liberty and impunity in sin, because he is
God's Creature: As many ignorant people have no higher hope then upon this
bottom, He that made them will not damn them: God has given Man a Law and Rule
to walk by, and provided means for him in order to his Salvation; but if Man
refuse thus to walk, and reject the means of his own happiness, let him not
censure his Maker as cruel to his Creature: For it is not so much God's
destroying Man, as Man's dedestroying himself. As if Jeremy the Prophet being
in the miry Dungeon, and having Ropes and old rags let down to him to pull him
out, should yet have refused to put them under his Arms, but will stay and
perish there; Jeremy had thereby been the cause of his own death. Or as a wise
and merciful King delights not to have his Subjects put to death, but by wilful
breaking the Law they bring it upon themselves.

Neither let any Man say God destroys his Creature out of his mere Sovereignty:
And that he made some Men on purpose to destroy them; And that without any
consideration of their sin, he decreed them out of his own pleasure to
everlasting misery.

And therefore here, though in the close of all, I shall vindicate my Text from
a corrupt Interpretation; which though the Grammatical construction may bear,
yet the Truth will not; (...).
For the Invisible things of him from the Creation of the World are clearly
seen, etc. even his Eternal Power and Godhead, to this end that they might be
without excuse. As if to make men inexcusable, was God's end in making himself
known in the works of Creation, when it is only a consequence of it through
Man's default.

`Some indeed have thought that God out of his absolute Sovereignty may take
away from his Creature that which he has given it, as Life, and Being; he may
annihilate what he has Created: but to make his Creature Eternally miserable
(which is worse then a not-Being) merely out of Sovereignty, this cannot
consist with his Infinite Mercy and Goodness: A Man has that Dominion over a
Beast that he may take away the Life of it if he please; but to put his Beast
out of his mere pleasure to perpetual Torment, is perfect cruelty, and contrary
to that mercy and humanity that belongs to the perfection of Man's Nature. And
therefore it cannot be imagined that any such thing can be found in God. I will
ascribe Righteousness to my Maker, said Elihu, Job 36. 3. And so we ought to
ascribe Mercy and Goodness, and all perfection to that God that made us all, as
it becomes Creatures to their Creator.

God might have chosen whether he would make such a Creature as Man or not; he
did not owe this to him to give him Being, much less to make him a reasonable
Creature; but having made such a Creature and put him under a Law, now God has
obliged himself to dispose of Man, not according to mere Sovereignty, but
according to that Law under which he stands.

And if Men, not so much for want of ability, as out of sloth, or hatred, and
contempt, do not comply with this Law, and the terms of their own happiness,
they are thereby self-destroyers, as God charged it upon Israel of old, O
Israel thou have, destroyed thy self.

And as one well speaks, Deus non prius est ultor quam homo peccator; God is
not a revenger till Man is first a sinner: God is often said to show mercy for
his Names-sake, but is never said to Plague or Punish merely for his
Names-sake. And therefore why should Man complain? as Salvian expostulates with
the Christians of his time. Why do we complain that our punishment is bitter
and grievous; Vnusquisque nostrum ipse se punit? Every Man does punish himself,
though he is also punished of God; God does it Judicially as a righteous Judge,
but Man does it Meritoriously as a guilty sinner.

Not but that God as an absolute Sovereign may give more of his grace and gifts
to one then another; for he may do what he will with his own, where he is
Indebted to none; Neither can we conclude because Man's destruction is of
himself, therefore his Salvation is of himself: For the one Man can effect of
himself as Adam did, but the other he cannot attain without God.

As the Sheep in the Parable that went astray of it self, but came not home
till the Owner found it out, and brought it back upon his Shoulder, 15. Luke 4,
5.

Man was able to deprive himself of his Original Righteousness, but it is only
God can restore it: As Natural privations in the Body are easily made by a
Man's own self, a Man may easily destroy his own sight, but it is beyond his
power to restore this habit of sight: According to the Axiom in Philosophy, A
privatione ad habitum non datur regressus; There is no return in Nature from a
privation to the habit again.

And it is much more true of Spiritual privations upon the Soul, Man has been
able to bring them upon himself, but he cannot of himself return to those
divine habits that he is deprived of.

So that in those that are Saved, God will have his Grace and Mercy magnified,
as being Saved by himself; so, in those that Perish, he will have his Justice
magnified, as being destroyed by themselves.

Men Perish by their own Will, but against God's Will; I mean his Antecedent
Will, and as revealed in his Word. For else Men Perish by God's consequent
Will, having rejected the means of their own Salvation.

So that I shall Conclude in the Conclusive words of that Learned Gentleman in
his late Elaborate Discourse of the Divine Will, Edward Polhil Esquire
it its Eternal Decrees, and Holy Execution. God's Will of Man's Conversion as
ordinative of means is accomplished in this; That there is a serious exhibition
of the means in order to Conversion as their proper end, and that end, (but for
Man's voluntary Corruption) would be thereby attained, even in all.

I should next proceed to speak of those several Attributes of God's Being,
which are evidenced from the Works of Creation, which are either mentioned in
the Text, or may be educed out of it; And show how they may all be improved to
the service of True Christianity, and to an higher degree then the highest
Light, and Power of Nature could ever attain to: But this shall suffice for the
present.

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE OF Some Books Printed for, and Sold by Nathaniel Ranew at the
Kings Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Folio's.
THE Famous and Memorable Works of Josephus, a Man of much honor and Learning
among the Jews; Translated out of Latin and French, by Thomas Lodge Doctor in
Physic: whereunto are newly added the References of the Scriptures throughout
the History, with an Alphabetical Table of the most Material things therein
contained, in Folio Large. A Body of Divinity, or the Sum and Substance of
Christian Religion, Catechistically propounded and explained by way of Question
and Answer, Methodically and familiarly handled: Whereunto is added Immanuel,
or the Mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of God. Composed by the Reverend
James Usher Bishop of Armagh, in Folio Small.
Quarto's.
The Harmony of the Divine Attributes, in the Contrivance and Accomplishment of
Man's Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ: or Discourses wherein is showed, how
the Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, Holiness, Power, and Truth of God, are Glorified in
that great and blessed Work: by William Bates D. D. in Quarto. Of Wisdom,
three Books written in French, by Peter Charron Doctor of Law in Paris:
Translated by Sampson Len^ard, in Quatro. A Sermon Preached at High-Wickham in
the County of Bucks, wherein the Ministers Duty is Remembered, their Dignity
Asserted, Man's Reconciliation with God urged; by Samuel Gardner Chaplain to
his Majesty, in Quarto. The Norfolk Feast, A Sermon Preached at St. Dunstans,
being the day of the Anniversary Feast for that County; by William ^^^^thes
Minister in that County, in Quarto. The Speech of Sr. Audley Mervyn Knight, His
Majesty's prime Sergeant of Law, and Speaker of the House of Commons in
Ireland; delivered to his Grace Duke of Ormond Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, the
13th Febr. 1662. in the Presence Chamber in the Castle in Dublin.
Octavo's.
A Worthy Communicant; or a Treatise showing the due order of Receiving the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper: by Jeremiah Dyke, in Octavo. The Way to
Salvation, or the Doctrine of Life Eternal: laid down from several Texts of
Scripture, opened and applied; fitted to the capacity of the meanest Christian,
and useful for all Families, by John Hieron: in Octavo. Solitude Improved by
Divine Meditation, or a Treatise proving the Duty, and Demonstrating the
Necessity, Excellency, Usefulness, Nature, Kinds, and Requisites of Divine
Meditation: first, intended for a Person of Honor, and now Published for
general use, by Nathaniel Ranew sometime Minister of Felsted in Essex: in
Octavo. Moral Virtues Baptized Christian, or the Necessity of Morality among
Christians, by William Shelton of Bursted Magna in Essex: in Octavo. The
Burning of London in the Year 1666. Commemorated and Improved in a hundred and
ten Meditations and Contemplations, by Samuel Roll Minister of the Gospel and
sometime Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge: in Octavo. Natural Theology,
or the Knowledge of God from the Works of Creation; Accommodated and Improved
to the Service of Christianity, by Matthew Barker: in Octavo. Christ and the
Covenant, the Work and way of Meditation; God's Return to the Soul or Nation,
together with his preventing Mercy; Delivered in Ten Sermons by William Bridge
sometime Minister of Yarmouth. The Sinfulness of Sin, and the Fullness of
Christ, Delivered in two Sermons by the same Author. The Vanity of the World,
by Ezekiel Hopkins: in Octavo. The Souls Ascension in the state of Separation,
by Isaac Loeffs: in Octavo. An Explication of the Assemblies lesser Catechism,
by Samuel Winney: in Octavo. Iter Boreale, with other select Poems; being an
exact Collection of all hitherto extant, and some added, never before Printed,
by Robert Wild D. D. in Octavo. A Synopsis of Quakerisme, or a Collection of
the Fundamental Errors of the Quakers, by Thomas Danson: in Octavo. A Poetical
Meditation, wherein the Usefulness. Excellency, and several perfections of Holy
Scripture are briefly hinted, by John Clarke: in Octavo.
Twelves.
Correction, Instruction, or a Treatise of Affliction; first Conceived by way
of Private Meditation, afterward Digested into certain Sermons, and now
Published for the help and Comfort of humble suffering Christians: by Tho.
Case, in Twelves. The Poor doubting Christian, drawn to Christ, by Thomas
Hooker of New England, in Twelves. Ovids Metamorphosis in English verse, by
George Sandy' s, in Twelves. Aesop's Fables, in Prose with Cuts, in Twelves.
The Principles of Christian Religion, with a brief Method of the Doctrine
thereof, Corrected and Enlarged by the Reverend James Usher Bishop of Armagh,
in Twelves. A plain Discourse of the Mercy of having Godly Parents, with the
Duties of Children that have such Parents, by M. Goddard, in Twelves. KAN
DIATHK Novum Testamentum; huic editioni omnia Difficiliorum vocabulorum
Themata, qua in Georgii Passoris Lexico Gramatice resolvunter in Margi^e
apposuit Carolus Hoole; in eorum (...) gratiam qui primi Graecoe Linguae
Tyrocinia faciunt: in Twelves.

