MEMORIALS OF WORTHY PERSONS: Two Decads.

By CL. BARKSDALE.

The Memory of the Just is blessed.

LONDON, Printed by I. R. 1661.

The Names of the Persons.
Dr. Joseph Hall Bishop of Norwich. Dr. John Done, Dean of S. Paul's. Sir.
Will. Cokain Ald. of London. Sir Thomas Bodley. D. John Jewel B. of Sarum. Mr.
George Herbert. Dr. James Usher A B. of Armagh. Mr. John Hales of Eton. R.
Evelyn. Dr. Art. Lake B. of Bath and Wells. Edward Peyto Esquire; Dr. Will. Laud A
Bishop of Cant. Arc-Bishop Usher. Thomas Brandeston. of Barfold. Mr. John Dod.
Mr. Joseph Mede. Mr. Josias Shute. Francis Bacon L. Verulam. Dr. Thomas
Jackson. Lady Falkland
TO HIS Honorable Friend, GEORGE MOUNTAGU Esquire;
SIR,
THat you have in your Family Three Knights of the Garter, is a great honor;
but it is a greater honor, that there be in your Family many more, excelling in
Courtesy, and Valor, and Loyalty, and Prudence, and in that which is the Head
of Wisdom, the Fear God. Where the fear of God is, there also dwel's a
Reverence to the Ministers of God, the Fathers and Doctors of the Church: Of
which Quality are most of the Persons remembered in these papers, which I have
gilded, as it were, and beautified with your flourish, ing Name. Some
Gentlemen are here mixed with the Churchmen. And I heartily pray, they may be
always conjoined, and lovingly united, for their mutual, both temporal and
eternal, happiness. These Memorials are of the Deceased only. I believe we
have their Equals of both sorts now Living. Whom God in mercy has rescued from
the late Calamities, and reserved for Himself and for his Vicegerent our most
Cracious Sovereign, that they might serve Him in this blessed Restoration of
Church and State. May they happily go on; and You, Right Noble Sir, among the
first Ranks, to deserve that Glory, which, if they receive not at present from
an Ungrateful Age, Posterity will surely render to their Memories.

Your most obliged and most affectionate servant CL. BARKSDALE.
April 23.
TO THE READER,
Reader,
I Purpose, God willing, to go on in this way of Collection, to revive the
Memory and spread the Fame of excellent Men and Women of our Church, conceiving
this also to be a means to gain the Affections, and reconcile those that stand
at a distance from us; when they see what holy persons this Church has been
(and is) adorned with. Know, that the Authors at the end, should have been
cited at the beginning of every Memorial respectively. The most considerable
Errata, be pleased, before reading of the book, to correct with the pen, thus:

Errata.
22. ult. Iz. W. 76. 5. often. 87. 14. Rochet. 101. 10. the P. 102. 8. ^oint.
109. 16. Poit^u 123. 13. add out of Dr. Gauden's Suspir. 126 5. out of Mr.
Fullers Church hist. 136. 2. Suspiria. 119. 1. Man^^ree. ^44. 9. fifth Command.
178. 3. Common.

I. Decad.
(...). Dr. Joseph Hall B. of Norwich. 1. ^I. Dr. John Done, Dean of St. Paul's
15. ^II. Sir William Cokain Ald. of Land. 23. ^V. Sir Tho. Bodley. 32. V. Dr.
John Jewel Bishop of Sarum. 44. VI. Mr. Geo. Herbert. 62. VII. Dr. James Usher
A B. of Armagh. 66. VIII. Mr. John Hales of Eton. 70. ^X. R. Evelyn. 76. X. Dr.
Arthur Lake B. of Bath and Wells. 86.
II Decad.
I. Edward Peyto Esquire; 10^ II. Dr. William Laud A B. o^ Canterbury. 116 III.
Arch-B. Ussher. 126 IV. Tho. Brandeston of Barfold. 136 V. Mr John Dod. 14^ VI.
Mr. Joseph Mede. 14^ VII. Mr. Josias Shute. 16^ VIII. Francis Bacon L. Verulam.
17^ IX. Dr. Tho Jackson. 18^ X. Lady Falkland. 20^
FINIS
I. Dr. JOSEPH HALL Bishop of Norwich.
1. HE was noted for a singular Wit from his youth; a most acute Rhetorician,
and an elegant Poet. Two years together he was chosen Rhetorick-Professor in
the University of Cambridge, and performed the Office with extraordinary
applause.

2. Whilst he was the private Pastor first of Halsted in Suffolk, and after at
Waltham in Essex, he preached thrice a week in a constant course; yet (as
himself witnesses) never durst clime up into the Pulpit to preach any Sermon,
whereof he had not before penned every word in the same order, wherein he hoped
to deliver it: although in his expressions he was no slave to syllables,
neither made use of his Notes.

3. It is well known in this City, how forward he was to Preach in any of our
Churches, till he was first forbidden by men, and at last disenabled by God.
And when he could not Preach himself; this learned Gamaliel was not content
only, but very diligent to sit at the feet of the youngest of his Disciples;
as diligent an Hearer as he had been a Preacher.

3. In his employment to the Synod of Dort, he had great respect there from the
Foreign Divines and States. And in those unhappy Disputes he showed excellent
Moderation. Concerning which, he afterward drew up such a Collection of
accorded Truths, as was offered to be subscribed by some of the most eminent on
both sides. Which reconciliatory Papers then unhappily buried, are very much
desired, and may be hoped for in time; together with an account of his life,
written by himself.

5. What Nazianzene said of Basil may be applied to him; Et eruditis pietate,
and pits eruditionis laud antecelluit. Those that were most eminent for
Learning he excelled in Piety, and those that were most famous for Piety he
excelled in Learning.

6. He was a rare Mirror of Patience under all his Crosses, which toward his
latter end were multiplied upon him. I have heard him often bewail the spoils of
the Church, but very seldom did he so much as mention his own losses.

6. Besides his spiritual Alms of Prayers, godly Admonitions, Comforts and
holy Counsels, whereof he was very liberal, his bodily Alms were constant and
bountiful: he gave a weekly contribution to poor Widows, to his dying day;
and by his Will, a good sum of money to the Town where he was born, and to
this City where he died.

8. For his Children, I may say, as Ambrose of Theodosius, Non totus recessit,
etc. He is not all gone; he has left us his Sons, in whom we may yet see him
and enjoy him. For his Works, I may with reverence say of them as the Psalm^st
o^ God's, They all praise him, because all men praise them.

Out of his Funeral Sermon by Mr. John Lightfoot, 1656.
II. Dr. JOHN DONE Dean of St. Paul's.
1. HE was born in London, of good and virtuous Parents: his Father lineally
descended from a very ancient Family in Wal^s; his Mother from the Family of
the famous Sr. Thomas More, sometimes Lord Chancellor of England. But his own
Learning and other multiplied merits may justly seem sufficient to dignifie
both himself and posterity.

2. Being nine years of age he was sent to the University of Oxofrd; having at
that time a command of the French and Latin Tongues, when others can searce
speak their own.

About the fourteenth year of his age, he was transplanted to Cambridge; where
(that he might receive nourishment from both soils) he stayed til his
seaventeenth year. All which time he was a most laborious Student, often
changing his Studies. Then was he removed to London, and entered into Lincoln's
Inn, where he gave great testimonies of wit, learning, and improvement in the
study of the Law.

3. About his nineteenth year, being unresolved in Religion, waving the Law, he
began to survey the Body of Divinity, controverted between the Reformed and
Roman Church, and in that search and disquisition, he proceeded with humility
and diffidence in himself, by the safest way of frequent Prayers, and
indifferent affection to both Parties. And indeed Truth had too much light
about her, to be hid from so sharp an enquirer; and he had too much ingenuity,
not to acknowledge he had seen h^^.

4. About the twentieth year of his age, he traveled, and returned not into
England, till he had stayed a convenient time, first in Italy, and then in
Spain; where he made many useful observations of those Countries, their Laws
and Government, and returned into England perfect in their languages.

5. Not long after his return, that exemplary pattern of wisdom and gravity,
the Lord Elsmore, Lord keeper of the Great Seal, taking notice of his Learning,
Languages and other abilities, and much affecting both his person and
condition, received him to be his chief Secretary, supposing it might be an
Introduction to some more weighty employment in the State: for which his
Lordship often protested, he thought him very fit; and at his dismission said,
he was a Secretary fitter for a King then a Subject.

6. Afterward, he lived many years with his noble Kinsman Sr. Francis Wally of
Pirford, where he studied the Civil and Canon Laws: in which he acquired such a
perfection, as was judged to hold some proportion with many, who had made that
study the employment of their whole life.

7. Sr. Francis being dead, he was importuned and persuaded by his friends, to
make his residence in London: where that Honorable Gentleman Sr. Robert Drury
assigned him a very convenient House Rentfree, next his own in Drury Lane; and
was also a daily cherisher of his studies.

8. His Majesty had formerly both known and much valued him, and had given him
some hopes of a State-employment, being much pleased, that Mr. Done attended
him, especially at his meals; where there was usually many deep discourses of
Learning, and disputes of Religion: and particularly at that time, concerning
the Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance; which was the occasion of Mr. Donne's
writing his ^seudomartyr.

9. When the King had read and considered that Book, he persuaded Mr. Done to
enter into the Ministry: and though many friends mediated with his Majesty to
prefer him to some Civil employment, to which his Education had apted him; yet
the King denied their requests, and having a discerning spirit, replied: I know
Mr. Done is a Learned man, an excellent Divine, and will prove a powerful
Preacher.

10. Yet he deferred to enter into sacred Orders for the space of three years:
all which time he applied himself to an incessant study of Textuall Divinity,
and attained a greater perrfection in the Learned Languages, Greek and Hebrew.
And then declaring his intention to his dear friend Dr. King, the then worthy
Bishop of London, that Reverend Bishop most gladly received the news, and with
all convenient speed ordained him Deacon and Priest.

11. Now all his studies (which were occasionally diffused) were concentred in
Divinity: Now he had a new calling, new thoughts, new employment for his wit
and eloquence. Now all his earthly affections were changed into divine love,
and all the faculties of his Soul were engaged in the conversion of others, in
preaching glad tidings, remission to repenting sinners, and peace to each
troubled Soul: preaching the word so, as showed he was possessed with those joys
that he labored to distill into others: a preacher in earnest; weeping
sometimes for ^is Auditory, sometimes with them; always preaching to himself
like an Angel from a Cloud, though in none; carry^ng some (as Paul was) to
heaven ^n holy raptures; enticing others by a sacred art and court^hip to amend
their lives; and ^ll this with a most particular grace, and an unimitable
fashion of speaking.

12. Presently after he entered into his holy Profession, the King made him his
Chaplain in Ordinary, and gave him other encouragements, promising to take a
care of him: And that summer attending his Majesty at Cambridge, the King was
pleased to recommend him to be made Doctor in Divinity; which the University
presently granted, expressing a gladness, they had an occasion to entitle and
write him theirs.

13. His abilities and industry in his profession were so eminent, and he so
much loved by many persons of quality, that within one year after his entrance
into sacred Orders, he had fourteen Advousons of several Benefices sent him:
but he desired rather some preferment that might fix him in London

14. And there he was importuned by the grave Benchers of Lincoln's-Inne (once
the friends of his youth) to accept of their Lecture, which by reason of Mr.
Gataker's removal, was then void: of which he accepted: nor did he preach
only, but was an ocular direction to them, by a holy and harmless
conversation.

15. Three years after, by a special command from his Majesty, Dr. Done
attended the Ambassador sent by the King, to reconcile some differences in
Germany: and about a year after his return, the Deanary of Paul's being vacant,
the King appointed him to wait upon him at dinner the next day: and his
Majesty being set down, before he eat any meat, said after his pleasant
manner; Dr. Done. I have invited you to dinner, and though you sit not down
with me, yet I will carve to you of a dish that I know you love: you love
London well; I do therefore make you Dean of Paul's: Take your meat home to
your study, say grace, and much good may it do you.

16. He was once (and but once) clouded with the King's displeasure, occasioned
by some malicious whisperer, who assured the King, D. Done had preached a
Sermon that employed a dislike of his Government, particularly of his late
direction, that the Evening Lectures on Sundays should be turned into
Catechizing. The King sent presently for the Doctor, and required his answer;
which was so satisfactory, that the King said, he was glad he rested not under
that suspicion: and calling some Lords of his Council, added with much
earnestness; My Doctor is an honest man: and, my Lords, I was never more joyed
in any thing that I have done, then in making him a Divine.

17. He was made Dean in the fiftieth year of his age, and in the fifty fourth
a dangerous sickness seized upon him, which turned to a Spotted Fever: But
God preserved his Spirit, keeping his intellectuals clear and perfect; and as
his health increased, so did his thankfulness, testified in his Book of
Devotions, a Composition of Holy Ecstasies, occasioned and appliable to the
Emergencies of that sickness.

18. The latter part of his life was a continued study, Saturdays only
excepted, which he usually spent in visiting friend^ and resting himself under
the weary burden of his weeks Meditations: And he gave himself this rest, that
thereby he might be refreshed and enabled to do the work of the day following,
not negligently, but with courage and cheerfulness.

19. Nor was his Age only so industrious, but in his most unsettled youth, he
was (being in health) never known to be in bed after four of the clock in the
morning, nor usually out of his Chamber till ten; and employed that time
constantly (if not more) in his study. The recreations of his youth were
Poetry: in which he was so happy, as if nature with all her varieties had been
made to exercise his great wit and high ^ncy. But, in his penitential ^eares,
viewing some of those ^ieces loosly scattered in his ^outh, he wished they had
been ^bortive. And yet was he not ^o fallen out with heavenly Po^try, as to
forsake it, no not in ^isdeclining age, witnessed then ^y many divine sonnets,
and ^ther high, holy and harmoni^us Composures.

20. He left the Resultance of 1400 Authors, most of them analyzed with his
own hand: He left 120 Sermons also, all writ with his own hand: A large and
laborious Treatise called (...), wherein all the Laws violated by that Act of
Self-murder are diligently surveyed, and judiciously censured; a Treatise
written in hi^ youth. All businesses of consequence in this and the
neighboring Kingdoms, he abbreviated, and kept by him for (...) Memorial: so
did he the Copies of diverse Letters and Case^ of Conscience that had concerned
his friends, with his solutions. A private yearly account, wherein he computed
first his Revenue, then his Expenses, then what was given to the poor and pious
uses, lastly what rested for him and his: blessing each years remainder with a
thankful prayer. As, An^ 1626. -- So this year God has blessed me and mine
with -- Multiplicatae sunt super nos misericordiae tuae, Domine. D^, Domine, ut
quae ex immensa bonitate tua nobis clargiri dignatus ^s, in quorumcunque manus
de^enerint, in tuam semper ^^da^t ^loriam. Amen.

21. He redeemed many out ^f Prison, that lay for small ^ebts or for their
sees: He was (...) continual giver to poor ^chollars, both of this and Foreign
Nations: Besides what he ^ave with his own hand, he ^sually sent a servant to
all the Prisons in London, to distribute ^is charity at all Festival times ^n
the year. He gave 100 l. at ^ne time to a Gentleman decayed. He repaired the
Chapel of his House. He was a happy reconciler of differences among his
friends and kindred.

22. In his last sickness he sent for many of his most considerable friends,
of whom he took a solemn and deliberate Farewell; commending to their
considerations some sentences particularly useful for the regulation of their
lives, and dismissed them with a spiritual Benediction. At his last hour he
said, I were miserable, if I might not die: and closed many periods of his
faint breath with these words, Thy Kingdom come, Thy will be done: And as his
last breath departed, and his Soul ascended, he closed his own eyes, and then
disposed his hands and body into such a posture, as required no alteration of
those that came to shroud him..

Ob. ult. Mart. 1631. aetat. 59.

Out of his Life, written by Jerem. Walton.
III. Sir W^ILIAM COKAIN Alderman of London.
1. THough he were of Parents of a good, of a great Estate, yet his possibility
and his expectation from them did not slacken his own instustry; which is a
Canker that eats into, nay that has eat up many a Family in this City, that
relying wholly upon what the Father has done, the Son does nothing for
himself. And truly it falls out too often, that he that labors not for more,
does not keep his own. God imprinted in him an industrious disposition, though
such hopes from his Parents might have excused some slacknesse: and God
prospered his industry so, as that when his Fathers Estate came to a
distribution by Death, he needed it not.

2. God gave him a large and a comprehensive understanding, and with it a
public heart: and such, as perchance in his way of Education, and in our
narrow and contracted times, in which every man determines himself in himself,
and scarce looks farther, it would be hard to find many examples of such
largeness.

3. You have, I think, a phrase of driving a Trade; and you have, I know, a
practice of driving a way Trade, by other use of Money: and you have lost a
man, that drove a great Trade the right way, in making the best use of our
Home-Commodity. To fetch in Wine, and Spice, and Silk, is but a drawing of
Trade; the right driving of Trade, is to vent our own outward. And yet for the
drawing in of that, which might justly seem most behovefull, i. e. of Arts and
Manufactures, to be employed upon our own Commodity, within the Kingdom, he
did his part diligently, at least, if not vehemently, if not passionately.

4. This City is a great Theater, and he acted great and various parts in it;
and all well. And when he went higher (as he was often heard in Parliaments, at
Council Tables, and in more private accesses to the late King of ever blessed
memory) as, for the comprehension of those businesses, which he pretended to
understand, no man doubts (for no man lacks arguments and evidences of his
ability therein.) So, for his manner of expressing his intentions, and
digesting and uttering his purposes, I have sometimes heard the greatest Master
of Language and Judgment, which these Times, or any other did, or do, or shall
give (that good and great King of ours) say of him, That he never heard any man
of his breeding, handle businesses more rationally, more pertinently, more
elegantly, more perswasively. And when his purpose was, to do a grace to to a
Preacher of very good abilities, and good note in his own Chapel, I have
heard him say, That his Language and accent, and manner of delivering himself
was like this Man.

5. God multiplied his Estate so, as was fit to endow many and great Children:
and he multiplied his Children so, both in their number and in their quality,
as they were fit to receive a great Estate. God was with him all the way; in a
pillar of fire, in the brightness of prosperity; and in the pillar of clouds
too, in many dark and sad and heavy Crosses. So great a Ship required a great
ballast; so many blessings, many Crosses: And he had them, and sailed on his
course the steadier for them. The Cloud as well as the Fire was a Pillar to
him: His Crosses as well as his Blessings established his assurance in God.

6. The Lord was with him at his death too. He was served with the process
here in the City, but his cause was heard in the Country. Here he sickned,
there he languished, and died there. In his sickness there, those that
assisted him are witnesses of his many expressings of a religious and a
constant heart toward God, and of his pious joining with them, even in the
holy Declaration of kneeling; then, when they, in favor of his weakness,
would diswade him from kneeling. I must not defraud him of this Testimony from
my self, that into this place where we are now met, I have observed him to
enter with much reverence, and compose himself in this place with much
declaration of devotion.

7. In his sickness he had but one days labor, and all the rest were
Saboths: one day he converted to business, thus; he called his Family and
Friends together; thankfully he acknowledged God's manifold Blessings, and his
own sins as penitently. And then, to those who were to have the disposing of
his Estate, jointly with his Children, he recommended his servants, and the
Poor, and the Hospitals, and the Prisons; which, according to his purpose, have
been all taken into consideration. And after this (which was his Valediction to
the World) he seemed always loath to return to any worldly business.

8. His last commandment to Wife and Children, was Christ's last commandment
to his Spouse the Church, in the Apostles, To love one another. He blessed them,
and the Estate devolved upon them, unto them: and by God's grace shall prove as
true a Prophet to them in that Blessing, as he was to himself, when in entering
his last Bed, two days before his death, he said, Help me off with my earthly
habit, and let me go to my last Bed. Where, in the second night after, he said,
Little know ye what pain I feel this night, yet I know I shall have joy in the
morning: And in that morning he died.

9. The form in which he implored his Savior, was evermore toward his end,
this; Christ Jesus, which di^d on the Cross, forgive me my sins! He, have
mercy upon me! And his last and dying words were the repetition of the Name
Jesus. And when he had not strength to utter that Name distinctly and
perfectly, they might hear it from within him, as from a man a far off; even
then, when his hollow and remote naming of Jesus, was rather a certifying of
them, that he was with his Jesus, then a Prayer that he might come unto him.

Out of his Funeral Sermon by Dr. Done, December. 23 1626.
IV. Sr. THOMAS BODLEY.
1. I was born at Exeter in Devonshire 2 Mar. 1544. descended both by Father
and Mother of worshipful Parents. My father, in the time of Queen MARY, being
noted and known to be an enemy to Popery, was so cruelly threatened, and so
narrowly observed, by those that maliced his Religion, that for the ^afeguard
of himself and my Mother, who was wholly affected as my Father, he knew no way
so secure as to fly into Germany.

2. My Father fixed his abode in the City of Geneva; where, as far as I
remember, the English Church consisted of some hundred persons. I was at that
time of twelve years of age, but through my Fathers cost and care,
sufficiently instructed to become an Auditour of Chevallerius in Hebrew, of
Beroaldus in Greek, of Calvin and Beza in Divinity, and of some other
professors in that University (which was newly then erected) besides my
domestic Teachers in the House of Philibertus Saracenus, a famous Physician in
that City, with whom I was boarded; where Robertus Constantinus, that made the
Greek Lexicon, read Homer to me.

3. In the first of Queen Elizabeth, my Father returned, and settled his
dwelling in the City London. It was not long after, that I was sent away from
thence to the University of Oxford, recommended to the teaching and tuition of
Dr. Humfrey. In the year 1563 I took the degree of Bachelor of Arts; within
which year I was also chosen Probationer of Merton College, and the next year
ensuing admitted Fellow. Afterward, in the year 1565 by special persuasion of
some of my Fellows, and for my private exercise, I undertook the public
reading of a Greek Lecture in the same College Hall, without requiring or
expecting any stipend for it: Nevertheless it pleased the Fellowship of their
own accord to allow me soon after four marks by the year, and ever since to
continue that Lecture to the College.

4. In the year 1566 I proceeded Master of Arts, and read for that year in the
Schoolstreets natural Philosophy. After which time, within less then three
years space, I was won by entreaty of my best affected friends, to stand for
the Proctorship, to which I and my Colleague were quietly elected in the year
1569, without any competition or counter-suit of any other. After this for a
long time, I supplied the Office of University Orator, and bestowed my time in
the study of sundry faculties, without any inclination to profess any one
above the rest; insomuch as at last I waxed desirous to travel beyond the Seas,
for attaining to the knowledge of some special modern Tongues, and for the
increase of my experience in the managing of affairs; being wholly then
addicted to employ my self and all my cares in the public service of the State.

5. After my return, in the year 1585, I was employed by the Queen to the King
of Denmark, and to the German Princes: Next, to Henry the 3 King of France:
After this, in 88, for the better conduct of her Highness affairs in the
Provinces United, I was thought a ^it person to reside in those parts, and was
sent thereupon to the Hague in Holland; where, according to the Contract that
had formerly past between her Highness and the States, I was ^dmitted for one
of their Coun^il of Estate, taking place in their assemblies next to Count
Maurice, and yielding my suf^rage in all that was proposed. During all that
time, what ap^robation was given of my ^ainfull endeavors by the Queen, Lords
in England, by the States of the Country there, and ^y all the English
Soldiery, I re^er it to be notified by some o^her's Relation.

6. I received from her Majesty many comfortable Letters of her gracious
acceptance of my diligence and care: and among the Lords of the Coun^il had no
man more to friend, ^hen was the Lord Treasurer Burleigh. For when occasion had
been offered of declaring his conceit as touching my service, he would always
tell the Queen (which I received from her self and some other Ear^ witnesses)
that there was not any man in England so meet as my self to undergo the Office
o^ the Secretary. And sithence, his son, the present Lord Treasurer, has
signified unto me in private conference, that when his Father first intended to
advanc^ him to that place, his purpose was withal to make me his Colleague: But
that the daily provocations of the Earl o^ Essex were so bitter and sharp
against him, and his comparisons so odious when he put (...) in a balance, as
he though^ thereupon he had very great reason to use his best means, to put any
man out of hope of raising his fortune, whom the Earl with such violence, to
his extreme prejudice, had endeavored to dignifie.

7. When I had well considered, how ill it did concur with my natural
disposition, to become or to be counted either a stickler or partaker in any
public faction; how well I was able, by Gods good blessing, to live of my
self, if I could be contented with a competent lively hood; I resolved
thereupon to possess my soul in peace all the residue of my days, to take my
farewell of State-employments, and so to retire me from the Court.

8. Now although after this, by her Majesty's direction, I was often called to
the Court, by the now Lord Treasurer, then Secretary, and required by him, and
also diverse times since, by order from the King, to serve as Ambassador in
France, and to negotiate in other very honorable employments, yet I would not
be removed from my former final resolution; but have continued at home my
retired course of life, which is now methinks to me as the greatest preferment
the State can afford.

9. This I must confess of my self, that though I did never repent me yet of
my often refusals of honorable offers, in respect of enriching my private
Estate, yet somewhat more of late I have blamed my self and my nicety that way,
for the love that I bear to my Reverend Mother the University of Oxford, and to
the advancement of her good by such kind of means as I have since undertaken.

10. Having examined what course I might take, I concluded at the last to set
up my staff at the Library door; being thoroughly persuaded, that in my solitude
and surcease from the Commonwealth a^^airs, I could not busy my self to better
purpose, then by reducing that place (which then in every part lay ruined and
wast) to the public use of Students.

11. For the effecting whereof, I found my self furnished in a competent
proportion, of such four kinds of aids, as unless I had them all, there was no
hope of good success. For without some kind of knowledge, as well in the
learned modern tongues, as in sundry other sorts of Scholastical literature;
without some purse ability to go through with the charge; without very great
store of honorable friends to further the design, and without special good
leisure to follow such a work, it could but have proved a vain attempt and
inconsiderate.

12. But how well I have sped in all my endeavors, and how full provision I
have made for the benefit and ease of all frequenters of the Library; that
which I have already performed in sight; That besides, which I have given for
the maintenance of it; and that which hereafter I purpose to add, by way of
enlargement to that place (for the project is cast, and and whether I live or
die, it shall be, God willing, put in full execution) will testify so truly
and abundantly for me, as I need not be the publisher of the dignity and worth
of mine own institution. Written with mine own hand, Anno 1609. December 15.

Ob. Ian. 29. 1612.

Out of his Life, written by himself, Printed at Oxford 1647.
V. Dr. JOHN JEWEL Bishop of Sarum.
1. AS the price and happiness of Aurelius Augustinus his Labors and Works,
the industrious vigilance of Gregory, the heavenly gifts of Theodosius, the
divine spirit of Ambrose, the golden mouth of Chrysostom, the sweet vein of
Lactantius, the shining style of Fulgentius, are very conspicuous in their
names; so here Grace in John, and eminent Perfection in Jewel.

2. He was born of virtuous and religious Parents, in the County of Devon (Anno
1522. May 24) a fertile soil of many good Wits, and two other most eminent, of
the same College after him, Dr. Reynolds and Mr. Hooker.

3. His singular promptness of Wit and Industry accompanied with ingenuity and
modesty, begat an exceeding love of him in his Master Bowin; whom afterward,
when he was Bishop, he forgot not, but most highly esteemed and bountifully
rewarded all Bowins for his Masters sake.

4. He was sent to Oxford at the age of thirteen, and taken by Mr. Parkhurst of
Merton College to be his Postmaster, who perceiving his capacity let fall a
prophetical speech of him; Surely Paul's Cross will one day ring of this boy.

5. From Merton College he was transplanted into Corpus-Christi, and there
chosen before all his Seniors to read the Humanity Lecture; which he did with
such diligence and facility, that many came from diverse other Colleges to
behold Rhetoric so richly set forth; among others, his Tutor Mr. Parkhurst of
Merton, who after the Lecture ended, saluted Jewel with this Distick.

Olim Discipulus mihi, chare Juelle, suisti:
Nune ero Discipulus, te renucn^c, tuus.
6. So industrious he was, that for the greatest part of the day he did himself
in his Study, and so much recalled his senses from all external objects, that
Chrysippus-like, he needed a Melissa to put him in mind of his meat. His only
Recreations from studies were studious being either in instructing his
Scholars, or disputing, or meditation.

7. As for his life and conversation in this slippery age, take the testimony
of an adversary (equal to a general consent) the Dean of the College: I
should love thee, Jewel (said he) if thou were not a Zuinglian; In thy Faith I
hold thee an Heretic, but surely in thy life thou art an Angel.

8. Peter Martyr, in the time of Edward 6. being called over, and appointed by
the King Professor of Divinity in Oxford, our Jewel was his Auditour, copied
out his Lectures and Sermons, was his Notary in that tumultuary disputation
about the Real Presence, and in tim^ became most intimate with him.

9. In those days of Peace he was noted also for an Oration in English
pronounced in the College in praise of the Founder, and two S^rmons in Latin
Ad Clerum, and for his preaching at Sunning well, whither he went on Foot at
least every fortnight.

10. At his departure from the College in the conclusion of his Speech, Pardon
me, good Sirs, said he, if it do grieve me to leave the place where I have been
brought up, where I have lived hitherto, where I have been in some place and
reckoning. But why do I stick to kill my heart with one word? Alas that I must
speak it, as with grief I must; Valcant studia, valiant haec tecta, valcat
scdes cultissimalitcrarum, valcat jucundissimus conspectus vestri,
valetejuvenes, valcte soc^i valetefratres, valcte oculi mei, valcte omnes,
valcte. Thus he burst out of his Speech, and his hearers burst out into tears.

11. After his expulsion, lamentable in the manner, but glorious in the cause,
he stayed himself at Broadgates Hall; where Fame of his Learning drew many
Scholars unto him. In the mean time, the College, by their unjust ejection of
him, were punished not only with loss, but with disgrace: For, when the Dean
boasted of their care in preserving the Colledgevestments and Treasure, the
Archdeacon of Oxford answered, Ye have done so indeed, but ye have wilfully
lost one Ornament and great Treasure, far more precious then any of these:
alluding to the saying of Cornelia, Mother of the Gracchi, H^^ sunt ornamenta
mea, showing her Sons to another Lady, that showed her pearls and costly
attire.

12. At this time the University chose him for their Oraratour; in whose name
he curiously penned a gratulatory Letter to Queen MARY, consisting of
exclamations of grief for the Funerals of King EDWARD, and acclamations of joy
for her happy Coronation. By which Letter, it seems, Mr. Jewel and others
conceived good hope, that Queen MARY would not altogether change Religion.
Which hope stayed him so long in Oxford, till the Inquisition caught him, and
urged subscription under pain of prescription and torture.

13. Here I^well brought into a strait, having no other Counselors, but
horror without and frailty within, saying to them, Do you desire to see my
hand, and will you try how well I can write? took the Pen and hastily writ his
name, whereby he seemed to approve some Articles of Popery: But this
subscribing procured not his safety; for he had been taken again, had he not by
Gods providence gone a wrong way to London, and so escaped their hands that
waited for him in the usual way: as St. Austin by the error of his guide
escaped the Donatists.

14. Pope Marcellinus washed out his stian of Idolatry with tears of repentance
and blood of Martyrdom: Cranmer purged the polluted hand that had subscribed,
with fire, before he was made an Holocaust. Origin and Jewel repealed their
public subscription by public confession and contrition. After he came to
Frankford, he made an excellent Sermon, and confessed his fall, and was
received there and embraced as amost dear Brother, nay, as an Angel of God.

15. From Frankford he was invited by the kind Letters of Peter Martyr to
Argentine, where he conversed with Grindal, Sandys, Cheek, and other English
Exiles for Religion; and assisted Martyr in the Edition of his Commentary upon
Judges: In whose house he spent the greatest part of his time, as a Companion
of his studies, endeavoring also sometimes to co^pose the contentions among
his Brethren, sometimes to comfort them in their afflictions, repeating usually
these words, Haec non dur abunt aetatem.

16. After his return, he was sent for to a Disputation at Westminster. The
Theses were, 1. That it is repugnant to the Word of God, and custom of the
Primitive Church, that Church Service and Liturgy should be performed in an
unknown Tongue. 2. That every Church has power to alter Rites and Ceremonies
for her better edification. 3. That the propitiatory sacrifice of the Mass for
quick and dead has no warrant in the Word of God. But the Disputation was
broke off, and Religion settled by the Parliament.

17. Jewel was appointed for the Visitation of the Western Churches: and so it
fell out very fitly, that he presented his first labors in the Ministry after
his return, in Devonshire and parts adjacent; there first breaking the bread of
life, where first he received the breath of life. After which Visitation, he
was consecrated Bishop of Sarisbury with much reluctance, often repeating the
Apostle's words, Qui desiderat Episcopatum, desiderat opus.

18. And surely, if ever to any, then unto him was his Bishopric a continual
work: such was his care, that his Church should sustain no loss; such his
pains in Governing and in Preadhing, that abuses might not grow by the
negligence or corruption of Officials. He sat often himself with his
Chancellor, and was president in his Consistory: where though he were a strict
executor of Ecclesiastical Laws, yet no doubt he tempered severity with that
lenity which he exhorted B. Parkhurst to in a certain Letter: Let your
Chancellor (says he) be harder, but you easier; let him wound, but do you
heal; let him lance, do you plaster. Wiseclemency will do more good, then
rigid severity: One man may move more with an Engine, then six with the force
of their hands.

19. When his friends admonished him to lighten his over-heavy burden of ruling
and instructing every particular Church in his Diocese, by Substitutes and
Coadjutors, he replied; Unlearned men can do me no good, and to the Learned I
can do no good: I have no Benefices in my gift to maintain them: Capon my
predecessor has devoured all. This Capon, unhappily understanding that of St.
Paul, as one is said to have read it, Qui desider at Episcopatum bonum, opes
desider at, made havoc of all the good Livings in his Diocese, enriching
himself, and leaving the Bishopric poor.

20. In all the time of his Bishopric, scarce any year passed, which was not
made noble and illustrious by some work of his. The year 1560. began with his
noble challenge at Paul's Cross^, and ended with his confutation of Dr. Cole.
His Apology, begun in the year 61, and per^ected 62, was made so much of by all
Protestants, that it was translated almost into all Tongues. The years 64 and
65, were renowned for his and Mr. Harding's contentions about the forenamed
challenge: In which time also he was solemnly created Doctor, and bare the part
of a Moderatour in those famous Acts, concluded with a divine speech of Queen
ELIZABETH: His Defense fell in the years 66 and 67. After which time diverse
Learned Books were dedicated to him by Martyr, Bullinger and others: and
himself intended diverse other excellent Works; but death prevented the birth of
them,

20. He recreated himself at his meals (a Chapter being first read) with
School-disputes of young Boys, whom he maintained at his Table. After dinner,
his doors and ears were open to all suits and causes. After businesses
dispatched, he retired to his study: About nine he called all his Servants to
account, how they had spent the day; and after prayers admonished them
accordingly: Then to his study again, oft-times till midnight; and so to Bed:
wherein after some part of an Author read unto him by the Gentleman of his Bed
chamber, commending himself to the protection of his Savior, he took his rest.

21. His memory was admirable, raised by Art to the highest pitch. For he could
repeat faithfully any thing he had penned, as he had penned it, after once
reading; and therefore usually at the ringing of the Bell, began to commit his
Sermons to heart. Many barbarous hard names and strange words, after once or
twice reading and short meditating, he could repeat backward and forward. This
Art of Memory he taught his old Tutor Mr. Parkhurst beyond the Sea; so that in
a short time, spending but one hour in a day at it, he learned all the Gospel
backward and forward by this artificial Memory.

22. His continual labors brought his body so low, that as he rode abroad to
preach, a Gentleman advised him to return home for his health sake, saying, it
was better the people should want one Sermon, then be deprived of such a
Preacher; but he replied, It becomes a Bishop to dye in the Pulpit. To one
weeping at his bed side, he used the words of Ambrose; I have not so lived,
that I am ashamed to live longer; neither do I fear to die, because we have a
merciful Lord.

23. In his Will, he considered his Brother and friends with some kind
remembrances, but bestowed the rest most liberally upon his servants,
scholars, and the poor of Sarum.

24. Before his death, he called his household about him, and after an
exposition of the Lord's Prayer, among others used these words; It was my
Prayer always to almighty God, since I had any understanding, that I might
honor his Name with the sacrifice of my flesh, and confirm his Truth with the
oblation of this my body unto death in the defense thereof; which seeing he
has not granted me in this, yet I some what rejoice and solace my self, that
it is worn away and exhausted in the labors of ^y holy Calling. Mr. R^dley,
the Steward of his House, shut his eyes in the year of our Lord 1571. Sept. 22.
about three of the clock in the afternoon.

Anno aetat. 50.

Out of his Life, prefixed to his-Works.
VI. Mr. GEORGE HERBERT.
1. BEing nobly born, and a^eminently endued with gifts of the mind; and having
by industry and happy education perfected them to a great excellency (whereof
his Fellowship in Trinity College in Cambridge, and his Oratourship in the
University; together with that knowledge the Kings Court had taken of him, are
evidences:) quitting all opportunities that he had for worldly preferment, he
betook himself to the Sanctuary, choosing rather to serve at God's Altar, then
to seek the honor of State-employments.

2. To testify his independency upon all others, and to quicken his diligence
in the Ministry, he used in his ordinary speech, when he made mention of the
blessed name of Jesus Christ, to add, My Master.

3. Next God, he loved that which God himself has magnified above all things,
i. e. his Word: so as he has been heard to make solemn Protestation, That he
would not part with one leaf thereof for the whole World, if it were offered
him in exchange.

4. His obedience and conformity to the Church and the discipline thereof, was
singularly remarkable. Though he abounded in private devotions, yet went he
every morning and evening with his Family to the Church; and by his example,
exhortations and encouragements drew the greater part of his Parishioners to
accompany him daily in the public celebration of Divine service.

5. As for worldly matters, his love and esteem to them was so little, as no
man can more ambitiously seek, then he did earnestly endeavor the resignation
of an Ecclesiastical dignity, which he was possessor of. But God permitted not
the accomplishment of his desire, having ordained him his Instrument, for
r^edifying the Church belonging thereunto.

6. With the remembrance whereof, as of an especial good work, when a friend
went about to comfort him on his death bed, he made answer; It is a good work,
if it be sprinkled with the blood of Christ.

7. We conclude with his Motto, with which he used to conclude all things, that
might seem to tend any way to his own honor; Less then the least of Gods
mercies.

Out of the Preface to his Sacred Poems.
VII. Dr. JAMES USSHER Archbishop of Armagh.
1. HE had constantly prayers in his Family four times a day. At six in the
morning, and eight at night, they were such, wherein the gifts of those who
were his Chaplains were exercised: but before dinner and supper in the
Chapel, the Liturgy was constantly observed* which he had in estimation to
his last.

2. A form of Prayer, not only by way of direction, but punctually composed,
he ever ^udged to conduce to the pub^ik benefit, especially in the
Administration of Baptism and the Communion: as well for the shnning and
preventing the disorder and scandalous con^usion found in some men's performance
of them, as the testi^ying of an unity and unanimi^y among us, which St. Paul
^refers as the more excellent way, before the vanity of all spiritual gifts
whatsoever. Concerning which, he wished the judgment of Calvin (in his Letter
to the Protector) were more known then it is, in regard of his esteem with
such as have opposed it.

3. For Ordination, or an ordained Ministry, such was his judgment of the
necessity of it* that he took it to be a Fundmental, and one of those
pri^ciples of Christian Doctri^^ ( Heb. 6. 2.) called, laying on (...) hands.
The great neglect (...) which he much lamented, (...) fearing it would prove to
b^ the undermining the founda^^on of our Church; which (...) Cartwright, in his
Comment^ry upon the place, confirms t^ the full, and in a higher expre^sion, as
if it were the overthro^ of Christianity.

4. What his judgment was (...) the use of the Lords Prayer, h^^ practice
showed it in the constant concluding of his Pray before Sermon with it. And h^
approbation of that gesture (...) kneeling at the Communion as often apparent
before ma^^ witnesses.

5. For Confirmation of chil^^en (which Calvin, Beza and o^^ers much commend,
and wish it ^ere restored) he was not want^ng in observation of it, as an
an^^ent laudable custom. And ^s Benediction was seconded ^^ith good and
spiritual instru^^ion, that stuck to the children ^hen they came to further
years.

6. The Church Catechism, ^espised by some for its plainess, ^e thought
therefore to be the ^ore profitable to the vulgar, and gave order it should
every ^ords day in the afternoon be ^xplained.

7. He was indeed, as Eras^^us says of St. Austin, Vivi^^um quodda^ exemplar
Episcopi, omnibus virtutu^ numeris absolutum. And I wish all that have (...)
reverent opinion of him, would show it, in taking his spirit o^ Moderation for
their Copy.

Out of Dr. Bernard.
VIII Mr. JOHN HALES.
1. MR John Hales, sometime (Fellow of Merto^ College and) Greek Professou^ of
the University of Oxford, long Fellow of Eton College, and at last also
Prebendary of Windsore, was a man, I think, of as great a sharpness,
quickness, and subtilty of Wit, as ever this, or perhaps any Nation bred.

2. His industry did strive, if (...) were possible, to equal the ^argeness of
his capacity: where^y he became as great a Master (...) polite, various and
universal ^earning, as ever yet converst with Books.

3. Proportionate to his Read^ng was his Meditation, which ^urnished him with a
judgment ^eyond the vulgar reach of ^an, built upon unordinary Notions, raised
out of strange ^bservations and comprehen^ive thoughts within himself. So that
he really was a most pro^igious example of an acute and ^iercing Wit, of a vast
and illi^mited knowledge, of a severe and profound judgment.

4. Yet, had he never under^tood a Letter, he had other. Ornaments sufficient
to endear him. For he was of a nature (as we ordinarily speak) so kind, so
sweet, so courting all mankind; of an affability so prompt, so ready to receive
all conditions of men, that I conceive it were as easy a task for any one to
become so knowing as so obliging.

5. As a Christian, none more ever acquainted with the nature of the Gospel,
because none more studious of the knowledge of it, or more curious in the
search; which being strengthened by those great advantages before mentioned,
could not prove other then highly effectual.

6. He took indeed to himself a liberty of judging, not of others, but for
himself: and if ever any man might be allowed in these matters to judge, it was
he, who had so long, so much, so advantageously considered; and which is more,
never had the least worldly design in his determinations.

7. He was not only most truly and strictly just in his se^cular transactions,
most ex^emplarily meek and humble, notwithstanding his perfections, but beyond
all example charitable, giving unto all, preserving nothing but his Books, to
continue his learning and himself: which, when he had before digested, he was
forced at last to feed upon, at the same time the happiest and most unfortunate
helluo of Books; the grand example of Learning, and of the Envy and contempt
which follows it.

8. While he lived none was ever more solicited and urged to write, and
thereby truly to teach the world, then he; none ever so resolved (pardon the
expression, so obstinate) against it. His facile and courteous nature learnt
only not to yield to that solicitation. And yet he cannot be accused for
hiding of his Talent, being so communicative, that his Chamber was a Church,
and his Chair a Pulpit.

9. Only that there might some Taste continue of him* some of his Remains were
collected, such as he could not but write, and such as when written, were out
of his power to destroy. These consist of two parts, of Sermons, and of
Letters: and each of them proceeded from him upon respective obligations. The
Letters, though written by himself, yet were wholly in the power of that
Honorable person to whom they were sent, and by that means they were
preserved. The Sermons preached on several occasions were snatched from him by
his friends, and in their hands, the Copies were continued, or by transcription
dispersed.

10. As to those Cut of Mr. Faringtons Letter.
Letters written from the Synod of Dort, take notice that in his younger days
he was a Calvinist, and even then when he was employed at that Synod, and at
the well pressing Io, 3. 16. by Episcopus, There I bid John Calvin Good Night,
as he has after told me. I have drawn in my mind the model of his Life: but I
am like Mr. Hales in this, which was one of his defects, not to pen any thing,
till I needs must.

Out of Dr. Pearsons Preface to his Golden Remains.
IX. R. EVELYN.
1. HE was taught to pray as soon as he could speak, and he was taught to read
as soon as he could pray. At three years old, he read any character or letter
whatsoever used in out printed books, and within a little time after any
tolerable writing hand; and had gotten by heart, before he was five years of
age, seven or eight hundred Latin and Greek words, together with their Genders
and Declensions.

2. His Promptitude in this nature was prodigious, so that I have been ready to
cry out, Horrori mihi est hoc ingenium. So infatiable were his desires of
knowledge, that upon a time hearing one discourse of Terence and Plautus, and
being told (upon his enquiry concerning those Authors) that the books were too
difficult for him, he wept for very grief and would hardly be pacified.

3. To tell you how exactly he read French, how much of it he spoke and
understood, were to let you only know, that his Mother did instruct him without
any confusion to the ^est. Thus he learned a Gatechisme and many prayers, and
read diverse things in that Language.

4. His usual Recreations were especially the Apologu^s of Aesop: most of which
he could so readily recount, with diverse other stories, as you would admire
from whence he produced them. But he was never without some book or other in
his hand. He often delighted himself in reciting of Poems and Sentences, some
whereof he had in Greek fragments of Comedies, diverse verses out of Herbert;
and amongst the Psalms, his beloved and often repeated, Ecce quam bonum!

5. I might add the incomparable sweetness of his countenance and eyes, the
clean fabric of his body, and prett^ addresses: how easily he forgot injuries,
when at any time I would break and cross his passions, by sometimes
interrupting his enjoyments in the midst of some delicious things which allured
him. But above all, extremely conspicuous was his affection to his younger
brother, with whose impertinencies he would continually bear, saying, he was
but a child and understood no better.

6. There are better things behind, and those are his early Piety and how ripe
he was for God. Never did this child lie in bed (by his good will) longer then
six or seven, Winter or Summer: and the first thing he did being up, was to
say his French prayers, and our Church-Catechisme; after breakfast that short
Latin prayer, which having encountered at the beginning of our Lilies Grammar,
he had learned by heart without any knowledge or injunction of mine.

7. Wonderful was it to observe the Chapters which himself would choose, and
the Psalms and Verses that he would apply upon occasions, and as in particular
he did to some that were sick in my family a little before him; bidding them to
consider the sufferings of Christ, how bitter they were and how willingly he
endured them.

8. The last time he was at Church (which was as I remember at Greenwich) at
his return I asked him, what he brought away from the Sermon? He replied, that
he had remembered two good things, Bonum gratiae, and Bonum gloriae: which
expressions were indeed used, though I did not believe he had minded them.

9. When about Christmas a kinsman of his related to us by the fire side some
passages of the presumptuous fasting of certain Enthusiasts about Colchester,
whilst we were expressing some admiration at the passage, That, says the
Child, is no such wonder; for it is written, Man shall not live by bread alone,
etc.

10 When the Lords day fortnight before he dyed, he repeated to me our
Church-Catechisme, he told me, That he now perceived that his Godfathers were
disengaged; for that since he himself did now understand what his Duty was, it
would be required of him and not of them for the future.

11. How divinely did this pious Infant speak of his being weary of this
troublesome world (into which he was scarcely entered) and whilst he lay sick,
of his desires to go to heaven, that the Angels might conveigh him into
Abraham's bosom, passionately persuading those that tended him to die with him.

12. The day before he took his leave of us, he called to me, and pronounced it
very soberly: Father, says he, You have often told me, that you would give me
your house and your land, your books, and all your fine things: but I tell you,
I shall have none of them; you will leave them all to my brother.

13. That very morning, not many hours before he fell into that sleep which was
his ^last, being in the midst of his Paroxysm, he called to me, and asked me,
whether he should not offend, if in the extremity of his pain, he mentioned so
often the name of God, calling for ease? And, whether God would accept his
prayers if he did not hold his hands out of bed in the posture of praying?
Which when I had pacified him about, he prayed, till his prayers were turned
into eternal praises.

Out of his Fathers Epistle before Chrysostom, of Education.
Grot. ad Patrem. Carere liberis durum non est, nisi his qui habuerunt.
I shall only add the Epitaph written upon this admirable Child by that
excellent Scholar and his kinsman. Mr. Christopher Wase.

EPITAPHIUM. R. EVELYN. I. F.
Quieseit hoe sub ma^more,
Una quieseit quicquid est amabile,
Patres quod optent, aut quod orbi lugeant.
Genas insontes non, ut ante, risus
Lepore condit ampl us.
Morum venustus, quanta paucis contigit
Desidetatur omnibus.
Linguae, Latina. G^llica,
Quas imbibit ^um lacte materno, ta^ent,
Tentarat A^tes, A^tiumque principis
Pi^tatis elementa hause^at.
Lib^is inhaesit improbo labor,
Ut sola mo^s divelleret,
Quid indoles, quid dis^iplina, quid labor
Possint, ab uno disceres.
Puer stupendus! qualis! lie esset senex,
Si fata vitae subministrassent iter!
Sed aliter est visum Deo.
Correptus ille febricula levi jacet:
^acent tot una spes parentum.
Vixit An. V. M. V. III. super D.
Eheu! Delicias breves!
Quicquid placet mortale non placet diu,
Quicquid placet mortale ne placeat nimis
D. ARTHUR LAKE, Bishop of Bath and Wells.
1. THis Holy man was noursed up from his tender age in the exercises of true
piety, and in the studies of various and exquisite learning, and in his riper
years advanced to diverse eminent places of dignity in the Church, not by any
ambitious suit or seeking of his own, but by the special providence of God,
beyond his expectation or desire raised to the height of Episcopal Dignity.

2. He was first placed a Child in the famous School of Winchester, thence
elected Fellow in New College in Oxford, and after Fellow in the College near
Winchester: thence again recalled by the conspiring Votes of that numerous
Society to the Warden-ship of New College. Afterward, preferred first to the
prefecture of the Hospital of S. Crosses near Winchester, then to the Deanery of
the Cathredral Church of Worcester. And lastly to the Bishopric of Bath and
Wells where he dyed.

3. He continued the same in his Rocket, which he had been in his Scholars
Gown, having so well studied Humility (the basis of all virtue) in his younger
years, that in the whole course of his life there was no tumor of pride
appeared, but as well in his actions as in his speeches, equalling himself with
the lowest; not withstanding the many temptations he had both from the eminency
of his place and excellency of his parts to do and speak otherwise. From this
did proceed that singular Affability and easiness of access, which he ever
retained to all sorts of men, and to those of his own Coat especially: so that
no man can say, he was ever slighted, or superciliously used by him.

4. Add hereunto his rare Tranquillity and Contentedness of mind. He
retained the same temper in all the alterations of his estate; So that
whatsoever outwardly befell him, either to the better or the worser part, he
seemed very little to be affected, surely nothing disquieted there withal. A
strange serenity of mind in him; whereof I take it also to have been a good
argument, that (as I have often heard him say) so long as he was in perfect
health of his body, he did never dream.

5. His Temperance was such, that at the greatest and best furnished tables,
whereat the condition of his place required his presence, his feeding was
commonly upon one dish and that none of the daintiest. And when he was not
hindered by resort of strangers unto him, he fasted usually four times in the
week from his supper, and spent that time in framing some Meditation or other
upon a piece of Holy Scripture.

6. Unless it were in the company of Scholars, and in such ingenious and
pleasant Discourses as are incident thereto (wherein he would sometimes
express much freedom of innocent mirth) a man could not observe, that he took
much delight in any worldly thing whatsoever: an evident argument, that his
intellectual part had the predominancy over his sensual, or rather indeed that
Grace ruled them both, and that the Man in him was subordinate to the Christian.

7. As he had been always liberal, from the time he had any thing to give; so
upon the increase of his fortunes he improved that virtue, even to a kind of
Magnificence. And though his forwardness in giving never let him stay till his
purse was full, so that he attained not to the doing of any pompous work: yet
his ordinary largess to the poor at his Ga^e and in the streets; his
Contributions to pious works of all sorts; his Exhibitions to poor Scholars
both abroad and in the University; his increasing the allowance of the poor
Brethren of S. Cross; his maintaning of two Lectures in New College in Oxford,
one for the Hebrew Tongue, another for the Mathematics; (A great part of his
books, he disposed to the Library of New College by a deed of gift, diverse
years before his death, reserving the use of them only for his life time.) his
leading the way to the founding of a Library at Worcester, and another at
Wells, are sufficient instances of his exceeding Bounty.

8. His Contempt of Wealth I may reckon as a part of his Magnanimity. I dare
say, that in all Elections of Scholars, Collation of Orders, and Benefices,
Dispositions of Offices, and Grants of College and Church-Leases, that passed
through his hands (as there passed in his time very many) he never fouled them
with the least touch of a Gehaz^'s reward, which integrity of his, together
with his open*hand*dednesse and Housekeeping, were the only Causes that he
left no greater Estate behind him.

9. His Ability to teach, as it was very great, so did it never appear more,
then after he was a Bishop. For though the acts of government alone may seem
sufficient to take up a man in that place: yet he never ceased to adorn the
Pulpit with his no less frequent and assiduous, then learned and pious labors.
Witness his ordinary preaching in the Cathedral Church of Wells; his frequent
excursions into the Parishes adjoining; and indeed his leaving of no place,
where he came, if it were a fit time of preaching, unsupplyed. Besides all
which his ordinary Discourses were in one kind or other as good as Lectures to
those that heard them.

10. Besides his ordinary Chapel hours, which he saw duly and by all
frequented; he caused many of his household to assist every morning at the six a
clock prayers in the Cathredral' Church adjoining: He never sa^e down at his
meals, but he had, according to the ancient fashion of Bishops, a Chapter of
the Bible read by one whom he kept for that purpose; and lastly, at the close
of the night, he called his whole Family into his ordinary Dining room, and
there, in his own person, most devoutly commended them by his prayers to
Almighty God.

11. He never conferred holy Orders upon any person, whom he did not first
examine strictly according to the Canons of the Church; neither did he trust
herein any Chaplain or other Deputy, but himself personally performed the
office. And as he was provident to plant a good Ministry in his Diocese, so
was he no less careful to cherish those who were already planted. The most
eminent among them for piety and learning, he did not only use most familiarly,
but studied to draw them nearest to himself by providing them of Prebends in
his Church: and to the weaker sort of them, he spared not to give his advice
and directions upon all occasions, how they might enable themselves for the
better discharge of their Calling.

12. In the exercise of the Discipline of the Church, he carried himself so,
that by his own practice he wrought a great reverence thereof, even in those
who were otherwise not well affected thereunto. For when any enormous Offender
was censured in his Consistory, whose punishment and penance was fit should be
performed in the Cathedral Church, as incestuous persons, notorious adulterers,
notorious schismatics or the like; Himself was usually the preacher at such
times: and this he did often and upon diverse occasions, and in such his Sermons
did so open the grievousnesse of those Offenses, and the Authority of the
Censurers and Discipline of the Church, as for the most part wrought great
Contrition in the parties punished; and after Sermon before the whole
Congregation, himself gave them Absolution. All which he performed with that
gravity, learning and power, as gave great comfort to all, and bred, no doubt,
a general reverence and awe of the Censures and Authority of the Church.

13. His Trienniall Visitations, he always kept in his own person; and kept
them so, that (to say no more) he was ever welcome where he came. They resorted
and flockt to him in every place, tanquam ad salutare and beneficum sidus; yea,
they brought their Children and whole Families to receive his blessing, and to
be confirmed by him. Which act he performed, not in a tumultuary manner, and as
we use to say, hand over head, but with advised deliberation and choice,
admitting only those, whom either by the Certificate of their Minister, or the
examination of his own Chaplains he found to be sufficiently instructed in the
Principles of Religion, and so by the intention of our Church capable of the
benefit of that sacred Action.

14 In the Cathedral Church of Wells, whether it were so that himself preached
or no, after the Sermon done and the Psalm sung as the manner is, Himself
standing up in the Episcopal Seat gave the Benediction to the people, after the
example of the High Priest in the old Testament, Number. 6. 23. which thing as he
performed like himself. i. e. In a most grave and fatherlike manner; So any man
that had but seen, with what attentive and devout gestures all the people
received it, what apparent comfort they took in it, and how careful every
particular man was, not to depart the Church without it, could not but
conclude, That there is a secret Virtue in the prayers and blessings, as of
natural, So of Spiritual Parents.

15. In his last Testament, amongst other pious recommendations of his soul to
God, he has these words: I desire to end my life in that faith, which is now
established in the Church of England, whereof I am a member, and have been by
Gods blessing well nigh thirty years a Preacher. And my Souls unfeined desire
is, that it may ever flourish, and fructify in this kingdom and in all his
Majesty's Dominions, and from thence be propagated to other Countries, which
sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, whether Infidels or Heretics.
Amen.

16. Having some few hours before his departure made a zealous and devout
Confession both of his faith and sins to the Bishop of Ely there present, from
whom also he received Absolution, according to the Order of our Church; and
being assisted to the last gasp with the comfortable and heavenly prayers of
that divine Prelate; after he had taken particular leave of all about him, and
given them respectively both his counsel and benediction, He speedily yielded
up his soul to God.

Libenter mortalis sum, qui sum futurus immortalis. Out of his Preface to his
Sermons.
The second Decad.
I. EDWARD PEYTO Esquire;
1. HE was a person, who lived a great deal of life in a little time;
especially dating it (as he did) from the memorable pains of his renovation.
When I consider him in his childhood at the University of Oxf. exciting others
by his example, to mind the end of their being there; how strict and studious
he appeared throughout his course; how much farther he went before, in point of
proficiency, then he came behind others in point of years; how much applauded
he was by all, for his public exercises in Lent, both as an orator at the
Desk, and as a Philosopher in the Schools; adding honor to his Degrees. When I
reflect upon his progress through much variety of learning, through every part
of the Mathematics, especially through Algebra the most untroden part of them:
and when I compare with all this, the great Sobriety of his temper, his
unaffected humility, and (after a public aberration) his perfect return into
the way, out of which for some years he had unhappily been seduced; last of
all, when I remember, how whilst nothing but prosperity made some in the world
to hug their error, he hated his so much the more, the more he had prosper'd
by its delusion (which was an argument of the most generous and Christian
temper:) I may fitly affirm of him, That being made perfect in a short time, he
fulfilled a long time.

2. I do the rather think it a duty, to praise him after his decease, the less
he was able to endure it, whilst yet alive. And I conceive my self the fitter,
to speak a little in his abse^ce of his perfections, because so long as he was
present I only told him of his faults (never leaving him as a Monitor, until
I thought he left them.) For having found him my noble friend, I could not but
afford him my reprehensions (yet still attended with respect) in whatsoever
regard I could think them useful. And 'twas the mark of an excellent judicious
Spirit, that he valued me most for my greatest freedom in that particular,
even then when our Heads were most at enmity (by their over great influence of
his Fathers persuasion upon his own) there still remained in both our Hearts a
most inviolable Friendship. He had impartially considered that sacred Aphorism,
That to refuse instructions, is to despise ones own Soul.

3. The manner of his departure did most remarkably resemble Sir Spencer
Compton's (a person so singularly qualified by grace and nature and education,
that however his extraction was highly noble, I may confidently say, it was the
lowest thing in him:) who dyed at Bruges about the time, wherein the man of our
desires expired at Compton. Never did I hear of a more heavenly Valediction to
all the contentments. of the earth, then was given by these two at their
dissolutions. Never yet did I hear of any two farewells so much alike. Never
were any more admired by those that saw them whilst they were going, or more
desired when they were gone.

4. As he deserves a noble Elegy, so he needs none at all: being one of whom I
have seldom or never heard an ill word spoken. And he was so much the less
obnoxious to the dishonesty of the tongue, because (as far as his Quality would
give him leave) he ever delighted in that obscurity, which most young Gentlemen
are wont to shun. For although his extraction was noble, and his Fortune
extremely fair; though his natural parts and abilities were truly great, as
well as greatly improved by art and industry; yet still his modesty and his
meekness were so much greater then all the rest, that, in a perfect
contrariety to the vain glorious and hypocritical, he ever turned his worst
side outward.

5. It was, no doubt, an effect of those two Virtues (his Modesty and his
meekness) that he so constantly observed that precept of S. James: For he, if
any man living, was swift to hear, but slow to speak. And when he thought it
his turn to speak, it was rather much, then in many words. As the speech of
Menelaus (...).
described by Homer: so perfectly free were his Discourses, from the fault of
impertinencie or superfluity.

6. So far was he from sitting down in the chair of the scornful (as too many
of his Quality are wont to do:) nay so far from walking in the Counsels of the
ungodly (from the time that he found them to be such) that he made it his care
and chiefest caution (in his later years more especially) not so much as to
stand in the way of sinners.

7 He was a true Nathaniel, an Israelite indeed, in whom was no guile: a right
honest man, which is a nobler title then right honorable; though I may say
very truly, that he had many due titles of honor too. For not to speak of his
Ancestors, who came in hither with the Conquest, and that from the City Po^ton
in France, from whence they derive the name of Peyto: I think it more for his
honor, to have been many ways (...).
good: viz. a good Husband, and a good Father; a a good Master, and a good
Friend; a good Neighbor, and a good Landlord; a good Christian, and a good
Man. And, which is a sign of more goodness then all the rest, he never thought
he was good enough; especially in the first, and in the two last Particulars.

8. He was so eminently sober, that I believe he was never known to have sinned
against his own body in any kind; so eminently righteous, that he was in pain,
till he had rendered to every man his due. Being so sober, and so righteous, he
is inferred to have been Godly too. For the most material part of Godliness is
moral honesty; nor was there any thing more conspicuous in the life of our
blessed Lord. The second Table is the touchstone of our Obedience to the first.

2. He enjoyed that Euthanasia, that happy calmnesse of death, which the
Emperor Augustus was wont to pray for: and that in both acceptions of the
word. For first, however he was sick of a burning Fever, yet without the least
taint of deliration. That knot of union betwixt his body and his soul, was not
violently broken, but very leisurely untyed; they having parted like two
friends, not by a rude falling out, but a loving Farewell. And secondly,
whereas two things make death terrible, sudde^ness and sin,: he was so armed
against the first, that he did not only take care for the setting of his house
in order, but sent for the Divine to assist his devotion, and farther told his
Physician, that God had sent him his Summons. And he used the help also of our
Englissh Letany, which prompts us to pray against sudden death, which he
commanded one of his servants to assist him with upon his death bed, bestowing
upon it (when he had done) a great deal of holy admiration.

10. Again, so well was he prepared against the second, that for the
tenderness of his Conscience and his deep resentment of all his sins, those of
the times more especially, in which he deplored his unhappiness that he had
had a share: next for his hatred of himself in the remembrance of them, and his
steadfast resolutions of better life, and of making ample satisfaction for every
ill that he had done: and last of all for his solicitude, that all his Family
might live in the fear of God: in all these respects, I say, he appears a more
then ordinary Example.

11. Marks of his sincerity were: 1. That he looked upon his failings, as
through a macroscope, which made them seem nearer and very much greater then
they were. 'Twas his own expression, That all the sins of his former life did
even kick in his very face; warning all those who stood about his sick bed, to
beware of those sins which the world calls little; and of the no-little sins,
which the world calls none; yea of the least appearances and opportunities of
sin 2. That he was not merely a death bed penitent, but began the great work in
his time of health. 3. That he insisted on the nature of true repentance, which
still imports an amendment and reformation of life: abhorring and deploring
those desperate notions of repentance, which the world is so commonly mistaken
in. 4. That after some Conflicts he had with the Ghostly enemy (that so he
might be happier in a Victorious, then he could possibly have been in an
untempted innocence) God was pleased very signally to speak peace unto his
Conscience, and to give him a foretast of Glory. 5. That he extended his care
to the souls of others, with as true a Charity as to his own; exhorting one
against the love of this world, charging another to be watchful against
intemperance, exciting a third unto frequent and servent prayer. In general and
in special, he was by his precepts as well as practice, a true preacher of
Repentance.

12. In imitation of good old Jacob, before he was gathered to his Fathers, he
gave a blessing to all his Children. And farther gave it in charge to his
virtuous Consort, not to educate his Children, so much to learning and other
accomplishments, as to the knowledge and service and fear of God: and that they
should be seasoned with those his last principles, which by his later
experience he found the best.

Ob. 8. Call. 7. An. 1658. aet 31.

Out of his Funeral Sermon by Mr. Thomas Pierce.
Dr. WILLIAM LAUD, Arch. B. of Canterbury
1. HE was by many suspected and charged not only as popishly affected
himself, but as a poisoner of the whole stream and current of the reformed
religion in England: at last he was treated either as a heretic or a traitor,
or both, to Church and State.

2. As to this aspersion of his ^eing popish in his judgment (which reflected,
in the repute and event, upon all the Bishops of England) truly his own Book
may best of any, and sufficiently vindicate him to be a great Antipapist: great
I say; because it seems by that learned dispute, that he dissented from Popery,
not upon popular Surmises and easy Prejudices, but very learned and solid
grounds, which true reason and religion make good, agreeable to the judgment
of the Catholic Church in the purest and best times. And in this the Aarch B.
does to my judgment, so very impartially weigh the state and weight of all the
considerable differences between the Papists and the English Protestants (not
such as are simple, futile and fanatic, but learned, serious and sober) that
he neither gratifies the Romanist nor exasperates him beyond what is just;
neither warping to a novel and needless super-reformation, which is a deformity
on the right hand, nor to a sub-reformation which is a deformity on the left;
but keeping that golden mean, which was held by the Church of England, and the
greatest defenders of it.

3. I am indeed prone to think, that he wished there could have been any fair
close or accommodation between all Christian Churches (the same which many
grave and earned men have much desired:) And it may be, he thought himself no
unfit Instrument to make way for so great and good a work, considering the
eminencies of parts, power and favor which he had. Happily he judged (as many
learned and moderate men have) that in some things between Papists and
Protestants, differences are made wider, and kept more open, raw and sore then
need be, by the private pens and passions of some men, and the interests of
some little parti's, whose partial policies really neglect the public and true
interest of the Catholic Church and Christian religion, which consists much in
peace as well as in purity, in Charity as in Unity.

4. He was neither Calvinist, nor Lutheran, nor Papist, as to any side or
party, but all, so far as he saw they agreed with the reformed Church of
England, either in fundamentals, or innocent and decent superstructures. Nor
did he esteem any thing as the Voice of the Church of England, which was not
publicly agreed to and declared by King and Parliament, according to the
advice and determinate judgment of a National Synod and lawful Convocation
convened and approved by the chief Magistrate, which together made up the
complete Representative, the full sense and suffrage of this Church.

5. After his confinement, having occasion to wait on him, I heard him
protesting with a serious attestation of his ^ntegrity before Gods omniscience,
that however he might mistake in the mean and method, yet he never had any
other design then the glory of God, the service of his Majesty, and the good
order peace and deconcy of the Church of England: that he was so far from
complying with Papists, in order to confirm them in their errors, that he
rather chose such methods to advance the honor of the Reformed Religion in
England, as he believed might soonest silence the cavils of fiercer Papists,
induce the more moderate Recusants to come in to us, as having less visible
occasion given them by needless distances and disputes to separate from us.

6. He added, that he had (further) a desire, as much as he could, to relieve
the poor and distressed condition of many Ministers, whom he had to his grief
observed in Wales and England, where their discouragements were very great by
reason of the tenuity and incompetency of their Livings: That he found the
sordid and shameful aspect of religion, and the Clergy gave great advantages
to those that were Popishly inclined, who would hardly ever think it best for
them to join with that Church, which did not maintain either ^ts own honor or
its Clergy to ^ome competency and come^inesse.

7. Doubtless this Prelate ^ad more in him of Charity, Liberality, Munificence
and Magnificence (as appears by ^he works he undertook to found, to build or to
repair) ^hen ever I saw in any of those, who are the having and get^ing from,
not the giving enemies to, Episcopacy.

Aditions of ARCHBISHOP LAUD.
1. HE was born of honest Parents at Reading in Barkshire. There he built an
Almes-house and endowed it with 200 l. per an. As appears by his own Diary,
which he constantly kept of all the passages of his life.

2. He was very plain in apparel, and sharply checked such Clergymen whom he
saw go in rich or gaudy clothes, commonly calling them of the Church
triumphant. At a Visitation in Essex reproving a Minister for his finenesse,
and showing his own plain apparel, he received this answer: My Lord, You have
better clothes at home, and I have worse.

3. His munificence appears chiefly by St. John's College in Oxford (where he
was bred) beautified, enlarged and enriched by him: and by St. Paul's Church,
the Masterpiece of his designs. One Satyrically said, He plucked down Puritans
and Property, to build up Paul's and Prerogative. But now that Church, formerly
approacht with due reverence, is entered with fear of the falling of it: and is
so far from having its old decays repaired, that it is daily decayed in its
new reparations.

4. An. 1645. Ian. 10. He was brought to the Scaffold, which he ascended with a
cheerful Countenance, as rather to gain a Crown then lose a head: He made a
Sermon-Speech on Heb. 12. Let us run with patience etc. Protested his innocence
and integrity, as never intending any subversion of Laws and Liberty; declared
his inward comfort; had his head stricken off at one blow, while he prayed,
Lord receive my Soul.

Out of Dr. Gaudens Ecclesiae Ang. Suspiria, B. 4. chapter 23.
III. ARCHBISHOP USHER.
1. Dr. James Usher, lat^ Archbishop of Armagh and Lord Primate of Ireland, I
reckon as ours, because not only his ashes and morta^ remains are deposited
with us, but he lived his last years o^ Exile, and ended his mortality amongst
us in England. Where besides his constant pains i^ preaching, even to his last,
h^ has left as many of his learned works, which are enjoyed by, and highly
esteemed of all worthy men, who were blessed with the example of his great and
unspotted worth, which no envy, no malice can, I think, be so impudent as to
blemish.

2. The real excellencies of this Bishop every way were such, that they
exceeded all ordinary measures of humane commendation and capacity, extending
to something of admiration (...)
and ecstacy. None but those whose minds are enlarged to some proportion of his
accomplishments can be able to comprehend his worth and amplitude: So vast, so
transcendent, so astonishing was his learning and understanding in all kinds of
knowledge, divine and humane, that he was as the Cynosure by which all great
Divines steered, and as the Sun-Dial by which all great Scholars set their
watches.

3. So accurate was he in all useful and learned Languages, occidental and
oriental; So clear a prospect he had of all History and Chronology, of all
Controversies, ancient and modern, that nothing escaped him: nor was he only
as a Reader and spectatour, but as a Judge and Censor, as an Arbitrator and
Dictator in Disputes, as one that sat in a Tribunal of Sovereign Learning over
all. Nothing was new or hidden to him in Philology, Philosophy, Geography,
Astronomy, Mathematics, and least of all in Theology or Divinity: he had
conquered all others, but in this he triumphed, which was the Trophie, Crown
and Centor of all his other studies.

4. There was scarce any Book, printed or manuscript, worth reading, in private
or public Libraries throughout all Christendom, which he had not read, either
in the Copy or Original, and digested into the method or design of his studies;
yea, and to a miracle remembered, as to the main contents of it. To the
immensity of his learning there was added excellent Principles of Politic
Prudence, as a Governor of the Church, and as a Counselor of State, taken
from that great experience he had gotten, and many excellent Observations he
had made out of all Histories, as well humane as divine; though he always laid
the greatest weight upon the grounds and instances of holy Scripture, which
gives the truest judgment of Wisdom or Folly.

5. His whole life, as to the Conversable part of it, was so civil, so sacred,
so affable, so am^^ble to all persons of any worth or ingenuity that came to
him, that nothing was more Venerable. I never saw him either morose or
reserved, much less sower or supercilious. If he were sad, it made him not
silent, but only more solemn: if he were cheerful, he abhorred not such
facetious and ingenious elegancies of discourse, as showed that holiness was no
enemy to Cheerfulness, but great Graces might safely smile, and innocent
Virtues might sometimes laugh without offense.

6. Whose humble and holy Industry was such, that besides his vast designs for
writing and printing, he never failed, since he was Presbyter, Prelate or
Primate, to preach once every week, if health permitted him; besides many times
on the week days upon occasion: Nor was it any great pains to a person of his
fullness, who did not pump for, but pour out his Sermons like a pregnant
spring, with a strange plenty, clarity and vivacity. If all Bishops hearts and
mouths had been as open as his, sure they had stopped the mouths and silenced
the tongues of all their Adversaries.

7. However, He held a fraternal Correspondency and actual Communion (as
occasion offered) with those Reformed Churches, and those Ministers, who
approved, yea desired Episcopacy, though they could not enjoy any Bishops,
properly so called, after the custom of all ancient Churches; yet, with S.
Cyprian Sine sp^ sunt, and perditionem maximam Dei indignatione acquirunt, qui
schi smata serunt, and relicto Episcopo suo, ultro sibi for as pseudo^ Episcopum
constituunt. Epist. 61. Lib 1.
he flatly condemned, and branded with the sin and scandal of Schism, all those
who wilfully cast off, injustly separated from their lawful Bishops, who
professed the same Orthodox Faith and reformed Religion; affirming that he
would not receive the Sacrament at such Ministers hands.

8. This excellent Bishop, who deserved to be esteemed one of the Primates of
all Learning, Piety and Virtue in the Christian world, was, by Gods wonderful
dispensations, made a Primate in sufferings. He lived to see, yea to feel, his
Venerable Person by some men shamefully slighted, his Function as a Bishop
exautorated, decryed, depressed, despised; his Revenues first stopped, then
alienated and confiscated; his moderate stock of movables (all, except his
excellent Library) and at last a reserve of some moneys, seized and swept away
by the Irish. After this, the profits of the Bishopric of Carlisle (then
vacant) being conferred on him by the late King, for the support of his age and
exile, even these were taken from him by those that took all Church-revenues
from all Bishops: and a Pension allowed him, which, after a year or two, was
never paid him.

9. At last this great Personage, the Primate of Armagh (whom Cardinal
Richelieu, with many other great Princes and States, had invited with very
honorary Propositions to make only his residence with them, as an honor to
their Country) was reduced to a small Stipend or Salary, which he was to earn
by preaching, as long as his sight and strength served him. These failing him
(and in him all the learned and better world) he lived upon Gods providence and
the Contributions (for the most part) of some noble Personages (wherein I was
happy to do him some service:) among whom none has merited and erected a more
lasting Monument of honor, then the Countess of Peterborough; under whose
grateful and hospitable roof this mortal Angel, this incomparable Bishop left,
as the English, so all the world, which was not worthy of him.

Out of Dr. Gaudens Eccles. Ang. S^pipria B. 4. ^h. 24.
IV. THOMAS BRANDESTON
1. A Rich Clothier of Bergholt (commonly, Barfold) in Suffolk, and more rich
in good works, for which his Memory is fresh, and will ever be preserved there.
Whose example is worthy to be commended to all the Clothiers in England.

2. He well knew, that thrift and diligence must bring in fuel for
munificence: and was both himself a laborious man in his Calling, and an exact
Overseer of his Workfolks, not enduring idleness, no nor any vain expenses.

3. His manner was, as he walked along the street to observe the painfulnesse
of the poorer sort, and at the Houses where he heard them diligent at their
business, to cast in at the doors his money liberally, and so knocked and away.
Which custom of his the people were so acquainted with, that they knew his
knock, and would hasten to the door and gladly take up his Alms.

4. Often did he visit the poor Houses, and look into their Cupboards, and
finding but slender provision there, leave money with them to buy them bread:
and if he perceived them to want Clothes, took care they should be better
apparelled at his charge.

5. It was his Custom also to provide many Suits of apparel, and give them to
some friend or servant to be distributed. Go, said he, and dispose of these
Commodities, and that they may go off the better, take money with you, and give
so much to one, and so much to another, that they may accept of the Clothes the
more willingly. Sometimes he would send for the Tailors and cause them to cut
out apparel for the poor out of a whole broad Cloth. For such Clothiers the
Lord provides bright shining Robes of Glory in his Kingdom.

6. He used to go to the weekly Lecture at Manigtree, and there had two purses
full of money: the one he would empty to the poor that came there to his
chamber; the other to others that would wait for him on the way as he returned
home. This was his way to lay up his Treain heaven, where no thieves can break
through and steal.

7. At Barfold on the Lecture day the Ministers that met at Church were
constantly entertained at his house and feasted, being pleased no less with
his company and good discourse then with his good cheer: And in another fair
room were fed at the same time a good number of poor people, that were his
welcome guests at all times.

8. He would sometimes delight himself in a relation, how his liberality once
saved him a thousand pounds. For, coming from London with this great charge of
money, and alone, he was set on by robbers, and distributing among them readily
at the first demand four or ^ive pounds, they were so taken with his cheerful
Bounty, that they did not search him, but guarded him on his way homeward till
he was past danger of the rest of their Confederates; for which civility he
freely gave them forty shillings more.

9. This good man had one sore affliction in his eldest Daughter, troubled some
space of time with a great Temptation, believing God would damn her: with whom
after he had used all fair means to disdeceive her and administer comfort (but
in vain) he took this course. He calls her into his private chamber, and with a
stern countenance said thus. Thou think God has no mercy for thee, but will
surely damn thee: come on then, and blaspheem that God. The daughter was amazed
at this command of her Father, and when he still pressed it (to try her) fell
down at his feet and cried out: Though you be my Father, yet I dare not at your
command sin against my God: I dare not blaspheem his holy name. Thou fool, said
the Father, with tears in his eyes: and can thou think, that that God whom
thou fear to displease, whom thou dare not sin against, can be so cruel as
to damn thee. Avoid Satan, The poor Daughter received comfort presently, and
the good Father was overjoyed.

10. To leave the rest to the remembrance of those that knew him, I add but
one thing more. Every Lords day after morning Sermon, he retired to his chamber
and spent his Dinnertime in Meditation: but, at Supper, he feasted his Family,
and his Children, that were placed out and married in the Town; and thus did
both receive much joy himself, and maintained unity, and amity amongst them.
Farewell, brave Clothier! May thy Example ^ever be forgoten.

From Tradition of good hands.
IV. Mr. JOHN DOD.
(...). HE was born at Shotledge in Cheshire, (the youngest of seventeen
children) bred ^n Jesus College in Cambridge. At a Disputation at one
Commencement, he was so facetiously solid, that Oxford-men there present
courted him home with them, and would have planted him in their University.

2. He was a passive Nonconformist, not loving any one the worse for difference
in judgment about Ceremonies, and acknowledged how God under the government of
Bishops had given a marvelous increase to the Gospel, and that godly men might
Compo^^ therewith comfortably. And to his dying day is conceived (though
roughly used) to have stuck to what he had written on the five Commentaries of
Obedience to lawful Authority.

3. Some Gallants at Sr. A. Cope's Table forbore swearing in reverence of Mr.
Dod being present: and confessing so much, he took occasion thence to discourse
of the power of Gods restraining grace: and how it would keep us from
wickedness, were we not wanting to our selves.

4. He would sit along while in contemplation of a flower, and said to one
inviting him to see a fair house, I can see much of God, even in this little
flower: more then in your stately buildings.

5. When the Soldiers had plundered him of his linen, he in their absence to
search after more, took a pair of the sheets, and clapped them under him in his
chair, and so conceals them and saves them from the Soldiers, much pleasing
himself after their departure, that he had, as he said, plundered the
plunderers, and by a lawful felony saved somewhat of his goods.

6. He was an exquisite Hebrician, and with his society and directions in one
Vacation taught that tongue to Mr. John Gregory that rare linguist, Chaplain of
Christ Church, who survived him but one year, dying at Kidlington Mar. 13.
1646. buried at Christ-Church in Oxford.

7. Mr. Dod dyed 1645. and was buried at Fausly in Northamptonshire: with whom
the old Puritan may seem to expire, and in his grave to be interred. Humble,
Meek, Patient, Hospital, Charitable, as in his Censures of, so in his alms to
others, would I could truly say but half so much of the next Generation.

Out of Mr. Fullers Church History.
Mr. JOSEPH MEDE
1. HIs parents were of honest rank, and though not by eminency of Condi^ion,
yet truly ennobled by hav^ng such a Son: of whom also Essex (near Bishops
Stratford) may justly glory as the place of his Nativity.

2. His friends, encouraged by their conceived hopes of him in his blossom,
placed him in the University of Cambridge, devoting him to learning in the
service of Christ, in that Coll. that bears his name. And what pains himself
took for his own improvement, may easily be imagined; and that to the rich vein
of his pregnant wit, an assiduous industry was not wanting. The fruits whereof,
soon appeared with that luster, that drew upon him the eyes not only of those
in his own College, but of the whole University: who looked upon him, as one
eminent in all kind of learning requisite for his standing.

3. He wanted that felicity of utterance, which uses to set off a slight
knowledge, having so great an hesitation in his speech, as made his expressions
painful to himself, and nothing pleasing to others. wherein yet, he in time
became a rare example, how much a discreet observation of such an imperfection
can work toward the cure of i^. For by a heedfull inspection into the nature of
his defect, what words he most stuck at, either single, or in Conjuncture, and
at what times he was more or less freo; he attained so great a mastery over
that infirmity, that he was able to deliver a whole Sermon without any
considerable hesitation.

4. By that time he had taken the degree of a Master in Arts, he had made so
happy a progress through all kind of Academical studies, as that Title was not
(as with many it is) any false inscription. His name was up, and he looked on as
one extraordinary seen in all those Arts and Languages that accomplish a
Divine: an acute Logician, a profound Philosopher, a skilful Mathematician, and
one not slightly versed in History and Chronology. In all which, but especially
in these last studies, he after became so great a Prosicient, that for his
singular knowledge and dextrous application of Prophesie^ to their punctual
times, he was worthily admired by those tha^ knew him.

5. His first showing himself abroad was by an address to that great pattern
and Patron o^ learning, Andrews (after Bishop of Winchester) in a large
discourse in Latin de Sanctuat^ relativa. Which gained the approbation of so
exact a judgment (as was his to whom i^ was presented) in so high a^ measure,
that the Bishop stood his firm friend in a business at Court about his
fellowship, and after that desired him for his household Chaplain: which place,
notwithstanding he refused, as valuing the freedom of his studies above any
hopes of preferment. And this freedom which he enjoyed in his Cell (as he used
cheerfully to term it) gave him a happy advantage of increasing his knowledge
in all kinds.

6. His constant reading the Greek Lecture in the College (which he obtained
soon after his being chosen Fellow, and held all his life) made that tongue
familiar to him: and his daily private readings to his pupils (to whom he was
an able guide in all kind of Philosophical and Mathematical studies) preserved
these parts of Academical learning. Nor were his hours of recreation (which was
very seldom in bodily exercises) this way unprofitable to himself and others,
being for the most part spent in learned discourses with his friends; and for
diverse years together mostwhat with his worthy friend Mr. William Chapel,
Hebrew Lecturer, in the same College, keeping that language in continual
exercise; and withal, by many happy excursions into the neighboring
Languages, gained no small treasure of knowledge in the Chaldee, Syriac, and
Arabic.

7. The time he had for retirement to his private studies, he spent principally
in a curious enquiring into the more abstruse parts of learning, and such as
were remote from the vulgar track. As in the exact calculation of time for
clearing the historical part of Scripture: to which he joined the laborious
search of Antiquities relating to Religion, Ethnic, Jewish and Christian. The
fruits of which study appear visible in his works.

8. Among other studies he spent no small pains in sounding the depths of
Astrology: and was wont in familiar discourse to determine, that (to use his
own apposite and fit words) the (...) coeli does beget in man (...)
temperamen^^; and this (...) temperamenti does beget (...) ing^nii, in the way
of direct and natural subordination: but, that here the chain is broken off,
because (...) ingen^i does beget or produce (...) actionis in man only
contingently, and without any necessity. And thus e contra, that (...) coel:
does beget (...) temperamenti, and the (...) temperamenti, (...) ingen^^; this
naturally, as before: But, that this (...) ingen^i should beget (...) actionis,
this is from no necessity; because it is in man's power and liberty, who is
naturally illdisposed, through the improvements of art, and especially by the
grace of God, to become good or better, as the divine goodness shall minister
opportunity. Which is as much as can be said in so few words, and might
determine the question to all judicious and knowing men, concerning the power
of the stars and those celestial influences.

9. From these he proceeded unto those mysterious Sciences, which made the
ancient Chaldeans and Egyptians so famous, tracing them, as far as he could
have any light to guide him, in their Prophetic Schemes, Hieroglyphics, and
Oneiromancy, or interpretation of dreams, for the affinity which he conceived
they might have with the language of the Prophets: to the understanding of
which he showed a most indefatigable desire: as witness especially those
labors of his which are published upon Daniel and the Revelation.

10. He ever seemed most delighted with those studies, where he might strain
the ^inews of his brain: and therefore used to set upon those difficult places
of Scripture, where he found error had insconced it self with obscurity,
antiquity or multitude of mistakes. By this means he became furnished with
variety of discourse, of things no less delightful and profitable, then out
of the vulgar rode of studies. Which made his company much desired and
frequented by Scholars, both of the same College and from abroad. To these ^e
seemed to impart himself with that willingness, that it seemed questionable,
whether had the greater desire, they to hear, or he to communicate his studies
to them. Which made a familiar friend of his once mertily to say to some, that,
having been partakers of his discourses, gave him thanks: That they might spare
their thanks; for that they were not so much beholding to him for delivering
himself to them, as he was to them for hearing him.

11. By this means he so fixed his notions in his memory, that he made them
ever his own, and himself able at any time readily to deliver them in a
complete and well formed discourse. Such are those excellent Diatribae now
published, wherein he has discovered more rarities and pieces of profound and
unvulgar learning, then are to be found in some vast volumes of many much
admired Authors. These were Academical exercises calculated for the meridian
of an University, and not fitted for the vulgar.

12. In popular Discourses or Sermons, he disliked the unnecessary quotation of
Authors and the use of foreign languages and terms of Art (too much practiced
even among men, otherwise learned and religious) as savouring of as much
inconsideration, as for shoo* makers (it was his comparison) to bring shoos to
be drawn on with their lasts in them: And would say, that Arts and Languages,
though they were necessary and excellent helps for the framing of any
d^scourse, and to enable men to instruct others, yet were they to be laid by in
discourses to the unlearned.

13. He was so far from the vanity of ostentation, that it is heard to say,
whether he was more eminent for his rare knowledge, or for his singular modesty
in valuing his own abilities: in so much as he could, not without trouble, hear
of that opinion, which some (deservedly enough) had conceived of his great
learning; owning only some diligence, freedom from prejudice and studium
partium as his best abilities. To this, as a near alliance of modesty may be
added his averseness from all ambitious thoughts, and affectation of great and
public places, to the pu^suance of which many have been spurred by the
conscience of lesser abilities. It was indeed his highest ambition to be in
tranquillitatc and s^c^ssu.

14. His great knowledge did not (as it does with many) make him apt either to
contend with any, or for difference in opinion to break the bond of amity: but
was ever most tenderly studious of the peace of the Church. To whose censure he
ever submitted his private judgment, being willing either to reform or silence
any opinion, which should be found repugnant to truth, or inconsistent to
peace. He loved not to entertain discourse with them, that were impetuous and
passionate in their opinions, who were resolved however to have the last word,
being more addicted to that uningenious humor (as he was wont to call it) of
Disputacity, then a sober and moderate disquisition after truth. And in that
unhappy difference about Predestination and its Appendants, he would often say,
that he wondered that men should, with so great animosity, contend about those
high and obscure speculations, and with so severe a confidence condemn each
other.

15. His Humility and Charity (rare virtues in this age!) appeared particularly
in these three instances. 1. That he was never forward (in what company soever)
to catch at hints of discourse, or to declare his opinion in a way of
singularity: and yet he was the most communicative man in the world. 2. That he
would fairly propound, dexterously illustrate, and ingenuously leave every man
to judge for himself, being not ambitious at all to gain Proselytes, nor
magisterially imposing his notions upon other men, but contented every one
should think or speak as himself best liked. 3. That he would speak ill of no
man; but dissemble the failings and errors of his very enemies: neither would
he willingly accompany them, who in the pregnancy or pruriency of wit would
adventure to criticize upon others, to the disparagement of their parts or
performances.

16. That the fear of God had a great impression upon his soul, he manifested,
not only by a religious and innocent Conversation, but in all his discourses:
in which, he ever showed himself tender of the honor of God, and that he could
not brook the least adulteration of his worship, nor the violation of any thing
upon which his awful name was stamped. Hence was that severity which he used
against the Roman Church in their Saint and Image Worship. Hence likewise was
his so great detestation of Sacrilege, and so zealous asserting the honor of
Gods house, and whatsoever else is dedicated to his worship, exacting a
reverence from Christians in the use of them in relation to God, to whom by a
peculiar propriety they belong. This latter procured him the suspicion of
Superstition with such as show their zeal against idolatry by committing or at
least by approving of Sacrilege, and banish all distinction between things
sacred and profane, and measure the truth of every point of religion by its
distance from Rome. But his reputation not standing or falling arbitrio
popularis aurae, it would but wrong him, to go about to vindicate him from such
men's censure. Neither need I clear him from the guilt of Time-serving in what
he has written for Reverence in Gods house, having declared it to be his
opinion many years before the times relisht it.

17. His soul, while it conversed in these regions of mortality, was invested
in a comely and healthful body, somewhat beyond a just temper inclined to
melancholy; yet so, as that melancholy seemed rather to poyse, and make it
serviceable to his studious mind, then to distemper it with those infirmities
which commonly attend the predominancy of that humor. His feeding, for the
most part, was rather to suffice nature, then satisfy his appetite. No man
more constant to his Colledge-Commons, with the smaller sort of beer, seldom
and very little wine. Which made him often merrily to tell them which observed
the thriving of his body, that They might see what Colledg-Commons could do.
And as his body with small Commons, so his purse, with a small Intrado,
received a considerable improvement.

18. He was taken away with a short (for it ended the fourth day) and not very
painful sickness, his understanding, judgment and memory continuing in
vigor to his last gasp. He bequeathed toward the new building, the increase
of the Library, the adorning of the Chapel: a large Legacy out of a Scholars
purse, of 300. l. in way of a grateful return for those mercies he had so long
enjoyed in that College, whereof he was a member.

19. He composed his soul (which he then was only to attend) for its address
into the divine presence with most devout thoughts and humble prayers, and
strengthened it with the commemoration of his death, by whom he hoped to obtain
a more blessed life, in the participation of the sacred Eucharist. And having
thus taken and tasted the cup of salvation, within a few hours he departed
hence, to the more full fruition of those heavenly delicates, among those
blessed ones that are called to the Supper of the Lamb, upon the second of
October. 1638. When he had lived 53 years, and spent above two thirds of that
time in that College, to which living he was so great an ornament and dead,
his worthy name shall be a lasting monument. A complete Edition of all Mr.
Mede's Works in Fol. is promised by R. R.


20. He had this happiness in his death, that he was taken away from the evils
that were then ready to come, and before Truth and Peace had begun to suffer in
this unhappy Island. And indeed he would often, in the presage of his divining
spirit, speak of this, a year or two before he dyed, as an observation upon
that in the 3. of Judges 30. The land had rest four score years: which now
(would he say) that from the beginning of blessed Queen Elizabeth's reign, we of
England have enjoyed: who knows whether our period may not be near at hand?
And whether it be so, or not, whosoever shall live but a year or two may know
it of a certain.

Out of the View of his Life annexed to his Works.
VII. Mr. JOSIAS SHUTE.
HIs very name is as a silver Trumpet to his re^utation, sounding out a
Quic^uid doctiorum est, assurgite huic tam colendo nomini: with whom 'twas, as
with Job appearing, chapter 29. The young men hid themselves, and the aged arose
and stood up: when the ear heard him, then it blessed him; and when the eye saw
him, it gave witness to him. His name, I say, is an Aromatic ointment,
diffusing a more rich perfume then the choicest of our broken boxes.

2. He was descended of a Learned Race, the son of an eminent Divine in
Yorkshire, and one of ^ive famous brotherpreachers. A man of that latitude of
learning, that length of apprehension, that depth of judgment and height of
speculation, so complete in all demensions, that I may justly renew that
admiration of Naz. concerning Basil (...). Where was there such a mixture of
rare parts and graces? what kind of learning was he unacquainted with? what
kind was he not excellent in, as if he had studied that alone.

3. And though he were a man of but a single heart, yet was he one of diverse
tongues, able to read the Scriptures without the spectacles of Translatours; he
both drank and derived those holy waters out of their sweeter Fountains, the
Originals. And even Bellarmine acknowledges, the Original is in several cases
to be used. Luther and Melancthon valued their skill in the Originals above
Kingdoms, says Amama in paraen. L. H. Our grave Author, like a wise
Merchant, was well skild in the tongue of the place he traded to: being Master
of those three grand mother Languages, inscribed on the Cross of Christ,
besides some others of their Progeny.

4. Filius Ecclesiae in patribus Versatissimus: This son of the Church of
England was most familiar with the ancient Fathers both of the East and West.
Of the Greek, Chrysostom lay in his bosom, even till he did patrizare, become
like unto him in his flowing style and golden eloquence. Among the Latin, St.
Augustine, that maul of heretics, was in chief esteem with him.

5. He was an exact Historian, for Ecclesiasticals especially, those Records of
the Church: the ignorance whereof is the mother of many of our growing errors
and indevotions: Nor was he less acquainted with the Schools; (though more
delighted with the waters of Siloah then of Meriba;) even a Master of the
Master of the Sentences, and a Secretioribus unto the Councils, even of their
Cabinet.

6. And because the flock is not only to be ^ed but cured sometime; he was a
singular Casuist, and spiritual Chyrurgion, that knew well (...), to set in
joint again, and to bind up the broken heart: a Soul-Chyrurgion right, for all
those properties of heart, and hand, and eye: no less sweet and soft in his
exhortations and consolations, then sharp and impartial in his reproofs and
reprehensions. He was indeed another Apollos, an eloquent man and mighty in the
Scriptures: And as a another Basil, he did thunder in in his doctrine, and
lighten in his life. His light shined before men; not only that of knowledge,
but that of example also, in his Piety and Charity, in his gravity and sweet
a^^ability.

7. He was at last dignified with the Arch deaconry of Colchester; and having
been above three and thirty years Rector of S. Mary Woolnoth in Lumbard-street,
London; an indefatigable, most faithful and most beloved preacher of the Gospel
there; Lamenting the Distractions, fallen upon the Church, he departed hence to
rest with God, Iu^. 23. 1643.

Out of Mr. Edward Sparke's Preface to Sarah and Hagar.
VIII. FRANCIS BACON Lord Verulam.
1. FRancis Bacon the Adorner and Ornament of Learning, was born in Yorkshire
Ian. 22. 1560. His father was Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper, that prudent
Counselor to Queen Elizabeth: His Mother the Daughter of Sir Anthony Cook, a
Lady eminent for Piety and Learning. These being the Parents, you may easily
imagine, what ^ssue was like to be.

2. He was so pregnant in his Childhood, that the Queen took notice of him and
delighted much, then, to confer with him, and to prove him with Questions; unto
whom he delivered himself with maturity above his years, that her Majesty
would often term him, The young Lord Keeper.

3. Whilst he was commorant in Cambridge, in Trinity College, under the
Tuition of Dr. Whitgift (afterward the renowned Arch-B. of Cant.) being about
sixteen years of age, he first fell into the dislike of Aristotle's Philosophy
(yet still attributing high Attributes to the Author) as a Philosopher only
strong for disputations and contentions, but barren of the production of works
for the benefit of the life of man. In which mind he continued to his dying day.

4. After he had passed the circle of the liberal Arts, his Father thought fit
to frame and mould him for the Arts of State, and for that end sent him over
into France with the Ambassador. In his absence, his Father dying, left him
being the youngest Son, in some streights: till after some years he succeeded
in the estate of his dearest brother Sir Anthony Bacon, a Gentleman equal to
him in height of wit, though inferior in learning.

5. Being returned from travel, he applied himself to the study of the Canon
Law, which he took upon him to be his profession, and seated himself for the
Commodity of his Studies and Practice in Greys Inn, where he erected that
elegant pile or structure, commonly known by the name of The Lord Bacons
Lodgings. In which house he carried himself with that Comity and Generosity,
that he was much reverenced and loved by the Readers and Gentlemen of the House.

6. His Birth and Capacities qualified him, above others of his profession to
have ordinary Accesses at Court, and to come frequently into the Queens eye,
who received from him great satisfaction not only in business of Law, but
also about Affairs of State. Yet was he kept back from preferment in the Queens
time by the policy of a great Statesman, then: lest, if he had risen, he
might have obscured his Glory. Only she gave him a dry Reversion of the
Registers Office in Star Chamber (which fell not till after her Majesty's time)
of which he used to say: That it was like another man's ground, bu^tting upon
his house; which might mend his prospect, but it did not fill his Barn.

7. After the coming in of his new Master King James, he made a great
progress: Sollicitour, Attorney, Counselor, Keeper, and lastly Chancellor:
(which two last places, though they be the same in Authority and power; yet
they differ in Patent,) since whose time, none of his Successors did ever bear
the Title of Lord Chancellor. But since the writing hereof, the Nation is
happy in the right Honorable Edward (...) Hide L. high Chancellor of England.


8. Toward his rising years, not before, he entered into a married estate, and
took to wife one of the daughters and co heirs of Alderman Barnhim. Children he
had none, yet he had other Issues to perpetuate his name; the Issues of his
Brain; in which he was ever happy and admired. Neither did the want of children
detract from the good usage of his Consort, whom he prosecuted with much
conjugal Love and Respect.

9. The last five years of his life, being withdrawn from Civil affairs and
from an active life, he employed wholly in Contemplation and studies, a thing
whereof his Lordship would often speak, during his Active life: as if he
affected to die in the Shade, and not in the Light. In which time, he composed
the greatest part of his Books and Writings, both in English and Latin. Some
of them are these: King Henry the Seventh. Natural History. The Advancement of
Learning. Essays. Miscellanies, and the chiefest in his account, Instauratio
magna etc.

10. Those Abilities which commonly go single in other men were all conjoined,
and met in him. These are, sharpness of Wit, Memory, Judgment, and Elocution.
Sir Walter Raleigh said of him by way of Comparison: That the Earl of Salisbury
was an excellent Speaker, but no good Penman; That the Earl of Northampton was
an excellent Penman, but no good speaker; But that Sir Francis Bacon was
eminent in both.

11. In the composing of his Books, he did rather drive at a masculine and a
clear Expression, then at any sinenesse or affectation of phrases; and would
often ask, if the meaning were expressed plain enough, as being one that
accounted words to be but subservient or ministerial to matter, and not the
principal. And if his style were polite, it was because he could do no
otherwise.

12. His meals were refections of the ear, as well as of the stomach: wherein a
man might be refreshed in his mind and understanding, no less then in his
body. In which Conversations he would not appropriate the Speech wholly to
himself, but draw out others and allure them to take their turns, and speak
upon such a subject as he knew they were skillful in. Neither contemned he any
man's Observations, but would light his torch at every man's candle.

13. When his office called him to charge any offenders, though it was his duty
to charge them home, yet he never insulted over them, but was always tender
hearted, and carried, himself decently toward the parties; as one, that looked
upon the example with the eye of severity, but upon the person with the eye of
pity and compassion. And in Civil Business, as he was Counselor of Estate,
he had the best way of advising, not engageing his Master in any precipitate or
grievous Courses; and the King gave him this testimony, that he ever dealt
suavibus modis, in a moderate and fair way.

14. He was a good Master to his Servants, and rewarded their long attendance
with good places freely, when they fell into his power. Which was the cause
that so many young Gentlemen of blood and quality sought to list themselves in
his retinue. And if he were abused by any of them in their places, it was only
the error of the goodness of his Nature, but the badge of their indiscretions
and intemperances.

15. This Lord was religious: for though the world be apt to suspect and
prejudge great wits and politics to have somewhat of the Atheist; yet he was
conversant with God, as appears by several passages throughout the whole
Current of his writings. Otherwise, he should have crossed his own principle,
That a little Philosophy makes man apt to forget God, as attributing too much
to second Causes; but depth of Philosophy brings a man back to God again. He
repaired frequently, to the service of the Church, to Sermons, to the
Sacrament, and dyed in the true Faith established in the Church of England.

16. He was free from Malice, which (as he said himself) He never bred, nor
fed. He was no revenger of injuries: no heaver of men out of their places, as
delighting in their ruin; no defamer of any man to his Prince. His Fame is
greater and sounds louder in foreign parts abroad, then at home in his own
Nation. Several persons of quality crossed the seas on purpose to gain an
opportunity of seeing him and discoursing with him. He dyed at High gate Apr.
9. An. 1626. ^^at. 66. of a gentle Fever, accompanied accidentally with a
great Cold, and was buried at S. Albans.

Out of his Life written by Dr. Rawley.
IX. THOMAS JACKSON, D. D.
1. HE was first planted in Queens College under the Tuition of Dr.
Cracanthorp, and from thence removed to Corpus-Christi. Though he had no notice
of the vacancy of the place till the day before the Election, yet he answered
with so much readiness and applause, that he gained the admiration as well as
the Suffrages of the Electours, and was chosen with full consent, although they
had received letters of favor from great men for another Scholar; the Mandamus
of the pious Founder, Nec prece nec pretio, prevailing more then all other
solicitations.

2. He preserved the high opinion which was conceived of him, by a studious and
exemplary life, not subject to the usual intemperances of that age. Certainly
the devil could not find him idle, nor at leisure to have the suggestions of
vice whispered in his ear. And although many in their youthful times have their
deviations and exorbitancies, which afterward prove reformed and excellent
men; yet it pleased God to keep him in a constant path of piety and virtue.

3. He was furnished with all the learned Languages, Arts and Sciences, as the
praevious dispositions or beautiful Gate, which led him to the Temple; but
especially Metaphysics, as the next in attendance, and most necessary handmaid
to Divinity; which was the mistress, where all his thoughts were fixed, being
wholly taken up with the love and admiration of Jesus Christ, and him
crucified. The Reading to younger Scholars, and some employments imposed by the
Founder, were rather Recreations and Assistances, then divertisements from that
intended work. The Offices he undertook (out of duty, not desire) were never
the most profitable* but the more ingenious; no^ such as might fill his purse,
bu^ increase his knowledge. When he was chosen into Office, the Governor of
the College was wont to give this testimony of him, That he was a man most
sincere in Elections, and that in a dubious Victory o^ younger wits, it was the
safes^ experiment for an happy choice, to sollow the omen o^ his judgment.

4. He read a Lecture of Divinity in the College every Sunday morning, and
another day of the week at Pembrok^ College (then newly erected) by the
instance of the Masters and Fellows there. He was chosen Vice President for
many years together, who by his place was to moderate the Disputations in
Divinity. In all these he demeaned himself with great depth of learning,
accompanied with all gentleness, curtesy, humility and moderation.

5. From the College he was preferred to a Living in the Bishopric of Durham
(in their donation) and from thence removed to the Vicarage of New Castle. This
was the place where he was first appointed by his friends to be a Merchant; but
he chose rather to be a Factor for heaven. Here he adorned the Gospel which he
preached, with an humble and charitable Conversation; giving usually to the
poor, when he went abroad, what money he had, who at length flocked so unto
him, that his servant took care he should not have too much in his pocket.
After some years, he was invited back again to the College, being chosen
President in his absence, at so great a distance, so unexpectedly without any
suit or petition upon his part, that he knew nothing of the vacancy of the
place, but by the same letters that informed him, it was conferred upon himself.

6. Upon his return to Oxford, and admission to his Government, they found no
alteration by his long absence, and more converse with the world, but that he
appeared yet more humble in his elder times; and this not out of coldness and
remission of Spirit, but from a prudent choice and experience of a better way.
He ruled in a most obliging manner, no man departed from him with a sad heart,
except they had by some willing error created trouble to him. The Friends as
well as the Memory of his Predecessors, he used fairly. A lover and maker of
peace, silencing and composing all differences, displeasures and animosities by
a prudent impartiality, and the example of his own sweet disposition. It was a
new and peculiar Art of Discipline, but successefully practiced by him, that
those under his Authourity were kept within bounds and order, not so much out
of fear of the penalty, as out of love of the Governor. He took notice of that
which was good in the worst men, and made that an occasion to commend them for
the goods sake; and living himself very strictly, yet reserved large Pardons
for imperfections of others.

7. He willingly admitted, and was much delighted in the acquaintance and
familiarity of hopeful young Divines, not despising their Youth, but accounting
them as Sons and Brethren, encouraging and advising them what Books to read,
and with what holy preparations, lending them such Books as they had need of.
This was one of the special advices and directions which he commended to young
men: Quod dubit as nefeceris; Hear the dictates of your own Conscience. He was
as diffusive of his knowledge, counsel and advice, as of any other his works of
mercy.

8. In all Histories of learned, pious and devout men, you shall scarcely meet
with one that disdained the world more generously: not out of ignorance of it,
as one brought up in Cells and darkness, for he was known and endeared to men
of the most resplendent fortunes; nor out of melancholy disposition, for he was
he was cheerful and content in all estates; but out of a due and deliberate
scorn, knowing the true value, that is, the vanity of it. As preferments were
heaped upon him without his suit, or knowledge, so there was nothing in his
power to give, which he was not ready and willing to part withal, to the
deserving or indigent man. He knew, it was a more blessed thing to give then to
receive; in all places of his abode, distributing to the poor with a free
heart, a bountiful hand, a comfortable speech, and a cheerful eye. How
disrespectful was he of Mammon, the god of this world, the golden image which
Kings and Potentates have set up: before whom the Trumpets play for war and
slaugh^er, and Nations and Languages fall down and worship, besides all other
kind of Music for jollity and delight, to drown (if it were possible) the
noise of blood, which is most audible and cries loudest in the ears of the
Almighty. How easily could he cast that away, for which others throw away their
lives and salvation, running headlong into the place of eternal skreekings,
weeping and gnashing of teeth. If it were not for this spirit of Cove^ousnesse,
all the world would be at quiet. Certainly (although the nature of man be an
apt soil for sin to flourish in, yet) if the love of money be the root of all
evil, it could not grow up in him, because it had no root: and if it be so
hard for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God and the narrow way which
leads unto life, then he that stooped so low by humbleness of mind, and
emptied himself so nearly by mercifulness to the poor, must needs find an
easier passage. Doubtless, they that say and do these things, show plainly
that they seek another Country, that is, an Heavenly: for if they had been
mindful of This, they might have taken opportunity to have used it more
advantagiously.

9. His Devotions toward God were assiduous and exemplary, both in public and
private. When he went the yearly progress to view the College Lands, and came
into the Tenants House, it was his constant custom (before any other
business, discourse or care of himself, were he never so wet or weary) to call
for a retiring room to pour out his Soul unto God, who led him safely in his
Journey. And this he did not out of any specious pretense of Holiness, to
devour a Widows house with more Facility, rack their Rents, or enhance their
Fines; for excepting the constant Revenue to the Founder (to whom he was a
strict accountant) no man ever did more for them, or less for himself.

1. As he was always a Reconciler of Differences in his private Government, so
he seriously lamented the public breaches of the Kingdom. He well knew that
war was commonly attended with ruin and calamity, especially to Church and
Churchmen. But God took him from the evils to come. It was a sufficient degree
of punishment to him to foresee it: it had been more then a thousand deaths
unto him, to have beheld it with his eyes. When his death was approaching, he
was ever heard repeating to himself with a soft voice these and the like
ejaculations: I wait for the Lord etc. Gracious is the Lord etc. Return unto
thy rest, O my Soul, etc. And having thus spoken, soon after he rendered up his
Spirit to Him that gave it.

X. The LADY FALKLAND.
1. THis elect Lady set out early in the ways of God, in the dawn of her age.
She came not from her Nurses arms without some knowledge of the Principles of
Christian Religion.

2. Her obedience to her Parents was so exact, that her Mother would say, She
remembered not any one particular, wherein at any time, she disobe^ed her self
or her Father.

3. When she was very young, she wrought a purse for her own Alms and would
importunately beg her Mothers single money to fill it, that she might empty
it again to the poor.

4. She was ost tims at a book in her closet, when she was thought to be a bed.
Hours of private prayer she constantly observed, and if strangers were in her
own room, she would retire into some other for that purpose.

5. After her Marriage, though she acknowledged Gods great goodness to her for
her temporal preferments, yet was not her heart any whit perceived to be
exalted with joy for them.

6. Upon the death of her Lord, she addresses her self to a Divine of great
eminency for piety and learning; and from him she takes direction for a more
strict course of life in this her widdowhood.

7. Her grand employment was to understand and practice our Saviors Sermon in
the Mount, and she began with those virtues, to which the beatitudes are
annexed, Humility, Meekness etc.

8. She excelled in mercifulness, Some of her neighbors that were very old,
and not able to work, or very young, and not fit to work, were wholly
maintained by her. To other poor Children she contributed much, both for their
spiritual and temporal well-being, by erecting a School for them, where they
were to be taught both to read and to work. And she accounted that the best
contrivement of her estate, which set most poor people to work.

9. When it was objected that idle beggars were relieved at her doors, she
said, I had rather relieve five unworthy vagrants, then that one member of
Christ should go empty away.

10. She was wont to send plentiful relief privately to prisons and needy
persons, with a strict charge, that it should not be known from whence it came.
And she failed not to relieve her enemies as often as occasion required.

11. She used to provide Cordials for the sick and to visit them her self (even
the poorest) and carry with her some ^ook of spiritual exhortation and read to
them.

12. The morning and evening prayers of the Church were constantly used in her
family, and her servants charged to be present. And on the Lords day she rose
earlier then ordinary, and enjoined her self much private duty besides the
public.

13. She had two Cautions for her Tongue: Never to speak evil of any, but
only to reclaim him: and that her words should not be idle but tending to
edification.

14. She agreed with her familiar friends, to take the liberty of reproving one
another, saying, There is no true friendship without this. If you suffer me to
be undone for ever, how are we friends?

FINIS.

