A SERMON PREACHED On the Fifth of November, MDCLXXIII.

By ISAAC BARROW, D.D. late Master of Trinity College in Cambridge, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons over
against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, M DC LXX IX.

A SERMON, PREACHED On the Fifth of November, 1673.
PSALM. LXIV. 9, 10. And all men shall fear, and shall declare the work of God;
for they shall wisely consider of his doing.

The righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust in him; and all the
upright in heart shall glory.


IF we should search about for a Case parallel to that which we do now
commemorate, we should perhaps, hardly find one more patly such, then is that
which is implied in this Psalm: and if we would know the Duties incumbent on us
in reference to such an Occasion, we could scarce better learn them other-where
then in our Text.

With attention perusing the Psalm, we may therein observe, That its great
Author was apprehensive of a desperate Plot by a confederacy of wicked and
spiteful enemies, with great craft and secrecy, contrived against his safety.
They, says he, encourage themselves in an evil matter; they commune of laying
snares privily; they say, Who Verse. 5.
shall see them? That for preventing the blow threatened by this design,
(whereof he had some glimpse, or some presumption, grounded upon the knowledge
of their implacable and active malice) he does implore Divine protection: Hide
me, says he, from the secret counsel of Verse. 2.
the wicked, from the insurrection of the workers of iniquity. That he did
confide in God's Mercy and Justice for the seasonable defeating, for the fit
avenging their machination: God, says he, shall shoot at them with an arrow;
suddenly shall they be wounded. That they should themselves Verse. 7.
become the detectours of their crime, and the instruments of the exemplary
punishment due thereunto: They (added he) shall make their own tongue to fall
upon themselves: Verse. 8.
all that see them, shall flee away.

Such was the Case; the which unto what passage in the history it does relate,
or whether it belongs to any we have recorded, it may not be easy to
determine. Expositours commonly do refer it to the designs of Saul upon David's
life. But this seeming purely conjecture, not founded upon any express words,
or pregnant intimations in the text, I shall leave that inquiry in its own
uncertainty. It suffices to make good its pertinency, that there was such a
mischievous Conspiracy, deeply projected against David; (a very great
personage, in whose safety the public state of God's people was principally
concerned; he being then King of Israel, at least in designation, and therefore
in the precedent Psalm, endited in Readiness time, is so styled;) from the peril
whereof Psalm. 63. 11.
he by the special Providence of God was rescued, with the notable
disappointment and grievous confusion of those who managed it. The which Case
(at least in kind, if not in degree) bears a plain resemblance to that which
lies before us.

And the Duties which upon that occasion are signified to concern people then,
do no less now sort to us; the which, as they lie couched in our Text, are
these: 1. wisely to consider God's doing; 2. to fear; 3. to declare God's work;
4. to be glad in the Lord; 5. to trust in God; 6. to glory. Of which the First
Three are represented as more generally concerning men; the others as
appertaining more peculiarly to righteous and upright persons.

These Duties it shall be my endeavor somewhat to explain and press, in a
manner applicable to the present case. I call them Duties; and to warrant the
doing so, it is requisite to consider, that all these particulars may be
understood in a double manner, either as declarative of event, or as directive
of practice upon such emergencies.

When God does so interpose his hand, as signally to check and confound
mischievous enterprises; it will be apt to stir up in the minds of men an
apprehension of God's special Providence, to strike into their hearts a dread
of his Power and Justice, to wring from their mouths suitable declarations and
acknowledgments; and particularly then good men will be affected with pious
joy, they will be encouraged to confide in God, they will be moved to glory, or
to express a triumphant satisfaction in God's proceedings. These events
naturally do result from such providential occurrences; for production of these
events, such occurrences are purposely designed; and accordingly (where men are
not by profane opinions or affections much indisposed) they do commonly follow.

But yet they are not proposed simply as Events, but also as matters of Duty:
for men are obliged readily to admit such impressions upon their minds, hearts,
and lives, from the special works of Providence: they are bound, not to cross
those natural tendencies, not to frustrate those wise intents of God, aiming at
the production of such good dispositions and good practices: whence if those
effects do not arise, as often notoriously they do not in some persons, men
thereby do incur much guilt and blame.

It is indeed ordinary to represent matter of duty in this way, expressing
those practices consequent in effect, which in obligation should follow,
according to God's purpose, and the nature of causes ordered by him. As when,
for instance, God in the Law had prescribed Duty, and threatened sore punishment
on the disobedient, it is subjoyned, And all the people shall hear, and fear,
and Deuteronomy. 17. 13. and 13. 11. and 19. 20.
do no more presumptuously: the meaning is, that such exemplary punishment is
in its nature apt, and its design tends to produce such effects, although not
ever, questionless with due success, so as to prevent all transgression of
those Laws. So also, When (says the Prophet) thy judgments are in the land,
the inhabitants of the world Isa. 26. 9.
will learn righteousness: the sense is, that Divine judgments in themselves
are instructive of Duty, it is their drift to inform men therein, and men ought
to learn that lesson from them; although in effect diverse there be, whom no
judgments can make wiser or better; such as those of whom in the same Prophet
it is said, The Isa. 9. 13. Jer. 2. 30. and 5. 3. Neh. 9. 29.
people turns not unto him that smites them; and in another, In vain have I
smitten your children, they received no correction. As therefore frequently
otherwhere, so also here, this kind of expression may be taken chiefly to
import Duty. To begin then with the First of these Duties.

I. We are upon such occasions obliged wisely to consider (...)
(or, as the Greek rendereth it, (...), to understand, or, to perceive, as our
Old Translation has it) God's (...)
doing. This I put in the first place, as previous in nature, and influential
upon the rest: whence (although in the Hebrew it be knit to the rest, as they
all are to one another, by the conjunctive parcicle ve, and, yet) we do
translate it causally, for they shall wisely consider, for they shall perceive;
because indeed without duly considering, and rightly understanding such
occurrences to proceed from God, none of the other acts can, or will be
performed: attentive consideration is needful to beget knowledge and
persuasion, these to breed affection and practice.

There are many who, in such cases, are no-wise apprehensive of God's special
Providence, or affected with it; because they do not consider, or do not
consider wisely and intelligently.

Some are very inobservant and careless in regard to things of this nature; so
drowzy and heedless, as not to attend to whatever passes, or to mind what God
acts in the world: such as those of whom the Prophet says, The Harp and the
Viol, the Tabret and Pipe, and Isa. 5. 12.
Wine are in their feasts; but they regard not the work of the Lord, nor the
operation of his hands: that is, their minds Psalm. 28. 5. and 10. 4.
are so amused by wanton divertisements, their hearts are so immersed in
sensual enjoyments, as no-wise to observe the most notable occurrences of
Providence.

Others, (although they do ken and regard what is done, as matter of news, or
story, entertaining curiosity and talk; yet) out of sloth or stupidity, do
little consider it, or study whence it springs; contenting themselves with
none, or with any superficial account, which fancy or appearance suggesteth:
like beasts, they do take in things obvious to their sense, and perhaps stand
gazing on them; but do not make any careful reflection, or inquiry into their
original causes and reasons; taking (as a dog, when he biteth the stone flung
at him, or as a child that is angry with the log he falls on) whatever
appears next, to be the principal cause: such as the Psalmist again touches,
when he says, A brutish man Psalm. 92. 6.
knows not, neither does a fool understand this: and as he does acknowledge
himself on one occasion to have been; Psalm. 73. 22.
So foolish was I, and ignorant; I was as a beast before thee.

Others pretend to consider much, and seem very inquisitive; yet (being
misguided by vain prejudices, or foul affections) do not consider wisely, or
well understand these matters; the result of their care and study about them
being to father them on wrong causes, ascribing them to the mere conduct and
agency of visible causes, hurried by a necessary swindge, or rolling on by a
casual fluctuation of things; not descrying God's hand in them, but profanely
discarding and disclaiming it: such as those in the Psalms, who so reflected on
Providence, as to say, How does God know? and, is there knowledge in the Most
High? The Lord does not see, neither Psalm. 73. 11. Psalm. 94. 7. and 10. 11.
does the God of Jacob regard it: such as has been the brood of Epicurean and
profane Considerers in all times, who have earnestly plodded, and strained
their wits, to exclude God from any inspection or influence upon our affairs.

Some indeed there have been so very dull and stupid, or so perverse and
profane, as not to discern God's Hand, when it was made bare, raised up, and
stretched Isa. 52. 10. Exodus 14. 8. Deuteronomy. 26. 8. Isa 26. 11. Lord, when thy
hand is lifted up, they will not see, etc.
out in the achievement of most prodigious works; not to read Providence,
when set forth in the largest and fairest print: such as those of whom it is
said in the Psalm, Psalm. 106. 7. Joh. 12. 37.
Our fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt; and those of whom it is
observed in the Gospel, Though he had done so many miracles before them, yet
they believed not: such as the mutinous people, who, although they beheld the
earth swallowing up Corah with his Accomplices, and a Number 16. 32. 35, 41.
Fire from the Lord consuming the men that offered Incense; yet presently did
fall a-charging Moses and Aaron, saying, Ye have killed the People of the Lord.
No wonder then, if many do not perceive the same Hand, when it is wrapped up in
a complication with inferior causes; when it is not lifted up so high, or so
far extended in miraculous performances.

The special Providence of God in events here effected or ordered by him, is
indeed commonly not discernible without good judgment and great care; it is not
commonly impressed upon events in characters so big and clear, as to be legible
to every eye, or to any eye not endued with a sharp perspicacy, not applying an
industrious heedfulness: the tracts thereof are too fine and subtle to be
descried by a dim sight, with a transient glance, or upon a gross view: it is
seldom so very conspicuous, that persons incredulous, or any-wise indisposed
to admit it, can easily be convinced thereof, or constrained to acknowledge it:
it is often (upon many accounts, from many causes) very obscure, and not easily
discernible to the most sagacious, most watchful, most willing observers. For,
the instruments of Providence being free agents, acting with unaccountable
variety, nothing can happen, which may not be imputed to them, with some
colorable pretense. Divine and humane influences are so twisted and knit
together, that it is hard to sever them. The manner of Divine efficacy is so
very soft and gentle, that we cannot easily trace its footsteps. God designeth
not commonly to exert his hand in a notorious way, but often purposely does
conceal it. Whereas also it is not fit to charge upon God's special hand of
Providence any event, wherein special ends of wisdom or goodness do not shine;
it is often hard to discover such ends, which usually are wrapped in
perplexities; because God acts variously, (according to the circumstances of
things, and the disposition, capacity, or state of objects) so as to do the
same thing for different ends, and different things for the same end: because
there are different ends, unto which Providence in various order and measure
has regard, which our short and narrow prospect cannot reach: because God, in
prosecution of his ends, is not wont to proceed in the most direct and
compendious way; but windeth about in a large circuit, enfolding many
concurrent and subordinate designs: because the expediency of things to be
permitted or performed, does not consist in single acts or events, but in many
conspiring to one common end: because we cannot apprehend the consequences, nor
balance the conveniences of things in order to good ends: because we are apt
to measure things by their congruity to our opinions, expectations, and
affections: because many proceedings of God depend upon grounds inaccessible to
our apprehension; such as his own secret Decrees, the knowledge of men's
thoughts, close purposes, clandestine designs, true qualifications and merits;
his prescience of contingent events and what the result will be from the
combination of numberless causes: because sometimes he does act in methods of
Wisdom, and by rules of Justice, surpassing our capacity to know either from
the finiteness of our nature, or the feebleness of our reason, or the meanness
of our state, and circumstances here: because also the Divine administration of
affairs has no complete determination or final issue here; that being reserved
to the great day of reckoning and judgment. It is further also expedient, that
many occurrences should be puzzling to us, to quash our presumption, to
exercise our faith, to quicken our industry, to engage us upon adoring that
Wisdom which we cannot comprehend. Upon such accounts, for such causes, (which
time will not give me leave to explain and exemplify) the special Providence
of God is often cloudy, is seldom so clear, that without great heed and
consideration we can perceive it. But however to do so is plainly our duty; and
therefore possible.

For our Reason was not given us to be idle upon so important occasions; or
that we should be as brute Spectatours of what God does. He, surely, in the
Governance of his noblest creature here discovers his Being, and displayeth
his Attributes, we therefore carefully should observe it. He thereby (and no
otherwise in a public way) does continually speak, and signify Psalm. 50. 1.
and 60. 6. and 62. 11.
to us his mind: and fit it is, that we his subjects should hear, should attend
to the least intimations of his pleasure. To him thence glory should accrue,
the which who but we can render? and that we may render it, we must know the
grounds of it. In fine, for the support of God's Kingdom, for upholding the
reverence due to his administration of Justice among us, it is requisite, that
by apparent dispensation of recompenses, Duty should be encouraged, and
Disobedience checked: very foolish therefore we must be, if we regard not such
dispensations.

So Reason dictateth, and Holy Scripture more plainly declares our obligation
to consider, and perceive God's doings. To do so is recommended to us as a
singular point of wisdom: whosoever is wise, and will observe these things, they
shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord. Psalm 107. 43.
Let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows me,
that I am the Lord, which exercise loving kindness, Jer. 9. 24.
judgment and righteousness in the earth. Who is wise? and he shall understand
these things; prudent? and he shall know them. For the ways of the Lord are
right, etc. Hos. 14. 9.
We are vehemently provoked thereto: Understand, ye brutish among the people;
and, ye fools, when will ye be wise? Psalm. 94. 8.
They are reproved for neglect and defailance, who do not regard the work of
the Lord, nor the operation of his Psalm. 28. 5. and 10. 4. Isa. 5. 12. Psalm.
92. 6. (Isa. 26 11) Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see.
hand. The not discerning Providence, is reproached as a piece of shameful
folly; A brutish man knows not, neither does a fool understand: and of woeful
pravity; Luke 12. 56. Matt. 16. 3. Psalm. 77. 12. and 143. 5. Psalm. 111. 2.
O ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the Sky; but how is it that ye
cannot discern this time? To contemplate and study Providence is the practice
of Good men: I will meditate on all thy works, says the Psalmist, chiefly
respecting works of this kind: and, The works of the Lord are great, sought out
of all them that have pleasure therein. It is a fit matter of Devotion,
warranted by the practice of good men, to implore God's manifestation of his
Justice and Power this way. O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongs, Psalm. 94.
1, 2.
show thy self; lift up thy self, thou Judge of the earth. It is God's manner
hereby to notify himself. The Lord is known by the judgment that he executes.
He for Psalm. 9. 16.
this very purpose does interpose his Hand, that men may know that it is his
Hand, and that the Lord has done it; Psalm. 109. 27
that (as it is in Esaias) they may see, and know, and consider, Isa. 41. 20.
and understand together, that the Hand of the Lord has done this, and the
Holy One of Israel has created (Ezekiel. 7. 27.)
it. He manageth things so, that men may be God thereby does support and
encourage good men.

He does thereby convince and confound ill men. Psalm. 9. 19, 20.

He thereby does instruct all men. Isa 26. 9.


brought to know, may be induced to acknowledge his authority, and his equity
in the management thereof; that they may know, that he whose Name is Jehovah,
is the most High over all the earth; that they may say, Verily there is a
reward for the righteous, verily there is a God that judges the Psalm. 59. 13.
and 83. 18. and 67. 2. Psalm. 58. 11.
earth. In fine, the knowledge of God's special Providence is frequently
represented as a mean of nourishing our faith and hope in him, as a ground of
thankfulness and praise to him, as an incentive of the best affections (of holy
joy, and humble fear, and hearty love) toward him: wherefore we ought to seek
it, and we may attain it.

There are consequently some distinctive marks or characters, by which we may
perceive God's Hand: and such may these be which follow, (drawn from the
special nature, manner, adjuncts, and consequences of events:) upon which may
be grounded Rules declarative of special Providence, such as commonly will
hold; although sometimes they may admit exceptions, and should be warily
applied.

1. The wonderful Strangeness of Events, compared with the ordinary course of
things, or the natural influence of causes: when effects are performed by no
visible means; or by means disproportionate, unsuitable, repugnant to the
effect. Sometimes great exploits are achieved, mighty forces are discomfited,
huge structures are demolished, designs backed with all advantages of wit and
strength are confounded, none knows how, by no considerable means that appear;
Nature rising up in arms against them; panick fears seizing on the Abetters of
them; dissensions and treacheries springing up among the Actors; sudden deaths
snatching away the principal instruments of them. As, when the stars in their
courses Judge. 5. 20. Aug. de Civ. Dei, 5. 26. 1 Samuel 7. 10. 2 Samuel 22. 14, 15.
fought against Sisera: when the winds and skies became auxiliaries to
Theodosius: when the Lord thundered with a great thunder upon the Philistines,
and discomfited them, and they were smitten before Israel: when the Lord made
the host of Syrians to hear a noise of chariots, of horses, of a 2 King. 7. 6.
Psalm. 53. 5. and 48. 6.
great host; -- whence they arose and fled: when the children of Ammon and Moab
stood up against the inhabitants of mount Seir, utterly to slay and destroy
them; and 2 Chronicles. 20. 23.
when they had made an end of the inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to
destroy another: when the Angel of the Lord went out, and smote in the camp of
the Assyrians 185000 men; and when they arose early in the morning, behold they
2 King. 19. 35.
were all dead corpses: when the mighty power of Antiochus was, as it is said,
to be broken without hands, and when, as it is foretold, a stone cut out of the
mountain without hands should break in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay,
the silver, Dan. 8. 25. Dan. 2. 45.
and the gold. Such Events do speak God to be their cause, by his invisible
efficacy supplying the defect of apparent means.

So likewise, when by weak forces great feats are accomplished, Vid. Artabani
Orat. apud Herod Polymn. page 246. Hom. Il. (...). ver. 688.
and impotency triumphs over might: when (as the Prophet says) Isa. 49. 25.
Josh. 23. 10. Lev. 26. 8. Deuteronomy. 32. 30.
the captivesof the mighty are taken away, and the prey of the terrible is
delivered: when One man (as is promised) does chase a thousand, and two put ten
thousand to flight: when 1 Samuel 17. 5, 40.
a strippling, furnished only with faith and a pebble, shall knock down a
monstrous Giant, armed with a helmet of brass, and a coat of mail, with a huge
target, sword and spear: when successes arrive like those recorded in
Scripture, under the conduct of Joshua, Gideon, Jonathan, Asa, Jehosaphat;
wherein very Judge. 7. 7. 1 Samuel 14. 6 -- 2 Chronicles. 14. 11. -- and 20. 12, 17.
small forces, by uncouth means, did subdue formidable powers: This does argue
that God does interpose; 2 Chronicles. 14. 11. 1 Samuel 14. 6. 2 Cor. 12. 9. Job. 12.
21. and 38. 15. Psalm. 10. 15. and 37. 17. and 35. 10. (Psalm. 76. 5.) Hom.
(...). verse. 11. 2 Samuel 51. 13.
with whom (as it is said) it is all one to save by many, or by few, and those
that have no power; whose power is perfected in weakness; who breaks the arm
of the wicked, and weakneth the strength of the mighty, and delivers the poor
from him that is too strong for him.

Also, when great policy and craft do effect nothing, but are blasted of
themselves, or baffled by simplicity; when cunningly-laid designs are soon
thwarted and overturned: when most perspicacious and profound counselors are
so blinded, or so infatuated, as to mistake in plain cases, to oversee things
most obvious and palpable: when profane, malicious, subtle, treacherous
Politicians (such as Abimelech, Achitophel, Aman, Sejanus, Stilico, Ruffinus,
S. Paul, d' Ancre, de Luna, etc.
Borgia, with many like occurring in story) are not only supplanted in their
wicked contrivances, but dismally chastised for them. These occurrences do more
then insinuate Divine wisdom to intervene, countermining and confounding such
devices. For he it is who (as the Scripture tells us) makes the Diviners mad;
turns wise men backward, and makes their knowledge foolish; disappointeth
Isa. 44. 25. Job. 5. 12, 13. (Psalm. 33. 10) (...).
the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their
enterprise; takes the wise in their own craftiness, and turns down the
counsel of the froward headlong.

Whenever a just cause, or honest design, without any support or succor of
worldly means, (without authority, power, wit, learning, eloquence,) does
against all opposition of violence and art prevail: this signifies him to
yield a special countenance and aid thereto, who (to depress humane pride, and
advance his own glory) has chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound
the wise; 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28.
and the weak things of the world, to confound the things that are mighty; and
base things of the world, and things which are despised, and things that are
not, to bring to naught things that are: (that are with us in most request and
esteem.)

Again, when Plots, with extreme caution and secrecy contrived in darkness, are
by improbable means, by unaccountable accidents disclosed and brought to light:
a bird of the air (as the wise man speaks) telling the matter; the stones in
the wall (as it is in the Prophet) crying Eccles 10. 20.
out Treason. The King cannot sleep; to divert him the Hab. 2. 11.
Chronicle is called for; Mordecai's service is there pitched on; an inquiry is
made concerning his recompense; honor is decreed him: so does Aman's cruel
device come out. Pity seiseth on a pitiless heart toward one among a huge
number of innocents devoted to slaughter; that he may be saved, a Letter must
be sent; in that, words inserted suggesting the manner of execution; that
carried to the wise King, who presently smells it out: so This day's Plot was
discovered. Such events, whence can they well proceed, but from the
all-piercing and ever-watchful care of him, whose eyes (as Elihu says) are
upon the ways (Psalm 121. 4.) Job 34. 21. Job 34. 22.
of man, and he sees all his goings? There is no darkness, nor shadow of
death, where the workers of iniquity shall hide themselves: For Hell is naked
before him, and destruction Job 26. 6. Psa. 132. 2, etc. Heb. 4. 13. Am. 9. 2.
has no covering.

Also, when ill men by their perverse wiliness do notably befool and ensnare
themselves, laying trains to blow up their own designs, involving themselves in
that ruin and mischief into which they studied to draw others; as when Saul,
exposing David's life to hazard, increases 1 Samuel 18. 25.
his honor; when the Persian Nobles incensing the King against Daniel, do
occasion his growth in savor, with their own destruction; when Aman, by
contriving to destroy Dan. 6. 24.
God's people, does advance them, and rearing a gallows for Mordecai, does
prepare it for himself: when it happens according to those passages in the
Psalms, The wicked are taken in the devices that they imagined; In the net
which they hid is their own foot taken; He made a Psalm. 10. 2. and 9. 15. and
35. 8. and 140. 5. and 7. 15. and 57. 6. and 7. 16. and 5. 10. Psalm. 9. 2.
pit and dug it, and is fallen into the ditch which he made; His mischief
shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealings shall come upon his
own pate. These are pregnant evidences of God's just and wise Providence: for,
the Lord is known by the judgment that he executes; the wicked is snared in
the work of his own hand.

All such occurrences containing in them somewhat, if not down-rightly
miraculous, yet very admirable, in like manner deflecting from the stream of
humane affairs, as miracles do surmount the course of nature, most reasonably
may, most justly should be ascribed to the special operation of him, who only
does wonderful things. Psalm. 72. 18. and 86. 10.


2. Another character of special Providence is, the Seasonableness, and
Suddenness of Events. When that which in it self is not ordinary, nor could
well be expected, does fall out happily, in the nick of an exigency, for the
relief of innocence, the encouragement of goodness, the support of a good
cause, the furtherance of any good purpose; (so that there is occasion to
acknowledge with the Prophet, Thou did terrible things, that we looked not
for:) This is a shrewd indication, that God's Isa. 64 3.
Hand is then concerned; not only the event being notable, but the connection
thereof with circumstances of need being more admirable.

Thus in time of distress and despondency, when a man is utterly forlorn, and
destitute of all visible relief, when (as the Psalmist speaks) refuge fails
him, and no man cares for his soul; if then Heb. 4. 16.
(...), an Psalm. 142. 4. (Psalm. 44. 25. and 108. 12.)
opportune succor does arrive; he is then unreasonable, and ungrateful, if he
does not avow a special Providence, and thankfully ascribe that event unto him
who is our refuge Psalm. 46. 1. and 9. 9. and 44. 24 -- and 37. 29. and 27. 5.
and 69. 14 -- and 18. 6.
and strength, a very present help in trouble; Isa. 25. 4. and 33. 2.
a strength to the poor, a strength to the needy in his distress, a refuge from
the storm, a shadow from the heat; Jer. 14 8. Job. 33. 18.
the hope of Israel, and the Savior thereof in time of trouble. This is that,
for which in the 107 Psalm the Divine Goodness is so magnificently celebrated;
this is the burden of that pathetical rapture, wherein we by repeated wishes
and exhortations are instigated Psalm. 107. 8, 15, 21, 31.
to bless God; his wonderfully relieving the children of men in their need and
distress: this is that, which God himself in the Prophet represents as a most
satisfactory demonstration of his Providence. When the poor and needy seek
water, and there is none, and their tongue Isa. 41. 17, etc.
fails for thirst; I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Jacob will not
forsake them: I will open rivers in high places, and fountains in the midst of
the valleys, etc. That they may see, and know, and consider, and understand
together, that the Hand of the Lord has done this, and the Holy one of Israel
has created it.

So also, when pestilent enterprises (managed by close fraud, or by impetuous
violence) are brought to a head, and come near to the point of being executed;
the sudden detection, or seasonable obstruction of them, do argue the
ever-vigilant Eye, and the all-powerful Hand to be engaged. God ever does see
those deceitful workers of iniquity, laying their mischief in the dark; he is
always present at their Cabals, and clandestine meetings, wherein they brood
upon it. He often does suffer it to grow on to a pitch of maturity, till it be
thoroughly formed, till it be ready to be hatched, and break forth in its
mischievous effects; then in a trice he snappeth and crusheth it to nothing.
God beholds violent men setting out in their unjust attempts, he lets them
proceed on in a full career, until they reach the edge of their design; then
instantly he checketh, puts in a spoak, he stops, he tumbleth them down,
or turns them backward. Thus was Aman's plot dashed, when he Esth. 3.
had procured a Royal Decree, when he had fixed a time, when he had issued
forth letters to destroy God's people. Thus was Pharaoh overwhelmed, when he
had Exodus 14.
just overtaken the children of Israel. Thus were the designs of Abimelech, of
Absalom, of Adonijah, of Sanballat nipped. Thus when Sennacherib with an
unmatchable host had encamped against Jerusalem, and had to appearance
swallowed it, God did put a hook into his nose, 2 King. 9. 28.
and turned him back into his own land. Thus when Antiochus was marching on
furiously, to accomplish his 2 Mac. 9. 4. --
threat of turning Jerusalem into a Charnel, a noisome disease did intercept his
progress. Thus when the profane Caligula did mean to discharge his bloody rage
on the Joseph. 18. 12.
Jews, for refusing to worship him, a domestic sword did presently give vent
to his revengefull breath. Thus also, when Julian had by his Policy and his
Authority projected Chrysostom. in Babylam, Orat. 2. Naz. Orat. 4.
to overthrow our Religion, his Plot soon was quashed, and his life snapped
away by an unknown hand. Thus, whenever the enemy does come in like a flood,
(threatening immediately to overflow, and overturn all things) Isa. 59. 19.
the Spirit of the Lord does lift up a standard against him; that is, God's
secret efficacy does suddenly restrain and (Job 38. 11.)
repress his outrage. This usually is the method of Divine Providence. God
could prevent the (...), etc. ved Chrysostom. ad Olymp.
beginnings of wicked designs; he could supplant them in their first onsets; he
could any-where sufflaminate and subvert them: but he rather winketh for a
time, and suffers the designers to go on, till they are (...), etc. Ibid.
mounted to the top of confidence, and good people are cast on the brink of
ruin; then Nec Deus intersit, nisi dignus vindice nodus inciderit.
(...), surprisingly, unexpectedly he strikes in with effectual succor: so
declaring how vain the presumption is of impious undertakers; how needful and
sure his protection is over innocent people; how much reason the one has to
dread him, and the other to confide in him. Then is God seen, then his care and
power will be acknowledged, when he snatcheth us from the jaws of danger, when
our soul does escape as a bird out of the snare of the fowler. Psalm. 124. 7.


3. Another character of special Providence is, the great Utility and
Beneficialness of Occurrences, especially in regard to the public state of
things, and to great personages, in whose welfare the public is much
concerned. To entitle every petty chance that arriveth to special Providence,
may signify lightness; to father on God the mischiefs issuing from our sin and
folly, may savor of profaneness: but to ascribe every grand and beneficial
event unto his good Hand, has ever been reputed Magna dii curant, parva
negligunt. Cic. 2. de N. D.
wisdom and justice. Quicquid magnam utilitatem generi adferret humano, id non
sin^ Divina bonitate erga homines fieri arbitrabantur. Cic. de Not. Dect. lib.
2.
It has been (says Balbus in Cicero) a common opinion among the Ancients,
that whatever did bring great benefit to mankind, was never done without Divine
goodness toward men. And well might they deem so, seeing to do so is most
agreeable to his nature, and appertaining to his charge; and may appear to be
so by good argumentation a priori. For, that God does govern our affairs, may
be deduced from his essential Attributes; and, consequently, that he does in
especial manner order these things, which are the most proper and worthy
objects of his governance. God indeed does not disregard any thing; he watches
over the least things by his general and ordinary Providence; so that nothing
in nature may deviate from its course, or transgress the bounds prescribed to
it. He thereby clothes the Mat. 6. 30. Psalm. 104. 14. Psalm. 147. 9. Job 38.
39. Psalm. 104. 21.
grass of the field; He provideth for the raven his food, and the young lions
seek their meat from him; without his care Mat. 10. 29, 30.
a sparrow does not fall to the ground; by it all the hairs of our head are
numbered. But his more special hand of Providence is chiefly employed in
managing affairs of great moment and benefit to mankind; and peculiarly those
which concern his people, who do profess to worship and serve him; whose
welfare he tendreth with more then ordinary care and affection. He therefore
has Dan. 4 25. Psalm. 75. 7.
a main stroke in all revolutions and changes of State: he presideth in all
great counsels, and undertakings; in the waging of war, in the settlement of
peace; in the Psalm. 46. 9. Prove. 21. 31. 1 Chronicles. 29. 11. Sap. 6. 4.
dispensation of victory and good success. He is peculiarly interested in the
protection of Princes, the chief Ministers of his Kingdom; and in preservation
of his people, the choice object of his care, from violent invasions, and
treacherous surprises; so as to prevent disasters incident, or to deliver from
them. It is he that (as the Psalmist Psalm. 144. 10. Eccles 10. 20. Psalm. 18.
50. and 21. 1. and 33. 16.
says) does give salvation unto Kings; who delivers David his servant from
the hurtful sword. It is he that continually Psalm. 121. 4. Jer. 14. 8. Psalm.
46. 5. Psalm. 94. 14. Isa. 54. 17. Psalm. 3. 8.
keeps Israel without ever sleeping, or slumbering; who is the hope of
Israel, and the Savior thereof; who is in the midst of her, that she shall not
be moved; who has declared, that he will help her, and that right early; that
he will not cast off his people, nor forsake his inheritance; that no weapon
formed against his Church shall prosper; that salvation belongs to the Lord,
and his blessing is upon his people. When therefore any remarkable event,
highly conducing to the public good of Church or State, (supporting them in a
good condition, or rescuing them from imminent danger,) does appear, it is most
reasonable and most just, to ascribe the accomplishment thereof to God's Hand.
When any pernicious enterprise, levelled against the safety of Prince and
people, is disappointed, it is fit we should profess and say, The righteous
Lord has hewn the snares of the ungodly in pieces. Psalm. 129. 4. (O. T.)


4. Another like mark of special Providence is, the Righteousness of the Case,
or the advantage springing from events unto the maintenance of Right, the
vindication of Innocence, the defense of Truth, the encouragement of Piety and
Virtue. God naturally is the Judge of Right, the Guardian of Innocence, the
Patron of Truth, and Promoter of Goodness. The Lord is a refuge to the
oppressed: He is a Father of the fatherless, and Psalm. 9. 9. Psalm. 68. 5. Psalm.
10. 14. Job 36. 15. Psalm. 140. 12.
a Judge of the Widow: He will maintain the cause of the afflicted, and the
right of the poor: Psalm. 103. 6. and 9. 8. Psalm. 5. 12.
He executes righteousness, and judgment for all that are oppressed: He
blesses the righteous, and compasses him with favor as with a shield: He
preserves the souls of the righteous, and delivers them out of the hand of
the ungodly: All his Paths are mercy and Psalm. 97. 10. and 37. 12 -- Psalm. 25.
10. and 146. 6.
truth, unto such as keep his Covenant and his Testimonies. Whenever therefore
Right is oppressed, or perillously invaded; when Innocence is grossly abused,
or sorely beset; when Piety is fiercely opposed, or cunningly undermined; when
good men for the profession of Truth, or the practice of Virtue, are
persecuted, or grievously threatened with mischief: then may we presume that God
is not unconcerned, nor will prove backward to reach forth his succor. And
when accordingly we find that signal aid or deliverance do then arrive, it is
most reasonable to suppose, that God particularly has engaged himself, and
exerted his power in their behalf. For, seeing it is his proper and peculiar
work, seeing it most becomes and behooves him to appear in such (...)
affording his helpful countenance; when he does it, we should be ready to
acknowledge it. In such a case, The hand of the Lord shall be known toward his
servants, Isa. 66. 14.
and his indignation toward his enemies, says the Prophet.

5. Another character is, the Correspondence of Events to the Prayers and
desires of good men. For seeing it is the duty, and constant practice of good
men, in all exigencies Psalm. 69 13 -- and ^02. 1, 2. and 140 6. and 60. 10. and
56. 1 -- Jam. 5. 16. Psalm. 56. 9. Psalm. 34. 15. and 91. 15. and 145. 18.
to implore God's help; seeing such Prayers have, as S. James tells us, a
mighty energy, it being God's property, by them to be moved to impart his
powerful assistence; seeing God most plainly and frequently has declared, and
obliged himself by promise, that he will hear them, so as to perform whatever
is expedient in their behalf; seeing we have many notable experiments recorded
in Scripture (as those of Asa, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Elias, Daniel, and the
like) 2 Chronicles. 14. 11. and 20. 9. and 32. 20 2 Kings 19. 15. 1 Kings 17. 1, etc.
of Prayers bringing down wonderful effects from Heaven, with which the
testimonies of (...); Naz. Orat. 4.
all times, and the daily experience of good men do conspire; seeing the
presumption of such efficacy is the main ground and encouragement of Devotion,
we have great reason, How many myriads and squadrons of men were there, whom we
only praying, and God willing, discomfited? says Nazianzen in reference to the
defeating of Julian 's design.
whenever Events are answerable to such Prayers, to ascribe the performance of
them to God's Hand: great reason we have in such cases to cry out with David,
Now know I that the Lord saves his Anointed; he will hear him from his holy
Heaven, with the saving strength of his right Psalm. 20. 6.
hand: just cause have we, according to his pattern, thankfully to acknowledge
God's favor in answering our petitions; The King (said he) shall joy in thy
strength, O Lord, and in thy salvation how greatly shall he rejoice? Psalm. 21.
1, 2.
For thou have given him his heart's desire, and have not withholden Psalm. 30.
2. and 66. 17 -- and 118. 5.
the requests of his lips.

6. Again, The proceedings of God (especially in way of judgment, or of
dispensing rewards and punishments) discover their original by their kind and
countenance, which usually do bear a near resemblance, or some significant
correspondence to the actions upon which they are grounded. Punishments (says
a Father) are the forced (...). Damasc.
offsprings of willing faults: and answerably, Rewards are the children of
good deeds: and God, who forms both, does commonly order it so, that the
children in their complexion and features, shall resemble their Parents. So
that the deserts of men shall often be legible in the recompenses conferred, or
inflicted on them: not according (...) Chrysostom. (...) 19.
to the natural result of their practice, but with a comely reference thereto;
apt to raise in them a sense of God's Hand, and to wring from them an
acknowledgment of his Equity in so dealing with them. So when humble Modesty is
advanced to honor, and ambitious Confidence is thrown into disgrace; when
Liberality is blessed with increase, and Avarice is cursed with decay of
estate; when Craft incurreth disappointment, and Simplicity finds good
success; when haughty Might is shattered, and helpless Innocence is preserved;
when the Calumnious tongue is blistered, the Flattering lips are cut off, the
Blasphemous throat is torn out; when Psalm. 12. 3. Rev. 16. 6.
bloody Oppressors have blood given them to drink, and come to welter in their
own gore; (an accident which almost continually does happen;) when Treacherous
men by their own Confidents, or by themselves are betrayed; when Retaliations
of vengeance are ministered, extorting confessions, like to that of Adoni-bezek,
As I have done, so God has requited me; deserving such exprobrations, Judges
1. 7.
as that of Samuel to Agag, As thy sword has 1 Samuel 15. 33.
made women childless, so shall thy mother be childless among women; grounding
such reflections as that concerning Antiochus, Thus the murderer and blasphemer
having suffered most grievously, as he entreated other men, so died he a 2 Mac.
9. 28.
miserable death: By such Occurrences the finger of God does point out and
indicate it self; they speak themselves immediately to come from that just God,
who does (...), render to men answerably to their doings; Luke 14. 12. Romans 12.
19.
who pays men their due, sometimes in value, often in specie, according to
the strictest way of reckoning. He (as the Prophet says) is great in counsel,
and mighty in Jer. 32. 19.
work: for his eyes are open to all the ways of the sons of men, to give every
one according to his ways, and according Psalm 62. 12.
to the fruits of his doings. This indeed is a sort of administration most
conformable to God's exact justice, and most conducible to his holy designs of
instructing and correcting offenders. He therefore has declared it to be his
way. It is (says the Prophet, directing his speech Jer. 50. 15. and 51. 49.
to the instruments of Divine vengeance upon Babylon) the vengeance of the
Lord: take vengeance upon her; as she has done, do unto her. And, The day of
the Lord (says Obad. 15.
another Prophet concerning the like judgment upon Edom) is near upon all the
Heathen. As thou have done, it Ezekiel. 35. 15.
shall be done unto thee; thy reward shall return upon thine own head. Thereby
does God mean to declare himself the Judge, and Governor of men: For, I will,
says Ezekiel. 7 27. Job 34. 11.
he in Ezekiel, do unto them after their way, and according to their deserts
will I judge them; and they shall know that I am the Lord. Farther,

7. Another argument of special Providence is, the Harmonious conspiracy of
various Accidents to one End or Effect. If that one thing should hit
advantageously to the production of some considerable Event, it may with some
plausibility be attributed to Fortune, or common Providence: yet that diverse
things, having no dependence, or coherence one with the other, in diverse
places, through several times, shall all join their forces to compass it,
cannot well otherwise then be ascribed to God's special Care wisely directing,
to his own Hand (...). Eusebius. lib. I. de Vit. Constable. de Maximino (sub finem.)
Is oculos qui erucrat Christianis, ipse ^pisu orbatus.
powerfully wielding those concurrent instruments to one good purpose. For it
is beside the nature, it is beyond the reach of Fortune, to range various
causes in such order. Blind Fortune cannot apprehend or catch the seasons and
junctures of things, which arise from the motions of causes in their nature
indifferent and arbitrary: to it therefore no such event can reasonably be
imputed. So to the bringing about our Lord's Passion, (that great Event, which
is so particularly assigned to God's Hand,) we may observe the monstrous
Treachery of Judas, the strange Malignity of the Jewish Rulers, the prodigious
Levity of the People, the wonderful Easiness of Pilate, with other notable
accidents, to have jumped in order thereto. So also that a malicious Traitor
should conceive kindness toward any, that he should be mistaken in the object
of his favor, that he should express his mind in a way subject to deliberate
examination, in terms apt to breed suspicion where the Plot was laid; that the
Counselors should despise it, and yet not smother it; that the King
instantly, by a light darted into his mind, should descry it: these things so
happily meeting, may argue God (who mouldeth the hearts, who guides the hands,
who enlightneth the minds of men) to have been engaged in the detection of this
day's black Conspiracy.

Such are some characters of special Providence: each of which singly appearing
in any occurrence, would in a considerate man breed an opinion thereof; each of
them being very congruous to the supposition of it; no such appearances being
otherwise so clearly and cleverly explicable, as by assigning the Divine Hand
for their principal cause. But the connection of them all in one Event (when
diverse odd accidents do befall at a seasonable Vid. Diod. Sic. lib. 15. p. 482.
time, according to exigency for the public benefit, the preservation of
Princes, the security of God's People, the protection of Right, the maintenance
of Truth and Piety, according to the wishes and prayers of good men, with
proper retribution and vengeance upon the wretched designers of mischief; such
a complication, I say, of these marks in one Event) may thoroughly suffice to
raise a firm persuasion, to force a confident acknowledgment concerning God's
Providence, in any considerate and ingenuous person: it readily will dispose
such persons upon any such occasion to say, This is the Lord's doing, Psalm.
118. 23.
and it is mavelous in our eyes.

Notwithstanding therefore any obscurity or intricacy (...). Chrysostom. ad Olymp.
Ep. 1.
that sometime may appear in the course of Providence, notwithstanding any
general exceptions that may by perverse incredulity be alleged against the
conduct of things, there are good marks observable, whereby (if we are not very
blockish, drowzy, supine, lazy, or froward; if we will consider wisely, with
industrious attention and care, with minds pure from vain prejudices, and
corrupt affections) we may discern and understand God's doing. Which to do is
the First Duty specified in our Text: upon which having insisted so largely, I
shall (hoping you will favor me with a little patience) briefly touch the rest.

II. It is the Duty of us all, upon such remarkable occurrences of Providence,
to fear God: All men, it is said, shall fear. It is our Duty in such cases to be
affected with all sorts of fear; with a fear of awful dread, with a fear Job 37
22. -- and 13. 11. Psalm. 52. 6. and 68. 35. Dan. 6. 26. Isa. 59. 17.
of hearty reverence, with a fear of sober caution; yea, sometimes with a fear
of dejecting consternation. When God does appear clad with his robes of
vengeance and zeal, denouncing and discharging judgment; when he represents
himself fearful in praises, terrible in his doings toward Exodus 15. 11. Psalm.
66. 32 5. and 65. 5. (130. 3.)
the children of men, working terrible things in righteousness; it should
strike into our hearts a dread of his glorious Majesty, of his mighty Power, of
his severe Justice, of his glorious and fearful Name: it should instill Deuteronomy.
28. 58. and 10. 17.
into our minds a reverence of his excellent Wisdom, his exceeding Goodness,
his perfect Holiness: it should breed in our Souls a solicitous care of
displeasing and provoking him: it should cause us in our hearts to shake and
tremble before him. Then is that of the Psalmist to be put Isa. 66. 2.
in practice, Let all the earth fear the Lord, let all the inhabitants of the
World stand in awe of him. Tremble thou Psalm. 33. 8.
Earth at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob. Such
dispensations are in their nature declarative Psalm. 114. 7.
of those Divine Attributes which do require such affections: they are set
before our eyes to cast us into a very serious and solemn frame; to abash, and
deter us from offending, by observing the danger of incurring punishments like
to those which we behold inflicted upon presumptuous transgressors; upon those
who do hainously violate Right, or furiously impugn Truth, or profanely despise
Piety; who earnestly prosecute wicked Enterprises; who persecute the Friends of
God with outrageous violence, or treacherous subtilty. Upon infliction of such
punishments, All the people shall hear, and fear, Deuteronomy. 17. 13. and 13. 11. and
19. 20.
and do no more presumptuously, says God himself, declaring the nature and
drift of them. They do plainly demonstrate, that there is no presuming to
escape, being detected in our close Machinations by God's All-seeing Eye; being
defeated in our bold Attempts by God's All-mighty Hand; being sorely chastised
for our Iniquity by God's impartial Judgment. Extremely blind and stupid
therefore must we be, or monstrously sturdy and profane, if such experiments of
Divine Power and Justice do not awe us, and fright us from sin. When the Lion
roareth, Hos. 11. 10. Amos 3. 6, 8.
who will not fear? when the trumpet is blown in the City, shall not the people
be afraid? Shall he, at whom the mountains Nah. 1. 5.
quake, and the hills melt; whose indignation the Nations are not able to
abide; at whose wrath the Earth does Jer. 10. 10. Psalm. 104. 32. and 18. 7. and
76. 8. and 143. 2. Job 26. 11. (Isa. 64. 3: Ezekiel. 21. 10. Isa. 25. 3. and 59.
18, 19.)
shake and tremble; at whose reproof the pillars of Heaven are astonished;
shall he visibly frown, shall his wrath flame out, shall he shake his rod of
exemplary Vengeance over us, and we stand void of sense or fear? If so, then
surely a brutish dotage, or a Gigantick stoutness does possess us.

III. We are in such cases obliged to declare God's work: that is, openly to
acknowledge and avow, to applaud and celebrate the special Providence of God,
with his adorable perfections displayed in such Events; to the glory of God's
Name, in expression of our reverence and gratitude toward him, for the common
edification of men; for which uses they greatly serve, to which purposes they
are designed. We should not view such providential occurrences, like dumb
beasts, with a dull or careless silence, as if we did not mind them, or were
not concerned in them: we should not suppress or stifle the knowledge of them
in our breasts, as if they were barely matters of private consideration and
use: we should not let our observation and resentment of them be fruitless, so
as to yield no honor to God, no benefit to man. But we should propagate and
convey them into others: in so loud a tone, in so lively a strain we should
vent them, as thereby to excite the notice, to inflame the affections of all
men within the reach of our voice; provoking them to conspire with us in
acknowledgment of God's Power and Wisdom, in acclamation to his Justice and
Goodness. This is the due improvement of our Glory; that peculiar excellency,
wherein chiefly (except in Psalm. 57. 8.
our Reason) we do surpass all creatures; that without which our Reason it self
is more then half unprofitable; that whereby we put our best Member to its best
use. For this we have the devout Psalmist his pious Resolutions, his exemplary
Performances, his zealous Wishes, his earnest Exhortations to guide and move
us. I will speak Psalm. 145. 5, 6, 11. (and 77. 12. and 9. 14)
of the glorious honor of thy Majesty, and of thy wondrous works. Men shall
speak of the might of thy terrible acts; and I will declare thy greatness. They
shall speak of the glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy power. So did he
signify his Resolution. I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart; I
have declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation: I have not Psalm. 40. 10.
concealed thy Loving Kindness and thy Truth from the great Congregation. So
his conscience testified of his Practice. Oh that men would praise the Lord for
his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men: that they
would Psalm. 107. 8, 15, 21, 22, 31.
offer the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and declare his works with gladness. So
does he pour forth his Desire. O clap your hands, all ye people, shout unto God
with the voice of triumph. Psalm 47. 1.
Sing unto the Lord, bless his Name: show forth his salvation Psalm. 96 2, 3.
from day to day. Declare his glory among the Heathen, his wonders among all
people. Come and see the works of God -- Psalm. 96. 3. and 105. 2. Psalm. 66 5,
2. (Psalm. 66. 16.)
Sing forth the honor of his Name, make his Praise glorious. O give thanks
unto the Lord, call upon his Name; make known Psalm. 105. 1.
his deeds among the people. So does he summon, so does he urge us to this
practice; and in his deportment we may see our Duty.

IV. It is peculiarly the Duty and practice of good men upon such occasions to
feel, and to express religious Joy. The righteous shall be glad in the Lord.
Good men indeed then have great matter, and much cause, on many accounts to be
glad.

It becomes them to rejoice, as having an universal complacence in God's
proceedings, as gratefully relishing all dispensations of Providence. They, as
pious, are disposed to bless and praise God for all things incident, and cannot
therefore but rejoice; Joy being an inseparable companion of Gratitude, and
Praise. Hence, Light is Psalm. 97. 11.
sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart. Hence, The
voice of salvation and rejoicing is in the tabernacles Psalm. 118. 15.
of the righteous. Hence, Rejoice in the Lord, O ye Psalm. 33. 1.
righteous: for praise is comely for the upright; is an exhortation backed with
a very good reason.

They cannot but find satisfaction in observing God's Providence notably
discovered, to the confirmation of their faith, and cherishing their hopes;
together with the conviction of infidelity, and confusion of profaneness. Our
heart (says the Psalmist) shall rejoice in him; because Psalm. 33. 21.
we have trusted in his Holy Name. I have trusted in thy mercy, my heart shall
rejoice in thy salvation. The righteous shall Psalm. 13. 5.
see it, and rejoice; and all iniquity shall stop her mouth. Psalm. 107. 42.


It is to them no small pleasure, to behold God's holy Perfections
illustriously shining forth; and the Glory of him (who is the principal object
of their love, their reverence, their hope and confidence) to be conspicuously
advanced. Rejoice, (says the Psalmist) O ye righteous, and Psalm. 97. 12. and
30. 4. Psalm. 97. 8, 9. and 48. 11.
give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness. Zion heard, and was glad, and
the daughters of Judah rejoiced, because of thy judgments, O Lord. For thou,
Lord, art high above all the Earth.

It is to them ground of exceeding comfort, to receive so clear pledges of
God's Love and Favor, his Truth and Fidelity, his Bounty and Munificence
toward them, expressed in such watchful care over them, such protection in
dangers, such aid in needs, such deliverance from mischiefs vouchsafed to them.
Sen. de Benef. 2. 22. Cum accipiendum judicaverimus, hilares a^cipiamus,
profitentes gaudium, etc. Vid. ib. 30. Psalm. 13. 6. Psalm. 63. 7. Psalm 71. 23.
Such Benefits they cannot receive from God's hand, without that cheerfulness
which always does adhere to gratitude. I will (says David) sing unto the Lord,
because he has dealt bountifully with me. Because thou have been my helper,
therefore in the shadow of thy wings I will rejoice. My lips shall greatly
rejoice in thee, and my Soul, which thou have redeemed. I will be glad, and
rejoice in thy mercy: for thou have considered my trouble, and have known my
Soul in adversities. Psalm. 31. 7.
The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are glad. Psalm. 126. 3.
Let all those that put their trust in thee rejoice: let them ever shout for
joy, because thou defendest them -- Psalm. 5. 11.


They are also greatly refreshed with apprehension of the happy fruits
sprouting from such dispensations of Providence; such as are the Benefit of
mankind, the Peace and prosperity of the Civil State, the Preservation,
settlement, enlargement, advancement of God's Church, the support of Right, the
succor of Innocence, the maintenance of Truth, the encouragement and
furtherance of Piety; the restraint of Violence, the discountenance of Error,
the correction of Vice and Impiety. In these things they, as faithful servants
of God, and real friends of Goodness, as bearing hearty good will and
compassion to mankind, as true lovers of their Country, as living and sensible
members of the Church, cannot but rejoice. Seeing by these things their own
best interest, (which is no other then the advantage of Goodness) their chief
honor, (which consists in the promotion of Divine Glory,) their truest
content, (which is placed in the prosperity of Sion,) are highly Psalm. 122. 6.
(1 Cor. 12. 26.)
furthered; how can they look on them springing up without great delight and
complacence? O (says the Psalmist) sing unto the Lord -- for he has done
mavelous Psalm. 98. 1, 3.
things -- He has remembered his mercy and truth toward the house of Israel:
all the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God. And, Sing, O
heavens, (cries the Isa. 49. 13. Psalm. 96. 11, 13.
Prophet) and be joyful, O earth, and break forth into singing, O ye mountains:
for the Lord has comforted his people, and will have mercy on his afflicted.
And, When (says he) ye shall see this, (the comfort of God's people) your
heart Isa. 66. 14.
shall rejoice; and your bones shall flourish like an herb, and the hand of the
Lord shall be known toward his servants, and his indignation toward his enemies.

Even in the frustration of wicked designs, attended with severe execution of
Vengeance on the Contrivers and Abettours of them, they may have a pleasant
satisfaction; they must then yield a cheerful applause to Divine Justice. The
righteous (says the Psalmist) shall rejoice Psalm. 58. 10. Job 22. 19. Psalm.
68. 2, 3.
when he sees the Vengeance: and, Let the wicked (says he) perish at the
presence of God; but let the righteous be glad, let them rejoice before God,
yea let them exceedingly rejoice. Whence at God's infliction of Judgment upon
Babylon, it is said in Jeremy, Then the heaven, and the earth, and all that is
therein, shall sing for Babylon: and at the Jer. 51. 48.
fall of Mystical Babylon, in the Apocalypse it is likewise said, Rejoye over
her, thou heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Apoc. 18. 20.
Prophets; for God has avenged you on her. Farther,

V. The next Duty prescribed to good men in such cases is to trust in God: that
is, to have their affiance in God (upon all such like occasions, in all
urgencies of need) settled, improved, and corroborated thereby. This indeed is
the proper end, immediately regarding us, of God's special Providence,
disclosing it self in any miraculous, or in any remarkable way; to nourish in
weldisposed minds that Faith in God, which is the root of all (Psalm. 78. 7.)
Piety, and ground of Devotion. Such experiments are sound arguments to
persuade good men, that God does govern and order things for their best
advantage; they are powerful incentives, driving them in all exigencies to seek
God's help; they are most convincing evidences, that God is abundantly able,
very willing, and ever ready to succor them. They, says the Psalmist, that
know Psalm. 9. 10.
thy Name, will put their trust in thee: for thou, Lord, have not forsaken them
that seek thee. And, I (says he) will abide in thy tabernacle for ever; I will
trust in the covert Psalm. 61 3, 4, 5. Psalm. 115. 9. etc. and 130. 7.
of thy wings: For thou, O God, have heard my vows; thou have been a shelter
for me, and a strong tower from the enemy. It is, indeed, a great aggravation
of diffidence in God, that having tasted and seen that the Lord is good; having
Psalm. 34. 8.
felt so manifest experience of Divine goodness; having received so notable
pledges of God's favorable inclination to help us; we yet will not rely upon
him. As a friend, who by signal instances of kindness has assured his good
will, has great cause of offense, if he be suspected of unwillingness in a
needful season to afford his relief: so may God most justly be displeased, when
we, (notwithstanding so palpable demonstrations of his kindness) by distrusting
him, do in effect question the sincerity Ecclus. 1. 10.
of his friendship, or the constancy of his goodness toward us.

VI. Good men upon such occasions should glory: All the upright in heart shall
glory. Should glory, that is, in contemplation of such Providence, feeling
sprightly elevations of mind and transports of affection, they should exhibit
triumphant demonstrations of satisfaction and alacrity. It becomes them not in
such cases to be dumpish, or demure; but jocund and crank in their humor,
brisk and gay in their looks, pleasantly flippant and free in their speech;
jolly and debonair in their behavior; every way signifying the extreme
complacency they take in God's doing, and the full content they taste in their
state. They with solemn exultation should triumph in Psalm. 126. 1. etc.
such events, as in victories achieved by the glorious Hand of God in their
behalf, in approbation of their cause, in favor toward their persons, for
their great benefit and comfort. They may (not as proudly assuming to
themselves the glory due to God, but as gratefully sensible of their felicity
springing from God's favor) se jactare, se laudibus efferre, (as the Hebrew
word does signify;) that is, in a sort boast, and commend themselves as very
happy in their relation to God, by virtue of his protection and aid. They may
(not with a haughty insolence, or wanton arrogance, but with a sober
confidence, and cheerfulness) insult upon baffled impiety, by their expressions
Psalm. 52. 6, 7. The righteous shall -- laugh at him, or deride him, in this
manner; Lo, this is the man that made not God his strength -- Psalm. 44 8.
Psalm. 92. 4.
and demeanor upbraiding the folly, the baseness, the impotency, and
wretchedness thereof, in competition with the wisdom, in opposition to the
power of God, their friend and patron. For such carriage in such cases we have
the practice and the advice of the Psalmist, to warant and direct us. In God,
says he, we boast all the day long, and praise thy Name for ever. Thou, Lord,
have made me glad through thy work; and I will triumph in the works of thy
hands. We will rejoice in thy salvation; and in Psalm. 20. 5.
the Name of our God we will set up our banners. Glory ye in his holy Name: let
the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord. Psalm. 105. 3. 4.
Sing unto him, sing Psalms unto him; talk ye of all his wondrous works. Save
us, O Lord our God, and gather us from among the heathen, to give thanks unto
thy Name, and to Psalm. 106. 47.
triumph in thy praise. Such should be the result (upon us) of God's merciful
Dispensations toward his people.

I shall only further remark, that the word here used is by the Greek rendered
(...), they shall be praised: which sense the Original will bear, and the
reason of the case may admit. For such Dispensations ever do adorn integrity,
and yield commendation to good men. They declare the wisdom of such persons, in
adhering to God, in reposing upon God's help, in embracing such courses which
God does approve and bless: they plainly tell how dear such persons are to God;
how incomparably happy in his favor, how impregnably safe under his Psalm. 126.
3. and 125. 1, etc and 138. 1, etc
protection; as having his infallible wisdom, and his invincible power engaged
on their side. This cannot but render them admirable, and their state glorious
in the eyes of all men; inducing them to profess with the Psalmist, Happy is
the people which is in such a case; yea, happy is that people, whose God is the
Lord. And of such a people, that Psalm 144. 15. and 33. 12.
declaration from the same mouth is verified, In thy Name shall they rejoice
all the day long, and in thy righteousness Psalm. 89. 16, 17.
shall they be exalted: For thou art the glory of their strength, and in thy
favor their horn shall be exalted.

Such are the Duties suggested in our Text, as suting these occasions, when God
in special manner has vouchsafed to protect his people, or to rescue them from
imminent mischiefs, by violent assault or by fradulent contrivance levelled
against them. I should apply these particulars to the present Case solemnized
by us: but I shall rather recommend the application to your sagacity, then
farther infringe your patience, by spending thereon so many words as it would
exact. You do well know the Story, which by so many years repetition has been
impressed on your minds: and by reflecting thereon,

You will easily discern, how God, in the seasonable discovery of this
execrable Plot, (the masterpiece of wicked machinations ever conceived in
humane brain, or devised on this side Hell, since the foundation of things,) in
the happy deliverance of our Nation and Church from the desperate mischiefs
intended toward them, in the remarkable protection of Right and Truth, did
signalize his Providence.

You will be affected with hearty Reverence toward the gracious Author of our
salvation, and with humble dread toward the just awarder of vengeance upon
those miscreant wretches, who dug this pit, and fell into it themselves.

You will be ready with pious acknowledgment and admiration of God's Mercy, his
Justice, his Wisdom, to declare and magnify this notable Work done by him
among us.

You must needs feel devout resentments of Joy for the Glory arising to God,
and the Benefits accruing to us, in the preservation of God's Anointed our just
Sovereign, with his Royal posterity: in the freeing our Country from civil
Broils, Disorders, and Confusions; from the yoaks of Usurpation and slavery;
from grievous Extortions and Rapines; from bloody Persecutions and Trials, with
the like spawn of disastrous and tragical consequences, by this Design
threatened upon it: in upholding our Church (which was so happily settled, and
had so long gloriously flourished) from utter ruin: in securing our profession
of God's Holy Truth, the truly Catholic Faith of Christ, (refined from those
drossy alloys, wherewith the rudeness and sloth of blind Times, the fraud of
ambitious and covetous Designers, the pravity of sensual and profane men had
embased and corrupted it,) together with a pure Worship of God, an edifying
administration of God's Word and Sacraments, a comely, wholesome, and moderate
Discipline, conformable to Divine Prescription, and Primitive example: in
rescuing us from having impious Errors, scandalous Practices, and
superstitious Rites, with merciless violence obtruded upon us: in continuing
therefore to us the most desirable comforts and conveniences of our lives.

You further considering this signal testimony of Divine Goodness, will thereby
be moved to hope and confide in God for his gracious preservation from the like
pernicious attemps, against the safety of our Prince, and welfare of our
Country, against our Peace, our Laws, our Religion; especially from Romish Zeal
and Bigottry, (that mint of woeful Factions and Combustions, of treasonable
Conspiracies, of barbarous Massacres, of horrid Assassinations, of intestine
Rebellions, of foreign Invasions, of savage Tortures and Butcherics, of holy
Leagues, and pious Frauds, through Christendom, and particularly among us,)
which as it without reason damneth, so it would by any means destroy all that
will not crouch thereto.

You will in fine, with joyous festivity glory and triumph in this illustrious
demonstration of God's Favor toward us; so as heartily to join in those due
acclamations of blessing and praise.

Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us a prey to Psalm. 124. 6. (and 68.
32.)
their teeth. Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers;
the snare is broken, and we are escaped.

Allelujah; Salvation and glory, and power unto the Lord Apoc. 19. 1, 2.
our God: For true and righteous are his judgments.

Great and mavelous are thy works, O Lord God Almighty; Apoc. 15. 3.
just and true are thy ways, O thou King of Saints.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who only does wondrous things: And blessed
be his glorious Name for ever: Psalm. 72. 18, 19.
and let the the whole earth be filled with his glory. Amen, and Amen.

FINIS.

