MIRZA. A Tragedy, Really acted in PERSIA, in the last Age.

Illustrated with Historical Annotations.

The Author. R. B. Esquire;

HORAT. -- Rex eris --
Si recte facies. Hic MURUS aheneus esto,
Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa.
LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
sign of the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard: and for T. Dring at the
George in Fleet Street near Cliffords Inn.

TO HIS MAJESTY.
SIR,
TO wait on YOU, the Persian MIRZA'S come
From the fair shades of his El^z^um:
If all the wrongs that is Innocence oppressed
Obtain one s^gh from YOUR heroic Breast,
H^'l think them (...), having preferred Him to
^OUR Royal Know^edge; and perhaps done so
More then his Birthright bad; for he hopes now
Not only to del^ght, but profit YOU,
^n warning to eschew what spoild his Right,
The Flatterer, and too powerful Favorite.
In old Time, sacred was the Po^ts Pen,
And useful to eternize worthy men:
To Rescue Virtue from the Furies spite,
^^d lift her Palm the h^gher for the weight.
And I could wish it the next Ages Song,
Had MIRZA not die'd, He Would not lived so long:
His (written) Ghost looks brighter in his Ba^
Then He had in the Crown of Persia.
So shall it be: Gain from His Loss shall flow,
And Life from Death, if YOU, Great SIR, say so.
BARON.

M. Spei Juveni, Rob. Baronio, Amico.
IN sese acervos mutuos fluctus cient,
Reddunque Nautis triste and intutum fretum:
Et aulici arts, abditi atque impervij,
Scelerisque pleni, Numinisque nescij,
Creant ruinam gentibus: Sic floridas
Segetes perurit ignis Aetnaei vapor.
At hos recessus ac Coeleste absconditus
Retexti, amoeni and floridi Genij parens!
Sic quippe magnum Scelera novisse;
At magis illa eleganter tradidisse posteris.
J. Hall.

Upon the incomparable Tragedy called Mirza, written by my dear Friend Mr.
Robert Baron.
ADvance Great Mirza, let the base world see
Virtue is Virtue though in misery.
Convince her of her madness, let her know
Goodness does still attend thee, high or low;
And that, which prosperous, wrought thy hate and scorn,
Commands our Adoration when forlorn.
Virtue's no Virtue while it lives secure,
When difficulty waits on it then it is pure.
The morning of thy life which soared so high
In acts of Valor Crowned with Majesty,
Had nere attained that glorious pitch and height,
Had thou not fallen a sacrifice at night;
This fall of thine thy Fame does much advance,
And death thy valuation does enhance.
So have I seen a much lamented hearse
When 'twas departing, all bepinn'd with Verse.
And from the self same channel issuing forth
The livers sorrow, and the dead Man's worth;
It Is this which makes us write, that 't may be known
Virtue is highly prized, though overthrown.
We mourn thy loss, admire thy worth, and grieve
Our Isle a Mirz' and Allybeg can give.
Thus Text and Time do suit, and whilst you tell
Your Tale, we will easily find a Parallel.
Jo. Quarles; Fell. of Pet. House Camb.

To the most Ingenious Master ROBERT BARON, On his Masterpiece of Tragedy.
PYTHAGORAS sang truth, souls shift we see
For IOHNSON'S transmigrated into Thee:
Or if that Doctrines false, thy glory's more
Without his helps to equal, whom before
We thought Sans peer: both are so very well,
So like, as mix them, and you cannot tell
Me which is which. Thou Fame enough have won,
Thy name is u^, n^w may thou lie till Noon,
And rest thy strong Muse, having equaled him
Whom sharpest wits did our best Poet deem:
I know thy Judgment's more then to aim ought higher,
Thou might as well hope to drown PHOEBUS Lyre;
Yet write again, till all the world's agreed
Thy P^GASUS has breath as well as speed.
Mean time, who will number our best Plays aright
First CATALINE, then let him MIRZA write,
So mix your names: in the third place must be
SELANUS, or the next that comes from thee.
TO. HlLLS Esquire;

To the best accomplished Author.
Thanks noble Friend, thou have given us a Play
This Age deserves not pray Heaven the next may,
A Play said I, I err to call it so,
It Is a laborious work, a great one too,
A work to which scarce even the ablest brain
So well, but in a wish, could ere attain;
So passing well it is as I no higher
Can ever hope to reach at then to admire,
To praise I need not strive, since Praisers thou
Enough have, though none it can praise enough.
JO. CARRY, M. A.

To the Author.
WHen I read yours ( dear friend) I seemed to see
In Persia acted this sad Tragedy,
But might we see it acted on the Stage
ABBAS in his, and MIRZA in his rage
Transported beyond pity, and the love
Of Parents, then (O then) how it would move!
For then, transfixt, men should not only see,
But should refent with such a Sympathy
As might extract a deluge from their eyes.
Persia would then seem but in theories
To Personate what you to life have dawn,
MELPOMENE was there but in the drawn*
Here in full splendors. There spectators shead
But only tears, yours acted, would strike dead.
Else, Stoic like, say there is an Apathie,
And that compassion is turned NIOBE.
No Marvail, since to her there have been shown
So many Tragic Acts, you bring but one,
But such a sprightfull one, that you may dare
To own what your name speaks, Born to be rare.
E. MANNYNG.

To the Reader.
READER,
THou have here the Triumph of Revenge, Tyranny, Jealousy, and Hate, in a
story sad and subl^me, however handled. But perhaps thou w^l^ say, what needed
I to have handled it at all, being already done? Indeed, I am not ignorant that
there is a Tragedy abroad of this subject, entitled The SOPHY; but it may be
said of me as TERENCE makes his Prologue to his Eunuchus speak of him (though
in a cause somewhat different.)

-- S^d eas fabulas factas prius
Latinas scisse sese, id vero pernegat.
I had finished three complete Acts of this Tragedy before I saw that, nor was
I then d^scouraged from proceeding, seeing the most ingenious Author of that
has made his seem qu^te another story from this. In his neither does the Prince
kill any of his Torturers; Nor does FATYMA d^e, which I take to be one of the
most important parts of the story, and the compleatest Conquest that ever
Revenge obtained over Virtue. In that King ABBAS d^es too, when, 't^s known,
that our King CHARLES ^n the second year of his Reign, An. 1626. sent S^r
DODMORE COTTON Ambassador to the same ABBAS, which was, some years after this
Tragedy was really acted there, From a Manuscript of which Ambassadors Letter,
to a friend of his in Cambridge, I had the hint of this story, as I propose it
in the ensuing Argument, and prosecute it in the whole. I have also the
Authority for the most important passages of it, of Master HERBERT, page
99.100.101, 102, 103, 104.
who relates this story in his Travells. However, ^t is no new thing for two
pens to employ themselves upon one Subject: nor need it seem other to the
Reader, or Spectator, then if thou did hear the same Song, sung first by a
Tenor, next by a Base voice.

If thou exceptest against the length of the Play, I answer; If it be well
written, all of it is worth thy Reading, if ill, none of it. However, I have
said enough, when I have only told thee,

-- Neque, me ut miretur turba, laboro:
Contentus paucis Lectoribus.
R. B.

The Argument.
ABBAS King of Persia, already flesht in blood (as having made his way to the
Crown by the murder of his eldest Brother, the completely valiant
Emir-hamze-mirza, and posting his purblind Father MAHOMET Codoband into
Paradise) grows jealous (so justly fea^ful are guilty minds) of his only
(legitimate) Son, and indub^table heir, the victorious Mirza, who (while he had
the command of his Fathers Armies) having much enlarged the Persian Territories
(by his acquests from the Mogull, toward Candahor, fom the Arabian, near to
Balsora, and the Tartar, east of the Hyrcanian Sea) grew great in the love and
admiration of the people. This jealousy (of its self, a blood thirsty passion,
more cruel th^n the Grave) irrita^ed by some Cabinet Councillors, enemies to
the Prince about the King, begat in him a fear of the Princes growth, that, a
resolve to strangle him; which to effect securely, that is closely, he trains
him from his Army, by dispatching a Post down to him (then sweating in bl^od,
to redeem the honor of his Countrymen against the Turk) with command to have
up to Court, where he should know his pleasure.

The Prince (being subject to that only disadvantage of honest hearts
credulity) assures his Army of his quick return, and hasts (so bold is
innocence) to attend his Father, from whom he is met by a Messenger, certifying
him, that the King, being by reason of some indisposition of health, unfit for
business, willed him to repose where that servant should carry him, till
himself came to welcome him. The credulous Prince (like other upright persons,
fearing no hurt because he meant none) follows his guide to his appointed
lodgings, whereinto (so soon as that false servant was departed) enter, at a
trap door, seven lusty villains, dea^ and dumb, armed with Bowstring^ and
bloody mind^, whose habit and weapons needed no other interpreters to a^sure
the amazed Prince that he was betrayed, and sealed to destruction. Oratory was
in vain, they were deaf in soul and body, (and this perhaps is the Reason why
the ^urks and Persians use to employ Mutes in these bloody office^) resistance
was bootless, he being single, and unarmed; yet (resolving not to go unattended
to the Grave) with such weapons at his Rage and Sorrow yielded him; he flew
upon them, offending them all by rare force and agility, a long time preventing
the noozes to fasten on him, which they threw incessantly toward his neck, so
that he sent three of them to the Devil, the other four reinforced their
violence, and at last fastened on him, who, quite spent with rage and opposals
fell down, as dead. The Canibals pursue their cruel cowardice, and had surely
finished their intent, had not the King (who was a private spectato^) touched
with some remorse, stepped forth, and commanded only that his tired Arms should
be pinnion'd; and ere he had fully recovered his senses, made an hot flaming
steel be drawn before his eyes, which (though giving no great pain) yet took
away his eyesight, forever forbidding him any more s^ght of what he loved,
Wife, Children, Friends, and endea^ed Soldiers. Then was he cast into Prison,
together with his Lady, an Arabian Princess, of the best endowments, and their
young Son Soffie, born to a brighter fortune.

Thus by the excessive impiety of an unnatu^al Father, has Asia lost her
chiefest Jewel, Mars his Darling, and Persia her incomparable Treasure; at once
undone, blind, imprisoned, and hopeless of any joy or honor ever after; the
cruel remembrance of which, soon drove the enraged Prince into madness, and
thirst of revenge, all the effects whereof were frequent with him, till his
afflicted friends and officers flocked about him, and dictated patience, which
they bettered by relating their own quondam greatness in blood and offices,
till by the same dislike, and mutability of King Abbas his humors they were
degraded, trod upon, mutilated, some their eyes put out, some their ears and
noses cut off, others captivated, and near famished, so truly said it is
Solamen miseris so cios habuisse doloris.

The grand enemy to the Prince, that infatuated King Abbas to this cruelty, was
Mahomet-ally-beg his principal favorite, a person raised to that height from
so obscure a descent, that he knew no further then his Father; yet (like most
mean men hoisted to extraordinary preferment,) he grew so over ambitious, as to
aim at the Crown; in order to which design, his first care was to remove the
Prince, the Bulwark and Palladium of Persia, and his family; next, to disband
the Kings Armies, what dishonorable condititions soever were granted to the
Turk, that no ready forces should be left to oppose him when he should break
out. One of his Instruments to besot the King to this, was one of his
Concubines, whom he knew to be strong in his affections; so dangerous Serpents
are they in the bosoms of Princes.

The Kings unfortunate credulity, gave Ally-beg a pretense specious enough to
take Arms, as but to obtain the Government of the young Prince Soffie, and to
assure the people of his safety against the dangerous anger of his jealous
Grandfather: So essential a beginning of all rebellions, is a smooth and fair
pretense either of Reformation or safety. But here a while leave we Allybeg
brooding over his design, co^rupting the great, buying the needy, and fawning
upon all, especially insinuating with the discontented, who are ever ready to
rebel.

In these unpleasant times, the King, (moving like Saturn in the highest Orb)
stood free and firm against all storms, giving himself all the variety of
pleasures; but none took him so much, as the beauty and pretty discourse he
observed in Fatyma, daughter to his blinded and enraged Son; which little Lady
he took into his Court for his pastime; and though not above seven years old,
she so captivated his doting mind, with her blooming, yet commanding Graces,
that nothing relished well without Fatyma, none gave him mirth save Fatyma, and
if inrag^d against any, no better reconcilement then by Fatyma; whom, when aged
two years more, he had an intent to marry with an Arabian King.

Nor had King Abbas alone, all the favor and benefit of this little Princess;
for though she had all possible pleasure at the Court, yet neglected she no
part of duty, but came very often into the Citadel to joy her Parents, and
relieve their wants; for none, save she, durst ask the King for their
allowances, without apparent danger of displeasure, and life w^thall; whereby
the royal, but most miserable prisoners, were sometimes near famished, none
daring to relieve them, lest the jealous King might have them in suspicion.

Thus by this child of virtue, and innocence, gained they what they pined for,
food and comfort. But behold the effects of mad melancholy! it ex^sperates the
blinded Prince to this strange resolve: He hearing of the immoderate joy and
pleasure that the King his father took in his little Grandchild Fatyma, being
incapable of obtaining any better revenge, vows to rob him of that his
Darling, though h^ wounded him through his own sides: So strong and so sweet a
passion is Revenge.

So that one time, when his sad W^fe and Son were sitting by him, in comes
pretty Fatyma, with relief unto her Father, by all actions of love and duty,
striving to show her self obedient. Such time, (cu^sed time!) as this young
Princess played about him, the Prince called her, who readily came to him to be
m^de much of, but see, a h^rrid entertainment! for instead of the embraces of
love, with admirable celerity, and rage, grasping her tender Neck with his
strong and wrathful hands, whirling her about, ere she could implore pity,
the enraged Son of a cruel Father, threw sta^k dead upon the floor his own
daughter Fatyma, and in her the chief joy left to himself, and his distrested
Princess (for the comfo^t of his revenge, how sweet soever in the Act, van^shed
with it) the excessive delight of the aged King, and sole ornament and comfort
of all that Kingdom (that seemed to enjoy the greatest of their condition; for
the Heir was with his Father buried alive in a too early and unjust captivity.)
His poor Princess, with all the strength of her weakness, seeing the Act,
struggled with him, crying out to him, that it was Fatyma that he killed,
little thinking he therefore killed her, because Fatyma. But he hearing his Son
Soffie cry out too, in blind sort pursued him, who, led by his better fate,
escaped down the stairs, and was safe.

Fatyma dead, begat as much sorrow and rage in old Abbas, as alive she did
love, who now sends threats of terrible satisfactions, as Famine, Chains,
Strapadoes, and all sharp and exquisite tortures, to the enraged Prince his
Son, who by his Messenge^s, returns his Father as many bitter curses, hopes of
better, and more perfect revenge, and wishes of whole Cataracts of miseries to
pour themselves upon him. In this Rage he spent two sad days, and in the
third, with a Roman resolution, gave a period to his sufferings in this world,
by quaffing off a cup of poison, to the confusion of his unnatural Father.

The sad Princess his Wife (like a true Turtle) surfeiting with sorrow, mewed
her self up, and since that time, has seldom been seen by any.

Lastly, Allybeg's Treason being discovered by a woman, we end with the
punishment of the Conspirators, the Kings reassuming of the Princes friends
into his favor, and declaring of his Son Soffie Heir to the Persian Dignity,
after his Grandfather Abbas his decease, which happening in the year 1629. the
young Prince took upon him the Empire; aged sixteen years, hopeful and
ingenious: so fresh in memory is this sad story.

The persons of the Play. EMIR-HAMZE-MIRZA'S Ghost.
ABBAS, King of Persia. MAHOMETALLY-BEG the Kings Favorite. BELTAZAR, a privy
Counselor. FARRABAN, Courtiers, creatures to Allybeg. SELEVCVS, Courtiers,
creatures to Allybeg. ELCHEE, A Duke, viceroy of Hyrcania. MATZED, Colonels,
and his creatures. MOZENDRA, Colonels, and his creatures. BENEFIAN, Colonels,
and his creatures. FLORADELLA, The Kings Concubine. OLYMPA, Count Ladies.
EARINA, Count Ladies. OMAY, Count Ladies. CLOE; Floradella's woman. MIRZA, The
Prince. SOFFIE, a child, his Son. EMANGOLY, Duke of Shiras, and Lieutenant
General of the Army under the Prince. METHICVLI, Noble men, and Officers in
the Army, fast friends to the Prince. HYDASFVS, Noble men, and Officers in the
Army, fast friends to the Prince. ALKAHAM, Noble men, and Officers in the Army,
fast friends to the Prince. DORIDO, a Page to the Prince. VASCO, Page to
Emangoly, NYMPHADORA, The Princess. FATIMA, Her Daughter, a Child. IFFIDA, The
Princesses woman*
PAGES, Seven MVTES, Executioners. Two THIEVES. OFFICERS. SOLDIERS. CHORUS.
THE SCENE, PERSIA.

MIRZA.
Act. 1.
EMIR-HAMZE-MIRZA'S Ghost. AND do thou swim in Pleasures, Tyrant, still?
Or have thou got a Patent to do i^?
When will the date expire? have thou not yet
Contracted guilt enough, that the ponderous weight
Of all thy Tyrannies, Ra^ines, Murders fell,
May, like a Millstone, sink thee quick to Hell?
Are these too light? leave thy Adulteries,
Thy Rapes, thy Incests, heaps of Perjuries,
And Ghomorean sports, no sting behind?
Or are the Gods grown all, like Fortune, blind?
Or has dull JOVE no Thunder left? Does not
(1.) The murder of our Sire (so soon forgot)
(2.) And Me, deserve a Bolt? Sleep'st thou? with what
Philtries is thy strange Pillow stuffed? do not
Ten thousand Fur^es with their flaring hair,
And knotted whips of wire, at thee still stare,
And threaten stripes? Is our great Fathers Ghost
Weary with haunting thee? or used to it, do
Account it now familiar, and not quake?
If so, behold, I come, from the dark Lake,
To be thy evil Genius, and distill
Into thy darker bosom deeds shall fill
The measure of thy sins up, and pull down,
With violent hand, heavens vengeance on thy Crow^.
The foul Fiend aid thy counsels; and unto
Thee dictate what he would, but cannot do. Discovers Abbas in his study.
Upon thy self, and thine own Princely line,
Revenge our Fathers wronged Ghost and mine.
Inherit all my fury, and obey
What jealousy shall prompt; mine did I say?
Alas! (vain voice!) how weak is that for thee!
The spirits of all unnatural Fathers be
Doubled upon thee. (3.) Act what the Mogull
(4.) And Turk shall start to hear, what (5.) the Tartar shall
Pity, what (6.) BAHAMAN could not wish should be,
And (7.) the Arabian will lament to see.
Faulter not in thy course now, but pursue
New mischiefs, till no mischief can be new.
" No cruel actions, unless thoroughly done
" Are done secure. Let not thy gallant Son
Engrosse the subjects loves: all his brave parts
And deeds, are Privy seals to take up hearts.
How will he stick (armed with the strength o'th Land)
To snatch the Scepter from thy hated hand,
As thou did from thy Father? "Such dire deeds
" Are still revenged with their like; no seeds
" So fruitful are, as wrongs. Who does not thirst
For Sovereign sway? or who, that may be first,
Is pleased with being second? then do thou
Begin with him, and wait not the first blow.
But with a Sons, and Grandchilds blood, appease
Fathers, and brothers Ghosts. What though thine ease
Be bought with razing out the family,
And strangling the hopes of all Posterity?
What need'st thou care (so here thy race be even)
If when thou fall'st, the Poles and studds of Heaven
Be shivered, the stars quenched, thy house, great names,
And all the world too with thee sink in flames?
" Free villainies a hated reign assure:
" And swords still drawn: dire deeds, dire deeds secure.
ABBAS. The vow is made, nor shall thy flattering Fate
O MIRZA contradict it; though thy Troops
Stood like a wall about thee, nay, though JOVE
Press all the Gods to guard thee, and should arm
Them every one with Thunder, I would through:
I Will tear the groundsells of thy Towers up;
And make their nodding spires kiss the Center,
But I will reach thy heart, thy heart proud Victor.
The power that I have climbed to ere my time
Cannot be safe, if any reach too near it.
I feel my Crowns totter upon my head,
Me thinks, and see him ready stand to latch them.
Was I a Prince, born to the Persian greatness?
(8.) Set equal with the Gods? and as adored
As is (9.) the Sun our Brother? and shall I
Be bearded by a Son, a beam of me?
And like a Cipher add but to his value?
I will, hereafter, call thee viper, ever.
If thou can lose thy filial Duty, I
Can lose my Bowels, and on thy ruins build
A Pyramid to my revenge and safety.
I that would wrest an Empire from a Father,
And Brother, will not lose it to a Son.
" Still may he fear that dares not to be cruel.
ABBAS, FLORADELLA. Who Is that?

Flo. It Is I.


Abb. My FLORADELLA.


Flo. Yes.


Abb. Enter my sweet: welcome as earliest light
To the infant world; and with thee ever bring
A thousand Comforts to my thoughtfull breast.
But why does sadness invade Beauties Kingdom?
And these fair eyes eclips their glorious He kisseth them. splendor,
With vailes of melancholy? is it possible,
So firmly enthroned in thy ABBAS Love,
That all the Gods should make thee know a grief?

Flo. Alas! my Lord, the peoples common theme
Still grates mine ears; no other voice is heard
But MIRZA's praises: the Gods hear no vows,
No prayers, but for MIRZA's safety: who is
So dull a soul that cannot, since he first
Led out your armies count his victories,
(As if all were Historiographers)
And for each blow he dealt return a statue?

Abb. I Will kick their sandy fabrics into dust,
And rear a lasting one of their own heads,
(10) Higher then that in Spawhawn is to which
Their Idols own shall be the Cupola.

Flo. They all read Lectures on his actions
Till out of breath, they pause, and then admire.
Till his encomiums hit the stars, and stick
His Idolized name amongst them swearing
The luster of that one puts out the rest.
You, my dear Lord, they say, lie wallowing here
In pleasures, and will one day take a surfeit.
A good effeminate Prince, whose only act
Of worth, is, that you gat so brave a son;
Whom as the rising they adore: for you,
They think, have passed your Meridian,
And now are nere your setting.

Abb. Setting! yet
I Have heat enough to scorch them all to cinders.
And see they not the Sun never look so bloody
As when he sets.

Flo. Ah! but my noble Lord,
How can I look upon this pompous Palace,
Furnished with spoils of nations; the long train
Of early clients, that wear my Thresholds out:
Nay, on your honored self, my excellent Lord,
But as the Prisoner, late condemned to death,
Does on the pleasant meads, the curled groves,
And silver brooks he passes by, as led
To execution? These he alas, must leave. She weeps.
And well I know how dead Kings Paramours
Are dealt by, by their cruel successors.

Abb. Why dead? why successor? but why these tears?
Which I Will dry up with kisses, and revenge
With as much blood of thy fea'rd enemies.
Be a good huswife of these pearls, (my dear)
Too precious ere to spend, 'lesse when I die,
Thou Wilt shed a few of them t'enbalm me with.
Who Is that? It is the voice of Beltazar.

Flo. Or Mahomet Allybeg, or both.


Abb. Sit still.


ABBAS, MAHOMET ALLYBEG, BELTAZAR, FLORADELLA. COme, come, my Lords, I Have long
expected you.

Mah. We met in the way a stop, a giddy stream
Of people, with broad eyes, and right-up ears,
Pouring themselves from all parts to (11) the Buzzarr.
The novelty made us too mix among them,
What then made all this concourse, ^^t to hear
A Panegyric, sung by hired Eunuchs,
In adulation of the valiant Mirza?

Abb. The mountain brought forth a ridiculous Mouse.


Flo. Heaven grant it proves ridiculous.


Abb. Heaven it self
Cannot make it otherwise.

Bell. There were all the deeds
Of (12) your great ancestors, from Mortys Ally
Recounted, not as copies to be followed,
But made as soiles, to set off his the better;
And brought but by comparison, to show
How his green valor conquers all example.
So, said the flattering pamphlet, Peleus name
Stoops to ACHILLES, and so SATURN joys
To be ore-topt by JOVE.

Abb. O most felt flattery!


Mah. And there exposed they his armed figure,
In a triumphall Chariot, drawn by (13) CYRUS
And great (14) DARIUS, yoked, with this inscription:
As the new Moon the light o'th old devours;
So do thy actions all thine Ancestors.

Abb. No more, no more: seemed any man of name
To countenance this fairy Pagentry?

Bell. No less then great Duke ELCHEE, at whose cost
It was performed; he is hasting down to's charge,
In The army, this was his farewell to's friends.

Abb. There Is music in that voice, would many more
Of his rank durst oppose us. "There is gain
" In mighty rebels. Flies and moths may buz
About our beard, and are not worth the notice,
Or if we crush them they but foul our fingers.
"'It Is noble prey deserves a Princes stroke:
And by my Fathers soul, they shall not want it.

Flo. Spoke lik^ thy self!


Mah. Heroic, god-like ABBAS.


Bell. Let not my Sovereign doubt my proved faith,
(That (15) would open MAHOMET's Shrine at your command)
If humbly I play the Princes friend,
And urge but their objections, as thus,
What ever glorious actions are achieved
By him or his, redound to the Kings glory,
As all the soldiers to the generals.
What common soldier ever gained a Triumph?
And yet, what Generals single valor conquered?
How then are you made less if he grows great
Since all his greatness is not his but yours?
Do not the flourishing of the branches add
To the Trees beauty? --

Abb. But luxuriant boughs
Not pruned suck too much moisture from the Tree.

Bell. What cares the Sea how great the Rivers swell,
Since all their pride flow into her?

Abb. But what
The Sea does get in one place, in some other
It loses; and the more he wins upon
The affections of the people, the more I lose.
" Minions too great argue a King too weak.

Man. " Great Favorites should be set near Kings as foiles
" To set them off, not to vie luster with them.
" A Partner once admitted to a Throne,
" Soon justles out the other: the snakes new skin
" Once come, she casts the old one. (16.) No where are
" Two Kings in safety but in Tener^ff,
" And there the one is dead, but one alive.

Bell. But it is not known the Prince intends a danger.


Mah. It is not proved.


Abb. It Is then too late, when proved,
To be prevented.

Flo. Cockatrices eggs
Must not be brooded over till they are hatched.

Mah. " Kings fears are proof enough they that will give
" Them cause to fear, give cause enough, to strike.
" A Treason is a kind of Hectique fever,
" In the beginning it is most easily cured,
" But hardly known: But in the course of time,
" Not having been in the beginning known,
" To know it becomes easy, hard to cure.

Bell. But he is modest --


Flo. So are Whores at first,
Coyness is the best Lure.

Be^. Blaming his friends
For doubling of his merit, and chides himself
For suffering of his acts so to be gilded,
Lest they might any way eclipse your splendor.

Abb. He Is Politic: "Seen nets are easily 'voided,
" And dangers threatened once, are half prevented.
" The cursed dog bites before he barks, and Thunder
" Strikes ere it speaks. Treason still shuns the Sun.
Tha^ female Virtue, Modesty, cannot harbor
In such a masculine spirit, even that
He makes a bait to catch the vulgar with,
It gets him a respect: He Is not to learn
" That honor, like a shadow, and love too
" Shuns the pursuer, follows him that flies it.

Mah. Why if he means no Rape upon the State,
Does he so fortify himself in's Party,
Binding all men of action unto him
With all the obligements of a Politician?

Abb. "He that will make a Faction means to use it.


Mah. He studies every particular Gen^us,
And takes every one in his own height.
The ambitious he makes his with honors, Titles,
And high commands; saying, "worth loses luster,
" Like Gems in Quarries, if it be not set
" To public view, like Diamonds well mounted.
The covetous he ties with chains of Gold
To his own purposes, extolling "bounty
" As the most conspicuous virtue of a Prince,
" And gainfullest; saying, Virtue else will freeze,
" If it be not kept active with Reward,
" Valors best Nurse. Those that are discontented
"(And such are sure ones) he gains by favor,
And silken promises. The multitude
He strokes with Popularity, and they
Like true dogs fawn, and crouch as much to him.
Though upon service he is austere enough,
Exacting each man's duty; out of Action
He courts the common soldiers by their names,
Lies with them on the Guard, fares as they fare,
And calls them all his fellows, sees them served,
In time of want, ere he himself will take
The least refreshment. --

Abb. What souls will not these
Strong arts allure, if he meant war with JOVE,
To storm even Heaven, and mak't a Colony!

Flo. What, Heaven a Province!


Mah. Noble Forts he builds,
And Cittadells, as if he meant to compass
The Kingdom with a trench, and into these
He put's his Confidents. Huge hoords of wheat,
Munition Provision stuff his Garrisons,
When no Foe threats the Confines. If these charms
Of Affability these knots of strength,
And preparations signify but care,
And Arts of wisdom, which need 'wake no thought
Of Jealousy, and require no prevention;
Let Us cast no Ramparts against the swelling Sea,
But tamely think the peaceful NEPTUNE means
Us no invasion but will sit content
In The old Boundaries of his watery Empire.
Cherish the speckled snake, and let him twine
About your leg, alas! poor loving worm!
It only comes to kiss your foot, and means
To dart no poisonous sting into your flesh.

Bell. Has he no filial love? no noble nature?
Cannot be that to him, to whom every Virtue
Seems in this dearth of Piety, to run
For Patronage, Paternall duty should
Be, or a stranger, or a slighted Exile?

Mah He is ambitious, and "Ambition knows
" No Kindred, 'twas a maxim practiced
"By JOVE himself upon his Father SATURN.

Abb. No, no, my Lords, that something must be done
Is not the question but what? and how?

Bell. Weaken him in his friends, call them from places
Of trust, and put in others or make them yours.

Abb. No they are preingag'd, and will not come
But to great baits: So to reclaim them would
Cost much, to ruin them add more to us.
'For all Rebellions, thoroughly suppressed,
" Make Kings more Kings, and Subjects still more Subject.

Bell. Then call him from his strength, lure him to Court.
And drown him here in pleasures and delights,
'Twill soften and enervate his great mind.
" There Is little fear of Carpet Kinghts, rough beards
" And hairy men have still the working heads.

Mah. And such is he.


Abb. That were to cross his Genius,
And force his Nature backward, he is made
For hardened steel, and not a masquing suit.
No Music please him but the bellowing Drum,
No exercise but tossing of a Pike.
So stout a nature never will recoil.

Bell. Confine him to some Island, with a set
Of beardlesse Eunuchs, and soft Punks about him,
Prohibiting all martial company.

Flo. Pictures and Beauties are alike to him;
His soul's so full of's NYMPHADORA'S love,
As throw him into 'an Ocean of Beauties,
The vessel's full, and can take no more in.

Bell. A brave truth from an Enemy! aside


Abb. Confine him,
That were to spur a fiery headstrong steed
And have no reins to hold him: or to 'wake
A sleeping Lion. "Persons of his rank
" If once disgraced, must not be left a tongue
"To tell it with, or hand to act Revenge,
" No, nor a heart to think it. He that strikes
" At mighty Enemies must do it thoroughly.
Say my beloved MAHOMET, "must not Kings
" That fear great subjects growth, and gathering strength;
" Or wink at all, and conquer them with kindness,
" Or, if they will take notice, leave no need
" Of second blows, but at the first cut off
" At once the fear they have, and cause of future?
" Who finds a Serpent couched, and at one blow
" Parts not his heart shall never fetch another.

Mah. The Oracles are revived, and speak in Abbas.
But how much more then pity is it, that
So high a valor, Affability
(Virtues of brightest luster with the Persian)
And all the endowments of a Princely mind,
Should, like good seed in ground too fat, grow rank,
And make him fit to feel the sickle! which
Gladly I would dissuade, were not the tree
More worthy then a wanton branch, or the head
Then any corrupted limb, though never so handsome.

Abb. Ah my good Lords, the bowels of a Father
Have yearn'd in me, and no small strift I had
To gain a Conquest of my fond affection,
And bend my will to part with him, as with
A gangreen'd member to secure the whole.
But I have won the field of foolish pity,
And swom (17) by the eight refulgent Orbs, his death.

Flo. The young wolfes death can never come too soon;
For he that spares the wolves, destroys the sheep.

Bell. But think, my honored Lord, will not the soul
Of every subject bleed in his each wound?
The pledge of their succeeding happiness!
The crown of their best hopes, hope of their Crown*
And who will spare to damn for Tyranny
(Pardon the speech, I act the Princes friend)
A deed, so without Justice, proof, or conscience?

Mah. Not all the steel forged into swords and spears,
Nor all the Iron formed to battering Rams,
Have ruined so many Kings, as that round word.
" Conscience and Sovereign sway are things at odds,
"'It Is mischifes freedom holds up Tyranny,
" Which who so blushes t'own is no right King.

Abb. No more debate; Sentence is justly passed,
The execution rests, which, what if acted
Upon him in the army?

Mah. If the cruelty
Chance to disclose it self, on the apprehension
O'th murderer, t'may raise some dangerous tumult.
" All cruel actions must be safely done,
" And all their safety lies in privacy.

Abb. Let Us train him up to court, and do it here.


Mah. That thought needs not a second.


Abb. Cause you then
Our secretary t'indite letters to him
Here to attend us with all possible speed,
Where he shall be acquainted with the weight
Of the affair that urges his quick coming.
Provide a messenger of your own knowledge.

Mah. I know my P^o^^nce.


Abb. You Lord BELTAZAR,
Who are not so well known his enemy
Though firm enough in our esteem, have down
Unto the Army, where, till he, you know
Be on his journey hither, keep your mask on:
Then break to the Lieutenant General
Your power, and errand, which is to be set
With him in joint commission ore that Army,
And be the noble partner of our care.

Bell. My faith shall labor to deserve the trust.


Abb. And thou my FLORADELLA shall have work too.
Be frequent in your visits to the Princess,
Extol the virtues of her gallant Lord,
And set the wheels a going. "Praise gets confidence,
That opennesse of speech, and women be
" Best spies of women's actions. Sift her then,
" What is intended, who, and where employed.
Speak with such confidence, as if you meant
To force her think you know what never was.
" It Is no less service to detect close treason,
" Then to vanquish open and avoucht Rebellion.

Flo. What arts will not my love unto my Lord
Infuse into me, and what subtle care?

Abb. You Have all your parts, act them but like your selves,
I Will in, any study more o'th art of King-craft.

Bell. Madam I kiss your hands. Yours Lord MAHOMET.


MAHOMET ALLYBEG, FLORADELLA. THis was well carried, there is another step
To our great purpose whilst the Tyrant stood
Firmly propt up by his heroic son
And his brave Troops, not all the Gods could shake him:
Now that he ruins him he but lies down
For me, and therefore thee, my FLORADELLA,
Upon his neck to rise to sovereignty.
Flo. But what if the success should thwart the platform,
And something intervene to save the Prince?
Would not the ruin turn upon our selves?
'Such deeds are never safe till they be acted.

Mah. Descend not from thy self so low as fear,
The blow meant him is guided by a hand
Sure and steady: but if he misses aim,
This very hand through wounds shall force his soul,
So does the love of thee arm me, I Will wrest
The Scepter from JOVES hand but thou shall have one.

Flo. Why do you court your own Sir?


Mah. Therefore dearest
Because mine own and worthy a Gods courtship,
I never meant thee less, nor have I wooed thee
To leave a Monarchs crowned love to grace
A subjects bed, but to adorn these Temples
With golden wreaths, more bright then AR^ADNE's,
And make thy name the subject of all Poetry.
Then shall thou trample on the under globe,
And choose what part of heaven thou meanst to grace.
So great is the reward of MAHOMET's love.

Flo. How grows your strength? what men of name, and fortunes
Espouse your interest?

Mah. It Is not yet my time
To tempt too many: when the heir is gone,
And all men in a maze, then is our hour.
No Fish shall 'scape us, when the water's troubled.
In the mean time get thee a party to thee
Of the male-spirited Dames, that may engage
Their sons and husbands, they are useful evils,
" Bosom solicitours are most prevalent.

Flo. I Will find, or make such: first I Am for the Princess.


MAHOMET ALLYBEG. POor credulous Cockatrice! think thou I Will rear
My self a Throne, and set a strumpet with me?
No, he that can crush Princes will not pick
Thee out, among the rubbish of their ruins.
Yet must ambition use such poor low things.
Thou art a good close spy, a bosom traitor,
And a fair bait for some smooth liquorish (18) Sultan,
Whom I Will perhaps buy with thy prostitution.
But a companion of my Sovereignty
Must boast a brighter virtue, higher descent,
One that in making nature toiled, and sweat:
Such as the excellent Princess NYMPHADORA,
Whom when industrious nature once had formed,
She broke her mould, for never since could she
Produce her like; she will fit our proudest height;
But her I Will not assay till I Am possessed
Of my new royalty: then -- a Princes Throne
Is a brave jointure, and the name of Queen,
To a young Widow lusty in her blood,
Will be a charm, hardly to be withstood.
FARABAN. What curses are entaild on wicked pelf! With a bag of money in his
hand.
We, when we want it, scratch and plot to get it,
And when we have it, fear to lose it still.
I dreaded vildly those two craving soldiers
That met me at my Merchants door they were
But meanly thatcht me thinks and seemed to have
Sharp stomachs too. They watched and waited on me
As Dogs do upon children for their victuals.
There lie ye -- till my Tailors long long bill
Brings an indictment strongly proved against He locks it up in a Trunk. you.
Thus are we but the Gaolers of our wealth,
Which although most men make their God, is but
The Poets slave, and mine -- And but for use --
Two THIEVES. listening. We Will rescue your rich prisoner presently. They knock.

Far. Come in -- (Pox on ye, its your tattar'd Rogueships.)


1 Thief. Your humble servant Sir.


2 Thief. Your servant Sir.


Far. Gentlemen, you will excuse me, I know you not.


1 Thief. You shall Sir know us better -- Please you lend us
The key of that same trunk -- Stir and One of them presents a dag to his
breast. you die.

Far. Nay Gentlemen.


1. Thief. Nay, not a word you had best.
Take the keys out of his pocket co^rade-so
Now we will eat boy and be warm again The other takes his keys out of his
pocket, and his watch.

1. Thief. Hang warmth and eating too,
We Will drink, drink deep.

2. Thief. drink by the hour, and this same watch shall help us.
To 'scape the Constables.

Far. But I dare hold
A rope of that -- the Devil! -- robbed! -- and thus too
Robbed in a Complement! -- Theves! -- Whilst they go to plunder his Trunk, he
runs out, and gives the Alarm. Thieves! ho Theeeves!

1. The. Pox of your care, could you not stop him?


2. The. Now
(Prithee leave chiding to another time)
We Have no way but to follow him, and cry
Out Thieves as loud as he: so we in the hubbub They run after him
May hap t'escape. 2 The. It Is best. Both. Thieves! Thieves! ho! Thieves!

SOFFIE, FATYMA, IFFIDA IS this the story's to be acted? Looking upon a Picture.

If. Yes Sir.


Sof. I love to see these Actions, they will put
Spirit into me. Is the Princess ready?

If. She will be presently. You stand on thorns now.


Fat. Shall I see it too?


If. Yes, yes, my pretty Lady,
If you will sit patient there, and weep no more,

Fat. Indeed I will not: but I could not hold
L^st day, they were so cruel; could you IFFIDA?
To see hard-hearted PROGNE stab her Son!
And all the while the boy cling to her breast,
And for each wound she gave return a kiss!

Sof. Go, you are fainthearted.


If. Nay Sir, she is good natured.


Fat. This too is some sad story: tell me IFFIDA,
Why does this woman look so angry here?

Sof. What ailes that old man so to weep? I cannot
Endure to see a man weep it shows cowardly.

If. That fierce Lady MEDEA resolved to fly
With her new servant JASON from her Father;
To hinder his pursuit* she tore in pieces
Her brother ABSYRTUS, and bestrewd in the way
His limbs which that old man, their father finding,
He stopped his vain pursuit o^'s cruel Daughter,
To gather up by peace meal his torn son,
And seems to bath each piece with tears, as if
He thought them Cement strong enough to set
The tattered joints and flesh again together.

Fat. Was she a sister? O I could not do
So by you SOFFIE for all the world --
I care not now for seeing it presented,
I hate all cruelty so perfectly:
Yet could I bear a part with that old man,
And weep as fast as he; so infectious
Is a just sorrow, chiefly in old persons.

NYMPHADORA, SOFFIE, FATYMA, IFFIDA, PAGE. WHat ailes my FATYMA to drown her
blossoms
Of beauty thus in tears? Child art not well?
Fat. Yes Madam, but this piece is limnd so lively,
As it does strain tears from me to embalm
Poor torn ABSYRTUS with.

Nym. Pretty compassion!
I like this tenderness in thee: but we think
This a feigned story. O may real griefs
Never touch thy breast, poor thing! -- wilt see it acted?

Fat. It will, I fear, make me too melancholy.


Nym. Do as thou will, my Heart.


Fat. This piece shall be
My m^lancholly study, and sad Tutor.
When I have either cause or will to weep,
I Will take up this, and sit, and think, I see
The tender boy stretched out his hands unto me
For help, and sigh, because I cannot rescue'him.
Then think again, the old man calls out to me
To help him gather up his sons limbs; and weep
Because I cannot.

If. Pretty innocence!


S^f. Pray Madam, let me wait upon your Highness
To the Tragedy.

Nym. Thou shall sweetheart.


If. What now?


Page If It please your grace, the Lady FLORADELLA
Is lighted at the gate, and means a visit.

Nym. She Is welcome.


Sof. Pish, pish, now her idle chat
Will keep us beyond time.

Nym. Soft my young Gallant.


NYMPHADORA, FLORADELLA, SOFFIE, FATYMA, IFFIDA. HAil my good Lady.

Flo. Mighty Princess, hail.


Nym. Please you to sit.


Flo. How does my little Lady?


Fat. I thank you Madam.


Flo. And you my Lord?


Sof. Madam,
At your service.

Flo. Troth, an early courtier.
How happy are you, Madam, in these copies
Of your fair self, and your renowned Lord?
By which you have filled times sharp teeth, and secured
Your names, your forms, and natures, from the wast
Of death, and eating age; nor is it fit
So eminent a beauty, and clear virtue
Should for less then eternity grace the world.

Nym. Why, Madam, give you me the trouble to
Speak your words over? for these heights of courtship
Are but like sounds made in a hollow room,
In expectation of the Eccho's answer.

FLo. No Madam, by your beauty and that is
The greatest Power that I can swear by, I
Often lose my self in pleasing Contemplation
Of you as Natures, and as Fortunes darling.
By whose best gifts yet can you never be
So highly graced, as you do grace their gifts,
And them too by your bare receiving them.
What had the Gods in all their Treasury
O^ greater worth or luster then the Prince,
Your excellent Lord? A Prince that strikes dumb
Envy and slander! and gives Fortune eyes!
And who could they find worthy to bestow
This great result of all their sweat upon
But you? who yet deserve him every inch.

Nym. In him indeed I am completely happy.
But he is so far above all deserving,
As I can plead no merit; yet the Gods
Themselves have sometimes deigned a mortal love.

Flo. In which of all the Gods fortunate Princess,
Could you have been so happy as in him?
With better grace thou Phoebus do not hold
Thy gorgeous rein, nor from thy glistring Throne
Scatter more beauty or more Majesty!
A Majesty indeed too great to know
Any Superior. And now that the King
Is bowed down with the burden of old age,
The heavy weight of the unweildy Empire
Grow but a trouble to his aged shoulders.
His Crowns are to his head a load, no more
An ornament It Is fitter his white Age
Should now indulge his genius, and release
His thoughts from all the ruffle of the world,
And give him time to contemplate the place
He tends to every day. So should the Prince
Make his few days brigh^er and easier to him,
By taking on himself (now fit for labor)
That load of care we call the Sovereignty.

Nym. Pray Madam give such thoughts no longer breath,
Thoughts that the loyal Prince and I detest.
It Is the base viper gets a life by forcing
A violent passage through his Parents bowels;
(19) My Country Phoenix when he duly mounts
His Fathers spicie Throne, brings on his wings
His honored ashes, and his funeral odours,
To show, he climbed not, till his death, his seat:

Flo. Your Highness rather should assist his rising,
By gaining more to's party, which is done
With but a gracious look or smile from you.
'So prevalent an Orator is beauty.

Nym. No, by his life, and all the love I bear him,
I Would rather follow him fairly to his Tomb,
Perfumed with that unblemished stock of honor
He now stands in, then that so foully broke,
See him untimely thrust into the Throne.
And justify my self a loyaller wife,
In loving more his honor then his life.

Flo. (Unconquerable Virtue if the Gods in secre^.
Give me a Plague 'twill be for the injury
I do this noble pattern of all goodness)
Well Madam, you may feed upon that air,
But there are those wish the design on foot.
And promise to themselves a fair success.
So great's the love they have for the brave Prince,
An exp^ctation of a braver King.
'For it is Authority declares the man.

Nym. I Will thrive their trai'trous plots.


If. My Lord, speak to her.


Nym. But in his face I read my SOFFIE think's
This conference might be spared, as well as I,
For he was wooing me to carry him
To see MEDEA played, at Madam OMAY'S,
And I am loath to disappoint his hopes.

Flo. I Will be no cause of that. -- I Will wait you thither.


Nym. You Will honor me.


Flo. (I Will go before you one day.) secret.


MAHOMET ALLYBEG, SELEUCUS. I Need not tell thee, my SELEUCUS, what
Have, secrecy, and care must wait you^ journey.
Attend Duke EL^HEE first, but privately,
And with my letters give him high salutes,
To work in him a confidence of me.
When you have obtained Audience of the Prince,
Note with what gust he takes his call to court,
And ere he be upon the way, be sure
I have a Post, t'inform me of the minute
I may expect him here; that his arrival
Anticipates not my provision for it.
Sell. My Lo^d, no part of your instructions shall
Be unobserved, and what my care can more,
Rely upon.

Man. Be happy. -- This will prove
His faith, and diligence, and those shall be
The rules by which i will further trust or slight him.
All tools are not for greatest works, they must
Be tried, and 'bide the trial must be made
Staves in the ladder we ascend a Throne by.

MAHOMET-ALLY-BEG, BELTAZAR. HAil my Lord BELTAZAR, what, you are going
To take possession of your new command?
I wish your journey and that too prosperous.
You know you have a friend in Court, and I
Assure my self of one now in the Army.
Bell. That your assurance will never fail you.
The King expects your Attendance.

Mah. I
Am with his grace already; -- Adieu my Lord.

BELTAZAR. HOw quick's this Jack of state! if this my journey,
And the whole project be not a web of his,
I miss my mark. -- The Prince is grown too great
And must be feared, and presently removed,
Not 'cause he is too great for ABBAS, but
For ALLY-BEG: But this I must not see,
Because I cannot help. Should I suggest it
Unto the Prince, 'twere but to fall with him.
I Will rather save my self, and try if I
Can keep an even Path, 'twixt the two hills.
"'It Is be^ter give way to, then resist ills,
" And raging Lions, of too horrid might
" To be withstood by force of Law, or right.
" The Prince must fall: his ruins will be great
Enough many less Princes to create;
Why may not I be one of those? so from
A River stopped, many small runs do stream.
Virtue, I love thee, but with thee to stand
Were now to fall; 'Yet what the King commands
" That word makes Virtue, or at least Law; for he
" Can do no wrong, since against himself't must be,
" And to the willing nothing's injury.
How ere, it is wisdom to obey: "They who
" Will rise at Court, must not dispute, but do.
CHORUS. O Misery of greatest states!
Obnoxious to unconstant Fates!
'Great and good Persons well may be
" From guilt, but not from envy free.
" They that stand high in Public trust
" Expect the forked arrows must
" Of such below, as deem their parts
" Less in employment then deserts.
These vapors yet may hap ore fly
So long as the helm is guided by
Temperate Spirits, and severe
Judges, that both know, and dare.
And whilst that Kings will, in things high,
Their action to good counsel tie.
And not by single advise be led,
Oth' passionate unsalted head.
" But since that flattery and ease
" Crept into Princes Palaces,
"'It Is dangerous to be good, or great,
" For such the Court's a slippery seat.
" Nor is it safe for Subjects since
" Too too much to oblige their Prince,
" With mighty service, that exceed
" The Power of his noblest meed;
" For whom he cannot well reward,
" He Will find occasion to discar'd:
To which many a Parasite
His easy nature will excite,
Things sold to riot, that still swell
With envy against such as do well,
Because their glory blazing higher
Then theirs, ecclipses their false fire:
So must he for their private ends
Divest himself of his best friends
Nor so their humour's fed, care they
If he and his become a prey
To's greatest for, against whom their care
Def^nd him neither can nor dare.
" These are those ear-wiggs to a King
'Then hostile foes more ruin bring.
As Ivy seems the blooming spray
TO adorn but sucks his heart away:
So do they rob their Prince of's heart,
In making him his duty 'invert.
And the best Government Monarchy,
Degenerate into Tyranny;
Persuading him, his single will
His Realms are made but to fulfill.
They make a wolf thus of whom Heaven
To the flock has for a shepherd given.
The Sun, they might as truly, say
Is vested with his flaming Ray,
To scorch and not assist the Earth
With gentle warmth, to natural birth.
" The Flatterer merits worse of you
" O Kings, then whose pale Poisons brue.
" They kill but single Princes, he
" Assassinates even Monarchy.
Leave then with beasts your sportive war,
Or hunt no beast but the Flatterer.
Act. 2.
MIRZA. Do, Fortu^e, do, frown on, that the world may see
My constant Virtue can overcome even thee.
And when thou pour'st out with full sea thy spite,
Swim with more strength against the angry tide.
Conspire with the Foe that not to you
The honor may, but to my self, be due.
But if thou be the Mistress of the world,
From whose mad wheel all our events are hurled,
Thank thee for being coy: It will improve
The pleasure of the Conquest, and my love.
" Slight favors are not for a Princes ware,
" The foulest ground the fairest crop does bear.
'In a dull calm, a child may play with the helm,
'But he is a Pilot can outride a storm.
Raise raise them, then, let loose the winds to rage,
And let this tumor with that warfare wage.
Block up the way that to Fames Palace lies,
To give my spirit nobler exercise.
Why am I more observed and courted too
Then other men unless I more can do
And suffer more? "'It Is not enough to be
" But born a Prince our greatest Royalty
" Lies in our Acts if we have greatest parts
'In reverence, let us have so in deserts.
And though the bravest soldier at this day
(The whole worlds terror) under me in pay,
Did never hear me saying yet, go thee
Where slaughter highest raged, but follow me,
Yet could he stronglier against the Torrent swim
Of War then I, I Would yield my Palm to him.
But Counsel must direct each martial feat;
" Uncounsel'd force is crushed with its own weight.
ELCHEE, PAGE. I Study nothing here, so much as how to merit your h^gh favor,
and do something Reading Mahomets letters to him. may fix me strong in your
desired friendship. --

WHy this to me, that never yet could gain
More then a quarter face, -- thus -- or perhaps
An over shoulder look from this great MAHOMET?
This sole ingrosser of the royal aspect?
To me this! a disgraced cast Courtier!
Sure this is more then complement, yet not scorn?
It looks like serious. He has his ends if he
But speaks, or bows, or nods to any man.
His very looks and smiles are all design.
Had I best meet his courtesy half way?
Or shun it as a snare? Sure he thinks not
Me cheap enough to be his instrument
In a low matter? and in great his craft
Has not enough of confidence in me.
I Will not embarque too far, yet still egg on
His confidence to make my breast his closet.
Then either close in what may serve my self,
Or save my Head by vnraveling his Plots.
He has somewhat in the sorge and hopes my late
Disgrace and discontent will make me blow
The cole with him, though he would but use my foot
But as the Cats to reach the nut out of
The fire for his tooth. He Is not to learn
" That malcontents are tinder for a faction.
He may remember too, that "with great Persons
" New benefits blot not out old injuries.
He hopes I Will catch the spark, if not for love
To him, for hate to the Tyrant, who yet perhaps
Bids him cast out his lures to tempt my stomach.
Yet will I see the bait, and play with it,
And since I see it, fear not to be hit. --
Who waits there? --
Page My Lord?


Elc. Desire the Gentleman
To enter, -- Favors done to followers
Oblige their Lords; as he that did relieve
MINERVA'S weary Priests engaged the Goddess.

ELCHEE, SELEUCUS. COme sir this mass of love your honored Lord
Is pleased to send me, flows with such a tide
Of joy upon me, as I shall either die
This night, or else live forty years the longer.
Sell. My Lord, his honor's covetous to find
Fit objects for his love, he is used to say,
But now he needs not seek abroad, your Grace
Deserves it all, and he is no less just
To pay desert her due, then wise to find it.

Elc. You Are too obliging, we know his judgment well
Which yet in nothing's more conspicuous,
Then in such prudent choice of followers.

Sell. My Lord, when will the Prince --


Elc. The Prince anon
Will be at the Council of war; there or expect
My entrance, or else by some attendant,
Give me but notice of your being there,
And I Will present you to his Grace, according
To your good Lords desire. The time draws on.
In The interim, here is some will entertain you.

MOZENDRA, SELEUCUS, BENEFIAN. SELEUCUS! hail.

Sell. Well met dear Colonel.


Ben. Welcome my better half, welcome to the Camp.


Moz. How looks the Court?


Sell. As't uses, like a Lottery,
Where one may draw and draw till he exchanges
His whole stock but for blanks: and if by chance
A Prize do come, it is more by luck then skill:
And then the noise, the Drum, and general cry
Follow the fortunate, when a thousand others
That ventured more, may sit and curse their stars.

Moz. A good Satyrick Metaphor; in them both
Blind fortune rules.

Ben. But how are Ladies? reasonable?


Sell. Even as they ever were, and ever will be.
Shadows, shaddows of us: pursue them and
You may pursue, and tire in the chase,
Seem but to fly, they will follow, and be handled.

Moz. 'Twas ever so, keep them but sharp and they will
Obey the lure.

Ben. Watch them and they will be tame.


Sell. But with fr^sh oaths songs, kisses, Duells, (food
Strong and approved) gorge them, and they will turn tail.

Ben. A pretty truth: but who bears greatest price.


Sell. Why, faith, the plainest, the fairest ever are
Most kind and least proud --

Ben. So, And what new loves?
How thrives the new sect of Platoniques? ha?

Sell. Troth the best Pimp that ever entered Court.


Moz. You need not fear the grouth of such a weed,
Nor hope we better fruit, since that (1.) the Persians
Begun to follow the Lacaedemonians.

Ben. Then i will up and turn Courtier, SELEUCUS
Wilt buy my Regiment?

Mox. Prithee BENEFIAN
Wilt now turn fly, and spend the day in buzzing
In Ladies beams till thou have singed thy wings?
Fie, fie, the Prince he^e shows thee'nobler game,
Will thou, like an ill-handled kite upon
Her wings after a noble quarry, go
Away with paultry check? or leave a Partridge
To dop after a lark, or Robinred-brest?

B^n. There is a Siren in that tongue. -- well, i will
Consider a while often. But you SELEUCUS
Mean to stay with us, ha? and see some sport?

Moz. Yes, yes you will not leave the stag at Bay.


Sell. Well, i have a Mistrisse I would fain present
With a piece of a torn Banner.

Ben. Well said my
Bully HECTOR,-but hold -- The Lords o'th Counsel

EMANGOLY, METHICULI, HYDASPUS, ALKAHEM, MATZED ANd now my Lords, what
business calls loudest
To be the first discussed in our Counsel?
Met. Exchange of Prisoners; many we hold of there is
At needless charge, as many they of ours
Deserving men and stout, whom we much want.

Hyd. Our Regiments and companies are thin,
Scarce one in ten of them amounts to half
The constitution: So the Guards are weaker
Then else they should: and thus hard duty comes
Oftener to the same men, till the poor soldiers
Grumble, and faint beneath the load, and scarce
Are held from mutiny; But which is worse,
A mass of Treasure daily is consumed
On idle officers, Parchment Colonells
And titular Captains, that never saw four files
Under their Ensigns, or perhaps no more
Then their own grooms, or private servants, save
Some that they borrowed upon days of muster,
Or else pretended to lie sick in Quarters.

Ema. Dead pays are not to be eschewed: it is grown
An abuse too strong for reformation.
The rest, the Prince has thoughts how to redress,
And means it suddenly, by casheering and
Reforming idle officers, and filling all
His Regiments; which method he intends
To be exact to four times in the year.

Mat. All gentlemen that come as volunteers
Expect commands, which yet they measure by
The greatness of their states, not martial skill.
A Troop, a Company, or a Regiment
Each novice claims as due; less cannot answer
A full fortune: when, for a Princes self,
They that know any thing, know it is no disgrace
To traile a Pike under a known Commander.

Hyd. But it is disgrace enough, and something more,
I Would almost said it is treason, t'undertake
More then a man's ability can perform,
Since the King suffers in it more then he;
The King, more in his work, then he in's credit.

Alk. These in their times; but first, if you concur,
Some thoughts of the reducing of you City
Were seasonable: the seige is long and tedious,
And sickness and disease invade our camp,
As if the foe had made them of their party.
And that, my Lord METHICULI, makes good
Your proposition; that place won, we gain
Those prisoners, whose exchange will cost us dear.

Mat. My Lord, I echo you. What a disgrace
Would stick upon our names indeleble
As cowardice, if our great Princes standard,
That never yet was fixed in vain before
A hostile Fort, but uses to display
Its self still on the Enemies proudest Turret,
Should now be left alone, or which is worse,
Forced to remove?

Ema. Though all the Gods were parties,
Our Princes stars are of a cleerer light,
Then so to be eclipsed by the (2) Turkish Moon.

Hyd. She Is pale, and waines already, and his Arm
Shall pluck her from her sphere, or quench her in it.

Met. Or daube her horns with (3) Ottoman blood, till she
Sets red, or shrinks into her Cloud, and wastes.

Alk. How can it be but so, when such a Sun
As this appears, drowning her sickly light!

MIRZA, EMANGOLY, ELCHEE, METHICULI, HYDASPVS, ALKAHEM, MATZED, MOZENDRA,
BENEFIAN. MY Lords, this City stands stiff in our way,
But none I hope, have any other thoughts
Then tempting of our stars, till the proud Turrets
Bow to our feet, and sink in vengefull flames;
For why should she ere boast a brighter fate,
Then her as potent sisters, that now kiss
Our yoke, and humbly truckle under us?
Ema. And so shall she, and glory in the bondage;
For to be slave to you, is next to win.
This my Lord ALKAHEM wisely advised,
Should be our first address unto your Highness.

Mir. He spoke my thoughts, or rather I in him.


Alk. This I the rather was induced to do,
Because, since the two Mines we sprung last day,
And five former assaults, proved unsuccessfull
And all your Messages met a Rejection:
I humbly now conceive, no storm or scale
So fit to be attempted, as some stratagem
To be advised of.

Mir. Give us but a hint.


Alk. An't please your Royal Highness, the last sally
'Twas my fortune to make two young men Prisoners,
Whom by their civil fashion and demeanor,
I judged and found to be men of the Book,
Rather engaged by novelty to see
Something of war, then any way expert
In these rough meetings: these I had into
My Tent, where being well warmed with (4.) Shiras wine,
They fell into a freedom of discourse,
And, among other things, assured me,
They in the City had received a Promise
From OSMANHELI, their old Governor,
Of succors within four days, for which service
He was prepared, and stayed but for some Galleys,
And Frigots to convoy him, and enable him
To pass through our Fleet, which Navy he had
A good assurance would attend him shortly.
And these are the only hopes hold up their hearts,
And keep their Gates shut against your Royal Highness.
Neither is this discovery the effect
But of their drink, for, sober, they confirm it.

Elc. The same, a Page of mine, lately their Prisoner,
Who mad's escape in the same sally, told me,
He learnt in the Town.

Mat. It is the general voice
Among the meaner Prisoners, who hug their
Condition, and joy they are with us,
That they may eat again, famine within
Rages so strongly.

Moz. Hopes of this supply,
They say, do only keep the Town from uproar.

Ben. The starved Soldiers fly upon their Leaders,
And cry with a half hollow voice, Bread! Bread!
For heavens sake Bread: when shall we eat again?
They answer, do but smell upon your Matches
Four days longer, then by th'life of (5) MORAT,
If no help comes, we will make our best conditions.

Met. It seems it is a conceit strongly believed,
That they shall have relief.

Alk. Believed, my Lord,
They every hour trace the sands, the walls
They climb, and Turrets, peep through Prospectives,
And if they but descry a Sea-gull, it is
A Sail, and if a flock, O that is the Navy,
Till lost again they chide their credulous faith,
And curse the two cross winds, till their own sighs
But make them stronger to defeat their joys.

Hyd. I had the guard last night, and intercepted
A messenger in disguise from the said OSMAN,
With Letters sown in's (6) Tulipant, spoke the same.
These be the Letters --, and the Postscript fixes
The time two days, or three at farthest.

M^r. Good,
And you conceive now, we may send a Party
Fresh flourishing in the Enemies Colors, who
By this pretense, may gain perhaps admittance,
And so surprise the Town?

Ema. It Is probable.


Alk. It Is certain.


Mat. Nay it is more, it is done already.


M^r. Well, since you have such a confidence, we will try it.
The Prince lightly peruses the Letters, then gives them to the Lords, who hand
them from one to another. You, my good Lord, METHICVLI, shall command
In this design, to whom we will join your Regiment,
HYDASPVS, and yours, ALKAHEM, and yours MATZED.

Met. Our care shall not be wanting.


Mir. Have the Brigads
Ready t'imbarque by the first light o'th'morning:
In the mean time, we will send unto our Admiral,
That riding in the gulf, blocks up the Town,
To bring ships down unto the Haven this night,
For to transport you in, those must you wing
With Turkish Flags and Streamers, and acquaint him
With the adventure, that you pass the Fleet
In the next night, yet not without some skirmish,
To work the greater confidence ith'City,
That you are foes to us, and their recruits.
Yet least discovery frustrates the project,
Keep your selves whole, that you may so make good
Your quick retreat. You, my Lord ELCHEE,
At the same time shall storm on the Land side,
To give the greater terror and diversion
To the Towns strength: so fortune aid the attempt.
My self, and you, EMANGOLY, will be ready
Either to enter with the Horse, or succor
Our friends, if they be forced to a retreat.

Alk. If this succeeds '^is but our keeping up
The Turkish Colors on the Towers awhile,
And we shall so train in the succors sent
For th'Towns relief, who ignorant of its taking,
Once landed, cannot escape us.

M^r. Grasp not too much.


Ema. The Action promises well.

To Elchee in secret.
Ben. My Lord, SELEVCVS
Attends without.

Elc. Sir, you will oblige me, if
You Will please to bring him in, and i will present him.

M^r. MOZENDRA, let it be your care to make
Our Admiral know our project, and desire
Of Ships from him.

M^z. Sir, I am gone about it.


SELEVCVS. To them. ALl hail.

Elc. May't please your Grace, this Gentleman
Is come from Court, with Letters for your Highness,
From your dread Father.

Mir. He is welcome, -- Sir,
How fares our Royal Father?

Sell. By me he sends
Your Highness twenty thousand blessings: and
Is kept in health, if but by the relation
Of your renown, which gives him hourly music,
So grateful to his Majesty is your fame.

Mir. We Will study to requite his love with duty.


Met. My Lord HYDASPVS, and you ALKAHEM He delivers his Letters to the Prince,
kisses his hand, and retires. The Prince opens, and reads them to himself.
And you MATZED, will all be sure to bring
Down to the Haven, before the Moon arises,
Your Regiments, where you shall find me ready
To lead you aboard, the Ships I need not doubt,
They being my MOZENDRA'S care.

Hyd. Do'nt doubt me.


Alk. Nor me.


Mat. Nor me. He starts.


M^r. Sure I red not right!


Hyd. His message likes him not.


Mir. O for an Augur!


Ema. Good heaven! what an Oglio of thoughts
His Highness has in's face!

Mat. He reads disturbance
In very line.

Ben. What bold blind fate dares thwart him!


Mir. It Is so -- Well, Soldiers may not dispute their orders. --
My Lord, I Have here commands come from my Father,
Forthwith to wait upon him, and I dare
Think nothing but obedience. -- But O in
What a Dilemma between duty and honor
Stand I? Honor calls to me from the house
Of Fame, built all of sounding Brass: and what
Will thou, says she, that have given up thy name
To me, go wanton in the Courts soft pleasures?
When yet the field is covered with thy Army,
And new attempts resolved?

Alk. Hear, hear her sir.


M^r. Then filial duty calls loud from the Temple,
To Obey is your chief honor, the contrary
Would fix more stains upon your Name, then all
The Ottoman blood, could you set it a Tilt,
Could ever wash away. O strait! who says not,
To go is Cowardice, to stay, Rebellion?

Ema. Excuse me sir, were it not blasphemy
Against our great (7) MITHRA, to say the Sun wants light,
When he does but keep state in gloomy days?
No, no your Highness have possessed the world
Enough with your known valor, now no spot
Will stick to you; besides who knows your business?
Your Highness going may be necessary,
And so your journey give more honor to you,
Then kicking open this Towns Gates with your foot.

Met. Of The other side, some handsome excuse may
Give satisfaction to the King, till this
Design be over, and not incur displeasure.

Ema. It may so, yet, why should our Lord the Prince
Run that hazard? his stay may do him hurt,
In losing the opportunity of some Action,
Sure of concernment, else the King would not
Have sent, knowing the weight of his work here:
Or worse, it may provoke his Fathers anger,
At least suspicion: His going cannot harm him,
This Plot is so contrived as we may act it:
Nor need the common Soldier know he is gone;
Put one into his Armor to disguize it.
When he is there, if the affair be urgent,
It Is well he went: if not, he may return
To us before the Action.

M^r. I Am confirmed,
Obedience possesses me all over.
I Will up, and down again, quick as your thought:
If I be forced to stay, go on and prosper:
But duty bears me not faster to him,
Then Love and honor shall again to you:
And so adieu my Lords.

Ema. Heaven keep your Highness.


Elc. Go safe.


Met. And safe return.


Hyd. And well as safe.


BELTAZAR, EMANGOLY, ELCHEE, METHICVLI, H^DASPVS, ALKAHEM, MATZED, BENEFIAN.
HAil my Lord Duke of Shiras.

Ema. My Lord BELTAZAR!
What wind wast drove hither trow? In secret.

Elc. No good one,
You may be confident.

Bell. Save you my Lords.


Ema. O my apprehensive soul! I Would give Aside:
An eye my Lord the Prince were here again.

Bell. It Is thus, in short, my Lords, His Majesty
Dreading some sickness growing strong upon him --

Hyd. He was in health even now. Aside.


Alk. Stay sir, observe.


Bell. Thought good to send down for his Son the Prince
The staff of his old age, to be about him:
And has done me the honor to command me
Hither, to stand in joint Commission over
The Army, with you, My Lord EMANGOLY,
My honored Colleague.

Ema. Your standing is my fall. Aside.


Bell. My Lords, methinks I see, and grieve to see,
Something like Discontent in all your faces.

Ema. I Am justly proud sir, to be joined with
So eminent a Virtue; but this, in this
Conjuncture of time, I think, was ill advised.
Now, when the Army is near worried out
In a long war, to tear their darling from them,
Will relish ill.

Ben. I Will up, and turn Platonic.


Met. And I Stoic.


Mat. I Will to my Farm, and there They whisper
Sow Mustard Seed: the Prince gone, farewell Arms.

Elc. This is a trick, the Prince nere dreamt of it.


Alk. A bait, to lure him up and lodge him -- O.


Ema. My Lord, his Highness ere we lost him, laid
The Platform of a Plot to gain this City
By a surprise; till that be done, will it please you
To keep close your Commission, lest th'novelty
Disturbs the Action.

Bell. Sir, I Will be advised
In this, and all things, by your better judgment.

Met. We all do know our duties, let us attend them.


Ema. Go then, my Lords, I Will follow: -- or I think,
We had as good let this adventure fall,
'Twas but to please the Prince.

Bell. Sir, as you please:
I Have some dispatches, those over, I am yours.

EMANGOLY, ELCHEE, METHICULI, HYDASPUS, ALKAHEM, MATZED. BENEFIAN. THe Prince
called up, to stay! and one sent down
To take his place? and that a Courtier too!
Plot of some Turk to ruin Persia
By striking her good Genius! Impudent head!
Worthy a thousand thunderbolts, that durst
Once mention it! why stay we in the Army?
There Is not a Captains place now to be given
But some Court-Madam must dispose it, to
Perhaps some little legged Gentleman Usher.
Ben. Or decayed Stallion.


Elc. Though we toiled and sweat
To purchase honor for the Prince, we will not
That BELTAZAR shall share with us.

Ema. Shall I
Be coupled now, after so many Triumphs,
With a Court Spaniell? I Will let the Turk in first.
Say my good Lords what, can you shrug and fawn,
And complement? your General is a Courtier.
Now you must fight in method, exercise
Your men as in a Dance. --

Met. Pox, let all fall.


Hyd. Best call MOZENDRA back, and lets do nothing.


Mat. But mutiny.


Elk. Or at bent, raise the Siege.


Ema. The shame will not be ours, but the dull Kings,
That knows ^ot how to prize a worthy Son.

Omne^. With all our hearts.


Met. Let'^hold together then,
And we are safe.

Ema. You are an Oracle.
The King shall know that nothing shall be done,
Less we be pleased, and have again, his Son.

BELTAZAR, SELEUCUS. SELEUCUS, is thy Post upon his wings
T'inform thy master of the Princes coming?
Sell. My Lord, I have dispatched him.


Bell. Prithee stay him
For my Packet.

Sell. My Lord, i will after him.


Bell. Do so, -- and then the King shall know he must not
Pull down his Son and let these great ones stand,
That are but his dependents, pieces of him.
They Are grown too great to obey any but
Their Prince, and will not brook my rising ore them.
And yet, to speak my conscience, they are but honest,
And do, but what I should; yet now that is not
The way to thrive, and so may well be loved
And wished, but not practiced, without loss.
" As he that fells an Elm, must also fell
" The Ivy Vine, and under shrubbs that dwell
" Beneath his shade, and cling in loving sort
" About his bole some but for their support,
" Some to suck sap from him: So who'd remove
" A Prince, or great man, strong in the Peoples love,
" Must strike his followers too. A mighty man
" Does never fall alone, no more then can
" The beams and columns of a Palace and
" The Rafters and the sparrs unmoved stand.

CHORUS. WHat dire effects evil Counsel works
Even to unhinging greatest states!
It does allure with specious baits,
But underneath foul Poison lurkes.
The Prince, to please a factious few
Must rob himself even of his best
Of friends, and discontent the rest,
Which he may ever after rue.
This happens when the Princes ear
Is open (dro^n'd in soft delight)
Unto the bosom Favorite,
Or undermining Flatterer.
How hard and difficult a thing,
Almost above the power of man,
Or even what the immortalls can,
Is it, to be a prudent King!
Almost with honor due to JOVE,
Such it is no Piacle to adore,
For sure, hourly less, or more,
He has intelligence from above.
O what a narrow path does lie
For him! what a straight neck of land?
'Twixt this dire Rock, and that Quicksand,
Here base contempt there flattery!
To escape flattery men must know
He loves the naked truth to hear;
B^t if these freedoms given are
To all, they to contempt will grow.
So do thou loose thy reverence
Great TITAN, guider of the Day,
Because thou do with equal Ray
Thy light alike to all dispense.
The wise Prince then some few selects,
And but to them gives liberty
To tell him all things as they be,
From the rest he naught hears or expects.
Of such a prudent choice must be,
(Men wise and daring, that above
His Fortune do his Person love,)
Lest they fall into flattery.
Not chose for favor, but for parts,
Not so poor as they him must make
Their prey, nor should he any take
For the^r high Fortunes, but deserts.
Nor must he yet let them ingrosse
His love; keep them his Counselors
Not Favorites, lest the gaining theirs
Of all hearts else becomes the loss.
Should SOL from one place never remove
And starve the rest, scorch would that part
With curses, and his partial Cart
Might more esteem get, but less love.
" Few Favorites were there ever seen
" But either wrought their Kings decay,
" And proved Usurpers, or else they
" Have by the People ruined been.
" O Kings, be sparing to make those
" Whom well you love, your Favorites;
" For them you give to vu^gar spights,
" Or else, for them, your selves, depose.
Act. 3.
MAHOMET ALLYBEG. IS there not something more for me to do,
Then to gain Persia's Crowns, and Asia's too?
Must I end there? and after ages say
Here was the limits of great MAHOMETS sway?
Forbid it my bold Genius. Such a Head
Was never meant less then the whole worlds dread,
To coin new projects, and dilate my fame
Beyond (1) cold Caucasus, where the Roman name
Could never come, all knees must bow unto't
(2) From Ganges head to towering Atlas foot.
Cunning or force all ways shall open make,
Or that all locks shall pick, or this shall break.
Some would start now, and say, we cannot dispense
With justice to do this, and Conscience.
Die all such thoughts in me. "Who great things dare
" Think all ways just that profitable are.
As long lives he that throws JOVES Temples down
As he that prostrates at his shrine his Crown.
" All Acts, in this world, good, that prosperous, are:
What, in the next I neither know, nor care.
This world then that I know i will either have
My subject, or else mine and its own Grave.
If I fall, she shall: the loud crack will be
A Dirge fit for so great an Obsequie.
ABBAS, MAHOMET-ALLY-BEG. WHere is my MAHOMET?

Mah. He Is here dread ABBAS.


Abb. Have set the Guards, and put a bit upon
The Mutinous Town? such acts as we intend
Are not safe in themselves, but only made so
By the same power that does them.

Mah. I, my Liege
Have doubled all your Guards; and yet the more
TO oblige them, I have paid them all arrears.

Abb. You did well to make that the first act of
Your Treasurership -- Sit down my Confidence.
And now what say your letters from the Army?

Mah. Even as we wished, the Prince is on the way,
But played loath to depart from his dear strength,
At first it was debated.

Abb. Heavens! how far
Was this state Gangreen crept, that they durst make
Debates of my so positive commands!

Mah. The wily Foxes yet advised his coming,
To gain your good conceit of his obedience.
BELTAZAR'S Power known once, all flew off
The hinges; every face, grew dull and misty;
All late resolves of Action recoiled,
As if their bloods were cooled, and frighted back,
Either through fear, their Treason is smelt out,
And so they shall not stay long after him,
Or else for pure Love to him they mourned;
But 'twas not love, men of the blade and Action,
Used to quaffe blood for Healths, are too too rough
For that soft tender Virtue to inhabit.

Abb. 'Twas conscious guilt that flew into their faces,
Armed with her furies whipps and Harpy nails.

Mah. Was it not time then to disarm the Serpent
Of's sting? who now may hiss, but never bite.

Abb. BELTAZAR writes EMANGOLY and ELCHEE
Seem most displeased, and slight his joining with them.

Mah. They know themselves, and know withal that he
Or I, or any, whom your grace dares trust,
Have not the Art of war. They know you need them,
Therefore take boldness thus to nose and beard you.

Abb. I Will ruin all mankind first. No, this war
Is but to enlarge our Territories; honor,
Not need or Right is all the cause: I Will send
Commissioners down, and clap up peace with the Turk,
And so disband this factious Army. Then
(3) Let the haughty Duke of Sh^ras have a care
Lest I absolve my self of my rash oath,
Never to lop him shorter by the head.
By the hands at least I will, that is the Power.
" The misery of rach oaths! yet in the cause
" Of Treason, no man has a privilege.
I Will thrust him from (4) his Government of Shiras,
(5) I Will turn his feast of Lillies into Cypress.
And remove ELCHEE from Hyrcania too.

Mah. To out EMANGOLY you have pretense enough.
Ha has been long continued in his trust;
Places so high ar'nt only for one Subject
Your Majesty have many to reward,
And honor is the cheapest way you have.
But ELCHEE has had no time in's Honor,
And been provoked already; besides he
May still be useful, and he is yet too great
For such disgrace. "'It Is never safe to anger
" Too many great ones at one time, Sir, ELCHEE
Made yours once, will serve to balance the other.
Yet for a while, banish him from your presence,
'Twill make him conscious of his fault, and put him
Upon some thoughts how to regain your favor.
Then, to be reconciled is to win him.
" It Is better to gain one friend, then crush then foes.
But let EMANGOLY be clean cast off,
As useless quite, and not to be reclaimed.

Abb. Wise MAHOMET, thou shall rule me, be it thy care
To draw up Articles, find Commissioners
To fetch us peace, empowered with full instructions.

Mah. Who mean you in EMANGOLY'S room, ore Sh^vas?


Abb. Who but thy self, companion of my Reign?
Who else is fit to be second in glory,
Or help to bear so many pondrous Crowns?
I now shall take sound sleeeps and no more start,
Or break my troubled slumbers, with conceit
Of sword, or Treason. The Hesperian fruit
Was not so safe under the Dragons guard,
Nor the golden Fleece kept by the brasse-hoof'd Bull
Half so secure, as I and the Empire shall be
In thy care, Angel Guardian of Persia.

Mah. Not all the Gods could so oblige me. Heavens!
What anxious care, what service, what endeavors,
Can ere requite such favors! But, Sir, I
Am conscious of mine own defects, for such
A Province, that requires the ablest man;
A man, A God Phoebus himself to rule it;
A rule as glorious as his flaming Throne.

Abb. Thou art modest ALY-BEG. He is most fit
Who we dare trust, and that is thee my MHOMET

ABBAS, MAHOMET-ALLYBEG, FARRABAN, Two THIEVES, OFFICERS. WHo have you brought
into our presence (Dogs)
And are the sons of filth and poverty
Fit objects for our eye?
2 Theev. Mercy, O mercy!


Far. An't please your Majesty, these two were soldiers.
Ran from their colors hither, and turned Thieves,
They robbed in the Court it self, my chamber.

Theev. Mercy.


Abb. 'Twere to disgrace our mercy to bestow her
Upon such vagabond^, who besides your Theft,
And cowardly sulking from the Camp, shall die,
If but for so disgracing, so profaning
Our Court, with such base rags, and bands of vermin
Compounds of Oil and stench! spawn of a Toad!
Are these weeds for a Court? Or is our Marble
To be polluted with your dust and sweat?
Rascals! spued out of Gaoles and Charnel houses!
Rotten already! that bear graves about you!
Go, Officers, away with them to death.
It Is plain they are Thieves, they have robbed some of their fellows
Long since hung up in chains, of those foul rags,
That danced ith'air many a frosty night.
Yet, that they may die neatlier then they lived,
Give them new Coats, then dragged out of the Town
Impale them high on stakes, thrust through their bodies.

1 Thee. This may thank you could keep the door no better.


2 Thee. T'may thank us both, for robbing without killing.
"They Are wise that make sure work.

Mah. It Is true.


Abb. Away.


Mah. (It Is a good Prologue this to his sons Tragedy.) Aside.
Attend without there, FARRABAN, I Have somewhat
To move the King, you may be useful in,
Be within call.

Far. I will, my honored Lord.


ABBAS, MAHOMET-ALLYBEG. Draws not the time on, you expect the Prince in?

Mah. Yes. How will you that he be entertained?


Abb. How entertained? why, how, but with a bowstring?
Is It not decreed? Entice the trusty Son
From his Eccliptick line, he shall obey
Your beck, and wander from his sphere, ere I
From my resolves.

Mah. Admired Constancy!


Abb. Set you some spy of faith against his arrival,
There let him stay him to attend my coming;
Then give us notice, and thou and I will plant
Our selves in secret to behold the justice;
To act which, get seven Executioners
Deaf, dumb, and dextrous to rush in upon him;
So all Rebellions shall be strangled in him:
Th'Hydra of Treason at one pluck shall lose
Her numerous heads* and we our fears, and be
For ever cured of all jealousy.

Mah. I Will appoint FARRABAN to be his last
Master of Ceremonies. FARRABAN,

MAHOMET-ALLYBEG, FARRABAN. WHich is the way to rise at Court, think thou?

Far. To Obey and please.


Mah. Right, and thou art ambitious.


Far. What do I here else?


Mah. Whither tends thy aim?
Give me the utmost height of thy aspiring.

Far. Troth there you pose me; for "Our thoughts still rise
" As our estates and power; the avarice
" Of honor is no less insatiable
" Then that of gold. -- But for the present, I
Know mine own wish, and so shall you my Lord.
When I walk by the Cittadell, so strong,
So stately, that claims reverence from mine eye,
I think if I had but the government
0f that, I should be happy enough to pity
(7) The grand Signior, and envy him no more.

Mah. The government oth' Castle! is that all?
Thou art too modest.

Far. Good my Lord, do'nt scoff me.


Mah. I am in earnest, -- thou shall have it FARRABAN,
The King has but one piece of Service for thee,
Do that, and thou art Governor.

Far. If I
Can do it, it is done.

Mah. Come, I Will instruct thee how.


FLORADELLA, CLOE. COme, why staid you so long abroad this morning?
You Will never leave your Gossiping till you
Be double rib'd, as GLAVCA was, and then
You may go seek a Father for it: 'bove all things
Beware of a great belly; there is loss
Of time, and loss of sport in it, besides trouble.
Clo. O Madam, I can make sirrup of Savin,
My self; and twenty tricks I have besides.
Here is the book EARINA promised you.

Flo. What, ARETINE, so famous for his postures!
Let Us see it. -- Were you at ERINA's house,
Or sent she this?

Clo. I was there Madam, and
Had the luck too, to see her fine new servant.

Flo. What for a creature is it?


Clo. A pretty silkworm.


Flo. How happy am I therein 'bove the rest,
That dote on sleeked limbs, and finest blood,
Looking but for couch comforts, not aspiring
The godlike ornament of a crown! let them
Melt in their youngsters arms, I Will sacrifice
To hair and bristles, cling to MAHOMET,
Or hug a coffin to arrive at honor --
Me thinks this Purruck leans to th'left hand somewhat,

Clo. No Madam, it is well set, and rarely sented.
I would we'd more of the prepared Pomatum,
And powder I bought last.

Flo. What talk's most rife
Abroad, wench?

Clo That my Lord MAHOMET is sworn
Lord Treasurer, he is now the only Sun
Next to the King, of greatest light.

Flo. He shall
Ecclips him one day. -- What do you now?

Clo. This fucus
Is laid too thick, I Will mend it with my scarlet.

Flo. Have you got Puppy Dogs, and an after burden?


Clo. Yes.


Flo. Well -- distill them then with care -- my Lord*


MAHOMET-ALLYBEG, FLORADELLA, CLOE. WHy; this is as it should be, now my beauty
Displaies her luster, throwing sweets and graces
About the place, her self being as the spring,
A box wherein all sweets compacted lie.
Flo. This spring, Sir, owes it self but to your beams.
I wish you joy, Sir, of your treasurership,

Mah. A step, that is but a step to a greater height.
I Have something more to tell thee, that is fit
For thy ear only.

Flo. CLOE, prithee leave us.


( Clo. Now cannot I for my soul but listen, I
Have such an itch of novelty)

Mah. Come my dear,
Art ready to ascend thy throne? have practiced Aside, she places her self
behind the hangings to listen.
To Queen it with a Majesty? see thou not
All creatures bow in homage to thy foot?
And Princes throng into thy set of servants?

( ^lo. This is fine Pageantry, would it were real.
O how I should be courted!)

Flo. Jest not, jest not,
How proceed you?

Mah. Smoothly, the dreaded Prince
Is on's last journey; an hour brings him hither,
An other sends him El^zium.
The army kicks at BALTAZAR's command,
And pines for th'Prince; the two Dukes fume and fret
Like Lions caught in toiles or Bulls in nets,
Where struggling but intangles them the more.
Since the King cannot trust these men thus enraged,
Nor knows he where to serve himself of others;
He means a league with the Turk, so falls this army,
And leaves him no force to oppose my rise.
He showed me his thoughts of outing ELCHEE
From his vice-royship of Hircania,
And stout EMANGOLY from his of Shiras.
I having hopes of ELCHEE, knew to out him
Were to disable him to do me service;
So wrought him to continue (8) the gelden Duke,
But not without a spice of his displeasure,
Forbidding him the Court, and this will rub
His former wounds, and make him fitter for me
To work upon; for "Nothing like disgrace
" And discontent drive men into rebellion.
EMANGOLY I know too wise and haughty
For my use so did close with his suspicion,
To lay him by; there I Have disarmed a foe,
(9) And the most Potent too in the whole Empire.
To hinder his gathering or abetting Factions,
We Will to this Town confine him, to have him in
Our eye, and keep his friends from herding with him.

( Clo. Fair fall that Counsel, I shall see my Sweetheart
Again then, -- O dear VASCO! -- Well, I Will venture
Catching the other cold, with sitting up
To let thee in at the back door a nights.
Lord, I Am so marriage-minded of the sudden!)

Flo. I Am mufing who shall be preferred to Shiras,
If any of that faction should step up,
It Were but the worse: be that your care to hinder.

Mah. Who cleares a field of thorns, but means to reap
The crop? nor had I counseled his remove,
But that the King proffered his place to me:
Whereby the best half of my design is acted.
" For he that gives the means unto another,
" To become powerful, undoes himself.

Flo. That word gives me new spirits. O my joy!
Let me embrace thee, sweet; all our contrivements
That sounded hard before, are easy now.
Nor will we rest in our first project: we
Will stretch our conquest farther, till no names
But only ours, be heard from Pole to Pole.

Mah. This hand was never made for to grasp less
Then the whole world, one Scepter cannot fill it:
Thou shall reward thy women all with Kingdoms --

( Clo. Hei, ho, my heart! then I shall be a Queen.)


Mah. And give whole Isles in dowry with thy Maidens:
The meanest drudge that toyleth in thy service,
Shall sweep his Oven with (10) MORAT'S Horse-tayle standard:
My Ganymeds and Lackies I Will prefer
To Provinces, and give a City to
My Grooms for every time they hold my stirrup.
I Will ride upon tame Unicornes, and thou
Shall have thy Chariot drawn by yoaked Lions:
My slaves shall play at football with the crowns
Of their own conquered Kings, whose blooming daughters
Shall sue to wait, some amongst thy maids, and some
To be entertained in my (11) Serraglio.

Flo. Why should not I have a Serraglio too,
For men and boys? I prithee let me build one.

( Clo. That would be fine in faith, I love variety.)


Mah. No, no, my sweet, thou must keep all for me.


Flo. Fie, this ingrossememt is but mere conceit:
Does the sweet spring less cool, less fair appear,
When many thirsts are quenched in her, then when
But one has drank? find you not the same sweets,
When more besides your self have smelt your Rose?

Mah. Well, I Will not press the Dove's example to thee,
Or geniall Vine, but give thee the free reins,
Let thy self loose to pleasures.

Flo. We Will make poor
Ingenuous luxury in all her Arts.

Mah. Mean while, we will re-erect our marble City,
(12.) Persepol's, far fairer then her founder
SOSARINUS, or rather JAMSHET meant her;
Or then she was indeed when (12) the mad Greek
Swimming in riot, at fair THAIS Counsel,
Did wrapped her pride about with wastfull flames.
There our bright Palace I Will repair, and give
(12) The forty Towers new Resurrection,
From their forgotten rubbish (12) Th'hundred Pillars
Of white and shining marble, shall again
Erect their pollish'd heads, not to support
APOLLO, as of old, but thy fair statue,
And mine, adored of the prostrate world.

Flo. We Will lie on Beds of Gold and Ivory,
(13) Richer then that Bythinian PYTHIUS gave,
Our great DARIUS: Golden Vines shall shade us,
Studded with Pearls, whose artificial clusters
Shall be the freshest Rubies. Thus we will tire
Nature and Art, and our selves too, with pleasures.

Mah. I Have a pretense shall gain even MIRZA'S friends.
It Is that I only aim at, the Protection
Of young SOFFIE, whom they cannot think safe
In's Grandsires hands, seeing his hate to's Father:
Do you pretend no other to the Ladies.
At first, to name my self were gross, and open.

Flo. Great soul of wit! that cannot choose but take them,
Some oth' great Ladies I Have with visits courted,
With presents some, all with unusual favors:
So that they seem to stand expecting something
I Would have them do, which when the Prince is gone,
They being thus prepared, they shall have.
It Were good you won the (14) Muft^e to your purpose;
And some of the (15) Abdalls, that at public meetings,
And market Lectures, may expound the Text
Oth' (16) Alchora^, according to your Comment.
Good cheer is bait enough for these poor spirits,
Fill them with that, and the bagpipes will sound
What Tune you will turn them to, when they are full:
Bid them inveigh against the Tyranny
They now groan under: promise silken Yoaks,
And easy burdens in your Government.
Pretend a Reformation of the Law,
To take down all illegal Courts and Taxes:
(17 To make all Lands and goods Hereditary,
So that the Persian being rich in Marble,
Need never more to build with unburnt clay.
Promise a Toleration of all
Religions, to ease tender Consciences,
Or Jew or Christian, but yet persecute
The Christian still; it is a spreading Sect,
And where it gets a foot draws in the body:
What though your word's not kept? your ends obtained,
You Are too great to be taxt with breach of promise.

Mah. It Is true, great wit, these mercenary Priests
Are the best firebrarnds, such I Have ready kindled,
They are at work in every Conventicle,
Their empty heads are Drums, and their hoarse voices
Are Trumpets to the war: then, when no longer
The people will believe, I shall be able
To force them to it: Power and Policy,
" Are the two Poles a Kingdom turns upon.

Flo. More Policy not MERCURY can boast;
O that your power were equal! as to that:
What think you of the Horse-guard I propounded?

Mah. I do intend it, when I Have money for it.


Flo. I Have twenty thousand (18) Tomaynes toward it.


Mah. (This want of money now was well pretended.) aside.
As many thanks, my sweet, I will return thee,
For every piece a Crown, (a nooze I should aside. say.)

Clo. Base man! well, I Will prevent thy treachery.


Mah. By this the King expects me, but my dear,
First let me leave my soul upon thy lips.

( Clo. Out Crocodile! he will lick off all her paint too.)


Mah. Adieu my Queen, my Goddess, more, my Love.


Flo. My Prince, my MAHOMET, my best of wishes,
And their accomplishmens attend thee ever.

FARRABAN. ANd must the brave Prince die? who would love virtue!
That sure has no reward, and is but name!
Could virtuous valor, and all daring goodness,
A noble scorn of Fortune, and her frowns,
Whole Hecatombes of Vows and Prayers, sent
Climbing to Heaven on pious breath, enough
To scale it, and force blessings from the Gods:
Could Countries love, or Persias Genius wrest
From ruthless ATROPOS the impartial sheares,
Then had thou lived, great MIRZA, and outlived
The smooth-tongu'd Greek. O let not this be known
In (19) Balsora, nor published in (20) Bizantium,
Lest the Arabian triumphs, and the daughters
Of ACHMET, sing the fall of the Persian glory.
But why wail I his fall that is my rising?
" Kings great intents are to be served, not searched:
But would he would used some other instrument:
Yet th'Cittadell is worth the pains I take for it.
He comes, -- I Am hardly bad enough for this service.
MIRZA, FARRABAN, PAGE. NOw FARRABAN.

Far. Long live your Highness, you
Are well returned. Sir, I am sent from The King,
To let you know, that since 'twas private business
Urged him to call you up, he thinks it best
You Would not appear in Court, or make your coming
Public, now when your Army so much needs you:
And since a sudden grief late fallen upon him,
Makes him unfit for business; he desires
You Would repose here, till himself comes to visit,
And give you your dispatch, which he assures
Your grace shall be as soon as he can get
Leave of's Disease to venture into the air.

Mir. Thou giv'st me joy and sorrow FARABAN;
Sorrow, to hear his Majesty wants health;
And joy, in hope of quick dispatch, because
My Army's need of me, and my desire
To be with them are alike great and urgent.
My humble duty to his Majesty
I Will here attend him, and employ the time
In prayers for his health.

Far. Heavens keep your highness,
For Earth shall not long I Am sure. Secret.

Page Your Highness said,
You Would have your Scimitar, new set on edge,
Whilst here you stay, if it please you, 't may be done.

Mir. That Is well remembr'd, the stout trusty blade,
That at one blow has cut an (21) Asinego
Asunder like a thread, is drunk and glutted
With Ottoman blood; it cuts not now, but bruises.
Take it, and giv't an edge, but be'nt long absent,
Mean while a nap shall settle my tossed He lies down upon a Couch to sleep.
brain,

ABBAS, MAHOMET, ALLYBEG They peep in from behind the hangings. MIRZA. HE
sleeps. -- One blow will make you sleep eternal.

Mah. He is the fitter for your purpose, farther
From opposition.

Abb. But it is cowardly,
To strike a man sleeping.

Mah. We that stick no^
For virtues self must not regard her shadow,
Fame and repute; no heed what honor says,
State says it, and state is the power we serve.

Abb. A handsome man! it is pity!


Mah. Do you soften?


Abb. Relent a little; alas, against a shower
Of so great blood, what Marble but relents!

Mah. You have your choice yet, whether you or he
Shall pass the Stygian sound first. Do, do, strain
Courtesy with him; say, my flower of youth
Has shed the leaves, thine flourishes in glory:
Live thine own time out MIRZA, and mine too.

Abb. No, he must fall; yet falls he not my crime,
But Tyrant Necessities, that knows
No law, not those of justice, nor of nature.

Mah. Now you are your self again.


Mir. Skirt all along
The trenches with the Horse.

Mah. Hark! hark! he dreams
Nothing but war; talks sleeping or awake,
Nothing but blood and wounds.

Mir. Remember but
That I am MIRZA, you Persians.

Mah. Is this
Nothing?

Abb. An overflow of dangerous valor.


ABBAS, MAHOMET-ALLYBEG, MIRZA, The King, and Mah. still behind the hangings.
seven Mutes. AH!

Mah. See your self and crowns rescued from danger. The Mutes with bow-strings
in their hands, they make softly toward the Prince.
Deaths journey-men ready to seize your fear.

Abb. Sad necessary evil!


Mah. Shut but your eye
And when you op't again. you will see no Rival.

Mir. Where, where is the opposition He starts up, the executioners fly back.
made?


Mah. He wakes.


Abb. There Is danger in his fury, and quick death
In every look.

Mir. Bless me! what do I see!
I am betrayed!

Mah. I warrant you.


Mir. Treason! Treason!


Mah. I, I, call till your lungs crack.


Mir. Hell, and furies!
What Devil made me send away my sword,
To fall a tame dull sacrifice to treason?

Mah. Persia's good Genius.


Mir. Yet the lower shades
Shall never see my Ghost They fly upon him, and throw their noozes toward his
neck. come unattended.
" Fury nere wanted weapons. He taks up a stool to ward and fight with.

Abb. O that I
Could save him, and be safe my self!

Mah. You cannot.


Mir* Go you dull dog, tell RADAMANTH He knocks down one of the executioners. I
come --
And you -- bid CHARON wait me He kills another. with his boat. --
How will it yrk my Ghost to fall without
My full revenge? -- could every blow I deal
Light on my cruel Father -- the cursed cause
Of my base murder -- I should die contented --
As in th'embraces of my dearest friends.

Mah. You see Sir, what you were to trust to from him.


Abb. would I had nere deserved it.


Mir. And you too,
Go you, -- and tell my Grandsire, and my He kills another. Uncle
I come -- to keep them company, -- we will sit
On A harons banks, -- under a fatal yew, --
Counting the murders -- of my Tyrant Father. --
Ah too unnatural Father! -- Our pale Ghosts
By turns shall vex thee. -- Is this private business!
Curses and horror dog thee to thy Hell. --
ABBAS! -- O ABBAS -- forget not -- that I die -- Wearied with resistance, he
falls, and faints, the other 4 executioners proceed to strangle him, when the
King comes out, and takes them off.
I die -- the complement of thy Tyranny.

Abb. I can no longer hold, I feel his torment.


Mah. Inconstant!


Abb. MAHOMET, help me rescue him,
And call him back from the infernal shades.

Man. Faith Sir, I Am deep in the gout I cannot struggle.


Abb. MIRZA, O MIRZA, speak, thy father calls.


Mir. My murderer.


Abb. O he lives he lives, help! help!


Mah. I am very lame -- Pox o'these Aside. bunglers, would
He had killed them all.

Abb. He faints again! the soul
Is coy, and will not stay, help! help! who waits there?

FARRABAN, SELEUCUS. To them. SIR.

Abb. O help me redeem my hasty error,
And be a Father again.

Mah. Alas Sir, we cannot
Bring him again oth' sudden; he is but swounded,
His spirits must have time to Rally. But what
Will do with him? do you think this injury
Will ever be forgotten? will you restore him?

Ab^. No, yet he lives, though in a dungeon. -- Bind him
Lest he recovers. -- Now to make him henceforth
Incapable of giving me more trouble,
I Will have a flaming steel be drawn before
His eyes, to take away his sight.

Mah. Do It then
Ere he recovers, you will not rule him else.

Abb. Be it your care FARRABAN and SELEUCUS.


Sell. It shall.


Abb. Then guard him to the Citadell.
Stay FARRABAN, you I Have made Seleucus and the Mutes carry out the Prince,
still in his swound. Governor.
Where Is his commission MAHOMET?

Mah. Here my Liege.
You see Sir I was mindful of my word.

Far. Your trust shall never be deceived by me.


Abb. Ward the Prince up, but hinder not his friends
Th'accesse of visits; yet observe who comes;
So shall we know the faction by degrees.
He fast, fetch his wife to him, and young SOFFIE.
Let little FATYMA be brought to me,
I Will have her in my Court to play withal.

Far. All your commands are done. -- Now I grow strong. Secret.
In villainy, and fit for any service.
At first I startled, and my blood recoiled.
" None are oth' sudden highly good or bad;
" By time and practice are crafts-masters made.

Abb. MAHOMET, compile a Proclamation
Declaring my just fears and jealousies
Of his exorbitant rise, and growing faction.
This timely mercy will possess the wo^ld
That I am only careful, and not cruel.
And that it is not the person but the treason
I punish. "Tyranny may be gilt with reason.

MAHOMET-ALLYBEG. INconstant dotard! can thou never sleep
And wake again, firm in the same resolve!
Well, thou but leave for me to do, what thou
Would have, but could not; nor shall this faint rub,
Thy cowardice cast in my way, impede
My strong-cast bowl, but the more surely lead
It to th'intended Jack, that is, thy head.
NYMPHADORA, FATYMA, IFFIDA. WHat mists are these that dwell about mine eyes
To cheat me into slumbers! as if rest
(The cure of troubled minds) meant to compose
The tumults of my brain, and sleep repair
My broken senses, softly by distilling
Her gentle balm upon my wounded thoughts!
When I no sooner do obey, and throw
My cares on her, but melancholy keeps
Sad orgies in my head, shuffling again
My senses with pale frights, and ghastly dreams,
Full fraught with horror and black Tragedy,
Turning to poison what soft sleep meant balsom!
If. Why weeps her grace, as if she would To Fatyma. wash the world
To its old innocence? accost her Madam.

Nym* Alas! poor heart! my load of grief's too heavy
To be removed by thee; -- mine eyes no sooner
Close, but I start in frights, visions and Ghosts,
Pale wandering Ghosts still shake their funeral brands
Before me, and invite me to their shades.
Me thought I saw my Prince with ghastly looks,
Squallid and bloody, beckon me away.
And then the Sun with bloody countenance seemed
To set upon his head, and a thick cloud
Invelop'd him in her dark misty womb.
Portents! portents of some dire fate to come.

Fat. Madam, alas how often have you chid me
For crying at sad dreams? last night, me thought
I saw an eagle pick his chickens eyes out,
And could have wept for it, but I soon forgot it.

Nym. It Is true, sweetheart, our sleeping thoughts are often
Idle and imperfect, but most commonly
They Are either Histories of something past,
Or dark presages of what is to come.

If. For heavens sake, Madam, torture not your self
With dreams, but let some (22) Magus read them to you,
Or else consult with some wise woman 'bout them.

Nym. No IFFIDA, "Wisdom and virtue be
" The only destinies set for man to follow.
" The heavenly powers are to be reverenced,
" Not searched into; their mercies rather be
" By humble Prayers to be sought, then their
" Hidden counsels by curiosity.

SOFFIE, NYMPHADORA, FATYMA, IFFIDA. MAdam, the Court is full of armed men,
They Have planted guards at every door, and make
Apace toward the presence.
If. Hark -- Madam, let A noise without.
The Prince be hidden.

Nym. No, he has innocence
Enough to guard him.

Fat. O they come!


Nym. Let them.


FARRABAN, NYMPHADORA, SOFFIE, FATIMA, IFFIDA, SELEUCUS, Guards. YOur Grace
will please to pardon us, whilst we do
Only our Offices, and the Kings commands,
In removing you, and my Lord your Son,
To th'Cittadell, where Madam, I assure you,
You shall find all the liberty and service
Is in my power to afford.
Sell. You, Madam, To Fatyma.
The King expects at Court, where all delights,
And studied pleasures, shall be spread before you.

If. O Heaven!


Nym. Why this oth'suddain? if there is ought
Amiss^ in me, his gentlest check could have
Reformed it soon, without this strict confinement.

Far. Madam, no cause of this is from your self,
As we conceive, but from the Prince, who is
Already there.

Nym. O my oraculous soul!
My dreams are read without a Magus, come,
Come, lead away, if he be there, the place
Is not a Prison, but a Court, a Palace,
A Paradise; this is my Prison, 'cause
He is not here: I go not to restraint,
But to enlargement. Is my Lord there say you?
I Am sure unjustly, since nothing deserves
A punishment but evil, and all evil is
Repugnant to bright honor, and her dictates,
And no dishonorable thought had ever
The confidence to thrust into his mind.
Adieu, my FATYMA, thou must to Court,
But I to riper pleasures, if allowed
Thy Fathers presence in what ever place.

Fat. Alas, Madam, may not I wait on you the


Sell. No Madam.


Fat. I Will not be long from your Grace:
Farewell my Princely Brother.

Nym. Alas! I cannot
She turns and weeps. See thee torn from me thus.

Sof. What insolence
Is this! and whither will you hurry me?

Far. My Lord, only to see your Royal Father.


Nym. Go, Child, the Gods of Persia are thy guard:
Will thou partake my fortunes IFFIDA?

If. Willingly, Madam, as i would entertain
My Bridal.

Nym. Come then, glad Brides do not meet
Their longing Grooms, more eagerly then I
Embrace my Prison, if that be a Prison
Where MIRZA is: the joy of meeting him,
Devours all thoughts o'th'place which must appear
Both noble and convenient, he being there.

ABBAS, OLYMPA. WE knew his Parts, but know with all, "No Virtue
" Can merit praise, once touched with blot of Treason:
Yet since it is not himself we chastize, but
His crime, the innocence of his children shall not
Share ith'reward of his offense, and therefore
We commit FATYMA to your Governance:
She is of the best blood, yet betters it
With all the Graces of an excellent spirit:
Mild as the infant Rose, and innocent
As when Heaven lent her us. Her mind, as well
As face, is yet a Paradise untainted
With blemishes, or the spreading weeds of vice.
Oly. My care sir, shall preserve those glories green,
To grow with her, and flourish as her beauty.

Abb. When aged some two years more, we me^ne a marriage
'Tween her and an Arabian King: Her goodnes^
Can brook no meaner fortune then a Throne.

ABBAS, OLYMPA, FATIMA, SELEUCUS. SEe where she comes, waited by all the Grace!

Oly. With Innocence cast about her as a Dress:
Yet wears she sorrow in her face.

Abb. But mixed
With such a sweetness, as gives sorrow beauty.
Come my fair Grandchild, welcome to our Court:
We mean to have thee here, as a choice Jewel
Set to the advantage, to be seen and praised;
Madam OLYMPA is your Governesse.

Fat. Then sir, my first suit to her is; that I
May see my Father, if not still wait on him.

Abb. Deny her nothing, but make quick (...)
A Prison is no shrine for such a good^es^e.

Oly. Come Madam, I Will attend you to hi^ Highness.


Abb. Do -- and SELEUCUS, have thee down to (23) Larr,
Be happy in thy Government let us know
What Is fit more to be done there? and how they
Take this great change of state.

Sell. I will my Liege.


SELEUCUS. YOu soon will know what you have done, and what
You should have left undone, when it is too late.
What Prince would have disarmed himself of so
Trusty a str^ngth! and to his watchful ^o^,
Laid himself open thus but one in whom
Strict justice would have that impartial doom
Of Tyrants to be proved, "Him whom fate
" Means to destroy, she does infatuate.
MIRZA, PAGE, FARRABAN. Blinded and led by his Page. THe empty nothing of our
worldly greatness!

Page O that your trusty Scimiter had stuck
Acrosse my heart, when I deprived you of it*
Armed but with that, the Sons of earth had felt
Their brothers fortune that made head against JOVE.

Mir. Remember it no more sweet youth, alas!
Hell and dire Treason called, called in the voice
Of love, the fiend ith'Cherubins disguize,
(Safest disguize, but cruellest!) I came led
By powerful Fate to my destruction,
And this by chance the wrathful Powers made join
To pluck me down. So, "To a falling man,
" Every thing gives a thrust to have his ruin.
Who Is that?

Page It Is FARRABAN your Jailer sir.


Mir. The Devils setting Dog! guide me but to him,
My wrathful arms shall crush out his black soul.

Page Alas! Sir, your revenge is toothlesse, hear him
'Twill less exasperate.

Far. NYMPHADORA, sir,
Your Princess comes to see you.

M^r. Can that name
Come in thy mouth, and not convert thee? wretch!

MIRZA, NYMPHADORA, SOFFIE, IFFIDA, PAGE. O Heavens! and has the Kite got that
Dove too
Into his fangs* the Gods have sure forgot
All justice, and hurl plagues about at random!
Nym. Goodness! what do I see! -- O, that I still
Did not only dream! -- O --

If. Ah! alas! sweet Madam!
She Is swounded! help me DORIDO.

Mir. What Tyrant Frighted to see the Prince blind, she swounds. They chafe her.
Planet did rage, not reign, at my cursed birth!
Too cruel heavens, to ply me thus with wounds?
Do harsh JOVE, do, shoot, shoot again, but know,
If thou spendst many Darts upon me more,
Thou Wilt soon disarm thy self. -- Is not my woe
Enough, without addition of hers
To sink me to the Center! Lead* O lead me
To her, my comfort once, but now my sorrow,
That I may revive her with fervent kisses,
Or mix with hers my dying breath.

Page Take heed sir.


M^^. O NYMPHADORA speak, thy MIRZA calls,
Still MIRZA, and still thine. O speak, speak quickly,
Lest grief before thou speak, puts me past hearing.
My name was once beloved, and powerful with thee.

Nym. Who, O who calls me from the pleasant shades?


Mir. Thy MIRZA dearest, it is thy MIRZA calls thee.


Nym. O the vast power of that Charm! where is he?
Bless me -- what see I? -- Heavens, let me return
To that sweet Grove, there stood my MIRZA for me,
Glorious and bright, and i will to him again.

If. Alas, She Is gone again -- sweet SOFFIE
Speak to her.

Mir. Ah! and is he here too!


Sof. Madam, ah Madam, SOFFIE never asked
Ought yet of you in vain.

Mir. Heaven is proud
To Have got so pure a soul, and vows to keep it.

If. Here comes poor FATIMA too.


Sof. Madam, -- FATIMA.


MIRZA, SOFFIE, NYMPHADORA FATIMA, IFFIDA, PAGE. O ye infernal Powers! your
conquest is
Complete ore me, why kill you me no faster?
But crucify me thus with lingering tortures?
I Will do it my self -- and never be beholding
To you for my last rest (24) BA^AZET'S Cage
Armed him with high resolves: my woe's as great,
As powerful.
Fat. O Gods!


Page Sir, sir, the Princess. H^ throws himself down, and be^ts h^s head on
the f^o^re.
Sweet FATIMA cling you to him, to hinder
His violence to himself.

Fat. O eyes! what see you.


Sof. O choice of bitter sights.


Fat. Wer'nt one enough,
To break so soft a heart as mine. O Father!
O Mother! whither shall I turn me first?
Which first bewail, or add my loss to yours?
O that I could redeem his life with mine!

Sof. Or I with my blood randsome hers 'twould be
A noble payment for the breath she lent me.

M^r. Oh -- oh! --


Nym. Ah! what strong groans are those?


Sof. It Is MIRZA dies, Madam, it is MIRZA dies,
Infected with your grief.

Nym. No M^RZA is
Immortal as his Virtue! -- O what cheats
Are these! even now I left him in ^lizium,
Yet now I find him here squallid and blo^dy,
As in my dream --

If. Madam, put off your fright,
Assist now his recovery.

Nym. O my MIRZA!
Which wound shall I first kiss? here? this? or that?
In silent streams below now do thou bath
Thy bleeding wounds -- but, ah! why do thou seek
To wash them any where but in my eyes?
See! see! they flow! These tears when once I dropped
Into thy hurts, when thou came hot from conquest,
Thou did call balm. Ah! they are still as warm,
As clear, and flow as free. See, see! I Would weep
All my whole moisture into cures could thou
But feel it, yet I Will weep because thou do not.
Ah, ah! thou do not! -- Thou art now possessed
Of thy fresh Grove, and there to fame deliver'st
Thy N^MPHADORA'^ Name; or on the rind
Of some fair Tree, perhaps thou now ingrav'st it,
Then hugg'st thou the fresh bark, and ask pardon
For wounding it with thy beloved Letters.
O'wake, 'wake dearest, and embrace the substance.

M^^. Where,-O-where am I?


Fat. O thank Heaven he lives.


NY^. Thou Art in my Arms, thy N^MPHADORA'S A^mes;
Where, O that thou had ever been, or now
At least may ever be.

M^^. No, no, I am not,
I Am in the Torrid Zone, right O right under
The vehement Line. -- Water-O-water quickly. --
What Devil has in my sleep, thrown me to Afric?
O for a River, though 'twere Acheron,
Or S^yx its self to bath in.

Nym. Alas he burns,
He Is high in a strong feavour.

If. Madam that
Will find an easy cure, get him to rest;
That Is the first step to health in a distemper.

M^r. Ah me! What COLCHIS, what Thessalian Hag
Thus tortures me, poor wretch, with Magic charms,
And boyles my guts in such a scorching flame,
Melting my marrow as her wax dissolves!

Nym. Alas dear Prince! best try to rest my Lord.


M^r. To Lyb^an Lions TITAN is more mild,
Then thus to rage. VULCAN feels! no such heat
At's glowing forge. Neither is Aetna's self
So scalding, when she vomits burning coals.

Nym. O, I will sigh my soul to air to cool thee.


M^r. O, who put HERCULES shirt on me? I feel
The poison work, and all my veins boil high
With Centau^'s blood.

Fat. That I could weep, till like
AEGIRIA I thawed into a fountain
To cool him!

Sof. Might I ACIS like melt to a stream.


M^r. Pretty obedience! -- Fortunate PROMETHEUS,
Though thy eternal entrails still should feed
A thousand Eagles! the kind Caucasus
Benums with cold; O that I might with thee
Under that hill, handle eternal frost,
Roll in perpetual snow, to quench my fires,
And slake my parched soul with continual Ice!

If. Dear Madam, get him in.


Nym. O that I could!


M^r. Or might I still thirst, TAN^ALUS with thee,
So I might always bath in thy cool River,
For O I burn, I burn, the dog star rules me,
And feeds his raging fires on all my joints.

Nym. Wilt in to rest?


Mir. It Is dog-daies every where,
And Affr^ck. -- Here ye BELIDES, here power
On me, kind sisters, your perpetual ^ialls. --
There is an impious nation that is said
To stuff with human flesh their greedy womb,
O they expect me, and are now devouring
My roasted Liver; all my members broile,
And ready be ^HYESTES for thy Table. --

Nym. Page, try to lift him up, softly, O softly.


M^r. O I am stifled in hot glowing brass!
I low, shut up in dire PERILLUS Bull. --
Away Dragons, you scald me with He struggles your breath.

Nym. Stay yet.


M^r. Naught see I'fore mine eyes but flames,
And towering Pyramids of eternal fire.
What food can serve such flames! alas! what mines
Of Bitumen and Sulphur have I in me,
That thus my loins consume without a pile.

If. Alas! this talking heightens his distemper.


Nym. It does, -- come try to bear him quickly in.
Once well, he will forgive it.

Mir. I melt! I melt!
Ah! mine own self am mine own funeral fire.

FLORADELLA, MAHOMET-ALLYBEG. BUngling Puppies! could not twitch hard enough
When once they would got him down! What will you do now?
Step on, or back, or alter the whole ma^hin
Of the contrivement?
Mah. On, my fair,
" These little difficulties indear great actions
" To noble minds; they are weak souls fall or stumble
" At rubs cast in their way to ^ry their s^^ength.
The peace I know by this time is patcht up,
And the bold factious Troops disbanded all.
The Town anon will swarm with idle Soldiers,
That will, like fish lie basking in the Sun,
And die, when all the water, their element,
Is let out from them. I Am for ELCHEE first.

Flo. I for OLYMPA, and EARINA.


Mah. Press hard
For liberal lones of money, plate, or Jewels,
Or any of their fine superfluities,
They Will help t'augment the heap. Possess them strongly
That I intend to rescue the brave Prince
And SOFFIE.

Flo. You Have instructed me enough.


"Mah. Keep hid the Serpent, Lure with the Dove:
" No Treason is like that goes mas'kd like love.

CHORUS. WHat is it Heavens, you suffer here?
As if that vices malice were unbounded,
All virtues Laws inverted are,
And the just be by the unjust confounded.
It Is punishable to speak reason,
Now reason and loyalty are out of fashion,
And Tyranny and Treason
Have all the vogue in this besotted Nation.
He that our great Palladium was,
No less our strength and bulwark, then our glory,
A pray to rampant malice lies,
Whose fall almost, the doers selves makes sorry.
His innocent issue suffer too,
Not laid so close up as a prized treasure;
But to show what their rage can do,
And that reason rules not their acts, but pleasure.
His noble friends, that whilst they wore
In The field his purple, could deaths self have daunted,
Men, that a crime, then death, fear more,
Suffer for crimes wherewith they are unacquainted.
Some to strickt bounds confined are,
Some to remote; all judged without due trial:
The cause, fond jealousy and fear,
Strange state, that fears such subjects as are loyal!
Whilst they that mean the rape o'th state,
Swim in smooth oil, and wallow in all riot,
Intit'ling their black deeds to fate,
And put bad men in arms, to keep good quiet.
O whither does the precipice
Of evil hurry men of base condition!
Made drunken with unjust success,
They all the world grasp in their vast ambition.
See thou not JOVE rebellions scope?
'Lesse thy quick vengeance stopps their sudden rising,
They Will, like their elder brothers, hope
To depose thee too, and dare heavens surprising.
Hear, O JOVE, hear their blasphemies,
How all their wickedness on thee they father.
Cheating the world with pious lies,
Saying, their rules from thy instinct they gather.
Do thou not hear it boldly said,
JOVE bids us break all ancient laws a sunder?
(At the dire speech ASTRAE fled)
Or hearing it, why sleeps so long thy Thunder?
Was it not worth one bolt to save
Him, who the world thy truest copy deemed?
Whom all good men in reverence have,
Who thy laws highly, as we his, esteemed?
Whom wilt not tempt, when these, they see
The great prosperity of evil secures,
Away from down-trod right to flee?
When wrong, with the fair bait, success, allures?
So would it be, but that there are
A wiser few, that know on high there fitteth
O'th world, an upright Governor,
And every thing is best that he permits.
" We know a punishment it be
" To evil to prosper, nor shall long endure.
" The wicked's false prosperity,
" Though justice slowly moves, she strikes sure.
Act IIII.
ABBAS, BELTAZAR. COme BELTAZAR, how have you used your power?

Bell. May't please your Majesty, a mutual league
Offensive and defensive we could not
Obtain, but upon terms too low for us.
The ^urk is yet too high, and stands upon
Rendition of those Towns you hold of his,
Which would disfurnish you of many men
Fit for your other wars; so'a Truce is all
We Have made, but so long, 'tmay be called a peace,
It Is for three years.

Abb. 'These truces yet in war
" Are only like the well days in an Ague,
" Short intervalls of health, that flatter us
" Into debauch, and make the next fit worse.
" Nor should we suffer a disorder follow
" To save a war, because that war's not saved,
" But only put off to our disadvantage. --
But how took our stout Captains their casheering?

Bell. full heavily and muttered mutiny.
EMANGOLY here at the Town was met
With your arrest, and seizure of his places.
Which he seemed to put off with no more trouble
Then he would do his Arms after a march,
Or a hard charge, to take a nap of sleep.

Abb. Cunning dissembler! How took ELCHEE
His banishment from Court?

Bell. As a schoolboy
That has played treuant, and hears his Master's angry.

Abb. There Is hopes of him; but the other is quite lost.


ABBAS, FATYMA, BELTAZAR. What Is that my FATYMA.

Fat. It Is a petition
From a poor subject, wronged by a great Lord.
Too strong for him to struggle with at Law,
Nor has he wherewithal to pay for justice.

Bell. The case holds in himself, and his aside. brave Son.


Abb. Our justice, FATYMA, shall be given, not sold.
It Was wisely done, who ere he be, to send it
^y thy hand, (sweet) of all the dearest to me.
It Is granted.

Fat. Heaven will pay the early mercy.


Abb. Take you the scrowle, BELTAZAR, and see right done.


ABBAS, FATYMA. BUt child thou show thy self as unconcerned
At all the pleasures of the Court, and seemst
A discontent.
Fat. Alas Sir, how can I
Relish these toys, when my poor Father pines
And raves, mewd up in Prison? Is the daughter
Fit for a Court, and Father, Mother, brother
But for a dungeon? -- She weeps.

Abb. Come, these thoughts will over,
As time and more discretion wins upon thee.
^ts fit thou be as free from the reward
Of his foul treasons, as thou were from them.
He may be yet restored; how ere, his Name,
Though stained with this one blot, shall ever stand
Full and Majestic in great History,
For noble acts yet shall those Histories
And after times boast thee his chiefest Act,
That fame him most. -- But which of all the pleasures
That court thee here, do thou most favor child?

Fat. Music; it feeds my melancholy, and
Brings Paradise into my thoughts. OLYMPA
Tells me the soul is only harmony,
And Music built the world.

Abb. Come child, within
Thou shall have some shall please thee.

Fat. 'Tmust be sad then.


MAHOMET-ALLYBEG, ELCHEE. HE was indeed the very soul of war,
The thunderbolt: had TYPAEUS fought like him,
Great JOVE had been his Prisoner.
Elc. Heavens! whose ears
Have not his Trumpets tingled in! what fears
In Persia's foes, have his braced Drums awaked!
What enemies face has not his hand besmeared
With blood and glorious dust! what land, what fields
Has not his sword manured with hostile blood!
Whose triumphs have not his deafned! his, heard
To, and beyond (1) Byzantiums walls of fire!

Mah. But now, O lost, lost is our hope, our glory,
And fortune of our name, except --

Elc. Except!
My Lord, and can yet all the Gods, if they
Should sit in counsel, form a remedy?

Mah. Yes, yes, dear ELCHEE, there is a way yet open
To rescue Persia's glory, and our comfort.

Elc. O speak it, and be our good Genius.


Mah. And it is, my Lord, a way wherein the Love
I bear to you, would have you high and eminent.
Nature and virtue have done their parts in you,
And Art and education bettered both,
The dignities and honors that you hold
Are no more then your birth assigned you to,
Were your parts less. I Would have those scores of merit
You Have put upon the age, paid double to you,
But how the course the King now takes, will do it,
Your new disgrace at Court assures you;
So that if justice, honor, or endearments,
Were silent all, the many disobligements
The King has given you, call you loud enough
To th'Princes Party.

Elc. I, my Lord, have studied
Not to divide my sovereign from himself,
His interest, and the Princes, I count one,
How ere his anger has now severed them.
And were I once assured in my reason,
That his dis-favour of the Prince were just,
I Would only mourn his fall, as much from Virtue,
As from his honors.

Mah. It Is but the jealousy
Of's guilty mind, persuades this cruelty
To th'Prince, and to himself, he being his hope.
Good JOVE! what fears, what doubtful apprehensions
Do wicked Actions leave in cruel minds!
His Fathers Ghost, and Brothers haunt him daily,
And MIRZA he thinks, must needs requite the blows
He gave to them. Nor will this humor cease,
But grow upon him still with its fond Nurse,
Old testy age, that is subject in its self,
To fears and doubts, and sees all dangers double.

Elc. That Is his disease, my Lord, but now the cure?


Mah. What, but a hard, and seeming violent one?
Why may not you martial men, rally your powers,
Free the brave Prince, secure his hopeful Son,
And then maintain't, and force his frenzy from him?

Elc. That looks too like Rebellion.


Mah. O success!
" Is a rare paint, that which succeeds is good,
" When the same Action, if it fails, is naught.

Elc. Indeed would the young SOFFIE were safe.


Mah. To wish it only is but womanish,
Attempt it, and he is. Think but my Lord,
The innocent Babe calls from his prison to us,
And are these hands that never could deserve them,
So soon for fetters? Believe it, DAMOCLES sword
Hung not by a less thread, then the Kings does
Ore that sweet hope of Persia, one mad fit
Destroys the race and glory of the Empire.
He grows apace, and the old Tyrant knows,
" The children, whose Parents have been wronged,
" Inherit all their hatred, and are dangerous:
What factions then, what numbers of Pretenders
Will not with force assert their fancied Titles?
And shall thou, fairest Mother Persia, be
Torn by the factious hands of thine own Children?
Forbid it Heaven.

Elc. MIRZA'S deserts plead too.


Mah. Yes, and that loud: shall I that spared no blood,
No toil, dear quondam Soldiers, to adorn
Your heads with Palm, your memories with fame,
Now pine, and find no courteous hand will knock
My unworthy shackles off? Is Honor, Love,
And Gratitude, all blinded with me too?

Elc. Who should begin?


Mah. (It works, it works) why you,
Or Lor any body; well begun,
The work's more then half ended. A small force,
And handsome Declaration, will find none
Such Enemies to themselves as to oppose:
Nor do the Princes high deserts, his Sons
Apparent danger, or our Honors call
Louder then our own safeties, they are too
At stake: He whose wild rage could reach a Father,
Brother, Son, and I may say, a Grandchild,
Will not spare us: but you, or I, or any,
May daily feed the monster of his fury.

Elc. It Is but too probable: like a mad man he will
Hurl stones at all alike.

Mah. And like a mad man
His present state appears, with sorrow, I
See him like one distracted, about to murder
His best friends, and himself; and does not this
Condition call for help? O let us pity
The Father of our Country, and interpose
Between his fury and his violence
It Is Duty, not Rebellion: We Will restore him
To's wits again, and then he will thank us all,
For hindring's making of himself away.
How would the young mad Greek have hugged that servant,
Had hindr'd him in's drunken frolic, from
Murdering his friend?

Elc. Our ABBAS jealousy,
Is no less wild then. ALEXANDER'S wine,
Both perfect madness, and the fit once over,
He Will see his error, and be sorry too.

Mah. Then how shall they appear lovely in story,
Firm in the Kings, the Princes Peoples loves,
That like good Angels, saved all that was dear
Mong us, to Gods, to Honor, and the Empire?
An Action no less glorious then is ATLAS,
His bearing up the sinking Globe from ruin.

Elc. My Lord, EMANGOLY, is well beloved,
And now enough incensed to make the head
Of the design, 'twill work his reconcilement
With the King too.

Mah. No, no, my Lord, why should you
Thrust from your self so fair a fortune? do it,
And let me serve you in it: your hand, my head,
Our Purses, and our friends together, do it.
Besides, EMANGOLY is too much disgraced,
And men will say his hatred to the King,
And not his love, or to the Prince, or Empire,
Put him in Arms.

Elc. They Will say the same of me.
Bear you the name, head both the act and Plot.

Mah. (I never meant other (2) good aside.
Gelden, but to ride you.)

Elc. I shall have honor enough in serving you.


Mah. Well Sir, I Will be no courtier with you then,
But do what JOVE shall envy, and wish his.
You Will hold the second place, Lieutenant General.

Elc. Yes.


Mah. Then what friends can you oblige to us?


El^. I Will try them all, but MATZED, young BENEFIAN,
And Stout MOZENDRA, I promise to my self.

Mah. Those are sure cards; what banks have you ith'City
Will push out freely to a contribution?
" These public works need many private purses.

Elc. Some we shall find.


Mah. The beauteous FLORADELLA
Has promised largely, her I have engaged:
We shall proceed the merrier for the Ladies.

Elc. We Will give them back their gold to buy their silence.


Mah. The best way to assure our selves of that,
Is to engage them deep enough; we need them
To work their friends, and to augment our treasure.
" All wars are chargeable, but civil most,
" And we that mean the public good, must not
'Lie heavy on the people. I intend
A guard of horse, my Government of Shiras
Will bear it out, thither I have sent SELEVCVS
To govern Larr, and raise three Regiments there,
Of horse one, two of foot. This Cittadell
Is mine and that is all that readily
Could give me any trouble; another force
I Will pick up here, the Town and Country swarm
With casheer'd soldiers, thirsting for employment.

Elc. My Lord, what if I levied in (3) Hircania?


Mah. It Is fit, call all your friends about you here
To cast your strength up, but avoid all listing.
" Listing is dangerous in secret Plots,
" One paper lost, discovers all; take only
The great ones names, and what they promise, trust to.

El^. We can have no resistance suddenly,
The first must be by forreiners called in,
Nor can the King trust to those mercenaries,
Nor will the Persian like their coming in.
Besides My Lord, our powers may be ready
To be with us, ere they can reach the fron^iers:
How ere they will hinder the Kings levies there.

Mah. Thou art my Oracle of war.


Elc. But why
May we not seize the King, and cut the fear
Of all resistance off? the Princes friends
Are ours already, the rest we will find, or make so.

Mah. Of that at our next Council, mean time work
Your friends as I will mine; but above all
Provide what money, and what arms you can:
" Who has the gold shall never want the man.

Elc. Enough. Farewell my Lord, my good Lord General.


MAHOMET-ALLYBEG. HOw shall I fall in love with mine own parts,
That have so conn'd all cunning mistique Arts!
On every side have I set wheels a going
Shall work my purpose with their own undoing.
Torches, shall spend themselves to give me light;
Stages, for me to climb by to my heigh^.
Then down go they then my hot credulous Lord,
And then my fine soft wench will I discard.
" The Lovers and the Courtiers Masterpiece,
" And the states-mans, dissimulation is;
" High favor and sure friendship to pretend
" To him whose Throat he will cut, to gain his end:
" This must he do, will rise, and then its best
" To swear most love, when he intends it least.
OLYMPA, FLORADELLA, EARINA ^LOE. THis, and much more we will do, to let men see
That we can help as well as they, to save
A sinking State.
Flo. And happy are we Madam,
In putting obligation on the present
And future ages. For this act the Prince,
The Princess, SOFFIE; nay the King shall call us
Their Patroness^^, that did timely bring
An arm to save them from their hasting ruins.

Ear. Children unborn, and Priests not yet begotten
Shall sing our names upon high festivalls.

Oly. And many a happy Pen shall toil to keep
Our memories as fresh when time himself
Grows old and halts as now our beauties are.

Ear. But why shall not we improve the debt, the State
Owes us, by enjoying offices, and sitting
In council with the men!

Flo. Madam you are happy
In that conceit. Indeed we are framed by nature
With th'same parts o'th mind for th'exercise
Of virtue as men be.

Ear. And if men boast
Such exellencies, it is reason to think
Those no less excellent of whom they are:
Since timorous Doves, did never yet hatch E^gles;
But men, and beasts, and all the whole creation,
Inherit th'minds and spirits of their Parents.

Flo. It Is no hard task to pattern in our sex
All excellent things that ever men performed,
Not arts excepted nor that active valor
That lift so many Demigods to heaven.
(4) The valiant Amazons are proof enough.

Ear. Nor do others fairness take away their force.


Oly. True vertu's not obliged to live with beards
Alone, she may choose the smoother edifice.
But the rough part of virtue, skill in arms
I am content to let the men ingrosse.
(4) I have no mind to lose a breast, to wear
A shield the better Yet state offices
And to be Counselors would become us well.
Our Wits are sharpest, and we fittest made
For Embassies, as having smoothest tongues.

Fl^. And should our Rhetoric fail, we will but employ
Our looks to plead, and conquer with our eyes.

Ol^. Besides, the novelties and varieties
We meet ith'state will yield us strange delight.

Ear. We Will have them both; the Buffe and Fur shall be
A new and fashionable dress, and every
Lady appear a PALLAS, with an Aegis
Upon her breast.

Flo. This, Madam, and what else
Our Cabinet thoughts can dictate to us shall be
All in our powers.

Ear. Plurality of husbands
Would be thought on.

Flo. Yes, and Seragl^o's too
For downy, peachy chins: This, and all el^e
If we but ply the work. There Is Madam OMAY
Is worth the winning, who has interest in her?

Oly. There has been long a league between us, strong
Enough I hope to make her hear reason from me.

Far. She has her share too of ambition, that
Will work.

Flo. Ambition! Madam, what are we
Without it? it is necessary as beauty
To a great Lady.

Ear. What sounds high in others,
And is pride, is but needful state in us,
And the true knowledge of our selves.

Flo. She Is rich,
And young and handsome, and you say ambitious;
Then She Is well qualified

Ear. Handsome, in troth
At first she presents well, but then she loses
Her self presently.

Flo. She does indeed -- what now.


Clo. Madam, my Lord. ^n secret


Oly. Well, Madam, your great friend
Expects you.

Flo. No.


Oly. Come, come, deny him, do.


Ear. Well, we all know our parts,, and will no^ loiter.


Flo. The pains will pay it self. -- Now where is my Lord?


MAHOMET-ALLYBEG, FLORADELLA HEre, where he would be, Dearest, in thy arms,
The Center my soul tends to.
Flo. Welcome, ah
Welcome hither, as conquest to the soldier.

Mah. How do the Ladies take thy proposition?


Flo. as their best wishes.


Mah. Good, good, ELCHEE too
Has swallowed the hook, and promised his Allies.
I feel the Crown warm on my head already.
My guard is raised, I want but the Kings license
For their attendance; for that plead thou strongly,
Possess him wi^h the need often for my safety,
This last service having pulled envy on me.

Flo. It shall be granted, or I Will lowre the dotard
To death, it shall, I Will kiss it out of him.

M^h. My better Angel! ah! how poor am I
That there are not more worlds then one, that I
Might cast their crowns into thy lap for this!

Flo. Your love my Lord shall set me higher, then if
I rode with HECATE in her ebon Chariot,
Or held the reins of JUNO's yoaked Peacocks.
To hold that heart is above all dominion.

FLORADELLA, CLOE. HOw stately a thing it is to be a Queen!
O that I now could but look into Heaven,
To see how our great sister JUNO shakes
Her Scepter ore the world, and learn her carriage!
We now must speak in the plural number CLOE,
Do thou not see new Majesty spring in us,
And all our looks speak Queen?
Clo. Madam, I would
Fortune had been as free to you as nature
Then had that honor long ago rewarded
That beauty which did ever merit it.

Flo. CLOE, bestow thy wishes on the needy.
Fortune has humbled her self to us, and
Asked pardon for so long keeping our right
From our possession, a fault she will now amend,
And be our servant ever. Go, provide
State Ornaments, and regal Robes for us,
Jewels will cost whole Provinces to purchase,
And yet receive new luster from our wearing.
Have any sisters, friends or kinswomen?
Prefer them to us, thou shall have the favor
TO appoint our maids of honor, and a set
Of servants for us, against our Coronation. --
Dull and insensible! what, did thou meet
Thy Mothers Ghost this morning fasting, that
Thou starest so! do not our eyes proclaim it?
And all our steps say, they are toward a Throne? --
The poverty of thy soul! --

( Clo. She Is mad, and raves!) aside.


Flo. Have we not taken care for all events
That can betide us? Have not we removed
All that stood stiff, and many in our way?
Goes not the levy's on? flow not friends to us?
Is not the Castle ours, and Shiras too?
Is not all ours? Or shall be, when I Have given
The Old Dotard King his pasport in a kiss
To the other world; thither a Dag, or draught,
Shall send the Prince, and a Plumb SOFFIE,
Who then is Emperor, wench, but MAHOME^
His head has laid it, and his hand shall act it,
His ready Army shall crush all gainsayers.

( Clo. Perhaps you too.) aside.


Flo. What mutter you? me too!


( Clo. O how her Plumes would fall now, should I tell her aside.
What I ore-heard!)

Flo. What is it you mumble, Gossip?


Clo. Madam, you will pardon me, at your last meeting
But one, with my Lord MAHOMET, I was curious
To listen, and ore-heard some doubtful words,
As if he would only serve his turn of you.

Flo. Pish, pish, He knew you listened, therefore spoke so,
If so he spoke, to try my confidence
Perhaps, or mock your curiosity.
No, well, he knows he never can requite
My love with a less dowry then the Empire;
I have deserved it of him, and i will never
Be jealous of his love.

( ^lo. What toys does fancy aside.
Suggest to us, in favor of our selves!
Well, I had best comply.) -- Indeed perhaps
His great wit played with me; but could he see me?

Flo. Yes, my self saw you.


Clo. Then 'twas so: but yet
Me thought the manner spoke him serious.
But sure the Army does not mean his rule,
But to restore the Prince.

Flo. Tush, Soldiers know not
Their own intents, it is as the General pleases,
Who has an Army up, and a strong Purse
May work them easily unto any thing:
It Is done, it is done, my CLOE, -- it is high time
For us to practice Queen-ship; thus do we
Indulge our hand, our trusty maid of honor.

Clo. May't please your Majesty, then Cloe kisses her hand. must I begin
To know my self, and set a higher price
Upon my beauty.

Flo. It Is indeed a virtue,
To prize our selves enough -- CLOE, as we pass,
Bear up our train -- so -Not so near our Grace.

^lo. High ho! my Heart! I shall have a sweet place.


MIRZA, NYMPHADORA, SOFFIE, IFFIDA, PAGE. O The seven Bandogs are let loose
again
Upon me! HERCULES! HERCULES! can not hear!
Prithee lend me thy club -- the Lubber's sore
With His labors still, and sleeps, and hears me not.
Nym. Why let you him come out thus?


Sof. Alas Madam,
He broke through's all, and calls us all his Hangmen.

Mir. See! Lightning flashes from their eyes.


Sof. Hark, Madam.


M^r. Every one of them is a match for CYCLOPS,
Yet will I charge them all alone. -- O -- O.

Nym. O.


If. Help! help!


Sof. Page, hold him from violence.


Mir. Thou Have hit me right TYPHAEUS, He runs his head against a Post, and
falls. The Princess turns away astonished, and weeps, the rest fall down about
him. thou have Centaure.


Nym. O heavens! if there be any powers that pity
The miseries of their Creatur^s, look down on him;
The fight's enough to move a heavenly nature.

Mir. So MIMAS, hold PORPHYRIO, strike no more,
I am TYPHAEUS Prisoner.

Nym. Lay not hands
Upon him, keep him but from farther hurt.

Mir. CHARON! oh, CHARON! --


Page Nay my Lord.


Mir. Come CHARON,
Quick, sirrah, Sculler, row me to Elyz^um.

Nym. Alas! the frenzies high talk not much to him.


M^^. But now ha'nt I a halfe-penny for the waftage,
No matter though, I Will snatch the slaves Oar from him,
And if he grumbles, knock his brains out with it,
And CERBERVS his too, if the Cur snarls at me --
So -- I am pas't without a Sop -- now which
Of all my friends shall I first meet?

Nym. O Gods!
Give me more ease, or else more punishment,
For I with this can neither die nor live.

Mir. Who Is that? -- That Is PROSERPINE bewailing of
Her Rape, the silly wench would feign be with
Her Mother again.

Nym. O make me either happy
Again, or wretched till you can no more!

Mir. It Is so, it is she -- she is warm, and Takes her hand. sof^ as air.
Sweet PROSERPINE.

Sof. Madam, apply your self
A little to his passion.

M^r. Beauteous Queen
O'th'under world, do'nt men when they come hither,
Though blind above, have here their eyes restored?

Nym. Alas! I cannot flatter his wild frenzy.


Sof. Pray Madam seem to be what he conceits you.


M^r. What art thou, GANYMED? and if thou be,
Good yellow-tressed Boy, entreat thy Master,
When next he thunders, to bestow a bolt
On ABBAS head, 'twill not be cast away,
The man deserves it; -- but that plague's too quick,
Desire him rather, send him (5) PHINEVS, Harpyes,
He merits them as much as the Arcadian,
He've put out his Sons eyes too: hear'st small skinker?

Sof. Yes, and when next I wait, I Will do the errand.


If. He wants no Furies, he has all in's breast.


Mir. Hah art thou a Fury? good TISIPHONE
Get thee to Persia then, and take thy sister
ERINNYS with thee and torment the Tyrant.

If. Well sir, he shall not want for torments.


Mir. Hark yet,
Prithee new wire thy whip before thou go,
And tie more knots on it, take fresh Snakes too with thee;
He is my Father, I Would have him want nothing.
(6) May all the Scorpions of Cushan sting thee.

Nym. Ah! cruel Father!


M^^. First TISIPHONE,
Lead me to TANTALVS, I Would feign talk with him.

If. Why TANTALVS?


M^r. 'Cause he killed his Son too,
I Would see if's punishment be great enough,
Then I Will Petition PLVTO, my hard Father,
May have the same.

Nym. O that the Comparison
Held whole in thee! He murdered his PELOPS,
To entertain the Gods but ABBAS thee
To feast the furies of his frantic mind:
To PELOPS too, the yellow Goddess gave,
A whiter shoulder for his own she tasted,
And with new better life requited him.
O that some Deity would thine eyes restore,
Or close up mine!

M^r. Hah! that is PROSERPINA,
She Is in love with me, and condoles me too,
But I Will not wrong my NYMPHADORA, though
PROSERPINA, where is (7) my Uncle, and (7) my Grandsire
Two Persian Princes, murdered by their Son,
And brother? I Would feign speak with them, and sit
Comparing fortunes with them.

Nym. O they are
Bathing themselves in bliss, in their sweet Grove.

M^r. And shall I be there too, CERES bright daughter?
Let me sweet Empress.

Nym. Yes, if you will rest
Your head here in my lap, and there lie still.

M^r. But will not PLVTO then be jealous of me?


Nym. No.


Mir. Come then -- (8) Now tell me more of Paradise.


Nym. There'midst the fragrant flowre-enammell'd fields,
Do golden Palaces their shining heads
Erect, with richest Arras each one floor'd,
Christalline Rivers flow to moat them round,
For state, not strength, and with their wanton murmurs,
Lull every sense, and make soft sleep yet softer;
Their banks are fringed with Trees of Gold, that feast
With goodly forms the eye, with fruits the taste;
Fruits that plucked never so often, straight spring again,
So the rich boughs still with like metal shine
Under whose fragrant shades they spend their course
Of happy time with amorous Virgins, who
Regard alone their own particular loves,
Not such as tired out in the world a life,
But there created for it, with best form,
(9) Cows eyes, and beauteous as the Hyacinth!
Still their Virginities return, and still
Their beauties flourish as their Paradise,
For ever young, yet ripe and fresh; full blown,
Yet always free from natural pollutions,
Still as in their third luster, men ith'fixt.
Their Boys of divine feature minister
To them, and proffer hourly to their choices,
The most delicious Viands, Drinks, and Voices.

Mir. But when, but when, dear Queen of darkness, shall I
Inherit all this bliss?

Nym. When thou art fit for it.


Mir. And how shall I make my self fit?


Nym. By sleep.
Sleep will much purge thee from thy earthy humors.

Mir. Sweet PROSERPINE, there is in Persia,
The fairest Lady that ere blessed the Earth,
Sweet NYMPHADORA, thou must needs have heard
Of her, many worthy Hero's have
Dyed for her love; one frown (if such a face
Can frown) of hers, have given a hundred Princes
Their Pasport hither: did nere hear them sit
And sigh her name? or see it carved in the rind
Of some fair Tree?

Nym. Yes. O that love should last
Longer then reason!

Mir. She PROSERPINA,
Will be with you ere long the noble heart
Has taken such a grief, for her wronged MIRZA,
It cannot last long unbroke, but when she comes,
Let not thy PLUTO see her, lest he falls
In love with her and so turn thee away,
He will PROSERPINA, let him not see her.

Nym. Well then, -- he shall not.


Mir. You talk of women too,
That we shall have in Paradise; when she comes
Let me have her, she was mine own above,
And I Will not change her for all natures store.

Nym. Admired constancy! sleep, and you shall.


M^r. Boy, GANYMED, give me a draught of Lethe
To make me sleep, -- wilt not? -- I Will try without it.

Nym. Alas! what noise is that? -- A noise witho^t.
Look IFFIDA.

If. Madam, here comes my Lord EMANGOLY,
And three or four with him.

Nym. He were welcome,
If's coming now could be without disturbance.

MIRZA, NYMPHADORA, SOFFIE, EMANGOLY, METHICULI, HYDASPUS, ALKAHEM, IFFIDA,
PAGE. HAh! hah! who is that? does. PLUTO come?

Nym. No, no,
Lie still.

Ema. We'd best retire.


Nym. No, join your help
With me to calm his fury.

Ema. O that my self
Had bit my unhappy tongue from th'panting ro^
And spit it in the Tyrants face, which falling
Had (trembling) murmured curses at hs foot,
When I gave counsel to my Lord to obey
His cruel message.

Met. O who ever yet
Saw the returning steps oth'credulous beasts,
That visited the counterfeit sick Lion?

Hyd. And yet, O ABBAS, what fierce ravenous Lion
Did ever Lyb^a's fiery womb produce,
Or what fell Tiger, thy Hyrcania,
Of so prodigious cruelty, as thou art?

Alk. Lions are tame as Lambs, and Tigers mild
As frisking kids, to that outrageous monster.

Ema. There is no perilous desert but his breast,
Where teeth and armed fangs do tear the strong
And treacherous toiles t'insnare the innocent,
Are ever ready set.

Met. O th'cruelty
Of hate, disguised like love!

Ema. And how, O Gods,
Is virtue dear to you, if thus the Serpent
Of Treason, be permitted to turn Dove,
To flatter it, by unsmelt means to ruin!

Mir. I knew on earth a voice like that, -- sure it is
My good EMANGOLY's -- and is he here too?

Ema. Here, my deer Lord; but O that I had been
Under the earth, when my unlucky judgment
Advised you hither.

Sof. O you have spoiled all my Lord.


M^r. Why are we still ith'upper world? I thought
I Would past the ford. -- Cheats! cheats! He starts up. and fantasies!
Quick then, EMANGOLY, go muster all
Our force, and see them paid, I Will march to morrow,
And never make a halt till I have kicked
Bizant^um's self to dust. (10) Let an Iron Cage
Be made to carry with us, for proud MORA^.
I Will try yet if his stomach be as stout
As BAJAZET'S; but line it all with furrs,
To hinder him from the pleasure of a death.

Nym. Would he but cool with sleep his high distemper,
All these wild thoughts would vanish with his frenzy.

Em^. Repose Sir till the Army needs your conduct.


Nym. Yes, my dear Lord, restore thy self again
Unto my care, and make my lap thy pillow.

M^r. I will, my sweet, and never would rise from hence,
Did not dear honor call as loud as thunder,
Such is my love to thee, yet could I not
Love thee so much, loved I not honor more.

Nym. IFFIDA call for music, and a song,
Gentle and soft, as Notes of dying Swanns,
To woo him into slumbers.

Sof. That will charm him.


Mir. The Turks already made thy Prisoner, when
I next return my self to thy soft breast,
His head's a present for thee.

Nym. Hark! my Lord, soft music.
How gentle rest courts thee in her best language.

SONG.
He Is great that masters his own soul,
As he whose nod shakes either Pole.
Not he that Kings in chains can bring,
But that subdues himselfe's a King.
That Is ever in himself at home,
And never lets his Queen Reason roam,
On whom all passions waiting stand,
As handmaids on their Ladies hand.
He ore himself triumphing first,
Dares chance and envy do their worst;
And keeping still his own even height,
Fall Fortune heavy, fall she light,
He Will never make to th'standers by
Too low a moan, or haughty cry;
But wisely can her fawning slight,
And then as bravely scorn her spite.
Who can deny that such a one
Possesses all things, or wants none?
And which oth'two would you wish first
Still to have drink, or never to thirst?
Ema. Excellent morality! O the vast extent
O'th Kingdom of a wiseman! Such a mind
Can sleep secure when th'brine kisses the Moon,
And thank the courteous storm for rocking him.

Sof. Come my good Lord METHICULI, you and I
Will sit, and tell sad stories; pray begin.

Nym. Ah me! what story can thou hear can vie
For sadness with our own? run ore the Roll
Of Tragedies, and write but NYMPHADORA
And MIRZA (for let us nere be parted more)
And that is the sum of all that grief can do.

Met. But my Lord SOFFIE, I Have a plot to free you.


Sof. Speak it, and be my Deity.


Met. And once out,
I can secure you, where not all the force
The Tyrant, or the world can make shall reach you.

Sof. But how shall I get out?


Met. Your sister, Sir,
Has won much on your grandsires best affections,
So that if he love ought that is good, it is hers:
And she comes often here to pay her duty
To her dear Father, (O too much wronged Father!)

Sof. Nay, pray, no circumstance, she comes, what then?


Met. I Would have your grace change clothes with her, and so
You veiled, may easily pass the guards, and come
Where I Will receive you.

Sof. How shall she get out
Again?

Met. Sir, 'twill be quickly known to the Tyrant,
Who loves her so, he will not be long without her,
He Will send for her, and with a chiding pass it.

Sof. But wilt not turn his rage on my dear Mother.
He Will not think this plot only FAT^MA's
And mine, but hers.

Nym. I Would suffer for thy good
All th'Tyrant now can do, the wasp has stung
Me already, and disarmed himself: if rest
Restores the Princes senses, we will advise
With him about it -- How sweet security
He now enjoyes! O pleasant dreams! slide softly
Into him, that he takes no wounds from you.
Present his silent thoughts with purling streams
And hushing winds, such as perfume the morn.
Then mildly as thou seized him gentle Goddess,
Resign him perfect: so what was the gift
Of relenting heaven, we will ascribe to thee.

M^r. Ah! where am I?


If. He wakes.


Nym. Pray heaven to health.
Here my deer Lord, In thy sad spouses lap,
Yet compassed with a ring of t^y best friends.

M^r. That Ring is sorrows Crown, -- and can it be
That any will be friends to wretchedness?
High mounted in the Courts and Armies head,
The Sun had not more Atoms dancing in
His beams, then I had followers in mine.
But even from him eclipsed, all shadows vanish,
And shall mine then continue?

Nym. These are such
As virtue, not your fortune, made your friends,
And will though fortune fails, continue such,
Since your high virtue cannot ever leave you.

Em. If we loved and obeyed you, when you stood
In power, both to do us good and honor,
Which then we never could requite unto you,
We ought to publish now our gratefulness,
When the world sees no hopes induce us to it.

M^r. There gratitude spoke in her Angels voice.


Met. We have lost in you a Prince for to defend us,
A Father to care for us, a Companion
In all our joys, a Friend in all our wants;
And if we owe to your sad memory
The pious duty of our love and honor,
Shall we not pay them to your self yet living?

M^r. Not living, say, but buried alive.


H^d. Treasure ith'mind, is treasure still, though trodden.


Ema. Should we desert you now, 'twould basely prove
We never loved your highness, but your fortune.

Alk. Rather, we never loved his Grace, but Highness.


Ema. Like vermin that suck of the living blood,
But leave the body soon as life.

Alk. The'more Love
We owed you, the more should we show our hate
To the accursed Author of our loss.
Let Us rouse revenge, and arm all her dire hands
With Thunder, to discharge upon the Tyrant.

M^r. Act, act, brave friends, and leave complaints to women;
'Twill be more honorable for my Tomb
To be sprinkled with my murderers blood,
Then with the tears of you my constant friends.

Nym. Now have I time to shed some, Iffida follows her out. but in private.
" They truly mourn, that mourn without a witness.

MIRZA, SOFFIE, EMANGOLY, METHICULI, HYDASPUS, ALKAHEM, PAGE. O Let me not lie
long in this sad durance

Met. This justice to the world, This duty to
Our injured Prince, This honor to our selves,
And terror to our foes, do strongly plead for.

Alk. This will restore our glories lost, and put
A muzzell upon Tyrannies black jaws.

Hyd. How shall we effect it?


Mir. How? and have not you
The Power of the sword, the Soldiery

Ema. Alas! not we, my Lord, we are all casheer'd.
Your highness was no sooner cheated from us,
And decoyed up to Court, to be undone,
But BELTAZAR comes down strong in commission,
To be my Colleague, that is, my superior.
We vexed at our injuries, and loss
Of you, threw up all diligence, and quitted
Counsel or action, when the minion showed
Power to clap a peace up, which was quickly
Done, on conditions fit for slaves, not soldiers;
The Army all disbanded, I called up,
Met with Arrest and banishment from Court.
Thus is their wrong secured by our weakness.

Mir. Shall we then tamely suffer? my blind self
Will grope out Vengeance yet, and in deep makes
^ncize it on the Tyrants own dull head.

Ema. O foolishness of Tyranny! that the King
Should arm his foes, and thirst his own undoing!
He studies evil, and seems lost to all goodness,
But for his love to your sweet FATYMA.

Mi^. And loves he her? can vice then affect virtue?


Ema. Sir, her he does embrace with all the powers
Of a doting soul.

Hyd. Has her still in his eye,
Nor ere seems pleased with ought but what she does.

Alk. He talks of marrying her to the King of Arabs.


M^r. Soft, I Have a better match for her in store.


Ema. We met his Proclamation as we came
Stuffed with invectives against your Grace and us
Your Highness grew too great, we too much loved you,
Therefore the King must fear, yea, and remove you.
(11) My treachery to the English it alledg's
That helped me to take Ormus, when it is known
Themselves first broke conditions, and enjoy
Still Privileges for their service there.
This is (12) the Costermonger ALLY-REG,
For his smooth tongue must the old King go mad
And dote upon his foes, when there is never
A Jewel in's Crown but is enameled
Both with your Highnesses brave blood and mine.

Mir. I that so often displayed his bloody colors
^'th' martial field, and bearded his proud foes,
^ that have so enlarged his Territories,
And stretched his line beyond (13) the Caspian Sea,
^14) Driv^n the Mogul into his Candahor,
To stand and see me wast his other lands.
(15) Made Balsora the Arabians utmost bound,
And (16) bounded the Tartar with the Hyrcanian Ocean.
(17) I that checked CYCALA'S insulting Progress,
Torturing the Georg^ans, our Confederates
With eighty thousand men, I that first chased
His bulkie Army to the A^menian bounds,
Then forced him fight, and gave my self the pleasure
To paddle in the blood of thirty thou^and ^urkes:
I that did still pursue that flying General
Into I^eria, and slaughtered all
The Turkish Garrisons in Testis, Tauris,
Cazbeen and Babylon (17) that year regaining
No less from ACHMAT to ungrateful ABBA^
Then our TAMAS lost to their SOLOMON.
(17) I that since that, beat that stout CYCALA
Often as he could recruit, till the Foe vowed
Never to follow more that lucklesse Chieftain,
Must now be the Martyr of the Insolence
Of slaves, and a besotted Tyrants wrath.

Ema. (18) I that gave Ormus scepter to his hand,
(18) And brought her Captive King to live upon
His slender Pension of five Marks a day.
(19) I that subdued Larrs sandy Kingdom for him,
Mangre her wall of Rock, am now accused
By him for killing her King treacherously,
When he himself angry I gave him quarter
Commanded it: I now must tire out
My life in exile, or, as bad, disgrace.

Met. And (20) I that won the Realm of Larry Jo^
Am taxt with a perfidious Victory,
When I had died, had I returned without it.

Ema. Why mur^ur subjects when his Son escapes no^


Mir. And how could I hope other, when his Natu^^
Thirsts after blood as food! O when so many
Innocent subjects fell, they warned me.
What signified (21) his wrong to the poor Chr^stians,
(22) His murdering of his Ambassador
To the ^^rk as he would kill all cannot work his ends.

Me^. (23) His Treachery to the Magician, set him
On work, then hang him up for conjuring.

^ma. (24) His murder of the sleeping Traveller,
Beca^se his pampered horse but startled at him.

Hyd. (25) His coupling of the soldiers lustful wife
To an Asinego.

Alk. (26) His cutting a Clerks hand off
But for not writing fair. (27) His wrath to the two
Pilfering Soldiers, more for their rags then theft.

Met. But above all, (28) his ore-ambitious murder
Of his brave Father, and far braver Brother.

Mir. His Torture, Poisons, strangling with bowstrings;
(29) Men eating Dogs, and Arts of Tyranny
Proclaim his nature, that it must be glut^ed
With blo^d, and why not ours, since it is best?

M^^. What better promises (30) his irreligion,
In taking needless Journeies still in Lent
TO avoid fasting, under pretense of Travel?

Ema. Our misery is his inconstancy
Like the weather about the Equinoctial,
Now a quiet breath, and gentle gale, and then
A storm so fierce, a ship can feel no helm?
(31) Thus he will forbid and tolerate the same thing
Often in one year, not as his interest,
But as his variable humor swaies him.

Mir. Go my EMANGOLY, take my bank at Ormus,
Rally with it a Troop of your old Soldiers,
And give me liberty: take my SOFFIE
Into your care, and make him safe in private.

Sof. Sir, here is a way propounded for my freedom,
To change clothes with my Sister FATYMA,
And go like her out hence.

M^r. Let it be done.
Be ready to receive him, and be to him
As much a Father as thou 'hast friend to me.

Ema. So Heaven be mine, as I his faithful friend.


M^r. It Is no small benefit that this rough fortune
Discovers yet my friends, severs the doubtful
From the assured, for Prosperity
At her departure took away with her
Those that were here is, and left me still mine own.
O at how vast a rate would I have bought
This fair discovery before my fall!
And when I thought my self most fortunate!
If Heaven again will my lost state restore
And wealth, i will use them better then before!
If not, my soul not at the loss repines,
Having found friends, a greater wealth th^n Mines.

VASCO, CLOE. LAdy, but that no fault or disrespect
In me to your sweet Beauties merit it,
I should afflict my self to see your Countenance
Estranged thus to your best servant.
Clo. Sir,
I know no fault, nor is my countenance changed
But with my state, due gravitie increased,

Vas. As how, dear Lady, since I left the Court
Is our state changed? I hope the cloud upon
My Lord shall not obscure me?

Clo. No, but you
Think then I am the same you left me?

Vas. Yes
Lady, I see no change, your lip, your eye
Has the same luster, the same tincture on it.
If there be any change, it is for the better.

Clo. Better, I know that marry; yes my hopes,
Nay certainties, are higher then before.
And shall my thoughts then bear no correspondence?
Is it no more to be chief Maid of Honor
To the Empress of Persia, then woman to
My Lady FLORADELLA?

Vas. (Sure she is mad!)
Empress! we have none.

Clo. But we shall have soon.
Follow me in, and I Will unriddle to you.
Since we are one, the secret is safe still,
And were the fortune mine, it should be yours.

Vas. Love and amazement! what will this produce?


ABBAS, FATTYMA, FARRABAN. It Is granted, pretty heart, they all shall have
Their just desires, and I truly wish
I could as safely give them liberty
As necessaries in their just restraint.
FARRABAN, see your royal Prisoners have
What they desire, fit for their condition.
Wait my fair granchild to them.
Fat. Sir, my thanks.
Come FARRABAN

Far. Madam, your humble Servant.


ABBAS. O Strength of virtue! how do thou shine forth
In this sweet Innocent! how dutiful,
How careful, how solicitous is she
For her Parents! and shall not nature then
As well descend, as ascend? am not I
As well his father, as she his daughter? but
Here Is she will turn these thoughts another way.
FLORADELLA. to him INtrude not I upon your privacies?

Abb. No, my best love, for what is more important
Then thy embrace? and what affair shall not
Vanish at thy approach, as mists at days?
But I see business in thy face; come speak it.

Flo. Though hither chiefly, love and duty brought me,
Which puts me strongly forward to your pleasure,
I have indeed somewhat to ask your Grace,
It Is for your servant MAHOMET, his last service --
Has rendered him most odious and envied.
The factious threaten in private, and in public
Beard him to's face.

Abb. There Is lightning in his eyes
Shall blast all his maligners.

Flo. They are great,
Strong, and increast much by th'cast Officers,
Most now in Town, all of the Princes faction,
So that without a guard he cannot with safety
Attend your person, or follow your affairs
Which ask his public presence: and you know
How much your service needs him.

Abb. He shall have part of our guards assigned him.


Flo. (Those cannot we aside.
Trust) that your state permits not -- see himself.

ABBAS, MAHOMET-ALLYBEG, FLORADELLA. COme MAHOMET, what need had thou t'employ
Any tongue but thine own in thy just suit?
Thou may do more with me, my MAHOMET, raise
For thy security, what guards thou please.
Mah. I willingly could have spared this needless state,
Could I securely attend your service:
But though armed with my innocence, I fear not
JOVES Thunderbolts yet, "Wise prevention
"Is the first point of wisdom in a Peer.
Sir, here is a commission, please you hear
It read, and sign it?

Abb. Give me it, MAHOMET,
We Will sign it without reading, we dare trust thee,
Farther then this.

Flo. Your Highness may.


Abb. We know it.


Flo. Dear, thou know when to They whisper. meet at Madam OMAY's.
The consultation's there, you had the watchword?

M^h. I know the time, and will not loiter, dearest.
Since it is for thee I work.

Flo. And I for thee.


Abb. A Masque attends me, thou shall sweet partake it:
Thou MAHOMET have something else to do.

MAHOMET-ALLYBEG. YEs, I have that to do, shall undo you,
I err, it is done not Heaven can hinder it.
But should the whole Machine oth' design crack, which
Would more amaze the world then brutish thunder,
The pleasure I have given my self to see
To what a height I Have wound this strumpets soul,
Would almost pay my pains: How sure she makes
Her self, of what I never mean her fortune!
Then when I rise fresh in my summer glory,
And throw her off, like a course robe I wore,
Only to shield me from my colder winter.
Who will not say, I cunnings Master am,
That can deceive, and that in their own game,
Greatest deceivers when they me shall know
Out-cheat a woman, and a strumpet too.
VASCO. AM I awake! or do I live! what torrent
Of evils have over spread thee Persia?
Is justice cripled? and the furies all
Let loose to act their Gambols in the world?
Dire secret of the direst Treason! how
It swells within me till I be delivered
Of it at my Lords ear! He happily
May stop its course: then was my love well placed
To sift out this; and though I die this night,
I Have lived to be most happy, and the ages
To come shall pay thanks to my memory.
MIRZA. ^n his Couch alone. BLinded! imprisoned! pining here for want
Of what each debaucht Ruffian spends in riot!
And by command of my own Tyrant Father!
A proper Patrimony! If the Turk
Had used me thus, my fall had been with honor,
And heart held up with hope, whilst I had had
A Father to command Reveng^, and friends
To act it home: But when those friends are thus
Fettered, disgraced, and torn from my assistance,
And nature too turned backward in my Father,
What have I left me, but to curse my stars?
Stars! ignes fatu! glittering Meteors!
That made a show of greatness, and in snuff
Now loose their glimmering false light, and stink!
Unnatural Monster! have I left so often
For thee, and for thy safety, the embrace
Of my fair Princely spouse? abandoned
My self to all the sufferings and hazzards
Of bitter and long war, to have this Triumph?
O that I could relieve my soul with vengeance!
In my last sleep I saw the wandering Ghosts
Of my great Uncle, and wronged Grandfather
Squallid and pale, attended with an Army
Of murdered spirits, all my Fathers crimes,
Calling loud to me for revenge, revenge,
Both for the love I bear them, and my self.
I'^h' head of these gnashing her teeth with ire
Came frowning NEMESIS, offering a whip
Of folded snakes to my impartial hand.
My soul's now like a boistrous working Sea
Swelling in billows for disdain of wrongs,
And tumbling to and fro from Bay to Bay,
Nothing can calm it but full wrought Revenge.
Stern Goddess! I adore, and give my self
To thy dispose. O point me but a way
To work thy ends and mine! My arm is short
And shackled thus with Irons, I cannot reach
The Tyrants heart, how shall I serve thee then?
When strait she calls to me with bended brows,
Reach him in's Favorites:'las! ALLYBEG
Is strong in the Courts and Tyrants affections,
But he has Marble walls, and Iron bars
T'ween him, and me. But FATYMA comes to thee,
She sai^s: and she is the Idol of his soul,
Rob him of her. Shall I through my own sides
Wound him? and to deprive him of a Grandchild,
Tear from my self a daughter, no less dear
And dutiful to me, then she is to him?
But I am great with child of indignation
And cannot be delivered but by vengeance,
And no revenge but this is in my reach.
I shall but send her to the pleasant Groves,
Give her at once Heaven and the Tyrant Hell,
Hell in his thoughts, Hell in his Conscience,
And that same Hell of his is Heaven to me.
It is decreed: She dies to make him do so.
O sweet revenge! how I thirst now for blood,
And burn more then I lately did for drink,
In my wild fever hottest fit? -- who waits there?
SOFFIE, MIRZA, NYMPHADORA, IFFIDA. Called you my Lord?

Mir. Yes child, is FATYMA come.


Sof. Not yet Sir,


Mir. SOFFIE, art thou prepared
For freedom when she comes.

Sof. Sir, as you please.


Mir. yes, thou shall go to Liberty, though I
Repent thy absence. -- O, my great resolve! in secret.
If I must fall, I Will pull down Persia with me,
And have no lesser Monument then an Empire.

Nym. And when the art free, and in EMANGOLY'S care
Think oth' restraint thy Parents here endure,
And seek with all discreet care to redress it.

Sof. I shall not rest till then.


If. Here Is FATYMA.


MIRZA, NYMPHADORA, SOFFIE, FATIMA, IFFIDA. COme child.

Fa^. Fate is not yet all cruelty.


Nym. What Is this I see child in thy face of mirth?


Fat. Madam, I have got License of the King
For all you can desire but Liberty.

Mir. And without that what can we here desire
Worth satisfying? -- Come hither FATYMA,
Stand here between my knees. -- (Sweet in secret. innocent!
Ah! that I could but now forget all Father,
Or else be like mine own, and leave all goodness!)
Sweet child, art thou contented to stay here,
And let thy Brother'scape in thy attire?

Fat. Most willing Sir.


Nym. Thy Grandsire will not let
Thee lie here long in misery like us.

Fat. Would I might still stay here to wait on you,
I Would rather so. -- My Lord METHICULI
Is at the Castle gate waiting for some body.

Sof. That is for me.


Fat. Come Brother let us change clothes.


Mir. Stay FATYMA, suppose thy Grandfather,
Why say I so? thy Fathers Murderer,
Should now grow angry with thee for this change,
How will thou bear his wrath? child, can thou die?

Fat. Yes Sir, if you will have me; to die and sleep
They say is one and after Death we wake
In a fresh Paradise where joys abound.

Mir. All joys are there, there once, for all the world
Thou would not be a minute here again.

Fat. But Sir, shall I not want your Presence there?
And my dear Mothers? and my Princely Brothers?
I love you better then all joys beside.

M^r. Pretty ignorance! thou go but before,
We soon will follow thee. In the mean time,
There shall thou meet thy Uncle and great Grandsire,
They will make much of thee, and show thee all
The glories there, the green and fragrant fields,
Ripe fruits that never decay. Soft melting songs
And Carolls of the Golden-feather'd birds
Shall lull thee asleep: then shall thou wake again
To see the Nymphs and Virgins dance about
The silver Rivers, they shall take thee in,
And make thee Mistress of their sprightly Revells.

Fat. Would I were there, if you would follow, but
I Will not be there without your company.

Mir. I Will follow thee sweet heart, when I have got
Revenge enough upon the doting Tyrant:
Mean while -- ( ONEMESIS^ see! I obey thee! in secret.
Act thou my shaking hands, and be my Goddess.)
Go thou before me, and prepare my way. --

If. O Heavens!


Sof. O Gods! what fury's this! He takes Fatyma by the neck, breaks it, and
swings her about. The Princess Soffie and Iffida in vain hang about him to
save the child.


Nym. My Lord, my Lord, it is
FATYMA you kill.

Mir. I therefore kill her because FATYMA.
She could not die more innocent, nor I
Get better vengeance on the Tyrants head
Lie thee there till another comes. --

Fat. O -- O -- He throws her down. She dies.


Nym. Ah me! sweet babe! is all the world turned Monster?


Sof. Ah! my dear Sister!


Mir. SOFFIE, come hither,
No? --

Nym. Fly dear SOFFIE.


If. Fly, fly, my Lord


Mir. Come hithe^ or be wretched. The Princess and Iffida fall a cl^fing of
Fatyma, till se^ing the Prince groap after Soffie too, they rise, and hold him,
till Soffie escape.


Nym. O my Lord,
Why will you wrong your virtue thus to murder
These pieces of your self?

Mir. Because the Tyrant
Loves them and loved he me I Would kill my self too,
But since he does not, I will live to spigh^ him.
The'world too little to satiate my revenge.

Sof. Page! Guard open, open, O open the doors and save me,


FARRABAN, PAGE. Guard. To them. RUn down, sir, run that way. -- Ho^ror and
Furies! To Soffie.

Mir. Take you all. -- dogs! where is SOFFIE?


Far. Escaped
From your wild rage,

Mir. My curse shall overtake him.


Far. We'd best bind him.


Page Hold gently, gently, sir.


Nym. Ah! the sweet soul is fled, fled, She chafes Fatyma again. never, never,
O never to return.

If. Ah. sweetest Mistress!


Mir. Then carry her to my Father as my Present,
'Twil make my peace with him, he will love me now
For doing this Act, it is so like his own.

Far. 'Twill make all good men --


Page Pray sir speak not to him.


Mir. Look down, look down great Uncles Ghost, and see
Where ABBAS Jewel lies! (32) the sight will give thee
A riper joy then thou did feel, when thy
Dread hand struck off CARAEMIT's proud head.
It Is I that must revenge my self and you.
Come Page, attend me to my Dungeon,
There will I boast my parcel Vengeance,
And study more, and ruin the whole Creation
But I will make the Tyrant hang himself.

Far. Good Heavens! how rage Bears men out of themselves.


Nym. Bring in the precious body IFFIDA,
I cannot yet bewail her fate nor mine,
Too great for words is my vast misery:
" Small Griefs make men lament, Great stupify.

SOFFIE, METHICULI. O My good good Lord! the saddest accident!
My Father has killed with his own hands my Sister,
The Castle is all in an uproar at it,
In which I escaped, else he had killed me too.
Met. Thank Heaven you have so- come my Lord, this is
No place for talk, quick, let us have away.

Sof. Fast as you please my honored Lord, and whither


EMANGOLY, VASCO. He muffles Soffi in his Cloak, and carries him away WHat
horrors seize me! that the world should thus
Be all abandoned to the furies envy!
Sure this is but to cheat us!
Vas. No my Lord,
Though CLOE told it with such confidence,
The horror was not able to persuade me,
Till first I ran to OMAY'S Garden House;
There the Conspirators are all to meet,
The house preparing and the entertainment.

Ema. Dire discoveries! VASCO, this you will swear,
And with your blood maintain?

Vas. I will sir.


Ema. Come then,
Though banished, I Will venture to the King,
And break his hasty order for his good.
How happy art thou to discover this?
Thou shall be Persia's Genius, she shall pay
Devotions to thee: and how blessed am I
To be an instrument to save my Country!
O Heaven! how bounteous art thou to mankind!
When we rush on to ruin, mad, and blind,
Thou cast's a bit upon our furious have,
To curb us for our good, and from our wast
Preserve us against our wills! Whence is it, whence
That the world stands but from thy providence,
Truth-loving JOVE? Thou will not suffer wrong,
However great, to go unpunisht long;
Or although long to us, and to sense past
All hope, yet full-paid vengeance comes at last.
" Thy certain Justice ever ready stands,
" And though she 'has leaden feet, she 'has Iron hands.

CHORUS. A Passion stronger then the rest
No more call love,
Since dire revenge in a wronged breast
More strong does prove.
She breaks all bands for her desire,
Blood is her food,
She treads down all things in her ire,
Though just or good.
Ore love it self she triumphed has,
Often having forced
Fierce hands in the dear blood to bath
Which they loved most.
The fierce Odrysian Queen to take
Revenge upon
Her husband, for her sisters sake,
Butchered her son.
As to the wood a Tygresse wild
A Fawn does trail:
She dragged to a close room the child.
Where naught avail
His tears, his banishments, or both
To calm her blood,
Revenge stood by gnashing her teeth,
Expecting food.
O rage of women! though the boy
TO her bosom clung,
She him (nor turned her face away)
Stabbed as he hung.
He kis't, she stabbed O dire reward
His kisses got!
The pavements blushed with blood besmeared
Though she did not.
This proves not she her sister prized
Before her Boy,
But that all are by rage despised
For cruel joy.
And that revenge might ore men too
Her Triumphs see,
We have a Father late did do
As much as she.
A Father, by his held in thrall,
His daughter killed
'Cause her the Grandsire above all
Things precious held.
Since his revenge could reach no more
O rages sway!
The Jewel of this soul he tore
From him away:
Careless, so him, himself to strike,
Hope flattered so,
What that to PROGNE's, this the like
TO his Sire would do.
Go innocent Princess, Martyr go
Of Rage and Fate,
And in thy checkered Grove below,
Embrace thy Mate.
ITYS and FATYMA there shall cling
Into a pair,
Him sweetest birds shall ever sing,
And MUSES her.
Impute not thou the crime, O JOVE,
And breach of Laws
To the Actor, but to them that gave
The cruel cause.
Act. V.
FATYMA's Funeral passes over the Stage; Six Virgins ^earers. ABBAS, MAHOMET
ALLY-BEG, BELTAZAR, FLORADELLA, OLYMPA, EARINA, etc. Chief Mourners. A Funeral
ELEGY, sung to the Harp. GRief and Horror seize on all,
From the Suns rise to his fall.
But in in sighs no breath be spent,
No voice heard but to lament,
In each face the cause is read,
FATYMA and Beauty's dead.
SOL, disturb not sorrows night
She gone, none deserves thy light.
And there is none now whose eye may
Bright as hers did, gild thy Ray.
Birds, that did your songs forbear,
Hers with more delight to hear,
And did still expecting stand
Notes from her voice, meat her hand,
You again may sing alone,
You Will be heard now she is gone.
To her name your voices set,
And never sing a note but that.
Flower^, droop your leaves and wither,
You no more her hand shall gather.
Wither, wither, for there is none
Worth a Garland, she being gone.
Water Nymphs, that in a maze
Often have stopped your sports to gaze
At her sitting on your banks,
Or else tripping ore their cranks,
In a Dance, with odorous feet,
And a grace as VENUS sweet,
Weep her loss: weep, more you will never
See your selves outdone by her.
Weep till you thaw: melting, mourn,
Till into your streams you turn.
Winds, let sighs henceforth consume ye,
Her breath shall no more perfume ye.
Be astonished thou O Earth,
Thou have lost thy fairest birth.
See! see! all the charm obey!
Into night is shrunk the day.
The Sun mourns, or, to judge right
He wants her to give him light.
Birds have learnt her name, and now
Hark! they sing't on every bough.
Of the flowers some decay,
Others wither quite away,
Or if any beauty have
Still, they keep it for her grave.
Grief has turned the Primrose pale,
Lillies droop, and all bewail:
Down the Violet hangs her head,
All the Roses tears have shed;
Cups full have each Daffadil:
Down along the cheeks they trill
Of the rest, and trembling there
Hang, true Pearls for sorrows wear.
Fountains weep, winds sigh her fall:
Earth is stupefied withal.
Only Gods from grief refrain,
Since earths loss is Heavens gain.
For since she arrived at Heaven,
Now the Graces number's even.
Abb. No more let bold Philosophers deny
That Virtues are from Nature since here ^ies
An heap of Beauties, with more graces born
Then Education or Art ere gave
The longest liver. Once a divine soul
^nform'd that curious Body, and so acted
^t to all good, that Heaven envied Earth
The enjoyment of it, therefore took it home
As bright as when she lent it the fair model,
And now it shines the brightest star she has.
But why, so soon, good Heaven, have dispossessed
Earth of her glory? Is It because you mean
To call the Chaos back again, and she
The soul oth' world must first be taken away?
Day must depart before soul night can come?
Or failed your Power? could you not make the summer
And Autumn of her Age as glorious
As her sweet Spring, and so destroyed it quite?
Or doubted you she would engrosse all hearts,
All loves? and make us think there was no Heaven,
No Paradise but her, and her sweet favor,
So, jealous of your Honor, took her hence?
No, but now that her viper Father had
Given up his name to mischief and Rebellion,
That all that is good of him might fall, she must:
And fall his crime: but O that crime alone
Had he no more, should sink his monstrous head
Below the deepest Hell, I punish him
Not now for crimes committed against me,
But against himself* these I could have forgiven,
And Nature almost now had won me to it,
But this dire murder of my joy and comfort,
Has chas't away all pity from my thoughts,
And armed my heart and hand with torments for him.
Who will not crush the worm that eats his Rose?
Go FARRABAN, lade the inhumane Monster
With pondrou^ chains as heavy as his guilt:
Remove all comforts from him: pine his carcass,
Till his own flesh be his abhorred food,
He may as well devour that as this
Tell him we will study Torments for him, Torments
Witty and requisite, as he wishes us.
Deliver the message to him in words, fit
For a just anger* great as ours is
'Twill be some comfort to this innocents soul
To see her murderers blood poured upon
Her divine ashes: Pardon, glorious Ghost,
(For now devotion's due to thy bright luster)
That we mix with thy sacred dust a blood
So tainted: yet it is but thy sacrifice. --
You FARRABAN, see SOFFIE be regained
Again, you would best: I wonder at your neglect
Of care to guard so great Prisoner.

Far. My Liege, In The aproar when the guards were all
Employed to stop the Princes frantic rage,
He made escape.

Abb. Well, see he be sought out.
Lead on, and enrich Earth with Heavens envy.

MIRZA, PAGE. GReat NEMESIS! now have I sacrificed
To thee the best of Creatures Persia had;
If the old Tyrant feels but the wound,
I have mine ends, and thou a feast of blood.
Page But sir, I fear the blow you gave through her
Will fall most heavy on your self: and make
Him more incensed.

Mir So he but feels a grief,
I Will triumph in my pains, and scorn his worst.

MIRZA, PAGE, FARRABAN. Who Is that?

Page It Is FARRABAN, in his looks
I see Revenge and Torments threatened.

Mir. Tut!


Far. Sir, the King-


Mir. Peac^, thou most impudent tongue,
Call him not King, but dotard Tyrant, Serpent,
Go on.

Far. Commands me to deliver's wrath
To you in thunder: Pardon the messenger,
He threats you with Strapadoes, Famine, Tortures
Cunning and cruel, for your dire deed.

M^r. I thank his Tyrantship; return thou him
From me many curses: but how took he
His minions death?

Far. As he would do the sight
Of his own Executioner, heavily.
His lifeblood seemed to stream from's aged eyes,
Horror to seize his Limbs, and grief his soul.
He tore his silver hair, beat's reverend breast,
Threw himself prostrate on the loved body,
And cursed his stars: the killing news is like
To do as much for him, as for the old
PANDION the like act of PROGNE's did.
He slights his meat, seems wholly given over
To sorrow and revenge.

Mir. Io, Io, PAEAN!
Sing victory, sing victory, my soul,
I Am Conqueror: I Have vanquished the stern Tyrant
In a great deed, 'bove the horror of his own.
Now I can make him grieve, I Will make him bleed,
Bleed next, dog Jailer, bleed his damned soul
To air, which will turn to Pestilence,
And poison, and infect the cursed world.
He has but yet a taste of what i will do.

Far. Sir, sir, we will keep you from all further outrage.


Page Be civil, villain, to your Royal Master.


Far. He must excuse me, I Am but an Officer.


M^r. O'th Devils. -- Traitor, do thy drudgery.


Far. He has commanded me to load your limbs
With weighty gyves, and famish your stout stomach.

Page The Devil has.


Mir. His gyves are ornaments,
To me: and Famine, that I fear not slave,
I Will feed on my revenge. Come bring thy fetters,
I will adore them as a lover does
His Ladies favors.

Page Sir, Exasperate
Not Tyranny.

Mir. Sweet youth, be patient,
I Will teach thee courage. Hangman come, your chains,
I Will follow you by your sent, Beare-ward, to have them.

EMANGOLY, HYDASPUS, VASCO, HOrror! that the brave Prince should ever do
So cruel a deed! but what cannot sense of wrongs
And thirst of revenge force a great mind to!
Yet shall this stop our grand design no longer.
Now for the King. HIDASPUS, you say SOFFIE
Is at METHI^VLI's Farm, without the Town? --
What is it you study of?
Hyd. My Lord? -- yes, yes,
He is. -- My Lord, I was even stricken dumb
With the discoveries you have made.

Ema. O great, and
Horrid they are: by this the hellish Counsel
Is upon meeting; sure their hour's near?

Vas. It Is come my Lord.


Ema. Come then HYDASPUS you will
Accompany me to the King.

Hyd. You know, my Lord,
We are forbidden.

Ema. What th^n? for his good,
And to save Persia, what is our lives hazard?

Hyd. They cannot be better spent, i will wait your Grace.


Ema. But not a word where SOFFIE is as yet.


ABBAS, PAGE. FATYMA murdered! all my joys are fled!
Fled in a moment! Pageant of Earths greatness!
I that was erst adored, great in an Army,
Strong in a valiant Son, and happy in
The fair hopes of two brave Grandchildren,
Am now forlorn in all: my Army broken,
A base peace made for which all brave men loath me,
One of my Grandchildren, hope of my Crown,
Fled, but O whither? that is unknown to me.
The other dead, dead, and worse, murdered
By her own Father, ah unnatural Father!
But yet not more unnatural then my self,
Used I not him so? and should he not be
As dear to me as she to him? I did,
I did, O mischief of credulity!
And causeless jealousy! would all my fears
Had happened, so I were guiltless still.
It then had been his fault, not mine. O heart!
Page May't please you, sir, my Lords, EMANGOLY
And HYDASPUS do strongly plead without
For Audience of your Majesty, shall they enter?

Abb. Have I not banished them my Presence? well,
They die for breach of the command, if they
Prove not their innocence: Let them enter, i will
Have now an ear for both parts; I will never
Punish more on bare hearsay, -- Guard, attend us.

ABBAS, EMANGOLY, HYDASPUS, GVARD. HOw dare you thus intrude into my presence?
Must I forbid you, and my strict commands
Be slighted thus? you rush upon your ruin.
Ema. Sir, were we conscious to our selves of any
The least neglect unto your-just commands,
We'd fly your sight as does the Owl the Suns,
And seek out corners for our Treasons safety,
But when we dare defy black Calumny,
We know not why we should not venture to you
To warn you of your safety, now at stake.

Abb. At stake! as how?


Hyd. If there be any fault
In us, examine it in fitter time,
And spare it not, but study punnishments
New and exemplary to plague us with,
At least, at present, mind to save your Crown,
Your Realms, your life, and all your Progeny.

Abb. What Pageant's this!


Ema: No Pagean^, Sir in short.
You are betrayed, and MAHOMET's the Traitor.

Abb. What envy dares traduce him? then my heart's
False to my head.

Ema. Sir, if I prove it not,
Dissect me into Atoms, torture me,
And fix eternal infamy on my name.

Abb. Produce your proofs.


Ema. Your Highness lately stood
A Bulwark to your friends, a terror to
Your Enemies, you had a Royal Army
Commanded by a noble Son, and though
I say it, a faithful General, and Officers
Trusty as truth it self, while these stood firm
In your esteem, as they deserved well,
(For what have your brave Son, and my poor self
Not done, that men could do, for your just honor?
You do not hold one Scepter in your hand,
But such as we have put there, or else kept
From being torn away:) whilst these I say
Had power with you, not your proudest foes
Or Treason had a tongue or hand to hurt you;
But we must fall, that they may rise, upon
Yours, and our ruins, and your credulity
Has given them way: pardon the plainness, sir.

Ab^. Go on, go on.


Ema. Sir, it was your misfortune
To Advance the impudent pleasant ALLYBEG
To such a dangerous height as made him giddy,
And mad with pride: he is the very person
That having got your ear, wrought all our ruins,
Intending yours: which thus he acts; first having
Obtained the Princes fall, disbanded the Army;
He has consulted with the mal^-contents
To Advance himself: has raised a bank of money,
And now is levying of a Guard --

Abb. That Guard
On second thoughts I feared.

Hyd. As well you might.


Abb. Well, who are of his party?


Ema. His pretense
Is specious (as all Traitors must be) so
He has allured some innocent Persons to him
(For such we yet are willing to believe them)
As ELCHEF, who yet owes you a Grudge,
And so's the fitter for his purpose; he
Engaged MATZED, MOZENDRA, and BENEFIAN,
MATZED is levying in Hyrcan^a,
But privately, as the rest here in Town.
These credit his pretense, which only is
To rescue the Prince, and be made Guardian
To SOFFIE, when he indeed intends
To murder you, the Prince, and SOFFIE --

Abb. What Is this, you say? --


Ema. Nay, good sir, hear me out.
He means himself our King too and his Queen
FLORADELLA, (she at least believes so)
For she was useful for him to gain you
To this advancement, and the Princes fall,
And rich to help his bank, and has engaged
OLYMPA, EARINA, and Madam OMAY,
All these we know, besides who else as yet
We Have not discovered. But his confidents
Are FARRABAN and the smooth tongued SELEVCUS
He at this present gathers force in Shiras
The other holds the Castle at his pleasure.

Abb. If this be so, themselves conveyed away
Young SOFFIE, I pray JOVE not to Heaven.

Hyd. That, time will prove, we speak but what we know.

Abb. How came you by the knowledge of thus much?


Ema. My Lord, my Servant VASCO has made love
Long time to CLOE, FLORADELLA'S woman,
And she has heard him not unwillingly:
It first came out by her, who boasted it
To him, as an addition to her fortune.

Abb. This makes me doubt the rest: sure ALLYBEG
Has more brain then to trust such high designs
To whores and waiting women; Sives, that let
All things run through them, be they never so precious.

Ema. Sir, she is the closet of her Ladies secrets,
It Is like she had this knowledge from her chiefly.

Abl. By some especial providence: O Gods!
How have we sinned! that you upbraid us thus
TO indebt us for our safeties to such low
Vile things! as if the basest instrument
Were good enough to save so corrupt a state!
But Rome thrice owed her life to as vile trash,
Once to a common Harlot, twice to Geese.
Wise Heaven can make good work with any tool.
But this me thinks requires pregnant proof,
Ere it gains my belief, as now my horror.

Ema. First, we attest it sir, next, your own eyes
And ears may be your certain witnesses.
Fail you they cannot: clap a Guard on us,
Send but another Guard to OMAY'S House,
There may you apprehend most of the Traitors,
There at this instant hold they their black counsel.

Abb. No lie can be avouch't with thus much forehead.
EMANGOLY, thou have deserved much of me,
And you HYDASPVS; first we cry you mercy,
For our too much rigor to you both,
We Will study an amends, if this be true,
If not, you both die without further process.

Ema. Sir, be it so.


Hyd. Yes, so my Liege we'd have it.

Abb. Come then, our self will go to OMAY'S house,
It Is worth our pains, you shall attend me thither.

Ema. Your Majesty still meets our wishes nearer.


Abb. Is BELTAZAR engaged?


Ema. No surely sir,
We believe him too honest, and a spirit
Too great to truckle to base ALLYBEG,
Though he had the misfortune to be used
In The Princes ruin, we might see regret,
And an unwillingnesse in him to th'action.

Abb. He did indeed, I think obey for fear;
Nor did he more then what our own commands
Did urge, so we have no ground for wrath to him;
Him then we will keep in favor still, and call
To Attend us to unkennell the base Fox.
First send for FARRABAN, and make him sure,
Then plant a Guard upon the Cittadell.

Ema. It will be best sir.


Abb. Guard attend us here.


FLORADELLA, OLYMPA, EARINA, OMAY, CLOE. WOmen are still most forward in great
actions,
I wonder yet none of the Lords are come.
Oly. All in Good time Madam -- it is a close day,
Me thinks it'bodes not well, I like it not.

Flo. The day is as it should be, close and dark,
And fittest for our Plot that must be secret.

Ear. The Sun perhaps mourns for poor FATYMA.


Oly. O that sad accident takes up my mind,
I Am almost statue still.

Oma. 'Twas sad and cruel.


Flo. Ladies, you see it is more then time we help
Poor Persia from ruining her self,
To which she hasts amain. --

Clo. Madam, my Lords.


MAHOMET-ALLY-BEG, ELCHEE, MOZENDRA, BENEFIAN, FLORADELLA, OLYMPA, EARINA,
OMAY, CLOE. SAve you Ladies.

Elc. Hail beauties all a^row.


Flo. Hail Persia's Genius.


Oly. Hail my honored Lord.


Mah. Are we all here?


Moz. I see not FARRABAN.


Elc. FARRABAN wanting!


Mah. What makes him so slow!


Flo. Slow, you are all Snails to us, you must confess
The Ladies still most active: we will not lose
Our shares of glory.

Elc. FARRABAN not here!
I like it not.

Flo. My Lord, he is gained already.


Ear. So we are all I hope.


Flo. I Will engage for him,
What you here order him, he shall be ready
Upon first intimation to perform.
He may be busy searching SOFFIE up,
You heard the Kings threats if he were not found.

Mah. Would he were found.


Flo. Let not that trouble you.
(1) If we cannot recover him, give out
He is baptized, and so incapable;
It Is no new way, in India, ASSAPH did it,
And well it took. -- My Lord, you are not cheerful.

Elc. MAHOMET'S troubled.


Oly. It Is for PARRABAN. To Olym.


Ben. What! does my Lord Court her, To Mo^ to be her Guardian?
Now had I rather talk of Love and Court-ship
To EARINA then these state-affaires.
How well she looks!

Moz. Fie, Flesh-flie, hold your peace. Secret


Flo. My Lord, I hope you flag not? To Ma^^ will you sail
Bravely three quarters of your course, out-ride
Many a storm, break thousand raging waves,
And then sink in the Haven?

Mah. My soul is dull,
And dreads some treachery; never till now
Knew I what 'twas to fear.

Flo. Come, sacrifice
To confidence, she will carry you through all;
I Will promise largely when we come to th'Loane,
More then you must expect to bring them on.

Ear. But sure we came not here to whisper, sirs.


Oma. No, I did think our business had been public.


Mah. Rouse my dull soul -- Public indeed it is,
And private too it must be, the Consult
Private, the benefit most public shall be --

Flo. Now he is himself again. Death! aside. dead ith'nest!

Mah. And reach to all: old men shall owe that short
Portion of life by natures course they hold,
And reverend Matrons their white age, to us:
Those shall thank us, they see their manly Sons,
Spend in soft exercise their peaceful time,
And that themselves sit in their chimny-corners,
Telling the loved stories of their youth,
And feel not at their withered throats the swords
Of foes, to force them to detect their wealth;
And these, that they enjoy their blooming daughters
Unravished, and see their Grandchildren
Come skipping on their aged knees, and not
Sprawling upon the Enemies hostile Spears.
The Nurse shall owe to us, that her dear child
Does suck her milk still, and not she its blood,
So to sustain a while her famished soul.
The Gods shall be indebted unto us,
That still their Temples stand, and do not crack
In sacrilegious flames; the Genius
Of every City, that he is not forced
To leave his walk, or wander '^out the ruins:
The dead that fury ransack not their Urnes,
And puff their ashes in the face of light:
Th'unborn, that we procured them time to ripen,
And that they fell not, blasted ere they blowed.
The benefit shall to the meanest Swain
Extend, that toyls in the Parmenian fields,
And farthest parts the Persian name does reach,
To us his morning, and his evening thanks,
Shall he ere pay, for that his wretched eyes
See not the battering hoofs of wastf^ll Troops
Trample his hopeful Corn, and springing grass,
For that the sheafes ar'nt from his reaping hand
Torn by the Foe, nor his full Barns blaze high
With dreadful flames, nor stalled Cattle low
Under the plundering Soldiers hungry blade;
For that the hated noise of bellowing Drums,
Fright him not from his Plough with fear of pressing.

Ber. He shepheardesses thanks might promise too,
For having time to sing still, and make To Moz. in secret. Chaplets.

Moz. Those thanks shall you reap.


Ben. Those I chiefly covet,
I soon can tell them how they may requite me.

Mah. This general good must unto all accrue,
By our incountring of that violent torrent
Of ruin, that flows strongly toward all,
And will ore-whelm us, if not stopped in time.
Is not our aged King (alas!) given up
To dotage, and unneedful jealousy?
Has he not cast down his chief prop, the Prince?
Disbanded his strong Armies? so the Empire
Lies open to her Foes, like as a Vineyard
To the wild beasts, its fence being trodden down. --

Elc. Princes were given to defend their subjects,
If he will quit the Protection of us,
Yet must not we quit our own safeties.

Mah. True,
Does not the royal stock decay apace?
One of the best and fairest branches of it,
Is torn away to death --

Oly. O that the Tyrants
Self had excused her! --

Mah. An act so horrid,
The Sun never shined out since, but hid for shame
His face with clouds; the other forced to hide,
Perhaps in some foul shed, poor and forlorn,
His innocent head, from his hard Grandfather,
And injured Sire, and yet he is our hope.
Pines not the Prince, whose fight no foe could 'bide,
Without his fight, in a condition
Beneath the merit of the greatest foe?
Melts not the sweetest Princess in the world,
In her own tears? she, worth a brighter fortune
Then Earth can give her, yet abides the worst. --

Ear So much the worse, as fallen from best.


Mah. You Ladies should resent this most of all. --


Oma. Who does not, has no sense.


Ear. No soul.


Flo. No honor.


Mah. Yet the old King's so fast in his dead sleep,
So lost in his strong Lethargy, he feels,
Nor sees, at least regards, nothing of this.
Is It then not time to 'wake him, and to stop
The gulf of ruin that thus opes and gapes
To swallow us all in its hollow entrails? --
I see it in your faces, you all think
It more then time; nor let the cure seem harsh:
No less then fire, cauterizing, searing,
Can salve this sore; it is Arms I mean must do it;
We must cast Rampants against so strong a tide,
Nor think it at all unjust; "That War is just
" That Is necessary, and those arms religious,
" When there is no hope left otherwise but in them.
The Prince restored, the King once shown his error,
SOFFIE returned to safety, how will all
Applaud the Actors! what is there you wish,
But will flow in unto you with advantage!
Your greatest thoughts will be accomplished,
As easily as desired. (2) Would you my Lord
ELCHEE, requite your self for th'injury
Late done to you? now, now is the time to do it.

Elc. I see, nor will let slip the fair occasion.


Mah. Would you, MOZENDRA, arrive at th'hopes
You, I know, have, of things worthy your merit,
And daring soul? this, this is the way.

Moz. I shall improve the opportunity.


Mah. Would you, BENEFIAN, render your self
Worthy, as the addition that honors,
And fair estate can make you, (and they are great
In women's eyes) to teach the bravest Lady
In The Persian Court to give and take a flame,
(For you, they say, are amorous) now is the time.

Ben. And I will strike, Sir, whilst the Iron's hot.
He 'has taken me in the right vein in faith.

Man. And is there any thing that you, sweet Ladies,
Can on your Pillows wish for? now command it. --

Flo. As there is no Lady sure but has her longings.


Man. Is there a seat in all the Empire
Fairer then other? or an air cooler?
Before your feet that place shall spread its self,
And court you to accept it. Is there ever
A Knight, or smooth chin'd youth your eye commends
Unto your heart? he is your ready servant. --

Oma. And we may had employ that privilege.


Mah. Are your thoughts higher? would you make your fortunes
Even with your beauties, equal unto Princes,
Fit for to meet with crowned Monarchs loves?
This is the way to atchieve all these, and more:
To be, alive great Queens and dead, bright stars.
You shall be cal^'d the Saviors of your Country,
A name more dear then Monarch, the sole honor
Of The present age, the grand obligers of
The next, and MAHOMET, your humble servant.

Flo. Admired height of Policy, and Courtship?


Mah. Cast then, sweet Beauties to so great a work
But your lose Ornaments, and receive greater.
Borrow but of your fair ear a Pendent,
A Garkane^ of your Neck, or of your breast
A Gem, and be returned more then a Crown.
And you brave Knights, shine forth in brandished steel,
Like to so many Gods of war, and be
Adored as he is Nor can I express
(Such is the dearth and poverty of words)
With how much dearnesse of affection
You Will be received of all loyal hearts.
With what resolution of fidelity!
With how great Piety! with what tears of joy!
Will any Gates dare to be shut against you?
Or any Envy to oppose your Progress?
Up then, and undertake this brave exploit
With that courage, and those fair hopes, wherewith
Such just great actions are to be attempted,
That under your colors, and protection
Of your Fortune Persia may be
Again ennobled, and made more then free.

Elc. My Lord, whilst uttering this, I wished your voice
Had been as loud as STEN^OR'S, or ram'd thunder,
That' to might been heard through (3) ABBAS thirty Kingdoms,
And strike upon the Center with an Echo
Loud as the acclamation it deserves,
It would have done more good then forty Troops
To our great purpose, of which men and money
I take to be chief elements: for men,
My MATZED's Levies prosper as our wishes
Designed them in Hyrcania.

Mah. And in Larr
SELEVCUS grows as fast: once on their March,
They Will gather like a snow-ball.

Elc. Here I Have gained
As many friends as when I can appoint them
A Rendevouz, will make a Regiment.

M^h. I have as many too, besides my Guard,
To help up which the bounteous FLORADELLA
Disbursed freely.

Flo. I have yet my Lord,
Fifty thousand Crowns toward the service.

Mah. And is your purse, sweet Mine, as fathomlesse as is your wit? -- this is
a brave example.


Flo. Sir, my good will.


Oly. (Shall I go less then she? secret
I will not, though it half undoes me) -- Sir,
I have as much at your command.

( Flo. I knew
She would not behind me)

Mah. Excellent Lady!
All I can say, is, you shall pay your self
For your great bounty, with your own desires.

Ear. (Shall we go below these? they will scorn us then.)


Oma. Faith Madam, I cannot spare such To Madam Omay. sums, let you
And I go halfes, and mak't betwixt us then. secret.

Ear. Content.) -- My Lord, this Lady, and my self.
Between us will bring fifty thousand Crowns.
What we will more we have in our own breasts.

(Flo. Pish, there is a Jewel at your breast would do it)


( Oly. They that least need are still the greatest hold-fasts)


Oma. 'Till be the welcomer that comes unlooked for.


Mah. You Are bounteous Ladies, and shall shine for this,
Below in story, 'above in the Firmament.

Ben. You, Ladies, have done well, but we will yet more,
Not to extol our selves, or slight your bounties,
You give but part, we all: you hazard gold,
We blood, and sweat, and life, and our gold too.

Mah. Brave Colonel! this toil shall buy you rest,
And furnish you with stories for your age:
Each skar you get esteem of as a favor
From wars great Goddess sent to win you hearts:
Men are not more enamored of their beauties,
Then fairest Ladies are of men's known valors.

( Oma. How he takes every bird with its own lure!) aside.


Moz. Where, where shall we begin? I would be at it.


Flo. Spoke like an Angel!


Mah. Here in Town I think.


Elc. Do you intend to seize on the Kings person?


Mah. What else?


Elc. Then it were easier done abroad,
If you could train him to some house of pleasure.

Flo. For that, let me alone; i will undertake it.


Mah. He cannot, though they grew, pick up a Force
That can make head against us in time; but should he,
Which is unlike, sure he would give us conditions.
If we get him, we will give him Articles
To sign, the effect you know, what else we then
Think fit, we can cast in.

Elc. Resist! my Lord,
Wrong not your Judgment once to think it can be
Are we not strong enough to force the Guards?

Mah. Yes sure.


Elc. Then let JOVE and HERCULES
Come take his part, they too, shall be our Prisoners.

Flo. Brave fiery Hero!


Mah. I Have a Proclamation
Already drawn, luring as words can make it.

Oly. Now for the time?


Elc. What if we presently
Dispatch advice unto our friends abroad
To put themselves upon their march toward us,
And when we know the time they can be with us,
Give our friends here the watchword, and to horse?
All this, I hope, may be sometime to morrow.

M^z. It may, it may, we by to morrow night
May all be ready, and night's the best time too.

Ben. The Sun shall see us Conquerors when he rises.

Mah. Your Counsel's good.

Ben. But at the hour we rise
The Citadel here must advance your colors.

Mah. It shall. -- Cheer up sad mother Persia
We will retrive again thy age of gold,
ASTRAEA shall come down once more, and fix
In thee her fair Tribunal: those impostumes
Rather then children, that broke from thee,
Thy factious sons, I mean shall fall in ruin,
Whilst thy true births shall grace thy happy bosom,
And thou on them bestow a thousand blessings.
Then Treason --

Elc. Hark! what noise is that? a noise without


Oma. Look out.


Clo. O heaven! the King and FARRABAN!


Mah. My soul!
Is he a Traitor!

Ben. Well, I only came
To contemplate the Ladies beauties.

Oly. Fly!
Fly all!

Clo. Alas! the Guards spread all about.


to them ABBAS, EMANGOLY, BELTAYAR, H^DASPUS, VASCO, FARRABAN ^n irons, GUARD.
HOrror! what a dire Conventicle's here!

Ema. Sir, now you will credit us.


Abb. My faithful friend! embraces him
Thou Art my good Genius: I must do thee Homage
Both for my life and Crown, I owe all to thee.

Ema. I Am happy sir, in being useful to you.


Mah. Let Us yet fall bravely.


Abb. Stand we here a while
Looking of Treason out of Countenance.
Since we have seen the Basilisk first, no danger
Can he bolt from his fiery eyes: see now
How bloud-shotten! how red with rage they be!

Oly. We Have innocence enough to trust to yet.


Om. We meant nothing but well to the whole Empire.


Hyd. So sculks the owl before the Suns golden ray,
As these black souls do at the face of justice.

Elc. Death! that I saw thee, yet could not escape it.


Bell. I Am looking on what Rock of Diamond
This house stands, that the weight of so much treason
Has not yet sunk it.

El^. Ah! unhappy me!


Ben. Madam, if you get free, for sure to Earina. the King
Will not extend his wrath even to the Ladies.
Beg me to be your Servant.

Ear. I my self
Would serve in any quality to be free.

Oly. Sure Madam, there was treason among our selves.


Flo. You may swear it.


Moz. O I am thunderstruck!


Mah. A vengeance on the Traitor! this was you
Damned Cockatrice. To Floradella.

Flo. Varlot 'twas thy self.


Abb. So, peal, do, do,


Elc. I yet fear FARRABAN.


Far. Alas! my Lord, will not these chains resolve you?


Elc. Craft, craft all.


Hyd. Faith, this is no fashion;
He has confessed enough to hang you all,
But not discovered.

Mah. Confessed! --


Far. Why should I spend
My last breath in avouching lies and Treason?

Mah. A bowstring stop that breath -- my Liege, we were
Designing --

Abb. Mischief. -- ball not, impudent head!
Ungrateful Monster! cause I raised thee
From they foul dunghill, will no meaner seat
Then a Throne please thee? and mine own too? wretch!
Guard apprehend them, to close Prison with them --

Flo. Mercy sir, mercy sir.


Oma. Pardon, mighty Prince.


Abb. Lest they consult, or pack lies, sever them.


Ear. Favor at least sir, till our cause be heard.


Ben. (I Will second her. -- Sir, please to hear us speak --


Ab^ Yes, on the rack you shall.


Mah. Let him put me
In PHALARIS Bull, he shall hear naught but curses.

Clo. What will become of me! I Am lost on all sides.


Vas. No, fear not, the discovery shall save you.


Moz. (I aimed at a great name, and to secret. transmit
My fame down to Posterity, and my fall
Shall do it for me, since my rising fails.
As long the memory of him shall last
That burnt DIANA's Fame, as his that built it.
" Fame follows great deeds be they good or bad.
I Will slight his rage then, and speak boldly to him.)
Sir, who ere was your spy upon our Actions,
Make much of him he, did you timely service --

Hyd. O unheard impudence! -- slit his windpipe some.


Moz. The truth is, we intended to take arms,
Not to disthrone you, as you intimate,
But to restore the Prince, and make you see
Your error in your unjust anger to him.

Abb. Peace impudence, the rack shall squeeze out more.


Moz. Not more then truth, and that you have already.


Elc. So may we find your favor, as it is truth
He tells you, and no farther stretched our aim.

Abb. Others did then Guard, bind them, and away.
You may EMAN^OLY, and BELTAZAR
Take their Confessions: force from that Pointing to Floradella. base serpent
Whom I detest to name, the truth by tortures.

Flo. Would I Would a sting, thou should not fail to feeel it.


Mah. She Is open enough, you need not press her much


Abb. Use CLOE gently, and persuade her, VASCO,
To detect all.

Vas. I Will do my best, my Liege.


Abb. Away with them. HYDASPUS, wait on us,
Double our Guards: we will to sacrifice
To gracious Heaven, and make public prayer,
That saved us from what we knew not to fear

MIRZA, PAGE. THe Cittadell beset with armed Guards,
Upon what interest as yet unknown!
And I still pining here! and still the Tyrant
Wallows in Luxury! (4) surfets with delights
As far fetched as dear bought! Hell and Confusion!
DORIDO, faithful DORIDO, there is yet
A way for thee to help me.
Page For me, sir?
Speak't and enjoy it.

Mir. Give me a draught of Poison.


Page Forbid it Heaven.


Mir. I promised FATYMA
^'d follow her, and I will keep my word,
'Twil in some part excuse the wrong I did her,
The sweet soul claims it of me: I never sleep
But still I see her beckning me away.
However DORIDO, had I not better
Die bravely like a Roman, then pine here
A slave? I Will die too, though thou do not help me,
And bequeath thee a Curse for thy unkindnesse.
In vain they are forct to live that vow to die,
This CATO Uticensis taught, this PORCIA
His noble Daughter too: and shall the Prince
Of Persia go to school to Italian Lad^es
To learn Courage? think but of that sweet youth.
Lead me to rest. --

Page Shall I do this, and bear
All his friends curses? no, they will rather bless me
For rescuing him from torment; and his foes
Will feel the pangs gnaw them of their own envy.

ABBAS, EMANGOLY, BELTAYAR, METHICULI, HYDASPUS. ALKAHEM. VASCO.
MAHOMET-ALLYBEG, ELCHEE, MOZENDRA, EARINA, OLYMPA, OMAY, CLOE, Officers,
Soldiers, Guard. FIrst, my EMANGOLY, and you, my Lords METHICULI, HYDASPUS,
ALKAHEM,
We here revoke our sentence against you
Of Banishment, and empower you to sit
With us in judgment, on these dire Delinquents.
Ema. We thank your Majesty, and glory more
In that we are capable of serving you,
Then in the honor which you grace us with.

( Oly. They Will complement our lives away at last)


( Ben. Then we are judged already;-well, the other day
I studied speeches for the Ladies, now secret.
I want one to the People; but, -- lets see --
The common place is to avoid ill company.
A curse on these state matters!)

Abb. Next we here
Degrade that Viper ALLY-BEG from all
Those places, or of public trust, or Honor,
To which too rashly we advanced him.
Those which he held of yours, EMANGOLY,
We do to you restore.

Ema. Your Grace shall find
Me faithful as at first.

Abb. The Treasurer-ship
We do conferr on you, METHICULI.

Met. My service, as i am able, shall requite it.


Mah. May they requite you as I would have done.


Alk. Bold Traitor! cannot armed justice awe thee?


Abb. Now BELTAZAR, produce your proofs against
These criminals.

Bell. They Are guilty all of Treason:
CLOE accuses that impostum'd monster
MAHOMET, to have forged the whole conspiracy,
But not without the help of FLORADELLA --

( Flo. A curse on that loose Gossip.


Mah. And you too.)


Abb. Give them no name but Traitors.


Bell. First they meant
To shift away the Prince, dissolve the Army,
That no force might oppose the Traitors rising.
You Majesty -- (the horror of it choaks
My utterance) -- your sacred Majesty --

Mah. So, try again.


Bell. This viperous woman should
Have poisoned. --

Mah. So, now it is out -- would she had.


Bell. And FARRABAN, SOFFIE, then held the Castle,
At the devotion of this monstrous man,
Who aimed to set the Crown on his own head,
Having already gotten a strong Guard,
Toward which that strumpet did disburse a Mass
Of ready Treasure, making still her Purse
As common to him, as her wicked body. --

Flo. You might preserve the modesty of the Court.


Bell. To this end be their Levies afoot too;
In Larr SELEUCUS, MATZED in Hyrcania,
Are raising Forces; so that this lewd woman,
And FARRABAN, and sly SELEUCUS, were
Chief accomplices, that knew his utmost aim;
The other we believe drawn in, as only
Crediting his pretense to free the Prince,
And MATZED'S Levies are on ELCHEE'S score.

E^c. Urge that my Lord.


Oly. Oma. Ear. Yes, yes, sir, urge that home.


Abb. Monster, what say you? knew the rest yo^ meant
Your self their King?

Mah. They knew as much as I did.


Oly. It Is false.


Moz. That thou were worthy but to bear
A Sword, that I might claim the combat against thee
I Would write it on thy heart, in stabbes, thou lie.

Mah. A brave Rodomantado!


Hyd. This vile man,
Given up to Treason late, and now despair,
Accuses these but to have company
In's fall.

Ben. True my good Lord. -- Come, you and I
Were Comrades once.

Ema. This I indeed believe.


Mah. The more the merrier.


Moz. Hear my gracious Lord,
He intimates as much before your Grace.

( Elc. What if I say I levied in Hyrcania, To Mozendra.
With an intent to help the King, and balance
MAHOMETS strength, having the greater hopes
For doing him service so unexpected?

Moz. 'Twill gain no faith: and then Secret. 'twas Treason too,
To list without Commission: know your doom first,
If you fall, urge it: some will credit you,
'Twill beget pity to your memory
I'^h' vulgar, who are still fond of the wretch^d.)

Alk. These persons could not be so lost to sense,
Being noble, as to advance so vile a thing
Over themselves.

O^y. We scorn him for our Groom.


Hyd. His envy and his rage will peal us too
Anon, I think.

Met. How strong is malice in thee,
Pernicious wretch! thou car'dst not how foul
Thy Treasons were on earth, nor weighst thou now
How great thy plagues for them shall be in hell.

Bell. Disburden yet thy soul of so much guilt,
And speak these innocent in what they are so.

Mah. Your selfe's not innocent, good Rhetorician. --


Hyd. I thought so, slit his impudent throat some body.


Mah. You did, as much as I, exasperate
The King against his Son.

Bell. If this be true,
I here beseech your Grace command me stand
Among the Traitors: -- Come come, Officers, bind
My hands, I am accused here of treason

Abb. You, more then feignedly, did act his friend,
And O that I had heard your pregnant reasons,
So urged to save him with an equal ear!

Bell. Heaven knows, I urged them strongly as I durst.


Mah. The Tyrant's selfe's not innocent. --


Alk. Bold head!


Mah. He Is guilty of his Sons blood, and FATYMA'S too.
I was but's instrument.

Met. O ecstasy!


Abb. Varlet, the guilt is thine, though the grief mine,
That I gave faith unto thy forgeries.
Proceed Lord BELTAZAR.

Bell. Sir, hoping these
May yet be worthy of your timely mercy;
What have I but t'inveigh against those other?
Look up, fair Mother Persia, and see
Thy self redeemed, put off the horrid fright,
Thy plotted ruin late amazed thee with.
Now shall not thy fair breast be stained with
Thy best Sons blood, but freed of thy worst.
Had this gone on, thou had been but thine own prey,
Thou Had seen thy Prince that toiled so often for thee,
Groaning his soul out into empty air,
The hopeful blossom nipt as soon as blown;
Thy aged King swelled up with deadly poison,
And burning as in Aetna till he would burst:
And impious MAHOMET upon thy Throne,
Unworthy of thy Galleys; and this strumpet,
His fine loose Queen. --

Mah. That yet I never meant.


Flo. The more wretch thou, so often to swear it to me.


Mah. The more fool thou though, ever to believe me.


Bell. Thy noblest Sons torn, some to cruel death,
And some to servile misery, worse then that;
This was the sight prepared for thine eyes.

Mah. And it had been a brave one.


Abb. Cursed monster!
No sense of guilt? no tears! can no remorse
Touch thy scared Conscience?

Mah. Yes, I see my guilt;
Guilty of folly I am, to trust a woman
To keep for me, what for her self she cannot,
A secret; tears I could profusedly shed,
Tears of just wrath, and for each one that drops,
Afford a curse too, that I sped no better.
I Would spend my soul in sighs, could they but scald thee:
To be so near a Crown, and reach it not!
O Hell and Furies!

Abb. In thy soul they are all.


Ema. Proceed to judgment sir.


Mah. Tyrant, remember,
^n me thou judge thy own Cause; I meant
No more to thee, then thou did to thy Father,
And brother too, and that for the same reason.

Ema. Prodigious boldness! sir, regard him not.


Abb. Monster, since thou have toiled to be ungrateful,
And with thy Treasons to outvie my favors,
To let thee die were too much pity to thee,
Nor is there a death equal to thy guilt;
Besides, we having so much honored thee,
And sworn thou never should feel death from our hand,
We Will keep our Oath, but leave it to our Heir,
A strict command, that on my funeral day
Thou dyest (5) the ancient death of boats.

Man. Then have I
Great MITHRIDATES for my pattern.

Abb. Mean while,
Officers, lead him to the public market,
There let the common Hangman bore his eyes out.
In a Dungeon shall he sustain his life,
With what he gets by begging only.

Mah. Nay,
I Will then sustain my soul with full mouthed curses,
To thee meant, and the rest of my undoers,
Especially that open Sex, whose souls are
So loose, they cannot keep them in their breasts,
But they will still swim on their lips.

Abb. VASCO,
To thee we do decree his whole Estate,
And our best thanks for thy discovery.

Vas. I humbly thank your Majesty.


Abb. Let Soldiers
Go pull down all his Palaces and Statues,
And make a Jakes there where his chief house stood.

Ema. Admired Justice!


Omnes, Equal, equal, Justice!


Mah. Do, do, ball on.


Abb. You, strumpet, are the next.


Mah. But that I scorn to ask it, might I hear
Her sentence, and I Would triumph in mine own.

Flo. Envious villain.


Abb. Away with him, he shall not
Give so much pleasure to his envious soul.

Mah. Write on my dust, IN HIGH ATTEMPTS HE DIED.
All ills betide you. --

Abb. Lead that impious wretch
To th'publique Market, and there (6) beat her brains out,
In The ancient way ordained for Poysoners:
As for the murder of her Queen STATIRA,
Base GIGIS died, then (7) burn her limbs with Cats dung.

Flo. Mercy! great sir.


Abb. Thou have too much in dying,
But that we are not rigorous to thy Sex. --
Away with her.

Flo. O this is a sad fall.


Abb. All her Estate to CLOE we confer;
It Is fit she have reward t'incourage others,
Though she not meant to do us good, she did it.

Clo. Indeed my Gracious Lord, I ever meant it,
I humbly thank your Majesty.

Vas. See now, CLOE, Secret.
I counseled you for the best. Come, I Am still constant,
Our business here is over, we will to better.

Abb. Take FARRABAN with the rest, and strangle him.


Far. O mercy, mercy!


Abb. Quick, away with him.


Far. The Citadell cost me fair; O dire ambition


Abb. The Citadel we give thee ALKAHEM.


Alk. I hope to do you better service in it.


Abb. We doubt it not. -- Now ELCHEE.


Ben (Now, now,
I feel the Bow-string at my throat.

Moz. Nay sure, Secret.
He Will let us die like Soldiers.)

Abb. Though we credit
The good of your intention, yet your life,
Is by your hasty error forfeited,
But that we give you, and confine you only
To the I Will of Ormus, whence on good behavior,
We may recall you.

Elc. Thanks dread Sovereign.
I hope my carriage will induce you to it.
My fear was never so great of your justice,
As grief for the rash error I ran into,
And so ensnared my friends.

Met. Troth, I believe him.


Ben. Sure he will send us thither too? MOZENDRA,
Are there any handsome Ladies there, can tell?

Moz. I care not, so there be a Book, I Will Secret. never
Converse but with the dead hereafter I.

Ema. This true repentance speaks him noble.


Abb. Yes,
Your two friends shall attend you.

E^c. A noble mercy.


Moz. Long live the Gracious ABBAS!


Ben. More then live!


Met. My Lord, my love to you remains To Elchee. still firm,
And eggs me on to prompt a way unto you,
How you may happily avoid exilement. Secret.
The Kings rigor, I know, will not extend
To th'Ladies lives, yet in the fright they stand in,
They will do any thing may get them mercy:
Urge them to promise, if they have their lives
To give the King in gratitude, those sums
They engaged for to the Traitors; then be you
Their speaker to him, and he cannot in honor
(Urged by my meditation) but receive
The favor as from you, and show you grace.

Elc. My Lord, my humble thanks, I will atttempt it.


Abb. But MATZED, for examples Elchee, whispers with the Ladies sake must die,
Being ith'very act of Treason, raising
Of Arms against us: You my Lord HYDASPUS,
Take a Brigade of our own Guards, and have
Down to Hyrcania to apprehend him,
Strike off his head, to you the Government
Of that fair Province we assign, until
If he deserves it, we recall Duke ELCHEE.

Hyd. I wish he may, mean while, I shall be careful.


Abb. EMANGOLY, send you some trusty person
To Shiras, armed, to seize SELEUCUS there,
And strike off his head too.

Ema. My Liege, I will.


Abb. These Ladies still expect, -- how shall we use them?


Ear. Oma. O my good Lord.


Oly. There Is mercy in his looks.


Ema. Sir, they'are beneath your anger, they cannot hurt you,
Nor stands it with the honor of great States,
To take strict notice of vain woman's actions.

Abb. Well, mercy is no less a virtue royal,
Then justice, and it is fit we show some, since
Heaven has shown us so much: we pardon you
Ladies, hereafter pray avoid state-matters.

Oma. Ear. We will we will, my Lord.


Oly. Our humble thanks.


Omnes, Long live King ABBAS! long, long-live the King!


Elc. You Will keep your words. To the Ladies.


Oly: Ear. Oma. Yes, yes, my Lord, we will.


Elc. May't please your Majesty, these noble Ladies,
(Not to say by my instinct) do resent
So heartily your royal favor to them,
As to their powers, to attempt gratitude,
Whereas their error late involved them in
A promise of considerable sums,
To'advance what they thought duty, but proves treason,
As testimonies of their thankfulness
For pardoning them that fault, they humbly pray
Your sacred Majesty to accept those sums,
Toward the raising of your force again.
It Is among them all an hundred thousand Crowns.

Em. A brave amends!


Alk. A noble gratitude!


Abb. Ladies, we thank your loves.


Oly. And we your mercy.


Abb. METHICULI'S Treasurer.


Oly. My Lord, we will
Attend you anon at the Exchequer.

Met. Now
They do deserve their Pardon, and I Would almost
Said, ELCHEE merits his too, for procuring
These donatives, it proves his loyalty.

Ben. Hark! hark!


Abb. ELCHEE, for improving thus
Your interest with the Ladies to our service,
We do revoke your sentence of exilement.

Elc. My best thanks and endeavors, still shall serve you.


Met. These two offended, sir, but on his score,
They Are his dependents.

Abb. Them we pardon too.


Ben. Our humble thanks.


Moz. We Will labor to deserve it.


( Elc. My Lord, I am your Creature for To Methiculi. your hint.


Met. I joy my love could prove behooffull to you)


( Moz. A fair escape!


Ben. A Resurrection! i will
Never hazard more so high a member as
My neck; VENUS is my star.

Abb. This were a happy day, were SOFFIE found.


Ema. And the brave Prince restored.


Abb. That he shall be.


Ema. Then SOFFI's safe sir --


Abb. Thou were born to oblige me.
Where, my good Genius?

Ema. In METHICV^'s care
And mine; and now forth coming, at your service.

Abb. Go METHICULI, bring him to the Castle.
We Will meet thee there, whither we now will have
To rescue our Son, and make our self deserve
This benefit the Gods were pleased to give us.

Met. My Liege I will.


Abb. O who can be a Tyrant,
And plague the innocent on bare surmises,
When gracious Heaven pass by our real ills,
And often to gain us, save us against our wills.

MIRZA, PAGE. FIe DORIDO, and did I ever think
I should check thee for disobedience?
Now I importune thee, shall not I obtain
My last draught of thee!
Page I can hold no longer
Against his command -- Sir, here is a bowl well spic'd
Will send you to your Paradise in a moment.

M^r. Give me it DORIDO.


Page Ah, my hand trembles
In the delivery.

M^r. Thanks, good faithful youth.
Now that my Father could see me quaff this!
A health to the confusion of the Tyrant. he drinks.

Page Sir, leave some, and i will pledge you.


M^r. As thou will.
Now call my wife to take her last farewell. --
I come sweet FATYMA, i am coming to thee,
And doubt not but thou wilt thank me for releasing
Thee from this Prison, the world calls a life.

NYMPHADORA, IFFIDA, to him. PAGE. WHat would my Lord?

Mir. Be reconciled to thee.
I know the art angry with me for the loss
Of FATYMA.

Nym. Not angry sir, but grieved.


M^r. Come I have sent the child to a place fit for her,
A sacred place of rest, worthy her goodness,
This world was not, it was her Hell and mine;
And I am following her; I sent for thee
To take my last leave.

Nym. I conceive you not.


Mir. Thy eyes shall make it plain -- I have drunk poison.


Nym. O Heavens forbid!


If. O Gods! how came he by it?


Page I gave it him, he drank, and here I pledge him. He drinks.


If. O wretch!


Nym. Were lawful, would i would pledge him too.


Page I still was used to obey all his commands,
And this was one, nor could I abide to see
Him miserable, my duty did gainsay it.

Mir. And my own honor, faithful youth, and courage


Nym. Self-murder's a false color of true courage,
" Rising from fear of torment, or of shame,
"TO outface ill Fortune, and malicious Fat^.
And this I hoped from you: then should the Heaven
First have dissolved, but you should have been righted.
" Heaven sets us Captains of our bodily Forts,
" Which without Treason, cannot be delivered
" Till redemanded.

M^r. Sure if Heaven had made us
Masters of any thing, it is of our lives?
Which if we may not without leave lay down,
We must not without warrant leave a joint.
If in these little Castles we be Heavens
Lieutenants, sure we may give up our charge,
When He^ven leaves us void of good means to keep it.

" Nym. We must not doubt Heavens goodness, who is nothing
" But goodness, nor limit it, since the last
" Instant is scope enough for the heavenly Powers
" To revoke all things to ones own desire.
Why pluck'st thou then their work out of the hand
Of Justice, and become thy own revenger,
When she would surely have don't, and better?

Mir. I feel the poison working -- O -- be happy.


Nym. Have IFFIDA, some antidote may help yet.


Page Nay, spare that pains, not natures self can help him.
'Twas strong enough.

Nym. To break my heart, I hope.


Page It works with me too: my eyes swim in death,
And dizzinesse toss over all my brains.

If. Fie, DORIDO, thou art the greatest Traitor
Of all, to poison thy dear Lord.

Mir. Peace fool,
He Is faithful, and my good deliverer.

ABBAS, EMANGOLLY, BELTAZAR, to them ALKAHEM, Servants. NO, that is yet my
part, I Am thy deliverer.
Rise injured Son, arise and meet thy freedom.
M^r. Who Is that?


If. The King.


M^r. The Tyrant: in good time
He comes to see me rescued from his rage.

Nym. His eyes blast me; I cannot, with patience, see him.
But what means this yet? why are these friends with him?

Page All are proved false and mock our misery.


Nym. And is this then a spectacle of pleasure?
That I could form a curse great as his guilt!

Abb. Spare them, sweet daughter, if I yet am worthy
So near alliance to so bright a virtue --

M^r. O death, why come no faster?


Ema. Heavens! what means he?


Bell. He thinks he comes to torture him.


Alk. He looks ill.


Abb. No art of words can now more aggravate
My guilt then mine own Conscience: nor do thou
Feel sharper pangs of Grief then I of horror.
I Am undeceived, I see my hasty error,
And had thou now a window into my breast,
Thou would confess the unfeigned integrity
Of my repentance, when thou see my soul
Weep (freely) tears of blood to bath her crime in.

Mir. Cro^odiles tears.


Ema. Indeed, my Lord you err.


Abb. Thou err'st, brave Son, for yet i will call thee so,
And will henceforth appear a Father to thee,
I Have been a Tyrant, nay a Monster long,
Which as I have bewailed, I will redress,
Repentance has made Rivers of mine eyes,
My eyes weep themselves blind for loss of thine.
My breast is hardened as brawn with strokes,
My head turned gray, with sorrow more then age.
Insense makes the offended Gods relent,
For that, i will spend my very soul in sighs.
" To be penitent bears a pardon with it:
A pardon, I that yet never begged of any,
Now beg of thee: A Father of a Son,
Let the relation at least obtain it.

Nym. So when the house is burnt the fire goes out.
O that this true remorse (for so I think it)
Had come before, when yet it had been useful!

Bell. Madam, it is never to late to redress wrongs.


Nym. Yes, when the wrongd's not capable of redress.
The Prince (alas!) inflamed with despair,
Got his unhappy Page to give him poison.

Abb. O Heaven* and slightest thou our Penitence?


Mir. Poison so strong defies all remedies,
As it will soon make me all injuries.

Ema. O Act of Horror!


Bell Dire event of wrongs.


A^k. Which when in time we'are careless to redress
We justly, when we would do it, are denied it.

Abb. I mourning to my grave must ever go then.
At least, before thou leave this upper world,
O speak thy self but reconciled to me.

M^r. I freely do it, and implore your pardon,
If I, exasperated with my wrongs,
Have vented any undecent words of you.
Of other crimes toward you my soul acquits me.

Abb. And mine own too: this piety adds load
Unto my grief, and melts my very soul.

METHI^VLIE, SOFFIE. SEe sir, their joy has drowned them all in tears.

Sof. This looks not yet like joy.


If. Ah! no, my Lord.
All joys have fled us.

Alk. The brave Prince, tired out
With suffering wrongs, took poison.

Sof. O just Gods!


Met. Not just, they are grown Tyrants too, and mock
Our best intentions -- O --

Abb. What a blessed day
Had this been, had not this draught clouded it!
That balefull draught descends in a di^e storm,
And not ecclipses but our Sunshine only,
But batters with fierce dropps our springing hopes!
How might thou else have triumphed in the Justice
Done on the cursed causers of thy ruin!
Base ALLYBEG, and impious FLORADELLA,
And all the rest of their dire Accomplices
This day fell sacrifices to thy wrath.
SOFFIE is found too, and does here attend thee.

M^r. Turn then your love to him, to him requite
My wrongs, and from him too expect my duty.
Now shall I die with much a lighter heart,
Since I have lived to hear those Traitors fall.

Nym. O this I ever hoped for from heavens Justice,
And grieve the more that thou despairedst of it.

Mir. I come sweet FATYMA-Father, farewell --
Use SOFFIE like a Son. --

Abb. O that Heaven would
Let me excuse thee!

Mir. SOFFIE, -- Farewell
Obey thy Grandfire -- as thou would do me --
Forget my wrongs -- and eschew Tyranny --

Sof. Ah! that I could forget sense, and turn stone!


Mir. Adieu sweet Spouse. --


Nym. O!


Mir. From thee I hardliest go! --
But thy grief will not suffer thee, I know,
To be long from me. --

Nym. O my wretched ears!
Do you hear this, and will you ever hear
Any thing after it! O woeful eyes!
Why at this wailfull sight drop you not out!
Or, frighted, recoile deep into you holes!
O stubborn heart! cannot all this shiver thee?
Am I turned Rock too!

M^r. Friends adieu -- make ore
To my young Son, the love to me you bore --

Ema. O that I could not hear!


Met. Or I could help!


Mir. Yet love my memory. --


Bell. O Grief!


Alk. O Anger!
That grief is all we can!

Mir. Thou DORIDO,
Art to attend me- to the shades below --

Page Yes my dear Lord.


If. O that he would gone before.


M^r. I shall again live -- and on some sad Stage
Be mourned. -- "Great wrongs reach further then one Age. --
O -- O. D^es.

Abb. He Is gone, he is gone, break heart and follow!


Omnes, O Heavens!


Nym. Stay winged spirit, stay and take
Me with thee, at least (8) let me suck thy last breath.

Bell. Madam, forbear, you will infect your self.


Nym. O Gods! what have been my deserts, to be
Thus punished! or if such be my deserts,
Why am I yet not punished more, with death?
Yet that were to give end unto my woes:
To join me with him, were to make me happy:
That happiness I shortly will obtain
In spite of fate, if not from thy kind hand
O ATROPOS, from mine own grief at least:
Mean while -- lie soft, O loved Corpse, and thou
Adored soul, if love to earthly creatures
Remain in death, think of me in thy shade,
And often Petition Fate to send me to thee.

Sof. Unhappy DORIDO! how have thou wronged
All Ages!

Alk. And shall still be cursed by all.


Page Is It not too late to say, forgive passed errors?
I h^st to follow him to his shade, I Will there
Wait on him too, and try to be more happy:
They that behold the Sun, must see his shadow,
And who remembers my brave Lord, must cast
A thought on me, and may they say thus of me;
I was his faithful servant, waited still
On him in life, and death, good state and ill, --
So used to obey his each command,
I did it, though it to his hurt did tend. --
If any fault -- of mine -- be known to time --
Service mistaken -- was my only crime. --
O -- O. Dies.

If. He dies.


Ema. Would 'twere our greatest loss!


Abb. Our loss (alas!) is above words to ease,
And we must more then mourn it: Do thou see
METHICULI, all rites of pomp and sorrow,
Performed to that brave body: This vile trunk
Of DORIDO'S, for giving his Lord poison,
We will have burnt upon his Tomb.

Met. Sad office.


Nym. Ah sadder sight! that 'twere Methiculi and Alkahem, carry out the Princes
body, and the Servants, the Pages. my last!


Abb. SOFFIE,
Thou now art our, and the Empire's hope,
EMANGOLY, be thou his Governor,
And breed him such as you intend to serve.

Ema. My care shall labor to requite the honor.


Sof. And mine t'improve your honor by my profit.


Abb. Daughter, your losses we can never requite;
Yet, as we can, let us attempt amends:
But that must come from you; look ore your wishes,
And be the Mistress of your own desires.

Nym. Alas! sir, what is there left for me to wish,
But a short term of wretched life? mean while,
Some humble Country seat shall be my Cell,
Free from the trouble of all tongues and eyes,
I being unworthy either waiting their
Kind deaths cold hand, to lead me to my Lord.

Abb. If that be your desire, you must enjoy it,
But we could wish we could deserve you still.

Nym. Will thou partake of my retirement, IFFIDA?


If. Madam, it would seem hard to me, to spend
My years, which my youth promise willbe many,
In solitude -- I Am an ill comforter, --
And then, my fortunes ar^ before me too.

Nym. Be happy in them.


Ema. Poor ingratitude!


Nym. Farewell, great sir, if ever you remember
You had a Daughter-in-law deserved your love,
Pay it to my poor Son, at least forget not,
You had a Son that did deserve it well.

Abb. To him we will pay the love we owed his Father
Adieu sweet Princess -- BELTAZAR, attend her.

Nym. I thank your Grace: -- Farewell my dearest Boy;
But that thou still wilt dwell in my best thoughts,
I would I could forget I ere was happy,
Be thou so ever.

Sof. Madam, if you please not
To stay still with us, you will, I hope, admit
Me in your solitude to do my duty.

Nym. Things of more weight will take thee up, be happy
And so shall I, when sighs have spent this breath
" A mortals happiness begins in death.

Abb. Com^ SOFFIE, and lea^n to be a Prince*
But (9) when thy hand shall close mine aged eyes,
And on thy head my Diadem shall shine,
Learn by my harms to eschew Tyranny;
It was thy dying Fathers Legacy,
And shall be mine too; and I leave thee more
In that, then in my splendid wreath of Oar*
" For cruel Acts in them their torment have,
" Guilt on our souls, blots on our names they leave.

THE END.
ANNOTATIONS
READER,
IF, by perusing the former pages, thou deservest that name, Thou have in them
perhaps met with diverse historical matters, which, unexplained, may defraud
thee of the content I wish thee, therefore I here offer thee a Key for every
Lock, ANNOTATIONS, which, if thou shall find useful, I am glad I inserted
them, if superfluous, they cost thee nothing, for they are so few, the^ have
not swelled the Play to a much greater rate. I will not trouble thee with
tedious digressions upon the Poetic Names and ^^gments strewn up and down the
Poem; those, if thou be Learned, thou know already, if not, a Dictionary
may inform thee, and spare my pains. I only touch, and that lightly, upon such
historical concernments, and customary rites of the Persians (essential to
our Scene) as every Scholar is not bound to know, for to such chiefly I wrote
this Tragedy.

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE FIRST ACT.
[(1.) THE Murder of our Sire,] This King Abbas, being a younger Son, was only
King of Heri (near Tartaria) by birth; but, aiming at the Persian Empire, he,
to make his way to it, privily murdered his Father, Mahomet Cod^band, or
purblind. Herbert's Travells. page 89.127. etc.

[(2.) And me] viz. Emir-hamze-Mirza, King Abbas his Elder Brother, whom also
he murdered, as standing between him and the Crown. A crime most usual in
these Eastern Princes, especially, in Persia, in this line of Guzpan Acuculu,
(or white sheep) of whom few attended patiently the death of their
Predecessors, but, by impious means, la^oured their own untimely
establishment. Herb. p. 100. etc. Of Emir-Hamz's bravery and prowess, See more
in the 32. note upon the fourth Act.

[(3.) The Mogul,] Emir-hamze mirza's Ghost irritating his Brother Abbas to
revenge him upon himself, bids him act those things upon his Son, which his
very enemies shall pity, (not without the example of the matchless Johnson,
who, in his Catiline (which miraculous Poem I propose as my pattern) makes
Sylla's Ghost persuade Catiline to do what Hannibal could not wish,) of the
Persians Enemies, I set the Mogull in front, against whom our Prince Mirza
served in Person, in his Fathers wars, and gained much from him, toward
Candahor; The great Mogul, according to others, Mogor or Emperor of East
India, bo^ders upon the Persian by the River Oxus, and is at continual enmity
with him, sometimes for Religion, sometimes for Empire; though it is no small let
to the accquests of the Mogul against him that the Frontiers of Persia are on
every side hemmed in with those outstreatches and branches of Caucasus, which
the Grecians call Paropamise, more defensive then any artificial rampire to
Persia, making it inaccessible to the Moguls horse, wherein the chief sinews
of his force consist. About the year 1300. (as Barros writes) the great
Sanosardin King of Delos, conquered much of these parts, and attempted the
Conquest of all Asia, but died by the Persian Powers. The present Mogul boasts
himself of the race of Tamberlain (which abridgeth his antiquity) and saie^ he
is the tenth from him. The probable opinion indeed is; that they descended of
the Tartar, or from the ancient Massagetae from whose coasts they came, whose
chief City is Shamascand, from whence came Tamberlain. A word of this Princes
Puissance may not seem superfluous, because it magnifies our conquering Mirza;
his bounds are one way divided from the Persian by the River Indus, betwixt
which, and Ganges he swaies far and wide? a territory no less puissant then
pleasant, a temperate air, over a fertile soil, abounding with all sorts of
commodities, rich and curious; stately beasts, as the best horses, Elephants
and Dromedaries; precious stones, especially Diamonds and Cornelians; most
delicious spices and fruits, among which is most of note a Tree they call
Moses, whose fruit is so delicate, as the Jews and Mahometans (which are the
religions of those parts, the last swaying the first) believe to be the same
that tempted Adam. This Prince enjoyes 47. Kingdoms, the chief are Mandao,
Citor, Bengala, Delly, (where he keeps his Court) and, to name no more,
Cambaia; a Kingdom enjoying a City of the same name, consisting of 130000
houses, this one Province is also reported to have 60000. Buroughs; a number
great and admirable, if we compare it to the best of our European Kingdoms: to
name but two: Ptome says there are in France (excepting Burgundy, and, as I
take it, Normandy) 27000. Buroughs, having parish Churches; though D' Juigne
will have the number of Parishes 132000. Guiccardine recounts that in the
Netherlands within the Territory of the 17. Provinces, are 208* walled Towns,
and 150. Boroughs, enjoing the privileges of Cities, and 6300. Villages having
parish Churches. In Bohemia are 780. Towns, and 32000. Villages. But because no
absolute judgment can be made of the power of any Province by the number of
parishes, see the forces of Cambaia: Maffeus writes that Bandurius, who, about
the year 1536, ruled in Cambaia, (by what right he d^termines not,) had under
his standard 150000. horse, where of 35000. were barbed, and 500000. foot among
these only 15000. were forraigners, and some 80. Christians, French, and
Portugals. The force that this Prince can on a short warning bring into the
field, are reputed 300000. horse, infinite foot, proportionable ships, and
50000. Elephants; beasts which they yet find useful in war, so that in the
year 1571. Idalcano had 60000. of them at the Siege of Goa. Nor let any wonder
that this Prince ingrosses not all the Orient, for he has as potent neighbors
as himself; as the King of Barma, the Persian and others: besides, he is so
shut up with Rocks, as he has no good egresse for his Armies; nor have those
vast multitudes of men so much true strength as they carry terror; they sink
with their own weight, are long gathering together, but not long held together;
the numberless Army Marhumedius led against Cambaia, did not only wast the
regions where through it passed, but by devouring all things that the earth
yielded, bereaved its self of sustenance: against such mighty impressions the
way is to draw the war out in length, and only to stand upon the defensive:
for such armies will soon waver, either for want of provision, scarcity of
coin, infection of the air, or infirmities of their own bodies; as the
inundations of Attila into Italy, and of Tamberlain into Asia, were but as
running marches in comparison of what the Romans, Grecians, Macedonians,
Carthaginians, English, Guales, and Portugals, have done with more nimble
power^; 800. only of which last named, at Demain upon the Coast of Cambaia,
settled in spite of this mighty Mogor, as another small number of them did at
Diu, at which two places they have built, and do maintain two most invincible
Citadells, that shut up the whole gulf of the Cambaian Sea; a greater detriment
to him then the loss of an inland, Kingdom; for on one side he has no haven,
and on the other the Portugals are his jealous neighbors.

[(4) And Turk] He is another, and the greatest of the Persians Enemies. He
enjoyes an Empire the greatest that is, or perhaps that ever was from the
beginning, comprehending the better part of the ancient, threefold division of
the Earth. His government is like his Neighbors Tyrannycall, his strength lies
in his Janissaries, as the Moguls do in his Nairs. His Religion is Mahumetan, of
which sect he is the chief patron, and more then slights the Persian, for
being less zealous then himself, so that in ballancing the state of
Christianity with Mahumetism; I have heard these two Princes, compared to the
two Kings of France, and Spain, the French to the Persian, the Spaniard to the
Turk. For the state of those differences, and for the quality of the Ottoman
Empire, I refer the Reader to the most elaborate, and accurate discourse of M.
Sandys, and M. Knolles his Turkish History, etc. See more of the Turk in the
third note upon the second Act.

[(5) The Tartar] or great Cham, against whom also our Mirza had wat^es, and
gained much from him, east of the Hyrcanian Sea. Herb. p. 9^. Of this Princes
Empire, larger then strong, see Paul Venetus, who first broke the Ice in
describing of those parts, Monst. l. 5. Cosmogr. Ortelius, Mercator, etc.

[(6) BAHAMAN] A Prince that had reason to wish as ill to the Persian, as any
of the rest, and deserves to live again in a Tragedy; his story is briefly
this: About fifty years since, King Meleck Bahaman reigned in Larry Joon, a
small and craggy territory, in the straits of Mount Taurus; his only a^me
tending to preserve his birth right, and that his gray hairs might go in peace
to an eternal dormitory: but Abbas the victorious Persian, set wholly upon
conquest, and now at leisure, having subdued Hyrcania, pret^nded that this
mountainous Prince, took opportunity to ^ansack his Caravans, anticipate his
progress to the Caspian Sea, etc. Reasons though but conjecturall, of fo^ce
enough to make Abbas send Methiculi with 30000 chosen men against him: Bahaman
hearing it, plants Garrisons in places of defense, leaves the rest, being not
able to take the field, and secures himself, his Queen their two Sons, and
10000 Soldiers in his Castle of Ryna, before which inaccessible fortress, when
the Persian came, despairing by reason of its incredible height, and
perpendicular ascent to expugne it, he turns force to fraud, desires a parley,
presents offertures of amity, s^conds them with presents, and strong
invitations to the aged King to come down, as well to banquet, as strike a
league with him, engaging all the Gods he knew, for his safety; which strong
allurements so wrought upon the old King, as he broke through all the tears,
persuasions, and prayer, of his Queen, Sons, and Soldiers, strongly carried
by his destiny, to the Enemies Tent, where indeed he was feasted all day, but
deteyned prisoner at night; then summons the Persian, the two young Princes to
yield the Castle, and descend, or their Father should die: they refuse, the
Persian assaults, is forced to retreat with loss, so sore to his Army that it
mutined, and vowed to return home; the General knowing his Masters severity,
considered, that to return without victory, were to run into the nooze; first
he releases Meleck Bahaman, persuades him, he used this discourtesie but to try
him, and gives him his choice of returning up to his Sons, or persuading them
to come down too, and seal the easy Articles, a Copy of which were with their
Fathers doting Letters sent up to them; the Soldiers dissuade them from
crediting the Persian, but the Queen, to enjoy her husband, provoked them down,
where they are entertained with all the greatness, and feigned affection, that
so great an intended treachery could devise: whilst they were here
congratulating with their Father, (the General then in company) at sight of a
private token, three Soldiers in an instant whipped off their heads with their
Scimiters, and ere it was divulged abroad, by inviting the Queen and the rest,
by counterfeit seals and tokens, to come down and partake of their joys, for
the new contracted league, they made them descend and yield the Castle, some of
which received destruction, others mercy. Herbert. p. 110. etc.

[(7) The Arabian] the last of the Persians Enemies that I here recount, though
not the least, against whom our Mirza expressed most heroic prowess, in
distressing of their Bassora, (among other achievements) a Town where Tygris
and Euphrate, empty themselves into the gulf of Persia. Herb.

[(8) Set equal with the Gods] Plutarch writes, that the Persians honor their
King as the Image of the God of nature; his words are these, recounting that
Themistocles desired Colonel Artabanus, to help him to the presence of the
King, he makes him answer thus: Amongst all the good Laws and Customs we
have, we esteem this above the rest, to reverence and honor our King, as the
image of the God of nature, who keeps all things in their perfect life and
state: wherefore if thou will fashion thy self after our manner, to honor the
King, thou may both see him, and speak with him: but if thou have any other
mind, then must thou use some third person as thy mean. Plut. in vita Themist.
and Justinus. lib. 2.

Ismenias being sent by the Thebans, after their defeat of the Lacedaemonians,
at the battle of Leuctres into Persia, to King Artaxerxes, to desire his
compliance, being commanded to keel to the King, he let fall his Ring at his
feet, and stooped to ^ake it up, whereby it was thought of some, that he did it
to kneel to the King. P^utarch, in vita Artaxerx.

[(9) And as adored, as is the Sun our Brother] That the Persians adored the
Sun, is as clear as the Sun, if any doubts it, to be informed, he needs but
open any Book that treats of that Kingdom; but, to point to one, let him
consult Justines first Book, there where he treats of the fortunate choice of
Darius, Son of Hystaspis to the Monarchy, his horse (which beast they hallow
to the sun) seeming first to salute their rising God: see more in the seventh
Note, upon the second Act. That the Kings of Persia yet took upon them so great
state, as to claim kindred to this adored Planet; I find by their inscriptions,
and directions of Letters and Pattents. Sapores, Son to Mizdates, Monarch of
Persia, in the yea^e after our Savior 315. w^ote thus to Constantius the
Empe^our: I Sapores, King of Kings, equal to the stars, and Brother to the
Sun and Moon, etc. And Chozroes (Father of Ormizda) who ruled Persia, Anno
Dom. 542. Enstiles himself thus to the Emperor Mauritius: I Chozroes, great
King of Kings, Begler beg, ( or Lord of Lords) Ruler of Nations, Prince of
peace, salvation of men, among the Gods, (a man good and ever) among men (a God
most glorious) the great conqueror, arising with the Sun, giving luster to
the night, a Hero in descent, etc. As blustering and blasphemous Titles and
Epithites, gives the great Turk to himself, as witnesses M. Sandys. Tra. l 1.
p. 47. Nor do any of these Oriental Monarch go less, everyone thinking himself
greatest, so good opinions have they of themselves for particulars see Herb. p.
129.130.

[(10) Higher then that in Spawhawn] Spawhawn, though it stands in Parthia, is
the imperial City of all the Persian Monarchy, and the best built; it is by
some called Spaan, by others Spahan, Jespaa, and Hispahan, as their several
Dialects concord; in her infancy she was called Dura, (but whether that Dura,
wherein Nebuchadnezzar erected his golden Coloss, I know not) the ancient
Greeks called it Hecatompiles, from its hundred Gates, (as the Isle of Crete
Hecatompolis, as having so many Cities) the Persians Hyperbolically term her
for her greatness, Half the world, though her circuit is not now much above
nine English miles, and in that the better half is Gardens; her form is near
round, like Paris, the number of inhabitants 300000. at most. In this City is a
monument of our Abbas his merciless cruelty; being a Pillar, compact of
several heads, of men, Antilopes, Bucks, Goats, Buffols, Elephants, and
Camels; it is at the base about 20. foot in compass, in height about 60: It was
erected upon this occasion; when Abbas was proclaimed King, the Spawhawnians
would not admit him, but charged him with the death of Mahomet his Father, and
the murder of Emir-hamze the Prince, his elder Brother. This netled Abbas who
stoutly swo^e for this Rebellion he would chastise them bravely, and cut off
40000. of their heads, to raise a Pillar of terror and admiration, as a ready
Sacrifice unto Mahomet. At length he Conquers, and ransacks the City, kills
1000. of them, and mi^dfull of his oath, gives order to behead 40000. A
lamentable cry is raised, but to small purpose, (the vow of the Persians never
alters,) nor could he be dissuaded, till the Mufti (or sacred Messenger)
assures him, Mahomet by revelation told him his oath might be dispensed with,
so 40000. were beheaded, no matter what; at length he consented, whereupon
ensued a massacre of all sorts of beasts, of whose heads this barbarous Column
was reared, higher then any Mosque in that City, though now grown ruinous,
Herbert. p. 89. etc.

[(11) The Buzzarr] In our language the Market place, H^rbert. p. 147.

[(12.) Your great Ancestors from MORTYS ALLY] the present King of Persia will
have himself of true descent from Mortys-al^y, or Haly, an honor he conceives
so great as he puts it among his titles. This Ally was Cousin to Mahomet, the
Persian Prophet, to whom he gave in marriage his daughter Fatyma born of his
first wife, and made him his heir, and head of his superstition, by the title
of Caliph: but after his death Abubacer Father of Aissa, Mahomets 2d. wife,
taking ill the preferment of Ally, by the aid of Omar and Ottomar Mahomets
kinsmen (whose desires were, in hope of succession, by reason of the old man's
years, and for kindreds sake, rather to see Abubacer then Haly Caliph) resisted
Haly, and set up himself, after him Omar and Ottomar succeeded; Omar was slain
by a slave, Ottomar in a private Quarrel; after them Haly reigned; against him
arose Mavius, who accusing him as accessory to the death of Ottamar, caused him
to be slain, near Cafe, a City some two days journey from Babylon, where he
lies buried; and there, in his honor, the Persian Kings have ever since used
to be consecrated; the place is called Massadell, or the house of Haly. Ossan
or Hussan his Son was p^oclaimed, but resisted by Mavius, and by him poisoned,
about the year 657. He had twelve Sons, eleven whereof were murdered with him,
and with him lay buried at Cafe, or Massad; the twelfth Son escaped, from whom
the now King derives his pedegee, his name was Mahomet Mahadin, alias Musa, or
Prince Cherisim. The Persians so highly honor Mortys-ally, as still they place
him in their devotions with Mahomet, and swear by his name; their usual oaths
being by Serrey Mortys Ally, the head of Mortys-Ally or Serrey Shaw, by the
Kings head; and putting one finger upon their eye, and then you may believe
them, if you list, they honor no less his son Hussan, whose death they yearly
celebrate with many ceremonies, nine several days, in great multitudes, in
the streets altogether, crying out Hussan! Hussan! so long, and so fiercely,
till they have spent their voices; on the ninth day they find him (whom they
imagine lost in a Forest) or one in his place, and then in a tumult, crying
out Hussan! Hussan! with drums, fifes, and all sorts of loud Music, they bring
him to the Mosque, where after some adoration and thanks giving, their Orgie
end. Most believe that Hocem, or Mahomet Mahadin, is not dead, but strongly
expect his return to convert the world, wherefore, their Prophet Mahomet also
having promised them his second glorious coming after 1000. year (which they
seriouysl late looking for and seeing themselves gulled by such credulity,
began to stagger, till the Mufti assured them the figures were mistaken, and
that upon better view of the Original he found 2000. when he would not fail to
visit them) till the first thousand years end the King of Persia, ever kept in
the Mosque of Massadella, a horse ready sadled, richly camparison'd, and well
attended, which, with one of his daughtrs, he reserved for Mahomet the Prophet,
or for Mahadin his Nephew, first come, first sarved. The lineal descent of this
King of Persia from Mortys Ally (superfluous and tedious here to insert) as
also of the difference in religion between the Persian and Turk raised by his
family. An. 1375. or at least by Syet Guynet who pretended to be so, read at
large in Mr. Herberts Travells, and Mr. Sandies his Relation.

[(13 and 14) CYRUS and DARIVS] The Alpha and Omega of the Persian Monarchy,
when it was the second and greatest in the world: and stretched from East to
West, from India to Ethiopia, if it can be that any is not yet acquainted with
the memory of these two m^ghty Princes, they may soon be so, by the means of
Quintus Curtius and Iustine. They were both the most fortunate and unfortunate;
the one overcome by Thomyris Queen of Scythia, the othor by great Alexander.
The two examples they were of the fragility of mundane g^eatnesse, whe^eof the
last, that led an Army of 1000000. fighting men against Alexander, professed it
his mishap at his death, that he had not werewith to requite Polystratus for a
draught of cold water, but was forced to leave it to his noble Enemy to do. And
the first, that possessed so large a Dominion, and had 200000. men to attend
his fall, was content with this modest Epitaph over his narrow do^mitory: O man
whatsoever thou art, and whencesoever thou come, for I know thou shall come:
I am Cyrus that conquered the Empire of Persia, I pray thee envy me not for
this little earth that covers my body. Words powerful enough to pierce even
the heart of Alexander, considering the instability of worldly things, as
witnesses Plutarch in vit. Alex.

[(15) Would open MAHOMETS shrine] Mahomet the Saracen Law giver died in his 63.
year (his great Clymacterick) giving his seduced sect a promise of his
Resurrection the third day after; till when they kept him unburied, and as
Anthonius writes, 30. days after the reckoning; till smelling he was a lier,
the air being infected with the monstrous stink of his carcass, by Abubecher
(or Ebbubecher) his Father in law, he was purified, entomb^d, and laid in a new
Sepulcher, at Medina Talnby, some two days journey from Mecha; to which place
is daily resort, by such of his sect as have zeal to Pilgrimage; and those not
only are ever after accounted Syets, or holy men, and cannot lie from that
time forward, but their Camels and apparel also are of such esteem, that they
never after do them service in vile carriages or servile occasions. The lay
people are not permitted to approach, much less to look into his Monument. But
the vulgar Tradition that he hangs in an Iron Chest attracted to the roof of a
Mosque by a loadstone there placed, I find approved of by few good Authors,
therefore wave it. Sandys, Herbert. etc.

-- No where are [(16) Two Kings in safete but in Teneriff] Teneriff is one of
the Canary Islands, in the Atlantique Sea, in former ages called Fortunate.
Pliny counts only six of them, others ten, but the moderns reckon their
number 7. viz. Grand Canaria, La Palma, Teneriffa, Lancerota, Hierro, La
Gomera, and Forte ventura, their commodities are Honey, Wax, Sugar, and the
best Sack; They were unknown to Romes greatness, being first discovered (as
Galvano writes) by a French Gentleman, called John de Betancour, An. 1417.
though some report it of another, and in the year 1330. at which time the
inhabitants were rather monsters then men; they knew no God but Nature, were
ignorant of the use of fire, they shaved their heads with flints, their
Children were given to Goats to suck, they cultivated the earth with horns of
Goats and Oxen. In Gomera, they had their wives in common, they gave adoration
to all Aetheriall Bodies. Their Dead they washed exceeding clean, then put the
carcass into a Cave, standing upright, with a staff in his hand, and a pale of
Milk and Wine placed by him; good Coadjutors to his imaginary Pilgrimage. They
were conquered by Don Henerico Infant of Spain, Anno 1418. De' Juigne says
long before, viz. in the year 1346. or thereabouts. But my purpose was only to
speak of that one of them, Teneriffa equal to the rest in circuit, or if not,
exceeding them in height; allowing it is immediate ascent from the Ocean, the
high peak is by most Geographers reputed 15. miles high, happily the highest in
the world; by reason of its affinity with the middle aerie Region, seldom
without snow, it is seen by Seamen in a Serene sky, 120. English miles, and
serves as an apt Sea-mark. In this I Will they had a Custom, and I think among
the Natives continued, (which occasioned this note) to have ever two Kings, one
dead, the other living, keeping him that died last unburied all the reign of
his Successor, pe^haps to be to him a memento of Mortality, and so a Monitor
to rule well. Herb. p. 3. etc.

[(17) -- Sworn by the Eight Refulgent Orbes] This (though a ranting one) was
one of King Abba's usual oaths when he was serious. Herbert recounts more of
this strein, as by his Crown, by the eleven hundred names of God, and the
honor of his Prophet Mahomet, and by his Fathers soul, which last I made use
of (170. lines) before. To swear by the souls and ashes of the deceased was no
less frequent among the Ancients then Moderns: to instance but in one example:
Ovid making Briseis avouch to Achilles her own chastity, and Agamemnos civility
toward her, makes her take these imprecations.

Per tamen ossa viri subito mala tecta sepulcro,
Semper judicis ossa verenda meis.
Perque trium fortes animas, mea numina, fratrum,
Qui been pro patria, cum patriaque jacent, Epist. 3.
^or by my Fathers bones, too ill interred,
Bones by me ever to be honored,
By my three valiant Brothers souls, my Pride,
That bravely for, and with, their Country died.
[(18) Sultan] in our language as much as an Earl. Herb. p. 171.

[(19) My Country Phoenix] Mirzas wife, who speaks this, was (according ^o
Master Herbert) an Arabian Princess, of which Country Pliny (L. 6. c. 28.)
with the consent of all or most Authors, makes the Phoenix: nor could any land
bring forth such a Princess as we would have her seem, but that which produces
the Phaenix, a bird Claudian calls Far Superis, equal to the Gods; but because
his rare Epigram of this rare Bird is too long to be inserted here, I will shut
up these Annotations upon our first Act, with what Ovid sings of this precious
Fowl, in as precious numbers.

Vna est, quae reparet. seque ipsa reseminet ales,
(Assyrii Phoenica vocant) nec fruge, nec herbis,
Sed thuris lacrymis, and succo vivit amomi.
Haec ubi quinque suae complevit saecula vitae,
Ilicis in ramis, tremulaeque cacumine palmae,
Vnguibus and duro nidum sibi construit ore.
Quo simulac casias, and nardi lenis aristas,
Quassaque cum fulva substravit cinnama myrrha;
Se super imponit: finitque in odoribus aevum.
Inde ferunt, totidem qui vivere debeat annos;
Corpore de patrio parvum Phaenica renasci.
Cum dedit huic aet^s vires; on^rique ferendo est;
Ponderibus nidi ramos levat arboris altae:
Fertque pius, cunasque suas, patriumque Sepulchrum.
Perque leves auras Hyperionis urbe potitus
Ante fores sacras Hyperionis aede reponit.
Ovid. Met. l. 14. One Bird there is repairs and sowes again
Her self, called Phoenix by the Assyrian.
Frankincense tears her happy life (not grain
Or herbs) and juice of Amomum sustain.
On Oak or Palm, when the Five hundred years.
fifth age is past
She with horned beak and tallons builds a neast.
This strewn with Cassia, bruized Cinnamon
Delicious Nard, and yellow Myrrh; thereon
She sits, and her age in odors ends.
A little Phoenix thence, it is said, ascends,
To live as long; Grown strong, and fit to bear
So sweet a load, her Parents Sepulcher
And her own Cradle loosing from the Tree,
Upon her wings with devout Piety
She to Haeliopolis in Egypt.
the City of the Sun conveighs,
And it in's Fane, before his Altar lays.
See the Tradition of the Phoenix excellently enquired into by Doctor Brown, in
his Pseudodoxia Epidemica. l. b. 3. cap. 12.

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE SECOND ACT.
[(1) NOr hope we better fruit since that the Persians Begun to follow the
Lacedaemonians. -- ]

Bringing in a Persian, taxing the Luxury of his Countrymen, I make him bewail
that that the Persians followed the Lacedaemonians, when indeed nothing is
truer then the contrary; the Grecians being then (exemplarily) valiant and
wise, Martial and Learned; the Persians (as Plutarch taxes them) wholly bent
upon softness and ease, riches, pomp and vanity, curiosity and fair women: Yet
is the Antiphrasis ancient, and recorded by Plutarch, the occasion this: In the
time of the reign of Artaxerxes over Persia, the Lacedaemonians seeing the
Persians lost in riot, determined to deliver the Grecians that dwelt in Asia
from the Persian bondage, and to that end persuaded their King Agesilaus to
undertake the expedition. He invaded, and at his first conflict overthrew
Tisaphernes, Artaxerxes his Lieutenant, and made most of the Cities held by
Grecians rebel against him. Artaxerxes to divert the war, sent into Greece
Hermocrates, a Rhodian (of great credit with him) with a mavelous sum of
money to bestow in raising a faction in Greece to invade Lacedaemon, now their
powers were abroad; Hermocrates so wisely executed his commission, as he raised
the chief Cities of Greece against Lacedaemon, so that all Peloponnesus being
up in arms, the Ephori (or controllers of the Senate) at Lacedaemon were
forced to entreat Agesilaus home again: so much sharper, even in those days,
was gold then steel, and that Agesilaus sorrowfully leaving Asia, said to his
friends most wittily: that the King of Persia had driven him out of his Realm
with 30000 Archers: (the Persian Coin being then stamped with an Archer, having
a bow in his hand) He gone, Artaxerxes takes arms, and by the revolt of Conon,
General of the Athenians, won that memorable Sea Fight near to the I Will of
Gnidus, by which he drove the Lacedaemonians from their whole jurisdiction by
Sea, which made him formidable to all Greece. Then rose up Antalcidas a corrupt
Grecian, (being a Citizen of Sparta, the Son of one Leon) who being empowered by
his Country, made between them that famous infamous league called Antalcidas
peace; for he favoring Artaxerxes his affair, procured by this treaty, that
the Lacedaemonians left unto Artaxerxes all the Cities of Greece in Asia and
all the Isles, to enjoy quietly, and tax at his Pleasure; Peace thus concluded
with the Grecians, (if so shameful a Treason, reproach, and common Infamy to
all Greece may be called a peace (says Plutarch) as never war fell out more
dishonorable for the vanquished) Artaxexes, that otherwise hated the
Lacedaemonians to the death, (as Dinon writes) did yet seem highly to favor
Antalcidas, insomuch as once he took a Garland of flowers, wet it with the mos^
precious and sweet Oils prepared for the feast, and sent it to Antalcidas, a
person well deserving such a Garland, who wa^ so bold to dance before, the
Persians, mocking and counterfeiting Leonidas and Callicratidas, two of the
valiantest men o^ Greece, wherefore one said at that time, in the presence of
King Agesilaus, O how unhappy is poor Greece at this day, when the
Lacedaemonians come to follow the Persians? But Agesilaus presently answered:
Not so, but rather the Persians follow the Lacedaemonians; so wisely taxing the
levity of Antalcidas, whom (though the business of this Note is now over) I
will trace to his end, being it cannot be far off, nor fair: shortly after the
Lacedaemonians lost the battle of Leuctres, and therewith the signiory they had
kept so long over all Greece, though they had lost their reputation before, for
consenting to so dishonorable a peace. Whilst Sparta flourished, Artaxarxes
continued to make much of Antalcidas, and called him his friend, but after this
loss, he being sent into Persia, to request aid for the Lacedaemonians; the
King so disdained him, denying him, and his request, that he returned back to
Sparta, as a man knocked on the head; and there also, seeing that his enemies
mocked him, and fearing that the Ephori would call him to account for abusing
his Country, he starved himself: so just reward found his treachery from a
Prince, wise enough to to slight the Traitor, when he had served himself of the
Treason. Plut. in vit. Artax.

[(2) The Turkish Moon] The half moon, or Crescent, is the Turks Arms, nor do
they honor that Planet only in their Ensigns, but also in their devotions,
superstitiously gratulating the discovery of the new Moon, esteeming him happy
that discovers it first, and by the course thereof, do reckon their year.
Sandys l. 1. p. 56.

The Persian Emperors Coat Armor, is a Lion passant Gardant, the sun orient
upon his back. Herbert. p. 151.

[(3) Ottoman blood] Ottoman is the name of the family of the Grand Signior.
The Turks arrived to the dominion of the goodliest portion of the Earth, from
so obscure an original, as the same is rather conjectured at, then positively
delivered by any. Some (after the manner of most Nations) derive them from the
Trojans, led thereunto by the affinity of the names Turci and Teneri, Philip of
Mornay, the noble and learned Frenchman, (in his work of the truth of the
Christian Religion) deduce them, and the Tartars from the Jews, viz. from the
ten Tribes which were by Salmanaser King of Assyria, in the time of Oseas King
of Israel, carried into captivity, and by him confined into Media, and the
other unpeopled Countries of the North, (2 King. 17.) His reasons are probable,
and worthy of consideration, but to long for this note. Indeed themselves
boast, that they are of the seed of Abraham, and his servant Hagar, and call
themselves Ishmalites; this is also assured by their Alcoran, which calls them
Hagarens, but that is such a fardel of forgeries, as it is no argument to beget
credit, and themselves are so ignorant of their own antiquities, that their
Histories are rather confused notes, then perfect Chronicles. Others will have
them of the legitimate offspring of Abraham, by his wife Sarah, and from her
called Saracens. But the most probable op^nion, grounded upon the Authority of
the greatest Cosmographers, (as Pomponius Mela (l. 1. cap. ult.) Plin. secundus
(lib. 6. cap. 7.) and Ptolomy (in the description of Sarmatica Asiatica) is
that they were a people of Scythia, at what time, and for what causes they left
their cold and barren seat, to seek a better more Southerly, is no less
controverted: Blondus, and Platina, will have them enforced with want to follow
their better fortune, Anno Dom. 755. with whom Segonius agrees in the cause of
their remove, but not in the time or place when, or whereby they departed: he
will have the year 844. and that they issued by the streights of Caucasus, the
others by the Caspian streights, which (says Sabellicus (Eunead 9. lib. 2.)
some of themselves report. With Segonius, our most exact Mr. Sandys agre^s in
the time, with the others in the way they took for their remove. So that
mingling the currents of Opinions and Authors, in the seventh or eighth Century
of years after our Savior, these people of Scythia, then called Turcae or
Tusci, expelled, or by force of ill neighbors, or famine, entering by the
streights of the Caspian Mountains, by strong hand possessed themselves of
Armenia the greater, called thereupon Turcomania, as it is at this day,
multiplying by the daily accession of their Countrymen, being in Religion
Pagans, and living in wandering troops, like the people about Techoa, or
Dea-chow (which signifies the Town under a hill) in the Kingdom of Larr, (of
which see more in the 23d Note upon the 3d Act) whom the Persians call Vloches,
or Shepherds, or as of old did the Scythian Nomades, a people about Maeotis,
thus described.

Nulla domus, plaustris habitant, migrare per arva,
Mos, atqueerrantes circumvectare penates.
No house, but wains have they; their mode's to range
The fields, and often their Gods new seats to change.
Now the Saracen Empire waining by the division of the Mohammedan Princes,
Mahomet Sultan of Persia, distressed by the Caliph of Babylon, and the Indians,
entreated aid of the Turks, who sent him 3000. soldiers under the conduct of
Tangrolipix, Prince of the Selzuccian family (for so the Greeks call him,
though others Togra Mucalet, the Son of Mikeil, others Sidoc, or Sadock names
(its like) corrupted of his Family) Mahomet by his aid vanquished Pysastris the
Caliph, the Arabians not being able to endure the Turks Archers. The Turk now
desires to leave the Persian, and return over Araxis; but the Sultan, desiring
to compel his father service, denied it; whereupon Tangrolipix not being able
to keep the field against such numbers, betook himself to the Carmanian
Deserts, spoiling the Persians Subjects; Against him Mahomet sent 20000.
soldiers, who were soon defeated by stratagem; which victory so flesht the
Turk's as (being now increased by fugitive) he fought Mahomet soon after with
60000. men: which battle Mahomet seeing lost, betook himself to flight,
intending for Spawhawn, but between it, and Rustans Tomb, fell and brake his
neck; So by the consent of both Armies was Tangrolipix elected Sultan, and
founded the Scythique or Turkish Empire. To Persia he added the jurisdiction of
Babylon (or Bagdat now) which continued in the Ottoman Tyranny till the year
1625. When ABBAS the victorious King of Persia, (or rather MIRZA his Son) beat
them out of it, as also out of Tauris, Van, and the greater Asia (of which see
more in the seventeenth note upon the fourth Act) yet continued Trangrolipix
the spiritual jurisdiction to the Caliphs successor, in honor of their false
Prophet, the Turk having now embraced the Mohammedan superstition, as the best
means to establish his new Empire, begun about the year 1030. such time as
Edward the Confessor ruled England, and about 200. years after the Turks
eruption out of Scythia. Axan succeeded his Father Tangrolipix, after him the
Empire fell into petty divisions, till Ottoman head of the Oguzian family no
less by f^aud then force united it under himself; who taking advantage of the
jarrs between the Christians, and some wrongs they did to him exasperating him,
in those 27. years that he reigned, he annexed Bythinia, Cappadocia, and most
of those strong holds that border on the Euxine Sea to his Empire, and left it
entire to his Son Orchanes, who also much augmented it, and l^ft it to his Son
Amurath, etc. since which, with mavelous fortune it has grown to that
stupendous bulk, that I hope will ruin it, for so long as the Christian arms
are thus miserably employed against themselves, so glorious a work is more then
we can hope from them. Ottoman achieved the Sultanship Anno 1300. in him began
the race still continued, called in his honor the Ottoman Race, though they
are indeed the Oguzian family; give me leave to shut up this long note with a
short poetical summary of this Ottoman, a man vigilant and hardy, and happily
the best, as well as the first, of the Turkish Emperors of that name.

Multiplici lassatae Asiae res clade premuntur,
Hinc Sarracenus, Tartarus inde ruit.
Mutua Christicolae gladios in vulnera stringunt:
Graecia funesta seditione perit.
Impiger interea nova concipit Ottomannus
Concilia, and valida surgit in arma manu.
Et vasta Turcis regno fundamina turbae
Ponit: and in multo sanguine Sceptra levat.
Phi. Lonicerus Hist. Turc. lib. 2. On Asia, torn, and tired with endless war
Here rushed the Saracen, the Tartar there.
In mutual wounds the Christians force is spent,
And poor Greece falls with civil discord rent.
Mean while quick Ottoman new Counsels takes,
And at the world his armed hand he shakes.
The basis of the Turks vast sway did found,
And his new Scepter bathed in many a wound.
Philip du Mornay, Pliny, Blondius, Platina, Pomponius Mela, Sabellicus,
Segonius, Ptolomie, Sandys, Herbert, Turkish History, D'Juigne.

[(4) Shiraz wine] Shiras is the Metropolitan City of Persia,) for Spawhawn is
in Parthia) she arose out of the ruins of Persepolis (of which read in the
12th. note upon the third Act) some confound the name, and think the Citie's
the same; others, that they once joined, though they are now 30. Eng^ish miles
distant; which distance, and the high craggy Mountains interposing them, seem
to confute that opinion. It Is seated upon the River Bindimire, the Persians
pronounce it Sheiras, some Syras, and such will have her built by Cyrus, and
from him called Cyropolis: others from Jamshet, fifth King of Persia, and so
from Noah. But its most probable, its derivation is from Sheir or Milk (being
fruitful in Pastorage) as Aleppo from Halip; which Synonymies are taken for
plenty and pleasure; many Towns in these parts ag^eeing so, as Whormoot, a Town
of Dates, D' Achow, a Town upon a Hill, De Gardow, a Town of Walnuts, Eri the
head City of Aria, so abounding with Roses, it may thence take the name. That
Shiras arose of the ruins of Persaepolis at least, most agree, though built in
a distant place; as we see Tauris from Echatane, Bagdat from old Babel,
Jerusalem toward Mount Calvary, Cairo from Memphis, Tunis from Carthage,
Constantinople from Bizantium, Rome now in Campus Martius, and many other
Cities which altering their seat, though but a league, some have got other
denominations, some to eternize their repairers, some from their site. The
compass of Sh^ras is about nine miles, pleasantly seated, and well adorned
with beautiful Mosques, and most delicious Gardens. It is a Proverb among the
Persians, Quando Suars erat Siras, tunc Caiarus erat ejus Pagus. A twinkling
Tradition, and implies much; For best fruits, gallant men, handsome women, and
good wine Shiras bears the bell; especially for wine; for about it grows the
best grape in Asia, so that the name of Shiraz wine is every where famous,
being no less cried up in Persia, then the Lesbian or Thracian wines were in
Greece, or then in Italy were the Falernian or Massican, or now is that they
call Lachrymae Christi (which made the Dutch man wish Christ had wept in his
Country) or that of Monte Fascone, which made the German Bishop immortal, as
the story goes, and as you may read it in Mr. Raymonds Mercurio Italico. page
62. The Shiraz wine is chiefly a Meat wine, somewhat like the French, but
better tasted, though more intoxicating, Herbert, etc.

[(5.) By the life of MORAT] The Turks also swear by the life of their King, a
Custom ancient, in all places: Joseph in Egypt learnt to swear by the life of
Pharaoh, or as some render it, by the health of Pharaoh, so the Remish, Genesis
42.15. This Morat or Amurath the 4th of that name, and 11th Emperor of the
Turks, reigned when this Tragedy was really acted in Persia, from him our
Mirza won Babylon or Bagdat, in the 3d or (as some say) 4th year of his Reign,
(see the third Note upon this Act.) He was one of the Sons of the greet Achmat,
and came to the Empire in the year 1623. (aged fifteeen years) after the
murder of his elder Brother Osman, and the short troublesome Reign of his Uncle
Mustapha.

[(6) Tulipant.] Tulipants, Turbants, and Shashes, are the head Ornaments of
the Turks and Persians. The Turks all of them wear white Shashes and Turbants,
the badge of their Religion; as is the folding of the one, and size of the
other of their vocations and quality. Shashes are long Towels of Calico wound
about their heads: Turbants are made like great Globes, of Calico too, and
thwarted with rolls of the same, having little copped Caps on the top, of
green or red velvet, being only worn by persons of rank, and he is the
greatest that wears the greatest, the Mufties (or Prelates) excepted, which
over-sizes the Emperors; yet is his big enough according to Mr. Sandys, who
reports, that Sultan Achmet, wore a Turbant, in shape like to a pumpion, but
thrice as great. And though many Orders have particular ornaments appointed for
their heads, yet wear they these promiscuously. It is yet an especial favor
in the Turk to suffer the Christian tributary Princes, and their chiefest
Nobles, to wear white heads in the City. The Persians also wind about their
heads great rolls of Calico, but some of silk and gold, somewhat higher, but
not so bulkie as the Turkish Tulipants; a little fash of gold, or fringe, hangs
down behind, as do our skarfes, which ornament they lately borrowed of the
Arabian. In Triumphs they wreath about their Turbants long chains of pearls,
Rubies, Turquoises, and Emeralds of no small luster and value. The King wears
the contrary side of his Tulipant forwards, which is all the difference in
habit 'twixt him and others. These Turbants they keep on continually, it being
a shame with them, to be seen bare-headed: (perhaps because generally they wear
no hair on the head or chin, (but on the upper lip they have very long
whiskers, and turned down-ward) some only reserve a lock of hair upon the top
of the head, as a certain note that Mahomet at Doomes-day, will distinguish
them from Christians, and by it lift them up to paradise) so that Mr Herbert
remembers as a singular favor, the civility of this King Abbas, to Sir Dodmore
Cotton, Ambassador from our late King Charles to him, Sc. When the King drank
to the Ambassador his royal Masters health, seeing the Ambassador put off
his Hat, the King put off his Turbant, and bare-headed took off his cup, to the
admiration of all the Court, to see so unusual a Grace from so haughty a
Prince, bestowed upon a Christian Ambassador: another of his favors to him
was, that whereas he thinks it honor enough to let the great Turks
Ambassador kiss the hem of his Garment only, and perhaps by especial Grace,
his foot; he gave the English Ambassador his hand, and with it, pulled him
down, and seated him next to himself crosse-legged, after the Asian mode.

[(7) MITHRA] the same with the Suns, or rather the Idol of the Sun, anciently
adored by the Persians, nor have Mahometisme yet justled out that old
superstition, but only mixed with it, so that Mr. Herbert affirms, that in
Spawhawne its self the Imperial City (of which before in the tenth Note upon
the first Act) at the appearing of every new Moon, they go out to worship it,
and each day at Sun set in every ward of the City, they beat their Kettle
Drums, till he arises with the Antipodes: at that time, and at his first
looking into our Horizon, a well voyced Boy from the Tarrass, or top of their
Temples, sing Eulogies to Mahomet and Ally, and then each layick Pagan falls to
his devotion, whatsoever he is about. Their prayers are in the Arabique, their
Negotiations in other Languages. Of old, in a Cave were the Rites of Mithra
solemnized; from whence they drew an Ox by the horns; which, after the singing
of certain Paeans, was sacrificed to the Sun. Zorastes places him between
Oremazes and Arimanius, the good and bad Demon, for which he took that
denomination. His image had the countenance of a Lion, with a Tiara on his
head, depressing an Ox by the horns. I find him mentioned by Grotius, in his
Tragedy of Christ's passion, but more to our purpose by Statius, Theb. l. 1.

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE THIRD ACT.
[(1) CAucasus] This is the highest mountain in Asia, yet was it in the
general Deluge fifteen Cubits under water, Genesis 7.20. Its of long extent, and
serves for limits to Scythia, to separate it from India, dilating it self
almost through the whole North, but under diverse names; that part which
stretches from Maeotis in Scythia, toward the Indian Sea where it arises,
Pliny will have called Taurus, (lib. 5. cap. 27.) Some parts of it, the Indians
call Imaus, other Paropamissus, Circius, Coatras, Niphates, Sarpedon, Coragus,
etc. These out-stretching branches of this Mountain, enco^pass some whole
Kingdoms, of some they ^unne by the sides, to others are a defensive Rampire;
sometimes they wholly shut up passages, sometimes make them inaccessible:
Difficulties more injurious to the Morgor, then any other Prince, rendering his
Horse, his chief strength, of small service, of this quality are the frontiers
of Persia, and the Kingdom of Sa^lastan, on every side hemmed in with that part
which the Grecians call Paropamis (as I said before in the third Note upon the
first Act. Segestan is likewise so environed, that the River Il^mento (were it
not for searching out infinite crooked windings through natural valleys) could
hardly find passage to pay his tribute to the famous Ganges. Notwithstanding
all these excrescencies of this Mountain, all agree that the highest part of
it is Caucasus, so called quasi Caspius, as being near the Caspian Sea. By
reason of the height, and and so snow perpetually on it, it is uninhabited,
producing little but salvage Trees, and poisonous herbs, and is barren even to
an expression: so that Virgil making Dido exclaim against Aeneas, for his
unkind attempt to leave her, could not put better words into her mouth, then
Nec tibi diva parens, generis nec Dardanus auctor
Perside; sed duris genuit te cautibus ^orrens
Caucasus, Hyrcanaeque admorunt ubera Tigres.
Aeneid. 4. Thou art not Venus Son, nor Dardans seed,
But faithless, thee dire Caucasus did breed
On churlish cliffes, and Hyrcan Tigers feed*


(At the Hyrcanian Tigers I glance in the eighth Scene of the fourth Act)
Caucasus by reason of the stupendous height administers much ease and
certainty to the observation of the stars, which have given so great a
reputation to the Scythians to be good Astronomers; this according to
Lactantius and Cicero (lib. 5. Tusc) is the reason the Poets feigned Prometheus
to be chained here, and to feed an Eagle with his breast, for stealing fire
from Heaven (not here to dilate any further upon the Mythology of that Fable)
meaning by him a studious man, and Astrologer; his name imports wisdom and
foresight, (as Epimetheus the contrary) he passes for Son of Japetus, and
Father of Deucalion, though some will have him begotten by Mercury, of Reason,
upon Mount Caucasus, because of the commodiousness of the place, for the
aspection of Stars. But the occasion of this Note, was what I find noted by
Boethius in his Philosophical comfort (lib. 2.) Out of Cicero his Scipio's
Dream, speaking of the narrowness of Fame, viz. that in his time the name of
the Roman, Commonwealth had not sworn over the River Ganges, (of which in the
next note) nor reached over this hill Caucasus; and yet it was then in the most
flourishing estate, fearful even to the Parthians, and the rest of Asia minor.

The same I find in Plutarch, who indeed makes Pompey (in vit. Pomp.) in chase
of Mithridates pass by those Nations that inhabit about Caucasus, and conquer
the Albanians and Iberians, but they are still of this side of the hill, the
Iberians (as himself say) stretch out unto Mount Moschium, and to the Realm of
Pontus, the Albanians lie toward the East and mare Caspium. So true is it that
the greatest Empires have hidden fates allotted them, and certain periods both
of time and place. Nor does Lucan in his muster roll of Pompeyes forces set
down any from beyond the hill, nor over Ganges, though just up to them; in that
agreeing with Plutarch, who also agrees with him, where he makes Ganges the
utmost bounds of Alexanders Conquests; no small fame to this hill and river to
bound the Roman and Macedonian Empires, to remember the Poets words is not
superfluous, at least so much of them as concern Ganges the subject of the next
note.

Movit and Eoos bellorum fama recessus,
Qua colitur Ganges, toto qui solus in orb
Ostia nascenti contraria solvere Phaebo
Audet, and adversum fluctus impellit in Eurum.
Hic ubi Pellaeus post Tethyos aequora ductor.
Constitit, and magno vinci se fassus ab orb est. Phars. l. 3.
The farthest East range of these famous wars,
Where Ganges flows, the only stream that dares
Cross rising Phoebus, and with horrid might
Force against the Eastern wind his rouling tide.
Here the Pellaean, stopped, was forced confess
His boundless mind then this one world was less.
[(2) From Ganges head to towering Atlas foot] The strange and unusual course
of this River Ganges, cross to the Sun, you have seen well described by Lucan.
It takes its source in the Mountains of Scythia, as most believe, though some
say in the Mountains of Tartarie, others, that it is uncertain, as that of
Nile. It traverseth the East Indies, giving a name to the Country. Gangeticus,
id est, Indicus: So Lucan speaking of the arrival of the ^pring, and of the
Suns drying up of the winter fogs, says, Et quas sentit Arabs, and quas
Gangetica tellus
Exhalat nubulas. Phars. l. 4.
-- He does exhale
The fogs that India, and Arabia feel.


It was (as many write) one of the four Rivers that bounded Paradise, and the
first mentioned in holy writ, by the name of Pishcon, or Phison. (Genesis 2.) It
was called Ganges from a King of Aethiopia of that name, so says Suidas. It is
very large in all its course; Pliny (lib. 6. cap. 18:) makes the narrowest part
of it to be eight miles over, the broadest twenty, and the depth more then 100.
foot. Arrianus in his History of Alexander, assigns the first place unto it,
making it excel Nilus; which must be granted (according unto later relations)
it does, at least in depth and breadth, if not in length: For the Magnitude of
Nilus consists in the dimension of Longitude, and is inconsiderable in the
other; what stream it maintains beyond Scyene or Asna, and so forward unto
its original, relations are very imperfect, but below these places and farther
removed from the head, the current is but narrow; and the History of the Turks
relates, that the Tartar horsemen of Selimus, swam over the Nile from Cairo, to
meet forces of Tonombeius, last Sultan of Egypt, more then the valiant
Macedonians durst under take to do at Ganges (though they had before done as
much as the Tartars did at Nile, in wading through Hydaspes, up to their
breasts with their harness on their backs, to meet King Porus) not so much
deterred by the report of the Kings of the Gangarides and the Praesians on the
other side ready to receive them (with 80000. horse, 200000. foot, 8000.
Chariots, and 6000. Elephants) for numbers were not terrible to them, but gave
hopes of the richer prey and brighter fame,) but they were dishartened to
combat the waves, understanding by the Countrymen, that it was 32. furlongs
over, and 100. fadom deep. So Plutarch (somewhat differing from Pliny, though
their measure will admit an easy reconcilement.) With an impetuous tide it
rages; for which I must quote Lucan again, who speaking of Caesar's going to
assault Corsinium a Town of the Peligni, when L. Domitius the Governor had cut
off the bridge of the River, three miles from the Town, makes him thus bravely
encourage his Cohorts to pass it, despising the petty difficulty, and vaunting
that he would do, if need were, now he had begun the War, what Alexander could
not, -- Non si tumido me gurgite Ganges
Submoveat, stabit jam flumine Caesar in ullo,
Post Rubiconis aquas: equitum properate catervae.
Ite simul pedites: ruiturum ascendite pontem.
Phars. l. 2. I Would ore; though Ganges here rowed all his might:
Now Rubicon is past; no rapid tide
Shall Caesar stop; on winged Troops, like hail,
Follow brave Foot, the sinking bridge assail.


A speech worthy Caesar. This River is by the Indians held so sacred, as many
of them drown themselves in it, esteeming it efficacious to wash away their
sins; and the Princes whose dominions it washes, exact great Tributes of such
as bath in it; well therefore might Lucan in the fore cited Verses, meaning
India, say Qua colitur Ganges. Where Ganges is adored --

Atlas is a mountain in Mauritania (now called Barbaria) or the Country of
Marisco, toward the Gaditan streights, and the west Ocean. It was anciently
called Adirim, according to Martian, Durim says Solinus, as also Anchisa, and
the Pillar of heaven, by the inhab^tants, being so high, that a man cannot
discern the top thereof. It was called Atlas from a King of Mauritania of that
name, the Son of Jupiter and Clymene, or of the Nymph Asie, say the Poets;
others, of Japet, and Brother to Prometheus; He having been advertized by the
Oracle of Themis, that the Son of Jupiter (prophesied by Hercules) should
carry away golden Apples, which grew in his Hesperian Hortyard, enclosed the
same with a mighty wall, and committed it to the custody of a sleepless
Serpent, admitting no Forrainer into his confines; and so being unhospitable
unto Perseus (the Son of Jupiter and Danae) was at the sight of Medusas head,
turned into that Mountain which carries that name, on whose high shoulders the
Stars are feigned to take their repose. So Ovid in his Metamorphosis, upon
the fourth Book of which M. Sandys in his Mythologicall commentary observes,
that some alluding this to a History, will have those apples flocks of large
and beautiful sheep belonging to Atlas, whose fleeces were of the color of
gold; as because a River environed those pastures, they were said to be guarded
by a Serpent, or in that they were kept by one Ladon, a churlish and inhumane
shepherd, or feigned perhaps of the store of gold wherewith Mauritania
abounds, dug up at the foot of that Mount; the wakefull Dragon, those
restless cares which afflict the covetous in the ^uition of their riches. Now
Atlas flying thither, from the invasion of Perseus (figuring a Masculine and
heroical virtue) and there lurking, was said to have been converted into that
Mountain, and in regard of the altitude thereof, to have sustained the heaven
on his shoulders. But Astronomically those Apples are taken for stars, shining
like gold, and in figure orbicular, said to grow in the West, in that they
appear not before sun set; the Zodiac, or our Hemispheare, being the Serpent:
all of them supported, in regard of his excellency in Astronomy, by Atlas. Some
say, that ascending aloft, the better to observe the course of the stars, he
fell headlong into the Sea from this Mountain, called for this by his name, as
of that aspiring height, the celestial Column: all agree that he is said to
sustain the Heaven with his shoulders, because he was the first Astronomer in
those quarters, and a famous Mathematitian, who invented the sphere, (though
others make that. Archimedes his device) and held the first light to the
discovery of the motions and qualities of the celestial bodies. Homer makes
Calypso, that deteyned Ulysses seven years in her Isle of Ogygia, Atlas, his
daughter, and thus sings of him and her, whilst he makes Pallas at the council
of the Gods, call her (...)
(...)
(...).
(...). Daughter of Atlas, that knew every where
The Oceans inmost gulfes, he that does bear
The two long poles that earth and heaven up rear.


I here put Ganges and Atlas, in opposition one to another, to express the
diverse ends of the world; to wit, East and West; though indeed to speak
strictly, (as Dr Brown observes in his Pseudodexia Epidemica: lib. 6. cap. 7.
There is no East and West in Nature; nor are those absolute and in variable,
but respective and mutable points, according to different Longitudes, or
distant parts of habitation, whereby they suffer many and considerable
variations. For first, unto some, the same part will be East or West, in
respect of one another; that is, unto such as inhabit the same parallel, or
indifferently dwell from East to West. Thus as unto Spain, Italy, lies East,
unto Italy, Greece, unto Greece, Persia, and unto Persia, China, so again unto
China, Persia lies West, unto Persia Greece, unto Greece Italy, and unto
Italy, Spain: so that the same Country is sometimes East, and sometimes West;
and Persia, though East unto Greece, yet is it West unto China. But laying the
Scene in Persia, it is as proper to express the East by Ganges, as China, or any
flood in it, as well because of their affinity, China bordring upon the
Brachmans that adore Ganges, as that Ganges is the most celebrated name. These
places to express the same meaning, Du' Bartas makes use of; in the first day
of his first Week, he says, That the Trumpe of the Angel in the last day,
shall be heard from Atlas to Ganges, meaning from the West to the East.

[(3) Let the haughty Duke of Shiras have a care, left I absolve my self of my
rash oath, etc.]

Emangoly Chawn, great Duke of Shiras, and Persepolis, and Viceroy of them and
Larr, got an oath from King Abbas, that he never should be beheaded, a
recompense for small reason too usual from that Emperor. ( Herbert, p. 62.)
Mahomet^lly beg had the like oath, as I hint toward the end of the Play. See
more of the greatness and state of this Emangoly, in the 9th. Note upon this
Act, of his martial acquests in the 18th. and 19th. Notes upon the fourth Act.
See Persepolis described in the 12th. and Larr in the 23d Note upon this third
Act.

[(4) I Will thrust him from the Government of Shiras.]

This Duke Emangoly, was Governor of Shiras, where he kept his Court in a
splendid manner, when he was out of Arms. Shiras you have seen enough of, in
the fourth Note upon the second Act. Herbert.

[(5) I Will turn his feast of Lillies into Cypress.]

Shushan, in the Province of Elam, or Persia, (according to Nehemiah and
Daniel) was one of the three royal Palaces of the Median Monarchs, one at
Babylon, another at Echatan, now Tauris, the third at Susa, or Shushan. This
Palace is mentioned in Hester, Cap. 1. That Ahasuerus, An. mundi 3500. ruling
over the Medes and Persians, and over 127 Provinces, made a feast in Shushan to
all his Nobles and Officers, lasting 180 days, which custom it seems, is yet
amongst them, for yearly to this day, the King of Persia celebrates a feast of
Roses, and the Duke of Shiraz, or Persepolis, (who is Lord of Susiana, or
Shushan) a feast of Lillies, or Daffadillies of like continuance. Herbert. p.
140. Susa, signifying a Lilly, a Rose or Joy, and so called from the Kingdom
of Susiana, in which it stands.

[(6) Hyrcania] Is a noble Kingdom of Asia, now called Mozendram, it was
called Corca, and Girgia (meaning perhaps Georgia, which is Iberia, 'twixt the
two Seas) by some again Caspia (from its sea) and Steana, and Myrach, and by
Mercator, Diargument. Tomasius will have it bounded on the East with the
Caspian sea, on the South with Armenia, on the North with Albania, on the West
with Iberia. M. Herbert, and most of the moderns, limit it on the North, with
the Caspian sea, on the South with Mount Taurus, on the East with Zagathia,
(which is part of Scythia intra Imaum) and on the West with Media, or rather
some part of the lesser Armenia, upon whose tops the Ark rested. Araxis from
the Turisian Mountains (as Ptolomy writes, from Sagapene, Colthyan, Seducene)
waters and fattens this peaceful Country; to perfect which, she is divided, and
subdivided so often into so many rivolets, that from an ample River, ere she
kisses the Caspian, she loses her pride, and gives one leave to wade through
her deepest channel. The Country is full of Woods, so that the people of old,
thinking to hinder Alexanders entrance, twisted one Tree to another; but he
that had dissected Gordions knot, though very mystical, with the same sword
annihilated their policies, and subdued them; yet with no small difficulty, not
so much from their Woods, as their Wolves, Lions, Bores, Panthers, Leopards,
Tigers, (so famed by the Poets, and remembered in the forecited Ve^ses out of
Virgil) and Scorpions, with which they are stored; Scorpions especially, not
more small in bulk, then fierce in their venomous disposition. He that is
stung, if he escapes death, is frantique twenty hours at least, and no better
remedy then (like Achilles's Spear) to turn a Scorpion into Oil, and apply it
to the place offended. The Hyrcanians think to prevent their poison by charms,
which they tie about their Arms, yet they sometimes fail them; then to excuse
their charms, they lay the cause on their that days sin. Though their woods
could not hold out the Macedonians, yet their noxious inhabitants of them,
defended them from the Romans, in some sort recompencing to the Country in
general, the hurt they do to its particular inhabitants: for Plutarch reports
(In vit. Pomp.) That Pompey going to invade Hyrcania, as far as Mare Caspium,
he was compelled to turn back again into Armenia the less, for the infinite
numbers of deadly venomous Serpents which he met with, being come within three
days Journey of it. These Woods yet befriend them against winter colds, and
shade them from the parching sun, both which in their seasons are there
extreme; and besides hurtful creatures they are plentifully stored with Apes
for European Merchandise; and Antilopes, and Red and fallow Dear for food. The
^rime Cities of this Kingdom are Farrabant, Asharaffe, Peris^^w, Omoall,
Barsrushdea and Derbent, most watered by the Rivers Araxis, Connack, Osbel,
Cyre, Rha, and Cheisell, who from the deserts of Larr, and together with the
70. mouthed Volga from Muscovia, empty themselves into the Caspian Sea. These
Rivers abound with fish, and are furnished with little Canoes or Boats made of
one Tree, capable to receive eight men in fair weather. In the River of
Farrabant (which bears a stream of 40. paces over) are some long deep prams,
sowed together with hemp and cord (but unpitcht or calk't) in these the
Muscovian Merchants sail down Volga, over the Caspian Sea, to Farrabant, to
traffic for raw silks, which they transport to Mosco, and through Russia.
These ships ordinarily come thither in March, and return in July. This Country
being both pleasant and rich, viz. a fine Plain abounding with Corn (chiefly
Rice, Barley and Ric) Wine, Honey, and ^ll sorts of fruits; and being an
useful passage into Tartarie and Turcomania, allured Abbas of Persia to
attempt it, who had the fortune to win it: To hold it the better, he often
afforded it his presence, residing much at Farrabant, (where he built a
sumptuous Palace) and Asharaff (where Master Herbert tells you he was when he
received Sir Dodmore Cotton Ambassador from our King Charles) and in his
absence there resides the Viceroy. The people speak the Language of Persia;
their apparel is like the Irish trooses; their heads have a high woollen Cap,
furred with their own sheeps skinns. They are affable, and delight in
Noveltie, being much civilized (as say the Persians) since they called Abbas
their Conqueror, and had the honor to afford him a Mother and a Wife, which,
though not the least, shall be the last praise of Hyrcania which I will here
remember, that it produced the Grandmother and Mother of MIRZA.

[(7) The Grand Signior] The Great Turk, so called in the same sense as we call
the Great Mogor, the Great Japan, the Great Duke of Muscovie, the Great Cham,
the Great Duke of Tuscany, etc.

[(8) The Gelden Duke] King Abbas his Viceroy for Hyrcania (whom I call
Elchee) liking a Boy, whose Father was poor, and under his command; against the
boys wi^^ his Parents knowledge, and the Law of Nature, made him Sodomite,
which crying sin, though licensed by their Alcora^ yet force is not to be used,
and therefore are Ganymeds (...) each great City tolerated. The Father of this
wrong Child prostrates himself before the King, and acquaints hi^ with that
villainy: The King seeing sor^ow and truth in the Peasants look, demanded of the
Duke, who then was sittin^ there, how true it was; his countenance bewrayed
him. The King having at that instant a knife in his hand, gave it to the poor
Father, and bad him Eunuchize him: The Duke dur^ not startle or intercede, the
Law of the Persian never alters the poor man executed as was enjoined him. The
King ye^ continued to the Duke his jurisdiction. His Seraglio onel^ lost most
by it. Herbert. p. 99.

[(9) -- There I Have disarmed a Foe, and the most poten^ too in the whole
Empire] This foe of Ally-Beg's was the above mentioned Duke Emangoly, the
greatest subject in Persia; hi^ Father and Grandfather were Dukes before him,
a Genealogy of that Antiquity as many Sultans and Dukes in India and Persia
cannot equal it, they know so little that way. He was one of the Kings four
great Dukes, each of which has under him 12. Sultans, each Sultan 5000.
Gouzel-Bashaws, no worse warriers then the Janissaries. His Titles without
ostentation were these; Emangoly Chawn, Lord of Persia, (which they call
Farsee) Great Duke of Shiras, Sultan of Larr, and the Mountains of Jaaroon,
Lord of Ormus, Ruler of Carmania, Mergiana, Susiana, Gedrozia, Aria, and
Sigestan, Prince of the Gulf of Arabia, Great Beglerbegg (or Lord of Lords)
Commander of twelve Sultans. Flower of Courtesy, second in Glory, Protector of
Mussullmen, Nutmeg o^ Comfort, and Rose of delight. He was very martial and
fortunate, he subdued all Larr, Ormus, and unto Jasques for his Sovereign, (of
which in the 18. and 19. notes upon the 4th. Act) He got footing in Arabia for
himself, in this manner: Two Arabian Princes contending for Sovereignty, he
that was vanquished demanded succor from this Duke, who entertained him, and
with 20000. Horse fought and killed his Adversary, and became Lord of both
their Tertitories. The relieved Prince thanks him, and desires to return home;
Emangoly refused, could he with any honesty leave him that had so succored
him; The Prince must stay, and in fine, becomes his Son in Law and Father at
once; for he wedded the Dukes Daughter, and the Duke his Signiory, and kept him
Prisoner; the usual fruit of Auxiliary or mercenary forces. When he hunts the
Tygre, Lion, Bores and such like (which he did once in four years) he set
20000. men to rouse them; and when they were herded together on some Mountain,
he impaled it with a huge toil, of wire, cords, and wood; a toil and burden for
600. Camels, and so commanded them. Answerable to his State was his Estate, his
plate and Jewels were valued at 300000. pounds. He had 300: women in his
Seraglio (called there Haram) at Shira, His Revenues (according to the
Merchants computation) were 400000. Tomaynes a year, (a Toman is 3. l. 6. s.)
So Herbert, which of our money comes to 1328000. l. a year, a Revenue equal to
some European Kings, not superfluous here to be ^emembred, because it shows the
greatness of Subjects in those parts.

[(10) MORATS Horse-tail standard] The Turks royal Standand (born by the
Janissaries) is no other then a horse-tail tied to the end of the staff. So
Sandys; which though seeming rude, and answerable to their Original, does
smell much of Antiquities; Colored Horse-hairs being a most ancient Ornament
for Crests; Homer sticks the like in the Helmet of the gallantly a^med
(though not so spirited) Paris being to fight the great deciding Combat with
Menelaus for Helena.

(...)
(...)
(...). Then on his head his well wrought Helm he set,
Plumed with Horse-tail, that horribly did threat.
Hear how this passage sounds in French, rendered by the great Poitique and much
admired Abbot of Saint Cheron, Salel.

-- Et puis couurit sa test
D'vn rich armet, ayant vne grand' oreste
Faite du poil qu'on voit prendre en la queue
D'vn grand cheval: tant horrible a la veue
Qu' aussi souuent que sa test il hausoit.
On eust pense que cela menacoit.
[(11) Seraglio] Those Palaces or Bawdy houses royal^ are called Seraglio's, in
which the noble men and Princes in Persia, Turkey, and indeed all over Asia
keep their Concubines; every great Man has one, commonly plentifully stored;
Emangoly (as I have said) had 300. women in his: But that belonging to the
Great Turk in Constantinople excells all in the world, yet his Predecessors
did not more exceed others, then of late years Sultan Achmat did them in this
point, having his furnished with 1500. women, whereof more then 500. of the
choicest were Virgins, all of them his slaves, either taken in the Wars, or
from their Parents, Christian or others, but the chosen Beauties of the Empire;
only a free woman is not to be made a Concubine unless she consents, and
herein only is the Grand Signiors power limited. They were attended only by
women and Eunuchs, nor were they presented to the Emperor until certain months
after their Entrance, in which time they were purged and dieted according to
the custom of the ancient Persians; when it was his pleasure to have one, they
stood rankt in a Gallery, and she prepared for his bed to whom he gave his
handkercher. This custom is still continued, and the Grand Signior sometimes
bestows some of his cast Concubines upon some of his Bassas, and principal
Favorites, as rewards of prime services, which is taken for a transcendent
favor; a certificate that they have pleased him, being accounted a noble
Dowry. In so besotted a subjection are the minds as well as the bodies of those
people to the Ottoman Tyrants. For more of this subject, I refer you Mr.
Sandys his Relation, and to a description of the Grand Signiors Seraglio in
particular, lately published, etc.

[(12) Persepolis was the head City of Persia (according to Pliny) and of the
whole Orient (according to Curtius) so called from Perseus its founder (say
some) and father of the Nation. The Persians say Jamshet was the founder, whose
Image is frequently carved in most places; he ruled over Persia in nine
descents from Noe, and is by Historiographers supposed son of Ouchange, fourth
King of Persia. Others will have her built by Sosarinus, who lived in the
Median Dynasty, and was the third Emperor from Arbaces, who gave end to
Sardanapalus and the Assyrian Monarchy, which had continued from Belus, Father
of Ninus 1480. years, in succession of 41, Monarchs: Howbeit she was most
beautified by Cambyses. Son to Cyrus, and second K. of the second Monarchy; and
continued the mightiest City in Asia from Cambysses to Darius Codomanus Son to
Arsamus, in the line of 13. Monarchs, 230. years, at which time it fell under
the Macedonian Victor; whose Historiographer Q. Curtius reports her built of
Cedar Trees, but improbably; for the Country produces none; if he meant
Cypresses, it is credible; for they every where crown the banks of the River
Byndamir, which waters this City: Adjoining are whole Mountains of black
Marble, of which the imperial palace was extracted and cut out, in which the
Kings Throne was Gold and Oriental Gemms; the Roof shined with Gold and
Silver, Amber and Ivory, now a heap of ruins, by the Inhabitants called
Chil-manor, or forty Towers; their Ancestors may have seen so many, (...) now
there are but ninteen standing, and one below to the East, though the ruins of
eighty more are yet extant. The Hall was cut out of black shining Marble,
wherein were placed 100. white Marble Pillars, each Pillar fifteen foot high,
and forty squares round, each square three inches: From hence is a Prospect of
all the Plains thirty miles about. The ascent to it is hewn out of the Marble
Rock, (as if the structor presaged fire and defied it) the stairs reserving
their durance and beauty to this day are 95. So broad that 12. horsemen may ride
up a breast. The immediate ascent is 22. foot high, at which is the Gate in
breadth six paces; in height 30. foot very elegantly hewn out of the Marble,
fixed, and durable for ever; engraven with a mighty Elephant on the one side,
and a Rhynoceros on the other. A little further from the Entrance are two
Towers or Pillars of like shape and bigness to the former, near which is
another part of the Gate, wherein is engraven a Pegasus; these are the Portalls
to that Apollo supported by 100. white Marble Pillars. Adjoining to this was
another apiece Room, each square 90. paces, 360 round; it had eight doors,
four of which are six paces broad, the other half so much, each door has still
seven engraven Marble stones, fixed one upon another, each stone four yards
long, and five quarters high, all which eight doors are exquisitly carved with
Lions, Tigers, Griffins, and Bulls of rar^ sculpture and proportion; on the top
of each door is in ston^ the Image of an Emperor in State, holding in his
hands ^ staff and Scepter, this was the Dyning room: The next wa^ the Queens
and her Ladies room, it is Quardrangular, but no^ equal in form, 2 sides being
60, the other 70. paces. The fourth Room not yet quite obscured, was the
Nursery, two sides 20 the other 30. paces long; the black Marble walls are
rarely wrote with Images of huge stature, and have been illustrated with Gold,
yet in some places visible: the stones so well polished they equal in luster a
steel mir^our* At the highest of thi^ Palace is cut, out of the pependicular
Mountain, the Image of a King (perhaps Cambyses) adoring three Deities, the
Fire, the Sun, and a Serpent. So far Master Herbert, of whose exact description
I have used the more, because none have so well done it as he; as also for the
worthiness of the subject, this having been says Diodorus Siculus the richest
(which you may guess at anon, when you see what wealth Alexander found in it)
and the most lovely City under the Sun; It had (says the Historian) a high
stately ^ower, environed with a threefold wall; the first wall was sixteen
Cubits high, b^autified with battlements, the second was as high again, and the
third as much exceeded that, to sixty Cubits, composed of hard Marble (polished
like a looking-glass and as bright) fixed with brazen gates: To the East of
which was a Hill of four Ac^es, wherein were Entombed the Monarchs of the
world. Nor was the glorious Temple of Diana here of less credit, being (as
Josephus writes) covered with refined gold. Arist. lib. de mundo, averreth the
admirable ingenuity of the Persian Magi such, combined with the immense cost of
those Emperors, that by well disposing of pipes in a wall, reaching to this
City, they could hear in one day of all affairs, though that bulkie Empi^e,
even from the Hellespont unto India. Magin in Geogr. makes this City still in
circuit 28. miles, and to contain 60000 Families, notwithstanding all the
injuries it has suffered of war and fire, the one having so much wronged her
beauty, the other diminished her Inhabitants and Treasure; for Alexander
himself writes (says Plutarch) that he caused many of the Persians Prisoners
and others to be put to the sword to secure himself against mutinies; and with
the Kings wardrobe, and Treasure which he found here, he laded 10000. Moyles
and 5000. Camels, of which the Citizens, after his soldiers had spoiled what
they pleased in the sack, gave him in ready Gold 120000 Talents to spare the
rest, yet felt it the flames of his wrath, or rather Luxury, he saying it was
to revenge the injuries done by the Princes thereof to the Greeks, (so Strabo.
lib. 15.) for meaning to refresh his Army, he stayed here, making it his winter
Quarters, then preparing to go again against Darius, he would needs revell and
banquet at the Palace one day, where was the famous Thais, the Athenian
Curtezan, his Concubine, (and after his death, King Ptolomies of Egypt) she
flattering of Alexander, began to utter her affection to her Country, saying,
that now she held her self fully recompensed for all the pains she had taken
in following of his Army over all Asia, now that she had the fortune to be
merry with him in the proud Palace of her Persian enemy; but yet it would do
her much more good for a recreation, to burn Xerxes his house with the fire of
joy, who had burnt the City of Athens, and her self to give fire to it, before
so noble a Prince as Alexander, that it might ever be said, that the women
following his Camp, had taken more dreadful revenge of the Persians, for the
injuries they did to Greece, then all the stoutest Captains of Greece could
obtain, or by Land or Sea. His Courtiers accorded, and persuaded him to it; so
Alexander putting a Garland of flowers upon his head, led all his train of
Courtiers and Concubines, following and dancing about the Palace, whilst it
burnt, his Soldiers thence taking hopes that he would return home, seeing he
burnt the Kings Castle. Some Writers think, that it was not burnt with such
spo^t, but by determination of the Council; however they all grant, that
Alexander did presently repent him, and commanded the fire to be quenched. So
Plut. in vit. Alex. such and no other is the bitter fruit of deboistnesse and
Curtezans, repentance, often too late.

[(13) Beds of Gold, etc:] The aforesaid Writers speaking of Persepolis, say,
that in his Bedchamber, in the Palace Royal, Darius had a golden Vine, so
disposed, as it served for the Tester of his Bed, it was studded with Pearls,
the artificial clusters were Pearls and precious Rubies; his Beds pillow was
bolstred with 5000 Talents of Gold, the feet, with 3000. Both Gold and Vine
were given to Darius by Pythius of Bythinia: a Bed more for state then ease,
and sure the richest in the world (the ready Gold exceeding a million sterling,
if (as M. Peacham observes) in all Authors, where a Talent is put absolutely,
and without any other circumstance; the lesser Attique Talent is meant, which
was of 6000 drams, and so worth 187l 10 s.) The next Bed in worth that I find
to this, (though infinitely behind it) is that in Prince Ludovisio's Palace
near Rome, mentioned by my friend Mr. Raymond, in his Mercurio Italico, built
all of precious stones, to the value of 80000 Crowns; if this, (as his friend
said) is fit to get none but an Alexander the great upon, the other was fit for
none but an Alexander to enjoy.

[(14) The Muftie] The high Priest or Patriark. The Dominion both spiritual and
temporal, rested for a long time after their Prophet Mahomets death in the
Caliphs, till they growing great, and intending only their temporal
Signiories; and the difference arising between the Turks and Persians about the
succession, the first adhe^ing to Ebbubecher, the last to Haly, (as has been
pointed at in the 12th Note upon the first Act) the Princes kept in themselves
only the lay greatness, and devolved the Ecclesiastical dignity (though with
much abatement) upon the Mufti, or sacred messenger. Of these the Turks have
one, and the Persians another, but their power in both Empires being alike, I
shall speak in the singular number. He is the sovereign of their Religion, and
ever resideth in the City Royal, or follows the person of the Emperor, who
still does rise at his approach to salute him, and sets him by him, and
undertakes no high design without his approvement. He has power to reverse
both his sentence, and the sentence of the Divan, or great Council, if they be
not adjudged by him conformable to the Alcoran; but his own is irrevocable. In
matters of difficulty they repair to him, and his exposition stands for a
Law. He is supreme Judge and Rectifier of all Actions, as well civil as
Ecclesiastical, and an approver of the justice military. The choice of him is
in the Emperor, whom to please and gratify, he usually flatters by wresting
all Expositions to his mind. He is very grave in look and carriage, seldom seen
abroad, and never admitting of impertinent conversation; for when any come to
him for judgment, they deliver him in writing the state of the Question, who
in writing, briefly returns his oraculous answer. He has his Seminary of
Boys, whom he instructs in the mysteries of their Law; nor is he restrained,
nor does he restrain himself from plurality of women, and the delights of a
Seraglio, a commendable recreation surely for so grave and infallible a
Prelate. There are among the Turks and Persians, under the Mufti, abo^e 70
several sorts of Religious Orders. (The Persians led by Gunets Reformation,
embracing the Imamian sect, which is their own from Haly; the Turks, the
Melchian, following Abbubecher) as Morabits, Abdals, Dervisses, Papassi,
Rafadi, Cobtini, Cadileschiers etc. But I shall only need to mention the
Abdals, of whom next. Sandys, Herbert, etc.

[(15) The Abdals] Are an order of mendicant Monks among the Persians. They
take their name from Abdala father of Mahomet. They have no abode, vow poverty,
lodge in Churches, and have provision brought them by the charitable and
superstitious, of whom they are reputed holy and venerable, but by the wiser
wolves in sheeps skins, wherewith they go covered with the wool on: about their
necks they wear horns (like our Bedlams) which they use to blow in Markets
and public places, to assemble the people to hear them preach lying wonders,
and expound the Alcoran according to their occasions or inventions, supposing
their spiritual gifts ^uperiour to others in that exercise. They travel with
dangerous barbed staves, with which they often rob, and do other villainies. Mr.
Herbert tells you a pretty pimping story of one of them. p. 196. and 197.

[(16) The Alcoran] The Book of the Mahumetan Law. In Arabic the word imports,
a gathering together of precepts: or Alfurcan, which is Redemption. It is
divided into Azoara, or Chapters, which word signifies Faces, because as by the
face you know the man; so by these, as by Titles, you know the contents of that
division. It was composed by Mahomet their Prophet, with the help of Abdalla a
Jew, and Sergius, a Nestorian Monk, who for embracing the Heresies of Arrius,
Cedron, Sabellin^s, and others, was banished from Constantinople, and coming
into Arabia, fell acquainted with Mahomet, whom (though formerly circumcised)
he baptized, and taught to misinterpret many places of the Scriptures; out of
which false glosses of theirs, they coined a new Religion, neither wholly
Jewish, or wholly Christian, but rejecting in both what they disliked, and this
newest Religion from him, was called Mahumetisme. So Pomponius Laetus, Joan.
Baptista, Egnatius, etc. But the Glossers of the Alcoran, and their Book Azar
(which is a History of Mahomet, authentic among the Moors, as the Gospel
among us Christians) say, that those that helped Mahomet in compiling his
Alcoran, were two Sword-Cutlers (Christian slaves unto one of Mecca) who knew
much confusedly of the new Testament, and out of their imperfect informations,
he gleaned what served his turn, not looking for antecedents, subsequents, or
coherence any where. So observes Joannes Andreas Maurus (who was once an
Alfaqui (or Bishop) among the Moors, of the City of Sciatinia, in the Kingdom
of Valentia, and afterward (Circ. An. 1487.) a Christian Priest) and probable
it is, that the composers of that rapsody of errors, were illiterate persons,
because they contradict all philosophy, sciences, History and Reason; the
Alcoran being a Fardel of Blasphemies, Rabinical Fables, Ridiculous Discourses,
Impostures, Bestialities, Inconveniences, Impossibilities, and Contradictions.
To speak a word of the chief Author Mahomet, his person; he was born about the
year 600 (not to mention any pa^ticular year, I find Authors so differ about
it, and I want room he^e to reconcile them, or show reason for ad^ering to any
one) some say in Itrarip, a Village of Arabia; others, in the City of Mecca;
others, in Medina Alnabi, of obscure parentage; some, that name his Father,
call him Abdalla, a Pagan, p^rhaps mistaken him for one of his Tutors, such
make his Mother a Jewess, and of ill repute, whom they call Emina. So uncertain
was the beginning of this Impostor. Baudier says, that his Father dying, and
his Mother being left very poor, she not able to keep him, committed him to an
Uncle, but he casting him off, young Mahomet was a prey to Thieves, who put him
in chains among other slaves, and in that quality being set to sale, a rich
Merchant, named Abdemonople, bought him; he dying, Mahomet by marriage of his
mistress, (the Merchants wife, not effected, as was thought, without
Witchcraft) attained to much riches; whereupon, leaving the exercise of
Merchandise, he became a Captain of certain voluntary Arabians, that followed
the Emperor Heraclius in his Persian Wars, who falling into a mutiny, for that
they were denied the military Garment, and incensing the rest of their Nation,
with the reproachful answer given them by the Treasurer, which was, that they
ought not to give that to Dogs, which was ordained for the Roman Soldiers; a
part of them chose Mahomet for their Ringleader; but being disdained by the
better sort, for the baseness of his birth, to avoid ensuing contempt, he gave
it out, that he attained not to that honor by military favor, but by divine
appointment. That he was sent by God to give a new Law unto man, and by force
of arms, to reduce the world to his obedience; then wrested he every thing to
a divine honor, even his natural defects, calling those fits of the falling
sickness wherewith he was troubled, holy trances; and that Pigeon which he had
taught to feed out of his Ear on pease, the holy Ghost. So went he on, to feign
his messages from heaven by the Angel Gabriel, and to composse his Alcoran. A
man of a most infamous life he was; Bonsinus writes, that he permitted adultery
and Sodomy, and lay himself with beasts; and Mr. Smith (in his Confutation of
Mahumetism) arraigns him of Blasphemy, Prid^, lies, Sodomy, Blood, Fraud,
Robbery, (for he was a common Thief, usually robbing the Caravans of Merchants
as they traveled) as entitles him Heir apparent unto Lucifer; no less then
12000. falsehoods being contained in his fabulous Alcoran.

To particularize a little: what higher blasphemy could he be guilty of, then
to prefer himself as far before Christ, as he was above Moses? He also denies
the divinity of our Savior, and affirms, that the Holy Ghost is not distinct
in person, but only an operative virtue of the Godhead that inspires good
motions: Many other absurdities he is guilty of concerning the Trinity, as not
comprehending that glorious mystery. The Alcoran impugnes both the divine Law,
and natural Reason at once, in that assertion, lib. 4. Cap. 2. viz. That at
the end of the world a Trumpet shall blow, and the Angels in Heaven, and men on
Earth shall fall down dead, and at the second sounding rise again. So it makes
the Angels mortal, when who knows not that the Angels are Spir^ts, having no
bodies, so cannot die, for death is nothing but the separation of the soul from
the body? Adams sin was the cause of his death, and his posterity; whence it
follows, had he not sinned, neither he, nor we, had dyed. And surely the good
Angels, being not guilty of the cause of death, sin must be exempt from the
effect. Lucifer, and the evil Angels that sinned with him, by their Pride,
were deprived of the glory of heaven, and cast into the bottomless pit for
ever, but not condemned to die, because they were spirits. And if the Devils
that sinned dyed not, how is it that the Alcoran says, that the Angels that
sinned not, shall die? Another fable concerning Angels, is in the first Chaper,
lib. 1. Sc. That God sent two Angels, called Harod and Marod, as Judges to do
justice in the City of Babylon, where in a Cave, for soliciting a Ladies
chastity, they hang by the eyelids, and must so hang till the day of judgment,
and the woman was transformed into the morning star. O divine Metamorphosis!
It Is like Mahomet might have heard somewhat of the story of Susanna and the
Elders, and so ignorantly shuffled it into this. But to follow his Text; I
would ask a Moorish Astrologer, whether the morning star be not more ancient
then the City of Babylon; how then could an inhabitant of that City be turned
into that star? And I would know of their Divines, why, if the Angels have
bodies, the Alcoran in many places (contradicting it self) calls them Roch,
Spirits? if they be spirits, and uncorporeal, how were they capable of knowing
women, or hanging by the eyelids? If they be Corporeal, where abouts in
Babylon may one see them hanging? and why does the Alcoran confess them to be
Spirits?

Another ridiculous assertion of the Alcoran, concerning Angels, is s. 1. cap.
1. and l. 2. c. 1. etc. viz. That God made man of all sorts and colors of
earth, and being formed, for some thousand of years laid him a baking in the
Sun, until he was pleased to breath life into him. Then commanded he all the
Angels to fall down and worship Adam, which all did but Satan, then an Angel
of light, saying he was created of a more excellent nature, fire, and man of
dirt; then God cursed and cast out Satan, who has ever since continued an
Enemy to man. How did the Angels fall for not reverencing of man, when they
were fallen before man was made, and envying his standing, tempted him to his
fall? and how could man lay a baking some thousand of years in the Sun, when
the Sun was made but two days before man? Genesis 1. The Alcoran fails in point
of History and Time, l. 3. c. 1. where it mistakes Mary the Prophetess, for
the B. Virg^n Mary, making Mary the sister of Moses, Mother of our Savior,
when there were above 1500. years between them. The reason of this mistake,
might be Mahomets ignorance in Antiquities and Chronology, finding in Arabic,
Moses his Father called Hembram, by which name Joachim our Ladies Father is
also called. But by what infallible Spirit was this Scripturist led, that could
admit to gross a mistake?

Another error in Time and Reason, is l. 3. c. 3. Where he affirms, that God
sent the Alforcan, which is the same with the Alcoran, (as Andreas Maurus
proves) unto Moses and Aaron, for a light and admonition to the just: and yet,
l. 1. c. 2. He says, God inspired the Thora, the Gospel, and the Alforcan (or
Alcoran) unto Mahomet: how can this agree with the former? or with what
follows in the Book called Sune, (or way of Mahomet) viz. That David read all
the Alcoran, whilst they saddled his Mule, unless Moses, David, and Mahomet,
had been contempora^ies? and yet again in above 300. places in his Alcoran, he
says, that God gave the Athorata or five Books, to Moses, the Gospel to Jesus
Christ, the Azabor or P^alter to David, and the Alcoran to Mahomet. He also
faulters in the time wherein he was composing of his Alcoran, in one place
telling us he was twenty years about it; in another place he says, that it
was revealed to him in one night, in the City of Mecca, by the Angel Gabriel:
so frequent a^e contradictions with him, though neither of these assertions are
absolutely true; for he was 23 years composing of it, ten y^ars at the City of
Mecca, eleven at Almedina, and two in the cave of Mecca. He dyed in the 63d
year of his age, and he began to call himself a Prophet, and to compile his
Alcoran in his fourtiteh year. But how could David, if the Alcoran had been
made in his time, have read it all over in the time that his Mule was saddled?
when (as Andreas Maurus reports) when the Caliph, because of the multiplicity
of papers that Mahomet left, summoned all the Doctors to Damascus, and out of
them, chose six to Epitomize all his Books of the Alcoran and Sune; each of
those six composed one Book and the rest of his writ^ngs were thrown into the
River, even so many Books and bundles of Papers, as loaded 200 Camels? For
Mahomet, because he was illiterate and could not write, kept a Secretary, who
wrote the Chapters of the Alcoran for him, giving out that God sent them by the
Angel, as occasion required. These he kept in a Chest, and that he might alter,
expugne, or add at pleasure what served his turn, he would never have collected
and reduced into Books, as they were by his Son in law Hozman, after his death
King and Caliph, who made the foresaid Epitome: at which time, the Papers being
sought for, many were: found in his house, having lain behind Chests, so
spoiled with damp, and eaten with Mice, as nothing could be made of them. A
goodly Scripture! when the power that inspired it, could not preserve it from
Mice! or if nothing Material was lost, the Author was guilty of superfluity,
and so of vanity. The Moors took scandal, as well they might, at those
revocations and alterations of above 150 Verses of the Alcoran, annulled by
others, called ^evocatory Verses.

If they were inspired by God, it was unjust they should be abolished by a man.
That Mahomet made his Religion serv^ his occasion, appears by this: Baheira a
King of the Jacobit^ presented unto Mahomet one Marine, a young beautifu^
Jewesse, with whom the old Leacher was taken in Adulter by two of his wives,
whom Andreas Maurus calls Axa an^ Hafeza; they re^uked him, having done an Act
unwo^thy (...) a Prophet, or holy man. He promised to abandon her, if the ^
would pass by this one slip, and keep his credit; but being by them surprised
the second time with her, they went from him to their Fathers houses as
repudiated wives: upon the publishing of it the Moors murmured, the Pagans
jeered, and Mahomet was disgraced and troubled, his wives Fathers being potent
men, so he had no way but to have recourse to his old remedy for all sores, the
Alcoran, wherein he razed out of the 6. Chapter of the light, in the 3d. Book that
verse that commanded that married persons taken in Adultery should be stoned*
called the ver. Lapidation, and composed a new Chapter the content^ whereof are;
that it is lawful for all Mussulmen (or true believe^s) to lie with their
slaves, and that their wives ought not to repine at it: and that Mahomet did
not sin in his late Act, knowing thi^ Law would come, but his wives sinned in
publishing what he did in secret, and that God warned them to return to him So
he cleared himself, repaired his credit, pleased his sect by this Licentious
liberty, and got his wiv^s again, who returned well satisfied and very
penitent, and now might he use his young slave by the Law. Th^s Chapter is
called the Chapte^ of Prohibition. l. 4. because his wives would have
prohibited him his freedom. Most insatiable he was in this point, and made
particular Laws for himself; as that he might repudiate any of his wives at
pleasure, and none might marry them; which kept them in obedience: but he might
take any ones repudiated wife, or any that proffered her self, or admitted of
his solicitation; and whereas others might marry two, or three, or four at
most, he might have as many wives as he pleased. The Book Assamiel (or the
Book of the good customs of Mahomet) praising him, and speaking of his virile
strength, says, that in one hour, he lay with all his wives, which were 11.
The Book Azar says he married fifteen wives, and had 11. together, besides
four who proffered themselves by Virtue of the foresaid Law. Caelius reports
he had forty wives, yet took he away his servant, Zeideus his wife, and whose
else he pleased; saying it was fit he should do so, that the greater number of
Prophets and holy men might issue from him. A life worthy or such a Prophet!
and author of ^uch a Religion! a good Religion sure when he affirms the
Devils were converted to it, l. 4. c. 8. and in the Chapter of Devils, he
says, that a company of Devils came one night to hear Mahomet read the
Alcoran, and took such delight in it, that they presently believed in him, and
became Moors, and shall go in to Paradise, and return to their first Stations,
and in the mean time employ their powers to convert men to Mahumetism; there
only he says true; But since the Devils are Mahomets friends, why does he in
his Alcoran command his sect to apply themselves unto God for defense against
evil and cursed Devils? and will them to say when they begin to read it, O
ahudu billehi mine Saytani ragini, i. e. Preserve me O God from the wicked
Devil! Repugnances all along! The Alcoran s. 2. c. 11. speaking of Mahomets
wondrous journey to Heaven, says that he passed through the eight Heavens,
whereof the first is made of Silver, the second of Gold, the third of a Pearl,
the fourth of an Emerald, the fifth of a D^amond, the sixth of a Carbuncle, the
seventh indeed of light. But if the six lower Heavens be Metalline, why does
the Alcoran say in another place, that they were made of smoke? It says, that
the stars are bound to the first Heaven with Chains of gold, and that the
greatest of them is as big as a Mountain, set there to stone the Devils with
fiery da^ts (perhaps meaning the gellies we se^ fall sometimes) when they come
to listen to hear Gods secrets. Mahomet might go in, but his friends and
Disciples (or rather tutors) the Devils may not listen at the door. But I
would hear any Moorish Ast^ologer that has read Ptolomy, and understands the
Sphere and Astrolabe, deny that each star is as big as the earth; why says
Mahomet then as a Mountain only? he was indeed a modest Person, and would not
say more then he knew. What can any of his Disciples, seeing him tie all the
stars to the first Heaven, think of him, that knows the Planets are in seven
Heavens, each having a particular orb? The Moon is the first and nearest to us,
Mercury is in the second, Venus in the third, the Sun in the fourth, Mars in
the fifth, Jupiter in the sixth, Saturn in the seventh, highest of all, and all
the stars in the eighth Heaven, in which are the twelve signs: which stars
how should we see if the Heavens under them were metalline and not diaphanous?
When the moon many times interposing Eclipseth, and hides the Sun from us;
because the Moon is an obscure body, as the clouds sometimes hide her; much more
would she first Heaven if it were of Silver, being not transparent, hide all
the stars from us for ever. So that all that are not blind may here confute
Mahomet, He says in his Sune that the earth is fixed upon the top of an Oxes
horn, and that this Ox stirring his head causes Earthquakes. But where then
does the Ox himself stand, or what eats he? or if the Prophet starves him he
must die, and then the Earth must be destroyed. O brutish Atlas! I had almost
said, more brutish Prophet! It had been kindly done of him to have given this
laborious Ox Pastorage in Paradise, as he does the sheep his Priests kill at
their Passover, and as he did the Ram that carried him on this strange
Celestial discovery, whom he names Alborac, and sometimes calls a white ram,
sometimes a black, the small difference betwixt black and white breaks no
squares with him; well, Alborac boggled, and would not let Mahomet bestride
him, till he promised he should be the first beast that should enter into
Paradise; and yet he says the Ram that Abraham sacrificed was fed forty years
there; how then could Alborac be the first? yes, otherwhere he makes him the
same beast; how then did Abraham sacrifice him? or if he was fed forty years
in Paradise, Andreas Maurus would fain have him give him by the rule of
Multiplication, an Arithmeticall account how many thousand Trickles he cast in
Paradise during those forty years: but the illiterate Impostor was not
accountant good enough to tell him. Horrid and ridiculous are the Blasphemies
and fooleries he recounts of that his voyage to Heaven; as that he approached
to God within little less then two shots of a Crossebow; and that God gave him
many Laws and Privileges; as that he should be the most excellent, and select
Creature that ever he created in Heaven or Earth; and that he should be the
general Redeemer, so that he had the impudence to call himself Almebi. i. e.
He that takes away sins. But leaving these, I had rather make my self sport
with his fopperies; He says he saw Angels in the first Heaven of all shapes,
of Birds, Beasts, and what not, especially many Cocks; and t^ere was one grand
Cock whose feet stood upon the first Heaven, and his comb reached to the second
Heaven. This Cock and the other Cocks in Heaven prayed for the Cocks on Earth
(as the Oxen in Heaven for the Oxen, and Asses in Heaven for the Asses on
Earth, etc.) and when this great Cock crowed all the Cocks in Heaven answered
him, and all the Cocks on Earth crowed too. In the third Heaven he saw the
Atropos or fatal Angel, so big, that from one eye to the other was 70000.
days journeies. Such stuff is his whole web, tolerable for mirth, did not the
consideration that he has seduced so many Nations, and his Blasphemies, and
abuses of the Patriarks and Prophets distaste the Christian Reader. But of all
Ancients Solomon is least beholding to him: indeed he makes him a wise man,
but, (as ignorant people take the name,) a most notorious Conjurer, being
carried up and down by Devils frequently, and having them as familiar as
himself had. This impostor ventured at miracles too, affirming diverse of
himself, but has no witness for any one of them. To give a taste of them. Alc.
l. 4. in the Chapter of the Moon, and in the Book Azar he says that at his
Uncle ^ugellins request to confirm his Doctrine, he made the Moon come to the
midst of Heaven and be at the full, (whereas she was then but 21. days old)
then she divided her self in the midst, and fell to the Earth, and one of the
pieces went through the hole of one of his sleeves, the other piece through the
hole of the other sleeve, and both pieces came out of the collar of his Coat;
speaking and saying that he was the Prophet of God, then joined, and returned
to Heaven. Yet, as this divine Jugler confesses, could not all this convert his
Uncle, nor does he bring his Uncles testimony or any others for the truth of
it. Some will have the Turks give a Crescent from hence, in honor of their
Prophet: many others of his lying wonders I might recite, as that of the Angels
lancing of his breast, and pulling out of the black Coar out of his heart, That
of the Trees bowing to him, and that of the other two Trees coming at his
command to shade him, when in the fields, in a hot day, he had occasion to
untruffe; and infinite other of his contradictions and repugnances I might
remember, as that of King Alexanders Journey from the East to the West, where
he daily saw the Sun set in a hot Fountain; which oppugneth Philosophy, as the
journey does History, etc. But with these I have tired my self, and I am sure
the Reader much more. Yet give me leave to remember one of his absurdities
more, though none of the least. viz. That at doomes-day he shall turn himself
into a great Ram, and all Mussulmen into Fleas, they shall hide themselves in
his spacious fleeces, and thus burdened, shall he travel till he comes where
he can skip into Paradise; there he assumes his proper glory, and gives them
new shapes, new strength, Wine, brave women, etc. as you may read at large in
the eighth note upon the Fourth Act: and this absurd fooler is generally
credited by his whole Sect; so just with God i^ it to give them up to believe
lies and Doctrine of Devils, for that they accounted Christ crucified to be
but foolishness. Thi^ Legend of lies they say was written upon the skin of the
Ram that Abraham sacrificed; an absurd Tradition; for neither could that skin
hold it, nor was that Ram flead; or if h^ had, how could their Prophet so many
years after have rod^ upon him to Heaven and Hell, etc. It is held by the
Mahumetans in no less veneration, then the old Testament by the Jews, and the
New by us Christians. They never touch it with unwasht hands, and a capital
crime it is, in the reading thereof to mistake a letter, or displace the accent
They kiss it, Embrace it, and swear by it: calling it the book of Glory, and
director unto Paradise. It is written in Arabic Rhyme, without due proportion
of Numbers: and must neither be written nor read by them in any other Language.
It contains according to Hozmans reformation four books: the first Book has
five Chapters, the second twelve: the third 19. and the fourth 175. in all 211.
Mahomet the second is also said to have altered it much; he and many others
seeking to reconcile those repugnances wherewith it so abounds, even in the
Positive Doctrine; which inclines me to Andreas Maurus his opinion, that they
were ignorant Persons that helped Mahomet to compose it; Sergius had more
knowledge then to have erred so grossly, whether it was that Sergius that was
Patriarch of Constantinople and author of the Monothelites Heresy (as some
contend) I determine not, or whether he was only a banished Heretical Monk
from thence. An^ yet the coherence betwixt Mahomet and the ancient Heretics,
of all whose puddle streams Sergius had drank deep, (and its like the poor
Cutlers were free) leads me to think him his Tutor. I will only briefly give
you a touch of the harmony betwixt their Discords, and leave you to judge who
composed the Lesson. Mahomet denies the Trinity with Sabellius. He said it was
ridiculous to think that Christ was God, and therefore with Arrius and Eunomius
he calls him a Creature, and with Carpocrates a holy Prophet. He maintained
with Cedron that it was impossible that God should have ^ Son, because he had
no wife. He denied with the Manichees that Christ was crucified, but (says he)
one was crucified in his place, who was very like him; with the Originists he
will have the Devils to be saved at the end of the world; with the
Anthropomorphites he will have God to have the form and members of a man; with
Cerinthus he places the chiefest felicity of man in carnal pleasures; with
Ebion he does admit of Circumcision. In imitation of Menander he calls himself
the Savior of the world; with Nicolas of Antioch he taught and practiced
Luxu^y; Yet with the Eucratitae he forbids the use of wine, etc. yet like his
predecessors he baited his hooks speciously enough in some places, commanding
upright dealing, amity, Reverence to Parents, Charity, to hate contention and
Murder, etc. and speaks reverently of our Savior, and B. Lady, and indeed of
all in some ^laces: excluding no Religions out of his Paradise, he is so kind;
Moses he says shall bring the Jews, Christ the Christians, and he his
Mahumetans; but the chief place and glory must be theirs; theirs the b^st Gold,
sweetest Rivers, and most beatifull Damozels; and good reason he should be
master in his own house. But I have swelled this note to a rambling Treatise,
and have yet much ado to take my pen off, yet I will force my self to it; and
refer you that would know more of the Alcoran to Cardinal Nicolas de Cusa, his
examination of the Alcoran. Lod. Vives. l. 4. de veritat. Relig. Christ.
Ricoldus in his computation of the Laws of Mahomet. Barthol. Hungarius.
Johannes de terra Cremata, and Guil. Postells, in their books against the
Mahumetans, Saracens, etc. Sandys, Herbert, D'Juigne, Johannes Andreas Maurus
his confutation of Mahomets sect, and the Alcoran its self, t^anslated out of
the Arabic into Latin by Theod. Bibliander; for the late published English
Translation I cannot commend its faithfulness. I had almost forgotten, (though
quoted above) Baudier his History de la Religion des Turcs, etc.

[(17) To make all Lands and Goods hereditary, etc.] The Turks and Persians
content themselves with very mean low buildings, few above two stories high,
some of rough stone, some of timber, some of Sun-dryed brick, the Marble being
used only about the Princes Palaces and the Mosques, though the Countries in
some places are plentifully stored with it, (especally about Persepolis,) the
people rather choosing to hoard their wealth, then by making a magnificent show
to tempt their Princes to take it from them, or at best from their Children
when they die; for no Possessions are hereditary, but all at the will of the
Emperor, so absolute is his Tyranny and the peoples slavery. Sandys, etc.

[(18) Tomaynes] A Toman is a Persian coin, worth 3 l. 6 s. sterling. Herbert.

[(19) Balsora] A Town where Tygris and Euphrates empty themselves into the
gulf of Persia. This Town is famous for the birth of Elhesin-Ibnu-Abilhasen,
the greatest Doctor of Antiquity, he taught the Persians and Arabs 80 years
after Mahomets death. Herbert.

[(20) Bizantium] A Maritime City of Thrace, the seat of the Turkish Empire.
Eusebius says, it was built by Pausanias King of Sparta, 663 years before the
incarnation of our Savior: others will have Pausanias only to re-edifie this
City, then called Bizantium of Biza the founder, and taken by assault but a
little before from the Persians, since which it still increased in fame, but by
nothing more then by the two famous sieges she endured, both times holding out
three years, once taken, once not; the last was in the time of her 31 Emperor,
Leo Isauricus, about the year of our Lord, 718, when Caliph Zulciman besieged
her, and after three years space, and the loss of 300000 men desisted. At this
siege was that fire invented, which we for the violence of it, call wild fire;
and the Latins, because the Greeks were the Authors of it. Graecus ignis, by
which the Saracen ships were no less molested, then the Romans were at the
siege of Syracusa by Archimedes his engines, or military burning-glasses, the
like stratagem was used at this Town of Constantinople, about the the year 500.
in the reign of the 14th Emperor Anastatius, in whose time the City suffered
much by the Scythians, till Proclus, a famous Mathematition, with artificial
Glasses, fired 3000 of their Galleys.

The first siege was long before, when she sided with Pescennius Niger, against
the Emperor Severus, and held out three years against him, and almost all the
forces of the world, During this time, she endured such a famine, that men
meeting in the streets, would (as it were) with joint consent, draw and fight,
the victor still eating the vanquished. For want of Artillery to discharge on
the assailants, the Citizens flung at them whole statuas of brass, and the
like curious Imagery. Houses they plucked down to get Timber for shipping, the
women cut off their hair to inch out their tacklings; and having thus patched
up a Navy of 500 sail, they lost it all in one Tempest. When (starved out)
they had yielded, the Conqueror (having put to the sword the chief of the
Nobles, and given the rest as a spoil to the Soldiers) dismantled the Town,
and left it almost in Rubbish: yet there appeared such signs of beauty and
strength in the very ruins, Vt mireris, (says Herodian) an eorum qui primi
extruxerunt, vel horum qui deinceps sunt demoliti, vires sint praestantiores.
About 106 years after this, she was rebeautified by the Christian Emperor
Constantine the Great, who called it after his own name Constantinople, and
removed the seat of his Empire hither. He called it also New Rome, enduing it
with the privileges of Rome, the Citizens of one being free of the other, and
capable of the dignities of either. But the chief cause of his remove was, that
by being near, and drawing into those parts his principal forces, the Empire
toward the East might be the better defended, then greatly annoyed by the
Persian. He intended first to have built at Chalcedon, on the other side of the
Thracian Bosphorus; in view of this, and a little below it, whereof the
Megarians were the builders, called blind by the Oracle, for that first
arriving at that place, they made choice of the worse, and less profitable
site. It is reported, that when the workmen began to lay the platform at
Chalcedon, certain Eagles conveyed their lines to the other side of the
straight, and let them fall right over the old Bizantium, whereupon Constantine
altered his determination, and re-edified that City, as if appointed so to do
by the Deity; finished it was on the 11th of May, Anno 331. and consecrated to
the blessed Virgin. Rome he bereft of her Ornaments, to adorn it, fetching
from thence in one year more Antiquities, then twenty Emperors had brought
thither before in 100. among others the Placation, that huge obelisk of Theban
marble; the brazen statue of Dedalian work, supposed the image of Apollo,
translated from Ilium; the Trojan Palladium, etc. according to the Omen of the
Eagles, this City was by destiny appointed, and by nature seated for
sovereignty; it was first the seat of the Roman Emperors, then of the Greek
now of the Turkish. Built by Constantine the Son of Helena, and lost by
another Constantine, the Son of a Helena also, (a Gregory then Bishop, whose
first Bishop was a Gregory) to Mahomet the second, Anno 1453. 1121 years after
Constantine the great had finished it, and the succession of eighty Emperors,
and they have a Prophecy, that a Mahomet shall lose it; such fatal
contrarieties in one and the same name may be observed. So a Baldwin (Anno
1200.) was the first of the Latins Emperors in her, and a Baldwin (Anno 1260)
the last. So Philip the Father of Alexander, laid the first foundation of the
Macedonian Monarchy; and Philip, the Father of Perseus, ruined it. So Augustus
was the first established Emperor of Rome, and Augustulus the last. Darius the
Son of Histaspes the restorer, and Darius, the Son of Atsamis the overthrower
of the Persian Monarchy. Warner in his Albions England, l. 8. cap. 44. observes
the Letter H. to be ominous to this Island, producing much good or ill, too long
here to remember; but to return to Constantinople: Saint Andrew first preached
here the Christian faith, to whom succeeded 23. Bishops, until Saint
Alexander, who was her first Patriarch or Met^opolitan; for he alone presided
over all the Greek Churches dispersed through the Orient; his Diocese grew
ample enough to enable his successor John to contend for the Primacie with the
Pope of Rome, about the year 608. in the time of Boniface the third but by the
Judgment of Phocas the Emperor, the Church of Rome carried the Supremacy.
Blond. l. 9. deca^ 1. Plat. Onuphr. In the time of Nicolas the first, about the
year 860. Photius the Patriarch separated himself from the Roman Church,
withal denying that the Holy Ghost proceeded from the Son at all, but only
from God the Father, drawing to his errou^ the whole Greek Church, in which it
still persevereth. Zonar. Tom. 3. But since the invasion of the Turk his
Patriarkship is much lessened by three Patriarchs more set up, though under
him, one at Jerusalem, one at Alexandria, and one at Antioch. Here have been
held many of the General Counsels, as the second, by Pope Damasus, against
Macedonius, for the Divinity of the Holy Ghost. An. 381. The fifth by Vigilius,
against the Origenists and Theodore, An. 553. The sixth, by Agathon against the
Monothelites, An. 680. The eighth, by Adrian the second, against Photius, the
iconiclast. Many brave spirits has this City produced, as Gennadius, Cassian,
and that Golden Mine of Eloquence, Saint John Chrysostom, her Archbishop. It
stands on a Cape of Land near the Entrance of the Bosphorus. In form
triangular: on the East side washed with the same, on the North with the Haven,
adjoining on the West to the Continent, walled with brick and stone, intermixed
orderly, having four and twenty Gates and Posterns; whereof five do regard the
Land, and ninteen the water; being about thirteen miles in circumference. The
noblest Structure was Saint Sophias Church, once a Christian Temple, twice
burnt, but happily (in that so sumptuously) reedified by the Emperor
Justinian, excceding not only the pattern, but all other fabrics in the
world; one of the Gates thereof is by the superstitious people thought to be
made of the planks of Noah's Ark: It is now a Mohammedan Mosque. It fronteth the
Sultans Seraglio, where formerly stood the ancient Bizantium, divided from the
rest of the City by a lofty Wall, three miles in circuit. That Palace, (not to
describe it, but say only it wants nothing for Luxuriousness or State)
however enlarged by the Ottomans, was first erected by Justinus, and called
Sophia of his Empress, so Agathius. Next, the Ottoman Mausoleas require
regard, built of white Marble. The seven Towers called anciently Janicula, now
the Arsinal. The Seraglioes, The Hippodrom for exhibiting of Horseraces are
remarkable: of the antiquities, the chif are the Emperor Valentinians
Aquaeduct, The Column of wreathed Brass. The ruinated Co^osse, The Historical
Pillar in the Aurathasar, (or market of women,) far surpassing both Traians,
and that of Antoninus at Rome; the workman having so proportioned the figure,
that the highest and lowest appear of on^ bigness. Constantines Pillar, and the
relics of his Palace, now made a stable of wild beasts. The many others are
perished, so little regard the Greeks their own Antiquities, nor can they
satisfy the inquirer of the History of their own calamities: So supinely
negligent are they, or perhaps so wise, as of passed evils to endeavor a
forgetfulness.

The Turks now call this City Stambul. The ordinary houses are low and mean,
of Sun-dryed brick, (as has been said) the possessions being not hereditary,
they care not for sumptuousness; as also being often subject to fires, whereof a
most horrible one befell in the days of Leo; and another not long after, in
the reign of Basilicus; when amongst other infinite losses, that famous Library
perished containing 120000 volumes; where in the inward skin of a Dragon,
Homers Iliads and Odysses were written; a loss beyond that of Pallas's Statue.
Another happened on October. 14. An. 1607. in which 3000. houses were consumed.
Nor is it a wonder, the Citizens not daring to quench the fire that burns
their own houses; or pull down some to preserve the remainder: an office that
belongs to the Aga and his Janissaries: who nothing quick in their assistance,
do often for spite or pillage beat down such houses as are farthest from
danger. So that the mischief is not only wished for the booty, but prolonged;
and not seldom they themselves begin it, by setting the Jews houses on fire.
So that the Citizens made weary by the example, build rather under then above
ground, for the safeguard of their goods, furnishing themselves with arched
Vaults, which are not to be violated by the flame. A great part of the City is
taken up in Gardens and Orchards (as Gaunt in Flanders) so that it shows from
the Sea or adjoining Mountains like a City in a wood. The streets are for the
most part exceeding narrow, and filled with dead walls belonging to great m^ns
Seraglioes. It has been much infested with Earthquakes; and though the air is
pretty serene, yet that boystrous Tramontan from the black Sea most violently
rages here, bringing often with it such storms of snow, that in September, the
Trees then flourishing, are so overcharged therewith, that their branches
break, accompanied with bitter frosts. The plague for the most part miserably
infecteth this City, brought more by the concourse of strangers then the
badnesse of the clime, and increased by the negligence of the Mahometans, who
slight and shun it not, but putting their fingers to their foreheads, say,
their destiny is written there, so they boldly frequent infected Persons, and
converse with them promiscuously. The populousness of this City we may guess
at by what Lipsius relates out of Benjamin a Jew his discourse of Europe. viz.
That the customs due to the Emperor, out of the victuals and Merchandise sold
at Constantinople only, did amount to 20000. Crowns a day; this argues them
either great eaters, (though I know it being a maritime Town, much is exported)
or their number must be more then Botero accounts, sc. 700000. souls. Which
though a multitude, yet is no whit admirable considering its compass; when we
know there are far more in Paris, though that beautiful City is three miles
less in circumference then Constantinople. There were counted in Paris long
since 500000. Citizens besides stranges and soldiers (and those were no few
that could maintain it against 100000. men led by the Dukes of Berry, Burgundy
and Bretagne;) but si^ce the number is much increased; so that the Commentator
upon Du Bartas will have the inhabitants to be diverse millions. Yet enjoys
she health with her pleasure and prosperity, seldom feeling pestilence, never
s^rcity, so that in the better part of a years residence there, I never heard
of one person dead or sick of the plague; a besom that sweeps Constantinople,
of her people; To these add a Scepter of a Mohammedan Tyrant, with the
insolency of slaves: and then O new Rome how are thy thus balanced profits and
delights to be valued! says our excellent Sandys; to whose exquisite Relation
I refer you for a more exact and ample description of Constantinople or
Bizantium. And though after him (he is so copious, authentic and transcendent
in all he did) I need name none other, you may also see others that helped me
in this, and do faithfully describe Constantinople: as Sir Walter Rawleigh,
Heylin, D' Iuigne, Eusebius, Boterus, Merc. Bellon. Onuper. Causin. etc.

[(21) Has cut an Asinego asunder, etc. This is the usual trial of the
Persian Shamsheers or Cemiters, which are crooked like a crescent: of so good
metal, that they prefer them before any other, and so sharp as any Rasor. The
hilts are without ward, most have them of steel, some of Gold, the poor of
wood. The Scabbards in solemnities they beset with stones of value. Herbert.

[(22) Some Magus] The Magi among the Persians, were those Philosophers that
held the place of Priests and sacrificers, reputed so cunning as they
attributed more then natural knowledge unto them, in expounding of dreams, and
presaging of good or evil events. There were some of this order in all
nations; The Greeks called them only Philosophers; The Indians, Brachmanes,
and Gymnosophists; the Gauls and Britons (amongst whom they had their chief
seats in Anglesy in Wales) Druids, Bardes, and Semnotheans; The Egyptian,
Priests; The Italians, Augurs, and Aruspices; The Jews, Prophets, and
Cabalists, from their Caballa or book of Doctrine and Traditions, which the
Rabbines say was together with the Law of Moses, delivered to the Hebrews; The
Babylonians and Assyrians called their Southsayers, Chaldeans (as our vulgar do
all they account cunning women, Gypsies or Egyptians) not that they all were
of that Country, but because Belo^hus Frisc. 5. Monarch of Chaldea was the
Author of divination by the flying of birds, called Auspicium; to these I might
add the Scottish weirds and many more. But to leave the names of the
Professors, and say something of the art its self; of Southsaying there were
four kinds among the Romans, Ovid alludes to them in this Distic.

Hoc mihi non ovium fibrae, tonitrusve sinistri,
Linguave servata, pennave dixit avis.
Trist, l. 1. Eleg. 8. Nor left hand thunder taught me this, nor sight
Of a sheeps Entrails, nor Birds noise, or slight.
1. Auspicium the Auspices, quasi Avispices ab aves aspiciendo, foretold things
by obse^ving the flight of Birds, either on the right or left; hence is avis
sinistra interpreted, good luck; because the givers right hand, in bestowing a
benefit, ^s opposite to the receivers left hand. So that in that place of
Virgil Saepe sinistra cava praedixit ab ilice cornix Ecleg. 1. The ill boading
Crow croak'd this from the hollow Elm the Epithet Sinistra is not to be applied
to the Crow as flying on the left hand (for that had been lucky) but as the
word is in other things received; so it presages evil; for vice versa to the
common acception, in these preposterous rites of southsaying, the left hand is
taken for the best: So Intonuit laevum is rendered, it has thundered luckily: So
Ovid speaking of Romulus his prayer for success in building of Rome, makes him
receive this prosperous answer.

Ille precabatur: tonitru dedit omnia laevo
Jupiter: and laevo fulmina missa polo.
Augurio laeti jacient fundamina cives,
Et novus, exiguo tempore, murus erat.
Fast. lib. 4. So prayed he: Jove with left hand Thunder signed
And lightning flashed from the left of Heaven, his mind.
All, at the Omen joy'd, foundations laid,
And the new wall, in a short time, was made.
Perhaps Sinistra avis is accounted lucky a sinendo, because the gods thereby
did suffer them to proceed in their purposes. Therefore Tully says, lib. 1. de
divinatione, A sinistra cornice ratum and firmum augurium fieri: and in the Law
of the twelve Tables it is said, Ave sinistra populi magister esto. The
Grecians from hence in the judgment of Lipsius called the left hand (...) from
(...), signifying, the best. They also made great Judgment from the number of
birds that appeared in the time of divination; hence Romulus was promised the
Empire before his brother Remus, because he had seen the double number. Of
this Ovid, speaking of the contest between them, which should build the City,
Nil opus est, dixit, certamine Romulus, ullo.
Magna fides avium est; experiamur aves.
Res placet, alter init nemorosi saxa Palati:
Alter Aventinum mane cacumen init.
Sex Remus, hic volucres his sex videt ordine, pacto
Statur: and arbitrium Romulus urbis habet.
Fast. l. 4. There nee^s, quoth Romulus no strife at all,
Great faith to Birds is given; on Birds lets call.
Of G^ovy Palatine this climb^ the height,
And that of Aventine, with springing light.
Remus saw six birds, the other twelve, good still,
The compact holds, and Romulus builds at will.


Much was guessed from the nature of the birds that appeared, whence the same
Romulus, seeing the Vultures, was, says Florus; (cap. 1.) plenus spet urbem
bellatricem fore: ita illi assuetae sanguini and pre^ae aves pollicebantur; of
which Stadius, Florus his commentator; Vultures ideo potissimum in auguriis
observatos ^e^tatur Plutarchus, quod rarissime and nisi fortuito conspiciantur;
quod innoxij sint, nec xerapto vivant, and sui generis cadavera non devorent.
Hence comes the Phrases, bonis avibus and auspiciis, with good luck, malis
avibus, with ill luck; and because they would begin nothing inauspicato, id
est, without the counsel of the Augures, hence auspicari rem has been
t^anslated, to begin a matter. Fr. Sylvius in orat. pro Cluentio.

2. Aruspicium. The Aruspices did divine by beholding the Entrails of beasts
sacrificed, and were so called ab aras aspiciendo, as also Extispices, ab exta
inspiciendo; the Entralls of a beast being in old Latin called Exta. They
observed whether the beast to be sacrificed came unto the Altar willingly,
without plucking and haling; whether he died without much struggling, and loud
bellowing; at one blow, or many; whether any unlucky object was seen or heard
by them, whilst they were sacrificing. When the beast was slain, they observed
whether the bowels were of an unnatural color, whether they were not
ulcerous, exsiccate, or impostumated; or whether there was any part wanting or
superfluous: as at Julius Caesar's last sacrifice the beast wanted a heart, the
worst of signs, and was followed with as ill luck. Augustus found two galls in
his sacrifice, whereupon the credusity of the City concluded a hope of peace
with Antonius; and the conjunction of persons in choler with each other. (Not
that the one beast did live without a heart, or that the other had two galls;
but the Devil to keep up this Tuscan superstition, foreseeing, or at least
guessing at the fate of the Emperors, stole away the heart from Julius Caesar's
breast, and conveyed another gall into Augustus's) Moreover they would divide
the bowels into two parts, in partem familiarem, whence they foretold what
should fall to themselves and their friends, and in partem hostilem, whence
they gathered predictions touching their enamies. Hence Manto in Seneca
describing the entralls of the sacrifice, says, Hostile valido robore insurgit
latus.
Oedip. Act. 2. Scen. 2. The enemies side with swelling tumors rise, meaning
by Hostile latus Partem hostilem. As the sacrifice was burning, they considered
whether the flame of the fire was smokie, whether the smoke rolled and tumbled
in the air; wheth^r it were of any continuance or no: these were unfortunate
tokens. These last which observed the fire and smoke, were called by a more
peculiar name, Capnomantes, Smoak-Augurers, from (...) fumus, and (...) Vates.
The Romans were taught this art by the Hetrusci, Hetrurians or Tuscans; They
learnt it of one Tages a little Devil (boy I should say) who arising to
certain Plowmen out of a furrow, taught them this skill, and vanished. So
Cicero, de divinat. and Ovid Met. l ult.

3. Tripudium. This kind of conjecturing is called Auspicium coactum, quoniam
necesse erat offa objecta cadere frustum ex pulli ore, cum pascitur. Cic. de
divinat. l. 1. The word Tripudium is used by a Syncopation for Terripudium, as
much as Terripavium, i. e. rebounding of any thing cast on the ground: for
pavire is the same with ferire: Others say, Tripudium quasi tritio pedum. So
Hubert. in lib. 60. Ep. fam. Cic. It was a Divining by the rebounding of
crummes cast to Chickins in a Coop by the Pultarius or Bird-Prophet, in the
morning: If the Chickens came slowly to them, or not at all, but walked up and
down, or set sullen, neglecting the bread; the enterprise inquired of was
displeasing to the Gods: but if they came hastily, and eat greedily of the
crummes, so that some fell out of their mouths again, the design should be
prosperous; and this was called Tripudium Solistimum. The Chickens were sullen
the same day that Tiberius Gracchus was slain, and again they had the pip, in
the first Punick war, when Publius Claudius under went the same fate; who, as
Valerius Maximus records, so contemned the Tripudary Augurati^ns, as he
commanded the holy Poultry to be cast into the Sea, saying, Quia esse nolunt,
bibant, seeing they will not eat, they shall drink. These men died, not because
the Pullets would not feed; but because the Devil foresaw their death, he
contrived that abstinence in them. So was there no natu^all dependence of the
ev^nt upon the s^gn, but an artificial contrivance of the sign unto the Event.
An unexpected way of delus^on, and whe^eby he more easily led away the
incircumspection of their belief. And perhaps their own despair ^nervated them
and rendered them the more easily their enemies prey; as Machbed the usurper of
the Kingdom of Scotland, and murderer of his Master King Duncan, about the year
of our Lord 1040. being told by some witches, that he should never be slain by
any man born of a woman, was rega^dlesse of dangers, till coming to charge
Mackduffe, (Governor of Fife, f^ghting for the right heir, Malcolm Conmor)
understanding that he was cut out of his mothers womb, she dying before her
delivery, and so not naturally born, he was so daunted th^rewith, as, though
otherwise a man of good performance, he was easily slain by Mackduffe. So
strongly do the Devils amphibolous oracles or riddles work with them, in whom
they gain credit, commonly to their overthrow. This Tripudary Soothsaying seems
to have its original from the Lycians, who to know future Events went to the
Fountain sacred to Apollo, into which they cast baits, of which the fishes
neglect was a sign of ill luck, as the contrary of good.

4. Augurium. This kind of soothsaying was said to be invented by Cara King of
Caria a Province in Anatolia, west of Lycia. It was called Augurium ab avium
garri^u, from the chirping and chattering of birds. The College of the Augures
at Rome was first appointed by Romulus himself, being very expert in
South-say^ng, There were at first but three Augures, of each Tribe one. So
Pomp. Laetus. The word Augure by the Trope Synecdoche, signifying all sorts of
divining; Servius Tullius, the sixth Roman King when he divided Rome into four
Tribes or Wards, added the fourth Augure, all elected out of the Patritij or
Nobility. Quintus and Oneius Ogulinus, being Tribunes got five others to be
chos^n out of the Commonalty, at which the Senate decreed, that the number should
never exceed nine, notwithstanding Sylla being Dictator, added six more; the
eldest was called Magister Collegij, or Rector of the College. The custom
was, that if any other Priest was convicted of any notorious offense, he should
be d^scharged of his Office, and another constituted; but the Augures for no
crime could be dismissed. When he divined, he sat upon a Tower, in a clear day
(holding in his hand a crooked staff, called Lituus) in his Soot^-^aving Robe,
called Laena, and in Greek (...), a calefa^iendo, from heating, because it was
well lined within, being guarded on the outside with purple and crimson gards;
his head was covered, and face toward the East, so his back was West, his
right hand South, and his left Northward. He quartered out the Heaven with his
staff into certain Templa, or Regions, observing in which the Birds did
appear; then killing his sacrifice, and muttering certain prayers called
Effata, he pronounced sentence. Nothing was confirmed without two lucky tokens,
one after another; nor was any thing gain-sayed by the appea^ance of one only
evil token. Although Plutarch tells us ( in vit. Pyrr.) that when Antipater,
Lysimachus, and Pyrrhus, met to be sworn upon the sacrifices, to articles of
peace between them; there were three beasts brought to be sacrificed, a Goat,
a Bull, and a Ram, of which, the Ram fell down dead of himself before he was
touched, whereat the standers by derided, but the South-sayer Theodotus,
persuaded Pyrrhus not to swear, saying that this Omen d^d threaten one of the
three Kings with sudden death, for which cause Pyrrhus concluded no peace. The
distinctions of south-sayings have been taken some from the event, thence
called Prospera, or Adversa; some from the manner of their appearing, and that
was either wished, called Impetrativa, or unwished, or Oblitiva; some from the
diversity of things that offered themselves in time of divining, and so there
were five distinct sorts. Observations first, Of Thunder; Second, Of flying, or
chattering of Birds; third of Crummes cast to Pullets; Fourth, Of Quadrupeds,
which either should cross the way, or appear in some unaccustomed place;
Fifth, Of those casualties whereby the Gods testify their anger to us, called
Dira, because thereby, Dei ira nobis innotescit, as falling of salt toward us
at the Table, shedding of wine upon our Clothes, bleeding so many drops, etc.
as also voices heard none know whence, or unnatural to the to the speakets, as
the Bulls crying in the second Punick War, Cave tibi R^ma, and such voices as
Cadmus heard when he overcame the Serpent; Val. Maximus gives you many of those
P^odigies, and Josephus among the signs of the destruction of Jerusalem, and
Lucan recounting the Omens that threatened Rome with civil wars. So Julius
Caesar's death was divined by the clattering of the A^mour in his house, and the
poisoning of Germanicus, by the sounding of a Trumpet of its own accord, an Owl
schreeching in the Senate house, was deemed ominous to Augustus, and a company
of C^owes accompanying home Seianus with great clamours, unlucky to that high
Favorite; so was the shole of Ravens that hovered over the French Host at
Cressy, (a little before our King Edward 3d and his brave Son the black
Prince engag^d and routed it) too much observed by some there present. So, as
Homer sings, ( Iliad. l. 12.) The Trojans storming the wall, or Rampir^ which
the Greeks had cast up to secu^e their Ships, saw an Eagle trusse a Serpent,
but the Serpent so stung her, that she let her fall among them; which Omen
daunted most of them, especially Polydimus; but how causelessly appeared by
Hectors slighting the Augury, and his success that day, though afterward in
the gross, the Omen proved true. They also observed what Objects they met
fasting, and stumbling at the Threshold at going forth, and a thousand such
fooleries; so because Brutus and Cassius met a Blackmore, and Pompey had a dark
or sad colored Robe on at Pharsalia, these must needs be presages of their
overthrow, which are scarce Rhetorical sequels, concluding metaphors from
realities, and from conceptions metaphorical, inferring realities again. But I
am too tedious, for more of this, I refer you to Cicero de divinatione.
Fenestella. Pomponius Laetus. L. Florus. L. Ampleius, Godwin. D' Juigne, etc.

Of the Indian Soothsayers, or Gymnosophistae, Plutarch tells us Alexander
took ten, whose discreet answers to his hard Questions, argued their wit no
less then their judgment. The British Bards were accounted very cunning, and
the Egyptian Barchmans most famous, so that Pythagoras left his Country to
converse with them; nay, his thirst and passion after this excellent commerce
was so admirable, that he made nothing of circumcising himself, that he might
with the more freedom and less suspicion, pry into their profoundest
mysteries. The same design led Thales, Eudoxus; Apollonius, nay Plato himself
into Egypt, and Democritus, Empedocles, and the same Pythagoras and Plato into
Persia, to comprehend (says Plutarch) the Arcana of Philosophy and Divinity.
For Magic in those days, was nothing else but that perspective science by
which the hidden works of Nature were brought to light, and things natural
distinguished from miraculous, good from bad, which made the worthiest Princes,
especially those of Persia studious in it; nor were they permitted to govern
that had not some light therein; But as it is the course for all things to
degenerate, so was this divine and excellent science corrupted. It was, say
they, taught by Adam to his Son Seth, it was polluted and depraved by Cham,
and his posterity, led by an impious curiosity to patch out Philosophy with
Necromancy, and by charm; and spells, to inquire that of evil Spirits, that by
study they could not obtain by nature. The Hebrews according to S. Clement
(l. 4. Recog.) attribute the invention of evil Magic to Mizraim the Son of
Cham, others to Cham himself, who reigned in Bactria, called by profane
Authors Zoroastres. He wrote diverse Books of Enchantment, containing 200000
Verses, burnt by Ninus King of Assyria after his Conquest. Pliny, l. 30. cap.
1. It took its source from three principal Arts, Physic, judicial Astrology,
and Religion. Some divide it into infinite sorts, but as the Mountain Caucasus
running through many Countries, takes of every one a name, yet is still the
same mountain: So is this the same science, however called by its several
professors. But the chief were three sorts.

1. The Persian, invented by Zoroastres, Zorad^s, or Cham.

2. The Judaic introduced as they say by Moses, but more probably by Jamnes and
Jotapa or, Mambres (Syrus calls them Jannis and Jambaris) who were with reason
thought to be the Inchanters of Pharaoh, we finding in 2 Timothy 3. mention made
of Jannes and Jam^res (or as some render it, Jamnes and Mambres) that withstood
Moses. The third was the Grecian Magic, mentioned by Homer in his descriptions
of Proteus, Circe, and the Syrenes. It was brought into Greece by Hosthanes a
Persian, that accompanied Xerxes, and afterward published by another
Hosthanes, at the suit of Alexander the Great. But of all, the Persian Magi
were most renowned, no less for their stanch Religion and lives, then curious
search into the secrets of Nature; they assisted at the service of the Gods,
made prayers and sacrifices, believed the Resurrection and Immortality of the
soul; they thought the world subsisted by their prayers, rejected Idols,
busied themselves in presaging events, believing the Gods obeyed them, and that
the air was filled with Spirits, with the Manichees, making two principal, the
one good, whom they call Jupiter and Horosmades, the other bad, named Pluto and
Arimanis. They held promiscuous Copulation lawful, otherwise lived in great
austerity, rejecting exterior ornaments, and and the use of Gold. They ever
held a wand in their hands, and went clothed in white, as a mark of the candor
and simplicity of their lives, they lay hard, eat ill, drank worse; bread,
herbs, and cheese, being their food, and their drink water, as having a touch
of the Pythagorian sect, they abstained from all food that had life, or rather
Pythagoras learnt that of them. Diog. Laert. l. 1. de vit. Philos.)

This Sci^nce once of such esteem for its sublimity, and being so far elevate
from the common, and by the exercise of personages of greatest honor and
antiquity, is now by superstition joined with the invocation of infernal
spirits rendered odious. Some make two sorts of Magic, Natural and Divine, one
lawful, the other unlawful; ^he natural consists in the searching of the causes
of all things, which is no more then the consummation of Philosophy. The Divine
part is diabolical, being the abuse of natural things, joined with the
familiarity of wicked Spirits, so Iamblique (Livre des mysteries des
Aegyptiens) with whom agree Proclus and Porphyrius, lib. de Sacrif.) he calls
the first Theurgie, which is good and approvable, and may be termed the white
or natural; the other Geotie, or Necromancie, which is evil and damnable,
vulgarly termed The black Art, and is divided into diverse Classes, comprehended
in these five, by Hugues de Saint Victor, (Liu. 6. chap. 5. De Son Erudition
Didascalque.) The first he calls La mantique, or Divination, which is thus
subdivided.

1. When it is applied to the dead, it is called Necromancie.

2. When to the Earth, Geomancie.

3. When to the Water, Hydromancie.

4. When to the Air, Aeromancie.

5. When to the Fire, Pyromancie: It is practiced with diverse ridiculous
Utensils, as Bas^ns, Looking-glasses, Hatchets, etc.

The second sort he calls Mathematique Ma^ic, comprehending three Species. 1.
Aruspicium 2. Auspicium (of b^th which before) and 3. L'Horoscope, when by the
Con^tellation or Ascendent of any one, and Calculating his Nativity, we make
judgments of his Fortune; this is judicial Astrology. The third he calls
Sortilege, or a Lot, when people cast D^ce for their fortune, as in the
Shepherds Calender, or any other way. The fourth Witchcraft; when by
Ligatures, Charms, Spells, ung^ounded Amulets, Philters, or compacts people
make use or evil Spirits to serve them: and the fifth, Les Prestiges, which we
may render Legerdemain, or Deceptio visus, Phantasmes and illusions, when by
the artifice of the Devil, things seem as they are not, as Witches to be
turned into Cats, Wolves, to which to give credit, is perhaps as great an
error, as to affirm there are no Witches at all. One Ingredient in their
Rites, is the blood of Infants, which to obtain, Ovid seems to believe, that
they turn themselves into the shapes of such familiar and household creatures as
Cats, Owls, etc by a ce^tain Ointment; and this themselves have confessed upon
examination at Pompelona, Anno 1583. yet surely but illuded by the Devil, and
their melancholy to their own destruction; for if the Devil cannot annihilate
or destroy, how can he contract a body? therefore wise Judges have admonished,
that men should not give too rash a belief to the confessions of Witches, nor
yet to the evidence which is b^ought against them, because Witches themselves
are imaginative, believing often times, that they do what indeed they do not. It
was repo^ted of the Neuri, a Nation of Scythia, that they could turn themselves
into Wolves, and again assume their true shapes when they pleased. And Sabinus
reports, how one accustoming to change himself into a Woolf, and again into a
man, was taken and brought before the Duke of Prusia, accused by the Peasants
for worrying their Cattle: a deformed fellow, and not much unlike a beast. He
had a scar on his face, the mark of a wound which was given him by a Dog, when
he was a Woolf, as himself reported. He confessed, that twice every year he was
converted into that shape, first about Christmas, and again at Midsummer; at
which times h^ grew salvage, and was carried with a certain natural desire to
converse with Wolves in the woods, afflicted with pain and hor^or, while the
hair was breaking out of his skin, and before he was thoroughly changed. For a
trial, he was shut up in prison, and carefully guarded, but continued
unaltered; by which it appeared that this, as the like, proceeded from a kind
of distraction, and strength of the abused imagination; the Devil doubly
deluding both themselves and such as behold them, with fantastic
resemblances, although Bodin affirms and strives to maintain the contrary. For
the other ingredients of witchcraft, as the Spume of the Moo^, (their
fautresse) or the dew of the Night, soperiferous herbs, pollutions of holy
things, etc. I refer you to Ovids Met. l. 7. treating of Medeas bath for Aeson,
and Master Sandys his learned Comment thereon: To Father Lewis Richeome, his
Pilgrim of Loretto, cap. 7. of the Pilgrims return, etc. To Delrius disquis.
Magic. and to our elaborate Poet Laureat, Johnson, his Masqve of Queens, in
which inimitable Poem he has treasured up all the knowledge of the Ancients, of
this Theme, of which all or most of the Ancient Poe^s wrote something, bringing
in some Witch; Homer Circe in the Odyssi; Theocritus, Simatha in Pharmaceutria;
Virgil Alphesibaeus; Ovid, Dipsas, in amor. Medea and Circe in Met. Titul^^,
Saga; Horace, Candida, Sagana, Veia, Folia; Seneca, (...) and the Nurse, in
Herc. Oete; Petr. Aubiter, Saga in frag; Lucan, Ericto; and Claudian Megaera.
lib. 1. in Rufinum; still attributing to them such diabolical and odious
qualities as are sufficient to render them detested, and deter others from
their wretched society, were it but for the penury, sluttish nastinesse, and
deformity in which the Devil commonly keeps these his servants.

That grand enemy of man not being able to draw many to this grossness of
evil, willing rather to play at small game then to stand out, have won them to
a conceit of his smaller wares, though they will not seem to drive a solemn
bargain with the Merchant, such are Philtres, Charms, Ligatures, Characters,
and other superstitious ways in the cure of common diseases; what natural
effect^ can reasonably be expected, when to prevent the Ephialtes or Nightmare
we hang up an hollow stone in stables? when for warts we rub our hands before
the Moon, or commit any maculated part unto the touch of the dead? when for
Amulets against Agues we use the chips of Gallows and places of Execution?
which kind are most frequent in Germany and Flanders, where when one is sick,
all his acquaintance bring him their medicinal charms, so usual there, as I
was there cred^bly informed, that a Preacher sitting himself powerfully to
inveigh against Witchcraft, about the beginning of Lent, found so good
success, as that before Easter, more then 500. persons brought him their
charms and renounced them, Of this sort (no less then the Familiars, in some
of those parts sold in shops) is the custom among some of their soldiers to be
made Hard, Spit-free or Shot-free, etc. the Devil seconding hereby the
expectations of men with Events of his own contriving, to obtain a bloody
advantage, for he begets not only a false opinion that his deceits are
natural causes, but such as leads the open way of destruction. Of this sort
the Sympathetick, Powder and Weapon Salve seem to me, unless I could salve
that Action in Philosophy, Non datur actio indistans. Though they be sometimes
successful, it is not to be imputed to the belief of the Patient, or efficacy
of the ingredients, which can have none at distance, but rather to some
previous compact with the Devil; to whom rather then to be beholding for my
life, I would choose to die; and however it be approved by many, yet not being
plain to me; I should rather trust my body, if wound^d, to the care of an
ordinary Surgeon, knowing, what (...) of Faith is Sin; and might expect more
comfort of my health procured by a known lawful, then if it had been obtained
by a doubtful means. Under this head may I put Palmistry and Judicial
Astrology, which not seldom fail: but if they be grounded only upon natural
Causes and people that have the same Ascendent and Lines must have the same
fate, how came Jacob and Esau to have so different Fortunes, when their Births
were so connexed, as the one had hold of the others heel? if in that short time
the whole revolution of the Heaven changed, what certain Judgment can be made?
And in Palmistry, why should it be confinable unto man, when the rules of it
are common to beasts? as in the forefoot of the Moll, especially of the Monkey,
there is the Table Line, that of Life, and of the Liver? This prying into the
Arcana Dei let the wise counsel of Cato the prudent Heathen dissuade.

Quid Deus intendat, noli perquirere sort.
Quid statuat de te, sine te deliberat ipse.
lib. 2. de Morib. Seek by no Divination Gods intents:
He without thee has fixed all thy events.
To say something of the Sortilegium or Divination by Lots. To determine
doubfull matters by the opening of a book, and letting fall a staff, are
ancient f^agments of Pagan superstition. The first an imitation of Sorts
Homericae or Virgilianae, drawing determinations from Verses casually occuring.
The same was practiced by Severus, who entertained ominous hopes of the Empire,
from that Verse in Virgil, Tu regere imperio populos Roman memento; and
Gordianus who reigned but few days was discouraged by those words, Ostendunt
terris hunc tantum fata nec ultra esse sinunt. Nor was this only performed in
Heathen Authors, but upon the sacred Text of scripture, as Gregorius Turonensis
has left some account; and as the practice of the Emperor Heraclius, before
his expedition into Asia minor, is delivered by Cedrenus. The decision from the
staff is an Augurial Relic, and the practice thereof is accused by God
himself; Hosea 4.12. My people ask counsel at their stocks, and their staff
declares unto them. Of this kind of Rhabdomancy was that practiced by
Nabuchadonosor in that Caldean Miscellany, delivered by Ezekiel. cap. 21. The
King of Babylon stood at the parting of the way, at the head of the two ways,
to use divination: he made his arrows bright, he consulted with Images, he
looked in the liver. At his right hand was the divination for Jerusalem; That
is, and Estius expounds it; the left way leading unto Rabbah the chief City
of the Ammonites, and the right unto Jerusalem; he consulted Idols and
Entrails, he threw up a bundle of arrows, to see which way they would light,
and falling on the right hand, he ma^ched toward J^rusal^m. A like way of
Belomancy or Divination by Arrows has been in request with the Scythians,
Alanes, Germans, Africans, and Turks of Algier. And (though by a more obvious
witchcraft) Cingis the first great Cham of Tartary, about the year of grace,
1162. b^fo^e he joined battle with Vncham, one of the Kings Tenduch, consulted
with his Diviners of the success: they taking a green reed, cleft it asunder,
and wrote on the one part the name of Cingis, and Vncham on the other, and
placed them not far asunder. Then fell they to muttering their Charms, and
the two reeds a fighting in the sight of the whole Army, Cingis reed overcame
the other, whereby they foretold the joyful news of Victory to the Tartar,
which accordingly happened. So Theodatus the Gothe (about the year 534.) being
in wars with the Romans, and willing beforehand to know his success; was
advised by a Jew to shut up a number of swine, and to give some of them Roman
names, the others Gothish. Not long after, the King and the Jew going to the
sties, found the Gothish Hoggs all slain, and the Roman half unbris^ell^d:
whereupon the Jew foretold that the Goths should be discomfited, and the
Romans much weakened, and so it fell out. This kind of Divination some call
(...), and has been prohibited by a general Council, and is with its other
kinds often condemnd and threatened with punishments by God himself, by the
mouths of his holy Prophets, especially Ezekiel. If any think that Elisha
p^actised Belomancy when by an arrow shot from an Eastern window, he
presignified the destruction of Syria, and when according unto the th^ee
strokes of Ioash, with an arrow upon the ground, he foretold the number of his
victories, 2 Kings 13. they may know that that was done by the spirit of God,
who particular'd the same, and determined the strokes of the King unto three,
which the hopes of the Prophet expected in twice that number. From the same
spirit proceeded those cures in Scripture, by means not to us effective. The
Divine power either proceeding by visible means, or not, unto visible effects,
is able to to conyjoyn them by his cooperation. And therefore those sensible
ways which seem of indifferent Natures, are not idle ceremonies, but may be
causes by his command, and arise unto productions beyond their regular
activities. If Nahaman the Syrian had washed in Jordan without the command of
the Prophet, its like he had been cleansed by them no more then by the waters
of Damascus. There is no cause to doubt if any besides Elisha had cast in salt,
the waters of Jericho had not been made wholesome. There was some natural
virtue in the plaster of figs applied to Ezechias, and gall is very
mundificative, and was a proper medicine to clear the eye of Tobit; which
carrying in themselves some action of their own, they were additionally
promoted by that power, which can extend their natu^es unto the production of
effects beyond their created efficiencies. And thus may he operate also from
causes of no power unto their visible effects; for he that has determined
their actions unto certain effects, has not so emptied his own, but that he
can make them effectual unto any other. So cannot the Devil, having no power
of his own, as a created essence, but that only that is permitted to him, all
which he stretches to make himself seem equal with God; so that we may call
him Gods Ape, assuming the annexes of divinity, and the prerogatives of the
Creato, ^rawing into delusive practice the operation of miracles, and the
prescience of things to come. See more of this in Doctor Browns ^seu. Epid. l.
1. cap. 10. and 11. lib. 5. cap. 21. and 22. The Devil has also made men
believe that he can raise the dead, that he has the key of life and death, and
this leads me to Necromancie, which is divination by the dead; when to foretell
some event, some dead body is called up: as Lucan. lib. 6. makes Pompeyes Son
Sextus go to the witch Erictho, to enqui^e the issue of the war, she quickens a
dead carcass that informs him, then by a spell lays it again. The like was
acted in the body of Samuel by the W^tch of Endor, when King Saul went to learn
of ^er what event his war with the Philistines should have, although whether
done by divine permission, or diabolical illusion, is as yet in controversy.
But more probable it seems, since the Devil can transform himself into an
Angel of light, that he assumed the shape of Samuel. Insomuch that the
apparitions of Saints and Angels (of no small danger to the credulous and
unstable) are not secure from deception. For to me it seems hard, that the
Devil should have power of of the body of a Saint, and holding that the dead
do rest in the Lord, that we should yet believe they are at the lure of Devil:
that he who is in bonds himself, commands the fetters of the dead; and
dwelling in the bottomle^^e Lake, the blessed from Abraham's bosom. The opinion
of the real Resurrection of Samuel is chiefly grounded upon that in
Ecclesiasticus (praising Samuel) cap. 46. v 2. After his death he prophesied,
and showed the King his end, and lift up his voice from the Earth in Prophecy.
Such expound those words in the story. 1. Sam. 28.19. To morrow shall thou and
thy sons be with me, in the Grave, only, in the state of the dead: farther
they cannot go; for if it were the Prophet, had he ^poken o^ the particular
place wherein he was, he would not have spoken so generally, take the place
either for Heaven, or Limbus patrum. for the^e we may fear Saul and his two
Sons Abinadab and Malchishua never came: If it were the Devil, and meant local
Hell; to have spoken plain, he should have said thou and thy two sons; for
Jonathan the Eldest and friend of David, was flain too, but left us pious hopes
of his better condition: but that plainness of speech he might wave to keep up
the controversy, making it his work to sow dissension; as also to speak here
like himself, elsewhere, all whose answers and Oracles were amphibolous and
mystical: But for more of this I refer you to Saint Augustine, lib. 2. q. ad
Simplician: where he proposes both the opinions as probable.

But to reassume the business of note, the Magi: Magus signifies as much as
(...), Sapiens, a wise man: so were the Philosophers in Persia and the East
named, though now by the corruption of the Science, its an odious name,
Magician alias Conjurer, though we might as well deprave the name of Divine, it
certainly coming a Divinando, from those ancient Diviners or Soothsayers. So
Tyrannus at first did only signify a Monarch and absolute King, but came
afterward by the abuse of Royal Authority to be taken for a cruel and evil
Prince; In like manner the word Lacrones signified of old such as were the
guards of Princes; but grew in time by their disloyalty to be understood of
Robbers and Thieves. Out of the Magi the ancients chose them Kings, and chief
officers; Cambyses second Monarch of the Medes and Persians, at his expedition
into Egypt, constituted Patizithes, one of the Magi, Viceroy in his absence.
And the Magi or wisemen led by the star to Bethelem to adore our Savior were
Kings, as say Saint Hierome, Saint Augustine, Saint Chrysostom, Saint
Anastasius, Saint Isidorus, Tertullian, and Remigius: perhaps Kings of Cities
or some narrow Territories or Topacks, such as the Kings of Sodom and Gomorrah,
the Kings of Ierico and Ai, the 31 Kings that Joshua subdued, and such as the
friends of Job are thought to have been; but their number is not expressed,
much less their names, in Scripture; Saint Augustine says they were three,
perhaps led thereunto by the number of their gifts. For their names Franciscus
Maurelicus has them in his Martyrologe, agreeing with the written Tables
annexed to their reputed Tombs in Collein in Germany, viz. The first was
called Melchior, an old grave Person, who offered Gold as unto a King. The
second Gasper, a young man, who presented Frankincense as unto God. The third
Belthazar, a Blackmore, who offered Mirrh, as unto a Man ready for his
Sepulcher. That they were Kings of Collein is the vulgar opinion; but though
Collein was the chief City of the Vbii, then called Vbiopolis, and afterward
Agrippina, in honor of Agrippa, Nero's Mother, and lastly Collein by the by
French, who there planted a Colonie, yet do no story say there were three Kings
thereof. Besides, then they after their return would probably have converted
their Subjects, it being their proper vocation, they being (says Chrysostom)
baptized and made Bishops by Saint Thomas the Apostle; but according unto
Munster their Conversion was not w^ought until seventy years after, by
Maternus a Disciple of Saint Peter's. Lastly, the wise men came from the East;
but but Collein is seated West from Jerusalem; for Collein has of Longitude
34. degrees, but Jerusalem 72. A more probable opinion it is, that they were of
Arabia, descended from Abraham by his second wife Keturah, and this the
aforesaid Table allows; First, because they came from the East, and so is
Arabia in respect of Jerusalem; as also, because in them was fulfilled the
Prediction of the royal Prophet, Psalm. 72. The Kings of Arabia shall bring
gifts. Their bodies are said by Eckius and others to have been translated by
Saint Helena, the mother of Constantine, unto Constantinople: From thence by
Eustorphius Bishop of Millain unto Millain; and finally brought unto Collein by
Rainoldus Bishop thereof, An. 1164. of which place they may be called Kings
rather from their Sepulcher then Territory.

The British Magi also, or Druides were their Magistrates, they took their
name and beginning (as some will) from Druis, fourth King of Britain, great
Grandchild to Samothes, (supposed to be Mesech Son of Iaphet, who some make the
first King here, saying he here first of any arrived and peopled this I Will, An.
Mundi 1787. after the Flood 131. years, and before the Incarnation of our
Savior 2158. He came into Europe together with Gomer and Fuisco or Aschenas
founders of the Western and Southe^n Gauls and Germans. He inhabited the North
and East parts of Gaul and Germany, from the Alps to the Rhene, from the
Pyrene Hills to the River Seine, and so to the British shore, and the Island it
self) such will have Poets called anciently Bardes (and among the Welsh
Barthes to this day) from Bardus the royal Orpheus of this Isle, fifth King
thereof, and Son to Druis.

They also will have the Magi of all Nations of British extraction, taking the
science of divine Philosophy, and the Name too, from Magus Son of Samothes,
and second King of Britain, the same man that to perpetuate his name, built
among the Gauls, Neomagus, Sitomagus, Rhotomagus, Noviomagus, etc. though his
Science shall out-last his Towns. These British Magi, might as well send their
Name as Learning, to the East, their King Sarron (say they) Son to Magus, and
third King of Britain (to whom they impute the first foundation of Schools
and Universities in this Isle, and elsewhere) by them persuaded, sent by
Timagen, and others of them, the first knowledge of Lite^ature, to Athens and
Egypt. But it seems the British learning, like their wool, thriveth better in
a hotter Cl^me then their own; for they tell us, that Bladud (8th King of
England, then called Leogria of Locrine, Son of Brute, first King of that
Division) studied at Athens, and brought thence four Philosophers, who
professed the Sciences at Stamford, where he founded an University which
flourished till S. Augustines time, when the Pope did interdict it for Heresies
(perhaps that of Pelagius) that then sprung amongst the Saxons and Britains.
So Mr Harding, Slatyer, Palae-Albion, etc. (though in our more authentic
^ecords, I find not any thing like an University at Stamford, till in the Reign
of King Edward 3d upon some contention between the Southern and Northern men in
Oxford; many of the Scholars removed thither, and there held public Schools
of all sorts of learning, but left it again, and returned, being commanded so
to do by the Kings Proclamation, and thereupon it was ordained in the
University, that the Scholars in taking of their degrees, should make oath, not
to read publicly at Stamford to the prejudice of Oxford.) This King Bladud,
was held so great a Magician, as that he founded Bath, and the three hot
medicinable springs there by his Art, then called Caer Badon, by the old
^rittons, from Badon or M^ns ^adonicus not far off, (...) Hot waters, by
Ptolomy, and by Antoninus, Aquae Solis, respecting their nature. Here Bladud
one day practicing Necromancy, decked himself with feathers, and presum^ng
(Icarus like) to fly, fell, and brake his neck upon the Temple he had the^e
built to Apollo, He reigned 863 years before the incarnation of our Savior;
from this Bladud, many will have Magic (his great Masterpiece) called the Black
Art, a far fetched Etymology, but perhaps as well Black Art from Bladud, as
Magic from Magus King of Britain. These relations are not altogether to be
derided, though they seem to have been composed by some more affectionate to
the honor of their Country, then the purity of story; they are attested by
learned and worthy ^ens, and (though none need to feign any thing to honor
Great Britain (as she lately stood) it is just such should find more credit,
then that impudent Detractor Polydore Virgil, that maliciously compiled her
story to abuse her, by leaving out, nay burning and embezling her best and most
ancient Records, Monuments, and Legier Books, that his own might not be
contradicted, (having a large Commission under the Great Seal, to make search
for all Antiqu^ties that might make for his purpose;) yet for all this, he has
ill luck to write nothing well, save the life of King Henry the seventh,
wherein he had reason to take a little more pains then ordinary, the Book
being Dedicated to Henry the eight his Son, though even in that piece he is
so far excelled by our eloquent Lord Verulam, as I must either retract that
Polydore wrote well, or allow it but to make him the better foil to Bacon, who
shows there was no need of Italian help to the British History.

One great Art of the Magi, was the Exposition of Dreams amongst them, believed
of gran^ importance, holding, that though sleep be the Image of death, Dreams
are the portraiture of ^ife; though Cassius reasoning with Brutus about the
apparition to him in Sardis, labored according to his Epicurian sect, to
Father all upon deception, and the strength of imagination; ( Plut. in vit.
Brut.) And though Dreams are more often Histories then presages, grounded upon
things that are in being, and which we have seen; for the imag^nation which is
the Couch and Nursery of Dreams, rep^esenteth commonly what she has received;
yet Dreams are not always of nature, but also of the inspiration of God, as
Jacob's Ladder, Joseph's Sun and Moon, and 11 Stars, Pharoahs fat and lean
^ine, etc. So Rich^ome Pilg. Loret. and as D' Brown observes, Rel. Med. There
is surely a nearer apprehension of any thing that delights each of us in our
Dreams, then in our waked senses, and Paulo post, The slumber of the body,
seems to be but the waking of our souls: It is the ligation of our sense, but
the liberty of Reason. With him, seem to agree Galen and Aristotle, in their
singular Tracts of Sleep. And M. Sandys, in his Commentary upon Ovids Met. l.
11. Defines Dreams, those Images which are formed in our sleeps by the various
discursion of the spirits in the brain (the spirits being the Chariot of the
soul) which follow concoction, when the blood is least troubled, and the
fantasy uninte^rupted ^y ascending vapors. These the Poet divides into three
kinds, the one im^tating the Rational, the other the Animal, and the third the
Inanimate: the first called Morpheus, which signifies Form; the second Icelos
by the Gods, which is similitude; but Phobetor or fear, by Mortals, in regard
of the terrors apprehended by beasts and Monsters; and the last Phantasius, of
the Imagination. And as the Cogitations of Princes, far differ from those of
the vuigar, so their Dreams are unvulgar and different: to this purpose M.
Howel in his vocal Forest, Oftentimes the conceptions of Kings, are as far
above the Vulgar, as their condition is, for being higher elevated, and walking
upon the battlements of sovereignty, they sooner receive the inspirations of
heaven.

As sleep was created to recreate the body, and free the mind from care for a
season; so, Dreams are sometimes sent to terrify the guilty (as those that the
Usu^per Richard the third is reported to have had, the night before the great
deciding battle at Bosworth field). Sometimes they are to confirm the good (as
those that the Earl of Richmond (afterward King Henry the seventh) had on the
aforesaid night) and they are not seldom prophetical (as they proved to those
two Princes.) So Ovid (it being the business of Poets, in the contemplation of
Nature, to represent things that are not as if they were) makes Morpheus
present her d^owned Husband Ceyx, to Alcyone in a Dream, and ^aesars wife
Calphurnia, foresaw her Husbands Tragedy in he^ sleep, but examples are
innumerable; yet such divine Revelations were often imitated by Spirits of
darkness, to beget a superstition, which in the end so increased, that
Aristides compiled an Ephemerides of his own Dreams; and Mithridates of those
of his Concubines. But the Romans finding the inconveniences thereof (because
all Dreams without distinction of Causes, were drawn to Divination) forbad the
same by a public decree, though they, more politiquely then wisely, made
their Religion and Auguries ever serve their occasions, as Machiavel observes
at large in his discourses upon Livie. Much ado I have to take off my hand from
describing their method in expounding of Dreams, as to dream of the dead,
signified receiving of Money, to dream of waters and green fields, the death of
friends, etc. As also their manner in procuring of Dreams, as wrapping
themselves up in beasts skins, and lying on their backs before the T^mples,
with a branch of Misletoe in their hands, or laying of an odd number of
^ay-leaves under their pillows, which they held efficacious to produce true
D^eams, etc. But such superstitions I had ^ather ^mit, s^eing I need not tell
them to the lea^ned; nor am I willing to teach them to the ignorant, whom I
refer to the Text, where they shall see (borrowed of the inc^mparable Sir
Philip Sidney) that -- Wisdom and virtue be,
The only Destinies set for man to follow, etc.


[(23) Larr] Larr is a sandy Kingdom, adjoining upon Susiana, almost wholly a
Dese^t, being for 400. miles together sterile, full of loose sand and danger,
having high hills on each side without Grass, River, or Herbage. It has for
the seat of justice, a City of the same name, seated under the Latitude of 27
degrees and forty minutes North, fourteen days jou^ney distant from Shiras.
This City is ancient, and had about fifty years since 5000 houses in her, of
which 3000 were overturned by an Earth quake. It Is now famous only for a
strong Castle, and handsome Buzzar; the Castle is built at the No^th end, upon
an high aspiring Mountain, well stored with Ordnance brought from Ormus: the
order and Situation of this Fort and Fabric, equalizing, if not preceding any
other in Persia. Here is a Mosque or Temple, framed in some part with Mosaique
work, and round in figure; at the entrance hangs a Mirror or Looking glass,
wherein Mahometans behold their defo^mities. This Church lodges the great long
named, long buried P^ophet Emyr-ally-saddey-ameer, whose sleep (they say) has
been 1500 years long in that Sepulcher; they expect his Resurrection shortly to
wait upon Mahomet, of whom he prophesied 500 years before his birth.

This Town affords Dates, Orenges, Aqua-vitae, or Arack, etc, but is very ill
watered; some Maps place it by a great River, wherein they mistake so
exceedingly, that the^e is not any River within 100 miles of it: Rain is also a
great stranger here, not a shower sometimes in five years, when it falls, it
brings incredible joy and profit to the people, and sunburned Country, though
sometimetimes no less detriment; for not long since, such a violent storm of
Rain unburthened it self near to Techoa, that caused such a sudden deluge and
Cataract, as a Caravan of 2000 Camels perished by it. The people are black and
needy, amongst whom many miserable Jews inhabit, and have their Synagogues.
This City and Province, were under the great Duke of Shiras, of whose reducing
of it to the Persian Crown, see the 19th Note upon the Fourth Act. Herbert. etc.

[(24) BAIAZETS Cage] see the 10th Note upon the Fourth Act.

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE FOURTH ACT.
[(1) BIzantiums walls of fire] The ancient walls of Bizantium, or
Constantinople, were said to be of a just even height, every stone so cemented
together with brass Couplets, that the whole wall seemed to be but one entire
stone. Some affirm the same of the outmost wall of Jerusalem. The Epithet
Fiery, I ascribe to Bizantiums wall, it being built of brick and stone
intermixed orderly. So was Thebes said to be walled with fire, being walled
with flint-stone, in which that fierce element is most predominant.

[(2) Good Gelden] meaning Elchee. See the 8th Note upon the third Act.

[(3) Hircania] See the sixth Note upon the third Act.

[(4) The valiant Amazones] In Cappadocia, about the River Thermodon, which
runs through Anatolia, into the Euxine Sea, the Amazones were said to inhabit,
so called, either quasi (...), because they used to fear, or cut off their
right paps, that they might be no impediment to their shooting, or throwing of
their lavelins; or from (...), sine pane, because they used not bread: or from
(...), because they used to live together, or from a Queen of Ephesus,
Priestesse to Diana, called Amazona.

They were, according to Pliny, Justin, etc. a people of Scythia, that valiant
Nation, which at several eruptions, dilated its self over the whole world,
(therefore styled by diverse Authors, the Mother of all inundations, Vagina
Gentium, and Officina generis humani) famous it was in both Sexes, the men
being founders of the Parthian and Bactrian, and the women of the Amazonian
Empire, about the year of the world, 2100. the occasion this, in the time of
Sesostris King of Egypt, the Scythians b^oke into Asia, b^inging with them
their wives, and household Gods; but there happening a quarrel between the rest
of the Nobility, and Plinos and Scolpythus the Generals, those two separated
themselves, and their faction from the ^est, and s^ated between the Rive^s
^anais, and Therm^don in Cappadocia, a long t^me they combated, and often
defeated the Themiscyrii, who were the inhabitants of that Region, but at last,
by a st^atag^m of th^irs* lost their Army. Their wives now doubly vexed, (both
with ^xile and widdowhood, and the extr^mity of g^ief,) and fear, producing the
usual effect, despe^atenesse, they not only def^nded their bo^ders against but
set upon the Con^ue^ors (weal^ed before by their Husbands) and not only
overcame them, but infinitely enlarged their ^ominions, under the conduct of
Marpesia and Lampedo, their two Queens, late wives to the two forenamed
Captains; then finding the sweetness of Rule, they not only resolved to
continue Widows, but made so such as yet were not, by mu^dering all the men in
the Country, pe^mitting none either to stay the^ein, or to enter in, but some
^ew for drudges. They proclaimed themselves Daughters of Mars, and defied the
wo^ld, of which they conquered a g^od part, acco^ding to Justin, lib. 2. Their
two Queens, Marpesia and L^mpedo, made war by turns, they subdued the better
parts of the continent of Europe, and many Cities in Asia, where they built
Ephesus, (though it was perfected by Andronicus the Son of Codrus) and many
other Cities.

Part of the Army they sent home with a noble booty, the rest that stayed to
defend Asia, was overpowred by concourse of the barbarous Nations, and put to
the sword, together with their Queen Marpesia, in whose place succeeded her
Daughter Orithya in the Throne, famous no less for her martial a^chievements,
then her inviolate chastity. At length having by War obtained peace, for
successions sake, they used during two months in the spring to accompany with
their Neighbors, especially with the Sarmates, says Pliny, (lib. 6. cap. 7.)
who were their subjects, with the Gelae and Leleges, says Plutarch (in vit.
Pomp.) The female issue they trained up to war, searing the left breasts of the
noble women, lest they might hinder their wearing of shields; and the right
breast of the common women, that they might not impede the^r drawing of Bows.
The Male issue (say some) they killed, others say they sent them to their
Fathers when they were weaned, breaking the legs and arms of those few whom
they reserved for drudgery, that they might be useless for war, and fit only
for procreation and husbandry. Grown thus famous, it was fit they should be
honored with the contention of Hercules, which happened thus: The King for
whom that stout Hero performed his twelve Labors commanded him, as a thing
impossible to fetch him the Armor of the Amazonian Queen; He with Theseus, and
the choice youth of Greece, shipped in nine Galleys, and assailed their Country,
at such time as their valiant Queen Orithya was making war abroad, so that he
found the less trouble in overcoming the other Queen Antiope: Theseus took
Hippolyta Antiopes sister prisoner, married her, and of her begat Hippolitus.
Hercules took the other sister Manalippe, and for her Ransom, took the Queens
Armor, and returned to the King that sent him. Orithya to revenge it upon the
Greeks, demanded aid of Sagillus, King of the Scythians, who sent her a Noble
Army of Horse, led by his Son Panaxagoras, but then the Athenians vanquished.
To Orithya succeeded Penthesilea, who got fame before Troy: She being slain,
her people continued their feminine Empire till Alexanders time, their Queen
Minthia, alias Thalestris, after she had obtained 14 days company with him to
have issue by him, dyed, and with her, the name of the Amazones: so Justin.
Plutarch in vit. These. (agreeing with Seneca) calls the Amazon that Theseus
took Antiopa, and alleges the authorities of Hellacanus, Menecrates,
Pherecydes, and Herodotus for it, that he made that voyage alone, after
Hercules's. Dion says, he brought her away by stealth, not force, invited her
to his Ship, then hoisted sail. Clidemus the Historiographer, agrees with
Justin; but which sister soever it was, either Antiope, or Hippolyta, (though
Theseus his naming his Son by the Amazon Hippolitus, as most say (though
Pindarus says he called him Demophon) rather inclines me to believe it was
Hippolyta) it is certain the Amazones invaded Greece to revenge it; to do which,
that they passed over the arm of the sea called Bosphorus Cimmericus, being
frozen, as Hellacanus reports, is scarce credible, more like it is that they
came by Land; for in Thessaly, (through which they could not pass without
fighting) there are seen some of their Tombs, about the City of Scotusa, hard
by the Rocks called the Dogs head: that they subdued the Country about Athens,
and much of the City too, is evident in that they pitched their Camp in the
very City, and fought Theseus in the place (called Pnyce) adjoining to the
Temple of the Muses: This also the Graves of the women that dyed there do
testify. Theseus having sacrificed unto the Goddess Fear (according to the
advice of the Prophecy he had received) gave them battle in the month of
August, on the same day on which the Athenians do solemnize the feast
Boedromia. Clidemus writes the circumstances of the fight, which was fierce and
hot, in which the Athenians were repulsed several times, and at last it proved
little more then a drawn Battle. After four months, peace was made, by the
means of Hippolyta, (though some say she was slain fighting on Theseus's s^de
with a Dart, by Molpadia) in memory whereof, the Pillar which is joined to the
Temple of the Olympian ground, was set up in her honor. However it is certain,
the war was ended by agreement; for a place adjoining to the Temple of Theseus
bears record of it, being called Orcomosium, because the peace was there by
solemn Oath concluded; and the sacrifice also does truly verify it, which they
made to the Amazons before the feast of Theseus, time out of mind. That of the
Poets, that the Amazones made war with Theseus, to revenge the injury he did to
their Queen Antiopa in refusing her, to marry Phaedra, seems but fiction,
though indeed after the death of his Amazonian Queen he married Phaedra, whose
violent lust was the ruin of his noble Son by his Heroine Lady, to wonder
expressed by Seneca in his excellent Tragedy, Entitled Hippolitus. What ever
was the cause of the War; it was so well managed, as it seemed not the
enterprise of a Woman; so Plutarch. Others Epitomizing the story of the
Amazones, say, they were a Race of warlike women in Cappadocia, managing
courageous Horses, expert themselves, and instructing their Daughters in
military exercises, and became so famous and formidable, that in the end it
drew on the courage of Hercules, together with the desire of Hippolita's rich
Belt to assail them; and that Hippolita and Manalippe, sisters to the Queen
Antiope, challenged Hercules and Theseus to single Combat, and were at last (to
their eternal credits) hardly vanquished. Hercules (say they) slew Antiope,
and took Hippolyta prisoner. whom he gave to Theseus his companion, as the
reward of his merit in that service. In this War he so weakened their forces as
they became a prey to their Neighbors; who after a while extinguished in those
parts both their name and Nation. Penthesilea with the remainder flying her
Country, assisted Priamus in the wars of Troy (for the innate hatred which her
nation bore to the Greeks) of which Virgil.

Ducit Amazonidum lunatis agmina peltis
Penthesilea furens: mediisque in millibus ardet,
Aurea subnectens exertae cingula mammae
Bellatrix; audetque viris concurrere Virgo.
Aeneid. 1. Penthesilea on the numerous Bands
Rusht with her Crescent-shielded Amazons*
A golden Bend swathing her seared Breast.
Bold maid! that durst with armed men content
She was there slain by Achilles or by Pyrrhus his son. Pliny reports that she
was the first that invented the Battellax^. Plutarch says part of the Amazones
did inhabit on the side of the Mountain Caucasus that looks toward the
Hyrcanian Sea. And Plato affirms that there was a Nation of Amazons in his time
in Sarmatia Asiatica, at the foot of Caucasus: from whence it should seem their
Queen Thalestria came into Hircania unto Alexander, that she might have a
Daughter by him, who participating of both their spirits might conquer and
deserve the world. But Strabo doubts by the uncertainty of Authors (though in
the story of no Nation do Historians punctually ag^ee) and the unlikelinesse
thereof, that there ever were any such women: And Palephates writes, that the
Amazones were a People courageous and hardy, who wore linen shashes on the^r
heads, and gowns to their heels (as now the Turks do) suffering no hair to
grow on their faces; and therefore in contumely were by their Enemies called
women. This opinion may be made yet more prob^ble by that of Plutarch, in vit.
Pomp. viz. that in the battle that Pompey fought with the Albanians by the
River Abas. there were certain Amazones, on the barbarous General Cosis his
side, who came from the Mountains that run along the River Thermodon; for after
the Victory, the Rom^ns spoiling the dead, found Targets and Buskins of the
Amazons, but not one woman's body. Goropius a late Author conceives them to be
the wives and sons of the Sarmatians, who invaded Asia, together with their
Husbands, and after planted in Cimbria; which he endeavors to prove by ce^tain
Dutch Etymologies: This conceit some will have arise from what others write,
viz. that they were called Sauromatides, from their feeding much upon Lizards,
in Greek (...). Francis Lopez and Vlrichus Schimdel find them in the Riv^r
Orellana in America: called thereof the River of Amazones: and Edward Lopez
affirms, that there are of these in Monomotapa in Africa, ninteen degrees
Southward of the line; the strongest guard of that Emperor as the East Indian
Portugalls acknowledge. Some of the ancients place Amazones in Lybia, among
whom were the Gorgons under their Queen Medusa, subdued by Perseus. Cael. l. 6.
cap. 12. Silius Ital. l. 2. The Moderns send us to the Islands of Japan; next
to the Taupinamboaus to find women that burn their right breasts not to hinder
their combating. Possidonius agrees with Strabo l. 4. Geogra. in making mention
of a certain Island of the Ocean near to the River Loir (which some think to be
Noirmoustier near Poictou) where were women that permitted no men amongst them,
but went by Troops to acccompany with the Samnite Gauls, and after conception
returned to their I Will. So D' Juigne.

[(5.) Phineus Harpyes] Phineus the son of Agenor, some make King of Phoenicia,
some of Thrace, some of Paphlagonia, but most of Arcadia; he having pulled out
the eyes of Crambus and Orythus his Sons by Cleopatra (otherwise called
Harpalyce) his first wife, daughter to Boreas and Orythia, at the instigation
of their Stepmother Idaea, the daughter of Dardanus King of Scythia, was
himself st^uck blind by the divine Vengeance for his unnatural cruelty, the
ravenous Harpyes being sent to devour his food, and contaminate his Table: but
the Argonautes in their Journey to Colchos being courteously entertained by
Phineus (a Prince of their blood and ^lliance, he having likewise informed them
concerning their voyage, and given them a Pilot,) sent the Boredes, Calais and
Zetes the winged Issue of Boreas (now reconciled for the ^njury done to his
innocent Nephews) to chase them away; who pursuing them as far as the
Strophades (two small Islands ^n the Ionian Sea, now called Strivalii) were
there commanded by Iris to do no further violence to the Dogs of Jupiter,
whereupon they desisted, and the Islands of their return were named Strophades
(a (...) Conversio) being before called Plotes. So the Fable, of which Virgil.

-- Strophades Graio stant nomine dictae
Insulae Ionio in magno; quas dira Celaeno,
Harpyaeque colunt aliae: Phineia postquam
Clausa domus: mensasque metu liquere priores.
Tristius haud illis monstrum, nec saevior uila
Pestis, and ira Deum stygiis sese extulit undis.
Virginei volucrum vultus faedissima ventris
Proluvies, uncaeque manus, and pallida semper
Ora fame. -- Aeneid. l. 3.
-- Isles In The Ionian Sea, in Greek
Called Strophades, did dire Celaeno seek,
And the other Harpyes when they would (frighted) flown
Phineus barred gates, and Table once well known.
No Monster's worse then they, a fiercer Plague
The wrath of Gods never roused from Stygian Lake.
They Are Foul with Virgin faces, purging ere
Their Paunches, armed with tallons bent to tear,
And still with famine pined. --
The Harpyes are feigned to be the daughters of Neptune and Tellus, of old
esteemed the Parents of Monsters, some lay them to Neptune alone, the Sea (for
the most part) being Father of Prodigies; and not without cause, for according
to Thales Milesius, all things are engendered of Humor, whence it comes that
the Ocean is called Father. Some will have them take their name of Harpalyce
Phineus his wife, being sent to revenge the wrongs done to her Sonns; but it
seems more probable that they were so called of of (...) Rapio, being the
Emblemes of Rapine and wrong. They are said to be Virgins, in that barren;
because goods so gotten descend but seldom to posterity. To fly, in that they
are swift in extorting; to be covered with plumes, for cloaking their prey; and
to have talons of vultures, for griping and fast holding of their ill gotten
riches. These qualities are also charactered in their names, Aello, Ocypetes
and Celaeno, signifying a taking away that which is another, celeritie in the
Act, and subtilty in concealing: those three Virgil mentions, Hesiod names but
the two first; Homer calls the last Podarge, and says that of her the wind
Zephyrus engendered the Chariot Horses of Achilles, named Balius and Ximphus.
The Harpyes are said to have the faces of women, in that Avarice, of which they
are the Hieroglyphics, allures with a beauteous pretense, but ends in a
Serpent; to this allusion some Mythologists, and among them our excellent
Sandys, restrain the whole Fable, making Phineus said to have put out his
sons eyes, in having abandoned wisdom and Liberality; to have lost his sight,
and to suffer perpetual Famine, in that so blinded with Avarice, that he could
not see into h^m^elf, nor afford himself the necessaries of life. The Harpyes
(called elsewhere his Daughters) are his covetous desires, not suffering him to
eat of the meat that was set before him, himself polluting it with his sordid
disposition, being infected with Solomon's evil, to have riches, and not a
heart to use them; therefore tormented with furies, those being said (as
Servius observes) to be afflicted with Furies, who covetously abstained from
the use of their own, excellently expressed by Virgil in the punishment of
Tantalus Aen. l. 8. Calais and Zetes import a calling of himself to account,
and a diligent inquiry into his own condition, by a speedy Reformation,
expelling those ravenous Harpyes, though forbidden utterly to destroy them, in
that they are the Dogs of Jupiter, the Ministers of his wrath upon the
covetous, who are ever their own Tormentors. Neither is this Fable of the
Harpyes unnaturally wrested to Flatterers, Delators, prodigal Sycophants and
greedy Officers, who devour the Treasure, and pollute the fame of Princes,
abused in their trust, and blinded in their understandings: Calais and Zetes
are no other then timely advice and swift execution (they are therefore winged)
in freeing Courts of such Monsters. Natales Comes makes a somewhat different
Mythologie, understanding by the Harpyes, the winds, l. 7. Mythol. Du Bartas
(in his third day) called the petty fogging Lawyers Harpyes; it being a common
Metaphor to express any by, that are rapacious, injurious, or blood-suckers of
poor people. The misery Phineus sustained by them, and his happy deliverance
from them, are wittily described by Ronsard in his Hymn of Calais and Zethes.

[(6) May all the Scorpions of Cushan sting thee.] Cashan (or for the better
sound, Cushan) is a famous City in Parthia; some six miles distant from
Spawhawn the Metropolis. The people are orderly, and more given to trade then
in the ^eighbour Cities. Silks, Sattens, and cloth of Gold are her ordinary
Commodities, plentiful, and at a reasonable (...). She is well seated, well
peopled, and well built. Here is a Carravansraw or common Inn, which exceeds
all in Persia, and is fit to entertain the greatest Prince in Asia, yet built
by King Abbas only for Travelers to lodge in, upon f^ee cost. It Is two large
stories high, the material Brick, varnished and colored with knots and Arabian
Letters, Po^es of Azure, red, and white. From the Basis it is built six foot
high of good stone. The Fabric is Quadrangular, and each proportionable Angle
200. paces. In the middle is a fair large Court, whereof in the midst is a
foursquare Tanck, or Pond of pu^e Water, about it are spacious and fragrant
Gardens. This civility of the King to strangers is second^d (as they say there)
even by the stinging Scorpions and Serpents that infest this City and the
neighbor Country in great abundance, whose Love and understanding the
inhabitants report to be such to Travelers, as that they never hurt them.
Th^se Scorpions so numerous here, as it is a frequent curse throughout all the
Persian Empire, May a Scorpion of Cushan sting thee. Herbert.

[(7) My Uncle and my Grandsire] meaning Emir-hamze-Mirza and Mahomet Cadoband.
See the first and second not^s upon the first Act.

[(8.) Paradise] The Paradise which Mahomet p^omises to his sect exceeds the
vanity of a Dream, and all old wives Fables; though it is to be more then
conj^ctured that he took his Pattern from the P^ets Elyzium, but has so far
misto^^ his copy, as of an ingenious Fancy, to present an absurd extravagancy.
Thus Tibullus describes Elyzium.

Sed me, qui facilis tenero sum s^mper amori,
Ipsa Venus c^mp^s ducet in Elysios.
Hic choreae, cantusque vigent, passimque vagantes,
Dulce s^nant tenui gutture carmen aves.
Fert cassiam n^n culta seges, totosque per agros,
Floret odoratis terra ^enigna rosis.
Ac juvenum ser^es teneris immista puellis
I ^^it, and assidue praelia miscet amor.
Il^^^ est quicunque rapax mors venit amanti,
Et gerit insigni myrtea serta coma.
Fleg l. 1. Eleg 3. But me, whose heart to soft Love easily yields,
Venus shall lead to the Elyzians fields.
Here Song and dance abound: Their slender throats
The tripping Birds still strain for pleasing notes.
The wildest shrub does odorous Casia yield,
And Roses each where paint the beauteous field.
Youths mixed with tender Virgins there disport,
And still encounter in an amorous sort.
What Lover e're untimely dies is there,
A Myrtle wreath crowning his glorious hair.
And thus Virgil, speaking of Aeneas his going thither to visit his Father
Anchises: Devenere locos laetos, and amaena vireta,
Fortunatorum nemorum, sedesque beatas.
Largior hic campos ether, and lumine vestit
Purpureo: Solemque suum, sua sidera norunt.
Pars in gramineis exercent membra palaestris;
Contendunt ludo: and fulva luctantur arena.
Pars pedibus plaudunt choreas, and carmina dicunt.
Nec non Threicius longa cum vest sacerdos,
Obloquitur numeris septem discrimina vocum.
Jamque eadem digitis, jam pectine pulsat eburno.
Hic genus antiquum Teucri, pulcherrima proles;
Magnanimi heroes, nati melioribus annis.
Ilusque, Assaracusque, and Troiae Dardanus author.
Arma procul, currusque virum miratur inanes.
Stant terrae defixae hastae: passimque soluti
Per campos pascuntur equi, quae gratia currum,
Armorumque fuit vivis, quae cura nitentes
Pascere equos eadem sequitur tellure repostos:
Conspicit ecce alios dextra, laevaque per herbam
Vescentes, laetumque choro paeana canentes,
Inter odoratum lauri nemus; unde superne
Plurimus Eridami per sylvam volvitur amnis;
Hic manus ob patriam pugnando vulnera passi:
Quique sacerdotes casti, dum vita manebat,
Quique pij vates, and Phaebo digna locuti:
Inventas aut qui vitam excoluere per arts;
Quique sui memores alios fecere merendo:
Omnibus his nivea cinguntur tempora vitta:
AEN. l. 6. Fair Greens they reached, places of joyful rest,
Sweet Groves, and happy Mansions of the blessed,
Here larger air with purple rays the fields
Of their own Sun and stars possessed, guilds.
In flowery meads some strive with foot and hand,
Some try their strength upon the golden Sand.
Some dance, and cheer their measure with a song.
The Thracian ^oet, in ^obes grave and long,
Renowns on seven sweet strings his sacred skill,
Now stopps his hand, now strikes his Ivory quill.
Teucers old stock, a noble race, here stood,
Magnanimous Hero's, born when times were good.
Ilus, Asaracus, and who Troy did found.
Their empty Chariots he admires: in the ground
Their spears stuck fast, their bruised Arms laid by
And charging Horses grazing carelessely.
Look what delight steeds Arms o^ Chariots were
To them alive, they still the same were here.
Others he saw on either side advance
Themselves, and sing glad Paeans in a dance,
Shaded with odorous Laurel Groves, whose sides
Silver Eridanus wash with frequent tides.
Here triumph those did for their Country die,
And Priests that kept their vow of Chastity.
Poets that sung lays worthy of their God,
Such as invented Arts for humane good,
And those whose merits have their names renownd,
All their blessed heads with snowie Garlands bound.
Again, in the person of Musaeus, Nulli certa domus: Lucis habitamus opacis,
Riparumque toros, and prata recentia rivis
Incolimus. -- ibid.
No certain seats have we: curld shadie woods
Cool Banks, and meads still fresh with Crystal floods
We do enjoy. --


Mahomets Paradise, according to the Alchoran, lib. 1. cap. 2. is as big as
Heaven and Earth, which is all the world: but where is it then? or else we must
say, that God has created another world besides this; but it were end less as
bootlesse, to question Mahomet for absurdities. The Alchoran in another place,
says, that God created seven Paradises, or seven Mansions, each of which is
called a Paradise: these are all wrought with Gold and Silver, Pearls and
precious stones, and have diverse Palaces Halls, Chambers, and Gardens, stored
with fruit Trees, two of each sort; under which Palaces run Fountains and
Rivers of water, milk, honey, and most sweet wine. In the midst of Paradise (as
the Alcoran affirms, and the Sune describes) is a Tree called Tuba, as big as
all Paradise, whereof some leaves are of Gold, others of Silver, and the
branches thereof cover the walls of Paradise. The Sune says, that in every
l^af of it, the name of Mahomet is written, jointly with the name of God,
running thus, Le ilche ille allah Mahumed razolloa, (i. e.) There is no other
God but the Lord, and Mahomet is his Messenger. The Alchoran (l. 3. c. 19. in
the Chapters of Sacrifices, of Mount Sinai, of the Glorious, of the Falls, and
of Man, l. 4.) describes how these Paradises are furnished, and adorned with
Tapestries and B^ds, with Curtains and Vallens of Cloth of Gold, of Purple, of
silk, not forgetting the Quilts, Chairs of Gold, and precious stones, etc.
Together, after what manner the Moors shall sit and lie on these Beds and
Couches, ever jocund and merry, not knowing Care or Grief. The said Chapters
describe a Fountain in Paradise, called Celzebile; and another called
Zengebila, the waters whereof are whiter then snow, and sweeter then honey; but
more especially, there is the rare fountain called Alcauzar, (by a singular
Chapter Al. l. 4.) reserved for Mahomet alone, though a strange ingrossement;
for he says it is 70000 days journeys in length and breadth (70000 is a
frequent number with him) and the water hereof purer and sweeter then of the
rest. In this Fount are many Bowls, Glasses, and drinking Vessels, as the^e a^e
stars in the firmament. The said Chapters mention and describe the Pages which
are always in Paradise, called in Arabic, Guildemin Mohalledun, (i. e.)
eternal Pages, not of the race of men; they are as beautiful as precious stones
set in Gold, and are clothed in silk, green, purple, and Zunduz. (i. e.)
Tissue upon Tissue. These wait continually with full Cups, Flaggons and Beakers
of Gold and Silver. The said Chapters treat of the chaste Virgins which God has
created for Paradise, called Horhim, and in the singular number Hora; they are
reclused, well watched, and guarded in their Palaces; their Garments are
wonderful, and their beauty is as the light: Nay, Mahomet in the Sune says,
that if any one of these Virgins should appear at Midnight, she would enlighten
all the world like noonday: and if she should spit in the Sea, all the water
in the Sea would become as sweet as honey.

Furthermore, the said Chapters mention their Carkanets, Rings, Jewels,
Coronets, and Trinkets of all sorts, which are prepared in Paradise for them,
and that these Virgins are not of humane race, but are continually created for
the Musselmen, they daily have their lost Vi^ginities restored, continue ever
young, (there, as here at 15. and the men as at 30.) and are ever free from
natural pollutions. The Sune mentions a feast, which God will make to men and
wom^n in Paradise, which it calls Hadrate Alcoduz, God makes this feast in the
Paradise, called Genetu Alcoduz, (i. e. The Paradise of the Holy, and is the
sixth in order among the seven hin^ed at before. Mahomet says also, that after
a time, he will by virtue of his general Redemption release the Moors who
have deserved Hell fire; they shall come out of Hell black and burnt, and he
will bring them to his fountain Alcauzar, wherein they shall wash and become
white as snow; being so purified, he will lead them to the other Moors that
never deserved Hell. After this he says, that God shall command the Angel
Gabriel to take the keys of the Paradise of the Holy, for to make his feast
there, which keys are kept by another Angel, of whom when Gabriel demands
them, the said Angel shall put his hand to his mouth, and shall draw forth
thence 70000 keys, each of which is 70000 leagues in length: and when the
Angel Gabriel shall assay to take up the keys, he shall not be able to lift
them, because of their great weight, hereupon he shall return to God, and say,
Lord, I cannot lift the keys from the ground because of their great weight,
and God shall say unto him, go again, and call upon my holy name, and the name
of my friend Mahomet, and then take the keys and bring them hither: then shall
Gabriel call upon those names, and take up the keys and bring them unto God,
with which keys he shall open the said Paradise of Alcoduz, where they shall
find a Table made ready, of a Diamond 7000000 days journeys in length and
breadth, with seats of Gold and Silver about it, and on it spread Napkins and
Table-cloaths richly wrought and woven. Then shall God command all the Moors
to sit down at the Table, and the foresaid Pages shall attend them with their
golden Bowls, and set before them most delicious Cates and Fruits of all sorts,
and skenk unto them the Wine and Water of Paradise. They having eaten and
drunk, the Pages shall come with rich apparel for every Moore, wherewith they
shall deck themselves, and put their Jewels and Bracelets on their Arms, Legs,
and Hands, and Rings into their ears; then the immortal Pages shall enter
again, every one with a dish in his hand, and in the dish a Citron, and shall
present to every Male of the Moors; as soon as they shall smell every one to
his Cit^on, one of the aforesaid Virgins shall issue out of it most gallantly
attired, and pe^fumed as the sp^ing, and beautiful as the morning; she shall
embrace her Moore, and he her, and so shall they continue in that sweet Act,
embracing each other the space of fifty years together, without rising or
separating from each others body, all the while ^ioting in the sweets of youth
and beauty. After they shall have thus taken their pleasure (says Mahomet) God
shall say, O my servants, now ye have eaten and drank, and are clothed, and
adorned with ^ewels, and have taken your pleasure in my Paradise and glory, I
will now show you my glorious face; he says, that God shall remove the vails
which he has on his face, and shall show his glorious visage to all the
Moors, and they shall all fall to the ground, through the brightness which
shall proceed from the face of God, and then God shall say, O my servants,
arise, and rejoice in my glory, without fear of ever dying, much less of being
sad or discontented to eternity; Then (says he) they shall lift up their
heads, and behold God face to face, in which vision they shall take unspeakable
solace. Then shall they all go from this to the other Paradises, to wit, every
one accompanied with his Virgin, shall go into his own Palace or Mansion, there
eternally eating, drinking, and taking his pleasure, joyful, and void of fear,
of death, or hurt.

Lastly, Mahomet promises, that he himself, at his own cost and charges, will
make another feast to all Musselmen, at his sweet fountain Alcauzar, with his
own hand, giving to every one of them to drink of the water thereof, whereof
who so drinks (he says) shall never thirst; the greatest truth among so many
Gulleries, wherein Andreas Maurus makes himself sport with these two defects.
The first is, that whereas Mahomet holds forth so magnificent Palaces, and is
so careful of contriving and furnishing of them with all sorts of conveniences,
he makes no mention of Easements; especially having spoken of so much eating
and drinking, and of such laxative things too as Honey and sweet Wine. The
second defect is, that he that loved Women so well* does not make their gl^ry
and pleasure equal to the men's; he gives the men fine easy Wenches, and why
should not the women in like manner, have their eternal servants? They must
needs take it discourteously; nay instead of Glory and Pleasure, he gives them
anger and sorrow, which they must necessarily feel when they see their Husbands
which they had in this world, embracing other women fifty years together, and
they left comfortless like Widows. Such is the absurd glory of Mahomets
delusive Paradise; yet with these fooleries is half the world bewitched, the
impostor cunningly debelling and forbidding all learning, lest the light
thereof should discover the grosseness of his absurditi^s, as it surely does in
those few that can attain it, under so strict a restraint: as Avicen that great
Philosopher and Physician, who flourished about 500 years since, when
Mahometisme had not yet utterly extinguished all good literature, who was by
lineage an Arabian of a Royal house, in Religion a Mohammedan, but by Country and
Habitation a Spaniard, and Prince (as some write) of Corduba, he (fo^ced by the
strength of his Reason) in his Books De Anima, and De Almahad, strives to
vindicate the most intelligent of his Sect, from the literal belief of this
Elyzium, and excuses his Prophet for proposing it so fraught with sensual
delights, as merely allegorical, and necessarily fitted to ^ude and vulgar
Capacities; for (says he) if the points of Religion were taught in their true
form to the ignorant dull Jews, or to the wild Arabians, employed together
about their Camels, they would utterly fall off from all belief in God. But its
like he here makes his Prophet (as some Commentators do their Authors) speak
more then he ever meant, being ashamed of him in gross, as appears Tract. 9.
cap. 7. and se^. where laying down for a while his outward person of a
Mohammedan, and putting the habit of a Philosopher; in his Metaphysics seems
to make a flat opposition between the truth of their faith received from their
Prophet, and the truth of understanding by demonstrative Argument. But however
Avicen and the Learned may see into the folly of their Doctrine (to which they
are yet held by Interest, and that strong charm, Reason of state) the vulgar
and illiterate look no further then the Letter, swallowing all with an implicit
faith, so strong in them, as that the poor Azapi or foot soldiers being
covetous of these delights in Paradise (promised (by an high policy) most
eminently to such as die for their Country) make nothing to p^ecipitate
themselves into the most horrid gulphes of eminent danger, nay, even to fill up
ditches with their bodies for the Janissaries to march over, and mount the walls
of assaulted fortresses. See the Alcoran, Johannes Andreas Maurus his
confutation thereof. Sandys. Herbert. etc.

[(9) Cowes eyes] Mahomet promises that the Virgins in his imaginary Paradise
shall have great Cow eyes (as big as eggs) which they have in principal
repute; affected both by the Persians, Turks and Grecians, as it should seem
from the beginning. Homer attributes it, as an especial excellency unto Juno;
(...)
(...). Then Juno with the Cowes fair eyes replied.

So Master Sandys, (the exactest of all Translators) and Mr. Chapman render it,
and the Latin Heroic Translation ^eads, Juno oculis veneranda bovinis: though
in the vulgar version it is but magnis oculis praedita Juno. We meet with the
same verse again in Homer, Il. 4. as if the best of Poets knew not a more
honorable attribute then this to ascribe to the Queen of Gods; the Cow of all
beasts having the fairest eye, fullest of spirits, and of their true color
too, black, which hue they ever preferred in women's eyes and hair. Anaceron
bids the Pain^er draw his Mistress so, Ode 38. and 39. with hair black and
shining; dark arched, eye brows, circular and almost meeting; and Eyes black
and sprightly. And Ovid Loves chief Priest, his judgment is Est etiam in fusco
grata color Venus.
Amor. l. 2. Eleg. 4. The Nut-brown beauties ever taking were. And again, Leda
fuit nigra conspicienda coma. ibid. Leda was lovely shaddow'd with black hair.

The Turkish and Persian Ladies dress themselves still as after these
patterns: they put between the eyelids and the Eye a certain black Powder with
a fine long pensil, made of a mineral brought from the Kingdom of Fez, and
called Alcohole; which by the not disgracefully staining of the lids, does
better set forth the whiteness of the eye: and though it troubles for a time,
yet it comfort the sight, and repelleth ill humors: Into the same hue (but
likely they naturally are so) do they die their eyebreis and eyebrowes: (the
latter by Art made high, half circular, and to meet, if naturallly they do not)
so do they the hair of their heads as a foyl that makes the white seem whiter,
and more becoming their other perfections. So Mr. Sandys, Tra. l. 1.

[(10) An Iron Cage etc.] Bajazet fourth King of the Turks (having possessed
himself of the greatest part of Thrace, subdued much of Greece, with the
Country of Phocis; and twice, though in vain, besieged Constantinople) An. Dom.
1397. (having an Army of 500000. men) encountered with Tamberlan^ (whose force
consisted of 800000. Tartarians, or, as some write, more, viz. 400000. horse,
and 600000. foot) near unto Mount Stella in Bythinia, a place destined for
Conquest to strangers, Pompey having there vanquished Mithridates: Bajazet
(with the loss of 200000. of his People) was overthrown, and being brought
before Tamberlane, was by him asked, what he would have done with him if it had
been his fortune to have fallen into his hands? He answered, he would have
enclosed him in a Cage of Iron, and so in Triumph have carried him up and down
his Kingdom: Tamberlane commanded the same to be done to him; professing that
he used not that rigor against him as a Prince, but rather to punish him as a
proud ambitious Tyrant, polluted with the blood of his own Brother Jacup.
Bajazet (late one of the greatest of Princes, now the scorn of Fortune, and a
byword to the world, shackled in fetter and chains of gold, and as some
dangerous wild beast) cooped up in an Iron Cage, made open like a grate, that
he might be seen on every side, and so carried up and down through Asia, to be
of his own Subjects scorned and derided; and, to his further disgrace, being
upon festival days used by his g^eatest ^n^my as a footstool to tread upon
when he mounted his Horse; and at other times scornfully fed, like a dog, with
c^u^s fallen from his Table;) having for two years, with great impatience,
linge^d out this most miserable th^aldom, finding no better means to end his
loathed life, he did violently beat out his b^ains against the bars of the
Grate wherein he was enclosed. An. 1399. Yet of his death are diverse other
reports; some say that he dyed of an ague, proceeding of sorrow and grief:
others, that he poisoned h^mself: The Turks affirm, that he was set at Liberty
by Tamberlane, being by him beforehand poisoned, whereof he dyed three days
after his inla^gement; but the first is the most generally received opinion
concer^ing his death. His dead body, at the request of his Son Mahomet, was by
Tamberlane sent to Asprapolis, from whence it was afterward conveyed to Prusa,
and there lies buried in a Chapel near unto the great Mohammedan T^mple,
without the City, Eastward, by his beloved wife Despina, and his eldest Son
Erthogrul; and hand by in a little Chapel lies his crime, his brother Jacup,
whom he in the beginning of his reign murdered. Turc. Hist. etc.

[(11) My treachery to the English it alleges; That helped me to take O^mus
etc.]

Ormus is an I Will within the Gulf of Persia, about twelve miles from the
Continent, in old time; known by the name of Geru, before that Ogiris, some say
from the famous Theban of that name. Its circuit is but small, about fifteen
miles; neither does it procreate any thing note-worthy, salt excepted, of which
the Rocks are participant, and the silver shining sands promise sulphur; but
however bar^en, its much famed for a safe ha^bour, and for that it stands
conveniently for the traffic of India, Persia, and Arabia; so that the
customs only afford the King thereof (who is a Mahomet^n) no less then
140000 Xeraffes yearly (a Xeraffis is as much as a French Crown, or 6. s.
sterling.) Some will have appertaining to the Crown of it, a part of Arabia
foelix, and all that part of Persia that is environed with the Rivers of Tabo,
Tissindo, and Druto, together with the Island of Bolsaria, not far fom it, and
diverse other Isles in the Gulf. An. 1506. it became tributary to the Portugals
(still permitting the King, but as their Liege-man) who first fortified it, and
built a City of the name of the Island, about the bigness of Exeter, with some
Monasteries and a fair Marketplace, though now little; but the Castle retains
that former beauty which gave occasion to that universal saying of the
Arabians.

Si terrarum orbis, quaqua patet annulus esset,
Illius Ormusium gemma decusque foret.
If quaint Art could into a Ring compile
The world, the Diamond should be Ormus I Will.
Abbas King of Persia finding himself bearded by the Portugal commanded
Emangoly Duke of Shiras to assault the I Will, who with 15000. men wan it, sacked
and depopulated the City, but not without the help of some English Merchants
ships, commanded by the Captains serving the East India company, Captain
Weddal, Blyth, and Woodcock. Their Articles with the Persian Duke were, to have
the lives of the Christans therein at their dispose, some Cannons, and half the
spoil: and accordingly when the City was entered, after a brave and tedious
resistance (forced to yield by Plague, Fluxes, and Famine) every house of
quality, Magazen, and Monastery was sealed up with the signers of the Duke and
Merchants; By which good o^der the Company might have been enrich^d with
2000000. l. sterling) though but their share) had it not been prevented by a
base Sailors covetousness, who, regardlesse of the danger of his life, or the
Christians credit, stole into a sealed Monastery, committed sacrilege upon the
Silver Lamps, Chalices, Church-stuffe, Crucifixes, etc. and came forth laden
with so big a pack as discovered his theft, which, being led to the Duke, he
confessed, and was right handsomely corrected; but the greatest redounded hereby
to the English; for hereby the Persians took advantage to repine before the
Duke, that they sat idle whilst the English purloined away their hopes; The
Duke (glad of the occasion) bad them be their own carvers, which they soon were
so liberally, as they left nothing for the second commer, the confident.
English all this while carrousing aboard their ships, and bragging of their
Victories and hopes; Only Captain Woodcock had good luck and bad, lighting
upon a Frigot laden with Treasure, which he made his own prize, worth 1000000.
of Rials, but soon after, hard by the Swally Road without the Bar, he lost the
Whale, his own ship (swallowed by the sands) and then his life by sorrow. The
poor City is now disrobed of all her bravery, the Persians each month
conveighing her ribbs of wood and stone to aggrandize Gombroon, not three
leagues distant, out of whose ruins she begins to triumph. Ormus has no fresh
water, but what the clouds weep over her in compassion of her desolation, that
is preserved in urnes, or earthen Jarrs for drink, and to cool sleeping places.
The privileges which the English enjoy for their service at Ormus are, they
have a Staple at the new Port Town Gombroon or Bander, (as the Natives call it)
their houses, and the Dutch Merchants being apparent from the rest, by their
Ensigns flying a top their Tarrasses. In January here yearly arrive English
and Dutch ships from India, and here the English are not only Custom free
themselves, but their Agents receive Custom of all strangers, in recompense of
their service at Ormus. D't Juigne, Heylen. Herbert.

[12) The Costermonger ALLY-BEG] The birthplace of this great Persian
Favorite Mahomet Ally-beg, was Parthia, (called so from Parah, to fructify)
and near Spawhawn; his parentage so worshipful, that he knew no farther then
his Father, a man both mean and poor, Mahomet had no stomach for the wars, and
having a large bulk to maintain, and no Camelion, his education being simple,
he became Costermonger, and by that made an hard shift for a poor living; till
in a happy hour the King (then in the Hippodrom in Spawhawn) in a good humor,
took notice of him, viewed him, liked him, and preferred him, so as in a short
time he became sole Favorite, and was feared, and for that honored every
where among the Persians; for so shall it still be done to him whom King
honors: Nor was their Prince, Duke, Sultan, or other, but in an awful
complement sent him yearly some wealthy present to cherish his favor, to the
great increase of his possessions, though in their hearts they despised him,
and undervalued the King for preferring him; as ever in such cases it happened
unto Princes, but most eminently unto Lewis the 11. the French King, who
advanced Cottier from a mender of stockings to be Lord Chancellor of France.
Herbert. Peacham. etc.

[(13) The Caspian Sea] This Sea is so called from the Caspii a people of
Scythia, whose Southern Coast it washes, its also called the Hircanian Sea, of
bounding Hircania, and Maridi Baccu, of the City Baccu; Therbestan and Mari di
Sala, and many other names it takes of the places it washes. It has on the
North Media; on the West and South the Turks Empire, and the Mascovites; on the
East Persia; the Moors and Arabians therefore call it Bohar Corsum, i. e. the
enclosed Sea. It is absolutely the biggest of all them which have no commerce
wi^h the Ocean, being near 3000. miles in compass, from North to South 700.
from East to West 600: the form ovall. Some say it has a subterranean Commerce
with the Euxine Sea, as the flood Zioberis was by Alexander found to have with
Rhodago: At this Caspian Sea Plutarch makes Alexander astonished, deeming it
not less then the Sea of Pontus, though much calmer (it always keeping at one
height without Ebb or reflux) yet could he not imagine whence it had it
sourse, but thought it some eruptive Torrent from the lake of Meotis. Over this
Sea did Prince MIRZA often make navall expeditions, into his Enemies Countries,
ever returning with wealthy booties, and not seldom leaving Garrisons behind
him: D' Juigne. Heylen. Herbert. etc.

[14) Driven the Mogul into his Candahor] Candahor and much of Arachosia, now
Cabull (once Alexandria, (for distinons sake, Arachosiae) belong^d to the
Mogul, till MIRZA first distressed him in them, then drove him out, Herbert.
etc.

[(15) Made Balsora, etc.] See the 19. Note upon the Third Act.

[(16) And bounded the Tartar with the Hircanian Ocean] By regaining what ever
he had gotten upon the continent of Persia, even to the Hircanian Sea, which is
the same with the Caspian Sea, of which before.

[(17 I I that checked Cycala's insulting Progress, etc.] Cycala Bassa was a
renegado Christian, son of a Christian Gentleman of Messina in Sicily, and his
wife Lucrece, both perfect enemies to Mahumetism. In the Christian quarrel the
Father sacrificed his life, but the son through an unhappy ambition became
Turk, and was circumcised by the persuasion of Ozman Baffa, Great General
against the Persian for Amurath the third; Cycala's aim was to succeed his
Patron Ozman in that charge; however al Amuraths reign he never was put upon
any valuable employment. Mahomet the third put him in the head of a Regiment at
Karesta in Bulgaria, after the famous siege of Buda in Hungary. After this he
insinuates far into the favor of Achmat son and successor to Mahomet,
presumptuously promising to ruin, and utterly swallow up the Persian; being
constituted General, he made many unfortunate attempts against King ABBAS and
his Son; but I overpasse as many of his defeats by them given, to come to that
most memorable in or about the year 1604. when he like a violent Torrent with
80000 men, resolved to overwhelm Persia, first powered himself upon the
Georgians, (a Christian People, so called (say some) of their Patron and first
Converter Saint George, Bishop of Cappadocia and Patron of England; others will
have their Province (which is a part of the greater Armenia) named Georgia from
the Georgi its ancient inhabitants; The people (say they) received the Gospel
in the time of Constantine the great; consenting in most Doctrinall Points with
the Grecians, but not acknowledging the Patriarch of Constantinople, having a
Patriarch of their own, who is for the most part resident in his Monastery on
Mount Sinai in Palestine, and has under his jurisdiction 18. Bishops. Their
Religion was since much reformed by Lodovic Gangier of the society of Jesus,
and some othe^s, who in charity departed from Pera near Constantinople, crossed
the black Sea, and landed in Mengrellia, with intent to rectify what was
erroneous in their Religion; and were to that end courteously entertained by
Th^ebis Prine of Georgia; for though the Province be under the Persian, it
enjoyes its Prince of the ancient race, and he his Nobility, but tributary to
King Abbas.) Cycala found a stout opposition from the Georgians alone, to whose
aid our MIRZA the admired Prince of Persia, by his Fathers command joined
himself with 12000 Horse, and prosecuted Cycala as in the Text. First chased
him to the utmost confines of Armenia, and there in a bloody battle slew 30000
of his Turks, with the loss of 9000 Persians and Georgians; and though Cycala
himself hardly escaped by flight, the Persian recompensed missing of him with
the mas^acres of the Turkish Garrisons, regaining all that in the sad year 1537
King Tamas of Persia lost to Solomon the Magnificent 4th Emperor of the
Turks; Cycala to redeem his honor if possible (after his Apology to the
grand Signior) the very next year invades the Persian again; but the Prince,
hearing that the Bassa of Caramania had express Command to join with him, to
prevent their conjunction, fell upon Cycala first, with 30000. men. His sudden
charge and unexpected coming, routed the whole body of the Turks, of whom he
slew 15000, and took all their great Ordnance and Baggage. Cycala himself with
but 300 Soldiers, with much ado escaped to Adena, to which City the brave
Persian pursued him, and sat down before it. This news distressed Sultan Achmat
beyond measure, who vowed to Cycala his reward, but first sent command to the
Bassa of Trebezond, with all speed to succor him: The Bassa resolved to try
all ways of recovery, with a vast but hastily gathered Army, put himself upon
his march toward the City. Cycala having got notice of his approach, the
better to direct him, caused himself with 10 of his Soldiers, whom he best
trusted, secretly by night to be let down over the wall of the City; having
given order to the Governor, that as soon as he perceived the battle to be
joined, he should salley out upon the rear of the Persians, so by holding them
in a doubtful battle to further the Victory; all which the valiant Persian
doubting, he divided his Army, and leaving one body to maintain the siege, led
the other against the Succors, wherein he used so incredible expedition, as
falling upon them before they could rank their battle; he made of the Turks
(now confusedly and without all order, fighting more for the safeguard of their
lives, then for any hope they had of victory) such an exceeding great
slaughter, that few of them escaped his sword. Cycala himself, with only 2 or 3
more, made hard shift by getting into a little Boat, to change the danger of
the Land, for that of the Water. The Persian returned to the Town, which (after
many a sharp assault) he had cast in to augment his honor. Others write, that
this was not a surprise, but a well fought Battle for 7 hours together, victory
doubtfully hovering between either Champion, till (by an ambush of the
Georgians) toward night she rested upon MIRZA's head. However, all agree, that
the Turks that survived this day, bound themselves by oath, never to follow
more so unfortunate a Leader as Cycala, and upon the rehearsal of his
overthrow, the great Turk was so transported with rage, as he gave Cycalas
Treasure to be rifled by the Janissaries and Spaheis, and to extirpate his
memory, bad them pull down his Palaces; though, to have been just, he should
have punished his Fortune, for upon her lay the blame of his defeat, and not
upon the man's ill conduct or cowardice. Turk. Hist. Herbert, etc.

[(18) I that gave Ormus Scepter to his hand, and brought her captive King,
etc. The description of the Isle of Ormus, with the taking thereof by Emangoly,
you have in the 11th Note upon this Act. It rests only to tell that he brought
thence captive, the King thereof (then Tributary to the Portugize) and the two
Princes his Sons, to all whom King Abbas allowed only 5 Marks sterling by the
day for their maintenance. Herb.

[(19) I that subdued Larrs Sandy Kingdom for him, mauger her wall of Rock, am
now accused, etc.] As to the description of the Kingdom of Larr, enough has
been said in the 23. Note upon the 3d Act. It remains only, to say that she was
confined by a huge wall, cut by incredible labor out of the solid Rock, as a
secure defense against the invading Persian, notwithstanding Abbas (to whose
fortune all things were possible) commanded Emangoly to subdue it, which he
did, after all the sufferings and toyls imaginable in so difficult an
enterprise. He ruined one Castle, and built another, slew many of the Citizens;
Ransackt the Town, and sent home to Shiras, as much Treasure as burdened 700
Camels. As for the poor King thereof, though his life was granted him, when he
was forging of others matters, an unexpected Scimiter (to end his stratagems)
took off his head, and by the extirpation of his progeny, established the
sovereignty unto the conquering Abbas. Herbet.

[(20) -- I that won the Realm of Larry Joon, etc.] See the 6 Note upon the
first Act.

[(21) What signified his wrong to the poor Christians?] About the ye^r 1609.
Some envious person, in spite to the Armenian and Georgian Christians, feigned
Letters as from their Patriarch to the Pope (knowing well the hatred that King
Abbas bore to the Sea of Rome,) that they were willing to become obedient to
the Church of Rome, and to acknowledge him head of the Catholic Church:
entreating him to write to the King of Persia in their behalf, that they might
freely enjoy their Conscienc^s under him: These Letters their Authors
intercepted, and presented to King Abbas, who (saying, that if they would be
obedient to the Pope, he could expect no further service or obedience from
them,) grew thereat so enraged, that no less then the lives of 1000 (some say
1200) of those innocent Christians could slack his fury, threatening to take
further revenge if ^e could prove the Letters a^thentick, as some still affirm
they were, but most believe them suppositions. Turk. Hist. Herb. etc.

[(22) His murdering of his Ambassador to the Turk. etc. -- About the year
1612. after many conflicts between the Turk and Persian, they were both so
pressed by neighbor Countries, as they propounded Articles for peace; to which end
King Abbas sends his Ambassador to Constantinople, who returning but with mean
conditions, his Master denied the Turks Agent to confirm them, and in a rage
struck off the head of his ill-advised Embassadou^ for consent in to them. Herb.

[(23) His treachery to the Magicians, etc.] Betwixt Chilmanor and Mogown in
Persia, is a high inaccessible Mountain, on whose top stood a Castle, so
fortified by nature and industry, as it was held impregnable; a Rebellious
Sultan weary of slavery, manned it against his Prince, the victorious Abbas, who
in person came to reduce him, but after six months fruitlesly spent, could
perceive no sign of Victory, whereat enraged, he proposed a considerable Reward
to him that could by any means enter it; an old covetous Magician undertakes
it, and wrought so by his Spells, that the Sultan came down, forced by the
Devil, who assured his pardon; but for all that, the block rewarded him for his
Rebellion; and the old wizard (ignorant of his end) demanded his Reward, which
the King grudgingly gave him; but then (with a forfeit of his estate) put him
to death for conjuring; a quality he allowed of to compass his ends by, but
condemned to recover his beloved Gold again. Herbert.

[(24) His murder of the sleeping Traveller, etc.] A peasant having traveled
from India into Hircania, affecting the coolness of the grass, fell there
asleep, but by ill fortune near the path by which King Abbas rod a hunting; the
King saw him not, but his Horse startled at him, whereat in his anger, he
immediately sent a broad arrow into the poor man's heart, and ere all his train
was past, the wretch was killed a hundred times over, if he could forfeit a
life to every shaft, all striving to imitate the King, as if the deed were good
and laudable, in shooting nearest his heart, which many hit; so dexterous at
archery are the Persians, well deserving of Virgil the Epithet of Quiver'd.
Herbert.

-- Pharetratae vicinia Persidis. --
Virg. Geor. l. 4.
-- Near quiver'd Persia. -- [(25) His coupling of a Soldiers lustful wife to
an As^nego.] A Soldiers wife making complaint to King Abbas, of her Husbands
insufficiency, he made her be coupled to an Asinego. whose brutish lust soon
took away her life. Herbert.

[(26) -- His cutting his Clarks hand off, but for not writing fair.] A
Soldier presented a Petition to King Abbas, whereof, only because the writing
did not please him, he sent for the Clark, ^ut off his hand, and made the
Petitioner be almost drubb'd to leath, for daring to present foul writnig to
his eye. Herbert:

[(27) -- His wrath to th'two Pilfering Soldiers, more for their rags then
theft.] See that presented, as it happened in the first Act, and (among these
other cruelties) asserted by M. Her^^rt. p. 98.

[(28) -- His ore ambitious murder of his brave Father, and far braver
Brother.] See the 1 and 2 Notes upon the first Act, etc.

[(29) Men eating Dogs,] As the old Romans made it their pastime to behold
condemned persons combat with wild beasts in their Amphitheaters, and then be
devoured by them: so did King Abbas keep fierce Mastiffe Dogs, which he bought
of the English Seamen for that purpose; for the same end also ha^ he men from
their infancy educated to Canibalism. Herbert.

[(30) What better promises his irreligion, in taking needless journeyes still
in Lent, to avoid fasting, under pretense of Travel.] The fifth among Mahomets 8
Commandments is, See that thou observest yearly a month Lent, and a Byram: in
obedience whereunto the Mahometans fast one month in the year, which they call
Ramazan, wherein they say, the Alcoran was delivered unto Mahomet by the Angel
Gabriel: But very wisely they observe their Lent, for though during the day
time they abstain from all kind of sustenance, yet as soon as the Sun sets,
they add a double proportion of Lamps about their Prophets Tombs, and stick all
their steeples round with lights, which burn till the Sun rises (affording an
object of great solemnity) the Kettles beat, and Trumpets sound, Eunuchs sing,
and they bouz it lustily, and feast all night, with all variety of meats and
pleasure. Such as in stead of abstaining from meats in the day time, during
this holy month, do abstain from their Mosques, they carry about in scorn, and
severely chastise; but such as drink wine then, they punish with death. This
day fast is observed by all but the infirm, and Travelers, who are obliged to
fast so long, when they recover health, or come to the end of their journey;
but King Abbas during this month, did use to ttavel upon purpose to be
privileged from fasting, being nothing careful to compensate for it at other
times. Two more religious feasts they have, the Byram and Nowrowz: the Byram
begins on the 7 of December. and lasts 3 days, observed by them as Easter is
with us: then kill they their sheep or Passover, in memory of the Ram which
Abraham sacrificed, in stead of his Son Isaac; but nothing else dies, during
those days, no not so much as a Louse or Flea, bite they never so shrewdly.
This Feast of Byram, was instituted by Caydar son of Ishmael, Grandfather of
the Arabians. The Nowrowz is their New-years-day, beginning (with the spring)
March 10. such time as the Sun is in the Equinoctial, at which feast the
Nobility have the custom of gratifying one another with gifts and presents, by
them called Pishcashes. Johannes Maurus. Sandys, Herbert, etc.

[(31) -- He Will forbid and tolerate, etc.] It was usual with King Abbas, to
forbid and tolerate the same thing often in one year, as his humor, or the gain
of any Minion Courtier prompted him to it: among other examples, M. Herbert
tells us, that at his being there, Mahomet-ally-beg (having got the monopoly
thereof) hearing of 40 Camels laden with Tobacco (with them called Tewton)
coming from India to Carbeen, he cut off the Noses and Ears of the Camel-men,
and put the Tobacco (now prohibited, but from his Warehouse) into a la^ge
earthen pipe in the ground, and there burnt it in gross.

[(32) When thy dread hand struck off CARAEMITS head.] The Sultan of Caraemit
General for Amurah the 3d Emperor of the Turks, fought a battle near Van, with
Emirhamze-Mirz a, Prince of Persia, and elder Brother to King Abbas; wherein
the Prince carried away so complete a Victory, as with little loss on his
side: there then dyed the Bassaes of Trepizond, and five Sanzacks, with 20000
Turks; the Prince in person incountred the General Caraemit, worsted him, and
with his own hand struck off his head, and mounting it upon the top of a Lance,
gave it to one of his followers to be carried as a royal ensign of Triumph to
him, and terror to the Enemy. By this, and many other victories, did that
excellent Prince renown himself, especially by his defeats given to the
Tartars, and that most memorable one given to Ozman the Turks General, Anno
1586. at Sancazan near Cazbeen, wherein fell 23000 Turks by his sword, and the
General by grief, giving way to the brave Prince to go on in pursuit of his
victory, in which he did wonders, that for the quality of the Countries, Towns
and Enemies, the length of the Marches, and shortness of time, hold parallel
with the Acts of no modern, so much as with them of Gustavus Adolphus, the late
victorious King of Sweden. But as no violent course lasts long, the
irresistible torrents of both their Trophies were stopped by the dire hand of
destiny; both dyed Conquerors, both in the strength of their years, both in the
midst of their own strengths, and both (its feared) by Treason. The valiant
Persian even then, when he was fair (for ever) to have freed his Fathers
Territories of the Turk and when he least feared any Treason, in the night, as
he was sleeping upon a pallet, he was suddenly struck through the body with a
dagger, by an Eunuch that waited upon him in his Chamber, incited to this
Treason (as is generally believed) by his next Brother Abbas, who had formerly
(but in vain) conspired to have betrayed him to the Turkish General. Turk. Hist.
Herbert, etc.

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE FIFTH ACT.
[(1) IF we cannot recover him, give out he is baptized, and so incapable, It Is
no new way, in India, ASAPH did it] Duke Asaph chief Favorite and Brother in
Law to Shaw Selyn (or Jangheer) the Mogul, he having married (for his la^ wife)
Normal, Asaphs Sister; and his Son Sultan Curroon (who afterward (because by
that name he was proclaimed Traitor by his Father) changed his name to Shaw
Iehan, or King John) having married Asaphs Daughter, he sent his Powers to set
the Crown upon his Son in Law Curroons head; but the old Mogul, Selym made the
Nobles swear not to accept Curroon, because he mu^dered his elder Brother, but
Bloche the young son and lawful heir of that murdered Prince. Selym being dead
(not without suspicion of poison given him by Asaph, Blockee is set up: The
Queen Normal pretends for her Son Seriare, youngest Son to Selym: Her brother
Asaph for his Son in Law Curroon, and two Sons of the old Kings elder Brothers
Morad or Amurath for themselves: The other two young Princes, Asaph found
means to murder outright, but these two last by circumstance, causing them
against their wills) by some Portugals to be baptized into the faith of Christ,
so making them utterly incapable of the Crown or Kingdom (for the Alcoran
forbids a Christian to wear a Crown where Mahomet is worshipped) though
afterward, for his further security, he destroyed them at Lahore, and without
further difficulty set up his Son in Law Curroon. Herbert.

[(2) The Injury, etc. See the eighth note upon the 3d. Act.

[(3) ABBA'S Thirty Kingdoms] King Abbas his title over 30. Kingdoms runs thus:
The most high, most mighty, most invincible Emperor, Abbas, King of Persia,
Farthia, Media, Bactria, Chorazon, Candahor, Heri of the Ouzbeg Tartar,
Hircania, Draconia, Evergeta, Parmenia, Hydaspia, Sogdiana, Aria, Paropaniza,
Drawginna, Arachosia Mergiana, Carmania (as far as stately Indus) Ormus Larr,
Arabia, Sufiana, Chaldea, Mesopotamia, Georgia, Armenia, Sarc^hia, and Van.
Lord of the imperious Mountains of Ararat, Taur^s, Caucasus and Periardo,
commander of all Creatures from the Sea of Chorazen to the Gulf of Persia. Of
true descent from Mortys-dly. Prince of the four Rivers, Euphrates, Tygris,
Araxis, and Indis, Governor of all Sultans, Emperor of Mussulmen, Bud of
Honor, Mirror of Virtue, and Rose of delight: Though the R^^der may know that
among these he claims some Kingdoms which he enjoyes not, as the Turk and
others of his neighbors do sone others of these in his Possession: An usual,
thing with all Princes* Herbert. Lodovic. De Wellen, de Reg. Pers. etc.

[(4) -- Delights as far fetched as dear bought.] It was an antien nicitie
among the Persian Monarchs (still continued) that n^ wine could please their
palate but the Chalydonian in Syria; ^or no bread but what grew at Assos in
Phrygia; no salt but what was brought from Egypt, (though Ormus nearer hand by
much, afforded much better) nor no water but that of the River Copa^paes, the
same which Pliny calls Euleus, and Daniel (cap. ^.) Vlai; it waters Shushan
(now called Valdack) in Susiana, and at length imbowells her self into the
Persian Gulf, not far from Bals^ra; one stream of it runs 'twixt Shiras and
old Persaepolis, over which there is a well built bridge, called Fullychawn.
Herbert etc.

[(5) The ancient death of Boats.] Mithridates vainly boasting in his drink
that it was he that had slain Cyrus (whom indeed he wounded) in his rebellious
competition with his elder Brother Artaxerxes the second (surnamed Mnemon, of
great Memory) for the Crown of Persia, was accused to the King, who was
desirous of the honor to have it believed that it was he himself that slew
him; wherefore esteeming himself touched in his credit by Mithridates his
report, he condemned him to the ancient death of boats, usual among the
Persians for heinous offenders, the manner this; They took two boats made of
purpose so even, that the one exceeded not the other neither in length nor in
breadth; then laid they the offender in one of them upon his back, and covered
him with the other; then did they fasten both boats together, so that the
Malefactors feet, hands and head came out at holes made purposely for him, the
rest of his body being all hidden within. They gave him meat as much as he
would eat, which if he refused, they forced him to take, by thrusting aules
into his eyes; having eaten, they gave him to drink honey mingled with milk
which they did not only pour into his mouth, but also all his face over,
turning him full against the Sun, to tempt the flies and waspes to his face;
and of his excrements in the bottom of the boat engendered worms that fed upon
his body, so that being dead they found his flesh consumed with them, even to
the entrals. Seaventeen days together did Mithridates languish in these
torments, and then died, for his folly in not contenting himself with ornaments
and gifts which the King had given him for wounding of his rebellious Brother,
but he must rob him of the honor of his death (which he knew he most desired)
so procu^ing his own, Crimine laesae Majestatis. Plutarch. in vit. Artaxerx.

[(6) -- Beat her brains out In The ancient way ordained for poysoners, etc.
Parysatis the mother of Ataxarxes King of Persia, took a grudge against his
wife because she thought she exaspented him too much against his Rebellious
Brother Cyrus, insom^ch as in her revengfull mind she plotted the death of her
daugh^er in Law the beauteous Statira; the wicked determination was executed by
poison, by the help (says Dinon) of Gigis, one of the women of her Chamber;
The King was so favorable to hi^ Mother, as he only confined her (according
to her own Petition) to Babylon; swearing that whilst she lived he would never
see Babylon; but Gigis he condemned to suffer the pains of Death ordained by
the Persians for poysoners; in this manner; They lay the head of the Malefactor
upon a large plain stone, and with another stone they press and strike it so
long, til they have dashed the brains out; so died Gigis. Plutarch in vit.
Artax.

[(7) Then burn her limbs with Cats dung.] This may seem a ridiculous kind of
Punishment, but it is very ancient, and frequent all over Asia; sometimes (but
by favor) it is performed with Dogs dung; So Mr. Herbert tells us that when it
was told King Abbas that Nogdibeg his quondam Ambassador into England had
poisoned himself (wilfully for four days feeding only upon Opium, not daring
to see his Master, or justify himself against his adversary Sir Robert
Sherley, then on his journey to the Court to purge his honor before the King,
of the stains which the aspersions of Nogdibeg had thrown upon him) the King
said it was well he had poisoned himself; for had he come to Court, his body
should have been cut in 365. pieces, and burnt in the open market place with
dogs dung; but for the greater terror and shame its usually performed with cats
dung, the Cat being the baser beast, as only used to destroy vermin.

[(8) Let me suck thy last breath. -- and

[(9) -- When thy hand shall close mine aged eyes.

The^e two concluding notes I put together because they re^ate to customs
about the same subject, viz. the parting office of friends to friends, observed
by the ancient Romans and others and still retained by the Persians and
Grecians; when any one was dying the next of the Kin used to receive the last
gasp of breath from the sick person, into his mouth, as it were by kissing
hi^; (to show thereby how unwillingly and with what regret they parted with
their friend) and closed his eyes being deceased. Virgil makes Anna say of her
Sister Dido newly dead, -- Vulnera lymphis
A^luam, and extremus si quis super halitus errat,
ore legam. -- Aen. 4.
-- Some water, I the wound may bath,
And if yet wanders any of her breath
My lips shall gather it: --


And Ovid makes Penelope (wishing that her Son Telemachus might outlive her
self and his Father, write thus to her husband Di' precor hoc jubeant, vt
euntibus ordine fatis,
Ille meos oculos comprimat, ille tuos. Aepist. 1.
This may Heaven grant, whilst fate in order goes,
That his hand mine eyes, and thine too may close!
Statius has both the customs together,
-- Sociosque amplectitur artus.
Herentemque animam non tristis, in ora mariti
Transtulit, and charae pressit sua lumina dextra. Stat. Silv. l. 5.
She him embraced, delivering (in glad wise)
Between his lips her cleaving soul, and dies,
With his dear (...) closing her sinking eyes.


FINIS.
Errata.
Page: 13. l. 14. for any r. and. p. 24. l. 24. for whose, r. who. p. 47. l. 14.
for Son r. Sun. p. 67. l. 3. dele not. l 30. for for r. fore. p. 93. l. 24. for
do. r to. p. 97. l. 29. for mind. r. mine. p. 98. l. 9. r. besprinkled. p. 112.
l. 1. dele good. p. 119. l. 23. after me, add as. p. 123. l. 31. for pleasant,
r. peasant. p. 137. l. 2. add, not, p. 144 l. ult. r. in. p. 152. read in the
beginning these two lines.

" And fear is contrary to noble Courage
" The passive valor is the greatest still.

