The Blazing Star: OR, A DISCOURSE OF COMETS, Their Natures and Effects: In a
LETTER from J. B to T. C. concerning the late Comet seen on Sunday December the
11. 1664. at Ibbesley in Hantshire, and since at London and Westminster, and
diverse other places of this Kingdom.

LONDON: Printed for Sam: Speed, at the Rainbow in Fleetstreet, near the Inner
Temple-gate, 1665.

THE Blazing Star; OR, A DISCOURSE OF COMETS, THEIR Natures and Effects.
SIR,
YOur Worships commands in Sir I. D. the Lady F. and Mr. S. affairs, have been
observed with that care and exactness that becomes him who understands little
other business he has to do in this world, beside your service, as will appear
to your great trouble, in the tedious account of them, sent your Worship by Dr.
P. as an alleviation whereunto, I thought fit humbly to represent to your
Worship a strange Accident that befell us here of late: The Accident, Sir is
this:

Honest I. S. was going to N. Market, about one of the clock the last Thursday
morning; and observing (as you know he is curious that way above his condition)
the situation of the Stars in Taurus, was surprised with a sudden glaring and
light, which obliged him and his companions to alight and view the strange
thing more narrowly; but so confounded he was with the rude Gang he had got (to
whom might be applied the Discourse of the Duke d' Alva, who being demanded,
whether he had seen the last Comet, said, He had not for many years been at
leisure to look up so high) that until he had tired them as much with his
patience and observation, as they had him with their noise and impertinence, he
could not make any exact judgment of its Figure, Situation, or Aspect. At last
having dismissed the people that talked nothing but Lilly and Booker, and
concluded nothing but fears and jealousies, he went up a little Hill by the way
side, and lay upon his back near a quarter of an hour, between two and three of
the clock; in which posture he observed a Star, in his apprehension about the
same dimension with Jupiter, South South-West, dazzling out glaring and
glimmering Beams (as far as he could then judge) some 11 yards long, and six
broad, declining between 3 and 4 a clock Westward; so as that by the
interposition of an untoward Cloud he lost it, and so arose and followed his
Comerades, who within six hours after filled the Town with the most horrid
apprehensions that mortals could be possessed with; those more knowing
reflecting on that in Cassiopoeia, the old people talking of the Blazing Star
1607. and the Comet 1608. and the subtle Fanatics improving men's fears and
ignorance by a more dreadful story of Prodigies (wherein the meanest of them,
as your Worship observed very well at S. April 7. are most ready and punctual)
insomuch that our Town had amassed together so much strange discourse of such
memorable things as happened since his Majesty's most memorable Restoration (a
miracle that in my poor opinion might supersede all others) as occasioned Dr.
T. (for whose Prudence and Learning this place is infinitely obliged to you) to
preach last Sunday upon this Text, There is no new thing under the Sun;
wherein, having premised the story of Charles the Great, who looking on the new
Star which presaged and preceded his death, was very inquisitive and desirous
to know what it portended, Enigardus (who writ his History) returns the words
of the Prophet Jeremy, Chap. 10.2. for answer; Be not dismayed at the Signs of
the Heaven, for the Heathen are dismayed at them: Unto which the wise Emperor
replies; Ne quidem metuere se ejusmodi signa, sed signorum opificem causam;
That he did not indeed fear any signs of that nature, but the Maker or cause
of those signs; adding, That it is most certainly true, that second causes are
seldom suspended or altered in their motions and actings, but only upon special
design, to let the world know that nature and the chain of causes are not
independent, but that he is the Sovereign Lord of them, and their being and
motions are in his hand: yet withal he must repeat (he said) those Verses of
Lucretius: Caetera quae fieri in terris coeloque tuentur
Mortales pavidis quam pendent mentibus saepe
Efficient animos humileis formidine divum
Depressosque premunt ad terram: propterea quod
Ignorantia causarum confer deorum
Cogit ad imperiumres, and concedere regnum and
Quorum operum causa nulla ratione videre
Possunt; haec fieri divino numine dicant.


Which I find thus Englished in a little Book Sir R. T. bestowed on me. Those
Bugbear-Meteors which the timorous eyes
Of pavid mortals wonder at in the skies:
And those unfrequent Progidies that appear
On Earth (while their weak souls are fooled by fear)
Are the sole charms that do emasculate
And cheat men's minds into a belief of fate
And some vindictive numen: for because
Men understand not natures criptick Laws
Nor her occult efficiency, they fly
(To salve their ignorance) to divinity:
And idly rest in this, whatever befall;
'Twas caused by Providence, that disposes all.


Seconding it with a passage, as I remember, of Plutarchs, That it is our
ignorance only of things, that makes them seem to us both prodigious and
miraculous: whereas were the true cause known or hunted out, the wonder would
quickly abate, and seem less; and that which before seemed monstrous and
miraculous, would become very common, if not contemptible. Which minds me of a
passage in Du Bartas: I Will not gainsay but that a knowing man
May give some reason (if he list to scan)
Of all that moves under heavens hollow cope.


The honest Gentleman (whom I pity when he throws away his Learning on a
poor Village in your absence) acknowledging, That God might raise Nature (which
he said was but his Art) above the apprehension of common men. Yet he asserted,
That these things have been in every age, and that men have assigned the causes
of them, not observing any fatal effects from them; as the Twins in one brought
forth Anno 1474 near Verona, with four hands, two heads, four legs, two
privities, and joined just from the buttock upward: and those in Ubulen a
village in Flanders 1567. a child with two heads, four arms, and members in
all other parts for two bodies, save the legs, of which there were but two
only: the cause whereof was assigned by the Physicians of those times to be a
violent contusion; and the event proved no worse, then that two Queens were
those years brought to bed of Twins a piece: which (with many more terrestrial
wonders) he insisted upon.

But the occasion being a celestial one, he mentioned out of Bishop Usher the
orderly Armies and Fights in the air, over Antiochus his tent, anno mundi 3785.
which imported no more harm to him, then that he should take Jerusalem, as he
did with all its treasures forty days afterward.

The fire in heaven, anno Chr. 15. when there was no trust but a young Emperor
was born, and a Plot of Agrippa and Julia's defeated.

A Blazing Star like a sword hanging over Rome, anno Christi 30. when Tiberius
settled his Government, and Otho was born.

A dreadful Comet six yards in bigness to common appearance for forty days,
Anno Chr. 48. when Vespasian took only the Isle of Wight, and his soldiers
overthrew the Picts.

The vast Star of thirty yards length, lasting six months, three weeks, and
four days, anno Christi 56. betokened only Nero's five years good Reign; as
did another three years after, intimating his Conquest of the Jews: and fifteen
years after, when Titus utterly subdued the Jews: and seven years after, when
Adrian was born, and Vespasian was settled.

Anno Christi 81. A Terrible Comet appeared. The effect of it was no other, but
that Haldanus the Swede was restored to his Kingdom from which he was expelled.

Anno Christi 152. Three Suns appeared at Constantinople (at the same time)
with a Star and a Rainbow. The effect was this: Caesar seeing a wonderful fire
at Rome, causes the persecution to cease by an Edict from himself.

Anno Christi 187. The Stars were seen all the day long at Rome. And some
Apparitions hung streaming down in the very middle of the Air. The effect of it
was this: Perennius and his Son were executed for Treason. Hanno of France wars
with the Romans.

Anno Christi 195. There were seen at Rome three Stars very glorious. The
effect of it was this: Severus followed war against the Parthians.

Anno Christi 204. A Comet for many days together was seen at Rome. The
effect: The Romans waste Arabia; strange Heresies broached by Praxeus.

In the year of our Lord 237. A Blazing Star was seen at Rome, that extended it
self a very great length, and was seen both to burn and blaze many nights
together. The effect: The Goths at this time became terrible to the Roman
Empire.

In the year of our Lord 323. There was a terrible Comet seen for many days
together at Rome. The effect: Constantine and Licinius met at Chalcedon.
Octavian recovers Britain by the aid of Fincomore.

In the year of our Lord 377. A Comet of wonderful greatness was seen in
Cicilia. The effect of it; That the Scots and Picts were set together by the
ears by Maximus. And the Goths turn Arrians.

In the year of our Lord 384. A fiery Pillar in the Heavens; the influence
whereof was remarked with no other product, then that Maximus possesses
Britain, France, Spain and Africa. And upon an Appeal from the Council of
Bourdeaux settled France.

In the year of our Lord 392. The Graecians observed a new Star like a sword
for three and forty days together. The remarkable contingence that attended
it, was the crowning of Eugenius Emperor, and the Romans imposing a Tribute
upon the French.

A like action whereunto happened in the year 430. when a sword-like Star was
seen at Rome. And the History about that time mentions nothing more
remarkable, then the destruction of the Goths by division amongst themselves;
and the settlement of Christianity by the burning of the Sybils books, and the
overthrow of the Idol-Temples.

In the years 434. and 454. Two dreadful Comets were seen; the one for six
weeks, the other for ten weeks together: the first whereof had no other honor,
then that wonderful Peace between the Emperor and the Vandals; nor the other
any more repute, then the Britains confining of the Saxons within the Isle of
Thanet.

In the famous year of our Lord 483. The world was amazed with the two
wonderful blazing Stars seen in Russia; which yet had gone out like a candle in
snuff, had not Clavis his no less wonderful Conquest innobled them to the
renown of Prodigies. And an eminent Comet was observed in the royal Sign
Sagittarius, by the incomparable Mathematician Almandus, which yet had been
forgotten as the last Christmas-candle, had not it blazed a fresh with the
glories of the then Emperor, who showed that Stars ruled the world, and wise
men Stars.

In the year of our Lord 590. The Roman Empire stood amazed at a blazing Meteor
as great as it self, which yet was no greater in its blaze (I must confess)
then in its product. A Famine so great in Britain, that the people assembled
themselves together in flocks to cast themselves into the Sea: and a Plague so
great in Rome, that 800. men fell dead in one hour in the time of Procession.

And yet an horrible Comet in the same place, in the year of our Lord 597. was
so innocent, that there is no other effect of it conveyed to posterity, then
that blessed one of St. Gregory's redeeming the captive Christians in Greece
from the Heathens, and the more miserable captive Heathens from Heathenism it
self: nor that Meteor which Jerusalem for a month together doted on, any other
consequence then that Dagopart was sole Monarch of France, and the Pope sole
Arbiter of the quarrel between the Sarazens and the Emperor of Constantinople.

It Is true, in the year of our Lord 687. near Christmas time, (Christ must
still be honored with a Star) a vast Comet was observed near the constellation
which is called Virgiliae, when the Emperor defeated the Sclavi, and raised so
great a controversy about the election of the Pope of Rome, that for many
years after he had the choice of him himself.

The years seven hundred twenty three, and forty seven, were honored with two
Comets together in Italy, when Italy cantoned it self into Dukedoms and free
States: And another Comet like a sword, which indeed was followed at
Constantinople with a Plague for three years, that they wanted men to bury
their dead; but withal with such a success of the Emperors against the
Sarazens, as gave Law to Cyprus, and most of those neighbor Countries.

It Is true, the blazing Star in the East might signify (said some Astronomers)
the expulsion of Telerick; and yet, why not the Emperors onslaught of 6000
Sarazens, and Alphonsus his overthrow of seventy thousand more, which happened
about the same time?

The Comet in Aries, in the year 840. might signify the Moors waste of Italy;
and why not their expulsion out of it? for both are in the Annals of one year.

The blazing Star vertical to Spain, might import the Vandals and Sarazens
incursions; and yet might prognosticate as well their overthrows, both
happening in one month.

Three Comets for a fortnight vertical to Germany, might foretell that Gonsalvus
should have poisoned Sancho with an Apple, and might likewise as well bode that
the French King and the Emperor after their bloody War, should play at Cards
this year: for these are the two most remarkable passages for this year.

A Comet very horrible to behold, casting out flames on every side, seen in the
year of our Lord 1062. might portend Otho poisoned with a pair of Gloves; and
why not the flying of the Danes to the Church, being there burnt, when they
were worsted at Oxford?

Stella Crinita, or that very great hairy Comet, which appeared in the year
1043. might indeed foretell that the Emperor should have overcome the Russians,
who invaded his Territories: and why not as well the great Famine in Germany
and France, together with the Prussians invasion of Polonia, where were 1500
and 2000 taken, all happening the same year?

The two blazing Stars which were seen vertical to Poland, in the year 1058.
might presage the Saxons Rebellion against the Emperor, as well as the Russians
Rebellion in Poland, which were reduced by Boleslaus, both happening about the
same time.

The Comet which appeared for eighteen days together, and the Star with the
Cross and a half Moon, seen in Italy in the year 1212, might foretell that two
hundred thousand Moors should be slain by the Spaniards: and likewise the
valor of the Flemish, who together with the English took three hundred Sail of
ships from Philip King of France, and burnt one hundred more; happening in the
same year.

The great Comet fearful to behold in the year 1242. might indeed signify the
Infidels taking of Jerusalem; and why not as well the miserable Plague in
Greece, and the great Famine in Constantinople?

The great Comet which appeared in the year 1255 might signify the Venetians
taking of Padua, as well as the breaking in of the Genoese into Venice, and
their expulsion.

That Comet of notable greatness seen in the year 1285, might portend the
Norwegians invasion of Denmark, as well as the Helvetians War against the
Emperor.

The Comet of wonderful magnitude which appeared in the year 1300, might
foretell that the English should beat the Scots: and why not as well, that the
Turk should invade the Empire, and do great mischief there?

The great Comet with a beard seen in the year 1376, might presage the burning
of five hundred houses in Gand, the drowning of seventeen Towns in Flanders;
likewise the Christians killing two thousand Turks in Bosna, by a Stratagem.

The Blazing Star that shot wonderful beams of fire from it, might indeed
foretell the wasting of Scotland by the English, the Frisons rebellion in
Holland: and why not as well the Popes imprisonment by the King of France?

That Comet of mighty magnitude seen in Poland, in the year 1439, might foretell
that France should be twice beaten by the English in Normandy, and the
Emperors death going against the Turks; as well as the Polanders wasting of
Silesia.

That glorious Star seen in the year 1478 to run along the firmament, might
indeed portend the Turks wasting of Carinthia; and why not their defeat as well
by the Hungarians and Transylvanians?

The very great Comet that passed through Cancer, Leo and Virgo, which was
visible to all Europe, in the year 1530, might portend the four hundred and
four Parishes drowned in Holland, with all their people and cattle; as well as
the Turks taking of Buda in Hungaria.

The bloody Star and Cross which were seen flying in the air, and the Blazing
Star seen likewise in the year 1539, might signify the great Fire in
Constantinople, which burnt the Gaol and seven hundred prisoners: and why not
the Irish overthrow, who had invaded the English; both being done in the same
year?

There appeared a Comet in the North, in the year 1652, which might very well
foretell that the Dutch and French should be subdued by the English; which was
done the very same year: and why not as well the change of the English
Government by Oliver Cromwell, who dissolving the long Parliament, made himself
Protector, the next year after?

THus you see how uncertain the effects of Comets are, sometimes boding the
greatest good, sometimes the greatest evil; which alas, cannot be judged signs
of any thing, when they are understood by none. What is a sign, signifies; and
what signifies is known: and how little understood or known any Meteor,
Exhalation, Comet, Apparition, or Prodigy is, learn we from Democritus Senior,
who laughed at men's folly this way loud among the Heathens; and Democritus
Junior, who does it louder among the Christians, in these words:

Who can give a reason of this diversity of Meteors, that it should rain
Stones, Frogs, Mice, etc. Rats, which they call Lemmer in Norway, and are
manifestly observed (as Munster writes) by the Inhabitants, to descend and fall
with some faeculent showers, and like so many Locusts, consume all that is
green. Leo Afer speaks as much of Locusts; about Fez in Barbary there be
infinite swarms in their fields upon a sudden: so at Arles in France 1553. the
like happened by the same mischief, all their grass and fruits were devoured,
magna incolarum admiratione and consternatione (as Valleriola obser. med lib.
1. obser. 1. relates) coelum subito obumbrabant, etc. he concludes, it could
not be from natural causes, they cannot imagine whence they come, but from
heaven.

There were 15 Astrologers and Mathematicians sent for by the Emperor to
consider the famous appearance in the Star Cassiopoeia, and each one put as the
septuagint of old in a Cell by himself: but they were so far from agreeing in
every Apex of the interpretation of that Star, that they differed in the very
substance of it; for Eckins would needs infer thence the union of the Dukedom
of Inspruch, with the Arch-Dukedom of Austria; Tuddus the death of the Palatine
of Hungary; Peucerius the dissolution of all free States; Algubinus the Sea
fights between the Turk and the Venetians; Fromund Senior the supposition of
the Heretics (as if that Star had been as infallible in its Cassiopoeian
chair, as the Pope is in his) Hashas the reduction of the Princes of Italy, and
so every one according to the interest of the place he lived in, and the
inclination of the Government he depended upon; insomuch that the chief
Minister cried out, Sapientes olim astra ducunt jam insipientes decipiunt; the
Stars formerly led wise men, and now play with fools: Stent jam Astrologi and
ij qui contemplantur stellas qui notas faciunt in menses praedictiones suas;
Let now the Astrologers, the Star-gazers, the monthly Prognosticators stand up,
Es. 47.13.

Peter Nonnius and Kepler have undertaken four demonstrations to make this out,
That no Meteors, Clouds, Foggs, Vapors, Exhalations arise higher then 56 or 84
Germane miles, and all others that are observed higher, to be purer Air or
Element of fire. The excellent Tycho Brach. subtle Cardan, and the honest
Prefacer to Euclid, I think his name is Jo. Bena, make all this ridiculous by
refractions, and many other demonstrations. The learned Landgrave of Hassias
Mathematician, Ratman by name, and Claremontius, in their Astronomical Tables,
and the Anti-Tycho, make Comets a part of the Air, and the Heavens impenetrable
and unalterable: Tycho in his Tables asserts them part of the Heavens (which in
his Epistles he makes non dura aut impervia sed liquida, subtilis, motuique
Planetarum facile cedens; they are his own words, That they are penetrable and
soft, as the air it self is; and that the Planets move in it, as birds in the
Air, and and fishes in the Sea; and by their Progress, Parallaxes, Refractions
and Interferings with the Planets, Centricks, Eccentricks, Cycles, Epicycles,
Equator, Tropicks, Circles Aequant, and the other hard words of Ptolomy and
his followers, are hooted at by Delrio, Imo^^ as suppositions and fancies: that
the Comet in Cassiopoeia 1572. that in Cygno 1600. that in Sagittarius 1604.
and others were new productions in the Aetherial Regions, as Raeslin would have
it; Caesar la Galla speaking of the appearances, or Phainomena, in the Orb of
the Moon will not admit: that they were created ab initio, and show themselves
at set times (as Blancanus affirms, who cries, Non per eunt sed disparent)
Burbachius and Maginus earnestly contradict.

A man would think that when Astronomers underdertake to show, that this or
that is a new Star, they know all the Stars: yet Jo. Bayerus will tell you they
are 1026. or 1725. the Rabbis among whom dwelt the ancient Astrologers 29000.
Myriades: and when these were at variance about their number, Galileus has
found they are infinite as nails driven into a door; and so its impossible to
guess when any new Star appears. These and such like instances have cooled our
spirits so far, that we are persuaded all things continue as they were before
the foundation of the world; and that if it be vanity to dogmatize in things
near us, it is much more for to be peremptory in things so much above us: and I
am of Pineda's mind, that it is a question fit for a God to propound, and for a
man to be amazed at: Job 37, 38. Do thou know the ballancing of the Clouds,
the wondrous works of him who is perfect in knowledge? have thou entered into
the treasures of the snow? or have thou seen the treasures of the hail, which I
have reserved against the time of trouble, against the day of battle and war?
has the rain a father? or who has begotten the drops of dew? out of whose
womb came the ice and the hoary frost of heaven, who has gendred it? can
thou bind the sweet influences of the Pleia^^^, or loose the bands of Orion?
can thou bring forth Mazaroth in his season? or can thou bind Arcturus with
his Sons? know thou the Ordinances of Heaven? can thou set the dominion
thereof in the earth?

Besides all this, the late learned Earl of Northampton in his Defensative
against the poison of supposed Prophecies, dedicated to Sir Francis Walsingham,
upon the occasion of the Cassiopaeian Star, brings many ancient and modern
instances, particularly of the Comets in the years 1555, 1556, 1557, 1558.
after which happened nothing extraordinary or evil; all things being as cheap
as they had been, and as abundant. Whereupon Dr. Hakewil commends the diligence
and faithfulness of Gemma Frisius, who observed all the Comets that ever were,
as this Gentleman before us has done, and noted as many good effects as bad
which have succeeded them.

Peucer a great Mathematician in Germany prognosticaten upon the last Comet
there, I mean the forementioned Star, That men's bodies should be parched and
burned up with heat: but (says my Author) how happened it? Forsooth (says he)
we had not a more unkindly Summer for many years, in respect of extraordinary
cold: never less inclination to War; no Prince deceased in that time; and the
Plague, which had been somewhat quick before in Lombardy, as God would have it,
ceased a the rising of the Comet.

Queen Elizabeth lying at Richmond at the time of a Comet, 1568, being
dissuaded by all means from looking thereon, with a courage answerable to her
greatness, caused the window to be opened, and said, Jacta est Alea; thereby
(says my Historian) showing, that her steadfast hope and confidence was too
firmly planted in the providence of God, to be blasted or affrighted with those
beams, which either had a ground in Nature whereon to rise, or at least wise no
warrant in Scripture to portend the mishap of Princes. And (says the learned
Apologist) I do not remember that any Comet appeared either before her death,
(as in the beginning of her most excellent Reign there did) nor of Prince
Henry, or King Henry the Great of France; the first a most peerless Queen, the
other a most incomparable Prince, and the third for prudence and valor a
matchless King; and all three, persons in whose destiny was involved the fate
of Europe.

Insomuch that I cannot but approve of Vespasians humor, when a Comet
appeared; who as Dion Halicarnasseus reports, being told it portended his
death, redlyed merrily, No surely, this bushie Star notes not me, but the
Parthian King: ipse enim Comatus est, ego vero calvus sum: for he wears bushie
looks, but I am bald.

And I cannot pass the two instances that are brought of the greatest good
presaged to mankind by two Comets; the one that, Foelicissimum sydus, and
auspicatissimus Cometa, in Chalcedius upon Plato. That Star of Jacob about this
time foreshewed the birth of the greatest Benefactor to Mankind, Christ: the
other, that whereof Tacitus speaks, Cometes sum bonus apparuit qui
praenuncius fuit mortis magnis illius Tyranni, and pestile^^ issimi hominis, i.
e. There appeared a favorable and most auspicious Comet, as an Herald to
proclaim the death of that great Tyrant, meaning Nero, and most pestilent man.

The Predictions then and successes of mischievous and unfortunate accidents
from the appearance of Comets, we may conclude so uncertain, and the knowledge
of them so little, that they are now more rare then in former times, when they
appeared almost every day; because the people are more knowing, and not subject
to those affrightments he that is Prince of the Air formerly put them unto,
upon the account of every new Apparition: which a curious Reader may see in
Lycosthenes de Prodigiis and Portentis ab orb condito usque ad annum 1557.
Peucer de Prodigiis Cardan, de rerum veritate.

In the midst of this discourse started up the Question, Whether new Stars,
are possible?

The Star at our Saviors birth was instanced in: to which instance it was
returned, that it being not observed by the Mathematicians of those times, the
Magi were only men carried and moved by Balaams Prophecy, Numb. 24.17. who was
their Countreyman, it is generally thought rather a blazing light, created in
the Region of the Air, carrying the resemblance of a Star; then a new and true
created Star seated in the Firmament.

2. That in Cassiopoeia which we have so often mentioned (the very year of the
great massacre in France) was urged again, and it was said it held the same
Aspect in all places of Christendom, it ^an the same course, it kept the same
proportion, distance, and situation every where, and in every point with the
fixed, by the space of two whole years, which no vapor can do: But I replied
to that, as we do to all arguments, from appearances above the Moon, in the
words of Varro, as they are quoted by St. Augustine in 3 Books, De civitate
Dei, and as I take it the eight Chapter: In coelo mirabile extitit portentum,
nam in stella veneris nobilissima, quam Plautus vesperruginem, Homerus Hesperon
appellat pulcherrimam dicens, Castor scribit tantum portentum fuisse ut mutaret
colorem, magnitudinem, figuram, and motum, quod factum ita neque antea, neque
post fit, hoc factum Ogyge rege decebant A^^rastus, Cyzicenus, and Dion
Neapolites Mathematici nobiles: In Heaven, says he, appeared a most mavelous
great wonder, the most noted Star called Venus, which Plautus terms Vespurruga,
and Homer, Hesperus the fair, as Castor has left it upon record, changed both
color, bigness, figure, and motion; which accident was never seen before nor
since that time: the renowned Mathematicians, Adrastus and Dyon, averring that
this fell out during the reign of King Ogyges, of which he gives no other
account then this: This happened, Quia ille voluit qui summo regit imperio ac
potestate quod condidit; That the world might acknowledge God its Creator and
commander, who can alter or destroy the natures, restrain or suspend the
operation of all things therein at his pleasure, which keeps men from
worshipping them as Gods, since they cannor keep themselves from alteration.

But one absurdity follows not another, so fast as one impertinent argument
ingages another. From the alteration of the world, we proceeded to the end of
it now approaching: 666. was up, that text, There shall be signs in Heaven,
was urged, (not remembering the place where it is written, An evil and an
adulterous generation seeks a sign.)

Considering to what disorder these loose imaginations may reduce the more
ignorant people, it was not unseasonable to insert a just account of the end of
the world; which take thus briefly.

I. That the world shall have an end, is not only an Article of the Christians
faith; but the very result of the Heathens reason: Qualis est futura vita
sapientis, etc. How shall a wise man live without friends, if in prison or
banished? Says Seneca in his ninth Epistle, Qualis est Jovi cum resoluto mundo
(is his Answer) as Jupiter shall live when the world shall be dissolved,
contenting himself within himself.

Quid enim, says the same Author, mutationis periculo exceptum? non terra, non
coelum, non totus hic rerum contextus, quamvis Deo agente ducatur non semper
tenebit hunc ordinem, sed illum ex hoc cursu aliquis dies dejiciet: omnia
sternet abducetque secum vetustas, supprimet montes, Maria sordebit: unus omnia
condet dies. The curious may see Oecumenius, in Collectaneis super 3. post Pet.
out of Heraclitus, Empedocles, Anaxagoras, Democritus, yea and Aristotle
himself, Lucretius, and Lucan, in their excellent Poems: the first, De rerum
Natura 3. the second, in his Pharsal. l. 1. Sic cum compagi soluta, etc. See
Eusebius. Demonstrat. Evang. l. 3. Grot. de verit. Relig. l. 2. Morney du Plessis,
ibid.

II. That the World shall end by Fire, is as certain among the Gentiles, as
among us; as appears from the Stoics (...): Seneca's exitus hujus mundi ^gnis,
humor primordium: Panaetius the Stoics fear, Ne ad extremum mundus ignosceret:
Lucans Rant, Communis mundo superest rogas ostibus astra -- misturus -- Ovid's
great reach, Esse quoque in fatis reminiscitur affore tempus quo mare quo
tellus correptaque regia coeli ardeat.

The Sybills, (...), etc. in Clemens Alexandrinus, and many more in Ludovicus
Vives, who made this Observation, Exustionis ultimae odor quidam etiam ad
Gentes manavit. de Fid. l. 2. Magnis de exustione mundi: and Eugubin. de
Perenni Philosophia, l. 10.

III. There is this reason why the World should burn by Fire, because that as
the waters above the Heavens, and those under the Earth; the moisture that
dwell in the Fountains of the deep, and that which was let out of the windows
of Heaven, prepared the Universe for the first Inundation; so likewise the Fire
that dwells (notwithstanding the Noble Tychoes Arguments) in the upper Region,
and the Stars, and the Sulphurous matter that is lodged in the Caverns of the
Earth, do prepare it for the last conflagration, when he who dwells in
everlasting burnings, and is Consuming Fire, shall come out of the Light
invisible, with ten thousands of his Angels waiting upon him, and a thousand
times ten thousand going before him: those Angels that are Spirits, and those
Ministers that are a flaming fire, casting a glance and glory over the amazed
Universe, that shall awake those Seeds and Principles of Heat and Fire, that
have insinuated themselves into this vast Frame, to an universal combustion
that shall make this all but one great Body, Flame, and Smoke of Fire and
Darkness as is prepared for the Devil, his Angels, and Servants.

IV. Its confessed that the burning of Vesuvius and Aetna, and the other flames
mentioned by Dr: Moor, do intimate that last Fire; yea and what is more, to see
an exhalation of 800 miles compass (such as some say this is) set on fire by
the celestial heat, does argue it: for sure (besides the divine power our
Religion points us to) its possible the Heavens may be placed in such a
Position and Aspect as may burn as much more, and so till we come to a
possibility that a fiery Conjunction may burn the Universe: yet because this is
but wide and conjectural, it should not trouble our heads with fear or disorder
upon any strange appearance, only it should dispose us to some serious
thoughts of that passage 2 Pet. 3. that as by the word of God the Heavens were
of old, and the Earth standing out of the Water, and in the Water, etc. Whereby
the World that then was, being overflowed with water, perished. But the Heavens
and the Earth which are now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto
fire against the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly men. But (beloved)
be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand
years, and a thousand years as one day. The Lord is not stack concerning his
promise, (as some men count slackness) but is long suffering to usward, not
willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. But the
day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which the Heavens
shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent
heat, the earth also, and the works that are therein, shall be burnt up. Seeing
then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye
to be in all holy conversation and godliness, Looking for, and hasting unto the
coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens being on fire, shall be
dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat. Nevertheless, we,
acccording to his promise, look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein
dwells righteousness. Wherefore (beloved) seeing that ye look for such
things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot and
blameless. And account that the long-suffering of the Lord is salvation, even
as our beloved brother Paul also, according to the wisdom given unto him, has
written unto you. As also in all his Epistles, speaking in them of these
things, in which are some things hard to be understood, which they that are
unlearned, and unstable, wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, unto
their own destruction. Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things
before, beware lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked, fall
from your own stedfastness. But grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ: to him be glory both now and for ever, Amen.

Of the Influence between a Planet or Comet and Men.
FRom a wild discourse of the end of the world, we are led into an account of
the Influence that this Comet may have upon Men; who do as much fear their own
end from it, as they did before the World, (as if it were a Torch only lighted
to lead to Funerals.) Comets have no other Influence then that natural one we
spoke of elsewhere, besides the virtue of their respective Planets; nor the
Planets any but in Conjunction with the Elements; nor they, but in their
predominancie in every particular man: whence this usual Table of Operation is
made, whence we may gather what we are to look in our particular capacities
from this famous Meteor.

The sympathy of the twelve Signs with the four Elements.
Fiery Hot and dry Choleric Earthly Cold and dry Melancholy Aerial Hot and
moist Sanguine Watery Cold and moist Phlegmatic Fiery. Hot and dry Choleric
Earthly Cold and dry Melancholy Aerial Hot and moist Sanguine Watery Cold and
moist Phlegmatic Fiery Hot and dry Choleric Earthly Cold and dry Melancholy
Aerial Hot and moist Sanguine Watery Cold and moist Phlegmatic

The nature and qualities of the seven Planets in union with the four Elements.
Earthly Cold and dry Melancholy Airy Hot and moist Sanguine and Fiery Hot and
dry Choleric and Watery Cold and moist Phlegmatic

Some influence no man will deny the Stars, and those Exhalations that depend
upon them, that considers Sir Walter Raleigh's words: who would say that it
could not be doubted but the Stars were instruments of some greater use, than
to give an obscure light, and for men to gaze on after the Sun set; it being
probable that the same goodness that endued the meanest being with some virtue,
denied not a bodies proportionable power to those glorious bodies which are
created, without question, to the same end in heaven, that plants, flowers,
etc. are in the earth, not only to adorn, but to serve it according to this
Stanza.

I Will never believe that the Arch-architect;
With all these fires the heavenly arches decked
Only for show, and with these glistering shields
To amaze poor shepherds watching in the fields.
I Will never believe that the light flower that pranks
Our garden borders, or the common banks,
And the least stone that in her warming lap
Our kind nurse Earth does courteously wrap,
Has some peculiar virtue of its own,
And that the glorious Stars of heaven have none;
But shine in vain, and have no charge precise
But to be walking in heavens galleries;
And through that Palace up and down to clamber,
As golden gulls about a Princes chamber.
But if the true and uttermost virtues of herbs and plants, which our selves
sow, and set under our foot, cannot be comprehended by us; ( Hardly do we guess
aright the things that are upon the earth, and with labor do we find the
things that are before us; but the things which are in heaven, who has
searched out? Wisd. 9.10.) much less can reach the farthest power of these
Stars, of whose effects upon natural things, skilful Astronomers may give a
good account: but for the things that rest in the liberty of man's will, the
Stars (says an excellent person) have doubtless no power over them, except the
will be led by the sensitive appetite, and that again stirred up by the
constitution and complexion of the body, as too often it is; especially where
the humors of the body are strong to assault, and the virtues of the mind too
weak to resist: Incline a man they may, force him they cannot, reason and
Religion may so alter the inclination: of the first whereof Socrates was an
eminent instance of old, and Cardinal Pool was such of late; the firsts
nativity being calculated, the Astrologer was laughed at, for saying he was
deboist, and an ill-natured man, till Socrates defended him, saying, He was
such a one before education had changed him: the other being certified by an
acquaintance, who pretended skill in the favors of the Stars, that he should
be raised and advanced to a great calling in the world; made answer, That
whatever was portended by the figure of his birth, or natural generation, was
cancelled and altered by the grace of his second birth, or regeneration in the
blood of his Redeemer.

The natural conclusion whereof is that (in Buchanans words De Sphaera) --
Quanquam moles omni sibi part coherens,
Una sit and nexis per mutua vincula membris,
Conspiret, positusque semel Rectore sub uno
Observet Leges, etc.
Though there is some coherence in the series of things, yet is it not so fatal
and necessary but that Gods power, our education, or grace may change it: and
though guilty men fear where there is no fear, and by that fear fall into what
they feared, that passion betraying the succor of teason, yet good men knowing
that the Stars are made to serve, and not to rule them (men were not made for
Stars, but Stars for men) and that their prayers, as did Eliahs, Hezekiahs, who
were men subject to their infirmities, can avail much against the heavens,
their influence and Stars; settle themselves upon providential Principles
against all events, choosing rather a modest ignorance, then a curious
inquisition following the pithy counsel of Phavorinus, (apud A. G. l. 14. c. 1.
with which we shall conclude:) Either they portend thee bad or good luck; if
good, and they deceive, thou will become miserable by a vain expectation; if
bad, and they lie, thou will be miserable by vain fear; if they foretell true,
but unfortunate events, thou will be miserable in mind, before thou art by
destiny; if they promise fortunate success, which shall indeed come to pass,
these two inconveniences will follow thereupon, both expectation by hope shall
hold thee in suspense, and hope will devour and deflower the fruit of thy
content.

This Discourse raised such expectations concerning this strange thing, that we
were resolved to sit up upon Sunday Night, and send for the Learned and
Ingenious T. F. with his Instruments; with whom about one of the Clock, after
incomperable discourses out of Tycho Brahe concerning the Comet of the last
Age, I went out to your beloved Lodge, which lies you know most happily for
it, whither (as soon as we could discern the so much talked of Star) my Lady
and the young Folk being awaked, and invited to the Prospect; You would not
imagine what pretty little Observations every body made about the color and
the fashion of it: But the wonder being a little over, and we at leisure, and
able to make distinct and particular reflections, take them as we made them,
with their Night and disorder about them, this being not to express our Art but
our Duty.

A Comet we concluded it; and a Comet our Ingenious friend defined to be an
exhalation hot and dry, of vast quantity, fat, clammy, hard-compact, like a
lump of Pitch, which by the heat of the Sun is drawn out of the Earth into the
highest region of the Air, and there by the excessive heat of the place is set
on fire, appearing like a Star with a blazing flame; carried most usually by
the motion of the Air, which is circular, but never goes down out of sight,
though it be not seen in the day time for the light of the Sun, but still
burns, till all the matter be consumed: And that we might be sure that the
matter of these Blazing appearances is great, There was never, he said, and
Wendeline said so before him, a Comet, but at the least it continued eight
days, some of them continuing 40 days, some 80, some 4 months, some 6. It
must needs sure be an admirable deal of matter that can give so much
nourishment to so great and fervent a Fire, and for so long a time: After some
discourses of Anaxagoras and Democritus his Opinion, that a Comet was none
other than an heap of massy Planets together, which modern Philosophy has made
so ridiculous, that it is fitter for Democritus to laugh at, than discourse;
and so absurd, that Anaxagoras his Snow is black is more rational, observing
all the Planets distinctly above the Horizon. And yet a Comet seen distinct
from them. Of Empedocles his fancy, that they were an heap of vapors gathered
together by the Genii or Angels of each place, which we thought not fit to
discourse, considering our vast distance from the genuine notions of Spirits of
the Pythagoreans imagination, of which our Hypocrates (not the Physician) seems
the Master; that a Comet is one of the Planets which disappears at its nearer
distance from the Sun, hid in its light, and appears again after some time when
further off that glorious body, as a new thing, an Imagination that Julius
Scaliger thinks not fit to answer any otherwise than Aristotle had done
before him, 1. Meteor. 6. viz. by asserting the appearance of of two together
in his time, as the Stagyrite had done in his, even when all the Planets were
seen in clear night as clearly as the Sun at Noon day. After, I say, these
extravagant chats, the Gentlewomen fell into a discourse of the color of it,
an argument of a more superficial consideration, the substance whereof was to
this purpose, that Color being, as the Philosopher says, (...), a reflection
of light upon the outside of an enlightened body or matter, according to the
matter, therefore must needs be the Color of any body: and so of these Comets,
if the matter be very thick, they are blew like burned brimstone; if but meanly
thick, they are ruddy as a burning flame; if thin, they are white as the
pulifaced Moon, and as the matter is more or less so disposed, they are
yellowish, duskish, greenish, etc. although besides all this, I remember the
Conimbricensian Philosophers, and they no Fools I Will assure you, assign the
(...) of the predominant Stars under which these Meteors appear, as the reason
of the variety of Colors, for they place every Comet under its peculiar Star,
((...), says the natural Philosopher) this seems to be but some thin
Exhalation, for it looks but poorly upon it.

From the Color we passed to the Frame and Fashion of it, and that likewise
was observed to arise from the Matter of it, for there are three Proportions
wherein these Meteors appear, with a Beard hanging down, with Beams round
about, with a Tail stretched out obliquely in length. The first of these
appears when the Exhalation is thick in the midst, and in length downwards also
meanly thick; The second is, when the Exhalation is thick in the midst, and
equally thin round about the edges; ((...), they are our Masters words) The
third, to which it seems he was a stranger, as Seneca was after him, is like
the first, save that the Exhalation hangs not down, but lies side-long, and
is usually of a greater length than the Beard. Upon this occasion I could not
choose but recollect how Pliny, as I take it, in the 7th. Book of Natural
Questions, and 11, or 12. Chapters, or rather the 2. Not. H. 1, 2. makes ten
sorts of Comets; The first two that I have mentioned; the third (...), or after
the similitude of a Dart; The fourth (...), or like a Sword; The fifth (...),
like a Tub, hollow and dark; The sixth (...), or horny, or rather turning and
winding like a Horn; The seventh (...), round as a dish, or like the picture of
the Sun, scattering thin and watery Beams from the edges; The eight (...), like
a Horses Mane; The ninth (...), silver-hair'd, because of the light and fulgor
of the circum-jacent flame; And the last the Blazing Star we have now before
us; but all these may be referred to the number forementioned.

After all this you will expect the description of this Comet, which the
excellent T. F. has drawn as exactly as I have seen, his Pencil being nothing
below his Pen; it seems the exhalation is somewhat thick a top which makes it
look like a Star, and of all the Stars likest Jupiter of any Star, as I could
imagine; though our friend would needs contest it was like Mars, and really it
was like to have its influence upon us, for it was almost a quarrel, and
effectually a wager between us about the figure; But whatever that Star-like
appearance is, its tail, or the long vapor that stretches from it, is some 6
yards and a half in length, and 3 in breadth, pointing obliquely Westward, very
sharp toward the bottom, although its possible it should alter its proportion
as it spends its matter, which I suppose was almost half spent when we observed
it.

But we were not puzzled so much in the figure as in the situation of it; for
our Assistant with his Mathematical instrument would needs demonstrate from the
Parallax, or equal distance that it was in the Heaven among the Planets, and as
that Comet or Star, one thousand five hundred seventy two was seen for 16 whole
months together in Casiopaea, moving with equal motion, and looking with an
invariable position, that is to say kept an equal distance with the fixed
Stars: and the other one thousand five hundred seventy seven observed in
Sagittary; so this was in Taurus, in an equal line with the Eagles-heart, not
far from, or rather in a constellation called the Ship, and in the hinder Mast
(Pardon the inaccurate expressions of a person that never saw the Sea) of that
Ship: his demonstration was ocular, and so not easily confuted: But I who have
a great kindness for my old Master Aristotle, put him off at present with the
difference that was between Tuddaeus and Cornelius Gemma about the Comet 1577.
the first affirming it in Sagittarius, the second asserting it in Mercury, and
others from their different arguments concluding it in neither: And withal how
easily we are deceived in the nearness of the Moon and Stars, and therefore how
easily we may be so in the distance of these Comets; we think the Moon touches
some high Mountains, and we think those Mountains touch the Moon, when alas our
sight only deceives us in the lowness of the one, and the height of the other;
and how easily we are deceived, when the Medium is so unconstant as the Air is,
when the distance is so great as from us to the upper Region; and when the
motion is so irregular, as must needs be the motion of a vapor that is carried
about with some wandering Planet, a Novice can tell you out of his Magirus. Thus
I talked, And because I might not seem of their humor, that overthrow all, and
build nothing; I would needs rub up my old Philosophy, and say, That Comets
were either immovable, or movable; Those that are immovable are such thick
exhalations as are drawn no farther than the lower part of the upper Region of
the Air, and there will not stir, being too big for the virtue or force of the
Planets under which they lie.

Those that are moveable, as most are, and this particularly, are thinner
matter drawn up to the upper end of the upper Region of the Air, moving either
with the Air constantly and directly, or with its own matter unconstantly,
sometimes here, sometimes there, or else as this seems to do, by the impulse
and influence of the Planet that is predominant above it, for so Scaliger says
in his 77 Exercit. Etenim quum materiam informam fidus ab ima nostra attraxerit
regione, quare nunc abs se compactam formatam, Libratam, sibi propriorem non
secum evehat? sustinet igitur eam stella ut ita dicam parens ejus, quasi cum a
sole nubis suppenduntur. Quid mirum si secum trahat? eadem namque potestati
quispiam and attrahi and retineri alibi disputatum est. That is in brief, The
Stars and Sun raise these exhalations, and they keep them up, and guide them,
only I must add, that as Fire follows the matter that feeds it; so likewise
this Flame does its fuel sometimes, from the North to the West, sometimes from
the North to the East, sometimes quicker, sometimes slower; for it moves so
swift sometimes, that as it is seen late at Night, so it is seen early in the
Morning, as if with Venus it out-ran the Sun; whence some have mistaken the
same Comet to be two.

At this rate of Pedantry I went on, but the mischief of it was, I could not
give a reason for it presently, until we came to consider how long it was
likely to continue, or to be seen, and my Gentleman, before he was aware, said
it might be seen for a fortnight, which words I laid hold of, and urged him to
make it out; and though he used many ways, none would do but this, viz. That it
has been observed to decrease so much since the first notice taken of it, that
if it would fall away proportionably so much every night, it could be seen but
sixteen nights at farthest; whence I concluded my Masters old discourse, that
the Exhalation that makes a Comet, is never so thin, but it may last seven
days. Brevissimum (says Pliny) quo cernerentur, spatium septem dierum
annotatum est: The shortest space of their appearance is seven days, but may
be so thick, compacted, and copious, that it may last seven months. (
Longissimum octoginta dies, that mistake of Pliny, Cardan has corrected, in
his Comment. Quadupert. Ptol. l. 2. c. 9.) Whence it follows, that the
celebrated flame in Taurus, is nothing but a little Exhalation, gathered some
800. miles round, by the Catholic or Universal Virtue of some Flames, which
have drawn it up, and will keep it there as long as it lasts, which will not be
half so long as the Sword-Comet, that hung (as Josephus reports it) over
Jerusalem, a whole Year before the Panolethria, or utter destruction of the
Jews, Besides, I remember the account that Gassendus had given of the Comet
that appeared from the end of November, to the middle of January, which makes
good my Supposition, and take it thus in his own words.

About the end of this Year, meaning 1618. there appeared a famous Comet, to
the observation whereof, he, meaning Perreskin, exhorted all the learned men he
was acquainted with, himself being destitute of fitting Instruments, and not
daring to trust himself in the Air, because of his sickliness, made no other
observation, save that by the Perspective Glass, he discerned the form of its
Head, and how it differed from the Tail, which he compared to the Sun beams
shining through a Window. But he was glad, when he heard afterward, that such
as dwell not in Aix, might a little after diligently observe all things
thereunto pertaining. And that I may relate somewhat thereof, for the sake of
those that desire to know such things: The Comet appeard from the end of
November, to the middle of January; and because it rose in the morning,
therefore the Tail thereof was seen turning upward some days before the Head
appeared. The Head was a Star, somewhat pale, as big as the fixed Stars of the
first magnitude (but twinckled not as they do) round on that side which was
toward the Sun, and crisped on the other end. The Tail or Hair was a thinner
radiation, and more white, as long at first as an eighth part of the Heaven,
and broad at the end (which did for the first day turn a little toward the
South) as much as came to a sixth part of its length. The first appearance of
its Head was there where Scorpio contracts its claws: Its dis-appearance or
ending was where the Dragon parting the Baars, does unfold the end of its tail;
For besides the daily motion whereby this Comet did rise and set, as the other
Stars, it went by its own proper motion from South to North: But so as if it
had begun at the middle of Scorpio, and had there cut the Ecliptic, inclining
to the West near 63. Degrees. And whereas at first this motion was every day
two Degrees, and an eighth part, it became about the Nones of December swifter
by an whole Degree: and afterward (which makes for my purpose, and proves it
but an Exhalation) it did so decrease, that at length it languished: and also
its Tail, which at the beginning was so long, became by little and little so
shortened, that at last it vanished, and became undistinguishable from the Head:
Insomuch that Kepler and he, who were loath to confess it an Earthly
Exhalation, yet must needs say what is as bad, that it was a Concretion of the
liquid Heavens.

Touching the direction of the Tail of the Comet toward the quarter which was
opposite to the Sun, I need say nothing, says the Learned Gassendus,
especially seeing it belongs not to this place to show the reason why it kept
not a direct opposition, but turned sometimes to the right hand, and sometimes
to the left, by an unequal kind of deflection.


Nor need I speak of what it presaged, seeing it is not the least argument of
humane weakness to be afraid of those things which have nothing to do with
this world wherein we live. At least it is a wonder, as that learned man goes
on, that Men will not believe God himself, who commands that we should not be
afraid of the signs of Heaven: for as much as he makes not signs of those
things, as being unexpounded, can give no warning; and unless God makes a Comet
to be the sign of Calamities ensuing, how can the Comet either have knowledge
of future things, or a desire to discover them? Does not the Comet take its own
course, as all other natural, being little concerned what a stir the Nations
of Mankind make one with another? But this Comet was said to foreshew the Wars
and Slaughters which followed: as if before there had been no Wars, Pestilence,
nor dearh of Kings! As if no Tragedies were now in action twenty years since!
They referr all to the Comet, and by the same reason, they may referr all the
Troubles that shall arise hereafter, till a new Comet appear, and make the
former forgotten, though it should not appear till an hundred years hence.

Thus far Gassendus most pertinently, as well to the Occasion, as to this
Discourse it self. But this was a high Point, and therefore I suddenly slipped
out of it, to a controversy about the times of its appearance, of which it was
said, that as in the Spring there is too much moisture, and too little heat, to
gather a Comet; in Summer there is too much heat, which will disperse and
consume the matter, that it cannot be joined together: (which is the reason,
why no Comets can be seen on the other side of the Tropicks, or within the
Zodiac, where the extreme heat dissolves the matter that should compose them)
So this season is clean contrary to the nature of a Comet, which is hot and
dry, Winter being cold and moist. But be it remembered what a moderate Winter
this is, and how extraordinary hot the last Summer and Autumn has been in
France, where they were afraid of their Vintage; and in Spain, where they are
in danger of Famine, by reason of the extraordinary Drought; and it will be
confessed a greater wonder to the Learned, that there had been no Comet this
year, at this time, than it is to the ignorant that there is one.

You will wonder all this while, that we discoursed not of the effects and
influence of this strange exhalation, you must know that was the thing in every
bodies mouth: But I avoided the resolution of that point as long as I durst
either safely or civilly, until at last being overprest by the ingenuous Mrs.
T. (whose knowledge is above most Women's, and curiosity above most Men's, who
owns a Masculine Spirit, and is the great argument. I use to prove there is no
sex in the Soul.) I began my Lecture very gravely, That the effects of these
Comets, 1. such as they had by their own influence, and 2. such as they had by
the influence of the Planets, they lie under. A Comet by its own operation and
nature betokens three things, 1. Drought, 2. Barrenness, 3. Pestilence. 1.
Drought, because such an exhalation as a Comet, cannot be generated without
great heat, and much moisture is consumed in the burning of it. 2. Barrenness,
because the fatness of the Earth is drawn up, whereof the Comet consists. 3.
Pestilence, for so much as that kind of exhalation which makes a Comet,
corrupts the Air, which infecteth the bodies of Men and Beasts: To which I
may add Tempests, Inundations, which the dispersion of these vapors round this
wide world is so apt to produce, that Manilius had good reason for his Verse,
Nunquam futilibus excanduit ignibus ether: Claudian for his, In Coelo nunquam
spectatum impune Cometam, and Camerarius for his (...). Non sit Cometa, quin
malum secum adferat: Which are all true in respect of the natural effects these
Comets have upon the inanimate part of the World: Though,

2. Those political effects that are ascribed them by those that would amuse
and deceive the World, I find in reason no ground and nature, no cohaerence,
for since if the dependence of men's bodies, whether in public or private
capacities, upon the Elements, should be certain, which yet is variable, and
the dependence of the Elements upon the Configurations of the Heavens should be
constant, which yet is alterable, yet that of men's Souls upon their Bodies is
so mutable by Grace, exalting them, as in Christ: by Education, altering them,
as in Socrates; by occasions by assing them, as in common Experience, that
there can be no more said of alterations in France, or Great Britain, where
this Comet is seen, than this.

All this time this Comet does appear, The Effects of this Comet,
no doubt but there are many dry and hot Exhalations in the Air, which in dry
men kindle heat, whereby they are provoked to anger: Of anger comes brawling;
of brawling, fighting and war; of war, victory; of victory, alteration in
Commonwealths: and now also the Air may be more infectious, and Princes living,
as they have reason, more delicately than other men, may be more subject to
infection than other men, and so it may be dye too; upon which account we may
reason form this Accident all the Contingents of our Age.

But then for those direful effects this Comet may pretend to, from the present
state of Heaven, and the Configuration of the Planets: First, All our
Astrologers confess the aspect of Heaven at this time most propitious to us,
Mars Culminant bespeaking our Undertakings, in all humane probability, happy;
Mercury our Counsels prosperous; Saturn and Jupiter our Trade improved; yea,
and Taurus, to which most of this Nation belongs, (as Albumazar, R. Bacon,
Alchandus, Ptolomy) the Sign wherein this Comet appears, is the very same Sign
wherein the Comet 1652. was seen, which began about the 7th. of December, as is
by some believed, about the 14th, or 15th. Degree of Gemini, but in its
retrogade motion entered Taurus, 20th. 21st. 22d. 23d. of December, which was at
the same time with the last Dutch War; a War, that notwithstanding it was
managed by a Faction in this Nation, ended so much to the glory of England, and
the shame of Holland, that it was thought this Generation should hear no more
of such a thing, as a Coutest with the King of England, by the distressed
States. Besides, the Position of the Heavens are presumed as happy as we could
wish them, the Royal Sign Leo ascending on the Eastern Finitor, and the
excellent Star, the Lion's Heart arising therewith, in the very opposite degree
of the ascendent, in the Figure of the beginning of our late Troubles, the Moon
ascendent in conjunction of the good Star Jupiter, between the Sextile of
Saturn and Venus, and applying its self to a Sextile of Mars, who is seated in
a House of Friendship, and in a place of kindly aspect.

At si quando ascendens fuerit signum fixum, and Luna in bono loco Figurae
Dominum longo tempore durabit, maxim si fuerit in Leone, vel in ejus
triplicitate: If the Horoscope shall be fixed, and the Moon in a good place of
the Figure (i. e.) Fortunate in an Angle, or a succedent House, it portends
that a Kingdom or Dominion shall remain a long time; chiefly, if Leo shall
ascend, (which in this Figure it does) or a sign of the same Triplicity. Haly
de jud. Astr. fol. 334. He goes on -- Etiam si fuerit in Ascendente fortuna,
significat bonitatem illius Regis, and bonos mores, and bona facta, Haly ut
supra. And if (says he) a fortunate Star shall be in the Ascendent, it
signifies Goodness, Clemency, Worth and Justice of the King so proclaimed, and
intimates him also to be active, and freely forward in good things. I shall
spare to Comment upon these most full Texts, because I would not be esteemed a
Flatterer.

-- Pone Ascendens Leonem, sitque Sol tunc in Tauro in decima ab Ascendente,
sit etiam Luna in primo juncta Veneri aut Jovi, etc. says Guido Bonatus, pars
3. fol. 480. When you would proclaim a (War says he) place Loo upon the
Ascendent, and let the Sun be in Taurus, in the tenth from the Ascendent, and
posite the Moon in the first house, joined either to Jupiter or Venus, etc.

Hear Haly yet again, -- Si Jupiter fuerit in Ascendente, etc. When Jupiter is
posited in the Ascendent of such a Figure, (here he is so, and is in
Conjunction of Luna also) he portends the King or Prince, in action, to be
just, prudent, and desirous of the good of his Subjects. And that as he is
honored with Victory, so will he be a great Cherisher and Preserver of the
Laws, and a Lover of all Acts of Clemency and Justice.

The Sun (says the Learned Cardan) has signification of Kings, and the Moon
of Subjects. The Sun, the grand Significator of Sovereignty, Rule and Dignity,
is nobly fixed in the Angle of Dignity, in the House of the benevolent Planet
Venus, and Exaltation of the Moon, whence it is apparent, that this great
Conversion and Change, will not only be for his Majesty's Happy and Peaceable
Reign, but the Peoples Joy and Delight.

That the Government thus founded shall remain fixed and immovable, is seen by
the fixation of the Angles, the prime points of the Figure; but chiefly of the
fixed position of the Sun. -- Si fuerit in fixis, significat durabilitatem and
firmitatem longum tempus. (i. e.) If the Sun shall be posited in a fixed Sign,
he portends the Government and Honor thereof to continue firm and durable a
long time. But besides his being located in a fixed Sign, and the chief Angle
of Heaven, he is in partile Sextile of Mars, the Patron of Victory and
Conquest, who is posited in the eleventh House; which is an eminent Argument,
and most clear Testimony, That his Majesty cannot want assistance and support
(should he (which I dare be confident he never will) stand in need) even from
the very best of men: (i. e.) from those that are most active, powerful, and
skilful in Arms. Nor should he be any manner of way less respected from those
of the meaner Rank, Quality, and Degree: Is not Luua in Sextile of Venus, who
is Lady or Governess of the Medium Coeli? Is not Mercury Lord of the eleventh
and second Houses, in Gemini in the tenth, and he simply most strong in the
Figure? I know some may be apt to urge a backsliding in Friends from Mercuries
retrogradation, and the Position of Mars in the eleventh House; but let such
know that this Retrogradation of a Planet is no Essential, but Accidental
Debility. Nor is the Position of Mars in the eleventh House the prodromus of
any danger, he being in the Sextile of the Sun. Besides, were it not that there
was that happy Radiation between the Sun and Mars; yet the injury his single
position portends, is alleviated by the benign presence of Venus in the same
house, she being in perfect Amity with the Moon: for it is a known Rule among
Astrologers, Quicquid ligat Mars, solvit Venus: Whatsoever Mars by his ill
influence, harms; Venus by her benevolent Rays, helps. Therefore neither Mars
his Position in the Angle of Friendship, or Mercury's Retrogradation, can have
any evil signification that is not otherwise over-balanced.

Asp^ce ad partem Fortunae, and ad partem Nobilitatis, quae accipitur in die a
gradu Solis in gradum ipsius Exaltationis -- and projicitur ab Ascendente.
Aspice etiam portem Regni and victoriae, quae accipitur in die and nocte a
gradu Solis, in gradum Lunae, and projicitur a gradu Medii Coeli. (Id est) In
the Figure of the proclaming of a King, you should have regard to the Part of
Fortune, and to the part of Nobility, which by day is gained by substracting
the Degree of the Suns place, from the Degree of his Exaltation, and projecting
it from the Ascendent. Behold also the part of the Kingdom, and of Victory,
which born day and night you must take from the Degree of the Sun, to the
Degree of the Moon, and then project it from the Degree of the Mid-heaven. Then
for the use of those Parts, examining the same learned Author, he tells us --
Si quando hae parts venerit in bonis locis and fortunatis, and cum Fortunis,
significat magnam nobilitatem and honorem illi domino, etc. (i. e.) If when any
or all of these Parts happen to be placed fortunately in the Figure, and with
the Fortunes also, they portend great Nobility and Honor to that Prince then
proclaimed, etc. -- -- Here you see these several Princely parts are posited in
the chief places of the Figure, and the part of Nobility near the body of
Venus: besides, they are all near eminent fixed Stars, viz. the part of Fortune
near Cor Scorpii, in the fourth house; and the part of Victory, etc. near Cor
Leonis, in the Ascendent or first house; and the part of Nobility in Cancer,
nearly in Conjunction of Ras-Algense, a splendid, shining, fixed Star in the
eleventh house: therefore I pronounce the Aphorism to take full effect. It is
no mean Argument of lasting honor and happiness, in which the fixed stars are
so eminently concerned: For, according to Ptolomy, Stellae fixae mirabiles and
ultra rationem foelicitates tribuunt, etc. The fixed Stars do design most
admirable Felicity and honor, etc. Ptol. Cent. Aphoris. 29.

To these particular Observations I may add this general one: The former part
of Taurus, wherein this Comet is thought to be, from the seventeenth Degree, to
the twenty seventh of the Stars are something turbulent, cloudy, but
inauspicious to them who are troublesome, by reason of the Pleiades contained
within those Degrees, and are of the nature of and. the middle parts of from
the twenty seventh Degree; to the first of are temporarely hot, and somewhat
moist, by reason of some ^^sterishes in Perseus, of the nature of and from the
beginning of to the Hyades, and the Horn of Taurus: and by the approach of
Orion, causes Thunder and Lightning: the North part made temperate by Perseus,
the South variable, and uncertain, by reason of some Stars participating of
commixed, and others of the nature of and.

Thus much, Good Sir, is the substance of our apprehension of this Comet, in
its Nature, Situation, and Influence, which its high time to put an end to;
since its almost three a Clock in the morning, and I am just called up to see
it again; only I must entreat your Worships pardon, for the mistakes in this
hasty Impertinence, which I dare not correct, since it is already so blotted,
that you can hardly read it. God bless you and yours, and be sure our fortune,
under God, is in our own hands, since Virtue and Vice, our Duties and our Sins,
are the only Configurations that portend Woe or Weal to the World. God bless
his Majesty, whose care and prudence, with his Peoples love and prayers, have
set him above Meteors, yea and Stars themselves, to fear nothing but the Star
Wormwood, I mean that Bitterness, and those Murmurings, that may forfeit the
greatest Blessings of Mankind.

From Andover, this 12th. I think I may say 13th. of December 1664./5. Your
Worships, Most humble, and most obedient Servant.

FINIS.
AN Advertisement OF BOOKS Lately Printed.
ACtions upon the Case for Deeds, by William Shepherd Esquire in Folio.

PHARAMOND, or the History of France, a New Romance, by the Author of Cassandra
and Cleopatra, in Folio.

A Discourse concerning the Precedence of Kings, with a Treatise of
Ambassadors, by James Howell Esquire in Folio.

The Statesmen and Favorites of England, since the Reformation; their Prudence
and Policies, Successes and Miscarriages, Advancements and Falls, by D. Lloyd,
in Octavo.

The Golden-Coast, or a Description of Guinney, in Quarto.

A Description of Tangier, with the adjacent People and Country; with an
Account of the Person and Government of Gayland, Usurper of the Kingdom of Fez,
in Quarto.

The Conduct and Character of Count Nicholas Serini, lately Deceased, Twelves.

The Villain, a Tragedy, by Tho. Porter Esquire Quarto.

The Ungrateful Favorite, a Tragedy, by a Person of Honor, Quarto.

Sold by Samuel Speed, at the Rainbow, near the Inner Temple Gate, in
Fleet Street, 1665.

FINIS.

