Directions to place the Sculptures.
1. The Frontispiece before the Title. 2. The Map of Italy before the Table. 3.
Michael Angelo. Page 17. 4. Titian. p. 50. 5. Paulo Veronese. p. 112. 6. Pietro
de Cortona. p. 117. 7. Raphael Urbin. p. 159.
Licensed,

Roger L'Estrange.
December. 6. 1678.
PICTVRA

The Painters Voyage of ITALY

Roma

W: Lodge (...) et fecit.



THE PAINTERS VOYAGE OF ITALY.

IN WHICH All the famous Paintings of the most eminent Masters are
particularised, as they are preserved in the several Cities of ITALY.

Chiefly relating to Their Altar-pieces, and such other Paintings as are
Ornamental in their Churches.

And Also Many choice Pictures, kept as Jewels, in the Palaces of particular
persons.

Whereunto is added That excellent Collection of Signior SEPTALE, in his Closet
at MILAN.

Illustrated with The Heads of some of the most renowned Painters.

Written Originally in Italian by Giacomo Barri a Venetian Painter. Englished
by W. L. of Lincolus-Inme, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Flesher, at the Angel and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1679.

TO The Right Honorable THOMAS, Lord BELLASIS, Viscount FAVLCONBERG.
My Lord,
WHen I had the honor to attend your Lordship in your Embassy to the States of
Venice, it was my fortune there to meet with a small Piece, entitled Viaggio
Pittoresco d'Italia, the Task being of no very great difficulty, and altogether
agreeable to my own inclination, I have gratified my self; and I hope not
disobliged ingenious Artists in a faithful rendition of it into English; which
I have done the rather because the Book is rarely to be found in Italy, and I
cannot remember I have seen any Original in England but that which is in my own
hands. I have taken courage to prefix your Lordships honorable name to this
Translation to render it acceptable to the world, under the Patronage of an
acurate Judge, and a zealous lover and encourager of the noble Art of Painting.
If it may serve to put your Lordship in mind of the pleasure you received by a
personal view and admiration of those great Masters elaborate Pieces when your
Lordship was abroad; and in any measure testify my desires to serve your
Lordship, it is the greatest Honor and satisfaction can be wished for, or is
attainable by,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most obliged and most obedient Servant W. L.

To the ingenious READERS.
HAving, not many years since, given my self the satisfaction of personally
viewing the most principal Places and Rarities of Rome, and other the beautiful
Cities of Italy; I thought my self obliged to make my Countrymen some account
of my Observations, those especially who are lovers of the Noble Art of
Painting; if not to assure our young Nobility and Gentry that it is worth their
while, and curiosity to Travel; yet at least to inflame their minds, and excite
their industry, to imitate those great Masters whose Employment made their
Lives easy, their Persons Venerable, and their Names Immortal: On these
considerations I had attempted, my self, a Collection of what I had seen, but
for want of opportunities, and admission into several Places of remark, I was
about to have desisted from that Design, which I foresaw was like to be but
very imperfect: At last, lighting upon the ensuing Treatise, I found the work
critically done to my hand; wherein there is a faithful account of the Names
and Performances of most of the greatest Masters, as well Ancient as Modern,
whose curious and elaborate Pieces are at this day the fairest Ornament, and
Pride, o^ all the places of Devotion, Pleasure* and Magnificence throughout all
Italy. The Author Giacomo Barr^ was a Venetian Painter of good esteem, and had
the good hap to please his Countrymen by letting them know in this Book what
Treasures they were Masters of: and I dare hope this my Translation (mean as it
is) has not rendered it altogether unacceptable at home, to those at least who
have any passion for an Art so worthily esteemed by the most Ingenious Spirits
of all Ages. I have added only two things of my own to this work, One is a
view of Signior Septale's Closet in Milan, not inferior to any of the Italian
Princes Collections (inaccessible it seems to our Author;) The other a few
Heads of some of the most renowned Masters. I shall compass the ends of all my
Travels and pains, if my Countrymen, by these my endeavors, may take
encouragement to emulate what they see there so highly valued and admired; and
undoubtedly the English Genius is as capable of arriving at the highest pitch
of Perfection and Glory in This and all other Liberal Sciences, as that of old
Athens, or of modern Rome.

W. L.

ITALIA by Robert Morden at the Atlas in Cornhil London
map of Italy

THE TABLE.
A.
ANcona. Page 27 Asolo. 105
B.
Bolognia. 33 Burano. 91 Bassano. 106 Br^scia. 113
C.
Citta di Castello. 24 Cividall. Conegliano. 100 Coneda. 103 Castello di S.
Salvatore, 101 Castle Franco. 106 Cittadella. 107 Cremona. 114, 154 Corte
Maggiore nel Piacentina. 135 Carpi. 140
F.
Fuori di Roma. 23 Fuligno. 24 Fano. 29 Furli. 29 Faenza. 32 Ferrara. 33
Fiorenza. 115 Finale di Modena. 139
G.
Genoa. 114, 154
I.
Imola. 30 Isola di S. Elena. 92 Isola della Gudiecha. 94 Isola di S. Giorgio.
93
L.
Loretto. 26 Lucca. 155
M.
Macerata. 26 Murano 88 Mazorbo. 90 Montanagna. 109 Modena. 136 Mantua. 141
Milano. 143
N.
Napoli. 159
P.
Perugia. 25 Pesaro. 28 Pordenon. 98 Padua. 108 Parma. 118 Piacenza. 132
Pescia. 157 Piere di Lamari. 158
R.
Roma. 1 Rimini. 30 Ravenna. 31 Reggio. 138
S.
Senegaglia. 31 Seravall. 104 Sirinalta. 113 Sassvoli. 140
T.
Torcello. 91 Treviso. 96
V.
Vrbino. 32 Venetia. 45 Vdine. 99 Villa di Marens. 101 Villa di Fontanelle. 101
Villa di Castello. 104 Villa di Mazen. 105 Vicenza. 110 Verona. 112
The State or Territory OF THE CHURCH, Within the City of Rome.
The Church of S. Peter.
AS you enter at the great Door, the first Chapel on the right hand of the
Crucifix is all painted by the hand of Lanfranco.

Then follows in the same part of the Church the great Altar-piece of the
Martyrdom of S. Sebastian, a singular work of Dominichino.

The Cuppola over this Altar is Mosaic work, and the Design of Pietro da
Cortona.

In like manner follows the Chapel of the Sacrament, where is a Piece of the
same Pietro da Cortona representing the Coronation of our B. Lady. The Cuppola
of this Chapel is also Mosaic, and the Design of the same Author.

Walking under this Chapel, on the front there is a Square of Mutiano.

Following on, in the cross Isle on the right hand there is a Side of one of
the Altars, which is the work of Monsieur Possine, representing the Miracle of
S. Erasomus, a very beautiful piece.

Being gone a little farther, you see the famous little Bark of S. Peter, a
singular good work of Lanfranco.

The Square right over against this is the hand of Camassei, and denotes the
Miracle done by the Apostle S. Peter, when he caused the water to spring up in
the Prison for baptizing withal.

Then follows directly in view the special Picture which demonstrates when S.
Petronilla was laid in the Sepulcher: it is the work of Guercin da Cento.

Turning toward the Chair at the head of the Church, and having passed the
said Chair, you see on your left hand a stately Picture which represents S.
Peter going to the Temple with S. John, and doing the Miracle of curing the
lame: a most superb work of Chivoli.

Advancing a little forward along the cross Isle, and being past the Sacristie,
there is a Picture which denotes the Miracle of S. Gregory holding a bloody
Handkerchief in his hand: a most beautiful work of Andrea Sacchi.

Those Pictures of the four Altars under the Pilasters of the great Cuppola are
by the hand of the same Sacchi.

The Church of S. Martha behind S. Peter's.
Entering this Church at the great Door you see the Picture of S. Vrsilla, and
on the left hand is a Picture of two Or Hermits.
Eremits, the work of Lanfranco.

The Church of S. Peter in Montorio.
Here you will admire the most famous great Altar-piece, and, as I may say, the
unparalled Picture of great Raphael. It signifies the Transfiguration of our
Savior.

The Church of S. Onofrio.
Before you enter this Church, there is a little Lodgment wherein are painted
three Half-moons, by the hand of Dominichino.

Within this Church on the right hand there is a Picture which represents the
Holy House as it was transported into Italy by the Angels, the work of Hannibal
Carache.

The Church of S. Mary in Transtevere.
Upon the Roof of this Church is a Square, wherein you find represented the
Assumption of our B. Lady; a beautiful work of Dominichino.

The Church of S. Francis on the Bank.
Entering at the great Gate, there stands a Picture within a Chapel on the left
hand, which signifies the Lady of Piety, the work of Hannibal Carache.

The Church of S. Bartholomew in the Island.
In this Church there are four Chapels painted by Anthony Carache, one on the
right hand as you enter the great Door, the other three on the left, all very
fair works.

The Church of S. Trinity de ponte Sisto.
That Piece of the Trinity of the great Altar done by Guido Reno is a work
worth great admiration.

The Church of S. Charles de Catenari.
The four Angles of the Cuppola do demonstrate the four Cardinal Virtues, by
the hand of Dominichino.

The Tribunal of this Church is the hand of Lanfranco.

The great Picture is of Pietro da Cortona.

Another Picture of the Pilgrimage of S. Joseph is by Andrea Sacci.

The Church of S. Bridget in Piazza furnete.
You will find in this Church an Altar-piece of our Lady with the Child Jesus
and S. John, by Hannibal Carache.

The Church of S. Petronio Bolognesi near unto the Farnese.
The Piece of the great Altar with our Lady and other Saints is the work of
Dominichino.

The Church of Girolamo della Carita.
At the great Altar you see most rare Pictures by Dominichino, representing the
Communion of the abovenamed Saint.

The Church of S. Catharina de Funari.
Entering at the great Door, the Piece of the first Altar on the right hand,
with a S. Margaret and a Christ over the said Altar, is the work of Hannibal
Carache.

The two Histories on the sides of the great Altar are the works of Frederico
Zucchari.

The Church of S. Paul without the Walls.
In a Chapel near to the great Altar there are two Squares with the Histories
of Moses, and in the Sacristie there are diverse other Squares; all the works of
Lanfranco.

The Church called the Baptism of Constantine near to S. John in the Laterane.
Here you see two great Histories: one represents the Battle of the Emperor
Constantine the Great; the other is the Triumph of the second Battle: both by
the hand of Camassei.

All those Squares around the little Cuppola, as also diverse Boys, are the work
of Andrea Sacchi.

The Church of S. Paul at the Three Fountains.
There is a Table which demonstrates the Crucifixion of S. Peter, a most fair
work, by Guido Reno.

The Church of S. Luke in Campo Vaccino.
The great Altar-piece denotes S. Luke as he is painting the Picture of our
Blessed Lady; the work of So termed amongst the Italians.
divine Raphael.

The Church of S. Lorenzo de Spetiali in Campo Vaccino.
The high Altar with the forenamed Saint is the hand of Pietro da Cortona: and
entering the same Church, the first Picture on your left hand is the work of
Dominichino.

The Church of S. Sebastian above the Pulveriere.
Here is the Piece of the great Altar with the Martyrdom of the said Saint,
done by the hand of Camassei.

The Church of S. Gregory.
In the Chapel of this Saint is a singular good Piece by Hannibal Carache.

The Chapel of S. Andrew adjoining to the foresaid Church of S. Gregory.
As you enter this Church, on your right hand you see a History painted in A
particular manner different from painting in Oil.
fresco, which represents this Saint when he was buffeted; a stupendous work
of Dominichino: on the left hand is, when the said Saint was conducted to his
Martyrdom; a singular work of Guido Reno.

In another little Chapel adjoining to this, you see the little Tribunal,
where are diverse Boys playing upon variety of Instruments.

The Round Church of S. Stephano.
The Picture of the first Chapel as you enter on your left hand with a Madonna
and the Child Jesus, S. Elizabeth, a S. John and a Joseph, is the work of
divine Raphael.

The Church of S. Bibbiana.
Where you may see diverse Pictures concerning the life of this Saint, by Pietro
de Cortona.

The Church of S. Maria Maggiore.
In the Chapel of our B. Lady are diverse Saints, beautiful Pieces, of Guido
Reno: the Cuppola of this Chapel is by the hand of Civoli.

The Picture aloft and near to this Chapel signifies a Madonna, by Guido Reno.
That Square near to the Crucifix represents when Christ raised Lazarus from the
dead; it is the work of Mutiano.

The Church of Madonna della Victoria.
Entering the great Door, the second Chapel on the right hand is all painted
with the History of S. Francis, by the hand of Dominichino.

There is another Table of the Trinity, by Guercin da Cento.

The Church of S. Bernard, having passed the Four Fountains.
The great Altar-piece is the hand of Andrea Sacchi.

In the same Church there is a Picture of S. Bernard, by Camassei.

The Church of the Fathers Capuchines.
As you enter at the great Door, the first Altar on the right hand,
representing S. Michael the Archangel, is a rare work of Guido Reno: and on
the left hand is demonstrated the Conversion of S. Paul; a very fair Piece of
Pietro da Cortona.

A little onward you see the Picture of the Lady of Piety, by the hand of
Camassei.

Then follows a Picture on which is painted the Nativity of our Savior, by the
hand of Lanfranco.

After that is another Picture of the B. Virgin, and an holy Bishop, by Andrea
Sacchi.

Afterward is the high Altar-piece with the Conception of the B. Virgin, the
work of Lanfranco.

Let us turn off to the other part of the Church, and we shall see the Picture
which demonstrates St. Anthony of Padua raising a man from the dead. An
excellent work of Andrea Sacchi.

The Church of S. Isodoro.
The great Altar-piece with this Saint praying, is the work of Andrea Sacchi.

The Church of S. Joseph.
The great Altar-piece represents a Dream of this Saint, by the hand of Andrea
Sacchi.

And at your entrance, you distinctly see a piece done by the hand of Lanfranco.

The Church of St. Trinity on the Mount.
Here are seen two Chapells, one demonstrates when our Savior was taken from
the Cross; and the other the Assumption of the B. Virgin, both mavelous works
of Daniel da Voltera.

The Church of Madonna del Popolo.
In the Chapel of the Chigi are several figures of divine Raphaell.

And in the Chapel on the right hand of the great Altar is seen a Piece of the
Assumption of the B. Virgin, and above this are several histories, to be
reckoned amongst the best works of Hanniball Carache.

The Church of S. Lorenzo in Luccina.
Here is seen a very fair Piece of our Savior upon the Cross, by the hand of
Guido Reno.

The Church of S. Maria Inviolata.
The Tribunal demonstrates the Assumption of the B. Virgin, an excellent
piece, by Camassei.

The Church of S. Romualdo.
The Piece of the High-Altar with this Saint, is a most stately work of Andrea
Sacchi.

The Church of S. Sylvester upon Monte Cavallo.
Being entered the great Door, you may observe in the second Chapel on your
left hand, two Freezes of Boys in Black and white.
Chiaro Scuro, by Polidoro.

Then follows the Chapel on the right hand of the great Altar, and there are
on the four Angles of the little Cuppola, four Histories of the Old Testament.

The First is Queen Esther falling before the King her Husband.

The Second, as they are discoursing together.

The Third is King David, playing on the Harp, before the Ark.

The Fourth is Judith, when she shows the Head of Holofernes, all by the hand
of Dominichino.

The Palace on Monte Cavallo.
That Chapel where the Pope says Mass is all excellently painted, by Guido
Reno.

The Church of Jesus.
Entering the great door, on your left hand, you may see many Saints, done by
Guiacome Bassano.

The high Altar-piece demonstrates the Presentation of the B. Virgin at the
Temple, by the hand of Mutiano.

The Church of S. Andrew in the Valley.
The Tribunal, with the four Angles are marvellously well done, by Dominichino.

The Cuppola also is a stately work of Lanfranco.

The Picture of the Blessed Caetano, is by the hand of Camassei.

And that of the Blessed Andrea Avelino, is the hand of Lanfranco.

The Church of S. Lorenzo in D^maso.
Here is seen the high Altar-piece, being the work of Frederico Zurthari.

The Chapel on the right hand of the great Altar is the work of Pietro da
Cartona.

The Spanish Church of S. Giacomo.
The Chapel of S. Diego is all painted by Albano. The design of Carache.

The French Church of S. Lewis.
Entering at the great door, the second Chapel an the right hand is all
excellently painted, by Dominichino, with the History of the life of S.
Cecilia. Only excepting the Altar-piece which is a copy after Raphael, copied
by Guido Reno from the Original, which they preserve at Bolognia.

The great Altar-piece is the work of Giacomo Bassano, representing the
Assumption of the B. Virgin.

The Church of the Madonna del Anima.
The Altar-piece of one of the Chapells, on the right hand as you enter, is a
Madonna, and the work of Julio Romano.

The Church of the Madonna della Pace.
Entering at the great door, there are over the first Chapel on your right
hand, diverse Prophets and Sibylls, and are some of the choicest things that
ever Raphael painted.

The great Tribunal is all painted by Albano.

The Church of S. Augustino.
As you enter at the great door, you may see on your left hand, over a
Pilaster, a Prophet and two Boys, an admirable work of Raphael.

In the Front of the Chapel of S. Tomaso da Villa nova, is to be seen a Picture
of Guercin da Cento.

The Chapel on the right hand of the great Altar in the corner of the Church,
is all singularly well painted by Lanfranco.

The Church of Salvatore in Lauro.
The Picture of the Nativity of our Savior is a fair work of Pietro da Cortona.

There is another Picture of the B. Virgin, with another Saint below; by Albano.

The Florentine Church of S. John.
Here you will admire a most beautiful Chapel, with the History of the Passion
of our Savior, by Lanfranco.

The new Church of the Fathers of S. Philippo Neri.
The Roof of the Church, and the Cuppola, the four Angles, as also the
Tribunal, are stately works of Pietro da Cortona.

You may also plainly see two Pieces of Barocci, one represents the
Presentation of our B. Lady, the other the Visitation of S. Elizabeth.

The Altar-piece on the Chapel of S. Philip is by the hand of Guido Reno.

And behind the same Altar is another painting, by the hand of Guercin da Centa.

S. Lorenzo alla Sobara, being the Church of the Curtezans.
The great Altar-piece is done by Camassei.

MICHAEL ANGILO
Not. Ao 147^

portrait of Michaelangelo

S. Lucia in celsis near to S. Maria Maggiore.
There is a Square by Lanfranco, and another by Camassei of S. John
Communicating the B. Lady.

The Nunns Church near to S. Mary in Trastevere.
The great Altar-piece here is the work o^ Camassei.

The Palace of the Vatican.
In the great Hall here, called the Sala Reggia, you see a Battle, with other
large Histories, most beautiful works of Frederico and Tadeo Zuccharo.

After you have seen the aforesaid Hall, you enter into S. Paul's Chapel,
which is all painted by Michael Angelo Bonarota; and here you will admire that
famous painting of the Universal Judgment.

Let us walk above in the second Gallery, which is all painted by Raphael, with
the Histories of the Old, and several of the New Testament; The Rabeschi or the
Ornaments are painted by John of Vdine, Raphael's Scholar; but the design of
Raphael.

Being afterward come within the Chambers, the first Chamber, all beneath the
Cornice, is painted with the Differing from other manners of Painting*
Cortoni of Raphael.

The first History as you enter on your left hand signifies when Constantine
the great saw the Holy Cross in the Sky, when he was making an Oration to his
Soldiers: Painted by Giulio Romano, a famous Scholar to the abovesaid Raphael.

Then follows the great Battle of Constantine; rarely Painted by the said
Giulio.

Then continues the third Picture, which represents how Pope S. Silvester
Baptized the aforesaid Emperor.

The fourth being a Chimney-piece, demonstrates the Baptism of Fattor Bono, by
the hand of Raphael Bergo, a Scholar also of the above named Raphael.

Now follows the second Chamber, the which is all Painted by Raphael's own
hand, excepting those Histories in Chiaro Scuro, A term of art for Black amd
White.
which are Painted by his Scholars.

The first History over the door where you enter, represents the Pope hearing
of Mass, and a Miracle succeeds.

The third History is when Attila coming with his Army to besiege Rome, against
the Pope, there appeared in the Sky S. Peter, and S. Paul.

The fourth demonstrates S. Peter in Prison.

After this there are several Histories of the Old Testament painted on the
Roof.

Then follows the third Chamber, and over the door where you enter, you see
represented the Ancient School of Athens.

Over against this is an History denoting a disputation concerning the Holy
Sacrament.

Over a Window is represented Mount Parnassus.

A little below, on the sides of the Windows, is a representation of the Pope
and the Emperor giving out the Laws.

There are also diverse significations painted on the Roof.

The fourth and last great Chamber is all rarely painted by the same Raphael,
only excepting the Roof, which is painted by Pietro Perugino, Raphael's Master.

The four Histories about this Room are these;

First, That over the door where you enter represents the Pope in a Ship.

The Second signifies the Burning of the City of Rome.

The Third is when the Pope Crowned the Emperor Charles the Great.

And in the Fourth are many Bishops.

The Palace of the Chigi in the street of Lungara.
In a Ground-room of this Palace you see the Study of Painting, and in a little
Garden-room is the famous Galatea; the works of great Raphael.

The Garden of the Duke Atlanti, as you go to Lungara.
Here you will find many Pieces, both by Raphael and Giulio Romano.

The Palace of Farnese.
Here you see a Gallery all painted in Fresco, by the most excellent hand of
Hanniball Carache.

In the Wardrobe of the said Palace, there are preserved a great many rare
Pictures, by diverse Masters, which I forbear to nominate one by one, for
brevity sake.

Within the Garden of the Palace of Chiavica dal Buffolo, you see very fair
works of Polidoro and Frederico Zuccharo.

At the Common Storehouse over against S. Eustachio, you see a House painted
by Frederico Zuccharo.

Upon the Mount Cittorio.
Here is a Front of a House, by the hand of Polidoro.

The Palace of the Verospi.
Here is a Chamber painted by Lanfranco, and a Gallery by Albano.

The Palace of the Mancini on Monte Cavallo.
The Gallery of this Palace is the work of Camassei.

You also see on this Palace that beautiful Aurora; by Guido Reno.

The Garden of the Mattei in Campo Vaccino.
Here is a little Chamber with several naked Women and other ornaments; by the
hand of Raphael.

The Palace of Pamphylio in Piazzo Navona.
Here you see a Gallery all painted by the hand of Pietro da Cortona.

And in the Hall is a Freeze, by Camassei.

The Front of the middle part of the Palace of the Duke d'Acqua Sparta.
This being called La Marchesa d'Oro, is all painted with various resemblances,
by the hand of Polidoro.

Coming from the Bridge of S. Angelo, and entering the Street De Coronari.
Here is a Front of a House in Being the usual manner of Polidoro's painting.
Chiaro Scuro, the work of Polidoro.

Near to the Chiavica of S. Lucia.
You see here upon a House diverse Histories in Chiaro Scuro, by Polidoro.

The Palace of Barbarini at the Four Fountains.
Here you see the great and famous Hall, painted by Pietro da Cortona, being
some of the choicest of his works.

Within one of the Chambers there is painted on the Roof, the Divine Wisdom. A
choice work of Andrea Sacchi.

On the side of another Chamber is plainly represented the Creation of Angels,
by Camassei.

Then follows another of Camassei, with the History of the Nine Muses on Mount
Parnassus.

Just without the Porto di Castello there is a little House painted by Polidoro.

The State or Territory OF THE CHURCH, Without the City of Rome.
Grotta Ferrata, being a Monastery of Benedictines, two miles distant from
Frescati.
THe famous works that you will find in the above mentioned Monastery, are
worth any ones coming a long journey to see, for they are the choicest things
that ever were painted. By the studious hand of Dominichino.

The City of Fuligno.
In the Nuns Church, called Le Countess.
HEre you will admire an extraordinary fair Picture of our Blessed Lady upon
the Clouds, and diverse Saints below, by the hand of divine Raphael. No Curious
person (without a dissatisfaction to himself) passes through this City without
a sight of this Picture.

The City of Castello.
In the Church of S. Dominico.
THere is to be admired a Picture of the Espousal of the Blessed Virgin with S.
Joseph; there needs no other commendation, than that it is the hand of Divine
Raphael.

The City of Perugia.
The Domo, or Great Church.
ON the right hand of the great Altar there is a Picture of the taking our
Savior from the Cross. The work of Frederico Barocci.

The new Church of S. Philippo Neri.
There is seen a most noble square, of Guido Reno.

The Church of S. Francis.
Here you will find the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin with the Apostles, by
the hand of incomparable Raphael.

S. Severo being the Church of the Fathers Camaldolesi.
Here is an admirable Piece of Christ on high, above the Clouds, and below
there are diverse Monks kneeling on the Ground; the work of Raphael.

The Church of the Nunns of Monte Lucce.
Where there are diverse fair Pieces of the aforesaid Raphael, and of Giulio
Romano.

The City of Macerata.
The Church of the Fathers Capuchines.
THe great Altar-piece represents Paradise, a truly divine work of Barocci; and
deserves to be seen by every one.

The holy House at Loretto.
The Church of the B. Virgin.
IN this Church you meet with a Picture of the Nativity of the B. Virgin, an
admirable work of Hanniball Carache.

And another in the far end of the Church, which demonstrates an Annunciation;
a singular work of Barocci.

After this is the Apothecaries Shop belonging to the holy House, where the
Pots and Vessels are all painted by the most excellent hand of Raphael.

The City of Ancona.
The Church of S. Dominico.
IN this Church you will find an admirable Picture, by the hand of great Titian.

The Church of the Fathers Franciscans Zoccolanti.
Here is seen another Picture of the above named Titian. None that are Curious
should deceive themselves so much, as to pass by this City and neglect a sight
of this Piece.

The City of Pesaro.
The Domo.
THere is a great Piece toward the middle of the Church, on the right hand as
you enter, which is a most beautiful work of Guido Reno.

The Church of the Fathers Franciscans.
Here is a little S. Michael, by the hand of Barocci.

The Confraternity of S. Andrew.
Here you will see a Picture with the History of that Saint when he came (being
called by our Redeemer) to the Apostleship; the work of the aforesaid Barocci.

The Church of the Fraternity of S. Anthony.
Here you will admire a most beautiful Piece, by Paulo Veronese.

The City of Fano.
The New Church.
HEre are seen several small Pictures, done by Guido Reno.

The City of Furli.
S. Girolamo, the Church of the Fathers Zoccolanti.
IN the Chapel of the Conception of the B. Virgin, you may observe a
representation of this Mystery, with Angels round about, by Guido Reno.

The Church of Madonna del Popolo.
There is a Picture, done by Guercin da Cento.

The New Church of S. Philippo Neri.
Where is seen a Picture of the Annunciation of the B. Virgin, by the hand of
Guercin da Cento.

The Church of the Fathers Capuchins.
The Piece at the great Altar is the work of Guercin da Cento.

The City of Imola.
The Church of S. Dominico.
AT the farther end of the Quire you will see a Picture with the History of S.
Vrsula, by the hand of Ludovico Caracci.

The City of Rimini.
The Church of S. Vitale.
HEre is seen a Picture with the Martyrdom of this Saint, by Paulo Veronese.

The Church of the Oratory of S. Girolamo.
Here is the Picture of this Saint, the work of Guercin da Cento.

The City of Senegalia.
IN this City is a little Church joining to the Piazza, where you may see a
Picture which represents Christ as he was carried to his Burial, by the hand of
Barocci.

The City of Ravenna.
The Domo.
IN the Chapel of Cardinal Aldrobandini is an admirable Picture, which
demonstrates when it rained Manna. And at the same time you ^ee an half Figure
of our Redeemer compassed about with Angels; it is the work of Guido Reno.

The Church of S. Vitale.
There is a Picture of the Martyrdom of this Saint, by Barocci.

The City of Faenza.
The Church of the Fathers Capuchines.
HEre is a large Piece of our B. Virgin, with the Child Jesus, St. Francis, and
S. Christina; by the hand of Guido Reno.

The City of Vrbino.
The Domo.
HEre are diverse Singular good works of Barocci.

The City of Ferrara.
The Church of S. Francesca Romana.
AT the high Altar is a most beautiful Piece, by Ludovico Caracci.

And in a Friery joining to this Church is a History, by the same Ludovico.

The City of Bolognia.
The Church of S. John on the Mount.
I Should do wrong if I did not instruct you where to find that divine Picture
of S. Cecilia, by the hand of eminent Raphael: it is preserved in this Church
as a precious Treasure of so great a Master: all the Virtuosi which travel by
the way of Bolognia cannot depart this City without a sight of such a
mavelous Piece.

There is likewise another Picture with the History of the most holy S.
Rosario, a rare work of Dominichino.

The Church of S. Petronio.
In which is seen a famous Picture of S. Rocco, by the hand of Parmegianino.

The Church of the Nunns of S. Margaret.
Here is seen a Picture of the B. Virgin, and Christ a Child, as also S.
Margaret, with other figures: by the hand of Parmegianino.

The Church of the Monks of S. Michael in Bosco.
In the Cloister of this Church you will admire diverse great Histories, which
represent the works of S. Benedetto; they are divided into partitions, in
Chiaro Scuro, with other pretty conceited ornaments by the hand of the most
Frequently so called amongst the Italians.
excellent Carache.

There is also another large and beautiful History by the hand of Guido Reno.

The Church of Certosa.
In this Church is seen a Picture which demonstrates S. John Baptist preaching,
with two other Histories of the Passion of Christ, by Ludovico Caracci.

There is also another famous Picture of the Communion of S. Girolamo, one of
the best pieces that ever was painted, by the Excellent Carache.

Without the Gate of the great Street in the Church of the Scalsi, you may see
a Picture, by Ludovico Caracci.

The Church of S. Dominico.
Here you will admire a Picture of S. Giacinto, and over against it is another
of S. Raimondo, and in the Chapel of the Martyrdom of S. Andrew there is the
figure of Charity, S. Francis, and S. Dominico, with other things, by the hand
of Carache.

You also see on the front over the Tomb in the Chapel of this Saint, a Piece
which demonstrates the said Saint as he Ascends with Christ into Heaven. There
is also the B. Virgin and a glory of Angels; by the hand of Guido Reno.

Behind the Pulpit you may see a Picture of the Innocents, by Guido Reno.

The Church of S. Francis.
Here is an admirable Piece of the Assumption of the B. Virgin and the
Apostles, rarely done, by Hannibal Carache.

There is also another Picture with the Conversion of S. Paul, by the hand of
Lodovico Caracci.

S. George, being the Church of the Fathers Serviti.
Where is seen a Picture of the B. Virgin and Christ a Child, and other two
Saints besides them, painted by Hannibal Carache.

There is also another rare Piece of the Baptism of Christ, by the hand of
Albano.

The Church of S. Gregory.
In this Church is seen a Picture of S. John Baptist Baptizing of Christ, by
the hand of Ludovico Caracci.

And as you enter on your left hand you see a Picture, by Guercin da Cento.

The Church of S. Nicolo in the Street of S. Felice.
In which is a Picture to be reckoned amongst the Choicest works of Hannibal
Carache.

The little Church of S. Bartolomeo di Reno.
Where is a Chapel with a Picture, wholly painted by Augustino Caracci.

The Church of S. Salvatore.
In this Church you meet with a Picture of the Assumption of the B. Virgin and
the Apostles, by the hand of Augustine Caracci.

And that Square of our Savior in the farther end of the Quire, is by the hand
of Guido Reno.

The Church of S. Bernard near the Street of Castiglione.
As you enter, on your left hand, in the first Chapel there is a Picture by
Ludovico Caracci.

On the left hand of the great Altar is a Square above upon the Wall, by the
hand of Guido Reno.

The Church of the Augustine Friars, called S. Giacomo.
Here is the Picture of S. Rocco, by Ludovico Caracci.

The little Church of S. Rocco, called the Pratello.
Where is seen a Picture of this Saint, by Lodovico Caracci.

S. Paul, being the Church of the Fathers Teatini.
The Picture at the second Chapel as you enter on the right hand, is by
Lodovico.

The Sagrestie of the Domo.
Where is also a Square of the aforesaid Lodovico.

The Church of the Nunns of S. John Baptist.
On Your left hand as you enter, the Picture at the second Chapel, as also the
great Altar-piece are the works of the same Lodovico.

The Church of the Nuns of Corpo di Christo.
On each side of the great Door you will see a Picture, of the aforesaid
Lodovico.

The Church of S. Ursula.
The Piece at the great Altar represents the Martyrdom of this Saint; there is
another on the right hand of this Altar, both by the hand of Lodovico.

The Church of the Nunns of S. Christina.
The great Altar-piece of this Church, is by the same Lodovico.

The Church of the Nunns Convertite.
Here is an admirable Piece on the right hand of the great Altar, rarely done
by Lodovico.

The Church of the Mendicanti.
Here they preserve a Picture of S. Matthew as he was called by Christ to the
Apostleship, by the hand of Hannibal Carache.

After this is the great Altar-piece, and a singular good work of Noble Guido
Reno.

The Church of S. Bartholomew in Piazza Ravegnana.
Here is a Picture of S. Charles, by Lodovico Carache. And another of the
Annunciation, by the hand of Albano.

S. Martin, being the Church of the Fathers Carmelites.
On the left side of the great Chapel you may observe the Picture of S.
Girolamo, by the hand of Albano.

The Parochial Church of S. Tomaso, in the great street.
In this Church you see a Christ aloft, and on the Ground below is S. Andrew,
and S. Francis, by the hand of Guido Reno.

The Church of the Fathers Capuchines.
In this you see a Divine Picture with Christ upon the Cross, with the B.
Virgin, S. John, and a Magdalen, all embracing the Cross, a singular work of
Guido Reno.

The Church of the Nunns of S. Agnes.
The great Altar piece is the work of Dominichino.

The Church of S. Sebastian behind the Gabella.
In This Church you find a Piece done by Albano.

S. Columbano.
Here is to be seen a Picture of S. Peter, in Fresco, by the hand of Albano.

Madonna di G^^iera, being the Church of the Fathers of the Order of S.
Philippo Neri.
Here are to be admired several beautiful works of Albano.

The Church of Madonna di Reggio.
Over against our most holy Lady, there is seen a Picture, done by Guercin da
Cento.

S. Antonio of the College of Mont-Alto.
Here is a Picture on the right hand of the great Chapel, done by Guercin da
Cento.

The Piece at the great Altar is the work of Lodovico Carache.

The Houses of Particular Persons.
The House of the Favi.
IN this House is seen diverse Freezes with the History of Aeneas out of Virgil,
by the abovenamed Lodovico.

There are also diverse works of Albano.

The House of the Magnani, near to S. Giacomo Maggiore.
Here is to be seen a large Freeze, the which represents the Acts of Romulus
and Remus, the Frames which contain them are painted with diversity of Garlands
and wreaths of Flowers in Chiaro Scuro; the work is of Excellent Carache.

And in a Room below there is a Chimneypiece of an Apollo, in Fresco, with
other Figures, by Lodovico Carache.

The House of S. Pieri, in the great Street.
In this House we see diverse works of Augustino, and Lodovico Carache, and of
Guercino, all in Fresco.

Upon the Front of the public Palace of the Piazza.
Here are three beautiful Figures of naked Women, by the hand of Guido Reno, in
Fresco.

Underneath that Portico which is over against S. Maria Maggiore.
Here you see a History which represents when Pilat washed his hands at the
presence of Christ, by Lodovico Carache, in Fresco.

The State or Territory OF VENICE.
The City of Venice.
The Palace of S. Mark.
AS you walk above to the College Chamber, you see four Squares in the four
corners.

In one of these is represented Vulcan and Cyclops as they are working at the
Anvil.

In another is Mercury with the three Graces.

In the third is Pallas compelling Mars to keep the Peace, with the Picture of
Plenty.

In the fourth is Ariana Crowned by Venus, with a Crown of Stars. As also a
Bacchus with other Figures.

Upon the Roof is a Square of S. Luke the Evangelist, and a Represented by a
Crowned Virgin holding a Scepter in one hand, and a pair of Scales in the other.
Venetia conferring together, as also a Picture of Justice, and a Or Duke of
Venice.
Doge.

There are likewise diverse little Histories in Chiaro Scuro, with little Boys,
painted by the hand of Tintoret, very fair works.

Let us enter another Chamber, and we shall find on our right hand, a great
Square of Titian, which represents the Picture of Faith upon the Clouds, with
three little Ange's, and below is S. Mark, and an armed Doge kneeling.

All the Roof is to be reckoned amongst the masterpieces of Tintoret.

After this Chamber you go into that of the College, and in the Antichamber
you see upon the Roof a most beautiful Square of Paulo Veronese, in some
compartements it is Azured in Chiaro Scuro; where are other Figures of the same
Author.

Then follows the Royal Chamber of the College, where you will admire upon the
Roof the Represented by flinging Thunderbolts from Heaven.
Thundering of Jupiter, by the most noble hand of Paulo Veronese.

The Square which is in Front, is of the same Paulo, and all the other about
are of Tintoret.

We go out of the College and enter into the Chamber of the Pregadi, where will
be admired the great Square which is above the Tribunal, with the Dead
Redeemer upheld by Angels, with many Saints, and other Figures And two Figures
in Chiaro Scuro, about the entrance at the great Door.

On the left hand is found a Figure in Chiaro Scuro, which represents Peace.

And there is near to that a Square of the Blessed Virgin in the Sky. S. Mark,
S. Peter, and S. Lewis, and a Doge kneeling.

And that great Square on the middle of the Roof with a Venetia upon the
Clouds, compassed about with a multitude of Gods, and other Figures, is the
work of furious Tintoret.

After this we go into the Chapel behind the College-Chamber, and before your
entrance you see over the Door, Christ risen from the dead, by the aforesaid
Tintoret.

And within this Chapel you see a Christ in Emaus at Table with the two
Disciples; this is the work of great Titian.

Let us enter into the Chambers of the Council of Ten, and we shall see in the
first of them, on the middle of the Roof, a great Oval of naked Figures; some
of the fairest works, done by Paulo Veronese.

Upon the same Roof you see several Vani (or Compartments) in one of which you
see a Juno pouring from Heaven great quantities of Jewels and Crowns, and below
stands a Venetia, in a posture receiving those gifts.

In another Square is to be admired a beautiful Juno, holding her hands on her
breast, together with an old Man holding his right arm under his chin, both
which are the works of Paulo.

There are also four Figures around the middle Ovall, in Chiaro Scuro, three of
these are done by Paulo.

After this first great Chamber, you enter into a lesser, where in the middle
compartment is a most beautiful Square, with six Histories, every one painted
in Chiaro Scuro, by Paulo Veronese. Rare things.

In the uppermost Chamber of the said Council you see upon the Roof, several
fair works, by Paulo.

Afterward you go into another Chamber, the Roof of which is all painted by
Tintoret.

And in this same Chamber, over the Tribunal is a Madonna with Christ, and an
Angel, by the hand of Raphael.

In this Chamber over a Door, you see a Madonna with the Child, S. Magdalen, S.
John Baptist, S. Catherine, and another Figure kneeling, the work of old Palma.

The Chamber of the Grand Council.
Here every one is amazed to see the great Square which represents Paradise; a
large Square, and by the hand of Tintoret.

Over against this great work, on the other side of the Chamber, is an History
of the Venetians warring against the Genoese, by Paulo Veronese.

The Roof is divided into three Orders.

In the Order of S. Giorgio Maggiore, the first Square toward the Throne is
the work of Paulo Veronese, the third and the fourth are by Tintoret.

In the second Order, on the right side of the Throne, are in like manner works
of Paulo, and Tintoret.

In the third Order there is a large Square, a mighty work of furious Tintoret.

The great ovall toward the Throne, is a noble work of Paulo Veronese.

That Chamber called the Sala del Scrutinio near to that of the Grand Council.
In this Chamber is to be seen a great Square of a Battle, by Tintoret. It is
the first Picture on the right hand of the Tribunal, near unto the Door, as
you go to the Chamber of the Grand Council.

The Magistrato delle Biade.
All the Roof here is painted by Paulo Veronese.

In this Magistracy there are Three Chambers, in one of which you see a Square
of the Resurrection of Christ, by Tintoret.

The little Church of S. Nicholas in the Palace of S. Mark.
In this little Church there are the Four Evangelists, on each side the Altar
two. And at a distance in a Half Moon is the Madonna with the Child Jesus, S.
Nicholas, and a Doge, the works of Titian.

Over the Door there is another Half Moon, with a S. Mark sitting upon a Lion;
rarely well done by Titian.

Over a Door of the Staircase, by which the Doge goes into the College, you
may observe a S. Christopher with the Child Jesus on his shoulders, a fair work
of Titian.

Here you may observe upon the Roof, a Lady with a little Boy in her hand; by
Titian.

Let us enter the Library, and on the left hand we shall see seven
Philosophers; the two first, as also the fourth, the fifth, and the sixth are
done by Tintoret. The seventh with a Globe in his hand, is by Sciavone.

On that side toward S. Mark's Steeple, there are four other Philosophers, by
Tintoret.

On that side toward the Piazza, there are seven Philosophers. The second is
by Sciavone, and the third laying his hand upon his breast, is by Paulo
Veronese.

Afterward upon the Roof there are three Rounds by Paulo Veronese, and other
three by Sciavone.

TITIANO
Not Ano 1480

portrait of Titian

After these, in a Chamber called the Procuratie, there are great quantities of
Or Pictures by the life.
Ritrati, by Tintoret.

The Magistrato delle Legne.
Upon the Roof you see a Square by Paulo Veronese.

And over the Tribunal you see five Retratti of Senators, by Tintoret.

The Church of S. Giminiano Preti.
That Picture on your left hand as you enter this Church at the great Door,
with a S. Catherine, and the Angel which Annunciates her Martyrdom, is by
Tintoret.

The Portalls of the Organ are by Paulo Veronese. On the outside of which are
two holy Bishops, and within is a S. John Baptist, and S. Menna Cavaliere.

S. Gallo Abbazia.
There is a Square of our Savior in the middle, and two Saints, by the hand of
Tintoret.

The Church of S. Moise Preti.
In the Chapel of the Most Holy, there is on the right hand, a Christ washing
the Feet of the Apostles, by Tintoret.

In the Chapel on the left hand near the Sacristie, the Piece at the Altar is
a Madonna with her Son; by the hand of Tintoret.

The Church of Santa Maria Gibenigo.
Here you see a Picture of our Savior in the Sky, accompanied with Angels, and
below is a S. Justina, and a S. Francisco di Paula; by Tintoret.

There is afterward the Organ painted by the same Tintoret.

On the outside of the Portall you see the Conversion of S. Paul; and within
there are the four Evangelists; and under the Roof, going out of the great
Door, there is a Madonna with her Son; by the same Author.

And upon a front of a House near to the house of the Pisani, and the Palace of
the Flangini, in S. Maria Gibenigo, there are painted by the hand of Giorgone,
many Freezes in Chiaro Scuro, in Yellow, Red, and Green, with rare fancies of
Boys, in the middle of which are four Half-figures, viz. A Bacchus, a Venus, a
Mars, and a Mercury, colored after the Which was not to paint in above two or
three colors.
usual manner of the Author.

S. Mauritio.
Here is a Palace of the Family of the Soranfa all painted by Paulo Veronese,
with four Histories of the Romans, adorned with many Boys with Garlands, all in
Chiaro Scuro, and below are two Figures finished in Bronzo.

The Church of S. Samuel.
Here you will admire a great Picture of our Lord, the Blessed Virgin, and a
St. John Baptist, by the hand of Tintoret.

The first Cloister of the Convent of S. Stephano. Augustine Friars.
In this Cloister there are twelve Histories which represent part of the Old,
and part of the New Testament: all singular work of Pordenon.

The first is, Christ discoursing with the Samaritan Woman.

The second is, The Judgment of Solomon, concerning the dead Child.

The third is, The Adultress brought before our Savior.

The fourth is, David cutting off Goliah's head.

The fifth is, Our Savior put into the Tomb.

The sixth is, The Sacrifice of Abraham.

The seventh is, S. Paul Converted at the voice of Christ.

The eighth is, Noah being Drunk, is found naked by his Sons.

The ninth is, The Martyrdom of S. Stephen.

The tenth is, The Murdering of Abel.

The eleventh is, Our Savior as he appeared to Magdalen after his Resurrection.

The twelfth is, Adam and Eve scourged by the Angel out of the Terrestial
Paradise.

Above the aforesaid Histories there is the Angel Annunciating Mary; and on
every side there are diverse Saints, with their corresponding significations.

The Church of S. Benedette Preti.
The Portals of the Organ are painted by Tintoret, on the outside of them you
may see Christ at the Well with the Samaritan Woman; and within is the
Annunciation.

The School of S. Girolamo, near to the Church of S. Fantino.
Look down upon a Bench, and you will see a Square of Tintoret's, with the
Miracle of S. Girolamo.

You also see four Squares of Paulo Veronese. One is the coming of the Wise
men. Another is the Disputation with the Doctors. The third is the Assumption
of the B. Virgin. And a fourth follows.

There is above, a most beautiful Picture of the B. Virgin, and S. Girolamo, by
the hand of Tintoret.

The Church of S. Luke Preti.
The high Altar-piece represents the B. Virgin in the Sky with our Savior, and
Angels, and below on the Ground S. Luke sitting upon the Bull; they are
precious works of Paulo Veronese.

The Church of S. Salvatore.
There the High Altar-piece, of the Transfiguration of Christ, by the hand of
great Titian, is a singular work.

And in the Chapel on the right hand of the great Altar, you see Christ in
Emaus, with the two Disciples, by old Palma.

The Picture of the Annunciation by Titian, a most fair work.

Fontico de Todeschi.
On the Front over the Canalle there are many Figures painted by Giorgone.

That Front toward the Land is by Titian. Stately Pieces.

Afterward in the German Merchants Diningroom there are many beautiful
Histories, by Paulo Veronese.

There is also a little work of Tintoret: where you see a Cynthia in the Sky,
followed by the Hours.

The Church of S. Guliano Preti.
In this Church you see a Supper of Christ with the Apostles, by Paulo Veronese.

As also a Dead Christ in the Sky upheld by Angels, and below on the Ground is
S. Mark, S. James, and S. Girolamo, the work of the abovesaid Paulo.

The Church of S. Paul.
Entering at the great Door, that Square which is in the corner of the Church,
with the Supper of our Savior with his Disciples, is a singular good work of
Tintoret.

In the field, or place before S. Paul's, you plainly see upon the Front of the
House of Soranzo several Figures of Giorgone, most beautiful things.

In this same Parish of S. Paul you see the Palace of the Zane, all painted by
Andrea Schiavone, with many Fables and Histories, the which look very
gloriously over the Grand Canalle.

The Church of S. Apollinare.
Here you see the Picture with the five Coronati, by Schiavone.

The Church of S. Silvestre.
As you enter at the great Door, you see on your left hand the famous Visit of
the Wise men, by Paulo Veronese.

You also plainly see a Square with our Savior in the Garden, by Tintoret.

There is another rare Picture of S. John Baptizing Christ, by Tintoret.

The Church of S. John di Rialto.
The great Altar-piece is the work of great Titian, signifying this same Saint
giving Alms to the Poor.

And in the Chapel on the left hand of the said Altar, is a work of Pordenon,
with the Saints Catherine, Sebastian, and S. Rocco, with a little Angel.

The Cuppola is all painted by the same Pordenon, in Fresco, and in the Angles
of the Cuppola there are the Four Evangelists, by the same hand.

Behind the great Altar, on the outside of the Church, upon the Wall, you see
this Saint giving Alms to the Poor; Rarely well done by Pordenon.

The Church of S. Augustino Preti.
Here is placed a Square over a side door of the Church, of our Lord shown unto
the People by Pilate; by Paris Bordone.

The Church of S. Stin Preti.
That Picture with the Assumption of the Blessed Mary, is the hand of Tintoret.

The School of S. John the Evangelist.
The Roof of the Albergo is to be admired; by the hand of great Titian.

In the middle part you see the holy Evangelist contemplating upon Heaven, with
other little Angels, and in four compartiments there are the four Symbols of
the Evangelists, with several little Angels heads in diverse other compartiments.

The Church called the Frari de padri Conventuali.
That Picture of the Conception of the B. Virgin, is a mavelous fair work of
Titian.

In the great Chapel there is the great and famous Picture of Titian, where is
represented Mary ascending into Heaven with the Eternal Father above, and below
are the Apostles in admiration.

The School of S. Francisco pure a Frari.
The Roof is all painted by Pordenon, where are diverse Saints; singular works.

The Church of S. Rocco.
Entering this Church, on the left hand, there is a great Square, with S. Martin
on Horseback, dividing his Cloak, with many other Figures; the work of Pordenon.

An the other side of the Church, right over against this, there is another
great Square representing Christ curing one sick of the Palsy; a work worthy
of Tintoret.

Afterward is the great Chapel, all painted by Tintoret, excepting the
Cuppola, and the four Evangelists, which are of Pordenon; both one and the
other are mavelous works.

In a Chapel on the left hand above the Altar, there is a Square with our
Savior carrying the Cross, by the hand of Titian.

The Organ is painted both within and without by Tintoret.

The School of S. Rocco.
Now here it is that I know not where to begin, because of the quantity of
Squares, where are seen infinite works of Tintoret.

In the first Ground Room, there are six great Squares.

The first on the left hand, there is an Angel which Annunciates Mary.

The second is the Visitation of the Three wise men.

The third is Mary going into Egypt.

The fourth is the Slaughter of the Innocents.

In the fifth is the Conception of our Lord.

In the sixth is Mary ascending into Heaven.

Over the first Stairs, you see an Annunciation, by Titian.

There is another in front of this Annunciation, where there is a Visitation of
Mary, with S. Elizabeth, by Tintoret.

Then above that, the first Square is the Nativity of our Lord.

And after, is S. John Baptizing Christ.

After that is the Resurrection of Christ.

Behind that, is the Supper with the Apostles.

And after, is the Altar-piece with S. Rocco in the Sky, with many Figures.

Then follows on the other side, Christ multiplying the Loaves and the Fishes.

After that, is the Messiah raising Lazarus from the Dead.

In another, is Christ Ascending into Heaven, with the Apostles below.

Then follows the Miracle done at the Pool in the Sheep-market in Jerusalem.

In a corner behind the door of the Albergo, there is a Devil speaking to
Christ, that he would convert the Stones into Bread.

In the head end of the Hall there is between the Windows S. Rocco, and S.
Sebastian.

Let us turn our eyes toward the Roof, and we shall see Adam and Eve, as they
stand eating the Apple.

Afterward, is the Pillar of fire which guided the Hebrews through the Desert.

Jacobs Dream when he saw the Angels Ascending, and descending from Heaven.

Jonas cast ashore, out of the Whales belly.

Elias flying from the wrath of Jezebel.

In the middle Square there is the Rod of Serpents.

The Sacrifice of Abraham.

The Manna in the Desert.

The Hebrews eating the Paschal Lamb, and many other Histories of the Old
Testament.

There is afterward in the Albergo, Christ before Pilate.

Christ, with the Reed in his hand.

Christ, going to Mount Calvary.

And again, that famous Crucifixion, one of the fairest works that ever was
done, by So called from his bold manner of painting.
furious Tintoret.

On the Roof you see St. Rocco in the Sky, with all the other compartiments.

All the above named works in this School, are by Tintoret.

The Church of S. Nichola de Frari.
The high Altar-piece with the B. Virgin in the Sky, and many Saints below,
viz. S. Nicholas, S. Katherine, S. Francis, S. Anthony of Paduae, and S.
Sebastian, is a most singular work of divine Titian.

On the right hand of the said Altar, you see a S. John Baptizing Christ, the
work of Paulo Veronese.

We also see two Prophets and two Sibyls in Chiaro Scuro, by the same Paulo.

There is a Square with Christ upon the Cross, by Paulo.

The Roof likewise is all painted by the aforesaid Paulo: and they are stately
works, particularly that of the Adoration of the Wise men, which is in the
middle.

Quartier de Castello.
The Nuns Church of S. Joseph.
ON the Piece of the first Altar on your right hand (entering by the great door)
there is S. Michael the Archangel, and a Senator, by the hand of Tintoret.

On the same side, at the third Altar, you see the Transfiguration of our Lord
on Mount Tabor, painted by Paulo Veronese.

The great Altar-piece represents the Nativity of our Savior, by Paulo, a most
admirable thing.

The Nuns Church of S. Daniel.
As you enter this Church at the great Door, the first Picture is a S.
Katherine disputing with the Doctors, by Tintoret.

Then follows the Piece at the great Altar, which demonstrates Daniel in the
Lions denn, the work of Pietro da Cortona.

The Church of S. John in Bragora.
Entering this Church at the great Door, there is the Supper of our Lord with
the Apostles; by Paris Bordone.

The Church of S. Severo Preti.
Where you see a Square with the Crucifixion of our Lord, joining to the
Chapel on the right hand of the great Altar, by the hand of Tintoret.

The Church of S. Maria Formosa Preti.
The great Altar-piece represents the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, the
work of Tintoret.

On the left hand beside the great Altar, and near to the Door, there is a
little Chapel, where you see a Picture divided into five parts, a mavelous
work of old Palma.

The Church of S. Leone called S. Lio Preti.
The first Picture as you enter at the great Door, on your left hand, with S.
James the Apostle, is by the hand of Titian.

The Church of Santa Maria Preti.
Entering at the great Door, you see on your left hand a little Picture with S.
Daniel in the Lions denn, with an Angel, a Prophet, and a S. Andrew, by the
hand of Paris Bordone.

The Nunns Church of Celestia.
In the Chapel on the right hand of the great Altar* there is an admirable
Picture of two holy Bishops, and S. Dominico, the work of Paris Bordone.

The Church of S. Francisco della Vigne, Padre Zoccolanti.
Entering the Church at the great Door, in the fourth Chapel on your right
hand, there is a Picture with the Resurrection of Christ, by Paulo Veronese.

On the other side of the said Church, in the fifth Chapel there is a Picture,
by Paulo, with a Madonna and her Son, S. John, S. Joseph, S. Katherine, and S.
Anthony the Abbot.

Let us enter into the Sacristie of the said Church, and the first Altar as you
enter on your right hand, is by Paulo.

The Church of S. John e Paulo, Padre Dominicani.
At your entrance at the great Door on your left hand there is a large Square
of S. Peter Martyr, by divine Titian.

After follows, underneath the foot of the Crucifix, in the middle of the
Church, a little Oblong, containing three Histories, viz.

Cain murdering his Brother Abel.

The Serpent exalted by Moses.

The third is Abraham offering Isaac.

The Chapel of Rosario, in the above said Church.
On that Front which is over against the Altar of our Lady, there is to be seen
a large Square in the middle between two Windows, which demonstrates the
Crucifixion of our Lord, and on the Roof you see an Oval, on each side of the
Oval, is an Oblong, by the hand of Tintoret.

The School of S. Mark.
Here are four great Squares, they may truly be called four wonders in
painting; but in particular that which is at the head of the School, with S.
Mark flying through the Sky; all the four represent the Miracles of the
abovesaid Saint, the work of furious Tintoret.

The Albergo of the said School.
As you enter, the first Square on your left hand is by Giorgone.

Then follows a second, which represents old Barcarole, as he presents the Ring
given by S. Mark to the Screne Prince. A singular work of Paris Bordone.

The Church of the Hospital of the Mendicanti.
On your left hand as you enter the great Door, at the second Altar there is a
Picture of S. Elena worshipping the found Cross, with other Figures, the work
of Guercin da Cento.

Sestier di Canall Reggio.
The Church of S. Maria nova Preti.
Entering this Church by the great Door, the first Picture on the left hand with
S. Girolamo in the Wilderness, is the work of Titian.

The Church of S. Apostoli Preti.
The Square on the right hand of the great Altar, where it rains Manna in the
Desert, is by Paulo Veronese.

The Church of the Fathers Jesuits.
As you enter at the great Door, at the second Altar on the right hand is a
Piece of the Martyrdom of S. Lorens; a rare thing of Titian.

At the farther Altar is a Christopher, by old Palma.

Afterward is the great Altar-piece, with the Assumption of the Madonna, so
delicate a piece, that I doubt not to say, it is absolutely the most superb
work that ever Tintoret painted.

And on the right hand of the said Altar, there is a Square of S. Mary visited
by S. Elizabeth, the work of Andrea Sciavone.

And on the other side of the Altar, there is the Crucifixion of our Lord,
painted in the wonted manner of Tintoret.

In a Chapel on the right hand of the great Altar, there is a most beautiful
Picture of the Naetivity of our Lord, by Paulo Veronese.

The Nunns Church of S. Catherine.
As you enter this Church by the great Door, the first Altar on your right hand
does demonstrate to you the Angel Raphael with Tobias: some say this piece was
done by a Scholar of Titian's, others say by Titian's own hand, but most say
it is the Masters hand, and so I am apt to believe.

Afterward at the high Altar, you see a Piece of the Espousall of this Saint
with the Child Jesus, and it is a really divine work of the for ever famous
Paulo Veronese.

Around this Altar there are six Squares containing the Life of S. Katherine,
done by Tintoret when he was a young man.

The Church of Santa Sophia Preti.
Over the great Door, there is a little Piece of a Supper of our Savior with
the Apostles, by Paulo Veronese.

The Church of S. Felice Preti.
Entering this Church at the great Door, you see a Piece at the second Altar on
the left hand, by Tintoret.

And on the right side of the great Altar there are two Squares one above
another; one is our Lord in the Garden. The other, The Supper with the
Apostles, both by Tintoret.

Going a little below the aforesaid Altar, there is plainly to be seen upon the
first Altar on the left hand an armed Saint, with a Or face after the life.
Ritratto.

The Church of the Madonna del Orto Frati.
As you enter at the great Door, you see on your left hand, the first
Altar-piece, consisting of five Saints, viz. S. Lorenz, S. Gregory, S.
Dominico, the Blessed Lorenzo, Justiniano, and S. Elena; a rare work of old
Palma.

Then follows the fourth Chapel, with a most beautiful Picture, where you find
S. Agnese, and many other Saints, with Angels in the Sky, by Tintoret.

A little forward at the sixth Altar, there is a Piece of the B. Lorenzo,
Giustiniano, S. John Baptist, S. Francis, and others, a work greatly worthy of
the praise of Pordenon.

On each side of the high Altar there is a very large Square.

That on the right hand represents the Hebrews worshipping the Golden Calf.

And that on the left hand is the Universal Judgment.

Above the Altar there are four Figures in Chiaro Scuro.

Then are the Doors of the Organ painted on the outside with the Purification
of the Blessed Virgin. And within on the right hand is S. Peter admiring the
Cross in the Sky. On the other hand is the Beheading of S. Christopher, all
these are the works of great Tintoret, and infinitely admirable.

The School of Merchants, near to Madonna del Orto.
In a low Room there is a Picture with S. Christopher and Mary in the Sky, with
Angels round about them, by Tintoret.

Above upon the Cieling, there is another Picture of the Nativity of S. Mary,
by Tintoret.

Afterward is seen an Annunciation, with many pieces of Architecture, on each
side is a Figure in Chiaro Scuro, rare things, and worthy of Paulo Veronese.

The Church of S. Marcelliano Preti.
The first Picture on your left hand as you enter at the great Door, with an
Angel and Tobias, as also an holy Hermit, and a Dog, is the work of famous
Titian.

The great Altar-piece with three Saints, viz. S. Marcelliano in the middle
between S. Peter and S. Paul, is by Tintoret.

The Church of the Fathers Serviti.
You see here the Organ, by the hand of Tintoret, on the inside is the
Annunciation, on the outside is an holy Bishop and a Prophet.

Below these is Cain Murdering his Brother Abel, and the Father Eternal
speaking unto Cain.

The Church of Magdalena Preti.
On the left hand of the great Altar, there is a S. Mary Magdalen accompanied
with many other Figures, by Tintoret.

Afterward upon the outside of the Doors of the Organ, there is a Christ as he
appears to S. Mary Magdalen after the Resurrection, and within is an
Annunciation.

On the top of the said Organ you see the Coming of the Wise men, in small, by
Tintoret.

The Church of S. Emagora e Fortunato, called S. Marcuola Preti.
Entering at the great Door, on the right hand under a little window you see a
square with the Child Jesus, and on each side is S. Andrew and S. Katherine, by
Titian.

Then follows the second Altar with the Picture of S. Elena, by Tintoret.

And on the left hand of the great Altar is a Supper, by Tintoret.

The Church of S. Giobbe Frati Zoccolanti.
As you enter at the great Door, the Piece of the fourth Altar on your right
hand, does demonstrate three Saints and an Angel, viz. S. Andrew, S. Peter, and
S. Nicholas, it is a most beautiful work of Paris Bordone, though a more
inferior hand has the credit of it.

The Church of S. Jeremia Preti.
All the Organ, excepting the little Doors, is painted in Chiaro Scuro,
together with the four corners; within there are the four Evangelists, a work
of great esteem, by the hand of Andrea Sciavone.

The Nuns Church of S. Girolamo.
The first Picture on your left hand as you enter the great Door, is the work
of Tintoret.

Quartier della Croce.
The Nuns Church of the Cross Franciscans.
LEt us enter at the great Door, and we shall find the first Altar on the right
hand, with a dead Christ and an Angel which supports him, as also a S
Katherine, and a Pope; by the hand of Tintoret.

The Nuns Church of S. Andrew.
That Altar-piece on the right hand of the great Altar with S. Augustine
clothed in a white Garment, likewise two Boys, one of them holding his Pastoral
Staff, the other his Mytre, is one of the best works of Paris Bordone.

At the other Altar on the left hand of the great Altar there is S. Girolamo in
the Hermitage, by the hand of Paulo Veronese.

The Church of S. Simeon Grande Preti.
As you enter at the great Door on the right hand, over a Bench, there is a
Supper of our Lord with the Apostles, by Tintoret.

The Church of S. Giacomo dall Ovio Preti.
The Picture of the Chapel of S. Lorens, is by Paulo Veronese; in it you find
this Saint, with S. Girolamo, and S. Nicholas, and a little Boy in the Sky.

Below the said Picture there is an oblong Picture with the Martyrdom of the
aforesaid Saint, a most graceful work of Paulo.

And near to a side Door of the said Church, on the left hand of the great
Altar, you see upon the Roof an Ovall with Faith, Hope, and Charity, and many
Angels. And the four Round with four Doctors, are rarely done after the usual
manner of Paulo Veronese.

The Church of S. Maria, Matter Domini Preti.
Being entered the great Door, and past the second Altar on the left hand, you
see a beautiful small Piece of a Supper, by old Palma.

And over a side Door of the Church there is a most famous Square of the
Invention of the Cross, by the hand of Tintoret.

The Church of S. Cassiano, called S. Cassiano Preti.
Let us enter at the great Door, and we shall find on the right hand of the
first Altar, a Picture with the Saints, Girolamo, S. Mark, S. Peter, and S.
Paul, a mavelous work, by the hand of old Palma.

The great Chapel is all by Tintoret.

One Picture repres^nts the Redeemer risen from the dead, and S. Cassiano
preaching unto many Nations.

On the right hand is Christ Crucified, and on the left is our Lord when he
delivers the holy Fathers out of Hell, beautiful pieces.

There are also three little Histories, upon the top of the Organ, concerning
the life of Cassiano, by Tintoret.

Quartier di Dorso Durro.
The Church of S. Pantaleon Preti.
ON the left hand of the Organ there is a large Square with S. Bernard curing
many sick of the Plague; a rare work of Paulo Veronese.

Another Picture of S. Bernard, is by Paulo Veronese.

The great Altar-piece with S. Pantaleon curing a Sick man, and a Priest, by
Paulo Veronese.

The Church of the Carmine Frati.
On the top of the Organ you see two oblong Pieces, in one is the Annunciation,
the other is the Nativity of Christ, by the hand of Andrea Schiavone.

In like manner upon the top of the little Quire, right against the aforesaid
Organ, you see two other oblong pieces, one is the coming of the Magi; the
other is the Circumcision of our Lord, by the hand of the aforesaid Schiavone.

There is another Picture of the Circumcision of our Lord, by the hand of
Tintoret.

The Nuns Church of S. Maria Maggiore.
The great Altar-piece represents the Assumption of the B. Virgin, with the
Apostles, by the hand of Paulo Veronese: a singular thing.

Afterward on the sides of the aforesaid Altar there are three great Squares.

One represents when the Priest scourges Joachin out of the Temple for having
no offspring.

In another is the Espousal of the B. Virgin with Joseph,

In the third is the Visitation of the three Magi; all three by the hand of
bold Tintoret.

In a Chapel on the left hand of the great Altar you see the Picture with the
famous S. John Baptist, by Titian.

Entering this Church at the great Door, and being past the first Altar on the
right hand, there is a Square which represents the Ark of Noah, by the hand of
Giacomo Bassano: it contains all the several kinds of living Creatures and is
reckoned to be one of the finest Pictures in the world.

After this there are four Squares placed on four Pillars of the Church; they
signify the four Seasons of the Year, by the hand of the same Bassano.

There are also two Squares on the sides of that Door which opens to the
Canalle.

One represents the Adultress before Christ.

In the other is the Centurion prostrated before the Redeemer.

And in a lesser Square upon a Pillar, there is Christ in the Garden upheld by
an Angel, they are all three by Paulo Veronese.

In the Sacristie there is an Ecce Homo, by Paris Bordone.

The Nuns Church of Terrese.
The Round which is in the middle of the Roof, with the Madonna in the Sky and
Angels round about, with three Saints below, and the four compartements
adjoining the abovesaid Round, containing the four Evangelists; all this is a
singular good work of Andrea Schiavone.

The Church of S. Nicholas Preti.
Upon the Roof over the great Altar, there is a Round, where S. Nicholas is
carried into Heaven by the Angels, with the Picture of Faith, and a multitude
of Angels and Cherubins, by the hand of Paulo Veronese.

Entering this Church at the great Door, on the left hand over a side Door of
the Church, upon the Roof there is a Round, and a lesser Round on each side of
the great one. In the great one is the Eternal Father with many Angels. In one
of the lesser is the B. Virgin, in the other is the Angel Annunciating, with
other four Rounds containing the four Evangelists.

The Church of S. Sebastian.
Joining to the little Door which is not far from the great one, you see the
Picture of S. Nicholas, a Bishop, and an Angel, the work of Titian.

At the farthest Altar on the same side you see a Picture with Christ upon the
Cross, by Paulo Veronese.

On the other side of the Church there is a Picture of St. John Baptizing of
Christ, by Paulo.

Then follows another Picture of Christ when he appeared to the two Disciples
going into Emaus, by Andrea Schiavone.

The Walls of the Church are all painted in Fresco with Pillars, Statues, and
other ornaments of Architecture, by Paulo Veronese.

All the great Chapel is by the same Paulo, the Cuppola and the Tribunal are
painted in Fresco.

The great Altar-piece represents the B. Virgin with her Son, and Angels in the
Sky; and below are the Saints Sebastian, S. Katherine, S. John Baptist, S.
Francis, and S. Peter.

The great Square on the right hand of the great Altar represents S. Mark and
S. Marcellin^ going with S. Sebastian (who is in Armor) and comforting him to
his Martydom.

In another Square on the left hand you see the abovenamed Saint bound to a
Machine of wood, coming to be Martyred, and the false Priests persuading him to
worship their Idols, with many standers by: all the aforesaid works are the
fairest that ever were done by the most noble hand of Paulo Veronese.

Afterward are the Doors of the Organ, on the outside is painted the
Circumcision of our Lord, and within is Christ curing one sick of the Palsy,
works so fair that they stand in no need of commendation.

Upon the top of the Organ you may observe a little Square with the Nativity of
Christ, one as well as the other are most graceful pieces of great Paulo.

Let us cast our eyes upon the Roof, which is all painted by the aforesaid
Paulo.

The first Square demonstrates Queen Esther going into the presence of King
Ahasuerus, accompanied with many Waiting-maids.

In the middle Square is the King Ahasuerus frowning on Queen Esther.

In the third you see Mordecai conducted to Haman, by the order of the King.

As you go into the Sacristie on the left hand over the Door of a little
Chapel you may see a little Square with S. Girolamo in the Hermitage.

In the Sacristie, the middle partition of the Coronation of the B. Virgin, and
the four other partitions of the four Evangelists, one as well as the other are
of Paulo.

There is also another Square of the Chastising of the Serpents, by Tintoret.

Let us go into the Quire, and right against the Door we shall see a Square,
which represents S. Sebastian before the god Cletiano, confessing himself to be
a Christian.

In front of this Square there is painted over the Door, the same Saint beaten
with Clubs, a work in Fresco.

Above these Squares there are the four Evangelists, two on either side in
Fresco, all these are of Paulo Veronese.

In the Refectory there is the great Feast of Christ in the House of the
Pharisee's, it is enough, that it is of Paulo Veronese.

The Nuns Church of All Saints.
The great Altar-piece represents Paradise; and on a little Door of the
Tabernacle of the said Altar there is a Christ rising again.

Afterward are the Doors of the Organ, on the outside of which you see the
most noble Visitation of the Magi; and within are four Doctors of the Church,
with Angels playing upon variety of Instruments.

On the Roof is the Father Eternal, and round about the top of it are diverse
little Figures, and Histories in Chiaro Scuro, all of them by the most noble
hand of Paulo Veronese.

The Church of S. Gervaso and Protaso, called S. Trovaso Preti.
The Picture of the Chapel on the right hand of the great Altar, contains S.
Anthony the Abbot tempted by Devils, with our Savior in the Sky succouring the
Abbot, the work of Tintoret.

Then follows the other Chapel, on the right hand of it you see the Supper of
our Lord with the Apostles, and on the left our Savior washing the feet of the
Apostles, both of them by Tintoret.

The Church of the Fathers Dominicans, formerly the Jesuits.
Entering at the great Door, at the third Altar on your right hand you may
observe a Picture of our Lord upon the Cross, and both the Mary's, by the hand
of Tintoret.

And upon the Doors of the Organ there is painted Pope Urban the fifth giving
of habits to the Fathers Jesuits, by the hand of Titian.

The Church of the Hospital of the Incurabili.
In which is seen a Picture with S. Vrsula accompanied with her Virgins, and an
Holy Bishop, with an Angel in the Sky, the work of Tintoret.

And over a side Door of the Church you may observe a little Square of our
Savior carrying the Cross, and an Executioner drawing him along, by the hand
of Giorgone.

The Nuns Church of Spirito Santo.
As you enter on your left hand there is a Round of the Image of the B. Virgin,
and two little Angels holding a Crown, with S. Girolamo and S. Sebastian in the
Clouds, and below is S. Evangelist and S. Augustine.

There is also a Picture of the Visitation of the Magi, both of them are by
Tintoret.

The Nuns Church of the Humilta.
Entering the great Door, at the second Altar on your right hand you will admire
a Picture o^ S. Peter, and S. Paul, a most fair work of Gi^como Bassano.

Upon the Arch of this Chapel you may observe a Square of Christ taken from
the Cross, with the two Marys, a rare work of Tintoret.

At the High Altar on the upper part of the Tabernacle there is a Nativity of
our Lord, by Giacomo Bassano.

A little lower upon the frontispiece is a Father Eternal, by Paulo Veronese.

And a little lower in the third piece there are two Angels, by Paulo.

On the Portall is the Redeemer with the Globe in his hand, and several
Cherubins, by Paulo.

On each side of the abovesaid Portall there is two little Squares. In one
there is S. John preaching in the Desert; in the other is the Centurion before
Christ, both by Paulo.

Afterward is the Roof done likewise by Paulo, with three great Histories, and
many pieces in Chiaro Scuro.

The first Square over the Quire represents the B. Virgin Annunciated by the
Angel.

And in an Ovall in the middle, there is Mary Ascending into Heaven, with the
Apostles below.

Then follows the third, which is the Nativity of Christ; all these are
mavelous good pieces.

The Church of the Salute.
There is in this Church two Pictures by the hand of great Titian.

In one you will admire the Coming of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles.

In the other is S. Mark sitting on high, and below are the Saints Sebastian,
S. Rocco, S. Cosmo, and S. Damiano.

Upon the Roof over the Quire you see eight Heads by Titian, in a round form.

Let us go into the Sacristie and cast our eyes upon the Roof, and we shall see
three Squares by Titian.

In the first is David cutting off the Head of Goliab.

In the second is the Sacrifice of Abraham and Isaae.

In the third is Cain slaying his Brother Abel. All singular works of the
Author.

And below is a great Square of the Marriage in Cana in Galilee, by furious
Tintoret.

The Church of the Most holy Trinity, near to the Salute.
There are thirteen Squares of Tintores, viz.

The Eternal Father creating the World.

The Forming of Adam and Eve.

The Tempting of Adam.

Cane slaying Abel.

The four Evangelists, in four Squares.

Two Apostles, in two Squares.

The Annunciation in two Squres.

In the Sacristie there is a little Square of the Most Holy Trinity. All
singular works of the same Author.

The School of Charity.
Here is a very large Square of the Blessed Virgin ascending the Stairs of the
Temple, with many other Figures, a divine work of great Titian.

The ISLANDS Adjacent to VENICE.
The Island of Murano.
The Church of S. Peter Martyr, Fathers Dominicans.
Entering this Church, on your left hand you see a Square near unto the Picture
of Rosario, where you find A Victory against the Turks, with the Blessed Virgin
in the Sky, and other Saints, by the hand of Paulo Veronese.

The Nuns Church of the Madonna de gli Angeli.
BElow the Organ there is an Ovall with four Angels singing; a most fair work
of Paulo Veronese.

There is also a Square with S. Girolamo, by Paulo Veronese.

After that is the great Altar-piece, where you find the Annunciation, a superb
work of Pordenon.

The Church of the Des Mess.
In which are to be seen three Squares, by Tintoret.

In one is The coming of the Magi.

In another is the Presentation at the Temple.

The third is the Adultery.

The Nuns Church of S. James.
Here are seen three Pictures by Paulo Veronese.

That of the great Altar represents diverse Saints, with a most beautiful Glory
of Angels.

The second on the right hand of the great Altar represents the Visitation of
S. Eliz^beth.

That on the left hand demonstrates Christ's resurrection.

The Organ is rarely painted, by Paulo Veronese.

The Church of S. John.
The great Altar-piece represents S. John Baptizing of Christ, the work of
Tintoret.

Before we part from Murano let us go see the Palace of the Trevisano, and we
shall see some of the beautifullest works that ever were painted by the
singular pencil of Paulo Veronese.

The Island of Mazorbo.
The Nuns Church of S. Katherine.
THe great Altar-piece is a singular work of Paulo Veronese.

The Island of Burano.
The Nuns Church of S. Mauro.
THe great Altar-piece of this Church, is the work of Paulo Veronese.

The Island of Torcello.
The Nuns Church of S. Anthony.
THere are such beautiful pieces in this Church, that they are worth coming a
long journey to see, and they are of the most noble pencil of Paulo Veronese.

The great Altar-piece with the two Prophets on the Angels of the said Altar,
are by the aforesaid Author.

On the left side of the great Altar, and on the sides of the Organ you see ten
Squares, which represent the life of S. Christina, both inside and outside of
the said Organ is adorned with precious Histories, by the hand of the same
Paulo.

Over the Altar of Christ there are two Figures in Chiaro Scuro, by the same
hand.

The Island of S. Elena.
The Church.
IN the Church here you will admire that most superb piece at the great Altar,
where is painted the coming of the Magi, by the hand of Palma.

The Island of S. Giorgio Maggiore.
The Church.
Entering the Church at the great Door, the first Picture on the right hand
demonstrates the Nativity of Christ, by Giacomo Bassano.

Then follows a Picture of the Martyrs, by the hand of Tintoret.

After this is a Picture on the right side of the Church, where you find the
Most holy Trinity crowning the Blessed Virgin, and below are several Saints, by
Tintoret.

There is in like manner on the left side of the Church, right against to that
aforesaid, with the Martyrdom of S. Stephen by Tintoret.

Then follows on the same side, the Resurrection of Christ, with the Pictures
of diverse Senators, by Tintoret.

Now follow the two great Squares which are on the sides of the great Altar,
one of which represents the Supper of our Lord with the Apostles, in the other
is Manna falling in the Desert, by the same Tintoret.

After this you go into the Chapel of the Defonti, where you see a Picture of
Christ taken from the Cross, by the aforesaid Author.

Afterward in the Refectory is that most mavelous and large Square which
represents the Marriage of Cana in Galilee; this, if I may so say, is a wonder
of the World, and whosoever comes to Venice and departs without a sight of this
Picture, may by said to have seen nothing, and it is done by the most excellent
and noble hand of Paulo Veronese.

The Island of the Giudecha.
The Church of the Redentore.
IN this Church you see two Pictures of Tintoret.

One demonstrates the Ascension of our Lord with the Apostles.

The other is the Scourging of Christ at a Pillar.

Afterward as you enter the Monastery, you see a Square over the Oratory with
Christ sitting, with the Apostles kneeling, and other Saints, by the aforesaid
Tintoret.

The Refectory of S. James, Fathers Serviti.
The Roof of this is painted by Paulo Veronese divided into three Partitions.

One demonstrates the Annunciation.

That in the middle, the Assumption of the B. Virgin, with the Father Eternal
in the Crystalline Heaven surrounded with Legions of Angels.

The third is the Visitation of S. Elizabeth, and are works really beautiful.

The Nuns Church of S. Cosmo and S. Damiano.
As you enter, you see on your left hand the B. Virgin in the Sky, and the two
Saints, S. Cecilia, S. Theodoro, and a S. Marina.

In a Chapel on the right hand of the great Altar there is another Picture
with Christ on the Cross, and the Mary's, both one and the other are by
Tintoret.

The City of Treviso.
The Domo.
HEre you see the Histories of the Nativity, and Resurrection of Christ,
singular works of Paris Bordone.

There is another rare Picture of the Annunciation, by the hand of Titian.

The Church of S. Francis.
Here you may observe a Picture, by Paris Bordone.

The Church of S. Girolamo.
Where you admire another Picture, by the aforesaid Paris Bordone.

The Church of All Saints.
There are also diverse works of the abovesaid Master.

As likewise one Piece of Giacomo Bassano.

The Church of S. Paul.
Here in like manner are singular works, and worthy of all admiration, by the
same Paris Bordone.

The Church of S. Magdalen.
The great Altar-piece represents Christ as he appeared to Mary Magdalen, the
work of Paulo Veronese.

The Church of S. Augustine.
Here is an admirable Picture of S. Giachino, S. Anne, S. James, and S. George,
the work of Paulo Veronese.

In the Refertory of the Nunnery there is a a Square which demonstrates the
Marriage of Cana in Galilee, by the hand of the aforesaid Paulo Veronese.

The Mountain of Piety in the aforesaid City.
Here they preserve a Christ with a little Angel, a most singular work, by the
hand of Giergone.

The Villa of Zerman Trevisano.
The Domo.
HEre you will find a most beautiful Picture of old Palma.

Pordenon.
The Castle of Friuli.
The Domo.
HEre you see the Organ painted by its own Countryman, Pordenone.

You also see works in Fresco upon the Wall, by the same Author, as there is
likewise in other places, all singular works.

The City of Vdine.
The Domo.
HEre yon will admire some beautiful Histories upon the ledge of the Organ by
the hand of Pordenone.

The Church of S. Peter Martyr.
In which you way observe a famous Picture of the Annunciation, by Pordenone.

The City of Belluno.
HEre are preserved two very fair Pieces, by Paris Bordone.

Compagnia del Croce.
Here you will find two singular Squares, by Tintoret.

THE TERRITORY OF CONEGLIANO.
Conegliano.
The Church of the Reformati.
HEre is a very fair Picture, by old Palma.

The Villa of Marens.
In the same Territory.
HEre you will see a fair Picture, by the hand of Titian.

The Villa of Fontanelle.
HEre is an admirable Picture, by the hand of Pordenone.

The Castle of S. Salvatore.
The Jurisdiction of the Conti Colalto.
HEre is a Church all painted by the hand of Pordenone.

And all the Roofs of the said Conti are painted by Andrea Schiavone.

Below the said Castle.
The Church of S. John.
THere are two Pictures, by Pordenone. One of the Virgin fleeing into Egypt.
The other of diverse Saints. And under them is the Picture of Piety.

Further below the said Castle.
The Villa of Sasigano.
HEre is preserved a Picture, by the hand of Pordenone.

Another Castle of the Colalti.
IN this Castle you see a great Square, by Pordenone.

The City of Ceneda.
The Domo.
THere is a Picture, by Titian, of the B. Virgin, S. Rocco, and S. Sebastian.

Upon the Organ of this Church is represented the life of San. Titian, the work
of Paris Bordone.

In the Piazza.
In this same there is a House side painted by Pordenone.

Villa di Castello below Ceneda.
The Church.
HEre are three Niches at the great Altar, in the middle you will admire the B.
Virgin, and a Saint on each side, by the hand of Titian, a singular work.

The Castle of Saravall.
The Domo.
THe great Altar-piece with the B. Virgin, and a Glory of Angels, and below are
two Saints, with a Landscape, and within it you find a Ship, it is a most
precious thing, but by an uncertain Author.

The Church of the Capuchines.
Here they preserve a Square of a Madonna, a stupendous work of Guido Reno.

Villa di Mazer in Trevisano, near to Asolo.
IN the said Villa there is a Palace all painted with diverse operations of the
most excellent hand of Paulo Veronese, singular works of the Author.

Asolo in Trevisano.
The Church of the Reformati.
HEre you see a Square with the Conception of the Blessed Virgin, by Giacomo
Bassano.

The Domo.
In which you see an Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, with numbers of Angels,
and two Saints, by Giacomo Bassano.

Castle Franco.
HEre is an admirable Picture of the Blessed Virgin with her Son, the work of
Giorgone.

There are likewise diverse Palaces near adjacent, where you will find works of
the same Giorgone, as also of Paulo Veronese.

The Castle of Bassano.
The high Church of the Castle.
IN this Church you will admire the mavelous Nativity of the Child Jesus, a
work to be admired by every one, and one of the fairest that ever was painted,
by Giacomo Bassano.

In the Townhouse, as also in the Churches, and upon the Houses of particular
persons, there are works of diverse sorts, by the said Giacomo Bassano.

Being this was the Country of this famous man, I look upon it as superfluous
to nominate place after place where paintings are, because of the great
quantities of them, and very little of other Masters.

Cittadella.
The Parochial Church.
THe great Altar-piece is by Giacomo Bassano, and on the sides of the Chapel
there is our Lord upon Mount Tabor, the work of the same Giacomo.

The Street which leads from Venice to Padua, viz. upon the bank of the River
Brenta.
Upon this Road you see many superb Palaces, painted both within and without,
with various operatious, viz. Histories, Freezes, Architecture, Garlands of all
sorts, stupendous works, by the most singular and excellent hand of Paulo
Veronese.

The City of Padua.
The Church of S. Justina.
THe great Altar-piece is a most singular work of noble Paulo Veronese, the
which represents the Martyrdom of this Saint, and is most excellently
imbellished by the hand of Augustino Carache.

The School of the said Saint.
In which you will admire the Saint, marvellously beautiful, it is enough that
they are done by the incomparable pencil of great Titian.

The Church of the Hermits.
In the Sacristie of this Church they preserve a S. John Baptist preaching, by
the hand of the most noble Guido Reno.

The Church of S. Maria in Vanzo.
Here stands a Picture of the Dead Redeemer, the work of Giacomo Bassano.

Montagnana near to Este.
The Domo.
HEre you will see the great Altar-piece, which represents the Transfiguration
of Christ upon Mount Tabor, a singular work of Paulo Veronese.

The City of Vicenza.
The Church of S. Rocco.
THe great Altar-piece is a most fair work of Giacomo Bassano.

The Church of S. Leuterio.
In like manner you see the great Altar-piece, by the same Bassano.

The Church of S. Croce.
Where there is another Picture by the aforesaid Giacomo.

Under the public House of the Piazza.
There is an History of Noah with his Daughters, by Paris Bordone.

The Refectory of Madonna di Monte, Frati.
In this you see a great Square which represents a Feast, in which is the
Redeemer, a most fair work of the most excellent hand of Paulo Veronese.

All that are curious omit not the seeing of this piece.

The Church of the Fathers Teatini.
Here you may observe in a Chapel a most fair piece, by old Palma.

The Church of S. Corona, Fathers Dominicans.
The Altar-piece here with the three Magi, is by Paulo Veronese.

There are also in this same City several works upon the Walls in Fresco, by
Pordenone.

The City of Verona.
The Domo.
HEre you may observe a Picture of the Assumption of the B. Virgin, the work of
great Titian.

The Church of S. George.
In this Church you see two Pictures, of which I may say nothing can exceed
them, by the most noble pencil of Paulo Veronese.

The Church called La Vittoria.
In the Sacristie of this Church you must observe a Square of no great size,
but extraordinary fine, by the aforesaid Paulo.

PAVLO: Veronese
Not. Ao 1490

portrait of Paulo Veronese

The City of Brescia.
The Church of S. Afra.
HEre is kept a most beautiful Standard, by Paulo Veronese.

There is also a Square of the Transfiguration of our Lord, a singular work of
great Tintoret.

The Church of S. Nazaro.
Here are several fair Pictures by Titian.

Sitinalta in the Territory of Bergamasco.
The Parochial Church.
IN this Church you see two singular Pictures, by old Palma, that Countryman.

The City of Cremona.
HEre is a Picture of S. Sehastian and two Angels, by the hand of Giorgone.

The City of Genoua.
The Church of S. Francis.
HEre is to be seen a Square with S. John, Baptizing Christ, by the hand of
Tintoret.

The STATE OF FLORENCE.
The City of Florence.
S. Mark, Fathers Dominicans.
HEre are three Pictures by the hand of Fra Bartolomeo.

The Church of S. Croce.
Here is a Picture representing the Lady of Piety, a singular work of Civoli.

In the Churchyard of the Nuntiata.
There are diverse works in Fresco, by Andrea del Sarto.

In the Cloister, over a Door, you see a famous Piece, called the Madonna del
Saccho, by the abovesaid Andrea.

The Confraternity of S. John Baptist.
In the Cloister upon the Wall there are the Histories of the life of this
Saint, by the same Andrea.

The Gallery of the Great Duke.
In which you see a Square with the History of the Fall of Phaeton, by the hand
of Leonardo da Vinci.

There is drawn a Ritratto of Pope Leo the X. by the hand of great Raphael.

There is also a little Square of a Madonna, the work of the abovesaid Raphael.

Then follow diverse Squares of Andrea del Sarto, particularly in the more
private Chambers there are most beautiful works, not omitting a sight of that
great Square of the Assumption of the B. Virgin, and the Apostles.

Over a Door of the said Chambers there is a PIETRO d': Cortona
Not Ao 1593

portrait of Pietro d'Cortona very large Square which expresses a Dispute
amongst several Saints; a singular work of the said Andrea.

There are likewise two Squares of Naked Women, by great Titian.

Then follow several Pieces, of Giacomo Bassano.

You also see a Square with little Figures of the B. Virgin, with the Child
Jesus in her arms, and a Saint on each side, the work of Corregio.

You see another Square of Naked Women, by Hannibal Carache.

The Palace of Pitti, being the habitation of the Great Duke.
Where are seen four most stately Chambers, excellently painted with variety of
Histories, by Pietro da Cortona.

The STATE OF PARMA.
The City of Parma.
The Church of the Nuntiatata.
IN the Quire of the said Church you see a Picture with a Madonna and her Son,
and four Saints by her side, by the hand of Parmeggiano, his first manner of
painting.

In the Sacristie of the said Covent, there is a Square of S. John Baptizing
Christ, by Parmeggiano, his first manner.

Santa Cecilia.
As you enter this Church, on your right hand there is a Picture with a Madonna
on high with her Son, on each side a Saint, by the hand of Lanfranco, a rare
work.

The Church of the Capuchines.
Entering this Church, on your left hand you see a Square with the Blessed
Felice holding the Child Jesus on his shoulders, with the B. Virgin in a
posture of receiving them, and a Glory of Boys, the work of Guercin da Cento.

Right against this you see another great Picture, with Christ on the Cross, by
his side is a S. Katherine, and the Ritratto of a Capuchine, with many Angels
lamenting, a most beautiful work of Guercin da Cento.

In a Chapel you see a S. Anthony of Padua, by Tadeo Zuccharo.

At the high Altar is a great Piece, the top whereof is half round, with a dead
Christ in the lap of the B. Virgin half dead, upheld by Angels, with S. Francis
pointing at our dead Lord, as also a S. Magdalen, and S. Chiara, with a Glory
of Angels carrying the Cross, painted by the most excellent hand of Hannibal
Carache.

On the side of the said Altar there is a S. Lewis King of France, and a S.
Chiara, the work of the said Hannibal.

Within the Covent, over a Door there is a Madonna with the Child, and a little
S. John, by the same Hannibal.

The Church of All Saints.
At the High Altar there is a Square which represents our Savior sitting and
giving benediction, with many Saints on his right hand, and a S. Stephen
praying, with other Pictures of holy Virgins, by the hand of Lanfranco.

The Church of the Fathers Jesuits.
Over a place of Confession you see a Square with our Savior bound to the
Pillar with two Angels lamenting, and many little Angels, by the hand of Tadeo
Zucch^ro.

The great Altar-piece is a most singular work of Paulo Veronese.

On the two Pedestals of the said Altar there are two Heads, with the B.
Virgin, and the Angel, the work of Tadeo Zuccharo.

The Church of S. Sepulcher.
As you enter at the great Door in the first Chapel on your left hand you will
admire a Square, the top of it is half round; where is a Madonna and the Child
Christ, and S. Joseph, a divine work, after the usual manner of great Correggio.

At the Madonna della Scala, over the Door of S. Michael.
There is a Madonna with her Son in her arms, by the hand of the aforesaid
Correggio.

The Church of the Fathers Serviti.
There is a Square upon which is a Madonna with the Child in her lap, and many
Angels, by the hand of Parmeggianino.

At the Battesimo.
There is a Square with S. Ottavio, and a Madonna, the work of Lanfranco.

The Nuns Church of S. Paul.
Entering at the great Door, at the second Chapel, there is a Square with the
B. Virgin and her Son in her lap, with S. Cecilia, S. Margaret, and a little S.
John showing our Lord, a most fair work of Augustine Carache.

At the great Altar there is a little Square, upon which is Our Lord on the
Judgment seat, and on the right hand of the Square is S. Paul at his feet, and
S. Katherine kneeling, the work of divine Raphael.

In the said Covent there is a Chamber painted in Fresco, with many Figures, by
the hand of Correggio, a most fair work.

The Church of S. Anthony.
As you enter at the great Door in a Chapel on your right hand is seen a
Square with a Madonna, and her Son sitting reading, and on the right hand of
this Square is a S. Girolamo kissing their feet. On the other side of it is a
S. Mary Magdalen kissing our Saviors feet, a singular work of divine Corregio.

Then follows at the great Altar a Square with the Madonna and the Child Jesus,
giving Benediction to the two Saints, S. Francis, and S. Chiara, by the hand of
Guercin da Cento.

The Domo.
In which you will admire the mavelous Cuppola, with the four Angles, one of
the finest works in the world, by the most excellent hand of great Correggio.

The Church of Madonna della Steccata.
Over the Cross-Isle of the Church there is a Madonna aloft, the rest of the
Roof is likewise painted by Parmeggianino.

In another Isle of this Church, over against the Image of the Blessed Virgin
is seen a Square with the Adoration of the Magi, the work of Carravagio.

On the inside of the Organ you see a David and a Sibyll, with other Figures,
by the hand of Parmeggianino: all of them singular works.

The Church of S. John, Fathers Benedictines.
In this Church you see a Cuppola with its four Angles, and other mavelous
works according to the usual manner of great Correggio.

On the Roof of the Quire are works copied from Correggio, by the hand of
Baglioue, but re-toucht by Correggio himself.

In the two Cross-Isles there are two Chapels where you will see works of
Carravagio in Fresco.

Coming out of the Church, at the second Chapel on your left hand, there are
two Squraes. On one you will admire a Piety. In the other the Martyrdom of
several Benedictine Saints, by the hand of great Correggio.

There are the Roofs of some little Chapells painted in Fresco, by
Parmeggianino.

There is also in this Church over a little Door, as you go into the Covent, a
S. John the Evangelist, painted in Fresco, by the hand of Correggio.

In the first Cloister of the Covent of the abovesaid Fathers, there are many
paintings in Chiaro Scuro, being Histories of the Old Testament, by the hand of
Carravagio.

The Palace of the Fontana adjoining the Garden of the Most Serene Duke.
In a low Apartement you see a great Square Chamber with the Roof painted in
Fresco, by the hand of Augustine Carache, singular works, and the last of the
Author.

There is a beautiful Inscription in the praise of Picture.

In the Apartement of Squares there is in one Chamber a Square with Venus and
Adonis, by the hand of Paulo Veronese.

There is also a Figure representing a River, by Carrache.

Then follow the Heads of the twelve Emperors in Chiaro Scuro, by the hand of
Titian.

There is also another Square of many Animals, by the hand of Bassano.

You also see two Figures in two Squares but not finished, by the hand of
Augustine Carrache.

There is seen likewise a little Square of two Ritrattos fixing a Crab-fish to
the ears of a Cat and laughing, the work of Carache.

There is another Square, with a Psyche aloft, two little Figures, and the work
of Tadeo Zuccharo.

Now follows the Famous Chamber of the Ritratti.
Over a Door is a Square of a beautiful Boy, by the hand of Hannibal Carache.

Then follow two Ritrattos, of a Senator and another composing of Music, the
work of Hannibal Carache.

Next is a Lady ordering her Locks, or Tresses, by the hand of Titian.

Over these is a Ritratto of P. Paul the third when he was Cardinal; the work
of excellent Raphael.

Next is a Ritratto of Diogenes with a writing pen in his hand; a fine thing.

You also see the Ritratto of that Amorous Lady, called L. Antea del
Parmeggiano, by his own hand.

Beneath these Squares is a Ritratto of Duke Ranuccio the first* by the hand of
Carache.

And beneath this again, there is the Picture of a little Girl with a Turbant
on her head, the work of Giulio Romano.

Next is the Picture of Cardinal Farnese, by the hand of Carache.

Below the said Cardinal is anether Ritratto of Duke Pietro Alovigi, the work
of Raphael Vrbin.

Then follow on the third Front two Ritrattos, by Parmeggianino.

In the middle between these two Ritrattos is another Picture of the abovesaid
Duke Pietro Alovigi Farnese, by the hand of Titian.

There are two little Ritrattos by the hand of Parmeggianino.

Next is the Picture of a Soldier, by the same hand.

There is also another Soldier in Armor, by the hand of Giulio Romano.

Over the Door you may see the Ritratto of Alexander the Great, the work of
Titian.

Behind a Window is a Ritratto of a Philosopher, by Andrea del Sarto.

Over the Window are two Ritrattos, one of which is the Duke of Ferrara, the
works of Titian.

In another Piece is the Picture of a Priest, by Parmeggianino.

Then follows the Picture of Paul the third, in little, the work of Titian.

Next to this follow two Ladies, by the hand of Parmeggianino.

On the other side of the Window are three Heads, by Titian.

There is also the Picture of Fra Sebastian^ del Piambo, a Painter, the work of
Giorgione.

And over this same is a Picture of a Shagged Spaniel, by Parmeggianino.

Here follows another Chamber.
Where you will admire the mavelous Or Gypsy.
Cingarina, by the hand of Correggio. There is also a S. Chiara, with a S.
Anthony of Padua, by the hand of Caravagio.

You may likewise observe four Squares in half Figures. In one is S. Mary
Magdalen, in the other are S. Peter, S. Girolamo, and Prophet David, by Guercin
da Cento.

You may observe near unto these, a Madonna with the Child, and a S. Joseph, by
Raphael de Vrbino.

Beneath this is a S. John, by the hand of Leonardo da Vinci.

Then follows a Magdalen weeping, the work of Hannibal Carache.

Here are two Saints by Guercino, viz. S. Peter and S. Girolamo.

There is a S. Nicholas de Tolentino, by the hand of Pordenon.

Here is also a Head of S. Girolamo by the hand of Carache.

Next is a Madonna, with her eyes lifted up toward Heaven, by the hand of
Carache.

You may observe likewise, a Nativity of our Lord, by Hannibal Carache.

Over a Chimney you may observe a Christ carrying the Cross, by the hand of
Andrea del Sarto.

Then follow two Copies of S. John, Copied from the works of Correggio, by an
able Master.

Now follows the Chamber of Audience.
Where are two Squares hung aloft, of two Figures at length, by the hand of
Correggio.

There are also two other Squares which represent two Elements, viz. The Earth
and the Water, by the hand of Bassano.

After these is another Square which represents Lucretia Romano killing her
self, by the hand of Parmeggianino.

Underneath this Square there is another of the Espousal of S. Katherine, one
of the fairest works that ever Correggio painted.

On each side of this Piece is a Ritratto, one is the effigies of Martin
Luther, done by Raphael, the other by Parmeggianino.

Next is a Christ in a half-figure, by the hand of Correggio.

On the other front you see a S. Girolamo, a half-figure, by the hand of
Leonardo da Vinci.

Near unto this is a Madonna with our Savior asleep, and a little S. John, by
the hand of Hanniball Carache.

Then follow two Ritrattos in little, one is the Picture of Hanniball Carache;
the other the Picture of a Lady; both done by her own hand.

Then follows another Chamber, which they call the Chamber of Sivetta.
In which you will find a Madonna with her Son at her feet, and a little S.
John, by the hand of great Raphael.

There is also a Square only in rough draught, by Correggio.

You may see the Nativity of our Lord, by the hand of Carrache, a little Square.

Here follow three little Madonnas, by Raphael, very fair works.

Then follows a Madonna and her Son, and S. Joseph, by the hand of Augustine
Carache, a rare work.

There is also a little Square of the head of a Madonna, by the hand of
Frederico Zuccharo.

Next is a S. Rocco, in little, the work of Parmeggianino.

There is likewise a head of our Savior, by the hand of Carache.

Then follows a half-figure as large as nature, of our Savior, the work of
Andrea del Sarto.

There is a head of a Priest after the life, by the hand of Hanniball Carache.

Then follows a Madonna with her Son in her arms, with a S. John, S. Joseph,
and S. Margaret, the work of Augustine Carache.

You may plainly observe a Christ dead carried to his Sepulcher, with many
Figures, painted upon Copper, a singular work of Hanniball Carache.

After this follows a little Square with a S. Francis in a Trance, upheld by an
Angel, and a Glory of Angels about, a most fair work of Hannibal Carache.

Then follows a S. John Baptist, by Hannibal Carache.

There is also a Madonna with her Son, by the hand of Parmeggianino.

Beneath this Madonna you see a Head of Pordenon.

Then follows another Chamber, which they call the Chamber of the Amoretti.
In which you first observe a Lucretia Romana, and another Square of a Leda
with a Swan, both of them by Dossi Ferrarese.

Adjoining to these is another Lucretia Romana, by the hand of Parmeggianino.

You also see The Passion of our Lord, the work of Hanniball Carache.

There follows a little Madonna with her Son in her Arms, and a S. John, by
Hanniball Carache; a very fine piece.

Another Square a the Madonna, S. Joseph, and several Angels, is the work of
Dossi Ferrarese.

There is also a S. Paul snatched up into the third Heaven, the work of
Lanfranco.

As also another little Madonna, by the hand of Guercino da Cento.

Then Follows the last Chamber, which they call the Emperor's Chamber.
In this Chamber you see three Squares.

In the first is represented Judith cutting off the Head of Holofernes.

The second does demonstrate Tarquin ravishing Lucretia Romana.

The third is Bathsheba discovered by David out of his Palace window, Painted
by a Lady called Artemisia, and very fair works.

You may also observe a Venus sleeping, by Hannibal Carache.

Over the Chimney there is a Square of St. Augustino, and other Figures, the
work of Pordenon.

You likewise observe twelve Emperors finely done, by Hanniball Carache.

The great Hall in the middle of the said Apartement.
Over the Chimney you will admire an Annunciation, the Figure is bigger than
the life, a singular work of great Correggio.

In this Hall you likewise see the Ritratto of Charles the fifth on Horseback,
a most singular work of Titian.

There follows in the same Hall, an Angel flying, with many other Angels which
accompany him: the Figures are bigger than the life, by Hannibal Carache.

Then follow two other Squares, of S. John Baptist, and S. John the Evangelist,
with many Heads of Angels, by the abovesaid Carache.

Next are two Squares of S. Benedetto and S. Mauro, with many Angels, by the
same Hanniball. All these works are much bigger than the life.

On the other side of the Hall there is the Nativity of our Lord, with many
Figures, it is a Night-piece, and the work of Bassano.

Right over against the Ritratto of Charles the fifth,

There is another Ritratto of Duke Alexander Farnese on Horseback, by the hand
of Augustine Carache.

In the Dukes Apartement there are Pictures of all sorts, of which I can give
no good relation, because of the great quantity there is of them, it also being
difficult to get liberty of seeing them.

The City of Piacenza.
The Domo.
AS you enter at the great Door, on your left hand, you see the Chapel of S.
Corrado, by the hand of Lanfranco.

Higher up near to the Quire, behind the Altar, and on your right hand as you
go into the Sacristie, there is an Altar with S. Alessio, by the same Lanfranco.

You also see in this Church a Picture which represents S. Martin giving part
of his Cloak for Alms, the work of Ludovico Carache.

The Church of S. Sisto, Fathers Benedictines.
The Picture in the Quire which represents the B. Virgin and her Son, in the
middle of the Picture, and by her side is S. Barbary, S. Sisto, and two Boys, a
mavelous fair work, as it was the usual manner of divine Raphael.

S. Nazario, a Parochial Church.
Going in at the great Door, you will find on your left hand, at the first
Altar near the said Door, a painting which represents S. Michael the Archangel
holding Lucifer in Chains, with these words underwritten Johannes Lanfrancus
fecit.

S. Andrew, a Parochial Church.
On your left hand as you enter the great Door, and in the first Chapel near
the said Door, you will find an Altar-piece with the Image of the Madonna di
Reggio, with S. Francis de Assisi, and S. Rustico a Martyr; the work of
Lanfranco.

The Church of the Fathers Serviti, called Madonna di Piazza.
As you enter at the great Door, the third Chapel on your left hand is all
painted by Lanfranco. The Altar-piece is S. Luke the Evangelist in a posture of
writing, with his head lifted up toward a Troop of Angels.

The Chapel about the Altar, where there is a little Cuppola with the B.
Virgin in glory, and around the said Virgin are twelve Persons which are
believed to be the twelve Patriarchs, from whence she is derived.

After this there is another little Cuppola with small windows, and on the Top
is the Father Eternal.

The Church of Madonna di Campagnia.
Where you see several works around the inside of the Cuppola, by the hand of
Giorgone.

In this Church you likewise see two Chapells, one with the History of S.
Katherine. In the other is the Picture of Christ: also the Altar of S.
Augustine, all the works of Pordenon.

Then follows the Tribunal, by the same Author.

In like manner you see a Picture with the Blessed Virgin, S. Peter, and S.
Paul, the work of most noble Paulo Veronese.

Corte Maggiore, in the Territory of Piacenza.
The Domo.
HEre you will see a Picture, and a little Cuppola, singlar works of Pordenon.

There is also a Picture by Carache.

The STATE OF MODENA.
The City of Modena.
The Gallery of the most Serene Duke.
IN this famous Treasury you see a half-figure, and a Head, by the most
ingenious Leonarda da Vinci.

In the same you see a Ritratto of Raphael, and two Heads, by Andrea del Sarto.

And a great Square of Abraham's Sacrifice, by the same Sarto.

There are ten pieces, or there-abouts, by Giulio Romano.

You likewise see a Head, by Giorgone.

In this same Gallery there are four Squares by Titian.

The first represents the B. Virgin and S. Joseph traveling into Egypt.

The second is the Blessed Virgin and her Son, and S. Paul.

The third is the Child Jesus in the Manger.

Then follows the fourth called the Quadro della Moneta, viz. When the Hebrews
showed money to the Redeemer, singular works of the Author.

There are also seen some little pieces of Heads, by Pordenon.

Then follows the Picture of our Savior, with another beautiful Square of old
Palma.

Next are two great Squares of noble Paulo Veronese.

In one you will admire the Marriage of Cana in Galilee.

In the other the Coming of the Magi, with two other Squares, some of the
fairest works of the Author.

The next you see is a famous Night-piece, by Correggio; one of his most
admirable works, the Lights of the Picture darting out miraculously.

In like manner you will admire two Squares of bold Tintoret.

Also two of Giacomo Bassano.

One does demonstrate the History of the Samaritan.

The other is a Piece of Animals, both of them singular works, after his usual
manner.

After these there are great Quantities of Squares, by Correggio, which I do
forbear to name particularly for brevity sake.

You will see a Picture, and a Ritratto, by Parmeggianino.

There are likewise diverse works of the three excellent Caraches.

There are also works of Guido Reno, and diverse other Authors, which would
fill a Book alone to write of all such Jewels as are contained in this Gallery.

I have only named the most principal, I leave the rest to the Virtuoso's and
most curious, to observe them particularly at their own leisure.

The Domo.
There are two singular good Pictures by Guido Reno.

The City of Reggio.
The Church of S. Prospero.
WHere you see a Picture with the Blessed Virgin and the Child Jesus, and S.
Girolamo, with S. Crispin and Crispianino, the works of Guido Reno.

The Picture in the Quire is by Hanniball Carache.

The little Church of S. Joseph.
There is a Picture which does demonstrate a living Christ, by Guido Reno.

The Confraternity of S. Rocco.
The Picture in the Quire is the work of Hanniball Carache.

Finale di Modena.
The Church of S. Nicholas.
HEre you will find a Picture of the B. Virgin with her Son, and S. Lorenz, the
work of Guercin da Cento.

The House of Count Zuccati.
The Front of this House is all painted by the abovesaid Guercin da Cento.

The Castle of Carpi.
The Domo.
HEre is a mavelous Picture of S. Rocco, by the hand of Guido Reno.

Sassuoli ten miles distant from Modena.
The Church of the Capuchines.
IN which you will admire that most beautiful Piece at the great Altar, by the
hand of Ludovico Carache.

The City of Mirandola.
IN this City (especially in the Duke's Gallery) they preserve variety of
singular good works of diverse principal Authors, beforementioned in this
little work.

The City of Mantua.
The Domo.
HEre you see a Picture representing the Redeemer when he called James and John
to the Apostleship, by Giulio Romano.

There is likewise seen another Picture with S. Anthony the Abbot, by Paulo
Veronese.

The Church of S. Andrew.
There are two Pieces, one demonstrates the Crucifixion of Christ; the other
the finding of his Blood, by Giulio Romano.

The Church of S. Dominico.
Here is seen a Picture of the abovesaid Giulio.

The Palace of T.
There are the most famous works of Giulio Romano, in diverse Halls, Galleries,
Chambers, etc. with Histories, and Freezes of all sorts, the works of this
Palace deserve coming from a far Country to see.

In the Delitie di Marmirolo, there are also various works of the same Giulio.

The STATE OF MILAN.
The City of Milan.
The Church of the Madonna della Gratie, Fathers Dominicans.
HEre is the famous Picture, by Titian, representing the Crowning of the
Redeemer with a Crown of Thorns, one of the fairest works of the Author.

The Domo.
Here you see a most beautiful Picture of a Dead Christ, by the hand of Barocci.

The Church of S. Celso Preti.
In the second Sacristie you see a Square of Raphael.

In the Church you will admire the Altar-piece of S. Girolamo, the work of
Paris Bordone.

The Church of the Fathers Teatini.
As you enter at the great Door, on your right hand you may observe a Square by
the side of the furthermost Altar, by the hand of Ludovico Carache.

In the most famous Library called the Libraria Ambrosiana.
There are four Squares by Titian, singular ones.

You see moreover, many works by Leonardo da Vinci.

In the same you see upon two Squares the dispute concerning the Sacrament, by
Raphael; painted in Rome in the Palace of the Vatican.

There are also diverse designs of the most singulars Painters named in this
Book.

THE FAMOUS CLOSET OF Signior Manfredo Septale.
THis Closet abounds with variety of Rarities, in Nature as well as Art, I
shall only take notice of the best Paintings, being only proper to the thing in
hand.

1. There is the Effigies of Galeazzo Septale, Captain of the Germans, and
Great-unkle to Manfredo Septale. This Picture needs no other commendation than
that it was the work of Titian.

2. The Picture of Ludovico Septale, Father to the same Manfredo, this is the
work of Fide Gallitia, the most celebrated Paintress in the world.

3. The Annunciation of the B. Virgin Mary, the work of a certain Hollander
eminent in the Court of Rome.

4. The Picture of Senator Septale, Brother to Manfredo, the work of Daniel
Crispi a Painter of great repute.

5. There is a large Picture of the aforesaid, Daniel Crispi, relating to the
Temptation of S. Anthony, a singular invention.

6. Another Picture of the most Illustrious and Reverend Bishop Charles
Septale, Brother to Manfredo, the work of a Flemming, eminent in the City of
Rome.

7. The Picture of Manfredo himself, the work of the abovenamed Daniel Crispi.

8. A small Picture of the B. Virgin Mary with S. Joseph and Christ an Infant
taking of Fruits from S. Joseph, a work of singular beauty, and the work of
that famous Woman Gallitia.

9. Another small Effigies of Ludovico Septale when he was a youth.

10. The Picture of the B. Virgin, with Christ, and S. John, being little
Boys, painted in a large Picture by great Raphael, the Prince of Painters.

11. A most Elegant Picture of a grave Matron, by Leonardo da Vinci.

12. A small, but most noble Picture, by Bernardino Luini, a famous Painter, in
which is represented the Picture of the B. Virgin Mary, and Christ giving a
Flower to S. John Baptist.

13. The Picture of Nontio Gallitii a famous Limner, and Father of Fide
Gallitia, who painted this piece.

14. The Picture of Fide Gallitia in the flower of her age, done by her own
hand.

15. The Picture of a Little Boy, the work of Fide Gallitia.

16. The Picture of the Duke of Ferrara, a singular work of Juliano.

17. Another Picture of Septale, the work of Bronzino, a Florentine.

18. The Picture of Gustavus Adolphus King of the Swedes, by an unknown hand.

19. The Picture of Christina Queen of the Swedes, and Daughter to Gustavus.

20. The Picture of Oliver Cromwell, by an unknown hand.

21. The Picture of the most Serene John Duke of Austria, the work of Paini.

22. The Picture of Pope Innocent the tenth.

23. The Picture of Pope Julius the second in the middle between two young
Cardinals, viz. Cardinal Medici (who was chosen Pope when he was but thirty
three years of age, and called Leo the tenth) and Cardinal Sixtus, the work of
one of Raphael Vrbines Scholars.

24. A Woman of tall Stature with her Face hairy all over, every hair as long
as ones hand, an egregious work of Paini.

25. The Picture of a Monster by an unknown hand.

26. The Picture of Two Virgins in Hunting habits.

27. A great Picture of Bassano, representing our Redeemer Crowned with Thorns,
a Night-piece.

28. A Picture upon which two Painters of no mean Rank (to wit Grosso and
Duchino) did vie with each other, in it there is expressed the B. Virgin with
the Child Jesus, and B. Elizabeth, and a little S. John.

29. A Picture expressing the sad Accident which befell Lucretia Romana
sheathing a Dagger in her Bowels, as an eternal signification of her inviolated
Chastity, the work of Cerani.

30. S. James sitting on his Horse, and brandishing his Sword amongst his
dispersed Soldiers, this is likewise a Picture of Cerani.

31. A S. Joseph, by Cerani.

32. A Busto, with the head of S. James, the work of Cerani.

33. The Woman believed to be a Whore, the work of that famous Painter Leonardo
da Vinci.

34. David carrying in his hands the formidable head of the Giant Goliath, a
singular work of Julius Caesar Procani, when he was young.

35. S. Francis with a Parrot, the work of Cerani's Sister.

36. A Lucretia, the work of Leone Aretini.

37. Another Lucretia, the work of Sardini.

38. S. Jerome accompanied with an Angelical Minstrel, the work of Vermilii.

39. The Picture of S. John, the work of Hercules Procacini.

40. An Anatomy naturally expressed by Daniel Crispo that eminent Painter, who
painted most part of the great Carthusian Church at Tiacin.

41. The Picture of the most celebrated Jucunda, an Ornament in the King of
France's Bedchamber, a Copy from Leonardo da Vinci.

42. An Egyptian Woman, by Fide Gallitia, from an Original of Leonardo da Vinci.

43. A great Piece in which the Martyrdom of S. Cecilia is expressed, by
Salimbono from an Original of Micerini.

44. Three large Pictures, Copied from the Paintings of Andrea del Sarto.

45. Two Pictures more of the same hand, in one is S. Agnes and S. Christina,
in the other is S. Peter, and S. John.

46. The Picture of a Woman, a Natural work of Tintoret.

47. Herodias with S. John Baptist's head, the Head is the work of Cerani,
Herodias the work of a Daughter of Cerani, and Wife to the Painter Melchiore
Gherardino.

48. S. Jerome, and S. Lucia, the works of Metchiore Gherardino.

49. S. Jerome praying, a Night-piece, the work of Bassano.

50. A Picture containing the B. Virgin with her Son, and two Angels
worshipping, the work of Soliano.

51. The B. Virgin with Jesus and S. John, a Copy from Raphael Vrbin, the
Original of which is reckoned amongst the precious pieces that the King of
France preserves.

52. An Emulous work of Luino, after Raphael Vrbino, expressing the B. Virgin,
with her Son and a Pilgrim.

53. The B. Virgin with her Son and S. Joseph, Copied from Correggio, by Fide
Gallitia.

54. The Blessed Virgin Mary habited after the Egyptian mode, likewise Copied
from Correggio, by Fide Gallitia.

55. A Heifer, painted by Fide Gallitia.

56. The Virgin, with Jesus, S. Elizabeth, and S. John, the work of Leo Aresini.

57. Another Virgin with Christ an Infant sleeping, the work of Camillo
Procacini.

58. Two singular Pictures, one of which is illustrated with S. Katherine, in
the other is the B. Virgin Crowned with a Glory of Angels, the works of
Bernardino Luini, and his Brother.

59. A great Picture in which is expressed the first Murder, viz. Cain giving
the fatal stroke to his Brother Abel, an original of Guido Reno. There are also
four other Pictures, Copied from the Originals of the same Guido Reno.

60. A Magdalen, by Hercules Procacino.

61. An Annunciation brought from Rome, a piece of singular beauty.

62. Three Pictures famous for three Heads, that of Homer, another of S.
Jerome, the third of Moses, having in his hands the Tables of the Law; the
works of Tiroli.

63. Two Birds painted by Fide Gallitia.

64. A Porrot of the most beautiful sort, as also another Egyptian Bird, which
were formerly live Ornaments in the House of Septale.

65. Daniel in the Lions Den, the Lions are the works of Daniel Crispi, after
Brugora, but Daniel is the work of Melchiore Gherardino.

66. The Pictures of Exotic Animals, formerly familiar Ornaments in the House
of Septale, now only beautify two Squares, the chief of these is a Japan Bird
called Micous, not so much famous for its diversity of colors, as for its
Docibility, for when the Archduke of Inspruck and the Arch-Dutchess of Austria
were admiring, and praising of it, it answered scornfully, that Septale had
given it them as a present to their most Serene Highnesses.

67. An Indian Crow.

68. Two large Landskips by the diligent hand of Pietro Florentino.

69. Two other Landskips of a lesser size, by the same Author.

70. A Tempest at Sea.

71. Another Prospect at Sea.

72. A Battle, by Carolo Battavo.

73. A Calm Sea, with many Sails displayed within the Haven, the work of a
Fleming, after Brugora.

74. A great Landscape expressing a large Country, by Carolo a Sole.

75. King Priam's Palace in Flames, by Rudolpho.

76. Another Landscape after the life.

77. Another fair Prospect of a Country, the work of Pietro Flandro.

78. A great Picture representing Armed Women, and other Types of War.

79. The Picture of the Great Colossus, or the Amphitheatre at Rome, together
with Constantine's Arch, done at Rome, by one Philipp.

80. Other small Landskips, expressed in six Pictures.

81. A most perfect piece of Brugora.

82. The Picture of K. Philip the fourth, the most potent Monarch of Spain, by
Paint.

83. A small Picture in Limning, which represents Jesus going to Emaus, done at
Rome.

84. Another small Picture, by Leonardo da Vinci.

85. Other two Pictures which represent the B. Virgin and Christ Crowned with
Flowers.

The City of Cremona.
The Domo.
ON the inside of the Front of this Domo there is a large History representing
Christ Crucified between the Thieves, with many other Figures, a superb work of
Pordenon.

The City of Genoua.
The Church of S. Stephen.
HEre is to be admired the History of the Stoning of this Saint, a stately work
of Giulio Romano.

In diverse places where the Gentlemen of Genoua assemble (but chiefly that
called the Imperial Assembly) are seen diverse Squares of great Titian.

The public Palace.
Here is to be seen in a Hall, a Freeze of most beautiful Boys, by the hand
of Pordenon.

The City of Lucca.
The Domo.
AT the third Altar on the right hand as you enter, you will find a Picture of
our Redeemer's last Supper with the Apostles, the work of Tintoret.

Near the Sepulcher of Cardinal Giudiccioni you see another Picture of the B.
Virgin and her Son Christ, Crowned by two Angels, at their Feet is an Angel
playing upon the Lute, and on each side is S. John Baptist and S. Stephen, by
Frae. Bartolomeo.

In the Church of S. Romano, Fathers Dominicans.
At the first Altar on your left hand as you enter, is another admirable
Picture, wherein is expressed an Ecstasie of S. Katherine of Siena, and S.
Magdalen with the Father Eternal in Glory.

At the second Chapel on your right hand is a Picture of the abovesaid Fra.
Bartolomeo, wherein is expressed the Virgin Mother of Mercy, blessing great
numbers of people with her Garment, and above is the B Virgin with the Redeemer
with his arms spread abroad, and showing.

Santa Maria, called Corte Landini.
Here are two Pictures by Guido Reno, one is on the right hand of the great
Altar representing the Virgin in the Snow, with Christ in her arms, and an
Angel shaking off the Snow, with a S. Mary Magdalen, and S. Lucia.

The other is on the left hand, with Christ on the Cross, at his Feet is S.
Katherine a Virgin Martys, and S. Giulio a Martyr.

The Church of S. Piero Samaldi.
As you enter at the great Door, the first Altar on the left hand is by old
Palma, where you find S. Anthony the Abbot in the middle of four other Saints.

In S. Pietro Civoli.
The third Altar on your left hand as you enter, is the work of Lanfranco,
signifying the Martyrdom of S. Lorenzo.

Near to the side Door, is likewise seen a Picture with Christ Crowning of S.
Teresa, and over them are two Saints.

In S. Maria without the Gates.
Here are seen two Pictures by Guercin da Cento, both of them near the great
Altar; in one is S Lucia, in the other is the Assumption, with S. Sylvester
Pope, and S. Francis of Asisi below.

Pescia, ten miles distant from Lucca.
In the Church called La Piere.
Entering this Church, in the utmost Chapel on your right hand, you see a
stately Picture of the B. Virgin upon a Throne with her Son in her Arms, and
two little Angels, with diverse Saints on each side, an admirable work of
incomparable Raphael.

Alla Piere de Lamari two miles distant from Lucca.
The Church.
HEre is seen a Picture of the abovesaid Raphael, with the B. Virgin, S.
Anthony, S. Bartholomew, and S. Bernardino of Siena, an admirable work.

In this same Church, and in the first Chapel on your right hand as you enter,
you see a Bishop and an holy Martyr, with two Ritrattos on their knees, and
above the Altar is the Father Eternal, it is the work of an unknown Author, but
a piece so beautiful that it does not give place to any Master whatsoever.

RAPHAEL d' Vrbina
Not: Ao 1483.

portrait of Raphael

The City of Naples.
The Chapel of Tesoro.
IN diverse parts of this Chapel you see Histories relating to several Saints,
singular works of Dominichino.

In the same Chapel are likewise seen diverse stupendous works by the hand of
Giovanni Lanfranco.

The Church of S. Dominico.
In this Church you see a most stately Picture of diverse Saints, by the hand of
great Raphael.

FINIS.

