THE RELIEF OF THE POOR: and ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING: Proposed.

By HUMPHREY BARROW, (during the War) a Member of the Army.

Qui cito dat, bis dat. LONDON, Reprinted, and are to be sold by William
Larner, at the Sign of the Blackmore near Fleet-Bridg, 1656.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY The Lord HENRY CROMWELL* Commander in chief of the Forces of
IRELAND.
And the rest of the honorable Commanders, and inferior Officers now, and late
of the Army.
THAT Glorious Success with which God has crowned your honorable Actions, in
the rescue of this precious Land out of those hands that without cause were
imbrued in the blood of our Country; is yet so fresh and warm in every
ingenuous heart, that (I hope) a Proposal, tending to a sacrificious gratitude
to the Lord of Hoasts, (by whose mercy and mighty arm, we are what we are)
will not be unreasonably presented to any person concerned in this Address.
Wherein I have humbly assumed the confidence to mind You of the pious Customs
of the Soldiers and Servants of God in former Ages; nay of the laudable (though
blind) Devotions of Pagans and Infidels, as Sacred, and other History do
(amply) manifest? Who no sooner could sound Victoria after a war, but up go the
Alters, and on go the Sacrifices, in retribution of thanks to that Deity each
held in veneration.

It Is true, we have (in the progress of this War) afforded God some Days of
Thanksgiving; and he (at last) having given us the issue of our hopes; the
Blessing and Harvest of our Blood and Sweat: those would all look like days of
hellish Hypocrisy, if we should not now present him with some Deeds of Thank
sgiving; and Sacrifices being ceased, we have an Opportunity to exercise what
he loves better, which is, Mercy.

Not then to hold You any longer in the Porch of expectation, I here present
You in one hand, the Aged, the Infirm, the Orphan, to be provided for by way of
Hospital: and in the other hand, that yet-in it's-Morning (but hopeful) light
of this Land, the University of Dublin, for Addition of Revenue. To carry on
both which, I wish God would persuade each heart herein concerned, to allow one
Acre of Land out of each hundred, due to him; which granted, there is little
doubt but the Adventurers, to whom God has given so fair a Return of their
pious Loanes; and Purchasers of Debentures, who have least reason to oppose,
will do the like: And the same deducted from each man's Proportion, to be cast
into a single, or what several Parcels, the wisdom of the Government shall
judge convenient.

Perhaps some may object, That this Motion comes too late, much of the Land
being already disposed of, (and I grant, had it been thought of sooner, it had
been effected with less trouble, but) Volenti nil difficile, we should not in
the least pause at the difficulty, were it to serve our own particulars; and
indeed, considered in the best sense, it is so, if we expect a blessing upon
the rest of our Estates; or if there be any wisdom in laying up treasure in
Heaven: for this shall be surer to your houses, then the brains of all the
Lawyers that ever trod Westminster Hallmet in one scull, can make the rest.

For who knows how soon, prodigal Heirs (ordinarily the Issue of penurious
Fathers) shall make havoc of those Estates, the hundredth part whereof, might,
though not merit, have brought a blessing upon you to all eternity. A fair
warning for the observance of that precious inch of Scripture, Whilst you have
time do good; least while you are rotting, your Heirs be revelling; and they
damned for spending upon their lusts, what you were damned for denying the
Lazar.

And if there be any (though I hope better things) that shall strain at this
Gnat, I wonder how they would have behaved themselves toward that Camel, laid
before the Young man in the Gospel, All that thou have. Remember the Widows
mite, and the superlative testimony our Savior gave of it. Poor woman! It was
all she had, and this a Fleece out of a flock.

And I dare affirm Ananias and Sapphira (laying aside their lie) were Saints,
compared to such as shall say to this Proposal, I Will consider of it.

If we can pay the fourth part of our Rents to these Common-welaths, we may
blush before the Angels to deny the hundredth part to the Commonwealth of
Christ: For this is not to denude your walls of their hangings, to cover the
flesh of the poor; nor your Coaches of their leather, to make them shoes; your
super-necessarie pampred Steeds of their Horsecloaths, to make them Shirts; nor
your Manger of their Provender, to fill their Ovens; though all these might
well be abated to reliev the meanest Member of Christ. God has given to many
amongst us vast Estates, large possessions; he has given us the Land and
labor of our Enemies, Beings that we neither built nor planted; nay he has
given us our lives for a prey, when thousands as valiant, as precious, as
worthy as we, lie now rotting in contempible ditches. And shall we not help our
Brethren to live with us? That Saying is as good as old, Non nobis solum nati
sumus, we are not born only for our selves; and I hope we did not altogether
fight for our selves; but shal'be tried by this trifle, though what is here
urged as an act of Charity, and as yet carries no other face, may to
after-ages be rendered an act of Polity, and that Sustenance and Science being
the subject matters here preast, who knows but that casting his bounty and
bread upon the waters now, he may after many days find them in the bellies and
brains of his needy posterity.

Perhaps there may be some who set a low rate upon that Beauty and Glory of
Humanity, Learning, which sanctified, restores us nearest to the Image of God:
but if there be, (as I hope few) they must give me leave to believe they are
such as would have the eyes both of Church and Commonwealth put out, that they
might have the leading of them.

It was highly in question which was the saddest Persecutione, that under
Dioclesian, or that under Julian the Apostate; the first laboring the
destruction of all the bodies of the Saints, and the last of all books, that no
memory of God or Religion might remain: but the last was concluded infinitely
transcendant, as a device that would have thrown the world into a deeper then
Egyptian darkness.

It Is true, there are many who (I have charity to believe) mean well, and much
mind the enlargement of the bounds of the Church, and opening a way for the
light of the Gospel in it is purity to shine upon the freckled face of the
erroneous World: But alas! that is hard to be done by a language that has no
acquaintance abroad; nor could ever travel farther then the verges of our own
shores, save amongst our own Colonies; and not communicable to other Natures by
any universal Rule. I must needs grant, that Christ in the election of his
Apostles, made choice of poor ignorant laboring men; but I hope none will
deny, that though he found them such, yet after the sealing of their great
Commission to preach the Gospel, by the Holy Ghost, in cloven tongues, they
went away the most sublimated Scholars that ever were, or shall be upon the
World; That Great Schoolmaster in a moment dispelling the mist of despicable
ignorance, and filling them with all Languages and requisite Knowledge. And
it is observable, that when God had a purpose to stay the Building of Babel, and
scatter mankind into fractions; he confounds their speech, and divides tongues
to the Nations: but when he resolves to build up his Church, he recollects them
all into the Mouths of his Apostles. With some measure of which Qualification
(immediate gift of tongues being ceased) the most eminent Servants of Christ,
and faithful promoters of the purity of his truth, have from time to time,
indefatigably labored by Nurseries of Learning to endow the Ministry.

It Is true, Exhortations, Reproofs, Consolations, and Directions in plain and
patent matters, are highly commendable in those of meanest parts; for they that
feared the Lord* spoke often one to another: but Preaching, Exposition, and the
unfolding of hidden Mysteries, do modestly call for sanctified Learning and
Authority. The management of which Assertion, I humbly leave to those Champions
of the Truth, whose Shields I am not worthy to bear.

And now craving pardon to my prolixity, glance once aagain upon the poor; and
wish the most obdurate wretch to lay his hand upon his heart and consider, how
his ears will one day tingle to hear that Soul-crushing charge of unkindnesse
from the mouth of the Son of God, I was hungry, and ye fed me not.

Adding only this, If there be any heart so much Adamant, brow so much brass,
or mind so void of Mercy, as to set himself in positive Opposition to what is
here suggested; or that his evil Example, or Coldness, cause this great
Business to fall to the ground; he must give me leave to tell him, He runs the
desperate hazard of eternally sinking under the weight of all the Curses, that
shall in bitterness of spirit fall from the trembling Aged, Anxieted, Infirm
persons, and friendless Orphans, that shall ever languish upon the face of this
fruitful Land, from this day to the day of Judgment.

In regard the effecting of this great Work may (to some dull spirits) seem
difficult, the ensuing Suggestions are humbly offered to consideration.

I.
That Commissioners of active spirits, and unbyassed Principles, be appointed
to the management and carrying on of this business.

II.
That the Muster-masters in the respective Provinces of this Dominion, be
ordered to offer it to the Subscription of every Officer relating to that part
of the Army, the next Musterday after he receivs it from hence.

III.
That whereas some are in parcel possession of their Estates, and out of
emploiment: the High Sheriff of every respective County be ordered by himself,
or his Substitutes, to tender it to the voluntary Subscription of every such
person, as also to all personally possessed Adventurers, and purchasors of
Debentures; for the deduction of the proportion out of the part remaining due
unto him.

IV.
That whereas many are in possession of their full proportion of Lands, and
consequently no convenient way left for contributing their proportions in
kind; there are numerous presidents of persons so completed, that offer their
return in money, rateably as they received each Acre.

V.
That whereas it may be objected, that many so in possession of their full
proportions, are not provided with ready money: the High Sheriff of every
County be ordered by himself, or his Substitutes, to tender it to the
voluntary Subscription of every such person, for the sum and time wherein
they cheerfully consent to pay it.

VI.
That what money shall so be received, be paid into a Treasury appointed for
that purpose in Dublin; and laid out in purchase of Land for the uses aforesaid.

VII.
That the Sheriffs of every respective County, be ordered yearly to give in
their Account to their Successors, before a full Bench of Justices.

VIII.
That the Sheriffs and Muster-masters aforesaid, be ordered to return hither
the names of all the Dissenters, to the end that being here recorded, there may
be no mistake in the deductions.

IX.
That the Sheriffs do within twenty days, return all the Subscriptions to the
Commissioners beforementioned.

X.
That his Highness's Council for the affairs of Ireland, be moved for their
countenance to, and assistance in the promotion of it.

XI.
That his Highness the Lord Protector be moved to recommend it to the
Adventurers in England, who are (ordinarily) cheerful contributors to works of
this nature.

XII.
That the Chancellor of this Universitie be moved to a speedy Rectification,
and rescue of it from Disorder.

FINIS.
My first Letter to my LORD, wherein I enclosed the PROPOSAL.
MY LORD!
I Had once a purpose to present this Address, and make it my own, but
considering that all things of this nature derive their value and vigor from
the countenance and power of those persons that are Primarily and Potently
Motive; I thought it most expedient to put it into your Excellencies hand, as
the only person able to promote it to perfection. My LORD! as for Learning you
have already owned its Patronage; and for what concerns the Poor, you have
great cause of confidence, that if you begin in Mercy, you shall end in Peace:
And for my self I shall humbly crave you will believe, That if this paper find
the effect it seems to aim at, I have my end; only shall beg to be esteemed,

MY LORD! Your Excellencies faithful and humble servant, HUMP. BARROW.
Sept. 12. 1655.
My second Letter to my LORD upon the delay.
MY LORD!
IT is not long since I presented your Excellency a Paper of Motion to the
Relief of the poor, and Ad(...)ning; what value it found in your (...) yet
happy to know, but have hope that no Aversion of Will, but the crowd of
public affairs have hurried it aside, though I have unhappily heard of almost
impossible difficulties charged upon it; And indeed my LORD, it was not much my
wonder, there being nothing wherein the depraved constitution of man is more
quick-sighted, then spying Lions in the way to all good Works. My LORD; What I
have proposed, will (I hope) be deemed the requisite promotion of Mercy and
Truth, and if those two be once shut out of our gates, it is greatly to be
feared it will not be long before their old inseparable companions
Righteousness and Peace leap over the Walls. My Lord; I perceive, that if this
languishing design be not kept alive by your Excellencies power, example, and
personal industry, it will inevitably die, but as certainly rise again at the
day of Judgment, to the confusion of faces of all those that have either
neglected or opposed it, to save to themselves a Spade-full of uncertain dung:
And My Lord, I humbly crave that to this great office of good to posterity,
and honor to your self, you will add a pardon to the presumption of.

MY LORD! Your Excellencies faithful, and humble servant, Humph. Barrowe.

My first Letter to Doctor Harrison, my LORD'S Chaplain.
SIR!
FEw days since I snatch an opportunity in your presence to present some
papers to my Lord, expecting your auxiliary endeavors to perfect a work which
posterity may bless you for, but whether or no they were imparted to you, I
am yet much to seek, and more unwilling to doubt there wants its fire, or the
Priest a readiness to receive in Sacrificers. Sir, if you are not already
acquainted with it, this Gentleman who is laudibly zealous for it will inform
you: Sir, the Condition of my Proposal is the same with that of Bethesda
Cripple, it has neither enemies, nor friends, but it is sad that so much
preaching, and so much praying should not be seconded by that precious and
pertinent ornament of Cristianitie, Pity. Sir, we do with a great deal of
confidence own ourselves upon God, sit before him as his people, and call to
him for all mercies, safeties, and successes, and it is fit our eyes should be
often up toward him, but sometimes down upon the poor; otherwise (which I much
fear) we shall run a course parallel with the Merchant Jew, who craves favor
and credit from every man, but will trust no man. Sir, as for the Advancement
of Learning, your manifest Education in, and high improvement of it, has from
the Pulpit saved me a labor, from whence one sentence of your Chrysostomiz'd
exhortations to this glorious work, would be heard in a continued Echo from
generation to generation, till the last Trumpet received it into the Consort of
Eternity Sir, I crave your pardon to my importunity, but you know whose
business it is, and further begs liberty to tell you, it was not for nothing
that Hester was set so near her King, Joseph to Pharaoh, Nehemiah to his potent
Master. Nor need I tell you, that the improvement of that great talent of
advantage God has given you, in the ear of that hopeful person (to whom you
relate) will be (one day) required. And Sir I further crave, you will believe I
write not this to move you, but to mind you; assuming only the office of a
silly Sexton, to toll the Bell of (...) to duties of piety, and am,

SIR, Your servant Humph. Barrow.
November. 1. 1655.
My second Letter to Doctor Harrison.
LEARNED SIR!
I Have here enclosed sent you a Copy of my late PROPOSALS, and another of my
last Letter to his Excellency, which it seems is mis-laid; wherein I then
enclosed a removal of all obstructions, and answer to all objections which I
could upon severest scruteny discern obvious, but shall not trouble you with
that till I see in the great ONES a propensitie to, and some progress in the
great business, which I am confident had been in a good forwardness, had I
(wisely) made a more timely application to your self, upon whom (I may not omit
to acquaint you) the eyes of


