A Brief ANSWER TO A DISCOURSE Lately Written by one P. B. TO PROVE BAPTISM
under the defection of Antichrist, to be the Ordinance of JESUS CHRIST, AND The
Baptizing of Infants to be agreeable to the Word of GOD. Wherein is Declared
(from his own grounds) that true Baptism, and a false Church are
inconsistent, and cannot stand together: And also maintained, That the
Baptizing of Infants has no authority from the Scriptures.

The simple believes every Word: but the prudent man looks well to his
goings. PROVE. 14.15. By R. BARROW.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1642.

To the READER.
ALthough diverse of the learned have declared the Baptism of Infants to be but
a humane tradition; as P. B. confesses in his Epistle, page 3. yet
notwithstanding, there be many that have, and do take upon them, to
countenance the same by the Word of God, wherein they commit a double offense;
one in seducing the people, and leading them to disobedience against Christ,
Mat. 28.19. Mar 16.15, 16. whom they are to hear in all things, Acts 3. The
other in taking the Word of Christ, and putting it as a sword into the hands of
men to defend and maintain themselves in such their disobedience against him;
amongst whom, one P. B. has lately taken part in publishing a book to prove
the Baptism of Infants to be agreeable to the word of God, but (as many times
it falls out when men undertake to defend an evil cause) he has so bewrayed
the error of that doctrine, that in the judgment of any, who are but
indifferently acquainted with the Scriptures, there needs no more be said to
discover the falsity thereof, and sinfulness of his own practice in the same
things wherein unadvisedly he accuses others. One instance J shall give
thereby to cause the Reader in pursuing his discourse, to take notice therein
he fights against himself, and in that thing most of all whereupon his
whole building stands, which is the perpetuity of the visible Church under
the new Testament, page 1. and so by consequent of Baptism, whereby the matter
of the Church is differenced, page 3.4. wherein he makes Baptism to depend
upon the Church; whence then it must needs follow, that unless he can find
such a Church which has successively continued from the first planting, until
these days, he cannot assure himsefe that his baptism received, is the
ordinance of Christ. But page 2.3. he confesses that he knows not where any
such Church has continued, nor does he believe that any can be found that can
make such a continuance of the Church to appear: therefore he received not
his Baptism from any such Church, nor is it then by his own argument, the
baptism of Christ, but a counterfeit, or Idol come out of the bottomless
pit, as he himself speaks, page 6. Having thus destroyed his foundation,
and impeached his own baptism, and the baptism of the Church of England,
derived from the Church of Rome, a false state the mother of fornications, etc.
as he affirms in the 3. page of his Epistle to the Reader, his whole building
must needs fall to the ground, which thing being considered, I know it may be
thought, that an Answer to such a Discourse should be altogether unnecessary;
for he that impeacheth himself, needs no other to accuse him; yet
nevertheless, hearing that some not well acquainted with the state of this
controversy have by his mis-applying the Scriptures in the handling of the
same, been prejudiced against the truth, by him evil spoken of; for their
sakes therefore is this brief Answer made, wherein not regarding to follow him
to and fro, in all his vain wandering and tautologies (wherewith his book is
stored) I have reduced his whole Discourse into such particular heads, as do
either concern the perpetuity of the visible Church, the baptism of the Church
of Rome, or the baptism of Infants, etc. which he undertaketh to prove; for
Answer, I have made use of little, save only what I have found in his own
writing, wherein indeed, is sufficient to discover the vanity of his opinion in
these particulars, and to satisfy any that thereby have taken offense againg
the truth; but all that is said, will appear to thee (courteous Reader) in the
following Answer, and therefore I shall refer thee thereunto, and also unto
the grace and guidance of Christ our Redeemer, in whose service I am always
thine,

R. BARROVV.

A BREIFE ANSWER To a Discourse, lately written by one P. B. etc.
FIrst, he says, that the visible Church of Christ has had a perpetual
continuance in the world from the first plantation thereof by Christ and the
Apostles, and shall so continue unto the end of the world; this he says was
prophesied, Esa. 9.7.59.21. witnessed, Luke 1.33. Acts 5.29. and confirmed,
Matthew. 16.18.28.20. and these Scriptures are stable and true, and so to be
accounted by all the Saints, page 1.

I answer, That these Scriptures, and all other, being delivered by the spirit
of God, 2 Pet. 1.21. are stable and true, and so to be accounted of all the
world, Acts 3.22.23. and yet are not therefore the several glosses and
understandings of men given upon these or other Scriptures always stable and
true, nor so to be accounted of any man. Before we give credit therefore to
his construction of these Scriptures; we will a little examine how he makes
the truth thereof to appear: he says, that the perpetuity of the visible
Church was prophesied, Esaias 9.7.59.21. And the Word is yea and Amen, etc.
whereupon then it must needs follow, that if the visible Church of Christ has
not had a perpetual uninterrupted succession in the world ever since the first
plantation thereof, until these days, though this prophecy in it self be
true, yet his understanding and interpretation thereof must needs be false.
This rule the Lord himself has given us, thereby to distinguish the true
Prophet from the false, Deutron. 18.22. he says, when a Prophet speaks in
the name of the Lord, and if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is,
not the thing which the Lord has spoken, but the Prophet has spoken it
presumptuously. Now, as hereby we are taught to distinguish the true Prophets
from the false, so likewise are we by the same rule taught, to know the true
interpretation of every prophecy from the false, and therefore when any
interpretation of any prophecy is given, and accordingly the thing follow not
nor come to pass that is, not the thing which the Lord has spoken in that
prophecy, but it is a false interpretation, and he is a false Prophet that has
given the same, of whom we are taught to beware, Matthew. 7.15. from which
imputation, we shall now see how well he acquitteth himself.

First, he tells us, that the defection and falling away under Antichrist was
very general and mavelous universal; and this he proves, Rev. 13.8, 16.
(to which also he might have added the 3.4. and 7. verses) and unless the
defection under Antichrist had been thus universal, he says the Waldenses,
who appeared in the dawne of the day, could not truly have been called the
first fruits unto God, as he conceives they were, page 2. We say so too, and
also firm that the visible Church could not continue under that defection,
because it is said, it was given to him to make war with the Saints, and to
overcome them, and if to overcome them, they could not continue, for if they
had not continued, then he did not overcome them and kill them with the sword,
as it is said he did, Rev. 13.7.10. compared with Dan. 7.21.25. Moreover, it
is said, that those which worshipped the Beast, were such, whose names were not
written in the Lambs book of life; therefore the visible Church could not
continue under that defection. But if it did not there continue, yet happily it
might continue under the Greeks? To this he answers, that indeed the Greeks
did not always subject themselves to the Roman power, yet were they very
little short in defection, in so much, that according to the measure whereby
the Romanists are measured, they will stand and fall together; well but I
demand (although the Church did not continue under the defection of Antichrist,
nor yet under the Greeks) whether he do not conceive that some man may be
found able (though he cannot himself) to make it appear that the the visible
Church has continued elsewhere in the world? Unto this he answers, that he
believes none can be found able to make any such continuance of the Church to
appear, page 3. if any could, he would thank God for such a discovery. And
who then can believe his exposition of Esaias 9.7.59.21. etc. seeing that his
own mouth testifies that no man can be found able to make the truth thereof
to appear; and therefore it must needs follow, that he has given a false
interpretation of the Scriptures by him alleged to prove the perpetuity of the
visible Church; neither will he himself, nor any other* be able to clear him
from the imputation of a false Prophet, and one that has spoken presumptuously
in the name of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 18.22. therefore having thus confuted himself
in this point, I think it a needless thing for me to spend any more time in
the confutation of it. But seeing he confesses that none can be found able to
make any such continuance of a visible Church (as he speaks of) to appear,
why are we by him blamed for not believing such a continuance, page 4. and why
are we so often charged for not believing the continuance thereof under the
defection of Antichrist, page 3.4.5. and 9. And why also are we accused for
making Christ a widower, in not believing a perpetual succession of the
visible Church of Christ, seeing he himself believes no man can prove the
perpetual succession thereof? What, would he have us believe that which he
cannot believe himself? Herein he is much more uncharitable then the Pope;
who requires none to believe what he and his Church believes not. If Christ
must be a widower, except he has always a visible Church in the world, then
there is no salvation out of the visible Church, because none can be saved
which are not first united to, and made one with Christ, (and then what shall
become of those believers which in all ages have appeared, such as Jerome of
Prague, John Hus, etc. who lost their lives for the testimony of Jesus, and
were never members of any true visible Church: I hope P. B. will not say that
they perished in their sins) and if they were saved, then were they espoused
unto and united to Christ; and if so, then Christ has, and so may have a
Spouse, although no visible Church, but P.B. I conceive, was so studious when
he wrote his book, to bring absurdities upon us, that he altogether forgot
himself.

Furthermore, seeing he cannot believe that any can be found able to make the
continuance of the visible Church to appear, and that as he says, The
administration of Baptism does so depend thereupon, that by no means possible
it can be had elsewhere, without a special commission given from heaven for
that purpose, such as John the Baptist had, page 4. and 6. I demand where, or
of whom P. B. received his Baptism: from the visible Church he received it
not, for he knows not where any such Church is, neither does he believe that
any man can make any such Church to appear to have continued in the world, if
any could, he would bless God for such a discovery, page 3. and 4. Belike then
he received it from one that had a special commission like to that of John
the Baptists, at least by his discourse he would have us to think so, but I
know it will appear that it was but a Bull.

But being unwilling to receive this confutation from himself, or having begun
a Discourse, so quickly to finish it, he proceeds, and tells us, that seeing
he believes that none can make it appear that the visible Church has
continued from under the defection of Antichrist, then it is more then
probable, that it has continued under that defection, page 3. But I demand how
that can be probable, seeing that but a little before he told us, and also
proved, that the defection and falling away under Antichrist, was very great,
and mavelous universal, and therefore were the Waldenses, who appeared in
the dawning of the day, not unfitly called the first fruits unto God; for they
could not be the first, if there had been a continuance, page 2. but he says,
2 These. 2.4. it is said, That the Son of perdition who exalts himself
above all that is called God; or that is worshipped, sits in the Temple of
God, showing himself that he is God, and therefore the Church has continued
under the defection of Antichrist, What is this, but I Sir, no Sir. But I
answer, That the Temple here spoken of, wherein the Man of Sin sits, and
is worshipped, cannot be taken to be the Church of God, or that Temple of the
living God. whereof Jesus Christ is the Head, Ephesians. 1.22 and wherein God
himself dwells and walks, 2 Cor. 6.16.17. The reason is, because that in
3. verse of this Chapter it is said, That the Man of Sin is not revealed
until first there be a falling away, and therefore his coming is said, verses
9. and 10. to be withal deceivablenesse; in whom? (not in the Church, but in
them that perish, who, because they received not the love of the truth, that
they might be saved, therefore God sent them strong delusions, that they should
believe lies, that all they might perish, who received not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness verse 9.10.11.12. Whereupon it must needs follow,
that that Temple or Society wherein Antichrist sits and is worshipped;
consists of persons departed from the faith, verse 3. who are by God justly
for that cause given up to believe lies, that so they may perish and be damned;
and therefore not in any wise to be esteemed the Church of Christ, or Temple of
the living God. And this must needs be so from his own ground, seeing that by
Antichrist here spoken of, he understands the Beast mentioned, Rev. 13. as
apeareth by his applying this Scripture against Antichrist, page 2. Now, for as
much as those that wonder after the Beast, and worship him, are said to be
such, whose names are not written in the Lambs Book of Life, Rev. 13.8 he
cannot therefore understand the same to be the Temple of God, where Antichrist
sits and is worshipped (unless he conceive that the Church of Christ
consists of such persons, whose names are not written in the Book of Life,
which I suppose he does not) and therefore I conclude from his own grounds,
that the Temple spoken of in the 2 These. 2.4. is no more the Temple of God,
then Antichrist, who sits therein, and is worshipped, is God himself, nor
is otherwise to be esteemed, nor has he any reason more to affirm the one,
then he has to affirm the other; from hence therefore it cannot be made to
appear probable that the visible Church has continued under the defection of
Antichrist, but it must stand as P. B. at first affirmed, page 2. that under
the defection of Antichrist it could not continue.

But suppose it were probable, that the Church had continued under that
defection, then he says page 3. that Baptism by which the matter of the
Church is differenced, has there likewise continued, and there also it will be
probable, that his Baptism derived from thence is the Baptism of Jesus
Christ. (Here we may take notice by way) that the best ground he has for his
faith in this particular, is but a probability: well, but seeing that he
holds that baptism depends upon the true Church, then where no true Church
is there can be no true Baptism. Now, I need not here demand whether conceives
the Church of Rome to be a true Church, because in his Epistle to the Reader,
page 5. he desires that none should think so of him, for there he says, that
he holds that state to be the mother of Fornications, the great whore, Sodom
and Egypt, etc. therefore it must needs hence follow, that the Church of Rome
has not Christ's Baptism; for thus he reasons, if the Church has continued,
then Baptism by which the matter of the Church is differenced has continued,
page 3. But the Church of Rome has not continued the Church of Christ, but is
become the mother of fornications Sodom and Egypt, as he faith in his Epistle,
page 5. therefore the Baptism of Christ by which the matter of the Church is
differenced, has not continued in the Church of Rome; whereas therefore, page
5. he desires those which hold that the Church and Baptism has not
continued under the defection of Antichrist would show him the error and
absurdity of such an opinion; he may easily discover the error and absurdity
hereof himself, if he will but take notice of what he has herein written,
viz. That Baptism differenceth the true matter of the Church from the false,
page 3.4. whence it will necessarily follow, that if the baptism of the Church
of Rome be the Baptism of Christ which differenceth the true matter of the
Church from the false, then Rome the false matter must thereby be differenced
from it self, and become a true Church; as when at first she received Christ's
Baptism, and then shall Rome be no longer Rome, but a true Church and State,
differenced from a false by her baptism which differenceth the true matter
from the false; and therefore for any to hold the church of Rome to be a false
church, as P. B. does, and withal to maintain that she retains the Baptism
of Christ, whereby the true matter of the Church is differenced from the false,
is as much as if a man should affirm even as he does, that Rome is the mother
of fornications, and also that Rome is the true Spouse of Jesus Christ, which
is both absurd and contradictory.

I will therefore conclude this point thus, Seeing that true Baptism
differenceth the true matter of the Church from the false, as P.B. says, and
yet the baptism of the church of Rome does not difference her from the false
matter, as he also affirms in his Epistle, page 5. therefore the baptism of
the church of Rome is not that Baptism of Christ, which differenceth the true
matter from the false, page 3.4. Secondly, That Church which has no other
baptism then the Baptism of Rome, which differenceth not the true matter from
the false, cannot thereby be differenced from the false church; but P.B. and
his church have no other baptism then the baptism of the church of Rome which
differenceth not the true matter from the false, therefore, P. B. and his
church, are not yet differenced from the false Church. Whether therefore Christ
will own the same for his Spouse, or reject her as a Harlot sprung from the
mother of Fornications and Harlos, may very well be a question without Question.

But he says, page 6. If the visible Church has not continued, then Baptism
is ceased, and being ceased without a special commission, such as John the
Baptist had at first to baptize, it can never be again obtained.

To this I answer, That although Baptism were ceased, as he intends it, viz.
That there were no baptized persons in the world to be found, yet so long as
Baptism the Ordinance of God is found in the word, with a Commission serving
to the end of the world for Believers or Disciples to make and baptize
Disciples, as Mat. 28.19.20. Baptism may be again obtained without any such
special Commission as that which at first was given to John the Baptist; for
it will not follow, that because John the Baptist might not baptize before
baptism was instituted and he commanded to baptize, that therefore Believers
after baptism is instituted and commanded to make and baptize Disciples may
not lawfully baptize such as are made Disciples, no more then it will follow,
that because Abraham might not circumcise himself and his Males, before
circumcision was instituted, and he commanded so to do; that therefore the
Israelites after circumcision was instituted, and they commanded to observe the
same, might not, without a special Commission, such as Abraham had, lawfully
circumcise their Males. It was necessary indeed, that John the Baptist should
have a special commission to baptize, Baptism being not before instituted nor
yet he, nor any other person required to baptize; as it was necessary to the
first building of the Temple, that a pattern should be given, Chron. 28.11.12.
but as then another pattern was not expected as necessary for the rebuilding
thereof at the peoples return out of captivity, who performed all things
according to the first appointment and ordination, Ezra 3. so neither is it
requisite, now baptism being ceased, that a new Commission should be obtained
for the raising of it up again. But that according to their example in the
former instance all be done according to the first institution and ordination
of Jesus Christ, Mat. 28.19. If it be objected as in page 8. that the
commission was given to baptized persons, such as had received their baptism
from John, and therefore it intends none that are unbaptised; I answer, that
this commission requires all such persons, who by the preaching of the
Gospel, either are or shall be made Disciples unto the end of the world to be
baptized, and Christ's voice must be obeyed in all things whatsoever he says,
Act. 3.22. and that without delay, as Acts. 22.16. therefore there lies a
necessity upon all believers to be baptized. What is now to be done in this
case? Baptized persons from whom they may receive the same as in a right line,
P. B. believes none can be found, page 2.3. for if none can make it appear
that the visible Church has continued, as he believes none can, then can none
make it appear that there are any baptized persons to be found in the world,
and therefore ought cannot be had from any such, how then? why in the 2 Timothy
2.16. and 17. the Apostle tells us; that the Scripture is profitable, and
serves for instruction in all righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect and thoroughly furnished unto all good works, and if unto all, then
unto this of Baptism; whereupon therefore I confidently affirm, that as at
first, John the Baptist, at the command of God baptized others, though he
himself was unbaptised: even so now (according to his example (which amongst
other things was written for our learning, that we thereby might be taught what
to do in the like case of necessity) Romans 15.4. May a Disciple at the command
of Jesus Christ, Matthew. 28.19. having made Disciples by the preaching of the
Gospel baptize them for the remission of their sins. Act. 2.38.

If it further be objected, that this example is extraordinary, and therefore
not exemplary; I answer, that every approved example, though extraordinary,
serves for our instruction and direction in the like extraordinary case; and
this is warranted by Christ's own testimony, Matthew. 12.3.4. where he declares,
that although in ordinary cases it was unlawful for any to eat the Show
bread, save only the Priest, yet in case of necessity it was lawful and
warrantable, both for David, and also for soldiers to eat thereof, whereby he
justifies his Disciples, who in the like case of necessity, were enforced to
do that which otherwise was not lawful to be done on the Sabbath day. This is
our case, and hereby we justify our practice in the point in hand, and by all
which it does appear, that although baptism were ceased in that sense wherein
he speaks, yet seeing that that there is a commission already given for
baptism, which by Christ himself is extended to the end of the world, there
is no need of a new commission for the raising of it up again; and therefore,
from that which P. B. speaks concerning Nadab and Abihu, their offering of
strange fire, which the Lord commanded not Lev. 10. he might more fitly have
applied against his strange baptism, viz. the baptism of Infants, of which
the Lord has never spoken, then against the baptising of believers at his
command, and according to his own institution, Matthew. 28.19. but for want of
better matter to fill up his book, he was, it seems, enforced to make use of
vain words.

But this is not all for although it be proved that there is commission and
authority for Disciples to baptize, though they themselves be unbaptised in the
case before declared; yet there is another thing whereat P. B. is greatly
offended, and that is the manner in which this new baptism (as he calls it)
is administered (which according to the institution) is by dipping the whole man
in water or burying the whole man under the water, Col. 2.12. Romans 6. This
although the Lord command the same, Mat. 28.19. and examples both of Christ
himself, Mar. 1.9. Mat. 3.16. John the Baptist, Ioh. 3.23. Philip and the
Eunuch, Act. 8.38.39. all of them giving witness thereunto, yet he cannot
believe it to be so necessary, as that a person who is only sprinkled with
water, should be esteemed unbaptised, p. 12. But what are his Reasons that
persuade him thus to judge? he says, at the most, sprinkling can be but a
defect in the quantity of the element, and it is wonderful that a Nullity
should follow thereupon. I answer, that it is wonderful that any should esteem
that to be an ordinance of Christ, which Christ has never ordained; but Christ
never ordained sprinkling for his baptising but dipping Mat. 28.19. therefore
sprinkling is none of Christ's ordinance and so by consequence must needs be a
nullity; but he says, by thus urging the Text, we place the substance of an
ordinance in the criticknesse of a word, page 13. I answer, that we do place
the substance of every ordinance in it is conformity to the Word of God, which
alone gives being thereunto, and for any to do otherwise, it is very strange:
but belike, he that by the word baptize will not understand to sprinkle, and
accept the same for Christ's ordinance in baptism, which is as much as if by
the word ( circumcise) the Jews should have understood to prick the finger*
and should so have practiced and owned the same for the ordinance of
circumcision in the judgment of P.B. he is a mere Critic, and places the
substance of an ordinance of a high nature in the criticknesse of a word, as he
speaks.

And whereas it is said that baptism resembles our burial and resurrection
with Christ, which sprinkling cannot import, Rom 6. Col. 2.12 He answers,
that sprinkling or pouring water on the face does hold forth both burial and
resurrection, page 14. for those (he says) that are sprinkled are under the
water and buried, if not so, then he demands how they were baptized unto
Moses in the cloud* and in the sea, when not so much as a hair of their head
was wet. I answer, that by this reason as they should not be dipped in
baptism, so neither should they be sprinkled, and yet shall they be under the
water, and buried nevertheless; This sure is one of the mysteries which he
speaks of, that cannot easily be perceived, page 10. but seeing he thus
urges the baptism of the cloud and of the sea in this and diverse other places
desiring that it may be well minded, as page 14.29.30. I desire to know,
whether thereby he understands the baptism instituted by Jesus Christ, Mat.
28.9. if he do not, then I demand, why he so often urges the same for an
example in this point? if he do, then further demand why contrary thereunto in
baptising his Infants (as he would have it esteemed) he sprinkleth water in
their faces? this practice of his to sprinkle water in the face, if persons may
be baptized without water, must needs be a point of voluntary religion, as he
speaks of the Surplise, and baptized garments, page 15. and hereby any may
see how pertinently he allegeth the Scripture. But he says, that whilst we
thus urge baptism to hold forth burial and resurrection* we lose that which
it holds forth equally therewith (namely) the sprinkling of the conscience in
the blood of Christ. Esaias. 52.15. Heb. 10.22. Ezekiel. 36.25. Heb. 12.24. and the
laver of regeneration and our washing in the blood of Christ, that blessed
Fountain, Acts 22.16. Heb. 10.22. 1 Cor. 6.11. Rev. 1.5. To which I answer,
and deny that sprinkling in the blood of Christ is required to be holden forth
in baptism, or that any of the Scriptures by him aledged, do prove any such
thing, or make any mention at all of baptism, and therefore are not to be
applied thereunto being only metaphors borrowed from those sprinklings used
under the Law, Heb. 10.19.20.21, 22. which, although the matter thereof might
or did set forth the blood of Christ, and the nature of it, being applied by
faith, as 1 John 1.7. yet did not the same at all set forth the manner of
baptism, which only is to be found in the institution, Matthew. 28.19. and
those examples which the Scripture affords us thereof, Mark 1.9. Matthew.
3.16. Acts 8.38.39. together with that conformity and agreement with it, has
with death, burial and resurrection whereunto the Lord is pleased to resemble
and compare the same, Romans 6.4. 1 Cor. 15.29. Col. 2.12. And he that shall
affirm that that act of sprinkling, used under the Law, is to be observed in
baptism, because the matter thereof did set forth the blood of Christ, the
matter of our cleansing may by as good reason maintain that all those
particular actions required to be used under the Law for the cleansing of the
Leaper (namely) the applying of the blood of his sacrifice to the thumb of his
right hand, to the tip of his right care, and to the great toe of his right
foot, ought also to be observed in baptism, seeing, that the matter thereof
pointed out the blood of Christ as well as that did, which was used in
sprinkling then which nothing more absurd can be imagined. As concerning our
washing in the blood of Christ, that blessed fountain, the other particular in
which he instanceth, and says, that we lose by urging baptism, to hold forth
burial and resurrection. I answer, that he is much mistaken therein; for as
dipping in the judgment of the spirit of God is washing, 2 King. 5.14.
compared with 10. so likewise unto washing by dipping is necessarily required
much water, as is seen, John 3.23. whereupon it does follow, that like as
dipping of the whole man in water, and his rising again forth of the same,
does lively hold forth and represent his death, burial and resurrection with
Christ, according to Romans 6.3.4.5. Col. 2.12. so likewise his dipping or
washing in much water, must needs be a full resemblance of his washing in that
blessed fountain, the blood of Christ, set open to wash in for sin and for
uncleanness, Zach. 13.1. We therefore by urging baptism to hold forth burial
and resurrection, lose not that which ought equally to be holden forth
therewith (namely) our washing in the blood of Christ, etc. But P. B. himself,
who for baptism uses sprinkling, loses both burial and resurrection, and
that which ought equally to be holden forth with them both also, to wit, our
washing in the fountain of the blood of Christ, for that sprinkling has
neither similitude, nor any proportion with any of them.

But he says that a thing that is dipped in water, is not therefore washed and
made clean; to which I answer, that then much less is that which is only
sprinkled with water therefore washed and made clean, but I have proved before
that dipping is washing, and therefore he that is dipped, is washed, and
consequently made clean so far forth as the ordinance of baptism does
require, that alone serving fully to demonstrate our death, burial,
resurrection with Christ, and the washing away and cleansing us from all
filthiness in the fountain of his blood Zach. 13 1.

Yet this will not suffice, therefore he further urges, that in those
Countries where baptism first begun, they dipped often, and also rubbed
thereby to cleanse page 14. I answer that they dipped in those countries, where
baptism first began, is most certain, and accordingly do we practice; and
when P. B. can prove that they dipped often, etc. and also justify their
practice by the Word of God, we shall therein also follow their example. But
seeing that he conceives they dipped, and not only so but also dipped often,
etc. Why then does he accuse us* who dip but once, as though that were too
often? and moreover if they used to dip where baptism first began, then is
dipping the old, and so consequently the good way, Ier. 6.16. and why then does
he reproach the same as a new way, page 3. and does not rather, as he would
teach his reader in the frontice-piece of his book, walk in the old and good
way, that he may find rest? Ier. 6.16. but it appears that he loves to
wrangle, and therefore, now contrary to dipping often, and rubbing to cleanse,
he says, that a little water serves to set forth our washing in the blood of
Christ intended in baptism as well as a great deal, and the washing of a
part, as the face, according to the present custom as well as washing of the
whole man as appears by Christ's washing of Peter's feet, John 13.10. I answer,
that a little water serves not so fully to set out our washing in the blood of
Christ as a great deal does, and therefore, when the Lord himself would set
forth this thing unto us, he does it not under the resemblance of a little
water, but of a fountain of water, Zach. 13.1. And hence it was, that his
messenger baptized in much water, John 3.23. Neither does the washing of a part
set forth the cleansing of us from all filthiness. 2 Cor. 7.1. Like as the
washing of the whole man does, and therefore, that we might draw near in full
assurance it is required (not our faces or feet) but that our bodies should be
washed in pure waters, Heb. 10.22. Christ's washing of Peter's feet he applies
that as well as he does the baptism of the cloud and of the Sea, and
therefore, as I answered him in that, so I shall also in this; if he conceive
that Christ by washing of Peter's feet would set forth unto us the manner of
baptism. I demand then, why contrary thereunto, he uses to sprinkle his
infants faces, when he christeneth them? And why he does not rather in a basin
of water wash their feet? I suppose therefore, that he knows well enough,
that Christ by washing of Peter's feet, would teach all his Disciples humility,
John 13.15. and not to wash a part in baptism contrary to his own
institution, Matthew. 28.19. and example Mark 1.9. Mat. 3.16. But his great
objection against the dipping of the whole man, is this (he says) That it is
hard to determine how it can stand with modesty and shamefastness, and yet in
the countries where baptism first began, he urges against us, that they
dipped often, and also rubbed, thereby to cleanse, page 14. Now, if he cannot
determine how dipping once may be performed with modesty, etc. how will he
determine how dipping often, and rubbing to cleanse (as he instanceth) could be
performed with modesty and shamefastness? Surely he will conclude that they
put on a linen garment. But there it will follow, that they baptize the
garments, etc. Happily he will say not the garments but the persons in the
garment, because that when he sprinkleth his infants he does not strip them
naked out of their clothes; neither yet will he say, that therefore he
baptiseth their garments into the death and resurrection of Christ, but the
infant that are therein. But if it must needs follow that they baptize the
garments, etc. (in their behalf, I know though not in ours) he will determine,
that it was but an error in respect of the subject, like to the baptism of an
infant in the stead of a believer (as he pleads, page 12.) and therefore not
worthy to be blamed or taken notice of.

Having thus spoken his mind against the ordinance of Christ (to wit) the
baptising or dipping of believers* which in derision he calls the new
baptism, page 3. he returns again to the former argument the baptism of
Infants, page 10. which, he says began many years before Christ died, or at
least, before the Apostles left the world, which indeed, must needs be true, if
it be the baptism which was instituted by Jesus Christ, as he pretends to
prove by these reasons that follow.

His first ground is from the Covenant of God made with Abraham, Genesis 17. which
covenant, he says was neither part of the new, nor yet of the old, chap.
17.18. because it was neither confirmed with the blood of Bulls, nor with the
blood of Christ* which thing he says, may seem new, but yet he desires to see
the error that attends its. I answer, marvelling that he should urge Infants,
being in a covenant not confirmed with the blood of Christ, to prove their
interest in baptism, and so by consequent in the blood of Christ; the blood of
Christ is the blood of the new Testament, Mat. 26.28. Now, if that infants be
not in this covenant confirmed with the blood of Christ, then can they have no
interest in baptism which serves (as he says page 14.) to set forth our
washing and sprinkling with the blood of Christ; there needs not therefore any
more words be used to show the error that attends this new conceit urged to
prove Infants right to baptism, when it not only excludes them from baptism,
but also from salvation by Christ.

But Infants being a part of the Church and members thereof before Christ, what
does let them from being so still? seeing (as he says) the Lord has never
spoken one word thereof, but the contrary. I answer, that although Infants were
of the Church before Christ yet the Lord has manifestly declared, that they
should not be so now, Christ the true promised seed being once come, as is
seen, Gal. 4.22. etc. where the Apostle thus speaks. It is written (says
he) that Abraham had two sons, the one by a bond-maid, the other by a free
woman, 23. but he that was borne of the bondwoman was borne after the flesh,
but he of the free woman was borne by promise, 24. which things he says, was
an allegory, verse 25.26. the bond maid Hagar shadowing out the old covenant
or testament and her son Ishmael which she bore to Abraham after the flesh,
or by carnal generation, shadowing out all the fleshly and carnal Israelites
which should proceed from Abraham in after generations. The free woman, Sara,
pointing out the new covenant or Jerusalem, which is from above and teaches her
son appointing out Christ, the promised seed as Gal. 3.16. and believers borne
from above* or by promise, as Isack was the spiritual seed of Abraham, as Gal.
3.29. and therefore he says verse 28. We brethren, as Isacke was, are the
children of promise; after this, to close up the full intent of the spirit of
God in this thing, in the 29. and 30. verses, he shows that by the carnal
and fleshly seed Ishmael* his persecuting of him which was borne by the promise
(to wit Isaac) whereupon he and his mother, was by the command of God, both
of them together, cast out of Abraham's house, the Church, Genesis 21.10. thereby
was foreshowne, that when Christ the true Isaac should be borne, Gal. 3.16.
and the barren woman the new Covenant or Gospel, should bring forth and bear
sons unto God (as verse 27.) then should the bond woman, the old and carnal
covenant, with all the carnal ordinances thereof. Heb. 9.10. together all her
sons, the carnal and the fleshly seed be cast out of the house (so says the
Text, verse 30.) Cast out the bond woman and her son; for the son of the
bond woman shall not be heir with the son of the free woman, Ioh. 7.35.26.
and therefore, although children carnally begotten were admitted members of the
Church before Christ, yet are they not so now, but are with their mother the
old and carnal covenant, with all the appurtenances thereof* are to be
rejected (as was said before) and so also is P. B. his exposition of this
Script* page 22. which by the sons of the bond woman only notes such who
have actually refused and rejected grace, as Ioh. 7.35.36. and thereby became
bound (as though by nature, before they had rejected grace, they had been free)
which is a manifest contradiction to the Apostle, who by the children of the
bond woman understands all that are borne, as Ishmael was by fleshly
generation, or all those who are not as Isaake, who was by promise (as before)
Col. 4.27.28. with 3 29.

His next ground to prove the baptism of Infants is this, because the Apostle
exhorts parents to bring up their children in admonition of the Lord,
therefore they were of the Church, and so by consequent were baptized; but how
does he prove that they were of the Church? thus* because the Apostle, who had
nothing to do with those who are without, 1 Cor. 5. exhorts their parents to
bring them up in the admonition of the Lord. To this I answer, that the Apostle
did not write this exhortation to the children who were without, but to their
parents who were within; besides where the Apostle says, that he has nothing
to do with those that are without, 1 Cor. 5.12. it is manifest, that he does
not mean that he has nothing to do to exhort those that are without, to know
and fear the Lord; for he was sent to preach the Gospel to those that were
without, that thereby they might be brought within, Act. 26.17.18. and he
acknowledges himself a debtor to all men to the unwise as well as to the wise
Romans 1.14, when he says, therefore that he has nothing to do with those
that are without, his meaning is, that he has nothing to do to censure and
deal with them that are without, for their evils of incest, whoredoms,
thefts, etc. he was not by Christ made a Judge over men in those matters, 1
Cor. 5.12.13. no more then Christ himself was, Luke 12.14. From this reason of
his to prove Infants to be of the Church, and therefore baptized, (viz.)
because the Apostle exhorts their parents to bring them up in the nurture of
the Lord* etc. It will follow, that because the Apostle Peter exhorts believing
wives to be in subjection to their husbands, that so (although by the word they
could not, yet) by their good conversation they might be won* 1 Pet. 3.1.2.
that therefore their unbelieving husbands were of the Church, and baptized, or
else the Apostle meddled with those with whom he had nothing to do.

But he says, it is an uncomfortable doctrine to hold that children are not of
the Church; for if they are not borne members of the Church, then they are
brought forth children to the devil, page 25. I answer, that by nature we are
all alike the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. our being of the Church depending
upon our new birth and generation, John 3.3. and if all that were not borne
members of the Church shall be damned, then by P. B. his judgment, seeing he
cannot prove any true visible church to be in the world, page 3. (and therefore
no children to be borne in church) there shall none at all be saved. Is not
this doctrine of his a very comfortable doctrine, for else what end does he
conceive was the preaching of the Gospel ordained? Matthew. 28.19. Acts 26.18.

He has yet another argument which must needs be answered, for in it there is
great confidence placed, and it is this, the children of believers are holy and
therefore may be baptized, 1 Cor. 7.14. To which I answer* that the Apostle
does not say, that the children of believers are holy, but he says, That the
unbelieving wife is sanctified to the believing husband, (that is) lawful for
his use so that he may lawfully abide with her, and needs not for her unbelief
sake put her away, (as was scrupled, verse 10.11, 12.) or else, if that she
were not, then the children which he should beget of her were unclean or
unholy, whereas being sanctified, or lawful to his use, they are clean, or
holy (that is, legitimate) for the holiness of the children here spoken of, is
not concluded from the faith of parent, but from the lawful use which the
believing husband has of his unbelieving wife; for so are the words, The
unbelieving husband is sanctified by, or to the believing wife, and the
unbelieving wife is sanctified by, or to the believing husband, or else were
your children unclean, but now are they holy. This Scripture therefore proves
no more holiness in the children of believers then in the children lawfully he
gotten in the honorable estate of marriage by unbelievers, Hebr. 13.4. and so
by consequence yields no better warrant for the baptising of the one, then it
does for the baptising of the other; but I intend brevity, and therefore for
further answer in this point, I refer him to A. R. his book lately printed,
wherein the same is handled at large.

These are the best reasons that P. B. can show to prove the baptism of
Infants to be according to the word of God, which in regard they cannot give
satisfaction to some, but they still notwithstanding do stick at the matter,
(as they well may) and desire a precept, or an example to warrant the same, and
therefore he promises to show both, page 29. but first he desires that we
would give him an example of an unbaptised persons his baptising of others, and
of the refusing of Infants from being of the Church both which being before
sufficiently declared, we will now take notice how he performs his promise:
First he says, There are examples of baptising of households, as the Iaylers
and Lydias, Acts 16. and the house of Stephanus, and questionless diverse
others, page 29. But I demand an example for the baptising of Infants, and not
of baptising households of believers, such as the Iaylors, Act. 16.34. and
Stephanus. 1 Cor. 16.16. and Crispus, Acts 18.8. and questionless diverse
others. This is a bad example, (for an example he will have it called though it
be none at all) to prove that the baptism of Infants which must be thus
declared: households were baptized, but in some households there are Infants,
therefore Infan^s have been baptized. This is as plain an example to prove the
baptism of Infants, as this that follows is to prove the baptising of
notorious drunkards swearers, thieves, murderers, etc. whole households have
been baptized, but in some houses there are notorious drunkards, swearers,
thieves, murderers, etc. therefore the Apostles baptized such, and such may be
baptized. Who sees not your folly? Another example as plain as this
follows, The whole Church of Colosse were buried with Christ in baptism, but
children were a part of the Church, therefore Infants were baptized, Col.
3.20.21. I answer, that the whole Church of Colosse were buried with Christ in
baptism, and that there were children in that Church to whom the Apostle wrote
and exhorted to obey their parents in all things, Col. 3.20. But our question
is about Infants, and not children in general, some whereof are grown to years
of understanding, as these were to whom the Apostle wrote: for sure P. B. will
not say he wrote to Infants, which could not understand what he says. In Genesis
43.14. when Jacob sent his son Benjamine into Egypt, he uses these words
concerning him and Joseph: If I am bereaved of my children, I am bereaved. Now,
by his reason, Benjamine, who was about seventeene years old, and Joseph, who
was about thirty years of age, should both of them be Infants because their
father called them children; These examples will yield as little satisfaction
to any that question the baptising of Infants, as his Reasons before answered.

But although these examples fail, yet page 31. he says, there is a plain
command of Jesus Christ for the baptising of Infants; and it appears thus,
Many nations appear to be Abraham's, and to have him for their father; now, all
these nations in which there must needs be some children, by the express
command of Jesus Christ, Mat. 28.19. are to be baptized. I answer, Abraham was
to be a father of many nations, some whereof were his natural and carnal
seed, borne after the flesh, as Ishmael and the Jews, who for unbelief, were
rejected, and cast off, with the old and carnal Covenant or Testament, as was
showed before; Others were so to be reputed in respect of their faith, and
walking in his steps, as it is written, Romans 4.11.12. where it is said, That he
received the sign of circumcision, the seal of righteousness of faith, which
he had before he was circumcised, that he might be the father, mark of whom
(viz,) of all them that believe and walk in the steps of that faith, which he
had before he was circumcised, according to which therefore it is said, Gal.
3.29. If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed and heirs, according to
promise. These later, his spiritual seed by the express command of Jesus
Christ, Mat. 28.19. are to be baptized, Go ye (says he) and make Disciples,
or believers all Nations, and baptize them, and he that believes (as Abraham
the father of all that believe did, Romans 4.11. Gal. 3.29. and is baptized,
shall be saved Mark 16.15. But what is all this to prove the baptism of
Infants which believe not, and therefore are none of Abraham's seed, who only
are to be baptized? no more then that which follows which is nothing at all;
being the same in effect with this. The Nations that are made Abraham's seed,
the nations that are saved, the kingdoms which shall become the kingdoms of
our Lord must needs receive Christ's badge. This is granted, but proves nothing
less then the baptising of Infants, seeing none are made Abraham's seed but
those which are first made Christ's, Gal. 3.29. that wake in his steps, Romans
4.12. and do his works, John 8.36. Neither do any kingdoms become the
Kingdoms of the Lord, but those that fear and serve him, that kiss the
son, Psalm. 1.10.11.12. hear his voice, Acts 3.22.23. and have him to reign
over him, Luke 19 27. Nor does the Scripture declare the salvation of any more
then those only which believe, he that believes on the son, has
everlasting life, but he that believes not shall not see life, but the wrath
of God abides on him, John 3.36. therefore in refusing to baptize Infants who
believe not, we curtaile not the nation that are made Abraham's seed, etc. I
should have thought (but that he denies a national Church, page 39.) that he
would have all nations of people to be baptized, but seeing he denies the
former, I cannot charge him with the later but by this that is said, it
appears how he has proved the baptism of Infants from Matthew. 28.19. and
other his instances then which nothing could possibly be alleged more opposite
thereunto, but herein he does not seem strange to me, finding his whole
discourse not only (weak, empty and impertinent) but so repugnant and
contradictions to it self; so that a man in the reading thereof* may very well
judge, that he wrote the same intending to desert and render the cause evil and
naught which he pretends to maintain, or else desiring to obtain to
himself a name amongst those vain janglers, mentioned 1 Timothy 6 who desire to
be teachers, when they neither know what they say, nor whereof they affirm,
verse 7. And so I leave him and the consideration of that which is said to
those for whose sakes it was first intended, desiring that it may accomplish
it is proposed end.

Col. 2.8. Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit,
after the traditions of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after
Christ.

Jerem. 10.3. The customs of the people are vain.

2 These. 2.15.Therefore brethren, stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye
have been taught, whether by word, or our Epistle.


FINIS.
Page. Line. Scapes. Correction. 2 15 for firm, affirm. 2 18 for had not
continued, had continued. 5 9 for there also it will, then also it will. 5 10
for by way, by the way. 5 14 for whether conceives, whether he conceives. 6 18
for be a question without Question, may very well be a question. 6 32 for and
commanded, and they commanded. 7 22 for ought cannot, it cannot. 7 41 for
soldiers, for his soldiers. 8 5 for that that there is a that there is a. 8
33 for his baptising, his baptism. 9 21 for further demand, further I demand.
10 3 for with it has, which it has.

In the Preface. page. 2. line 9. for pursuing, read perusing, in the same
line, for notice therein, read notice how therein.


