Practical Discourses UPON THE CONSIDERATION OF Our Latter End; AND THE Danger
and Mischief OF Delaying Repentance.

By ISAAC BARROW, D. D. Late Master of Trinity College in Cambridge.

Formerly Published by his Grace, JOHN Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons, against the
Royal Exchange, in Cornhil, 1694.

THE Bookseller's Advertisement.
THE usefulness of short Practical Discourses, which are of small Price, and
the good Reception which the late small Volume of Discourses concerning
Industry, By the Learned Author of these has found; have induced me to
Re-print these in the like manner, from the Third Volume of his Works in Folio;
for the Use of those who have not that, and cannot so well reach the Price of
it. I wish the Author's Pious Design in these Writings may be promoted hereby,

B. A.

ADVERTISEMENT.
NEwly Printed, the Holy Bible, containing the Old Testament and the New; with
Annotations and Parallel Sciptures. To which is annexed, the Harmony of the
Gospels: As also the Reduction of the Jewish Weights, Coins and Measures, to
our English Standards; And a Table of the Promises in Scripture; by Samuel
Clark, Minister of the Gospel. Printed in Folio of a very fair Letter, the like
never before in One Volume.

Printed for B. Aylmer in Cornhill.

SERMON I. The Consideration of our latter End.
PSALM XC. 12. So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts
unto wisdom.
THIS Psalm is upon several peculiar accounts very remarkable; for its
antiquity, in which it perhaps does not yield to any parcel of Scripture; for
the eminency of its Author, Moses the Man of God; the greatest of the ancient
Prophets (most in favor, and (as it were) most intimate with God:) It Is also
remarkable for the form and matter thereof, both affording much useful
instruction. In it we have a great Prince, the Governor of a numerous People
sequestring his Mind from the management of public Affairs to private
Meditations; from beholding the present outward appearances, to considering the
real nature and secret causes of things; In the midst of all the Splendor and
Pomp of all the stir and tumult about him he observes the frailty of humane
condition, he discerns the Providence of God justly ordering all; this he does
not only in way of wise consideration, but of serious devotion, moulding his
observations into pious acknowledgments, and earnest Prayers to God; thus while
he casts one eye upon Earth viewing the occurrences there, lifting (...) the
other to Heaven; there seeing God's all governing Hand, thence seeking his
gracious Favor and (...). Thus does here that great and good Man teach us all,
(more particularly men of high Estate, and much Business) to find opportunities
of withdrawing their thoughts from those things, which commonly amuse them (the
Cares, the Glories, the Pleasures of this World) and fixing them upon matters
more improvable to devotion; the transitoriness of their Condition, and their
subjection to God's just Providence; joining also to these Meditations suitable
acts of Religion, due acknowledgments to God and humble Prayers. This was his
practice among the greatest encumbrances that any Man could have; and it should
also be ours. Of those his devotions, addressed to God, the Words are part,
which I have chosen for the subject of my meditation and present discourse;
concerning the meaning of which I shall first touch somewhat; then propound
that observable in them, which I design to insist upon.

The Prophet David has in the 39th Psalm a Prayer very near in words, and of
kin (it seems) in sonse to this here; Lord, prays he, Psa. 39. 4.
Make me to know my end, and the measure of my days, what it is, that I may
know how frail I am: Concerning the drift of which place, as well as of this
here, it were obvious to conceive, that both these Prophets do request of God,
that he would discover to them the definite term of their life (which by his
decree he had fixed, or however by his universal prescience he did discern;
concerning which we have these words in Job, Seeing mais Job 14. 5.
days are determined, the number of his months are with thee, thou have
appointed his bounds, that he cannot pass) we might, I say, at first hearing be
apt to imagine, that their Prayer unto God is, (for the comfort of their mind
burdened with afflictions, or for their better direction in the management of
their remaining time of life) that God would reveal unto them the determinate
length of their life. But this sense, which the Words seem so naturally to hold
forth is by many of the Fathers rejected; for that the knowledge of our lives
determinate measure is not a fit matter of Prayer to God; that being a secret
reserved by God to himself, which to inquire into savours of presumptuous
curiosity; the universal validity of which reason I will not debate; but shall
defer so much to their judgment, as to suppose that the numbering of our days
(according to their sense) does here only imply a confused indefinite
computation of our days number, or the length of our life; such as, upon which
it may appear, that necessarily our life cannot be long (not according to the
account mentioned in this Psalm (the same with that of Solon, in Herodotus)
above seventy or eighty Years, especially as to purposes of health, strength,
content) will probably by reason of various accidents, to which it is exposed,
be much shorter (seven or ten Years according to a moderate esteem) may
possibly, from surprises undiscoverable, be very near to its period; by few
instants removed from death (a Year, a Month, a Day, it may be somewhat less.)
This I shall allow to be the Arithmetic that Moses here desires to learn;
whence it does follow that teaching (or making to know, so it is in the Hebrew)
does import here (as it does other-where frequently in Scripture) God's
affording the Grace to (...). Plut. ad Apoll. p. 202.

Quis est tam stultus, quamvis sit adolescens, cui sit exploratum se vel ad
vesperum esse victurum. Cic. de Son.


know practically, or with serious regard to consider this state and measure of
our life (for in speculation no Man can be ignorant of humane life's brevity and
uncertainty; but most Men are so negligent and stupid, as not to regard it
sufficiently, not to employ this knowledge to any good purpose.) This
Interpretation I choose, being in it self plausible enough, and countenanced by
so good authority; yet the former might well enough (by good consequence, if
not so immediately) serve my design: Or be a ground able to support the
discourse I intend to build upon the Words; the subject whereof briefly will be
this, that the consideration of our lives certain and necessary brevity and
frailty, is a mean proper and apt to dispose us toward the wise conduct of our
remaining life; to which purpose such a consideration seems alike available, as
the knowledge of its punctual or definite measure; or more than it; upon the
same, or greater reasons.

As for the latter clause, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom; it is
according to the Hebrew, And we shall bring the heart to wisdom; implying, the
application of our hearts to wisdom to be consequent upon the skill and
practice (bestowed by God) of thus computing our days. As for wisdom, that may
denote either sapience, a habit of knowing what is true; or prudence, a
disposition of choosing what is good; we may here understand both, especially
the latter; for, as Tully says of De fin. II. p. 95.
Philosophy, Omnis summa Philosophioe ad beat vivendum refertur, The sum or
whole of Philosophy refers to living happily; so all Divine Wisdom does respect
good practice. The word also comprehends all the consequences and adjuncts of
such wisdom Natura dedit usuram vitae, tanquam pecuniae, nulla praestituta die.
Tusc. quaest. I. p. 326.
(for so commonly such words are wont by way of metonymie to denote, together
with the things primarily signified, all that naturally flow from or that
usually are conjoined with them) in brief (to cease from more explaining that,
which is in it self conspicuous enough) I so understand the Text, as if the
Prophet had thus expressed himself: Since, O Lord, all things are in thy hand,
and Sovereign disposal; since it appears that Man's life is so short and frail,
so vexatious and miserable, so exposed to the just effects of thy displeasure;
we humbly beseech thee, so to instruct us by thy Wisdom, so to dispose us by
thy grace; that we may effectually know; that we may seriously consider the
brevity and uncertainty of our lives durance; whence we may be induced to
understand, regard, and choose those things which good reason dictates best for
us; which according to true Wisdom, it most concerns us to know and perform.
From which sense of the words we might infer many useful documents, and draw
matter of much wholesome discourse; but passing over all the rest, I shall only
insist upon that one point, which I before intimated, viz. that the serious
consideration of the shortness and frailty of our life is a proper instrument
conducible to the bringing our hearts to Wisdom, to the making us to discern,
attend unto, embrace and prosecute such things as are truly best for us; that
it is available to the prudent conduct and management of our life; the truth of
which proposition is grounded upon the divine Prophet his opinion: he
apprehended such a knowledge or consideration to be a profitable means of
inducing his heart to Wisdom; wherefore he prays God to grant it him in order
to that end; supposing that effect would proceed from this cause. And that it
is so in way of reasonable influence I shall endeavor to show by some
following reasons.

1. The serious consideration 1 John 1. 17. Love not the world; for -- the
world passes away, and the desire thereof.
of our life's frailty and shortness will confer to our right valuation (or
esteem) of things, and consequently to our well-placing, and our duly
moderating our cares, affections and endeavors about them. For as we value
things, so are we used to affect them, to spend our thoughts upon them, to be
earnest in pursuance or avoiding of them. There be two sorts of things we
converse about, good and bad; the former, according to the degree of their
appearance so to us (that is, according to our estimation of them) we naturally
love, delight in, desire and pursue; the other likewise in proportion to our
opinion concerning them, we do more or less loath and shun. Our Actions
therefore being all thus directed and grounded, to esteem things aright both in
Primum est, ut quanti quidque sit judices; secundum, ut impetum ad illa caplas
ordinatum temperatumque; tertium, ut inter impetum tuum, actionemque conveniat,
ut in omnibus istis tibi ipsi consentias. Sen. Epist. 89.
kind and degree ((...), to assign every thing its due price, as Epictetus
speaks; quanti quidque sit judicare, to judge what each thing is worth as
Seneca,) is in order the first, in degree a main part of wisdom; and as so is
frequently by wise men commended. Now among qualities that commend or vilify
things unto us, duration and certainty have a chief place; they often alone
suffice to render things valuable or contemptible. Why is Gold more precious
than Glass or Crystal? why prefer we a Ruby before a Rose, or a Gilly-flower?
it is not because those are more serviceable, more beautiful, more grateful to
our senses than these (it is plainly otherwise) but because these are brittle
and fading, those solid and permanent; these we cannot hope to retain the use
or pleasure of long; those we may promise our selves to enjoy so long as we
please; whence on the other side is it, that we little fear or shun any thing
how painful, how offensive so-ever, being assured of its soon passing over,
the biting of a flea, or the prick in letting blood? The reason is evident; and
that in general nothing can on either hand be considerable (either to value or
disesteem) which is of a short continuance. Upon this ground therefore let us
tax the things concerning us whether good or bad, relating to this life, or to
our future state; and first the good things relating to this life; thence we
shall be disposed to judge truly concerning them, what their just price is, how
much of affection, care and endeavor they deserve to have expended on them. In
general, and in the lump concerning them all St. Paul tells us, that (...), the
shape or fashion (all 1 Cor. 7. 31.
that is apparent or sensible) in this present world does flit, and soon give
us the go-by: We gaze awhile upon these things, as in transitu, or intra
conspectum; as they pass by us, and keep awhile in sight; but they are
presently (...),

(...). Gr. Epig. Anthol.


gone from us, or we from them. They are but like objects represented in a
Glass; which having viewed awhile, we must shortly turn our backs, or shut our
eyes upon them, then all vanishes and disappears unto us. Whence he well infers
an indifferency of affection toward them; a slackness in the enjoyment of them
to be required of us; a using this world, as if we used it not; a buying, as if
we were not to possess; a weeping, as if we wept not; and a rejoicing, as if we
rejoiced not; a kind of negligence and unconcernedness about these things. The
world (says 1 John 2. 17.

(...),


St. John) passes away, and the desire thereof; whatever seems most lovely
and desirable in the World is very flitting; how-ever our desire and our
enjoyment thereof must suddenly cease. Imagine a man therefore possessed of all
worldly goods, armed with power, flourishing in credit, flowing with plenty,
swimming in all delight (such as were sometime Priamus, Polycrates, Croesus,
Pompey) yet since he is withal supposed a man and mortal; subject both to
fortune and death; none of those things can he reasonably conside, or much
satisfy himself in; they may be violently divorced from him by fortune, they
must naturally be loosed from him by death; the closest union here cannot last
longer than till death us depart; wherefore no man upon such account can truly
call or (if he consider well) heartily esteem himself happy; a man cannot hence
(as the Eccl. 1. 3, etc.
most able judge, and trusty voucher of the commodities does pronounce) receive
profit or content from any labor he takes (upon these transitory things)
under the sun. Why then (let me inquire) do we so cumber our heads with care,
so rack our hearts with passion, so wast our spirits with incessant toil about
these transitory things? why do we so highly value, so ardently desire, so
eagerly pursue, so fondly delight in, so impatiently want, or lose, so
passionately contend for and emulate one another in regard to these bubbles;
forseiting and foregoing our homebred most precious goods, tranquillity and
repose, either of mind or body, for them? Why erect we such mighty fabrics of
expectation and confidence upon such unsteady sands? Why dress we up these our
Inns, as if they were Commorandi natura nobis diversorium dedit, non habitandi
locum. Cic. de Sen.

1 Pet. 2. 11. 1.

Heb. 13. 11. 11. 15.

1 Chronicles. 29. 15.

Job 14. 1.

Psalm. 78. 39.

Jam. 4. 14.

Isa. 64. 6.

Psalm. 102. 3. 90. 5. 9. 103. 15. 39. 5. 144. 4. 119. 19.

Psalm. 103. 15.

Isa. 40. 6.


our homes, and are as careful about a few nights lodging here, as if we
designed an everlasting abode (we that are but sojourners and pilgrims here,
and have no fixed habitation upon earth; who come forth like a flower, and are
soon cut down; flee like a shadow, and continue not; are winds passing away,
and coming not again; who fade all like a leaf, whose life is a vapor
appearing for a little time, and then vanishing away; whose days are a
handbreadth, and age as nothing; whose days are consumed like smoke, and years
are spent as a tale. Who wither like the grass, upon which we feed; and crumble
as the dust, of which we are compacted; for thus the Scripture by apposite
comparisons represents our condition) yet we build (like the Men of Agrigentum)
as if we were to dwell here for ever; and hoard up, as if we were to enjoy
after many ages; and inquire, as if we would never have done knowing? The
Citizens of Croton (a Town in Italy) had a manner (it is said) of inviting to
Feasts a Year before the time, that the Guests in appetite and garb might come
well prepared to them; do we not usually resemble them in this ridiculous
solicitude and curiosity; spes inchoando longas, commencing designs, driving on
projects, which a longer time than our life would not suffice to accomplish?
How deeply do we concern our selves in all that is said or done; when the
morrow all will be done away and forgotten? when (excepting what our duty to
God, and charity toward men requires of us, and that which concerns our future
eternal state) what is done in the World, who gets or loses, which of the
spokes in fortune's wheel is up, and which down, is of very little consequence
to us. But the more to abstract our minds from, and temper our affections about
these secular matters, let us examine particularly by this standard, whether
the most valued things in this World deserve that estimate which they bear in
the common Market, or which popular opinion assigns them.

1. To begin then with that which takes chief place, which the World most dotes
on, which seems most great and eminent among men; secular state and grandeur,
might and prowess, honor and reputation, favor and applause of men, all the
objects of humane pride and ambition; of this kind, St. Peter thus pronounces;
(...), 1 Pet. 2. 24.
All the glory of the men is as the flower of the grass; the grass is dried up,
and the flower thereof does fall off; it is as the flower of the grass, how
specious so ever, yet the most fading and failing part thereof; the grass it
self will soon wither, and the flower does commonly fall off before that. We
cannot hold this flower of worldly glory beyond our short time of life; and we
may easily much sooner be deprived of it: Many tempests of fortune may beat it
down, many violent hands may crop it, it is apt of its self to fade upon the
stalk; how-ever the Sun (the influence of age and time) will assuredly burn and
dry it up, with our life that upholds it. Surely Psalm. 62. 9.
(says the Psalmist) men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are
a lie: Men of high degree; the mighty Princes, the famous Captains, the subtle
Statesmen, the grave Senators; they who turn and toss about the World at their
pleasure; who, (in the Prophet's Isa. 14. 17.
language) make the Earth tremble, and shake Kingdoms: Even these, they are a
lie; (said he, who himself was none of the least considerable among them, and
by experience well knew their condition, the greatest and most glorious Man of
his time King David.) They are a lie; that is, their state presents something
of brave and admirable to the eye of Men; but it is only deceptio visus; a show
without a substance; it does but delude the careless spectatours with false
appearance; it has nothing under it solid or stable; being laid in the balance
(the royal Prophet there subjoins; that is, being weighed in the scales of
right judgment, being thoroughly considered) it will prove lighter than vanity
it self; it is less valuable than mere emptiness, and nothing it self; that
saying sounds like an hyperbole, but it may be true in a strict sense: Sceing,
that the care and pains in maintaining it, the fear and jealousy of losing it,
the envy, obloquy and danger that surround it, the snares it has in it, and
temptations inclining men to be pufft up with Pride, to be insolent and
injurious, to be corrupt with pleasure (with other bad concomitants thereof) do
more than countervail whatever either of imaginary worth or real convenience
may be in it. Perhaps could it without much care, trouble and hazard continue
for ever, or for a long time, it might be thought somewhat considerable; but
since its duration is uncertain and short; since man in honor abides not, but
is like the beasts that perish; that they who Psalm. 82. 6.
look so like Gods, and are called so, and are worshipped as so, yet must Psalm.
49. 12, etc.
die like (like men, yea like sheep shall be laid in the grave;) Since, as it is
said of the King of Babylon in Esaias; their pomp must be brought Isa. 14. 11.
down to the grave, and the noise of their viols; the worm shall be spread
under them, and the worm shall cover them; seeing that a moment of time shall
extinguish all their luster, and still all that tumult about them; that they
must be disrobed of their Purple, and be clothed with Corruption; that their
so spacious and splendid Palaces must soon be exchanged for close darksome
Coffins; that both their own breath, and the breath of them who now applaud
them must be stopped; that they who now bow to them, may presently trample on
them; and they who to day trembled at their presence, may the morrow scornfully
insult upon their memory: Is this the man (will they say, as they Isa. 14. 16.
did of that great King) who made the Earth to tremble; that did shake
Kingdoms; that made the World as a Wilderness; and destroyed the Kingdoms
thereof? Since this is the fate of the greatest, and most glorious among Men,
what reason can there be to admire their condition; to prize such vain and
short-lived preeminences? For who can account it a great happiness to be styled
and respected as a Prince, to enjoy all the Powers and Prerogatives of highest
dignity for a day, or two; then being obliged to descend into a sordid and
despicable Estate? Who values the fortune of him that is brought forth upon the
Stage to act the Part of a Prince; though he be attired there, and attended as
such; has all the garb and ceremony, the ensigns and appurtenances of Majesty
about him; speaks and behaves himself imperiously; is flattered and worshipped
accordingly; yet, who in his heart does adore this Idol; does admire this
mockery of greatness? Why not? because after an hour or two the Play is over,
and this Man's reign is done. And what great difference is there between this
and the greatest worldly state? between Alexander in the History, and Alexander
on the Stage? Are not (in the Psalmist's account) all our Psalm. 90.
years spent as a tale that is told; or, as a Fable, that is acted? This in
comparison of that, what is it at most, but telling the same story, acting the
same Part a few times over? What are a few years more than a few hours repeated
not very often? not so often as to make any considerable difference; so a great
Emperor reflected: (...); what (said he) Anton. IV. 50.
does the age of an infant, dying within three days, differ from that of
Nestor, who lived three ages of men; since both shall be past, and ended; both
Sen. Ep. 99. 24.
then meet, and thereby become equal; since considering the immense time that
runs on, and how little a part thereof any of us takes up (juvenes and senes in
oequo sumus) we are all alike young and old; as a drop and a Pint bottle in
compare to the Ocean are in a sort equal, that is, both altogether Mihi ne
diuturnum quidem quidquam videtur. in quo est aliquid extremum, etc. Cic. de
Senect.
inconsiderable. Quid enim diu est, ubi sinis est? says St. Austine: what can
be long that shall be ended; which coming to that pass is as if it never had
been? Since then upon this account (upon worldly accounts, I speak all this;
and excepting that Dignity and Power may be Talents bestowed by God, or
advantages to serve God, and promote the good of Men; excepting also the
relation Persons justly instated in them bear to God as his Deputies and
Ministers; in which respects much reverence is due to their Persons, much value
to their Places; even the more, by how much less their present outward Estate
is considerable, and because at present they receive so slender a reward for
all their cares and pains employed in the discharge of their Offices; this I
enterpose to prevent mistakes, lest our discourse should seem to disparage, or
detract from the reverence due to Persons in eminent Place. But since, under
this caution) all worldly Power and Glory appear so little valuable, the
consideration hereof may avail to moderate our affections about them; to quell
all ambitious desires of them, and all vain complacencies in them. For why
should we so eagerly seek and pursue such empty shadows, which if we catch, we
in effect catch nothing; and whatever it is, does presently slip out of our
hands? Why do we please our selves in such evanid dreams? is it not much better
to rest quiet and content in any station wherein God has placed us, than to
trouble our selves and others in climbing higher to a Precipice, where we can
hardly stand upright, and whence we shall certainly tumble down into the grave?
This consideration is also a remedy, proper to remove all regret and envy
grounded upon such regards. For why, though suppose Men of small worth, or
virtue should flourish in Honor and Power, shall we repine thereat? Is it not
as if one should envy to a Butterfly, its Psalm. 90. 6.
gaudy Wings; to a Tulip its beautiful colors, to the Grass its pleasant
verdure; that Grass, to which in this Psalm we are compared; which in the
morning flourishes, and grows up, in the evening is cut down and withers?
I may say of this discourse with the Philosopher, Ant. IV. 50.
(...), it is a homely remedy (there may be diverse better ones) yet has its
efficacy; for David himself made use thereof more than once: Be not, Psalm. 49.
16. 73. 17. ^^ 1.
says he, afraid (or troubled) when one is made rich, when the glory of his
house is increased; for when he dies he shall carry nothing away, his glory
shall not descend with him. I was (says he again) envious at Prove. 23. 17.
the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked; but I went into the
sanctuary, then understood I their end; surely thou did set them in slippery
places -- how are they brought into desolation as in a moment: Thus considering
the lubricity and transitoriness of that Prosperity, which foolish and wicked
Men enjoyed, did serve to cure that envious distemper, which began to affect
the good man's Heart.

2. But let us descend from Dignity and Power (that is from names and shows) to
somewhat seeming more real and substantial; to Riches; that great and general
Idol, the most devoutly adored that ever any has been in the World; which has
a Temple almost in every House, an Altar in every Heart; to the gaining of
which most of the thoughts, most of the labors of Men immediately tend; in the
Possession of which Men commonly deem the greatest Happiness does consist. But
this consideration we discourse about, will easily discover, that even this, as
all other Idols, is nothing in the 1 Cor. 8. 4.
World, nothing true and solid; Will (I say) justify that advice and verify
that assertion of the Wiseman: Prove. 23. 5.
Labor not for riches, will thou set thy heart upon that which is not? it well
applied will pluck down the high Places reared to this great Idol of Clay in
Men's Hearts; will confute the common Conceits and Phrases, which so beautify
Wealth; showing that whoever dotes thereon is more truly and properly styled a
miserable Man, than a happy, or blessed one: For is he not indeed miserable,
who makes lies his (...), E^atus, etc. pro divite. Hab. 2. 9.
refuge, who consides in that which will deceive and disappoint him? The
Prophet assures us so: Woe (says the Prophet Habbakuk) woe be to him, who
coveteth an evil covetousness to his house; that he may set his nest on high,
that he may be delivered from the power of evil: Men (he implies) imagine by
getting Riches, they have secured and raised themselves above the reach of all
mischief? But ye see it was in the Prophet's judgment a woeful mistake. St.
Paul 1 Timothy 6. 19.
does warn Men (very emphatically) not to hope (...), in the uncertainty (or
obscurity) of riches; intimating, that to trust in them, is to trust in
darkness it self; in that wherein we can discern nothing; in we know not what.
They are, we cannot but observe, subject to an infinity of chances, many of
them obvious and notorious; more of them secret and unaccomptable: They make
(the Wiseman tells us) themselves wings Prove. 23. 5.
(they need it seems no help for that) and fly away like as an eagle toward
heaven (quite out of sight, and beyond our reach they of their own accord do
swiftly fly away) however, should they be disposed to stay with us, we must fly
from them; were they inseparably affixed to this life, yet must they together
with that be severed from us; as we came naked of them into this World, so
naked shall we return; As he came, says the Preacher, s^ Job 1. 21. 27. 19.

1 Timothy 6. 7.

Eccl. 5. 21.


shall he go; and what profit (then) has he that labors for the wind? From
hence, that we must so soon part with riches, he infers them to be but wind; a
thing not any-wise to be fixed or settled; which it is vain to think we can
appropriate, or retain; and vain therefore greedily to covet or pursue: So the
Psalmist also reasons it: Surely, every man (says he) walks in a vain show;
Psalm. 39. 6.
surely they are disquieted in vain; he heapeth up riches, and knows not who
shall gather them. Men, in his account, that troubled themselves in
accumulating Wealth, did but idly delude themselves, fansying to receive
content from such things, which they must themselves soon be separated from;
and leave at uncertainties, to be disposed of they now not how: That which in
his wise Son's esteem was sufficient to make a man hate all his labor under
^he Sun: Because, says he, I shall Eccl. 2. 18.
^eave it to the man that shall be after ^e, and who knows, whether he shall
^e a wise man or a fool? yet he shall ^ave rule over all my labor, wherein I
have labored, and wherein I have showed my self wise under the Sun: All, it
seems, that we ^re so wise, and so industrious In his elaborant, quae sciunt
nihil omnino ad se pertinere; serunt arbores, quae alteri seculo prosint. Cic.
de Senect.
about; that we so beat our heads about, and spend our spirits upon, ^s at most
but gaudium hoeredis; the joy of an heir, and that an uncertain one (for your
Son, your Kinsman, your Friend may for all you can know die before you, or soon
after you) it is but a being at great pains and charges in tilling the Land, and
sowing and dressing it; whence we are sure not to reap any benefit to our
selves, and cannot know who shall do it.

The rich man (St. James tells us) Jam. 1. 11.
as the flower of the grass shall he pass away; for the Sun is no sooner risen
with a burning heat, but it withers the grass, and the flower thereof
falls, and the grace of the fashion thereof perishes; So also shall the rich
man fade in his ways; all the comfort (we see by the Apostles discourse) and
the convenience, all the grace and ornament that riches are supposed to yield
will certainly wither and decay, either before, or with us; whenever the Sun
(that is, either some extreme mischance in life, or the certain destiny of
death) does arise, and make impression on them. But our Savior has best set
out the nature and condition of these things in that Parable concerning the
man, who having Luke 12. 20.
had a plentiful crop of Corn, and having projected for the disposal of it,
resolved then to bless himself, and entertain his mind with pleasing
discourses, that having, in readiness and security, so copious accommodations,
he might now enjoy himself with full satisfaction and delight; not considering,
that though his Barns were full, his Life was not sure; that God's Pleasure
might soon interrupt his Pass-time; that the fearful sentence might presently
be pronounced: Thou fool, this night thy life shall be required of thee, and
what thou have prepared, to whom shall it fall? Euripides calls riches (...), a
thing which much endears life; or makes men greatly love it; but they do not at
all enable to keep it: There is no (...), (...)
no price, or ransom equivalent to life; all that a man has, he would give to
redeem it, but it is a Purchase too dear for all the riches in the World to
compass; so the Psalmist tells us, They that trust Psalm. 49.
in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their riches, none
of them can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him;
for the redemption of their soul is precious: They cannot redeem their
Brother's soul, or life; nor therefore their own; for all souls are of the same
value, all greatly surpass the price of gold and silver. Life was not given us
for perpetuity, Luke 12 20.
but lent, or deposited with us; And without delay or evasion it must be
resigned into the hand of its just Owner, when he shall please to demand it;
and although righteousness may, yet riches (as the Wiseman tells us) cannot
deliver Prove. 11. 4.
from death, nor at all profit us in the day of wrath. Could we probably retain
our Possessions for ever in our hands; nay, could we certainly foresee some
considerable long definite time, in which we might enjoy our stores, it were
perhaps somewhat excusable to scrape and hoard, it might look like rational
Providence, it might yield some valuable satisfaction; but since, Rape,
congere, aufer, posside, statim relinquendum est; since, as Solomon tells Prove.
27. 24.
us, Riches are not for ever, nor does the crown endure to every generation;
yea, since they must be left very soon, nor is there any certainty of keeping
them any time; that one day may consume them; one night may dispossess us of
them, and our life together with them; there can be no reason why we should be
solicitous about them; no account given of our setting so high a rate upon
them. For who would much regard the having custody of a rich treasure for a day
or two, then to be stripped of all, and left bare? To be to day invested in
large domains, and to morrow to be dispossessed of them? No Man surely would be
so fond, as much to affect the condition. Yet this is our case; whatever we
call ours, we are but guardians thereof for a few days. Sen. Ep. 98.
This consideration therefore may serve to repress, or moderate in us all
covetous desires, proud conceits, vain confidences and satisfactions in respect
to worldly Wealth, to induce us (in Job's language) not to Job 31. 24.
make gold our hope, nor to say to the fine gold, thou art my confidence; not
to rejoice because our wealth is great, and because our hand has gotten much;
to extirpate from our hearts that root of all evil, the love of Money. For if,
as the Preacher thought, the greatest pleasure or benefit accruing from them,
is but looking upon them for a while, (what good, says he, is there to the
Eccl. 5. 11.
owners thereof, saving the beholding of them with their eyes?) if a little
will, nay must suffice our natural appetites, and our present necessities; if
more than needs, is but (as the Scripture teaches us) a trouble Eccl. 5. 12.

1 Timothy 6. 9.


disquieting our minds with care; a dangerous snare, drawing us into mischief
and sorrow; if this, I say, be their present quality; and were it better, yet
could it last for any certain, or any long continuance, is it not evidently
better to enjoy that pittance God has allotted us with Simplici cura constant
necessaria, in delicias laboratur. Sen Ep 89.

Matthew. 6.


ease and contentation of mind; or if we want a necessary supply, to employ
only a moderate diligence in getting thereof by the fairest Heb. 13. 15.

1 Timothy 6. 8.

Psalm. 55. 26.


means, which with God's blessing promised thereto, will never fail to procure
a competence, and with this to rest content; than with those in Amos, to pant
after the dust of the Amos 2. 6.

Hab. 2. 6.


earth; to lade our selves with thick clay; to thirst insatiably after floods
of gold, to heap up mountains of treasure, to extend unmeasurably our
possessions, (joining house to Isa. 5. 8.
house, and laying field to field, till there be no place, that we may be
placed alone in the midst of the earth; as the Prophet Esaias does excellently
describe the covetous Man's humor) than, I say, thus incessantly to toil for
the maintenance of this frail body, this flitting breath of ours? If Divine
Bounty has freely imparted a plentiful estate upon us, we should indeed bless
God for it; making our selves friends thereby Luke 16. 9.
(as our Savior advises us) employing it to God's Praise and Service; to the
relief and comfort of our Brethren that need; but to seek it earnestly, to set
our heart upon it, to rely thereon; to be greatly pleased or elevated in mind
thereby, as it argues much infidelity and profaneness of heart, so it signifies
much inconsiderateness and folly, the ignorance of its nature, the
forgetfulness of our own condition, upon the grounds discoursed upon.

3. Now, in the next place; for Pleasure, that great Witch, which so enchants
the World, and which by its mischievous Baits so allures Mankind into sin and
misery; although this consideration be not altogether necessary to disparage it
(its own nature sufficing to that; for it is more transitory than the shortest
life, it dies in the very enjoyment) yet it may conduce to our wise and good
practice in respect thereto, by tempering the sweetness thereof, yea souring
its relish to us; minding us of its insufficiency and unserviceableness to the
felicity of a mortal creature; yea, its extremely dangerous consequences to a
soul, that must survive the short enjoyment thereof. Some persons indeed,
ignorant or incredulous of a future estate; presuming of no sense remaining
after death, nor regarding any account to be rendered of this life's actions,
have encouraged themselves, and others in the free enjoyment of present
sensualities, upon the score of our life's shortness and uncertainty;
inculcating such Maxims as these:

Lucr.
Quem fors dierum cunque dabit. Appone, nec dulces amores [lucro Sperne puer,
etc.
-- Brevis est hic fructus homullis;
-- post mortem nulla voluptas.
Hor. l. 9.
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye; 1 Cor. 15. 32.
because our life is short, let us make the most advantageous use thereof we
can; because death is uncertain, let us prevent its surprisal, and be
beforehand with it, enjoying somewhat, before it snatches all from us. The
Author of Wisdom observes, and thus represents these Men's discourse: Our
life is Sap. 2. 1, etc.
short and tedious; and in the death of a man there is no remedy; neither was
there any man known to have returned from the grave: -- Come on, therefore let
us enjoy the good things that are present; let us speedily use the creatures
like as in youth; let us fill our selves with costly wine and ointments; and
let no flower of the spring pass by us; let us crown our selves with rose-buds
before they be withered; let none of us go without his part of voluptuousness
-- for this is our portion, and our lot is this. Thus, and no wonder, have some
men conceiving themselves beasts, resolved to live as such; renouncing all
sober care becoming men, and drowning their reason in brutish sensualities; yet
no question, the very same reflection, that this life would soon pass away, and
that death might speedily attack them, did not a little quash their mirth, and
damp their pleasure. To think, that this perhaps might be the last Banquet they
should taste of; that they should themselves shortly become the feast of Worms
and Serpents; could not but somewhat spoil the gust of their highest
delicacies, and disturb the sport of their loudest jovialties; but, in Job's
expression, make the meat in their bowels Job 20. 14.
to turn, and be as the gall of Asps within them. Those customary enjoyments
did so enamour them of sensual delight, that they could not without pungent
regret imagine a necessity of soon for ever parting with them; and so their
very Pleasure was by this thought made distasteful and embittered to them. So
did the Wiseman observe: O death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a
man that lives at rest in his possessions; unto the man that has nothing to
vex him; and that has prosperity in all things; Yea (adds he) unto him that is
yet able to receive meat: Ecclus 41. 1.
And how bitter then must the remembrance thereof be to him, who walloweth in
all kind of corporal satisfaction and delight; that places all his happiness
in sensual enjoyment? However, as to us, who are better instructed and
affected; who know and believe a future state; the consideration, that the time
of enjoying these delights will soon be over; that this World's jollity is but
like the crackling of thorns under a pot (which yields a brisk sound, Eccles.
7. 6.
and a cheerful blaze, but heats little, and instantly passes away) that they
leave no good fruits behind them, but do only corrupt and enervate our minds;
war against, and hurt our souls; tempt us to sin, and involve us in guilt; that
therefore Solomon was surely in the right, when he said of laughter, that it is
mad, Eccl. 2 2.
and of mirth, what does it? (that is, that the highest of these delights are
very irrational impertinences) and of intemperance; that, at the last, it
biteth like a Serpent, and Prove. 23 32.
stingeth like an Adder; with us, I say, who reflect thus, that ((...))
enjoyment of sinful pleasure for a season Heb. 11. 25.
cannot obtain much esteem and love; but will rather, I hope, be despised and
abhorred by us. I will add only

4. Concerning secular Wisdom and Knowledge; the which Men do also (...).
Arist. Eth. X 7.
commonly with great earnestness and ambition seek after, as the most specious
ornament, and pure content of their mind; this consideration does also detect
the just value thereof; so as to allay intemperate ardour toward it, pride and
conceitedness upon the having, or seeming to have it, envy and emulation about
it. For, imagine, if you please, a Man accomplished with all varieties of
learning commendable, able to recompt all the stories that have been ever
written (or the deeds acted) since the World's beginning; to understand, or
with the most delightful fluency and elegancy to speak all the languages that
have at any time been in use among the sons of men; skillful in twisting and
untwisting all kinds of subtilties; versed in all sorts of natural experiments,
and ready to assign plausible conjectures about the causes of them; studied in
all Books whatever, and in all Monuments of Antiquity; deeply knowing in all
the mysteries of art, or science, or policy, such as have ever been devised by
humane wit, or study or observation; yet all this, such is the pity, he must be
forced presently to abandon; all the use he could make of all his notions, the
pleasure he might find in them, the reputation accruing to him from them must
at that fatal minute vanish; his breath goes forth, he returns to his earth,
in that very day Psalm. 46. 4.

Eccl. 9. 10.


his thoughts perish. There is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom
in the grave, whither he goes. It Is seen (says the Psalmist, seen indeed
every day, and observed by Psalm. 49 10.

Eccl. 2. 14, 15, etc.


all) that wise men dye, likewise the fool and brutish person perishes; one
event happens to them both; there is no remembrance of the wise more than of
the fool for ever; (both dye alike, both alike are sorgotten) as the wisest man
himself, did (not without some distaste) observe and complain. All our subtle
conceits, and nice criticisms; all our fine inventions and goodly speculations
shall be swallowed up either in the utter darkness, or in the clearer light of
the future state. One Potion of that Lethean cup (which we must all take down
upon our entrance into that land of forgetfulness) will Psalm. 88. 12.
probably drown the (...). Cato Sen. apud Plut. page 641.
memory, deface the shape of all those Idea's, with which we have here stuffed
our minds; however they are not like to be of use to us in that new, so
different, state; where none of our languages are spoken; none of our
experience will suit; where all things have quite another face unknown,
unthought of by us. Where Aristotle, and Varro shall appear mere Idiots;
Demosthenes and Cicero shall become very insants; the wisest and eloquentest
Greeks will prove senseless and dumb Barbarians; where all our Authors shall
have no authority; where we must all go fresh to school again; must unlearn
perhaps, what in these misty regions we thought our selves best to know; and
begin to learn, what we not once ever dreamed of; Does therefore, I pray you,
so transitory and fruitless a good (for it self I mean and excepting our duty
to God, or the reasonable diligence we are bound to use in our calling) deserve
such anxious desire, or so restless toil; so careful attention of mind, or
assiduous pain of body about it? Does it become us to contend, or emulate so
much about it? Above all do we not most unreasonably, and against the nature of
the thing it self we pretend to (that is, ignorantly and foolishly) if we are
proud and conceited, much value our selves or contemn others, in respect
thereto? Solomon the most experienced in this matter, and best able to judge
thereof (He that gave his heart to seek and search out by wisdom concerning
all things that had been done under Heaven, and this with extreme success; even
he) passes the same sentence of vanity, vexation and unprofitableness, upon
this, as upon all other subcelestial things. True, he commends wisdom as an
excellent and useful thing comparatively; exceeding folly, so (...).

Eccl. 2. 15.


far as light exceeds darkness; But since light it self is not permanent, but
must give way to darkness, the difference soon vanished; and his opinion
thereos abated; considering, that as it happened to the fool, so it happened to
him, he breaks into that expostulation: And why then was I more wise? to what
purpose was such a distinction made, that signified in effect so little? And
indeed the Testimony of this great personage may serve for a good Epilogue to
all this discourse, discovering sufficiently the slender worth of all earthly
things: Seeing he, that had given himself industriously to experiment the worth
of all things here below, to sound the depth of their utmost perfection and
use; who had all the advantages imaginable of performing it: Who flourished in
the greatest magnificences of worldly pomp and power; who enjoyed an incredible
affluence of all riches; who tasted all varieties of most exquisite pleasure;
whose heart was (by God's special gift, and by his own industrious care)
enlarged with all kind of knowledge (furnished with notions many as the 1 Kings
4. 29.
sand upon the sea shore) above all that were before him; who had possessed and
enjoyed all that fancy could conceive, or heart could wish, and had arrived to
the top of secular Happiness; Yet even He with pathetical reiteration
pronounces all to be vanity and vexation of spirit; altogether unprofitable and
unsatisfactory to the mind of Man. And so therefore we may justly conclude them
to be; so finishing the first grand advantage this present consideration
affords us in order to that wisdom, to which we should apply our hearts.

I should proceed to gather other good fruits, which it is apt to produce and
contribute to the same purpose; but since my thoughts have taken so large scope
upon that former head, so that I have already too much, I fear, exercised your
patience, I shall only mention the rest. As this consideration does, as we
have seen, First, dispose us rightly to value these temporal goods, and
moderate our affections about them; so it does, Secondly, in like manner,
conduce to the right estimation of temporal evils; and thereby to the well
tempering our passions, in the resentment of them; to the begetting of patience
and contentedness in our minds. Also, Thirdly, it may help us to value, and
excite us to regard those things (good or evil) which relate to our future
state; being the things only of a permanent nature, and of an everlasting
consequence to us. Fourthly, It will engage us to husband carefully and well
employ this short time of our present life: Not to defer or procrastinate our
endeavors to live well; not to be lazy and loitering in the dispatch of our
only considerable business, relating to eternity; to embrace all
opportunities, and improve all means; and follow the best compendiums of good
practice leading to eternal bliss. Fifthly, It will be apt to confer much
toward the begetting and preserving sincerity in our thoughts, words and
actions; causing us to decline all oblique designs upon present mean interests,
or base regards to the opinions or affections of men: bearing single respects
to our conscience and duty in our actions; Teaching us to speak as we mean; and
be what we would seem; to be in our hearts and in our closets, what we appear
in our outward expressions and conversations with Men; For considering, that
within a very short time all the thoughts of our hearts shall be disclosed; and
all the actions of our lives exposed to public view (being strictly to be
examined at the great bar of divine judgment before Angels and Men) we cannot
but perceive it to be the greatest folly in the World, for this short present
time to disguise our selves; to conceal our intentions, or smother our actions.
What has occurred (upon these important subjects) to my meditation, I must at
present, in regard to your patience, omit. I shall close all with that good
Collect of our Church.

Almighty God, give us grace, that we may cast away the works of darkness, and
put upon us the armor of light now in the time of this mortal life, in which
thy Son Jesus Christ came to visit us in great humility; that in the last day,
when he shall come again in his glorious Majesty to judge both the quick and
the dead, we may rise to the life immortal, through him, who lives and
reigns with thee, and the Holy Ghost; now and ever.

Amen.
SERMON II. The Consideration of our latter End.
PSALM XC. 12. So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts
unto wisdom.
IN discoursing formerly upon Job 14. 14.

All the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my change come.


these words (expounded according to the most common and passable
interpretation) that which I chiefly observed was this: That the serious
consideration of the shortness and frailty of our life is a fit mean or
rational instrument subservient to the bringing our hearts to wisdom; that is,
to the making us discern, attend unto, embrace and prosecute such things as,
according to the dictates of right reason, are truly best for us.

I. The truth of which observation I largely declared from hence, that the said
consideration disposes us to judge rightly about those goods (which ordinarily
court and tempt us, viz. worldly glory and honor; riches, pleasure, knowledge;
to which I might have added wit, strength and beauty) what their just worth and
value is; and consequently to moderate our affections, our cares, our
endeavors about them; for that if all those goods be uncertain and transitory,
there can be no great reason to prize them much, or to affect them vehemently,
or to spend much care and pain about them.

II. I shall next in the same scales weigh our temporal evils; and say, that
also, The consideration of our lives brevity and frailty does avail to the
passing a true judgment of, and consequently to the governing our passions, and
ordering our behavior in respect to all those temporal evils, which either
according to the Law of our nature, or the fortuitous course of things, or the
particular dispensation of providence do befall us. Upon the declaration of
which point I need not insist much, since what was before discoursed concerning
the opposite goods does plainly enough infer it; more immediately indeed in
regard to the mala damni, or privationis, (the evils, which consist only in
the want, or loss of temporal goods) but sufficiently also by a manifest parity
of reason in respect to the mala sensus, the real pains, crosses and
inconveniences, that assail us in this life. For if worldly glory do hence
appear to be no more than a transient blaze, a fading show, a hollow sound, a
piece of theatrical pageantry, the want thereof cannot be very considerable to
us. Obscurity of condition (living in a valley beneath that dangerous height,
and deceitful luster) cannot in reason be deemed a very sad or pitiful thing;
which should displease, or discompose us; if we may thence learn that abundant
wealth is rather a needless clog, or a perilous snare, than any great
convenience to us; we cannot well esteem to be poor a great inselicity, or to
undergo losses a grievous calamity; but rather a benefit to be free from the
distractions that attend it; to have little to keep for others, little to care
for our selves. If these present pleasures be discerned hence to be only wild
fugitive dreams; out of which being soon roused we shall only find bitter
regrets to abide; why should not the wanting opportunities of enjoying them be
rather accounted a happy advantage, than any part of misery to us? If it seem,
that the greatest persection of curious knowledge (of what use or ornament
soever) after it is hardly purchased, must soon be parted with; to be simple or
ignorant will be no great matter of lamentation; as those will appear no solid
goods, so these consequently must be only umbroe malorum, phantasms, Sen. Ep.
89.
or shadows of evil, rather than truly or substantially so; (evils created by
fancy and subsisting thereby; which reason should, and time will surely
remove.) That in being impatient or disconsolate for them, we are but like
children, that fret and wail for the want of petty toys. And for the more real
or positive evils, such as violently assault nature, whole impressions no
reason can so withstand, as to distinguish all distaste or afflictive sense of
them; yet this consideration will aid to abate and assuage them; affording a
certain hope and prospect of approaching redress. It is often seen at Sea, that
Men (from unacquaintance with such agitations, or from brackish steams arising
from the salt Water) are heartily sick, and discover themselves to be so by
apparently grievous symptoms; yet no man hardly there does mind or pity them,
because the malady is not supposed dangerous, and within a while will probably
of it self pass over; or that however, the remedy is not far off; the sight of
Land, a taste of the fresh Air will relieve them: It Is near our Case: We passing
over this troublesome Sea of life: from unexperience, joined with the
tenderness of our constitution, we cannot well endure the changes and crosses
of fortune; to be tossed up and down; to suck in the sharp vapors of penury,
disgrace, sickness, and the like, does beget a qualm in our stomachs; make us
nauseate all things, and appear sorely distempered; yet is not our condition so
dismal, as it seems; we may grow hardier, and wear out our sense of affliction;
however, the Land is not far off, and by disembarking hence, we shall suddenly
be discharged of all our molestations. (...).
It Is a common solace of grief, approved by (...). Ant. VII. Sect. 33.
wise men, si gravis, brevis est; si longus, levis; Summi doloris intentio
invenit finem: nemo potest valde dolere, and diu: sic nos amantissima nostri
natura disposuit, ut dolorem aut tolerabilem, aut brevem faceret. Sen. Ep. 24.
if it be very grievous and acute, it cannot continue long, without
intermission or respit; if it abide long, it is supportable; Dolor perculsi
mortem imploramus, eamque unam, ut miseriarum malorumque terminum, exoptamus.
Cic. cons.
intolerable pain is like lightening, it destroys us, or is it Moriar? hoc
dicis; desinam aegrotare posse, etc. Sen.
self instantly destroyed. However, death at length (which never is far off)
will free us; be we never so much tossed with storms of misfortune, that is a
sure haven; be we persecuted with never so many enemies, that is a safe refuge;
let what pains or diseases soever infest us, that is an assured Anodynon, and
infallible remedy for them all; however we be wearied with the labors of the
day, the night will come and ease us; the grave will become a bed of rest unto
us. Shall I dye? I shall then cease to be sick; I shall be exempted from
disgrace; I shall be enlarged from prison; I shall be no more pinched with
want; no more tormented with pain. Death is a Winter, that as it withers the
Rose and Lily, so it kills the Nettle and Thistle; as it stifles all worldly
joy and pleasure, so it suppresses all care and grief; as it hushes the voice
of mirth and melody, so it stills the clamours, and the sighs of misery; as it
defaces all the World's glory, so it covers all disgrace, wipes off all tears,
silences all complaint, buries all disquiet and discontent. King Philip of
Macedon once threatened the Spartans to vex them sorely, and bring them into
great straits; but, answered they, can he hinder us from dying; (...).

Eripere vitam (...) homini potest; At nemo (...). Sen. Trag.


that indeed is a way of evading, which no enemy can obstruct, no Tyrant can
debar Men from; they who can deprive of life, and its conveniences, cannot take
away death from them. There is a place, Job tells us, where the wicked cease
Job 3. 17.
from troubling, and where the weary be at rest; where the prisoners rest
together; they hear not the voice of the oppressor; the small and great are
there; and the servant is free from his Master. It Is therefore but holding
(...). Plut. ad Apol. p. 195.
out a while, and a deliverance from the worst this World can molest us with,
shall of its own accord arrive unto us; in the mean time it is better that we at
present owe the benefit of our comfort to reason, than afterward to time; by
rational consideration to work patience and contentment in our selves; and to
use the shortness of our life as an argument to sustain us in our assliction,
than to find the end thereof only a natural and necessary means of our rescue
from it. The contemplation Omnia brevia tolerabilia esse debent, etiamse magna.
Cic. Lael. ad fin.
of this cannot fail to yield something of courage and solace to us in the
greatest pressures; these transient, and short-lived evils, if we consider them
as so, cannot appear such horrid bugbears, as much to affright or dismay us; if
we remember how short they are, we cannot esteem them so great, or so
intolerable. There be, I must confess, diverse more noble considerations, proper
and available to cure discontent and impatience. The considering, that all
these evils proceed from God's just will, and wise providence; unto which it is
fit; and we upon all accounts are obliged readily to submit; that they do
ordinarily come from God's goodness, and gracious design toward us; that they
are medicines (although ungrateful, yet wholesome) administered by the Divine
Wisdom, to prevent, remove or abate our distempers of soul (to allay the
tumors of pride, to cool the fevers of intemperate desire; to rouse us from
the lethargy of sloth; to stop the gangrene of bad conscience) that they are
fatherly corrections, intended to reclaim us from sin, and excite us to duty;
that they serve as instruments or occasions to exercise, to try, to refine our
virtue; to beget in us the hope, to qualify us for the reception of better
rewards; such discourses indeed are of a better nature, and have a more
excellent kind of efficacy: yet no fit help, no good art, no just weapon is to
be quite neglected in the combat against our spiritual foes. A Pebble-stone
has been sometimes found more convenient than a Sword or a Spear to slay a
Giant. Baser remedies (by reason of the Patient's constitution, or
circumstances) do sometime produce good effect, when others in their own nature
more rich and potent want efficacy. And surely frequent reflections upon our
mortality, and living under the sense of our life's frailty cannot but conduce
somewhat to the begetting in us an indifferency of mind toward all these
temporal occurents: to extenuate both the goods and the evils we here meet
with; consequently therefore to compose and calm our passions about them.

III. But I proceed to another use of that consideration we speak of emergent
from the former, but so as to improve it to higher purposes. For since it is
useful to the diminishing our admiration of these worldly things, to the
withdrawing our affections from them, to the slackning our endeavors about
them; it will follow that it must conduce also to beget an esteem, a desire, a
prosecution of things conducing to our future welfare; both by removing the
obstacles of doing so, and by engaging us to consider the importance of those
things in comparison with these. By removing obstacles I say; for while our
hearts are possessed with regard and passion toward these present things, there
can be no room left in them for respect and affection toward things future.
It Is in our soul as in the rest of nature; there can be no penetration of
objects (as it were) in our hearts, nor any vacuity in them; our mind no more
than our body can be in several places, or tend several ways, or abide in
perfect rest; yet some-where it will always be; some-whither it will always go;
somewhat it will ever be doing. If we have a treasure here (somewhat Matthew.
6. 21.
we greatly like and much confide in) our hearts will be here with it; and if
here, they cannot be otherwhere; they will be taken up; they will rest
satisfied; they will not care to seek farther. If we affect John 5. 44. 12. 43.

Matthew. 6. 24.


worldly glory and delight in the applause of men, we shall not be so careful
to please God, and seek his favor. If we admire and repose confidence in
riches, it will make us neglectfull of God, and distrustful of his Providence;
if our Romans 8. 5.
mind thirsts after, and sucks in greedily sensual pleasures, we shall not
relish spiritual delights, attending the practice of virtue and piety, or
arising from good conscience; adhering to, attending upon Masters of so
different, so opposite a quality is inconsistent; they cannot abide peaceably
together, they cannot both rule in our narrow breasts; we shall love and hold
to the one; hate and despise the other. If any 1 John 2. 15.
man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him; the love of the
World, as the present guest, so occupies and fills the room; that it will not
admit, cannot hold the love of God. But when the heart is discharged and
emptied of these things; when we begin to despise them as base and vain; to
distaste them as insipid and unsavory; then naturally will succeed a desire
after other things promising a more solid content; and desire will breed
endeavor; and endeavor (furthered by God's assistence always ready to back
it) will yield such a glimps and taste of those things, as will so comfort and
satisfy our minds, that thereby they will be drawn and engaged into a more
earnest prosecution of them. When (I say) driving on ambitious Projects,
heaping up Wealth, providing for the flesh (by our reflecting on the shortness
and frailty of our life) become so insipid to us, that we find little appetite
to them, or relish in them; our restless minds will begin to hunger and thirst
after righteousness, desiring some satisfaction thence: Discerning these
secular and carnal fruitions to be mere husks (the Luke 22. 5.
proper food of swine) we shall bethink our selves of that better nourishment
(of rational or spiritual comfort) which our Fathers house does afford to his
children and servants. Being somewhat disentangled from the care of our sarms
and our trafficks; from yoaking our oxen and being married to our present
delights; we may be at leisure, and in disposition to comply with divine
invitations to entertainments spiritual. Experiencing, that our Matthew. 22. 5.
trade about these petty commodities turns to small account, and that in the
end we shall be nothing richer thereby; reason will induce us with the Merchant
in the Gospel to sell all that we have (to forego our Matthew. 13. 46.
present interests and designs) for the purchasing that rich Pearl of God's
Kingdom, which will yield so exceeding profit; the gain of present comfort to
our conscience, and eternal happiness to our souls. In fine, when we consider
seriously, that we have here no abiding City, Heb. 13. 14.

1 Pet. 2. 11.


but are only sojourners and pilgrims upon Earth; that all our care and pain
here do regard only an uncertain and transitory state; and will therefore
suddenly as to all fruit and benefit be lost unto us; this will suggest unto
us, with the good Patriarchs, (...), to long after a better Country; a Heb.
11. 16.
more assured, and lasting state of life; where we may enjoy some certain and
durable repose; to tend homeward, in our desires and hopes, toward those
eternal Mansions of joy and rest prepared for God's faithful Servants in
Heaven. Thus will this consideration help toward the bringing us to inquire
after and regard the things concerning our future state; and in the result will
engage us to compare them with these present things, as to our concernment in
them and the consequence of them to our advantage or damage, whence a right
judgment, and a congruous practice will naturally follow. There be four ways of
comparing the things relating to this present life with those which respect our
future state: Comparing the goods of this with the goods of that; the evils of
this with the evils of that; the goods of this with the evils of that; the
evils of this with the goods of that. All these comparisons we may find often
made in Scripture; in order to the informing our judgment about the respective
value of both sorts; the present consideration intervening, as a standard to
measure and try them by.

First then; comparing the present goods with those which concern our future
state, since the transitoriness and uncertainty of temporal goods detract from
their worth, and render them in great degree contemptible; but the durability
and certainty of spiritual goods does increase their rate, and make them
exceedingly valuable; it is evident hence, that spiritual goods are infinitely
to be preferred in our opinion, to be more willingly embraced, to be more
zealously pursued than temporal goods, that in case of competition, when both
cannot be enjoyed, we are in reason obliged readily to part with all these,
rather than to forfeit our title unto, or hazard our hope of those. Thus in the
Scripture it is often discoursed: The world (says St. John) passes 1 John 2.
17.
away, and the desire thereof; but he that does the will of God abides for
ever: The World, and all that is desirable therein is transient; but obedience
to God's commandments is of an everlasting consequence; whence he infers, that
we should not love the world; that is, not entertain such an affection thereto,
as may any way prejudice the love of God, or hinder the obedience springing
thence, or suitable thereto.

All flesh is grass (says St. Peter) 1 Pet. 1. 24.
and all the glory of man as the flower of the grass; the grass withers, and
the flower thereof falls away; but the word of the Lord endures for ever:
All worldly glory is frail and fading, but the Word of God is eternally firm
and permanent; that is, the good things by God promised to them, who faithfully
serve him, shall infallibly be conferred on them to their everlasting benefit;
whence it follows, that as he exhorts, we are bound to gird up the loins of our
mind, to be sober, and hope to v. 13.
the end; to proceed and persist constantly in faithful obedience to God.
Charge those (says St. Paul) who are rich in this world, that they 1 Timothy 6.
19.
be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God; that
they do good, be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate; treasuring up for themselves a good foundation for the future;
that they may attain everlasting life: Since, argues he, present riches are of
uncertain, and short continuance; but faith and obedience to God, exercised in
our charity and mercy toward men, are a certain stock improveable to our
eternal interest; therefore be not proud of, nor rely upon those, but regard
especially, and employ our selves upon these. Our Savior himself does often
insist upon, and inculcate this comparison: Treasure not Matthew. 6. 20.
unto your selves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust do corrupt; and
where thieves break through and steal; but treasure up to your selves treasures
in heaven, where moth and rust do not corrupt, and where thieves do not break
through and steal. Do not take v. 25.
care for your soul, what ye shall eat, and what ye shall drink; nor for your
body, what ye shall put on; but seek first the kingdom of God. Labor not John
6. 27.
for the food that perishes, but for the food that abides to eternal life;
sell Luke 12. 33.

(...).


your substance, and give alms; provide your selves bags that wax not old; an
indefectible treasure in the heavens: Thus does the holy Scripture, setting
forth the uncertainty and transitoriness of the present, the certainty and
permanency of future goods, declare the excellency of these above those;
advising thereupon, with highest reason, that we willingly reject those (in
real effect, if need be, however always in ready disposition of mind) in order
to the procuring or securing of these. It also, for our example and
encouragement, commends to us the wisdom and virtue of those Persons, who have
effectually practiced this duty: of Abraham, our Father, who, Heb. 11. 10.
in expectation of that well-founded City, made and built by God, did readily
desert his Country and Kindred, with all present accommodations of life; of
Moses, who disregarded v. 23.
the splendors and delights of a great Court; rejected the alliance of a great
Princess, and refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter; in respect to
the (...), that future distribution of reward; a share wherein shall assuredly
fall to them, who above all other considerations regard the performance of
their duty to God, of the Apostles, who forsook all, Parents, Brethren, Matthew.
19. 27.

Luke 18. 28.


Lands, Houses, Trades, receipts of Custom, to follow Christ; him at present
poor, and naked of all secular honor, power, wealth and delight; in hope only
to receive from him divine benefits, and future preserments in his Kingdom; of
Mary, Luke 10. 39.
who neglecting present affairs, and seating her self at Jesus his feet,
attending to his discipline; is commended for her wisdom, in minding the only
necessary thing; in choosing the better part, which could never be taken from
her: of St. Paul, who accounted all his gains (all his worldly Phil. 3. 7, 8.
interests and privileges) to be damage, to be dung in respect to Christ, and
the excellent knowledge of him, with the benefits thence accruing to him. On
the contrary there we have Esau condemned and stigmatized for a profane and a
vain person, who ((...)) for Heb. 12. 16.
one little eating-bout; one meis of Pottage (for a little present satisfaction
of sense, or for the sustenance of this srail life) did withgo his birthright,
that emblem of spiritual blessings and privileges. We Mark 10. 18.
have again represented to us that unhappy young Gentleman; who though he had
good qualities, rendering him amiable even to our Savior; and had been trained
up in the observance of God's Commandments; yet not being content to part with
his large Possessions, in lieu of the treasure by Christ offered in Heaven, was
reputed deficient; could find no acceptance with God, nor admission into his
Kingdom; for a petty temporal commodity forfeiting an infinite eternal
advantage. For, says our Savior, He that loves father or mother above Matthew.
10. 37.
me; he that does not hate father Luke 14. 26.
and mother, wife and children, brothers and sisters, yea his own life (for me
and the Gospel) is not worthy of Mark 10. 29.
me, nor can be my disciple. He that in his esteem or affection does prefer any
temporal advantages before the benefits tendered by our Savior (yea does not
in comparison despise, renounce and reject his dearest contents of life, and
the very capacity of enjoying them, his life it self) does not deserve to be
reckoned among the Disciples of Christ; to be so much as a Pretender to eternal
joy, or a candidate of immortality. Our Savior rejects all such unwise and
perverse traders, who will not exchange brittle glass for solid gold;
counterfeit glistering stones for genuine most precious jewels; a garland of
fading flowers for an incorruptible Crown of Glory; a small temporary pension
for a vastly rich freehold; an inheritance 1 Pet. 1. 4.
incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in the
heavens. Thus does the Holy Scripture teach us to compare these sorts of good
things;

And, secondly, so also does it to compare the evils of both states; for that
seeing, as the soon ceasing of temporal mischiefs should (in reasonable
proceeding) diminish the fear of them, and mitigate the grief for them; so the
incessant continuance of spiritual evils does (according to just estimation)
render them hugely grievous and formidable; it is plain, that we should much
more dislike, abominate, and shun spiritual evils, than temporal; that we
should make no question rather to endure these paroxysms of momentany pain,
than incur those chronical and (indeed) incurable maladies; that we should run
willingly into these shallow plashes of present inconvenience, rather than
plunge our selves into those unfathomable depths of eternal misery. There is (I
suppose) no man, who would not account it a very great calamity (such as hardly
greater could befall him here) to have his right Matthew. 5. 29. 18. 8.
eye plucked out, and his right hand cut off, and his foot taken from him; to
be deformed and maimed, so that he can do nothing, or stir any whither; yet our
Lord represents these to us as inconsiderable evils, yea as things very
eligible and advantageous in comparison of those mischiefs, which the voluntary
not embracing them, in case we cannot otherwise than by so doing avoid sin,
will bring on us: (...), it is (says he) profitable for thee, that one of thy
members be lost, rather than that thy whole body be cast into hell; (...), it is
good, it is excellent for thee to enter into life lame and maimed, and one eyed,
rather than having two hands, and two feet, and two eyes (in all integrity and
beauty of this temporal, or corporal state) to be cast into eternal fire. To be
banished from ones native soil, secluded from all comforts of friendly
acquaintance, divested irrecoverably of great estate and dignity; becoming a
vagrant and a servant in vile employment, in a strange Country, every Man
would be apt to deem a wretched condition; yet Moses, we Heb. 11. 25.
see, freely chose it, rather than by enjoying unlawful pleasures at home, in
Pharaoh's Court, to incur God's displeasure and vengeance: (...), choosing
rather to undergo evil together with God's people, than to have (...), a
temporary fruition of sinful delight, dangerous to the welfare of his soul.
Death is commonly esteemed the most extreme and terrible of evils incident to
man; yet our Savior bids us not to regard or fear it, in comparison of that
deadly ruin, which we adventure on by offending God: I say unto you my friends
(says he, Luke 12. 4.

Matthew. 10. 28.

(...).


he intended it for the most friendly advice) be not afraid of them that kill
the body, and after that have nothing farther to do; but I will show you whom
ye shall fear; Fear him, who after he has killed, has power to cast into
hell; to cast both body and soul into Hell, and destroy them therein; Yea, I
say unto you (so he inculcates and impresses it upon them) fear him.

But thirdly; Considering the good things of this life together with the evils
of that, which is to come; Since enjoying these goods in comparison with
enduring those evils is but rejoicing for a moment in respect of mourning to
eternity; if upon the seeming sweetness of these enjoyments to our carnal
appetite be consequent a remediless distempering of our soul; so that what
tastes like honey proves gall in the digestion; gripes our bowels, gnaws our
heart, and stings our conscience for ever; if present mirth and jollity have a
tendency to that dreadful weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth threatened
in the Gospel; if for the praise and favor of a few giddy men here we venture
eternal shame and confusion before God and Angels and all good men hereafter;
if for attaining or preserving a small stock of uncertain riches in this World
we shall reduce our selves into a state of most uncomfortable nakedness and
penury in the other. It Is clear as the Sun that we are downright fools and
madmen, if we do not upon these accounts rather willingly reject all these
good things, than hazard incurring any of those evils; for, says truth it
self, What will it profit a man, if he gain the whole World ((...) Mark 8. 36.

Luke 9. 25.


) and be endamaged as to his soul, or lose his soul as a mulct. It Is a very
disadvantageous bargain for all the conveniences this World can afford to be
deprived of the comforts of our immortal state. But,

Lastly, comparing the evils of this life with the benefits of the future,
since the worst tempests of this life will be soon blown over, the bitterest
crosses must expire (if not before, however) with our breath; but the good
things of the future state are immutable and perpetual; it is in evident
consequence most reasonable; that we freely (if need be) undertake, and
patiently endure these for the sake of those; that in hope of that
incorruptible inheritance, Pet. 1. 4.
laid up for us in Heaven, we not only support and comfort our selves, but even
rejoice and exult in all the afflictions by God's wise and just dispensation
imposed on us here; as they in St. Peter; wherein (says Ibid.

(...)


he) ye greatly rejoice (or exult,) being for a little while as in heaviness
through manifold (...)

James 1. 2.


afflictions or trials. Accompting it all joy (says St. James) when ye fall
into diverse temptations (that is afflictions or trials) knowing that the trial
of your faith perfecteth patience; that is, seeing the sufferance of these
present evils conduces to the furtherance of your spiritual and eternal
welfare. And, We glory intribulation, says St. Paul; rendering the same
account, because Romans 5. 8.
it tended to their souls advantage: St. Paul, than whom no man perhaps ever
more deeply tasted of the cup of affliction; and that tempered with all the
most bitter ingredients which this World can produce; Whose life was spent (...)
in continual agitation and unsettledness; in all hardships of travel and
labor and care; in extreme sufferance of all pains both of body and mind; in
all imaginable dangers and difficulties and distresses, that nature exposes man
unto, or humane malice can bring upon him; in all wants of natural comfort
(food, sleep, shelter, liberty, health) in all kinds of disgrace and contumely;
as you may see in those large inventories of his sufferings, registered by
himself, in the 6th and 2 Cor. 11. 23. 6. 5.
11th Chapters of his 2d Epistle to the Corinthians; Yet all this considering
the good things he expected afterward to enjoy, he accounted very slight and
tolerable: For (says 2 Cor. 4. 17. 5. 1.

(...)


he) our lightness of affliction, that is for a little while here, works for
us a far more exceeding weight of glory; while we look not at the things which
are seen; but at those, which are not seen; for the things which are seen are
temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal. For we know, that when
our earthly house of this tabernacle (of this unsteady transitory abode) is
dissolved we are to have a tabernacle from God, a house not made with hands,
eternal in the Heavens. I reckon, says he Romans 8. 18.
again, (that is having made a due comparison and computation I find) that the
sufferings of this present time are not worthy (that is are not considerable,
come under no rate or proportion) in respect of the glory which shall be
revealed (or openly conferred) upon us. The like opinion had those faithful
Christians, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, of Heb. 10. 34.

(...).


whom it is said, that being exposed to public scorn as in a theater, with
reproaches and afflictions, they did with gladness accept the spoiling (...).
(or rapine) of their goods; knowing that they had in Heaven a better and more
enduring substance. But the principal example (most obliging our imitation) of
this wise choice is that of our Lord himself; who, in contemplation of the
future great satisfaction and reward of patient submission to the divine will,
did willingly undergo the greatest of temporal sorrows and ignominies; Who
(says the Apostle to the Hebrews, Heb. 12. 2.
propounding his example to us) for the joy that was set before him endured the
Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of God.

Thus immediately, or by an easy inference does the consideration of this
life's shortness and uncertainty confer to that main part of wisdom, rightly to
value the things about which we are conversant; disposing us consequently to
moderate our affections, and rightly to guide our actions about them; fitting
us therefore for the performance of those duties so often enjoined us; of not
caring for, not trusting in, not minding (unduly that is, and immoderately)
things below; of dying to this World and taking up our cross, or contentedly
suffering (in submission to God's will) all loss and inconvenience; as also to
the placing our meditation and care; our love and desire; our hope and
confidence; our joy and satisfaction; our most earnest pains and endeavors
upon things divine, spiritual and eternal.

IV. I proceed to another general benefit of that general consideration; which
is that it may engage us to a good improvement of our time; the doing which is
a very considerable piece of wisdom. For if time be, (as Theophrastus called
(...).
it truly) a thing of most precious value (or expense) as it were a great folly
to lavish it away unprofitably; so to be frugal thereof, and careful to lay it
out for the best advantage, especially every Man having so little store
thereof, must be a special point of Prudence. To be covetous of time (Seneca
tells us) Nulla nisi temporis honesta est avaritia. Sen.
is a commendable avarice; it being necessary for the accomplishment of any
worthy enterprise; there being nothing excellent, that can soon or easily be
effected. Surely he that has much and great business to dispatch; and but a
little time allowed for it, is concerned to husband it well; not to lose it
wholly in idleness; not to trifle it away in unnecessary divertisements; not to
put himself upon other impertinent affairs; above all not to create obstacles
to himself, by pursuing matters of a tendency quite contrary to the success of
his main undertakings. It Is our case; we are obliged here to negotiate in
business of infinite price and consequence to us; no less than the salvation of
our souls and eternal happiness; and we see, that our time to drive it on and
bring it to a happy issue is very scant and short; short in it self; and very
short in respect to the nature of those affairs; the great variety, and the
great difficulty of them: The great father of Physicians did quicken the
students of that faculty to diligence, by admonishing them (in the first place,
setting it in the front of his famous Aphorisms) that, life is short, and Non
enim dat natura virtutem; ars est bonum fieri. Sen. Ep. 89.
art is long. And how much more so is the art of living well (that most
excellent and most necessary art; for indeed virtue is not a gift of nature,
but a work of art; an effect of labor and study) this, I say most needful and
useful art of living virtuously and piously; this art of spiritual Physic;
(of preserving and recovering our souls health) how much longer is it? how many
rules are to be learnt? how many precepts to be observed in order thereto? We
are bound to furnish our minds with needful knowledge of God's will and our
duty; we are to bend our unwilling Wills to a ready compliance with them; we
are to adorn our souls with dispositions suitable to the future state (such as
may qualify us for the presence of God, and conversation with the blessed
spirits above) it is incumbent on us to mortify corrupt desires, to restrain
inordinate passions, to subdue natural propensities, to extirpate vicious
habits; in order to the effecting these things, to use all fit means; devotion
toward God, study of his Law, reflection upon our actions, with all such
spiritual instruments; the performing which duties, as it does require great
care and pains, so it needs much time; all this is not dictum factum, as soon
done as said; a few spare minutes will not suffice to accomplish it. Natural
inclination, that wild beast within us, will not so presently be tamed, and
made tractable by us. Ill habits cannot (...). Epict.
be removed without much exercise and attendance; as they were begot, so they
must be destroyed, by a constant succession, and frequency of acts. Fleshly
lust is not to be killed with a stab or two; it will fight stoutly, and rebel
often, and hold out long before with our utmost endeavor we can obtain an
entire victory over it. No virtue is acquired in an instant, but by degrees,
step by step; from the seeds of right instruction and good resolution it
springs up, and grows forward by a continual progress of customary practice;
it is a child of patience, a fruit of perseverance (that (...), enduring in
doing well, St. Paul speaks of) and consequently a work of time, for enduring
implies Romans 2. 7.
a good space of time. Having therefore so much to do, and of so great
concernment, and so little a portion of time for it, it behooves us to be
careful in the improvement of what time is allowed us; to embrace all
opportunities and advantages offered; to go the nearest way, to use the best
compendiums in the transaction of our business; not to be slothful and
negligent, but active and intent about it; (for as time is diminished, and in
part lost by sloth or slackness; so it is enlarged, and, as it were, multiplied
by industry; my day is two in respect of his, who does but half my work.) Not
(also) to consume our time in fruitless pastimes, and curious entertainments of
fancy; being idly busy about impertinences and trifles (we call it sport, but
it is a serious damage to us;) not to immerse our selves in multiplicities of
needless care about secular matters, which may distract us, and bereave us of
fit leisure for our great employment; that which our Savior calls Luke 10. 40.
(...), to keep a great deal of do and stir (to be jumbled about as it were,
and confounded) about many things; and, (...), to be distracted and perplexed
about much combersome service; which St. Paul calls (...), 1 Timothy 2. 4.
to be implicated and entangled (as in a net) with the negotiations of this
present life; so that we shall not be expedite, or free to bestir our selves
about our more weighty affairs. The spending much time about those things does
steal it from these; yea, does more than so, by discomposing our minds so that
we cannot well employ what time remains upon our spiritual concernments. But
especially we should not prostitute our time upon vicious projects and
practices; doing which is not only a prodigality of the present time, but an
abridgment of the future; it not only does not promote or set forward our
business, but brings it backward; and makes us more work than we had before;
it is a going in a way directly contrary to our journey's-end. The Scripture
aptly resembles our life to a way faring, a condition of travel and pilgrimage;
now he that has a long journey to make, and but a little time of day to pass
it in, must in reason strive to set out soon, and then to make good speed must
proceed on directly, making no stops or deflections (not calling in at every
sign that invites him, not standing to gaze at every object seeming new or
strange to him; not staying to talk with every Passenger that meets him; but
rather avoiding all occasions of diversion and delay) lest he be surprised by
the night, be left to wander in the dark, be excluded finally from the place
whither he tends: So must we in our course toward Heaven and Happiness; take
care that we set out soon (procrastinating no time, but beginning instantly to
insist in the ways of Piety and Virtue) then proceed on speedily, and persist
constantly; nowhere staying or loitering, shunning all impediments and
avocations from our Progress; lest we never arrive near, or come too late unto
the gate of Heaven. St. Peter tells us, that the end of all things does
approach, and thereupon advises us to be sober, and 1 Pet. 4. 7
to watch unto prayer; for that the less our time is, the more intent and
industrious it concerns us to be. And, St. Paul injoins us to redeem the time,
because the days are evil; Ephesians. 5. 15.
that is, since we can enjoy no true quiet or comfort here, we should improve
our time to the best advantage for the future; he might have also adjoined,
with the Patriarch Jacob, the paucity of the days to their badness; because the
days of our life Genesis 47. 9

Job 14. 1.


are few and evil, let us redeem the time; Man that is born of a woman is of
few days, and full of trouble: So few indeed they are, that it is fit we should
lose none of them, but use them all in preparation toward that great change we
are to make; that satal passage out of this strait time into that boundless
eternity. So, it seems, we have Job's example of doing: Job 14. 14.
All the days (says he) of my appointed time will I wait till my change come. I
end this Point with that so comprehensive warning of our Savior: Take heed to
your selves, lest Luke 21. 34.
at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and
cares of this life; and so that day come upon you unawares. Watch ye therefore
and pray, that ye may be counted worthy to escape -- and to stand before the
son of man.

V. I shall adjoin but one use more, to which this consideration may be
subservient, which is, that it may help to beget and maintain in us (that which
is the very heart and soul of all goodness) Sincerity. Sincerity in all kinds,
in our thoughts, words and actions. To keep us from harboring in our breasts
such thoughts, as we would be afraid or ashamed to own: from speaking otherwise
than we mean, than we intend to do, than we are ready any-where openly to
avow; from endeavoring to seem what we are not; from being one thing in our
expressions and conversations with men; another in our hearts, or in our
closets. From acting with oblique respects to private interests or passions, to
humane favor or censure (in matters, I mean, where duty does intervene, and
where pure conscience ought to guide and govern us) from making professions and
ostentations (void of substance, of truth, of knowledge, of good purpose) great
semblances of peculiar sanctimony, integrity, scrupulosity, spirituality,
refinedness like those Pharisees so often therefore taxed in the Gospel; as
also from palliating, as those men did, designs of ambition, avarice, envy,
animosity, revenge, perverse humor, with pretenses of zeal and conscience. We
should indeed strive to be good (and that in all real strictness aiming at
utmost perfection) in outward act and appearance, as well as in heart and
reality; for the glory of God and example of men (providing things honest in
the Romans 12. 17.
sight of all men) but we must not shine with a false luster, nor care to seem
better than we are, nor intend to serve our selves in seeming to serve God;
bartering spiritual commodities for our own glory or gain. For since the day
approaches when God will judge (...), Romans 2. 16.
the things men do so studiously conceal; when God shall bring Eccl. 12. 14.
every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or
whether it be evil; since we must all 2 Cor. 5. 10.

(...).

Chrysostom.


appear (or rather, be all made apparent, be manisested and discovered) at the
tribunal of Christ; since there is nothing covered, which shall not be
revealed; nor hid, that shall not be known; so that whatever is Luke 12. 2, 3.
spoken in the ear in closets, shall be proclaimed on the house tops: Since at
length, and that within a very short time (no man knows how soon) the whispers
of every mouth (the closest murmurs of detraction, slander and sycophantry)
shall become audible to every ear; the abstrusest thoughts of all hearts (the
closest malice and envy) shall be disclosed in the most public Theater, before
innumerable spectatours; the truth of all pretenses shall be thoroughly
examined; the just merit of every Person, and every cause shall with a most
exact scrutiny be scanned openly in the face of all the World; to what purpose
can it be to juggle or basfle for a time; for a few days (perhaps for a few
minutes) to abuse, or to amuse those about us with crafty dissimulation or
deceit? Is it worth the pains to devise plausible shifts, which shall
instantly, we know, be detected and defeated; to bedaub foul designs with a
fair varnish, which death will presently wipe off; to be dark and cloudy in our
proceedings, whenas a clear day (that will certainly dispel all darkness and
scatter all mists) is breaking in upon us; to make vizors for our faces, and
cloaks for our actions, whenas we must very shortly be exposed, perfectly naked
and undisguised, in our true colors, to the general view of Angels and Men?
Heaven sees at present what we think and do, and our conscience cannot be
wholly ignorant or insensible; nor can Earth it self be long unacquainted
therewith. Is it not much better, and more easy (since it requires no pains or
study) to act our selves, than to accommodate our selves to other unbeseeming
and undue parts; to be upright in our intentions, consistent in our discourses,
plain in our dealings, following the single and uniform guidance of our reason
and conscience, than to shuffle and shift, wandering after the various uncertain
and inconstant opinions or humors of men? What matter is it, what clothes we
wear, what garb we appear in, during this posture of travel and sojourning
here; what for the present we go for; how men esteem us, what they think of our
actions? St. Paul at least did not much stand upon it; for with me, said he,
it is a very small thing ((...), 1 Cor. 4. 3.
the least thing that can come under consideration) to be judged of you, or of
humane day (that is, of this present transitory, fallible, reversible judgment
of men.) If we mean well and do righteously, our conscience will at present
satisfy us, and the divine (unerring and impartial) sentence will hereafter
acquit us; no unjust or uncharitable censure shall prejudice us; if we
entertain base designs, and deal unrighteously; as our conscience will accuse
and vex us here, so God will shortly condemn and punish us; neither shall the
most favorable conceit of men stand us in stead. Every man's work shall become
manifest; for the 1 Cor. 3. 13.
day shall declare it; becuase it shall be revealed by fire; and the fire (that
is, a severe and strict inquiry) shall try every man's work, of what sort it
is. I cannot insist more on this Point; I shall only say, that considering the
brevity and uncertainty of our present state, the greatest simplicity may
justly be deemed the truest wisdom; that who deceives others does cozen
himself most; that the deepest policy (used to compass, or to conceal bad
designs) will in the end appear the most downright folly.

I might add to the precedent discourses, (...)

Anton. lib. 7.


that Philosophy it self has commended this consideration as a proper and
powerful instrument of virtue; reckoning the practice thereof a main part of
wisdom; the greatest proficient therein in common esteem, Socrates, having
desined Philosophy (or the study of wisdom) to be nothing else, but ((...))
the study of death; intimating also (in Plato's Phoedon) that this study, the
meditation of death and preparation of his mind to leave this World, had been
the constant and chief employment of his life. That likewise, according to
experience, nothing more avails to render the minds of men sober and well
composed, than such spectacles of Mortality as do impress this consideration
upon them. For whom does not the sight of a Coffin or of a Grave gaping to
receive a friend perhaps, an ancient Acquaintance; however a man in nature and
state altogether like our selves; of the mournful looks and habits, of all the
sad pomps and solemnities attending man unto his long home, by minding him of
his own frail condition, affect with some serious, some honest, some wise
thoughts? And if we be reasonable men, we may every day supply the need of such
occasions, by representing to our selves the necessity of our soon returning to
the dust; dressing in thought our own Herses, and celebrating our own Funerals;
by living under the continual apprehension and sense of our transitory and
uncertain condition; dying daily, or becoming already dead unto this World. The
doing which effectually being the gift of God, and an especial work of his
Grace, let us of him humbly implore it, saying after the Holy Prophet, Lord, so
teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

Amen.
SERMON III. The Danger and mischief of delaying Repentance.
PSALM CXIX. 60. I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments.
THIS Psalm (no less excellent in virtue, than large in bulk) contains
manifold reflections upon the nature, the properties, the adjuncts and effects
of God's Law, many sprightly ejaculations about it (conceived in different
forms of speech; some in way of petition, some of thanksgiving, some of
resolution, some of assertion or aphorism) many useful directions, many
zealous exhortations to the observance of it; the which are not ranged in any
strict order, but, (like a variety of fair flowers and wholesome herbs in a
wild field) do with a grateful confusion lie dispersed, as they freely did
spring up in the heart, or were suggested by the devout spirit of him, who
indicted the Psalm; whence no coherence of sentences being designed, we may
consider any one of them absolutely or singly by it self.

Among them, that which I have picked out for the subject of my discourse,
implies an excellent rule of practice, authorized by the Psalmist's example;
it is propounded in way of devotion or immediate address to God; unto whose
infallible knowledge his conscience makes an appeal concerning his practice;
not as boasting thereof, but as praising God for it, unto whose gracious
instruction and succor he frequently does ascribe all his performances: But
the manner of propounding I shall not insist upon; the rule it self is, that
speedily, without any procrastination or delay, we should apply our selves to
the observance of God's Commandments; the practice of which rule it shall be my
endeavor to recommend and press.

It is a common practice of men, that are engaged in bad courses, which their
own conscience discerns and Recognosce singulos, considera universos, nullius
non vita spectat in crastinum; non enim vivunt, sed victuri sunt.

Sen. Ep. 45.


disapproveth, to adjourn the reformation of their lives to a farther time, so
indulging themselves in the present commission of sin, that yet they would seem
to purpose, and promise themselves hereafter to repent, and take up: Few
Victuros agimus semper, nec vivimus unquam. Manil. 4.
resolve to persist finally in an evil way, or despair of being one day
reclaimed, but immediately and effectually to set upon it, many deem
unseasonable or needless; it will, they presume, be soon enough to begin to
morrow or next day, a month or a year hence, when they shall find more
commodious opportunity, or shall prove better disposed thereto; in the mean
time with Solomon's sluggard, Yet, say they, a little sleep, a little slumber,
a little Prove. 6. 10.
folding of the hands; let us but neglect this duty, let us but satisfy this
appetite, let us but enjoy this bout of pleasure; hereafter, God willing, we
mean to be more careful, we hope that we shall become more sober: So like bad
debtors; when our conscience dunneth us, we always mean, we always promise to
pay; if she will stay a while, she shall, we tell her, be satisfied; or like
vain spendthrifts, we see our estate fly, yet presume that it will hold out,
and at length we shall reserve enough for our use. (...), Let serious business
stay till the morrow, was a saying that Plut. in Pelop.
cost dear to him who said it; yet we in our greatest concerns follow him.

But how fallacious, how dangerous Non est creed mihi sapientis dicere, vivans.

Mart. I. 16.


and how miscievous this manner of proceeding is; how much better and more
advisable it is, after the example propounded in our Text, speedily to betake
our selves unto the discharge of our debt and duty to God, the following
considerations will plainly declare.

1. We may consider, that the observance of God's Commandments (an observance
of them proceeding from an habitual disposition of mind, in a constant tenor
of practice) is our indispensable duty, our main concernment, our only way to
happiness; the necessary condition of our attaining salvation; that alone which
can procure God's love and favor toward us; that unto which all real blessings
here, and all bliss hereafter are inseparably annexed: Fear God and keep his
Commandments, for this is the whole of man; (the Eccl. 12. 13.
whole duty, the whole design, the whole perfection, the sum of our wisdom,
and our happiness.) If Matt. 19. 27.
thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments: The righteous Lord loves
righteousness, his countenance Psalm. 11. 7.

Prove. 15. 9.


does behold the upright; God will render to every man according to his Romans 2.
6.
works; these are Oracles indubitably clear, and infallibly certain; these are
immovable terms of justice between God and Man, which never will, never can be
relaxed; being grounded on the immutable Matt. 5. 18.

Luke 16. 17.

Psalm. 119. 15.


nature of God, and eternal reason of things; if God had not decreed, if he had
not said these things, they would not assuredly be true; for it is a foul
contradiction to reason, that a Man ever should please God without obeying him;
it is a gross absurdity in nature, that a Man should be happy without being
good; wherefore all the wit in the World cannot devise a way, all the authority
upon Earth (yea, I dare say, even in Heaven it self) cannot establish a
condition, beside faithful observance of God's Law, that can save, or make us
happy; from it there can be no valid dispensation, without it there can be no
effectual absolution, for it there can be no acceptable commutation; nor in
defect thereof will any faith any profession, any trick or pretense whatever
avail, or signify any thing: Whatever expedient to supply its room
superstition, mistake, craft, or presumption may recommend, we shall, relying
thereon, be certainly deluded: If therefore we mean to be saved (and are we so
wild as not to mean it?) if we do not renounce felicity (and do we not then
renounce our wits?) to become virtuous, to proceed in a course of obedience, is
a work that necessarily must be performed; and why then should we not instantly
undertake it; wherefore do we demur or stick at it? how can we at all rest
quiet, while an affair of so vast importance lies upon our hands, or until our
mind be freed of all uncertainty and suspense about it? Were a probable way
suggested to us of acquiring great wealth, honor or pleasure, should we not
quickly run about it, could we contentedly sleep, till we had brought the
business to a sure or hopeless issue? and why with less expedition or urgency
should we pursue the certain means of our present security and comfort, of our
final salvation and happiness? in doing so, are we not strangely inconsistent
with our selves?

Again, disobedience is the certain road to perdition; that which involveth us
in guilt and condemnation, that which provokes God's wrath and hatred against
us, that which assuredly will throw us into a state of eternal sorrow and
wretchedness: The foolish shall not stand in God's sight, he hates all the
workers Psalm. 5. 5.
of iniquity; If ye do not repent, ye Luke 13. 3.
shall perish. The wicked shall be turned Psalm. 9. 17.
into Hell, and all the people that forget God; The unrighteous shall not 1
Cor. 6. 9.

Matthew. 25. 46. 7. 21.


inherit the Kingdom of God; The wicked shall go into everlasting punishment;
these are denunciations no less sure than severe, from that mouth, which is
never opened in vain; from the execution whereof there can be no shelter or
refuge; And what wise man, what man in his right senses would for one minute
stand obnoxious to them? Who that any-wise tendereth his own welfare would move
one step forward in so perilous and destructive a course? the farther in which
he proceeds, the more he discosteth from happiness, the nearer he approaches
to ruin.

In other cases common sense prompteth men to proceed otherwise; for who,
having rendered one his enemy that far overmatcheth him, and at whose mercy he
stands, will not instantly sue to be reconciled? who being seized by a
pernicious disease, will not haste to seek a cure? who being fallen into the
jaws of a terrible danger, will not nimbly leap out thence? and such plainly is
our case; while we persist in sin, we live in enmity and defiance with the
Almighty, who can at his Pleasure crush us; we lie under a fatal plague, which,
if we do not seasonably repent, will certainly destroy us; we incur the most
dreadful of all hazards, abiding in the confines of death and destruction; God
srowning at us, guilt holding us, Hell gaping for us: Every Sinner is
(according to the Wise-man's expression) as he that lies down in the midst of
the sea, or as he that lies Prove. 23. 34.
upon the top of a mast; and he that is in such a case, is he not mad or
senseless, if he will not forthwith labor to swim out thence, or make all
speed to get down into a safer place? can any man with comfort lodge in a
condition so dismally ticklish?

2. We may consider, that in order to our final welfare we have much work to
dispatch, the which requires as earnest care and painful industry, so a
competent long time; which, if we do not presently fall on, may be wanting, and
thence our work be left undone, or impersect: To conquer and correct bad
inclinations, to render our sensual appetites obsequious to reason, to compose
our passions into a right and steady order, to eleanse our souls from vanity,
from perverseness, from sloth, from all vicious distempers, and in their room
to implant firm habits of virtue; to get a clear knowledge of our duty, with a
ready disposition to perform it; in fine, to season our minds with holy
affections, qualifying us for the presence of God, and conversation with the
blessed Spirits above; these are things that must be done, but cannot be done
in a trice; it is not dictum factum, as soon done as said; but, (...), a Romans
2. 7.
patient continuance in well-doing is needful to atchieve it; for it no time
can be redundant, the longest life can hardly be sufficient: Art is long, and
life is short, may be an Aphorism in Divinity as well as in Physic; the art of
living well, of preserving our Soul's health, and curing its distempers,
requires no less time to compass it, than any other Art or Science.

Virtue is not a Mushroom, that (...)

Chrysostom. ad Ephesians. (...)


springs up of it self in one Night, when we are asleep or regard it not: But
a delicate Plant, that grows slowly and tenderly, needing much pains to
cultivate it, much care to guard it, much time to manure it, in our untoward
soil, in this World's unkindly weather: happiness is a thing too precious to be
purchased at an easy rate, Heaven is too high to be come at without much
climbing; the Crown of Bliss is a Prize too noble to be won without a long and
a tough conflict. Neither is a vice a spirit that will be conjured down by a
charm, or with a Presto driven away; it is not an adversary, that can be
knocked down at a blow, or dispatched with a stab. Whoever O quam istud parum
p^tant, quibus tam facile videtur!

Quint. 12. 1.


shall pretend at any time easily with a celerity, by a kind of Legerdemain or
by any mysterious knack, a Man may be settled in virtue, or converted from
vice, common experience abundantly will confute him; which shows, that a
habit otherwise (setting miracles aside) cannot be produced or destroyed, than
by a constant exercise of acts suitable or opposite thereto; and that such acts
cannot be exercised without voiding all impediments and framing all Principles
of action (such as temper of body, judgment of mind, influence of custom) to a
compliance; that who by temper is peevish or choleric, cannot without
mastering that temper become patient or meek; that who from vain opinions is
proud, cannot without considering away those opinions prove humble: that who by
custom is grown intemperate, cannot without weaning himself from that custom
come to be sober; that who from the concurrence of a sorry nature, fond
conceits, mean breeding and scurvy usage is covetous; cannot without draining
all those sources of his fault, be turned into liberal. The change of our mind
is one of the greatest alterations in nature, which cannot be compassed in any
way, or within any time we please; but it must proceed on leisurely and
regularly, in such order, by such steps, as the nature of things does permit;
it must be wrought by a resolute and laborious perseverance; by a watchful
application of mind in voiding Prejudices, in waiting for advantages, in
attending to all we do; by forcible wresting our nature from its bent, and
swimming against the current of impetuous desires; by a patient disentangling
our selves from practices most agreeable and familiar to us; by a wary fencing
with temptations, by long struggling with manifold oppositions and
difficulties; whence the Holy Scripture terms our practice a warfare, wherein
we are to fight many a bloody battle with most redoubtable foes; a combat,
which must be managed with our best skill, and utmost might; a race, which we
must pass through with incessant activity and swiftness.

If therefore we mean to be good or to be happy, it behooves us to lose no
time; to be presently up at our great task; to snatch all occasions, to embrace
all means incident of reforming our hearts and lives. As those who have a long
journey to go, do (...) Hom. Od. (...).
take care to set out early and in their way make good speed, lest the night
overtake them before they reach their home; so it being a great way from hence
to Heaven, seeing we must pass over so many obstacles, through so many Paths of
duty before we arrive thither, it is expedient to set forward as soon as can
be, and to proceed with all expedition; the longer we stay, the more time we
shall need, and the less we shall have.

3. We may consider, that no future time which we can fix upon will be more
convenient than the present is for our reformation. Let us pitch on what time
we please, we shall be as unwilling and unfit to begin as we are now; we shall
find in our selves the same indispositions, the same averseness, or the same
listlesness Cras hoc fiet; idem cras fiet, etc Pers. Sat. 5.
toward it as now: There will occur the Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus
erit.

Ovid. de Rom I. Epict 4. 12.


like hardships to deter us, and the like Pleasures to allure us from our duty;
objects will then be as present and will strike as smartly upon our senses; the
case will appear just the same, and the same Pretenses for delay will obtrude
themselves; so that we shall be as apt then as now to prorogue the business. We
shall say then, to morrow I will mend; and when that morrow comes, it will be
still to morrow, and so the morrow will prove endless. If like the simple
Rustic, (who stayed by the River side waiting till it had done running, -- qui
recte vivendi prorogat horam,
Rusticus expectat dum defluat amnis, at ille
Labitur, and labetur in omne voubilis evum.
Hor. Ep. I. 2.
that so he might pass dry-foot over the chanel) we do conceit, that the
sources of sin (bad inclinations within, and strong (...). Epict. 4. 12.

For the same reason we put it off, we should put it away. If it be good at
all, it is good at present.


temptations abroad) will of themselves be spent or fail, we shall find our
selves deluded. If ever we come to take up, we must have a beginning with some
difficulty and trouble; we must courageously break through the present with all
its enchantments; we must undauntedly plunge into the cold stream; we must
rouse our selves from our bed of sloth; we must shake off that brutish
improvidence which detaineth us, and why should we not assay it now? there is
the same reason now that ever we can have! yea, far more reason now; for if
that we now begin, hereafter at any determinate time, some of the work will be
done, what remains will be shorter and easier to us. Nay farther,

4. We may consider, that the more we defer, the more difficult (...) Epict. 4.
12.
and painful our work must needs prove; every day will both enlarge our task,
and diminish our ability to perform it: Sin is never at a stay; if we do not
retreat from it, we shall advance in it; and the farther on we go, the more we
have to come back; every step we take forward, (even before we can return
hither, into the state wherein we are at present) must be repeated; all the web
we spin must be unravelled; we must vomit up all we take in; which to do we
shall find very tedious and grievous.

Vice as it grows in age, so it improveth in stature and strength; from a
puny Child it soon waxes a lusty Stripling, then rises to be a sturdy Man,
and after awhile becomes a massy Giant, whom we shall scarce dare to
encounter, whom we shall be very hardly able to vanquish; especially seeing
that as it grows taller and stouter, so we shall dwindle and prove more
impotent; for it feeds upon our vitals, and thriveth by our decay; it waxes
mighty by stripping us of our best forces; by enfeebling our reason, by
perverting our will, by corrupting our temper, by debasing our courage, by
seducing all our appetites and passions to a treacherous compliance with it
self; every day our Falsis opinionibus tanto quisque inseritur, quanto magis in
eis, familiariusque volutatur. Aug. Ep. 117.
mind grows more blind, our will more resty, our spirit more faint, our
appetites more fierce, our passions more headstrong and untameable: The power
and empire of sin do strangely by degrees encroach, and continually get ground
upon us, till it has quite subdued and enthralled us; first we learn to bear
it, then we come to like it, by and by we contract a friendship with it, then
we dote upon it, at last we become enslaved to it in a bondage which we shall
hardly be able, or willing to shake off; when not only our necks are fitted to
the yoke, our hands are manacled, and our feet shackled thereby; but our heads
and hearts do conspire in a base submission thereto: When vice has made such
impression on us, when this pernicious weed has taken so deep root in our
mind, will and affection, it will demand an extremely toilsome labor to
extirpate it.

Indeed by continuance in sin, the chief means (afforded by nature, or by
grace) of restraining, or reducing us from it, are either cut off, or enervated
and rendered ineffectual.

Natural modesty, while it lasts, is a curb from doing ill; Men in their
first (...). Greg. Naz. Or. 26.
deflexions from virtue -- nam quis
Peccandi finem posuit, sibi quando recepit
Ejectum semel attrita de front ^ubo^em?
Juv. Sat. 18.
are bashful and shy; out of regard to other Men's opinion, and tenderness of
their own honor they are afraid, or ashamed to transgress plain rules of duty;
but in process this disposition wears out; by little and little they arrive
to that character of the degenerate Jews, whom the Prophets call impudent
children, having a brow of brass, and faces harder than Ezekiel. 2. 4. 3. 7.

Isa. 48. 4.

Jer. 5. 3.

Prove. 21. 29.


a rock; so that they commit sin with open face, and in broad day, without any
mask, without a blush; they despise their own reputation, and defy all censure
of others; they outface and outbrave the World, till at length with prodigious
insolence they come to boast of wickedness, and glory in their shame, as an
instance of high courage and special Phil. 3. 19.
gallantry.

Conscience is a check to beginners in sin, reclaiming them from it, and rating
them for it; but this in long standers becomes useless, either failing to
discharge its office, or assaying it to no purpose, having often been slighted,
it will be weary of chiding; or if it be not wholly (...), etc. Chrysostom. Tom.
Orat. 64.
dumb, we shall be deaf to its reproof: As those who live by cataracts or
downfalls of Water are by continual noise so deafened as not to hear or mind
it, so shall we in time grow senseless, not regarding the loudest Peals and
Ratlings of our conscience.

The Heart of a raw Novice in impiety (Ezekiel. 2. 4. 3. 7.

Neh. 9. 29.

2 Chronicles. 36. 73.

Dan. 5. 20.)


is somewhat tender and soft, so that remorse can pierce and sting it; his neck
is yielding and sensible, so that the yoke of sin does gall it; but in stout
Proficients the heart becomes hard and stony, the neck stiff and brawny; (an
iron sinew, Isa. 48. 4.
as the Prophet terms it) so Quo quis pejus se habet, minus sentit. Sen. Ep.
53.
that they do not feel or resent any thing; but are like those of whom St. Paul
speaks; (...), Ephesians. 4. 19.
who being past feeling all forrow or smart, have given themselves over unto
lascivousness, to work all uncleanness with greedness.

When first we nibble at the Bait, or enter into bad courses, our reason does
contest and remonstrate against it, faithfully representing to us the folly,
the ugliness, the baseness, the manifold ill consequences of sinning; but that
by continuance is muffled so as not to discern, or muzled so as not to declare;
yea, often is so debauched as to excuse, to avow and maintain, yea, to applaud
and extol our miscarriages.

For a time a Man retains some courage, and a hope that he may repent; but
progress in sin dispiriteth and casts into despair; whether God be placable,
whether himself be corrigible; an apprehension concerning the length of the
way, or the difficulty of the work discourageth, and despondency renders him
heartless and careless to attempt it. There is no Man that has heard of God,
who has not at first some dread of offending him, and some dissatisfaction in
transgressing his will; it appearing to his mind (not yet utterly blinded and
depraved) a desperate thing to brave his irresistible Power, an absurd thing to
thwart his infallible Wisdom, a detestable thing to abuse his immense
Goodness; but obstinacy in sin does quash this conscientious awe; so that at
length God is not in all his thoughts, the Psalm. 10. 4 36. 1.
fear of God is not before his eyes; the Wrath of the Almighty seems a
Bugbear, the fiercest menaces of Religion sound but as Ratties to him.

As for the gentle Whispers and Touches of Divine Grace, the monitory
Dispensations of Providence, the good advices and wholesome reproofs of Friends,
with the like means of reclaiming sinners; these to Persons settled on their
lees, or fixed in bad custom, are but as Ier. 48. 11.

Zeph. 1. 12.


gusts of Wind brushing an old Oak, or as Waves dashing on a Rock, without at
all shaking or stirring it.

Now when any Person is come to this pass, it must be hugely difficult to
reduce him; to retrieve a defloured Modesty, to quicken a jaded Conscience, to
supple a callous Heart, to settle a baffled Reason, to rear a dejected Courage,
to recover a Soul miserably benumbed and broken, to its former vigor and
integrity, can be no easy matter.

The diseases of our Soul no less than those of our Body; when once they are
inveterate, they are become more -- frustra medicina paratur, Cum mala per
longas invaluere moras. Ovid.
incurable; the longer we forbear to apply (...)

Greg. Naz. Orat. 26.


due remedy, the more hard their cure will prove; if we let them proceed far,
we must ever we can be rid of them, undergo a course of Physic very tedious
and offensive to us; many a rough Purge, many a sore Phlebotomy, many an
irksome Sweat we must endure. Yea farther,

5. We may consider, that by delaying to amend, to do it may become quite
impossible; it may be so in the nature of the thing, it may be so by the will
of God: The thing may become naturally impossible; for vice by custom may pass
into nature, and prove so congeneal, as if it were born with us; so that we
shall propend to it as a stone falls down, or as a spark flies upward: By
soaking in Voluptuousness (...). Chrysostom. in Babyl Orat. 2.
we may be so transformed into Brutes, by sleeping in malice so converted into
Fiends, that we necessarily shall act like creatures of that kind, into which
we are degenerated; and then nowise without a downright Miracle are we capable
of being reformed. How long, says Solomon, will thou Prove. 6. 9.
sleep, O Sluggard, when will thou arise out of thy sleep? We may be so often
called on, and it is not easy to awaken us, when we are got into a spiritual
slumber; but when we are, dead in trespasses and sins, so that Ephesians. 2. 1.

Apoc. 3. 1.

1 Timothy 5. 6.


all breath of holy affection is stopped, and no spiritual pulse from our heart
does appear; that all sense of duty is lost, all appetite to good does fail, no
strength or activity to move in a good course does exert it self; that our good
complexion is dissolved, and all our finer spirits are dissipated; that our
mind is quite crazed, and all its Powers are shattered or spoiled, when thus, I
say, we are spiritually dead, how can we raise our selves, what beneath
omnipotency can effect it? as a stick, when Frangas citius quam corrigas quae
in pravum induruerunt.

Quintil. 1. 3.


once it is dry and stiff, you may break it, but you can never bend it into a
streighter posture, so does the Man become incorrigible, who is settled and
stiffned in vice. The stain of habitual sin may sink in so deep, and so
thoroughly tincture all our Soul, that we may be like those People, of whom the
Prophet says, Can the Ethiopian change his Jer. 13. 23.
skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye do good, that are accustomed to
do evil: Such an impossibility may arise from nature; one greater and more
insuperable may come from God.

To an effectual repentance the succor of divine grace is necessary; but that
is arbitrarily dispensed; the spirit blows where it lists, John 3. 8.
yet it lists wisely, with regard both to the past behavior, and present
capacities of Men; so that to such who have abused it, and to such who will not
treat it well, it shall not be imparted: And can we be well assured, can we
reasonably hope, that after we by our presumptuous delays have put off God and
dallied with his grace; after that he long in vain has waited to be gracious;
after that he has endured so many neglects, and so many repulses from us;
after that we frequently have slighted his open invitations, and smothered his
kindly motions in us; in short, after we so unworthily have misused his
goodness and patience, that he farther will vouchsafe his grace to us? when we
have forfeited it, when we (...).

Heb 10. 29.

(...).

Heb. 6. 4.


have rejected it, when we have spurned and driven it away, can we hope to
recover it?

There is a time, a season, a day allotted to us; our day it is termed, Luke
19. 42, 44.

2 Cor. 6. 2.

Heb. 3. 13.

John 9. 4.


a day of salvation, the season of our visitation, an acceptable time; wherein
God freely does exhibit grace, and presents his mercy to us; if we let this
day slip, the night Luke 19. 42.
comes when no man can work; when the things belonging to our peace will Isa.
59. 10.
be hidden from our eyes; when (as the Prophet expresses it) we shall grope
for the wall like the blind, and stumble at noonday as in the night, and be in
desolate places as dead men; after that day is spent, and that comfortable
light is set, a dismal night of darkness, of cold, of disconsolateness will
succeed; when Jer. 15. 6.

Mal. 2. 17.

Isa 1. 14. 7. 13.

Romans 1. 24, 26, 28.


God being weary of bearing with Men does utterly desert them, and delivers
them over to a reprobate mind; when subtracting his gracious direction and
assistence, he gives them over to their own hearts Psalm. 81. 12.
lusts, and to walk in their own counsels; when they are brought to complain
with those in the Prophet, O Lord, why have thou made us to err Isa. 63. 17.
from thy ways, and hardened our heart from thy fear? when like Pharaoh they
survive only as objects of God's justice, or occasions to glorify his power;
when like Esau, they cannot Romans 9. 17.
find a place of repentance, although they seek it carefully with Heb. 13. 17.
tears; when as to the foolish loitering Virgins, the door of mercy Matthew. 25.
10.
is shut upon them; when the master of the house does rise and shut the Luke
13. 25.
door, etc. when that menace of divine wisdom comes to be executed; They
shall call upon me, but I Prove. 1. 28.
will not answer: they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me; for
that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord: And if
neglecting our season, and present means, we once fall into this state, then is
our case most deplorable; we are dead Men irreversibly doomed, and only for a
few moments reprieved from the stroke of final vengeance; we are vessels of
wrath Romans 9. 22.
fitted (or made up) for destruction; by a fatal blindness and obduration
sealed up to ruin; we are like the terra damnata, that earth (in the Apostle,)
which drinking up the rain, (...).

Heb. 6. 7, 8.


that comes often upon it, and bearing thorns and briars, is rejected, and is
nigh unto cursing, and whose end is to be burned. Wherefore according to the
advice of the Prophet, Seek ye the Lord, when he may be found, call Isa. 55. 6.
ye upon him, while he is near.

It is true, that God is ever ready upon our true conversion to receive us into
favor, that his arms are always open to embrace a sincere Penitent; that he
has declared, whenever a wicked man turns from Ezekiel. 18. 27.
his wickedness, and does that which is right, he shall save his soul alive;
that if we do wash our selves, make us clean, put away the evil of our doings,
Isa. 1. 18.
and cease to do evil, then although our sins be as scarlet, they shall be
white as snow, though they be like crimson they shall be as wool; that if we
rend our hearts, and turn Joel 2. 13.
unto the Lord, he is gracious and merciful. and will repent of the evil; that
God is good and ready to forgive, Psalm. 86. 5.
and plenteous in mercy unto all that call upon him; that whenever a prodigal
Son with humble confession and hearty contrition for his sin does arise and go
to his father, he Luke 15. 18.
will embrace him tenderly, and entertain him kindly; that even a profane
Apostate, and a bloody Oppressor (as Manasses) a lewd Strumpet (as Magdalene)
a notable Vid. Chrysostom. ad Theod. 2. Judas (says he there) was capable of pardon.
Thief (as he upon the Cross) a timorous Renouncer (as St. Peter) a furious
Persecutour (as St. Paul) a stupid Idolater (as all the Heathen World, when the
Gospel came to them, was) the most heinous Sinner that ever has been, or can
be imagined to be, if he be disposed to repent, is capable of mercy; those
declarations and promises are infallibly true, those instances peremptorily do
evince, that repentance is never super-annuated; that if we can turn at all, we
shall not turn too late, that poenitentia nunquam sera, modo seria, is an
irrefragable rule; yet nevertheless delay is very unsafe; for what assurance
can we have, that God hereafter will enable us to perform those conditions of
bewailing our sins, and forsaking them? have we not cause rather to fear that
he will chastise our presumption by withholding his Grace? for although God
fails not to yield competent aids to Persons who have not despised his
goodness and long-suffering Romans 2. 4.
that leads them to repentance; yet he that wilfully or wantonly loitereth
away the time, and squandereth the means allowed him; who refuses to come when
God calls, yea woeth and courteth him to repentance, how can he pretend to
find such favor?

We might add, that supposing God in super-abundance of mercy might be presumed
never to withhold his grace; yet seeing his grace does not work by irresistible
compulsion; seeing the worse qualified we are, the more apt we shall be to
cross and defeat its operation; seeing that we cannot hope that hereafter we
shall be more fit than now to comply with it: Yea, seeing we may be sure, that
after our hearts are hardened by perseverance in sin, we shall be more
indisposed thereto; we by delay of repentance do not only venture the
forfeiture of divine grace, but the danger of abusing it, which heinously will
aggravate our guilt, and hugely augment our punishment.

We should do well therefore most seriously to regard the Apostle's admonition;
Exhort one another to day, Heb. 3. 13.
while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened by the deceitfulness of
sin: Now that we find our selves invited to repent, now that we apprehend so
much reason for it; now that we feel our hearts somewhat inclined thereto; now
that we have time in our hands, and are not barred from hopes of mercy; now
that it is not extremely difficult, or not absolutely impossible, let us in
God's name lay hold on the occasion, let us speedily and earnestly set upon the
work. Farther yet,

6. We should consider, that we are mortal and frail, and thence any designs of
future reformation may be clipped off, or intercepted by death; which is always
creeping toward us, and may for all we can tell be very near at hand. You say
you will repent to morrow; but are you sure you shall have a morrow to repent
in? have you an hour in your hand, or one minute at your disposal? have you a
lease to show for any term Qui poenitenti veniam spospondit, peccanti crastinum
diem non promisit. Greg. in Evang. Hom. IX.
of life? can you claim or reckon upon the least portion of time without his
leave, who bestows life, and deals out time, and orders all things as he
pleases? Can you any-wise desery the just measure of your days, Job 12. 10.
14. 5. 7. 1.

Psalm. 39. 4. 90. 12.

Dan. 5. 23.

Prove. 27. 1.

(...).

Bas. M. exh. ad Bapt.


or the bounds of your appointed time without a special revelation from him, in
whose hands is your breath; and with whom alone the number of your months is
registered? Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may
bring forth, says the Wiseman: boast not of it, that is, do not pretend it to
be at thy disposal, presume not upon any thing that may befall therein; for
whilst thou presumest thereon, may it not be said unto thee, as to the rich
Projectour in the Gospel, Luke 12. 10.
Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee. Does not, seluding
hidden decrees, every Man's life hang upon a thread very slender and frail? is
it not subject to many diseases lurking within, and to a thousand accidents
flying about us? how many, that might have promised themselves as fair scope as
we can, have been unexpectedly snapt away? How many have been cropped in the
flower of their age and vigor of their strength? Does not every day present
experiments of sudden death? Do we not continually see that observation of the
Preacher verified, Man Eccles. 9. 12.
knows not his time; as the fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as the
birds are caught in the snare, so are the sons of men snared in an evil time,
when it comes suddenly upon them? Old (...), etc.

(...), etc. Constable. Ap. 2. 13.


men are ready to drop of themselves, and young men are easily brushed or
shaken down; the former visibly stand upon the brink of Eternity, the latter
walk upon a bottomless Quag, into which unawares they may slump; who then can
any-wise be secure? We are all therefore highly concerned to use our life,
while we have it; to catch the first opportunity, lest all opportunity forsake
us; to cut off our sinning, lest our selves be cut off before it: And that the
rather, because by lavishing, or misemploying our present time, we may lose the
future, provoking God to bereave us of it; for as prolongation of time is a
reward of Piety; as to observance of the Commandments it is promised, Length of
days, and Prove. 3. 2.
long life, and peace shall be added unto thee; so being immaturely snatched
hence is the punishment awarded to impious practice; so it is threatened that
Evil men shall be Psalm. 37. 9.
cut off; that bloody and deceifull men Psalm. 55. 23.
shall not live out half their days; that God will wound the head of his Psalm.
68. 21.
enemies, and the hairy scalp of such an one as goes on still in his
wickedness: the very being unmindfull of their duty is the cause, why men are
thus surprised; for, If, says God, thou do not watch, I shall come upon Rev.
3. 3. 16. 5.
thee as a thief, and thou shall not know when I come upon thee. And If (says
our Lord) that servant does say in his heart, my Lord delayeth Luke 12. 45, 46.
his coming, etc. The Lord of that servant will come in a day, when he looks
not for him, etc.

If then it be certain, that we must render a strict account of all our doings
here; if by reason of our frail nature and slippery state, it be uncertain when
we shall be summoned thereto; if our negligence may abridge and accelerate the
term, is it not very reasonable to observe those advices of our Lord; Watch,
Matthew. 25. 13. 24. 42.

Mark 13. 33.

Luke 12. 15, 35.


for ye do not know the day, nor the hour, when the son of man comes; Take
heed to your selves, lest any time your heart be overcharged with surfeiting
and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you
unawares. Let your loins be girded about, and your lamps burning, and ye your
selves like men, that wait for your Lord: And to take the counsel of the
Wiseman, Make no tarrying Ecclus. 5. 5.
to turn unto the Lord, and put not off from day to day; for suddenly shall the
wrath of the Lord come forth, and in thy security shall thou be destroyed, and
perish in the day of vengeance.

These considerations plainly do show how very foolish, how extremely dangerous
and destructive the procrastinating our reformation of life is: there are some
others of good moment, which we shall reserve.

SERMON IV. The Danger and mischief of delaying Repentance.
PSALM CXIX. 60. I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments.
I Proceed to the Considerations which yet remain to be spoken to.

1. We may consider the causes of delay in this case (as in all cases of
moment) to be bad and unworthy of a Man: What can they be but either stupidity,
that we do not apprehend the importance of the affair; or improvidence that we
do not attend to the danger of persisting in sin; or negligence that we do not
mind our concernments; or sloth that keeps us from rowsing (...) Simpl.
and bestirring our selves in pursuance of what appears expedient; or
faint-heartedness and cowardice, that we dare not attempt to cross our
appetite, or our fancy; all which dispositions are very base and shameful: It
is the prerogative of humane nature to be sagacious in Animal hoc providum,
sagax, Cic. de leg. 1. Cic. de offic. 1.
estimating the worth, and provident in descrying the consequences of things;
whereas other creatures, by impulse of sense, do only fix their regard on
present appearances; which peculiar excellency by stupidity and improvidence we
forfeit, degenerating into brutes; and negligence of that, which we discern
mainly to concern us is a quality somewhat beneath those, depressing us below
beasts, which cannot be charged with such a fault; sloth is no less despicable,
rendering a man fit for nothing; nor is there any thing commonly more
reproachful than want of courage: so bad are the causes of delay.

2. And the effects are no less unhappy, being disappointment, damage, trouble
and sorrow: As expedition (catching advantages and opportunities, keeping the
spirit up in its heat and vigor, making forcible impressions wherever it
lights, driving on the current of success) does subdue business, and archieve
great exploits (as by practicing his Motto, to defer nothing, Alexander (...).
Successus urgers suos, instare, etc. Luc. 1.
did accomplish those mighty feats which make such a clatter in story; and
Caesar more by the rapid quickness and forwardness of undertaking, than by the
greatness of courage, and skilfulness of conduct, did work out those
enterprises, which purchased to his Name so much glory and renown) so delay and
Plerisque in rebus tarditas and procrastinatio odiosa est. Cic. Philip. 6.
^^owness do spoil all business, do keep off success at distance from us,
thereby opportunity is lost, and advantages slip away; our courage (...). Hes.

Dum deliberamus quando incipiendum est, incipere jam serum est. Quint. 12. 7.


does flag, and our spirit languisheth; our endeavors strike faintly, and are
easily repelled; whence disappointment necessarily does spring, attended with
vexation.

3. Again, we may consider, that to set upon our duty is a great step toward
the performance of it; if we can resolve well, and a little pust forward, we
are in a fair way to dispatch; to begin (they say) is to have half done
Dimidium facti qui coepit habet. Hor. Ep. 1. 2.

(...), etc. Chrysostom. Tom. 6. Orat. p. 68.

(...). Ib. p. 79.


to set out, is a good part of the journey to rise betimes is oftener harder
than to do all the days work; entering the Town, is at most the same with taking
it; it i^ so in all business, it is chiefly so i^ moral practice: For if we can
fine in our hearts to take our leave of sin if we can disengage our selves from
the Honestas, quae principie anxia habetur, ubi contigerit, voluptati
luxuriaeque habetur. Vict. in Sept. Sev.
witcheries of present allurement; if we can but get over the threshold, of
virtuous conversation, we shall find the rest beyond expectation smooth and
expedite; we shall discover such beauty in virtue, we shall taste so much
sweetness in obedience as greatly will encourage us to proceed therein.

4. Again, we may consider, that our time it self is a gift, or a talent
committed to us, for the improvement whereof we are responsible no less than
for our Wealth, our Power, our Credit, our Parts, and other such advantages,
wherewith for the serving of God, and furthering our own salvation we are
entrusted: To Ephesians. 5. 16.

Col. 4. 5.


redeem the time is a Precept; and of all Precepts the most necessary to be
observed, for that without redeeming (that is embracing and well employing)
time we can do nothing well; no good action can be performed, no good reward
can be procured by us: Well may we be advised to take our best care in
husbanding it, seeing justly of all things it may be reckoned most precious;
its price being inestimable, (...).
and its loss irreparable; for all the World cannot purchase one Moment of it
more than is allowed us, neither can it, when once gone, by any means be
recovered: So much indeed as we save thereof, so much we preserve of our
selves; and so far as we lose it, so far in effect we slay our selves, or
deprive our selves of life; yea by mispending it we do worse than so; for a
dead sleep, or a cessation from being, is not so bad as doing ill; all that
while we live backward, or decline toward a state much worse than annihilation
it self* Farther

5. Consider, that of all time the present is ever the best for the purpose
Omnioe quae ventura sunt in incerto jaecent, protinus vive. Sen. de vit. brev.
9.
of amending our life; It is the only sure time, that which we have in our
hands, and may call our own; whereas the past time is irrevocably gone from us;
and the future may never come to us: It is absolutely (reckoning from our
becoming sensible of things, and accomptable for our actions) the best, as to
our capacity of improving it;

Optima quaeque dies miseris mortalibus aevi Virg. Georg. 3.
Prima fugit Our best days do first pass away, was truly said; the nearer to
its source our life is, the purer it is from stain, the freer from clogs, the
more susceptive of good impressions, the more vivid and brisk in its activity;
the farther we go on, especially in a bad course, the nearer we verge to the
dregs of our life; the more dry, the more stiff, the more sluggish we grow;
delay therefore does ever steal away the flower of our age, leaving us the bran
and refuse thereof. Again,

6. If at any time we do reflect upon the time that has already slipped away
unprofitably from us, it will seem more than enough, and (if we consider well)
it will be grievous to us to lose more; the morrow will seem too late to
commence a good life; (...), The time past of our Sera nimis vita est crastina,
vive hodie.

Mart. 1. 16.

1 Pet. 4. 3.


life (says St. Peter) may suffice us to have wrought the will of the
Gentiles, or to have continued in ill courses; more indeed it might than
suffice; it should be abundantly too much to have imbezilled so large a portion
of our precious and irreparable time: After we have slept in neglect of our
duty, (...), it is (as St. Paul says) now Romans 13. 11.
high time to awake, unto a vigilant observance thereof: this we shall the
rather do, if we consider, that

7. For illiving now we shall come hereafter to be sorry, if not with a
wholesome contrition, yet with a painful regret; we shall certainly one day
repent, if not of our sin, yet of our sinning; if not so as to correct for the
future, yet so as to condemn our selves for what is past: the consideration of
our having sacrilegiously robbed our Maker of the time due to his service; of
our having injuriously defrauded our souls of the opportunities granted to
secure their welfare; of our having profusely cast away our most precious hours
of life upon vanity and folly, will some time twitch us sorely. There is no man
who does not with a sorrowful eye review an ill-past life; who would not
gladly recall his misspent time; O mihi proeteritos! O that God would restore my
past years to me, is every such Man's Prayer, although it never was heard,
never could be granted unto any. And what is more inconsistent with wisdom,
than to engage our selves upon making such ineffectual and fruitless wishes?
What is more disagreeable to reason, than to do that, for which we must be
forced to confess and call our selves fools? What Man of sense for a flash of
transitory Pleasure, for a puff of vain repute, for a few scraps of dirty Pelf
would plunge himself into such a gulf of anguish?

8. On the contrary, if laying hold on occasion, Ille sapit quisquis, Post
hume, vixit heri. Mart. 5. 60.
we set our selves to do well, reflection thereon will yield great satisfaction
and pleasure to us; we shall be glad that we have done, and that our task is
over; we shall enjoy our former life; Our time Ampliat aetatis spatium sibi vir
bonus, hoc est

Vivere his, vita posse priore frui. Mart. 10. 23.


which is so past will not yet be lost unto us; but rather it will be most
securely ours, laid up beyond the reach of danger, in the repository of a good
conscience.

9. Again, all our time of continuance Romans 2.
in sin we do treasure up wrath, or accumulate guilt; and the larger our guilt
is, the sorer must be our repentance; the more bitter the Quam magna
deliquimus, tam granditer defleamus, etc. Cypr. de Laps. Or. 5.
sorrow, the more low the humbling, the more earnest the deprecation requisite
to obtain pardon: the broader and deeper the stain is, the more washing is
needful to get it out; if we sin much and long, we must grieve answerably, or
we shall be no fit objects of mercy.

10. And whenever the sin is pardoned, yet indelible marks and monuments
thereof will abide. We shall eternally Poena potest demi, culpa perennis erit.
Ovid.

(...). Chrysostom. Tom. 8. p. 97.


be obliged to cry peccavi; although the punishment may be remitted, the desert
of it cannot be removed; a scar from it will stick in our flesh; which ever
will deform us; a tang of it will stay in our memory, which always will be
disgustfull; we shall never reflect on our miscarriages without some confusion
and horror; incessantly we shall be liable to that question of St. Paul, What
Romans 6. 21.
fruit had ye of those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? If therefore we
could reasonable presume, yea if we could certainly foresee, that we should
hereafter in time repent, yet it were unadvisably to persist in sin, seeing it
being once committed, can never be reversed; never expunged from the registers
of time, never dashed out from the tables of our mind and memory; but will
perpetually rest as matter of doleful consideration, and of tragical story to
us. Then shall thou remember thy Ezekiel. 16. 61.

Ezekiel. 16. 63.


ways, and be ashamed. That thou may remember and be confounded, and never
open thy mouth any more because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee
for all that thou have done, says the Lord God: Then shall ye remember your
own evil ways, Ezekiel. 36. 31. 20. 43.
and your doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves in your own
sight, for your iniquities, and for your abominations.

11. Again, so much time as we spend in disobedience, so much of reward we do
forfeit; for commensurate to our works shall our rewards be; the fewer our good
works are in the course of our present life, the smaller shall be the measures
of joy, of glory, of felicity dispensed to us hereafter; the later consequently
we repent, the less we shall be happy: One star (says the Apostle) differs
from another in glory; 1 Cor. 15. 41.
and of all stars, those in the celestial sphere will shine brightest, who did
soon rise here, and continued long by the luster of their good works to glorify
their heavenly Father; for the path of the just is as the shining Prove. 4. 18.
light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day. While therefore we let
our interest lie dead by lingering, or run behind by sinful practice, we are
very bad husbands for our soul; our spiritual estate does thereby hugely
suffer; every minute contracteth a damage that runs through millions of
ages, and which therefore will amount to an immense sum: And who for all the
pleasures here would forego one degree of blissfull joy hereafter; who for all
earthly splendours would exchange one spark of celestial glory; who for all the
treasures below would let slip one gem out of his heavenly crown?

12. Farther, let us consider that whatever our age, whatever our condition or
case be, the advice not to procrastinate our obedience is very suitable and
useful.

Art thou young? then it is most Sub paedagogo coeperis licet; serum est.

Mart. 8. 44.


proper to enter upon living well. For when we set out, we should be put in a
right way; when we begin to be Men, we should begin to use our reason well;
life and virtue should be of the same standing; what is more ugly than a Child,
that have learnt little, having learnt to do ill; than naughtiness springing up
in that state of innocence? the foundation of good life is to be laid in that
age, upon which the rest of our life is built; for this is the manner of our
proceeding; the present depends always upon what is past; our practice is
guided in notions that we had sucked in, is swayed by inclinations that we got
before; whence usually our first judgments of things, and our first propensions
to stretch their influence upon the whole future life. Train up a Prove. 22. 6.
child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it,
says the Wiseman.

That age as it is most liable to be corrupted Natura tenacissimi sum^s co-rum,
quae rudibus annis percipimus, etc. Quint. 1. 1.

Difficulter eraditur quod rudes animi perbiberunt. Hier. ad Laetam.


by vice, so it is most capable of being imbued with virtue: then nature is
soft and pliable, so as easily to be molded into any shape, ready to admit any
stamp impressed thereon; then the mind is a pure table, in which good
principles may be fairly engraven, without raising out any former ill
prejudices; then the heart being a soil free of weeds, the seeds of goodness
being cast therein will undisturbedly grow and thrive; then the complexion
being tender will easily be set into a right posture; Our Ut corpora ad quosdam
membrorum flexus formari nisi tener a non possunt, sic animos ad pleraque
duriores robur ipsum facit. Quint. ib.

Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem Testa diu.

Hor. Ep. 1. 2.


soul is then a Vessel empty and sweet; good liquour therefore may be
instilled, which will both fit it, and season it with a durable tincture; the
extreme curiosity and huge credulity of that age, as they greedily will swallow
any, so will they admit good instruction. If we do then imbibe false
conceptions, or have bad impressions made on our minds, it will be hard
afterward to expel, or to correct them. Passion is then very fluid and
moveable, but not being impetuously determined any way, may easily be derived
into the right chanel. Then the quickness of our wit, the briskness of our
fancy, the freshness of our memory, the vigor of our affections, the lusty and
active mettle of our spirits being applied to virtuous studies and endeavors,
will produce most noble (...). Chrysostom. (...).
fruits; the beauty of which will adorn us, the sweetness will please us, so as
to leave on our minds a perpetual relish and satisfaction in goodness. Then
being less encombred with the cares, less entangled in the perplexities, less
exposed to the temptations of the World and secular Affairs, we can more easily
set forth, we may proceed more expeditely in good courses. Then being void of
that stinging remorse, which does adhere to reflections upon past follies, and
misspent time, with more courage and alacrity we may prosecute good
undertakings; then beginning so soon to embrace virtue, we shall have advantage
with more leisure, and more ease to polish and perfect it through our ensuing
course of life; setting out so early, in the very morning of our age, without
much straining, marching on softly and fairly, we may go through our journey to
happiness.

Our actions then are the first fruits of our life, which therefore are fit and
due sacrifices to our Maker; which if we do withdraw, we shall have nothing
left so worthy or acceptable to present unto him; will it be seemly to offer
him the dregs and refuse of our age; shall we not be ashamed to bring a crazy
temper of body and soul, dry bones and decayed senses; a dull fancy, a
treacherous memory, a sluggish spirit before him? shall we then when we are fit
for little begin to undertake his service? with our decrepid limbs and wasted
strength shall we set our selves to run the ways of his commandments?

As it is uncomfortable to think of being parsimonious, when our stock is
almost gone; so it is to become thrifty of our life, when it comes near the
bottom. (...).

If we keep innocence, spend our youth well, it will yield unexpressible
comfort to us; it will save us much sorrow, it will prevent many inconveniences
to us: If we have Psalm. 37. 38.
spent it ill, it will yield us great displeasure, it will cost us much pains;
we shall be forced sadly to bewail our folly and vanity therein; it will be
bitter to see, that we must unlive our former life, and undo all we have done;
that we must renounce the Principles we have avowed, we must root out the
habits we have planted, we must forsake the Paths which we have beaten and so
long trod in, if ever we will be happy; it will be grievous to us, when we
come with penitential regret to deprecate, Lord remember not the sins of my
youth; we Psalm. 25. 7.
shall feel sore pain, when our bones Job 20. 11.
are full of the sins of our youth, and we come to possess the iniquities 1^ 26.
thereof.

It is therefore good (as the Prophet says) Lam. 3. 27.

Fingit equum tenera docilem cervice Magister
Ire viam, quam monstrat eques. --
Hor.
that a man bear the yoke in his youth, when his neck is tender; it is
excellent advice which the Preacher gives, Remember thy Creator Eccl. 12. 1.
in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, and the years draw
nigh, when thou shall say I have no pleasure in them.

Aristotle says, that Eth. 1. 3.

(...).


young men are not fit bearers of moral doctrine; because (says he) they are
unexperienced in affairs of life; and because they are apt to follow their
passions, which indispose to hear with fruit or profit; but his conclusion is
false, and his reasons may be well turned against him; for because young men
want experience, therefore is there no bad prejudice, no contrary habit to
obstruct their embracing sound doctrine; because their passions are vehement
and strong, therefore being rightly ordered, and set upon good objects they
with great force will carry them to virtuous practice; that indeed is the best
time to regulate and tame Passions; as Horses must be broken when they are
Colts, Dogs must be made when they are Whelps, else they will never be brought
to any thing. The Poet therefore advised better than the Philosopher, -- nunc
adbibe puro
Pectore verba puer, nunc te melioribus offer;
Hor. Ep. 1. 2.
and St. Paul plainly does confute Ephesians. 6. 4.
him, when he bids Parents to educate their children in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord; when he charge Titus, that he exhort young Tit. 2. 6.
men to be sober-minded; when he commends Timothy, for that he 2 Timothy 2. 22.

2 Timothy 3. 15.


had (...) from his infancy known the Holy Scriptures; So does the Psalmist,
when he says, Wherewith Psalm. 119. 9.
shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed according to thy word. And
Solomon, when he declares Prove. 1. 4.
that his moral Precepts did serve to give subtilty to the simple, to the young
man knowledge and discretion; when he bids us to train up a Prove. ^. 6, 15.
child in the way he should go; St. Peter 1 Pet. 2. 2.
does intimate the same, when he bids us, as new born babes to desire the
sincere milk of the word; and our Savior, when he said, Suffer Luke 18. 16.
little children to come unto me, for of such is the kingdom of God; that is
the more simplicity and innocence a Man is endued with, the more apt he is to
embrace and comply with the Evangelical Doctrine: Aristotle therefore was out,
when he would exclude young men from the Schools of Virtue. It is observable
that he contradicts himself; for (...). Eth. 2. 2.
It is (says he) of no small concernment to be from youth accustomed thus or
thus; yea it is very much, or rather all: And how shall a young man be
accustomed to do well, if he be not allowed to learn what is to be done?

Again, are we old? it is then high time to begin; we have then less time to
spare from our most important business; we stand then in most imminent danger,
upon the edge of perdition, and should therefore be nimble to skip out thence;
our forces being diminished, our quickness and industry should be increased;
the later we set out, the more speed it behooves us to make. If Quod facere
solent qui serius exeunt -- calcar addamus. Sen. Ep. 63. 76. 10.

Apoc. 3. 2. (...).


we stay, we shall grow continually more indisposed and unfit to amend, it will
be too late, when utter decrepitness and dotage have seized upon us; and our
body does survive our soul. When so much of our time, of our parts, of our
strength are fled, we should husband the rest to best advantage, and make the
best satisfaction we can unto God, and unto our souls with the remainder.

This age has some -- non omnia grandior aetas Quae fugiamus habet -- Ovid.

(...). Ghrys. Tom. 6. Orat. 38.


peculiar advantages, which we should embrace; the froth of humors is then
boiled out, the fervours of lust are slaked, passions are allayed, appetites
are flatted; so that then inclinations to sin are not so violent, nor does the
enjoyment thereof so much gratify.

Long experience then has discovered the vanity of all worldly things, and the
mischief of ill courses; so that we can then hardly admire any thing, or be
fond of enjoying what we have found unprositable or hurtful.

Age is excused from compliance with the fashions, and thence much exempted
from temptations of the World; so that it may be good without obstacle or
opposition.

It is proper thereto to be grave and serious, and consequently to be virtuous;
for gravity without virtue and seriousness about vain things are ridiculous.

Nothing does so adorn this age as goodness, nothing does so disgrace it as
wickedness; The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be Prove. 16. 31.
found in the way of righteousness; but it is a mark of Infamy, if it be
observed proceeding in a course of iniquity, it signifies that experience has
not improved it, it argues incorrigible folly, or rather incurable madness
therein.

There is indeed no care, no employment proper for old Men but to prepare for
their dissolution; to be bidding adieu to the World with its vain Pomps and
mischievous Pleasures; to be packing up their Goods, to be casting their
Accounts, to be fitting themselves to abide in that state into which they are
tumbling, to appear at that Bar, before which suddenly nature will set them. As
a Ship, which has long been tossed and weather-beaten, which is shattered in its
timber, and has lost much of its rigging, should do nothing in that case but
work toward the Port, there to find its safety and ease; so should a Man, who
having past many storms and In freto viximus, moriamur in portu. Sen. Ep. 19.
agitations of the World is grievously battered and torn with Age, strive only
to die well, to get safe into the Harbor of eternal Rest.

In fine, Epicurus himself said well, that no (...). Epic. ad Monoec.
man is either immature or over-ripe in regard to his souls health; we can
never set upon it too soon, we should never think it too late to begin; to live
well is always the best thing we can do, and therefore we should at any time
endeavor it; there are common reasons for all ages, there are special reasons
for each age, which most strongly and most clearly do urge it; it is most
seasonable for young Men, it is most necessary for old Men, it is most
advisable for all Men Quare juventus, imo omnis aetas (neque enim rectae
voluntati serum est tempus ullum) totis mentibus huc tendamus, in hoc
elaboremus; forsan and consummare contingat. Quint. 12. 1.
.

Again, be our condition what it will, this advice is reasonable: Are we in
health? we owe God thanks for that excellent gift, and the best gratitude we
can express is the improving it for his service and our own good; we should not
lose the advantage of a season so fit for our obedience and repentance; while
the forces of our body and mind are entire, while we are not discomposed by
pain or faintness, we should strive to dispatch this needful work, for which
infirmity may disable us.

Are we sick? it is then time to consider our frailty, and the best we can to
obviate the worst consequences thereof: It is then very fit, when we do feel
the sad effects of sin, to endeavor the prevention of worse mischiefs that may
follow; it is seasonable, when we lie under God's correcting hand to submit
unto him, to deprecate his wrath, to seek reconciliation with him by all kinds
of obedience suitable to that state; with serious resolutions to amend
hereafter, if it shall please God to restore us; it is most advisable, when we
are in the borders of death to provide for that state, which lies just beyond
it.

Are we rich and prosperous? it is expedient then presently to amend, lest our
Wealth do soon corrupt us with Pride, with Luxury, with Sloth, with Stupidity;
lest our Prosperity becomes an inevitable snare, an irrecoverable Prove. 1. 32.
bane unto us.

Are we poor or afflicted? it is then also needful to repent quickly; that we
may have a comfortable support for our soul, and a certain succor in our
distress; that we may get a treasure to supply our want, a joy to drown our
sorrow; a buoy to keep our hearts from sinking into desperation and
disconsolateness. This condition is a medicine, which God administreth for our
soul's health; if it do not work presently so as to do us good, it will prove
both grievous and hurtful to us.

13. Lastly, we may consider, that abating all the rufull consequences of
abiding in sin, abstracting from the desperate hazards it exposes us to in
regard to the future life, it is most reasonable to abandon it, betaking our
selves to a virtuous course of practice. For virtue in it self is far more
eligible than vice, to keep Est virtus nihil aliud quam in se perfecta, and ad
summum perducta natura, Cic. de Leg. 1.
God's Commandments has much greater convenience than to break them; the life
of a good Man in all considerable respects is highly to be preferred above the
life of a bad Man: for what is virtue, but a way of living that advances our
nature into a similitude with God's most excellent and happy nature; that
promoteth our true benefit and interest; that procures and preserves health,
ease, safety, liberty, peace, comfortable subsistence, fair repute,
tranquillity of mind, all kinds of convenience to us? to what ends did our most
benign and most wise Maker Deuteronomy. 10. 13.

Mic. 6. 8.

Neh. 9. 13.

Romans 7. 12.

Psalm. 19. 9. 119. 107.


design and suit his Law, but to the furthering our good, and securing us from
mischief, as not only himself has declared, but reason shows, and
experience does attest? What is vice but a sort of practice which debaseth and
disparageth us, which plungeth us into grievous evils, which brings distemper
of body and soul, distress of fortune, danger, trouble, reproach, regret, and
numberless inconveniences upon us? which for no other reason, than because it
so hurts and grieveth us, was by our loving Creator interdicted to us?
Virtue is most noble and worthy, most lovely, most profitable, most pleasant,
most creditable; vice is most sordid and base, ugly, hurtful, bitter,
disgraceful, in it self, and in its consequences. If we compare them together,
we shall find, that virtue does always preserve our health, but vice commonly
does impair it; that virtue improveth our estate, vice wastes it; that virtue
adorneth our reputation, vice blemisheth it; that virtue strengthens our
parts, vice weakneth them; that virtue maintains our freedom, vice enslaveth
us; that virtue keeps our mind in order and peace, vice discomposeth and
disquieteth it; virtue breeds satisfaction and joy, vice spawneth displeasure
and anguish of conscience: to enter therefore into a virtuous course of life,
what is it but to embrace happiness; to continue in vicious practice, what is
it but to stick in misery?

By entering into good life, we enter into the favor and friendship of God,
engaging his infinite power and wisdom for our protection, our succor, our
direction and guidance; enjoying the sweet effluxes of his mercy and bounty; we
therewith become friends to the holy Angels, and blessed Saints, to all good
Men, being united in a holy and happy consortship of judgment, of charity, of
hope, of devotion with them; we become friends to all the World, which we
oblige by good wishes, and good deeds, and by the influence of good example; we
become friends to our selves, whom we thereby enrich and adorn with the best
goods; whom we gratify and please with the choicest delights: but persisting
in sin we continue to affront, wrong, and displease our Maker, to be disloyal
toward our Sovereign Lord; to be ungrateful toward our chief Benefactour, to
disoblige the best Friend we have, to provoke a most just and severe Judge; to
cope with Omnipotency, to contradict Infallibility; to enrage the greatest
Patience, to abuse immense Goodness: We thereby become enemies to all the
World, to God, whom we injure and dishonor; to the friends of God, whom we
desert and oppose; to the creatures which we abuse to our pride, lust and
vanity; to our neighbors, whom we corrupt, or seduce; to our selves, whom we
bereave of the best goods, and betray to the worst evils.

Beginning to live soberly, we begin to live like Men, following the conduct of
reason; beginning to live in charity, we commence the life of Angels, enjoying
in our selves most sweet content, and procuring great benefit to others; but
going on in sinful voluptuousness, we proceed to live like beasts, wholly
guided by sense, and swayed by appetite; being pertinacious in malice we
continue to be like fiends, working torment in our selves, and mischief to our
neighbors.

Embracing virtue we become wise and sober Men, worthy and honorable,
beneficial and useful to the World: but continuing in vice, we continue to be
foolish and vain, to be vile and despicable, to be worthless and useless.

By our delay to amend, what do we gain? what, but a little flashy and
transient pleasure instead of a solid and durable peace; but a little
counterfeit profit instead of real wealth; but a little smoke of deceitful
opinion instead of unquestionable sound honor; shadows of imaginary goods
instead of those which are most substantial and true, a good mind, the love of
God, the assured welfare of our souls. But this field of discourse is too
spacious, I shall only therefore for conclusion say, that speedily applying
our selves to obedience, and breaking off our sins by repentance, is in effect
nothing else but from a present Hell in trouble, and the danger of a final Hell
in torment to be translated into a double Heaven; one of joyful tranquillity
here, another of blissfull rest hereafter; unto the which Almighty God in his
mercy bring us all, through Jesus Christ our Lord; to whom for ever be all
glory and praise.

Amen.
The very God of peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray God your whole 1 Thessalonians.
5. 23.
spirit, and soul, and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Amen.
THE END.

