SEVERAL SERMONS AGAINST Evil-Speaking.

BY ISAAC BARROW, D. D. late Master of Trinity College in Cambridge, and one
of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1678.

TO THE Right Honorable HENEAGE Lord FINCH, Baron of DAVENTRY, Lord High
CHANCELLOR OF ENGLAND, AND One of His MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy
Council; THOMAS BARROW humbly dedicateth these SERMONS.

The Publisher to the Reader.
THese SERMONS are thought fit to be put together in one Volume, because of
their affinity to one another, all of them relating to the same Argument, and
tending to reform the several Vices of the Tongue. The Two last indeed, against
Pragmaticalnesse and meddling in the affairs of others, do not so properly
belong to this Subject; but considering that this Vice is chiefly managed by
the Tongue, and is almost ever attended with some irregularity and indiscretion
of Speech, they are not altogether so foreign and unsuitable to it.

Never were Discourses of this kind more necessary then in this wicked and
perverse Generation; wherein the Vices here reprehended are so very rife, and
out of the abundant impiety of men's hearts there proceeds so much
Evil-speaking of all kinds, in Atheistical Discourses, and blasphemous
Raillery, and profane Swearing; and when Censoriousness, Detraction, and
Slander are scarce accounted faults, even with those who would seem to be most
strict in other parts and duties of Religion.

The Author of these SERMONS as he was exemplary in all manner of
conversation, so especially in this part of it; being of all men I ever had the
happiness to know the clearest of this common guilt, and most free from
Offending in Word; coming as near, as is possible for humane frailty to do, to
the perfect Idea of S. James his perfect man. So that in these excellent
Discourses of his he has only transcribed his own practice. All the Rules
which he has given he most religiously observed himself, and was very uneasy
when at at any time he saw them transgressed by others in his company.

There is one thing needs excuse, namely, That several things which are more
briefly and summarily said in the First Sermon, are repeated in some of the
following Discourses: which because it could not well be avoided, but either by
wholly leaving out the First Sermon, or very much mangling some of the rest,
will, it is hoped, for that reason be easily pardoned.

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I. S. James 3. 2. If any man offend not in word, he is a perfect man.
SERMON II. Ephesians. 5. 4. -- Nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not
convenient. SERMON III. S. James 5. 12. But above all things, my Brethren,
Swear not. SERMON IV. Titus 3. 2. -- To speak evil of no man. SERMON. V. and VI.
Prove. 10. 18. He that utters Slander is a Fool. SERMON VII. S. James 4. 11.
Speak not evil of one another, Brethren. SERMON VIII. S. Matthew 7. 1. Judge
not. SERMON. IX. and X. 1 These. 4. 11. And that ye study to be quiet, and to do
your own business.
IMPRIMATUR Hic Liber cut Titulus, (Ten Sermons, etc.)

May 28th. 1678. Geor. Thorp, Rmo in Christo Patri, and Dno Dno Gulielmo,
Archiep. Cant. a Sacris Domesticis.

The First Sermon.
S. JAMES. 3. 2. If any man offend not in word, he is a perfect man.
THis Sentence stands in the head of a discourse concerning the Tongue, (that
doubtful engine of good and evil,) wherein how excellent benefits, and how
grievous mischiefs, it, as rightly or perversely wielded, is apt to produce, how
it is both a sweet instrument of all goodness, and a sharp weapon of all
iniquity, is positively laid down, and by fit comparisons illustrated. But
secluding all relation to the Context, the words may well be considered singly
by themselves: and as such they instruct us, asserting a certain Truth; they
direct us, implying a good Duty. They assert that man to be perfect, who
offends not in Speech; and they consequently imply, that we should strive to
avoid offending therein: Deuteronomy. 18. 13.
for to be perfect, and to go on to perfection, Luke 6. 40.
are precepts, Matt. 5. 48. and 19. 21.
the observance whereof is incumbent on us. We shall first briefly explain the
Assertion, 2 Cor. 13. 11.
and then declare its truth; Heb. 6. 1.
afterward we shall press somewhat couched in the Duty.

To OFFEND originally signifies to impinge, (...).
that is, to stumble, or hit dangerously upon somewhat lying cross our way, so
as thereby to be cast down, or at least to be disordered in our posture, and
stopped in our progress: whence it is well transferred to denote our being
through any incident temptation brought into sin, whereby a man is thrown down,
or bowed from his upright state, and interrupted from prosecuting a steady
course of Piety and Virtue. By an usual and apposite manner of speaking, our
tenor of life is called a Way, Psalm. 37. 23, 24.
our conversation Walking, our actions Steps, our observing good laws
Vprightness, our transgression of them Tripping, Faultring, Falling.

By NOT OFFENDING INWORD, we may easily then conceive to be understood such a
constant restraint, and such a careful guidance of our Tongue, that it does
not transgress the rules prescribed unto it by Divine Law, or by good Reason;
that it thwarteth not the natural ends and proper uses for which it was framed,
to which it is fitted; such as chiefly are promoting God's glory, our
Neighbor's benefit, and our own true welfare.

By A PERFECT MAN is meant a person accomplished and complete in goodness, one
of singular worth and integrity, Jam. 1. 4.
a brave and excellent man, who, as to the continual tenor of his life, is
free from all notorious defects, and heinous faults; Act. 13. 22.
like David, fulfilling all God's will, Psalm. 119. 6.
and having respect to all Gods commandments; like Zachary and Elizabeth, Luke
1. 6.
walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless. Genesis 6.
9. and 17. 1.
Thus was Noah, thus was Abraham, Job 1. 1.
thus was Job perfect. This is the notion of Perfection in Holy Scripture: Not
an absolute exemption from all blemish of Soul, or blame in life; for such a
Perfection is inconsistent with the nature and state of Man here, where none
with modesty or with truth can say, Prove. 20. 9.
I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin; where every man must
confess with Job, Job 9. 20.
If I justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me; if I say, I am perfect,
it shall prove me perverse. Eccles 7. 20.
For, There is not (as the Preacher assures) a just man upon earth, that does
good, and sins not; and, In many things we offend all, is our Apostle's
assertion, immediately preceding my Text; which words may serve to expound
these. In many things, says he, we offend all; that is, there is no man
absolutely perfect: but if any man offend not in word, (that is, if a man
constantly govern his Tongue well,) that man is perfect; perfect in such a kind
and degree as humane frailty does admit; he is eminently good; he may be
reasonably presumed upright and blameless in all the course of his practice;
able (as it follows) to bridle the whole body, that is, qualified to order all
his actions justly and wisely. So that in effect the words import this, That a
constant governance of our Speech according to duty and reason is a high
instance, and a special argument of a throughly-sincere and solid goodness.

The truth of which Aphorism may from several Considerations appear.

1. A good Governance of Speech is a strong evidence of a good Mind; of a mind
pure from vicious desires, calm from disorderly passions, void of dishonest
intentions. For since Speech is a child of Thought, which the mind always
travaileth and teemeth with, Ecclus 19. 11. A fool travaileth with a word, as a
woman in labor of a child.
and which after its birth is wont in features to resemble its parent; since
every man naturally is ambitious to propagate his conceits, and without a
painful force cannot smother his resentments; since especially bad affections
(like stumme or poison) are impetuous and turgid, so agitating all the spirits,
and so swelling the heart, that it cannot easily compose, or contain them;
since a distempered constitution of mind, as of body, is wont to weaken the
retentive faculty, and to force an evacuation of bad humors; since he that
wants the principal wisdom of well ordering his Thoughts, and mastering his
Passions, can hardly be conceived so prudent, as long to refrain, or to
regulate their dependence, Speech; considering these things, I say, it is
scarce possible, that he which commonly thinks ill, should constantly either be
well silent, or speak well. To conceal fire, to check lightning, to confine a
whirlwind, may perhaps be no less fecible, then to keep within due compass the
exorbitant motions of a Soul, wherein Reason has lost its command, so that qua
data porta, where the next passage occurrs, they should not rush forth, and
vent themselves. A vain Mind naturally will bubble forth or fly out in frothy
expressions; Wrath burning in the breast will flame out, or at least smoke
through the mouth; rancorous impostumes of Spite and Malice will at length
discharge purulent matter; Lust boiling within will soon foam out in lewd
discourse. If the fountain it self is polluted, or infected, how can the
streams be clear, or wholesome? Matt. 12. 34.
How can ye, being evil, speak good things? (says our Lord) for from the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. A good man (adds he) out of the
good treasure of the heart brings forth good things; and an evil man out of
the evil treasure brings forth evil things: (...), he casts forth ill
things, as a fountain does its waters by a natural and necessary ebullition. It
is true, that in some particular cases, or at some times, a foul heart may be
disguised by fair words, or covered by demure reservedness: Shame, or Fear, or
crafty Design, may often repress the declaration of ill thoughts and purposes.
But such fits of dissimulation cannot hold; men cannot abide quiet under so
violent constraints; the intestine jars, or unkindly truces, between Heart and
Tongue (those natural friends) cannot be perpetual, or very durable: No man can
hold his breath long, or live without evaporating through his mouth those
steams of passion which arise from flesh and blood. Psalm. 39. 3.
My heart was hot within me, while I was musing, the fire burned; then spoke I
with my tongue, says David, expressing the difficulty of obstructing the
eruption of our Affections into Language. (...).
Hence it is, that Speech is commonly judged the truest character of the mind,
and the surest test of inward worth; as that which discloseth the hidden man of
the heart, 1 Pet. 3. 4.
which unlocketh the closets of the breast, which draws the Soul out of her
dark recesses into open light and view, which renders our thoughts visible,
and our intentions palpable. Hence, Loquere, ut te videam, Speak, that I may
see you, or know what kind of man you are, is a saying which all men, at first
meeting, do in their hearts direct one to another: neither commonly does any
man require more to ground a judgment upon concerning the worth or ability of
another, then opportunity of hearing him to discourse for a competent time: yea
often, before a man has spoken ten words, his mind is caught, and a formal
sentence is passed upon it. Such a strict affinity and connection do all men
suppose between Thoughts and Words.

2. From hence, that the use of Speech is it self a great ingredient into our
Practice, and has a very general influence upon whatever we do, may be
inferred, that whoever governs it well, cannot also but well order his whole
life. The extent of Speech must needs be vast, since it is nearly commensurate
to Thought it self, which it ever closely traceth, widely ranging through all
the immense variety of objects; so that men almost as often speak incogitantly,
as they think silently. Speech is indeed the Rudder that steereth humane
affairs, the Spring that sets the wheels of action on going; the Hands work,
the Feet walk, all the Members and all the Senses act by its direction and
impulse; yea, most Thoughts are begotten, and most Affections stirred up
thereby: it is it self most of our employment, and what we do beside it, is
however guided and moved by it. It is the profession and trade of many, it is
the practice of all men, to be in a manner continually talking. The chief and
most considerable sort of men manage all their concernments merely by Words; by
them Princes rule their Subjects, Generals command their Armies, Senators
deliberate and debate about the great matters of State: by them Advocates plead
causes, and Judges decide them; Divines perform their offices, and minister
their instructions; Merchants strike up their bargains, and drive on all their
traffic. Whatever almost great or small is done in the Court or in the Hall,
in the Church or at the Exchange, in the School or in the Shop, it is the
Tongue alone that does it: it is the force of this little machine, that turns
all the humane world about. It is indeed the use of this strange organ which
renders humane life, beyond the simple life of other creatures, so exceedingly
various and compounded; which creates such a multiplicity of business, and
which transacts it; while by it we communicate our secret conceptions,
transfusing them into others; while therewith we instruct and advise one
another; while we consult about what is to be done, contest about right,
dispute about truth; while the whole business of conversation, of commerce, of
government, and administration of justice, of learning, and of Religion, is
managed thereby; yea, while it stops the gaps of time, and fills up the
wide intervalls of business, our recreations and divertisements (the which do
constitute a great portion of our life) mainly consisting therein: so that, in
comparison thereof, the execution of what we determine and all other action do
take up small room; and even all that usually depends upon foregoing Speech,
which persuadeth, or counsels, or commands it. Whence the Province of
Speech being so very large, it being so universally concerned, either
immediately as the matter, or by consequence as the source of our actions, he
that constantly governs it well, may justly be esteemed to live very
excellently.

3. To govern the Tongue well is a matter of exceeding difficulty, requiring
not only hearty goodness, but great judgment and art, together with much
vigilance and circumspection; whence the doing it argues a high pitch of
Virtue. For since the Tongue is a very loose and versatile engine, which the
least breath of thought does stir, and set on going any way, it cannot but need
much attention to keep it either in a steady rest, or in a right motion. Since
numberless swarms of things roving in the fancy do thence incessantly obtrude
themselves upon the Tongue, very much application of mind and great judgment
are requisite to select out of them those few which are good and fit, rejecting
all that is bad, and improper to be spoken. Since continually temptations
occurr provoking or alluring to miscarriage in this kind, (for beside internal
propensions and commotions of Soul, every object we behold, every company we
are engaged in, every accident befalling us does suggest somewhat inviting
thereto; the condition of our neighbor moving us, if high, to flatter, if low,
to insult; our own fortune prompting, if prosperous, to boast, if cross, to
murmur; any action drawing from us, if it pleases us, fond admiration, if it
disliketh, harsh censure: since, I say, we are thus at every turn obnoxious to
speak amiss,) it must be a matter of huge skill and caution, of mighty industry
and resolution, to decline it. We for that purpose need to imitate that earnest
and watchful care of the Holy Psalmist, which he thus expresses; Psalm. 17. 3.
I have (says he) purposed that my mouth shall not offend: and, Psalm. 39. 1.
I said, (says he again) I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my
tongue; I will keep my mouth with a bridle, while the wicked is before me. And
thus to maintain a constant guard over his heart and ways, thus in consequence
thereof to curb and rule his Speech well, must assuredly be the mark of a very
good person. Especially considering, that,

4. Irregular Speech has commonly diverse more advantages for it, and fewer
checks upon it, then other bad Practice has. A man is apt (I mean) to speak
ill with less dissatisfaction and regret from within; he may do it with less
control and less hazard from without, then he can act ill. Bad Actions are
gross and bulky, taking up much time, and having much force spent on them,
whence men easily observe and consider them in themselves and others: but ill
Words are subtle and transient, soon born, and as soon deceased; whence men
rashly utter them without much heed before them, or much reflection after them.
Bad actions have also usually visible effects, immediately consequent on them:
but Words operate insensibly and at distance; so that men hardly discern what
will follow them, or what they have effected. There are also frequent occasions
of speaking ill upon presumption of secrecy, and thence of indisturbance and
impunity; yea, doing so is often entertained with complacence, and encouraged
with applause: the vilest abuses of speech (even Blasphemy, Treason and Slander
themselves) may be safely whispered into ears, which will receive them with
pleasure and commendation. Bad Language also in most cases is neither strictly
prohibited, nor severely chastised by humane Laws, as bad Action is. Whence
ordinarily the guilt of this misbehaviour seems little or none; and persons
much practicing it, both in their own conceit, and in the opinion of others, do
often pass for innocent. Men indeed here will hardly discern any rule, or
acknowledge any obligation: the Tongue they deem is free, and any words may be
dispensed with: it is sufficient if they abstain from doing gross wrong or
mischief, they have a right and liberty to say any thing. Psalm. 12. 4.
Our lips are our own; who is Lord over us? so are men commonly prone to say,
with those in the Psalm. Hence whosoever, notwithstanding such encouragements
to offend herein, and so few restraints from it, does yet carefully forbear it,
governing his Tongue according to rules of duty and reason, may justly be
reputed a very good man. Furthermore,

5. Whereas most of the enormities, the mischiefs and the troubles whereby the
Souls of men are defiled, their minds discomposed, and their lives disquieted,
are the fruits of ill-governed Speech; it being that chiefly which perverteth
justice, which sows dissensions, which raises all bad passions and
animosities, which embroileth the world in seditions and factions, by which men
wrong and abuse, deceive and seduce, defame and disgrace one another, whereby
consequently innumerable vexations and disturbances are created among men; he
that by well governing his Speech preserves himself from the guilt,
disengageth his mind and life from the inconveniences of all such evils, (from
the discreet and honest management thereof enjoying both innocence and peace,)
must necessarily be as a very wise and happy, so a very good and worthy person.

6. His Tongue also so ruled cannot but produce very good fruits of honor to
God, of benefit to his Neighbor, of comfort to himself: it will be sweet and
pleasant, it will be wholesome and useful; endearing conversation, cementing
peaceful society, breeding and nourishing love, instructing and edifying, or
chearing and comforting the hearers. Prove. 12. 18.
His tongue is health; His mouth is a well and tree of life; Prove. 10. 11. and
15. 4. Prove. 15. 7. Prove. 12. 14. and 13. 2, 3. and 15. 23.
His lips disperse knowledge; He shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of
his mouth; Every man shall kiss his lips: Prove. 24. 26.
Such (as the Wiseman tells us) are the effects of innocent, sober and
well-ordered discourse; the which do much commend their author, and declare
the excellent virtue of that tree from which such fruits do grow.

7. Lastly, The observation how unusual this practice is, (in any good degree)
may strongly assure the excellency thereof. For the rarer (especially in
morals) any good thing is, the more noble and worthy it is; that rarity arguing
somewhat of peculiar difficulty in the attainment or the achievement thereof.
Nothing is more obvious to common experience, then that persons, who in the
rest of their demeanor and dealings appear blameless, yea who in regard to
other points of duty would seem nice and precise, are extremely peccant in this
kind. We may see diverse, otherwise much restraining and much denying
themselves, who yet indulge themselves a strange licenciousness in speaking
whatever their humor or their passion dictates. Many, in other respects
harmless, (who would not for any thing smite or slay folks,) we may observe
with their Tongue to commit horrible outrages upon any man that comes in their
way. Frequently persons very punctual in their dealings, are very unjust in
their language, cheating and robbing their neighbor of his reputation by
envious detraction and hard censure. They who abhor shedding a man's blood,
will yet without any scruple or remorse, by calumnious tales and virulent
reproaches, assassinate his credit, and murder his good name, although to him
perhaps far more dear and precious then his life. Commonly such as are greatly
staunch in other enjoyments of pleasure, are enormously intemperate in
speaking, and very incontinent of their Tongue: men in all other parts of
morality rigorously sober, are often in this very wild and dissolute. Yea, not
seldom we may observe, that even mighty pretenders to godliness, and zealous
practisers of devotion, cannot forbear speaking things plainly repugnant to
God's Law, and very prejudicial to his honor. Thus it is observable to be now;
and thus we may suppose that it always has been. So of his time S. Hierome (or
rather S. Paulinus, in his excellent Epistle to Celantia) testifies: Tanta
hujus mali libido mentes hominum invasit, ut etiam qui procul ab aliis vitiis
recesserunt, in istud tamen, quasi in extremum Diaboli laqueum, incidant. Ad
Celant.
Such a lust (says he, concerning the ill-governance of Speech) of this evil
has invaded the minds of men, that even those who have far receded from other
vices, do yet fall into this, as into the last snare of the Devil. So it
appears, that among all sorts of good Practice, the strict Governance of the
Tongue is least ordinary, and consequently, that it is most admirable, and
excellent. And this is all I shall say for Confirmation of the Point asserted.

NOW then, as it is our duty to aim at perfection, or to endeavor the
attainment of integrity in Heart and Life, so we should especially labor to
govern our Tongue, and guard it from offense. To which purpose it is requisite,
that we should well understand and consider the nature of those several
Offenses to which Speech is liable, together with the special pravity,
deformity and inconvenience of each: for did we know and weigh them, we should
not surely either like, or dare to incurr them.

The Offenses of Speech are many and various in kind; so many as there be of
Thought and of Action, unto which they do run parallel: accordingly they well
may be distinguished from the difference of objects which they do specially
respect. Whence 1. some of them are committed against God, and confront Piety;
2. others against our Neighbor, and violate Justice, or Charity, or Peace; 3.
others against our Selves, infringing Sobriety, Discretion, or Modesty; or, 4.
some are of a more general and abstracted nature, rambling through all matters,
and crossing all the heads of Duty. It is true, that in most, or in all
offenses of Speech, there is a complication of Impiety, Iniquity, and
Imprudence; for that by all sorts of ill Speaking we sin against God, and break
his Commandment; we injure our Neighbor, at least by contagion and bad
example; we abuse our Selves, contracting guilt, and exposing our selves to
punishment: also the general vices of Speech (unadvisedness and vanity) do
constantly adhere to every bad word: Yet commonly each evil Speech has a more
direct and immediate aspect upon some one of those objects, (God, our
Neighbor, or our Selves,) and is peculiarly repugnant to one of those capital
Virtues (Piety, Charity, and Sobriety) unto which all our Duty is reduced. Now
according to this distinction, I should, if time would give leave, describe,
and dissuade particularly all these sorts of Offense: but (since I must be
respectfull to patience, and careful my self not to offend in Speech) I shall
confine the rest of my present Discourse to the first sort, the Offenses
against Piety; and even of them I shall (waving the rest) only touch two or
three, insinuating some reasons why we should eschew them. These are,

I. Speaking blasphemously against God, (Psalm. 78. 19. Number. 21. 5. Job 34. 37.)
or reproachfully concerning Religion, or to the disgrace of Piety, with intent
to subvert men's faith in God, or to impair their reverence of him. There has
been a race of men (and would to God that race were not even till now
continued) concerning whom the Psalmist said, Psalm. 73. 8, 9.
They speak loftily, they set their mouth against the heavens; who, like the
proud Senacherib, Isa. 37. 23. 2 Chronicles. 32. 19.
lift up their eyes, and exalt their voice against the Holy One of Israel; who,
with the profane Antiochus, Dan. 11. 36.
speak mavelous things against the God of Gods. This of all impieties is the
most prodigiously Gigantick, the most signal practice of enmity toward God,
and downright waging of war against Heaven. Of all weapons formed against God,
Isa. 54. 17.
the Tongue most notoriously does impugn him: for we cannot reach Heaven with
our hands, or immediately assault God by our actions: other ill practice indeed
obliquely, or by consequence dishonors God, and defameth goodness; but
profane Discourse is directly levelled at them, and does immediately touch
them, as its formal objects. Now doing thus argues an extremity both of folly
and naughtiness: for he that does it, either believes the existence of God,
and the truth of Religion; or he distrusts them. If he does believe them, what
a desperate madness is it in him, advisedly to invite certain mischief to his
home, and pull down heaviest vengeance on his head, by opposing the
irresistible power, and provoking the inflexible justice of God? What an
abominable villainy and baseness is it, thus to abuse God's immense goodness and
mercy, offering such despite to the Author of his being, and free donour of
all the good he enjoys? What a monstrous conspiracy is it of stupidity and
perverseness in him, thus wilfully to defy his own welfare, to forfeit all
capacity of happiness; to precipitate and plunge himself into a double Hell,
that of bitter remorse here, that of endless pain hereafter? But if he that
reproacheth God and Religion be supposed distrustful of their being and
reality, neither so is he excusable from like degrees of folly and pravity:
for, beside the wild extravagance of such disbelief, against legions of cogent
arguments and pregnant testimonies, against all the voice of nature and faith
of history, against the settled judgment of wise and sober persons, who have
studied and considered the point, against the current tradition of all Ages,
and general consent of mankind; all which to withstand, no less demonstrateth
high indiscretion then arrogance; beside also the palpable silliness which he
displays, in causelessly (or for no other cause then soothing a fantastic
humor) drawing upon himself the anger and hatred of all men, who are concerned
for the interests of their Religion, thrusting himself into great dangers and
mischiefs thence imminent to him both from private zeal, and public law;
beside (I say) these evident follies, there is an unsufferable insolence and
horrible malice apparent in this practice: for it is no less then the height of
insolence, thus to affront mankind in matters of highest consideration, and
deepest resentment with it; not only thwarting its common notions, but
vilifying the chief objects of its highest respect and affection, of its main
care and concernment; so making the fiercest invasion that can be on its
credit, and charging it with greatest fondness. Who can endure, that He, whom
he apprehends to be his grand Parent, his best Friend and Benefactour, his
great Patron and Sovereign, should in downright terms be defamed or
disparaged? Who can patiently bear, that wherein he places his utmost hopes,
and supreme felicity, to be expressly slighted or scorned? Who can take the
offering to do this, otherwise then for a most injurious reflection upon his
judgment and his practice? If he cannot believe in God, he may let them alone
who do: if he will not practice Religion, he may forbear to persecute it. He
cannot pretend any zeal; it is therefore only pride that moves him to disturb
us. So may every man with all the reason in the world complain against the
profane Talker. Seeing also it is most evident, that hearty reverence of God,
and a conscientious regard to Religion, do produce great benefits to mankind,
being indeed the main supports of common honesty and sobriety, the sole curbs,
effectually restraining men from unjust fraud and violence, from brutish lusts
and passions; since apparently Religion prescribes the best rules, and
imposes the strongest engagements to the performance of those actions, whereby
not only men's private welfare is promoted, and ordinary conversation is
sweetened, and common life is adorned, but also whereby public order and peace
are maintained; Haud scio an, pietate adversus Deos sublata, fides etiam, and
societas humani generis, and und excellentissima virtus justitia tollatur. Cic.
since (as Cicero with good reason judged) Piety being removed, it is probable
that Justice it self (of all Virtues the best guarded and fortified by humane
power) could not subsist, no faith could be secured, no society could be
preserved among men; it being manifestly vain to fansy, that assuredly without
Religious conscience any one will be a good Subject, a true Friend, or an
Honest man; or that any other consideration can induce men to prefer duty to
their Prince, the prosperity of their Country, fidelity toward their Friends or
Neighbors, before their own present interests and pleasure: Since, I say, the
credit of Religion is so very beneficial and useful to mankind, it is plain,
that he must be exceedingly spiteful and malicious, who shall by profane
Discourse endeavor to supplant or shake it. He that speaks against God or
Providence, has assuredly a pique at Goodness, and would not have it
predominant in the hearts of men. He that disparages Religion, does certainly
take his aim against Virtue, and would not have it practiced in the world: his
meaning plainly is, to effect, if he can, that Men should live like Beasts in
foul impurities, or like Fiends in mischievous iniquities. Such an one
therefore is not to be taken as a simple embracer of Error, but as a spiteful
designer against common Good. For indeed, were any man assured (as none can
upon so much as probable grounds think it) that Religion had been only devised
by men, as a supplemental aid to Reason and Force, Vt quos ratio non posset,
eos ad officium religio duceret. Cic.
(drawing them, whom the one could not persuade, nor the other compel, to the
practice of things conducible to the public weal;) that it were merely an
implement of policy, or a knack to make people loyal to their Prince, upright
in their dealings, sober in their conversations, moderate in their passions,
virtuous in all their doings; it were yet a most barbarous naughtiness and
inhumanity in him to assay the overthrow thereof, with the defeating so
excellent purposes: he that should attempt it, justly would deserve to be
reputed an enemy to the welfare of mankind, to be treated as a pestilent
disturber of the world.

II. Another like Offense against Piety is, to speak loosely and wantonly about
Holy things, (things nearly related to God or to Religion,) to make such things
the matter of sport and mockery, to play and trifle with them. But of this I
shall have occasion to speak in another Discourse.

III. Another grand Offense against Piety is rash and vain Swearing in common
discourse; an Offense which now strangely reigns and rages in the world,
passing about in a specious garb, and under glorious titles, as a gentile and
graceful quality, a mark of fine breeding, and a point of high gallantry. Who,
forsooth, now is the brave Spark, and complete Gentleman, but he that has the
skill and confidence (O Heavens! how mean a skill how mad a confidence!) to lard
every sentence with an Oath or a Curse; making bold at every turn to salute
God, fetching him down from Heaven to avouch any idle prattle, to second any
giddy passion, to concern himself in any trivial affair of his; yea, calling
and challenging the Almighty to damn and destroy him? But somewhat to repress
these fond conceits and vile practices, let us, I pray, consider,

1. That Swearing thus is most expressly and strictly prohibited to us. Matthew.
5. 34, 37.
I say unto you, Swear not at all: But let your conversation be Yea, yea, Nay,
nay; for whatsoever is more then these, comes from evil: Jam. 5. 12.
so our Lord forbids it. But above all things, my brethren, swear not -- lest
you enter into condemnation: so does Saint James warn against it. And is it not
then prodigious, that in Christendom any man should affect to break laws so
plain, and so severe; that it should pass here not only for a tolerable, but
even for a commendable practice, to violate so manifest and so important a
Duty; that so directly to thwart our Lord himself should be a thing not in use
only, but in credit and request among Christians? What more palpable affront
could be offered to our Religion, and to all that is Sacred among us? For, what
respect or force can we imagine reserved to Religion, while a practice so
indisputably opposite thereto, in a high degree, is so current and prevalent?

2. Again, according to the very nature and reason of things, it is evidently
an intolerable Profaneness, thus unadvisedly to make addresses and appeals to
God, invoking his testimony, and demanding his judgment about trifles; far more
such, then it were a high presumption and encroachment upon the Majesty of a
Prince, on every petty occasion to break into his presence, and to assail his
ears, dragging him to hear and determine concerning it. Whence the very light of
Nature condemns this practice, and even Heathens have loudly declared against
it, as derogatory to the reverence of the Deity, and unsuitable to the gravity
of a worthy man.

3. Swearing indeed is by our Holy Oracles worthily represented to us, as an
especial piece of Worship and Devotion toward God; wherein, duly performed, we
piously acknowledge his chief Attributes, and singular Prerogatives: (his being
everywhere present, and conscious of all we say or do; his Goodness, and
Fidelity, in favoring truth, and protecting right; his Justice, in rewarding
veracity and equity, in avenging falsehood and iniquity; his being the Supreme
Lord of all persons, and last Judge in all causes: to signify and avow these
things to God's glory, Swearing was instituted, and naturally serves:)
wherefore as all other acts of Devotion, so this grand one especially should
never be performed without all serious consideration and humble reverence; the
cause should be certainly just and true, the matter worthy and weighty, the
manner grave and solemn, the mind framed to earnest attention, and furnished
with devout affections. Those conditions are always carefully to be observed,
which the Prophet intimates, when he charge thus; Jer. 4. 2.
Thou shall swear, That Lord lives, in truth, in judgment, and in
righteousness. It is therefore horrible mockery, and profanation of a most
sacred ordinance, when men presume to use it without any care or consideration,
without any respect or awe, upon any slight or vain occasion.

4. The doing so is also very prejudicial to humane Society; for the decision
of Right, the security of Government, and the preservation of Peace, do much
depend upon an awful regard to Oaths; and therefore upon their being only
used in due manner, and season: the same do greatly suffer by the contempt or
disregard of them, and consequently by their common and careless use. They are
the surest bonds by which the Consciences of men are tied to the attestation of
truth, and observance of faith; the which as by rare and reverent use they are
kept firm and fast, so by frequent and negligent application of them (by their
prostitution to every light and toyish matter,) they are quite dissolved, or
much slackned. Whence the public seems much concerned, that this enormity
should be retrenched. For if Oaths generally become cheap and vile, what will
that of Allegiance signify? if men are wont to dally with Swearing everywhere,
can they be expected to be strict and serious therein at the Bar, or in the
Church? Will they regard the testimony of God, or dread his judgment, in one
place, or at one time, whenas everywhere continually (upon any, upon no
occasion) they dare to confront and contemn them?

5. This way of Swearing is also a very uncivil and unmannerly practice. It is
not only a gross rudeness toward the main body of men, who justly reverence
the Name of God, and loath such abuses thereof; not only an insolent defiance
to the common Profession and Law of our Country, which disallows and condemns
it; but it is very odious and offensive to any particular Society, if at least
there be one sober person therein: for to any such person (who retains a sense
of goodness, or is any-wise concerned for God's honor) no language or
behavior can be more disgustfull; nothing can more grate the ears or fret the
heart of such an one, then this kind of talk: to give him the Lie were a
complement, to spit in his face were an obligation, in comparison thereto.
Wherefore it is a wonder, that any person, having in him a spark of ingenuity,
or at all pretending to good manners, should find in his heart or deign to use
it.

6. This practice also much derogateth from the credit of him that uses it,
rendering the truth of whatever he says in reason and justice suspected. For he
that is so void of Conscience, as to swear vainly, what can engage him to speak
truly? He that is so loose in one such point of obedience to God and Reason,
why should we conceive him strict in regard to another?

7. It can be surely no wrong to distrust him, since he implies himself not to
be, even in his own opinion, a credible person; since he judges not his own
bare affirmation to deserve belief. For why, Tantus in te sit very amor, ut
quicquid dixeris, juratum putes. Hier.
if he takes his word to be competently good, does he back it with such
Asseverations? why unprovoked calls he God to witness, if he thinks his own
honesty sufficient to assure the truth of what he says? An honest man,
methinks, should scorn thus to invalidate his own credit, or to detract from
the authority of his word, which should stand firm upon it self, and not want
an Oath to support it.

8. To excuse this, the Swearer must be forced to confess another ugly fault in
speaking, that is, impertinence, or using of wast and insignificant words; to
be charged wherewith he is indeed however unavoidably liable. For Oaths, as
they pass commonly, are mere excrescencies of Speech, which do nothing else but
encumber and deform it: they embellish discourse, just as a wen or a scab does
beautify a face; as a spot or a patch does adorn a garment. For to what
purpose (I pray) is God's Name haled into our idle talk? why should we so often
mention him, when we never mean any thing about him? Into every sentence to
foist a dog, or a horse, would altogether be as proper and pertinent. (...).
Hier.
These superfluous words signify nothing, but that the speaker little skilleth
the use of speech, or the rule of conversation, but means to part any thing
without wit or judgment; that his fancy is very beggarly, and craves the aid of
any impertinency to relieve it. One would think, that a man of sense should
grutch to lend his ears, or incline his attention to such putid stuff; that
without nauseating he should not endure to see men lavish time, and squander
breath so frivolously.

9. In fine, this Offense is particularly most inexcusable, in that it scarce
has any temptation to it, or brings with it any advantage; so that it is
unaccountable what (beside mere vanity or perverseness) should dispose men
thereto. It gratifieth no sense, it yields no profit, it procures no honor:
for the sound of it is not very melodious, nor surely was any man ever
preferred for it, or got an estate thereby; it rather to any good ear makes a
horrid and jarring noise, it rather produces displeasure, damage, and
disgrace. Wherefore of all dealers in sin the Swearer is apparently the
silliest, and makes the worst bargains for himself: for he sins gratis, and
(like those in the Prophet) sells his soul for nothing. Isa. 52. 3.
An Epicure has some reason, and an Extortioner is a man of wisdom, if
compared to him; for they enjoy some pleasure, or acquire some gain here, in
lieu of their Salvation hereafter. But he offends Heaven, and abandons
happiness, he knows not why, nor for what; a fond humor possesses him, he
inconsiderately follows a herd of fopps, he affects to play the Ape; that is
all he can say for himself. Let me be pardoned, if just indignation against a
wickedness so contemptible, so heinous, and so senseless, and withal so
notorious, and so rife among us, does extort from me language somewhat tart and
vehement.

If men would then but a little consider things, surely this scurvy fashion
would be soon discarded, much fitter for the scumme of the people, then for the
flower of the Gentry; yea rather, much below any man endued with a scrap of
Reason, not to say with a grain of Religion. Could we bethink our selves,
certainly modest, sober and pertinent Discourse would appear far more generous
and manly, then such wild Hectoring God Almighty, such rude insulting over the
received Laws, such ruffianly swaggering against sobriety and goodness. If
Gentlemen would regard the Virtues of their ancestors, (that gallant Courage,
that solid Wisdom, that noble Courtesy, which first advanced their Families,
and severed them from the vulgar,) this degenerate wantonness and dirtiness of
Speech would return to the dunghill, or rather (which God grant) would be quite
banished from the world.

Finally, as to this whole Point, about not offending in our Speech against
Piety, we should consider, that as we our selves, with all our members and
powers, were chiefly designed and framed to serve and glorify our Maker; (it
being withal the greatest perfection of our nature, and the noblest privilege
thereof so to do;) so especially our Tongue and Speaking faculty were given us
to declare our admiration and reverence of him, to express our love and
gratitude toward him, to celebrate his praises, to acknowledge his benefits, to
promote his honor and service. This consequently is the most proper and worthy
use thereof; from this it becomes in effect what the Psalmist so often terms
it, Psalm. 16. 9. and 30. 12. and 57. 8. and 108. 1.
our glory, and the best member we have; as that whereby we far excel all
creatures here below; that whereby we consort with the blessed Angels above, in
distinct utterance of praise to our Creator. Wherefore applying it to any
impious discourse, (tending any-wise to the dishonor of God, or disparagement
of Religion,) is a most unnatural abuse thereof, and a vile ingratitude toward
him that gave it to us. From which, and from all other offenses, God in his
mercy preserve us all, through Jesus Christ our Lord, unto whom for ever with
heart and tongue let us strive to render all glory and praise.

AMEN.
The Second Sermon.
EPHESIANS. 5. 4. -- Nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient.
MOral and political Aphorisms are seldom couched in such terms, that they
should be taken as they sound precisely, or according to the widest extent of
signification; but do commonly need exposition, and admit exception: otherwise
frequently they would not only clash with reason and experience, but
interfere, thwart and supplant one another. The best Masters of such wisdom
are wont to interdict things, apt by unseasonable or excessive use to be
perverted, in general forms of speech, leaving the restrictions, which the case
may require or bear, to be made by the hearers or interpreters discretion:
whence many seemingly-formal prohibitions are to be received only as sober
cautions. This observation may be particularly supposed applicable to this
precept of S. Paul, which seems universally to forbid a practice, commended
(in some cases and degrees) by Philosophers as virtuous, not disallowed by
Reason, commonly affected by men, often used by wise and good persons; from
which consequently if our Religion did wholly debar us, it would seem
chargeable with somewhat too uncouth austerity and sourness: (...). Arist. Eth.
4. 8.
from imputations of which kind as in its temper and frame it is really most
free, (it never quenching natural light, or cancelling the dictates of sound
Reason, but confirming and improving them;) so it carefully declineth them,
Phil. 4. 8.
injoyning us, that if there be any things (...), (lovely, or grateful to
men,) any things (...), (of good report and repute,) if there be any virtue and
any praise, (any thing in the common apprehensions of men held worthy and
laudable,) we should mind those things, that is, should yield them a regard
answerable to the esteem they carry among rational and sober persons.

Whence it may seem requisite so to interpret and determine S. Paul's meaning
here concerning Eutrapelia, (that is, facetious speech, or raillery, by our
Translatours rendered Jesting,) that he may consist with himself, and be
reconciled to Aristotle, who places this practice in the rank of Virtues; or
that Religion and Reason may well accord in the case; supposing, that if there
be any kind of Facetiousness innocent and reasonable, conformable to good
manners, (regulated by common sense, and consistent with the tenor of
Christian Duty, that is, not transgressing the bounds of Piety, Charity, and
Sobriety,) Saint Paul did not intend to discountenance or prohibit that kind.

For thus expounding and limiting his intent, we have some warrant from
himself, some fair intimations in the words here. For first, what sort of
facetious speech he aims at, he does imply by the fellow he coupleth
therewith; (...), (says he) (...), foolish talking, or facetiousness: such
Facetiousness therefore he touches as does include Folly, in the matter or
manner thereof. Then he farther determines it, by adjoining a peculiar quality
thereof, unprofitableness, or impertinency; (...), which are not pertinent, or
conducible to any good purpose: whence may be collected, that it is a frivolous
and idle sort of Facetiousness which he condemns.

But however manifest it is, that some kind thereof he does earnestly forbid:
whence, in order to the guidance of our practice, it is needful to distinguish
the kinds, severing that which is allowable from that which is unlawful; that
so we may be satisfied in the case, and not on the one hand ignorantly
transgress our duty, nor on the other trouble our selves with scruples, others
with censures, upon the use of warrantable liberty therein.

And such a resolution seems indeed especially needful in this our Age,
(this pleasant and jocular Age,) which is so infinitely addicted to this sort
of speaking, that it scarce does affect or prize any thing near so much; all
reputation appearing now to vail and stoop to that of being a Wit: to be
learned, to be wise, to be good, are nothing in comparison thereto; even to be
noble and rich are inferior things, and afford no such glory. Many at least,
to purchase this glory, (to be deemed considerable in this faculty, and
enrolled among the Wits,) do not only make shipwreck of conscience, abandon
Virtue, and forfeit all pretenses to wisdom; but neglect their estates, and
prostitute their honor: so to the private damage of many particular persons,
and with no small prejudice to the public, are our Times possessed and
transported with this humor. To repress the excess and extravagance whereof,
nothing in way of discourse can serve better, then a plain declaration when and
how such a practice is allowable or tolerable; when it is wicked and vain,
unworthy of a man endued with Reason, and pretending to honesty or honor.

This I shall in some measure endeavor to perform.

But first it may be demanded what the thing we speak of is, or what this
Facetiousness does import. To which question I might reply as Democritus did to
him that asked the definition of a Man, It Is that which we all see and know:
any one better apprehends what it is by acquaintance, then I can inform him by
description. It is indeed a thing so versatil and multiform, appearing in so
many shapes, so many postures, so many garbs, so variously apprehended by
several eyes and judgments, that it seems no less hard to settle a clear and
certain notion thereof, then to make a pourtraict of Proteus, or to define the
figure of the fleeting Air. Sometimes it lies in pat allusion to a known
story, or in seasonable application of a trivial saying, or in forging an
apposite tale: sometimes it plays in words and phrases, taking advantage from
the ambiguity of their sense, or the affinity of their sound: sometimes it is
wrapped in a dress of humourous expression; Eadem quae, si imprudentibus
excidunt, stulta sunt, si simulamus, venusta creduntur.
sometimes it lurketh under an odd similitude; sometimes it is lodged in a sly
question, in a smart answer, in a quirkish reason, in a shrewd intimation, in
cunningly diverting, Quint. 6. 3.
or cleverly retorting an objection: sometimes it is couched in a bold scheme
of speech, in a tart Irony, in a lusty Hyperbole, in a startling Metaphor, in a
plausible reconciling of contradictions, or in acute Nonsense: sometimes a
scenical representation of persons or things, a counterfeit speech, a mimical
look or gesture passes for it: sometimes an affected simplicity, sometimes a
presumptuous bluntness gives it being: sometimes it rises only from a lucky
hitting upon what is strange, sometimes from a crafty wresting obvious matter
to the purpose: often it consists in one knows not what, and springs up one
can hardly tell how. Its ways are unaccountable and inexplicable, being
answerable to the numberless rovings of fancy, and windings of language. It is,
in short, a manner of speaking out of the simple and plain way, Et hercle omnis
salse dicendi ratio in eo est, ut aliter quam est rectum verumque dicatur.
Quint.
(such as Reason teaches and proves things by,) which by a pretty surprising
uncouthness in conceit or expression does affect and amuse the fancy, stirring
in it some wonder, and breeding some delight thereto. It raises Admiration, as
signifying a nimble sagacity of apprehension, a special felicity of invention,
a vivacity of spirit, and reach of wit more then vulgar: it seeming to argue a
rare quickness of parts, that one can fetch in remote conceits applicable; a
notable skill, that he can dexterously accommodate them to the purpose before
him; together with a lively briskness of humor, not apt to damp those sportful
flashes of imagination. (Whence in Aristotle such persons are termed (...),
Eth. 4. 8.
dexterous men; and (...), men of facil or versatil manners, (...). Chrysostom. in
Ephesians. Or. 17.
who can easily turn themselves to all things, or turn all things to
themselves.) It also procures Delight, by gratifying curiosity with its
rareness, or semblance of difficulty; (as monsters, not for their beauty, but
their rarity; as juggling tricks, not for their use, but their abstruseness,
are beheld with pleasure;) by diverting the mind from its road of serious
thoughts; by instilling gayety and airiness of spirit; by provoking to such
dispositions of spirit in way of emulation or complaisance; and by seasoning
matters, otherwise distasteful or insipid, with an unusual, and thence
grateful tang.

But saying no more concerning what it is, and leaving it to your imagination
and experience to supply the defect of such explication, I shall address my
self to show, first, when and how such a manner of speaking may be allowed;
then, in what matters and ways it should be condemned.

I. Such Facetiousness is not absolutely unreasonable or unlawful, which
ministers harmless divertisement, (...). Arist. Eth. 4. 8.
and delight to conversation: (harmless, I say, that is, not intrenching upon
Piety, not infringing Charity or Justice, not disturbing Peace.) For
Christianity is not so tetrical, so harsh, so envious, as to bar us continually
from innocent, much less from wholesome and useful pleasure, such as humane
life does need or require. And if jocular discourse may serve to good purposes
of this kind; if it may be apt to raise our drooping spirits, Danda est
remissio animis; meliores acrioresque requieti surgent, etc. Sen. de Tranq. 15.
to allay our irksome cares, to whet our blunted industry, to recreate our
minds being tired or cloyed with graver occupations; if it may breed alacrity,
or maintain good humor among us; if it may conduce to sweeten conversation,
and endear society; then is it not inconvenient, or unprofitable. If for those
ends we may use other recreations, employing on them our ears and eyes, our
hands and feet, our other instruments of sense and motion; why may we not as
well to them accommodate our organs of speech, and interior sense? Why should
those games which excite our wits and fancies be less reasonable, then those
whereby our grosser parts and faculties are exercised? Yea, why are not those
more reasonable, since they are performed in a manly way, and have in them a
smack of Reason; seeing also they may be so managed, as not only to divert and
please, -- ridentem dicere verum Quid vetat?
but to improve and profit the mind, rouzing and quickening it, yea sometimes
enlightening and instructing it, by good sense conveyed in jocular expression?

It would surely be hard, that we should be tied ever to knit the brow, and
squeeze the brain, (to be always sadly dumpish, or seriously pensive,) that all
divertisement of mirth and pleasantness should be shut out of conversation: and
how can we better relieve our minds, or relax our thoughts, how can we be more
ingenuously cheerful, in what more kindly way can we exhilarate our selves and
others, then by thus sacrificing to the Graces, (...) it a Plato Xenocratem
morosiorem monuit.
as the Ancients called it? Are not some persons always, and all persons
sometimes, incapable otherwise to divert themselves, then by such discourse?
Shall we, I say, have no recreation? or must our recreations be ever clownish,
or childish, consisting merely in rustical efforts, or in petty sleights of
bodily strength and activity? Were we in fine obliged ever to talk like
Philosophers, assigning dry reasons for every thing, and dropping grave
sentences upon all occasions, would it not much deaden humane life, and make
ordinary conversation exceedingly to languish? Facetiousnesse therefore in such
cases, and to such purposes, may be allowable.

2. Facetiousnesse is allowable, when it is the most proper instrument of
exposing things apparently base and vile to due contempt. It is many times
expedient, that things really ridiculous should appear such, that they may be
sufficiently loathed and shunned; and to render them such is the part of a
facetious wit, and usually can only be compassed thereby. When to impugn them
with downright reason, or to check them by serious discourse, would signify
nothing; then representing them in a shape strangely-ugly to the fancy, and
thereby raising derision at them, may effectually discountenance them. Thus did
the Prophet Elias expose the wicked superstition of those who worshipped Baal:
1 Kings 18. 27.
Elias (says the Text) mocked them, and said, Cry aloud; for he is a God,
either he is talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or peradventure
he sleeps, and must be awaked. By which one pregnant instance it appears,
that reasoning pleasantly-abusive in some cases may be useful. The Holy
Scripture does not indeed use it frequently; (it not suting the Divine
simplicity and stately gravity thereof to do so;) yet its condescension
thereto at any time sufficiently does authorize a cautious use thereof. When
sarcastical twitches are needful to pierce the thick skins of men, to correct
their lethargick stupidity, to rouse them out of their drouzy negligence; then
may they well be applied: when plain declarations will not enlighten people, to
discern the truth and weight of things, and blunt arguments will not penetrate,
to convince or persuade them to their duty; then does Reason freely resign its
place to Wit, allowing it to undertake its work of instruction and reproof.

3. Facetious discourse particularly may be commodious for reproving some
vices, and reclaiming some persons; (as Salt for cleansing and curing some
sores.) It commonly procures a more easy access to the ears of men, and
works a stronger impression on their hearts, then other discourse could do.
Many who will not stand a direct reproof, and cannot abide to be plainly
admonished of their fault, will yet endure to be pleasantly rubbed, and will
patiently bear a jocund wipe; though they abominate all language purely bitter
or sour, yet they can relish discourse having in it a pleasant tartness: you
must not chide them as their master, but you may gibe with them as their
companion: if you do that, they will take you for pragmatical and haughty;
this they may interpret friendship and freedom. Most men are of that temper;
and particularly the Genius of diverse persons, whose opinions and practices we
should strive to correct, does require not a grave and severe, but a free and
merry way of treating them. For what can be more unsuitable and unpromising,
then to seem serious with those who are not so themselves, or demure with the
scornful? If we design either to please or vex them into better manners, we
must be as sportfull in a manner, or as contemptuous as themselves. If we mean
to be heard by them, we must talk in their own fashion, with humor and
jollity: if we will instruct them, we must withal somewhat divert them: we
must seem to play with them, if we think to convey any sober thoughts into
them. They scorn to be formally advised or taught; but they may perhaps be
slily laughed and lured into a better mind. If by such complaisance we can
inveagle those Dottrels to hearken to us, we may induce them to consider
farther, and give Reason some competent scope, some fair play with them. Good
Reason may be apparelled in the garb of Wit, and therein will securely pass,
whither in its native homeliness it could never arrive: and being come
thither, it with especial advantage may impresse good advice; making an
offender more clearly to see, and more deeply to feel his miscarriage; being
represented to his fancy in a strain somewhat rare and remarkable, yet not so
fierce and frightfull. The severity of reproof is tempered, and the reprover's
anger disguised thereby. The guilty person cannot but observe, that he who thus
reprehends him is not disturbed or out of humor, and that he rather pitieth
then hates him; which breeds a veneration to him, and imparteth no small
efficacy to his wholesome suggestions. Such a Reprehension, while it forces a
smile without, does work remorse within; while it seems to tickle the ear,
does sting the heart. In fine, many whose foreheads are brazed and hearts
steeled against all blame, are yet not of proof against derision; diverse, who
never will be reasoned, may be raillied into better order: in which cases
Raillery, as an instrument of so important good, as a servant of the best
Charity, may be allowed.

4. Some Errors likewise in this way may be most properly and most succesfully
confuted; such as deserve not, and hardly can bear a serious and solid
confutation. He that will contest things apparently decided by sense and
experience, or who disavows clear Principles of reason, approved by general
consent, and the common sense of men, what other hopeful way is there of
proceeding with him, then pleasantly to explode his conceits? To dispute
seriously with him, were trifling; to trifle with him is the proper course:
since he rejects the grounds of Reasoning, it is vain to be in earnest; what
then remains but to jest with him? To deal seriously, were to yield too much
respect to such a baffler, and too much weight to his fancies; to raise the man
too high in his courage and conceit; to make his pretenses seem worthy the
considering and canvasing. Briefly, perverse obstinacy is more easily quelled,
petulant impudence is sooner dashed, Sophistical captiousnesse is more safely
eluded, Skeptical wantonness is more surely confounded in this, then in the
simple way of discourse.

5. This way is also commonly the best way of defense against unjust reproach
and obloquy. To yield to a slanderous reviler a serious reply, or to make a
formal plea against his charge, does seem to imply, that we much consider, or
deeply resent it; whereas by pleasant reflection on it we signify, the matter
only deserves contempt, and that we take our selves unconcerned therein. So
easily without care or trouble may the brunts of malice be declined, or
repelled.

6. This way may be allowed in way of counterbalancing, and in compliance to
the fashion of others. It would be a disadvantage unto Truth and Virtue, if
their defenders were barred from the use of this weapon; since it is that
especially whereby the patrons of Error and Vice do maintain and propagate
them. They being destitute of good reason, do usually recommend their absurd
and pestilent notions by a pleasantness of conceit and expression, bewitching
the fancies of shallow hearers, and inveagling heedlesse persons to a liking of
them: and if, for reclaiming such people, the folly of those Seducers may in
the like manner be displayed as ridiculous and odious, why should that
advantage be refused? It is Wit that wageth the war against Reason, against
Virtue, against Religion; Wit alone it is that perverteth so many, and so
greatly corrupts the world: It may therefore be needful, in our warfare for
those dearest concerns, to sort the manner of our fighting with that of our
adversaries, and with the same kind of arms to protect Goodness, whereby they
do assail it. If Wit may happily serve under the banner of Truth and Virtue, we
may impressed it for that service; and good it were to rescue so worthy a faculty
from so vile abuse. It is the right of Reason and Piety, to command that and
all other endowments; Folly and Impiety do only usurp them: just and fit
therefore it is, to wrest them out of so bad hands, to revoke them to their
right use and duty.

It does especially seem requisite to do it in this Age, wherein plain Reason
is deemed a dull and heavy thing. When the mental appetite of men is become
like the corporeal, and cannot relish any food without some piquant sauce, so
that people will rather starve, then live on solid fare; when substantial and
sound discourse finds small attention, or acceptance; in such a time, he that
can may in complaisance, and for fashion's sake, vouchsafe to be facetious; an
ingenious vein coupled with an honest mind may be a good talent; he shall
employ Wit commendably, who by it can further the interests of Goodness,
alluring men first to listen, then inducing them to consent unto its wholesome
dictates and precepts.

Since men are so irreclaimably disposed to mirth and laughter, it may be well
to set them in the right pin, to divert their humor into the proper chanel,
that they may please themselves in deriding things which deserve it, ceasing to
laugh at that which requires reverence or horror.

It may also be expedient to put the world out of conceit, that all sober and
good men are a sort of such lumpish or sour people, that they can utter nothing
but flat and drowzy stuff; by showing them, that such persons, when they see
cause, in condescension, can be as brisk and smart as themselves; when they
please, can speak pleasantly and wittily as well as gravely and judiciously.
This way at least, in respect to the various palates of men, may for variety
sake be sometimes attempted, when other means do fail: when many strict and
subtle arguings, many zealous declamations, many wholesome serious discourses
have been spent, without effecting the extirpation of bad principles, or
conversion of those who abett them; this course may be tried, and some perhaps
may be reclaimed thereby.

7. Furthermore, the warrantableness of this practice in some cases may be
inferred from a parity of reason, in this manner: If it be lawful, (as by the
best authorities it plainly does appear to be,) in using Rhetorical schemes,
Poetical strains, involutions of sense in Allegories, Fables, Parables, and
Riddles, to discoast from the plain and simple way of speech; why may not
Facetiousness, issuing from the same principles, directed to the same ends,
serving to like purposes, be likewise used blamelesly? If those exorbitancies
of speech may be accommodated to instill good Doctrine into the head, to excite
good Passions in the heart, to illustrate and adorn the Truth, in a delightful
and taking way; and facetious discourse be sometime notoriously conducible to
the same ends; why, they being retained, should it be rejected? especially
considering how difficult often it may be, to distinguish those forms of
discourse from this, or exactly to define the limits which sever Rhetoric and
Raillery. Some elegant figures and tropes of Rhetoric (biting Sarcasms, sly
Ironies, strong Metaphors, lofty Hyperbole's, Paronomasies, Oxymorons, and the
like, frequently used by the best speakers, and not seldom even by Sacred
Writers) do lie very near upon the confines of Jocularity, and are not easily
differenced from those sallies of wit, wherein the lepid way does consist: so
that were this wholly culpable, it would be matter of scruple, whether one has
committed a fault or no, when he meant only to play the Orator, or the Poet;
and hard surely it would be to find a judge, who could precisely set out the
difference between a Jest and a Flourish.

8. I shall only add, that of old even the sagest and gravest persons
(persons of most rigid and severe Virtue) did much affect this kind of
discourse, and did apply it to noble purposes. The great introducer of moral
wisdom among the Pagans did practice it so much, (by it repressing the windy
pride and fallacious vanity of Sophisters in his time,) that he thereby got the
name of (...), the Droll: and the rest of those who pursued his design, do by
numberless stories and Apophthegms recorded of them appear well skilled, and
much delighted in this way. Many great Princes, (as Augustus Caesar for one,
many of whose Jests are extant in Macrobius,) many grave Statesmen, (as Cicero
particularly, who composed several books of Jests,) many famous Captains, Cic.
de
(as Fabius M. Cato the Censor, Scipio Africanus, Orat. 2.
Epaminondas, Themistocles, Phocion, and many others, whose witty Sayings
together with their Martial exploits are reported by Historians,) have pleased
themselves herein, and made it a condiment of their weighty businesses. The two
greatest men and gravest Divines of their time, S. Greg. Naz. and S. Basil)
could entertain one another with facetious Epistles. (Greg. Naz. Ep. 7. ad
Basil. (...), etc. Et Ep. 8.)
So that practicing thus (within certain rule and compass) we cannot err
without great patterns, and mighty patrons.

9. In fine, since it cannot be shown, that such a sportfulness of wit and
fancy does contain an intrinsic and inseparable turpitude; since it may be so
cleanly, handsomely and innocently used, as not to defile or discompose the
mind of the speaker, not to wrong or harm the hearer, not to derogate from any
worthy subject of discourse, (...): Chrysostom. (...).
not to infringe decency, to disturb peace, to violate any of the grand duties
incumbent on us, (Piety, Charity, Justice, Sobriety,) but rather sometimes may
yield advantage in those respects; it cannot well absolutely and universally be
condemned: and when not used upon improper matter, in an unfit manner, with
excessive measure, at undue season, to evil purpose, it may be allowed. It is
bad objects, or bad adjuncts, which do spoil its indifference and innocence:
(...): Chrysostom.
it is the abuse thereof, to which (as all pleasant things are dangerous, and
apt to degenerate into baits of intemperance and excess) it is very liable,
that corrupts it; and seems to be the ground, why in so general terms it is
prohibited by the Apostle. Which prohibition to what cases, or what sorts of
Jesting it extends, we come now to declare.

II. 1. All profane Jesting, all speaking loosely and wantonly about Holy
things, (things nearly related to God and Religion,) making such things the
matters of sport and mockery, playing and trifling with them, is certainly
prohibited, as an intolerably-vain and wicked practice. It is an infallible
sign of a vain and light spirit, which considers little, and cannot
distinguish things, to talk slightly concerning persons of high dignity, to
whom especial respect is due; or about matters of great importance, which
deserve very serious consideration. No man speaks, or should speak, of his
Prince that which he has not weighed, whether it will consist with that
veneration which should be preserved inviolate to him: And is not the same, is
not much greater care to be used in regard to the incomparably-great and
glorious Majesty of Heaven? Yes surely: as we should not without great awe
think of him; so we should not presume to mention his Name, his Word, his
Institutions, any thing immediately belonging to him, without profoundest
reverence and dread. It is the most enormous sauciness that can be imagined, to
speak petulantly or pertly concerning Him; especially considering, that
whatever we do say about him, we do utter it in his presence, and to his very
face. Psalm. 139. 4.
For there is not (as the Holy Psalmist considered) a word in my tongue, but
lo, O Lord, thou know it altogether. No man also has the heart to droll, or
thinks raillery convenient in cases nearly touching his life, his health, his
estate, or his fame: and are the true life and health of our Soul, are interest
in God's favor and mercy, are everlasting glory and bliss affairs of less
moment? are the treasures and joys of Paradise, are the damages and torments
in Hell more jesting matters? No certainly, no: in all reason therefore it
becomes us, and it infinitely concerns us, whenever we think of these
things, to be in best earnest, always to speak of them in most sober sadness.

The proper objects of common mirth and sportfull divertisement are mean and
petty matters; any thing at least is by playing therewith made such: great
things are thereby diminished and debased; especially Sacred things do
grievously suffer thence, being with extreme indecency and indignity depressed
beneath themselves, when they become the subjects of flashy wit, or the
entertainments of frothy merriment: to saorifice their honor to our vain
pleasure, being like the ridiculous fondness of that people, which (as Aelian
reports) worshipping a Fly, did offer up an Ox thereto. These things were by
God instituted, and proposed to us for purposes quite different; to compose our
hearts, and settle our fancies in a most serious frame; to breed inward
satisfaction, and joy purely spiritual; to exercise our most solemn thoughts,
and employ our gravest discourses: All our speech therefore about them should
be wholesome, Fir. 2. 8.
apt to afford good instruction, or to excite good affections; Ephesians. 4. 29.
good, (as S. Paul speaks) for the use of edifying; that it may minister
grace unto the hearers.

If we must be facetious and merry, the field is wide and spacious; there are
matters enough in the world beside these most august and dreadful things, to
try our faculties, and please our humor with; everywhere light and ludicrous
things occurr: it therefore does argue a mavelous poverty of wit, and
barrenness of invention, (no less then a strange defect of goodness, and want
of discretion,) in those who can devise no other subjects to frollick upon
beside these, of all most improper and perilous; who cannot seem ingenious
under the charge of so highly trespassing upon decency, disclaiming wisdom,
wounding the ears of others, and their own consciences. Seem ingenious, I say;
for seldom those persons really are such, or are capable to discover any wit
in a wise and manly way. It Is not the excellency of their fancies, which in
themselves usually are sorry and insipid enough, but the uncouthness of their
presumption; not their extraordinary wit, but their prodigious rashness, which
is to be admired. They are gazed on, as the doers of bold tricks, who dare
perform that which no sober man will attempt: they do indeed rather deserve
themselves to be laughed at, then their conceits. For what can be more
ridiculous, then we do make our selves, when we thus fiddle and fool with our
own Souls; when, to make vain people merry, we incense God's earnest
displeasure; when, to raise a fit of present laughter, we expose our selves to
endless wailing and woe; when, to be reckoned Wits, we prove our selves stark
wild? Surely to this case we may accommodate that of a truly-great Wit, King
Solomon; Eccles 2. 2.
I said of laughter, It is mad; and of mirth, What does it?

2. All injurious, abusive, scurrilous Jesting, which causelessly or needlessly
tends to the disgrace, damage, vexation, or prejudice in any kind of our
Neighbor, (provoking his displeasure, grating on his modesty, stirring passion
in him,) -- solutos Qui captat risus hominum, famamque dicacis, Hic niger est.
Hor. S. 1. 4.
is also prohibited. When men, to raise an admiration of their wit, to please
themselves, or gratify the humor of other men, do expose their Neighbor to
scorn and contempt, making ignominious reflections upon his person or his
actions, (...). Arist. Eth. 4. 8.
taunting his real imperfections, or fastening imaginary ones upon him, they
transgress their duty, and abuse their wits; it is not urbanity, or genuine
facetiousnesse, but uncivil rudeness, or vile malignity. To do thus, as it is
the office of mean and base spirits, (unfit for any worthy or weighty
employments,) so it is full of inhumanity, of iniquity, of indecency, and
folly. For the weaknesses of men, of what kind soever, (natural, or moral, in
quality, or in act,) considering whence they spring, and how much we are all
subject to them, and do need excuse for them, do in equity challenge compassion
to be had of them; not complacency to be taken in them, or mirth drawn from
them: they, in respect to common humanity, should rather be studiously connived
at and concealed, or mildly excused, then wilfully laid open, and wantonly
descanted upon; they rather are to be deplored secretly, then openly derided.

The Reputation of men is too noble a sacrifice to be offered up to vainglory,
fond pleasure, or ill humor; it is a good far more dear and precious, then to
be prostituted for idle sport and divertisement. It becomes us not to trifle
with that, which in common estimation is of so great moment; to play rudely
with a thing so very brittle, Vitrea fama. Hor.
yet of so vast price; which being once broken or cracked, it is very hard, and
scarce possible, to repair. A small transient pleasure, a tickling the ears,
wagging the lungs, forming the face into a smile, a giggle or a humme, are not
to be purchased with the grievous distaste and smart, perhaps with the real
damage and mischief, of our Neighbor, which attend upon contempt. Prove. 26.
18, 19. As a mad man who casts firebrands, arrows, and death; so is the man
that deceives his neighbor, and says, Am I not in sport?
This is not Jesting surely, but bad earnest: it is wild mirth, which is the
mother of grief to those whom we should tenderly love; (...) -- LXX.
it is unnatural sport, which breeds displeasure in them whose delight it
should promote, whose liking it should procure: it crosses the nature and
design of this way of speaking; which is, to cement and ingratiate society, to
render conversation pleasant and sprightly, for mutual satisfaction and comfort.

True Festivity is called Salt, and such it should be, giving a smart, but
savoury relish to discourse; exciting an appetite, not irritating disgust;
cleansing sometime, but never creating a sore: Matt. 5. 13.
and, (...), if it become thus insipid, Nimium risus pretium est, si probitatis
impendio constat. Quintil.
or unsavory, it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to
be trodden under foot of men. Such Jesting which does not season wholesome or
harmless discourse, but gives a haut-goust to putid and poisonous stuff,
gratifying distempered palates and corrupt stomachs, is indeed odious and
despicable folly, (...); Chrysostom.
to be cast out with loathing, to be trodden under foot with contempt. If a man
offends in this sort to please himself, it is scurvy malignity; if to delight
others, it is base servility and flattery: upon the first score he is a buffoon
to himself; upon the last, a fool to others. And well in common speech are such
practisers so termed, the grounds of that practice being so vain, and the
effects so unhappy. Eccles 7. 4.
The heart of fools (says the Wiseman) is in the house of mirth; meaning, it
seems, especially such hurtfully-wanton mirth: for it is (as he farther tells
us) the property of fools, to delight in doing harm; (It is a sport to a fool
to do mischief.) Prove 10. 23.
Is it not in earnest most palpable folly, Fools make a mock of sin. Prove. 14.
9.
for so mean ends to do so great harm; Potius amicum quam dictum perdidi.
to disoblige men in sport; to lose friends, and get enemies, for a conceit;
out of a light humor to provoke fierce wrath, -- dummodo risum Excutiat sibi,
non hic cuiquam parcet amico.
and breed tough hatred; Hor. S. 1. 4.
to engage one's self consequently very far in strife, danger, and trouble? No
way certainly is more apt to produce such effects then this; -- dicax idem, and
Tibe^ium acerbis facetiis irridere solitus, quarum apud praepotentes in longum
memoria est. Tac. V. Ann. p. 184.
nothing more speedily enflameth, or more thoroughly enrageth men, or sticks
longer in men's hearts and memories, then bitter taunts and scoffs: whence this
honey soon turns into gall; these jolly Comedies do commonly terminate in woeful
Tragedies.

Especially this scurrilous and scoffing way is then most detestable, when it
not only exposes the blemishes and infirmities of men, but abuses Piety and
Virtue themselves; flouting persons for their constancy in Devotion, or their
strict adherence to a conscientious practice of Duty; aiming to effect that
which Job complains of, The just upright man is laughed to scorn; Job 12. 4.
resembling those whom the Psalmist thus describes, Psalm. 64. 3, 4.
Who whet their tongue like a sword, and bend their arrows, even bitter words,
That they may shoot in secret at the perfect; serving good men as Jeremy was
served, Jer. 20. 8.
The word of the Lord (says he) was made a reproach unto me, and a derision
daily.

This practice does evidently in the highest degree tend to the disparagement
and discouragement of Goodness; (aiming to expose it, and to render men ashamed
thereof;) and it manifestly proceeds from a desperate corruption of mind,
(from a mind hardened and emboldned, sold and enslaved to wickedness:) whence
they who deal therein are in Holy Scripture represented as egregious sinners,
or persons superlatively wicked, under the name of Scorners; ((...), Pests, or
pestilent men, the Greek Translatours call them, properly enough in regard to
the effects of their practice;) concerning whom the Wiseman (signifying how
God will meet with them in their own way) says, Prove. 3. 34.
Surely the Lord scorneth the scorners. 2 Pet. 3. 3.
(...), Scoffers, (or Mockers,) Saint Peter terms them, who walk according to
their own lusts; who not being willing to practice, are ready to deride Virtue;
thereby striving to seduce others into their pernicious courses.

This offense also proportionably grows more criminal, as it presumes to
reach persons eminent in dignity or worth, unto whom special veneration is
appropriate. This adjoyneth sauciness to scurrility, and advances the wrong
thereof into a kind of sacrilege. It Is not only injustice, but profaneness,
Exodus 22. 28.
to abuse the Gods. Their station is a sanctuary from all irreverence and
reproach; they are seated on high, that we may only look up to them with
respect; their defects are not to be seen, or not to be touched by malicious or
wanton wits, by spiteful or scornful tongues: the diminution of their credit
is a public mischief, and the State it self does suffer in their becoming
objects of scorn; not only themselves are vilified and degraded, but the great
affairs they manage are obstructed, the justice they administer is disparaged
thereby.

In fine, (...). Chrysostom. in Ephesians. Or. 17. (...). Idem.
no Jesting is allowable, which is not thoroughly innocent: it is an unworthy
perverting of wit, to employ it in biting and scratching; in working prejudice
to any man's reputation, or interest; in needlessly incensing any man's anger,
or sorrow; in raising animosities, dissensions, and feuds among any.

Whence it is somewhat strange, that any men from so mean and silly a practice
should expect commendation, or that any should afford regard thereto; the which
it is so far from meriting, that indeed contempt and abhorrence are due to it.
Men do truly more render themselves despicable then others, when, without just
ground, or reasonable occasion, they do attaque others in this way. That such a
practice does ever find any encouragement or acceptance, whence can it proceed,
but from the bad nature and small judgment of some persons? For to any man who
is endued with any sense of goodness, and has a competence of true wit, or a
right knowledge of good manners, (who knows -- inurbanum lepido seponere
dicto,) Hor.
it cannot but be unsavory and loathsome. The repute it obtains is in all
respects unjust. So would it appear, not only were the cause to be decided in
the court of morality, because it consists not with Virtue and Wisdom; but
even before any competent judges of wit it self. For he overthrows his own
pretense, and cannot reasonably claim any interest in wit, who does thus behave
himself: he prejudgeth himself to want wit, who cannot descry fit matter to
divert himself or others: he discovers a great straightness and sterility of
good invention, who cannot in all the wide field of things find better subjects
of discourse; who knows not how to be ingenious within reasonable compass, but
to pick up a sorry conceit is forced to make excursions beyond the bounds of
honesty and decency.

Neither is it any argument of considerable ability in him that haps to please
this way: a slender faculty will serve the turn. The sharpness of his speech
comes not from wit so much as from choler, which furnishes the lowest
inventions with a kind of pungent expression, and gives an edge to every
spiteful word: so that any dull wretch does seem to scold eloquently and
ingeniously. Commonly also Satirical taunts do owe their seeming piquancy, not
to the speaker, Obtrectatio and livor pronis auribus accipiuntur: quippe
adulationi foedum crimen servitutis, malignitati falsa speeies libertatis
inest. Tac. Hist. 1. init.
or his words, but to the subject, and the hearers; the matter conspiring with
the bad nature, or the vanity of men, who love to laugh at any rate, and to be
pleased at the expense of other men's repute; conceiting themselves extolled by
the depression of their neighbor, and hoping to gain by his loss. Such
customers they are that maintain the bitter Wits, who otherwise would want
trade, and might go a begging. For commonly they who seem to excel this way,
are miserably flat in other discourse, and most dully serious: they have a
particular unaptnesse to describe any good thing, or commend any worthy person;
being destitute of right Idea's, and proper terms answerable to such purposes:
their representations of that kind are absurd and unhandsome; their Elogies (to
use their own way of speaking) are in effect Satyrs, and they can hardly more
abuse a man then by attempting to commend him; like those in the Prophet, Jer.
4. 22.
who were wise to do ill, but to do well had no knowledge.

3. I pass by, that it is very culpable to be facetious in obscene and smutty
matters. Such things are not to be discoursed on either in jest, or in earnest;
they must not, as S. Paul says, be so much as named among Christians: Ephesians. 5.
3.
to meddle with them is not to disport, but to defile one's self, and others.
There is indeed no more certain sign of a mind utterly debauched from Piety and
Virtue, then affecting such talk. But farther,

4. All unseasonable Jesting is blameable. As there are some proper seasons of
relaxation, Vitandum ne petulans, ne superbum, ne loco, ne tempori alienum, ne
praeparatum and do^^ allatum videatur. Quint.
when we may desipere in loco; so are there some times, and circumstances of
things, wherein it concerns and becomes men to be serious in mind, grave in
demeanor, and plain in discourse; when to sport in this way is to do
indecently, or uncivilly, to be impertinent, or troublesome.

It comporteth not well with the presence of Superiors, before whom it
becomes us to be composed and modest: much less with the performance of
Sacred offices, which require an earnest attention, and most serious frame of
mind.

In deliberations and debates about affairs of great importance, (...). Eurip.
Arist. Pol. 2. 4.
the simple manner of speaking to the point is the proper, easy, clear and
compendious way: facetious speech there serves only to obstruct and entangle
business, to lose time, and protract the result. The Shop and Exchange will
scarce endure Jesting in their lower transactions: the Senate, the Court of
justice, the Church do much more exclude it from their more weighty
consultations. Whenever it justleth out, or hinders the dispatch of other
serious business, taking up the room, or swallowing the time due to it, or
indisposing the minds of the audience to attend it, then it is unseasonable and
pestilent. (...), Arist. Eth. 10. 6.
To play, that we may be seriously busy, is the good rule (of Anacharsis,)
implying the subordination of sport to business, as a condiment, and
furtherance, not an impediment or clog thereto. He that for his sport neglects
his business, deserves indeed to be reckoned among children; and childrens
fortune will attend him, to be pleased with toys, and to fail of substantial
profit.

It Is, again, improper (because indeed uncivil, and inhumane) to jest with
persons that are in a sad or afflicted condition; Adversus miseros inhumanus
est jocus. Quint.
as arguing want of due considering, or due commiserating their case: it
appears a kind of insulting upon their misfortune, and is apt to foment their
grief. Even in our own case (upon any disastrous occurrence to our selves) it
would not be seemly to frollick it thus; it would signify want of due regard to
the frowns of God, and the strokes of his hand; it would cross the Wise-man's
advice, In the day of prosperity be joyful, Eccles 7. 14.
but in the day of adversity consider.

It is also not seasonable, or civil, to be jocund in this way with those who
desire to be serious, and like not the humor. Jocularity should not be
forcibly obtruded, but by a kindly conspiracy (or tacit compact) slip into
conversation: consent and complaisance give all the life thereto. Its design is
to sweeten and ease society: when to the contrary it breeds offense or
encumbrance, it is worse then vain and unprofitable. From these instances we
may collect when in other like cases it is unseasonable, and therefore
culpable. Farther,

5. To affect, admire, or highly to value this way of speaking, (either
absolutely in it self, or in comparison to the serious and plain way of
speech,) and thence to be drawn into an immoderate use thereof, is blameable. A
man of ripe age, and sound judgment, for refreshment to himself, or in
complaisance to others, may sometimes condescend to play in this, or any other
harmless way: but to be fond of it, to prosecute it with a careful or
painful eagerness, to dote and dwell upon it, to reckon it a brave or fine
thing, a singular matter of commendation, a transcendent accomplishment,
any-wise preferrable to rational endowments, or comparable to the moral
excellencies of our mind, (to solid Knowledge, or sound Wisdom, or true Virtue
and Goodness,) this is extremely childish, or brutish, and far below a man.
What can be more absurd, then to make a business of play, to be studious or
laborious in toys, to make a profession or drive a trade of impertinency? what
more plain nonsense can there be, then to be earnest in jest, to be continual
in divertisement, or constant in pastime; (...). Arist. Eth. x. 6.
to make extravagance all our way, and sauce all our diet? Is not this plainly
the life of a child, that is ever busy, yet never has any thing to do? or
the life of that mimical brute, which is always active in playing uncouth and
unlucky tricks; which, could it speak, might surely pass well for a professed
Wit?

The proper work of Man, the grand drift of humane life, is to follow Reason,
(that noble spark kindled in us from Heaven; that Princely and powerful
faculty, which is able to reach so lofty objects, and to atchieve so mighty
works;) not to sooth fancy, that brutish, shallow, and giddy power, able to
perform nothing worthy much regard. Neque enim it a generati a natura sumus, ut
ad ludum jocumque facti videamur; sed ad severitatem potius, and ad quaedam
studia graviora, atque majora. Cic. Off. 1.
We are not (even Cicero could tell us) born for play and jesting; but for
severity, and the study of graver and greater affairs. Yes, we were purposely
designed, and fitly framed, to understand and contemplate, to affect and
delight in, to undertake and pursue most noble and worthy things; to be
employed in business considerably profitable to our selves, and beneficial to
others: We do therefore strangely debase our selves, when we do strongly bend
our minds to, or set our affections upon such toys.

Especially to do so is unworthy of a Christian; that is of a person who is
advanced to so high a rank, and so glorious relations; who has so excellent
objects of his mind and affections presented before him, and so excellent
rewards for his care and pains proposed to him; who is engaged in affairs of so
worthy nature, and so immense consequence: for him to be zealous about
quibbles, for him to be ravished with puny conceits and expressions, it is a
wondrous oversight, and an enormous indecency.

He indeed that prefers any faculty to Reason, disclaims the privilege of being
a Man, and understands not the worth of his own Nature: he that prizes any
quality beyond Virtue and Goodness, renounces the title of a Christian, and
knows not how to value the dignity of his profession. It is these two (Reason
and Virtue) in conjunction, which produce all that is considerably good and
great in the world. Fancy can do little; does never any thing well, except as
directed and wielded by them. Do pretty conceits or humourous talk carry on any
business, or perform any work? No; they are ineffectual and fruitless: often
they disturb, but they never dispatch any thing with good success. (...). Bas.
Constable. Mon. 12.
It is simple Reason (as dull and dry as it seems) which expediteth all the
grand affairs, which accomplisheth all the mighty works that we see done in the
world. In truth therefore, as one Diamond is worth numberless bits of Glass;
so one solid Reason is worth innumerable Fancies: (...). Ibid. Iocorum frequens
usus omne animis pondus, omnemque vim erip^et. Sen. de Tranq. c. 15. (...).
Chrysostom. in Ephesians. 17.
one grain of true Science and sound Wisdom in real worth and use does
outweigh loads (if any loads can be) of freakish Wit. To rate things otherwise,
does argue great weakness of judgment, and fondness of mind. So to conceit of
this way, signifies a weak mind; and much to delight therein, renders it so:
nothing more debaseth the spirit of a man, or more renders it light and
trifling.

Hence if we must be venting pleasant conceits, we should do it as if we did
it not, carelessly and unconcernedly; not standing upon it, or valuing our
selves for it: we should do it with measure and moderation; not giving up our
selves thereto, so as to mind it, or delight in it more then in any other
thing: we should not be so intent upon it, as to become remiss in affairs more
proper or needful for us; so as to nauseate serious business, or disrelish
the more worthy entertainments of our minds. This is the great danger of it,
which we daily see men to incurr; they are so bewitched with a humor of being
witty themselves, or of harkening to the fancies of other* that it is this
only which they can like or savor, which they can endure to think or talk of.
It Is a great pity, that men who would seem to have so much wit, should so
little understand themselves. But farther,

6. Vainglorious ostentation this way is very blameable. All ambition, all
vanity, all conceitednesse, upon whatever ground they are founded, are
absolutely unreasonable and silly: but yet those, being grounded on some real
ability, or some useful skill, are wise and manly in comparison to this, which
stands on a foundation so manifestly slight and weak. The old Philosophers by
a severe Father were called animalia gloriae, Tertull.
animals of glory; and by a Satirical Poet they were termed bladders of vanity:
(...) Timon.
but they at least did catch at praise from praiseworthy knowledge; they were
puffed up with a wind which blowed some good to mankind; they sought glory from
that which deserved glory if they had not sought it; it was a substantial and
solid credit which they did affect, resulting from successful enterprises of
strong reason, and stout industry: Risus -- tenuissimus ingenii fructus. Cic.
de Orat. 2.
but these animalcula gloriae, these flies, these insects of glory, these, not
bladders, but bubbles of vanity, would be admired and praised for that which is
no-wise admirable or laudable; for the casual hits and emergencies of roving
fancy; for stumbling on an odd conceit or phrase, which signifies nothing, and
is as superficial as the smile, as hollow as the noise it causes. Nothing
certainly in nature is more ridiculous then a self-conceited Wit, who deemeth
himself somebody, and greatly pretends to commendation on from so pitiful
and worthless a thing as a knack of trifling.

7. Lastly, It is our duty never so far to engage our selves in this way, as
thereby to lose or to impair that habitual seriousness, modesty, and sobriety
of mind, that steady composedness, gravity, and constancy of demeanor, which
become Christians. We should continually keep our minds intent upon our high
calling, and grand interests; ever well tuned, and ready for the performance of
holy Devotions, and the practice of most serious duties with earnest attention
and fervent affection: Wherefore we should never suffer them to be dissolved
into levity, or disordered into a wanton frame, indisposing us for religious
thoughts and actions. We ought always in our behavior to maintain, not only
(...), a fitting decency, Phil. 4. 8.
but also (...), 1 Timothy 3. 8.
a stately gravity, a kind of venerable majesty, suitable to that high rank
which we bear of God's Friends, and Children; Tit. 2. 10. Dictum potius
aliquando perdet, quam minuet autoritatem.
adorning our holy profession, and guarding us from all impressions of sinful
vanity. Wherefore we should not let our selves be transported into any
excessive pitch of lightness, Quint. 6. 3.
inconsistent with or prejudicial to our Christian state and business. Gravity
and Modesty are the fences of Piety, which being once slighted, sin will easily
attempt and encroach upon us. So the old Spanish Gentleman may be interpreted
to have been wise, who, when his Son upon a voyage to the Indies took his leave
of him, Strad. Infam. Famiani.
gave him this odd advice; My son, in the first place keep thy Gravity, in the
next place fear God: intimating, that a man must first be serious, before he
can be pious.

To conclude, as we need not be demure, so must we not be impudent; as we
should not be sour, so ought we not to be fond; as we may be free, so we should
not be vain; as we may well stoop to friendly complaisance, so we should take
heed of falling into contemptible levity. If without wronging others, or
derogating from our selves, we can be facetious; if we can use our wits in
jesting innocently, and conveniently; we may sometimes do it: but let us, in
compliance with S. Paul's direction, beware of foolish talking and jesting,
which are not convenient.

Now the God of grace and peace -- make us perfect in every good work to do
his will, Heb. 13. 20, 91.
working in us that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ,
to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

The Third Sermon.
S. JAMES 5. 12. But above all things, my brethren, Swear not.
AMong other Precepts of Good life (directing the practice of Virtue, and
abstinence from Sin) S. James does insert this about Swearing, couched in
expression denoting his great earnestness, and apt to excite our special
attention. Therein he does not mean universally to interdict the use of Oaths;
(for that in some cases is not only lawful, but very expedient, yea needful,
and required from us as a Duty;) but that Swearing which our Lord had expressly
prohibited to his Disciples, and which thence, questionless, the brethren to
whom S. James did write did well understand themselves obliged to forbear,
having learnt so in the first Catechisms of Christian institution; that is,
needless and heedlesse Swearing in ordinary conversation: a practice then
frequented in the world, both among Jews and Gentiles; the which also, to the
shame of our Age, is now so much in fashion, and with some men in vogue; the
invoking God's Name, appealing to his testimony, and provoking his judgment,
upon any slight occasion, in common talk, with vain incogitancy, or profane
boldness. From such practice the Holy Apostle dehorteth in terms importing his
great concernednesse, and implying the matter to be of highest importance: for,
(...), says he, Before all things, my brethren, do not swear; as if he did
apprehend this sin of all other to be one of the most heinous and pernicious.
Could he have said more? would he have said so much, if he had not conceived
the matter to be of exceeding weight and consequence? And that it is so, I mean
now, by God's help, to show you, by proposing some Considerations, whereby the
heinous wickedness, together with the monstrous folly, of such rash and vain
Swearing will appear; the which being laid to heart will, I hope, effectually
dissuade and deterr from it.

I. Let us consider the nature of an Oath, and what we do when we adventure to
swear.

It is (as it is phrased in the Decalogue, and other-where in Holy Scripture)
an assuming the Name of our God, Exodus 20. 7.
and applying it to our purpose, Prove. 30. 9.
to countenance and confirm what we say.

It is an invocation of God as a most faithful Witness, Genesis 31. 50.
concerning the truth of our words, Jud. 11. 10.
or the sincerity of our meaning. 1 Samuel 12. 5.
Jer. 42. 5.
Job 16. 19.
Mal. 3. 5.
1 John 5. 9.
Plurima firmantur jurejurando -- diis immortalibus interpositis tum judicibus,
tum testibus. Cic. de Leg. 2. p. 326.


It is an appeal to God as a most upright Judge, Genesis 31. 53.
whether we do prevaricate in asserting what we do not believe true, 1 Samuel 24.
15.
or in promising what we are not firmly resolved to perform.

It is a formal engagement of God to be the Avenger of our trespassing in
violation of truth or faith. 1 King. 8. 31, 32. and 2. 23. and 19. 2. and 20.
10. Neh. 5. 12, 13. Ruth 1. 17. 2 King. 6. 31. 2 Samuel 3. 9, 35. and 19. 13. 1 Samuel 14. 44. and 3. 17. and 20. 13.


It is a binding our souls with a most strict and solemn obligation, Number. 30.
2. (...). Plut. in Capit. Romans (p. 491.)
to answer before God, and to undergo the issue of his judgment about what we
affirm, or undertake.

Such an Oath is represented to us in Holy Scripture.

Whence we may collect, that Swearing ever does require great modesty and
composedness of spirit, very serious consideration and solicitous care, that
we be not rude and saucy with God, in taking up his Name, and prostituting it
to vile or mean uses; that we do not abuse or debase his Authority, by eiting
it to averr falsehoods, or impertinencies; that we do not slight his venerable
Justice, by rashly provoking it against us; that we do not precipitantly throw
our Souls into most dangerous snares and intricacies.

For, let us reflect and consider: What a presumption is it, without due regard
and reverence to lay hold on God's Name; with unhallowed breath to vent and
toss that great and glorious, Psalm. 99. 3. and 111. 9. and 148. 13.
that most holy, that reverend, that fearful and terrible Name of the Lord our
God, Deuteronomy. 28. 58.
the great Creator, the mighty Sovereign, the dreadful Judge of all the
world; that Name which all Heaven with profoundest submission does adore, which
the Angelical powers, the brightest and purest Seraphim, without hiding their
faces, Isa. 6. 2.
and reverential horror, Chrysostom. (...).
cannot utter or hear; the very thought whereof should strike awe through our
hearts, the mention whereof would make any sober man to tremble? Chrysostom. (...).
p. 514.
(...), For how (says S. Chrysostom) is it not absurd, that a servant should
not dare to call his Master by name, or bluntly and ordinarily to mention him;
yet that we slightly and contemptuously should in our mouth toss about the
Lord of Angels?

How is it not absurd, Id. (...). p. 525.
if we have a garment better then the rest, that we forbear to use it
continually; but in the most slight and common way do wear the Name of God?

How grievous indecency is it, at every turn to summon our Maker, and call down
Almighty God from Heaven, to attend our pleasure, to vouch our idle prattle, to
second our giddy passions, to concern his Truth, his Justice, his Power in our
trivial affairs?

What a wildness is it, to dally with that Judgment upon which the eternal
doom of all creatures depends, at which the pillars of heaven are astonished,
Job 26. 11.
which hurled down legions of Angels from the top of Heaven and happiness into
the bottomless dungeon; the which, as grievous sinners, of all things we have
most reason to dread; and about which no sober man can otherwise think, then
did that great King, the Holy Psalmist, Psalm. 119. 120.
who said, My flesh trembles for thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments?

How prodigious a madness is it, without any constraint or needful cause to
incurr so horrible danger, to rush upon a curse; to defy that vengeance, the
least touch or breath whereof can dash us to nothing, or thrust us down into
extreme and endless woe?

Who can express the wretchedness of that folly, which so entangleth us with
inextricable knots, and enchaineth our Souls so rashly with desperate
obligations?

Wherefore he that would but a little mind what he does when he dares to
swear, what it is to meddle with the adorable Name, the venerable Testimony,
the formidable Judgment, the terrible Vengeance of the Divine Majesty, into
what a case he puts himself, how extreme hazard he runs thereby, would
assuredly have little heart to swear, without greatest reason, and most urgent
need; hardly without trembling would he undertake the most necessary and solemn
Oath; much cause would he see (...), to adore, to fear an Oath: which to do
the Divine Preacher makes the character of a Good man; Eccles 9. 26
As (says he) is the good, so is the sinner, and he that swears, as he that
fears an oath.

In fine, even a Heathen Philosopher, considering the nature of an Oath, did
conclude the unlawfulness thereof in such cases. (...), etc. Simpl. in Epict.
cap. 44.
For, Seeing (says he) an Oath does call God for Witness, and proposes him
for Umpire and Voucher of the things it says; therefore to induce God so upon
occasion of humane affairs, or, which is all one, upon small and slight
accounts, does imply contempt of him: wherefore we ought wholly to shun
Swearing, except upon occasions of highest necessity.

II. We may consider, that Swearing (agreeably to its nature, or natural
aptitude and tendency) is represented in Holy Scripture as a special part of
religious Worship, or Devotion toward God; in the due performance whereof we do
avow him for the true God, and Governor of the world; we piously do
acknowledge his principal Attributes, and special Prerogatives; (his
Omnipresence and his Omniscience, extending it self to our most inward
thoughts, our secretest purposes, our closest retirements; his watchful
Providence over all our actions, affairs, and concerns; his faithful
Goodness, in favoring truth, and protecting right; his exact Justice, in
patronizing sincerity, and chastizing perfidiousnesse;) his being Supreme Lord
over all persons, and Judge paramount in all causes; his readiness in our
need, upon our humble imploration and reference, (...). It is a pious thing
willingly to commend our case or controversy to God. Arist. Rhet. 1. 48.
to undertake the arbitration of matters controverted, and the care of
administering justice, for the maintenance of truth and right, of loyalty and
fidelity, of order and peace among men. Swearing does also intimate a pious
trust and confidence in God; as Aristotle observes.

Such things a serious Oath does imply, to such purposes Swearing naturally
serves; and therefore to signify or effectuate them, Divine institution has
devoted it.

God in goodness to such ends has pleased to lend us his great Name, allowing
us to cite him for a Witness, to have recourse to his Bar, to engage his
Justice and Power, whenever the case deserves and requires it, or when we
cannot by other means well assure the sincerity of our meaning, or secure the
constancy of our resolutions.

Yea in such exigencies he does exact this practice from us, as an instance of
our religious confidence in him, and as a service conducible to his glory: For
it is a Precept in his Law, of moral nature, Deuteronomy. 10. 20. and 6. 13.
and eternal obligation, Thou shall fear the Lord thy God; him shall thou
serve, and to him shall thou cleave, and shall swear by his Name. It is the
character of a religious man, to swear with due reverence and upright
conscience. For, Psalm. 63. 11.
The King (says the Psalmist) shall rejoice in God; every one that swears by
him shall glory: but the mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped. It is
a distinctive mark of God's people, according to that of the Prophet Jeremy,
Jer. 12. 16.
And it shall come to pass, if they will diligently learn the ways of my
people, to swear by my Name -- then shall they be built in the midst of my
people. It is predicted concerning the Evangelical times, Isa. 45. 23.
Unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear: Isa. 65. 16.
and, That he who blesses himself in the earth, shall bless himself by the
God of truth; and he that swears in the earth, shall swear by the God of
truth.

As therefore all other acts of Devotion, wherein immediate application is made
to the Divine Majesty, should never be performed without most hearty intention,
most serious consideration, most lowly reverence; so neither should this grand
one, wherein God is so nearly touched, and his chief Attributes so much
concerned: the which indeed does involve both Prayer and Praise, does require
the most devotional acts of Faith and Fear.

We therefore should so perform it, as not to incurr that reproof; Matthew. 15. 8.
This people draws nigh unto me with their mouth, Isa. 29. 13.
and honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.

When we seem most formally to avow God, to confess his Omniscience, to
confide in his Justice; we should not really disregard him, and in effect
signify, that we do not think he does know what we say, or mind what we do.

If we do presume to offer this service, we should do it in the manner
appointed by himself, according to the conditions prescribed in the Prophet,
Jer. 4. 2.
Thou shall swear, The Lord lives, in truth, in judgment, and in
righteousness: in truth, taking heed, that our meaning be conformable to the
sense of our words, and our words to the verity of things; in judgment, having
with careful deliberation examined and weighed that which we assert or
promise; in righteousness, being satisfied in conscience, that we do not
therein infringe any rule of Piety toward God, of Equity toward men, of
Sobriety and discretion in regard to our selves.

The cause of our Swearing must be needful, or very expedient; the design of
it must be honest, and useful to considerable purposes; (tending to God's
honor, our Neighbor's benefit, our own welfare;) the matter of it should be
not only just and lawful, but worthy and weighty; the manner ought to be
grave and solemn, our mind being framed to earnest attention, and endued with
pious affections suitable to the occasion.

Otherwise, if we do venture to swear, without due advice and care, without
much respect and awe, upon any slight or vain (not to say, bad or unlawful)
occasion; we then desecrate Swearing, and are guilty of profaning a most sacred
Ordinance: the doing so does imply base hypocrisy, Matthew. 15. 7, 8.
or lewd mockery, or abominable wantonness and folly; in boldly invading, and
vainly trifling with the most august Duties of Religion. Such Swearing
therefore is very dishonorable and injurious to God, very prejudicial to
Religion, very repugnant to Piety.

III. We may consider that the Swearing prohibited is very noxious to humane
Society.

The great prop of Society (which upholdeth the safety, peace and welfare
thereof, in observing laws, dispensing justice, discharging trusts, keeping
contracts, and holding good correspondence mutually) is Conscience, or a sense
of Duty toward God, obliging to perform what is right and equal; quickened by
hope of rewards, and fear of punishments from him: secluding which principle,
no worldly consideration is strong enough to hold men fast; or can farther
dispose many to do right, or observe faith, or hold peace, then appetite, or
interest, or humor (things very slippery and uncertain) do sway them.

That men should live honestly, quietly, and comfortably together, it is
needful that they should live under a sense of God's will, and in awe of the
Divine power, hoping to please God, and fearing to offend him, by their
behavior respectively.

That Justice should be administered between men, it is necessary that
testimonies of fact be alleged; and that witnesses should apprehend themselves
greatly obliged to discover the truth, according to their conscience, in dark
and doubtful cases.

That men should uprightly discharge offices serviceable to public good, it
does behove that they be firmly engaged to perform the trusts reposed in them.

That in affairs of very considerable importance, men should deal with one
another with satisfaction of mind, and mutual confidence, they must receive
competent assurances concerning the integrity, fidelity, and constancy each of
other.

That the safety of Governors may be preserved, and the obedience due to them
maintained secure from attempts to which they are liable, (by the treachery,
levity, perverseness, timorousness, ambition, all such lusts and ill humors of
men,) it is expedient that men should be tied with the strictest bands of
allegiance.

That controversies emergent about the interests of men should be determined,
and an end put to strife by peremptory and satisfactory means, is plainly
necessary for common quiet.

Wherefore for the public interest, and benefit of humane Society, it is
requisite, that the highest obligations possible should be laid upon the
Consciences of men.

And such are those of Oaths, engaging them to fidelity and constancy in all
such cases, out of regard to Almighty God, as the infallible Patron of truth
and right, the unavoidable Chastiser of perfidiousnesse and improbity.

To such purposes therefore Oaths have ever been applied, as the most effectual
instruments of working them; not only among the followers of true and perfect
Religion, but even among all those who had any glimmering notions concerning a
Divine Power and Providence; who have deemed an Oath the fastest tie of
Conscience, and held the violation of it for the most detestable impiety and
iniquity. So that what Cicero says of the Romans, that their Ancestors had no
band to constrain faith more straight then an Oath, Nullum enim vinculum ad
astringendam fidem jurejurando majores arctius esse voluerunt. Cic. de Off. 3.
Dion. Halic. Procop. Diod. Sic.
is true of all other Nations; common Reason not being able to devise any
engagement more obliging then it; it being in the nature of things (...), and
(...), the utmost assurance, the last resort of humane faith, the surest pledge
that any man can yield of his trustiness. Hence ever in transactions of
highest moment this has been used to bind the faith of men.

Hereby Nations have been wont to ratify Leagues of peace and amity between
each other: (...). Polyb.
(which therefore the Greeks called (...).)

Hereby Princes have obliged their Subjects to loyalty: and it has ever been
the strongest argument to press that duty, which the Preacher uses; I counsel
thee to keep the King's commandment, Eccles. 8. 2.
and that in regard of the Oath of God.

Hereby Generals have engaged their Soldiers to stick close to them, Veget. 2.
in bearing hardships, and encountering dangers.

Hereby the Nuptial league has been confirmed; the solemnization whereof in
temples before God is in effect a most sacred Oath.

Hereon the decision of the greatest causes concerning the lives, estates and
reputations of men have depended; so that (as the Apostle says) an Oath for
confirmation is to them an end of all strife. Heb. 6. 16.


Indeed such has the need hereof been ever apprehended, that we may observe,
in cases of great importance, no other obligation has been admitted for
sufficient to bind the fidelity and constancy of the most credible persons; so
that even the best men hardly could trust the best men without it. For instance,

When Abimelech would assure to himself the friendship of Abraham, although he
knew him to be a very pious and righteous person, whose word might be as well
taken as any man's, yet, for entire satisfaction, he thus spoke to him; Genesis
21. 22, 23.
God is with thee in all that thou do: Now therefore swear unto me here by
God, that thou will not deal falsely with me.

Abraham, though he did much confide in the honesty of his servant Eliezer,
Genesis 15. 3. and 24. 2.
having entrusted him with all his estate, yet in the affair concerning the
marriage of his son, he could not but thus oblige him: Genesis 24. 2, 3.
Put, (said he) I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh, and I will make thee
swear by the Lord, the God of heaven and the God of earth, that thou will not
take a wife unto my son of the daughters of the Canaanites.

Laban had good experience of Jacob' s fidelity; yet that would not satisfy,
Genesis 31. 49, 50, 53.
but, The Lord (said he) watch between me and thee, when we are absent one from
another. If thou shall afflict my daughters, or if thou shall take other wives
beside my daughters; no man is with us; see, God is witness between thee and
me. The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, the God of their father judge
betwixt us.

So did Jacob make Joseph swear, Genesis 50. 5.
that he would bury him in Canaan: Genesis 50. 25.
and Joseph caused the children of Israel to swear, that they would translate
his bones. So did Jonathan cause his beloved friend David to swear, 1 Samuel 20.
14, 15, 17.
that he would show kindness to him, and to his house for ever. The prudence
of which course the event shows, the total excision of Jonathan' s family
being thereby prevented; 2 Samuel 21. 7.
for, The King ('it is said) spared Mephibosheth the son of Jonathan, because of
the Lord's Oath that was between them.

These instances declare, that there is no security which men can yield
comparable to that of an Oath; (1 King. 1. 51. Ezr. 10. 5. Neh. 5. 12. and 13.
25.)
the obligation whereof no man wilfully can infringe, without renouncing the
fear of God, and any pretense to his favor.

Wherefore humane Society will be extremely wronged and damnified by the
dissolving or slackning these most sacred bands of Conscience; and consequently
by their common and careless use, which soon will breed a contempt of them,
and render them insignificant, either to bind the Swearers, or to ground a
trust on their Oaths.

As by the rare and reverent use of Oaths their dignity is upheld, and their
obligation kept fast: so by the frequent and negligent application of them, by
the prostituting them to every mean and toyish purpose, their respect will be
quite lost, their strength will be loosed, they will prove unserviceable to
public use.

If Oaths generally become cheap and vile, what will that of Allegiance
signify? If men are wont to play with Swearing any-where, can we expect they
should be serious and strict therein at the Bar, or in the Church? Will they
regard God's testimony, or dread his judgment, in one place, or at one time,
when everywhere upon any, upon no occasion they dare to confront and contemn
them? Who then will be the more trusted for Swearing? what satisfaction will
any man have from it? The rifenesse of this practice, as it is the sign, so it
will be the cause of a general diffidence among men.

Incredible therefore is the mischief which this vain practice will bring in to
the public; depriving Princes of their best security, exposing the estates of
private men to uncertainty, shaking all the confidence men can have in the
faith of one another.

For which detriments accruing from this abuse to the public every vain
Swearer is responsible; and he would do well to consider, that he will never
be able to make reparation for them. And the public is much concerned that
this enormity be retrenched.

IV. Let us consider, that rash and vain Swearing is very apt often to bring
the practiser of it into that most horrible sin of Perjury. For (...). Philo in
Decal. Ne quisquam facili juratione etiam ad perjurium decidisset, and in
Ecclesia populo praedicabat, and suos instituerat, ne quis juraret nec ad
modicum quidem. Posid. in Vit. S. Aug. c. 25.
false swearing (as the Hebrew Wiseman says) naturally springs out of much
swearing: (...), etc. Chrysostom. (...). p. 553. (...), quidam legunt, Jac. 5. 12.
Vid. Grot. (...). Ib.
and, He (says Saint Chrysostom) that swears continually, both willingly
and unwillingly, both ignorantly and knowingly, both in earnest and in sport,
being often transported by anger and many other things, will frequently
forswear. It is confessed and manifest, that it is necessary for him that
swears much, to be perjurious. (...), For (says he again,) it is impossible,
(...). Chrysostom. (...). p. 559.
it is impossible for a mouth addicted to swearing, not frequently to forswear.
He that swears at random, as blind passion moves, or wanton fancy prompteth,
or the Tempter suggesteth, often will hit upon asserting that which is false,
or promising that which is impossible: that want of Conscience and of
consideration which do suffer him to violate God's Law in Swearing, will betray
him to the venting of Lies, which backed with Oaths become Perjuries. If
sometime what he swears does happen to be true and performable, it does not
free him of guilt; it being his fortune, rather then his care or conscience,
which keeps him from Perjury.

V. Such Swearing commonly will induce a man to bind himself by Oath to
unlawful practices; and consequently will entangle him in a woeful necessity,
either of breaking his Oath, or of doing worse, and committing wickedness:
(...). Chrysostom. ibid. p. 553.
so that Swearing (as S. Chrysostom says) has this misery attending it, that
both transgressed and observed it plagueth those who are guilty of it.

Of this perplexity the Holy Scripture affords two notable instances: the one
of Saul, (1 Samuel 25. 22. David.) (...). Matt. 14. 9.
forced to break his rash Oaths; the other of Herod, being engaged thereby to
commit a most horrid murder.

Had Saul observed his Oaths, what injury had he done, what mischief had he
produced, in slaughtering his most worthy and most innocent Son, the prop and
glory of his family, the bulwark of his country, Vid. Chrysostom. (...).
and the grand instrument of salvation to it; in forcing the people to violate
their cross Oath, 1 Samuel 14. 45.
and for prevention of one, causing many Perjuries? He was therefore fain to
desist, and lie under the guilt of breaking his Oaths.

And for Herod, the excellent Father thus presses the consideration of his
case: (...). p. 552.
Take, (says he) I beseech you, the chopp'd-off head of S. John, and his warm
blood yet trickling down; each of you bear it home with you, and conceive that
before your eyes you hear it uttering speech, and saying, Embrace the murderer
of me, an Oath. That which reproof did not, this an Oath did do; that which
the Tyrant's wrath could not, this the necessity of keeping an Oath did effect.
For when the Tyrant was reprehended publicly in the audience of all men, he
bravely did bear the rebuke; but when he had cast himself into the necessity of
Oaths, then did he cut off that blessed head.

VI. Likewise the use of rash Swearing will often engage a man in undertakings
very inconvenient and detrimental to himself. A man is bound to perform his
vows to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 23. 21.
whatever they be, Matt. 5. 33.
whatever damage or trouble thence may accrue to him, Psalm. 66. 13, 14.
if they be not unlawful. Deuteronomy. 23. 23.
It is the Law, That which is gone out of thy lips, thou shall keep and
perform. It is the property of a Good man, Psalm. 15. 4.
that he swears to his own hurt, and changes not. Wherefore it is the part of
a sober man, to be well advised what he does swear or vow religiously; that he
do not put himself into the inextricable straight of committing great sin, or
undergoing great inconvenience; that he do not rush into that snare of which
the Wiseman speaks, Prove. 20. 25. (...), etc. Chrysostom. (...).
It is a snare to a man to devour that which is holy, (or, to swallow a sacred
obligation,) and after vows to make inquiry, seeking how he may disengage
himself: the doing which is a folly offensive to God, as the Preacher tells
us; Eccles 5. 4.
When (says he) thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for he has
no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou have vowed. God will not admit our
folly in vowing, as a plea or an excuse for nonperformance; he will exact it
from us both as a due debt; and as a proper punishment of our impious folly.

For instance, into what loss and mischief, what sorrow, what regret and
repentance, did the unadvised vow of Jephtha throw him? the performance whereof
(as S. Chrysostom remarketh) God did permit, Chrysostom. (...).
and order to be commemorated with solemn lamentation, that all posterity might
be admonished thereby, and deterred from such precipitant Swearing.

VII. Let us consider, that Swearing is a sin of all others peculiarly
clamorous, and provocative of Divine judgment. God is hardly so much concerned,
or in a manner constrained, to punish any other sin as this. He is bound in
honor and interest to vindicate his Name from the abuse, his Authority from
the contempt, his holy Ordinance from the profanation, which it does infer. He
is concerned to take care that his providence be not questioned, that the dread
of his Majesty be not voided, that all Religion be not overthrown by the
outrageous commission thereof with impunity.

It immediately touches his Name, it expressly calls upon him to mind it, to
judge it, to show himself in avenging it. He may seem deaf, or unconcerned, if,
being so called and provoked, he does not declare himself.

There is understood to be a kind of formal compact between him and mankind,
obliging him to interpose, to take the matter into his cognizance, being
specially addressed to him.

The bold Swearer does importune him to hear, does rouse him to mark, does
brave him to judge and punish his wickedness.

Hence no wonder that the flying roll, Zech. 5. 2, etc.
a quick and inevitable curse, does surprise the Swearer, Chrysostom. (...)* 9. p.
525. 15. p. 565. 19. p. 591.
and cut him off, as it is in the Prophet. No wonder that so many remarkable
instances do occurr in history, of signal vengeance inflicted on persons
notably guilty of this crime. No wonder that a common practice thereof does
fetch down public judgments; and that, as the Prophets of old did proclaim,
Jer. 23. 10.
because of Swearing the land mourns. Hos. 4. 3.


VIII. Farther, (passing over the special laws against it, the mischievous
consequences of it, the sore punishments appointed to it,) we may consider,
that to common sense vain Swearing is a very unreasonable and ill-favored
practice, greatly misbecoming any sober, worthy, or honest person; but
especially most absurd and incongruous to a Christian.

For in ordinary conversation what needful or reasonable occasion can
intervene of violating this command? If there come under discourse a matter of
reason, which is evidently true and certain, then what need can there be of an
Oath to affirm it, it sufficing to expose it to light, or to propose the
evidences for it? If an obscure or doubtful point come to be debated, it will
not bear an Oath; it will be a strange madness to dare, a great folly to hope
the persuading it thereby. What were more ridiculous, then to swear the truth
of a demonstrable Theorem? what more vain, then so to assert a disputable
Problem? Oaths (like wagers) are in such cases no arguments, except of
silliness in the users of them.

If a matter of history be started, then if a man be taken for honest, his word
will pass for attestation, without farther assurance: but if his veracity or
probity be doubted, his Oath will not be relied on, especially when he does
obtrude it. For it was no less truly then acutely said by the old Poet, Aeschyl.
(...), The man does not get credit from an Oath, but an Oath from the man: and
a greater Author, An Oath (says S. Chrysostom) does not make a man credible;
(...). Chrysostom. (...) p. 514.
but the testimony of his life, and the exactness of his conversation, and a
good repute. Many often have burst with swearing, and persuaded no man: others
only nodding have deserved more belief, then those who have swore so mightily.
Wherefore Oaths, as they are frivolous coming from a person of little worth or
conscience, so they are superfluous in the mouth of an honest and worthy
person; yea, as they do not increase the credit of the former, so they may
impair that of the latter.

A good man (as Socrates did say) should apparently so demean himself, (...).
Socr. apud Max. Sermon. 85.
that his word may be deemed more credible then an Oath; (...). Philo.
the constant tenor of his practice vouching for it, Colendo fidem jurant
(Scythae; apud Curt. 7. 8.)
and giving it such weight, that no asseveration can farther corroborate it.

He should (...), Clem. Alex. Str. 7. p. 524.
swear by his good deeds, and exhibit (...), a life deserving belief, (as
Clemens Alex. (...). Diog. Laert. in Xenocr.
says:) so that no man should desire more from him then his bare assertion;
but willingly should yield him the privilege which the Athenians granted to
Xenocrates, that he should testify without Swearing.

He should be like the Essenes, (...). Joseph.
of whom Josephus says, that every thing spoken by them was more valid then an
Oath; whence they declined Swearing.

He should so much confide in his own veracity and fidelity, and so much stand
upon them, that he should not deign to offer any pledge for them, implying them
to want confirmation.

He should (as S. Hierome says) so love truth, Tantus in te sit very amor, ut
quiequid dixeris, juratum putes. Hier. Ep. 14.
that he should suppose himself to have sworn whatsoever he has said; and
therefore should not be apt to heap another Oath on his words.

Upon such accounts common reason directed even Pagan wisemen wholly to
interdict Swearing in ordinary conversation, or about petty matters, as an
irrational and immoral practice, unworthy of sober and discreet persons.
Forbear Swearing about any matter, (...). Plato apud Clem. Alex. Str. 5. p. 433.
(said Plato, cited by Clem. Alex.) Avoid Swearing, if you can, wholly, (said
Epictetus.) For money swear by no God, though you swear truly, (...). Epict.
Ench. cap. 44.
said Isocrates. And diverse the like precepts occur in other Heathens; the
mention whereof may well serve to strike shame into many loose and vain people,
(...). Isocr. ad Demon.
bearing the name of Christians.

Indeed, for a true and real Christian, this practice does especially in a far
higher degree misbecome him, upon considerations peculiar to his high calling
and holy profession.

Plutarch tells us, (...); Plut. in Qu. Romans p. 491.
that among the Romans the Flamen of Jupiter was not permitted to swear: of
which Law among other reasons he assigns this; Because it is not handsome,
that he to whom divine and greatest things are entrusted, should be distrusted
about small matters. The which reason may well be applied to excuse every
Christian from it, who is a Priest to the most High God, and has the most
celestial and important matters concredited to him; in comparison to which all
other matters are very mean and inconsiderable. The dignity of his rank should
render his word verbum honoris, passable without any farther engagement. He
has opinions of things, he has undertaken practices inconsistent with
Swearing. For he that firmly does believe that God is ever present with him, an
auditour and witness of all his discourse; he that is persuaded that a severe
judgment shall pass on him, wherein he must give an account for every idle
word which slippeth from him, Matt. 12. 36.
and wherein, among other offenders, assuredly Liars will be condemned to the
burning lake; Revel. 21. 8. and 22. 15.
he that in a great Sacrament (once most solemnly taken, and frequently
renewed) has engaged and sworn, together with all other Divine Commandments,
to observe those which most expressly do charge him to be exactly just, Col. 3.
9.
faithful, Ephesians. 4. 25.
and veracious in all his words and deeds; 1 Pet. 2. 1.
who therefore should be ready to say with David, Psalm. 119. 106.
I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy righteous judgments; to
him Omnis sermo fidelis pro jurejurando est. Hier. in Matt. 5.
every word has the force of an Oath; every Lie, every breach of promise,
every violation of faith does involve Perjury: for him to swear, is false
heraldry, an impertinent accumulation of one Oath upon another: he of all men
should disdain to allow that his words are not perfectly credible, that his
promise is not secure, without being assured by an Oath.

IX. Indeed the practice of Swearing greatly disparageth him that uses it, and
derogateth from his credit upon diverse accounts.

It signifies, (if it signifies any thing,) that he does not confide in his
own reputation, and judges his own bare word not to deserve credit: for why,
if he takes his word to be good, does he back it with asseverations? why, if
he deemeth his own honesty to bear proof, does he cite Heaven to warrant it?

It is (says S. Basil) a very foul and silly thing, (...). Bas. in Ps. 14.
for a man to accuse himself as unworthy of belief, and to profer an Oath for
security.

By so doing a man does authorize others to distrust him: for it can be no
wrong to distrust him, who does not pretend to be a credible person, or that
his saying alone may safely be taken; who, by suspecting that others are not
satisfied with his simple assertion, implies a reason known to himself for it.

It renders whatever he says to be in reason suspicious, (...). Philo.
as discovering him void of conscience and discretion: for he that flatly
against the rules of duty and reason will swear vainly, what can engage him to
speak truly? he that is so loose in so clear and so considerable a point of
obedience to God, how can he be supposed staunch in regard to any other? (...).
Arist. Rhet. ad Alex. c. 18.
It being (as Aristotle has it) the part of the same men to do ill things,
and not to regard forswearing. It will at least constrain any man to suspect
all his discourse of vanity and unadvisedness, seeing he plainly has no care
to bridle his tongue from so gross an offense.

It is strange therefore, that any man of honor or honesty should not scorn,
by such a practice, to shake his own credit, or to detract from the validity of
his word; which should stand firm on it self, and not want any attestation to
support it. It is a privilege of honorable persons, that they are excused from
Swearing, and that their verbum honoris passes in lieu of an Oath: is it not
then strange, that when others dispense with them, they should not dispense
with themselves; but voluntarily degrade themselves, and with sin forfeit so
noble a privilege?

X. To excuse these faults, the Swearer will be forced to confess, that his
Oaths are no more then wast and insignificant words; deprecating being taken
for serious, or to be understood that he means any thing by them; but only
that he uses them as expletive phrases, Hierocl. Philo.
(...), to plump his speech, and fill up sentences. But such pleas do no more
then suggest other faults of Swearing, and good arguments against it; its
impertinence, its abuse of speech, its disgracing the practiser of it in point
of judgment and capacity. For so it is, Oaths as they commonly pass are mere
excrescencies of Speech, which do nothing but encumber and deform it; they so
embellish discourse, as a Wen or a Scab do beautify a face, as a Patch or a
Spot do adorn a garment.

To what purpose, I pray, is God's Name hooked and haled into our idle talk?
why should we so often mention him, when we do not mean any thing about him?
would it not, into every sentence to foist a dog or a horse, (to intrude
Turkish, or any barbarous gibberish,) be altogether as proper and pertinent?

What do these superfluities signify, but that the venture of them does little
skill the use of speech, or the rule of conversation, but means to sputter
and prate any thing without judgment or wit; that his invention is very
barren, his fancy beggarly, craving the aid of any stuff to relieve it? One
would think a man of sense should grutch to lend his ear, or incline his
attention to such motley ragged discourse; that without nauseating he scarce
should endure to observe men lavishing time, and squandring their breath so
frivolously. It Is an affront to good company, to pester it with such talk.

XI. But farther, upon higher accounts this is a very uncivil and unmannerly
practice.

Some vain persons take it for a gentile and graceful thing, a special
accomplishment, a mark of fine breeding, a point of high gallantry: for who,
forsooth, is the brave Spark, the complete Gentleman, the man of conversation
and address, but he that has the skill and confidence (O heavens! how mean a
skill! how mad a confidence!) to lard every sentence with an Oath or a Curse;
making bold at every turn to salute his Maker, or to summon him in attestation
of his tattle; not to say, calling and challenging the Almighty to damn and
destroy him? Such a conceit, I say, too many have of Swearing, because a
custom thereof, together with diverse other fond and base qualities, has
prevailed among some people, bearing the name and garb of Gentlemen.

But in truth there is no practice more crossing the genuine nature of
Gentilenesse, or misbecoming persons well born and well bred; who should excel
the rude vulgar in goodness, in courtesy, in nobleness of heart, in
unwillingnesse to offend, and readiness to oblige those with whom they
converse, in steady composedness of mind and manners, in disdaining to say or
do any unworthy, any unhandsome things.

For this practice is not only a gross rudeness toward the main body of men,
who justly reverence the Name of God, and detest such an abuse thereof; not
only (farther) an insolent defiance of the common Profession, the Religion,
the Law of our Country, which disalloweth and condemns it; but it is very
odious and offensive to any particular Society or company, at least wherein
there is any sober person, any who retains a sense of goodness, or is
anywise concerned for God's honor: for to any such person no language can be
more disgustfull; nothing can more grate his ears, or fret his heart, then to
hear the sovereign object of his love and esteem so mocked and slighted; to see
the Law of his Prince so disloyally infringed, so contemptuously trampled on;
to find his best Friend and Benefactour so outrageously abused. To give him the
lie were a complement, to spit in his face were an obligation, in comparison to
this usage.

Wherefore it is a wonder, that any person of rank, any that has in him a spark
of ingenuity, or does at all pretend to good manners, should find in his heart
or deign to comply with so scurvy a fashion; a fashion much more befitting the
scumme of the people, then the flower of the Gentry; yea rather much below any
man endued with a scrap of reason, or a grain of goodness. Would we bethink
our selves, modest, sober and pertinent discourse would appear far more
generous and masculine, then such mad Hectoring the Almighty, such boisterous
insulting over the received Laws and general notions of mankind, such ruffianly
swaggering against sobriety and goodness. If Gentlemen would regard the
Virtues of their Ancestors, the founders of their quality; that gallant
courage, that solid wisdom, that noble courtesy, which advanced their
families, and severed them from the vulgar; this degenerate wantonness and
sordidnesse of language would return to the dunghill, or rather (which God
grant) be quite banished from the world; the vulgar following their example.

XII. Farther, the words of our Lord, when he forbad this practice, do suggest
another consideration against it, deducible from the causes and sources of it;
from whence it comes, that men are so inclined or addicted thereto: Let (says
he) your communication be Yea, Matthew. 5. 37.
yea, Nay, nay; for whatsoever is more then these comes of evil. The roots of
it he assures us are evil, and therefore the fruit cannot be good: it is no
grape which grows from thorns, or fig from thistles. Consult experience, and
observe whence it does proceed.

Sometimes it arises from exorbitant heats of spirit, or transports of
unbridled passion. When a man is keenly peevish, or fiercely angry, or eagerly
contentious, then he blustereth, and discharges his choler in most tragical
strains; then he would fright the objects of his displeasure by the most
violent expressions thereof. This is sometime alleged in excuse of rash
Swearing; (I was provoked, the Swearer will say, I was in passion:) but it is
strange, that a bad cause should justify a bad effect; that one crime should
warrant another; that what would spoil a good action, should excuse a bad one.

Sometimes it proceeds from arrogant conceit, and a tyrannical humor; when a
man fondly admireth his own opinion, and affecting to impose it on others, is
thence moved to thwack it on with lusty Asseverations.

Sometimes it issues from wantonness and levity of mind, (...). 2 Cor. 1. 17.
disposing a man to sport with any thing, how serious, how grave, how sacred
and venerable soever.

Sometimes its rise is from stupid inadvertency, or heady precipitancy; when
the man does not heed what he says, or consider the nature and consequence of
his words, but snatcheth any expression which comes next, or which his roving
fancy does offer; for want of that caution of the Psalmist, Psalm. 39. 1. and
141. 3.
I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue: I will
keep my mouth with a bridle, while the wicked is before me.

Sometimes (alas! how often in this miserable Age?) it does spring from profane
boldness; when men design to put affronts on Religion, and to display their
scorn and spite against Conscience; affecting the reputation of stout Blades,
of gallant Hectors, of resolute Giants, who dare do any thing, who are not
afraid to defy Heaven, and brave God Almighty himself.

Sometimes it is derived from apish imitation, (Psalm. 26. 4.)
or a humor to comply with a fashion current among vain and dissolute persons.

It always does come from a great defect of Conscience, of reverence to God, of
love to goodness, of discretion and sober regard to the welfare of a man's
Soul.

From such evidently-vicious and unworthy sources it proceeds, and therefore
must needs be very culpable. No good, no wise man can like actions drawn from
such principles. Matthew. 7. 16.
Farther,

XIII. This offense may be particularly aggravated by considering, that it has
no strong temptation alluring to it; that it yields no sensible advantage;
that it most easily may be avoided or corrected.

Every sin (says S. Crysostome) has not the same punishment; (...). Chry.
(...). p. 531.
but those things which may easily be reformed do bring on us greater
punishment: and what can be more easy, then to reform this fault? Tell me,
(says he) what difficulty, what sweat, what art, what hazard, what more does
it require beside a little care to abstain wholly from it? (...), etc. Chrysostom.
(...). p. 594.
It is but willing, or resolving on it, and it is instantly done: for there is
not any natural inclination disposing to it, Chrysostom. (...). p. 499. (...). p.
489.
any strong appetite to detain us under its power.

It gratifieth no sense, it yields no profit, it procures no honor; for the
sound of it is not very melodious, and no man surely did ever get an estate by
it, or was preferred to dignity for it. It rather to any good ear makes a
horrid and jarring noise; it rather with the best part of the world produces
displeasure, damage, and disgrace. What therefore beside monstrous vanity, and
unaccountable perverseness, should hold men so devoted thereto?

Surely of all dealers in sin the Swearer is palpably the silliest, and makes
the worst bargains for himself; for he sins gratis, and (like those in the
Prophet) sells his soul for nothing. Isa. 52. 3.
An Epicure has some reason to allege, an Extortioner is a man of wisdom,
and acts prudently in comparison to him; for they enjoy some pleasure, or
acquire some gain here, in lieu of their Salvation hereafter: (...). Chrysostom.
(...). p. 531. (...). Ibid.
but this fondling offends Heaven, and abandoneth Happiness, he knows not
why or for what. He has not so much as the common plea of humane infirmity to
excuse him; he can hardly say that he was tempted thereto by any bait.

A fantastic humor possesses him of spurning at Piety and soberness; he
inconsiderately follows a herd of wild fops; he affects to play the Ape.
What more then this can he say for himself?

XIV. Finally, let us consider, that as we our selves, with all our members and
powers, were chiefly designed and framed to glorify our Maker; (the which to
do is indeed the greatest perfection and noblest privilege of our nature;) so
our Tongue and speaking faculty were given to us to declare our admiration and
reverence of him, to exhibit our due love and gratitude toward him, to profess
our trust and confidence in him, to celebrate his praises, to avow his
benefits, to address our supplications to him, to maintain all kinds of
devotional intercourse with him, to propagate our knowledge, fear, love and
obedience to him, in all such ways to promote his honor and service. This is
the most proper, worthy and due use of our Tongue, for which it was created, to
which it is dedicated, from whence it becomes, as it is so often styled, Psalm.
16. 9. and 30. 12. and 57. 8. and 108. 1.
our glory, and the best member that we have; that whereby we excel all
creatures here below, and whereby we are no less discriminated from them, Hoc
enim uno* praestamus vel maximeferis, quod colloquimur inter nos, and quod
exprimere dicendo sensa possumus. Cic. de Orat. 1.
then by our Reason; that whereby we consort with the Blessed Angels above in
the distinct utterance of praise, and communication of glory to our Creator.
Wherefore applying this to any impious discourse, with this to profane God's
Blessed Name, with this to violate his Holy Commands, with this to unhallow his
Sacred Ordinance, with this to offer dishonor and indignity to him, is a most
unnatural abuse, an horrid ingratitude toward him.

It is that indeed whereby we render this noble Organ incapable of any good
use. For (...) --; Chr. (...). p. 559. (...). p. 538.
how (as the excellent Father does often urge) can we pray to God for mercies,
or praise God for his benefits, or heartily confess our sins, or cheerfully
partake of the Holy mysteries, with a mouth defiled by impious Oaths, with a
heart guilty of so heinous disobedience?

Likewise, whereas a secondary, very worthy use of our Speech is, to promote
the good of our Neighbor, and especially to edify him in Piety, according to
that wholesome precept of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 29.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good
to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers; the
practice of Swearing is an abuse very contrary to that good purpose, serving to
corrupt our Neighbor, and to instill into him a contempt of Religion; or
however grievously to scandalize him.

XV. I shall add but two words more. One is, that we would seriously consider,
that our Blessed Savior, who loved us so dearly, who did and suffered so much
for us, who redeemed us by his blood, Joh 14. 15.
who said unto us, If ye love me, keep my commandments, he thus positively has
enjoined, Matt. 5. 34.
But I say unto you, Swear not at all: and how then can we find in our heart
direcly to thwart his word?

The other is, that we would lay to heart the reason whereby S. James does
enforce the point, and the sting in the close of our Text, wherewith I
conclude; But above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven,
neither by the earth, neither by any other oath: but let your Yea be yea, and
your Nay nay, lest you fall into condemnation, or, (...).
lest you fall under damnation. From the which infinite mischief, and from all
sin that may cause it, God in mercy deliver us through our Blessed Redeemer
Jesus, to whom for ever be all glory and praise.

The Fourth Sermon.
TITUS 3. 2. -- To speak evil of no man.
THese words do imply a double Duty; one incumbent on Teachers, another on the
People who are to be instructed by them.

The Teachers Duty appears from reflecting on the words of the Context, which
govern these, and make them up an entire sentence; (...).
Put them in mind, or, Rub up their memory to do thus. It is S. Paul's
injunction to Titus, a Bishop and Pastor of the Church, that he should
admonish the people committed to his care and instruction, as of other great
Duties, (of yielding obedience to Magistrates, of behaving themselves
peaceably, of practicing meekness and equity toward all men, of being readily
disposed to every good work,) so particularly of this, (...), to revile, or
speak evil of, no man.

Whence it is apparent, that this is one of the principal Duties that Preachers
are obliged to mind people of, and to press upon them. And if this were
needful then, when Charity, kindled by such instructions and examples, was so
lively; when Christians, by their Sufferings, were so inured to meekness and
patience; when every one, for the honor of his Religion, and the safety of his
person, was concerned in all respects to demean himself innocently and
inoffensively; then is it now especially requisite, when (such engagements and
restraints being taken off, Love being cooled, Persecution being extinct, the
tongue being set loose from all extraordinary curbs) the transgression of this
Duty is grown so prevalent and rife, that evil-speaking is almost as common as
speaking, ordinary conversation extremely abounding therewith, that Ministers
should discharge their office in dehorting and dissuading from it.

Well indeed it were, if by their example of using mild and moderate discourse,
of abstaining from virulent invectives, tauntings and scoffings, good for
little but to inflame anger, and infuse ill will, they would lead men to good
practice of this sort: for no examples can be so wholesome, or so mischievous to
this purpose, as those which come down from the Pulpit, the place of
edification, backed with special authority and advantage.

However, it is to Preachers a ground of assurance, and matter of satisfaction,
that in pressing this Duty they shall perform their duty: their Text being not
so much of their own choosing, as given them by S. Paul; they can surely scarce
find a better to discourse upon: it cannot be a matter of small moment or use,
which this great Master and Guide so expressly directs us to insist upon.
And to the observance of his Precept, so far as concerns me, I shall
immediately apply my self.

It is then the Duty of all Christian people, (to be taught, and pressed on
them,) not to reproach, or speak evil of any man. The which Duty, for your
instruction, I shall first endeavor somewhat to explain, declaring its import
and extent; then, for your farther edification, I shall inculcate it, proposing
several inducements persuasive to the observance of it.

I. For Explication, we may first consider the object of it, no man; then the
Act it self, which is prohibited, to blaspheme, that is, to reproach, to
revile, or (as we have it rendered) to speak evil.

NO MAN. S. Paul questionless did especially mean hereby to hinder the
Christians at that time from reproaching the Jews and the Pagans among whom
they lived, men in their lives very wicked and corrupt, men in opinion
extremely dissenting from them, men who greatly did hate, and cruelly did
persecute them; of whom therefore they had mighty provocations and temptations
to speak ill; their judgment of the persons, and their resentment of injuries,
making it difficult to abstain from doing so. Whence by manifest analogy may be
inferred, that the Object of this Duty is very large, indeed universal and
unlimited: that we must forbear reproach not only against pious and virtuous
persons, against persons of our own judgment or party, against those who never
did harm or offend us, against our relations, our friends, our benefactours; in
respect to whom there is no ground or temptation of ill-speaking; but even
against the most unworthy and wicked persons, against those who most discoast
in opinion and practice from us, against those who never did oblige us, yea
those who have most disobliged us, even against our most bitter and spiteful
enemies. There is no exception or excuse to be admitted from the quality,
state, relation, or demeanor of men; the Duty (according to the proper sense,
or due qualifications and limits of the act) does extend to all men: for, Speak
evil of no man.

As for the Act, it may be inquired what the word (...), to BLASPHEME, does
import. I answer, that it is to vent words concerning any person which do
signify in us ill opinion, or contempt, anger, hatred, enmity conceived in our
minds toward him; which are apt in him to kindle wrath, and breed ill blood
toward us; which tend to beget in others that hear ill conceit, or ill will
toward him; which are much destructive of his reputation, prejudicial to his
interests, productive of damage or mischief to him. It is otherwise in
Scripture termed (...), to rail or revile, (to use bitter and ignominious
language; Luke 11. 45.
) (...), to speak contumeliously; 2 Pet. 2. 11.
(...), to bring railing accusation, Jud. 9.
(or reproachful censure; Jam. 4. 11.
) (...), to use obloquy, or obtrectation; Romans 12. 14.
(...), to curse, that is, Luke 6. 28.
to speak words importing that we do wish ill to a person. (2 Samuel 16. 10.)


Such is the language we are prohibited to use. To which purpose we may
observe, that whereas in our conversation and commerce with men, there do
frequently occurr occasions to speak of men and to men words apparently
disadvantageous to them, expressing our dissent in opinion from them, or a
dislike in us of their proceedings, we may do this in different ways and
terms; some of them gentle and moderate, signifying no ill mind or disaffection
toward them; others harsh and sharp, arguing height of disdain, disgust, or
despite, whereby we bid them defiance, and show that we mean to exasperate
them. Thus, telling a man that we differ in judgment from him, or conceive him
not to be in the right, and calling him a Liar, a Deceiver, a Fool; saying that
he does amiss, takes a wrong course, transgresses the rule, and calling him
dishonest, unjust, wicked; (to omit more odious and provoking names, unbecoming
this place, and not deserving our notice;) are several ways of expressing the
same things: whereof the latter, in relating passages concerning our Neighbor,
or in debating cases with him, is prohibited: (Act. 23. 3, 4, 5.)
for thus the words reproaching, reviling, railing, cursing, and the like, do
signify; and thus our Lord himself does explain them, in his Divine Sermon,
wherein he does enact this Law; Whosoever (says he) shall say to his brother,
Matt. 5. 22.
RACA, (that is, Vain man, or Liar,) shall be in danger of the council: but
whosoever shall say, THOU FOOL, shall be in danger of Hellfire; that is, he
renders himself liable to a strict account, and to severe condemnation before
God, who uses contemptuous and contumelious expressions toward his Neighbor,
in proportion to the malignity of such expressions.

The reason of things also does help to explain those words, and to show why
they are prohibited: because those harsh terms are needless; mild words
serving as well to express the same things: because they are commonly unjust,
loading men with greater defect or blame then they can be proved to deserve, or
their actions do import: (for every man that speaks falsehood is not therefore
a Liar, every man that erreth is not thence a Fool, every man that does amiss
is not consequently Dishonest or wicked; the secret intentions and the habitual
dispositions of men not being always to be collected from their outward
actions:) because they are uncharitable, signifying that we entertain the worst
opinions of men, and make the worst construction of their doings, and are
disposed to show them no favor or kindness: because also they produce
mischievous effects, such as spring from the worst passions raised by them.

This in gross is the meaning of the Precept. But since there are some other
Precepts seeming to clash with this; since there are cases wherein we are
allowed to use the harsher sort of terms, there are great examples in
appearance thwarting this rule; therefore it may be requisite for determining
the limits of our duty, and distinguishing it from transgression, that such
exceptions or restrictions should be somewhat declared.

1. First then, we may observe, that it may be allowable to persons anywise
concerned in the prosecution or administration of Justice, to speak words which
in private intercourse would be reproachful. A Witness may impeach of crimes
hurtful to justice, or public tranquillity; a Judge may challenge, may
rebuke, may condemn an offender in proper terms, (or forms of speech prescribed
by Law,) although most disgraceful and distasteful to the guilty: for it
belongs to the majesty of public Justice to be bold, blunt, severe; little
regarding the concerns or passions of particular persons, in comparison to the
public welfare.

A Testimony therefore or Sentence against a criminal, which materially is a
reproach, and morally would be such in a private mouth, is not yet formally so
according to the intent of this rule. For practices of this kind, which serve
the exigencies of Justice, are not to be interpreted as proceeding from anger,
hatred, revenge, any bad passion or humor; but in way of needful discipline
for God's service, and common benefit of men. It is not indeed so much the
Minister of justice, as God himself, our absolute Lord, as the Sovereign, God's
representative, acting in the public behalf, as the Commonwealth it self, who
by his mouth do rebuke the obnoxious person.

2. God's Ministers in Religious affairs, to whom the care of men's instruction
and edification is committed, are enabled to inveigh against sin and vice,
who-ever consequentially may be touched thereby: yea sometimes it is their
duty, with severity and sharpness to reprove particular persons, not only
privately, but publicly, in order to their correction, and edification of
others.

Thus Saint Paul directs Timothy; Them that sin (notoriously and
scandalously, 1 Timothy 5. 20.
he means) rebuke before all, 2 Timothy 4. 2.
that others may fear: that is in a manner apt to make impression on the minds
of the hearers, so as to scare them from like offenses. And to Titus he writes,
Rebuke them sharply, Tit. 1. 13.
that they may be sound in the faith. Isa. 58. 1.
And, Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my
people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins, says the Lord
to the Prophet. Such are the charges and commissions laid on and granted to his
Messengers.

Thus may we observe that God's Prophets of old, Vid. Hier^ (...) Pelag. 1. 9.
S. John the Baptist, our Lord himself, the Holy Apostles did in terms most
vehement and biting reprove the Age in which they lived, and some particular
persons in them. The Prophets are full of declamations and invectives against
the general corruption of their Times, and against the particular manners of
some persons in them. Isa. 1. 4.
Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evildoers,
children that are corrupters! Jer. 9. 2, 3.
They are all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men; and they bend their
tongues like their bow for lies. Isa. 1. 23.
Thy Princes are rebellious, Hos. 9. 15.
and companions of thieves; Ezekiel. 22. 6, 27.
every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards: they judge not the
fatherless, neither does the cause of the widow come before them. Jer. 5. 31.
and 14. 14.
The Prophets prophesy falsely, and the Priests rule by their means. Hos. 6. 9.
As troops of robbers wait for a man, so the company of Priests murder in the
way by consent, Ezekiel. 22. 26.
and commit lewdness. Mic. 3. 11.
Zeph. 3. 4.
Such is their style commonly. S. John the Baptist calls the Scribes and
Pharisees Matt. 3. 7.
a generation of vipers. Our Savior speaks of them in the same terms;
calls them an Matt. 16. 4. and 12. 34, 39.
evil and adulterous generation, Serpents, and children of vipers; Matt. 23.
13, etc.
Hypocrites, painted sepulchers, obscure graves, Matt. 15. 7, 14. 8. 16. 3. and
22. 18.
((...),) blind Guides, Fools and blind, children of the Devil. Luke 1^. 1.
S. Paul likewise calls the Schismatical and heretical Teachers. Luke 1^. 44.
Matt. 23. 24, 17.
Joh. 8. 4^.
Phil. 3. 2.
Dogs, false Apostles, evil and deceitful workers, men of corrupt minds,
Reprobates, and abominable. With the like colors do S. Peter, 2 Cor. 11. 13.
S. Jude, 1 Timothy 6. 5.
and other the Apostles paint them. 2 Timothy 3. 8.
Which sort of speeches are to be supposed to proceed, Tit. 1. 16.
not from private passion or design, but out of holy zeal for God's honor, and
from earnest charity toward men, for to work their amendment, and common
edification. They were uttered also by special wisdom, and peculiar order;
from God's authority, and in his name: so that as God by them is said to
preach, 2 Cor. 5. 20.
to entreat, to warn, Col. 1. 28.
and to exhort, so by them also he may be said to reprehend, and reproach.

3. Even private persons in due season, with discretion and temper, may reprove
others, whom they observe to commit sin, or follow bad courses, out of
charitable design, and with hope to reclaim them. This was an office of charity
imposed anciently even upon the Jews; much more does it lie upon Christians,
who are obliged more earnestly to tender the spiritual good of those who by the
stricter and more holy bands of brotherhood are allied to them. Levit. 19. 17.
Thou shall not hate thy brother; thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor,
and not suffer sin upon him, was a precept of the old Law: and, (...), 1 Thessalonians.
5. 14.
to admonish the disorderly, is an Evangelical rule. Such persons we are
enjoined to shun and decline: 1 Timothy 6. 5.
but first we must endeavor by sober advice and admonition to reclaim them;
Romans 16. 17.
we must not thus reject them till they appear contumacious and incorrigible,
Tit. 3. 10.
refusing to hear us, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6.
or becoming deaf to reproof. Matt. 18. 17.
This although it necessarily does include setting out their faults, and
charging blame on them, (answerable to their offenses,) is not the culpable
reproach here meant, it being needful toward a wholesome effect, and proceeding
from charitable intention.

4. Some vehemence (some smartness and sharpness) of speech may sometimes be
used in defense of Truth, and impugning Errors of bad consequence; especially
when it concerns the interest of Truth, that the reputation and authority of
its adversaries should somewhat be abased, or abated. If by a partial opinion
or reverence toward them, however begotten in the minds of men, they strive to
overbear or discountenance a good cause, their faults (so far as truth
permits, and need requires) may be detected and displayed. For this cause
particularly may we presume our Lord (otherwise so meek in his temper, and mild
in his carriage toward all men) did characterize the Jewish Scribes in such
terms, that their authority (being then so prevalent with the people) might not
prejudice the Truth, and hinder the efficacy of his Doctrine. This is part of
that (...), Jud. 3.
that duty of contending earnestly for the faith* which is incumbent on us.

5. It may be excusable upon particular emergent occasions, with some heat of
language to express dislike of notorious wickedness. As our Lord does against
the perverse incredulity and stupidity in the Pharisees, Matt. 17. 17.
their profane misconstruction of his words and actions, their malicious
opposing truth, and obstructing his endeavors in God's service. As S. Peter
did to Simon Magus, Act. 8. 23.
telling him, that he was in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of
iniquity. As S. Paul to Elymas the Sorcerer, Act. 13. 8, 10.
when he withstood him, and desired to turn away the Deputy, Sergius, from the
faith; O (said he, stirred with a holy zeal and indignation) thou full of all
subtlety and all mischief, thou child of the Devil, thou enemy of all
righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord? The
same spirit which enabled him to inflict a sore punishment on that wicked
wretch, did prompt him to use that sharp language toward him; unquestionably
deserved, and seasonably pronounced. As also, when the High Priest commanded
him illegally and unjustly to be misused, that speech from a mind justly
sensible of such outrage broke forth, God shall smite thee, Act. 23. 3.
thou whited wall. So, when Saint Peter presumptuously would have dissuaded our
Lord from compliance with God's will, in undergoing those crosses which were
appointed to him by God's decree, our Lord calls him Satan; Matt. 16. 23.
-- (...), Avaunt, Satan, thou art an offense unto me; for thou savourest not
the things that be of God, but those that are of men.

These sort of speeches, issuing from just and honest indignation, are
sometimes excusable, oftentimes commendable; especially when they come from
persons eminent in authority, of notable integrity, endued with special
measures of Divine grace, of wisdom, of goodness; such as cannot be suspected
of intemperate anger, of ill nature, of ill will, of ill design.

In such cases as are above mentioned, a sort of Evill-speaking about our
Neighbor may be allowable or excusable. But for fear of over-doing, great
caution and temper is to be used; and we should never apply any such
limitations as cloaks to palliate unjust or uncharitable dealing. Generally it
is more advisable, to suppress such eruptions of passion, then to vent it; for
seldom passion has not inordinate motions joined with it, or tends to good
ends. And however it will do well to reflect on those cases, and to remark
some particulars about them.

First, We may observe, that in all these cases all possible moderation, equity
and candor are to be used; so that no Ill-speaking be practiced beyond what is
needful, or convenient. Even in prosecution of offenses, the bounds of truth,
of equity, of humanity and clemency are not to be transgressed. A Judge must
not lay on the most criminal person more blame, or contumely, then the case
will bear, or then serves the designs of justice. However our Neighbor does
incurr the calamities of sin and of punishment, we must not be insolent, or
contemptuous toward him. So we may learn by that Law of Moses, backed with a
notable reason: Deuteronomy. 25. 2, 3.
And it shall be, if the wicked man be worthy to be beaten, that the Judge
cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his face, according to his
fault, by a certain number. Forty stripes he may give him, and not exceed; lest
if he should exceed, and beat him above those stripes, then thy brother should
seem vile unto thee. Whence appears, that we should be careful of not
vilifying an offender beyond measure. And how mildly Governors should proceed
in the administration of justice, the example of Joshua may teach us, who thus
examineth Achan, the cause of so great mischief to the public; Josh. 7. 19, 25.
My son, give, I pray thee, glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make
confession unto him; and tell me now what thou have done, hide it not from me.
My son; what compellation could be more benign and kind? I pray thee; what
language could be more courteous and gentle? give glory to God, and make
confession; what words could be more inoffensively pertinent? And when he
sentenced that great Malefactor, the cause of so much mischief, this was all
he said, Why have thou troubled us? The Lord will trouble thee; words void of
contumely or insulting, containing only a close intimation of the cause, and a
simple declaration of the event he was to undergo.

Secondly, Likewise Ministers, in the taxing sin and sinners, are to proceed
with great discretion and caution, with much gentleness and meekness;
signifying a tender pity of their infirmities, charitable desires of their
good, the best opinion of them, and the best hopes for them, that may consist
with any reason; according to those Apostolical rules: Gal. 6. 1.
Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore
such an one in the spirit of meekness; considering thy self, lest thou also be
tempted: Romans 15. 1.
and, We that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to
please our selves: and more expressly, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25.
A servant of the Lord must not fight, but be gentle toward all, apt to teach,
patient, In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves. Thus did S.
Peter temper his reproof of Simon Magus with this wholesome and comfortable
advice; Act. 8. 22.
Repent therefore from this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the
thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee.

Thirdly, As for fraternal correption, and reproof of faults, (when it is just
and expedient to use it,) ordinarily the Reprehensie contumelia vacare debet.
Neque monitio asper ^ sit, nec objurgatie contumeliosa. Ambros. de Offic. 3. 16.
calmest and mildest way is the most proper, and most likely to obtain good
success: it commonly does Prove. 17. 1^.
in a more kindly manner convey the sense thereof into the heart, A reproof
enters more into a wise man, then a hundred stripes into a (...).
and therein more powerfully works remorse, then the fierce and harsh way.
Clearly to show a man his fault, with the reason proving it such, so that he
becomes thoroughly convinced of it, is sufficient to breed in him regret, and
to shame him before his own mind: to do more, (in way of aggravation, (...),
etc. Epict. 2. 12.
of insulting on him, of inveighing against him,) as it does often not well
consist with humanity, so it is seldom consonant to discretion, if we do, as
we ought, seek his health and amendment. Humanity requires, that when we
undertake to reform our Neighbor, we should take care not to deform him; (not
to discourage or displease him more then is necessary;) when we would correct
his manners, that we should also consider his modesty, and consult his
reputation; curam agentes (as Seneca speaks) non tantum salutis, Sen. de
Clem. 1. 7.
sed and honestae cicatricis, Vid. Chrysostom. in Matt. 9. 8. Or. ^9.
having care not only to heal the wound, but to leave a comely scar behind. It
a succense iniquitati, ut consulere memineris humanitatis.
Be (advises S. Austin) so displeased with iniquity, as to consider and
consult humanity: for, Zeal void of humanity, is not (says S. Chrysostom)
zeal, Aug. (...), etc.
but rather animosity; and reproof not mixed with good will, appears a kind of
malignity. We should so rebuke those who, by frailty or folly incident to
mankind, have fallen into misdemeanors, that they may perceive we do sincerely
pity their ill case, and tender their good; that we mean not to upbraid their
weakness, or insult upon their misfortune; that we delight not to inflict on
them more grief then is plainly needful and unavoidable; that we are conscious
and sensible of our own obnoxiousness to the like slips or falls, and do
consider, Gal. 6. 1.
that we also may be tempted, and being tempted may be overborn. This they
cannot perceive, or be persuaded of, except we temper our speech with benignity
and mildness. Such speech Pleasant words are as an honeycomb, sweet to the
soul, and health to the bones. Prove. 16. 24.
prudence also dictateth, as most useful and hopeful for producing the good
ends honest reprehension does aim at; A soft answer turns away wrath; but
grievous words stir up anger. Prove. 15. 1.
it mollifieth and it melts a stubborn heart, it subdueth and wins a
perverse will, it heals distempered affections. Whereas roughly handling is
apt to defeat or obstruct the cure; rubbing the soar does tend to exasperate
and inflame it. Harsh speech renders advice odious and unsavory; savoury;
drives from it, and depriveth it of efficacy: it turns regret for a fault
into displeasure and disdain against the reprover: it looks not like the
dealing of a kind friend, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 15. (...).
but like the persecution of a spiteful enemy: it seems rather an ebullition
of gall, or a defluxion from rancour, then an expression of good will: the
offender will take it for a needless and pitiless tormenting, or for a proud
and tyrannical domineering over him. He that can bear a friendly touch, will
not endure to be lashed with angry and reproachful words. In fine, all reproof
ought to be seasoned with discretion, with candor, with moderation and
meekness.

Fourthly, Likewise in defense of truth, and maintenance of a good cause, we
may observe, that commonly the fairest language is most proper and
advantageous, and that reproachful or foul terms are most improper and
prejudicial. A calm and meek way of discoursing does much advantage a good
cause, as arguing the patron thereof to have confidence in the cause it self,
and to rely upon its strength; that he is in a temper fit to apprehend it
himself, and to maintain it; that he propounds it as a friend, wishing the
hearer for his own good to follow it, leaving him the liberty to judge, and
choose for himself. Qui dum dicit, malus videtur, ^tique m^le dicit. Qui^t. 6.
2. Nisi qu^d i^^p^ritos eti^^ ani^^sos atqu^ iracundes esse manifestum est, dum
per i^^piam consilii and ser^^is ad i^^eu^diam facile vertu^tur. Firmil. apud
Cyp. Ep. 75.
But rude speech, and contemptuous reflections on persons, as they do signify
nothing to the question, so they commonly bring much disadvantage and damage
to the cause, creating mighty prejudices against it: they argue much impotency
in the advocate, and consequently little strength in what he maintains; that he
is little able to judge well, and altogether unapt to teach others: they
intimate a diffidence in himself concerning his cause, and that, despairing to
maintain it by reason, he seeks to uphold it by passion; that, not being able
to convince by fair means, he would bear down by noise and clamor; that, not
skilling to get his suit quietly, he would extort it by force, obtruding his
conceits violently as an enemy, or imposing them arbitrarily as a Tyrant. Thus
does he really disparage and slur his cause, however good and defensible in it
self.

A modest and friendly style does ^^te truth; it, like its author, does
usually reside (not in the rumbling wind, 1 King. 19. 11, 12.
nor in the shaking earthquake, nor in the raging fire, -- and inh^manum est,
and ipsi qui dicit inutile; tum causae contrarium, quia plane and adversarii
tiunt, and inimi^i: and quantulumcunque his virium est, contumelia augetur.
Quint. 12. 9.
but) in the small still voice: sounding in this, it is most audible, most
penetrant, and most effectual: thus propounded; it is willingly hearkened to;
for men have no aversation from hearing those who seem to love them, and wish
them well. It is easily conceived; no prejudice or passion clouding the
apprehensive faculties: it is readily embraced; no animosity withstanding or
obstructing it. It is the sweetness of the lips, Prove. 16. 21. (...). Chrysostom.
in 2 Timothy Or. 6.
which (as the Wiseman tells us) increases learning; disposing a man to
hear lessons of good doctrine, rendering him capable to understand them,
insinuating and impressing them upon the mind: the affections being thereby
unlocked, the passage becomes open to the Reason.

But it is plainly a very preposterous method of instructing, (...). Greg. Naz.
Or. 26.
of deciding controversies, of begetting peace, to vex and anger those
concerned by ill language. Nothing surely does more hinder the efficacy of
discourse, and prevent conviction, (...). Naz. Or. 32.
then does this course, upon many obvious accounts. It does first put in a
strong bar to attention: for no man willingly does afford an ear to him, whom
he conceives disaffected toward him; which opinion harsh words infallibly will
produce: no man can expect to hear truth from him, whom he apprehends
disordered in his own mind, whom he sees rude in his proceedings, whom he
takes to be unjust in his dealing; as men certainly will take those to be,
(...). Chrysostom. Tom. 5. or. 59.
who presume to revile others for using their own judgment freely, and
dissenting from them in opinion. Again, this course does blind the hearer's
mind, so that he cannot discern what he that pretends to instruct him does
mean, or how he does assert his doctrine. Truth will not be discerned through
the smoke of wrathful expressions; right being defaced by foul language will
not appear; passion being excited will not suffer a man to perceive the sense,
or the force of an argument. The will also thereby is hardened, and hindered from
submitting to truth. In such a case, non persuadebis, etiamsi persuaseris;
although you stop his mouth, you cannot subdue his heart; although he can no
longer fight, yet he never will yield: animosity raised by such usage renders
him invincibly obstinate in his conceits and courses. Briefly, from this
proceeding men become unwilling to mark, unfit to apprehend, indisposed to
embrace any good instruction or advice: it makes them indocile and
intractable, averse from better instruction, pertinacious in their opinions,
and refractary in their ways.

Every man (says the Wiseman) shall kiss his lips that gives a right
answer: Prove. 24. 26.
but no man surely will be ready to kiss those lips which are embittered with
reproach, or defiled with dirty language.

It is said of Pericles, (...).
that with thundering and lightning he put Greece into confusion: such discourse
may serve to confound things, it seldom tends to compose them. If Reason
will not pierce, Chrysostom. in 2 Timothy 2. 24. (...).
Rage will scarce avail to drive it in. Satirical virulency may vex men sorely,
but it hardly ever soundly converts them. Few become wiser or better by ill
words. Children may be frighted into compliance by loud and severe
increpations; but men are to be allured by rational persuasion backed with
courteous usage: they may be sweetly drawn, they cannot be violently driven to
change their judgment and practice. Whence that advice of the Apostle, 2 Timothy
2. 25.
With meekness instruct those that oppose themselves, does no less favor of
wisdom, then of goodness. This case is like the other cases, wherein the
practice of good and great men, although excusable, is not yet exemplary: as
the heroical acts of David, of Sampson, of Ehud, of Phine as, of Elias, of
Moses; David's Duel, Sampson's Suicide, Moses's slaying the Egyptian, Ehud's
stabbing the K. of Moab, Elia^'s calling for fire, by extraordinaand peculiar
inflict.


Fifthly, As for the examples of extraordinary persons, which in some cases do
seem to authorize the practice of Evil-speaking, we may consider, that as they
had especial commission enabling them to do some things beyond ordinary
standing rules, wherein they are not to be imitated; as they had especial
illumination and direction, which preserved them from swerving in particular
cases from truth and equity; so the tenor of their life did evidence, that it
was the glory of God, the good of men, the necessity of the case, which moved
them to it. And of them also we may observe, that in diverse occasions, (yea
generally, whenever only their private credit or interest were concerned,)
although grievously provoked, they did out of meekness, patience, and charity,
wholly forbear reproachful speech. Our Savior, who sometimes upon special
reason in his discourses used such harsh words, yet when he was most spitefully
accused, reproached, and persecuted, did not open his mouth, or return one
angry word: 1 Pet. 2. 23.
Being reviled, he did not (as S. Peter, proposing his example to us, tells
us) revile again; suffering, he did not threaten. He used the softest language
to Judas, to the Soldiers, to Pilate and Herod, to the Priests, etc. And the
Apostles, who sometimes inveigh so zealously against the opposers and
perverters of truth, did in their private conversation and demeanor strictly
observe their own rules of abstinence from reproach: 1 Cor. 4. 12.
Being reviled we bless, Romans 12. 14.
being persecuted we suffer it; so does S. Paul represent their practice. And
in reason we should rather follow them in this their ordinary course, then in
their extraordinary sallies of practice.

In fine, however in some cases and circumstances the matter may admit such
exceptions, so that all language disgraceful to our Neighbor is not ever
culpable; yet the cases are so few and rare in comparison, the practice
commonly is so dangerous and ticklish, that worthily forbearing to reproach
does bear the style of a general Rule: and particularly, (for clearer
direction;) we are in the following cases obliged carefully to shun it; or in
speaking about our Neighbor we must observe these Cautions.

1. We should never in severe terms inveigh-against any man without reasonable
warrant, or presuming upon a good call and commission thereto. As every man
should not assume to himself the power of administering justice, (of trying,
sentencing, and punishing offenders,) so must not every man take upon him to
speak against those who seem to do ill; which is a sort of punishment,
including the infliction of smart and damage upon the persons concerned. Every
man has indeed a commission, in due place and season, with discretion and
moderation to admonish his Neighbor offending; but otherwise to speak ill of
him, no private man has just right or authority; and therefore in presuming to
do it, he is disorderly and irregular, trespassing beyond his bounds, usurping
an undue power to himself.

2. We should never speak ill of any man without apparent just cause. It must
be just: we must not reproach men for things innocent, or indifferent; for not
concurring in disputable opinions with us, for not complying with our humor,
for not serving our interest, for not doing any thing to which they are not
obliged, or for using their liberty in any case: it must be at least some
considerable fault, which we can so much as tax. It must also be clear and
certain, notorious and palpable; for to speak ill upon slender conjectures, or
doubtful suspicions, is full of iniquity. Jud. 10*
(...), They rail at things which they know not, is part of those wicked men's
character, whom S. Jude does so severely reprehend. If indeed, these conditions
being wanting, we presume to reproach any man, we do therein no less then
slander him; which to do is unlawful in any case, is in truth a most
diabolical and detestable crime. To impose odious names and characters on any
person, which he deserves not, or without ground of truth, is to play the
Devil; and Hell it self scarce will own a fouler practice.

3. We should not cast reproach upon any man without some necessary reason. In
charity (that Charity which covers all sins, Prove. 10. 12.
which covers a multitude of sins) we are bound to connive at the defects, 1
Pet. 4. 8.
and to conceal the faults of our brethren; 1 Cor. 13. 4^*
to extenuate and excuse them, when apparent, so far as we may with truth and
equity. We must not therefore ever produce them to light, or prosecute them
with severity, except very needful occasion urges: such as is the glory and
service of God, the maintenance of truth, the vindication of innocence, the
preservation of public justice and peace; the amendment of our Neighbor
himself, or securing others from contagion. Barring such reasons, (really
being, not affectedly pretended,) we are bound not so much as to disclose, as
to touch our Neighbor's faults; much more not to blaze them about, not to
exaggerate them by vehement invectives.

4. We should never speak ill of any man beyond measure: be the cause never so
just, the occasion never so necessary, we should yet no-wise be immoderate
therein, exceeding the bounds prescribed by truth, equity, and humanity. We
should never speak worse of any man whatever then he certainly deserves,
according to the most favorable construction of his doings; never more then
the cause absolutely requires. We should rather be careful to fall short of
what in rigourous truth might be said against him, then in the least to pass
beyond it. The best cause had better seem to suffer a little by our
reservednesse in its defense, then any man be wronged by our aspersing him; for
God, the patron of truth and right, is ever able to secure them without the
succor of our unjust and uncharitable dealing. The contrary practice has
indeed within it a spice of Slander, that is, of the worst iniquity.

5. We must never speak ill of any man out of bad principles, or for bad ends.

No sudden or rash Anger should instigate us thereto. Ephesians. 4. 31.
For, Let all bitterness, Col. 3. 8.
and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil-speaking be put away from you,
with all malice, is the Apostolical precept: they are all associates and
kindred, which are to be cast away together. Such anger it self is culpable, as
a work of the flesh, and therefore to be suppressed; and all its brood
therefore is also to be smothered: the daughter of such a mother cannot be
legitimate. Jam. 1. 20.
The wrath of man works not the righteousness of God.

We must not speak ill out of inveterate Hatred or Ill Will. For this
murtherous, this viperous disposition should it self be rooted out of our
hearts: whatever issues from it cannot be otherwise then very bad; it must be
a poisonous breath that exhaleth from that soul source.

We must not be provoked thereto by any Revengefull disposition, or rancorous
Spleen, in regard to any injuries or discourtesies received. For, as we must
not revenge our selves, or render evil in any other way; so particularly not in
this, which is commonly the special instance expressly prohibited. Render not
evil for evil, 1 Pet. 3. 9.
(says Saint Peter) nor railing for railing; but contrariwise bless, or speak
well: and, Bless them (says our Lord) which curse you; Matt. 5. 44.
Bless (says Saint Paul) and curse not. Romans 12. 14.


We must not also do it out of Contempt: Deuteronomy. 25. 3.
for we are not to slight our brethren in our hearts. No man really
(considering what he is, whence he came, how he is related, what he is capable
of) can be despicable. Extreme naughtiness is indeed contemptible; but the
unhappy person that is engaged therein, He that is void of wisdom despises
his neighbor. Prove. 11. 12.
is rather to be pitied, then despised. However, Charity binds us to stifle
contemptuous motions of heart, and not to vent them in vilifying expression.
Particularly, it is a barbarous practice, out of contempt to reproach persons
for natural imperfections, for meannesse of condition, for unlucky disasters,
for any involuntary defects: this being indeed to reproach Mankind, unto which
such things are incident; to reproach Providence, from the disposal whereof
they do proceed. Prove. 17. 5.
Whosoever mocketh the poor, despises his Maker, says the Wiseman: and the same
may be said of him that reproachfully mocketh him that is dull in parts,
deformed in body, weak in health or strength, defective in any such way.

Likewise we must not speak ill out of Envy; because others do excel us in any
good quality, or exceed us in fortune. To harbor this base and ugly
disposition in our minds, is unworthy of a Man, (who should delight in all good
springing up any-where, and befalling any man, naturally allied unto him;) it
is most unworthy of a Christian, who should tender his brother's good as his
own, Romans 12. 15.
and rejoice with those that rejoice. From thence to be drawn to cast reproach
upon any man, is horrible and heinous wickedness.

Neither should we ever use reproach as a means of compassing any Design we do
affect or aim at: it is an unwarrantable engine of raising us to wealth,
dignity, or repute. To grow by the diminution, to rise by the depression, to
shine by the eclipse of others, to build a fortune upon the ruins of our
Neighbor's reputation, is that which no honorable mind can affect, no honest
man will endeavor. Our own wit, courage, and industry, managed with God's
assistence and blessing, are sufficient, and only lawful instruments of
prosecuting honest enterprises; we need not, we must not in stead of them
employ our Neighbor's disgrace: no worldly good is worth purchasing at such a
rate, no project worth atchieving by such foul ways.

Neither should we out of Malignity, to cherish or gratify ill humor, use this
practice. It is observable of some persons, that not out of any formed
displeasure, grudge, or particular disaffection, nor out of any particular
design, but merely out of a (...), an ill disposition, springing up from
nature, or contracted by use, they are apt to carp at any action, and with
sharp reproach to bite any man that comes in their way, thereby feeding and
soothing that evil inclination. But as this inhumane and currish humor should
be corrected, and extirpated from our hearts; so should the issues thereof at
our mouths be stopped: the bespattering our Neighbor's good name should never
afford any satisfaction or delight unto us.

Nor out of Wantonness should we speak ill, for our divertisement or sport.
For our Neighbor's reputation is too great and precious a thing to be played
with, or offered up to sport; we are very foolish in so disvaluing it, very
naughty in so misusing it. Our wits are very barren, our brains are ill
furnished with store of knowledge, if we can find no other matter of
conversation.

Nor out of Negligence and inadvertency should we sputter out reproachful
speech; shooting ill words at rovers, or not regarding who stands in our way.
Among all temerities this is one of the most noxious, and therefore very
culpable.

In fine, we should never speak concerning our Neighbor from any other
principle then Charity, or to any other intent but what is charitable; such as
tends to his good, or at least is consistent therewith. 1 Cor. 16. 14.
Let all your things (says S. Paul) be done in charity: and words are most of
the things we do concerning our Neighbor, wherein we may express Charity. In
all our speeches therefore touching him, we should plainly show, that we have a
care of his reputation, that we tender his interest, that we even desire his
content and repose. Even when reason and need do so require, that we should
disclose and reprehend his faults, we may, we should by the manner and scope of
our speech signify thus much. Which rule were it observed, if we should never
speak ill otherwise then out of charity, surely most Ill-speaking would be cut
off; most, I fear, of our tattling about others, much of our gossipping would
be marred.

Indeed so far from bitter or sour our language should be, that it ought to be
sweet and pleasant; Prove. 15. 26. and 16. 24.
so far from rough and harsh, that it should be courteous and obliging; so far
from signifying wrath, ill will, contempt, or animosity, that it should
express tender affection, good esteem, sincere respect toward our brethren;
and be apt to produce the like in them toward us: the sense of them should be
grateful to the heart; the very sound and accent of them should be delightful
to the ear. Romans 15. 2.
Every one should please his neighbor for his good to edification. 1 Cor. 10.
33.
Our words should always be (...), Col. 4. 6.
with grace, seasoned with salt; they should have the grace of courtesy,
Charitas -- cum arguit mitis est, cum blanditur simplex est: pie solet saevire,
sine dolo mulcere; pa^ienter novit irasei, humiliter indignari. S. Bern. Ep. 2.
they should be seasoned with the salt of discretion, so as to be sweet and
savoury to the hearers. Commonly ill language is a certain sign of inward
enmity and ill will. Good Will is wont to show it self in good terms; it
cloatheth even its grief handsomely, and its displeasure carries favor in its
face: its rigor is civil and gentle, tempered with pity for the faults and
errors which it disliketh, with the desire of their amendment and recovery
whom it reprehendeth. It would inflict no more evil then is necessary; it would
cure its Neighbor's disease without exasperating his patience, troubling his
modesty, or impairing his credit. As it always judges heartily, so it never
condemns extremely.

II. But so much for the explication of this Precept, and the directive part of
our discourse. I shall now briefly propound some inducements to the observance
thereof.

1. Let us consider, that nothing more then railing and reviling is opposite to
the nature, and inconsistent with the tenor of our Religion; the which (as
even a Heathen did observe of it) nil nisi justum suadet, Ammian. Marcell.
and lene, Lingua Christum confessa non sit maledica, non turbulenta, non
conviciis and litibus perstrepens audiatur. Cypr. de Unit. Eccl. Conviciis and
maledictis quaeso vos abstinete; quia neque maledici regnum Dei consequentur;
and lingua quae Christum confessa est, incolumis and pura cum suo honor
servanda est. Cypr. Ep. 7.
does recommend, nothing but what is very just and mild: which propounds the
practices of Charity, Meekness, Patience, Peaceablenesse, Moderation, Equity,
Alacrity or good humor, as its principal laws, and declares them the chief
fruits of the Divine Spirit, and Grace: which charge us to curb and compose
all our Passions; more particularly to restrain and repress Anger, Animosity,
Envy, Malice, and such like dispositions, as the fruits of carnality and
corrupt lust: which consequently dries up all the sources, or dammeth up the
sluices of bad language. 1 Pet. 4. 8.
As it does above all things oblige us to bear no ill will in our hearts, so it
charge us to vent none with our mouths.

2. It is therefore often expressly condemned and prohibited as evil. It Is the
property of the wicked, a character of those who work iniquity, Psalm. 64. 3.
to whet their tongues like a sword, and bend their bows to shoot their arrows,
even bitter words.

3. No practice has more severe punishments denounced to it then this. The
Railer (and it is indeed a very proper and fit punishment for him, he being
exceedingly-bad company) is to be banished out of all good Society; thereto S.
Paul adjudgeth him: 1 Cor. 5. 11.
I have (says he) now written unto you, not to keep company, if any man that
is called a brother be a fornicatour, or covetous, or an idolater, or a Railer,
or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such an one not to eat. Ye see what
company the Railer has in the Text, and with what a crew of people he is
coupled: but no good company he is allowed other-where; every good Christian
should avoid him as a blot, and a pest of conversation: Hinc intelligere
possumus quam gravis sit and perniciosa maledictio, quando, etiamsi alia bona
adfuerint, sola excludit a coelo. Salv. de Guber. Dei lib. 3.
and finally he is sure to be excluded from the blessed Society above in
Heaven; for 1 Cor. 6. 10.
-- neither thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor Revilers, nor
extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God: and, Apoc. 22. 15.
Without (without the heavenly city) are Dogs, (says S. John in his
Revelation,) that is, those chiefly, who out of currish spite or malignity do
frowardly bark at their Neighbors, or cruelly bite them with reproachful
language.

4. If we look upon such language in its own nature, what is it but a symptom
of a foul, a weak, a disordered and distempered mind? It Is the smoke of inward
rage and malice: it is a stream that cannot issue from a sweet spring: it is a
storm, that cannot bluster out of a calm region. Prove. 15. 26.
The words of the pure are pleasant words, as the Wiseman says.

5. This practice does plainly signify low spirit, ill breeding, and bad
manners; and thence misbecometh any wise, any honest, any honorable person. It
agrees to Children, who are unapt, and unaccustomed to deal in matters
considerable, to squabble; to Women of meanest rank, (apt by nature, or
custom, to be transported with passion,) to scold. In our modern languages it
is termed Villainy, as being proper for rustic Boors, or men of coursest
education and employment; who, having their minds debased by being conversant
in meanest affairs, do vent their sorry passions, and bicker about their petty
concernments, in such strains; who also, being not capable of a fair
reputation, or sensible of disgrace to themselves, do little value the credit
of others, or care for aspersing it. But such language is unworthy of those
persons, and cannot easily be drawn from them, who are wont to exercise their
thoughts about nobler matters, who are versed in affairs manageable only by
calm deliberation and fair persuasion, not by impetuous and provocative
rudeness; the which do never work otherwise upon masculine souls, then so as
to procure disdain, and resistance. Such persons, knowing the benefit of a good
name, being wont to possess a good repute, prizing their own credit as a
considerable good, will never be prone to bereave others of the like by
opprobrious speech. In quo admirari soleo gravitatem and justitiam and
sapientiam Caesaris, qui nunquam nisi honorificentissime Pompeium appellat.
Cic. Epist. Tom. 6. 6.
A noble enemy will never speak of his enemy in bad terms.

We may farther consider, that all wise, all honest, all ingenuous persons have
an aversation from ill speaking, and cannot entertain it with any acceptance or
complacence; that only ill-natured, unworthy and naughty people are its
willing auditors, or do abett it with applause. The good man, in the 15.
Psalm, Psalm. 15. 3.
non accipit opprobrium, does not take up, or accept, a reproach against his
neighbor: Prove. 17. 4.
but A wicked doer (says the Wiseman) gives heed to false lips, and a liar
gives ear to a naughty tongue. And what reasonable man will do that which is
disgustfull to the wise and good, is grateful only to the foolish and baser
sort of men? I pretermit, that using this sort of language does incapacitate a
man for to benefit his Neighbor, It is always taken as an argument of ill will.
and defeateth his endeavors for his edification, disparaging a good cause,
Maledicus a malefico non distat, nisi occasion.
prejudicing the defense of truth, obstructing the effects of good instruction,
Quint. 12. 9.
and wholesome reproof; as we did before remark and declare. Farther,

8. He that uses this kind of speech does, as harm and trouble others, so
create many great inconveniences and mischiefs to himself thereby. Nothing so
enflameth the wrath of men, so provokes their enmity, so breeds lasting
hatred and spite, as do contumelious words. They are often the scourge of the
tongue, Job 5. 21. Prove. 12. 18. There is that speaks like the piercings of a
sword. Psalm. 57. 4. and 59. 7. and 64. 3. Psalm. 52. 2. sharp rasour. Prove. 30.
14. knives.
called swords and arrows; and as such they pierce deeply, and cause most
grievous smart; which men feeling are enraged, and accordingly will strive to
The froward tongue shall be cut out, Prove. 10. 31.
requite them in the like manner, and in all other obvious ways of revenge.
Hence strife, clamor and tumult, care, suspicion and fear, danger and trouble,
sorrow and regret, do seize on the Reviler; and he is sufficiently punished for
this dealing. No man can otherwise then live in perpetual fear of reciprocal
like usage from him, whom he is conscious of having so abused. Whence, if not
justice, or charity toward others, yet love, and pity of our selves, should
persuade us to forbear it as disquietfull, incommodious, and mischievous to us.

We should indeed certainly enjoy much love, much concord, much quiet, we
should live in great safety and security, we should be exempted from much care
and fear, if we would restrain our selves from abusing and offending our
Neighbor in this kind: being conscious of so just and innocent demeanor
toward him, we should converse with him in a pleasant freedom and confidence,
not suspecting any bad language or ill usage from him.

9. Hence with evidently-good reason is he that uses such language called a
Fool, and he that abstaineth from it is commended as wise. Prove. 18. 6, 7.
A fool's lips enter into contention, and his mouth calls for strokes. A
fool's mouth is his destruction, and his lips are the snare of his soul. Prove.
10. 19.
He that refraineth his tongue is wise. Prove. 12. 18.
In the tongue of the wise is health. He that keeps his lips keeps his
life: Prove. 13. 3.
but he that opens wide his mouth (that is, in evil-speaking, gaping with
clamor and vehemence) shall have destruction. The words of a wise man's mouth
are gracious: Eccles 10. 12.
but the lips of a fool will swallow up himself. Prove. 18. 21.
Death and life are in the power of the tongue; and they that love it shall eat
the fruit thereof; that is, of the one or the other, answerably to the kind of
speech they choose.

In fine, very remarkable is that advice, or resolution of the grand point
concerning the best way of living happily, Psalm. 34. 12, 13.
in the Psalmist: What man is he that desires life, and loves many days, that
he may see good? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile.
Abstinence from ill speaking he seems to propose as the first step toward the
fruition of a durably-happy life.

10. Lastly, we may consider, that it is a grievous perverting the design of
Speech, (that excellent faculty, which so much distinguishes us from, so
highly advances us above other creatures,) to use it to the defaming and
disquieting our Neighbor. It was given us as an instrument of beneficial
commerce, and delectable conversation; that with it we might assist and advise,
might cheer and comfort one another: we therefore in employing it to the
disgrace, vexation, damage, or prejudice in any kind of our Neighbor, do
foully abuse it; and so doing, render our selves indeed worse then dumb beasts:
for, Mutos n^sci, and egere omni ratione satius fuisset, quam providentiae
munera in mutuam perniciem convertere. Quint. 12. 1.
better far it were that we could say nothing, then that we should speak ill.

Now the God of grace and peace -- make us perfect in every good work to do
his will, Heb. 13. 20, 21.
working in us that which is wellpleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ;
to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

The Fifth Sermon.
PROVE. 10. 18. He that utters Slander is a Fool.
GEneral Declamations against Vice and Sin are indeed excellently useful, as
rouzing men to consider and look about them: but they do often want effect,
because they only raise confused apprehensions of things, and indeterminate
propensions to action; the which usually, before men thoroughly perceive or
resolve what they should practice, do decay and vanish. As he that cries out
fire does stir up people, and inspireth them with a kind of hovering tendency
every way; yet no man thence to purpose moves, until he be distinctly
informed where the mischief is; then do they, who apprehend themselves
concerned, run hastily to oppose it: So, till we particularly discern where our
offenses lie, (till we distinctly know the heinous nature and the mischievous
consequences of them,) we scarce will effectually apply our selves to correct
them. Whence it is requisite, that men should be particularly acquainted with
their sins, and by proper arguments be dissuaded from them.

In order whereto I have now selected one sin to describe, and dissuade from,
being in nature as vile, and in practice as common, as any other whatever that
has prevailed among men. It is Slander, a sin which in all times and places
has been epidemical and rise; but which especially does seem to reign and rage
in our Age and Country.

There are principles innate to men, which ever have, and ever will incline
them to this offense. Eager appetites to secular and sensual goods; violent
passions, urging the prosecution of what men affect; wrath and displeasure
against those who stand in the way of compassing their desires; emulation and
envy toward those who hap to succeed better, or to attain a greater share in
such things; excessive self-love; unaccountable malignity and vanity, are in
some degrees connatural to all men, and ever prompt them to this dealing, as
appearing the most efficacious, compendious and easy way of satisfying such
appetites, of promoting such designs, of discharging such passions. Slander
thence has always been a principal engine, whereby covetous, ambitious,
envious, ill-natured and vain persons have strove to supplant their
competitours, and advance themselves; meaning thereby to procure, what they
chiefly prize and like, wealth, or dignity, or reputation, favor and power in
the court, respect and interest with the people.

But from especial causes our Age peculiarly does abound in this practice: for,
besides the common dispositions inclining thereto, there are conceits newly
coined, and greedily entertained by many, which seem purposely levelled at the
disparagement of Piety, Charity, and Justice, substituting Interest in the room
of Conscience, authorizing and commending, for good and wise, all ways serving
to private advantage. There are implacable dissensions, fierce animosities, and
bitter zeals sprung up; there is an extreme curiosity, niceness, and delicacy
of judgment; there is a mighty affectation of seeming wise and witty by any
means; there is a great unsettlement of mind, and corruption of manners,
generally diffused over people: from which sources it is no wonder that this
flood has so overflown, that no banks can restrain it, no fences are able to
resist it; so that ordinary conversation is full with it, and no demeanor can
be secure from it.

If we do mark what is done in many (might I not say, in most?) companies, what
is it, but one telling malicious stories of, or fastening odious characters upon
another? What do men commonly please themselves in so much, as in carping and
harshly censuring, in defaming and abusing their Neighbors? Is it not the
sport and divertisement of many, to cast dirt in the faces of all they meet
with; to bespatter any man with foul imputations? Does not in every corner a
Momus lurk, from the venom of whose spiteful or petulant tongue no eminency
of rank, dignity of place, or sacredness of office, no innocence or integrity
of life, no wisdom or circumspection in behavior, no good nature, or
benignity in dealing and carriage, can protect any person? Do not men assume to
themselves a liberty of telling Romances, and framing characters concerning
their Neighbor, as freely as a Poet does about Hector or Turnus, Thersites or
Draucus? Do they not usurp a power of playing with, of tossing about, of
tearing in pieces their Neighbor's good name, as if it were the veriest toy in
the world? Do not many, having a form of godliness, (some of them demurely,
others confidently, both without any sense of, or remorse for what they do,)
backbite their brethren? Is it not grown so common a thing to asperse
causelessly, that no man wonders at it, that few dislike, that scarce any detest
it? that most notorious Calumniatours are heard, not only with patience, but
with pleasure; yea are even held in vogue and reverence, as men of a notable
talent, and very serviceable to their party? so that Slander seems to have
lost its nature, and not to be now an odious sin, but a fashionable humor, a
way of pleasing entertainment, a fine knack, or curious feat of policy; so that
no man at least takes himself or others to be accountable for what is said in
this way? Is not, in fine, the case become such, that whoever has in him any
love of truth, any sense of justice or honesty, any spark of charity toward his
brethren, shall hardly be able to satisfy himself in the conversations he
meets; but will be tempted, with the Holy Prophet, to wish himself sequestered
from society, and cast into solitude; repeating those words of his, Oh that I
had in the wilderness a lodging-place of wayfaring men, Jer. 9. 2, 3. and 6.
28.
that I might leave my people, Ezekiel. 22. 9.
and go from them: for they are -- an assembly of treacherous men, and they
bend their tongues like their bow for lies? This he wished in an Age so
resembling ours, that I fear the description with equal patnesse may suit both:
Jer. 9. 4, 5.
Take ye heed (said he then, and may we not advise the like now?) every one of
his neighbor, and trust ye not in any brother: for every brother will utterly
supplant, and every neighbor will walk with slanders. They will deceive every
one his neighbor, and will not speak the truth: they have taught their tongue
to speak lies, and weary themselves to commit iniquity.

Such being the state of things, obvious to experience, no discourse may seem
more needful, or useful, then that which serves to correct or check this
practice: the which I shall endeavor to do, 1. by describing the Nature, 2.
by declaring the Folly of it; or showing it to be very true which the Wiseman
here asserteth, He that utters Slander is a Fool. The which particulars I
hope so to prosecute, that any man shall be able easily to discern, and ready
heartily to detest this practice.

I. For explication of its Nature, we may describe Slander to be the uttering
false (or equivalent to false, morally false) speech against our Neighbor, in
prejudice to his fame, his safety, his welfare, or concernment in any kind, out
of malignity, vanity, rashness, ill nature, or bad design. That which is in
Holy Scripture forbidden and reproved under several names and notions; of Exodus
20. 16.
bearing false witness, Psalm. 35. 11.
false accusation, Jud. 9. 2 Pet. 2. 11.
railing censure, Luke 3. 14. and 19. 8.
sycophantry, Levit. 19. 16. Prove. 18. 8. and 26. 20.
talebearing, Prove. 16. 28. Romans 1. 29. 2 Cor. 12. 20.
whispering, Psalm. 15. 3. Romans 1. 30.
backbiting, Jer. 9. 4.
supplanting, Psalm. 15. 3.
taking up reproach: which terms some of them do signify the nature, others
denote the special kinds, others imply the manners, others suggest the ends of
this practice. But it seems most fully intelligible by observing the several
kinds and degrees thereof; as also by reflecting on the diverse ways and manners
of practicing it.

The principal kinds thereof I observe to be these.

1. The grossest kind of Slander is that which in the Decalogue is called
Bearing false testimony against our neighbor; that is, flatly charging him
with facts the which he never committed, and is no wise guilty of. As in the
case of Naboth, when men were suborned to say, 1 King. 21. 13.
Naboth did blaspheme God and the King: and as was David's case, Psalm. 35. 11.
when he thus complained, False witnesses did rise up, they laid to my charge
things that I knew not of. This kind in the highest way (that is, in judicial
proceedings) is more rare; and of all men, they who are detected to practice
it, are held most vile and infamous; as being plainly the most pernicious and
perilous instruments of injustice, the most desperate enemies of all men's
right and safety that can be. But also out of the Court there are many Knights
errant of the post, whose business it is to run about scattering false reports;
sometimes loudly proclaiming them in open companies, sometimes closely
whispering them in dark corners; thus infecting conversation with their
poisonous breath: these no less notoriously are guilty of this kind, as
bearing always the same malice, and sometimes breeding as ill effects.

2. Another kind is, Affixing scandalous names, injurious epithets, and odious
characters upon persons, which they deserve not. Number. 16. 3, 13, 14.
As when Corah and his accomplices did accuse Moses of being ambitious, unjust,
and tyrannical: when the Pharisees called our Lord an Impostour, John 19. 7, 21.
a Blasphemer, Matt. 26. 65.
a Sorcerer, Matt. 9. 3. and 12. 24.
a Glutton and Wine-bibber, Matt. 11. 19.
an Incendiary, Luke 23. 2, 5, 14.
and Perverter of the people, one that spoke against Caesar, and forbad to give
tribute: John 19. 12.
Luke 23. 2.
when the Apostles were charged of being Act. 17. 6. and 24. 5.
pestilent, turbulent, factious and seditious fellows. This sort being very
common, and thence in ordinary repute not so bad, yet in just estimation may be
judged even worse then the former; as doing to our Neighbor more heavy and
more irreparable wrong. For it imposes on him really more blame, and that such
which he can hardly shake off: because the charge signifies habit of evil, and
includes many acts; then, being general and indefinite, can scarce be
disproved. He, for instance, that calls a sober man Drunkard, does impute to
him many acts of such intemperance; (some really past, others probably future;)
and no particular time or place being specified, how can a man clear himself of
that imputation, especially with those who are not thoroughly acquainted with
his conversation? So he that calls a man unjust, proud, perverse,
hypocritical, does load him with most grievous faults, which it is not possible
that the most innocent person should discharge himself from.

3. Like to that kind is this, Aspersing a man's actions with harsh censures,
and foul terms, importing that they proceed from ill principles, or tend to bad
ends; so, as it does not, or cannot appear. Thus when we say of him that is
generously hospitable, At nos virtutes ipsas invertimus, atque Sincerum cupimus
vas incrustare. probus quis
that he is profuse; of him that is prudently frugal, that he is niggardly; of
him that is cheerful and free in his conversation, that he is vain or loose;
of him that is serious and resolute in a good way, Nobiscum vivit? multum est
demissus homo. illi Tardo cognomen pinguis damus. etc. optime. Hor. Sermon. 1. 3.
Vid. Sidon. Apoll.
that he is sullen or morose; of him that is conspicuous and brisk in virtuous
practice, that it is ambition or ostentation which acts him; of him that is
close and bashful in the like good way, that it is sneaking stupidity, or want
of spirit; of him that is reserved, that it is craft; of him that is open, that
it is simplicity in him: when we ascribe a man's liberality and charity to
vainglory, or popularity; his strictness of life, and constancy in devotion,
to superstition, or hypocrisy. When, I say, we pass such censures, or impose
such characters on the laudable or innocent practice of our Neighbors, we are
indeed Slanderers, imitating therein the great Calumniatour, who thus did
slander even God himself, imputing his prohibition of the Fruit unto envy
toward men; (God, Genesis 3. 5.
said he, does know, that in the day ye eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened,
and ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil;) who thus did ascribe the
steady Piety of Job, not to a conscientious love and fear of God, but to
policy, Job 1. 9. and 2. 4.
and selfish design, Does Job fear God for naught?

Whoever indeed pronounces concerning his Neighbor's intentions otherwise
then as they are evidently expressed by words, or signified by overt actions,
is a Slanderer; because he pretends to know, and dares to averr, that which
he no-ways possibly can tell whether it be true; because the heart is exempt
from all jurisdiction here, is only subject to the government and trial of
another world; because no man can judge concerning the truth of such
accusations; because no man can exempt, or defend himself from them: so that
apparently such practice does thwart all course of justice and equity.

4. Another kind is, Jer. 23. 36.
Perverting a man's words or actions disadvantageously by affected
misconstruction. All words are ambiguous, and capable of different senses,
(some fair, some more foul; (...). Epict.
) all actions have two handles, one that candor and charity-will, another that
disingenuity and spite may lay hold on: and in such cases, to misapprehend is a
calumnious procedure, arguing malignant disposition and mischievous design.
Thus when two men did witness, that our Lord affirmed, he could demolish the
temple, Matt. 26. 60, 61.
and rear it again in three days; although he did indeed speak words to that
purpose, Joh. 2. 19.
meaning them in a figurative sense, (discernible enough to those who would
heartily have minded his drift and way of speaking;) yet they who crudely
alleged them against him are called false witnesses. Psalm. 56. 5. Every day
they wrest my words.
(At last, says the Gospel, came two false witnesses, and said, Matt. ubi
supra.
This fellow said, I am able to destroy the temple, etc.) Thus also when some
certified of S. Stephen, as having said, Act. 6. 13, 14.
that Jesus of Nazareth should destroy that place, and change the customs that
Moses delivered; although probably he did speak words near to that purpose, yet
are those men called false witnesses: And (says S. Luke) they set up false
witnesses, which said, This man cease not to speak blasphemous words, etc.
Which instances plainly do show, if we would avoid the guilt of Slander, how
careful we should be to interpret fairly and favorably the words and the
actions of our Neighbor.

5. Another sort of this practice is, Partial and lame representation of men's
discourse, or their practice; suppressing some part of the truth in them, or
concealing some circumstances about them, which might serve to explain, to
excuse, or to extenuate them. In such a manner easily, without uttering any
Logical untruth, one may yet grievously calumniate. Thus suppose that a man
speaks a thing upon supposition, or with exception, or in way of objection,
or merely for disputation sake, in order to the discussion or clearing of
truth; he that should report him asserting it absolutely, unlimitedly,
positively and peremptorily, as his own settled judgment, would notoriously
calumniate. If one should be inveagled by fraud, or driven by violence, or slip
by chance into a bad place, or bad company; he that should so represent the
gross of that accident, as to breed an opinion of that person, that out of
pure disposition and design he did put himself there, does slanderously abuse
that innocent person. The reporter in such cases must not think to defend
himself by pretending that he spoke nothing false; for such propositions,
however true in Logic, may justly be deemed lies in morality, being uttered
with a malicious and deceitful (that is, with a calumnious) mind, being apt to
impresse false conceits, and to produce hurtful effects concerning our
Neighbor. There are slanderous truths, as well as slanderous falsehoods: when
truth is uttered with a deceitful heart, and to a base end, Prove. 12. 17.
it becomes a lie. He that speaks truth, (says the Wiseman) shows forth
righteousness: but a false witness, deceit. Deceiving is the proper work of
Slander; and truth abused to that end puts on its nature, and will engage
into like guilt.

6. Another kind of Calumny is, by Instilling sly suggestions; which although
they do not downrightly assert falsehoods, yet they breed sinister opinions in
the hearers; especially in those who, from weakness or credulity, from
jealousy or prejudice, from negligence or inadvertency, are prone to entertain
them. Vid. Herm. Pastor. where the Pastor observes, that the Devil does in his
temptations intersperse some truths, serving to render his delusions passable.
This is done many ways; by propounding wily suppositions, shrewd insinuations,
crafty questions, and specious comparisons, intimating a possibility, or
inferring some likelihood of, and thence inducing to believe the fact. Does not
(says this kind of Slanderer) his temper incline him to do thus? may not his
interest have swayed him thereto? had he not fair opportunity and strong
temptation to it? has he not acted so in like cases? Judge you therefore
whether he did it not. Thus the close Slanderer argues; and a weak or
prejudiced person is thereby so caught, that he presently is ready thence to
conclude the thing done. Again; He does well, (says the Sycophant) it is
true; but why, and to what end? Is it not, as most men do, out of ill design?
may he not dissemble now? may he not recoil hereafter? have not others made as
fair a show? yet we know what came of it. Thus do calumnious tongues pervert
the judgments of men to think ill of the most innocent, and meanly of the
worthiest actions. Even commendation it self is often used calumniously, with
intent to breed dislike and ill will toward a person commended in envious or
jealous ears; or so as to give passage to dispraises, and render the
accusations following more credible. It Is an artifice commonly observed to be
much in use there, where the finest tricks of supplanting are practiced, with
greatest effect; so that, pessimum inimicorum genus, laudantes; there is no
more pestilent enemy, then a excusando exprobraret. Tac. Ann. 1. p. 10.
malevolent praiser. All these kinds of dealing, (...). Polyb. lib. 4.
as they issue from the principles of Slander, and perform its work, so they
deservedly bear the guilt thereof.

7. A like kind is that of Oblique and covert reflections; when a man does not
directly or expressly charge his Neighbor with faults, but yet so speaks,
that he is understood, or reasonably presumed to do it. This is a very cunning
and very mischievous way of Slandering; for therein the sculking Calumniatour
keeps a reserve for himself, and cutteth off from the person concerned the
means of defense. If he goes to clear himself from the matter of such
aspersions: What need (says this insidious speaker) of that? must I needs mean
you? did I name you? why do you then assume it to your self? do you not
prejudge your self guilty? I did not, but your own Conscience it seems does
accuse you. You are so jealous and suspicious, as persons overwise or guilty
use to be. So means this serpent out of the hedge securely and unavoidably to
bite his Neighbor; and is in that respect more base and more hurtful then the
most flat and positive Slanderer.

8. Another kind is that of Magnifying and aggravating the faults of others;
raising any small miscarriage into a heinous crime, any slender defect into an
odious vice, and any common infirmity into a strange enormity; turning a small
mote in the eye of our Neighbor into a huge beam, Matt. 7. 3.
a little dimple in his face into a monstrous wen. This is plainly Slander, at
least in degree, and according to the surplusage whereby the censure does
exceed the fault. As he that, upon the score of a small debt, does extort a
great sum, is no less a thief, in regard to what amounts beyond his due,
then if without any pretense he had violently or fraudulently seized on it: so
is he a Slanderer, that, by heightning faults or imperfections, does charge his
Neighbor with greater blame, or loads him with more disgrace then he deserves.
It Is not only Slander to pick a hole where there is none, but to make that
wider which is, so that it appears more ugly, and cannot so easily be mended.
For Charity is wont to extenuate faults, Justice does never exaggerate them. As
no man is exempt from some defects, or can live free from some misdemeanors;
so by this practice every man may be rendered very odious and infamous.

9. Another kind of Slander is, Imputing to our Neighbor's practice, judgment,
or profession, evil consequences (apt to render him odious, or despicable)
which have no dependence on them, or connection with them. There do in every Age
occurr disorders and mishaps, springing from various complications of causes,
working some of them in a more open and discernible, others in a more secret
and subtle way; (especially from Divine judgment and Providence checking or
chastizing Sin:) from such occurrences it is common to snatch occasion and
matter of Calumny. Those who are disposed this way, are ready peremptorily to
charge them upon whom-ever they dislike or dissent from, although without any
apparent cause, or upon most frivolous and senseless pretenses; yea, often,
when Reason shows the quite contrary, and they who are so charged are in just
esteem of all men the least obnoxious to such accusations. So usually the best
friends of mankind, those who most heartily wish the peace and prosperity of
the world, and most earnestly to their power strive to promote them, have all
the disturbances and disasters happening charged on them by those fiery Vixons,
who (in pursuance of their base designs, or gratification of their wild
passions) really do themselves embroil things, and raise miserable combustions
in the world. So it is, that they who have the conscience to do mischief, will
have the confidence also to disavow the blame and the iniquity, to lay the
burden of it on those who are most innocent. Thus, whereas nothing more
disposes men to live orderly and peaceably, nothing more conduces to the
settlement and safety of the public, nothing so much draws blessings down
from Heaven upon the Commonweal, as true Religion; yet nothing has been more
ordinary, then to attribute all the miscarriages and mischiefs that happened,
unto it: even those are laid at its door, which plainly do arise from the
contempt or neglect of it; being the natural fruits, or the just punishments, 1
King. 18. 17, 18.
of Irreligion. King Ahab by forsaking God's commandments, and following wicked
superstitions, had troubled Israel, drawing sore judgments and calamities
thereon; yet had he the heart and the face to charge those events on the great
assertour of Piety, Elias: Art thou he that troubles Israel? The Jews by
provocation of Divine justice had set themselves in a fair way toward
desolation and ruin; this event to come they had the presumption to lay upon
the faith of our Lord's doctrine: Joh. 11. 48.
If (said they) we let him alone, all men will believe on him, and the Romans
shall come, and take away our place and nation: whenas, in truth, a compliance
with his directions and admonitions had been the only means to prevent those
presaged mischiefs. Tertull* Apol.
And, Si Tibris ascenderit in moenia, if any public calamity did appear, then
Christianos ad Leones, Christians must be charged and persecuted as the causes
thereof. To them it was that Julian and other Pagans did impute all the
concussions, confusions, and devastations falling upon the Roman Empire. The
Christianis temporibus detrahunt, and mala quae illa civitas pertulit, Christo
imputant. De Civ. D. I. 1. III. 31. They (says that great Father) detract from
the Christian times, and impute the evils which that city suffered, unto Christ.
sacking of Rome by the Goths they cast upon Christianity: for the vindication
of it from which reproach Saint Austin did write those renowned Books de
Civitate Dei. So liable are the best and most innocent sort of men to be
calumniously accused in this manner.

Another practice (worthily bearing the guilt of Slander) is, (...). M. Ant.
being Aiding and accessory thereto, by any-wise furthering, cherishing,
abetting it. He that by crafty significations of ill will does prompt the
Slanderer to vent his poison; he that by a willing audience and attention does
readily suck it up, or who greedily swalloweth it down by credulous approbation
and assent; David, Psalm. 101. 5. Whosoever privily slandereth his neighbor, him
will I cut off; (...), him have I driven away, say the LXX.
he that pleasingly relisheth and smacketh at it, or expresses a delightful
complacence therein; as he is a partner in the fact, so is he a sharer in the
guilt. Neque vero illa justa est excusatio, Referentibus aliis injuriam facere
non possum. Nemo invito auditori libenter refert. Sagitta in lapidem nunquam
figitur; interdum resiliens percutit dirigentem. Disc at detractor, dum te
videt non libenter audire, non facile detrahere. Hier. ad Nep^t. Ep. 2.
There are not only slanderous Throats, but slanderous Ears also; not only
wicked Inventions, which engender and brood lies, but wicked Assents, which
hatch and foster them. Not only the spiteful Mother which conceives such
spurious brats, but the Midwife that helps to bring them forth, the Nurse
that feeds them, the Guardian that traineth them up to maturity, and sets
them forth to live in the world, as they do really contribute to their
subsistence, so deservedly they partake in the blame due to them, and must be
responsible for the mischief they do. For indeed were it not for such free
entertainers, such nourishers, Posidonius relates of S. Austin, that he had
upon his table written these two verses, Quisquis amat dictis ^bsentum r^dere
vitam, Hanc mensam indignam ^^verit esse sibi: (He that loves by ill speech to
gnaw the life of those who are absent, let him know himself unworthy to sit at
this table; or, that this table is unfit for him:) and if any there did use
detraction, he was offended, and minded them of those verses, threatening also
to leave the table, and withdraw to his chamber. Posid. cap. 2^.
such encouragers of them, Slanders commonly would die in the womb, or prove
still-born, or presently entering into the cold air would expire, or for want of
nourishment soon would starve. It is such friends and patrons of them who are
the causes that they are so rife; they it is who set ill-natured, base and
designing people upon devising, searching after, and picking up malicious and
idle stories. Were it not for such customers, the trade of Calumniating would
fall. Many pursue it merely out of servility and flattery, to tickle the ears,
to sooth the humor, to gratify the malignant disposition, or ill will of
others; who upon the least discouragement would give over the practice. If
therefore we would exempt our selves from all guilt of Slander, we must not
only abstain from venting it, but forbear to (...), Thou shall not receive
(or, take up) a false report, says the Law, Exodus 23. 1.
regard or countenance it: for, Prove. 17. 4. Beatus est, qui ita se contra hoc
vitium armavit, ut apud eum detrahere nemo audeat. Hier. ad Celantiam.
He is (says the Wiseman) a wicked doer, who gives heed to false lips; and a
liar, who gives ear to a naughty tongue, Yea, if we thoroughly would be clear
from it, we must show an aversation from hearing it, an unwillingnesse to
believe it, an indignation against it; so either stifling it in the birth, or
condemning it to death being uttered. This is the sure way to destroy it, and
to prevent its mischief. If we would Hedge thy ears with thorns, etc. Ecclus
28. 24. ita legit Cypr. Ep. 55.
stop our ears, we should stop the Slanderer's mouth: if we would resist the
Calumniatour, he would fly from us: if we would reprove him, we should repel
him. For, As Prove. 25. 23. (...). Chrysostom. (...).
the north wind drives away rain, so (the Wiseman tells us) does an angry
countenance a backbiting tongue.

These are the chief and most common kinds of Slander; and there are several
ways of practicing them worthy our observing, that we may avoid them; namely
these.

1. The most notoriously-hainous way is, forging, and immediately venting ill
stories. Psalm. 52. 2.
As it is said of Doeg, Thy tongue devises mischief; and of another like
companion, Psalm. 50. 19.
Thou give thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames deceit: and as our Lord
says of the Devil, When he speaks a lie, Joh. 8. 44. (Isa. 32. 7.)
(...), he speaks of his own; for he is a liar, and the father of it. This
palpably is the supreme pitch of Calumny, incapable of any qualification or
excuse: Hell cannot go beyond this; the cursed Fiend himself cannot worse
employ his wit, then in minting wrongful falsehoods.

2. Another way is, receiving from others, and venting such stories, which they
who do it certainly know, or may reasonably presume to be false: the becoming
hucksters of counterfeit wares, or factours in this vile trade. There is no
false coiner, who has not some accomplices and emissaries ready to take from his
hand, and put off his money: and such Slanderers at second hand are scarce less
guilty then the first authors. He that breweth lies may have more wit and
skill, but the broacher shows the like malice and wickedness. In this there
is no great difference between the great Devil, that frames scandalous
reports, and the little Imps, that run about and disperse them.

3. Another way is, when one without competent examination, due weighing, and
just reason, does admit, and spread tales prejudicial to his Neighbor's
welfare; relying for his warrant (as to the truth of them) upon any slight or
slender authority. (...), etc? Chrysostom. in Heb. 11. 3. (...), etc. Ibid.
This is a very common and current practice: men presume it lawful enough to
say over whatever they hear; to report any thing, if they can quote an author
for it. It is not, say they, my invention; I tell it as I heard it: sit fides
penes authonem; let him that informed me undergo the blame, if it prove false.
So do they conceive themselves excusable for being the instruments of injurious
disgrace and damage to their Neighbors. But they greatly mistake therein: for
as this practice commonly does arise from the same wicked principles, at least
in some degree, and produces altogether the like mischievous effects, as the
wilful devising and conveying Slander: so it no less thwarteth the rules of
duty, and laws of equity; God has prohibited it, and reason does condemn it.
Levit. 19. 16.
Thou shall not (says God in the Law) go up and down as a talebearer among
thy people: Prove. 18. 8. and 26. 22.
as a talebearer, (as Rachil, that is,) as a merchant or trader in ill reports
and stories concerning our Neighbor, to his prejudice. Not only the framing
them, but the dealing in them beyond reason or necessity, is interdicted. And
it is part of a Good man's character in the 15. Psalm, Non accipit opprobrium,
He takes not up a reproach against his neighbor; Psalm. 15. 3.
that is, he does not easily entertain it, much less does he effectually
propagate it: and in our Text, He, it is said, that utters Slander (not only
he that conceives it) is a Fool.

And in reason, before exact trial and congnizance, to meddle with the fame and
interest of another, is evidently a practice full of iniquity, such as no man
can allow in his own case, or brook being used toward himself, without judging
himself to be extremely abused by such reporters. In all reason and equity,
(yea in all discretion,) before we yield credence to any report concerning our
Neighbor, or adventure to relate it, many things are carefully to be weighed
and scanned. We should concerning our Author consider, whether he be not a
particular enemy, or disaffected to him; whether he be not ill-humoured, or a
delighter in telling bad stories; whether he be not dishonest, or unregardfull
of justice in his dealings and discourse; whether he be not vain, or careless
of what he says; whether he be not light and credulous, or apt to be imposed
upon by any small appearance; whether at least in the present case he be not
negligent, or too forward and rash in speaking. We should also concerning the
Matter reported mind, whether it be possible, or probable; whether suitable to
the disposition of our Neighbor, to his principles, to the constant tenor of
his practice; whether the action imputed to him be not liable to
misapprehension, or his words to misconstruction. All reason and equity do, I
say, exact from us, diligently to consider such things, before we do either
embrace our selves, or transmit unto others any story concerning our Neighbor;
lest unadvisedly we do him irreparable wrong and mischief. Briefly, we should
take his case for our own, and consider whether we our selves should be
content, that upon like grounds or testimonies any man should believe, or
report disgraceful things concerning us. If we fail to do thus, we do
(vainly, or rashly, or maliciously) conspire with the Slanderer to the wrong of
our innocent Neighbor; and that in the Psalmist (by a parity of reason) may be
transferred to us, Psalm. 50. 18.
Thou have consented unto the Liar, and have partaken with the author of
Calumny.

4. Of kin to this way is the assenting to popular rumors, and thence
affirming matters of obloquy to our Neighbor. Every one by experience knows
how easily false news do rise, and how nimbly they scatter themselves; how
often they are raised from nothing, how soon they from small sparks grow into a
great blaze, how easily from one thing they are transformed into another:
especially news of this kind, which do suit and feed the bad humor of the
vulgar. It Is obvious to any man how true that is of Tacitus, how Plebi non
judicium, non veritas. Tac. Ann. 16. Non est consilium in vulgo, non ratio, non
discrimen, non diligentia -- ex opinione plurima, ex veritate pauca judicat.
Cic. pro Planco. (...). Phocyl.
void of consideration, of judgment, of equity, the busy and talking part of
mankind is. Whoever therefore gives heed to flying tales, and thrusts himself
into the herd of those who spread them, is either strangely injudicious, or
very malignantly disposed. If he want not judgment, he cannot but know, that
when he complieth with popular fame, it is mere chance that he does not
slander, or rather it is odds that he shall do so; he consequently shows
himself to be indifferent whether he does it or no, or rather that he does
incline to do it: Prove. 14. 15. The simple believes every word.
whence, not caring to be otherwise, or loving to be a Slanderer, he in effect
and just esteem is such; having at least a slanderous heart and inclination. He
that puts it to the venture whether he lies or no, does eo ipso lie morally,
as declaring no care or love of truth. Exodus 23. 2.
Thou shall not (says the Law) follow a multitude to do evil: and with like
reason we should not follow the multitude in speaking evil of our Neighbor.

5. Another slanderous course is, to build censures and reproaches upon slender
conjectures, or uncertain suspicions, 1 Timothy 6. 4.
(those (...), evil surmises, Matt. 9. 4.
which S. Paul condemns.) Of these occasion can never be wanting to them who
seek them, or are ready to embrace them; no innocence, no wisdom can any-wise
prevent them; and if they may be admitted as grounds of defamation, no man's
good name can be secure. But he that upon such accounts dares to asperse his
Neighbor, Ziba. 2 Samuel 16. 3. and 19. 27.
is in moral computation no less a Slanderer, then if he did the like out of
pure invention, or without any ground at all: for doubtful and false in this
case differ little; to devise, and to divine, in matters of this nature, do
import near the same. He that will judge or speak ill of others, ought to be
well assured of what he thinks or says: he that asserteth that which he does
not know to be true, does as well lie, as he that affirms that which he
knows to be false; (for he deceives the hearers, begetting in them an
opinion that he is assured of what he affirms;) especially in dealing with the
concernments of others, whose right and repute justice does oblige us to be
wary of infringing, charity should dispose us to regard and tender as our own.
It is not every possibility, every seeming, every faint show or glimmering
appearance, which suffices to ground bad opinion, or reproachful discourse
concerning our Brother: the matter should be clear, notorious, and palpable,
before we admit a disadvantageous conceit into our head, a distasteful
resentment into our heart, a harsh word into our mouth about him. Men may
fancy themselves sagacious and shrewd, (persons of deep judgment and fine wit
they may be taken for;) when they can dive into others hearts, and sound their
intentions; when through thick mists or at remote distances they can descry
faults in them; when they collect ill of them by long trains, and subtle
fetches of discourse: but in truth they do thereby rather bewray in themselves
small love of truth, care of justice, or sense of charity, together with little
wisdom and discretion: for Truth is only seen in a clear light; Justice
requires strict proof; 1 Cor. 13. 5, 7.
Charity thinks no evil, and believes all things for the best; Wisdom is
not forward to pronounce before full evidence. Prove. 18. 13.
(He, says the Wiseman, that answers a matter before he hears it, it is
folly and shame unto him.) In fine, they who proceed thus, as it is usual that
they speak falsely, as it is casual that they ever speak truly, as they affect
to speak ill, true or false; so worthily they are to be reckoned among
Slanderers.

6. Another like way of Slandering is, impetuous or negligent sputtering out of
words, without minding what truth or consequence there is in them, how they may
touch or hurt our Neighbor. To avoid this sin* we must not only be free from
intending mischief, but wary of effecting it; not only careful of not
wronging one distinct person, but of harming any promiscuously; not only
abstinent from aiming directly, but provident not to hit casually any person
with obloquy. For as he that discharges shot into a crowd, or so as not to
look about regarding who may stand in the way, is no less guilty of doing
mischief, and bound to make satisfaction to them he wounds, then if he had
aimed at some one person: so if we fling out bad words at random, which may
light unluckily, and defame somebody, we become Slanderers unawares, and
before we think on it. This practice has not ever all the malice of the worst
Slander, but it works often the effects thereof, and therefore does incurr
its guilt, and its punishment; especially it being commonly derived from ill
temper, or from bad habit, which we are bound to watch over, to curb, and to
correct. The Tongue is a sharp and parlous weapon, which we are bound to keep
up in the sheath, or never to draw forth but advisedly, and upon just occasion;
it must ever be wielded with caution and care: to brandish it wantonly, to lay
about with it blindly and furiously, to slash and smite therewith any that
happeth to come in our way, does argue malice, or madness.

7. It is an ordinary way of proceeding to calumniate, for men, reflecting upon
some bad disposition in themselves, (although resulting from their own
particular temper, from their bad principles, or from their ill custom,) to
charge it presently upon others; presuming others to be like themselves: like
the wicked person in the Psalm, Psalm. 50. 21.
Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thy self. This is to
slander Mankind first in the gross; then in retail, as occasion serves, to
asperse any man: this is the way of half-witted Machiavilians, and of desperate
reprobates in wickedness, who, having prostituted their consciences to vice,
for their own defense and solace, would shroud themselves from blame under the
shelter of common pravity and infirmity; Remedium poenae suae arbitrantur, si
nemo sit sanctus, si omnibus detrahatur, si turba sit pereuntium, etc. Hier. ad
Asellam, Ep. 99.
accusing all men of that whereof they know themselves guilty. But surely there
can be no greater iniquity then this, that one man should undergo blame for the
ill conscience of another.

These seem to be the chief kinds of Slander, and most common ways of
practicing it. In which description the Folly thereof does, I suppose, so
clearly shine, that no man can look thereon without loathing and despising it,
as not only a very ugly, but a most foolish practice. No man surely can be
wise, who will suffer himself to be defiled therewith. But to render its Folly
more apparent, we shall display it; declaring it to be extremely foolish upon
several accounts. But the doing this, in regard to your patience, we shall
forbear at present.

The Sixth Sermon.
PROVE. 10. 18. He that utters Slander is a Fool.
I Have formerly in this place, discoursing upon this Text, explained the
Nature of the Sin here condemned, with its several kinds and ways of practicing.

II. I shall now proceed to declare the Folly of it; and to make good by diverse
reasons the assertion of the Wiseman, that He who utters Slander is a Fool.

1. Slandering is Foolish, as sinful and wicked.

All Sin is foolish upon many accounts; as proceeding from ignorance, error,
inconsiderateness, vanity; as implying weak judgment, and irrational choice;
as thwarting the dictates of Reason, and best rules of Wisdom; as producing
very mischievous effects to our selves, bereaving us of the chief goods, and
exposing us to the worst evils. What can be more egregiously absurd, then to
dissent in our opinion and discord in our choice from infinite Wisdom; to
provoke by our actions sovereign Justice, and immutable Severity; to oppose
Almighty Power, and offend immense Goodness; to render our selves unlike, and
contrary in our doings, our disposition, our state, to absolute Perfection and
Felicity? What can be more desperately wild, then to disoblige our best Friend,
to forfeit his love and favor, to render him our Enemy, who is our Lord and
our Judge, upon whose mere will and disposal all our subsistence, all our
welfare does absolutely depend? What greater madness can be conceived, then to
deprive our Minds of all true content here, and to separate our Souls from
eternal Bliss hereafter; to gall our Consciences now with soar Remorse, and to
engage our selves for ever in remediless Miseries? Such Folly does all Sin
include: whence in Scripture-style worthily Goodness and Wisdom are terms
equivalent; Sin and Folly do signify the same thing.

If thence this practice be proved extremely sinful, it will thence
sufficiently be demonstrated no less foolish. And that it is extremely sinful,
may easily be showed. It is the character of the superlatively-wicked man;
Psalm. 50. 19, 20.
Thou give thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames deceit: Thou sit and
speak against thy brother; thou slanderest thine own mother's son. It is
indeed plainly the blackest and most hellish sin that can be; that which gives
the grand Fiend his names, and most expresses his nature. He is (...), the
Slanderer; Satan, the spiteful Adversary; the old Snake, or Dragon, hissing
out lies, and spitting forth venom of calumnious accusation; Apoc. 12. 10.
the Accuser of the brethren, a murtherous, envious, malicious Calumniatour;
Joh. 8. 44.
the Father of lies; the grand defamer of God to Man, of Man to God, of one Man
to another. And highly wicked surely must that practice be, whereby we grow
Namesakes to him, conspire in proceeding with him, resemble his disposition and
nature. It is a complication, a comprisal, a collection and sum of all
wickedness; opposite to all the principal Virtues, (to Veracity and
Sincerity, to Charity and Justice,) transgressing all the great Commandments,
violating immediately and directly all the Duties concerning our Neighbor.

To Lie simply is a great fault, being a deviation from that good Rule which
prescribes truth in all our words; Ephesians. 4. 25.
rendering us unlike and disagreeable to God, 1 Pet. 2. 1.
who is the God of truth; Psalm. 31. 5. and 25. 10. and 86. 15. and 89. 14. and
146. 6.
(who Prove. 12. 22. and 6. 17.
loves truth, and practices it in all his doings, who abominateth falsehood;)
including a treacherous breach of faith toward mankind; (we being all, in order
to the maintenance of society, by an implicit compact, obliged by speech to
declare our mind, to inform truly, and not to impose upon our Neighbor;)
arguing pusillanimous timorousness, and impotency of mind, a distrust in God's
help, and diffidence in all good means to compass our designs; begetting
deception and error, a foul and ill-favored brood: Lying, I say, is upon such
accounts a sinful and blameable thing: and of all Lies those certainly are the
worst, which proceed from malice, or from vanity, or from both, and which work
mischief; such as Slanders are.

Again, to bear any hatred or ill will, to exercise enmity toward any man, to
design or procure any mischief to our Neighbor, whom even Jews were commanded
to love as themselves, Levit. 19. 18.
whose good, by many laws, and upon diverse scores, we are obliged to tender as
our own, is a heinous fault: and of this apparently the Slanderer is most
guilty in the highest degree. For evidently true it is which the Wiseman
affirms, A lying tongue hates those that are afflicted with it; Prove. 26. 28.
there is no surer argument of extreme hatred; nothing but the height of
ill will can suggest this practice. The Slanderer is an enemy, as the most
fierce and outrageous, so the most base and unworthy that can be: he fights
with the most perilous and most unlawful weapon, in the most furious and foul
way that can be. His weapon is an envenomed arrow, Jam. 3. 8.
full of deadly poison, Psalm. 64. 3, 4. and 57. 4.
which he shoots suddenly, and fears not; a weapon which by no force can be
resisted, by no art declined, whose impression is altogether inevitable, and
unsustainable. It is a most insidious, most treacherous, and cowardly way of
fighting; wherein manifestly the weakest and basest spirits have extreme
advantage, and may easily prevail against the bravest and worthiest: for no man
of honor or honesty can in way of resistance or requital deign to use it, but
must infallibly without repugnance be born down thereby. By it the vile
practiser atchieveth the greatest mischief that can be. His words are, as the
Psalmist says of Doeg, Psalm. 52. 4.
devouring words, (Thou love all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue:)
Prove. 25. 18. and 12. 6.
and, A man (says the Wiseman) that bears false witness against his
neighbor, is a maul, and a sword, and a sharp arrow; An ungodly man diggeth up
evil, and in his lips there is a burning fire.
that is, he is a complicated instrument of all mischiefs: he smites and
bruiseth like a maul, he cutteth and pierces like a sword, he thus does hurt
near at hand; and at distance he wounds like a sharp arrow, Prove. 16. 27.
it is hard any-where to evade him, Ecclus 28. 18, etc.
or to get out of his reach. Many (says another Wiseman, the imitatour of
Solomon) have fallen by the edge of the sword: but not so many as have fallen
by the tongue. Well is he that is defended from it, and has not passed through
the venom thereof; who has not drawn the yoke thereof, nor has been bound in
its bands. For the yoke thereof is as a yoke of iron, and the bands thereof are
bands of brass. The death thereof is an evil death, the grave were better then
it. Incurable are the wounds which the Slanderer inflicteth, irreparable the
damages which he causes, indeleble the marks which he leaves. Adversus
Sycophantae morsum nullum est remedium.
No balsame can heal the biting of a Sycophant; no thread can stitch up a good
name torn by calumnious defamation; no soap is able to cleanse from the stains
aspersed by a foul mouth. Aliquid adhaerebit; somewhat always of suspicion and
ill opinion will stick in the minds of those who have given ear to slander. So
extremely opposite is this practice unto the Queen of Virtues, Charity. Its
property indeed is, 1 Cor. 13. 7.
to believe all things, that is, all things for the best, and to the advantage
of our Neighbor; not so much as to suspect any evil of him, without
unavoidably-manifest cause: how much more not to devise any falsehood against
him? It covers all things, Prove. 17. 9.
studiously conniving at real defects, and concealing assured miscarriages: how
much more not divulging imaginary or false scandals? It disposes to seek and
further any the least good concerning him: how much more will it hinder
committing grievous outrage upon his dearest good name?

Again, all injustice is abominable; to do any sort of wrong is a heinous
crime; that crime, which of all most immediately tends to the dissolution of
society, and disturbance of humane life; which God therefore does most loath,
and men have reason especially to detest. And of this the Slanderer is most
deeply guilty. Prove. 19. 28.
A witness of Belial scorneth judgment, and the mouth of the wicked devoureth
iniquity, says the Wiseman. He is indeed, according to just estimation,
guilty of all kinds whatever of injury, breaking all the Second Table of
Commands respecting our Neighbor. Most formally and directly he bears false
witness against his neighbor: He does covet his neighbor's goods; for it is
constantly out of such an irregular desire, for his own presumed advantage, Woe
be to them who justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness
of the righteous from him.
to dispossess his Neighbor of some good, and transfer it on himself, that the
Slanderer utters his tale: He is ever a thief and robber of his good name, a
deflowrer and defiler of his reputation, an Dei Episcopos linguae gladio
jugulastis, fundentes sanguinem non corporis, sed honoris. Opt. lib. 2.
assassine and murderer of his honor. Isa. 5. 23.
So does he violate all the rules of justice, and perpetrateth all sorts of
wrong against his Neighbor.

He may indeed perhaps conceive it no great matter that he commits; because
he does not act in so boisterous and bloody a way, but only by words, which
are subtle, slimme, and transient things; upon his Neighbor's credit only,
which is no substantial, or visible matter. He draws (thinks he) no blood,
nor breaks any bones, nor impresseth any remarkable scar: it is only the soft
air he breaks with his tongue, it is only a slight character that he stampeth
on the fancy, it is only an imaginary stain that he daubeth his Neighbor with:
therefore he supposes no great wrong done, and seems to himself innocent, or
very excusable. But these conceits arise from great inconsiderateness, or
mistake; nor can they excuse the Slanderer from grievous injustice. For in
dealing with our Neighbor, and meddling with his property, we are not to value
things according to our fancy, but according to the price set on them by the
owner: we must not reckon that a trifle, which he prizeth as a jewel. Since
then all men (especially men of honor and honesty) do, from a necessary
instinct of nature, estimate their good name beyond any of their goods, yea do
commonly hold it more dear and precious then their very lives; we, by violently
or fraudulently bereaving them of it, do them no less wrong, then if we
should rob or cousen them of their substance, yea then if we should maim their
body, or spill their blood, or even stop their breath. If they as grievously
feel it, and resent it as deeply, as they do any other outrage, the injury is
really as great to them. Even the Slanderer's own judgment and conscience
might tell him so much: for they who most slight another's fame, are usually
very tender of their own, and can with no patience endure that others should
touch it: which demonstrates the inconsiderateness of their judgment, and the
iniquity of their practice. It is an injustice not to be corrected or cured.
Thefts may be restored, Wounds may be cured; but there is no restitution or
cure of a lost good name: it is therefore an irreparable injury.

Nor is the thing it self, in true judgment, contemptible; but in it self
really very considerable. Prove. 22. 1. and 15. 30.
A good name, says Solomon himself, Eccles 7. 1.
(no fool,) is rather to be chosen then great riches; and loving favor rather
then silver and gold. In its consequences it is much more so; the chief
interests of a man, the success of his affairs, his ability to do good, (for
himself, his friends, his neighbor,) his safety, Prove. 12. 6.
the best comforts and conveniences of his life, sometimes his life it self,
depending thereon: so that whoever does snatch or filch it from him, does not
only according to his opinion, and in moral value, but in real effect
commonly rob, sometime murder, ever exceedingly wrong his Neighbor. It is
often the sole reward of a man's Virtue and all the fruit of his industry; so
that by depriving him of that, he is robbed of all his estate, and left stark
naked of all, excepting a good Conscience, which is beyond the reach of the
world, and which no malice or misfortune can divest him of. Full then of
iniquity, full of uncharitableness, full of all wickedness is this practice;
and consequently full it is of Folly. No man, one would think, of any tolerable
sense, should dare, or deign to incurr the guilt of a practice so vile and
base, so indeed diabolical and detestable. But farther more particularly,

2. The Slanderer is plainly a Fool; because he makes wrong judgments and
valuations of things, and accordingly drives on silly bargains for himself, in
result whereof he proves a great loser. He means by his calumnious stories
either to vent some passion boiling in him, or to compass some design which he
affects, or to please some humor that he is possessed with: but is any of
these things worth purchasing at so dear a rate? can there be any valuable
exchange for our honesty? Is it not more advisable to suppress our passion, or
to let it evaporate otherwise, then to discharge it in so foul a way? Is it not
better to let go a petty interest, then to further it by committing so
notorious and heinous a sin; to let an ambitious project sink, then to buoy it
up by such base means? Is it not wisdom rather to smother, or curb our humor,
then by satisfying it thus to forfeit our innocence? Can any thing in the world
be so considerable, that for its sake we should defile our Souls by so foul a
practice, making shipwreck of a good Conscience, abandoning honor and honesty,
incurring all the guilt, and all the punishment due to so enormous a crime? Is
it not far more wisdom, contentedly to see our Neighbor to enjoy credit and
success, to flourish and thrive in the world, then by such base courses to
sully his reputation, to rifle him of his goods, to supplant or cross him in
his affairs? We do really, when we think thus to depresse him, and to climb up
to wealth or credit by the ruins of his honor, but debase our selves.
Whatever comes of it, (whether he succeeds, or is disappointed therein,)
assuredly he that uses such courses will himself be the greatest loser, and
deepest sufferer. It Is true which the Wiseman says, Prove. 21. 6.
The getting of treasures by a lying tongue, is a vanity tossed to and fro of
them that seek death. Isa. 5. 18.
And, Woe unto them (says the Prophet) that draw iniquity with cords of
vanity; that is, who by falsehood endeavor to compass unjust designs.

But it is not, perhaps he will pretend, for to assuage a private passion, or
to promote his particular concernment, that he makes so bold with his
Neighbor, or deals so harshly with him; but for the sake of orthodox Doctrine,
for advantage of the true Church, for the advancement of public Good, he
judges it expedient to asperse him* This indeed is the covert of innumerable
Slanders: zeal for some Opinion, or some Party, bears out men of Sectarian
and factious spirits in such practices; they may do, they may say any thing
for those fine ends. What is a little truth, what is any man's reputation in
comparison to the carrying on such brave designs? But (to omit that men do
usually prevaricate in these cases; that it is not commonly for love of truth,
but of themselves, not so much for the benefit of their Sect, but for their own
interest, that they calumniate) this plea will no-wise justify such practice.
For Truth and Sincerity, Equity and Candor, Meekness and Charity are
inviolably to be observed, not only toward dissenters in opinion, but even
toward declared enemies of truth it self; we are to bless them, (that is, to
speak well of them, and to wish well to them,) not to curse them, (that is, not
to reproach them, or to wish them ill, much less to belly them.) Truth also, as
it cannot ever need, so does it always loath and scorn the patronage and the
succor of lies; it is able to support and protect it self by fair means; it
will not be killed upon a pretense of saving it, or thrive by its own ruin.
Nor indeed can any party be so much strengthened and underpropt, as it will be
weakened and undermined, by such courses: No cause can stand firm upon a bottom
so loose and slippery, as falsehood is: All the good a Slanderer can do is, to
disparage what he would maintain. In truth, no Heresy can be worse, then that
would be which should allow to play the Devil in any case. He that can dispense
with himself to slander a Jew or a Turk, does in so doing render himself worse
then either of them by profession are: for even they (and even Pagans
themselves) disallow the practice of inhumanity and iniquity. All men by light
of nature avow Truth to be honorable, and Faith to be indispensably observed.
He does not understand what it is to be Christian, or cares not to practice
according thereto, who can find in his heart in any case, upon any pretense, to
calumniate. In fine, to prostitute our Conscience, or sacrifice our honesty,
for any cause, to any interest whatever, can never be warrantable or wise.
Farther,

3. The Slanderer is a Fool, because he uses improper means and preposterous
methods of effecting his purposes. As there is no design worth the carrying on
by ways of falsehood and iniquity; so is there scarce any (no good or lawful
one at least) which may not more surely, more safely, more cleverly be
achieved by means of truth and justice. Is not always the straight way more
short then the oblique and crooked? is not the plain way more easy then the
rough and cragged? is not the fair way more pleasant and passable then the
foul? Is it not better to walk in paths that are open and allowed, then in
those that are shut up and prohibited; then to clamber over walls, to break
through fences, to trespass upon enclosures? Prove. 10. 9.
Surely yes: He that walks uprightly, walks surely. Using strict veracity
and integrity, candor and equity, is the best method of accomplishing good
designs. Our own industry, good use of the parts and faculties God has given
us, embracing fair opportunities, God's blessing and Providence, are sufficient
means to rely upon for procuring, in an honest way, whatever is convenient for
us. These are ways approved, and amiable to all men; they procure the best
friends, and fewest enemies; they afford to the practiser a cheerful courage,
and good hope; they meet with less disappointment, and have no regret or shame
attending them. He that has recourse to the other base means, and makes lies
his refuge, Isa. 28. 15, 17.
as he renounceth all just and honest means, Jer. 28. 15.
as he disclaimeth all hope in God's assistence, and forfeiteth all pretense to
his blessing; so he cannot reasonably expect good success, or be satisfied in
any undertaking. The supplanting way indeed seems the most curt and compendious
way of bringing about dishonest or dishonorable designs: but as a good design
is certainly dishonored thereby, so is it apt thence to be defeated; it
raising up enemies and obstacles, yielding advantages to who-ever is disposed
to cross us. As in trade it is notorious, that the best course to thrive is by
dealing squarely and truly; any fraud or couzenage appearing there does
overthrow a man's credit, and drive away custom from him: so in all other
transactions, as he that deals justly and fairly will have his affairs
proceed roundly, and shall find men ready to comply with him; so he that is
observed to practice falsehood, will be declined by some, opposed by others,
disliked by all; no man scarce willingly will have to do with him; he is
commonly forced to stand out in business, as one that plays foul play.

4. Lastly, the Slanderer is a very Fool, as bringing many great
inconveniences, troubles, and mischiefs on himself.

First, Prove. 18. 7. and 13. 3. and 18. 21.
A fool's mouth (says the Wiseman) is his destruction, his lips are the snare
of his soul: and if any kind of speech is destructive and dangerous, then is
this certainly most of all; for by no means can a man inflame so fierce anger,
impresse so stiff hatred, raise so deadly enmity against himself, and
consequently so endanger his safety, ease, and welfare, as by this practice.
Men can more easily endure, and sooner will forgive, any sort of abuse then
this; they will rather pardon a robber of their goods, then a defamer of their
good name.

Secondly, Such an one indeed is not only odious to the person immediately
concerned, but generally to all men that observe his practice. Every man
presently will be sensible how easily it may be his own case, how liable he may
be to be thus abused, in a way against which there is no guard or defense. --
ecquid Ad te post paulo ventura pericula sentis? Hor. Ep. 1. 18.
The Slanderer therefore is apprehended a common enemy, dangerous to all men;
and thence renders all men averse from him, and ready to cross him. -- Sibi
quisque timet, quanquam est intactus and odit. Idem.
Love and peace, tranquillity and security can only be maintained by innocent
and true dealing: so the Psalmist has well taught us; What man is he that
desires life, Psalm. 34. 12, 13.
and loves many days, that he may see good? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy
lips from speaking guile.

Thirdly, All wise, all noble, all ingenuous and honest persons have an
aversation from this practice, and cannot entertain it with any acceptance, or
complacence. Prove. 13. 5.
(A righteous man hates lying, says the Wiseman.) It is only ill-nurtured
and ill-natured, unworthy and naughty people, that are willing auditors or
encouragers thereof. A wicked doer (says the Wiseman again) gives heed to
false lips; Prove. 17. 4.
and a liar gives ear to a naughty tongue. All love of truth, and regard to
justice, and sense of humanity, all generosity and ingenuity, all charity and
good will to men, must be extinct in those who can with delight, or indeed with
patience, lend an ear, or give any countenance to a Slanderer: and is not he a
very Fool, who chooses to displease the best, only soothing the worst of men?

Fourthly, The Slanderer indeed does banish himself from all good conversation
and company, or intruding into it becomes very disgustfull thereto: for he
worthily is not only looked upon as an enemy to those whom he slandereth, but
to those also upon whom he obtrudeth his calumnious discourse. He not only
wrongeth the former by the injury, but he mocketh the latter by the falsehood of
his stories; implicitly charging his hearers with weakness and credulity, or
with injustice and pravity.

Fifthly, He also derogateth wholly from his own credit, in all matters of
discourse. For he that dares thus to injure his Neighbor, who can trust him
in any thing he speaks? what will not he say to please his vile humor, or
farther his base interest? what (thinks any man) will he scruple or boggle at,
who has the heart in thus doing wrong and mischief to imitate the Devil?
Farther,

Sixthly, This practice is perpetually haunted with most troublesome
companions, inward regret, and self-condemnation, fear, and disquiet: (...).
etc. Chrysostom.(...).
the conscience of dealing so unworthily does smite and rack him; he is ever in
danger, and thence in fear to be discovered, and requited for it. Of these
passions the manner of his behavior is a manifest indication: for men do
seldom vent their slanderous reports openly, and loudly, to the face, or in the
ear of those who are concerned in them; but do utter them in a low voice, in
dark corners, out of sight and hearing, where they conceit themselves at
present safe from being called to an account. Psalm. 59. 7.
Swords (says the Psalmist of such persons) are in their lips; for, Who, say
they, does, hear? Psalm. 101. 5.
And, Whosoever privily slandereth his neighbor, him will I cut off, says David
again, intimating the common manner of this practice. Calumny is like the
plague, Psalm. 91. 6.
that walks in darkness. Hence appositely are the practisers thereof termed
whisperers, and backbiters: their heart suffers them not openly to avow, their
conscience tells them they cannot fairly defend their practice. Again,

Seventhly, The consequent of this practice is commonly shameful disgrace,
with an obligation to retract, and render satisfaction: for seldom does
Calumny pass long without being detected and Psalm. 63. 11. The mouth of them
that speak lies shall be stopped.
confuted. Prove. 10. 9.
He that walks uprightly walks surely; but he that perverteth his ways
shall be known: and Prove. 12. 19. (Prove. 26. 26.) -- Refrain your tongue from
backbiting: for there is no word so secret that shall go for naught; and the
mouth that slandereth, slays the soul. Sap. 1. 11. Et delator habet quod
dedit exitium. Vid. Tac. An. 1. p. 45.
The lip of truth shall be established for ever; but a lying lip is but for a
moment, says the great observer of things. And when the Slander is disclosed,
the Slanderer is obliged to excuse, (that is, to palliate one lie with another,
if he can do it,) or forced to recant, with much disgrace and extreme
displeasure to himself: he is also many times constrained, with his loss and
pain, to repair the mischief he has done.

Eighthly, To this in likelihood the concernments of men, and the powers which
guard justice will forcibly bring him: and certainly his Conscience will bind
him thereto; God will indispensably exact it from him. He can never have any
sound quiet in his mind, he can never expect pardon from Heaven, without
acknowledging his fault, repairing the wrong he has done, restoring that good
name of which he dispossessed his Neighbor: for in this no less then in other
cases Conscience cannot be satisfied, remission will not be granted, except due
restitution be performed: and of all restitutions this surely is the most
difficult, most laborious, and most troublesome. It Is no-wise so hard to
restore goods stolen or extorted, as to recover a good opinion lost, to wipe
off aspersions cast on a man's name, to cure a wounded reputation: the most
earnest and diligent endeavor can hardly ever effect this, or spread the
plaster so far as the soar has reached. The Slanderer therefore does engage
himself into great streights, incurring an obligation to repair an
almost-irreparable mischief.

Ninthly, This practice does also certainly revenge it self, imposing on its
actour a perfect retaliation; He that diligently seeks good, procures
favor: but he that seeks mischief, it shall come unto him. Prove. 11. 27.
Prove. 26. 27. It was the punishment of Slanderers in the Law -- Then shall ye
do unto him as he had thought to have done unto his brother. Deuteronomy. 19. 19.
Prove. 19. 5. A false witness shall not be unpunished; and he that tells lies
shall not escape. Psalm. 52. 4, 5. God shall destroy thee for ever, thou false
tongue. Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord; but they that deal truly are
his delight. Prove. 12. 22.
a tooth for a tooth; an irrecoverable infamy to himself, for the infamy he
causes to others. Who will regard his fame, who will be concerned to excuse
his faults, who so outrageously abuses the reputation of others? He suffers
justly, he is paid in his own coin, will any man think, who does hear him
reproached.

Tenthly, In fine, the Slanderer (if he does not by serious and sore repentance
retract his practice) does banish himself from Heaven and happiness, does
expose himself to endless miseries and sorrows. Apoc. 21. 27.
For, if none that makes a lie shall enter into the heavenly city; if without
those mansions of joy and bliss every one must eternally abide that loves,
Apoc. 22. 15.
or makes a lie; if Apoc. 21. 8. It is one of those things which God
especially does abominate. Prove. 6. 19. and 12. 22. A false witness shall
perish. Prove. 21. 28.
(...), to all liars their portion is assigned in the lake which burns with
fire and brimstone; then assuredly the capital Liar, the Slanderer, (who lies
most injuriously and mischievously,) shall be far excluded from felicity, and
thrust down into the depth of that miserable place. 1 Cor. 6. 10. and 5. 11.
If (as S. Paul says) no railer, or evil-speaker, shall inherit the Kingdom of
God; how far thence shall they be removed, who without any truth or justice do
speak ill of and reproach their Neighbor? If for every (...), idle, Matt. 12.
36.
or vain, word we must render a strict account; how much more shall we be
severely reckoned with for this sort of words, so empty of truth and void of
equity; words that are not only negatively vain, or useless, but positively
vain, as false, and spoken to bad purpose? If Slander perhaps here may evade
detection, or escape deserved punishment; yet infallibly hereafter, at the
dreadful Day, it shall be disclosed, irreversibly condemned, inevitably
persecuted with condign reward of utter shame and sorrow.

Is not he then, he who, out of malignity, or vanity, to serve any design, or
sooth any humor in himself or others, does by committing this sin involve
himself into all these great evils, both here and hereafter, a most desperate
and deplorable Fool?

Having thus described the Nature of this Sin, and declared the Folly
therefore, we need, I suppose, to say no more for dissuading it; especially to
persons of a generous and honest mind, who cannot but scorn to debase and
defile themselves by so mean and vile a practice; or to those who seriously do
profess Christianity, that is, the Religion which peculiarly above all others
prescribes constant Truth, strictest Justice, and highest Charity.

I shall only add, that since our faculty of speech (wherein we do excel all
other creatures) was given us, as in the first place to praise and glorify our
Maker, so in the next to benefit and help our Neighbor; as an instrument of
mutual succor and delectation, of friendly commerce and pleasant converse
together; for instructing and advising, comforting and chearing one another; it
is an unnatural perverting, and an irrational abuse thereof, to employ it to
the damage, disgrace, vexation, or wrong in any kind of our brother. Better
indeed had we been as Brutes without its use, then we are, if so worse then
bruitishly we abuse it.

Finally, all these things being considered, we may, I think, reasonably
conclude it most evidently true, that, He which utters Slander, is a Fool.

The Seventh Sermon.
S. JAMES 4. 11. Speak not evil of one another, Brethren.
ONe half of our Religion consists in Charity toward our Neighbor; (...).
and of that Charity much the greater part seems exercised in Speech; for as
speaking does take up the greatest part of our life, (our quick and active Mind
continually venting its Thoughts, and discharging its Passions thereby; all our
conversation and commerce passing through it, it having a large influence upon
all our practice) so Speech commonly having our Neighbor and his Concernments
for its Objects, it is necessary, that either most of our Charity will be
employed therein, or that by it we shall most offend against that great Duty,
together with its Associates, Justice and Peace.

And all Offenses of this kind (which transgress Charity, violate Justice, or
infringe Peace) may perhaps be forbidden in this Apostolical Precept; for the
word (...), according to its origination, and according to some use, does
signify all kind of Obloquy, and so may comprize slander, harsh censure,
reviling, scoffing, and the like kinds of speaking against our Neighbor; but
in stricter acceptance, and according to peculiar use, it denotes that
particular sort of Obloquy, which is called Detraction, or Backbiting: So
therefore we may be allowed to understand it here; and accordingly I now mean
to describe it, and to dissuade from its practice.

There is between this, and the other chief sorts of Obloquy, (Slander,
Censuring, and Reviling) much affinity, yet there is some difference; for
Slander involveth an imputation of falsehood; Reviling includes bitter or foul
language, but Detraction may be couched in Truth, and clothed in fair
Language; it is a Poison often infused in sweet Liquor, and ministered in a
Golden Cup. It is of nearer kin to Censuring, and accordingly S. James here
coupleth it thereto: He that detracteth from a Brother, and he that censureth
his Brother, backbiteth the Law, and censureth the Law: yet may these two be
distinguished; for Censuring seems to be of more general purport, extending
indifferently to all kinds of Persons, Qualities, and Actions, which it unduly
taxes; but Detraction especially respects worthy Persons, good Qualities,
and laudable Actions, the reputation of which it aims to destroy, or to
impair.

This sort of ill practice (so rife in use, so base in its nature, so
mischievous in its effects) it shall be my endeavor to describe, that we may
know it, and to dissuade, that we may shun it.

It is the fault (opposite to that part of Charity and Goodness, which is
called Ingenuity, or Candor) which, out of naughty disposition or design,
striveth to disgrace worthy Persons, or to disparage good Actions, looking for
blemishes and defects in them, using care and artifice to pervert and
misrepresent things to that purpose.

An honest and charitable Mind disposes us, when we see any Man endued with
good Qualities, and pursuing a tenor of good practice, to esteem such a
Person, to commend him, to interpret what he does to the best, not to suspect
any ill of him, or to seek any exception against him; it inclines us, when we
see any Action materially good, to yield it simply due approbation and praise,
without searching for, or surmising any defect in the cause or principle,
whence it comes, in the design or end to which it tends, in the way or
manner of performing it. A good man would be sorry to have any good thing
spoiled; as to find a crack in a fair Building, a flaw in a fine Jewel, a
canker in a goodly Flower, is grievous to any indifferent man; so would it be
displeasing to him to observe defects in a worthy Person, or commendable
Action; he therefore will not easily entertain a suspicion of any such, he
never will hunt for any. But on the contrary, it is the property of a Detractor,
when he sees a worthy Person, (whom he does not affect, or whom he is
concerned to wrong) to survey him thoroughly, and to sift all his Actions, with
intent to descry some failing, or any semblance of a fault, by which he may
disparage him; when he vieweth any good Action, he peereth into it, laboring
to espy some pretense, to derogate from the commendation apparently belonging
to it. This in general is the nature of this Fault. But we may get a fuller
understanding of it, by considering more distinctly some particular Acts,
wherein it is commonly exercised, or the several paths in which the detracting
Spirit treads; such are these following:

1. A Detractor is wont to represent Persons and Actions under the most
disadvantagious Circumstances he can, setting out those which may cause them to
appear odious or despicable, slipping over those which may commend or excuse
them. There is no Person so excellent, who is not by his Circumstances forced
to omit some things, which would become him to do, if he were able; to perform
some things lamely, and otherwise then he would do, if he could reach it; no
Action so worthy but may have some defect in matter, or manner, (...). Theoph.
incapable of redress; and he that represents such Person or Action, leaving
out those excusing circumstances, does tend to beget a bad or mean opinion of
them, robbing them of their due value, and commendation: thus to charge a man
of not having done a good work, when he had not the power, or opportunity to
perform it, or is by cross accidents hindered from doing it according to his
desire; to suggest the Action was not done exactly, in the best Season, in the
rightest Mode, in the most proper Place, with Expressions, Looks, or Gestures
most convenient, these are tricks of a Detractor; who when he cannot deny the
Metal to be good, and the Stamp true, he clippeth it, and so would reject it
from being current.

2. He is wont to misconstrue ambiguous Words, or to misinterpret doubtful
appearances of Things: Let a man speak never so well, or act never so fairly,
yet a Detractor will say his Words may bear this ill Sense, his Actions may
tend to that bad Purpose; we may therefore suspect his meaning, and cannot
yield him a full Approbation.

3. He is wont to misname the qualities of Persons or Things, At nos virtutes
ipsas invertimus, atque Sincerum cupimus vos incrustare; probus quis Nobiscum
vivit? multus est demissus homo; illi Tardo cognomen pinguis damus, etc.
assigning bad Appellations or Epithets to good or indifferent Qualities: the
names of Virtue and Vice do so nearly border in signification, that it is easy
to transfer them from one to another, and to give the best Quality a bad Name:
Thus, by calling a sober man sour, a cheerful man vain, a conscientious man
morose, Hor. Sat. L. 3.
a devout man superstitious, a free man prodigal, a frugal man sordid, an open
man simple, a reserved man crafty, one that stands upon his Honor and
Honesty proud, a kind man ambitiously popular, a modest man sullen, timorous,
or stupid, is a very easy way to detract, and no Man thereby can escape being
disparaged.

4. He does imperfectly characterize Persons, so as studiously to vail, or
faintly to disclose their Virtues, and good Qualities, but carefully to expose,
and fully to aggravate or amplify any defects or failings in them. The
Detractor will pretend to give a character of his Neighbor, but in so doing he
stifleth what may commend him, and blazoneth what may disgrace him; like an
envious Painter he hides, or in dusky Colors shadoweth all the graceful Parts
and goodly Features, but sets out all Blemishes in the briskest Light, and
most open view. Every Face has in it some Mole, Spot or Wrinkle; there is no
man, that has not (as they speak) some blind place; some blemishes in his
nature or temper, some faults contracted by education or custom, somewhat amiss
proceeding from ignorance, or misapprehension of things; these (although they
be in themselves small and inconsiderable, although they are some of them
involuntary and thence inculpable, although they be much corrected or
restrained by virtuous Discipline, although they are compensated by greater
Virtues, yet these) the Detractor snatcheth, mouldeth, and out of them frames
an Idea of his Neighbor, apt to breed hatred, or contempt of him in an unwary
Spectator; whereas were Charity, were Equity, were Humanity to draw the Person,
it representing his Qualities with just advantage, would render him lovely, and
venerable.

5. He is wont not to commend or allow any thing absolutely, and clearly, but
always interposing some exception, to which he would have it seem liable: the
man indeed, Non audes repetere, qui tacendo amplius criminaris: and quia non
habes quod objicias, simulas vericundiam; ut lector te putet mihi parcere, qui
mentiens nec tuae animae pepercisti.
says he, does seem to have this, or that laudable quality; the action has a
fair appearance, but then if he can, he blurteth out some spiteful Objection;
if he can find nothing colorable to say against it, yet he will seem to know,
and to suppress somewhat; but (says he) I know what I know, I know more than
I Will say -- so (adding perhaps a crafty Nod or Shrug, Hier. in Ruff. 3, 6.
a malicious Sneer or Smile) he thinks to blast the fairest performance.

6. He is ready to suggest ill Causes and Principles (latent in the Heart) of
Practices apparently good; ascribing what is well done to bad Disposition, or
bad Purpose: So to say of a liberal man, that he is so from an ambitious
Temper, or out of a vainglorious design; of a religious man, that his constant
Exercises of Devotion proceed not from a conscientious Love and Fear of God, or
out of intention to please God and work out his Salvation, but from Hypocrisy,
from affectation to gain the favor and good opinion of men, from design to
promote worldly Interests; this is the way of Detraction: He does well (says
the Detractor) it cannot be denied; but for what reason does he so? is it not
plainly his Interest to do so? does he not mean to get Applause, or Preferment
thereby? Does Job serve God for naught? so said the Father of detracting
Spirits.

7. He derogateth from good Actions by pretending to correct them, or to show
better that might have been done in their room: it is, says he, done in some
respect well or tolerably; but it might have been done better, with as small
trouble, and cost; he was overseen in choosing this way, or proceeding in this
manner: Thus did Judas blame the good woman, who anointed our Lord's Feet; Joh.
12. 5.
Why (said he) was not this Ointment sold, and given to the Poor? so did his
covetous baseness prompt him to detract from that performance, of which our
Savior's goodness did pronounce, that it was a good work, which should
perpetually through the whole World pass for memorable. Mat. 26. 10, 13.


8. A Detractor not regarding the general Course, and constant Tenor of a man's
Conversation, which is conspiciously and clearly good, will attaque some part
of it, the goodness whereof is less discernable, or more subject to contest,
and blame; as if in a Body admirably handsome, one overlooking that curious
Harmony, that delicate Complexion, those fine Lineaments, and goodly Features
which running through the whole, do conspire to render it a lovely Spectacle,
should pitch on an Eye, or a Nose to carp at; or as if in a Town, otherwhere
begirt with impregnable Defenses, one should search for the weakest place, to
form a Battery against it.

9. In Fine, The Detractor injecteth suggestions of every thing any-wise
plausible or possible, that can serve to diminish the worth of a Person, or
value of an Action, which he would discountenance; he pryeth into every Nook,
he bolteth every circumstance, he improveth every pretense, he alleges any
Report or Rumor, he uses all the tricks imaginable to that end. Such is the
nature and way of detraction; in enlarging upon which I am the more sparing,
because the Arts and Methods of Detraction being in great part common with
those of Slander and Censure, I have otherwhile in treating upon those offenses
more fully declared them.

Now for dissuading from its Practice, I shall propound to your Consideration,
the causes whence it proceeds, the irregularities and pravities which it
involveth, the effects which it produces; the which will appear so base, and
ugly, that whoever shall consider them, cannot I suppose but loath the Daughter
of such Parents, the subject of such Qualities, and the Mother of such Children.



1. Ill Nature, and bad Humor: as good Nature, and ingenuous Disposition
incline men to observe, like, and commend what appears best in our Neighbor;
so malignity of Temper and Heart prompteth to espy, and catch at the worst:
one, as a Be, gathers Honey out of any Herb; the other, as a Spider, sucketh
Poison out of the sweetest Flower.

2. Pride, Expedit vobis neminem videri bonum, quasi aliena virtus exprobratio
vestrorum delictorum sit. Sen. de Vit. B 19.
Ambition, and inordinate Self-Love: the Detractor would engross Praise, and
derive all Glory to himself; he would be the chief, the only excellent Person;
therefore he would justle another Worth out of the way, that it may not
endanger standing in competition with his, or lessening it by a partnership;
that it may not outshine his Reputation, or dim it by the luster thereof.

3. Envy: A Detractor likes not to see another thrive, and flourish in the
good esteem of men, therefore he would gladly blast his Worth, and Virtue; his
Eye is evil and sore, therefore would he quench, or cloud the light, that
dazleth it.

4. Malicious Revenge and Spite: his Neighbors good Practice condemns his
bad Life; his Neighbors worth disparageth his unworthiness; this he conceives
highly prejudicial to him; hence in revenge he will labor to vilify the Worth
and good Works of his Neighbor.

5. Sense of Weakness, (...). Socr. Hist. Eccl. 6. 13.
want of Courage, or despondency of his own Ability: He that in any kind
deemeth himself able, or confideth in his own Strength, and Industry, will
allow to others the commendation beseeming their Ability; for he thinks
himself in capacity to deserve the same, and as he would not lose the Fruits of
his own Deserts, so he takes it for equitable, that another should enjoy them;
to deprive another of them, he sees were in consequence to prejudice his own
capacity and hope: but he that feels himself destitute of worth, and
despaireth to arrive to the credit of others, is thence tempted to disparage
and defame such Persons: this course he takes as the best allay of his
contemptibleness, the only solace for his defects that he can hope for; being
he cannot arise to another pitch, he would bring down that other to his; he
cannot directly get any praise, therefore he would indirectly find excuse, by
shrouding his unworthiness under the blame of others: Hence Detraction is a
sign of the weakest and basest Spirit; it is an impotent and grovelling Serpent,
that lurketh in the Hedge, waiting opportunity to bite the heel of any nobler
Creature that passes by.

6. Evil Conscience: A man that is conscious to himself of a solid worth and
virtue, Remedium poenae suae arbitrantur si nemo sit sanctus, si omnibus
detrahatur, si turba sit pereuntium, si multitudo peccantium. Hier. ad Asellam.
Ep. 99
of having honest intentions, of having performed good Deeds, is satisfied with
the Fruits of inward Comfort, and outward Approbation, which they do yield; he
therefore will scorn to seek the bettering himself by the discredit of others;
he will not by so mean a practice, adulterate that worth, in which he feels
sufficient complacence; he rather does like, that others should enjoy their due
commendation, as justifying his own claim thereto; he willingly pays it,
because he may justly demand it; and because withholding it from another, may
prejudice his own right thereto: But he that is sensible of no good qualities
in himself, that is conscious of no worthy actions that he has done, to breed
a satisfaction of mind, or build a reputation upon, would please himself in
making others as little better than himself as he can, would ground a kind of
credit upon the ruins and rubbish of another's fame. When he knows he cannot
shine by his own light, he would seem less obscure by eclipsing the brightness
of others, and shutting out the day from about him; conceiving that all things
look alike in the dark, and that bad appears not bad where no good is near.

As also a good man likes Worth and Virtue, because they resemble what he
discerns in himself; so evil men hate them, because they do not find
themselves masters of them; they are like the Fox, who said, The Grapes were
sour, because he could not reach them; and that the Hare was dry meat, because
he could not catch her. A Detractor therefore is always a bad man, and wants
those good qualities which he would disparage.

7. Bad selfish Design: Detraction is a common Engine, whereby naughty men
strive to compass their ends; when by fair means, by their own Wit, Industry,
Courage, worthy Behavior, they cannot promote their Interests, they cannot
drive on their ambitious or covetous Projects, they cannot attain that
preferment or that gain which they affect, then they betake themselves to this
crooked and foul way of supplanting, by detracting those whom they conceit to
stand in the way of their Designs. It was the first piece of wicked policy that
ever was practiced in the World, the Devil by detracting from the goodness and
veracity of God (misrepresenting his Intentions, and misconstruing his
Commands) strove to atchieve his mischievous design of seducing our
Forefathers; and in his footsteps his serpentine Progeny (the race of
malicious, envious, ambitious, covetous, and crafty Politicians) do tread. It
is observed to be a Fault that usually haunteth Courts, wherein there is
competition for the favor of a Prince, and the consequences thereof, (for
Dignity, Power, Wealth, Repute): to get which to themselves, they strive to
dispossess, or prevent others by this Instrument of Detraction. It is also rife
among Scholars, that is, among Competitors for Wit, Learning, Industry, and the
rewards of them, Reputation or Preferment. From such Principles and Causes
usually does this Practice spring.

It does involve these kinds of irregularity

1. Injustice. A Detractor cares not how he deals with his Neighbor, what
wrong he does him. Justice obliges to render every man his due; honor to whom
honor is due, and praise to him that deserves praise. There can be no greater
injury done a man, then to spoil his best good, his Virtue; then to rob him of
the best reward of his pains and cares, which is a fair Reputation; (I speak of
Rewards which lie in the reach of men). No man prizes any thing comparably to
his Honesty and Honor; who therefore by any means blurreth them, is most
injurious. Woe unto them -- who take the righteousness of the Righteous from
him, Prove. 17. 15.
Isa. 5. 23.

Injurious indeed he is not only to the virtuous Person, but to Virtue it self;
for commendation is a debt we owe to it wherever it is found; which conduces
to its encouragement and advancement; and to wrong Goodness it self, is the
most heinous injustice.

2. Uncharitableness: It is evident that the Detractor does not love his
Neighbor; for Charity makes the best of every thing: 1 Cor. 13.
Charity believes every thing, hops every thing to the advantage of its
Object; Charity delights to see the Beloved to prosper and flourish; and will
therefore contribute its endeavor to the procuring it to do so: the Detractor
therefore (who would defile the best, and display the worst in his Neighbor)
can have no Charity; he indeed manifests the greatest hatred, seeing he
striveth to do the greatest mischief, to cause the greatest vexation to his
Neighbor, in bereaving him of his most precious and dear enjoyments.

3. Impiety: He that loves and reverenceth God, will acknowledge and approve
his Goodness, in bestowing excellent Gifts and Graces to his Brethren; when
such appear, he will be afraid to disavow, or disgrace them, that he may not
rob God himself of the glory thence due to his favor and mercy, or through his
Neighbors side wound the Divine Benignity: he will be ready to bless and
praise God for all such emanations of his Goodness; as those did in the Gospel,
who beholding our Savior's miraculous Works of Grace, did glorify God, who
had given such works unto men: but the Detractor cares not for that; he
fears not to bereave God of the honor of dispensing good Gifts, that his
Brother may not have the honor of receiving them; he will rather deny God to
be good, then allow a man to be so by his Grace and Blessing; so is he no less
a Detractor from God, then from his Neighbor.

Hence of all Offenses, Detraction certainly must be most odious to God: He is
the God of Truth, and therefore detesteth Lying, of which Detraction ever
(especially in moral esteem) has a spice: He is the God of Justice, and
therefore especially does abhor wronging the best Persons and Actions; he is
the God of Love, and therefore cannot but loath this capital violation of
Charity; he is jealous of his Glory, and cannot therefore endure it to be
abused by slurring his good Gifts and Graces; he cannot but hate that Offense,
which approaches to that most heinous and unpardonable sin, that consists in
defaming the excellent Works performed by Divine Power and Goodness, Matt. 12.
ascribing them to bad Causes.

4. Detraction involveth degenerous baseness, meanness of spirit, and want of
good manners. All men affect to seem generous, and will say, They scorn to be
base; but Generosity is in nothing more seen, then in a candid estimation of
other men's Virtues and good Qualities; to this generosity of Nature, generosity
of Education, generosity of Principles and Judgment do all conspiringly
dispose: It Is the noblest kind of courtesy, to tender and farther the
Reputation of others; to be liberal in bestowing commendation on deserving
Persons; it obliges men more then any other benefit can do, procuring them
commonly real advantage, always chearing and satisfying their mind; for in
nothing more do they please themselves, then in reaping this Fruit of their
good Intention, and honest Industry, the approbation of worthy men; it is
therefore a most gentile thing thus to oblige men. But on the other side,
nothing more plainly argues a degenerate, and ignoble heart, ill-breeding and
ill-formed Manners, a sorry Mind and poor Judgment, then to disesteem or
disparage Worth and Virtue in others: It Is the most savage rudeness, the most
sordid illiberality, the most ugly clownishness that can be; of all men
therefore it most does misbecome those who pretend to be Gentlemen.

5. In consequence to these things, Detraction includes Folly; for every
injust, every uncharitable, every impious, every base Person is (as such) a
Fool; none of those qualities are consistent with Wisdom; but the folly of it
will particularly appear (together with its pravity) by the bad and hurtful
effects, which it produces, both in regard to others, and to him that
practices it; some of which are these:

rude assaults of their Reputation) will be scared and daunted by Detraction;
so as consequently to be induced, -- placare invidiam virtute relicta. Hor.
And when thus the credit of Virtue is blasted in its Practisers, many will be
diverted from it; so will it grow out of request, and the World will be
corrupted by these Agents of the Evil One.

It were indeed, upon this consideration, advisable and just, not to seem ever
to detract; even not then when we are well assured that by speaking ill, we
shall not really do it; if we should discover any Man to seem worthy, or to be
so reputed, whom yet we discern (by standing in a nearer light) not to be truly
such, having had opportunity to know his bad qualities, bad purposes, or bad
deeds; yet Wisdom would commonly dictate, and Goodness dispose not to mar his
repute: If we should observe (without danger of mistake) any plausible Action
to be performed out of bad Inclinations, Principles, or Designs; yet ordinarily
in discretion and honesty we should let it pass with such commendation as its
appearance may procure, rather then to slur it, by venting our disadvantagious
apprehensions about it: for it is no great harm that any man should enjoy
undeserved commendation, or that a counterfeit worth should find a dissembled
respect; it is but being over-just, which if it be ever a fault, can hardly be
so in this case, wherein we do not expend any cost, or suffer any damage; but
it may do mischief to blemish an appearance of Virtue; it may be a wrong
thereto to deface its very Image; the very disclosing Hypocrisy does inflict a
wound on Goodness, and exposes it to scandal; for bad men thence will be prone
to infer, that all Virtue proceeds from the like bad Principles: so the
disgrace cast on that which is spurious, will redound to the prejudice of that
which is most genuine: And if it be good to forbear detracting from that worth
which is certainly false, much more is it so in regard to that which is
possibly true; and far more still is it so in respect to that which is clear
and sure.

2. Hence Detraction is very noxious and baneful to all Society; for all
Society is maintained in welfare by encouragement of honesty and industry; the
which, when disparagement is cast upon them, will be in danger to languish and
decay; whence a Detractor is the worst Member that can be of a Society; he is a
very Moth, a very Canker therein.

3. Detraction works real damage, and mischief to our Neighbor; it
bereaveth him of that goodly Reputation which is the proper reward of Virtue,
and a main support to the practice of it; it often really obstructeth and
disappointeth his Undertakings, estranging those from him, or setting them
against him, who do credulously entertain it.

4. The Detractor abuses those, into whose ears he instilleth his poisonous
suggestions, engaging them to partake in the injuries done to Worth and Virtue;
causing them to entertain injust and uncharitable conceits, to practice
unseemly and unworthy behavior toward good men.

5. The Detractor produces great inconveniences and mischiefs to himself.

He raises against himself fierce animosity, and wrath: for Men, that are
conscious to themselves of their own honest meaning, and blameless proceedings,
cannot endure to be abused by unjust disparagement; hence are they stirred to
boil with passion, and to discharge revenge upon the Detractor.

He exposes himself to general hatred; all good men loath him as a base and
mischievous Person, and a particular Enemy of theirs, always ready to wrong
them; every man is apt to say, He that does thus abuse another, will be ready
to serve me in like manner, if I chance to come in his way, vilifying the best
thing I can do; even the worst men will dislike him; for even such affect to do
somewhat laudable or plausible, and would be glad to enjoy approbation for it;
and cannot therefore brook those who lie in wait to rob them of the Fruit of
their good endeavors; so do all men worthily detest and shun the Detractor, as
a common Enemy to Goodness first, and then unto Men. Farther;

6. The Detractor yields occasion to others, and a kind of right to return
the same measure upon him. If he has in him a show of any thing laudable, men
will not allow him any commendation from it: for why, conceive they, shall he
receive that which he will not suffer others to enjoy? How can any Man admit
him to have any real worth or virtue in himself, who does not like it, or treat
it well in another? Hence, if a Detractor has any good in him, he much
injureth himself, depriving himself of all the respect belonging thereto.

7. Again, the Detractor (esteeming things according to moral possibility) will
assuredly be defeated in his aims; his detraction in the close will avail
nothing, but to bring trouble and shame upon himself; for God has a particular
care over Innocence and Goodness, so as not to let them finally to suffer; the
good man's Righteousness he will bring forth as the light, Psalm. 37. 6.
and his Judgment as the noon day: Wise men easily will discern the foul play,
and will scorn it; Good men ever will be ready to clear and vindicate the
Truth; Worth however clouded for a time, will break through all Mists, and
gloriously expand it self, to the confusion of its most sly opposers.

Such are the natural and obvious effects of this practice; the consideration
whereof (together with the causes producing it, and the essential adjuncts
which it does involve) will, I should think, suffice to deter us from it.

I shall only adjoin one Consideration, which our Text suggesteth: Speak not
evil of one another, Brethren, says the Apostle: Brethren; That Appellation
does imply a strong Argument enforcing the Precept: Brethren, with especial
tenderness of affection, should love one another, and delight in each others
good; they should tender the interest and honor of each other as their own;
they should therefore by all means cherish and countenance Virtue in one
another, as that which promoteth the common Welfare, which adorneth and
illustrateth the dignity of their Family. We should rejoice in the good
qualities and worthy deeds of any Christian, as glorifying our common Father,
as gracing our common Profession, as edifying the common Body, whereof we are
Members; Members we are one of another, and as such should find complacence in
the health and vigor of any part, from whence the whole does receive benefit
and comfort: for one Brother to repine at the Welfare, to malign the
Prosperity, to decry the Merit, to destroy the Reputation of another, is very
unnatural; for one Christian any-wise to wrong or prejudice another, is highly
impious.

To conclude; It is our duty (which Equity, which Ingenuity, which Charity,
which Piety do all concurrently oblige us to) whenever we do see any good
Person, or worthy Deed, to yield hearty esteem, to pay due respect, gladly to
congratulate the Person, and willingly to commend the Work; rendering withal,
thanks and praise for them to the Donor of all good Gifts: unto whom, for all
the good things bestowed upon us, and upon all his Creatures, be for ever all
glory and praise. Amen.

The Eighth Sermon.
S. MATTHEW. 7. 1. Judge not.
THese Words (being part of our Saviors most Divine Sermon upon the Mount)
contain a very short Precept, but of vast use, and consequence; the observance
whereof would much conduce to the good of the World, and to the private quiet
of each man; it interdicting a Practice, which commonly produces very
mischievous and troublesome Effects; a Practice never rare among men, but now
very rife; when with the general causes, which ever did and ever will in some
measure dispose men thereto, some special ones do concur, that powerfully
incline to it.

There are innate to men an injust Pride, emboldning them to take upon them
beyond what belongs to them, or does become them; an excessive Self-love,
prompting them as to flatter themselves in their own conceit, so to undervalue
others, and from vilifying their Neighbors, to seek commendation to
themselves; an envious malignity, which ever lusts to be pampered with
finding or making faults; many corrupt Affections, springing from fleshly
Nature, which draw or drive men to this Practice; so that in all Ages it has
been very common, and never any profession has been so much invaded, as that
of the Judge.

But diverse peculiar Causes have such an influence upon our Age, as more
strongly to sway men thereto: there is a wonderful affectation to seem hugely
wise and witty; and how can we seem such more, then in putting on the garb and
countenance of Judges; scanning, and passing Sentence upon all Persons, and all
things incident? there is an extreme niceness and delicacy of conceit, which
makes us apt to relish few things, and to distaste any thing; there are
dissensions in opinion, and addictedness to parties, which do tempt us, and
seem to authorize us in condemning all that differ from us; there is a deep
corruption of mind and manners, which engages men in their own defense to
censure others, diverting the blame from home, Expedit vobis neminem videri
bonum; quasi aliena virtus exprobratio vestrorum delictorum sit. Sen. de Vit.
B. 19.
and shrowding their own under the covert of other men's faults; there are new
principles of Morality, and Policy, become current with great vogue, which
allow to do or say any thing subservient to our Interests, or Designs; which
also do represent all men so bad, that (admitting them true) nothing hardly can
be said ill of any man beyond Truth and Justice.

Hence is the World become so extremely critical and censorious, (...). Chrysostom.
ad den. T. 6. Orat. 42.
that in many places the chief employment of men, and the main body of
conversation is, if we mark it, taken up in judging: Every gossiping is, as it
were, a Court of Justice; every seat becomes a Tribunal; at every Table
stands a Bar, whereto all men are cited, whereat every man (as it happens)
is arreigned, and sentenced: No sublimity or sacredness of Dignity, no
integrity or innocence of Life, no prudence or circumspection of Demeanor can
exempt any Person from it; Not one escapes being taxed under some scandalous
Name, or odious Character, one or other. Not only the outward Actions and
visible Practices of men are judged; but their retired sentiments are brought
under trial, their inward dispositions have a verdict past on them, their final
states are determined. Whole Bodies of men are thus judged at once, and nothing
it is in one breath to damn whole Churches, at one push to throw down whole
Nations into the bottomless Pit. All mankind in a lump is severely censured, as
void of any real goodness, or true virtue; so fatally depraved as not to be
corrigible by any good discipline, not to be recoverable even by the grace of
God: yea God himself is hardly spared, his Providence coming under the bold
obloquy of those, who (as the Psalmist speaks of some in his time, whose race
does yet survive) speak loftily, Psalm. 73. 8, 9.
and set their Mouth against the Heavens.

This being too apparently the present state of things, and obvious practice of
men, it were desirable, that in order to their being reclaimed, men commonly
did well understand the nature of this practice with the heinous guilt, and
consequently the deadly hazard they do incur thereby: at this purpose my
discourse shall aim, wherein I shall endeavor both to describe the nature of
the practice forbidden in my Text, and to declare the pravity, iniquity, and
folly of it.

Judge not. As to the word we may observe, that it being in it self according
to its primitive sense of a middle and indifferent signification, is yet
frequently in the Scripture used in the worst sense; so as to import those
acts, or those effects of judgment, which pass to the disadvantage of the
Persons subjected thereto; for condemnation, and for infliction of punishment:
And this sense here surely the word does principally respect, yet not so
precisely as to exclude somewhat contained in the larger sense: We are so
prohibited the condemning, and punishing our Neighbor in his good name, that
withal some acts antecedent, or concomitant to those, are glanced at in the
prohibition: undue application thereto, unjust proceeding therein are also
signified unlawful; for the meaning of the word, and the reason of the case may
be so far extended.

But for the fuller and clearer understanding of the matter, we must observe,
that there are diverse sorts of Judging, or acts resembling Judgment, which do
not belong to this precept; which it is requisite to distinguish from this
Judging prohibited.

1. That exercising public Judgment, or administering Justice is not here
prohibited, I need not to insist, that is necessary; Humane Society could not
subsist, Right could not be maintained, nor Peace preserved without it; God
thereby governs the World, earthly Judges being his Instruments and
Substitutes; such Judgment is not so much the act of men, as of God himself, by
whose Authority, in whose Name, for whose Service it is ministered. As Moses
told the Judges in his time, Deuteronomy. 1. 17.
You shall not be afraid of the Face of Man, for the Judgment is God's. And in
numberless places of Scripture this Judgment is allowed, and authorized; it
therefore is not touched here.

2. That Trial and Censure (although out of Court, and without formal process)
which any kind of Superiors do exercise upon their Inferiors, committed to
their inspection and care; such as of Parents over Children, Masters over
Servants, Pastors over their Flock, any Governors over their Charge, their
Admonitions, Reprehensions, and Corrections are to be excepted hence, as being
in themselves needful, and warranted, yea enjoined by God.

3. Neither are fraternal correption or friendly reproof (proceeding out of
charitable design, upon clear ground, in fit season, within reasonable compass)
concerned in this prohibition; this being a wholesome practice, and a duty
incumbent on us: Lev. 19. 17.
Thou shall (says the Law) not hate thy Brother in thine heart; 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.
thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer Sin upon him.

4. All observing, and reflecting upon our Neighbors Actions, all framing an
opinion about them, and expressing our Minds concerning them are not forbidden.
For we are not bound perpetually to shut our Eyes, or go about hood-winked; nor
to stop our Ears and make our selves deaf: And how can we forbear to think
according to plain evidence? how can we resist the impressions of sense upon
our Minds? how can we contest notorious experience? How also barring such
apprehensions of obvious and apparent things, could we bear testimony
concerning them? how could we signify our approbation or dislike of them? how
could we for his amendment admonish or reprove our Neighbor, as in some cases
we are obliged to do?

5. We are not hence obliged to think so well of all men, as without competent
knowledge always to rely upon their pretenses, or to entrust our interests in
their hands; for common experience acquainteth us that we may be deceived in
trusting men, Prudence bids us in matters of importance not to confide in
uncertainties; wherefore we shall not be culpable for being wary in such cases:
this indeed is not a positive Judgment, but only a waving to declare in favor,
when sufficient ground of doing so does not appear; it is only a reasonable
suspecting the possibility of miscarriage in some Persons, not a downright
asserting ill concerning any one man; wherefore to do it as it suiteth
discretion, so it does not thwart Justice or Charity; and cannot therefore be
prohibited here.

6. We are also not hence obliged, in contradiction to plain sense, to judge
well of men; accounting him for a Saint, or a good man, whom we see living
disorderly, or committing scandalous offenses; plainly repugnant to the rules
of Piety, Justice, or Sobriety.

In fine, There are some special cases, and circumstances, wherein good men
excusably may in severe terms declare their resentment of manifest wickedness,
especially such as is prejudicial to God's Honor, and public good. Of this
there are diverse instances, which yet hardly can be reduced to common rules, or
proposed for general example; the matter being ticklish, and men being apt to
pervert any liberty or pretense of this kind, by indulging to their own bad
humors and passions.

These sorts of allowable Judgments being excepted, it is then private,
affected, needless, groundless, rash and harsh censuring the persons or actions
of our Brethren; such as does resemble not the acting of a lawful Superior, of
a needful Witness, of a faithful Friend, but of a Judge, acting without
competent right, upon no good grounds, or in undue manner, which is here
interdicted: the word Judging does well imply the nature of this Fault, the
manner of our proceeding therein, the grounds of its unlawfulness; neither
perhaps can we better understand our duty in this matter, then by expending
what are the Properties and Obligations of a Judge, and comparing our practice
thereto; for thence it may plainly appear how unqualified we are to bear this
Office, and how unduly we execute it.

1. No Judge should intrude himself into the Office, or assume a Judicial Power
without competent Authority; that is, by delegation from Superior Powers, or by
voluntary reference of the Parties concerned. This Condition we fail in,
whenever without warrant from God, or special reason exacting it from us, we
do pry into, scan, and tax the Actions of our Neighbor. 1 Pet. 4. 15.
When, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11.
I say, we are pragmatically inquisitive into the Purposes and Proceedings of
our Superiors, Prove. 27. 16.
of our Equals, 1 Timothy 5. 13.
of those who are not subject to our Charge and Care, when we narrowly examine
them: When we peremptorily blame them, then do we unduly exalt our selves above
them, and exercise an unwarrantable jurisdiction over them. What Sense does
offer, we may receive in; what Judgment Reason does extort, we may follow; what
Testimony public Benefit requires, we may yield; what Expression Charity does
call for toward our Neighbor's edification, we may seasonably vent: but if we
proceed further in this way, the Party concerned may appeal from us as
incompetent and unlawful Judges of his actions, Quid in potestatem alienam
irruis? quid temerarius Dei Tribunal ascendis? Opt. lib. 2.
or his state; we are arrogant and injurious in presuming to exercise that
Office. God is the Master and Judge of Men, and without Authority from him, we
must not presume to judge his Servants and Subjects: So we are taught by S.
Paul; Romans 14. 4.
Who (says he) art thou that judge another man's Servant? to his own Master
he stands or falls: and S. James in like manner upon the same ground
expostulateth with the Censurer; Jam. 4. 11.
There is (says he) one Lawgiver, who is able to save, or to destroy; Who art
thou that judge another? Our Lord himself for this reason declined
intermedling in the affairs of Men; Luke 12. 14.
Who (said he) made me a Judge, or Divider over you? And shall we constitute our
selves in the Office, shall we seat our selves on the Tribunal, without any
Commission from God, or Call from Men? How many Judges, if this proviso were
observed, would have their quietus? how many Censures would be voided hence?

2. A Judge should be free from all Prejudices, and all partial Affections;
especially from those which are disadvantagious to the Party in danger to
suffer; Levit. 19. 15.
such as tempt or incline to condemn him; from ill-opinion, and ill will, from
anger, envy, revengefulness, contempt, and the like: for he that is possessed
with these, is no wise qualified to be a Judge; his eyes are blinded, or
distorted, or infected with bad tinctures, so that he cannot discern what is
right, or that he sees things represented in the wrong place, and under false
colors: His Mind is discomposed and disturbed, so that he cannot calmly and
steadily apprehend or consider the just state of the Case; his Will is biassed,
and strongly propendeth one way, so that he cannot proceed uprightly in a
straight and even course: Being not indifferently affected, but concerned on
one side, Jam. 2. 1.
he is become a Party, Matthew. 22. 16.
or an Adversary, 1 Timothy 5. 21.
and thence unfit to be a Judge; He has determined the Cause with himself
beforehand, so that no place is left to further discussion or defense;
wherefore before such a Judge the best Cause will fall, the clearest Innocence
shall not preserve from condemnation. He therefore that will undertake this
Office, must first divest himself of all Prejudices, must rid himself of all
Passions, must purify himself from all corrupt Inclinations, taking care not to
come with a condemning Mind, or a lust to punish the obnoxious Party; otherwise
a just Exception lies against him, and reasonably his Jurisdiction may be
declined.

If this Rule were put in practice, there would be little censuring; for few
come to it with a free and pure Mind; few blame their Neighbors without some
preoccupation of Judgment, or some disaffection toward them.

3. A Judge should never proceed in Judgment, without careful examination of the
Cause, so as well to understand it. Deuteronomy. 1. 16.
Even those, who out of indispensible Duty, or by a just Power may call others
to account, are yet obliged to be wary, and never to pass Sentence without due
congnizance of the Cause; otherwise they will judge blindly and rashly; they
will either decide wrongly, or so truly, that doing it must be imputed not to
their Virtue, but to their Fortune; often they will be mistaken, and it is luck
that they are not so always; and what plainer Iniquity can there be, then that
the Reputation or real Interest of any Man should be put to the arbitrament of
Chance; that he should be defamed, or damnified, not for a certain Fault, but
from an unhappy Lot? As things viewed at a distance appear much different in
bigness, shape, and color from what they are in nature and reality; so if we
do not look nearly and narrowly, we shall greatly misapprehend the nature, the
degrees, the right characters of things, and of persons; then be our pretense
to judge never so fair, yet our proceeding is unjust; then if we do unduly
invade the place, it will be a great aggravation of our misdemeanour: If of our
own head and pleasure, we will constitute our selves Judges, yet at least we
should act the Judges part, in patiently attending to, and heedfully sifting
the Cause: If we have not a stomach to hear, if we will not afford the care to
mind what may be alleged in favor of the Party concerned; if we cannot, or
will not scan every Point and Circumstance, which may serve to acquit him, or
to excuse and extenuate his Guilt, why do we undertake to be his Judges? Why do
we engage our selves into the Commission of so palpable injustice? yea, Prove.
18. 13.
of so disgraceful folly: for, He that answers a Matter before he hears it,
it is (says the wise Man) a folly, and shame unto him. This Caution excludes
rash Judgment, from which if Men would abstain, there would be little
censuring: for nothing is more ordinary, then for men to do like those of whom
S. Jude says, (...), Jud. 10.
they rail at what they know not; they censure Persons with whom they are not
thoroughly acquainted, they condemn Actions, whereof they do not clearly ken the
Reasons; they little weigh the Causes and Circumstances which urge or force men
to do things; they stand at great distance, and yet with great assurance and
peremptoriness determine how things are, as if they did see through them, and
knew them most exactly.

4. A Judge should never pronounce final Sentence, but ex allegatis and
probatis, upon good grounds, after certain Proof, and upon full Conviction. Not
any slight Conjecture, or thin Surmise; any idle Report, or weak Pretense is
sufficient to ground a Condemnation upon; the Case should be irrefragably clear
and sure before we determine on the worse side: John 7. 24.
Judge not (says our Lord) according to the appearance, -- (...). Ch^ys. in
Genesis Hom. 42
but judge righteous Judgment. The Jews seeing our Lord cure an infirm Person
upon the Sabbath Day, presently upon that semblance condemned him of violating
the Law; not considering either the sense of the Law, or the nature of his
performance; Quod probari non potest, mihi infectum est. Bern.
and this he terms unrighteous Judgment. Every Accusation should be deemed
null, De occultis cordis alieni temere judicare iniquum est, and cum cujus non
videntur opera nisi bona, peccatum est ex suspicione reprehendere. Joh. 3. 1.
Ep. 1.
until both as to matter of fact, and in point of right, it be firmly proved
true; it suffices not to presume it may be so; to say, It seems thus, does
not sound like the Voice of a Judge; otherwise seeing there never is wanting
some color of Accusation, every Action being liable to some suspicion, or
sinister construction, no Innocence could be secure, no Person could escape
condemnation; the Reputation and Interest of all men living would continually
stand exposed to inevitable danger. It is a Rule of Equity and Humanity, built
upon plain Reason, that rather a Nocent Person should be permitted to escape,
then an Innocent should be constrained to suffer: for the impunity of the one
is but an inconvenience, the suffering of the other is a wrong; the punishment
of the Guilty, yields only a remote probable benefit; the affliction of the
Blameless, involveth a near certain mischief: wherefore it is more prudent and
more righteous to absolve a Man, of whose guilt there are probable Arguments,
then to condemn any Man upon bare suspicions. And remarkable it is how God in
the Law did prescribe the manner of Trial and Judgment, even in the highest
Case, and most nearly touching himself, that of Idolatry; If (says the Law,
Deuteronomy. 17. 4.) it be told thee, and thou have heard of it, and enquired
diligently, and behold it be true, and the thing certain, that such an
abomination is wrought in Israel; then shall thou bring forth that man, or that
woman, and shall stone them: See what great Caution is prescribed, what
pregnant Evidence is required in such Cases; it is not enough that it be
reported, or come to our ear; diligent inquiry must be made, it must be found
true, it must appear certain, before we may proceed to condemn, or execute; it
is indeed not fair judgment, but mere calumny to condemn a man, before he does
by sufficient proof appear guilty.

If this Rule were regarded, how many Censures would be prevented? For do not
men catch at any shadow of a Fault? are they not ready upon the least
presumption to condemn their Neighbor? Does not any, even the weakest and
vainest testimony, any wandering hearsay, or vulgar rumor serve to ground the
most heavy Sentences?

5. From hence is plainly consequent, that there are diverse Causes wholly
exempted from our Judgment, and which in no case we must pretend to meddle
with; such as are the secret thoughts, affections, and purposes of men, not
expressed by plain words, nor declared by overt acts; for a capacity of
judging, does ever suppose a power of cognizance; and it being impossible for
us to reach the knowledge of those things, we cannot therefore pretend to judge
of them. As it is the property of God to search the Hearts, and try the Reins,
so it is his Prerogative to judge concerning the secret motions in them; the
which we attempting to do, no less vainly and foolishly, then presumptuously
and profanely do encroach upon.

This Point also being regarded, would prevent innumerable rash Judgments; for
men commonly do no less dive into the thoughts, and reprehend, the inward
dispositions and designs of their Neighbor, then they do his most apparent and
avowed Actions; it is almost as ordinary to blame men for the invisible workings
of their Mind, as for their most visible deportment in Conversation.

6. Hence also it is not commonly allowable to judge concerning the state
(either present or final) of our Neighbor in regard to God; (...). Greg. Naz.
Orat. 26.
so as to take him for a wicked man, or to denounce Reprobation upon him: for
the state of men is not so much determined by single Actions, as by a body of
Practice, or by a long course and tenor of Life, compounded and complicated of
Actions in number and kind unconceivably various, it depends not only upon
external visible Behavior, but upon the practice of close Retirements, and
occult motions of Soul; upon the results of natural Temper, upon the influence
of fortuitous Circumstances; upon many things indiscernible, inscrutable, Psalm.
139. 6.
and unaccomptable to us; the which God alone can perceive, and estimate
thoroughly: 1 Samuel 16. 7.
God sees not (as he did himself tell Samuel) as man sees; Isa. 11. 3.
for man looks on the outward appearance, but God locketh on the heart: He
searches our hearts, Psalm. 139. 2, 3.
and understands our thoughts afar off: He compasses our path, and is
acquainted with all our ways: Prove. 16. 2.
He weighs our spirits; he knows our frame; 1 Samuel 2. 3.
he numbreth our steps; he scanneth our Designs, Psalm. 103. 14.
and poiseth all our Circumstances exactly; Job 14. 16.
he does penetrate, and consider many things transcending our reach, upon which
the true worth of Persons, and real merit of Actions do depend; he therefore
only can well judge of men's state. As a specious outside does often cover
inward hollowness and foulness, so under an unpromising appearance much
solidity and sincerity of Goodness may lodge; a dirty ground does often contain
good Seeds within it; our judgment therefore in such Cases is likely (at least
in degree) to be fallacious and unjust; and therefore it is fit to supersede
it, according to the advice and discourse of S. Paul; 1 Cor. 4. 5.
He that judges me is the Lord; Therefore judge nothing before the time, until
the Lord come; who both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and
make manifest the counsels of the heart; and then shall every man have praise
(that is a right estimate of his Person and Deeds) from God.

If this were duly considered, many hard thoughts, and many harsh words would
be spared; Men would not be so apt to damn those, whom they have no skill to
try.

7. Farther; A Judge should not undertake to proceed against any man, without
warning and citing him to appear, or without affording him competent liberty
and opportunity to defend and justify himself. Judgment should not be
administered clancularly, in dark Corners, but in open Court; not suspiciously,
in a muttering or whispering way; but frankly, with a clear and audible voice;
not upon surprise, but with allowance of leisure and advice, that the Party may
be able to apprehend his Case, and manage his Plea, for his best defense: for
it may justly be presumed, that as he is most concerned, so he is best
acquainted with his own Proceedings, and may allege Reasons for them, which no
man can so well perceive as himself; it is therefore fit that he should be
heard, before he is condemned, that he may not suffer wrong; at least that he
may be convinced that he does not, and that our proceeding may be cleared from
misprision; that also the World may be satisfied of Justice being done; and
that likewise false Accusers may be liable to due shame and chastisement. The
manner of proceeding used by the Romans, Acts 25. 16.
and reported by Festus in S. Paul's Case, was full of reason and equity: It is
not (said that Governor) the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to die,
before that he, which is accused, have the Accusers face to face, and have
license to answer for himself, concerning the Crime laid against him: Otherwise
indeed any Innocence may easily be oppressed irrecoverably, (...), etc. Theod.
Ep. 91.
without any defense, and consequently without any means of evasion or redress.
We should never yield both ears to the Accuser, but reserve one for the
Accused. God himself (as some of the Fathers observe) has showed us an Example
of this Equity, descendam igitur and videbo, etc. Genesis 18. 21. (...). Theod. Ep
119 and P. Pelagius ad Eliam.
The end of Justice, we may consider, is not to condemn nor to work mischief to
any one, but rather, so far as may be, to acquit and prevent evil to all; at
least it aims to clear the Truth, and state the Case indifferently; wherefore
it is just, that all advantage that well can be, should be afforded to the
obnoxious Party for his justification and deliverance; at least that he be not
denied equal advantage with his Prosecutors; Humanity would allow him some
favor; the most rigorous Justice cannot refuse him leave to contest his Cause
upon equal terms: wherefore it is fit that he should be acquainted with his
Case, that competent time and means should be afforded him to prepare for his
Defense, that his Plea should receive, if not a favorable, yet a free
audience: the contrary practice is indeed rather backbiting, whispering,
supplanting, or sycophantry, then fair and lawful judging.

The observation of this Rule would also cut off many Censures; for seldom it
is that our Censurers do charge men to their faces, but rather take all
possible care, that what they say may never come to the ears of those whom they
accuse; they fear nothing more then being confronted, and detected; they
decline the shame and the requital due to their sycophantick practice; which is
a manifest Argument of their foul dealing; and they no less in reality do
thence condemn themselves, then they would seem to condemn others.

8. Moreover, a Judge is obliged to conform all his Determinations to the settled
Rules of Judgment, so as never to condemn any man for acting that, which is
injoined, or approved, or permitted by them; he must not pronounce according to
his private fancy, or particular affection, but according to the standing Laws;
which as they are the only certain Rules of Moral Action, the only Grounds of
Obligation, the only Standards of Guilt and Innocence, so in reason they should
be the sole Measures of Judging; he that proceeds otherwise, is an arbitrary
and a slippery Judge; he encroacheth upon the Right and Liberty of those with
whom he medleth, pronouncing them Guilty, whom God and Reason do proclaim
blameless. This is that which S. Paul does reprove in the 14 th to the Romans,
Romans 14.
and other-where; 1 Cor. 8. 8.
the Case was this; Col. 2. 16.
Some were of opinion, that abstaining from some kinds of Meat, and observing
some Festival Times, were matters of Duty required by God; others thought it
free to eat any thing, and to use any times alike: these, according to such
their private opinions, did censure the practices of each other; one Party
condemned the other as transgressing Duty, the other contemned them as weak in
Judgment; but the Apostle reproves both as irregular in their Behavior, in
taxing one another for Matters which on both hands were indifferent; the Divine
Law having clearly neither enjoined those observances, nor prohibited them; so
that each man had a liberty to do, or to abstain, as he thought good, or most
agreeable to his Duty, and conducible to his Salvation: So is it culpable in us
to blame any man for doing that which is not repugnant to God's express
Command, or to the plain Dictates of Reason.

The observing this Condition, would smother many Censures: For do we not
commonly reprehend our Neighbors for practices wholly blameless, perhaps
commendable? Do we not sometimes grievously reproach them for not complying
with our Desires, for not serving our Interests, for not jumping with our
Humors, for not dancing after our Pipe; for dissenting from us in any Conceit,
although dubious or false; for discosting from our practice, although bad or
inconvenient? Say we not ordinarily, he is morose, peevish, singular, rude,
because he will not run with us into the same excess of Riot; he is weak, nice,
superstitious, because he constantly and strictly adhereth to his Duty; he is
negligent, loose, profane, because he uses his liberty in some mattets
indifferent? Bar such matters of obloquy, into how narrow a compass would it be
restrained?

9. Hence farther it is to be supposed, that a Judge should be a Person of good
Knowledge and Ability; (...). Arist. ^th. ^. 3.
well versed and skilful in the Laws concerning Matters under debate; endued
with good measure of Reason, enabling him as to sift and canvas Matters of
Fact, so to compare them accurately with the Rules of Right; for nothing is
more absurd then an Ignorant, and unskilful Judge. Men therefore of weak
Capacity, of mean Education, of small Experience, are qualified to judge in few
Cases, most things being placed above their reach; such never should presume to
censure Actions, the worth or moral quality whereof, depend upon the stating
and resolution of abstruse, intricate, or subtle Questions: It is not
therefore for Mechanics or Rusticks to judge about Difficulties of Science,
about Controversies in Religion, about Mysteries of Policy, or Reasons of
State; or to censure those who deal in them; in so doing, they hugely trespass
beyond their Calling and Sphere; they do strangely misbecome the Bench, and
will very untowardly misbehave themselves thereon; the decision of such Matters
is to be reserved to those, who by study and experience have attained peculiar
Faculties to do it respectively.

Observing this Point, would draw many down from their usurped Seats of
Judicature, and stop numberless vain Sentences; we should have very few Judges
left, if all men would be so modest and so wise, as not to meddle beyond their
skill and ability.

10. Again; It is proper for a Judge not to make himself an Accuser; not to seek
for Misdemeanors; Sine dubio in omnibus statim accusationibus hoc agendum est,
ne ad eas libenter descendisse videamur. Quintil. 11. 1.
not to draw more Causes under his cognizance, then are in course presented
before him: He should rather judge as out of constraint, then of choice; rather
as sorry to find a Necessity, then glad to snatch an occasion of condemning
Offenders. So should we rather decline, then seek the Office of censuring our
Brethren, rather conniving at, and concealing their Faults, then being forward
to expose them; absolute Reason only should induce, or indispensible Necessity
force us thereto.

This also greatly would diminish the Trade of Censuring; for if we should
never censure without great Reason or necessity, how seldom should we do it? Do
we not rather affect to do it causlesly and needlessly? do we not eagerly search
after, and greedily embrace all occasions to do it? Is it not a pleasant
entertainment to us, to be carping and cavelling at any Body we meet, at any
thing we see done? Farther,

11. He that pretends to judge others, should himself be innocent; under no
Indictment, and not liable to Condemnation: Cum ipse sis reus, in alterum audes
far sententiam? Opt. 2.
Is it not very improper for a Criminal, for one who is not only in Truth, and
in his own Conscience guilty, but who stands actually convicted of heinous
Offenses, to sit upon the Bench, determining about the Deeds and the States of
others? It is the case of us all, we are all notoriously guilty of heinous
Crimes before God, Psalm. 143. 2.
we all do lie under the Sentence of his Law; we do all stand in need of Pardon
from our Judge, his Mercy is our only Hope and Refuge; and shall we then pretend
to be Judges, or be passing Sentence on our Brethren? If only those, who are
free and guiltless, should judge, who could undertake it? there would surely be
no more, then there appeared then, when in the Case of the Woman taken in
Adultery, our Lord propounded the like condition; (...), Joh. 8. 7, 9.
He that is without sin among you, let him cast the first stone at her: upon
which Proposition the Sequel was; And they which heard it, being convicted by
their own Conscience, went out one by one, beginning at the eldest, even to the
last; and Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing in the midst; so
infallibly should no man be allowed to judge, who were not himself void of like
Guilt, would every man escape censure.

12. Lastly; It is the property of a good Judge to proceed with great
moderation, equity, candor, and mildness; as a general Friend, a Friend to
Justice, to the Public, to Mankind, to the Party impeached: As a Friend to
Justice, he should be careful that the Defendant receive no wrong in his
Credit, or Interest; as a lover of the Public, he should wish that no Offenses
or Scandals be found; out of humanity he should desire, that no man may incur
the blemish of guilt, or pain of suffering; he should tender the Parties Case
as compassionable, and desire that he may be delivered from the evil threatening
him; this should render him willing to acquit, and free the Party, apt to
apprehend and interpret all things favorably, ready to excuse and mollify the
business what he can; far from picking faults out of obscure surmises, or
slender pretenses, from aggravating the miscarriages that are detected, from
stretching the blame farther then it will reach of it self, or making the case
worse then it needs must be, from pronouncing a harsh or heavy sentence
thereon. He should always be of Counsel to the Defendant, pleading his Cause so
far as truth and equity will permit; putting himself in his Case, and thence no
wise dealing with him more rigorously, then he, according to impartial
judgment, should in the like case deem it equal that himself should be dealt
with: in fine, however the Matter in the result appear to stand, he should
avoid rigor and extremity, he should exercise clemency and mercy.

If this course were observed, innumerable Causes, which now are severely
judged, would never be mentioned, or come under trial, but would presently be
cast out; many would soon, after small discussion, be voided; few would pass
that extremity of censure, which now by the cruel asperity of men, they are
forced to undergo: For do we not accuse men for things, that are no Faults; do
we not exaggerate the guilt of petty Faults? do we not insult over great
miscarriages with too unmerciful severity? as if they were incorrigible and
unpardonable.

Seeing then few of us, according to those reasonable qualifications and
conditions, are capable of being Judges; seeing, if those equal Rules were
observed, most Censures would be discarded; seeing hard it is for any man
either warrantably to undertake, or uprightly to discharge this Office; great
reason there is for this Precept, most fit it is that we should be forbidden to
judge.

So much for the part explicative, and directive; now for the persuasive, and
for inducing us to eschew this practice, let us briefly declare the pravity and
vanity of it; the performing which, will I suppose, be sufficient to dissuade
and deter us from it. Be pleased only first to note, that some Considerations
which we shall propound, will be applicable to some kind of bad censure, some
to another, according to the several defects and incapacities we have to judge
lawfully, upon the grounds already touched.

1. Censuring is an impious practice in regard to God.

By taking upon our selves to judge unduly, without Authority, or beyond it, we
do invade God's Office, setting up our selves as Judges in his room; we usurp
his Right, exercising Jurisdiction over his Subjects, without order and license
from him: it is S. Paul's Argument, Romans 14. 4.
Who art thou that judge another Servant? that is, how intollerably bold and
arrogant, how sacrilegiously injurious and profane art thou, to climb up into
God's Tribunal, and thence to pronounce doom upon his Subjects?

By rash judgment in matters not subject to our cognizance, (as when we
pronounce concerning the secret thoughts and intentions of men) we proudly and
perversely do arrogate to our selves the incommunicable Perfections of God, who
alone can know such things, and determine rightly in such cases; who therefore
has reserved them to himself, 1 Cor. 4. 5.
commanding us to judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come.

By passing Sentence about the state of our Neighbor, we do anticipate God's
Judgment, and by prejudging strive to frustrate it. We take upon us to purge
his Floor; Matt. 3. 12, 13. and 25. 32.
to sever the Chaff from the Corn, and the Tares from the Wheat, Quantus
arrogantiae tumor est, quanta humilitatis ac lenitatis oblivio, arrogantiae
suae quanta jactatio, at quis aut facere se posse credat, quod nec Apostolis
concessit Dominus, ut zizania a frumento putet se posse discernere, aut quasi
ipsi paleam auferre, and aream purgare concessum sit, paleas conetur a tritico
separare? Cypr. Ep. 52.
to discriminate the Goats from the Sheep; which to perform, will be the Work
of God's Infinite Wisdom and Justice at the great day.

By censuring our Brethren causlesly, for not complying with our conceits,
humors, or practices, we lay hold upon, and appropriate to our selves God's
Legislative Power; we subject his Law to our fancy and pleasure; we in effect
condemn his Law of Error and Imperfection; we do at least make our selves
sharers with him in the enacting Laws, and dispensing Justice: He (says S.
James) that speaks against his Brother, Jam. 4. 11.
and judges his Brother, speaks against the Law, and judges the Law; that
is, he opprobriously does imply the Law to be defective, until he does complete
or correct it; making it a guilt not to satisfy his Will or Conceit, beside the
plain intent of the Law; the dispensation of Justice is not sufficient, unless
he partake therein, taxing whom and why he pleases; God without him is not a
perfect Lawgiver, or Judge.

We are also very ungrateful in not being favorable toward our Brethren in
Judgment; when as God is in his Judgment so benign, patient, and merciful
toward us; Psalm. 130. 3.
who is not extreme to mark what we do amiss; is not forward to seek or find
faults, Isa. 30. 18.
but rather waits to be gracious, hides his face from our sins; Psalm. 51. 9.
and passes by our trangressions; Mic. 7. 18.
does not aggravate our offenses, Psalm. 78. 39. and 103. 14.
but rather does excuse them, remembering that we are flesh; is not glad of
occasion to punish, Mic. 7. 18.
but delights in mercy; Lam. 3. 33.
and does not afflict willingly, or grieve the children of men; is not severe,
Ezr. 9. 13.
but punishes us less than our iniquities deserve; Hab. 3. 2.
and in his wrath remembers mercy. And are we not impious, if we do so ill
requite him, and so little resemble him, in being rigorous and harsh toward our
Brethren, when they offend* or seem to do so?

In fine; Censuring is impious, as involving the violation of those great
Commandments, of exercising (in all our demeanor and dealing) Humility,
Meekness, Pity, and Mercy toward our Brethren; of pursuing and promoting peace
among them.

2. Censuring, in respect to our Neighbor, is an unjust practice. It is unjust
to meddle in Affairs, with which we have nothing to do; to draw those Persons
under our Jurisdiction, who are not subject to it, but are liable to render
their Account at another Bar; to punish those in their reputation or interest,
over whom we have no just Authority, who have their own Master, to whom they
must stand or fall.

It Is most unjust to judge any man without competent means of knowing, or skill
to determine his Case; to condemn him without diligent trial, without certain
proof, without full conviction of his Fault; to punish him without just cause,
or beyond due measure.

It Is very unjust to usurp an interest in the Goods, which are to our Neighbor
most proper and dear; his Credit and Concernments depend thereon; disposing of
them as we please, to his disadvantage and prejudice.

It Is also very unjust, -- aequum est Peccatis veniam poscentem reddere rursus.
Hor. S^rm. 1 3. Det ille veniam facile, cui venia est opus. Sen. Tr.
when as we do need the candid Judgment, the forbearance, and pardon of others
for many things faulty and offensive that we commit, to refuse the like to
others.

3. Censuring is also a very uncharitable practice, and so contrary to the
principal Duty of our Religion; it is so eminently in all cases wherein it is
unjust, (for Charity does virtually contain Justice, and transcendeth it) it is
so peculiarly whenever it is harsh or rigorous, when it is affected; when it
is needless or unprofitable; for Charity disposes us to be gentle, meek,
patient, and merciful in all our dealings; it engages us to hide and smother,
to diminish and excuse, to pass by and pardon Offenses; 1 Cor. 13. 5, 7. (...).
Naz. Or. 21.
Charity seeks no evil, it covers all things, it bears all things; it
tendreth our Neighbor's good, and advantage of all kinds, (his credit, his
interest, his convenience, and pleasure) it therefore will inflict no more
evil, then reason and necessity shall indispensably require.

A Censurer is indeed unjust and uncharitable, not only toward those whom he
censureth, but also toward those into whom thereby he does infuse ill-opinion,
and ill will toward their Neighbor; he is guilty of their injustice and
uncharitableness, a mischief more irreparable then his own.

4. Censuring is a very foolish and vain practice in manifold respects; Est
proprium stultitiae aliorum vitia cernere, oblivisci s^orum. Cic. Tusc. 1.
as arguing great ignorance and inconsiderateness, as producing grievous
inconveniences and mischiefs; especially to the practiser of it.

It signifies, that we do not well understand, or not well consider the
natural impotency and frailty of mankind; how liable others are to mistake, and
slip; and how prone we our selves are thereto; how (as S. James says) in many
things we offend all; Jam. 3. 2.
Did we observe, or would weigh this; we should not be so forward to censure,
or so vehement and bitter in it; we should see failing and tripping in many
things to be a common case, rather demanding commiseration then censure.

It implies also, that we little consider, how our escaping any Faults, which
our neighbor slippeth into, is no wise imputable to any worth or virtue in us,
so much as the good Providence, and merciful Grace of God, guarding or rescuing
us from them; if we did apprehend and reflect on this, it would appear our Duty
rather to bless God for our being protected from miscarriages, then
censoriously to insult over those who seem to fall into them. It signifies we
have no sight or sense of our own defects; for did we clearly see, did we
humbly resent them, that would damp our heat and earnestness to censure. It
declares a fond self-conceit, that we deem our selves superior to our Neighbor
in Wisdom, and less obnoxious to blame, and therefore fit to be his Judges;
whereas according to a sober esteem of our selves, we should appear more fit to
stand at the Bar, then to sit upon the Bench; and should thence more dread the
one, then affect the other.

It shows likewise, that we do not rightly conceive the nature, or worthily
esteem the consequences of this practice: We know not, or regard not, the value
of our Neighbor's Reputation, which by censure we do mean to ruin, or impair:
We perhaps by no means would rob him of his Substance, or of his Life; yet we
scruple not by grievous censure to bereave him of his good Name; which he, the
best prizer of his own Goods, may esteem beyond his Estate, or his Life it
self; we think it nothing, or a slight matter to carp at him, but he feels it
very painful, and deeply resenteth it.

It argues in us an untamed fierceness of mind, and discomposedness of
passion, which can never consist or cohabit with Wisdom; for a well-ordered,
calm, and free mind, will be slow in conceiving offense or dislike, moderate in
estimating things, Prove. 12, 16. A fools wrath is presently known; but a
prudent man covers shame.
reserved in expressing its sentiments, not easily transported into extremity
or excess; it consequently hardly will suffer a Man to break forth into rash or
harsh censure. Prove. 29. 11. A fool utters all his mind; but a wise man
keeps it till afterward.
So many Signs and Arguments of incogitancy and blindness this Practice does
involve.

5. Furthermore, this practice will produce many great inconveniences and
mischiefs to us.

1. We do thereby provoke, and in a sort authorize others to requite us in the
same kind: ^at tibi contra (...), inquirant ^i^ia ut tra (...), and ^lli^ Hor.
Sermon (...)
for nothing more does excite the indignation, does inflame the anger, does
engender the hatred of men toward us, then being pragmatical in finding fault,
and hasty to censure their doings, causlesly or immoderately; nothing seeming
to them a more certain Argument that we bear them ill will, or do contemn them;
and if we so vex them, they will in requital be as ready by finding or making
faults in us, to vex and trouble us; it engages their care, and quickneth
their industry, and whetteth their invention to observe, or devise matter of
recrimination. Men think it not only lawful, but even needful for them, in
their own defense, to disparage the Censurer, that his judgment may have the
less weight to their prejudice: So that it will infalliby come upon us, as our
Lord warns (using it as an Argument to dissuade us from this practice) that,
Matt. 7 2.
with what judgment we judge, we shall be judged; Luke 6. 37, 38.
and with what measure we mete, it shall be measured to us again: Men take it
for allowable to retaliate in this way to the height, and stoutly to load the
censorious man with censure.

2. We do by this practice, Vid. Chrysostom. in Matt. Or* 36. p. 249.
not only expose our selves to censure, but implicitly, and according to ready
consequence do pass it upon our selves; seeing we seldom, in kind or
equivalently, are our selves clear of that which we charge upon others; with
our own weapon of sharp censure, we through another's side do imprudently wound
our selves; 2 Samuel 12.
and often, as David did in his Parley with Nathan, adjudg our selves to
capital punishment; so that to any censorious Person, it may be said, Romans 2. 1.
in S. Paul's words, Wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self;
for thou that judge, do the same things.

3. We do by censuring others, aggravate our own faults, (...). Chrysostom. (...).
Romans 2. 1, 3.
and deprive them of excuse, and render ourselves incapable of Mercy and
Pardon: for of all men, he that is forward and prone to censure, who is
rigorous and severe in judging others, deserves no favor, nor can reasonably
pretend thereto. Inexcusable (says S. Paul) art thou, O man, whosoever thou
art, that judge; for, -- (...). Naz. Or. 26. (...). Chrysostom. ad Demet. Tom. 6.
Or. 52.
think thou this, O Man, that judge them which do such things, and do
the same, that thou shall escape the Judgment of God? and, (...). Do not (says
S. James) moanfully complain one against another, Jam. 5. 9. and 2. 13.
lest you be condemned; and, He shall have judgment without mercy, that has
showed no mercy, in his judgment, says the same Apostle. Which passages imply,
(...). Chrysostom. Ibid.
that to be unmerciful in this kind, (...). Ibid.
will expose us to the severity of Judgment in regard to our offenses; or, that
if we deal harshly with our Brethren now, God will then proceed the more
severely toward us, when our great Cause does come under trial.

4. Indeed censuring others is an Argument, that we do little mind our own
case, or consider to what a dreadful Judgment we do stand obnoxious: did we
think of that, we should see cause rather to employ our leisure and care in
stating our own Accounts, then in examining those of others; more advisable it
would appear to mind our own case, then to busy our selves in canvasing and
determining the state of our Neighbor; finding what great need our Actions
will have in that day of favorable construction, and merciful allowance, we
should become candid and mild in reflecting upon the actions of others; we
should not be forward to carp at any thing, we should scarce have the heart to
condemn any man; this S. Paul seems to imply, Romans 14. 10.
when he thus argues: Why do thou judge thy Brother, or why do thou set at
naught thy Brother? We shall all stand at the Judgment Seat of Christ; that is,
Why do any of us judge others, seeing we must all be judged our selves? (...).
Chrysostom. in 2 Timothy Orat. 2.
It is not seemly, it is not expedient for those, who soon must be arraigned,
and put to answer for themselves, to be busy in questioning and prejudging
others; but rather to spend their care and pains in preparing for their own
Account.

5. Nothing indeed more causes us to neglect our own case, nothing more
engages us to leave our own Faults unobserved and uncorrected, (...). Chrysostom.
(...).
then this humor. It is easy to observe, that as they who are most sparing and
gentle in censure, are usually most exempt from blame (for that carefully
reflecting upon their own infirmities and defects, spending their heat and
activity of spirit upon amending their own Errors and Faults, they have less
time, less concernment, less mind to search out and scan the imperfections and
misdemeanors of others; they do find less reason also, Vid. Chrysostom. Tom. 2. Or.
42.
and therefore have less will to be fierce or severe toward them) so the most
censorious are usually the most stupid in discerning, and most careless in
retrenching their own faults. Sen. de Vit. B. 27.
And needs it must be so, for the Actions of other men devour their leisure,
take up the intention of their spirits, employ the keenness of their passions
upon them, (...). Naz. Orat. 8.
so that they cannot, and will not attend to themselves; they are so much
abroad, they are so very busy otherwhere, that they little know, or care what
is done at home; while they are spying and pulling out Motes from their
Brothers eye, Mat 7. 3, 4. (...). Naz. Ep 27. (...). Naz. Orat. 21.
they consider not the Beam that is in their own eye, although never so gross
and obvious.

6. Hence, I say, it is that commonly the best men are the most candid and
gentle, and they are most apt to blame others, who deserve worse themselves;
that the sharpest tongues, and foulest lives do usually go together; that they
who are the strictest Judges of their own, are the fairest Interpreters of
other men's actions; Ego mi ignosco, Maenius inquit; Stulcus and improbus hic
amor est, dignusque notari. Hor. Sermon. l. 3.
and they who will least pardon others, do most excuse themselves; that they
who are strangely acute in descrying other men's Faults, are stark blind in
discerning their own. Our Savior therefore charge such Persons with
Hypocrisy, (Thou Hypocrite; first cast the Beam out of thine own eye)
implying, that they do but falsely pretend a respect for goodness and zeal
against Sin, seeing in their own practice they indulge it; that it is indeed
rather pride, peevishness, idleness, spleen, or selfish design that acts them.

7. In fine; The censorious humor, as it argues ill nature to be predominant,
(a vulturous nature, which easily smells out, and hastily flies toward, and
greedily feeds on Carrion) as it signifies bad Conscience; for he that
knows evil of himself, is most prone to suspect, and most quick to pronounce
ill concerning others; so it breeds and fostereth such ill dispositions; it
debaucheth the minds of men, rendering them dim, and doltish in apprehending
their own Faults, negligent and heedless in regard to their own hearts and
ways; apt to please and comfort themselves in the evils, real or imaginary, of
their Neighbors; which to do, is a very barbarous and brutish practice.

These Considerations may, I hope, suffice to persuade the observance of this
Precept, by the help of God's Grace, to which I commend you, and conclude.

Now the God of Peace -- make you perfect in every good Work to do his Will,
working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ,
to whom^ be glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

The Ninth Sermon.
1 THESSALONIANS. 4. 11. And that ye study to be quiet, Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. Orat. 19.
and to do your own Business.
AS frequently between neighboring States there do rise Dissentions and
Contests about the just limits of their Territories; so does it frequently
happen between Virtue and Vice, Right and Wrong, Duty and Miscarriage in
Practice: for although the extreme Degrees; and even the middle Regions of
these things are very distant, yet the Borders of them do lie very close
together, and are in a manner contiguous; a certain ridg of separation running
between them, which commonly (being very narrow, thin, and obscure) it is not
easy to discern. So it particularly falls out in the matter before us,
wherein our Text is concerned. Duty and Offense do nearly confine, and almost
indiscernibly differ one from the other; for there are about this Case Precepts
which seem to contradict; there are Duties appearing to thwart one another.

S. Paul here bids us to be studious, or ambitious of quiet; otherwhere he
enjoineth us to be earnestly active, (to be (...), not slothful in business);
Romans 12. 11.
Here he would have us to mind our own Affairs; otherwhere he prescribes, that
we should not look every man to his own things, Phil. 2. 4.
but every man also to the things of others.

According to the general drift of Scripture, and the tenor of our Religion,
we are in charity obliged to concern our selves heartily for the good of our
Neighbor, and to strive earnestly in promoting it; we are enjoined so far to
interpose and meddle in the Affairs of others, as to watch over them for their
good; to instruct and advise them, to admonish and excite them, to check and
reprove them upon occasion; to offer and yield them succor, to compose
Differences between them; to promote their Edification and Peace; (...).
Let us (says the Apostle to the Hebrews) consider one another to provoke unto
love, Heb. 10. 24.
and to good works: Let us (says S. Paul to the Romans) follow after the
things which make for peace, Romans 14. 19. and 15. 2.
and things wherewith one may edify another; 1 Thessalonians. 5. 11, 14.
and, exhort your selves together, and edify one another; warn them that are
unruly, comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak, says he to the
Thessalonians in this Epistle.

To be zealous and earnest in the maintenance and propagation of Truth, of
Virtue, of Piety, is a Duty incumbent on us, which implies care and activity
concerning others; that we offer to instruct them; Tit. 11. 11.
that we enter into contest with them; that we examine their words and actions;
that we presume to tax and oppose them.

In fine; Our Religion does seem, by the bands of mutual Relation, and
obligations of Charity so to unite us together, so to endear us to one another,
and to all men; that all things belonging to our Brethren do nearly touch us,
and should answerably affect us; so that by intermedling with any thing
relating to their welfare, we can hardly be said to meddle with what does not
concern us.

The condition of things also may seem to require, that we so intermeddle; for
the Duties and Affairs of Men are so entangled or interwoven, that we can
hardly prosecute any Concernments of our own, without being engaged in the
Matters of others: In discharging all Offices of Society, in pursuance of any
Traffic or Commerce, in all intercourse and conversation, while we transact
our own Business, we cannot avoid the furthering, or obstructing the Business
of others, who are engaged in the same, or contrary Designs: Society does
subsist by combinations of Care and Pain, regarding common Interests, so that
it seems impossible so to mind our own Business, as not to meddle with the
Business of others.

Yet notwithstanding S. Paul injoineth us so to affect Quiet, as simply to mind
our own Business, or not to be meddlesome in the concernments of others; for
that doing our own Business, is meant exclusively to meddling with the Affairs
of others is plain enough, by the importance of (...); which is emphatical, and
signifies only our own, or our proper Business; and because it is joined with
being quiet, which respects others, and imports not stirring beyond our own
bounds; to be so meddlesome, being also a practice expressly condemned by S.
Peter, 1 Pet. 4. 16.
in that prohibition, But let none of you suffer as a Murderer, or as a Thief,
or as a Malefactor, or as a busy-body in other men's matters; where
Pragmaticalness is we see not only forbidden, but is coupled with the most
heinous Offenses.

How then shall we reconcile these things? how shall we in the case sever
between the bounds of Duty and Blame? It is indeed somewhat difficult to do it
precisely, and with distinctions which shall reach all cases: But somewhat I
shall endeavor toward it; by propounding some Rules and Directions, which
should commonly be observed in our dealing and intercourse with others; but
first let us a little reflect upon the terms in which the Precept is couched.

Study to be quiet: Study; the word is (...), which signifies to be ambitious,
that is, to affect quiet with the like vehemence of desire and care, as men are
wont to pursue Reputation, Dignity, and Power, the Objects of Ambition: the
expression contains a remarkable emphasis, or a grave acumen; for whereas
Ambition commonly does prompt men to be restlesly busy, and engages them in
the Concernments proper to others, S. Paul bids them to be ambitious the
contrary way, in affecting quiet, and abstinence from other Affairs beside
their own.

To be quiet; This does signify not a Physical, but a Moral Rest; not a total
forbearance of Action; not a fastidious or drowsy listlessness to do any thing;
not a senseless indifferency concerning the Matters of others; not an absolute
sequestring our selves from common Affairs; this is not quiet, or tranquillity,
the (...) here, but a naughty sloth, stupidity, or savageness; the Quiet here
meant is opposed to disorderly motion, to turbulency, to contention, to
pragmatical curiosity, to all such exorbitant behavior, whereby the Right of
others is infringed, their Peace disturbed, their just Interest or Welfare
any-wise prejudiced: This Quiet is a calm, steady, regular way of proceeding,
within the bounds and measures prescribed by Reason, Justice, and Charity,
Modesty, and Sobriety; such a motion as the Heavenly Bodies do keep, which so
move that they seem ever to stand still, and never disturb one another; in
fine, what a Quiet is meant, the subsequent words, and the context do show; it
follows.

And (...), to do our own Business, or to act things proper and pertinent to
us; things which suit to our Condition, our Station, our Vocation; whereby we
may discharge our own Duties, and supply our own Needs; may work benefit to
others, or however avoid being any-wise burdensome or troublesome to them; an
instance of which practice is immediately subjoined; to work with our own hands
-- that we may have lack of nothing; 1 Thessalonians 3. 12.
in another place S. Paul calls it (...), to work with quiet, opposing it
(...), being over-busy, or pragmatically curious, and to walking disorderly;
that is, beyond the Bounds of our Calling, or the Rules of our Duty; so as to
encroach upon the Rights, or molest the Quiet of others.

The words then as they do imply an Obligation lying upon us to be industrious
in our own Business, so they chiefly design to prohibit our meddling with the
Concernments of others; but how to settle the limits between this Quiet minding
our own Business, and a culpable neglect of the Duties concerning others; how
to distinguish between meddling innocently, from being blameably meddlesome, hic
labor, hoc opus est; this is that hard task which I am to undertake, but cannot
hope thoroughly to perform. However the method toward it, which I shall
observe, is this: First, I shall touch some cases in which it is allowable or
commendable to meddle with the Affairs of others; then I shall propound some
general Rules, according to which such meddlesomeness is commonly blameable; in
the next place I shall assign some Directions proper to some chief and most
obvious kinds of meddling; and lastly, offer some Considerations to dissuade men
from this pragmatical humor.

1. Superiors may intermeddle with Paul's expression) to attend continually
upon this very thing; Romans 13. 6.
their proceedings therefore are not to be charged with culpable
Pragmaticalness.

2. In any case, wherein the Honor and Interest of God is much concerned, we
may interpose in vindication and maintenance of them. If any man dares to
blaspheme God's Name, we may and ought to stand up in its defense; if any man
disparageth Religion, we should strive to clear its repute; if any man
impugneth any Divine Truth of moment, (...). Chrysostom. (...).
we should endeavor to assert it; if any man notoriously transgresses God's
Law, we may discountenance his presumption, and reprove him for it: Every man
in such cases, as God's Subject, has not only a Commission, (...). etc. Chrysostom.
^^id.
but an Obligation; is indeed by his Allegiance bound to serve God, in
maintaining the honor and interest of his Empire; it is foul disloyalty, it is
pitiful baseness to forbear meddling in such cases. Thus have good Men, without
fear or shame, defended Religion, and Truth, against the mightiest Powers, and
most dangerous oppositions that could be; Thus stood up Phineas and executed
Judgment, Psalm. 106. 30. not only checking, but avenging that heinous scandal:
Thus Elias maintained the true Worship of God against all the Corrupters of it,
the Kings and whole Nation of Israel: Thus the Prophets did not forbear to tax
the wicked manners of the Princes, the Priests, and the People in their Times:
Thus St. John Baptist did not stick to reprove King Herod for his unlawful
practice: So our Savior censured the superstitious and hypocritical Scribes,
and he chastised the profaners of God's House: So, in sine, the Holy Apostles
resolutely did assert God's Truth against all the World.

3. When the Public Weal and Safety are manifestly concerned, we may also
intermeddle to support or secure them: So may we rebuke him that slandereth or
reproacheth our Prince; we may check him, that would break the Peace; we may
impeach him that violateth the Laws, conducing to public welfare: Tertull.
Every Man is a Soldier against Traitors and Enemies of his Country: Every Man
is born with a Commission to defend the Public against those which plot its
ruin or harm: Every Man is a Party for his Prince against Rebels, for the
Church against Schismatics, for the Law against lawless Transgressors, for
common Peace, against those who outragiously disturb it: Duty to our Superiors,
Justice and Charity to Mankind, just regard to our own welfare, allow and
oblige us to such meddling.

4. We may also meddle for the succor of Right, against palpable wrong and
outrage: We may help an honest Man against a Thief assaulting him; we may guard
the life of any Man against an Assassine; we may vindicate the Reputation of an
innocent Person aspersed by a slanderous Tongue; as Moses -- seeing one of his
Brethren suffer wrong, Acts 7. 24.
defended him; and avenged him that was oppressed, and smote the Egyptian; Luke
23. 40.
as the penitent Thief rebuked his Companion, unjustly railing upon our
Savior; the common Interest of Justice and Charity do not only excuse, but
commend meddling in such cases.

5. We may likewise meddle with the proceedings of others, when our own just
defense requires it; we may Cum moderamine in culpatae t^telae.
repel those who attaque our safety or peace, who invade or rifle our Goods,
who traduce our good Name; we may endeavor to defeat their Plots, and to
restrain their Violence: This is indeed doing our own Business, for to preserve
our Life with its conveniences and comforts, to maintain our Right and just
Interest, to keep our Honor and Reputation clear from scandal, is incumbent
upon us; we are naturally the Patrons, Advocates, and Guards of those
considerable Goods assigned or entrusted to us by Providence.

6. When the life or welfare (either Spiritual or Temporal) of our Neighbor is
deeply concerned, and cannot otherwise then by our aid be supported or
relieved, we may lawfully interpose to yield it: If we see him exposing his
Life to any great hazard, or engaging his Soul into any great sin, we may in
any fair way, (by Admonition, Advice, Reproof, politic Device, harmless Force)
without any invitation or license, with or against his will, presume to reclaim
or restrain him. We may stop him in his carier to ruin, or grievous mischief;
we may withold him from running into a Snare, or tumbling down a Precipice,
or drinking in Poison; we may (as S. Jude speaks) snatch him out of the Fire.
Jud. 23. (...).
In such cases we may reasonably suppose, that our Neighbor being himself,
will allow us to meddle, or will not be displeased therewith; if he has not
his wits about him, we may supply him with ours in such exigence; Invito non
tribuitur quodcunque pro ^o praestatur. Reg. I.
his present consent and approbation are not then requisite, he not being in
condition to yield them; Furiosis nulla voluntas est. R. I.
he needs Guardians, and opportunity constituteth us in that Office: Extreme
and evident need will not only excuse the liberty we shall assume, but it
obliges us to use our power to save him; in case of neglect, that surly
answer, Am I my Brothers keeper? Genesis 4. 9. (...), etc. Vid. Chrysostom. (...). 1.
and Tom. 2. Or. 59. in Mat. Orat. 77, 78. in Joh. Or. 15. in Ephesians. Or. 19.
Chrysostom. in Tit. Or. 5. in Hebr. Or. 30.
will not serve our turn. We may, we should, it is not only innocent, but just
and laudable for us to be watchful over our Neighbor's concernment and
deportment, if we do it out of pure charity, in a discreet, quiet, and gentle
manner.

7. In fine; If any signal opportunity of doing our Neighbor considerable
good, especially to his Soul, does offer it self, we may lawfully, we should in
charity embrace it; we may then even obtrude upon him our direction and
succor; if he be so blind as not to discern our good will, so peevish as to
dislike our proceeding, so ungrateful as not to thank us for our pains, yet our
good intent will justify us before God, and at the Bar of Reason; and we have
to countenance us therein, the common example of good Men, who for doing thus,
have worthily been accounted the Friends and Benefactors of Mankind.

In these and the like cases we may, without offending, intermeddle; in doing
so, we may indeed truly be said to be quiet, and to do our own Business;
because there is no exorbitancy or disorder in such proceeding, because God's
Law and sound Reason have appropriated these things to us, and made them our
concernment: There is no Business more proper or pertinent to us, then that
wherein we labor to promote the Glory of God, or to procure the good of Men;
this is the principal design of our Being, and therefore Emploiment therein
cannot misbecome us: but we must however in such Cases take heed that our
Pretenses are real and well-grounded, that our Proceedings are regular and
fair; we must not take or use such liberty maliciously; we must never out of
hypocritical pretense to the maintenance of God's Honor, of public Good, of
Justice, Truth, or Peace, be irregularly pragmatical or turbulent; this is to
be doubly bad, adding to the irregularity of Offense, the wickedness of Fraud
and Malice.

from his Order, and deserting the Station assigned us by his Providence; we
usurp upon Man, exercising authority over him, which he is not bound to stoop
unto.

2. We should not (without Call, or Allowance) meddle with our Superiors, so as
to advise them, to reprehend them, to blame or inveigh against their
Proceedings; for this is to confound the right order of things, to trespass
beyond the bounds of our Calling and Station; to do wrong, not only to them,
but to the Public, which is concerned in the upholding their Power and
Respect: It is indeed a worse fault then assuming the Ensigns of their Dignity,
or counterfeiting their Stamps; for that is but to borrow the Semblance, this
is to enjoy the Substance of their Authority.

Nothing in this busy and licentious Age is more usual, then for private Men to
invade the Office, to exercise the Duties, to canvas and control the Actions of
their Superiors; discussing what they ought to do, and prescribing Laws to
them; taxing what is done by them; murmuring at their Decrees, and inveighing
against their Proceedings: Every one is finding holes in the State, and picking
quarrels with the conduct of Political Affairs: Every one is reforming and
settling the Public according to Models framed in his own Conceit: Things
(says one) are out of order, the Constitution is very defective, and ought to
be corrected; such a Law in all reason should be repealed, and such an one
enacted: Here our Statesmen were out of their Politics, and there our
Lawgivers failed in point of equity or prudence: No, clamours another no less
eagerly, all things stand as well as can be, nothing can be amended, or ought
to be altered; our establishment in all respects is more perfect then Plato's
Commonwealth, or the State of Eutopia: Thus does each Man appoint himself
Counselor of State, and turns Legislator without any Call from the King, or
Choice of the Country; every one snatches at the Scepter, and invests himself
with the Senator's Robe; Every one acts a Prince and a Bishop, or indeed is
rather a Censor and Controller of both Orders; not considering the wrong he
commits, nor the arrogance he practices, nor the mischiefs which naturally
ensue upon such demeanor; for to direct, or to check Governors, is in effect
to exauctorate or depose them, substituting our selves in their room; and what
greater injury can we do them, or the Public? to fix or reverse Laws,
belongs to the highest Authority and deepest Wisdom, which it is enormous
presumption for us to arrogate to our selves; by attempting such things, we
confound the ranks of Men, and course of things; we ruffle the World, we
supplant Public Tranquillity; and what greater mischief then this can we do
among Men?

It is the business and duty of those whom God has constituted his
Representatives and Ministers to deliberate and conclude what is to be done;
and for the due performance of their Charge, they are accomptable to their
Master, Tibi summum rerum judicium dii dedere; nobis obsequii gloria relicta
est. M. Terent. apud Tac. ^nn. V. C.
not to us; Nobis obsequii gloria relicta est; our Duty and our Privilege, (for
so it is, if we could understand it, it being far more easy and safe) it is to
submit and obey with quiet and patience; if we do more, we are therein
irregular, and no less undutiful to God, then to our superiors; We forget
those Divine Rules and Precepts; Eccles 8. 4.
Where the Word of a King is, there is Power; and who may say to him, 1 Pet. 2.
13, 18.
What do thou? Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's
sake? Phil. 2. 14.
Do all things without murmurings, and disputings: We consider not what
Judgments are denounced upon those, 2 Pet. 2. 11.
whose Character it is, to despise Government, to be presumptuous, and
self-willed, not to be afraid to speak evil of Dignities.

We do not weigh the nature of the things we meddle with, nor the advantages of
the Persons, whom we tax; nor our own incapacity to judge rightly about them.
There is a kind of sacredness in the Mysteries of State; as the Mysteries of
Faith do surpass natural Reason, so do those of State transcend vulgar
Capacity: as Priests by special Grace are qualified best to understand the one;
so are Princes by like peculiar assistance enabled to penetrate the former. He
that employeth them in that great Work of governing the World, and makes them
Instruments of his Providence, is not wanting in affording to them direction,
and aid needful for the discharge of their Duty; whence their Judgments of
things are somewhat more then humane, and their words may with us pass for
Oracular; Prove. 16. 10.
A divine Sentence (the wise King said) is in the Lips of the King; his Mouth
transgresses not in Judgment: According to the ordinary reason of things they
are best able to judge of such things, being, by reason of their eminent
station, able to discern more, and farther then others; having by experience
and constant practice acquired a truer insight into things, and a better skill
to manage them: whereas we being placed beneath in a Valley, can have no good
prospect upon the grounds and causes of their resolutions and proceedings; we
for want of sufficient use and exercise, cannot skill to balance the contrary
weights and reasons of things; to surmount the difficulties and rubs, to unfold
the knots and intrigues, which occur in Affairs of that kind; we cannot expect
those special influences of light and strength from Heaven, toward judging of
Affairs, which do not properly concern us: wherefore we are altogether
incompetent Judges, and impertinent Dealers about those things; it is great
odds, that in doing so, we shall mistake, and misbehave our selves; we
consequently do vainly and naughtily to meddle with them. If the love of
Public Good does transport us, let us restrain our selves.

3. We should not indeed so much as meddle with the Affairs of our Equals,
(those I mean not who do equal us in dignity or worth, but all such who are not
subject to our command or charge, however otherwise inferior to us; those I say
we should not meddle with) so as to control or cross them; to direct, or check,
or censure their proceedings against their will, or without special reason
engaging us thereto: for this is also to usurp an undue authority; this argues
self-conceit; this contains immodesty and arrogance.

4. We should not, without the desire or leave of Parties concerned,
intermeddle in the smaller Temporal Interests of others, upon pretense to
further them, or with design to cross them, for every man should be left to
himself to choose, and to manage his own Business, prosecuting it in the method
he best likes (consistent with Law and Justice toward others) without
interruption or control: Every man has a right to do so, every man desires
it, every man commonly has a capacity sufficient for it; for each man is apt
to study his own Business, to weigh his Case, to poise his Abilities, with the
Circumstances in which he stands; and thence is likely to get righter notions
concerning the state of his Affairs, to descry better ways of accomplishing
them, then others less regarding them can do: Every man is best acquainted with
his own humor and temper, and thence can pick his Business, and wind the
management of it, so that it shall comply with them, or not grate upon them.
However, as every man in point of interest and honor is most concerned in the
success, and suffers most by frustration of his endeavors, so it is equal
that a free choice of his proceedings should be allowed him, without impediment
or disturbance; which enjoying, he will more contentedly bear any
disappointment that shall happen. This especially we say, in respect to matters
of lesser consequence, such as most worldly Interests are) by the ill success
whereof our Neighbor is not extremely dammaged or hurt; for in such cases the
immodesty and arrogance of meddling, with the vexation and trouble it is apt to
work, do commonly much outweigh any benefit we can presume by our meddling to
procure.

5. We should not indeed ever in matters of indifferent and innocent nature so
far meddle, as without considerable reason or need, to infringe any man's
liberty, to cross his humor, to obstruct his pleasure, however discordant
these may be to our Judgment and Palate: Every man has a particular gust for
Diet, for Garb, for Divertisements, and Disports, (arising from particular
Complexion, or other unaccomptable Causes) and fit it is that he should satisfy
it; it is enough, that what he does seems good, and relisheth to himself; if
we check him therein, we shall seem impertinent and troublesome, and therefore
we shall really be so; for it is not our Office to be Tasters, to be Dressers,
to be Masters of the Sports to all Men: we in such Matters would please our own
fancy, and therefore we should not about them offend others; it is incivility,
it is injustice to do it.

6. We should never offer to put a force upon any man's inclination, or strive
to bend it unto a compliance with ours; in attempting that we shall commonly be
disappointed, and we shall never come fairly off: for some are so tough, they
will never yield to us, none will comply against the grain, without regret and
displeasure; if you extort a compliance with your desire, you thereby do lose
their good-opinion and good will; for no man likes to be overborn with
violence or importunity.

7. We should not in Conversation meddle so as impose our Opinions and Conceits
upon others: In conversation with our Equals, we have a liberty to propound our
Judgment, and declare our Reasons for it; but if our Judgment does not take,
nor our Reasons persuade, we should have done; to press farther is rude, to be
displeased for it is vain, to be angry or violent is unjust; for by the Law of
Conversation every man takes himself to have an absolute right to use and
follow his own Reason; and he that affects to deprive any man thereof, will
pass for a petty Tyrant, a Clown, or an Idiot; to retain the satisfaction,
which our own persuasion affords, is enough to content a just and sober Mind,
without triumphing over the understandings of others.

8. We should not ordinarily in converse affect, or undertake to teach; for
this implies a pretense to a kind of superiority, and a preferring our selves
to others in wisdom; which argues vanity, and is offensive to those with whom
we converse; who care not to be dealt with as Disciples, or Underlings. We may
with our Equals modestly dispute the Case, upon even ground, as fellow Students
of Knowledge, or Advocates of Truth; but we must not peremptorily dictate, or
pronounce with Authority, like Masters or Judges.

9. We should indeed be cautious of interrupting any Man's Discourse, Nec quid
agatur in alia domus alia per^te noverit. Hier. Ep. 2.
or of taking his words out of his Mouth: for this is a rude way of
dispossessing men of that, which by common Law of society they suppose
themselves to enjoy, speaking their mind through, and perfecting their
Discourse; it is an implicit accusation of impertinency or weakness in their
speech; it is an Argument, that we deem our selves wiser then they, or able to
speak more to the purpose; it is therefore an unsociable and distastful
practice.

10. We should be careful of intrenching upon any man's modesty, in any way,
either of commendation or dispraise; so as to put him to the blush, or to
expose him unto scorn: Sober Men care not to be the Subjects of Talk; no Man
can endure to be the Object of Sport; we should not therefore thrust any Man
upon the Stage; it is vexatious, and therefore always discourteous, sometimes
very injurious.

11. It is good to be very staunch and cautious of talking about other Men, and
their Concernments, in way of passing Characters on them, or descanting upon
their Proceedings for want of other Discourse: This is the common refuge of
Idleness, and the practice of fidling Gossips, who because they will do nothing
themselves, must be reflecting upon the doings of others; and that they may not
say nothing, will talk impertinently: (...), S. Paul well coupleth together,
that is, frivolous Tatlers and Busy-bodies; And withal (says he of such
gossiping Women, 1 Timothy 5. 13.) they learn to be idle, wandering about from
House to House; and not only idle, but Tatlers also, and Busy-bodies, speaking
things which they ought not: To affect talking about others, is indeed a great
temptation to speaking things which we ought not to speak; Vid. Chrysostom. in
Heb. 31. 3. Orat. 21.
words of unjust and uncharitable obloquy.

12. Further; we should not be inquisitive into the Designs of Men; for this
(beside the vain curiosity and impertinency of so doing) is to assail their
modesty, and an adventure to vex both them and our selves: Thy Neighbor
perhaps (as most advised Men are) is desirous to keep his purpose close to
himself; Percontatorem fugito.
then by inquiry thou either forcest him unwillingly to disclose what he would
not, or to give thee a repulse, which he likes not to do; and which whenever
he does, he is displeased; (...).
what is pumped out, comes up against nature, and brings regret with it; and
if we cannot get any thing out, we yet cause disturbance within; and our selves
are not well satisfied in the disappointment.

13. We should not press into the Retirements of Men; to do so, is not only
immodest, and rude, but injust: it is immodest to desire to know from any Man,
what he is ashamed or unwilling to show: it is rude to disturb any Man in the
enjoiment of his lawful freedom, Arcanum neque tu scrutaberis ullius unquam,
Comissiumque teges, and vino tortus and ira.
to interrupt him in his conversation with himself, to obstruct his private
satisfactions: it is unjust to bereave a Man of that leisure and opportunity
which he possesses, of doing that which he best likes, and perhaps is greatly
concerned in; of enjoying his own Thoughts, of meditating upon his Concerns, of
examining his ways, of composing his Passions, of studying Truth, of devotion
and intercourse with his God; of contriving and carrying on in any wise the
welfare of his own Soul. Why does he retire, but to shun diversion, or that he
may be master of his time and thoughts? why then are we so unkind, or so
unjust, as to deprive him of those contents and advantages.

14. We should not pry, or peep into men's secrets; it is a practice upon many
accounts blameable.

It is commonly impertinent curiosity; for men hide things, because they do not
think others concerned to know them; the concealment argues their Opinion to
be such; and consequently that he is fondly curious who would search into them:
(...). Plut. (...).
Why (said he well to one, who seeing him carry a Basket covered, did ask what
was in it) do thou seek to know, when thou see it covered, that thou may
not know?

It is foully discourteous, because offensively depriving men of the
satisfaction they take in concealing their matters; encroaching upon the
innocent freedoms which they would enjoy, without rendering account to any;
trespassing upon their bashfulness, or frustrating their discretion; for
therefore men choose to keep things close, because they like not, or judge it not
expedient to declare them. Eccles. 7. 21. Take no heed unto all words that are
spoken, lest thou hear thy Servant curse thee.

It is also grossly injurious to deal thus; for it is a robbery of what is most
dear to men; which they with more care reserve and guard, then they do their
Gold, or their Jewels; so that to break open the Closet of a Man's Breast, to
ransack his Mind, to pilfer away his Thoughts, his Affections, his Purposes,
may well be deemed a worse sort of Burglary or Theft, then to break open Doors,
to rifle Trunks, or to pick Pockets.

It is a practice in the common opinion of Men worthily esteemed very dishonest
and treacherous; for Men generally do suppose each other to be under a tacit,
but well understood compact, obliged mutually (as they tender greatly the
retaining their own Secrets, so) to abstain from attempting to discover the
Secrets of others; to do otherwise, is therefore taken for an act of perfidious
enmity, and a violation of mutual confidence.

In fine; to peep into Chinks, to listen at Doors, or Windows, to mind
Whispers, to dive into Letters and Papers, and the like practices, are the
practices of insiduous Evesdroppers, Spies, and Sycophants, which common
humanity will not endure.

Yea, if the knowledge of what our Neighbor would conceal, does casually arrive
to us, it is advisable to smother it, it is inhumanity to reveal it to his
prejudice. To reveal Secrets, is a practice condemned in Scripture as odious
and base; Prove. 20. 9. He that goes about as a Talebearer, reveals Secrets.
Prove. 11. 13. A Talebearer reveals Secrets; but he that is of a faithful
Spirit concealeth the matter.

Not to take up, or scatter reports prejudicial, Ecclus 19. 7, 10.

A wise Man would not willingly anywise know the secrets of others, (...) --
(...).
but gladly would shun them, although offering themselves to his knowledge; that
he may be freed from the burden of keeping them, and the danger of venting
them, to the distaste, wrong or prejudice of others; Philippides apud Plut. in
Apopth* ad Lysimachum: (...).
and he is commended for his discretion, who to a Prince asking him what of his
he should impart to him? replied, Whatever you please, except your Secrets;
them he well thought unsafe to keep, and dangerous to utter; How foolish then
is it voluntarily to intrude, or carefully to search into them.

15. We should not lie in wait to surprise, or catch any Man at advantage, to
overthrow him when he trips, to insult upon his mistake, or his disaster; to do
thus, is always ill manners, it is sometimes barbarous inhumanity. Goodness in
such cases would dispose a Man to support, relieve, and comfort another, if he
demands, or his case needs such meddling.

16. Lastly; We should never, at least with much earnestness, meddle with
Affairs, more properly belonging to others, and which we do not, or may not
handsomely pretend to understand so well as others: such are Affairs beside our
Profession, which if we understand not, it is a folly, in a peremptory manner,
to treat of them; if we do understand them, it is yet undecent to contest or
dictate about them, in the presence at least of those who profess them: thus
should private men beware (at least in that magisterial or eager way) to meddle
with Political Affairs, illiterate Men with Scholastical, Laymen with
Theological, unexperienced Men with any such matters, the comprehension whereof
depends upon Skill and Exercise; no Man should be forward to meddle with
things extraneous to his way and calling: doing so, is wont to create much
offense, it has usually much immodesty and much folly in it, often it
contains much injustice.

These are some more general Rules concerning the matter in hand, I should now
(if time did permit) insist upon some particular kinds of Meddling, (Advice,
Reproof, Interposing in Contests) but in regard to your patience, I shall
proceed no further at present.

The Tenth Sermon.
1 THESSALONIANS. 4. 11. And that ye study to be quiet, and to do your own Business.
IN a former Discourse upon these words, I have already showed,

I. In what cases it is allowable or commendable to meddle with the Affairs of
others. II. Next* I propounded some general Rules concerning this matter,
according to which we may discern in what cases meddling with the Affairs of
others is commonly blameable. Thus far I have proceeded; III. I shall now give
some Directions concerning particular kinds of meddling. And because they are
many, I shall at present only insist upon three, (referring others to other
occasions) they are, Advice, Reproof, Interposing in Contests, and Contentions.
I. As to meddling in Advice, we may do well to observe these Directions.

1. Advise not (except upon Call) a Superior, or one more eminent then thy self
in Authority, in Dignity, or in Age: for he that offers to advise, does
thereby claim to himself a kind of superiority, or excellence, above another;
and it is not well consistent with the reverence and respect due to our betters
to seem to do so: they should be wiser then we, at least it becomes us not to
declare we think they are not; If they ask Advice, we may without presumption
give it, supposing it to be not so much their defect of Knowledge, as prudent
Caution, which makes them willing to hear what any man can say to the Case;
but to obtrude it on them, argues we think them to need it, and our selves
able to direct them, which is presumption, and will pass for arrogance.

2. We should not indeed, with any violence or importunity, thrust Advice upon
our Equals, or upon any Man not subject to our charge, who is unwilling to
receive it; for this is also an exalting our selves in skill and wisdom above
him, and implies a contemptuous opinion concerning his Knowledge; that he is so
weak as to need Advice, and yet more weak in not seeking it when needful from
us; which practice consists not with modesty, and needs must breed offense,
it is indeed injust; for every Man of right is to be allowed to act by his own
Advice, and to choose his own Counselors.

3. Be not obstinate in pressing Advice; if he that asks thy counsel, do not
like it, desist from urging farther, and rest content: If thou have performed
the part of a faithful Friend, of a good Man, of a charitable Christian in
advising what seemed best to thee, that may abundantly satisfy thee; for the
rest ipse viderit, it is his concernment more then thine: If thou pretendest
that he must follow thy Advice, or art displeased because he does not so, thou
make thy self a Commander, not a Counselor; the which to appoint thee, was
beside his intention; he meant to seek thy help, not to forfeit his own
liberty; and thou art not just in pretending to so much.

4. Affect not to be a Counselor, nor let any Considerations (except of
Friendship, Humanity, or Charity) easily dispose thee to accept the Office; it
is not worth the while to undertake it as a matter of Reputation, or because it
seems to argue a good opinion concerning thy skill and ability; for it is a
critical and dangerous thing to advise; because if the Business succeeds well
according to thy Advice, the Principal usually carries away the Profit, and
the Praise; his Judgment, his Industry, his Fortune, are applauded; little
commendation or benefit accrueth to the Counselor; but if it prosper not, the
main weight of blame is surely laid upon him that advised the course; If you
(says the Party, and say the lookers on) had not thus directed, it had not
thus fallen out.

5. Wherefore it is commonly expedient not to advise otherwise then with
reservation and diffidence: It Is, we may say, the most probable course I know,
but I question whether it will succeed; I hope well of it, but do not
thoroughly confide therein; this modest and discreet way, whatever the event
shall be, will shelter thee from blame; yea, will advance the reputation of thy
sagacity; for if it fail, thy Reason to suspect will be approved; if it
prosper, the goodness of thy Judgment will be applauded: whereas the confident
Director, if Success crosses his Advice, is exclaimed upon for his rashness;
if Success favors, he is not yet admired for his wisdom, because he seemed
to be sure; it being more admirable to guess the best among doubtful things,
then to determine that which is certain. So much for meddling about Advice.

II. For Reproof, (which is necessary, and a Duty upon some Occasions) we may
do well to follow these Directions.

1. Reprove not a Superior; Levit. 19. 17.
for it is exercising a power over him, Ephesians. 5 11.
and a punishing him; we thereby therefore do soar above our pitch, we confound
Ranks, and pervert the Order settled among men; the practice contains
irreverence, and presumption; it seems injurious, and is ever odious. What
the Ministers of God, or Spiritual Pastors do in this kind, they do it by
special commission or instinct, (as the Prophets in reprehending Princes and
Priests, as St. John Baptist in reproving Herod); Or as ordinary Superiors in
the case of Spiritual Guidance, Heb. 13. 17.
being set over us for that purpose, and watching for our Souls, for which they
must render an account; yet they must do it with great moderation and
discretion: (...), Rebuke not an Elder, 1 Timothy 5. 1.
(or one more aged then thy self) but entreat him as a Father, (that is, advise
him in the most respectful and gentle manner) is the charge of S. Paul to B.
Timothy. In case of grievance, or scandal, it becomes Inferiors not proudly or
peremptorily to criminate and tax, but humbly to remonstrate and supplicate for
redress.

2. Reprove not rashly, and without certain cognizance of the Fact; for to
reprove for things not done, or (which in moral reckoning is the same) for
things not apparent, is both unjust, and argues a malignant disposition: it is
unjust to punish so much as the modesty of any Man without clear evidence and
proof; it is malignity to suspect a Man of ill, it is calumny to charge blame on
him upon slender pretenses, or doubtful surmises.

3. Reprove not also rashly as to the point of right, or without being able to
convince the Matter to be assuredly culpable: to reprove for things not bad, or
not unquestionably such (for things that are, or perhaps may be indifferent and
innocent) is also unjust, and signifies a tyrannical disposition: it is unjust
any-wise to punish a Man, without clear warrant of Law; it is tyrannical to
impose upon Men our conceit, or to persecute them for using their Liberty,
following their Judgment, or enjoying their Humor; which in effect we do, when
we reprove them for that, which we cannot prove blameable: It Is (S. James
says) a judging the Law, James 4. 11.
or charging it with defect, when we condemn Persons for things not prohibited
by it: He (says the Apostle) that speaks against his Brother, and judges
his Brother, speaks against the Law, and judges the Law.

Both these kinds of rash Reproof are very inconvenient, as breeding needless
Offense, and endless Contention; for who-ever is thus taxed, will certainly
take it ill, and will contend in his own defense; no man patiently, for no
sufficient cause or sure ground, will lie under the stroke of Reproof, which
always smarteth, but then enrageth, when it is supposed to be inflicted
unjustly or maliciously: Even those who contentedly will bear friendly Reproof,
can worst brook to be causlesly taxed.

4. Reprove not for slight matters; for such faults or defects as proceed from
natural frailty, from inadvertency, from mistake in matters of small
consequence: Mitem animum, and mores modicis erroribus aequos. Iuv. Sat. 14.
for it is hard to be just in such Reproof; or so to temper it, as not to
exceed the measure of blame due to such faults; they occur so often, that we
should never cease to be carping, if we do it upon such occasions; it is not
worth the while, it is not handsome to seem displeased with such little things;
it is spending our Artillery upon a Game not worth the killing: Reproof is too
grave and stately a thing to be prostituted upon so mean things; to use it upon
small cause, derogateth from its weight, when there is considerable reason for
it; Friendship, Charity, and Humanity, should cover such Offenses. In fine; It
is unseemly to reprove Men for such things as all Men, as themselves are so
continually subject unto: It is therefore better to let such things pass
without any mark of displeasure or dislike.

5. Reprove not unseasonably; not when a Person is indisposed to bear reproof,
or unfit to profit thereby; not, when there is likely to be no good effect come
from it; when thou shall only thereby conjure up an evil spirit of displeasure
and enmity against thy self. Reproof is a thing of it self not good or
pleasant, but sometimes needful, because wholesome, and good in order to the
end; it should therefore be administered as Physic; then only, when the Patient
is fit to receive it, and it may serve to correct his Distemper; otherwise you
will only make him more sick, and very angry.

It Is ever almost unseasonable to reprove some Persons; as scorners, impudent,
incorrigibly profligate Persons; who will hate the Reprover, without regarding
the Reproof; He that reproves a Scorner, Prove. 9. 7, 8. and 15. 12.
gets to himself shame; and he that rebukes a wicked man, gets himself a
blot. Reprove not a Scorner, lest he hate thee. To be maligned, to be derided,
to be aspersed with reproach and slander, is all one shall get by reproving
such Persons; it is both prostituting good Advice, and exposing ones self to
mischief; as our Savior intimates in that prohibition; Give not that which is
Holy unto Dogs, Matt. 7. 6.
neither cast your Pearls before Swine, lest they trample them under their
feet, and turn again and rent you.

As such Men ever, so most Men in some Seasons are incapable of Reproof; so are
Men in calamity, who are discomposed by grief, the which is rather to be
mitigated by comfort, then increased and exasperated by blame; so are Men in a
passion, who have no Ears to hear, no Reason to judge, no Will to comply with
Advice: Reproof is apt to produce rather anger and ill-blood, then any
contrition or kindly remorse in Persons so affected.

It is also usually not seasonable to reprove Men publicly, when their modesty
is highly put to it, and their reputation grievously suffers; for this is an
extreme sort of punishment, and is taken for needless; it is extreme, because
men had rather suffer any way, then in their honor; it is deemed needless,
because it may be ministered privately.

6. Reprove mildly and sweetly; in the calmest manner, in the gentlest terms;
not in a haughty or imperious way, not hastily or fiercely; not with sour
looks, or in bitter Language; for these ways do beget all the evil, and hinder
the best Effects of Reproof: They do certainly inflame and disturb the Person
reproved; they breed wrath, disdain, and hatred against the Reprover; but do
not so well enlighten the Man to see his Error, or affect him with kindly sense
of his miscarriage, or dispose him to correct his Fault; such Reproofs look
rather like the Wounds and Persecutions of Enmity, then as Remedies ministered
by a friendly hand; they harden Men with stomach and scorn to mend upon such
occasion. If Reproof does not savor of Humanity, it signifies nothing; it
must be like a bitter Pill wrapped in Gold, and tempered with Sugar, otherwise it
will not go down, or work effectually.

7. Affect not to be reprehensive; seem not willingly to undertake the place of
a Reprover; appear to be merely drawn thereto by sense of Duty, or exigency of
Friendship, or constraint of Charity and Good Will. For to affect reproving, is
a sign of ill nature and arrogance; that we delight to observe the Faults, that
we love to insult upon the Infirmities and Infelicities of other Men; which is
the part of a domineering and cruel humor. A truly good Man indeed would be
glad to be excused from the Office; it is the most unpleasant thing he can do
to be raking in Men's Sores, and causing smart to his Neighbors; far more
gladly would he be commending their good Deeds, and cherishing their Virtue;
nothing therefore but Conscience and Charity can put him on this Emploiment.
But so much for meddling in Reproof.

III. Another kind of meddling is, Interposing in the Contests, and Contentions
of others. As to this, we may, briefly, do well to observe these Directions.

1. We should never meddle, so as to raise Dissentions, or to do such things
which breed them; we should by no means create misunderstandings, or distasts
between our Neighbors; we should not instill Jealousies, or Surmises; we should
not misconstrue Words or Actions, to an offensive sense or consequence; we
should not conveigh spightful Tales; we should not disclose the Secrets of one
to another: these practices engender enmity and strife among Men; and are
therefore inhumane, or rather Diabolical; for the Devil is the great Makebate
in the World.

2. We should not foment Dissentions already commenced; blowing up the Coals
that are kindled, by abetting the strife, or aggravating the causes thereof; it
is not good to strengthen the Quarrel, by siding with one part, except that
part be notoriously oppressed or abused; in such a case indeed, when Justice
calling for them, we may lend our advice and assistance; and may bear the
inconvenience of being engaged; as Moses honestly and generously did, when he
succored his Brother that suffered wrong; otherwise it is advisable to keep
our selves out of the Fray; that we do not encourage it by our taking part, and
involve our selves in the mischiefs of it.

3. Especially we should not make our selves Parties in any Faction, where both
sides are eager and passionate; for then even they who have the juster cause,
are wont to do unjust things, in which it is hard for any Man engaged not to
have share, at least not to undergo the imputation of them: it is wisdom
therefore in such cases to hold off, and to retain a kind of indifferency; to
meddle in them is, (as the Wise Man says) to take a Dog by the Ears; Prove. 26.
7.
which he that does, can hardly take care enough of his Fingers.

4. We should not interpose our selves (without invitation) to be Arbitrators
in Points of Difference: We may cautiously mediate perhaps, or advise to
Agreement; but not pretend as Judges with Authority to decide the Controversy;
this savoureth of arrogance; (...). Arist.
this will work trouble to us, and bring the displeasure of both sides upon us;
it is hard in doing so, to avoid becoming Parties, and offending one side: Our
Lord therefore did, we see, wave this Office, and put off the invitation, with
a, Who made me a Divider, or a Judge between you?

5. If we would at all meddle in these Cases, it should be only in
endeavoring, by the most fair and prudent means, to renew Peace, and reconcile
the Dissenters; if we can by exhortation and persuasion to Peace, by removing
misprisions, by representing things handsomely, by mitigating their passions,
bring them to good terms; this is a laudable meddling, this is a blessed
practice. So I leave this particular, and finish the directive part of my
Discourse.

IV. I shall now further only briefly propose some Considerations inducing to
Quietness, and dissuasive from Pragmaticalness; such as arise from the Nature,
Properties, Causes, and Effects of each; serving to commend the one, and
disparage the other.

1. Consider that Quietness is just and equal, Pragmaticalness is injurious.
When we contain our selves quiet, and mind only our own Business, we allow
every Man his Right, we harm no Man's Repute; we keep our selves within our
bounds, and trespass not on the Place or Interest of our Neighbor; we disturb
not the right order and course of things: but in being pragmatical, we do
wrongfully deprive others of their right and liberty to manage their Business;
we prejudice their Credit, implicitly charging them with weakness, and
incapacity to dispatch their Affairs without our direction; we therefore upon
our own unequal and partial Judgment, do prefer and advance our selves above
them; we assume to our selves in many respects more then our due, withdrawing
it from others. In fine; No Man loves that others should invade his Office, or
intrude into his Business; therefore in justice every Man should forbear doing
so toward others.

2. Quietness signifies Humility, modesty, and Sobriety of Mind; that we
conceit not our selves more wise then our Neighbor, that we allow every Man
his share of discretion; that we take others for able and skilful enough to
understand and manage their own Affairs, but pragmaticalness argues much
over-weaning and arrogance; that we take our selves for the only Men of Wisdom,
at least for more wise then those, into whose Business we thrust our selves.

3. Quietness is beneficial to the World, preserving the general order of
things, disposing Men to keep within their rank and station; and within the
sphere of their power and ability* regularly attending to the Work and Business
proper to them; whereby as themselves do well, so the Public does thrive; but
pragmaticalness disturbeth the World, confounding things; removing the
distinction between Superior, Inferior, and Equal rendering each Man's Business
uncertain; while some undertake that which belongs not to them: One busy-body
often (as we find by experience) is able to disturb and pester a whole Society.

4. Quietness preserves Concord and Amity* for no Man is thereby provoked,
being suffered undisturbedly to proceed in his course, according to his mind
and pleasure: but Pragmaticalness breeds Dissentions and Fewds; for all Men
are ready to quarrel with those, who offer to control them, or cross them in
their way; every Man will be zealous in maintaining his privilege of choosing
and acting according to his choice; and cannot but oppose those, who attempt to
bereave him of it; whence between the busy-body assailing, and others defending
their Liberty, Combustions must arise.

5. Quietness to the Person endued with it, or practicing it, begets
tranquillity and peace; for he that lets others alone, and comes in no
Man's way, no Man will be apt to disquiet or cross him; he keeps himself out
of Broils and Factions; but the Busy-body creates vexation and trouble to
himself; others will be ready to molest him in his proceedings, because he
disturbeth them in theirs: He that will have a Sickle in another Corn, or an
Oar in every Man's Boat, no wonder if his Fingers be rapped; Men do not more
naturally brush off Flies, which buz about their Ears, sit upon their Faces or
Hands, and sting or tickle them; then they strive to drive away clamourous, and
encroaching Busy-bodies. 1 Pet. 4. 15.
Let (says S. Peter) none of you suffer as a Busy-body in other men's matters;
it is, he intimates, a practice whereby a Man becomes liable to suffer, or
which Men are apt to punish soundly: and so the Wise Man, implying the fondness
and danger of it; Prove. 26. 17.
He (says he) that passes by, and medleth with strife not belonging to him,
is like one that takes a Dog by the Ears; that is, without any probable good
effect, he provokes a Creature that will snarl at him, and bite him.

6. Quietness is a decent and lovely thing, as signifying good disposition, and
producing good effects; but Pragmaticalness is ugly and odious. Every Man
gladly would be Neighbor to a quiet Person, as who by the steady calmness and
smoothness of his humor, the inoffensive stillness and sweetness of his
demeanor, does afford all the pleasure of Conversation, without any cross or
trouble. But no Man willingly would dwell by him, who is apt ever to be
infesting him by his turbulent humor, his obstreperous talk, his tumultuous
and furious carriage; who upon all occasions, without invitation or consent,
will be thrusting in his Eyes, his Tongue, his Hand; prying into all that is
done, dictating this or that course, taxing all proceeding, usurping a kind of
jurisdiction over him and his actions; no Man will like, or can well endure
such a Neighbor. It is commonly observed, that Pride is not only abominable to
God, but loathsome to Man; and of all Prides, this is the most offensive and
odious: for the Pride which keeps at home, within a Man's heart or fancy, not
issuing forth to trouble others, may indeed well be despised, as hugely silly
and vain; but that which breaks out to the disturbance and vexation of
others, is hated, as molestful and mischievous.

7. Quietness adorneth any Profession, bringing credit, respect, and love
thereto; but Pragmaticalness is scandalous, and procures odium to any Party or
Cause: Men usually do cloak their pragmatical behavior with pretenses of Zeal
for public Good, or of kindness to some Party, which they have espoused; but
thereby they do really cast reproach, and draw prejudice upon their side; if it
be a good Cause, they do thereby wrong it, making it to partake of the blame,
incident to such carriage, as if it did produce or allow disorder; if it be a
bad Cause, they wrong themselves, aggravating the guilt of their adherence
thereto; for it is a less fault to be calm and remiss in an ill-way, then busy
or violent in promoting it. Nothing has wrought more prejudice to Religion, or
has brought more disparagement upon Truth, then boisterous and unseasonable
Zeal; pretending in ways of passion, of fierceness, of rudeness, to advance
them: A quiet Sectary does to most Men's fancy appear more lovely, then he that
is furiously and factiously Orthodox: The Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit,
1 Pet. 3. 4.
is (says S. Peter) in God's sight of great price; and it is also very
estimable in the Opinion of Men.

8. Quiet is a safe practice; (...). Chrysostom. apud Plut. de Stoic. contr.
keeping Men not only from needless encumbrances of Business, but from the
hazards of it, or being charged with its bad success: but Pragmaticalness is
dangerous; for if things go ill, the Medler surely will be loaded with the
blame; the profit, and commendation of Prosperities will accrue to the Persons
immediately concerned; but the disaster and damage will be imputed to those
who meddled in the Business; to excuse or ease themselves, Men will cast the
disgrace on those who did project, or further the undertaking: He therefore
that would be secure, let him be quiet; he that loves peril and trouble, let
him be pragmatical.

9. It is consequently a great point of discretion to be quiet, it yielding a
Man peace and safety, without any trouble; and it is a manifest folly to be
Pragmatical, it being only with care, pains, and trouble to seek
dissatisfaction to others, and danger to himself; it being also to affect many
not only inconveniences, but impossibilities.

Is it possible for any Man to grasp, or compass an infinity of Business? yet
this the Pragmatical Man seems to drive at; for the Businesses of other Men
are infinite; and into that Abyss he plungeth himself, who passes beyond his
own bounds; by the same reason that he medleth with any beside his own, he may
undertake all the Affairs in the World; so he is sure to have work enough; but
Fruit surely little enough of his pains.

Is it imaginable, that we can easily bring others to our bent, or induce Men
to submit their Business to our judgment and humor? Will not he that
attempteth such things, assuredly expose himself to disappointment and regret?
Is it not therefore wisdom to let every Man have his own way, and pursue his
Concernments without any check or control from us?

10. We may also consider, that every Man has Business of his own sufficient
to employ him; to exercise his mind, (...). Eurip.
to exhaust his care and pains, to take up all his time and leisure: To study
his own near Concernments, to provide for the necessities and conveniences of
his Life, to look to the Interests of his Soul, to be diligent in his Calling,
to discharge faithfully and carefully all his Duties relating to God and Man,
will abundantly employ a Man; (...). Zenon. apud Laert. Chrysostom. Tom. 2. Eth. 64.
well it is if some of them do not encumber and distract him; he that will set
himself with all his might to perform these things, will find enough to do; he
need not seek farther for work, he need not draw more trouble on him.

Seeing then every Man has burden enough on his shoulders, imposed by God and
Nature, it is vain to take on him more load, by engaging himself in the Affairs
of others; he will thence be forced, either to shake off his own Business, or
to become overburthened and oppressed with more then he can bear. It is indeed
hence observable, and it needs must happen, that those who meddle with the
Business of others, are wont to neglect their own; they that are much abroad,
can seldom be at home; they that know others most, are least acquainted with
themselves; And the wise Hebrew, Eccl. 38. 26. The wisdom of a learned man
comes by opportunity of leisure, ((...)) and he that has little Business shall
be wise; ((...).) Whence it is scarce possible that a pragmatical Man should be
a good Man; (...). Democr.
that is, such an one, who honestly and carefully performs the Duties
incumbent on him.

Philosophers therefore generally have advised Men to shun needless
Occupations, Sen. Ep. 72, 2^.
as the certain impediments of a good and happy Life; Tertullian calls
Stoicisme, quietis Magisterium. de pall. 5.
they bid us endeavor (...), to simplifie our selves, or to get into a
condition requiring of us the least that can be to do; 2 Timothy 2. 4.
S. Paul intended the same, when he advised us (...), not to be entangled in
the negotiations of Life; Luke 10. 41. (...).
and our Savior, when he touched Martha for being troubled about many things:
Omnium occupatorum conditio misera est, eorum tamen miserrima, qui ne suis
quidem occupationibus laborant. Sen. de Brev. Vitae. 19.
So far therefore we should be from taking in hand the Affairs of other Men,
that we should labor to contract our own, and reduce them to the fewest that
we can; otherwise we shall hardly attain Wisdom, or be able to perform our Duty.

II. But suppose us to have much spare time, Tacitus says of the Stoics Sect,
-- quae turbidos and negotiorum appetentes facit.
and to want Business; so that we are to seek for divertisement, and must for
relief fly to curiosity; yet is it not advisable to meddle with the Affairs of
other Men; there are diverse other ways more innocent, more safe, more pleasant,
more advantageous to divert our selves, and satisfy curiosity.

Nature offers her self, and her inexhaustible store of appearances to our
contemplation; we may, without any harm, and with much delight, survey her rich
Varieties, examine her Proceedings, pierce into her Secrets; Every kind of
Animals, of Plants, of Minerals, of Meteors presents Matter, wherewith
innocently, pleasantly, and profitably to entertain our minds: There are many
noble Sciences, by applying our minds to the study whereof, we may not only
divert them, but improve and cultivate them: The Histories of Ages past, or
relations concerning Foreign Countries, wherein the manners of men are
described, and their Actions reported, may afford us useful pleasure and
pastime; thereby we may learn as much, and understand the World as well, as by
the most curious inquiry into the present Actions of men; there we may observe,
we may scan, we may tax the proceedings of whom we please without any danger or
offense: There are extant numberless Books, wherein the wisest and most
ingenious of men have laid open their hearts, and exposed their most secret
Cogitations unto us; in perusing them we may sufficiently busy our selves, and
let our idle hours pass gratefully, we may meddle with our selves, studying our
own dispositions, examining our principles and purposes, reflecting on our
thoughts, words, and actions; striving thoroughly to understand our selves; to
do this, we have an unquestionable right, and by it we shall obtain vast
benefit, much greater then we can hope to get by puddering in the designs or
doings of others. Pragmaticalness then, as it is very dangerous and
troublesome, so it is perfectly needless; it is a kind of idleness, but of all
idleness the most unreasonable: It is at least worse then idleness, in S.
Gregory Nazianzen's Opinion: (...). Adag. apud Suidam. (...). Greg. Naz. Or. 26.
for, I had rather, said he, be idle more then I should, then over-busy. Other
Considerations might be added, but these I hope may be sufficient to restrain
this practice, so unprofitable and uneasy to our selves, and for the most part
so injurious and troublesome to others.

Now the God of Peace, make us perfect in every good word and work, through
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Books printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil.
TWelve Sermons preached upon several Occasions, by Isaac Barrow, D. D. late
Master of Trinity College in Cambridg, and one of His Majesty's Chaplains in
Ordinary. In Octavo.

The Duty and Reward of Bounty to the Poor: In a Sermon, much enlarged,
preached at the Spittal, upon Wednesday in Easterweek, Anno Dom. 1671. The
Second Edition. By Isaac Barrow, D. D. In Octavo.

A Sermon upon the Passion of our Blessed Savior; Preached at Guild Hall
Chapel, on Good Friday the 13 day of April, 1677. The Second Edition. By Isaac
Barrow, D. D. In Octavo.

The true and lively Effigies of Dr. Isaac Barrow, in a large Print; Ingraved
by the excellent Artist, D. Loggan; price without Frames six pence.

The Harmony of the Divine Attributes, in the Accomplishment of Man's
Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ: Or Discourses wherein is showed how the
Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, Holiness, Power and Truth of God, are glorified in that
great and blessed Work. In Quarto. By William Bate^, D. D.

Considerations of the Existence of God, and of the Immortality of the Soul,
with the Recompenses of the future State. To which is now added, The Divinity
of the Christian Religion proved by the Evidence of Reason, and Divine
Revelation: for the Cure of Infidelity, the Hectic Evil of the Times. The
Second Edition, enlarged. By William Bates. D. D. In Octavo.

The Reconcileableness of God's Prescience of the Sins of Men, with the Wisdom
and Sincerity of his Counsels, Exhortations, and whatsoever means he uses to
prevent them. In a Letter to the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire. To which is now
added a Postscript in Defense of the said Letter. By John How, M. A. sometime
Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxon.

Forty Sermons upon several Occasions, by the late Reverend and Learned Anthony
Tuckney, D. D. sometime Master of Emanuel and S. John's College (successively)
and Regius Professor of Divinity in the University of Cambridg. Published
according to his own Copies; By his Son Jonathan Tuckney, M. A. sometimes
Fellow of S. John's College in Cambridg. In Quarto.

Sermons preached by the late Reverend and Learned Divine, Thomas Manton, D. D.
In Quarto.


