Aetat: Suae 17


Vultus Apellinea pictus Barone tabella est

Lotus Apollinea pingitur art liber

W. Marshall sculpsit. John Hobart Gent:

EPOTOPAIGNION Or the CYPRIAN ACADEMY.

BY ROBERT BARON OF Grayes Inn Gent: Velle pro posse.



TO THE SUPEREMINENT PARAGON OF ART, AND Literature, the truly noble James
Howell Esquire, Nestors Longaevity and both worlds Felicity.
Honored Sir,
AS I did frequently take fresh air in your Dodonaean grove attending the
Articulate, and intelligible susurrations of your ever verdant vegitals, (to
which former ages have nothing (in that kind) to assimulate, neither shall
future times be able to parallel,) from these Apollinean Plants of yours, I
have slifted here a twig, and there a sprig, and I have bestowed some time in
binding them in a bundle, which with my self I humbly offer to your approved
censure, it being the Apex of my ambition to have your honored self my
justice in Air, I cannot say with Persius

Nec scombros metuent mea carmina, nec thus for this confused trusse of twiggs
(as I may say) though made of green wood, yet is it far from meriting any
longaevity, it deserves rather to kin- (...) Helena, Ariadne, and Phyllis, with
other innumerable eminent endouments which bounteous nature has liberally in
all ages reposited in your lovely sex, as in the Apothecke or magasine of
perfection, makes this my Gynophilian or amorous infant long rather to be
dandled upon your tender knees, then lie reclused in a dustie study.

If you please to bestow part of that time which you spend in other
divertisments to converse with this poor brat of my brain, it will paint out
unto you though with a quavering pencell, and in course and caligenous colors
the passions of your royal Amorists, with inducements to commiserate them, the
event whereof (which may make them operative in this kind) will perhaps make
you repent no more of reading them, then I of composing them. When you talk
with your children you expect from them no congruence or quaint language, yet
you are often pleased to hear them prattle, and are delighted with their
lisping Ideoms. This makes me hope that you will dispense with the Lallation
and Low dialect of this babe, whose tone is rude, yet his meaning is plain
dealing, which according to the proverb is a jewel, and consequently most fit
for Ladies. Thus wishing you all delights, and happiness, endless like the
rings you wear, and that the period of my pains may be the beginning of your
pleasure, I remain

Your Ladyshyps in all observance ROBERT BARON.

On his beloved friend the Author, and his ingenious Cyprian Academy.
NOe sooner in our Inn, but out in Print!
Sure it is Arts Arcademy, and the Muses Mint:
Where in Dame Nature Pupil is to Art;
Bearing Minerva's Image in each part:
The Court of Pallas and the Muses Throne;
Where Ignoramus stands outlawed alone.
Baron, go, non suit momus; for's barren plea
Against the Court; and tell him openly;
The brain of Jupiter's each Courtiers Mother:
Or bid him read thy book; and then think other.
Me thinks I see the world thy book admire;
And Ladies dandling it with much desire
To see that hand; these flowrie Pastrolls penned;
And wish them Ring-like, without any end.
What Uenus can deny to be the Fem',
Of Laureat Baron; borne of Orpheus stem;
None can object against thy worth, or line;
Save more then Bigamie with the Nine:
Pernassu's thine! make jointure then;
And let God Hyemen say Amen.
To Court thou art welcome; the Muses blaze thy Praise:
Momus shall wear the Ivy; Thou the Bays.
William Beversham of Grayes Inn Esquire.

To my chosen Friend, the hopeful Mr. Baron.
SO young! and write so well! it might appear
Impossible but that thy name is there
Nature has here her former self surpast,
Showing at once perfection and have:
Since thou like Virgills Genethliack bay
Art a tall tree, ere time could think a spray.
Well might thy happy lovers wish to come
From the Checquer shades of their Elysium,
And suffer further miseries so they might
Engage so rich a pen to give them light;
For nothing was so well performd as writ,
Such is the wide Prerogative of wit.
Thy Book and Picture contradictions tell,
And thwart themselves into a Miracle.
J: HALL. e Soc: Gray. hosp. Gent.

To his ever Honored Friend Mr. Robert Baron upon his Cyprian Academy.
HOw dare I venture to insert a line
Before thy book, when every word of thine
Does swell it self with a strong winded blast
Of rich embrouerd Eloquences, what wa'st
Not fraid of choking in their bringing out.
Or did not board with Lessius about
Some 9 months since conception, and did there
With in thy throat make a full passage clear
To give them birth? what Midwife had at hand?
Came not Minerva with Apollo manned
Merc'ry attending (in his proper place
Most sweetly sings a fifth and eight's the base)
Dect with his wings, even hoarse in setting forth
Thy new lict Faetus with its unknown worth.
Her'e is a Chimist which from a rude mass
Extracts Elixar that death may well surpass
Spencers ninth Canto in the fairy Queen,
Or Ben's vulpony, oh had he but seen
Thy pregnant fancy, how could be forebeare
To rend his Cat'line and by Jove to swear
Thy'ns the better, thou scornst exoticke words
Or Exolericke Phrases which affords
No luster to thy book, thy we^bs not drawn
Or Spun of home-made thread, it is pure fit lawne
For P^ace stockings, The Acromatick strains
Surely are flowne from out Cylen'ns brains;
Thy words carry charms, able to lay wist
The direful magic of an Exorcist,
Come Rhombus come I prithee pause a while
Thy language is pedantick, here is a style
To Court a Lady in, away, away
To Schole young Emperick and make no stay
But come and learn to speak, to Court, to charm
The obdurate Mistrisse in thy wanton arm.
Hence all your Momus bratts leave off to fleere
Away you Critics which are wont to Jeere,
Or else King Arthur with his Knights shall come
And Robin Hood shall strike his paper drum
In his defense, brave Guy shall bring a long
St. George for England with a warlick throng
Famous Parismus and Primaleon,
Palm'rin D'oliua with Montelion:
Cease now Antiquity T'hang weeping ore
Brave Sydnys vrne invest thy self no more
With sable weeds, he livs, for sure there is
Of Souls a sam'an Metempsychosis,
Is this not Sidney; mark his Vein in verse
His style in prose, I cannot here rehearse
His worth in several arts, here Ptolemy
Or Strabo may learn new Geography,
Here Tycobrah may veiw the turning sphers
Making still music in his listening ears,
Out of thy book Euclid may learn to frame
A sphere, or draw a paralellograme;
But muse it is time to stop, do thou not see
You Are over guilty with Tautology;
His book shall praise it self, it may, nay can
Suffice to make an English Uatican.
THO: BRADFORD

To his honored friend, Mr. Robert Baron upon his excellent Poem.
BAron of Wit! 'tware sin to blazon forth,
Under a meaner style thy mighty worth:
'Tware but a trick of state if we should bring
The Muses Lower house to vote thee King.
Thou highly do deserve it, and the bays
Should crown thy brows to thine immortal praise
While ushered by the Graces thou art sent
To sit as King in the Poets Parliament.
The famous Sidney's soul I think had gone
A widow till the resurrection
And never been inspired, now had not she
Found out her Match and been espoused to thee.
We have some things (called Poets) who although
They nere were Verst but in the Crist-crosse-row
And never swallowed Possum think they are able,
To be pertakers at the Muses Table.
Who nere inspired with the thrice three-Sisters,
But took their learning, as men do their Glisters.
And should you come and tell them what you lack
Their wits (like ware lost in a Pedlers pack
They have, but know not where, perhaps their bundle
May yield a Ballad for the widow-Trundle,
Or some such business, wherein is shown
A mournful ditty, to the pleasant tune.
Fortune my Foe, or else-pox what do you call it
When t'hath no more Concepit then has a Mallett.
Who from their spungy brains may squeeze a sonnet
When they have a Fortnight chewed the cud upon it.
But shall such clumsey Humors ever be
Renouned with the name of Poetrye?
No, 'twere a sin beyound a pardon, you
Deserve the Poets name and Laurel too.
Thy book swells high; thy lines well-wrought not weak
Thy words might teach Apollo how to speak
Which if he ever could have done, like Thee
Daphne had never been turned into a Tree
Thy twisted Plott so nice a hand has spun,
You Would swear it were not only made, but done.
And you would not believe me should I tell
How soon this work was done, when it is sowell.
Go on (dear friend) enlarge thy spreading fame
And let thy Pen immortalize thy Name.
HENRY BOLD Fell N. C. Oxon.

To his ingenious friend Mr. Robert Baron upon his Cyprian Academy.
I Have thought upon it, yet faith I cannot tell
Wether thy prose or verse does most excel
Each other, both in an Emphaticke style
Roar like the torrent of a troubled Nile
Stopped by an oblique beam thy words being pent
In The confin's of thy throat, did force, their vent
To torture weak capacities, who will say
Reading thy book it is Greek, wrote English way
Nor is that all, some will conjecture by it
That in'ts conception thou keep'st sparing diet
They will not think thou did gross Hamkins eat
Least thou should choke thy quibles with such meat
Yet whatso'ere thou eat'st for other Palats
They Orcheards apples yield, thy gardens sallads.
Well may Antiquity amazed be
To view their chapells, an Academy
So far out vie'd in which are many bowres
For Venus darlings, neatly strow'd with flowers
Of Rheth'rick, nay the seven li'brall arts
Like thunder-clappsdoe act their several parts
In high expressions, which are forth brought
Some of them sure stand for a thirteenth thought.
But here I Will stoup, least I Tautologize
In vain ambages, when it will suffice
That in worths plentuous cropps, of infant bays
I gl^e an handful to adorn thy praise.
John Gleane Cantabri.

Roberto Barono, S. I. Apollines amplissimo cardinali ordine Amatorum.
QUa front ambulat monstrum illud sine labe? nes cis ignare? audies;

Invenis Platonicus cujus os ruris filiae suum fecerunt alvearium, Corpus
Poeticum cujus caput Musis est capitolium, ingenium perpetuus dictator. Venoris
argentea columba quae diu inter mystica sacra ejus numinis versata, tandem ad
matris auri, gam se ^^ntulit Phaebo pulchriore and sorore Phaebj.

Sub Chirone Cupidineo Cypria Achilles acerrimus, Acteon sine cornibus, cujus
oculis, Clorinda, Hecate illa triformis est obnoxia.

Novum sydus lactea collocatum plaga, Mercurius qui caduceo suo amoris somnium
jnduxit, totus aureus cui nupsit Pactolus.

Hic est ille Laudatus eralogiae in Cypriana academia professor, illius meritis
hasce primitias, officij and observantiae pignus, libentissime consecrat

Christophorus Baretus Londinensis. Coll. Cere. Chr. Cantb.

To his worthy friend upon his Excellent Book the Cyprian Academy.
NAtur's Apelles that can thus the State
Of Lovers with thy pencill adumbrate
Come quit this spot, and mount the starry quire
Where sit inshrin'd souls made of pure^i fire;
Half shadowed Venus shall then come to thee
Hoping perfection in thy Poetry.
The winged post of heaven shall guild his place
Knowing thy Attick tongue can go his pace.
When Priam's Paris lived (had thou been borne,
The godesses would thee their judge have sworn.
Had Barclay seen thy book, he would have said
Unhappy Argenis thou art betrayed.
To riper wits, in deserts may thou be
(Hating bright Sol) deformed Nyctimine
Let Satyrs now be packing, and that name
That would eclipse the luster of thy fame.
What shall I give thee? such titles sure as these
Amphitruo or Bombimachides.
Mentfieur of Helicon, Marquis of the Mount
Pernassus, and of the Cabaline fount
Poets Collosse, under whose mighty feet
May sail a greater then the Spanish Fleet
To Loves Elysium, in stately boules
Where heavenly Nectar suck Platonic souls.
I swear by Venus and her turtle dove,
He Is like a Tartar that d^s not thee love.
C. B.

To his worthy Friend Mr. Robert Baron upon his excellent POEM.
LEt ancient Poets stand aghast to see
Themselves so far outrun, out-stript by thee
Minerva's Magazin, who have not seen
The third part of their years, nay scarce seventeen.
Hither may ancients come, and grieve to see
Their learning all Epitomized in thee.
Thy language is of proper words and phrase,
What it affects it easily brings to pass,
Were chaste Penelope surviving now,
Her stubborn heart it would make soon to bow.
Cupid directs thy heart, thy pen Apollo,
Or else such lofty strains thou could not swallow.
Had thou not been in love, sure thou coul'st never
Have writ such sublime raptures as are here.
No more let Greece of famous Homer boast,
No longer let old Ovids sacred goast
Be grieved for, he now survives again,
Henceforth let dropping eyes cease, and amain
Let ink run from your quills in blazing forth
This our inspired Poets praise and worth.
I hold the opinion of Pithagoras,
This Muse cannot be less then Ovids was,
Only it suffered a transmigration
Into a body of a newer fashion.
Unto thy book may all men have recourse,
It does descry the effects of love, the force
Of armies and after victory the rest
Which no man can so all as are expressed.
In this thy book Faminius his life
Thou have expressed together with his wife
Clorinda, Poets veil fair Helens (...)
Here Is one indeed what she but painted was.
Now lovers cease t'invoke and call upon
God Pan for his sage direction
In Nuptial Hymns, we scorn the common story
This book henceforth shall be our Directory,
The praises all to write should I accord
Each line to me Encomiums would afford:
But I have done, my pen is naught, and I
Have but a slender vain in poesy.
Wherefore farewell, go on as thou have begun
To make thy name more glorious then the sun.
Thus wishing the each man a happy guest
Unto thy book I take my leave and rest.
Tui amicissimus Joh. Quarles
ex aede St Petri Cantabridg.
Ana- RORERTVS BARONVS. RARVS AB ORB NOTVS.
gram.
Rarus, haud cuiquam peperit Natura secundum
Notus es, and scriptis (Baron) ab orb tuis.
To my special Friend Mr. Robert Baron upon his EPOTOPAIGNION.
Jewel of Nature whom a blessed age
To us has brought forth even an Albion sage.
Were It not obsurdity with silent quill
To veil in verse and propose thy Atick skill.
Had a wise Sybill our Euriphilus
But auguriz'd of thy approach to us
Each hand had itched to be buisied
In weaving Chaplets to adorn thy head.
Critics may now prejudicate, what though?
They show their envy, neither hurt they you,
Minerva brought thee forth, Eupheme then
The Muses nurse nursed thee the gem of men.
Thou Ovid-like thou from thy infancy
Brought this Heroic strain now shown by thee.
In which high tract thou Mars and Venus clear,
Thou Neptune also do demonstrate hear.
Thee Mars in field may justly general,
Thee Neptune may by sea vice admiral
Insert: Thee Venus in her lofty state,
May make her amorous associate.
Now hither may resort most antique sages
Incredulous that these our iron ages
A Phaenix should produce, it is true, and sure
Natures best fabric now within us endure.
If these but wits first blossoms are, what then
May be expected from thy riper pen.
In this fair road proceed we thee desire
That as thy youth, we may thine age admire.
Charles Cremer.
Cantabr.
Idem in Eundem.
Te, Barone, Canam. te Polyhimnia:
Musarumque pater plectrasonantia
Pulsans se recinet Daphidis arborum
Docta front geras, est vigor in ^uis
Occultus folijs, tergeminas habe
Lauds, at quatiat sidera vertice
Aeque Caelicolas terra Britannica
Quae talem peperit de gremio suo
Vatem; perge diu trame^e prosperus
Incaepto, and faveat nomen Apollinis.
Carol. Cremer.
Coll. Corp. Crist. Cantabr.
To his admired friend Mr. Robert Baron upon his Book.
Great Madam Nature's womb as yet I see
Is not grown feeble, it has brought forth thee,
Our ages ornament, to ath brought forth thee,
Who art a Nestor in thy infancy.
Thy thoughts (though green) so ripe they are, and rare
With hoarie wisdom they may well compare.
In thy elaborate Poem, fancies seem
In Learnings choice, and chief spoils triumphing.
Wits deepest mines thy eagles eye can spy.
Thy cleerer soul sound their profundity.
This thriving bays, this verdant laurel sprout,
Over tops old slanders, at's peeping out,
It shall even Scythian frosts survive, and last
In spite of spattering envy, and the blast
Of Momus keener breath, it shall be seen,
Like youthful Daphnie always clad in green.
Cant pale faced study cow thy haughty sprite?
Renowned Sir, will thou proceed in spite
Of knotty arts? go on still and be blessed,
Tough ruggid sciences thou shall digest,
And swallow time himself, who never shall have
Power to rear for thy great name, a grave.
Sic vaticinatur, JOS. BROWN Gent.

EPOTOPAIGNION THE CYPRIAN ACADEMY. The First Book.
IT was in that time of the Year wherein party-colored Flora had diapred the
Earth with her chiefest Treasury, and Silvanus the Rustic ruler of the woods
had decked the spreading trees, with his choicest Livery, when the Illustrious
and Heroic Flaminius (the delight of his Age, and the glory of his Nation)
cast his love-infected eyes upon the fair Clorinda, a Lady who filled all
mouths with the praises of the amiable Physiognomy of her Face, and the
laudable faculties of her soul) as she was walking in a shady bower, attending
to the chirping Notes of well-tuned birds, and picking (as Fancy prompted her)
here a speckled Pinke, and there a Primerose, (the years Maidenhead,) now
ablushing gillyflower, then a blew vained-violet, this she sticks upon her
arm, that upon the borders of her curious plated hair, at length she bosomed
a happy rose-bud in her Lilly-brest, whereat the rest of the flowers contended
for fresh beauty to delight her, and swelling with emulation to bid an ultimum
vale to the breast of the dull earth to adorn hers (the Theater of virtue) they
all grew sweeter, and by a gentle gale sent an odoriferous invitation to her to
pluck them. Flaminius beholding her in this heart-attracting posture, he
forthwith placed so in her all his future hopes of joy, and joyful parts of
his heart, as he left remaining in himself nothing but a maze of longing
desire, in seeing he liked, in liking he loved, in loving he felt the effects
incident to love; the torments which he sustained in her presence, the griefs
which he endured in her absence, the pining thoughts in the day, the pinching
dreams in the night, the dying life, the living death: his fear of losing
her, his despair of gaining her, shall be the subject of the subsequent
History.

But first let us glance upon him in his minority, discourse a while upon the
course of his fortunes, before he was reputed a man, and insert his Legend.

He was by birth an Italian, borne in the delicate and luxurious City of
Naples, first the receptacle of Philosophy, now of Soldiery,

Erected by sweet Siren, said to be
By Phaleris built, styled once Parthenope;
Rich hort-yard of the dove-drawn Queen of Love,
New field of the Hydra slaying son of Jove.
Fat soil of liberal Ceres, crowned with corn,
Rare vineyard of the wine-wet god unshorne.
Boast not because no Citie's like to thine,
For sweetness, Empire, beauty, strength, corn, wine,
Boast not thy ra^ities, thy bubling Fount,
Labulla called, nor yet thy bifork't Mount
Vesuvius, whence Sol's Steeds (with mains be curled)
That circumdates in twice twelve hours the world,
Do first begin their race, as if it were
Their master Phoebus private Bedchamber.
Brag not of thy obscure Chimerian dale,
Never seen by Sol, nor by his Sister pale.
Nor cause thou giv'st a grave to him whose verse;
The conquests of victorious Kings rehearse,
Brag neither of the pleasant watered Lake,
Aquano termed, so fatal to the Snake.
Nor of Authentic Sibills domicil,
Whose past predictions bald time fulfill.
Insult not Parthenope because you have
Lacus Avernus, and black Charons cave,
And sootie Vulcans fier-spitting Court,
Wherein he tempers arms to make Mars Sport
It Is this Parthenope, it is this that raise
Especial Trophies to thy lasting praise;
Flaminius, whom fame affirms to be
Made in dame Natures prodigality;
Flaminius, whose name live till times glass run,
For earths last dark Eclipse of no more Sun,
Was borne in thee, at whose Nativity,
A general Turnament was held in the Sky,
The Stars did run a tilt, and Phoebus bright,
Danced a Coranto with the Queen of night.
The Rocks did Echo forth his name, and none,
Of their dull clifts, but did repeat that tone.
Orpheus did string his harp with nimble hand,
To sound his praise, -- Silvanus did command
Mirtles to dance, the pines their roots forgo,
The Holmes and branching Elmes did caper too,
Sweet firre-trees friskt, and sublime Cedars ran.
Joves tall Oak fed by gumms Assyrian,
Joined in a Galliard with that lofty tree,
Whose courtly boughs the meed of valor be,
And odor-breathing Zephyr this news bore
On's way, unto a grove of Sycomore,
Whilst there he told it in a flowrie gale
Tres bowed their tops, as thankful for his tale.
Each flowing stream in gentle murmuring tones,
Whisperd these tidings to the pebble stones.
Nor was Amphions sphere enchanting Lute,
(Whose sound erected Theban structures) mute.
Pan on his reed, on his pipe Mercury,
Carrold in Sonnets their festivity.
With beamie eyes, and bright disheveld hairs,
The Nymphs tript ore the Lawns, -- thus chim'd the Spears
Naples rejoice, a Prince is borne in thee
Whose fame shall burgeon to Eternity.
He had for his father Pompilius a man of an affable nature, in war as
expert, as valiant, in peace as provident, as prudent, always resolute to
undertake, and ever fortunate to execute any design conducing to the emolument
of the weale-publique, which he was industrious to advance, both in buffe, and
fur, by arms and art. He took to wife C^pricia a Lady of an exquisite
feature, and of so ripe a wit that the fragrancy of those redolent flowers of
female ^loquence which blossomed in all her discourses, turned all tongues into
attentive ears whilst she was speaking. If she did deambulate, besides the
making diverse places happy by her steps, the very moving did add an amiable
life to her innate perfections. If she did set still, the conspiracy of her
several attractive graces combined together, to present one perfect figure of
incomparable beauty to the ravished beholders.

From this happy couple proceeded this miracle of art and nature Flaminius, in
whom nature seemed to have planted the paradise of her perfection He was well
stored with civil virtues for peace, and martial valor for war; passion
was not exiled from him, but suppressed in him; and so subjected to right
reason, as he was idoneous for prosperity or adversity: whereof the one did
not make him insolent, nor the other dejected. He was one of the silken wits of
his age, by nature a Phylomathy, so addicted to erudition and ^iterature, that
he used his cradle like a Library, making Books his nugaments. Apollo did so
cooperate in his production as he lisp't meeter, and his first notes were
Castalian lays, as if he had been borne in Tempe, or Pernassus, or had the
sphear-borne harmontous sisters for his nurses.

There was no virtue but he did depute it either fit for ornament, or use, no
vice but he did condemn and contemn it as sordid.

His exercises and refocillations from his infancy, and very nonage, were
ingenious, manly, decent, and such as tended still to wit, valor, and
activitie, which he used ad ruborem, non ad sudorem, his games did not make him
pale with fear of loosing, nor hot with desire of gaining.

He was a fit soil for praise to dwell upon, and were it not as superfluous,
as it is tedious, we might protract this tract, or register of his virtues in
infinitum.

(...) sharp tusked Bores, crafty Foxes, and timorous Hares, with all which
kinds of Beasts, kind Nature (aspiring to recreate her darling Flaminius) had
plentifully stored that spacious Forest.

But to turn to our task, the French King at this time had his residence at
his standing house within a mile of Possy, whither this favorite the Duke of
Luynes was summoned, so that Flaminius was for a time deprived of his society,
which he made not only necessitudo, but necessitas, almost essential to his
subsistence: in whose absence Saturn that leaden planet did cast his
melancholy influence over all his intellectuals, yet he being willing to
dissipate those black foggs of disconsolate pensiveness, he rode attended by
two of his Domestics, Florian and Doristo, into the Forest, where he suddenly
heard such a plangerous and lamentable cry; as he was well assured it was the
doleful note of some object of pity, wherefore making his ears his guide, he
left not many trees behind him, before he discovered mounted upon a black
Palfrey a Damsel of exquisite formosity, urged with sorrow making toward him:
her light molded Horse though quickened and vivified with the whip, equalled
not the celerity of her timorous mind, she had her sad Oration inscribed in
pale characters upon her tristfull countenance, her eyes were distained, and
cheeks bedewed and irrigated with watering tears: the thwarting boughs of the
spreading trees did loose her tresses, and spread her hair on her shoulders
after the Funeral manner. Being come within his ken, she implored his aid in
the rescuing of her Lady out of the hands of an injurious usurper, and this
boon she begged with as much vehemeney of passion, as if her panting heart
would have climed into her mouth, to take her trembling tongues office.
Flaminius whose heart was the Throne of tender pity, as well as of truculent
prowess, undertook the quarrel, and followed the Damsel, who conducted him
to that place were the Ladies Servants (which the strange Knight and his
Accomplices had vanquished, and almost unliv'd) lay (besmeard in their congealed
blood) calling upon Charon (with dying groans) to afford them a speedy
passage. Flaminius conceived it more necessary to resume the captived Lady,
then condole the conquered Servants, wherefore he left them and out-stript the
flower wind in pursuit of that Knight, whom he at last saw leading away the
unwilling Lady, for whose sake he saluted him with this challenge.

It suffices not that thou have subdued yonder Petitoes of Mars, and captived
their Lady, fortune will not sell her at so under a rate, it remains that you
vanquish me also before you enjoy her, the wager of our contention, whose mercy
i will constrain you to abide, and in whose defense my sword (blushing at thy
impieties) shall strike thy soul to Erebus, and compel thee to garter thy
hose with thy gutts.

The strange Knight coined this proud reply to this unexpected de^^e; I
conceive it no hard task to chastise thy insolency, for I take thee for no
other then a body animated by a Pythagorean Transmigration, with one of those
cowardly souls which I even now sent to seek new Lodgings.

With that he turned his Horse to take his career, expecting nothing but the
fall of Flaminius, but he fell short of his expectation, at the first encounter
being sent to fetch an errand in the dust, but remounting his bitchamping
coursier, they charged each other with much agility; so thick, as if every blow
had striven to have been foremost, but the strange Knights Horse carvetting,
received upon his head a forcible blow intended for his Master, the anguish
whereof made him cast his burden, to accompany his blood (which too too
prodigally streamed out at his deep wounds) to the all receiving earth. Then
Flaminius contemning advantages over an almost vanquished Antagonist, lighted
also, and now these Champions entertained one another with fresh courage, till
Flaminius let fall such a fortunate blow upon the unfortunate strange Knight,
as parted his ill-tempered shield, and despising the weak and inconsiderable
oppugnation of his already broken armor, it made a great breach into his
heart-side, as if it would cut a passage for his unlawful love to issue out
at, and sent his whole body to strike the earth, falling, since he could offend
his Antagonist no better, standing.

Flaminius (after he perceived his pale enemy had acted his lives Epilogue)
accompanied the Lady to her Castle, which stood in the same Forest, and in the
journey he desired her to beguile the times have, and abbreviate the ways
length with the relation of her precedent fortunes.

To this request of his the Lady shaped this Reply.

Royal Sir, your commandment does not only give me will, but power to obey
you, such influence has your excellency. I will lay the foundation of this
subsequent sermocination with any one name, which is Iulia, eldest daughter to
signior le Aroine, and his wife Isabella, who both during the time of my
minority, (having performed the message for which they were sent into the
world) returned again to their Maker. First, my indulgent Father being too old
to live, his decayed nature was conquered by triumphant death, and useless
Physic did yield to his manifold diseases, then my widdowed Genetrix striving
to survive without him, and liking not, expired also. After this, I with my
Orphan Sister Andronica, retired to our Castle, (toward which we now equitate)
where we reap as much delectation in the rural solentary groves and hewts of
our own, as the rest of the French Ladies do in the populous streets of
stately Paris, she that has no looking-glass to dress her head by, will use
a boule of water, she that wants a sleekestone to repumicate her linen, will
take a pibble. The Countrey-girle girdeth her self as strait in the waste with
a course caddis, as the Madame of the Court with a silk riband; and we were as
well content in our Rustic immorigerous rooms,, as others in the magnificent
structures of our Royal Sovereign.

But to proceed, there arrived at my Castle Phylispis a valiant and heroical
Knight, one out of the number of those, whom renowned Fame will ever celebrate:
his errand was to prostrate his love-sicke-heart at my feet, in the highest
degree of lowest duty; and the purity of the verity is, he had taken a full
possession of the Fort, before he did ask for the keys; the match was
concluded, and agreed on before the capitulations were treated on: my ravished
eyes did no sooner behold him, then my amorous heart did fancy him; (for he
resembled Abdalmuralis, the grandfather of Mahumet, who was so amiable, that
women were enamoured of him;) yet my modest tongue did a long time hold him in
wavering suspense, neither suffering his fear to fall into despair, not his
hope to hasten to assurance; though once to prove the reality of his
unalterable affection, I charged him with whole vollyes of flat denialls;
though any man that had been trained up in Cupids discipline, might easily
perceive, I shot nothing but powder, to try his animosity, not bullets, to
batter down his breast-workes of hope already reared. To these he framed this
satisfactory reply.

Madame, the poor Fisherman that was warned he should not fish, would
notwithstanding at his door make nets. And the old Vintner of Venice that was
prohibited from selling Wine, did still hang out an inviting Ivie-bush; and so
will I die in faith to you, if I may not live in favor of you: My malevolent
and inauspicious stars may impeach my enjoyment of you, but if they should
implore the assistance of Erynnis, and call into their aid the three
Acheronticall Haggs, Alecto, Megera, and Tysophone, they should never force me
from your love; which is radicated so profoundly in my heart, that he which
plucks it out, pulls up at once that, and my soul together. Your gifts
inspired by bounteous nature, and your virtues acquired by liberal education,
have stamped for you such an indelible impression of love and affection in my
estimation, as no distance of place, length of time, or traverse of chance,
shall be able to race out, or impair, till death and sad despair, make a
sponge of my bleeding heart to wipe it out.

For all this, I still made his condition like a taper almost burnt out,
sometimes all obscured in black dark despair, and now and then a flash or
two, an Ignis fatuus of comfort; but of so short continuance, 'twas as soon
extinguished, as perceived, till at length, my kinder heart being willing to
yield, I was content not to persuade it to hold out any longer, against the
sweet blows of love, but I promised him marriage, which is shortly to be
consummated.

Soon after him came this knight, who is by your valor, Ad Charontem sine
naulo missus, and he also pretended a desire to match my matchless beauty,
with matchless affection, him I denied as fervently, as I did the other
faintly. And now this Tripolis (for so he was nominated, whom you have
vanquished) did attempt to atchive that (Tarquin-like) by force of arms, which
he could not effect by persuasion and argument, this made him devise all
means, and wait for all occasions to surprise me.

It fortuned, though late, yet at last, there was a match concluded on between
Arcates, son and heir to the ancient Duke of Orleans, and Claritia my
Mothers sisters daughter; to solemnization of these nuptials, I with my
damsels took our way, and now earths black babbling daughter spread the pinions
of swift wings, advanced her shtill trumpet, and filled the inquiring ears of
Tripolis, with the relation of our journey; of which being certified, he
diligently awaited for my return, and had assuredly made me his captive, had
not you been my rescuer; to whom I am indebted for my liberty (the joy of life)
which I hold now the second time of you. Thus sir have you bound me to you in
an energeticall chain of gratitude. To attempt a requital, would extremely
extenuate your transcendent courtesy, and derogate from the worth of your high
favor: but for the other office of gratitude, retention, if you had a window
into my memory, you might epsy there safely stored up, and conservated, to
preserve it from mouldring away in oblivion.

By this time the setting Sun with loose rays was posting to his Western
home, waiting only to light Flaminius and Julia to the Castle, which was a
place as strongly fortified, as rarely edified; it was erected of speckled free
stone, adorned with marble shining pillars, and statues of the pred^cessors of
Signior le Artine, it was environed with large walks both green and gravelly,
with spreading trees on either side, bowred on the top, so that in Summer time
the scorching Sun could not offend any with intemperate heat, there were such
delicate shadows, and in the Winter, the chilly and sharp winds found no
pass; the trees were so high and thick; round about these ran silver streams,
whose sweet murmur, as they gently tumbled over their beds of pebble stone, did
much adorn the pleasant solitariness of the place. Opposite to the front of
this strong structure was a large park, which for cheerful risings of the
ground, for groves, and rowsings for the Dear, and for crystal Rivolets of
clear water might compare with any. In the Hall, cost and invention strove for
mastery, so many Stories did so successively succeed one another, that the most
curious spectators eye, (though his admiration might dwell in each piece) could
find no cause of stay, until he had overlooked them all; here he did recreate
his active fancy, with this variety of pleasing objects.

Here might he perceive the ruddy blood drawn out of Daphne's tender legs, by
the enjurious thorns, as she over-hastily fled from persuing Phoebus, and her
dishevelled hair seemed to play with the warm breath of her following lover.
There might he behold sorrowful Venus bemoaning the violent death of her
boreslaine minion Adonis, and striving to wash away the clottered blood from
his worried carkesse with her pearly tears, which dropped from her tender eyes
like a continued chain of pearl, ^gushing forth in such abundance, as if her
rubie blood had changed its natural course and color, to run forth at the
wide open sluices of her eyes. She kissed his pale lips, as if she would
willingly have melted her sad heart to have restored them to fresh color, and
breath into him another soul fit for her love. Here might he epsy Leander
beating the swelling Helispont^ck waves with his weary limbs, swimming to his
expecting Hero, whose painted torches seemed to burn as bright as those real
torches which by this time had inherited the set-Suns office. There might he
discrie the rude mouths of Acteons dogs filled with white foame, greedy to
dismember their brutified master, and delacerate his limbs instead of the
innocent beast he persued. There grief in the stead of gain, pain in the
room of pleasure, seemed to bath its self in his sorrowful eyes.

By this time our Spectators appetites began to solicit them in behalf of
their stomachs, the colerick looks knocked, the trumpets sounded to supper, and
when the tables were with-drawne, the Ladies servants for the better
entertainment of Flaminius (being ambitious to exhibit all their forces to
perform any thing that might conduce to his contentment) presented him with
this pastoral.

(...) PROLOGVE
Flambio. APelles coveting to please your sight
Prepos'd those various objects of delight
To recreate your sent Here Is choice perfumes
Of unctious Narde, and Aromatic fumes.
Our cost-neglecting cooks to please your taste
Have dressed choice cates and veands of the best;
And to delight your tooth we all conspire
To add what is corispond with that desire.
Lastly this pastoral our wits prepare
Even as second course to feed your ear.
Expect no polish't linos, no sublime strains;
But rural Speech, such as is used amongst Swains.

ACTUS 1.
SCENA 1.
Gripus. Hegio.
When gaudy Flora in her prime
Observing it was Summertime
With fragrant flowers of each day
Had made our mother Tellus gay,
The newborn plumed minstrills fills
The si^iling heaven and ecchoing hills,
With chirping music, every groan
Was made their quire. -- Olympic Jove
Commanded Aprels balmy shoures,
To refresh the March bred flowers,
And May perfection in each field
To Aprels suckling babes to yield.
The spring p^^^umed this brood, whose sm^
The Phoenix nest might paral^ll.
Now did approach the festival
Of god Silvanus nuptial
To his grove haunting Clarida,
Then all the Faun^s keept holyday.
The nimble faries danced, and all
The dieties agresticall.
Cl^ius and kind Phisipile
Vowed loving Man and wife to be.
So Clodin did to Colatine,
So Serin to his Eglatine,
So Cloris did to Coridon,
And so dealt sheapheards many a one.
At length imploring love to be
So propitious unto me,
To Mira the fair sheapheardesse
In courteous wise, I did address
My hand, my heart, my cap, my coin,
With all the good I could conjoyne,
But she coy thing, refused to prove
What gentle Hymen is, or love.
As pevish Daphne fled away
From the illustrator of the day;
Even so my sight coy Mira flies,
My sighs she slights, my suit denies.
When glorious Sol has turned his back,
And all the world is hung with black.
Sleep (natures soft-nurse) flies my eyes,
My mind's ore-cast as are the skies.
(...) I Would rather fill a barn full then a bed;
More profit it is to have a crooked plough
Still going, then a tottering cradle rock.
But more then that, these I term foolish men,
(But foolish is the Amorists ep^hite,
Ou peut a peine aymer ensemble estre sage,
One scarce can be both wife, and love, together)
That ere will trust their honor in a Bark,
Made of so ^^ight weak bulrush as woman,
Apt every fleeting minute for to sincke it.
And how can^ thou expect fidelity,
In the disloyal sex called feminine.
Remember fifty sisters, Belus daughters,
Who all (save one) made of their husbands slaughters.
And both the Atrides had their envied lives
Endangered by the falsehood of their wives.
Euriphile (false Hag) her husband sold
To Polinyces for a chain of gould.
And Queen Euridice conspired
How to deliver to grim visag'd death
Her re^all Lord, and husband, to enthrone
In his void room her fancied Son in Law.
The fierce Medea did delacerate
Absyrtus tender members, to escape
Her Fathers pursuit, if we may rely
On the report of sage Antiquity.
Grip. Thou pleadst against thy self, I Will turn the point
Of thy last daggar into thine own breast.
Thou say Medea tore in twain her brother
Absyrtus, it is confessed, 't^as to discover
Her ardent, and firm settled desire
To follow Jason, ungrateful Jason,
Who after that, left her and all her charms,
To clap another Lady in his arms.
So have I seen a Horse-leach often embrace,
Cleave to and hang upon some bloud-swoln face,
Till its own turn be served, it holds fast,
Until his panch be full, then drop at last.
But to our ta^ke. Penelope lived chaste,
Though twice five years her royal Lord was gone.
Did not Aeneas fly, and leave his sword
To let out over-credulous Dido's blood.
When as Hiero blamed his wife, 'cause she,
Never informed him of his stinking breath.
I thought (quoth she) that all men's breaths smelt so.
Arria when Petus was condemned to dye,
First stabbed her self, then giving him the steel,
This wound (dear Petus grieves me not quoth she)
But that which thou must give thy self grieves me.
The Minians wives having obtained leave,
To say valete to their dying Lords,
Exchanged their habits, and exposed themselves
(In their escaped Spouses rooms) unto
The penalty of the offended Law.
Dona the partner of her husbands woe,
With him a long way (as his Page) did go.
When Conrad gave the Matrons leave to bear,
From Weinsberg foe-girt town what best they liked,
Each took up her own husband on her back.
Cornelia Annia did prostrate lie,
On her defunct Lords Sepulcher, and dye;
For this cause annually a pair of Doves
Are sacrificed to their firm settled loves.
And happy Phillacides loyal wife,
From death redeem^d him with the loss of life.
But many uncertain ways has Phillis gone.
To find her runnagate Demop^oon.

Hegio. Humanum est errare, I confess,
Both sexes then are faulty; but what else
Do thy deluded eyes discover in
Thy Mira, that thy heart should fancy her.
Is It for her skin-deep beauty (her chiefest pride)
That Is but times fading flower, which as it is
Most delicate, is as volatious.
Its like unto the Colors Phidias drew,
Which seemed most admirable to the view,
But suddenly did vanish and impair,
At the weak puff of each aeriall breath.
A wife is but a fair affliction.
Symonides reputed her to be,
The Shipwreck of a man, the tempest of
A house, the troubler of quiet rest.
A prison of life, a plague assiduall,
A sumptuous conflict, a necessary evil,
A horrible care, an ordinary battle,
A sayly hinderance, the humane slavery,
A fair Aspe, an inevitable pain,
A pleasant damage, a domestic strife.
If then coy Mira scorn with thee to dwell,
On earth leave her to lead bruit Apes in hell.

Gripus. Quote not these Accherontick Anchorites.
Those stollid moatheaten Foolosophers,
That libell against Angels, those night-birds
That do defile even their own nests, nay worse,
That strangle sacrilegiously the fames
Of their own mothers; Those ungracious brats
That impiously requite with Stygian Ink
The Nectar which indugently they lent them.
Heed not the hissing of that viperous brood
Of Parricides to their own mothers names.
A female is the second part of man,
She is a male in the the newest edition,
A wife's the best of her Lords movable.
For such a one fierce Champions have proved tame,
The stoutest Soldiers trembled, and look wan,
Ready to give their ghost up at a frown,
The oracles of wit and Philosophy,
Have been loves fools, and bent their litterature,
But to express great loves Supremacy,
And the extent of its Dominions.
Nay under Venus sacred Ensigns march,
Etheriall troops of high mounted gods.

Hegio. Well, each man as he likes, but should the mad
Disloyal Sycophant, whose sphere is woe,
Attempt to shoot a raving shaft at me,
In's many pieces I would make it recoile
Upon his corpse, as there be golden sands,
In the Pactolian or Tagean shores.

Gripus. Cease, cease, good Hegio, to repine at love,
Atlantas pace was staid by golden balls.
And gods themselves are often ensnared by love,
For they have slipped beyond their skill in that,
They have made beauty of a greater force
Then they themselves are able to resist.
For Laeda, Jove became a wandering Swan,
And for Europia a loud lowing Bull,
And for Antiopa a Satyr rude,
And for bright Danae a storm of Ore.
Did not Apollo leave his burnish't throne,
Lay by his tresses? and in humane shape,
Most humbly beg a boon at beauties gate?
Did not Alcides for Jole's sake
With huge often draw the slender thread.
He was taken captive by his captives look,
She took the Conqueror that had her took.
Kind Paris for to steal his dainty piece,
Traveled as far as betwixt Troy and Greece.
And Perseus amongst the Negroes sought,
And fair Andromade from Inde brought.
Cupid can make the Regal Lion sport,
In amorous dalliance with the frisking Kid.
Venus can yoke the ravenous and fell kite,
With milder Swans in the same Chariot;
Immane rapacious Eagles she can linck
And timorous silver-brested Doves together.
When she commands all animalls lay by
Their contrarieties, and antipathy. Exit.

Hegio. Enjoy, sir, your conceit, but for my part,
I am invulnerable, thou blind Boy
Shall never take me captive, I am like
Achilles dipped in Styx, nor do I fear
Thy boy-ships shafts, go play with angry Bees
And painted Butterflies, and at the Wasps nest,
And when thou art stung, in thy mams lap go rest.

SCENA 2.
Venus. Cupid.
Hark Cupid and revenge, this profane Swain
Does slight thy quiver, and blaspheme thy bow,
He says he is shot-proofe, scorns thy archery,
Scoffos at thy skill.
Cupid. I Will penetrate his heart,
I Will make him be an earnest Votary
Unto a marble-hearted female Saint.
I Will melt to amorous thoughts his soul of stone,
I Will torture 'm in loves torrid, frigid Zone.
I Will make him in the same flames freez, and fry,
The world shall be enamored of his woe,
I Will find a Shepherdess in whom he will joy,
And this his darling I will soon infect
With coyness and with niceness, for her sake.
His morning Orisons shall nothing be
But numbers of innumerable sighs,
Which he shall count by pearly tears, not beads.
I Will make the cherries of her ruby lips
The only cordials for to sustain
His loathed life, and those shall be like to
Fugacia poma, which like Tantalus
He always shall desire, and always miss.
I Will make him view the place where she has set,
And thither he shall repair, as if he thought,
The place some sovereign virtue did contain
To ease him, and to cure his gnawing pain.

Venus. Let him not wander far from home to seek
Deep streams in which to wash his frisking flocks.
Let such uncessant floods flow from his eyes
As may supply the want of rivolets,
Let his pined cheeks and hollow countenance,
Affight all wolves from his secure sheep,
Let him spend all his days in pinching grief,
And melancholy discontents; and look
Like to a withered tree o're-growne with dross.
Let his illetable and pensive sighs,
Scare all rapacious, and omenous Ravens
From picking out the eyes of his young Lambs
Bleating for nutriment unto their dammes.

Cupid. Innumerable such effects as these,
Shall all be caused by this keen pointed dart.
When as the long-tongu'd Lord of envious light,
Whose presence make the day, whose absence night.
Betrayed my mother, and the god of war.
Unto the sooty, black, club-footed dolt,
As he was tempering of a thunderbolt,
For to revenge this wrong, I made him prove,
The power of my golden shaft and love.
And I will make this Hegio soon confess,
I am a god, and of the starry race.
He shoots. Now lay thy hatred down, thy spite decline,
And prove a votarie at Daris shrine.

Exeunt. SCEN 3.
Hegi^ solus. BUt sure I was not borne Minerva-like?
Nor did fond Paracelsus teach my Sire
To make a man without conjunction,
What furious madness did possess my breast
To flout at love? and wrong the femal sex?
And to requite in a sharp Satyrs strain,
The roundelayes, and charming lullabies,
That my indulgent genetrix did warble?
What are my brains grown dry, or my blood cold?
Or am I on a sudden waxen old?
I thought, though Cupids aire-deviding shaft,
Soon penetrated the well tempered
Corslet: which the hot-halting god of fire,
Made for his boisterous rival, it should not find,
Or make a way to vulnerate my mind.
And therefore Venus I blaspem'd thy son,
But now I sing a Palinodia.
Alas I have heheld that lovely face
That from her eyes shot Cupids into mine.
To Abuse my sight, and work upon my frailty,
With their smooth oratory to undo me,
Among thy other trophies let me be,
Kind Cupid, Hertan Porrigo to thee.
Me thinks soft love has lately made a breach
Into the battered bulworks of my breast,
And there commands all my yielding powers,
Which now insulteth in their vassalage.
One look has struck my soul into a fever,
Me thinks affection whispereth in my care
Fair Daris name, Daris the shepherdess;
An object beautified with the choice gifts
Of liberal nature, and of virtue too,
My wandering eye has made my heart receive
So good opinon of the forenam'd Nymph,
And hourly it solliciteth my tongue,
To try my fortune, and to let it know,
Whether its like in Daris love to rest
In happy bliss, and blissful happiness;
Which if denied, its suddenly prepared,
To leave my skelliton unto grim death.
But courage Hegio, let not cold despair
Chill thy green, and wide-gaping wounds too fast;
She is a woman, and she may be won,
Venus Adonis loved, why may not she
Prove lovesick too, and at length fancy me:
Shall I be bashful then, and so expire
With grief; fie, fie, what shall a woman's eye
Prevail so far over me to cause me dye,
And leave my name in the fools Callender,
And there be noted with a rubie letter,
For a supereminent Festival;
No, I am loath to leave earth yet, I Will try
If I may live, and find a remedy. Exit.

SCENA 4.
Chorus of Faires. BRight Phoebus who with morning light
Put'st Hesperus twinkling train to flight,
When as thou rowzest, and display
Thy golden locks, and summon day;
Thou who do rest thy drowzie-head,
In aged Thetis froathy bed:
When as thy gilded Car of day,
His glowingaxle does allay.
Thou who in twice 6 Months fulfill
Thy journall on th'Olympian hill,
Illustrious Lord of light, in vain
Thou bragg'st with arrows to have slain
Thy Python stern, whose massy bones
Were Iron bars, like congealed stones
His knotty sinews were, the boughs
Wer's shady covers; his great troughes
Deep Rivolets, which he (well nigh)
Caroused at one watering dry:
His belching shot forth flames, his eye
Shined like the dapled morning sky.
Fair Venus thy young hoodwinkt son
More glorious trophies often have won,
Thou that crown'st thy loves with bays,
Inventer of mellodious Lays.
Thou left'st Pernassus bifork't hill,
And Tempe thy fair domicill,
At loves command, and all to be
At Daphne's shrine a Votary.
Thou that did by virtuall heat
The happy plants, and herbs create,
Could find no plant, or herb to be
A medicine for loves malady.
When thou commandst the birds to bring,
In triumph to the world, the Spring,
The new-clad earth has quickly lost
Her Snow-white roabes, no chilly frost
Candies the grass, no ycie cream
Congeale the lake, or pearly stream;
No snow lies sheltred in the shade,
The earth is thawed and tender made:
For all thy heat, thy love does lowre,
Nor had thy scalding rays the power
To thaw her Marble ice, and this
It Was caused her Metamorphosis.
Large limbed Hercules trebly blessed
With fame, thou who in youth expressed
Deeds of honor, thy cradle's crowned
With brave achivements, which renowned
Thy name; thy valor was supplied
With strength, thy haughty spirit defied
An host of men, Heaven never conjoined
So strong a body, or so stout a mind.
1.
Brag not cause you flew and withstood
Within the thick Naemaean wood
A beast, the temper of whose heart
Was like a nether Millstone; Dart,
Nor threatening Sword, nor frightfull Spear,
Could terrify it with Panick fear:
Like knotty wreaths of craggy brass
His sinews were, a noise did pass
From's mouth, which might strike deaf the cares
Of mortals, and affright the Spheres,
You wore his ruggid shaggie hide
About your shoulder, and left side.
2.
The Hydra by thy hand was slain,
Whose heads lopt off sprouted again.
The mud was made his downie bed.
The stones were pillowes for his head,
His speckled jaws which hideous were,
Thy brawny arms did bodly tear.
3.
Thy club made th'Erymanthean Bear.
Lie weltring in his ruddy goare,
His sharpened tusks shall spoil no more
(As it was wont to do before)
Arcadia, which in antique days
Did warble out her well-tun^d Lays,
And sing loves on her oaten reed,
Whilst her secure flocks did feed.
4.
The Centaure thou subdu'st by force,
Half like a man, half like a horse.
5.
Swifter then wind you ran, or thought,
On foot a running Stag you caught.
6.
Rapacious bird Stymphalide,
Were made a prey to death by thee.
7.
Thou mighty Scavinger wertable
To cleanse the foul Augean stable,
8.
You made a Bull to cross the Maine,
And graze on Neptunes liquid plain.
9.
And Diomedes fell monster,
Who made his captives provender
To his proud pampered steeds, by thy
Revengefull hand did justly dye.
10.
False Cacus thou did crush to death,
And 'twixt thy arms squeeze out his breath:
11.
Cease the adjuring world to tell
Of thy forced entrance into Hell.
You swadled Charon with his oar,
The triple-headed ban-dog roar,
And yelle: you Pluto ere you're gone
Confronted on his jeaty throne.
12.
Hesperides fruit, sweet and gay,
By thee were stolen, and borne away.
By Juno's labors you war'nt broke,
And yet you yielded to loves yoke.
Thus Love made Hegio to epsy
Sweet Daris Phisiognomy,
And prove close prisoner to that eye,
Whose frowns make him prepared to dye,
Love wound her too, that we may all
Keep holyday at their Nuptial.

Exeunt. ACTUS 2.
SCENA 1.
Hegio. Grypus.
NOw we are both in the same predicament
Of Passion, we both blessed objects love.
But through their nicitie, and coy disdain,
We Are like Loves cursed abjects both to prove.
Now, now we Symbolize in egritude,
And Simpathize in Cupids malady.
My drooping head, my deep contracted brow,
My bloudlesse cheeks, dead eyes, pale lips, faint tongue,
Shall strive in each point thine to equalize.
My heart even now resolved my hasty feet
Should measure out the over tedious way
To Daris (whose fair face a garden is,
In which fresh beauty plants her choysest flowers
But frozen Winter keeps his risidence.
It h Domicil ofr Adamantine heart.)
I thought each weary step to be a mile,
I thought each pace to be a measured league,
Until I heard her tender nibling Lambs
Imploring with their bleating oratory,
Some aliment of their indulgent dames.
At length I spied upon a happy mount.
My Daris, whom the Sun did gently kiss,
(Being then mounted in his midday heat.)
Daris both singing sat, and knitting too.
As if her nimble fingers sought to keep,
True tune with her tongues Music. --
Thus she sung. Song.
I Have a Sunne-burnt Pilgrim seen
That dry has been,
Hasting unto the Crystal Springs,
Where down he flings
His prostrate body, then he will be
With bended knee
A Votary
Unto the flowing Dietie.
2.
But when his sweating face is drencht
And thirst be quenched
In her cool waves, then this his sweet
With saucy feet
He kicks, and from the slighted place
Soon moves his pace,
And court no more
The silver Nymph so loved before.
3.
So Io was with foul scorn wasted,
When once tasted
By the injurious ravisher
Great Jupiter,
Who first with prayers did invade
The credulous Maid;
After the rape
He plagued her with a brutish shape.
4.
Kind Maiden Goddess by thy skill
Protect, and still
Let netts of passions finest thread
Never thee spread,
Nor snaring Poems proffer, d be
T'intangle me.
For they endure
For their reward a Calenture.
5.
That fondly prove too kind to cure
Loves disease. -- I Would rather sure
That my fond Lover still should pine
Then that his wanne cheek should assign,
A sempiternall blush to mine.
Still chaste Dian let me be thine.
I Will vow allegiance at thy shrine,
No Nuptial bands shall me combine.
Whilst thus she sung, the winds grew whist, the wild
Incensed Bears, and Panthers proved mild,
Amazed I a fixed tree did prove,
But wonder blasted trees did dance, and move,
Each bends his palsy tops to worship her,
And turn obsequious Idolater,
Her Lyrick airs intic't the ravished quire
Of birds to come, which (being come) admire.
The scaly fish to hear her voice did lay
Upon the waters top, and frisk, and play.
Ere while I fondly thought love could convay
(Although he is deified) no other way,
But through the gazing eyes, into the heart
His love-infected, keen and fatal dart,
But whilst I heard this smooth-tongu'd Siren sing
On the harmonious aier-deviding wing
Of her sweet voice, it plainly did appear,
That subtle love could enter at the ear.
Long time I stood amazed, at length vowed I
To live by her propitious smiles, or dye
By rigorous frowns shot from her awful eye.
I sad for nuptial love, she strait denied,
I plead affection, by she replied
(Disdainfully) denialls, and left me
An abject unto love and misery.
Gripus. Even now anatomized by groans and sighs,
Almost interred and buried in woe,
To Mira's pastures I resolved to go,
The sheep and lamkins with rich fleeces laden,
Became my spokes-men, and with bleating noise
Pleaded at Mira's bar for my admission.
She mounted sat upon a happy hillock.
Clad in the verdent plush of Madam Nature,
In twisted braids of silver Lillies knitting,
The loose train of her amber dropping hair.
Phoebus my rival proved, and would my fair,
He grazed upon her coral lips, and bathed
Himself in balmy juice of fervent kisses.
He seized the rose-buds in the spicy beds
Of her delicious cheeks, whilst thus she sung.
Song.
Men's loves like tinder set on fire
Flame, and expire.
Fond love does fail^
With brittle beauty. Beautie's frail
Like Junes rain, or Decembers Sun
It Is quickly dene.
Or like to the Solsticiall flower,
It buds and withers in an hour.
2.
Caelia's locks so aptly twined,
Each hair would bind
Olympic Jove,
I^ a strong twisted net of love,
If to descend down he assumes
His Eagles plumes,
These hairs will change their hue, and grow
Hoary and cold, as melting snow.
3.
Like to a comely field of Snow
Now shows her brow,
Rutts shall betray
Ere long, and wrinkles deep display,
Times plough have furrowed her brow.
An Ice shall flow
Through every vein, she shall discry
Pale Death displaid in her dim eye.
4.
Each beam shot from her eye so gray
Creates the day,
That eye often made
By winkes, the noonday Sun a shade.
Now it is youthful Cupids nest,
It Is at the best.
For it will prove his grave, and be
Ecclipsed in obscurity.
5.
Of flowers both the King and Queen
In'r cheeks are seen
By graces led
Thither, and laid in nuptial bed
On whom sips like Nymphs do wait
In regal state.
They blush and redder grow, by this
That they themselves, themselves still kiss.
6.
No Lilly shall be found, or Rose
In cheek, chin, nose,
When age grows on
And beauties Summer time be done,
As Swallows seek when Summers gone
Some warmer Sun.
So will disloyal Lovers all
Which now fond Celia servants call.
(...)
But why should I say if? it is sure enough
Each Shepherd now is tuning of his pipe
To warble your Epithalamians.

Mira. Then let them turn them into Elegies
And Epicediums for Gripus death.

Daris. And let the Shepherdesses weaue a wreath
Of Willowes to encircle Hegio's brows.
Here comes our Parents.

Tyndarus. These fair maids, I hope.
Are counselling each other to prove kind,
And pity their distressed lovers.

Daris. Lovers,
Sir, what have we to do with lovers, we
Have sworn alleageiance at Diana's shrine;
If we should love, we break the faith we owe
To Virgin pureness, and our vestall vow.

My. Such are like plum-trees that do crooked grow
Ore standing pooles, they laden are, and rich
With pleasant fruits; but naught but chattering Pyes,
And Crows, and Catterpillars feed upon them.

Tyndarus. O fie upon this single life, forgo it,
We read how Daphne for her peevish flight,
Became a fruitless Bay Tree, Sirinx turned
To a pale empty Reed, Anaxarite
Was frozen into Marble, whereas those,
Which married, or proved kind unto their friends,
Were by a gracious influence transformed
Into the Olive, Pomegranet, Mulberie,
Became Flowers, precious Stones, or eminent Stars.

Dip. Imprudent girls, why should we women prove
Sore tortures, and disturbances to men,
If we be foul we are odious and loathed.

Theft. And such unkind girls as these are, if fair,
Are like rich vessels full of poisonous drugges,
Or like black Serpents armed with golden scales.

Mira. Cease to persuade, for Gripus name and death
Have both one sound in my esteem, that tongue
Which warble forth the one, do chant the other.

Daris. That direful sound, that most disasterous knell
Attends Hegio's name, and ever will.

Tynd. Rare grace, and comely feature both are joynd
In you, as if they both cospir'd to make
Two parragons, which should excel each other.
Shall common beauties then, and meaner faces
Enjoy these joys, which your selves deny
Unto your selves, no let your gentle hearts
Embrace the sweets due to so fair deserts,
Your lovely features were bestowed on you
By liberal nature for to be enjoyed;
And 'twere a sin where she have been so free lovers sides,
Of her best graces, to be nigardly.

Micon. Wound not your selves through your poor
Starve not your selves to make them pine away,
Be kind unto your selves, if not to them.

Dipsas. Use time, the squabling Snake with age oreworne
Casts off her hide, and re-assumes a new.
The towering Eagle change her aged plumes,
The fading Rose (the glory of the Spring)
Receive an annual birth from the sharp briar,
Be wise, and crop in time your beauties flowers,
They never spring more, being faded once, like ours.

Thest. Use time, no lovers will crowd to impart
Their thriving suits to your age deafned ears,
Choose constant lovers then whilst that you may,
Such as love for a like-long-age, not days,
Your beautie's frail, and soon will bud, and wither,

Mir. With beauty love will bloome, and blow together.

Daris. Beauty and love are like the coupled twins
Of wise Hipocrates, who both at once
Received birth, and nutriment, and death.

Mira. He never shall crop my youthful beauties flower
That i will cease to love, when beauty 'gins to lower.

Exeunt. SCEN. 3.
Gripus. Hegio
Gripus. OF late I did (not brooking a denial)
Renew my suite, attempt a further trial,
Entreat, conjure, I left no way untri'd
I must not, no I would not be denied.
This was my resolution, but she
The obdurate portall of whose Marble heart
Was locked, and barred against the powerful art
Of often repeated tears, or far fetched sighs,
Or deep, and heart-bred groans, stood deaf, and dumb
She must not, no she would not be over come.

Hegio. I never move her, but my hopeless trial
Always read Hieroglypicks of denial.

Gripus. Still lets proceed, who knows we may prevail,
Let not our best advised endeavors fail,
To be employed, lets make a further trial,
And fairly speed or find a foul denial.

Exeunt. CEN. 4.
Chorus of Faires SOme love, and have their loves rewarded
Some love, and are no whit regarded,
Some woe and speed, some woe and be
Rejected for their loyalty,
This tyrant love compared may be
To the Macedonian dietie
Whose looks seemed sometimes to disdain
This Champion, or that again,
It would cast amorous glances forth
Applauding to his mighty worth.
No torture, no affliction
Like to true loves passion,
This made Sophocles wish his foe
Might only be tormented so.

Exeunt. Finis Act. 2d.
ACTUS 2.
SCENA 1.
Hegio. Gripus.
Hegio. Exiled from mirth I wander up and down,
Galled with loves tyranous torment, Io Ily,
Inthrall'd, and bound in Cupids golden chains,
Perplexed with woe, my feature all is blur'd
And changed, and I am Metamorphosed.

Gripus. I am transformed too, O how has passion
Thrust all my thoughts, and senses out of fashion.

Hegio. My head of late was thatcht with yellow straw
Now it is perriwig'd with Winters gray.

Gripus. My front as smooth as Ivory while ere
Now bears deep furrows, made by sorrows plough,
In which the seeds of woe are scattered.

Hegio. My eyes are Islands, they are girt round about
With troubled Oceans, and tides of tears.

Gripus. I spend those tears whose store will never be spent,
Yet shall I want tears, before cause of them.
My Mira score not up my cares, and fears,
Nor keep a Catalogue of my sad tears.

Hegio. Quotidian fevers of reproach and scorue,
Have chilled the vigor of my wounded heart,
Yet by the scorching rays of Daris eyes,
It still is ignifi'd and glowes, and flames,
O Daris let the showers of thy love
Assuage the glowing fire of my passion.

Gripus. If I should put to Sea and boldly plough
The glassie face of Neptune, love would be
My Pylot. If perchance I walk abroad
For recreation, my companion
Is love, the fruitless love, of coy Mira.

Hegio When the soft charms of labor chasing sleep
Seize with their downy wings upon my eyes,
When heavy Morpheus with his leaden keys
Close up my watchful senses, love's my pillow.

Grip. Me thinks the gentle gales of winds that move
The trembling boughs, and through their palsy leaves,
Breath music, whisper Mira's name to me.

Hegio. Me thinks the notes of all the chirping birds
Are changed, and warble naught but Daris name.

Grip. Me thinks that Echo which do always speak
In answer to my sighs, say Mica's coy.
It Is true, Diana has more Nimphs then one
In store, but no fruit else will please my taste,
But what Hesperides garden brought forth,
No color please my eye but that which was
Stained by the fish Maurieticall,
And none but Mira can my fancy move.
O Mira that my heart were flint like thine,
Or thine were soft, and pliable, like mine.

Hegio. The birds wander in the flowrie fields
In the wild benefit of nature, live
Happier then we; for they may choose their mates,
And carroll their sweet pleasures to the Spring,

Now you would surfeit him with happiness,
Now you would throw his Mistress Julio's arms,
You Would have her struck too, that she sick might be
No more of coyness or unconstancie.

Venus. The Eagle scorns to stoop unto a Fly,
The Regal Lion does refuse to prey
On him that prostrate lies, and will you prove
More cruel then these be? Then Poets pens
Shall Satyrs drop, and paint out thy disgrace,
Thy childehood, nakedness, and hood winck't face,
Prove kind, and every tongue shall carroll forth,
And chant in amorous lines thy lasting praise.
Cupid, he shoots. Yield (gentle girls) to love, now each go rest,
Her amourous heart in her true lovers breast.

SCEN. 3.
Gripus. Hegio. Echo.
Grip. Lanch forth sad soul into an Ocean
Of tears, driven by the blustering gales of sighs,
To find the Haven, and seek safe harbor out,
But stay a while, I think I Would need provide
Some other Pylot for to steer and guide
Thy ballanc't bulk, besides sorrow, and grief,
For these I fear will strike, and split o'th sands,
Wanting a Compass in their quavering hands.
How ere thou art like to leake, and sinck in the waves,
In The raging Waves of sad despair, if so
Thy sails and tacklings thou to flames may tnrn
Cast overboard thy hope, thy carcass burn.
My grief's a boundless Sea that knows no Shore.

Hegio. O that I were a Basiliske that I
Might venom Daris, or unvenom'd dye.
To some tenebrious dungeon let us hie
Where never day shall be acquainted with us,
Where we will remain still in obscurity.
Cursing our fat^s, and never more behold
Sols radient and splendidious rays; and hear
The melancholy Owl Nictimine,
(The chiefest friend of solitariness)
The fullen Dogs, the immitating Apes,
Shall still converse with us, and such dumb things,
To whom nature denies use to sound our names,
Our grifes to blab, or fames to damnifie.

Echo. Fie,

Hegio. We wish for death, we live without all hope,

Echo. Hope.

Gripus. Hopes t'obtaine our loves their are none,

Echo. One.

Hegio. It Is bootlesse to try again,

Echo. Try again.

Gripus. Say, shall we then obtain reciprocal love?

Echo. Love.

Hegio. Shall we assuredly
Upon a babbling Eccho's voice rely?
Alas, he fondly prates, shall we beleev't?

Echo. Beleev't.

Gripus. We will; and as thy tale prove true,
So will we credit Eccho's.

Echo. Credit Echo.

Hegio. Now as a well is hotter, when the ground
Wear Winters hoary mantle, then when as
Earth decking Flora does invest the graffe
In Summers tapestry, and Junes parliament roabs
By an Antiperistasin, or by
The cirumambient airs humidity,
Which in a manner do besiege it round,
And make th'intrinsique heat unite, and so
Concentre to resist th'invading foe:
So let their coyness set an edge on us,
And cuspidat our animosities.
Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito,
Yield not to ev'les, but against them stoutlier go.

Exeunt. SCENA 4.
Flambio. Agroicus.
Flam. How happy am I in my bud of youth?
The blossom of my nonage is not blown,
Nor do the strength of nature (yet) begin
To uneffeminate my downy cheek.
I place no happiness in women's smiles,
Nor torture in their ill-becomming frowues,
My heart is shot-free (yet) nor does it lie
in the fair casket of a Females eye,
But hail Agroicus, what think of love.

Agroicus. In good sooth, I know not how to devine it, or give an extract
deminution of it, but as I deceive, its very nocent, and almost omninocent,
where it gits the upper hand.

Love and the botts have killed many an old horse, my Grandame told me that.

And I have heard an old blancient boet say that Megander swum through Hell to
his Hero, I think he was a Goose to do so; And yet my Zonne Tom did more the
'tother day, he leapt over a high wall, and waded through a deep moate past
his depth, to git to Margery.

As I came up at the butt londs end, I met him in that case, but O, how did I
bemire, and wonder, to see his new slop and all his clothes bejeered with the
mud of the pond he ran through.

The old Boet I bominated before, said, That when folk fell in love, a blind
naked boy, he called him Stupid, shot them, 'Twas he shot my Zonne Tom, by the
Maskins I would give the best cow in my yard, to find out this rascal Stupid,
and I would thrash him, as I did the Hen last Shrove-tuesday.


Exeunt. SCENA 5.
Gripus. Hegio. Hymen.
Gripus. Like as a guilty prisoner, upon whom
Offended Justice lately past her doom,
Drags his sad Irons from the loathed jaile,
(Hopeless to live) unto the cursed tree
Where he stands muffled (but an inch from death)
His last prayer said, and hearts confession made;
At last (unlookt for) come a slow reprieve.
And gives the wretch some few days more to live.
Now he (lost in amazement) boldly rends
Deaths muffler from his eyes, and scarcely knows
(Being overjoyed) whether he lives or dies:
Even so joy whose life is quit from death,
And despair, by Mira's propitious smiles,
Now 'gins t'approach my Festival, and rest,
I Have chaste dull sorrow from my pensive breast.

Hegio. Thanks gentle Echo for thy sweet direction,
Thanks gentle Juno for thy kind protection,
Daris is won, Hence loathed Melancholy,
A^t, avaunt from hence thou Snake-hair'd Devil,
Thou ^ollow-eyde monster full fraught with evil,
Hence, to the Abysle below, thy way imb^,
For that is thy Mansion, thy proper place.
The gu^fe that wants a bottom, there may dwell,
And preside over the counsel of dark hell,
Inthroan'd in Radamanthus seat may reign
Among the C^cod^mons, never again
A^cen^ to cast thy influence ore my brain.

Hymen. You that in this unfortunate age of love,
This hapless time of of Cupids tyranny,
Have felt the worst that winged wag could do
Now banish sorrow, henceforth you shall be
So happy as to think no wight is wretched,
Or that there is a thing called misery.
What pleasures Poets fame of after death,
In the Elizean a^busted groves,
Shall spread themselves before you, as if you were
Tenants, or Farmers of those blessed shades,
It shall be a perpetual Spring, where you
Inhabit, all disasterous dewes, and blasts
Shall strangers to your happy pastures be.
Come follow me, this my well-lighted flame
Shall light you unto Ceres Tempell, where
(Expecting you) they Nuptial garlands wear,
That hold your hearts ^nain'd in their golden hair

Exeunt. SCEN. 6.
Chorus of Fairies. Ring out ye Crystal Spheres,
Once bless our listening ears,
Let your sweet silver chime
(Keeping harmonious time)
Carroll forth your loud lays
In the winged wantons praise.
Mab thou Majestic Queen
Of Fairies, be thou seen
To keep this holyday,
Whilst we dance and play,
And frisk it as we go
O'th light fantastic toe.
The Satyrs and the Fawnes
Shall nimbly cross the Lawnes,
Over tawny sands, and shelves,
Trip it ye dapper Elves,
Dance by the fountain brim
Nymphs decked with Daisies trim,
Come Lovers all in rows,
With your blithe and jolly brows,
With flowery chaplets crowned,
Come Lovers walk a round
This Village, Venus say,
Annually this day
Her Sons triumphs shall be,
Lovers express your glee.

Exeunt cantantes. Epilogue.
Flambio. Our Lovers now find in their strict embraces
The true Elyzium, (the best of places,)
Their joys are full, they nothing want at all,
But your acceptance of their Pastoral.

FINIS.


BY that time this pastime was past, it was past time, to keep their drowsy
eyes any longer waking, who by this time, solicited them to commend themselves
to the elder Brother of death, but upon the approaching of the next Aurora,
before the welkin had fully put aside the sable vizard of the night, before the
stars were covered, and the earth discovered by the Sun, Philispis
(accompanied with a troop of Knights of such renown, and transcendent worth,
as future times must out of duty owe them the debt of an honorable memory)
came to celebrate his nuptials with the Lady Julia.

Now every busy Virgin is preparing costly jewels to adorn the Bride. every
willing hand is providing ornaments to deck her. Rare beauty and well becoming
grace damaskt her rosy cheeks, her glorious eyes did spark and rutilate, and
eject rays, her pace was careless, her deportment neglected, seeming to
discover an amorists passions. She was led by Flaminius to the Chapel of the
Castle; Flora did weaue the violets into a purple rugg, to spread het paths
with. Cardinal de Rechileu tied that Cordian knot which sempiternally
conjoined these Amorists.

Having paid the duty they owed to their stomachs, for the greater
magnificence of the solemnization a ju^^ing was held in the presence of
Phylispis, and Julia, who now knew no other sphere besides joy to move in. The
first that entered the lists was Flaminius, the first that encountered him was
Mendorus, who though he was a Knight whose heroic deeds of chivalry, neither
time can wear out of memory, neither death himself by any means disolve) was
forced at the first meeting to make a pillow of his Palfries croop.

The second that came against Flaminius, was Plitilius, in whose acts there is
truth enough to make him famous, besides that which is fabulous, when these two
sons of valor, (whose lightfooted steeds ran as if they had been begotten by
the wind, and ballassed with quick silver) met, breaking their knotty spears
even to their gaunt^ets, they seemed to have dimmed the air with the dispersed
splinters of their shivered lances, whilst they passed by each other, not
without evident tokens of their approved prowess encharacterized upon their
raced gorgets, the next time Flaminius encountered him with so much force, as he
enforced him to leave his saddle.

Our Champion next Antagonist was Alsus, a man of a haughty courage, and of
grand experience in Military affairs, he bore for his device upon his shield,
fickle fortunes whirling wheel; but this angry goddess placed him in the
lower spokes, for he was soon sent with his heels upward to company his
fellows.

Flaminius still continued unhorsing his unabiding enemies, till the declining
lamp of light did treble each shadow, and Titans fiery chariot horses
defatigated with their tedious race, were retired to drench themselves in their
hospitable salt bath, for the refreshing of their sweating members; at which
time he left the lists, having renowned Victory for his handmaid, and the
trophies of the day adorning his crest.

We may better imagine, then describe the rest of the entertainment, only thus
much, when the chorus of their dreams were ready to step upon the theater of
the imagination, the over-wearied creatures of the world inclining to repose,
being now survayd by the Pale Lady of the night, the princely company there
present attended Philispis and Julia to their Amphithalame, where one of the
Actors of the precedent pastoral warbled worth this Epithalamium.

Epithalamium.
Mirth and nuptial joys betide
The happy Bridegroom and fair Bride,
Sol have quenched his glowing beam
In the cool Atlantic stream,
Now their shines no tell-tale sun
Hymen's rites are to be done,
Now Loves revells 'gin to keep,
What have you to do with sleep?
You have sweeter sweets to prove,
Lovely Venus wakes, and love,
Goddess of Nocturnall sport
Always keep thy jocond court
In this loving couples arms
(O that my prayers might prove charms.)
Goddess of the marriage feast
Here approach at our request
Saturnia, whose car I saw
A harnest teame of Peacoks draw
Fercely through the fleeting sky,
wherein sat thy majesty,
On thee did an Host attend
Of bright goddesses, descend
From that chariot, and bless
Julia's womb with fruitfulness,
Make her, when 9 Months be run
Mother of a lovely son,
Let every year the Queen of love
Her new filled cradle rock, and move.
Mirth and Nuptial joys betide
The happy Bridegroom, and fair Bride.
This Song being ended, they took away their candle, and wished them good
night.

Soon after the nimble hours had yoaked Piroeis, Aethon, Eous, and Phlegon,
the fire-breathing Palfryes of Apollo, and their master Phoebus leaving the
Sea-greene bed of his watery Lover, had with his golden Chariot made a swift
passage through the ribs of the deep, and saluted him at his Chamber window,
Flaminius arose to take his leave of this glorious assembly, then he returned
to Poyssy, and by degrees visited all France, past through the meridian of the
slow pac't Spain, and drunken Germany, with the most part of those united
Provinces, which are plucked out of the jaws of Neptune, and after three years
space he returned home to Naples, whose happy return we heartily congratulate
in these rimes.

(...) the low lowing Bull, the sharp-tuskt Bore,
(Besmeared with Adonis ruddy gore.)
And frisking Lambs, and with their bloods bestow
A (...) (...), coral ^cture on the brow
Of froth becurled Neptune, lets arise,
And to the careful Sea-gods sacrifice.
Let grateful Aromatic odours burn,
Let pious incense smoke, for the return
Of Great Flaminius, in whom abide
More Art, then raised Athens to her pride,
More civil Ethics he contain, then may
Well moralize all savage India.
Dance nimbly Ladies, beat the measured ground
With your light feet, in a fantastic round,
Lads jointly join your hands, whilst you are to greet
Flaminius, we will join our measured feet.
THE SECOND BOOK Of the CYPRIAN ACADEMY.
AS the Sea (that great Regiment of waters) cannot be quartered in the
cloister of a slender nut, no, neither could the mind of the most renowned,
and most worthy to be most renowned Flaminius be included or reclused in that
small local compass which circumscribed his body, but it continually made its
transcursians and progresses abroad, to find out and enjoy knowledge (its most
optable object) though under remote regions, he was willing once more to leave
his indulgent parents (whose lives were bound up in his welfare) and his
selfe-sufficient country (though we esteem it difficient without him) that he
might ratify his judgment, and enrich his head with variety of knowledge, and
leave fame for a patrimony to his posterity.

Now the Saylors have drunk their parting cups, vocat jam carbasus auras; Now
Flaminius is ready to steer his course toward the white forest the land of
fortune Albion, we will usher him to his ship with this vale,

Farewell Flaminius, so smoothly sweep
The glassy face of the becalmed deep,
Devide the streams, let thy guilt brag out brave
The prouder billows, cleave each yiedling wave,
Outstrip the tide, and with your painted oars
Stout Saylors, glide along the moving shores.
Kind Neptune claim the winds, let not them jarre
Commencing with the bubling tide, a war.
Now the spreading sails are hoysted up, now the Anchors are way'd, and the
wind also the part of a dutiful and observant servingman, waiting just behind
him, and filling the swelling caves with prosperous gales, the cloth swelled
and grew proud of Flaminius presence, and the sea danced to receive him, and
the wind sweetly kissed the waters whispering new joys to enriched Thetis, who
had now quite forgotten to be colerick wished she bore Flaminius, he soon left
the lessened land behind him and gentle Neptune afforded him such a favorable
transmarian voyage, as he with more then ordinary celerity discovered Dover,
where he landed but not lazed, for he no sooner left admiring at the laudable
beauty of the Island, (which was then fluorishing, encoying a well settled and a
happy peace under an unusurped Government) but he repaired to the Metropolitan
City, Albions imperial chamber, Troy-novant.

Rich Britain's unexchausted treasury,
Illustrious Englands large Epitomie,
By lib'rall nature stored with what belong
To state, for beauty brave, for warfare strong,
Refulgent Titan who surveigheth all
Structures contained in the massy ball
Never saw the like -- As Cypres-trees excells
The humble shrub in loftiness and smell:
As fairest Lillies, clad in hoary plush
Exceed the fruitless, withered bramble bush:
As the springs glory (the red Rose) exceed
In beauty, and in sent, the foulest weeed:
Or as the fertile tree whose Laden boughs
With varnish pride crowns jolly Autumes brows
Transcend the Idle shrub: so you in worth
Surpass the edifices of the earth.
As Caesar's courts surmount Amyntas cells:
So neighboring republiques yours excells.
The Silver Thames whose bed have always been
Made at thy feet, of rivers is the Queen,
Her Barges standing in even placed rows
Like to a watery wilderness she shows.
The Nerean goodesse twice each natural day
Comes fourscore thousand paces off to pay
The tribute, whom precedent times did call
Great Troy-novant polyanthropicall,
Ring out Bow bells, proclaim your joys aloud,
People embrace the smothering throng and crowd,
To view Flaminius, Euphrosyne
Right goddess of free mirth come lead with the
The frolic mountain Nymph fair liberty.
Attended on by youthful ^ollity,
And let your bonfires smoke asspire so high.
As if you meant with earth to sing the sky.
Let sweet Bellonius music, and the voice
Of Cannons sing (in a loud base) your joys.
In this City his eyes made his mind know what power heavenly beauty had to
throw it down to hellish agonies, he spied the beauteous Clorinda walking in a
checkerd garden among those flowers which contended for breauty to recreate
her, and were ambitious which should be fairest because just like to her, who
was thrice fairer then the fairest, Flaminious steps could find no further
ground, but here he cast anchor, and became inamoured of Clorinda, A Lady every
way as rarely accomplished with virtues becoming a woman, as he was with graces
adorning a man, she was borne in the metropolitan of beauties dominion, in
complexion a pure sanguine, in condition a perfect Saint, either her exterior
feature, or inferior faculties did captivate all beholders, for virtue took
as much pains to adorn the one, as nature did to complete the other.

Ut Solin Coelis; ut Lux in sole videtur:
Uirtus in vultu sic habitare suo,
Spectator quicunque venit, discedit amator
Aut illum virtus, aut sua forma capit. As Sol in heaven, as light in Sol abide:
So virtue in Clorindadoe reside,
Who comes to view her ere he goes will love,
Her virtue, or her beauty will him move.


As the Tartarian plant Boxaneth grows up in the visible form of a Lamb, and
insensibly eats up all the grass round about it, so did she by an intrinsique
kind of magic subiugate all hearts to her eyes. There wanted nothing in this
Angel, that nature might add for perfection, or fortune bestow for wealth, or
that the Gods at any time confer upon mortals, the greatest reritie that the
world could show was her beauty, though the least thing that might be
encomionized in her was her beauty.

Been que le corpse soit bean ^ame est encore plus belle, her fair body was but
a fair Inn of a far fairer guest within, an excellent Cabinet of an
incomperable jewel, the gifts of her mind did as far transcend the perfection
of her face, as that did the beauty of the rest of the Ladies of the court,
among whom she showed like a silver dove trooping with rows, or like Cynthia
among the lesser stars, or like the discolored tulip among weeds or like Jo
among the rest of Argus herd. In a word let the curious hand of art extract
from all virtues and graces an Elixer, or perfect quintessence of perfection
and it will appear but the picture of her; for to fill this treatise with
elogies of her, were to put Hercules shoe upon an Infants foot, to clap
Bucephalus saddle upon a Spanish Ginnet, or lay Atlas burden upon a child's
shoulders, or to empty the sea into a pond.

One look of this Paragon of the terrestiall paradise struck Flaminius into a
fever, and fyred him with her love, the exorbitant flames whereof he could
neither suppress, nor conceal. -- Quis enim celaverit ignem
Lumine qui semper proditur ipse suo. Who can the ardent fire of Love conceal?
Which by its own light does it self reveal.




To this end the Poets painted Minerva the Hieroglyphick of wisdom veiled, to
signify that wisdom may be covered, and reclused, but Cupid the character of
affection they portraitured naked, to infinuate that Love is not to be over
canopied, but these are the petulancies of Poets.

To our task, his passions cannot be written of me with out floods of tears,
(which would wet the paper, and obliterate the relation) nor read of you
without grief: he observed the place of her recreation, where she would walk
alone, and thither would be repair, esteeming the place happy, yea, and holy
too, which had contained so sovereign a beauty, one night among the rest in a
sad fit of Passion, (as if his soul had been gone upon some errand, and left
his corpse in a paune till its return,) he gave way to his imaginations to
ruminate upon that which permitted him not to sleep, and these, or such like
were his meditations, Alas Flaminius, what magic, what pyromancie, what
enchantment is inshrined in the ancles of Clorinda's eyes that have this
influence upon the heart? why should thou annihilate thy self, and pine, and
die for beauty, a gilded nothing, a rose can show more vermilion then a Ladies
cheek, a Lilly boast a richer white then her hand, alas a wife is but a fair
affliction, it is true the disease of love is impatient, the desire extreme,
whose assaults the wise can neither oppugn by policy, or the valiant by
prowess; its the epidemicall egritude of mortals, and the best mallady in the
world when it infects two together, but herein consists thy infelicity in
affecting a Lady whom thou art no more like to obtain then the Wolf to drink
up the Moon, or the Giants to dismount Jupiter.

Think thou that thou art caught alone with the bait of her Atheriall
beauty, can an old he goat be without a beard, a lewd userer without full
baggs, a Uenus without a temple, or a fair Lady without a Lover.

Can the Albion court afford never a votary to thy Saint.

-- Quae ditissima forma
Mill procis placuit --
Whose feature thousands do invite
To admire, and delight.
Will the Partridge let the ripe ears of corn stand for the sparrow, will the
cat let the crummes lie for the Mouse, or English Lords bequeath beauty to an
Italian; no no, expire rather with a private scar then public shame, if thy
Lady never loved any she will not know how to affect thee, if any, she will
not leave them for thee. But courage Flaminius. -- Timidi nunquam statuere
tropheam.
covard aimant n'ent ou ny' aura beile amye.


Faint heart never won fair Lady, will you then loose the day before you begin
the battle, will you conclude your self conquered before the conflict, will
you cast down your shield before your sword break, Mastifes fawn when they
are fed, Tigers stoop when they be tickled, Bucephalus will prostrate himself
to be carried, and women yield when they be courted, cast anchor here then
Flaminius, what needst thou, -- Per saxa per Ignes. By Scilla and Charybdis,
sea, and land,
By Rocks, and shelves, heaps of moving sands,




Run to rifle the Eastern shore, when thou may behold far more precious
diamonds in her eyes, why should thou, Per varios casus, per tot discrimina
rerum. By Marine toils
And Martial broils.




Steer thy course to Tire for purple when thou may find fresher in her ruddy
cheek.

To what end should thou dig Peru for that Ore which thou shall find
excelled by her golden hair, why should thou ransack the rocky Licilian Sea
for Coral, when thon may enjoy it on her ruby lips? why should thou seek
for Ivory in Africa when thou may find it upon her hands? what needst thou
toil in India for gummes when she can breath a more redolent Diapasma? or run
to Arabia to hear the Phoenix sing when her voice makes a far more melodious
Diapason?

Flaminius had of his acquaintance Grisonus an Italian who became his spokesman
to Diaphoro (his Ladies Guardian) to obtain for him admission in this manner.

Diaphoro, the intimacy that has been always between us since the first taste
of our acquaintance, have embouldened me in behalf of a noble Lord of my own
country, to solicit your council and assistance in a business of grand
importance: his name is Flaminius of whose person virtue her self is proud of
so great patrimony, and of so comely personage, that it is dubitable whether
he be more indebted to nature for the lineaments of his person, or to Fortune
for the increase of his possessions, he is of a quick inventive and penetrating
capacity, without spot of morosity, or color, he is aliquis in omnibus,
fraught with all kind of scientificall knowledge, if you ask what countryman
he is? I may rather say, what country man is he not? he is Cives mund^, a
Citizen of the world, having with the sun (his fellow traveller) surveyed most
of habitable and hospitable regions, and in his travells being arrived in this
happy kingdom, and come to this magnificent City, that powerful dietie Love,
which have enkindled the hearts of mightyest monarchs with the beautiful
lineaments of rosy cheek't Ladies, at this time have manifested its
soveraignety over him, who is taken in the snare of Clorinda's love, and
fetered with the chain of affection.

The countlesse griefs which day and night he indures may be as persuasive
orators to moove any pitiful nature to favor him, he doubts not of success,
had he but access, which if you shall please to procure him, you shall bind
together with me to your self this noble Lord in the most corroborated limitts
of truest affections.

Diaphoro replied, Sir, amongst the rest of the Encomions of your Lord, you
might have remembered the soundness of judgment, which I perceive and applaud
in his choice of Clorinda, a Lady adorned with singular beauty and chastity,
excelling in the one Uenus, in the other Uesta. Zeuxis, having before him fifty
of the most eminent beauties of Sparta to include all their perfections in the
simulachre of one amiable Venus, said that fifty more of more excellent beauty
then those would not administer sufficient beauty to shadow the goddess of
beauty by; in the like manner it fares with me, who despair by art to shadow
Clorinda (to whom the rest of her sex serve but as foyles) or by imagination to
comprehend her. I may say, and that without a solaecisme that truth her self
might be her Panegyrist and yet continue naked. If I do any acceptable service
to Flaminius that might conduce to his obtaining her, esteem it but the shadow
of what I desire to do, in the mean time let me crave your society together
with Flaminius at a slender meal at my house at night, not for the cates which
you shall find, but for your company which I fancy, what want in cost shall
exceed in courtesy, and welcome shall be as great as your cheer little.

Grisonus (after due thanks returned) departed from Diaphoro to certify
Flaminius his friendship, who now called upon Phoebus to whip on his lazy
teame, and precipitate headlong to the west: which done he repaired to
Diophoro's house, where we will cover with a veil of silence the
entertainment (which was royal) though Flaminius best dish was the beauty of
Clorinda, and Clorinda's the personage of Flaminius, so that they were both
caught in one net, and both struck with the same dart, and before Phoebus was
ten times brought abed, their souls were knitt in an entire union, and their
hearts lodged in eithers breast, but O the Remora's, and obstacles that
obvaricate a lovers progress, O the tri^tfull casualties, the dolorous
accidents, the s^d contingencies that wait upon an amorist, for no sooner was
loves sacred jubilee proclaimed by these new lovers, but a corrivall must step
in to eclipse their joys.

The glorious sun exhales the noisome vapors of the earth, and the shining jet
draws to it the contemptable straw, and the rare beauty of Clorinda, (that
loadstone of love) attracted the heart of Vernar and laid it prostrate at her
feet.

To give a character of Vernar, he would have made a fit standard bearer for
that gigantick troop that bad Jove battle, and besieged the gods.

He half in despair because of Flaminius and half in hope because of Decia
Diaphoro's Lady, (whom he inserted in read letters, in the catalogue of his
best friends) took his way to Chelsey to Diaphoro's house, where he found
Clorinda sitting in a cool arbor thatcht with sucklings, and guarded by the
enamoured chirping wood quire, which came thither to adore her (who could show
more graces then there be sands in the glass of time,) She sat upon a banck of
Lillies which grew pale to see themselves excelled in whiteness by her fair
hand, the arbor was lined within with Roses, which blushed themselves into a
fresher cornation to assimulate her cheeks, the pavement was of purple violets
and other redolent flowers which could bost no sweetness, but what they
derived from her, by the entrance of this arbor ran a silver stream which
with its bubling oratory did court the shore to dam up the torrent, that it
might stand still to behold Clorinda, but being denied, it went murmuring away.
The Nymphs and freshwater Sirens danced, and the aeriall spheres laid a side
their melodious lutes to lissen whilsts Clorinda gave an air to these more
charming notes.

SONG.
1.
First shall the Be abhor the smell of Hybla's fragrant boure,
And sease her thigh with balm to swell?
Sucked from each spicy flower.
2.
First shall the chastest turtle dove
Forget to bill, and fly
From her own mate, and emblem prove of loathed inconstancy.
3.
First Pan shall make a loving league betwixt the wolfes, and sheep
First shall the hen her brood bequeath unto the Kite to keep.
4.
First shall the huge Levia^han abide in the sea no more,
But come to sport with active man upon the parched shore.
5.
First shall the Lion weary be. of solitary woods,
And skip into the frighted sea to wanton in the floods.
6.
First North with South its place shall change
Orient with West shake hand,
First steadfast earth shall move, and range, and air fixed stand.
7.
First spangled heaven below shall ly and sable hell above,
Ere unto my Flaminius I false or unconstant prove.
8.
First shall my ashes pass the fire and cloistered ly in urne,
Ere my affections expire or loves flame cease to burn.
9.
Love with my body shall not end that never shall fail, or fade,
But shall upon my soul attend into the Sacred shade.
Her Song ended; Uernar stepped to her and thus spoke,

Divine Madam, (Divine I call you because like a diefied goddess you
monarchize over my affections) the rare Idea of your beauteous portraiture, and
supereminent accomodations have so fired my heart, that nothing but your
propitious aspect can save me from becomeing loves abject.

Since every part of you is decked with some particular ornament, your face
with etheriall beauty, your head with celestial wisdom, your eyes with awful
majesty, and lovely lenity, make also your heart the throne of tender pity,
being the most excellent raiment, of the most excellent part.

The luster of your resplendent eyes have kindled those fires which nothing but
the showers of your mercy can mitigate, you have wounded one, you only can
heal me, like Achilles his lance you have as well a medicinal as a
vulnerating virtue, the knife can as well spread a plaster as make a wound,
and you can as well happifie me with your love, as pine me for your goodliking.

Let not Flaminius (whose life is a mere blanck wherein brave actions shall
never be inscribed for the militant of posterity) enjoy what I sue for, Let
not that straggling stranger, who is enamoured of every new face he beholds,
enjoy you the glory of women, of men the only admiration, shall that loathed
Issue of his fathers loins, that slander of his mothers heavy womb, that rage
of honor possess that which love sick-Albion Lords have sued for in vain?

Modesty made in Clorinda's blushing cheeks, a fresh bed of coral, whilst
she heard Flaminius (the mirror of magnanimity and true patron of prowess,
and chivallrie, thus reviled, and though these petulant expressions might well
have sturd up anger, yet his deportment did rather breed disdain in Clorinda,
who thus replied.

If you knew how much your discourse displeases me, and how little it is like
to profit you, you would esteem your time as vainly lost in pursuing your
task, as I account it over long until you end it, and those flames of
affection which you pretend shall sooner burn your heartto a cole, then
enkindle mine with a reciprocal ardour.

Clorinda having given Uernar this bitter pill to swallow left him in despair,
and repaired to Diaphoro, and Delia, as she walked the flowers did ambitiously
crowd themselves into love-nets to entangle her feet, and kiss them, and
detain them prisoners in their amorous stalks, the Daffadillies wept when she
removed and the Tulip called all it is blood into it is cheeks to count her,
stay, Being come to Diaphoro and Delia, she said,

As I was shrouding my self in a cool arbor, from the soultry rays of the
scorching sun, Vernar (the truest hyerogliphick of in solence) intruded,
distilled his lovesick passions into my loathing ears, and so reviled heroic
Flaminius, with contemptible provocations as would whet any cowards sword to
carve out the reveng of his reputation, Nay had it been spoke of a disceased
Hero, the enraged spirit in pity of the ashes so profaned, would nimbly lift
up the sweating marble, and leap into the wronged dust, which being now new
animated would become 'its own revenger.

Diaphoro and Delia answered,

We grieve that Uernar should say any thing that should produce your
displeasure, but doubtless if you would please to bless his suit with your
good liking, it would extremely conduce to your friends contentment.

Ciorinda coined this reply.

The torrent of my affections ran in another chanel, Alexander would have no
man ingrave him in precious stone but Pergotales, and I will have my picture
imprinted in the heart of no man but Flaminius, the Peacock is a bird for none
but Juno, The Dove for none but Uesta, none might wear Uenus in a table
besides Alexander, nor Pallas in a ring but Ulysses, as there is but Phaenix in
the world, so there is but one tree in Arabia called Rasin that she will build
in, and as there is but one Clorinda to be heard of, so there is but one
Flaminius that she will like of.

And let the inconvenience of forced watches be demonstrated in this Tragedy
which I have often heard Flaminius relate, (viz,)

There fled in France some hundred and odd years since one Captain Coucy as
gallant a Gentleman as those times afforded, if fortune had been as intentive
to augment his possessions, as nature was to complete his person, he was tossed
iu Cupids blanket, and became servant to a gentlewoman from whom he received a
paritie of affection, which news no sooner arrived at her Parents ears, But
they (to cross her former intention) hudled up a constrained marriage,
between her and one Monsieur Faiel, one whose wealth was more grave and
weighty then his wit, and who had rather a mine of gold, then a golden mind,
though his purse did guild his infirmities, and his purse compounded for his
folly. Captain Coucy (having an army of passions, for his convoy in discontent
quitted France, and became a Commander in the wars of Hungary against the
Turk, where he receivd his imnedicable wound not far remote from Buda, being
convaied to his Asylum, he lingered and strugled with death some few days,
and not long before he expired, he called to him one of his Ueteran soldiers,
and servants, of whose fidelity he had formerly received sufficient evidence,
he told him he had a business of grand importance to impart unto him, which he
conjured him punctually to perform, which was, that after his soul had left
his pined body, he should cause his corpse to be ripped open, and then take his
heart out of his breast, and recluse it in an earthen pot, to be baked to
powder, then to enclose the powder in a small box together with that bracelet
of Madamoisella Fails. hair, which had a long time entwined his left wrist,
and with them a note which he had written to her with his own blood, and after
he had cloysterd his carcass in the bowels of his mother earth, to repair
with all expedition to France, and present that box to Madamoisella Faiel's
fair hand, This direction led the old Servant by the hand, who having
fullfill'd the former command (this being the last importunity that he had
left to express his duty to his Master) his hasty feet devoured the way to
Paris, where coming to do his errand Faiel interrupted his passage, and
questioned him because he was assuredly certisied he was Coucy's man, and
finding his faultering tongue to let fall some unadvised slips, he and his
Servants ransackt him, and interrupted the box with the note which discoverd
what was therein contained, he dismissed the bearer with threats, and menaces.

And delivered the powder to his cook, advising him to make a little well
rellished dish of it, without wasting a dust of it, for it was a dear and
precious relick, and and conjured him to serve it in himself after the last
course at Supper, which being done Faiel commanded all the waitors to absent
themselves and enterd into a serious discourse with his wife, how ever sines
their nuptials he observed she did indulge too much melancholy, and least it
should bring her into a consumption, he had composed that approved cordial,
there upon he importuned her to eat up the whole dish, and after much
persuading to declare what it was, he told her she had eaten Coucy's heart,
and so drew forth the box; and presented her with the note, and the bracelet,
she (lost in amazement) in a sud lain exultation of joy, with a deep sigh said,
This is a precious cordial indeed, and so lick't the dish, affirming It is so
precious that it is pity ever to put any meat upon it, from this her repast she
went to her repose, and as soon as the morning began to draw dew from the
fairest greenes to wash her face withal against the approach of her glistring
lover, she was found dead in her bead. Worse success attended the inauspicous
forced match of Aegyptus 50. Sons to Danaus Daughters, who all (but one) made
their bridal beds stages, whereon they acted their husbands tragedies, what
inference may be drawn from all this conference but the inconvenience and
misery of compelled marriages, to prevent such sad events my own choice shall
procure my good liking; the chariot of the Sun is for Phoebus, not for Phaeton,
Seianus his horse will thrive with none but his Master, nor will the Tolosonian
gold enrich Cepio's coffers, none can sound Mercuries pipe but Orpheus, non can
unfold the Sphinx his riddle but Oedipus, none but Laertes his offspring can rob
Pallas of her Troysaving Palladium, Uenus delights to hear none but Mercury,
and Clorinda, to love none but Flaminius.

This her discourse was so full of rapture, that they only began to be sorry
when she did end her speech, and wished (in wonder) that she held it less vain
glory to talk much, then they did penance to give audience to her dulciloquie.

But let us return to Uernar.

Now mischief began to unmaske her self, and take a pride to grow terrible,
for he (seeing himself slighted) turned his love into loathing, and the heat
of his affection into the height of malice, he repaired to, Flaminius and said.

Sir, Bombar interposed betwixt Clorinda and your self and have eclipsed her
affection from shining upon you, alas, your Lady plays fast and loose with you,
her love is like a Gypsies knot, in one gale she both hoyst sailed, and waighed
anchor, in one wind she sounded both an alarm, and a parley, pretending nothing
more, intending nothing less, then to love you, her tongue is furnished with
fauning affection, as a Haberdashers shop with new fashions, and her heart is
stuffed with fraud as an usurers closset with parchment bonds.

As in Logic there be Aristotelis Periherminias as well as his intricate
questions, in the realitie of numerus, as in Ethics his magna moralia as well
as his Nichomacha, as in music there is a diatessaron, as well as a
paralambanominion; as in Geometry there be oblique fines as well as right: an
Isoperimetris as well as a dedocathedron, an Isosieles as well as an
ambligonium, as in Retorick there be Schemes, and tropes, as well as
pronuntiation: as in Grammar be He^reroclitans, as well as perfect nownes; as
in physic be the colon as well a the Arteries: as in Geographie there is a
Terra incognita periwig'd over with P^olemies Delphuego, as well as the know
parts of the temperate Zone; so in women there be false intentions as well as
false conceptions, the herb Moly has a flower as whit as snow, and a root as
black as Ink, so has Clorinda a fair tongue as false heart, tout ce qui luit
n'est pas or, all is not gold that glistereth, thou know not what bitter
poison I Will in sweet words, aux mots, and non aux mots, il faut juger d'le'
home, a good archer is judged of by his aim, not his arrow, and a true friend
known (...) by performances not protestations.

Toute chair n' est pas venaison all flesh is not venison, nor every tale true,
straight trees have crooked roots, smooth baits sharp hooks, and a honied
tongue a heart of gall, the fairer the stone be in the toades head, the more
pestilent is the poison in her bowels, and your Ladies talk the more it is
seasoned with fine phrases the le^te it favouerth of true meaning, there is
nothing more smooth then glass, yet nothing more brittle, nothing more fair
then snow yet nothing less firm, nothing more beautiful then a woman yet
nothing more fickle.

Flaminius breaking his long kept silence said,

I shall never take joy of this life, if I may not enjoy her, for whose sake I
joy principally to have life, but to what end is this supposition? if other
women be brickle as glasses, my Clorinda stands a rock of Parian marble, firm
and sure, the crystal shall be tainted, the Emerlin spotted, and rude feet
shall profane the galaxia, Leda's winds shall forsake their orbs, or
Serpentarius disert his small fry of twinisling stars, or Lucidelyra detest
her self of her refulgent beauty, or Boots cease to drive on Charles wain,
ere I Will harbor dishonorable thoughts of Clorinda, A Titan though curtained
with clouds yet in time dissipates the congealed vapors, and gets the victory
and dissolves those vailes into thinnisse, and so to nothing; so shall Clorinda
these aspersions.

Should you faigne the Elephant to choose the Mouse for her companion (which all
men know she fears) should you forge the Lion to be delighted with the crowing
of a cock, or the load stone to embrace Theamides, or the Be to build in the
tree Alpina, when no man is ignorant but she, (either suspecting it to be
venomous, or misliking it because it is so gorgious) always shun it, who
would extol you for a naturalist that affirm things so unnatural, more
absurd is it to accuse Clorinda to become Helena, whom she excells as well in
beauty as in chastity.

Now Flaminius (ushered by affection, and attended on by fear) departed from
him, and directed his steps toward Chelsey, in the way he met Bombar,
Diaphoro's, brother, whom he (misinformed) looked upon with narrow eyes,
because he esteemed him ready to enjoy the perfection of his desires.

But when Flaminius heard how Uernar reviled him, and accused falsely his
constant Clorinda, with very anger at his insolence his eyes waxed blood shot,
and his forehead was furrowed with so fearful a frown as all the beholders
trembled at the terrible aspect of his bunched brow, which notwithstanding was
but the shadow of his hearts impatience, choler choked up the mouth of his
voices organ, so as he was unable for a time, to render any reply, but as soon
as he had recollected himself he sent him this desire, Impious Uernar, Though
you have practiced villianie from your cradle, and sucked more mischief then
milk from your hated dug, and hitherto escaped scot-free, yet now retain a
mortal challenge from my arm, which glories to oppugn so foul a cause, I
shall expect you in Hide Park, as soon as the clear Aurora be risen out of
the arms of Titan that I may see what complexion thy heart bears, and that
thy body may be offered up for a breakefast to the Crows by

Your irreconsileable Antagonist FLAMINIUS.


Uernar accepted the challenge and sent this retort,

More (Impious Flaminius,) not dreading thy menaces I doubt not to carve thy
body into steakes, and distribute it to the plumed spectators of thy tragedy,
for the world shall sooner want adventures, then the courage to undertake them,
who styles himself,

Your utter enemy UERNAR.


A little before the time of combat, a Lady called the sage Artimaga came to
Flaminius prophesied his victory, and presented him with a strong armor, more
gorgeous then the Uulcan framed armor of Aeneas fetched from the Cyclops forge,
by the Pampian goddess Cytherea, when she sought for her sons safeguard from
the fury of Rutilian Turnus, fighting for a Kingdom and his love Lavinia, this
armor Clorinda beautified with Locks of her golden hair, which was fastened to
his cres^, and obumbrated his Corslet dangling down in small braides, tied up
in Lovers knotts with silver ribands, the armor was of a seagreen color with
rocks, and sands of gold, his device upon his shield was the jmages of the
chaste and constant Penelope, and his Lady Clorinda in silver, with their hands
joined, his impresse was. Est vunum velle duobus.
Clorinda and Penelope The colum's are of constancy.




The color of his horse was milk white, but upon his breast and croop he was
dap^ d with red stains, as when a white Tulip is streakt with red, or a few
strawberies scattered in a mess of cream, he was fiery and of a goodly
proportioned greatness, his hasty hoofes scorned the earth, and he sent proud
challenges in his loud dialect to his enemy.

Now Clorinda, Diaphoro and Belia, Grisonus, Bombar, Artimaga, Florian,
Doristo, and others ushered Flaminius into the field with this song.

SONG.
Arms and hon^ thy ^ory
To thy fames immor^y,
Adverse fortune ever ^y the,
No disasterous fate come nigh the,
Prosper still in martial courses
Prosper still in arts and forces,
Bright victory
Attend the nigh,
Whilst spreading fame
Resound thy name
And Blason forth
Thy mighty worth.
Just Astraea whom Poets say
From wicked earth is fled away,
And in the bandrike have thy seat
To make the Zadiack complete,
Once more from thy bright throne descend
Thy own stout Champion to defend,
Shield him from harm
Strengthen his arm,
Kind Mars come down
And his head crown
With wreaths of palm,
Then myrh, and balm
Sweet insence, with the Cypress tree,
And Cassia shall flame to the,
And The Magpie, and the Woolfe which be
Devoted to thy dietie,
Ride on truths champion, and go
Assured thy haughty foe,
Shall fall like Sparrowes before a halke
Thou ore his spoils shall boldy walk,
Bright victory
Attend the nigh,
Whilst spreading fame
Resound thy name
And Blazon forth
Thy mighty worth.
Flaminius waited not long before Uernar appeared gallantly mounted upon a bay
brown coursier, full of black spots, his forehead marked with a white starr,
to which in his whole body there was not any part answerable but the left foot
behind, his armor was rich and gorgious of a sky color full of stars of
gold, he bore in his shield the effigies of Cassandra the prophetical daughter
of Priamus in silver, with this word Mentriri non est meum, Its not my part to
lie.

Flaminius (who affected not war, but in cause of necessity, always peace,
but with honorable conditions) before he would extort from Uernar a forced
confession of injury done to Clorinda, he went about first like a flexanimous
Orator to exhort him to it, Should you Sir Uernar accuse Helena of falcifying
her conjugall trust, it had been but to tell over a tale that is already told,
this accusation had been warrantable by tradition, but to charge Clorinda with
inconstancy, nay to think such a thought of her (whose beauty bewray her to be
Uenus, but that she excel her in chastity, and whose continence speaks her
to be Diana, but that she stains her beauty,) were intolerable impudence, to
speak such a word flat impiety, and to affirm it with oaths inexpiable
injury.

Or had Nullifidius whom no man will credit reported this it had not been worth
my answering, or her regarding, but that you Uernar who was sometimes of her
intimate acquaintance (being Deli'as friend) Though as it is now evident a
dissembling Sycophant, for you to relate this, others believe it, she stomaches
it, and I Will revenge it, I had better take a blister of a nettle, then a prick
of a rose, I am more willing that a Raven should pick out my eyes, then a
Turtle pick at them, to dye of the food one affects not is better then to
surfeit of that one delights in, I am of Scipi'os mind who had rather that
Hanibal should eat his heart with salt then Laelius grieve it with discurtifie,
or of the same with Laelius who chose rather to be slain of the Spaniards then
suspected of Scipio, I had rather an enemy should beat me, then a friend belie
me, rather that an Antagonist should flay me, then one of acquaintance slander
me.

Uernar replied,

We come not hither to debate, but to combat, not to prate but to praeleate,
not to cavil but to duel, not to jest but to just, wherefore (having turned
their horses) these champions met so furiously, That their shivered lances flew
upwards, as if they challenged the sky before they falled on earth, never was
game of death better played, never did fury display it self in greater bravery,
never were Hector and Achilles better imitated or rather excelled, never were
swords guided by more skillful hands, never were hands accommodated with more
trusty swords, which like deep mouthed Cannons battering down by peace meal
their armours, made many wide breaches for troops of wounds to rush in at,
Here Is the Trojan wars in Epitome, here is the battle of Lepanto acted in
Monomachy, here is York and Lancaster fought over again in a Hippomachy, here is
the Pharsalian field discrib'd in these lists, here is the fight at Canna
excelled in a duel.

Now the barriers blood began to chase sweat from the full possession of their
outsides, for their armours blushed that they had defended their masters no
better, force against force, prowess against prowess were interchangibly
encountered, as the fire the more its fed with fuel the more hungry its still
to devour; so the more they did strike the more unsatisfied they were with
striking; they sharpened their sharp swords with hope of victory, their thick
blows lighting upon their well tempered shields, made the air to Echo the
noise whereof sounded as many waters in their feirce combats against some
concave rock, by this time Uernar's body was scarified and broch't with so many
wounds as his soul was in a doubt which way to get out at, but weakened with a
prodigal effusion of blood (which he sent to bespeake him a grave) he fell to
the earth, and feeling the prevayling point of Flaminius sword at his wretched
throat, he upon his knees confessed himself vanquished, and Clorinda
flandered, in these words.

Redoubted Flaminius as fire is to gunpowder, so is ambition to the heart of
man, which if it be touched with felfe-Love mounteth aloft, and never bends
downward, till it be turned into ashes, I confess my self to be a man whose
eyes could not look right upon any others happiness, nor ears bear the
burden of any others praises, I knowing that each corner in the world rang of
your praises, mine fits no man's mouth, this consideration breeds
antipatheticall difference, and discontent brought forth emulation, emulatio^
desire of reveng, that engendered execution, of such desires, to further this
design I had a further design, I considered that you were to be joined in
nuptial bonds, to the incomparable Lady Glorinda, (whose beauty is so
excellent, and her feature agreeable in every lineament, her modesty so decent,
and virtue apparent, that she may be rightly styled the Phaenix for beauty, and
most famous among Ladies for bounty) and I betroathed to the deformed Melena,
(who bare upon a foul carcass a fair and rich wardrope, (which she may be
rather said to carry, then enjoy,) whose beauty is borrowed more from art then
nature, (it being now the common practice among such decayed, and superannuated
faces, banquerouted by time, or accidents, to hide it from others eyes with
art, and from their own with false glasses) by her persuasion (O Proles
nefanda, cerebri nefarij O horrid conceit of a wicked brain) by her
instigation I did calumninate, as sasly as subtly the virtuous and chaste
Clorinda.

Flaminius who was as merciful as magnanimous, as virtuous as valiant, as
pitiful as powerful, granted him his life, but Vernar whose uncontrouled
spirit disdained a life of alms, with his poniard soon put an end to his own
days, over whom our conqueror triumphed.

Soon after this Victory Amenides, brother to Clorinda returned from travel,
and now this Hero of a refined wit and rectified judgment, and Flaminius were
linked together with a Gordian knot of friendship a fraturnall claim of
fidelity, which neither time by degresse could impair, nor suspicions
infrienge, such a love it was, as was between Daman and Pythias, and Bylades
and Onestes, Tytus and Gysippus, Theseus and Pyrithous, Scipio and Laelius. But
Les peines importunes ne sont volontiers loing de plus hautes tunes,
troublesome pains be not (commonly) remote from the most perspicuous fortunes.

As the lives of men, so their prosperity, run not upon a Helirri that still
enlarges, but on a circle, which aving at the meridian, they decline in
obscurity, and fall under the center again. Il n'est de jour si clair qui
n'ait quelque nuage, the most glorious sun risings are subject to shaddowings,
and droppings in, the freshest colors soonest fades, the fairest flowers
soonest withers, the clearest day quickly clouds, black and white be both
commonly in one border, the sweetest rose is not without its sharp pricks, nor
the fairest velvet without its list, nor the most fortunate life without
crosses, the Be bears honey in her thigh, but she carries a sting in her
tail, the deceitful Panther before the destruction of his eye-gazers, does
hide his head, and prepose his delectate skin to the enticement of other
beasts, the night is blackest alittle before day, the winds stillest before a
storm, the sun bleakest, hottest, before a shower, the deformed Porpisces
before the coming of some outrageous tepmest are pleasantly sporting before
the seame^ and so did Lubricious fortune give Flaminius the forementioned
victory, inventing to plunge him the deeper into misery, this fickle dietie
resembles the sun, who by his heat scorcheth the grass of Pelion, which
even now by his beams was vanished, she is like the monster Hylima, in a
moment she can (Proteus like) change her self and grow variable, now she
took a pride to act both parts of her lubricity, and to cross Flaminius
joyfulnesse with this joylesse accident.

Soon after that time of the day when the highest mounted sun make shortest
shadows, Flaminius for his wonted recreation accompanied Amenides and Clorinda
into a pleasant grove, which (through her presence) appeared like the sole
Paradise of Silvanus, who had there planted many fragrant arbours for the
recreating of his beauteous Clorinda, or the silent grove of Calisto, wherein
the enamoured Jupiter in likeness of a wood Nymph did sport with her, as they
were here ambulatory there rushed in one Flaminius Fathers servants, all
perboil'd in sweat, with visage pale as death, and this was his message to
Flaminius, (viz.) That his mother Capricia was lately arrested by a violent fit
of sickness at the suit of death, and being ready to pay the debt she owed to
nature, desired that he might close her eyes, these sad tidings made Flaminius
prepare, Jam revocare gradum, patriasque evadere ad oras. To check his
progress, leave Albion strand
And s^eere his course unto his native land.




By this time these sad lovers have said that ill faring word, farewell; they
husbanded their embraces, as children do their sweet-meates as being loath to
devour them too soon.

Flaminius accompanied with (his inseparable companion) Amenides took shipping
to Dover, the Sea rec^ived them with a smooth, and smiling face, and Nep^e who
had now learnt to fawn on Princes, blessed them with a happy transfretation,
Capricia soon after the sight of her son in an extasis of joy expired, and
Po^pilius (unwilling to survive so loving a wife, and willing because the
journey was dark, and melancholy to bear her company to the Elizian groves)
his heart began proudly to beat up the alarums of death, and he also became a
prey to the leane-chapt Monster.

Now the triumphs intended for Flaminius arivall are turned into funerals, now
all eyes are glazed with tears striving to deluge deeper then Ducalions, now
the universal torrent of pearly drops have washed away al^mirth from that sad,
and lamentable world which is muffled up in the mourning cloakes of grief, and
confu^n.

Now the Honorable Senators and worthies of the gown, are assembled to
condole the maine engine of state Pompilius, whose approved whighty con^tancie,
and integrity as clear as the noone day h^ cognomiz'd him the Atlas of the
common wealth, and made him a fit subject unto these predicates, a plant, and
planet of justice, a constellation of the form^ which have eternized him a
perpetual memory to posterity, and have stamped so deep an impression, in the
hearts of the surviving as no age should oblite^ate, he did easily triumph
over smarting rancor, and having run and posted over all the stages of his
^ife, have edificated a memorable statue, and trophie of his worth in the
breasts of all to whom no testifi^ation, or Epitaph can be more precious. Now
the courtly Ladies and grave Matrons are congregated to bewail the falling of
this Cyprian star Capricia from their Zenith, whose loss even heaven might
lament, did not heaven enjoy her.

Now the valiant Soldiers that might have daunted death himself when they
wore the colors of this their disceased Viceroy in the field, with their
drums covered, pikes and tears trayled in a mournful posture, lances
broken, insignia and instruments of war reversed proclaim their griefs, now
all sorts, the cream and the scumme of the people, not to fill their eyes but
to employ them, and to invest themselves in black for him whose purple they
once adored, our muse shall bear part in this lamentation, and sadly weep out
this Elegy.

AN ELEGY.
Hence, hence fond mirth, hence vain deluding joys,
Glee and alacrity, you be but toys,
Go gilded elves, love idle brain possess
With fickle fancies, thick and numberless,
Sorrow the subject of my song shall be.
My harp shll chant my hearts anxietie,
Pompilius the great, (who did appear
Arts Zodiac, valors Zenith, vertus Sphere)
And sweet Capricia, (which all hearts did move,
In whom fresh beauty, charity, and love
Did claim a being) these ore all lands admired
That Sol's bright circle warmes, are both expired,
Thus the Didimies or twins did, whom fate
To one another did conglutinate,
Nature at one time both did animate,
Both lives at one time did evaporate.
Bright Car of Day, which do ditunally
Flame in the forehead of the azure sky,
Blush to behold this sad, and helpless hap,
And hide thy head in Thetis eazy lap,
Let thy coruscant thy translucent light
Not make a difference twixt this day and night,
Let this black day be from all annalls cut
Nor in the reckoning of the year be put,
Let gloomy shades upon it ever pass
For to delucitate how fatal 'twas.
Rapacious Skeleton, leave death (that cares not
For wit or beauty) monster fell, (that spares not
Honors) can nothing thy nice palate please,
(Grim sir) but such Ambrosian cates as these,
So delicate a dish may pamper thee
But make ten thousand pine, and pensive be,
Yet since thou have caught this choice Ambrosia
(Sweeter then Joves) we will weep tears which may
Be Nectar too, our loss shall satiate thee,
And with our sad tears may thou drunken be.
Your envious fates (that holds the vital sheares
And set upon the nine infolded Spheres
Whirling the Adamantine spindle round
On which the brittle lives of men are wound,)
Since this blessed pair are fallen, let them have
An earthquake (at the least) to open their grave.
They are magnificently interred in the chiefest Temple in Naples, and over
them is engraven this Epitaph.

AN EPITAPH.
Here lies a blessed pair, alive one bed,
Containd them both, and one grave being dead.
(...) lies interred the twins of fate,
One was the Atlas of the State,
His head the throne of Art,
Of Piety, his heart.
Minos in furre,
A friend of right
Mavors in war,
A devil in fight.
In The others lovely face
Fresh beauty dwelt, and grace,
An Angel clothed in flesh, and sent into a claie tenement
She was, -- Reader admire this, and wish
Thy self a worm to taste so choice a dish.
Having given the parents the rights of burial let us return to the children,
and speak some thing of their Daughter Dionella, although some may conceive it
impertinent to the History, yet they may find it no more repugnant, then in one
nosegay to set two flowers, or in one counterfeit diverse colors, yet to
expect all passages and circumstances of their lives, were to loose ons
longing, you may as well seek Paul's steeple in Hordius his Map of the world,
for abridgments, Histories are nets of a larger wash, which only enclose great
fishes, (...), things worth mentioning, the smaller fry, matters of less
consequence, escape them, passing over therefore, and omitting all impertinent
tautologies and ambages, we shall proceed to relate, how.

Amenides Clorinda's brother, an honorable slip of the ancient tree of English
nobility, a pregnant proficient in all discipline of state, of a sweet aspect,
and comely form and feature, of whom it may be justly spoken without
Hyperbolies of fiction, as it was of Cato Uticensis that he seemed to be borne
to that only which he undertook, Uersatilis ingenij (as Plutarch has it) but
to speak much of him were the way to leave out something that might add to
his praise, and to forget much that would augment his honor, in a word
therefore he became enamoured of Dionella Flaminius his sister, a Lady that did
cast upon her beholders so sweet a look, as was able to raye one into a
Galliard, that lay in a dead palsy, and to dote on that sweet countenance, but
in that look there reigned so divine a countenance, as cut off all lascivious
and vain hopes, her face was Queen virtues palace, adorned with natures
choysest tapesterie; thatcht with a golding hair, the windows of his gorgious
Court, cast forth more glorious beams then those wherewith rash trayn'd
Phaeton singed the world, the rubie portalls boast in incomparable sweetness,
for the fruition whereof a man would even enthrall and inhell himself, upon
the sanguine and Lilly walls of this Paphian structure interlaced, and kindly
mixed with Alabaster and Uermilion where more Theoremes were livly portraitured
then in whole volumnes tedious pariphrase, as her superlative beauty won the
praise from all women that stood in degree of comparison with her, so her
virtue was as amiable in men's judgments, as her feature in their eye sight,
but to speak more of her were to take her less, only thus much, all fair
Ladies might break their flattering glasses and dress themselves in her.

But let us leave her with Amenides happy in their reciprocal affection, and
turn to Flaminius who (when he had digested his grief) longed to return to
Clorinda, (with whom he had left his heart for a pawn till he came back,) to
this end he took ^hipping for England attended by Florian and Do^o.

At first the disembling sea smiled on them, but before they had sailed three
leagues the sweet tongued Sirens began to sing, and the delighted Dolphins, and
gamesome Porpises to da^nce to their music, and all on a sudden, a ^ble
cloud curtain'd the refulgent Lord of Light, the Seas were made a dark stage
for a miserable Tragedy to be acted upon, now proud Aeolus began (in a loud
base) to sing destruction, now Neptune did Court and kiss Iris, and the
traitorous Sea sweld it self into mountains more high and hideous then the
Alps, on which the afflicted ship as upon a promentory or starry pointed
Piramid was carried to invade heaven, to seek safty there, being denied it
upon the Sea, but was straight darted down again into a precipice of hellish
darkness, as if it chose rather to ride upon gentle Phlegeton, then this now
unnavigable Ocean, the Sea strove with the wind which should be lowdest, and
the welkin (now all inveloped in ugly darkness) contended with the Maine which
should be more horrid, The distressed vessel, was like a football tossed by
the rude feet of a rusticke crew, here only proceeded that little of safety
which it had, it was equally assailed on every side. All this time Flaminius
sat with settled countenance discovering nothing that argued fear, he Augustus
like encouraged the pale Pisot with that sentence, Flaminium and Flaminii
fortunam vehis; how can that Vessel suffer shipwreck that carries Flaminius,
and his Fortune? the subject of his Meditations was the object of his love,
Clorinda, a brighter Nymph then she that received a being from (his now angry
enemy) the Sea, Toto sonuerunt aequ^r^ nimbi, the idle Compass, the broken
Rudder, and split Anchor were useless, the flapping mainsayle and shivered
Mast were cast over-boord, the Seamen were distracted, some plied the Pump,
some their (till then neglected) Prayer-books. Nihil hic, nisi pentus, and aer.


Now no objects presented themselves to these abjects, but the raging Sea, and
gloomy air, neither had they a perfect prospect of them, but when
cloudcompelling Jove held out to them a Torch of Lightning, till at last kind
Aurora became a Harbinger of that ensuing day, which showed them light to land
at Cyprus, a rich and flourishing soil, placed under a smiling Heaven, and
sacred to Venus, to whom we direct this Meeter:

Great Queen of change and mutability,
As false as fair, fickle Deity,
Were It not a sin, I Would doubt what Poets sing,
And boldly swear from th'sea thou did not spring,
But from some silent grove, or bower of blisses,
Where Turtle-billing Lovers hide their kisses;
Thou were begot in some Love-covering shade,
And not of glassie Thetis crispt froth made,
For then the bold imperious surges might
Have been controlled by thee, then had thou fight,
To quiet the proud billows, and to chain
In its prefixed bounds, the gadding maine,
Which now contemnes thy idle blast, and roar
For all thy threats, and rages more and more*
Now stubborn Triton mounted on a Whale,
Refused to hark to thy neglected call,
And at thy slight commands he stoutly scorn,
To sound retreating with his bugle Horn,
Or give the floods a signal to retire,
But joined Aeolus to swell them higher;
Revenge this Cytherea, else who shall
Adore, or let one grain of Incense fall
Upon thy Altars, sacred Nymph arise,
The Rebell-rout of Sea-gods to chastise,
But legally, let Mercury be sent,
To summon a celestial Parliament,
Exclude the common crew, deny the rude
Fierce Hydra which we call the multitude,
To sit with thee in Council, or debate,
To redress grievances in the Lovers state;
Admit no vulgar gods, for they will be
Like Tinkers, mending one hole they will make three:
Dispatch thy ayre-dividing Messenger
With sealed Writs, and summon to appear,
Hymen, Thalassius, and Raucina too,
The sacred Nuptial Deities which do
Tie hearts in knots, and mutually twists
In holy chains, the souls of Amorists.
The Quiver-bearing Wag, whose potent Bow
Nor sex, nor age evades, nor high, nor low,
The Goddesses so debonaire, and free
Aglaia, Thalia, Euphrosyne,
Esteemed by men for their heart-easing mirth,
Whom thou (fair Cytherea) at one birth
Bore to the Ivie-crowned God of Wine.
Egeria, at whose adored shrine
The youthful teeming females do implore
The Goddess aid, to these and diverse more
Direct thy summons, when they all
Be congregated at great Joves White Hall:
(Divinest Queen of Love) persuade them still,
To grant thy just demands, and pass this Bill,
That whereas hoary Thetis did not chain,
(According as she ought) the boiling Maine.
But traitorously did join with Dione
And Malicerba to disturb the Sea,
When he (whose fame shall drop from many a pen,
When Heralds shall want coats to sell to men,
Whose Arms and Arts his glorious name shall raise,
A like to wreathes of Pallas Oaks and Bays)
Did furrow the great deep, and gently glide
Over the bubling face of th'hasty tide,
Bound for Clorindas arms (that happy port,
That true Elysium, Queen pleasures Court)
So that Clorinda (a bright Nymph to whom
We grant priority, being overcome
By her rare feature, alas she misses
Those enthusiastic raptures, Lovers blisses,
It Is this day ordered by the joint consent,
Of the sublime Aetheriall Parliament,
That Phoebus (whom terrestialls do
Adore, and yearly pay a tribute to)
For ten nights next ensuing shall not rest
His drowsy head in Rebel Thetis breast,
But in Clorinda's lap should we assign
A longer date, the Sun would never shine,
We should have short days, Sol would never rise
From her lap, but to gaze upon her eyes,
And whereas Boreas did let loose his breath,
And Aeolus threat nothing under death,
And set the waves at variance with the sky,
And made among the Floods a mutiny:
Its further ordered that for ten days the
Fairy pair of jarring brothers cloysterd be,
In slender Bottles; its decreed they both
With th'Marine Deities shall take this Oath.
From this time forward solemnly we vow
To wait on sacred Lovers, whilst they plough
The vast Gulphes back; it plainly shall appear
We will retreat, as glad to see them there;
We will concur in one, both Sea and Wind,
To make their speedly passage safe, and kind.
I Sea will smooth my buncht brow, and invite
Their blessed eyes, to see how I delight
To bear their weight, and jointly with them prove
Zealous adorer of the Queen of Love.
And I the Wind (to storm forgotten quite)
Will whisper new joys to rich Amphitrite,
And in so mild a breath I Will tell my Tale,
As it shall only fill their swelling sail.
And I the Sea, will boil officiously
To bring them to their harbors, whilst sad I
Lament their absence, and dissolve to tears,
And rather drown my self then them with fears.
This done (kind Cytherea) now release
The Winds, and grant to the relenting Seas
Once more the ancient immunitie,
The Lamp of Lights nocturnall Bed to be:
Those acts by which fierce Juno did conspire
Alcides bane, augmented, and swelled higher
His venerable name, which now shall last
Till Time want sand to run, or Fame a blast;
So make this tempest raised by the Seas
To ruin thy Flaminius, increase
His firm emolument (fair Queen of Loves)
We do conjure thee, by thy silver Doves,
To be his Guardian, let his lasting glory
Fill all men mouths, and make the world a story.
Finis Libri secundi.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE CYPRIAN ACADEMY.
Soon after the Oriental Majesty arose to over-circulate the Earth,
Flaminius in a weather-beaten Ship, or rather the Carcass of the Ship, or
rather some few bones of the Carcass, was driven upon the coasts of the Isle
Cyprus, at the foot of a cacuminous Clift, whose steep-downe chalkie sides
reverberating and beating back the rays of the resplendent Sun, by the
beams reflection seemed to gild the Ocean with a new Phaebean glister.

Flaminius (with his trusty servants) sat upon the Clift, beholding the
perjured waters of the Changeling Sea, and uttering these complaints; Ah unkind
Nature, Queen of dissimilitudes, and vicissitudes, when will thou be glutted
with the miseries of mortals? How unfortunate is the fate of man, to be
subjugated under the yoke of so belluine and inhumane a stepdame? Thy gifts
are only temporary, there is no stable happiness in this circle of flesh,
nor is it in the optics of these eyes to behold permanent felicity: Apres un
peu de joye ou seut mieux la tristesse, a pound of grief follows an ounce of
joy: as the tree and the rind grows and sprouteth together, the one not
subsisting without the other; so with man is care and anxietie engendered, which
as an inseparable evil Angel follows him in all his actions, as the shadow
does the body: Lieur and mallieur se suyvent tour a tour, good and evil follow
one another. What were the lives of those Hero's, Alexander and Darius, who
strove together which should be Cock of the Worlds Dunghill, but one continued
perplexity? If to day Mars smiled on one of them, he feared the
amphibologicall success of to morrow; for, Cela qu'un jour nous done, un autre
jour nous l'oste, what one day gives us, another takes away from us: so that a
man can make himself sure of nothing without the power of his action (that is
not wholly in his hands) for, Multa cadunt inter poculum, and labra, Chance is
a Dicer; its vain to put more confidence in this life then in one wind at Sea,
but it is wisdom to have tackling ready for all vicissitudes of Fortune.

The Mulberry tree (as Herbalists observe) is long in begetting and keeping its
buds, but (the cold season being past) it shootes them all in one night; and
Fortune, which sometimes is long in dandling her favorites, (the edge of her
lubricious affection being abated) she diverts from them her benignity, and
converts it to their misery. But we will omit the rest of his complaints,
desiring rather to relate matter then words.

Flaminius arose, intending to direct his weary steps to the Regal City
Nicosia, almost n the heart of the Island, in the territory of Lapathia: the
way was pleasurable, and the earth clad in her best apparel, which made the
Island appear to be the field of Ceres, the garden of Bacchus, the prime
pastorage of Pan, and the richest beauty of Silvian; the Wheat over-topt his
head, the Vines over-lookt the Trees, the rank grass justled with his knees,
and the high-sprong Woods did threaten to invade the Clouds. He had not
travailed far, before he was set upon by a pack of Robbe^ a rout of crazed
fortunes, whose cracked estates did gape to be soldered up by any wealthy
booty; but valor respects not numbers: wherefore Flaminius (who esteemed few
swords in a just defense able to resist many unjust assailers) commanded his
trusty Squires, Florian and Doristo, (who had rather sacrifice their lives at
their Masters feet, then seek (by flying) a dishonorable safety) to assist
him, who like an enraged Lion sent some arme-lesse, others leg-lesse, more
headless, but many life-lesse, to take up their comfortless Lodgings under
the black mantle of endless night.

Florian lent such a terrible blow to one of their Chiefetaines, (who with open
mouth threatened his destruction) as slicing off both his tongue and chaps,
before he had ended his babbling, gave a period to his oration. Doristo struck
at another in the same posture, and made his soul in a stream of clottered
blood, to sail out at his mouth.

Those that survived of this Rabble (seeing themselves over-matcht every way,
and frustrated of hopes to resist any way) desisted, and Flaminius persisted on
in his journey; but before he could reach the City Nicosia, it did
advesperate, and the silent night with her pitchie Chariot had coursed over the
face of the element, and he was forced to take the earth for his pillow, the
wide fields being to him in stead of a Chamber, and the windy skies being a
roof to his blasted Lodging, and having the cold and humid vapors of Nocturna
to accompany the unwisht-for Bed of his repose: but as soon as he espied the
beauteous Aurora had with Vermillion blushing cheeks forsaken the Saffron
Couch of her age-wearied Lover, he continued his travail through a most
pleasant Valley; on the right hand stood a ridge of mountains, whereof one
surmounted the rest, and had mounted upon his top a Pyramid of Brass; on the
left hand was the Sea, bordered with continued hills, beset with variety of
fruits; the Champaine between was full of flowrie hillocks, not much
over-topping their ranker valleys, which were with Groves of Olive and Orange
trees dispersedly adorned. At the end of this Paradise he entered into a
solitary desert, whose ornaments were uncouth Rocks; some eaten with age,
others blasted with lightning, others bruised with thunder: no comfortable
beam of pleasure shined here, no cheerful Sun or Moon illuminated this
palace of death with gladsome rays; it was filled with deep ditches, and
soundlesse pi^s, which were inhabited by hoarse Frogs and croaking Toads; it
was paved with blouddrawing Thorns: about the middle of this wilderness was a
melancholy Cave, the black Domicill of the daughters of death; Flaminius
passing by it, heard coming from it these lamentations, couched in a Medley,
both for Verses and Tunes.

1
When Phaeton fell from Sols bright Throne,
And failed in's enterprise,
How did his sisters him bemoane,
And fill the air with cries?
2
Proud Pelops Wife, bold Niob^,
(Her offspring being slain)
Against storms approach, O how does she
In Marble still complain?
3
What sorrow Orpheus did sustain,
When through the infernal shade
Thou, thy Euridice to obtain,
With Music passage made.
4
What madness did corrode thy breast,
woeful Andro^ache?
When Hector (being laid to r^st)
Thy lucklesse eyes did see.
5.
Astianax flung from a Tower,
(The hope of Troy, and thee)
O cursed act of a cursed hour,
what sorrow might this be?
6.
What grief Jocasta had thou,
To see Eteocles
Engaged by a fatal vow,
To ^lay Polynices?
7.
Sad Dedalus, how small's thy ease,
That saw thy daring Boy
Baptize the vast Icarion Seas,
And leave thee void of joy?
8.
What should I speak how Progne grieved
For her Spouse, spouse breach, tell
Should I, how sad Anthony lived
After Acteon fell.
9.
All this black Troop of dismal wee^
enumerated here,
Are pleasures if compared with those
which horally I bear.
10.
Had I more tongues my grief to tell,
Then Romans (loath to yield)
In one Rome-wasting Battle fell,
In lucklesse Canna's Field.
11.
Yet should I want an Idiome,
Or dialect, to say
My grief in an idoneous tone,
My tongue, ah welladay.
12.
The Tongues of Muses are too faint
In Helicon that keep
To Express the cause of my complaint,
Come Muses with me weep.
13.
But why should I perplex the Nine
with my grief, when it is known,
They find enough (Ah) without mine,
To relament their own.
14.
The ancient Helicon they have left,
Since their Antiomers
Was of his wished for life bereft,
They Have made one of my tears.
15.
I often and often did them invoke,
But none of them replied,
Their Harmony (alas) is broke
Since their Maecenas died.
16.
Come and approach, and attend to my cries,
you Hags and Hobgoblins,
Register up and keep
a catalogue of my tears,
These archt walks of midnight Gr^ves
will I never abandon,
And Silvans shadows,
And shades that Clarida loves,
Where silver buskined triping Nymphs
were never affrighted,
By harsh blows of the rude Axe
from their hallowed haunt.
17.
Here Death keeps his Court,
Here pitchy horror inhabits,
This is griefs freehold,
Here will I choose to abide,
Come and aproach dapper Elves,
Satyrs rough, and cloven-heel'd Fawnes,
Not trickt and frounc't up
As in the fresh flowery May,
But civil suited Kerchift in Winter attire,
Draw near I Will teach you how
To weep tears in parts.
18.
Sol retrograde with your fire breathing steeds,
And shut my eyes up in eternal night,
My soul have lost its Sun, my body needs
No radient light.
19.
Sink toth'infernall shade, and let thy rays,
Illuminate their foggy hemisphere,
Give to th'Antipodes that share of days,
Which I do hate here.
20.
Acquaint them not with my anxiety,
For then thy guilt carr will prove tedious,
They Will fall a grieving too, and implore thee
To return to us.
21.
Kind Phoebus grant me what I postulate,
But if you slight, and churlishly deny't,
My tears my optic sense shall adumbrate,
And so make a night.
22.
Lark
Nor Thrush
In no bush
Shall tell his tale,
Nor sweet Nightingale
That on the bloomy spray,
Carrols praises of fresh May,
Come and inhabit this dim dale,
Cuckoo ever telling of one tale,
Raven and Nyctimine, that love the dark.
23.
Come Steele-digesting Bird, come and draw near
You brood-devouring Kite, greedy Wane,
That under-mines, fierce Cormorant:
Come Faleon, and Vulture too,
With the predictious Crow,
Jay that ever talk,
Griping Goshawke,
Keep company
With me,
Here.
24.
Antiomer, Apollo in the head,
Mars in the hand, a Saint ith'heart, a man
Who was the Magazine, or Vatican
Oth' lib'rall Sciences, alas is dead.
25.
Earth-decking Flora, beauteous Less that use
To purple the fresh ground with vernal Flowers
That suck in the Nectarian honied showers,
Thou that wear'st Flowrets of a thousand hues.
26.
Thou that the smooth shorn fields enamelest,
And annual wrapst the even shaven Plain,
In a mellifluous Rug of Flowers, daigne
Propitiously to come at my request.
27.
Come bring with thee the well-atti'rd Woodbine,
The Lovers Pansie freakt with shining Jet,
The tufted Growtoe, glowing Violet,
Ruddy Narcissus, and pale Gessamine.
28.
Bring the Fair Primrose (that forsaken dies)
The Daffadillies with cups filled with tears,
All Amaranth's brood that Embroidery wears,
To strew her Lawreat Hearse where my Love lies.
The Melody being ended, Flaminius desiring as well to satisfy his sight as
his hearing, stepped to the Cave, where he beheld the Querimonious Lady, in a
garment of black Velvet, embroydered with silver, her hair was gathered up
under a small cap, covered with feathers, and set thick with Diamonds, which
glittering about her head dazeled his sight, but it was little in respect of
that lightning which came from her face.

She was ravished with the rare feature of Flaminius, who doubtless had been
as much taken with hers, had he not been gained by another, but his soul wa^
so filled with the most excellent perfection of Clorinda, that there was no
place left for any other impression. After some Discourse, the Ladies offer^
and his desires became convertible, she requeste^ that which he most desired,
which was to accompany her to the Court, and he requested that which she was
most ambitious to perform, which was, to inform him of the cause of her
querulous Soliloquie, which she did in these words.

Gentle Sir, though I am assidually used to complaints, yet were my heart
contracted into tongue I should be deficient in declaring the unspeakablenesse
of my ineffable grief, and though I despair^ to bring you any pastime, yet to
pass the time, be^ pleased to hear this Tragedy. There arrived at thi^ Island,
Antiomers son to the Emperor of Germany, Knight, who was in peace sweet and
humble, in Wa^ stern and haughty, the East could not boast more pearls then
he could virtues, the gentleness of hi^ countenance, and the fircenesse of his
courage seemed to be two contraries in the same subject, his heart was
incapable of fear in any danger, but tractable and easy in conversation; in a
word Antiomers, a man under whose name is comprehended all Warlike virtue;
loved no women but me, that loved not any man but him; he never spoke but of
me, h^ never made any relation which he esteemed good, if (...) were not the
subject thereof; nor did I think any time lost, but what I spent out of his
company. It so fortuned that Silenus, brother to Lycidus, the young King of
Cicilie, proclaimed a general challenge against all Knights that should deny
his Lady Adria^ (daughter to the Great Turk) to be the Paragon of the
terrestiall Paradise; Fame proud to promulge this defy to all the world,
graspt it between her teeth, and shaked it about, so that it came to Antiomers
ears, who soon left Cyprus, and went to Cicilie, resolved to make him repent
his brags, or to bury my honor with his own body.

I shall omit the circumstances of his Journey, and return to Silenus, who
hearing of Antiomers his approach entered the Field in an Armor of a Cornation
color all be set with Croslets of gold in a Field Azure, he bore upon his
Shield the Picture of Adrias in silver, with the Seven Stars round about her,
under her was engraven this Saphick. Adrias splende^ ^elut inter ignes,
Luna minores. 'As Cynth^ among nights Fry,
So Adrias shines resplendently.




Antiomers had on a French Armor of an Ashie color, which hid the sparks of
a lively fire, spotted with Flower-de-luces of Silver and Gold, his device was
a Heart tied to a pillar in the middle of a Faggot kindled by me, my
portraicture was all beset with Flowers, and just under my Simulachrie was
inscribed in Greek Characters these words, (...) (the best of Flowers) his
Feather was Gree-de-lieu and white, his Caparisons Grisde-lieu, embroidered
with Gold, set thick with sparks of Diamonds.

These two Champions in their careere darkened the air with the dust they
raised, and struck the earth into an Ague with their Horses battering hoofes,
Antiomers in the middle of his course met his Enemy like a Whirlewind, and fell
upon him like a Tempest, they both sent the splinters of their Lances to dig
Graves in the dust for their blood, which forthwith filled them, for there were
many salliports cut in their Armours for their lives to issue out at, and death
to enter in at. Silenus words and blows were delivered so together, that it
was aenigmaticall whither enterprizing or prevailing went first, his
energeticall strokes seemed as thunder, to his words lightning; but he found
no barren ground for this feed, for Antiomers (abhorring sterility) yielded him
his own with increase, which because he did not expect, he was perplexed by
it, and in this respect, though reason and amazement be seldom joined, yet
here they were not dissentaneous, for the most reasonable spectators had good
reason to be amazed at the unreasonable ferocity of the combatants, who both
overwearied with fighting, fell prostrate to the earth, where Antiomers thus
commun'd with himself.

Can my courage faint remembering my Lady, or can any thing dismay me being in
her favor, no the honor of her name (which I honor) has called me to the
Field, and her beauty is so perfect, as nothing shall be able to force me to
fly.

And now these Champions carried more by strength of affection then of body, by
the cruelty of the second charge they wiped away the astonishmen^ of the first,
till at last they were both carried out of the Field, with more appearance of
death then hope of life. As soon as I heard of the event of the fight, I went
to visit him, he no sooner cast his dim eyes upon me, but his color freshly
revived in the pale cinders of his thin cheeks, and the old vermilian tincture
began to plead a new possession of his several mansions, but at length I saw
the vermilian nonsuited, and him pale and dead (though even in that condition
lovely, as if death had taken that shape to make me enamoured of him) alive he
surprised and suppressed envy with virtue, and dead honors accompanied him to
the grave. -- Quis talia fando.
Explicet, aut possit lachrimis aequare dolorem; What tongues can chant my
grief, what blubbering Eyes,
With weeping can my sorrow equalize.




Ocursed be the hand that killed, that killed him, cursed be his heart that had
the heart to do it, o ye just gods let most direful, and hapless happs,
happen to that hateful wretch that made me wretched by his death, o kind death
lend my cheeks his palenesse, which boast more of these trickling drops of
tears, then the Pactolian sand hills do of their most gorgious glistering
pearls left there, and forsaken by the ^bbing billows of the bubling waters,
My tears shall rain upon his grave to make the gentle earth bear some
Adonean, or rather Antiomerean flower, which shall bear his name and memory.

She would have uttered more circumstancies of the Tragedy, but she was forced
to make their womb their tomb, and to bury them before she brought them forth,
those other things which she intended should have had birth in her mouth dyed
there, for her words were washed away by her tears which came dropping down,
like rain in sunshine, and hang upon her cheeks and lips, like drops upon
cherries, which the dropping tree bedeweth, her swelled eyes became her
fortune, and made her tears comely.

By this time they were come to the Court, where Arbella Daughter to Romulus
King of Cyprus, (for so was the prementioned Lady nominated) brought him to the
King, whose Sister Capricia (mentioned in the former part of this history) was
wife to Pompilius viceroy of Naples, and Mother to Flaminius, so that the King
quickly so dispersed the rays of his grace upon his Nephew Flaminius, as he
thought his court deficient, without this pregnant proficient of State, but let
it be sufficient for the present that we have brought Flaminius to the court,
and into the Kings favor, let us now return to Clorinda, (disconsolate
Clorinda,) whom we have too long forgotten.

In this time of Flaminius absence, and consequently of her infelicity (for how
could she choose but languish in the absence of her best Physician) no careful
art, or art of carefullnesse was imployd in her adorning her self, she left
all to neglected chance, which yet could no more impair her perfections, then a
dye cast any way could loose its squarenesse.

Still her love did burn lik a vestall fire, which with Flaminius memory,
richer then all spices dispersed fragrant odours, round about her Love-fick
soul, and did refresh it, when 'twas in the dumpes, and stuck fast in the
quagmire of melancholy.

She was seldom out of the company of Delia, whose presence would have diverted
much grief, had it been curable by company, yet she set as cheerful a
countenance upon it, as the sadness of her heart would permit, after he had
been absent from her some considerable time, not having opportunity personally
to kiss her hands; he sent this letter as his paper deputy to do it for him.

Flaminius to Clorinda,
Sweet Princess of my life.
Some three months since I left the artificial sea of tears (wept out of my
dewy eyes, for the discease of my defunct parents,) and lanched out into the
natural sea bound for thy arms, (that haven of happiness, that port of
pleasure) but I was unhappily diverted by a disasterous tempest which for
twelve days tossed me too and fro upon the enraged Ocean, and then cast me upon
the Isle of Cyprus, a Land enobled for its celebrated excellencies,) here I am
in favor with the King, and in credit at the court, but the thorn amongst
these Roses, is thy absence, my greatest evil, is the want of my most beloved
good, thy honored self, the life of my hopes, and the hope of my life, which
I keep only for thy service, nor can I loose it better then for thy love, and
if I should sorrow for the loss thereof, it would be rather in respect of thee
then my self, and out of grief I should have to see my end, before I have
testified the beginning of my service to thee.

But my fair one, I (who live only to dye for thee) I (who entertain my
self only with Imaginations, and live only with hopes of thy love) conjure
thee by the radient lights of thy eyes, (the only suns by whose rajes I am
animated) that thou do not pine thy self (whilst I remain in this
darkness, wherein I enwrap my self, during thy absence,) for so thou may^ cut
off thy own time, but not abate (but augment) my troubles, rather manifest a
princely magnanimity of mind, in conquering this grief by the valor of thy
patience, and continue to love still.

Cyprus. Madam. Thy Immutable Uotary, and constant Servitour. Flaminius.


Clorinda. having often honored this letter with most affectionate kisses,
dispatched the messenger, (which was Florian) with this answer.

Clorinda to Flaminius.
My Lord,
THough I know that out of your ingenuitie and candor, you are noble enough to
overvalue me so far, as to love me without any merits that might induce you to
it, yet I were ungratefully sordid, and sordidly ungrateful, if I should not
teach my pen (which is guided by my heart) to affirm that the least scruple of
your love is not lost, but highly prized, and returned to you in like measure,
believe it Sir I am more torn and pursued by fears, of and for you, then
Actaeon was by his dogs, I see not but through your eyes, I live not but by
your love, which is in eternal characters engraven upon the Amethist of my
heart, and though the stars condemn us to this separation, yet your name and
representation shall be always the dearest jewels of the life, of

Your Clorinda.
England.

Having delivered this letter to Flaminius let us look upon Arbella, who made
her heart rasam tabulam a white paper, longing to have Flaminius writ his love
upon it, to this end she studied with great art to tie all those graces
together, wherewith she accustomed to have her admirable beauty accompanied,
for the glory she apprehended in captiving such a courage made her desire to
seem fair, she would be seldom out of his company, hoping that if he were not
taken with the inevitable strookes of her face, he should be constrained to
yield by her charming speech, and because she would move every stone, and leave
no means unatempted, when she knew Flaminius (who was much delighted with the
airey whistlings, and inarticulate sufurrations of vegitables) to be walking in
a tufted grove, adjoining to the City, thither she repaired, and placing her
self within a leavy labyrinth in the navil of this obscure inmost bower,
sitting upon a mossie couch of grassie turfs she utterd these words.

Fair silver shafted Lad go burn thy frivolous bow, and in imitation of
Hercules in these waving woods erect thy pillars and write Nil plus vltra, my
conquest is ended, what shall Flaminius remain always as free, as invincible?
can it be that so much valor can be altogether unaccompanied with love?

Flaminius (willing to convince her of her error, in thinking him altogether
without love, took a seat in an adjoining arbor, and made this protestation
of his love to Clorinda.

Loadstone of love, life of beauty, picture of formositie, flower of
comeliness, Clorinda, believe that my affection is so perfect as it cannot be
increased or diminished, since the first birth of it, but if it be capiable of
augmentation, thy late letter was as bellows to kindle a new fire in my soul,
which shall never be extinguished by averse stars, or adverse fortune, know
(sweet Mistress of my love, and life) and believe that it is the royal
prerogative of a lover to be metamorphosed into the essence of the party loved,
and so it fares with me, whose heart is as faithful to you as the needle to
the north.

First, shall fertile soyles render nothing but thorns to Coridon, (as a
reward for his good seed,) or rivers (the emblems of gratitude) forget to
repay their floods to Neptune, or a trusty grayhound transform himself to a
pilfering Tygar, or virtue become vice, and beauty a blemish, before any
goddess be made governesse of the cittadell of my heart besides thy self.

Arbella seeing her hopes frustrated returned to her fathers Court, where she
found Lycidus King of Sicilie her beauty shined so bright that the amarous King
was too weak to resist it, for although her mind was possessed with sorrow,
and her body clad with mourning, and corrupuit oculos fletu, and she loboured
to hide her feature, and dim the lusture of her face, yet could not the
excellent perfection wherewith she was enriched be defaced.

Neither Lycidus Rhetoric, nor his friends persuasions could procure for him
Arbella's good likeing, therefore he out of the atrocity of his spirit, seeing
his love rewarded with loathing, returned home and raised an army to make at
once a conquest, both of Arbella, and her fathers Kingdom, when he had almost
covered the Sea with his potent Armado, and made a bridge of ships over the
miditerranian Ocean, Lemuroc (a man of an arrogant mind, a fit hing for
mischeife to turn upon, one that like the fellow that burnt the Temple of
Diana at Ephesus, would get himself a name, though it were for doing
mischeife, who was left by Lycidus in Cyprus under pretense to negociate the
match, did patch the Lions skin with the Foxes tail, and thus he acted his
part for his Masters advantage, he congregated, and seduced the rout, and scumd
the mud and froth of the people, the fittest soyles for this grand incendiary
to sow his seeds of rebellion, with this Gallemaufery of Plebeians (who having
nothing to lose, no not the oppulency of a good disposition) were easily
engaged in his tumult) he marched to the regal palace in Nicosia, the Walls,
Turrets, and Battlements were white marble, the windows of carved silverworke,
enamelled with Indian pearl, glazed with Crystal glass. Lemuroc mounted
upon a high scaffold made this insinuating O^a^ion to his rebellious followers,
among whom were some popular and discontented Lords.

My Lords,
COnsider how this straggling stranger Flaminius has so stolen into the Kings
favor, that it is locked up from you, you are of the Court but not of the
Council, he is grown so excessive in the appetite of the Kings favor, and so
excessive in the limitation of the Sovereign aspect, that he alienates his
Majesty's grace from you, he has intrinsicated the occult disposition of
Romulus, and conformed his own so exquisitely thereunto, that there is but one
velle between them both.

From hence arises that entire confidence, that Romulus who is jealous of all
men else, is confident of him, nor does he hide any clandestine negotiation
from him; and to say true he makes himself but like a Cipher to make this
Figure the more in number.

Ere-while you were honored in the sight of your Prince, enjoyed his delights,
you were crushed with honor as with burdens, you required nothing but you
obtained it, so that all men admired and desired your estates: but now a sable
cloud has obscured all these fair beams in one day, your Prince frowns,
your glory departs like a dream, and you the Atlasses who carried such heaps
and mountains of honors upon your shoulders, have your Exits with reproach.

All eyes are attracted to, and fixed on this new light of Flaminius, all
hearts are pinned upon his sleeve, all necks buckled under his girdle; from
his hand only you receive your most importunate dispatches, you hold your
selves graced by his injunctions, if he daigne not to disdain your Petitions,
you are highly honored; If he please to break silence in your behalf, you
are greatly obliged, you diligently wait at his doors, and endure the
churlishness of his Porters, and bribe them to be the first that may obtain
access to this adored Idol, you all labor to feign the choicest amplifyings
to encomionize him, and the greatest submission to flatter him, his strength
makes you all weak, his soarings makes you flag your wings, and fly close to
the earth, his golden feathers are of such vastness, that they spread like
sails, and so becalme you all, that you want air, and Sea-roome to raise your
plumes, and taste the pleasures of your own Elements.

He is the Harpy which has all ears locked to his sound, you are but as
Fidles unstrung; he among you that has Flaminius for his Protector, need not
bend all his nerves to acquire dignities; he that has him for his foe
languisheth under disgrace, and misery. None can obtain any elevation without
his been placet, neither can any without his leave preserve himself with
innocence and virtue. You may say of Flamin ius as Tiberius Subjects did of
Seianus, ut quisque Seiano intimus ita ad Caesaris amicitiam validus: contra
incensus esset metu ac sordibus conflictebantur.

He has even changed the nature of your Prince, and made him Saturnine and
supercilious, who was once as debonaire and infastidious as Augustus of whom it
was said, Augustus civil rebatur misceri voluptatibus vulgi, he was a Prince,
yet seemed a Citizen, and disdained not to bear a part in popular recreations.
Will you run with so much patience to the infringing of your liberties, and
throw your self headlong into the gulf of servitude. Remove the cause of
these grievances, and the effect will cease, take Flaminius from about the
King, and the day of his benignity will daun upon you. Or if a quiet and
peaceable Prince, and a prosperous Republique be your summa bona, adhaere to
my Royal Lord and Master Lycidus, and hope by his assistance to attain the
Apex of felicity, the top of your desires.

Flaminius having assembled a troop of loyal Courtiers with them, went to
appease the multitude, nothing fearing foreign incursions, if he could
prevent homebred insurrections, he therefore (who fought as if he had been
suckled by Bellona, and never ^ingerd ought but a Lance, and who spoke as if
he had been fostered by Minerva, and never handled any thing but a pen; he
who shared as much of Mercury in his tongue, as Mars in his hand) began thus, O
scelus, o veterum proles vesana Gigantum.


What? are Romulus his Subjects become Authors of a riot, and actors of their
own tragedy? What, have you combined Phoenix-like to let out your own life
blood? What, will you imitate the Viper, and tear, and dilacerate the entralls
of your own great parent your Country? and are Plitus, Xanverde, Turpill and
others of the gown that should be participes curarum, companions in care to
your Royal Sovereign; you that should be co-props of the State, you that
should bear part of the burden with your Prince, are you confederated against
him? you are advanced to as high a pitch of Supremacy as subjection will
permit, or Sovereignty endure, and yet will you still aspire, till you expire?

Are you so transported with a desire to reign, that all your potency seems
villinage so long as you must acknowledge any Superior? were there a
resurrection of your Ancestors, they would blush at your insolence, and run
to kiss their graves that have hidden them from beholding such Rebellion, were
your Fathers now to dye again, they would every one bequeath as a legacy to
his son that grave and laudable precept, Nec tibi regnandi veniat tam dira
Cupido.


But look before you leap, consider the Person you conspire against, is the
Majesty of Romulus, who by celestial institution is the terrestiall Deity,
its Romulus the Father of your Country, the fountain of honor, a man beyond
all commendation, of a grave spirit, of a constant and well-setled judgment,
so that if all the rancour and malice in the world were contracted into one
eye, it should never detract from him, he is a professed Guardian to the Muses
and their refined fancies, he is accute in wit, grave in censure, mature in
judgment, and in all the liberal Sciences so frequent, and beyond compare
perfect, that they rather appeareinnate to him, then acquired by education. The
Arts Court him to be called their Oracle, as if he only had been borne to
uncloud whatsoever is included in their spacious Orbs, he holds a Dormant
Councel-table in his own Princely breast, the whole current of his
dispensations speak him a pattern to the admiration and imitation of
posterity. He is the prop, the Atlas on which the safety of you all lean, he
is the hinge on which the whole State turns; in a word, he is the Pelops for
wisdom, the Minos for good government. Remember Amor and Royalte ne veulent
point o'esgall, Love and Lordship suffer no fellowship. Forget not that
Sovereign authority is so delicate and tender, that it will take hurt with the
least rude handling.

Nor do enterprises against Princes prosper, remember that Seianus that
contrived the death of Drusus, Litia that consented to it, Endemus that
compounded the drug, and Ligdus the Ganimed that presented it, all perished
miserably, and so let those furies all of them perish that undertake against
the lives and prosperity of their Princes.

But will you that have seen many years of Sunshine days, and been the
happiest Nation upon the surface of the Universe, as if felicity had been
calculated only for your Meridian; will you make your Island the seat of
war, and stage of woe, and banish prosperity from your confines? do you long
to see your Babes brought forth for the sword to glut upon? to see the bodies
of your Ancients made pavements to walk upon, your Matrons become a prey, and
prize to every ravisher, your Priests and Sacrificers slain at the gates of
your Temples, Quae tantum insanas voluit, dementia gentes?


And you Mushromes, you lesser stars, that come not within any Constellation,
will you join with them that quo rure, quaque injuria invade your Country,
you should rather join hand in hand to shoulder them out, who will use you but
as instruments to ruin one another: you do but shoot arrows against the Sun
which will retrograde, and fall upon your own heads: but if you be resolved to
contribute to your own destruction, I despair not to find some who are not
such ^ickle and desultory temporizers as will concur in this rebellion against
their King, but will never do that which most of his Subjects do, flatter
him, but who will do that which few of his Subjects do, love and honor him,
and let these join with me in this acclamation, Vivat Rex, Vivat Romu lus,
Vivat Rex Romulus, in Eternum vivat.


Whilst thus he spoke, conticuere omnes intentaque tenebant. Flaminius had such
action in his speech, and grace in his action, as he raised attention with no
less admiration then silence. For his Oration carried smoothness and
concinuity enough with it to make many revolt from Lemuroc, only some few
ambitious Lords, whether out of instigation, or as it has been conjectured
out of emulation, and jealousy to be eclipsed and over-shadowed by the fame
and splendour of Flaminius, swaid their Tennants and domesticke retenews, and
fled to Lycidus (who by this time was entrenched in the plain of Mamrash some
five miles from Nicosia) under whose ensign we will resign them, and assign
our style to the perfecting of our former designs.

Flaminius dispatched a Messenger to Amenides (whom he desired might join
with him in his achievements, and partake of his glory) who soon left
Dionella, of whom he took leave with tears in his eyes, she also
contributing hers unto their grief, he went accompanied with the same sorrow
which he left behind, and in ten days space arrived at Cyprus, with 1000.
valiant Neopolitans, whose spangled plumes of diverse colored feathers
obumbrating their steely crests, and their gilded helmets, showed in semblance
like Mars his burganets overshadowed with the golden tressalines of his fair
paphian paramoure; If unknown Choraebus with his troops of undaunted Ueterans
were in Troyes extremity, welcome to the distressed Priamus, or the resolved
bands of Achilles with his fierce Mirmidons acceptable to the Grecians in the
time of intestine skirmishes; how joyful then was Romulus at the arrival of
Amenides in this time of disaster, wherein he more needed his Heroicke
actions, then either Priam or the Grecian Heroes did their proffered succouring
aiders. By this time the Governors of the several Provinces (having fortified
their Cities) repaired with their bands to Nicosia, where there was a general
muster of Romulus his soldiers which amounted to the number of 40000. the day of
battle between the two Armies was appointed on the morrow, and the Plains
whereon it was to be fought were the prementioned Plains of Mamrash. As soon
as the Celestial Waggoner had forsaken the watery lap of Thetis, and issuing
out at the latticed portalls of the Eastern Ocean had swiftly followed the
flying darkness (which with sable wings had taken her speedy flight to the
Western India) the thundering drumms and shrill trumpets proclaimed the battles
approach.

Romulus his Army was thus ordered; against the approach of his reproachful
enemies; the first Squadron was conducted by Yeslin Governor of the Province
of Salamina, the second was given in charge to Amenides, the third was led by
Flaminius, the fourth by Romulus the King, the last by Pruteus. This Army
garnished with their discolored plumes, raised such a luster by the rays of
the earths illustrator, as heaven it self seemed to blush at the gorgeousness
of the enriched earth, whose duskie face was so admirably garnished with such a
glorious Army.

Lycidus also divided his Army which consisted of 60000. men into diverse
squadrons, allowing to each squadron 10000. men, the first was carried on by
Lemuroc, the second followed Turpill, the third Xanverde, the fourth was under
Lycidus own conduct, the fifth had his Brother Silenus for its Leader, the
last was commanded by Plitus. The signal of the battle being given, the two
bodies engaged; and the earth loath to behold such cruelty, hid its face
under a bloody mantle. Now the noise of the Soldiers (which was no less then
the mad Sacrifices of Bacchus in Thebes and Phrygia, were wont to be the
neighing of horses, the clashing of the Arms, the groans of the dying and
wounded men, the obstrepency of the Canons and sounding grenades drowned one
another, and concurrd to make a discord, which at once both fed and frighted
death. Now Charon sweated with plying his Ores, now Cerberus feared to admit so
many of Romulus rebellious Subjects, because he doubted (they were so inured
to insurrections) that they would mutiny against Pluto. Now Radaman thus
trembled to give censure against so many soldiers, lest they (disliking their
doom) should make another riot, and break the peace. But because I would
nothave the battle ended before I have described the manner of it, I will leave
roaving at Generals, and particularize some of the most eminent Combitants.

Flaminius (having valor for his leader, and fortune for his Auxiliar) dealt
down right blows (and them often redoubled) upon his unabiding adversaries, his
blood-bedabled sword guided by his ruthlesse hand cleft where it struck, it
cut out more work for the Sexton then the Surgeon, it made no wounds but
mortal ones, it left every one on whom it had discharged its fury either
dying or dead.

Here his frantic arm cleave horse and man insuna der at one blow, there it
makes an Orphan, here widow, and so he remained pressing, and oppressing his
enemies till being ringd about with the distracted and amazed multitude his
steed was slain by Turpil but Flaminius so executed his vigorous rage upon
him, as he made the Traitor to late repent his but lately offered injury, for
burying his blade in his cursed stomach he made him (bleching out his life
together with his blood, bid a sorrowful farewell, to his more then sorrowful
soldiers, and he soon mounted himself on a fiery coursier, whose masters head
he paid for his horse hire. Undanted Romulus also, who chose rather to trust to
his body a castle of bones, then one of stones, no sooner dealt blows, then
these gave wounds, and those wounds, death, till at length his force
decreasing, he was dismounted yet defended himself on foot till at last he
espied, Flaminius coming, and then (whereas before he expected a noble death)
he hoped for a glorious victory, for who can fear that has Flaminius by him,
whose very presence might apall his proudest foe, but how many he slew, (not
stranger for number, then for the manner,) how he sent them to their deserved
deaths, were a subject delectable to me to write, and to all to read, but I
should be over tedious to discourse of every particular. Plitus advanced
himselfeagainst Amenides, whose actions speak him higher then our Epithites,
but the burnt child dreads the fire, the baited Bear will beware of the stake,
the singed gnat dare not again flutter about the flame of the candle, the fish
Sphyrana once entangled will shun the net, the dogs of Egypt once terrified by
the Crocadile will seldom after lap at the banks of Nilus, and Pusillanimous
Plitus having received two wounds sought by the swiftness of his horse a
dishonorable safety, Lemuroc took his place and incountered Amenides, and it
fared with him as with the young wrestler that came to the Olympic games, who
having had a foil thought scorn to retreat till he received a fall, or him
that being pricked in the finger by a bramble, thrust in his whole hand among
the thorns for madness, for having diverse wounds and not liking them, he left
not, till he took that which was immedicable, and Amenides continued purpling
the grass with blood and enriching the ground with pale carcasses. Pruteus ran
against Lycidus, and bearing him quite over his saddle, he made him take a new
and more uneasy seat upon the croop of his palfrey, Yeslin and Silenus were so
forward in the careere, as the very earth seemed scarcely to bend under their
horses hoofes, with such exceeding celeritie they passed to the encounter, but
o the impartiality of the fates, o the atrocity of chance, The well
accomplished Socrates and just Phocian were executed like Traitors, whilst
Rebel Caesar was advanced, the cruel Severus lived prosperously and was
adored, whilst the excellent Severus was miserably murdered, Sylla and Marius
dyed in their beds, Pompy and Cicero slain, when they would have thought exile
a happiness, and Yeslin, Loyal Yeslin, ^ell by the flesh-devouring hand of
Silenus, but his blood being scattered like seed upon the ground, brought rich
increase to Romulus, for his death gave desire to the most pitiful, and power
of revenge to the most cowardly, and now between both armies began a most
bitter bick^ing, but Lycidus his army being not able any longer to continue the
conflict were enforced to fly, fear added spurs to their have, Flaminius and
Amenides added fury to valor, and desperateneffe to fury, and pursued them
with their Squadrons, and prosecuted the pursuit as far as Ceratina erected by
Cyprus (now called Cerines) whose perfidious governor Dromus surrendered it to
Lycidus, Flaminius and Amenides, sat down before this City, where we will
leave them and look over the plains of Mamrash. Here stood a head strong
steed wanting nothing but a proud rider to guide him, there another drags his
Lim-lopt Master up and down the field, the plains which were never before
overfloud, are now drowned in blood, here lies a headless body, there a Limme
newly discinded from that miserable trunk that lies yet groaning, here lies a
gasping head cropped from its shoulders, there lie huge heaps of half dead
bodies, whereof some curse fate, others blaspheme their misdisposed stars, one
pitties his poor widow, another commiserated his Lucklesse Orphans, and curse
the night wherein the children were borne, because he must dye and leave them
unhappy, here lies a throng of livelesse carcases, whose eyes are damned up with
bloud-congealed dust, there grovells the Son whose hopes were all his aged
Fathers pleasure, there were slain in this battle (as is evident by the bills
given in of the dead) of Romulus party 500. whereof one was the honorable Lord
Yeslin. Of Lycidus soldiers there fell 11000 and upward, among whom were
Turpil and Xanverde of the nobility. Report carrying the fame of these wars
tied unto his wings, brought it to Clorinda, whereupon (education having given
her more languages, then nature tongues) she drew her thoughts into these ^es,
adorned them with Roman attire, wrapped them in (...) and dispatched them to
Flaminius.

Clorinda Flaminio.
Pax tibi tuta venit (comptos redimita capillos)
Nunc fulgent violae, Lilia flava, rosae.
Massica pampinei florescunt dona Liaei
Nunc vocat ad dulces tibia grata choros.
Pace virente, casas habitat securus Amyntas
Neve citat tutum hunc tristis ad arma tuba.
At cum trita patent furibundi limina belli,
Turnus and armiferas aptat ad arma manus,
Aspicis undantes effuso sanguine campos
Si venit in terras martia turba tuas.
Exurit passim segires, magalia, villas,
Mar^iaque artifici fulmina nube ruunt.
Pace repertus amor, Mars spirat naribus ignem,
Hic terram tumulis sarcinat, illa viris.
Magnificis Pacem quis te non laudibus ornat,
Ipsa Ceres, te nox induit, Ipsa Venus.
Clorinda. Arbella loath any longer to see her Fathers Kingdom sustain the
miseries of war for her sake) fled secretly from the Court in a disguise, and
apparralled her self in a tawney armor, having for her device an Austridge
holding a horse shoe in his mouth, with this word Sic nutriuntur Fortes, she
repaired to the camp and sent this defy to Lycidus.

Redoubted Lycidus it is both repugnant to your honor and honesty, to seek to
conquer that with Mars ^is lance, which can be subdued only by Cupids shaft
(...) mean Arbellas heart, appear therefore in the field forthwith armed at
all points to prove by what right you seek the daughters love by the
destruction of her Fathers Kingdom, be not inquisitive of my name b^t let it
suffice you to know that I am Arbellas friend and consequently your enemy.

The stranger had no sooner veiwed the advantages of the ground, but Lycidus
forthwith issued out of the Abbey (which was by this time straightned for want
of Provision) with an armor of a sea green color whereon was the Simulachres
of Priamus and Hecuba hanging their heads in their bosoms, and with their
naked hands upholding a deaths head, whereon was written this composure,
Nostrae spes tanta salutis, The stranger faild in his careere, and was sent to
write his foil with his helmet upon the dust, Lycidus (as rich in courtisie as
courage) counting conquest by advantages rather stolen then accheived, left his
sturdy steed to fight on foot, but Lycidus perceiving the stranger discovered
more anger then either skill or strength, holding him far unworthy of his
hate, pitied his weakness, and said, Sir Knight, I conceive you fitter to
masque with Uenus then march with Mars, to hold a distaffe with Hercules, then
a lance with Hanibal, or to handle a Lute in a Ladies chamber, then a spear in
Bellona's Camp, contest therefore no more, but husband your strength, employ it
against your enemy, for my part I am your friend and will spend my life to
serve you for Arbellas sake, whose friend you profess your self, the stranger
replied all the service I desire of you, is; that I have no service for you, but
abused courtesy, in Lycidus begat wrath who united all his force, and cleft
the perfidious Helmet of the stranger which struck him to the ground, he the^
thrust his glittering sword into his left side and having enloosed his helmet
(intending to crop him shorter by the head) espied golden tramells of fair
hair, falling down upon her shoulders, which witnessed that it was the
b^autious Ar^^lla, whose coral lips trembled as if they were kissing death,
the Lilly and rose which were before united in her cheeks now broake their
league, and commenced war, the Lilly got the victory, and remained master of
the field, and put the rose to flight, in her forehead where the wound was made
a fresh tor rent of rubie blood (whose least drop might have ran somed Cupid,
were he taken prisoner) strove to over flow its own fairness, here the rose
took sanctuary being expulsed from her cheeks, in a word here was an Island
of perfect white environed with a red sea, in whose deadly stream death came
sailing, and arived at the port made in her front, and soon chaced the soul,
though not the beauty from her lovely body.

Now Lycidus (ashamed of his unluckie victory broke his sword, threw down his
gauntlet, and in three days shipped his whole army to return to Sicilie, he
bequeathed his kingdom to his brother Silenus, and spent the residue of his
discontented life, in the Monastery of mount Serat, where he became a
Capouchin, His majesty out of the height of benignity passed a bill of
indemnity, and pardoned his subjects, and as a leg broke well set is stronger
then before, and as a bow cract and well mended sounder then ever, so his
peoples hearts were in the most corroborated chains of love and obedience
chained him by this singular example of cleme^cie for Le pardonner n'est
moindre virtue aux grauds quand 'lis sont offencez, que le vengeance vice aux
petits quand ils sont injuriez, to forgive is no less virtue in Princes, when
they are offended, then revenge is a vice in the common sort, when they are
wronged, but to proceed, because his majesty would not have the grief for
Arbella's, death make a full conquest of his great mind, he admitted of this
pastoral Eclogue.


An Eclogue.
The Kings magistie being seated, and the room filled with spectators of
quality, Flaminius and Amenides, entered in a rural disguise, intending to
summon their senses, to attend their pastimes, to show their alacrity, for the
new established peace, and celebrate their Ladies excellencies, under the
pastoral names of Julietta, and Floretta, calling themselves. Archus, and
Plaindor, Archus (which was Flaminius) disguised began thus.

Archus. Come swain assume thy slighted pipe, and play
Upon thy oaten reed a rounde-lay,
Come warble amorous anthems, call to be
Partakers in thy mirth the Napaeae,
That haunt arbusted groves, those rural powers
That live inshrin'd in oaken curled bowres,
Among the sapplins tall, whose shady roof
Are ringletts knitt of branching elm, star proof,
Call Naiades from their obscure sluse
By which his Alpheus met his Arethuse,
Call mountain Orcades for to comply
To further with us this solemnity,
Call the thrice three sweet Aganipian Nymphs
That steeps the fancy in Heliconian lymphs
Of eloquence, and strains heroical
To help us tune our dulcid madrigall.
Avaunt thou Styx borne sadness, I Will take care
Thou shall be mist no more, the shaddow's are
In The deep of night, when Morpheus Leaden key
Lock mortals under a black canopie,
Rejoice, and Jocaean sing to me
Now Janus folding gates close boulted be,
Sicilian tyrants are returned home
Mars is appeased with a hecatombe.
The tempest's ore, the Cyprian ocean's calm,
Our victors brows are crowned with wreaths of palm.

Plaindor. For Monuments we have hung up bruised arms,
To pleasuers we have converted ^ern alarms
And dreadful marches to delightful greetings,
And harnest squadrons into merry meetings.
Grim Visag'd war has smoothed his brow, in stead
Of mounting of a fiery barbed steed.
To fright pale foes, now all in a qualme
He capes in a Ladies Amphithalme.
Bends all his nerves, and every means he will prove
To the lacivious pleasing of his love.
No more the fruitful name of Cuirassier
Shall scare our swains, or fleet Harquebusier.
We shall dispute no more what Cavallrie
Or ammunition mean, or Infantrie
The Pouldron and Vambrace, the casque the sheare
The flanks both right and left, the front, the reere
Are Exotic words whose very sound
Shall be no more heard in Cyprian ground.
Nor rank, nor file, less when we go a maying
All in a row, or when we be a playng
At Course a Park, or telling of a tale
To the Ranck't Lasses at a Whitson ale.
I never shall see a sword, but such as grow
Upon a flitch of Bacon, never know
An other pike but such as daily glides
Along the softly whistling riv' lets sides
And by Meanders rushie frienged bank,
Where grows the willow green, and Osier dank
I near shall Loricate, or embrace arms
But such as are Floretta's voice of harms.
No shield but that of sinowie brawn we^e bear
Turn thou thy blade to knives great warrier
To subdue Geese, and Capons, and caronse
Healths in thy close hilt in a frolic bouse.
To Tabers change thy drum, to kitts thy fife
Let Bagpipes and shrill Harpsicons be rife,
Come change thy trumpet and Bellona's flute
To the loud Cimballs, Violl, Harp and Lute,
Whilst in this piping time, these Halcion days
We do contest who best their Loves can praise.

Arcas. Hark Plaindor then how I anatomize
My Julietta, and her encomionize.
Were all the goddesses composed in one
They would come short of her perfection.
Gray headed morn blush to see her more bright
Then the eye of Moon, or her excelled Light.
The dangling Tramells of her curious hair
Then fine fair flax, are far more small and fair.
Those golden threads in an even order set
Entangle hearts, like fishes in a net.
Her front is the perfection of delight
The down of Uenus doves is not so white.
What covert charms, what latent magic lies
Within the circles of her speaking eyes.
Beams shot from heaven like to a fiery dart
Transfixt my soul, and scorcht my ravished heart
When peerlesse beauty did her cheeks compose
The ingredients were the Lilly, and fresh rose.
They are like a plum which blush (the sole cause is)
'Cause Phoebus now and then does steal a kiss.
Her straight nose, dimpled chin, incirled ears
A snowy suit, or Ivory mantle wears.
The porphier portalls of her honored words
A relish most mellifluous affords.
From these Jemms clad in rubie livery
I cul fresh balm to heal loves malady
Her teeth like orient pearl or ivory be
Or like the newborn blossoms on a tree.
Her thrice celestial voice which bless our ears
Proclames its consanguinitie with th'spheres.
Her neck more comely then the polish't tower
Whose walls Jove skal'd in a Tagean shower
Her arms in hue heavens milkie zone surpass
Or white Aequoreall Neptunes fomie face.
Her lovely arms are like pressed curds, there stand
Ledas pale Swan immewr'd in either hand.
Now Muse return into the milkie way
Where Cupid (in a sweat) abathing lay
About this beauteous dale on either hand
Loves Alps and Uenus Pireney mountains stand,
With Azure curles each is inammel'd round
And with a soft red Porphier berrie crowned.
These are two Apples taken from Paradise
The graces use to sport in wanton wise
Under their shades Pomena's ripe fruit fall
From lofty trees moved by no wind at all.
To do them homage, Cupid sucks from hence
His sunshine days and love his influence.
Greece borne and banished love seeking to find
A domicil where he might sit inshrin'd
Parching himself in Juliettas eyes
Intended in her heart to signorize
But finding that too cold for's resience
He took his flight to my close heart from thence,
where with some firebrands, which himself did lay
He singed his wings and must for ever stay.
Her breast a field of Lillies whiter showing
Then those Alcinons in thy Garden growing.
Fair Erycina's Ida next to that
Or Athos stand, or Cupids Ararat.
Beneath this lies loves mediterranean
The gulf of Venice leading to th'lle of Man.
To praise the Coloums of this structure, this
Adored bulk, this amorous edifice
Were a fit theme for the elaborate lines
Of ever honored Maro, whose worth shines
Bright in the lamp of poesy, and raise
As many trumps as men to chant his praise.
In softness they the silk worms web surpass
Woven in leavy shop, on Loomes of grass.
In whitenes Albian clifts, in smoothnes the
Repumicated glass of Normandy.
Her round small feet beneath her roab do run
Now out, now in, as if they feared the sun.

Plaindor. Floretta has for Dioniaea power
To make each place she comes in Cupids bower.
Nature did summon every grace to meet.
At the composure of a saint so sweet;
And with more beauties they did her invest
Then Cabalinean Poets have expressed
In The comely Aspect of the Paphian Queen
Or more then in Corinnas face was seen.
My Love a quarrie is, or Cabinet
Where beauteous nature her choice gemmes has set.
Her amber locks shine like the Topace bright,
Or golden Carbuncle, or Chrysolite
Her eyes at each glance rutilate and spark
Like Diamonds in murke, tenebrous dark:
Her fair infolded ears, high front, nose, chin
Resemble the hate-spot Emerlin.
Argent and Gules in her cheeks kindly mix
As in the part colored Jasponix.
The orifice, or ports of her words are
In color Coral, in worth Cinoper.
Her pearl like teeth are an even placed row
Of occidentall Margarites which grow
In her fresh Rubie gumms, her round soft breasts
Where Cydias pigions fanbricate their nests
Are Alabaster circumstructures, one
Loves Ossa is, the other Pelion.
Warm azure veins (by prudent Natures skill)
Inamell and inviron either hill,
Streams of dissolved Jazul, circling founts
Of liquid Turkise in these lovely mounts
Make many pretty Islands, which appear
Some Ovall, some in figure of a Sphere.
Her hands those gemms of love Antimonie
Her digits nails Arabian Oynx be.
She Is a chaste Emerauld, and that this list
Might perfect be, her hearts's an Amethist.
Not stubborn and obdurate, but a heart
Soon penetrated with loves wanton dart.
Nor can the buckets of our rustic quire
Quench this Asbeston flaming with Loves fire.
The harmony of loveliness and grace
Combineth in the magique of her face.

FINIS.
AMORIS NVLLVS.
Flaminius and Amaenides when their sport was past fell to their repast, and
after that retired into a flowrie seild to digest their thougths, rather then
their supper, as they were here ambulatory they espied a commet darting its
flaming beard from the ruddy sky to the Appaled earth, this prodigious omen
was attended on by formidable thunder, and unusual fulgurations, the Aghast
earth trembled, and with fear fell into convulsion fits, and Madam nature
seemed to run mad, as she did when Caesar dyed, and small pieces of minced flesh
descended in the manner of a shower, as it was once at Rome. Flaminius and
Amenides after they had filled their eyes with these prodigies impoverished
their clothes to enrich their beds, and with what certain imaginations are
the slumbers of some eminent personages adumbrated? the day before that
execrable assassinate was committed on the person of great Henry the fourth
King of France, (by Revillac an obscure varlet) the Queen was crowned, and that
night succeding her coronation, and the preceding the Kings murder, she dreamt
that the diamonds with which she was crowned, the day before were metamorphosed
into pearls which are the emblems of tears. William Rufus the morning before
he was unfortunatly shot in hunting, dreamed that an extreme cold wind passed
through his sides.

And Flaminius in his nocturnall unquiet repose, conceived that those pastoral
weeds, with which he had been disguised were converted into regal roabes, and
that that paganical bonnet which incircled his head was transformed to an
imperial diadem, and that that rustic sheep-hooke which filled his hand, was
transmuted to a royal Scepter. Amaenides also being consopiated and luld
asleep with multiplicitie of cogitations, the ghost of king Romulus appeared to
him with his head bound about with a wreath of Cypress, and suddenly this
ruthful voice exuscitated him out of his repose, Romulus is disceased, whom
our muse shall condole in this elegy.

In obitum serenissimi potentissimique principis Romuli Eleg^ia funebris.
Romulus, Aonidum de^us altus, honosque Gradivi,
Insignis patriae nobilis atque pater,
Qui modo terrificis tot regna lacesserat armis,
Celsa fuit nostro Qui Cynosura polo.
Qui fuit Euboicos dignus transcendere fines,
Atque trisaeclini secla vetusta ducis.
Qui fuit Haemonio dignus iuvenescere succo
Aesonijsque oculis claudere, fata subit.
Heu mihi, fata subit, (Stygia haecvox faucibus haesit)
Nec favet officio mors inopina suo.
Crudeles nimium Parcae, crudelia fata,
Crudeli nimium stamina rupta manu
Delacerate comas invenes, and tundite palmis
Pectora, purpureas imbre rigate genas.
Lugete Aonides, vos que altiloqui quibus offert
Culta Heliconiadem Caliopea lyram,
Uos Colophoniaci modulis vlulate poetae
Occidit Aonij gloria summa chori.
Lugent Sithonici ducis inclita castra sequentes
Nam tulit atra viris, quae dedit alba dies.
Omnia funesto tumeant jam flumina fletu,
Atque fluant lachrymae more fluentis aquae.
Indoluit Phoebus radians, Heliconis alumnae
Implerunt gemitu Castalidumque nemus.
At nonulterius canimus, jam linquimus vdo
Ore ipso lachrymis verba Ligata natant.
FINIS.
DOLORIS NVLLVS.
This glorious King was well beloved and as much lamented as any that ever
swayd the Cyprian Scepter, he was admired and adored as the worlds wonder, and
heavens darling, the love and fiduciary obedience which he had from his
subjects was drawn as a thread through a needls eye out of the apprehension of
affection, his body the earthly cabinet wherein so many heavenly endowments had
been stored up, as if all virtues had made a confluence in him, their center)
was eviscerated and polivi'd and carried upon a chariot drawn by six horses
coverd with sable velvet (whose pensive posture made them seem sensible of
their masters loss) to the funeral pile, never were ashes repleate with more
wealth, his obsequie and funeral solemnities resembled the fire, wherein the
body of Archemorous was consumed, coruscant jewels did crackle, heat
disolv'd, silver streamed, and gold melted, embrodered vestiments were
consumed, and huge sublime oaks (fatted by the juice of Assyrian gums)
penetrated the sky, with bright shining flames, fier'd honey and Safforan
hissed, full bowls of wine, and goblets of blood, and milk were powered out,
potentates and nobles encircled the pile, and the eyes of the rest were
infected with their weeping, thrice their weapons clash, and four times their
bruised arms ecchoed, as often the meaner subjects struck their bared breasts,
and filled the air with out cries, They were drowned in Sadness to see the
potentates drencht in such sorrow, the Plebeians lamented with trickling tears
to bear the diapason in the peers melancholy music, herds of lowing cattle
and beasts half slain were devoured by another wastfull fire, the honored
dust of this renouned Prince, Patriot and Patron shall be deplored with
perpetual elegies, this glorious sun which was set in the terrene Horizon,
and translated to shine in heaven, was enclosed in a slender vrne, and adorned
with this Epitaph.

EPITAPHIVM. MIRACVLI HOMINVM ROMVLI REGIS.
Immortale de^us patriae, sol vni^us orbis,
Doctorum sidus, Sophiae, iustitiae ocellus.
Pelliger invictis Martis laus Romulus armis
Inque intent ^oga Charitum mellita voluptas
His jacet; ante diem fatis ereptus iniquis.
Sic furibunda suis mors sceptra ligonibus aequat.
Thus was the dust (though not the immortal fame) of this monarch (of famous
memory) interred, but now his imperial throne was empty, his kingdom was an
Anarchy, the lords brooked not a confused democracy, and the commons affected
not an Aristrocracy, or oligarchie, but all sorts applauding regalitie,
(knowing deux testes sur vn' corpse est chose monstrue two heads on one body is
a monstrous thing, unnanimously expected a new monarch, the line of Romulus did
determine in Arbella (whose Tragedy is prementioned) wherefore by unite consent
Flammius (whose mother Capricia, was sister to Romulus) was proclaimed King of
Cyprus (the fortunate Island the paradise of pleasure, The granary of Cores,
the wine celler of Bacchus, the best Salt-pit of Neptune) in the place of his
defunct uncle. His inauguration or public coronatio^ was prorogued for forty
days, which were spent in mourning for their late Sovereign, and this term
expird, his way was spread with scarlet cloth and he in a sumptuous chariot of
gold, the wheels being purest ebonv, and covering of crimson satin, crosbard
with staves of gold, rode to the temple of Uenus, where he was crowned, and
seated upon a cushion stuffed with the hearts of his subjects, as he returned,
home to the palace, his guard and attendents sung these verses.

Haec sacra Erithraeis lux est signanda lapillis.
Semper habenda bona est multo in honor dies.
Nunc festo pulsanda pedeest tellus, and amaenis
Nunc ornanda sacri floribus ara Jovis.
Plaudite nervosi juvenes, reddantur honores
Caelicolis, festis addite thura focis
Addite fragrantes quos misit Eous odores
Quosque Hispana novo pinus ab orb tulit.
Flaminius solium hodie petit altus eburnum,
Ornat honoratas clara corolla comas,
Uive diu faelix, patriae pater optime nostrae
Et numeres annos quot tua vota vocant.
Now Flaminius was to execute justice, as before Magnanimite now he made his
life the example of his Laws, and his Laws the maxios arising from his deeds,
so that I might with as much facility discribe the whole art of good
government, as his proceedings honor and regality, make a difference between
the nearest relations, and degrees of state, distinguish betwixt the most
intimate associates, Flaminius and Amaenides, (which before were entire
familiars,) now do not so much as discourse but at a distance, Romulus his
death made the one a royal sovereign, the other a Loyal subject, though
fortunes next task was to elevate him, even ad culmen honoris, ad Regium
Fastidium, and this means she used to accomplish her intention, She prompted
him to invade Sicilie, and that he might gild his projecst with a specious
pretense, he pretended to revenge the invading of Cyprus, and to pay Silenus in
his own coin, and to punish him by the law of retaliation, By his formidable
courage in war, and facetious carriage in peace he purchased and entailed the
peoples affections to him, who were now ambitious to court any occasion, to
evidence to him how much they were his servants, they thronged to enroll
themselves, under so heroique a chiefetaine who when he had listed 30000.
resolved warriers enbarqued for Sicilie, to whom we will say as the Greek
Commander did to Teucer, (...) proceed, and prosper.

Flaminius was no sooner warm in his Throne, then he was fired with the
thought of Clorindas Love, these cogitations were winged with desire of
fruition, these wings (he having constituted Pruteus his vicegerent in his
absence,) carried him to his port town Famagosta, which is erected upon a
palm betwixt too promontories, in form almost quadrangular, whereof two parts
are washed by the Sea, here he enbarqued for the impresse and empress of the
Sea, the darling of the Caerulian god, the female paradise, England, after
four days sail this noble fleet (consisting of twenty ships) was discried by
an armado of Algire pirates whose first salutations were the thundering reports
of gally roaring pieces, the Cyprians in a quick reply sent out a back sounding
echo of firey flying shots, which make an Equi-nox to the clouds, the pirates
presented them with another voll which rebounded backward in their own
perturbed breasts the ambiguous sounds of fear and hope, now they all turned
broad sides, and began the monomachy boarding one another, now the equorean
park put on a new Livery, and was invested in a purple roab, the glittering
fishes which use to be men's fosterment, have men's blood for their aliment and
element, Phoebus seeing so many wounded persons takes up his bed, fearing least
they should leave him no room, descended from his Olympian Chariot, and
crowded in with them, so that the two shatterd fleets were compelld by the
tenebrositie of the night to end the conflict, the Cythereans, (the Pirates
being discomfited and dispersed) steerd forward to Albions Imperial chamber
Troyntvant, where their spousalls were celebrated, with as many complements of
State as magnificence could give, or regalitie receive, Clorinda (like the
sunes Hellotropeian flower that shuts its yellow Curtayne, when he declyneth
and opens it again at his fayer rasing.) at her Lords departure closed up all
delights, but now at his return courted them again, having a new and fiery
spirit dancing upon her amorous heart strings The bridegroomes Suite was
tissue, his cloak cloth of gold, whose buttons were the richest and largest
Diamons that ever Prince wore, or Subject saw, the Brides gown was of white
velvet having at every seame a lace of gould and row of Rubies, her fair hair
had nothing on it but golden ribban twisted like a diadem, which begirt her
high fronted forehead, and fell down upon her back, closed up at each end with
the richest Jewel in the oriental Cabinet, her neck (which stained the
whiteness of her garment) was adorned with, (or rather did adorn,) a carkanet
of Indian pearl, for rich attire which is the sole ornament of Sophisticated
and Plebeian beauties, did derive that luster and gracefulness which it had
from her elegant feature, which I dare not delineate, in all its demensions
lest (Gentlemen Readers) I should prejudice you, which intended only to
delectate, and make all your hearts (which were lately your own freehold) to
be copy hold in fee of her, let it suffice them to know that she was a Lady of
a flowing sweetness, and the living glory of noble Ancestors, whose virtue and
beauty were above all Titles.

When Phoebus had spread his sweaty limbs upon his marine couch, the happy
couple followed his example and bedded also, to whose solemnities Bombar
chanted this Epithalamium.

Epithalamium.
Mirror of Men, it is Venus will
Thou should approve thy abler skill
In loves Pharsalia, that she
As well as Mars may boast of thee.
Thy foe is the selected flower
Of Albions knot or beauties bower
A Cytherean Amazon.
Loves Penthesilean champion.
Imprison her in thy foulding arms
And stoutly strike up loves allarms:
And satiate with agile delights
Your unrestrained appetites.
My joy, and happy Omens meet
With pleasure in the geniall sheet.
In this sportive Sciamachie
Where lips both shafts and targets be
No cannons are, thy head to shroud
In a blew mist or smoakie cloud.
This is Cupids jolly feast
Who proud to please so choice a guest,
Through loves Alimbique thee invite
To distill the joys of night,
And from thy Mycrocosme by
The art of Paphyan Chymistrie,
One Catapasmian balm derive,
Which may preserve thy name alive.
May joy and happy Omens meet
With pleasure in the geniall sheet.
Both these whom Hymen here untie
Make up but one Hermaphrodite
Let their affections (Queen of love,)
Within the same sphere always move,
And never terminate or know
A thing called period, but grow
And with their wreathes be always seen
Like Daphne clothed in Aprills green.
Thou that can thy trophies show
Over these, and over thy mother too,
Kindle daily their desires
Toward one another with new fires.
May joy and happy omens meet
With pleasure in the geniall sheet.
The influence of stars above
Do Sympathize with sacred love
This night by Uenus assignation
Of two is made one constellation
For Uirgo is (to shine more free)
Transferred into Gemini.
These twinkling stars concur to bear
A Hieroglyphick of you here,
But stop here muse now Juno's rites
Wait to be done, extinguish lights,
Lest by their glaring is descride
The blushing of the bashful bride.
My joy and happy omens meet
With pleasure in the geniall sheet.
Whilst golden mouthed Bombar sung these, the hearers seemed to be charmed by
the magique of his aires, and to be deprived of all motions in their bodies,
their hearts were ravished with his wonderful harmony, and their ears chained
to the sweetness of his tongue: but because these lovers happiness should be
no longer provoked every one avoided the room and emptied their clothes to
fill their beads, having their heads filled with dreams of that felicity they
envied in others, and longed for in themselves, by that time the mornings
mistress with dishevelled tressalines had ten times taken possession of the
air, and as often released it again to Cynthia, these Princes prepared to
return to their own kingdom where they monarchized in the most unlimited
latitude of supremacy.

Let ruffling Eurus in Aeolian jayle
Ly close confined without maine prise or bail.
Come Amphitrite with thy sea green train
Of Nymphs to trip it over the liquid plain,
Come Doris with thy watery band, and all
The Druid crew Chrysostomaticall.
Come Crescis, and sweet tongued Cymodocea,
With Zantho, and aequoriall Amothea.
With golden tressalines Dexamine
Come hand in hand both blithe Cymothae.
Through Neptunes park this Navy dance before
And usher it to Cyprus peeble shore.
The sea shouted for joy to bear Clorinda, and the windsung aloud his
gladness to court her, he filled the Canvas wings of the fleet with auspicious
gusts, and carried it with a pegasian celerity to the intended harbor, the
shore was made a goodly Theater, the rocks and battlements were crowned with
venerable age, and lovely lasses, pressing to obtain a glympse of their new
Queen, who being crowned, and seated at Nicosia, this Masque was prepared for
the entertainment of their Majesty's.

DEORVM DONA A MASQVE.

Presented before Flaminius and Clorinda, King and Queen of Cyprus at their
Regal Palace in Nicosia.

LONDON, Printed for I: H. T: H. T: I. 1647.

DEORUM DONA. A Masque Presented before Flaminius and Clorinda.
THe palace being hung with rich Babilonian tapestrie, of various shapes
wrought by the needle of Semyramas, and perfumed with the wealthy gums of
Parchica, such as the Arabian bird fills her nest with, when she prepares to
sacrifice her self, and their Majesty's (clothed in the precious skins of
Ermynes, wearing crowns, whose luster dimmed Ariadnes coronet embelished with
the glorious Olympian lamps) being seated, the first thing obvious to the
sight, was a rich ornament that enclosed the Scene, on the one side stood a
man, bearing a Scepter, with a hand, and an eye in the palm, in the other hand
a book, on his head a chaplet of Amaranthus, his curace was of gold, with a
palludamentum of blew, and antique bases of crimson, his foot trampled on the
head of a Serpent, by him was imported just Government, opposite to him stood
two young women in draperies, with their arms joined, the one denoting the
glory of Princes, the other mansuetude. The curtain was white, and a pale red
in panes, which suddenly flying up discovered a fair prospect of the palace,
and the city Nicosia, which being the Metropolis of the Kingdom, might
(Synechdocally) be taken for it all.

The Genius of the Country warned by a loud masick descended, and entered.

GENIUS. WHen Jove, and nature metamorphosed
The undigested lump, (which was the bed
Of indisposed confusion) a rude load
Where scuffling seeds of things misplac't abode.
Where springs, ponds, lakes immense and hewtes curled
Were with things hot, dry, humid, frigid hurld.
So when the game is played, the Chessmen be
Though dignified with names of majesty,
Though God-like Kings, or reverend Bishops they,
Or honorable Lords be called in the play,
Or Knights errand or worthies of the grown,
They Are altogether into one bag thrown.
But to our task, when out of this dull mass
By heavenly Alchymie extracted was
A world well orderd, and methodicall,
The fire and thin air were highest place't
The solid self clogged earth did lowest fall
And was by the vast Ocean embraced,
In whose larg precincts many sea-girt lands
And Islands fenced by salt water stands,
Which Amphitrite with her cripst locks hem
So various jemmes inlay a diadem,
Neptune his tributary gods that graces
Gives them the government of these small places,
And let them wear their saphrie crowns, and weild
Their little tridents in their watery field;
But this fair Isle which of its self affordes
Matter to build an Ocean furrowing ship
From the top gallant to the keeles low bottom,
And furnish it with tackling, and munition
Without the help of exotic addition.
Unto his blew hair'd dieties he quarters,
And he himself with a brave flying guard
Of winged coursers, her ingarison.
Then her indulgent guardian provided
A ruler worthy of so rare an Isle,
But Jove observing his just government
Took him to his Olympus there to be
His colleague, vicegerent, deputy,
His life we loved, and wished, but he expired
Your happiness is of our hearts desired.
And you the orb where power, and beauty move
Fair Queen of Amathusia, and love,
Each Subject has erected on his heart
A vestall flaming Altar, to offer up
A thankful sacrifice for your arivall,
At this white hour, t'inclose so fair a guest
Our Land waxt proud, and I the Genius
Am by so great a presence weakt, and glory
To bid you welcome in your subjects names,
Whose hearts dance in their eyes for joy of you,
Their pulses all beat music, and their blood
Beat in their blew-rooft channells a soft measure,
Even as the radiant Olympic cole
Whose heat thawes annually the icy pole,
By his coruscant beams correct the sight,
Of mortals eyes that dare gaze on light,
Even so you move in so sublime a sphere
With awful reverence, and regal fear,
Majestic Queen, your sacred majesty
Fires kindled by your eyes do qualify,
For you (Adored Cypria) had been
The whole worlds Mistress, if no Cyprian Queen.
Phoebus and Cynthia of our hemispheare,
Father, and Mother, of our fertile I Will,
May your admired court, and reign become
The pattern for all Princes imitation
And be the copy Kings strive to write after,
Heaven crown my wish, whilst earth concur to sing
Kind fortune fan you with a courteous wing.

Enter Forture conducting fame and virtue. Fortune. Translucent twins of Love,
and majesty
I that of things ad libitum dispose,
And this man elevate, and that depose,
I that advanced Servus Tullius
That tumbling came into the spacious world,
A vassell cadit or cosmopolite.
Even to the Apex of all mundan honor,
I that cast Mustapha the Idiot
From the Ottoman throne, and sealed Osman there
And dandled him in my lubricious arms,
Till weary of my dalliance I threw him down,
Invested Mustaph in his pristine state,
Reducing Osman to such penury
He beggd a draught of water at a fount,
Then out of cruel pity I commanded
An obscure Ianizary to dispatch him,
I, that made Arlots Illegitimate son
To sway the scepter of rich Albion,
I have deposed my variableness
And sworn alleagence to fair constancy,
I Will never interrupt your happiness
By any churlish or disasterous frown,
Which oath is as irrivocable as
The strickt law of the Meedes and Persians was,
About your palaces the yellow streams
Of Tagus, Isberus, and Pactolus,
Shall run and meet there with the Indian Ganges.
Little petty homagers all stubborn Princes
Shall prostrate their shining scepters at
Your most majestic feet and gredily
Shall glory in your royal servitude,
Crowns pil'd on crowns shall pave your happy paths,
And Captive Kings wait on your chariot.
And erect statues to your memoryes
Which shall survive Egyptian Pyramids,
And last when Hyems has frozen up the world,
And when old palsy time shall droop, and halt
Being ore worn, and moatheaten with years.
Your joys still bud, and grow, and gemminate
And not be capiable to terminate.

Fame. Before Joves spangled portalls (with a crew
Of bright aeriall souls) I dwell insphear'd
Chanting the conquests of the son's of valor
And magnifying their great names, which last
Unbitten by the canker worm of time,
I near can take a trump to carroll forth,
Some royal Potentates heroic name,
But Mars still rounds me in the ear, and says,
Fame sing Flaminius worth, whose mighty facts
Has made the world a register of's acts,
Whose manly heart propitious Jove does bless
With haughty spirit, that spirit with success,
Victorious success with lasting glory
Which glory makes his martial feats a story,
Whose spreading fame with gray hair'd time shall vie
And be companion of eternity.
When I would blaze a beauty Uenus comes
And with her fatal magic charms me thus,
Hark thou repositor of comeliness,
From Albions Isle where silver Thames dos dally
With the even bosom of the spungie sands
And often wash the fructifying sides
Of her beloved banks, with wanton tides,
I have transplanted to my Cyprian Isle
Clorinda, from whose fair sun bright eyes
Issue such sparkling heart surprising rays,
As proclaim her the wonder of her days,
Her brow excell's the Rodopeian snow,
Her silken hair which in curld ringlets grow
Might make so many strings for Cupids bow.
Her eyes can make a stubborn soldier melt
Although his heart be hearder then his shield,
Each smile of hers has a magnetic force
To attract souls, her Angels voice can charm
A Satyr rude, and rock his wanton soul
Into Elizian slumbers, let her be
Genophilus the subject of thy song.
Erect a temple to her honored name
The Virgin quire shall make it their devotion
To pay her grateful Paeans, and to crown
With ever springing garlands her fair statue;
I have descended through the silver orbs
To satisfy these dieties, I Have taken
A shrill resounding trumpet, new, and clean,
Lest it it should taint my breath, whilst I blaze forth
Your names which as in deep graven characters
Shall last for times immortal process sure,
Whilst Phoebus, Phaebe, and nights fry endure.

Virtue. Bright ornaments of the heaven covered world
To whom the far famed Cyprian nation bow
I'ts most obsequious, and willing knees,
On whose illustrious fronts the regal crown
Imprint no rigorous, and austere frowns
Your subjects hopes of joy to batter down.
But whose auspicious, and calmer eyes
Pronounces omens of ensueing joy,
And defuse hopes of safety to their hearts,
Which pious reverence does thaw to streams
Flowing in the current of obedience.
Your Raigne's become a lecture of piety
Which transfuse through your court an admiration,
And Zealous ardour of its imitation,
Nay the high towering flames do penetrate
The dapled sky, and make Gods emulate,
Jove envy your rare virtues (Potent Prince)
And Juno (Mighty Queen) your share of graces,
Which make you so resplendent in all places.

Now the music sounded and fortune, fame, and virtue, danced to its measures,
Corantoes, Durettoes, Moriscoes, Galliards, and sung thus, Fortune. With gentle
stars I will concur in influence,
On you of all joys to confer the confluence.

Fame. With every jocand spring your fames shall bud, and grow,
No envious gust your fragrant names can make to blow.

Virtue. Your loves I Am tried in hard assayes Majestic pair
Now shall a crown of deathlesse praise adorn your hair.

Fortune. Your joys which on a Helix move no evil shall cross
Till Lachesis webs preys do prove to Atropos.

Virtue. Then Royal Sir, and Regal bride my golden key
Shall open the palace where abide Eternity.

Fame. Your days shall daune with every day and shine, and glow
Tributes of praise each age shall pay yet still must owe.
Exeunt.

The Scene was transformed to that part of the Sea, that washes the Cyprian
shore, on the one hand were erected two pedestalls, whereon Captains lay
chained, on the other hand a woman in a sea green drapery heightened with
silver, on her head a corona rostrata, with one hand holding the rudder of a
ship, with the other a little winged figure with a branch of palm, and a
garland, this woman denoted navall victory.

When the soft music sounded, Neptune and a chorus of Marine Nymphs ascended,
with a sea triumph of children riding on sea horses, and young Tritons, with
their writhen trumpets, they all sung this ditty.

Best of men, and best of Kings,
Homage and peace thy Navy brings
Where ere she spreads her canvas wings,
Thy Foemen when thy flags appear
Are half subdued with Panique fear
Lest thou toward them thy course shoulst steer.
Alas they preliate in vain
against thy winged Pegasean train
Which gives club law upon the maine.
We all thy Palizado's be
To keep thy ebbing Ocean free
From storms, and filching piracie.
A greedy Foe with as small toil
Another land may sack, and spoil
As touch thy sea Nymph guarded soil.
Should we give raines to floods once more
Till earth and sea one visage bore
And that Sea knew no bounding shore,
Thy moving bowers would in pride
Supported by the raging tide
Triumphing ore the drowned ball ride.
Then would ore plains and hillocks too
Thy wounded pinas to visit go
High mountains where they once did grow.
Exeunt.

The Scene changed to a magnificent palace, adorned with all manner of
diliciousnesse, Comas appeared and said.

Come lets dispeople all four elements,
And when we have ran th rough all the register
Of past delights, lets set and study new ones,
Dark veiled Cotytto stay thy ebon chair
Wherein thou triumphest with Herate
And let not nice mourn on the Indian steep
Peep from her cabin'd loop hole, let no cock
His matins ring, till pomp, and revellry
Have taken their fills, with masque, and pagentry.
Let midnight see our feast and jollity
And wear a blacker mask, as envious
Of our dance, jocond rebecks, and wreathed smiles.
Now Tellus is arrayd in fresh attire
And pricked, and dect with Flora's tapestrie,
And each groves Quiristers do warble anthems
And all to grace this nights solemnity.
Now that blithe youth upon whose clusterd locks
A wreath of jvy berries set, have crushed
From purple grapes a most Nectarian juce
That mortals may with freedom entertain
Blithe joy, and debonair mirth, which again
At this good time to visit mortals daigne.
Music whose losty tones grace Princes crowned
Unto this novall coronation sound.
Fame with a blast as love as rattling thunder
Proclaim this pompous frolic holyday,
That Jeve may know of our quips, and cranks
And to bear part in our smooth ditty'd pranks
Leave valted heaven, and his sky Roabes put off
And pure ambrosial weeds of Iris woof,
Attended by Coruscant constellations
Who to present shall make it their next task
Before your Majesty's an another masque.

Let us leave these Potentates in their Court, the mansion of flourishing
pleasure, (where delight in all her shapes, and studied varieties, every minute
courted their souls to actuate their chief felicities) and step over the Sea
to Ameindes, who at his landing fell down (by his foot slipping) and brought
up some earth in his hand, as if he had taken livery and seisne of the
Country, he soon stormed the ancient seat of the Sicilian Kings Palermo the
happy (so sir-named for the delightful situation) but Lilenus came quickly
down, with a resolute legion, who made a hedge with their own bodies to impede
the progress of Amenides, and finding him possessed of Palermo, he then
besieged him: but he, because he could not take a sound sleep: but
Hercules-like with club in hand because of the befiegers, challenged his
enemies to let fortune decide the controversy in a pitched field; which being
assented to, and his army marshalled because he was to venture all his stock
in one bottom, and to stand to the success of one Croysado, he sharpened and
festinated his Armies animosity with Brachylogie.

My heroicke Hero's, and courageous Compeers, my intention is to cuspidate and
set an edge upon your magnanimity, and to cause an ebulition and boiling up of
our high wrought spirits to the height, now when you had need of Robor and aes
triplex circa pectus, a breast plate of adamant, a burganet of steel, to make
you impenetrable, against the hail shot of impugnation.

We must not expect that this honorable prize, this (...) will be Salmacidum
spolium sine sanguine, and (...), no, no, (...) the gods sell all for sweat, a
Philomacoy comes not to his existency, nor obtains any competency of skill in
the Encyclopaedie without many nocturnall lucubrations, Mutla tulit fecit puer,
sudavit, and alsit. He must suck in the smoke of many candle lights studies,
before he can perform any thing that savours of the lamp.

A mechanical Artificer cannot thrive in his vulgar station without more then
vulgar sedulity, what running velletation, combats, and contentions were in
the Pythian and Olympicke games to obtain the Chaplet, and shall we think
that the Crown of the Queen of the Mediterranian Islands will come dropping
into our laps if we be remiss and perfunctory in our proceedings. No, no, a
Throne is not got with a wish, nor a Scepter obrepted with a Song. Non est a
terris mollis ad astra via.

We must not with Marcus Lepidus stretch our selves upon the grass, and say o
utinam hoc esset laborare, our intention must rather be as stable, and
unmovable as the Roman Fabritius of whom it was said, that one might with as
much facclity obvaricate the Suns progress as cause him to digress. Il faut
semer devant qu' ou puisse moissouner, we must sow before we reap, we must
conquer before we triumph, win the Garland before we wear it; timidity and
consternation will hold out a Gorgon head of encumbrances, and tell of
Chimaeras, and Fantasies of determents: but let not these dash our hopes, melt
our courage, or emasculate our resolutions, for believe (...) the hyperbolicall
game will quit the cost, our noble reward is that great knot of strength which
Cato called the granary and nurse of the people of Rome. Cicero terme'd it the
treasury and life of the City, a Land deliciously fertile, and wonderfully
productive, humectated with winding catracts, and small sluices, this will be
an opulent purchase, and a good pennyworth at my rate; Imperia pretio quolibet
constant been. Agrippica esteemed the Roman Empire well bought, though she
purchased it for her Son Nero with the loss of her own life, Occidat modo
imperet. Let us then oppugn all obstrigillations, which are but as steps for
us to ascend to honor, and when the names of our conspirgated antagonists
shall rot above ground, and they themselves be rung down to the dust with a
peal of satyrs, ours shall be odoriferous to posterity, and succeeding
generations shall enbalm them with honor. This dulciloquie inspired the
faintest hearts with freshest courage, and made them impatient of delay, they
and their horses too, with a clamor militaris, and loud acclamations assented
to their Generals Oration.

Silenus also was encouraging his Soldiers when the classicum of their enemies
was rhetoric enough to invite them to their tasks. The black clouds poured
down upon the Sicilians store of Funeral tears: and sholes of Ravens and
other birds of prey) as predicting the harvest of carcasses at hand) flew over
their host.

A sore Battle was begun, and with equal success a long time maintained,
where the grass became grayheaded for want of moisture, it was sprinkled with
a sanguilent Nectar. Here was a Father divided from his Son, here a Husband
from his Wife, and yonder where there was no Kin they be joined in blood.

But because that Cato the Censor that taught the young men to preliate with a
steady foot, would often say, that words and shoutings had more power to amaze
and put enemies to the rout, then hand, strokes, wherefore Amenides host did
amaze their adversaries with a shrill clamor, whereas the Cicilians (as if the
whole army had had but one heart) let all their courages fall into their feet,
which now they altogether trusted to.

Amenides who knows as well how to use as gain a victory, pursued his
dissipated foe-men to Mount-royall their chief Assylum, which place being
reduced to the height of penury by the multitude of the Garrison, and deprived
of supplies from the adjacent and conterminent Villages, by its cautelous
besiegers. Silenus in a disguise fled, and got to the Academy at Tolouse, where
he changed his royal Ermynes for sables, and became a fantastical Scholar,
spending the residue of his life in enigmaticall disputations, as whether or no
Cassandra was troubled with the toothache, how many knots were on HERCULES
Club, of what color ACHILLES Beard was, he studied himself half bleareey'd
to know the true sementry of Caesar's nose by a Shooing-horne, and all to be
dignified with the name of a speculative man.

But the Citizens considering ameux vaut plier rompre, its better to bow then
break, and seeing that their egresse afforded no hope of regresse, of fear of
their foes ingresse, and perceiving no happy help, for their helpelesse hap,
had wit enough to set their sails that way that the wind blew, and to wheel
about as they saw occasion, that they might be of the prevailing side. Much
like the man in Macrobrius, who during the Civil War between Augustus
Caesar and Antonius, had taught two Crows their several notes, the one to say
Aue Imperator Antoni: the other to say Aue Imperator Augusti. That so when the
Controversy was determined, what side soever prevailed he might have a Bird
for the Conqueror.

So Silenus being fled, his Subjects subjected themselves to the Victor, and
framed themselves to call Vivat Rex Amenides, who soon adorned his Royal
brows with the Regal Circle, the Gates were opened to entertain his Army,
and the peoples hearts were opened to entertain himself.

But those which ingenuity prompted not to love him, he taught to fear him,
knowing primus in orb deos fecit timor. But it was as possible for Phoehus to
find new paths to drive his Chariot in, or for the Loadstone to forget its
faith to the North, as for Amenides to turn Loves Apostate, and be unmindful
of Dionella, by the air of whose Blessed name, Chamelion-like he lived,
having taken fealty of his Subjects, steered his course to Naples. At his
presence Dionella was revived, as a starved fly is when the Sun get out, after
their Epithalmie, they repaired to Sicilie.

Now these Potentates, Flaminius and Clorinda, Amenides and Dionella, after
they had a long time Monarchised in the highest degrees of Sovereignty (having
left a numerous offspring to sway their Scepters whom I wish a
Chrysostomaticall repositor of their virtues) yielded rather to a gentle
dissolution then death. Their Bodies are interred in the most magnificent
Cathedralls in their Dominions where the sumptuonsnesse of their Monuments
proclaim their extrinsicall Fortunes, and their ever-living Fame their
intrinsicall endowments. But when their Statenesse and Tombs, composed and
erected of Gold, Marble, or Ivory, shall drop down into ashes, and crumble by
peece-meale into nonentity and be found as ARCHIMEDES his Tomb (by CICERO)
in Vepretis, crowned with moss, and over-growne with briars, and thorns, I
wish they may survive in this Monument of their Fame.

FINIS.

