A SERMON Preached June 1. 1699. AT Feckenham IN WORCESTERSHIRE, Before the
Trustees appointed by Sir Thomas Cooks, Knight. Bart. To Manage his Charity given
to that Place.

By JOHN BARON, M. A. and Fellow of Balliol College in Oxford.

To him that sows Righteousness, shall be a sure Reward.

Prove. 11.18. OXFORD, Printed by Leon. Lichfield, 1699.

To the Right Worshipful Sir Tho. Cooks, OF BENTLEY, Knight-Baronet.
SIR,
I Hope You will not be surpised, when You find your Name set before the
following Discourse. As it was Preached at your Request, so I think I have no
reason to doubt of Your favorable Acceptance of it; especially since I know
You are persuaded, that the Doctrines contained in it, are both sound and
seasonable.

The Charitable Settlements which You have already made, are a sufficient
Argument, that You firmly believe Good Works to be absolutely necessary to
Salvation; and Your very earnest Desire of perfecting Your more noble Designs,
notwithstanding the Discouragements You have met with, farther show, that You
look upon the time of Life to be the most proper, if not the only time of doing
good.

As far as I remember, I have never seen any just Discourse on this Subject;
and I heartily wish, what I have here said, may answer my chief design in the
Publication of it, which is, that I may convince Men of Ability of the danger
of delaying their Charity till they dye. If I should not be so happy as to
succeed herein, it will yet be a great satisfaction to me to consider, that I
have so fair an opportunity of acknowledging Your generous Kindness to me, and
of assuring You withal, that I am,

Honored SIR, Your very Humble Servant, JOHN BARON.
Ball. Coll. Oxford July 11. 1699.
GAL. Chap. VI. Ver. 10. As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto
all men.
IN these Words there are three things contained, I. A Duty recommended. II.
The Extent of this Duty. III. The proper Time of performing it.


I. The Duty here recommended is that most excellent one of doing good, to
which we are indispensably obliged, both by the Principles of natural and
revealed Religion. Right Reason directs us to it, Almighty God has expressly
commanded it, our blessed Savior, while he was upon Earth, exemplified it to
us, for he went about doing good, Act. 10.38. and he has likewise assured us
all, who are called by his holy Name, that we must be exercised in it, if we
desire or hope at the last day to give up our Accounts with joy, and not with
grief. Notwithstanding the great heats that have been raised about
Justification, herein all agree that good Works are the necessary visible
Fruits, whereby the sincerity of our Hearts may be known; without these our
Hope is Presumption, our Assurance nothing but a groundless Confidence, and our
Faith absolutely ineffectual. For as the body without the spirit is dead, so
faith without works is dead also, Jam. 2.26.

II. The second thing to be observed is the universal Extent of this great
Duty, expressed in these words, Let us do good unto all men. Our Kindness must
be extended as the Blessings of Heaven are, and the displays of our Love must
reach like those of the Sun in the Firmament, to the just and the unjust. For
we are all Brethren, descended from the same common Stock; and he that is afar
off, as well as he that is near, is (according to the Christian interpretation
of the word) our Neighbor.

It Is true indeed the proud and ill-natured Pharisees of old, restrained the
sense of this Word, and accordingly confined their Charity and Mercy within the
narrow limits of their own Nation: But he who came to fulfill the Law, to supply
what was wanting, and to explain what they by their false Glosses and
ill-grounded Comments had darkened and perplexed; ^oh. 14.6.
He who was the way, the truth, and the life, has taught us by the Parable of
the good Samaritan taking pity on a Stranger, Luk ^0 ^0.
that fell among Thieves, that under the Gospel every Person, who stands in
need of our relief, though he be as great an Adversary to us, as a Jew to a
Samaritan, must yet be looked upon as the object of our Compassion and Mercy,
and of any charitable acts, which he can receive, and we perform.

III. The third thing to be observed is the proper time of performing this
Duty, which is, when and while we have opportunity. For though to do good to
all Men, be a Duty incumbent upon us, yet we are not at all times equally
obliged to the exercise of it. The cries of some that want, never come to our
ears, and the necessities of others may be so great, that we are not able to
relieve them. No Man can be obliged beyond his knowledge and power, neither
will much be required of him, to whom little has been given. The Apostle
therefore says, (...), As we have opportunity, let us do good unto all Men.
The old Version is, while we have time; Dr. Hammond renders it, as we have
ability; Grotius his Note upon the place is, Dum manet haec vita, While we are
alive. All these put together will complete the signification of the Word: for
after death we can do nothing, and in this Life we can then only be said to
have an opportunity offered us of doing good, when the wants of others, and our
own plenty meet together. So that what St. Paul here presses, from the
certainty of a reward, which we shall reap in due time, if we faint not, is,
That we be merciful after our power, and so far as we have ability, embrace
every opportunity of doing good while we live.

These things being premised, that my following Discourse may the better suit
with the present occasion, I shall endeavor to show,

1. That it is upon several accounts more advisable for Men of Ability, to
dispose of what they intend for charitable Uses in their Life time, than to
leave it to be managed by others after their Death.

2. That Men of Ability are in Duty obliged to do good while they live.

3. I shall speak of the peculiar excellency and usefulness of those charitable
Settlements, which are designed to promote and encourage Learning.

4. And lastly, I shall enquire what is the Duty of all those, who more
immediately enjoy the Benefit and Advantages of such Foundations.

First I am to show that it is upon several accounts more advisable for Men of
Ability, to dispose of what they intend for charitable Uses in their Life time,
than to leave it to be managed by others after their Death.

This Proposition I hope to make good from the following Considerations:

1. That it is utterly uncertain, whether that which Men of Ability leave to
the disposal of others, be ever settled according to their original design and
intent.

2. It is a greater Argument of a free and generous Mind, to dispose of what
they design for charitable Uses while they live, than to leave it to be managed
by others after their Death.

3. It shows they firmly trust in, and more entirely rely upon the good
Providence of God.

4. It may conduce very much to the raising of their Affections from things
below, and placing them on things above.

5. By settling what they design for charitable Uses while they live, they will
in all probability derive a Blessing upon themselves for the remainder of their
Lives.

6. And lastly, The Reflection upon what good they have done, will afford them
great comfort and satisfaction when they come to dye.

1. In the first place it should be considered by Men of Ability, that it is
utterly uncertain, whether what they leave to the disposal of others, be ever
settled according to their original design and intent. For a Man's Will may be
stifled or perverted; it may be the interest of some, that it never see light,
of others, that it be interpreted quite contrary to the intention of the
Testator. A Son does not always inherit the Virtues of his Father, and those
generous Principles whereby the one was governed, are many times found to have
little or no influence on the other. If this should be the case, if the Son's
eye should be evil, because his Father's is good; we must expect to see him,
instead of fulfilling his Will, making a thousand trifling scruples against it.
Either he will except to some particular Clauses of it; or by objecting the
contradiction and inconsistency of its parts, he will at one stroke attempt to
invalidate and overthrow the whole. Like the unfaithful Disciple, he reckons
all wasted that is set aside for God's Service; and thinks his Father's giving
any thing to the Church or Poor, is a direct robbing of his own Children or
Relations, and consequently a sufficient Arguent that he was not in his right
Mind.

If the trust and execution be lodged in extraneous hands, which have no such
immediate relation to the Testator, they also may be careless and negligent,
ignorant and unskilful, Men that don't love, or don't understand business; they
may disagree among themselves, or have private ends of their own to promote.
These are no impertinent, impossible, or maliciously contrived suppositions, as
appears from the frequency of Commissions for charitable Uses, and the many
Years distance between the Death of some Donours, and the complete settlement
of their Benefactions.

After all, Admit that none of these things should happen, but that the
Executors, out of a sense of their Duty, should resolve to use their utmost
diligence, in order to the settling every thing as it was designed; yet the
Charity it self may be such as cannot be so employed. When it comes to be put
in practice, it may be found contrary to some Constitution of the Realm, or it
may be inconsistent with the Customs or Privileges of the Body or Society,
for which it was originally intended. There may be several other impediments,
which while the Charity was only in Theory or design, could not be foreseen or
prevented.

The Civil Law indeed in such cases directs very well, that when what is given
for any special or determinate Use, cannot be so applied, it may be disposed of
otherwise, D. 50.8.4.
as shall be thought most necessary for the public good. I think our Laws
likewise make some such provision: nevertheless it is still most advisable for
Men of Ability, to fix what they design for Charity in their Life time. For by
this means, if one way be observed unlikely to take effect, they may
immediately resolve upon another. They may review their Settlement when it is
made, they may add to it, they may correct, alter or explain what they please
in it, and at last leave it entirely to their own satisfaction.

It is to my purpose, and therefore I must by no means forget to observe here,
what unexpected hindrances that Honorable Person, who has already been a great
Benefactor to this place, has met with; which though they have created him much
trouble and uneasiness, yet I have all imaginable assurance, that his Heart is
still fixed and ready; and I do not question but his more diffusive Charity
will in a short time be firmly settled in Oxford, which he has long since
designed, as a completion of his other good Works, so beneficial to, and by the
care of his worthy Trustees, and skilful Masters, so successfully carried on in
this County.

2. The second Consideration I would propose to Men of Ability, is this, That
it is a greater Argument of a free and liberal Heart, to dispose of what they
intend for charitable Uses while they live, than to leave it to be managed by
others after their death.

It Is certain that God has a peculiar regard to the thoughts and intents of
their Hearts, and it is no less certain, that that only will be accepted and
rewarded by him, which they dispose of not grudgingly or of necessity, but with
a free and ready Mind: for God loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9.7.

Now those who seek and embrace every opportunity of employing what they design
for charitable Uses while they live, do abundantly evidence this readiness and
cheerfulness in giving. Whereas such as leave their Charity to be distributed
by others after their Death, which they might conveniently dispose of
themselves whilst alive, seem to have a certain secret reserve, that the World
shall never be the better for what they possess, so long as they can reap any
benefit from it themselves; and by resolving to give part of their Substance
when they dye, they do in effect resolve to give nothing while they live.

As therefore we pass not the best Complement, and consequently lay no very
great Obligation upon our Friends, by offering them what we cannot any longer
keep or make use of: So in the esteem of all indifferent Men, there is little
generosity in him, who adjourns his Charity, as Sinners commonly do their
Repentance, not to a more convenient season, for the present will be always
equally inconvenient, but to the very utmost extent of Nature, and at last goes
naked out of this World, merely because he cannot carry his Mammon of
unrighteousness away with him.

Such a Man's Charity, if I may so call it, is somewhat like that improper kind
of Donation, Inst. l. 2.7.
which the Roman Law calls, Donatio mortis causa. Whereby he that gave any
thing did it only conditionally, propter mortis suspicionem, in case he should
dye in his Journey, in Battle, or of the Disease under which he then labored.
He had rather indeed the Person to whom he thus gave any thing should have it,
than his Heir; but he still secured the propriety to himself, so long as he
lived, and it many times happened that he lived long enough to repent of, and
revoke his Donation.

Just so it is here: A Man's Will, though never so solemnly made, is during his
Lifetime, provided the use of his Reason be continued to him, changeable and
ambulatory. So that he who gives any thing in one, may grow out of humor, and
re-call it by another. The best and wisest of Men are very wavering and
irresolute, so that no one knows what a Day may bring forth. And suppose there
should be no danger in the delay, but that the former should stand unaltered,
yet a Testament is of no strength at all, Heb. 9.17.
whilst the Testator lives; and therefore that his designed Charity ever takes
effect, is not wholly due to his Will and Intention, but in some measure also,
to that standing unchangeable Decree, whereby it is appointed for Man once to
dye.

If you could certify him that he had longer to live, and that his Soul should
not yet be required of him, he would be sure to hold fast his Possessions. His
Desires would increase with his Heaps, till at length they became capacious and
unsatiable as the Grave; and I make no doubt, but the same tenacious Principle,
which hinders him from reaching out his hand to do good, as he has an
opportunity, would equally influence him an hundred Years hence twice told, if
we could suppose his days to be so prolonged on the Earth. Those then afford us
the highest demonstration of a noble, a large and generous Soul, who settle
their Charity themselves; thereby giving glory to God, before he causes
Darkness, before their Feet stumble upon the dark Mountains, and they
themselves fall into the ruins of Old Age.

3. My third Consideration is this, That they who dispose of what they design
for charitable Uses, while they live, do thereby show, that they firmly trust
in, and more entirely rely on the good Providence of God.

The Lord (says the Psalmist) has prepared his throne in the heavens, Ps. 103
19
and his kingdom rules over all. His Providence extends to all the Works of
the Creation, but he is said to be particularly concerned for the Children of
Men. We ought therefore to lay aside all anxious perplexing thoughts for to
morrow, and to cast all our care upon him, who has promised not to leave us,
Heb. 13.5.
nor forsake us. And the best way to evidence this our reliance upon the good
Providence of God, is to make him a plentiful return of his own Bounties, and
to do good proportionably to our Ability with what we at present enjoy.

We ought to remember, that a considerable part of our blessed Lord's divine
Sermon upon the Mount, was designed to remove our doubts concerning the things
of this Life; that we might not be troubled or discomposed, as the Heathens
were, with fearful apprehensions of future wants.

We may learn from thence, that our Life is more than Meat, and our Body than
Raiment; and therefore we may surely conclude, that God who is so able, and so
kind as to give the one, cannot be unable, neither will he be backward to give
the other. We cannot but observe, that the Fowls of the Air are plentifully
fed, though they contribute nothing to their own support; and that the Lilies
of the Field, which do neither toil nor spin, are yet so richly arrayed, that
they exceed Solomon in all his glory. And having such demonstrative Arguments
of God's Providence, over Beings of an inferior Class, we may be very confident
that his watchful eye is over Man, who being made in his own Image, is the
perfection and masterpiece of this lower World.

The case of the Gentiles was far otherwise: the Idols they adored were Wood
and Stone, the work of Men's hands; which they saw stood in need of the help
and protection of their Votaries, whose wants they were ignorant of, and so
could by no means be thought able to supply them; upon this account it was no
great wonder, that they were so very solicitous for themselves. But if we, who
worship the true living GOD, who understands all our necessities before we ask,
and has promised in his due time to relieve them; if we should continue to
disquiet our selves about distant Events, and future Contingencies, it might
justly be thought, that we have not learned CHRIST so perfectly as we should,
and that this distrust of ours proceeds from a very great weakness, if not from
a total want of Faith. And as there is some reason to suspect, that the same
evil distrustful Heart is in those, who defer their Charity till they dye, so
the best method of removing all just grounds of such a suspicion, is to be rich
in good Works while they live. For he that disperseth abroad, and is glad to
distribute to the necessities of others, gives all the World a satisfactory and
convincing Proof, that he firmly believes in God, and entirely depends upon his
never-failing Providence, for the supply of his own.

4. I desire it may be considered by Men of Ability, that the disposing of
their Charity while they live, may conduce very much to the raising of their
Affections from things below, and placing them on things above. The
conversation of all true Christians is in Heaven, there they ought to set their
Affections, Col. 3.2.
even while they sojourn upon Earth. For they are but Strangers and Pilgrims
here below, and therefore they must not irregularly love the World, neither the
things of the World. If any man love the world, 1 John 2.15.
the love of the Father is not in him. The Friendship of the World is direct
irreconcilable enmity against God, and an immoderate desire of earthly
Enjoyments is the root of all evil. We cannot serve God and Mammon.

Would we be able then to wean our Thoughts from all that looks great and
inviting here? Would we be able to raise our Minds to an heavenly frame and
temper? The way and means hereto, is to return our Money into the other World.
Lay up (says our Savior) for your selves treasures in Heaven, Mat. 6.20, 21.
for where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. Wherever we are,
our Affections will always point toward the beloved Object, and whilst our
Treasures are those of this World, we shall not easily be brought to be intent
on the next. But if we do good with what we possess, we are then said to lend
unto the Lord; and it will be no difficult matter to elevate our Desires, and
to fix them on Heaven, when once we have remitted our Treasure thither. Then we
shall be wholly at leisure for Divine Contemplations, never to be interrupted
or distracted by any of those Casualties, which trouble the thoughts of the
Children of this World. There will be no moth, nor rust to corrupt, no secret
or avowed thieves to break through and steal. And whereas the most cautious and
subtle Usurer upon Earth is sometimes cheated and disappointed; they who give
credit to the sovereign Lord of all, need fear no disadvantageous Compositions,
no shuffling or discount: they are sure of receiving their own again with
usury, either an hundredfold in this World, or in the World to come
Everlasting Life.

5. It is worthy the consideration of Men of Ability, That by disposing of
their own Charity, they will in all probability derive a Blessing upon
themselves for the remainder of their Lives. Righteous and Merciful Men are the
peculiar Favorites of Heaven, and by a secret and undiscerned Providence, all
things are made to work together for their good. Lose thy money (says the Son
of Syrach) for thy brother and thy friend, and let it not rust under a stone to
be lost. Lay up thy treasure, according to the commandments of the most High,
and it shall bring thee more profit than gold. Shut up alms in thy
storehouses, and it shall deliver thee from all affliction. It shall fight for
thee against thy enemies, better than a mighty shield and strong spear, Ecclus.
29.

As for what the poor Miser objects, That Charity is wholly inconsistent with
our temporal Interest, and that by doing good to others we shall in a short
time impoverish our selves and our Families; it is spoken with as much ease, and
as little reason, as other Calumnies are, by Men who dare speak any thing but
what is true, and do any thing but what is good.

The Royal Psalmist was a Man of Years and Experience, when he declared, That
he had never seen the righteous forsaken, Psalm. 37.25.
nor his seed begging bread. And his Son Solomon, so justly celebrated for his
Wisdom, Prove. 13 7.
observed, that there was that made himself rich, and yet had nothing, and
there was that made himself poor, and yet had great riches. And again, that
there was that scattered, and yet increased, and there was that withheld more
than was meet, and it tended to poverty. Prove. 11.24, 25
That the liberal soul was made fat, and he that watered, was watered also
himself. Our Heavenly Father, who is the Fountain and only dispenser of all
Plenty, and from whom alone every good gift comes, is always able, Jam. 1.17.
and does many times reward the liberal Man with temporal Blessings, improving
every Alms which he gives, 1 Kings 17.16.
like the Oil in the poor Widow's Cruse, which was so far from failing, that it
increased in spending, and grew more by being consumed.

I own this is not universally true: the charitable Man does not always meet
with a proportionable recompense in this World. But then it should be farther
considered, that when it pleases God otherwise to order things, and to fail him
in his returns here, he has for his security the Promise of him who is Truth it
self, with whom is no variableness or shadow of turning, that he shall be amply
rewarded at Resurrection of the Just.

And besides all this, if we should farther suppose that God, for the trial of
his Patience, or out of very faithfulness, should cause him to be troubled: If
he should suffer by any common Calamity, if any fatal Change, any sudden
extraordinary Revolution of State should reach him among others; in a word, if
poverty should overtake him like an armed man, yet he has this apparent
advantage over the unmerciful Worldling, that the good deeds which he has done,
will recommend him to the liberality of others, and the light afflictions,
which he here indures, will procure him a far more exceeding and an eternal
weight of glory. 2 Cor. 4.17.

6. And lastly, It ought to be considered by Men of Ability, that the
Reflection upon what good they have done, in their Life, will afford them great
comfort and satisfaction, when they come to dye. This is as important a
Consideration as can well be, for the thoughts of this great Change do
naturally affright and disturb the Soul, which never stands in more need of
comfort, than at the time of its separation. The best Men, when they are laid
on the Bed of Sickness, feel some disorder within, some doubts arising
concerning their Salvation; they are perplexed and divided between Hope and
Fear, Nature and Grace. Now the most effectual way of removing these
disquietudes, and of procuring rest for our Souls at the hour of Death, is to
reflect upon what good we have done in the healthful and vigorous part of our
Lives. Alms are a lasting foundation, 1 Timothy 6.19.
and a sure Pledge of Peace and Tranquillity; and good Works, which are done
out of an unfeigned Faith in Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 4.8.
will deliver from Death, and contribute very much to the covering a multitude
of sins. Ad Nepot.
I do not remember ( says St. Jerome) that I have read, that ever any
charitable Person dyed an evil Death; for having the Holy Spirit for his
Comforter, a good Conscience for his Testimony, and CHRIST for his Advocate, he
can with cheerfulness commit his Soul to God, as to a faithful Creator. It Is a
mighty ease and refreshment to him, to remember, that he has clothed the Naked,
fed the Hungry, entertained the Stranger, and visited those that were sick and
in Prison; and to consider withal, that whatsoever kindness or mercy he has
showed to his necessitous Neighbor, will be as well accepted by Christ, as if
it had been immediately done unto himself. Mat. 25.40.
If amidst these joyful composing Reflections, the great Enemy and Accuser of
Mankind should raise any distrustful thoughts in his Heart, he can presently
fly for refuge to the Father of Mercies, who knows and pities his Infirmities,
and who will the rather deliver him because he observes his Confidence is
balanced with Reverence, Humility and Godly Fear.

As for cruel uncharitable Men, it is not so with them; at the approach of
Death, when the terrors of the Lord set themselves in array against them, Job
6.4.
fearfulness and trembling comes upon them, and an horrible dread overwhelms
them; they are like the troubled sea, Isa. 57.20.
which cannot rest. The sensual Delights which they heretofore so eagerly
pursued, can now entertain or divert them no more, neither will their Treasures
of Wickedness profit them in this day of wrath. They may look for some to have
pity on them, but they will find none; none that can redeem their Souls, or
make an Agreement with God for them. They are left perfectly as Men without
Hope, which is certainly the most miserable condition they can be in on this
side Hell. They remember that they many times stopped their ears, and turned
their faces from the poor and needy, and therefore they conclude that the face
of the Lord will be turned away from them: and as they showed no mercy, so they
are under a certain fearful looking for of judgment without mercy. The
bitterness of their Souls makes them long for Death, and yet the sense of
approaching Vengeance makes them afraid to dye. I shall conclude this
Consideration with the words of the truly pious Bishop Tailor: Certain it is,
(says he) God cannot, Holy Dying, p. 52.
will not, never did reject a charitable Person in his greatest needs and most
passionate Prayers. For God himself is Love, and every degree of Charity that
dwells in us is the participation of the Divine Nature: and therefore when upon
our Deathbed a cloud covers our Head, and we are enwrapped with sorrow, when
we feel the weight of a sickness, and do not feel the refreshing Visitations of
God's Loving Kindness, when we have many things to trouble us, and looking
round about us, we see no Comforter; then we should call to mind, what Injuries
we have forgiven, how apt we were to pardon all Affronts and real Persecutions,
how we embraced Peace when it was offered us, how we followed after Peace when
it ran from us: and when we are weary of one side, we should turn upon the
other, and remember the Alms, that by the Grace of God, and his assistances, we
have done, and look up to God, and with the eye of Faith behold him coming in
the Clouds, and pronouncing the sentence of Doomsday, according to his
Mercies, and our Charity.

From what has been said, I think it is evident, that it is upon several
accounts more advisable for Men of Ability to dispose of what they intend for
charitable Uses in their Life time, than to leave it to be managed by others
after their Death. I proceed now in the

2. Second place to show, That Men of Ability are strictly obliged to do good
while they live. I shall not here undertake exactly to state how much good
every Man ought to do, indeed it cannot nicely be determined. There is a great
difference in the Conditions and Abilities of Men; some want much more than
others to support themselves handsomely, according to the Station or Office
they are in, or to maintain or educate their Children agreeably to their Birth
and Quality. There cannot be one standing measure of Charity common to all; and
since it has not pleased God under the Christian Dispensation, to assign any
particular proportion, every Man must be left to the direction of his own
Conscience herein. All that I am about to prove then is this, That they who are
able, ought according to their Ability, to do good if they have an opportunity,
while they live.

This will appear from the consideration of the Circumstances they are in, and
the relation they bear to the supreme Lord of all the World. For who made them
to differ from others? 1 Cor. 4.7.
or what have they, which they have not received? The Earth is the Lord's, and
the fullness thereof; the richest of Men are only Stewards and Trustees under
him. The many Talents they possess, and all the special and eminent Blessings
they enjoy above others, are derived from the Fountain of his all-sufficient
and overflowing Goodness. Therefore they must be employed according to his
Will, and agreeably to those great and noble ends for which they were
originally granted; such as are the Glory of God, and the assistance of their
Fellow Creatures. And whether at all, or how far they have improved the
Advantages here afforded them, will be strictly enquired into at the great Day
of Retribution. Then they must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
then the Almighty's Book of Remembrance will be opened, all Men will be called
to give an account of their Stewardship, and will be rewarded or punished
according to their Works. They will not then be judged by their bare
Intentions, or conditional Resolutions, which through their own fault never
took effect; neither will it be enquired, what good they have remotely
designed, but what they have actually done, when they were alive, and had an
opportunity of doing it. The time of Life is the only proper season for
exercising those Talents they are entrusted with: The living, the living, they
may praise God, and honor him with their substance, but in Death who remembers
the Poor? or how can a Man be charitable in the Grave? Unless therefore Men of
Ability will be content to be reckoned among the negligent or unfaithful
Stewards, either among such as hide their Talents, and make no use at all of
them, or among such as abuse them to the dishonor of their Master, they must
search out for, at least lay hold of every opportunity of improving them while
they live.

I know such as get all that they can, and keep all that they can get, may say
at the last gasp, That though they have done no good in their Life time, yet they
have all along resolved it, and according to these Resolutions, their Charity
will commence after their Death. To this I answer, first, That Resolution is in
its own nature an imperfect Act, and therefore can signify nothing without
Performance and Consummation; unless it be where a sudden Death, or some
unforeseen, irremoveable Impediment has hindered it. So that this Resolution
will prove an Argument against themselves: for if they were not convinced of
the absolute necessity of doing good, why did they ever resolve it? and if they
were, certainly they cannot imagine merely to resolve it, will be sufficient.
Secondly, As for their Charity commencing after their death, I dare not
encourage any one to depend upon it, who might as conveniently have employed it
himself. I am sure our blessed Savior frequently presses his Disciples, to
work while it is day, i. e. while they live, because the Night of Death comes,
when no man can work. And from that most solemn description of the last
Judgment, Mat. 25
wherein he peculiarly recommends to us all the acts of Compassion and Mercy, I
find no mention made of resolving to clothe the Naked, to feed the Hungry, to
visit the Sick, and the like, nor any great grounds to hope, that a Deathbed
Charity, which might as well have been settled in the Life of the Donour, will
be accepted by him. Nay rather, upon an attentive and indifferent view of that
account of the Process of the last Judgment, we may conclude, that to him that
has an opportunity of doing good while he lives, and does it not, to him it
will be sin.

I would not here be mistaken, and therefore I must a little farther explain my
self, which I cannot better do than in the words of a late Author, in his
Practical Discourse concerning Death. Dr. Sherlock, p. 288.
It is the good (says he) we do while we live, that shall be rewarded, and
therefore we must take care to do good while we live. It is well when Men, who
do no good while they live, will remember to do some good when they dye. But if
God should accept such Presents as these, yet it will make great abatements in
the Account, that they kept their Riches themselves as long as they could, and
would part with nothing to God, till they could keep it no longer. The case is
different as to those who did all the good they could while they lived, and
when they saw they could live no longer, took care to do good after death: Such
surviving Charities as these prolong our Lives, and add daily to our Account;
when such Men are removed into the other World, they are doing good in this
World still; they have a stock a going below, the increase and improvements of
which will follow them into the other World. Blessed are the dead which thus
dye in the Lord. Rev. 14.13.
I come now in the

3. Third place to speak of the peculiar excellency and usefulness of those
charitable Settlements, which are designed to promote and encourage Learning.
These I conceive excel other kinds of Charity in two respects: 1. Because the
Benefit of them reaches to the Soul, as well as to the Body. 2. Because the
whole Kingdom reaps advantage by these, whereas several other kinds of Charity
terminate in particular Persons, or in one Body or Society.


1. The Benefits of those charitable Settlements, which are designed to promote
and encourage Learning, reach to the Soul, as well as the Body. To do good to
our Brethren in any respect or capacity, is very commendable; but since the
Soul is the better part of the Man, it is proportionably a more noble design to
provide for that, than for the Body. The wants of the Mind are most
importunate, and the necessities of the Flesh may be better born, or more
easily supplied, than those of the Spirit. Hunger and Nakedness are not of so
fatal a consequence, as Ignorance and Error, and however mean the
Accommodations of the Body are, that the soul be without knowledge is not good.
It Is better to be poor, Prove. 19 2.
than unlearned. This, I suppose, will look like a Paradox, but I truly believe
it was the opinion of the most eminent among the ancient Philosophers, who in a
right sense despised Dominions, and slighted Dignities, being chiefly careful
about regulating and improving their intellectual Faculties. They knew, that to
have their Understandings clear, and free from prejudice and error, to be able
to think methodically, and argue closely, to have their Wills set strait, and
their Affections under the conduct and discipline of Reason, was a Perfection
and Happiness, wherein they excelled the generality of Mankind, as much as some
in human shape do the Beasts that perish. And here let us suppose a Child to be
born in the Wilderness, to grow up to Manhood without any instruction and
information, to have no notices of things, no rules and directions for the
government of his Life communicated to him by others; verily there would not be
a more miserable Creature upon the face of the Earth. We should find him dull
and stupid, froward and obstinate, churlish, barbarous and untractable;
ignorant, and yet hating instruction, unable to judge aright, and therefore
easily to be seduced; vain and roving in all his imaginations, and violent in
the pursuit of his pleasures, neither fearing God, nor regarding Man, without
discretion, without civility, without humanity it self. In short, this mere
Animal of such wild, desert, uncultivated Manners, would be useless to himself,
and an intolerable burden to all about him. For sand, and salt, and a mass of
iron, are easier to bear, than a man without understanding, Ecclus. 22.15.

Upon this consideration of the great inconveniences, and manifest evils the
want of Learning and Instruction exposes Men to, some have made it a question,
Whether they were more obliged to them from whom they had their Being, than to
those who gave them their Education. Others, though they have not gone so far,
have yet remarkably honored those, who by guiding and directing them in their
tender Years, contributed to the rectifying and exalting their Natures. Others
again to show their esteem of Learning, have encouraged and rewarded it in
those that have been Strangers, and professed Enemies to them. Thus when
Alexander had taken and plundered Thebes, he spared the House and Family of
Pindar, Suppl. in Q. Curt.
Summum in doctos favorem manifestissimo exemplo testatus. And though the
Romans suffered by the Inventions of Archimedes, Livii lib. 25. cap. 31.
yet Marcellus to evidence how much he was concerned at his Death, ordered a
Sepulcher for a memorial of him; which being overrun with Brambles, was
restored by Cicero after the space of an hundred and thirty Years. Many more
Instances of this nature might be produced, both from ancient and modern
Histories; but since all civilized Nations are already agreed, that Instruction
is the very life of the Soul, more need not be said to prove, that those
charitable Settlements which are designed to promote and encourage Learning, do
peculiarly excel most others, because the benefit of them reaches to the Soul
as well as to the Body.

2. Whereas several kinds of Charity terminate in particular Persons, or in one
Body or Society, the whole Kingdom reaps advantage from those Settlements,
which are designed to promote and encourage Learning. This advantage is much
every way, we will briefly consider it first,

1. In time of Peace, which is therefore reckoned so great a Blessing, because
of that security it gives to all Ranks and Conditions of Men at home, and the
free liberty of Trade and Commerce abroad. In both which respects those
Foundations that promote and encourage Learning are very advantageous and
useful. In these all liberal Sciences are taught and improved, and there are
none of the inferior manual Arts, that serve to provide Man with Food and
Raiment, or do otherwise minister to the necessities and conveniences of Life,
but what receive some benefit from hence. The Masters of them being enabled by
Arithmetic, and some Rules of the Mechanics, to proceed with less charge, and
more ease and expedition, at least with more certainty in the business of their
respective Callings. In these also Men of higher Quality and better Parts, have
all imaginable opportunities of leisure, Books, and Conversation, whereby, if
they are not extremely wanting to themselves, they may in due time become
useful in their Generation, and capable of doing God and their Country service,
either in the Church, or in the State, in the Court, or at the Bar. In a word,
Take away those helps to Learning and Knowledge, such charitable Settlements as
we are now speaking of afford, and Peace it self would only serve, like the
quiet silence of the Night, to lull us fast asleep, and to let us more
insensibly slide backward into that profound, universal Ignorance, which we now
pity in others, and from which we of this Nation have not yet many Ages been
delivered.

And then for Trade and Commerce with other Nations, who are as different from
us in their Language and Customs, as they are remote in their Climate, I shall
take the boldness to affirm, that they may doubt of, or deny any thing, who
either do not see, or through prejudice will not acknowledge how much this
Island is engaged to those, who by a right use of the means and opportunities
of studying charitably reached out to them, have very far advanced several
useful parts of Learning, particularly Astronomy, Geography and Navigation.

2. Let us consider how far these Settlements which are made for the
encouragement of Learning, advantage the whole Kingdom, in relation to War.
It Is manifest, if we would succeed herein, we must not only have disciplined
Soldiers, but also skilful Mathematicians, and expert Engineers; such the
Royal Society, and the Two Universities have, and I trust always will afford
us. Besides, the Arts of War being vastly improved, an ordinary skill and
policy, or a little acquaintance with our own Affairs, will stand us in no
great stead. Our Generals must be able to look back and make judicious remarks
upon the noble Exploits, and cunning Stratagems of those ancient Nations, which
have heretofore been Nations of renown. Lastly, since the end we ought to
propose when we make War, is an honorable and a lasting Peace, we ought to
have Men of Years and Observation, to deliberate of, and manage so weighty a
Concern; Men that understand the Laws of Nature, and of Nations, and the
undoubted Rights and Interest of our own, as well as the Strength, the
Constitution, and Pretenses of those Kingdoms, with whom they are to treat. Now
how far these Foundations, which are designed to promote and encourage
Learning, have contributed to the supplying this Nation with Men thus useful,
thus absolutely necessary in its greatest exigencies, may be easily understood
if we will but consult the Lives of the wisest Statesmen, the most eminent
Commanders, and the most famous Admirals, that are mentioned in our English
Annals.

I know very well what a hideous outcry was made some years ago by the
Quakers, and other illiterate Enthusiasts, against all liberal Sciences, all
skill in the Tongues, and Histories, against all Books, but the Bible; against
the Schools of the Prophets, and all Universities, as Heathenish,
Antichristian, Marks of the Beast, as deformities, darkenings, impertinencies,
etc. But I shall not say one word at present to their Testimony, as they call
it, partly because all that has been urged against humane Learning has been
particularly considered by others, but chiefly because the Cry of these Men is
not now so great, they having got some measure of that Knowledge among
themselves, which before they condemned as rags and tatters in us.

Thus much may suffice concerning the third thing I proposed to speak of,
namely, the peculiar Excellency and Usefulness of those charitable Settlements,
which are designed to promote and encourage Learning. I shall therefore go on
in the

4. Fourth and last place, to enquire very briefly what is the Duty of all
those who more immediately enjoy the Benefit of such Foundations.

1st. Then, they who more immediately enjoy the Benefit of such Foundations,
ought to set apart some time for the solemn Commemoration of their Founders and
Benefactors, to assert the Honor, and report the Praises of those famous Men,
who have been the Instruments of so much good to Mankind, and by whom the Lord
has wrought so great glory. The remembrance of Righteous Men should be always
fresh on the minds of them, who have received good at their hands, and they
should be telling of their Liberality from day to day. As they were honored in
their Generations, and were the glory of their Times, so care should be taken
that their Names may live for evermore, that Posterity may understand the noble
Works which they have done, and the Children, who are yet unborn, may call them
Blessed.

If we look back on the accounts of former times, since Man was placed upon the
Earth, we shall find, that they who have done well, have had praise of the
same. The Heathens had public Orations, and anniversary Feasts in memory of
those who had wrought any great Deliverance for them, or who had been the
inventers, or promoters of any useful Arts or Sciences. The Jews also did
Honor to worthy Persons at their Death, and never mentioned them afterward,
without a Blessing on their Memory. And the Christians in the several Ages of
the Church, have not only had set Speeches in commendation of Men eminent for
their Piety and Charity, but have also recorded their good Works, that they
might be had in perpetual remembrance. This they saw was a likely Method of
infusing excellent Principles into the Living, and of exciting and provoking
them to an holy and laudable Emulation of the Dead. Since therefore they who
enjoy the Benefit of others Bounty and Liberality, have the example of all
Nations to engage them, and of all the Ages of the World to warrant their
paying the easy Tribute of Praise to their Benefactors, it would be an argument
of very great Ingratitude, if they should suffer their Memorial to perish, as
though they had never been. All that I shall farther add on this Head is, that
they must beware their Gratitude does not degenerate into Superstition, and
that when they are celebrating the Charity and Beneficence of Men, they do not
forget to give Glory to GOD, who is chiefly to be respected in all the returns
they make to his Creatures: For his Name alone is excellent, and his Praise
above heaven and earth. Psalm. 148.13.

2. It is the Duty of all those who enjoy the Benefit of such charitable
Settlements, to take good heed that they make a right use of them, that they so
improve their time, and all other Advantages, that they may in some measure
answer the pious Designs of their Founders, and the just Expectations of their
Country. They must not think such Provision is made for them, only that they
may with the less concern for to morrow, sit down to eat and drink, and rise up
to play; or that the Liberality of their Benefactors was intended as a cloak
for, or an occasion of Sloth and Idleness, Pride and Vanity, Intemperance and
Disorder. If they would discharge themselves as they ought, they must be Sober,
Modest, Humble, Devout and Industrious; manifesting by the whole Course of
their Lives and Conversations, that they have a due sense of the extraordinary
Encouragements reached out to them, through the want whereof many Men of great
natural Parts, have been determined to the Spade, the Hammer, or the Plough;
and so their whole Lives being taken up in a laborious pursuit of those things
which are necessary for the satisfying and supporting of their Bodies, their
Minds have been neglected, and they themselves unfit for those higher and more
noble Employments, which a liberal Education would have qualified them for.

Ecclus. 39.
How can he get wisdom (says the Son of Syrach) that holds the plough, and
that glories in the goad? that drives oxen, and is occupied in their labors,
and whose talk is of bullocks? or the carpenter, or they that cut and grave
seals, or the potter that turns the wheel about with his feet, or the smith
sitting by the anvil, who fights with the heat of the furnace, and has the
noise of the hammer and the anvil ever in his ears? All these want that leisure
and retirement, which are necessary to the getting of Learning and Knowledge,
and therefore it is not expected, that they should be able to declare Justice
and Judgment, or that they should fit themselves for standing before Princes,
or sitting high in the Congregation. But of them to whom much is given, and for
whom liberal Men have devised liberal things, both God and Men will require the
more. Whatever Talents they are entrusted with, whatever opportunities of
Learning they now enjoy, they must hereafter give an account of them, and
therefore they ought faithfully to manage, and industriously to improve them
here, by a constant vigorous application to such Studies, as may edify, not
puff up; fill, but not swell the Mind; such as may promote the Glory of God,
their own Salvation, and render them serviceable and beneficial to the Public.
For really a man may be idly and unprofitably busy, he may rise early, and late
take rest, and eat the bread of Carefulness, and all this while only labor for
the Wind, and serve no other ends but those of Folly and Vanity. And it is
altogether as good to all the purposes of a civil or religious Life, to fold
our Arms, and do nothing, as to squander away our time, and exercise our Parts
about trifles and things of no value. To conclude, Not he that knows much, but
he that knows what is most useful, is, and always will be, accounted the Best
Scholar, and the Wisest Man.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
SIR Thomas Cooks of Bently, in the County of Worcester, Baronet, has built
at Bromsgrove in the same County, a large and convenient School-house, with a
very good Dwelling House for a Schoolmaster. And by Deed bearing date June 22.
1693. settled on Feofees 50 l. per An. for ever, freed from all Taxes and
Payments, for the said School in this manner, viz. 20 l. per An. to a
Schoolmaster, nominated by Sir Thomas and his Heirs, and Licensed by the
Bishop of Worcester, to instruct 12 poor Boys in Learning and Religion, as
established in the Church of England, to be admitted into the School between 9
and a 11 Years old, and continue at School 6 Years at least; 16 l. per An. to
buy them Clothes, viz. Blew Coats, Caps, etc. 10 s. per An. to buy them Books;
10 s. per An. for Prayers and a Sermon at Bromsgrove Church on the 1st of May,
when the Feofees are to meet for managing the said Charity, and 1 l. for their
Entertainment yearly on that day; and the 12 l. remaining, to be kept as a
Stock for placing out the said Boys Apprentices, not allowing to any one Boy
above 12 l. appointing excellent Rules for the good ordering of the whole
Affair.

He also gives the present Schoolmaster 20 l. more per An. for Preaching a
Sermon every Lord's day in the Afternoon at Tardebig, Sir Thomas's
Parish Church, two Miles from Bromsgrove; and further, he gives 10 l. per An.
to an Usher in the said School.

He has likewise by Deed, dated about the 24 of March, 1695. settled on Feofees
50 l. per An. for ever, freed from all Taxes and Payments, for a School at
Feckenham in the said County, appointing a Schoolmaster and 12 poor Boys, with
the same Allowances, in the same Manner, and under the same Rules, with
Bromsgrove forementioned, only fixing Thursday in Whitsun-week, for the Yearly
Meeting of the Feofees at Feckenham.

2 Cor. 9.6. He which sows bountifully,
shall reap also bountifully.

