Ford Mayor.



Martis secundo die Maii 1671. Annoque Domini Regis CAROLI Secundi Angliae,
etc. vicesimo tertio.

This Court does desire Dr. Barrow to Print his Sermon Preached at the Spittal
on Wednesday in Easter Week last, with what farther he had prepared to deliver
at that time.

THE DUTY and REWARD OF BOUNTY TO THE POOR: IN A SERMON Preached at the SPITTAL
Upon Wednesday in Easter Week, Anno Dom. MDCLXXI.

BY ISAAC BARROW, Fellow of Trinity-College, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by Andrew Clark, for Brabazon Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in
Cornhil, MDCLXXI.

To the Right Honorable Sir RICHARD FORD Lord Mayor of London, AND The Court
of Aldermen.
Right Honble,
AS out of Grateful Respect, I did (although otherwise indisposed for such
Employments) endeavor to discharge that Service, which You vouchsafed to call
me unto, in conceiving and uttering these Meditations; so now in publishing
them, I do purely submit to Your Commands, meaning therein to approve my self,

Right Honble, Your most Obedient Servant, Isaac Barrow.

IMPRIMATUR,

Sam. Parker, Rmo in Christo Patri ac Domino Dno Gilberto Archiep. Cantuar. a
Sac. Dom.
Jul. 3. 1671.
A SERMON PREACHED at the SPITTAL, UPON Wednesday in EASTER-WEEK, Anno Domini
1671.
Psalm cxii. 9. He has dispersed, he has given to the poor; his righteousness
endures for ever, his horn shall be exalted with honor.
AS this whole Psalm appears to have a double intent; one to describe the
proper affections and actions of a truly religious or pious man, Verse. 1.
(of a man who fears the Lord, and delights greatly in his commandments)
the other to declare the happiness of such a man's state, consequent upon those
his affections and actions, whether in way of natural result, or of gracious
recompense from God: so does this Verse particularly contain both a good part
of a pious man's character, and some considerable instances of his felicity. The
first words, (He has dispersed, he has given to the poor) express part of his
character; the latter, (His righteousness endures for ever, his horn shall be
exalted with honor) assign instances of his felicity. So that our Text has
two parts, one affording us good information concerning our Duty, the other
yielding great encouragement to the performance thereof; for we are obliged to
follow the pious man's practice, and so doing we shall assuredly partake of his
condition. These parts we shall in order prosecute, endeavoring (by Gods
assistance) somewhat to illustrate the words themselves, to confirm the truths
couched in them, and to inculcate the Duties which they imply.

For the first part, He has dispersed, he has given to the poor; these words
in general do import the liberal bounty and mercy, which a pious man is wont to
exercise; doing which, does in good part constitute him pious, and signally
declares him such; is a necessary ingredient of his piety, and a conspicuous
mark thereof: but particularly they insinuate some things concerning the
nature, the matter, the manner, and the object of those acts.

He has dispersed, he has given; Those words being put indefinitely, or
without determining what is dispersed and given by him, may be supposed to
imply a kind of universality in the matter of his Beneficence; that he
bestows whatever he has within compass of his possession, or his power; his
(...), Luke 12. 33.
(the things which he has) and his (...), Luke 11. 41.
(the things which he may) according to the prescriptions of our Lord in the
Gospel. Every thing* (I say) which he has in substance, or can do by his
endeavor, that may conduce to the support of the life, or the health, or the
welfare in any kind of his Neighbor, to the succor or relief of his
indigency, to the removal or easement of his affliction; he may well here be
understood to disperse and give: feeding the hungry, clothing the naked,
visiting the sick, entertaining the stranger, ransoming the captive, easing the
oppressed, comforting the sorrowful, assisting the weak, instructing or
advising the ignorant, together with all such kinds or instances of
Beneficence, may be conceived either meant directly as the matter of the good
man's dispersing and giving, or by just analogy of reason reducible thereto:
substantial alms, as the most sensible and obvious matter of bounty, was ('it is
probable) especially intended, but thence no manner of expressing it is to be
excluded; for the same reasons which oblige us, the same affections which
dispose us to bestow our money, or deal our bread, will equally bind and move
us to contribute our endeavor and advice for the sustenance and comfort of our
poor Neighbor. Answerably, our discourse will more expressly regard the
principal matter, liberal communication of our goods; but it may be referred to
all sorts of Beneficence.

Farther, the word dispersed intimates the nature of his bounty, in exclusion
of practices different from it. He disperseth, and is therefore not tenacious;
does not hoard up his goods, or keep them close to himself for the gratifying
his covetous humor, or nourishing his pride, or pampering his sensuality, but
sends them abroad for the use and benefit of others. He disperseth his goods,
and therefore also does not fling them away altogether, as if he were angry
with them, or weary of them, as if he loathed or despised them; but fairly and
softly, with good consideration he disposes of them here and there, as reason
and need do require. He disperseth them to the poor, not dissipateth them among
vain or lewd persons in wanton or wicked profusions, in riotous excesses, in
idle divertisements, in expensive curiosities, in hazardous gamings; in any
such courses, which swallow whole all that a man has, or do so cripple him,
that he becomes unable to disperse any thing: Our good man is to be understood
wisely provident, (...). Arist. Eth. 4. 1.
honestly industrious, and soberly frugal, that he may have wherewith to be
just first, and then liberal.

His dispersing also (or scattering, so the (...)
Hebrew word here used is other where rendered: Prove. 11. 24.
There is (says the Wiseman) that scatters, and yet increases: where we may
remark, that this word singly by it self, without any adjunct matter to limit
or interpret it, is used to signify this kind of practice; this his
dispersing, I say also) denotes the extent of the pious man's bounty, that it is
very large and diffusive, and in a manner unrestrained; that it reaches to
many places, and is withheld from no persons within the verge of his power,
and opportunity to do good. This practice commonly by a like phrase (unto which
perhaps this word refers) is termed sowing: 2 Cor. 9. 6, 10.
He (says St. Paul) which sows sparingly, Gal 6. 7, 8.
shall also reap sparingly; Prove. 11. 18.
and he which sows bountifully, shall also reap bountifully: Now, he that
sows, having chosen a good soil, and a fit season, does not regard one
particular spot, but throws all about so much as his hand can hold, so far as
the strength of his arm does carry. It is likewise called watering, (He that
waters, Prove. 11. 25.
says Solomon, shall be watered himself;) which expression also seems to
import a plentiful and promiscuous effusion of good, dropping in showers upon
dry and parched places; that is, upon persons dry for want, or parched with
affliction: So the good man does not plant his bounty in one small hole, or
spout it on one narrow spot, but with an open hand disseminates it, with an
impartial regard distills it all about: he stints it not to his own family or
relations; to his neighbors, or friends, or benefactours; to those of his own
sect and opinion, or of his humor and disposition; to such as serve him, or
oblige him, or please him; whom some private interest ties, or some particular
affection endears him to; but scatters it indifferently and unconfinedly toward
all men that need it; toward mere strangers, yea toward known enemies; toward
such who never did him any good, or can ever be able to do any; yea even toward
them who have done evil to him, and may be presumed ready to do more. Nothing
in his Neighbor but absence of need, nothing in himself but defect of ability,
does curb or limit his Beneficence; in that (...) (that proclivity and
promptitude of mind) which St. Paul speaks of, 2 Cor. 8. 12.
he does good every where; Ubicu^ que homo est, ibi beneficio lo^us est. Sen.
de Vit. B. cap 24.
wherever a man is, there is a room for his wishing well, and doing good, if
he can; he observes that rule of the Apostle, Gal. 6. 10.
As we have opportunity, 2 Cor. 9 13.
let us do good unto all men: So the pious man has dispersed. It follows,

He has given to the poor: These words denote the freeness of his bounty, and
determine the principal object thereof: He not only lends (though he also
does that upon reasonable occasion; Psalm 112. 5.
for, A good man, as it is said before in this Psalm, shows mercy and
lends; Psalm 37. 26.
and other where, The righteous is ever merciful and lends; he, I say, not
only sometimes willingly lends) to those who in time may repay, or requite
him; but he freely gives to the poor, that is, to those from whom he can
expect no retribution back. He does not (as good and pious, he does not)
present the Rich; to do so, Qui diviti donat, petit.
is but a cleanly way of begging, or a subtle kind of trade; it is hardly
courtesy, it is surely no bounty; for such persons (if they are not very sordid
or very careless, and such men are not usually much troubled with presents)
will it is likely over-do him, or at least will be even with him in kindness;
in doing this, there is little virtue; for it, there will be small reward: Luke
6. 33, 34.
for, If you do good to them who do good to you* (or whom you conceive able and
disposed to requite you) (...); what thanks are due to you? for that (says our
Savior) even sinners (even men notoriously bad) do the same: And if you lend
to them, from whom you hope to receive, what thank have you? for sinners even
lend to sinners, to receive as much again. (...). Eurip* in Orest.
All men commonly, the bad no less than the good, are apt to be superfluously
kind in heaping favors on those, whom Fortune befriends, and whose condition
requires not their courtesy; every one almost is ready to adopt himself into
the kindred, (...).
or to scrue himself into the friendship of the wealthy and prosperous; but
where kindness is of use, there it is seldom found; it is commonly so deaf, as
not to hear when it is called; so blind, as not to discern its proper object,
and natural season; Prove. 17. 17.
(The time of adversity for which a brother is born:) men disclaim alliance
with the needy, and shun his acquaintance; so the Wiseman observed, Prove. 19.
7, 4^ (...). Eurip.
All the brethren of the poor do hate him, how much more do his friends go far
from him? Thus it is in vulgar practice; but the pious man is more judicious,
more just, and more generous in the placing of his favors; he is courteous to
purpose, he is good to those who need: He, as such, does not make large
entertainments for his friends, Luke 14 12, 13.
his brethren, bis kindred, his rich neighbors, but observes that precept of
our Lord, When thou make a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the
blind, and thou shall be blessed; for they cannot recompense thee; thou shall
be recompensed at the resurrection of the just. Thus the pious man gives, that
is, with a free heart and pure intention bestows his goods on the indigent,
without designing any benefit, or hoping for any requital to himself; except
from God, in Conscience, respect and love to whom he does it.

It may be also material to observe the form of speech here used, in reference
to the time: He has dispersed, and he has given; or, he does disperse, he
does give, (for in the Hebrew Language the past and present times are not
distinguished:) which manner of speaking may seem to intimate the reality, or
the certainty, and the constancy of his practice in this kind; for what is past
or present, we are infallibly secure of; and in Morals, what one is said to
have done, or to do, is always understood according to habit, or custom. It is
not, He will disperse, he will give; that were no fit description of a good
man; to pretend, would be no argument of piety; those words might import
uncertainty, and delay in his practice: He that says, I will give, may be
fallacious in his professions, may be inconsistent with his resolutions; may
wilfully or negligently let slip the due season of performing it. Our good man
is not a Doson or Will-give, (like that King of Macedon, who got that name from
often signifying an intention of giving, but never giving in effect;) he not
only purposes well, and promises fairly for the future, but he has effectually
done it, and perseveres doing it upon every fit occasion. He puts not his
neighbor into tedious expectations, nor puts him off with frivolous excuses,
saying to him, (as it is in the Proverbs) Go and come again, Prove. 3. 28.
and the morrow I will give, when he has it by him: He bids him not have
patience, Jam. 2. 16.
or says unto him, Depart in peace, when his need is urgent, and his pain
impatient; when hunger or cold do then pinch him, when sickness incessantly
vexes him, when present streights and burdens oppress him; but he affords a
ready, quick, and seasonable relief.

He has dispersed and given, while he lives, not reserving the disposal of all
at once, upon his death, or by his last Will; that unwilling Will, whereby men
would seem to give somewhat, when they can keep nothing; drawing to themselves
those commendations and thanks, which are only due to their Mortality; when as
were they immortal, they would never be liberal: No; it is he has freely
dispersed, not an inevitable necessity will extort it from him; it cannot be
said of him, Av^r^s, nisi cum moritur, nil re^te facit. Laber.
that he never does well, but when he dies: so he has done it really and
surely.

He also does it constantly, through all the course of his life, whenever good
opportunity presents it self: he does it not by fits, or by accident, according
to unstable causes or circumstances moving him, (when bodily temper or humor
inclines him, when a sad object makes vehement impression on him; when shame
obliges him to comply with the practice of others; when he may thereby promote
some design, or procure some glory to himself) but his practice is constant and
uniform, being drawn from steady principles, and guided by certain rules;
proceeding from reverence to God, and good will toward man; following the clear
dictates, and the immutable Laws of Conscience. Thus has the pious man
dispersed, and given to the poor; and let thus much suffice for explicatory
reflection upon the first words.

The main drift and purport of which, is to represent the liberal exercising of
bounty and mercy, to be the necessary duty, the ordinary practice, and the
proper character of a truly pious man; so that performing such acts, is a good
sign of true piety; and omitting them, is a certain argument of ungodliness:
for the demonstration of which points, and for exciting us to a practice
answerable, I shall propound several Considerations, whereby the plain
reasonableness, the great weight, the high worth and excellency of this duty,
together with its strict connection with other principal duties of piety, will
appear. And first, I will show with what advantage the Holy Scripture
represents it to us, or presses it upon us.

1. We may consider, I. Head of discourse.
that there is no sort of duties, which God has more expressly commanded, or
more earnestly inculcated, than these of bounty and mercy toward our brethren;
whence evidently the great moment of them, and their high value in Gods esteem
may be inferred. Even in the ancient Law, we may observe very careful
provisions made for engaging men to works of this kind, and the performance of
them is with huge life and urgency prescribed: Thou shall not harden thy heart,
nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother. Deuteronomy 15 7, 10.
-- Thou shall open thine hand wide unto thy brother, unto thy poor, and to thy
needy in thy land: so did Moses, in Gods Name, with language very significant
and emphatical, enjoin to the children of Israel. The holy Prophets also do
commonly with an especial heat and vigor press these duties, most smartly
reproving the transgression or neglect of them; especially when they reclaim
men from their wicked courses, urging them seriously to return unto God and
goodness, they propose this practice as a singular instance most expressive of
their conversion, most apt to appease Gods wrath, most effectual to the
recovery of his favor. Esaias 1. 16, 17, 18.
Wash you, says God in Esaias, Jer. 7. 5, 6.
make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease
to do evil, learn to do well: so in general he exhorts to repentance; then
immediately he subjoins these choice instances thereof: Seek judgment, relieve
the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow. -- Come now, (then he
adds) let us reason together; though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as
white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. When
Daniel would prescribe to King Nebuchadnezzar the best way of amendment, and
the surest means of averting Gods judgments impendent on him, he thus speaks:
Wherefore, Dan. 4. 27.
O King, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, (...); so the LXX render those
words, reading, i^ seems* (...) for (...). Athan. ad Antioch. Quaest. 87.
break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing mercy to
the poor: this he culled out as of all pious acts chiefly grateful to God, and
clearly testifying repentance; and, so very impious a person was alms able to
justify, says the Father thereupon. So also when God himself would declare
what those acts are, which render penitential devotions most agreeable to him,
and most effectual, he thus expresses his mind: Isai. 58. 6, 7.
Is not this the fast, which I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness,
to undo the heavy burdens, to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break
every yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the
poor that are cast out to thine house; when thou see the naked, that thou
cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from thine own flesh? Of so great
consideration and moment was this sort of duties, even under that old
dispensation of weakness, servility and fear; so much tenderness of compassion
and benignity did God exact even from that hard-hearted and worldly people, who
were so little capable of the best rules, and had encouragements, in comparison
so mean, toward performances of this nature. The same we may well conceive,
under the more perfect discipline of universal amity, of ingenuity, of
spiritual grace and goodness, in a higher strein, with more force and greater
obligation to be imposed on us, who have so much stronger engagements, and
immensly greater encouragements to them; and so indeed it is; for those
precepts delivered by our Lord, Luke 12* 33. 6. 3^. 11. 41.
Sell all that you have, and give alms; If thou will be perfect, sell all that
thou have, and give to the poor; Give to every man that asks thee; Mat. 19.
21. 6. 19.
Treasure not up to your selves treasures upon the earth, do indeed sound high,
but are not insignificant, or impertinent; they cannot signify or design less,
than that we should be always in affection, and disposition of mind, ready to
part with any thing we have for the succor of our poor brethren; that to the
utmost of our ability, (according to moral estimation prudently rated) upon all
occasions we should really express that disposition in our practice; that we
are exceedingly obliged to the continual exercise of these duties in a very
eminent degree: These indeed were the duties which our Lord, as he did
frequently in his discourse commend and prescribe, so he did most signally
exemplify in his practice; his whole life being in effect but one continual
act of most liberal bounty and mercy toward mankind; in charity to whom, he
outdid his own severest rules, being content never to possess any wealth, never
to enjoy any ease in this world: and therein (both as to doctrine and practice)
did the holy Apostles closely follow their Master; 2 Cor. 6 20.
As poor, yet enriching many; as having nothing, yet possessing all things; so
they thoroughly in deeds practiced these duties, which in words they taught,
and earnestly pressed; admonishing their converts to Romans 12. 13.
distribute to the necessities of the saints, to Gal. 6. 10.
do good to all men, Heb. 13. 16.
to do good, and to communicate not to forget, to show mercy with cheerfulness,
to Colos. 3. 12.
put on bowels of mercy, to Ephesians. 4 32.
be kind, and tenderhearted one toward another; 2 Cor. 8 7.
to abound in the grace of liberality: Such are their Directions and
Injunctions to all Christian people; so did they preach themselves, and so they
enjoined others to preach: 1 Timothy 6. 7, 8.
Charge the rich in this world, (says St. Paul to his Scholar Timothy) that
they do good; that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate: Tit. 3. 8.
and, These things (says he likewise advising Bishop Titus) I will that thou
affirm constantly, that they which believe in God may be careful to maintain
good works; what good works he means, the reason adjoined does show; for
these things, says he, are good and profitable unto men.

2. It is indeed observable, that as in every kind that which is most excellent
does commonly assume to it self the name of the whole kind; so among the parts
of righteousness, (which word is used to comprehend all virtue and goodness)
this of exercising bounty and mercy is peculiarly called righteousness; so that
righteousness and mercifulness, (or alms-deeds) the righteous and bountiful
person are in Scripture-expression ordinarily confounded, as it were, or
undistinguishably put one for the other; it being often, when commendations are
given to righteousness, and rewards promised to righteous persons, hard to
discern, whether the general observance of Gods Law, or the special practice of
these duties are concerned in them. Likewise works of this nature are in way of
peculiar excellency termed good works, and to perform them is usually styled to
do good, and to do well, (a) (...), (b) (...), Act. 9. 36. 1 Timothy 5. 10. 1 Timothy
6. 18. Tit. 3. 8, 14. 2 Cor. 9 8. Gal. 6. b 9, a 10.
(...), Luke 6. 35.
(...), Heb. 13. 16.
(...), Act. 10. 38.
(...), are words applied to this purpose) which manners of expression do argue
the eminent dignity of these performances.

3. We may also consequently mark, that in those places of Scripture, where the
Divine Law is abridged, and Religion summed up into a few particulars of main
importance, these duties constantly make a part: so when the Prophet Micah
briefly reckons up those things, which are best in the Law, and chiefly
required by God, the whole Catalogue of them consisting but of three
particulars, Mercy comes in for one: Micah 6. 8.
He has showed thee, O man, (says he) what is good, and what does the Lord
require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy God? Likewise of those ((...), those) more substantial and weighty things
of Gods Law, the neglect of which our Savior objecteth as an argument of
impiety, and a cause of woe, to those pretending Zealots, this is one: Mat. 23.
23.
Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye pay tithe of Mint and
Cumin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and
Faith. The sum of St. John the Baptist his instruction of the people is by St.
Luke reduced to this point: Luke 3. 11.
The people asked him, saying, What shall we do? He answering, says unto them,
He that has two Coats, let him impart to him that has none; and he that has
meat, let him do likewise. St. James his Systeme of Religion is this: Jam. 1.
27.
Pure and undefiled Religion before God and the Father is this; to visit the
fatherless and widow in their afflictiction, (that is, to comfort and relieve
all distressed and helpless persons) and to keep himself unspotted from the
world. St Paul seems to be yet more compendious and close: Gal. 6. 2.
Bear ye (says he) one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.
Yea, God himself comprizeth all the substantial part of Religion herein, when
comparing it with the circumstantial part, he says, I will have mercy, Hos. 6.
6.
and not sacrifice.

4. It is in like manner considerable, that in the general descriptions of
piety and goodness, the practice of these duties is specified, as a grand
ingredient of them. In this Psalm, where such a description is intended, it is
almost the only particular instance; and it is not only mentioned, but
reiterated in diverse forms of expression. In the 37 Psalm it is affirmed, and
repeated, that The righteous shows mercy; Psalm 37. 21, 26.
he shows mercy, and gives; he shows mercy, and lends. In the Proverbs,
it is a commendation of the virtuous woman, whose price is far above rubies,
that, Prove. 31. 20.
She stretches out her hand to the poor, yea, stretches forth both her hands
to the needy. And in Ezekiel (which is especially remarkable) the 18 Chapter,
where the principal things constituting a pious man are, more than once,
professedly enumerated, this among a very few other particulars is expressed,
and takes up much room in the account; of such a person (who shall surely live
and not die; Ez^k. 18. 7, 16.
that is, who certainly shall abide in Gods favor, and enjoy the happy
consequences thereof) it is supposed, that he -- neither has oppressed any,
nor has withholden the pledge, nor has spoiled by violence; but has given
his bread to the hungry, and has covered the naked with a garment; and has
taken off his hand from the poor.

5. Also in the particular Histories of good men, this sort of practice is
specially taken notice of, and expressed in their characters. In the story of
our Father Abraham, Heb. 13. 2.
his benignity to strangers, and hospitableness is remarkable among all his
deeds of goodness, being propounded to us as a pattern and encouragement to the
like practice. In this the Conscience of Job did solace it self, Job 29. 11,
etc.
as in a solid assurance of his integrity: I delivered the poor that cried, and
the fatherless, and him that had none to help him: The blessing of him that was
ready to perish came upon me, and I caused the widows heart to sing: Job 30 25.
I was eyes to the blind, and feet I was to the lame; I was a father to the
poor. Did not I weep for him that was in trouble? was not my soul grieved for
the poor? Hence also did the good Publican recommend himself to the favor and
approbation of our Savior, saying, Luke 19. 8, 9.
Behold, Lord, half of my goods I give to the poor; hence did salvation come to
his house; hence he is proclaimed, a son of Abraham. Of Dorcas, that good
woman, who was so gracious and precious among the Disciples, this is the
commendation and character; She was full of good works, Act. 9. 36.
and alms-deeds which she did; such practice made her capable of that favor,
so great and extraordinary, the being restored to life; (...). Chrysostom. in Gem.
Orat. 55.
at least in St. Chrysostom's judgment: The force of her alms, says he, did
conquer the tyranny of death. Cornelius also, that excellent person, who was,
though a Gentile, so acceptable to God, and had so extraordinary graces
conferred on him, is thus represented: Act. 10. 2.
He was a devout man, and one that feared God, with all his house, who gave
much alms to the people; and prayed to God always. We may add, that to be
hospitable (one branch of these duties, and inferring the rest) is reckoned a
qualification of those, 1 Timothy 3. 2.
who are to be the Guides and Patterns of goodness unto others: Tit. 1. 6.
And particularly one fit to be promoted to a widows office in the Church, is
thus described: 1 Timothy 5. 10.
Well reported of for good works; if she have brought up children, if she have
lodged strangers; if she have washed the saints feet; if she have relieved the
afflicted; if she have diligently followed every good work.

6. So near to the heart of Piety does the holy Scripture lay the practice of
these duties; and no wonder; for it often expressly declares Charity to be the
fulfilling of Gods Law, Gal. 5. 14.
as the best expression of all our duty toward God, Romans 13 9, 10.
(of faith in him, 1 Timothy 1. 5.
love and reverence of him) and as either formally containing, Mat. 7. 12.
or naturally producing all our duty toward our Neighbor. And of charity,
works of bounty and mercy are both the chief instances, and the plainest signs:
for whereas all charity does consist either in mental desire, or in verbal
signification, or in effectual performance of good to our Neighbor, this last
is the end, the completion, (...). Greg. Nyss. in Mat. 5. 7.
and the assurance of the rest. Good will is indeed the root of charity; but
that lies underground, and out of sight; nor can we conclude its being or life
without visible fruits of beneficence: Good words are at best but fair leaves
thereof, such as may (and too often do) proceed from a weak and barren
disposition of mind; but these good works are real fruits, (so St. Paul's calls
them; Let ours also, Tit. 3. 14.
says he, Romans 15. 28.
learn to maintain good works for necessary uses, Phil. 4. 17.
that they be not unfruitful) which declare a true life, and a good strength of
charity in the bearer of them: by them (...), 2 Cor. 8. 8.
the sincerity (or genuineness) of our charity is proved; for as no man ever
does impress a false stamp on the finest metal, so costly charity is seldom
counterfeit: it is to decline spending their goods, or their pains, that men
forge and feign; pretending to make up in wishing well, the defect of doing so;
and paying words in stead of things: but he that freely imparts what he has,
or can do for his Neighbors good, needs no other argument to evince that he
loves in good earnest, nor can indeed well use any other: for words, if actions
are wanting, seem abusive; and if actions are present, they are superfluous;
wherefore St. John thus advises: 1 John 3. 18.
My little children, let us not love in word, or in tongue, ((...)) but in work
and in truth; to love in work, and to love in truth, he signifies to be the
same thing; and to pretend love in speech, without practicing it in deed, he
implies not allowable. And St. James in way of comparison says, That as faith
without works is dead, so love without beneficence is useless: Jam. 2. 16.
for, If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of
you say unto him, Depart in peace, be you warmed and filled, notwithstanding ye
give them not those things which are needful to the body, what does it profit?
even so faith without works is dead. Cold wishes of good, working no real
benefit to our Neighbor, and a faint assent unto truth, producing no constant
obedience to God, are things near of kin, and of like value; both of little
worth or use. Charity then being the main point of Religion, mercy and bounty
being the chief parts of charity, well may these duties be placed in so high a
rank, according to the divine Heraldry of Scripture.

7. To enforce which Observations, and that we may be farther certified about
the weight and worth of these duties, we may consider, that to the observance
of them most ample and excellent rewards are assigned; that in return for what
we bestow on our poor brethren, Psalm. 63. 3.
God has promised all sorts of the best mercies and blessings to us. The best
of all good things (that which in David's opinion was better than life it self)
the fountain of all blessings (Gods love, and favor or mercy) is procured
thereby, or is annexed to it: 2 Cor. 9. 7.
for God loves a cheerful giver, says S. Paul; and, Mat. 5. 7.
The merciful shall obtain mercy, Jam. 2. 13.
says our Savior; and, Mercy rejoices against judgment (or boasts, and
triumphs over it; (...); that is, it appeaseth Gods wrath, and prevents our
condemnation and punishment) says St. James; Mat. 6. 14.
God will not continue displeased with him, nor will withhold his mercy from
him, who is kind and merciful to his Neighbor. It Is true, if rightly
understood, what the Hebrew Wiseman says, Ecclus. 3. (...)
Water will quench a flaming fire, and alms makes an atonement of sins: for
this practice has the nature and name of a Sacrifice, and is declared, as
such, both in excellency and efficacy to surpass all other Sacrifices; to be
most acceptable to God, most available for expiation of guilt; most effectual
in obtaining mercy and favor. Other Sacrifices performed in obedience to Gods
appointment, (on virtue of our Lords perfect obedience, and with regard to his
pure sacrifice of himself) did in their way propitiate God, and atone sin; but
this has an intrinsic worth, and a natural aptitude to those purposes; other
oblations did signify a willingness to render a due homage to God, this
really, and immediately performs it; they were shadows or images well
resembling that duty, (parting with any thing we have for the sake of God, and
for purchasing his favor) whereof this is the body and substance: this is
therefore preferred as in it self excelling the rest, Hos 6. 6.
and more estimable in Gods sight; so that in comparison or competition
therewith, the other seem to be slighted and rejected. Mic. 6 7.
I will (says God) have mercy and not sacrifice; and, Will the Lord be pleased
with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil? Will he? that
is, he will not be pleased with such sacrifices, if they be abstracted from the
more delightful sacrifices of bounty and mercy. God never made an exception
against these, or derogated from them in any case; they absolutely and
perpetually are (as St. Paul speaks) Odours of a sweet smell, P^il. 4. 18.
sacrifices acceptable and well-pleasing to God; and the Apostle to the Hebrews
seconds him: To do good, Heb. 13 8.
says he, and to communicate, forget not, for with such sacrifices God is
well-pleased; by these, all other works, and all enjoyments are sanctified;
for, Luke 11. 41.
Give alms (says our Lord) of what you have, and behold all things are pure
unto you. Such charitable persons are therefore frequently pronounced blessed,
that is in effect enstated in a confluence of all good things: Blessed is he
that considers the poor, Psalm. 41. 1.
says the Psalmist; and, He that has a bountiful eye, Prove. 22. 9.
is blessed, 14 21.
says Solomon; and, He that has mercy on the poor, happy is he, says the
Wise man again; and, Mat. 5. 7.
Blessed are the merciful, says our Lord himself; so in gross and generally;
particularly also, and in retail the greatest blessings are expressly allotted
to this practice: prosperity in all our affairs is promised thereto; Thou
(says Moses) shall surely give thy poor brother, Deuteronomy* 15. 10.
and thine heart shall not be grieved, that thou give unto him, because that
for this thing the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all
that thou put thine hand unto. Stability in a good condition is ordinarily
consequent thereon; so the Prophet Daniel implies, when advising King
Nebuchadnezzar to these works, he adds, Dan 4 17.
If it may be a lengthning of thy tranquillity: deliverance from evil
incumbent, protection in imminent danger, and support in afflictions, are the
sure rewards thereof; so the Psalmist assures us: Psalm. 41. 1, etc.
Blessed (says he) is he that considers the poor, the Lord will deliver him
in time of trouble; the Lord will preserve him and keep him alive, and he shall
be blessed upon earth; and thou will not deliver him into the will of his
enemies; the Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing, thou will
make all his bed in his sickness. Security from all want, is likewise a
recompense proper thereto: P^ov. 28. 27.
for, He that gives to the poor, shall not lack, says the Wiseman: thriving
in Wealth and Estate, is another special reward; for, The liberal soul shall be
made fat; Prove. 11 25.
the same Author gives us his word for it: even of the good things here below
to those, who for his sake in this, or any other way, Mat. 19 29.
do let go houses or lands, our Lord promises the return of a hundred fold,
either in kind, or in value. So great encouragements are annexed to this
practice even in relation to the concernments of this transitory life; but to
them beside God has destinated rewards incomparably more considerable and
precious; spiritual and eternal rewards, treasures of heavenly wealth, crowns
of endless glory, Luke 14 13.
the perfection of joy and bliss to be dispensed at the resurrection of the
just. M^^. 19. 29.
He that for my sake has left houses Mark 10. 30.
or lands, shall receive a hundred fold now at this time, (or in this present
life) and in the world to come shall inherit everlasting life; so infallible
Truth has assured us. They who perform these duties, Luke 12. 33.
are said to make themselves bags, which wax not old; a treasure that fails
not in the heavens; Luke 16. 9.
to make themselves friends of the unrighteous mammon, who, when they fail,
(when they depart, and leave their earthly wealth) will receive them into
everlasting habitations; to lay up in store for themselves a good foundation
against the time to come, 1 Timothy 6. 19.
that they may lay hold on eternal life; such rewards are promised to the
observers.

8 And correspondently grievous punishments are designed, and denounced to the
transgressors of these duties; the worst of miseries is their portion and
doom; they for being such do forfeit Gods love and favor; they lose his
blessing and protection; they can have no sure possession of, nor any
comfortable enjoyment of their Estate, Jam. 2. 13.
for, He (says St. James) shall have judgment without mercy, who shows no
mercy: and of such a person it is said in Job, That which he labors for he
shall restore, Job 20. 18.
and shall not swallow it down; according to his substance shall the
restitution be, and he shall not rejoice therein; because he has oppressed,
and forsaken the poor; (not only because he has unjustly oppressed, but
because he has uncharitably forsaken the poor:) If by the Divine forbearance
such persons do seem to enjoy a fair portion in this life, Psalm. 17. 14.
(prospering in the world, Psalm. 73. 12.
and increasing in riches) they will find a sad reckoning behind in the other
world; this will be the result of that Audit: Luke 6. 24.
Woe be unto you rich men, for you have received your consolation, (such rich
men are meant, who have got, or kept, or used their wealth basely; who have
detained all the consolation it yields to themselves, and imparted none to
others;) Luke 16. 25.
and, Remember, son, thou did receive thy good things in this life; (so did
receive them, as to swallow them, and spend them here; without any provision or
regard for the future in the use of them;) and, Cast that unprofitable servant
(who made no good use of his Talent) into utter darkness: Mat. 25. 30.
such will be the fate of every one, Luk 12 21.
that treasures up to himself, and is not rich unto God; not rich in piety and
charity, not rich in performing for Gods sake works of bounty and mercy.

9. It is indeed most considerable, that at the final reckoning, when all men's
actions shall be strictly scanned, and justly sentenced according to their true
desert, a special regard will be had to the discharge or neglect of these
duties. It is the bountiful and merciful persons, who have relieved Christ in
his poor members and brethren, who in that day will appear to be the sheep at
the right hand; and shall hear the good Shepherds voice uttering those joyful
words, Come ye blessed of my Father, Mat. 25. 34.
enter into the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world: for
I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I
was a stranger, and ye took me in; I was naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick,
and ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto me: He does not say,
because ye have made goodly professions, because you have been Orthodox in your
opinions, because you have frequented religious Exercises, (have prayed often
and long, have kept many Fasts, and heard many Sermons) because you have been
staunch in your conversations, because you have been punctual in your dealings;
because you have maintained a specious guise of piety, sobriety, and justice,
(although indeed he that will come off well at that great Trial, must be
responsible, and able to yield a good account in respect to all those
particulars) but because you have been charitably benign and helpful to persons
in need and distress; therefore blessed are you, therefore enter into the
Kingdom of glorious bliss prepared for such persons: this proceeding more than
intimates, that in the judgment of our Lord no sort of virtue or good practice
is to be preferred before that of charitable bounty, or rather that in his
esteem none is equal thereto; so that if the Question were put to him, which is
one of them to Antiochus, Athan. Tom. 2.
(in Athanasius his works) Which is the most eminent Virtue? Our Lord would
resolve it no otherwise, than is done by that Father, affirming, That
Mercifulness is the Queen of Virtues; for that at the final account, the
examination chiefly proceeds upon that; it is made the special Touchstone of
Piety, and the peculiar ground of happiness. On the other side, those who have
been deficient in these performances, (uncharitable and unmerciful persons)
will at the last Trial appear to be the wretched Goats on the left hand, unto
whom this uncomfortable speech shall by the great Judge be pronounced: Mat. 25.
41.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels: for I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me
no drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me not in; naked, and ye clothed me
not; sick and in prison, and ye visited me not: It is not, we may see, for
having done that, which in this world is called rapine or wrong; (...). Greg.
Naz. Ora^. 16.
for having pillaged, or cozened their Neighbor; for having committed Adultery
or Murder, or any other thing prohibited, that these unhappy men are said to
be formally impeached, and finally condemned to that miserable doom, but for
having been unkind and unmerciful to their poor brethren: this at that high
Tribunal will pass for a most enormous crime, for the capital offense; for this
it is, that they shall be cursed, and cast down into a wretched consortship
with those malicious and merciless Fiends, unto whose disposition they did so
nearly approach.

Thus it appears how mighty a stress God in the holy Scripture does lay upon
these duties, so peremptorily commanding them, so vehemently pressing them, so
highly commending them, so graciously by promises alluring us to the
performance, so dreadfully by threatenings deterring us from the neglect of
them: what an affront then will it be to Gods Authority, what a distrust to his
Word, what a contempt of his Power, his Justice, his Wisdom, what a despite to
his Goodness and Mercy, if notwithstanding all these Declarations of his will
and purposes, we shall presume to be uncharitable in this kind? There are also
Considerations (very many, very clear, and very strong) which discover the
great reasonableness and equity of these Laws, with our indispensable
obligation to obey them; the which indeed with greater force do exact these
duties from us, and do more earnestly plead in the poor man's behalf, than he
can beg or cry. If we either look up unto God, or down upon our poor Neighbor;
if we reflect upon our selves, or consider our wealth it self, every where we
may discern various reasons obliging us, and various motives inducing us to the
practice of these duties.

In regard to God,

1. We may consider, II. Head of Discourse.
that by exercising of bounty and mercy, we are kind and courteous to God
himself; by neglecting those duties, we are unkind and rude to him: for that
what of good or evil is by us done to the poor, God interprets and accepts as
done to himself. The poor have a peculiar relation to God; he openly and
frequently professes himself their especial Friend, Patron and Protector; he
is much concerned in, and particularly charge his Providence with their
support: in effect therefore they shall surely be provided for one way or
other, (The poor shall eat and be satisfied; Psalm. 22. 26.
God will save the afflicted people; 18. 27.
The Lord preserves the strangers, 146. 9.
he relieveth the fatherless and widow) but out of goodness to us, he chooses
(if it may be, we freely concurring therein) and best likes, that it should be
done by our hands; this conducing no less to our benefit, than to theirs; we
thereby having opportunity to show our respect to himself, and to lay an
engagement on him to do us good. God therefore lends the poor man his own
Name, and allows him to crave our succor for his sake; (when the poor man
asks us in Gods Name, or for Gods sake, he does not usurp or forge, he has
good authority, and a true ground for doing so) God gives him credit from
himself unto us for what he wants, and bids us charge what he receives on his
own account; permitting us to reckon him obliged thereby, and to write him our
debtor; engaging his own word and reputation duly to repay, Prove. 19. 17.
fully to satisfy us: He that has pity on the poor, lends to the Lord, and
that which he has given, will he pay him again, says the Wiseman; Mat 25.
40, 45.
and, In as much as ye have done it to the least of my brethren, ye have done
it unto me, says our Savior: and, God is not unrighteous to forget your work
and labor of love, Heb. ^ 10.
which ye have showed toward his Name, in that ye have ministered to the saints,
and do minister, says the Apostle. What therefore we give to the poor, God
accepts as an expression of kindness to himself, being given to one of his
friends and clients, in respect to him; he regards it as a testimony of
friendly confidence in him, signifying that we have a good opinion of him, that
we take him for able and willing to requite a good turn, that we dare take his
word, and think our goods safe enough in his custody. But if we stop our ears,
or shut our hands from the poor, God interprets it as a harsh repulse, and a
heinous affront put upon himself; we doing it to one, who bears his Name, and
wears his Livery, (for the poor man's rags are badges of his relation unto God)
He thereby judges, that we have little good will, little respect, little
compassion toward himself, since we vouchsafe not to grant him so mean a
favor, since we refuse at his request, and (as it were) in his need, to
accommodate him with a small sum, he justly reputes it as an argument of
unkindly diffidence in him, that we have sorry thoughts of him, deeming him no
good Correspondent, little valuing his word, suspecting his goodness, his
truth, or his sufficiency.

2. We by practicing those duties are just, by omitting them are very unjust
toward God. For our goods, our wealth, and our estate, are indeed none of them
simply or properly our own, so that we have an absolute property in them, or an
entire disposal of them: no, we are utterly incapable of such a right unto
them, or power over them; God necessarily is the true and absolute Proprietary
of them. They are called the gifts of God, Eccles 5. 19. 6. 2.
but we must not understand that God by giving them to us, has parted with his
own right to them; they are deposited with us in trust, not alienated from him;
they are committed to us as Stewards, not transferred upon us as Masters: they
are so ours, that we have no authority to use them according to our will or
fancy, but are obliged to manage them according to Gods direction and order. He
by right immutable is Lord Paramount of all his Creation; every thing
unalienably belongs to him, upon many accounts: He out of nothing made all
things at first, and to every Creature through each moment a new being is
conferred by his preservative influence; originally therefore he is Lord of all
things, and continually a new Title of Dominion over every thing springs up
unto him: it is his always, because he always makes it. We our selves are
naturally mere Slaves and Vassals to him: as we can never be our own, (Masters
of our selves, of our lives, of our liberties) so cannot we ever properly be
owners of any thing; there are no possible means by which we can acquire any
absolute Title to the least mite; the principal right to what we seem to get,
according to all Law and Reason, accrueth to our Master. All things about us,
by which we live, with which we work and trade; the Earth which supports and
feeds us, and furnishes us with all commodities; Psalm. 24. 1.
the Air we breathe, 50. 12.
the Sun and Stars which cherish our life, 89. 11.
are all of them his, 95. 5.
his Productions, and his Possessions, subsisting by his pleasure, subject to
his disposal: how then can any thing be ours? how can we say with the foolish
Churl Nabal, 1 Samuel 25. 11.
Shall I take my bread, and my water, and my flesh, and give it? Thine? O
inconsiderate man! How came thou by it? how do thou hold it? did thou
make it, Sed ais; Quid in justum est, si cum aliena non invadam, propria
diligentius servem? O impudens dictum! propria dicis? quae? ex quibus recond it
is in hunc murdum detulisti? Ambros.
or do thou preserve it? Can thou claim any thing by Nature? No, thou
broughtest nothing with thee into the world, thou did not bring thy self
hither: Can thou challenge any thing to thy self from Chance? No, for there
is no such thing as Chance, all things being guided and governed by Gods
Providence. Do thou conceive thy Industry can entitle thee to any thing? Thou
art mistaken, for all the wit and strength thou appliest, the head thou
contrivest with, and the hands thou workest with, are Gods; all the success
thou find did wholly depend on him, was altogether derived from him; all thy
projects were vain, all thy labors would be fruitless, did not he assist and
bless thee: Thou do vainly and falsely lift up thine heart, D^ut. 8. 13, 14,
17* 18.
and forget the Lord thy God, whenas thy herds and flocks multiply, and thy
silver and gold is multiplied, and all that thou have is multiplied; if thou
say in thy heart, My power and the might of my hand has gotten me this
wealth: But thou must remember the Lord thy God, for it is he that gives thee
power to get wealth. Since then upon all scores every thing we have does
appertain to God, he may without any injury recall or resume whatever he
pleases; Aliena rapere convincitur, qui ultra necessaria sibi retinere
probatur. Hieron.
and while he lets any thing abide with us, we cannot justly use it
otherwise than he has appointed, we cannot duly apply it otherwise than to his
interest and service. Quicquid Deus plusquam opus est dederit, non nobis
special^ter dedit, sed per nos aliis erogandum transmisit* quod si non
dederimus, res ali^nas invasimus.
God then having injoined, that after we have satisfied our necessities, and
supplied our reasonable occasions, we should employ the rest to the relief of
our poor Neighbors; Aug. Sermon. 219. de Temp.
that if we have two coats, Luke 3. 11.
(one more than we need) we should impart one to him that has none; if we have
meat abundant, that we likewise communicate to him that wants it: Proprium nemo
dicat quod commune; plusquam sufficeret sumptui violenter obtentum est. Ambros.
God by the poor man's voice (or by his need and misery) demanding his own from
us, we are very unjust if we presume to withhold it; doubly unjust we are, both
toward God, and toward our Neighbor: (...); ^as. M.
we are unfaithful Stewards, misapplying the goods of our Master, and crossing
his order: we are wrongful Usurpers, detaining from our Neighbor that which
God has allotted him: we are in the Court of Conscience, we shall appear at
the Bar of Gods Judgment no better than Robbers, (under vizards of legal right
and possession) spoiling our poor Brother of his goods; his, I say, by the very
same title as any thing can be ours, by the free donation of God, fully and
frequently expressed, as we have seen, in his holy Word: (he cannot take it
away by violence or surreption against our will, but we are bound willingly to
yield it up to him; to do that, were disorder in him; to refuse this, is wrong
in us:) Nostrum est pauperes clamant quod effunditis; nobis crudelite^
subtrahitur, quod inanite^ expenditur. Bern.
it is the hungry man's bread, which we hoard up in our barns; it is his meat, on
which we glut; and his drink, which we guzzle: it is the naked man's apparel,
which we shut up in our presses, or which we exorbitantly ruffle and flaunt in:
it is the needy persons gold and silver which we closely hide in our chests, or
spend idly, or put out to useless use: we are in thus holding, or thus
spending, truly (...), not only covetous, but wrongful, or havers of more than
our own, against the will of the right owners; plainly violating that precept
of Solomon, Prove. 3. 27.
Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thy
hand to do it. If we are ambitious of having a property in somewhat, Omne quod
male possidetur alienum est; male autem possidet, qui male ^titur. August.
or affect to call any thing our own, it is only by nobly giving that we can
accomplish our desire, that will certainly appropriate our goods to our use and
benefit: but from basely keeping, or vainly embezilling them, they become not
our possession and enjoyment, but our theft and our bane. (These things, spoken
after the holy Fathers, wise Instructors in matters of piety, are to be
understood with reasonable temperament, and practiced with honest prudence. I
cannot stand to disdiscuss cases, and remove scruples; a pious Charity will
easily discern its due limits and measures, both declining perplexity, and not
evading duty: the sum is, that justice toward God and man obliges us, not to
suffer our poor Brother to perish, or pine away for want, when we surfeit and
swim in plenty; or not to see him lack necessaries, when we are well able to
relieve him)

3. Showing bounty and mercy are the most proper and the principal expressions
of our gratitude unto God; so that in omitting them, we are not only very
unjust, but highly ungrateful. Innumerable are the benefits, favors and
mercies, (both common and private) which God has bestowed on us, and does
continually bestow; he incessantly showers down blessings on our heads; he
daily loadeth us with his benefits; Psalm. 68. 19.
he perpetually crowns us with loving kindness and tender mercies: Psalm. 103.
4.
all that we are, all that we have, all that we can hope for of good, is alone
from his free bounty; our beings and lives, with all the conveniences and
comforts of them, we entirely owe to him as to our Maker, our Preserver, our
constant Benefactor: all the excellent privileges we enjoy, and all the
glorious hopes we have as Christians, we also stand endebted for purely to his
undeserved mercy and grace; and, What shall we render unto the Lord for all his
benefits toward us? Psalm. 116. 12.
Shall we render him nothing? shall we refuse him any thing? shall we boggle at
making returns so inconsiderable, in regard to what he has done for us? What
is a little Gold, or Silver, or Brass perhaps, which our poor Neighbor craveth
of us, in comparison to our life, our health, our reason, to all accommodations
of our body, and all endowments of our mind? What are all the goods in the
world to the love and favor of God, to the pardon of our sins, to the gifts of
Gods Spirit, to the dignity of being the children of God, and heirs of
salvation; to the being freed from extreme miseries, and made capable of
eternal felicity? And does not this unexpressible goodness, do not all these
inestimable benefits require some correspondent thankfulness? Are we not
obliged, shall we not be willing to exhibit some real testimony thereof? And
what other can we exhibit beside this? We cannot directly or immediately
requite God, for he cannot so receive any thing from us; he is not capable of
being himself enriched or exalted, of being any wise pleasured or bettered by
us, who is in himself infinitely sufficient, glorious, joyful and happy: Psalm.
16. 2.
Our goodness extends not to him; Job 22. 2.
A man cannot be profitable to his Maker: All that we can do in this kind, is
thus indirectly, in the persons of his poor relations, to gratify him,
imparting at his desire and for his sake somewhat of what he has bestowed on
us, upon them. Such a thankful return we owe unto God, not only for what he
has given us, (...). Naz.
but even for the capacity of giving to others; for that we are in the number
of those who can afford relief, and who need not to demand it. Our very wealth
and prosperous state should not seem to us so contemptible things, that we
should be unwilling to render somewhat back in grateful resentment for them:
the very act of giving is it self no mean benefit, Nec enim he^o Deo pra^stat
benficium in his, quae dederit; sed Deus his homini, quae acceperit. Salvian.
(having so much of honor in it, so much of pleasure going with it, so much of
reward following it) we receive far more than we return in giving; for which
therefore it is fit, that we should return our gratitude, and consequently that
we should perform these duties: for indeed without this practice, no other
expression of gratitude can be true in it self, or can be acceptable unto God:
We may seem abundantly to thank him in words, but a sparing hand gives the lie
to the fullest mouth; we may spare our breath, if we keep back our substance;
for all our praising God for his goodness, and blessing him with our lips, if
we will do nothing for him, if we will not part with any thing for his sake,
appears mere complement, is in truth plain mockery, and vile hypocrisy.

4. Yea, which we may farther consider, all our devotion severed from a
disposition of practicing these duties, is no less such; cannot have any true
worth in it, shall not yield any good effect from it. Our prayers, if we are
uncharitably disposed, what are they other than demonstrations of egregious
impudence and folly? For how can we with any face presume to ask any thing from
God, when we deny him requesting a small matter from us? How can we with any
reason expect any mercy from him, when we vouchsafe not to show any mercy for
his sake? Can we imagine, that God will hearken unto, or mind our petitions,
when we are deaf to his entreaties, and regardless of his desires? No; it is his
declaration to such bold and unreasonable petitioners, Isai. 1. 15.
When you spread forth your hands, I will not hear you; when you make many
prayers, I will not hear: No importunity, no frequency of prayers will move God
in such a case; the needy man's cries and complaints will drown their noise; his
sighs and groans will obstruct their passage, Jam. 5. 4.
and stop the ears of God against them. Likewise all our semblances of
repentance, all our corporal abstinencies and austerities, if a kind and
merciful disposition are wanting, what are they truly but presumptuous
dallyings, or impertinent triflings with God? For do we not grossly collude with
sin, when we restrain the sensual appetites of the body, but foment the souls
more unreasonable desires? when we curb our wanton flesh, and give license to a
base spirit? Do we not palpably baffle, when in respect to God, we pretend to
deny our selves, yet upon urgent occasion allow him nothing? Do we not
strangely prevaricate, when we would seem to appease Gods anger, and purchase
his favor by our submissions, yet refuse to do that, which he declares most
pleasing to him, and most necessary to those purposes? It is an ordinary thing
for men thus to serve God, and thus to delude themselves: (...). Bas. M. in Luk
12. 8.
I have known many, (says St. Basil) who have fasted, and prayed, and groaned,
and expressed all kind of costless piety, who yet would not part with one doit
to the afflicted: such a cheap and easy piety, which costs us little or
nothing, can surely not be worth much; and we must not conceit that the
All-wise God, 1 Samuel 2. 3.
( the God of knowledge, by whom actions are weighed, as Anna sang; and, who
weighs the spirits also, Prove 16. 2.
as the Wiseman says) will be cheated therewith, or take it for more than its
just value. No, he has expressly signified, that he has not chosen such
services, 2 Samuel 24. 24.
nor does take any pleasure in them; Isai. 58. 5. 1. 13, 14.
he has called them vain and impertinent oblations; Mic. 6. 7.
not sweet or acceptable, Jer. 6. 13, 20.
but abominable and troublesome to him, such as he cannot away with, and is
weary to bear. It Is religious liberality that does prove us to be serious and
earnest in other religious performances; which assures that we value matters of
piety at a considerable rate; which gives a substance and solidity to our
devotions; which sanctifies our fasts, and verifies our penances; which renders
our praises real, and our prayers effectual; so that these being combined, we
may reasonably expect acceptance and recompense; and in effect to hear that
from God, which by him was returned to good Cornelius, Thy prayers and thine
alms are come up for a memorial before God. Act. 10. 4.


5. The conscionable practice of these duties, does plainly spring from those
good dispositions of mind, regarding God, which are the original grounds and
fountains of all true piety; and the neglect of them issues from those vicious
dispositions, which have a peculiar inconsistency with piety, being destructive
thereof in the very foundation and root. Faith in God is the Fundamental Grace,
upon which Piety is grounded; Love and fear of God, are the Radical Principles,
from which it grows; all which as the charitable man discovers in his practice,
so they are apparently banished from the heart of the illiberal and unmerciful
person.

As for Faith, the good man in showing bounty, exercises the chief acts
thereof; he freely parts with his goods, because he trusts on Gods
Providence more than them; and believes God more ready to help him, than any
Creature can do, in his need; because he is persuaded, that God is most good
and benign, so as never to suffer him to be oppressed with want; because he
takes God to be just and faithful, who having charged him to care for nothing,
Mat. 6. 25.
but to cast his care and burden upon the Lord, Phil. 4. 6.
having promised to care for him, 1 Pet. 5. 7.
to sustain him, Psalm. 55. 23.
never to leave or forsake him; Heb. 13* 5.
having also engaged himself to repay and recompense him for what he gives to
his poor Neighbor, will not fail to make good his word; because he thinks God
abundantly solvent, and himself never the poorer for laying out in his behalf;
because, in short, he is content to live in a dependence upon God, and at his
disposal. It is mentioned by the Apostle to the Hebrews, Heb. 10. 34.
as a special instance of a resolute and constant faith in the first
Christians, that they took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing in
themselves, that they had in heaven a better and an enduring substance: he that
not forcibly by the violent rapacity of others, but voluntarily by his own free
resignation for the service of God, delivers them up with the same alacrity,
opinion and hope, thereby demonstrates the same faith. But the Gripple Wretch,
who will bestow nothing on his poor Brother for Gods sake, is evidently an
Infidel, having none at all, or very heathenish conceits of God: He must be
either a mere Atheist, disbelieving the existence of God; or an Epicurean, in
his heart denying Gods Providence over humane affairs: (for did he conceive God
to have any regard unto, or any influence over what passes here, how could he
be afraid of wanting upon this score? how could he repose any confidence in
these possessions? how could he think himself secure in such a neglect or
defiance of God?) Or he must be exceedingly profane, entertaining most
dishonorable and injurious apprehensions of God: He cannot but imagine God
very unkind, not only in neglecting men that want his help, but in making them
to suffer for spending upon his account; very unjust, in not repaying what he
borrows; very unfaithful, in breaking his word; very deceitful, in gulling us
of our things by fair promises of restitution and requital: Or he must
apprehend God forgetful of what we do, and himself says; or that he is needy
and impotent, not having wherewith to make satisfaction, not being able to make
good what he pretends. He must in his conceit debase God even beneath the
vilest Creatures, thinking a senseless lump of clay more apt in his need to
help him, than God can be with all his power and care; supposing his money
safer in his own Coffers, than in Gods hands; and that Iron Bars will guard it
more surely, than divine protection; esteeming his Neighbors Bond for much
better security than Gods Word; and that a mortal man is far more able or more
true, than the Eternal Lord. He certainly cannot think one word true, that God
says, being loath to trust him for a penny, for a piece of bread, or for an old
garment; all Gods promises of recompense, and threatenings of punishment, he
takes for idle fictions; Heaven and Hell are but Vtopia's in his conceit; the
joys of one, offered to the charitable person, are but pleasant fancies; the
torments of the other, denounced to the uncharitable, but fearful dreams: all
other things are but names, money and lands are the only real things unto him:
all the happiness he can conceive or wish, is contained in bags and barns;
these are the sole points of his Faith, and objects of his confidence. Habac.
2. 9.
He makes gold his hope, and says to the fine gold, Thou art my confidence: he
rejoices because his wealth is great, and because his hand has gotten much,
Job 31. 34.
(as Job speaks, disclaiming that practice in himself, and tacitly charging
it on the persons we speak of.) He does in fine affect a total independency
upon God, and cares to have no dealing with him; he would trust to himself, and
live on his own estate: so gross infidelity, and horrible profaneness of mind,
lie couched under this sort of vices.

As for the love of God, the liberal man declares it, in that for Gods sake he
is willing to part with any thing; that he values Gods love and favor above
all other goods; that he deems himself rich and happy enough in the enjoyment
of God. 1 John 3. 17.
But, Who has this worlds goods, and sees his brother have need, and shuts
up his bowels from him, how dwells the love of God in him? says St. John;
that is, it is impossible he should love God; it is a vain conceit to think he
does; it is a frivolous thing for him to pretend it; for how possibly can he
bear in his heart any affection to God, who will not for his sake, and at his
instance, part with a little worthless trash, and dirty pelf? who prizes so
inconsiderable matters beyond Gods favor and friendship? who prefers the
keeping of his wealth, before the enjoyment of God; and chooses rather certainly
to quit his whole interest in God, than to adventure a small parcel of his
estate with God? His practice indeed sufficiently discovers, that his hard and
stupid heart is incapable of any love, except of a corrupt, inordinate and fond
love, or dotage toward himself, since so present and sensible objects cannot
affect him: 1 John 4* 20.
He that loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he
has not seen?

And as to the fear and reverence of God, the liberal man expresses it in
submission to Gods commands, although with his own present seeming diminution
and loss; in preferring the discharging of his Conscience before the retaining
his Money; in casting overboard his temporal goods, that he may secure his
spiritual and eternal concernments: He can say (his practice attesting to his
profession) with David, I love thy commandments above gold; Psalm. 119 127, ^2.
and, The law of thy mouth is dearer to me than thousands of gold and silver;
he shows, that he is a man of truth, Exodus 18. 21.
fearing God, and hating covetousness; which dispositions, as having much
affinity and connection, are well joined together by Jethro. But the
uncharitable man can have little fear of God before his eyes; since the
commands of God have no efficacy on his Conscience; since he dreads not the
effects of divine power and justice, provoked by his disobedience; since he
deems an imaginary danger of want from giving, worse than a certain commission
of sin in withholding; and is more afraid of penury here, than of damnation
hereafter.

The truth is, the covetous or illiberal man is therefore incapable of being
truly pious, because his heart is possessed with vain devotion toward somewhat
beside God, which in effect is his sole Divinity: Col. 3. 5.
he is justly styled an Idolater, Ephesians. 5. 5.
for that he directs and employs the chief affections of his mind upon an Idol
of Clay, which he loves with all his heart and all his soul, which he entirely
confides in, which he esteems and worships above all things. It is Mammon,
which of all the Competitors and Antagonists of God, invading Gods right, and
usurping his place, Mat. 6. 24.
is (as our Lord intimates) the most dangerous, and desperately repugnant:
where he becomes predominant, true Religion is quite excluded, Ye cannot serve
God and Mammon. Other vicious inclinations combat reason, and often baffle it,
but seldom so vanquish it, as that a man does approve or applaud himself in his
miscarriages; but the covetous humor seizes on our reason it self, and
seateth it self therein; inducing it to favor and countenance what is done
amiss: the voluptuous man is swayed by the violence of his appetite, but the
covetous is seduced by the dictate of his judgment; he therefore scrapes and
hoards, and lets go nothing, because he esteems wealth the best thing in the
world, and then judges himself most wise, when he is most base: Prove. 23. 4.
Labor not to be rich, cease from thine own wisdom, says Solomon; intimating
the judgment such persons are wont to make of their riches: whence of all
dispositions opposite to piety, this is the most pernicious. But farther,

6. Let us consider; That nothing is more conformable to Gods nature, or
renders us more like to him, than beneficence and mercy; and that consequently
nothing can be more grateful to him; that nothing is more disagreeable and
contrary to the essential disposition of God, than illiberality and
unmercifulness, and therefore that nothing can be more distastful to him. What
is any being in the world, but an efflux of his bounty, and an argument of his
liberality? Look every where about Nature, consider the whole tenor of
Providence; survey all the works, and scan all the actions of God, you will
find them all conspiring in attestation to those sweet Characters and Elogies,
which the holy Scripture ascribes to God, representing him to be Merciful and
gracious, Exodus 34* 6.
longsuffering, and abundant in goodness; Joel* 2. 13.
to be sorry for evil, (incident or inflicted upon any Creature) to delight in
mercy, Mic. 7. 18.
to wait that he may be gracious; Isai. 30. 18.
stiling him the God of love, Romans 5. 33. 13. 5.
of peace, Ephesians. 2. 4.
of hope, of patience, of all grace, 2 Cor. 13. 11. 1. 3.
and of all consolation; the Father of pities, Jam. 5. 11.
rich in mercy, and full of bowels; 1 Pet. 5. 10.
affirming of him, and by manifold evident evidences demonstrating, that he is
benign even unto the ungrateful and evil; Luk* 6. 35.
that He is good to all, Psalm. 145. 9.
and his tender mercies are over all his works. Nature, (I say) Providence and
Revelation, do all concur in testifying this, that there is nothing in God so
peculiarly admirable, (...). Naz. Orat. 26.
nothing (as it were) so God-like; that is, so highly venerable and amiable, as
to do good and show mercy. We therefore by liberal communication to the needy,
Deus est mortal juvare mortalem. Plin. Not. H. lib. 2.
do most approach to the nature of God, and most exactly imitate his practice;
acquiring to our selves thereby somewhat of Divinity, and becoming little Gods
to our Neighbor: (...). Chrysostom. in Mat. Orat. 35.
Nothing (says St. Chrysostom) makes us so near equal to God, as
beneficence; and, (...) Naz. Orat. 16.
Be (says St. Gregory Nazianzen) a God to the unfortunate, imitating the mercy
of God; for a man has nothing of God so much as to do good. That such has
always been the common apprehension of men, the practice of all times shows,
in that men have been ever apt to place their Benefactors among their Gods,
deferring that love and veneration unto them in degree, which in perfection do
appertain to the supreme Benefactor. Luke 6. 35, 36.
Be merciful, as your heavenly Father is merciful; so our Savior proposes
Gods mercy to us, both as a pattern directing, and as an argument inducing us
to mercifulness; implying it also to be a good sign declaring us the children
of God; the genuine offspring of the all-good and all-merciful Father; yea,
that it even renders and constitutes us such, (we thereby coming most truly to
represent, and most nearly to resemble him.) Our Lord farther teaches us, Mat.
5. 44, 45.
saying, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to those that
hate you -- that you may be the sons of your Father which is in heaven. And
they who thus are Gods children, must consequently be very dear to him, and
most gracious in his sight; he cannot but greatly like and love himself (the
best of himself) in them; he cannot but cherish and treat them well, who are
the fairest and truest images of himself; no spectacle can be so pleasant to
him, as to see us in our practice to act himself, doing good to one another;
Colos. 3. 12.
as the elect of God, holy and beloved, putting on bowels of mercies and
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, longsuffering; forbearing one another,
and forgiving one another, even as Christ forgave us, Ephesians. 5. 1, 2.
being followers of God as dear children, and walking in love, even as Christ
also loved us. But on the other side, there is not in Nature any thing so
remotely distant from God, or so extremely opposite to him, as a greedy and
griping Niggard; Hell is scarce so contrary to Heaven, as such a man's
disposition to the nature of God; for it is goodness which sits gloriously
triumphant at the top of Heaven; and uncharitableness lies miserably
grovelling under the bottom of Hell: Heaven descends from the one, as its
principal cause; Hell is built on the other, as its main foundation: as the one
approximates the blessed Angels to God, and beatifies them; so the other
removes the cursed Fiends to such a distance from God and happiness: not to
wish, not to do any good, is that which renders them both so bad, and so
wretched; and whoever in his conditions is so like to them, and in his practice
so agrees with them, cannot but also be very odious to God, and extremely
unhappy; God cannot but abhor so base a degeneration from his likeness in
those, who by nature are his children, and should be farther such according to
his gracious design; neither can any thing more offend his eyes, than seeing
them to use one another unkindly: so that if obtaining the certain favor of
the great God, with all the benefits attending it, seem considerable to us; or
if we think it advisable to shun his displeasure, with its sad effects; it
concerns us to practice these duties. So I conclude that sort of
Considerations, enforcing these duties, which more immediately regard God.

Farther, III. Head of Discourse.
before we deny our relief to our poor Neighbor, let us with the eyes of our
mind look on him, and attentively consider who he is; what he is in himself,
and what he is in relation unto us.

1. He whose need craves our bounty, whose misery demands our mercy, what is
he? He is not truly so mean and sorry a thing, as the disguise of misfortune,
under which he appears, does represent him. He who looks so deformedly and
dismally, who to outward sight is so ill bestead, and so pitifully accoustred,
has latent in him much of admirable beauty and glory; he within himself
contains a nature very excellent; an immortal soul, and an intelligent mind,
by which he nearly resembles God himself, and is comparable to Angels; he
invisibly is owner of endowments, rendering him capable of the greatest and best
things: What are Money and Lands? what are Silk and fine Linen? what are Horses
and Hounds in comparison to Reason, to Wisdom, to Virtue, to Religion, which he
has, or (in despite of all misfortune) he may have, if he please? He whom you
behold so dejectedly sneaking, in so despicable a garb, so destitute of all
convenience and comfort, (lying in the dust, naked or clad with rags, meagre
with hunger or pain) he comes of a most high and heavenly extraction; he was
born a Prince, the Son of the greatest King Eternal; he can truly call the
Sovereign Lord of all the World his Father; having derived his soul from the
mouth, having had his body formed by the hands of God himself: Prove. 22. 2.
(in this, The rich and poor, as the Wiseman says, do meet together; the Lord
is the Maker of them all.) That same forlorn Wretch, whom we are so apt to
despise and trample upon, Genesis 1. 28.
was framed and constituted Lord of the visible World; had all the goodly
brightnesses of Heaven, and all the costly furnitures of Earth created to serve
him: Psalm. 8* 6.
( Thou made him, says the Psalmist of man) to have dominion over the works
of thine hands; thou have put all things under his feet:) Yea, he was made an
inhabitant of Paradise, and Possessour of felicities superlative; had immortal
life, and endless joy in his hand; did enjoy the entire favor and friendship
of the most High: such in worth of Nature, and nobleness of Birth he is, as a
man; and highly more considerable he is, as a Christian: for as vile and
contemptible as he looks, God has so regarded and prized him, as for his sake
to descend from Heaven, to cloth himself with flesh, to assume the form of a
servant; for his good to undertake and undergo the greatest inconveniences,
infirmities, wants and disgraces; the most grievous troubles, and most sharp
pains incident to mortal nature; God has adopted him to be his Child; the Son
of God has deigned to call him Brother; he is a Member of Christ, a Temple of
the Holy Ghost, a free Denizon of the heavenly City; an Heir of Salvation, and
Candidate of eternal Glory; the greatest and richest Personage is not capable
of better privileges, than God has granted him, or of higher preferments,
than God has designed him to: He equally with the mightiest Prince is the
object of Gods especial Providence and Grace, of his continual regard and care,
of his fatherly love and affection; who, as good Elihu says, Job 34. 19.
accepts not the persons of Princes, nor regards the rich more than the
poor; for they are all the work of his hands. In fine, this poor Creature whom
thou see, is a man, and a Christian, thine equal, whoever thou art, in
nature, and thy peer in condition; I say not in the uncertain and unstable
gifts of fortune, not in this worldly state, which is very inconsiderable; but
in gifts vastly more precious, in title to an estate infinitely more rich and
excellent: yea, if thou art vain and proud, he sober and humble, he is thy
better, in true dignity much to be preferred before thee, far in real wealth
surpassing thee: Prove. 28. 6.
for, Better is the poor that walks in his uprightness, than he that is
perverse in his ways, though he be rich.

2. That distinction, which thou stand upon, and which seems so vast
between thy poor Neighbor and thee, what is it? whence did it come? whither
tends it? It is not any wise natural, or according to primitive design: for as
all men are in faculties and endowments of nature equal, so were they all
originally equal in condition, all wealthy and happy, all constituted in a most
prosperous and plentiful estate; all things at first were promiscuously exposed
to the use and enjoyment of all; every one from the common stock assuming as
his own what he needed. Inequality and private interest in things, (...). Greg.
Naz. Orat. 16.
(together with sicknesses and pains, together with all other infelicities and
inconveniences) were the by-blows of our fall; sin introduced these degrees
and distances; it devised the names of rich and poor; it begot these
ingrossings and enclosures of things; it forged those two small pestilent
words, meum and tuum, which have engendered so much strife among men, and
created so much mischief in the world: these preternatural distinctions were (I
say) brooded by our fault, and are in great part fostered and maintained
thereby; for were we generally so good, so just, so charitable as we should be,
they could hardly subsist, especially in that measure they do. God indeed (for
promoting some good ends, and for prevention of some mischiefs, apt to spring
from our ill nature in this our lapsed state; particularly to prevent the
strife and disorder which scrambling would cause among men, presuming on equal
right, and parity of force) does suffer them in some manner to continue, (...).
Basil. M.
and enjoins us a contented submission to them; but we mistake, if we think
that natural equality and community are in effect quite taken away; or that all
the world is so cantonized among some few, that the rest have no share therein;
No, every man has still a competent patrimony due to him, and a sufficient
provision made for his tolerable subsistence; God has brought no man hither to
be necessarily starved, or pinched with extreme want; but has assigned to
every one a Child's portion, Incas^um se innocents putant, qui commune Dei
munus sibi privatum vindicant. Greg. M.
in some fair way to be obtained by him, either by legal right, or by humble
request, which according to Conscience ought to have effect. No man therefore
is allowed to detain, or to destroy superfluously what another man apparently
wants, but is obliged to impart it to him: so that rich men are indeed but the
Treasurers, the Stewards, Mat. 24. 45.
the Caterers of God for the rest of men, having a strict charge to dispense
unto every one his meat in due season, Luke 12. 42.
and no just privilege to withhold it from any: the honor of distribution is
conferred on them, as a reward of their fidelity and care; the right of
enjoyment is reserved to the poor, as a provision for their necessity. Thus
has God wisely projected, that all his Children should both effectually and
quietly be provided for; and that none of them should be oppressed with penury;
so that (as St. Paul has it) One man's 2 Cor. 8* 14.
abundance should supply another man's want, that there may be an equality: for
since no man can enjoy more than he needs, and every man should have so much as
he needs, there can be really no great inequality among men; the distinction
will scarce remain other where than in fancy. What the Philosopher said of
himself, Ego mea sic ha^eo, ut omnium sint. Demetrius apud Sen. de Benef. VII.
10. (...). Basil. M.
What I have, is so mine, that it is every man's, is according to the practice
of each man, who is truly and in due measure charitable; whereby that seemingly
enormous discrimination among men is well moderated, and the equity of Divine
Providence is vindicated: But he that ravenously grasps far more than he can
well use, and gripes it fast in his clutches, so that the needy in their
distress cannot come by it, does pervert that equity which God has established
in things, defeats his good intention, (so far as he can) and brings a scandal
on his Providence; and so doing is highly both injurious and impious.

3. It was also (which we should consider) even one main end of this difference
among us, permitted and ordered by Gods Providence, that as some men's industry
and patience might be exercised by their poverty, so other men by their wealth
should have ability of practicing justice and charity; that so both rich and
poor might thence become capable of recompenses, suitable to the worth of such
virtuous performances. Why art thou rich, (says St. Basil) and he poor? (...).
Bas. M.
Surely for this; That thou may attain the reward of benignity, and faithful
dispensation; and that he may be honored with the great prize of patience. God
in making thee rich, would have thee to be a double Benefactor, not only to thy
poor Neighbor, but also to thy self; whilst thou bestowest relief on him,
purchasing a reward to thy self. God also by this order of things designs, that
a charitable intercourse should be maintained among men, mutually pleasant and
beneficial; the rich kindly obliging the poor, and the poor gratefully serving
the rich. Wherefore by neglecting these duties, we unadvisedly cross the good
purpose of God toward us, depriving our selves of the chief advantages our
wealth may afford.

4. We should also do well to consider, that a poor man, even as such, is not
to be disregarded, and that poverty it self is no such contemptible thing as we
may be prone to imagine: there are Considerations, which may qualify Poverty
even to dispute the place with Wealth, and to claim precedence to it: If the
world vulgarly does account, and call the rich man happy, a better Author has
pronounced the poor man such: Luke 6* 20.
Blessed are the poor, does march in the van of the Beatitudes, and a reason
goes along therewith, which asserteth its right to the place; for theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven; for that they are not only in an equal capacity as men,
but in a nearer disposition as poor to the acquisition of that blissful state;
for that poverty (the Mistress of Sobriety and honest Industry, the Mother of
Humility and Patience, the Nurse of all Virtue) renders men more willing to go,
and more expedite in the way toward Heaven: by it also we conform unto the Son
of God himself, the Heir of Eternal Majesty, the Savior of the World, 2 Cor 8.
9.
who for our sake became poor, ((...), for our sake became a beggar) that we
through his poverty (or beggary) might become rich: he willingly chose, he
especially dignified and sanctified that depth of poverty, which we so proudly
slight and loath. The greatest Princes and Potentates in the World, the most
wealthy and haughty of us all, but for one poor Beggar had been irrecoverably
miserable: to Poverty it is, that every one of us does owe all the possibility
there is, all the hopes we can have of our Salvation; and shall we then
ingratefully require it with scorn, or with pitiless neglect? shall we presume
in the person of any poor man, to abhor or contemn the very poor, but most holy
and most happy JESUS, our Lord and Redeemer? No; if we will do Poverty right,
we must rather for his dear sake and memory defer an especial respect and
veneration thereto.

5. Thus a due reflection on the poor man himself, Nemo est in genere humano,
cui non dilectio, et si non pro mutua charitate, pro ipsa tamen communis
naturae societate debetur. Aug Epist. 125.
his nature and state, will induce us to succor; but let us also consider him
as related unto our selves: Every such person is our near Kinsman, is our
Brother, is by indissoluble bands of cognation in blood, and agreement in
Nature knit and united to us. We are all but several streams issuing from one
source, several twigs sprouting from one stock; Act. 17. 26.
One blood, derived through several channels; one substance, (...). Arist.
by miraculous efficacy of the Divine Benediction, multiplied or dilated unto
several times and places. We are all fashioned according to the same original
Idea, resembling God our common Father; we are all endewed with the same
faculties, (...). Greg. N^z.
inclinations and affections; we all conspire in the same essential ingredients
of our constitution, and in the more notable adjuncts thereof; it is only some
inconsiderable accidents, (such as age, place, figure, stature, color, garb)
which diversifie and distinguish us; in which, according to successions of time
and chance, we commonly no less differ from our selves, than we do at present
from them: so that in effect, and reasonable esteem, every man is not only our
Brother, Nih^l est unum uni tam simile, tam par, quam omnes inter nosmetipsos
s^m^s. Cic de Leg. 1.
but (as Aristotle says of a Friend) (...), another ones self; is not only our
most lively image, but in a manner our very substance; another our self under a
small variation of present circumstances: the most of distinction between us
and our poor Neighbor, consists in exterior show, in moveable attire, in
casual appendages to the nature of man; so that really when we use him well, we
are kind to our selves, when we yield him courteous regard, we bear respect to
our own nature; when we feed and comfort him, we do sustain and cherish a
member of our own body: but when we are cruel or harsh to him, we abuse our
selves; when we scorn him, we lay disparagement and disgrace on mankind it
self; when we withhold succor or sustenance from him, we do (as the Prophet
speaks) hide our selves from our own flesh; Isai. 58. 7.
we starve a part of our own body, and wither a branch of our stock: immoderate
selfishness so blinds us, that we oversee and forget our selves: it is in
this, it is in other good senses true what the Wiseman says, The merciful man
does good to his own soul; Prove. 11. 17.
but he that is cruel, troubles his own flesh.

6. Farther, as the poor man is so nearly allied to us by society of common
nature, so is he more strictly joined to us by the bands of spiritual
Consanguinity. All Christians (high and low, rich and poor) are children of the
same heavenly Father, spring from the same incorruptible seed, are regenerated
to the same lively hope, are Coheirs of the same heavenly inheritance; are all
members of one body, ( members, says St. Paul, one of another) and animated by
one holy Spirit; which relation, as it is the most noble, and the most close
that can be, so it should breed the greatest endearments, and should express it
self in correspondent effects; it should render us full of affection and
sympathy one toward another; it should make us to tender the needs, and feel
the sufferings of any Christian as our own; it should dispose us freely to
communicate whatever we have, (...). Eu^ip. Androm.
how precious soever, to any of our brethren: this holy friendship should
establish a charitable equality and community among us, both in point of honor
and of estate: for since all things considerable are common unto us, since we
are all purchased and purified by the same precious blood, since we all partake
of the same precious faith, of the same high calling, of the same honorable
privileges, of the same glorious promises and hopes; since we all have the
same Lord and Savior; why should these secular trifles be so private and
particular among us? Why should not so huge a parity in those only valuable
things not wholly (I say not in worldly state, or outward appearance, such as
the preservation of order in secular affairs requires, Colos. 3. 11.
but) in our opinion and affection extinguish that slight distinction of rich
and poor, in concernments temporal? How can we slight so noble, so great a
Personage as a Christian, for wanting a little dross? How can we deem our
selves much his superior, Heb. 2. 11.
upon so petty an advantage, Mat. 25. 40.
for having that, Joh. 15* 14.
which is not worth speaking or thinking of, in comparison to what he enjoys?
Our Lord himself is not ashamed to call the least among us his Brother, and his
Friend; and shall we then disdain to yield to such an one the regard, and
treatment suitable to such a Quality? Shall we not honor any Brother of our
Lord? shall we not be civil and kind to any Friend of his? If we do not, how
can we pretend to bear any true respect or affection unto himself? It is his
express precept, that the greatest among us should, Mat. 20. 26.
in imitation of his most humble and charitable Self, be ready to serve the
meanest; Romans 12. 10.
and, Phil. 2. 3.
that we should in honor prefer one another, and in lowliness of mind esteem
others better than our selves, are Apostolical Rules, extending indifferently
to rich and poor, which are plainly violated by disregarding the poor. Yea,
this relation should, according to St. John's Doctrine, dispose us not only
freely to impart these temporal goods, but even, if occasion be, willingly to
expose our very lives for our brethren: 1 John 3. 16.
Hereby, says he, we perceive the love of God, because he laid down his life
for us; and we ought to lay down our lives for our brethren. How greatly then
are they deficient from their duty, how little in truth are they Christians,
who are unwilling to part with the very superfluities and excrements of their
fortune for the relief of a poor Christian? Thus considering our Brother may
breed in us charitable dispositions toward him, and induce us to the practice
of these duties.

Moreover, IV. Head of Discourse.
if we reflect upon our selves, and consider either our nature, or our state
here, we cannot but observe many strong engagements to the same practice.

1. The very constitution, frame and temper of our nature, directs and
inclines us thereto; whence by observing those duties, we observe our own
nature, we improve it, we advance it to the best perfection it is capable of;
by neglecting them, we thwart, we impair, we debase the same -- haec nostri
pars optima sensus; Juven. Sat. 15.
The best of our natural inclinations (those sacred relics of Gods image
originally stamped on our minds) do sensibly prompt, -- Mutuus ut nos Affectus
petere auxilium, and praestare juberat.
and vehemently urge us to mercy and pity: the very same bowels, Iuven. 16.
which in our own want do by a lively sense of pain inform us thereof, and
instigate us to provide for its relief, do also grievously resent the
distresses of another, admonishing us thereby, and provoking us to yield him
succor. Such is the natural sympathy between men, (discernable in all, but
appearing most vigorous in the best natures) that we cannot see, cannot hear
of, yea can hardly imagine the calamities of other men, without being somewhat
disturbed, and afflicted our selves. As also nature to the acts requisite
toward preservation of our life, has annexed a sensible pleasure, forcibly
enticing us to the performance of them: so has she made the communication of
benefits to others, to be accompanied with a very delicious relish upon the
mind of him that practices it; nothing indeed carrying with it a more pure and
savoury delight than beneficence. A man may be virtuously voluptuous, and a
laudable Epicure by doing much good; (...). Plut. de Philos. conv. cum Princ.
for to receive good, even in the judgment of Epicurus himself, (the great
Patron of Pleasure) is no wise so pleasant as to do it: God and Nature
therefore within us do solicit the poor man's case; even our own ease and
satisfaction demand from us compassion and kindness toward him; by exercising
them, we hearken to Natures wise Disciplines, and comply with her kindly
Instincts; we cherish good humor, and sweeten our complexion; so ennobling our
minds, we become not only more like to God, but more perfectly men; by the
contrary practice we rebel against the Laws, and pervert the due course of our
Nature; we do weaken, corrupt and stifle that which is best in us; we harden
and stupifie our souls; so monstrously degenerating from the perfection of our
kind, and becoming rather like savage beasts, than sociable men; yea, somewhat
worse perhaps than many beasts; for commonly bruits will combine to the succor
of one another; they will defend and help those of the same kind.

2. And if the sensitive part within us does suggest so much, the rational
dictates more unto us; that heavenly faculty, having capacities so wide, and so
mighty energies; was surely not created to serve mean or narrow designs; it was
not given us to scrape eternally in earth, or to amass heaps of clay for
private enjoyment; for the service of one puny creature, for the sustenance or
satisfaction of a single carcass: it is much below an intelligent person to
weary himself with servile toils, to distract his mind with ignoble cares for
concernments so low and scanty; but to regard and pursue the common good of
men; to dispense advise and aid, where needs requires; to diffuse its virtue
all about in beneficial effects; these are Operations worthy of Reason, these
are Employments congruous to the native excellency of that Divine Power
implanted in us; such performances declare indeed what a man is, whence he
sprang, and whither he tends.

3. Farther, examining our selves, we may also observe, that we are in reality,
what our poor Neighbor appears to be, in many respects no less indigent and
impotent than he: we no less, yea far more, for our subsistence depend upon the
arbitrary bounty of another, than he seems to rely upon ours. We as
desectible creatures do continually want support; we as grievous sinners do
always need mercy; every moment we are contracting huge debts, far beyond our
ability to discharge; debts of gratitude for benefits received, debts of guilt
for offenses committed; we therefore perpetually stand obliged to be craving
for mercy and relief at the Gates of Heaven. We all, from Prince to Peasant,
live merely upon alms, and are most really in condition Beggars: to to pray
always, is a duty incumbent on us from the condition of our nature, as well as
by the command of God. Such a likeness in state should therefore dispose us to
succor our fellows, Greg. Naz.
and (...), to lend mercy to God, who need mercy from him, as the good Father
speaks. Heb. 13. 3.
We should (as the Apostle advises and argues) Remember them that are in
bounds, as bound with them; and them which suffer adversity, as being our
selves also in the body; as being companions in necessity, or subject to the
like didistress. If we daily receive mercy and relief, yet unmindful of our
obligation to God, refuse them to others, shall we not deserve to hear that
dreadful exprobration, Mat. 18. 32, 33.
O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt because thou desiredst me;
should not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow servants, even as I
had pity on thee?

4. The great incertainty, (...). S^ph^n. T^^chin.
and instability of our condition, does also require our consideration We that
now flourish in a fair and full estate, may soon be in the case of that poor
creature, who now sues for our relief; we that to this day enjoy the wealth of
Job, may the morrow need his patience; there are Sabeans, which may come and
drive away our cattle; there are tempests, which may arise, and smite down our
houses; there is a fire of God, which may fall from Heaven, and consume our
substance; a messenger of all these mischiefs may, for all we know, be
presently at our doors; it happened so to a better man than we, as unexpectedly
and with as small ground to fear it, as it can arrive to us: all our wealth is
surrounded with dangers, and exposed to casualties innumerable; Violence may
snatch it from us, Treachery may cheat us of it; Mischance may seize thereon, a
secret Moth may devour it; the wisdom of Providence for our trial, or its
justice for our punishment, may bereave us thereof; its own light and fluid
nature (if no other accomptable causes were apparent) might easily serve to
waft it from us; Prove. 23. 5.
for, Riches (says the Wiseman) make themselves wings, (they it seems do need
no help for that) and fly away like as an Eagle toward Heaven; that is, of
their own accord they do swiftly convey themselves away, out of our sight, and
beyond our reach: they are but wind, Eccles. 5. 21.
What profit (says the Preacher) has he that labors for the wind? for wind,
that is, for a thing which can no wise be fixed or settled in one corner; which
therefore it is a vanity to conceive, that we can surely appropriate, or long
retain. How then can we think to stand firm upon a place so slippery? How can
we build any confidence on a bottom so loose and brittle? How can we suffer our
minds to be swelled up, like bubbles, with vain conceit, by the breath of such
things, more fleeting and vertiginous than any Air? against the precepts of the
wisest and best men: Psalm. 62. 10.
If riches increase, says the Psalmist, set not your heart on them: Prove. 23.
5.
Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? says the Wise man: (that is,
will thou regard that which is so transitory and evanid, that it hardly may be
deemed real; which we can scarce look on, before it is gone?) and, Charge them
(says St. Paul) that are rich in this world, that they be not high minded, nor
trust in uncertain riches: ((...), in the obscurity, or inevidence of riches;
things which we can never plainly discern how long we shall keep them, how much
we can enjoy them) what should make us unwilling with certain advantage to our
selves, freely to let that go, which presently without our leave may forsake
us? How can we reasonably judge our case much different from that of the
poorest body, whenas in a trice we may perhaps change places and persons; when
the scene turning, he may be advanced unto our wealth, we may be depressed into
his want? since every Age yields instances of some Croesus, some Polycrates,
some Pompey, some Job, some Nebuchodonosor, who within a small compass of time
does appear to all men the object both of admiration and pity, is to the less
wise the mark both of envy and scorn; seeing every day presents unexpected
vicissitudes, the Sea of Humane Affairs continually ebbing and flowing, now
rolling on this, now on the other shore its restless waves of profit and
credit; since especially there is a God, who arbitrarily disposes things, and
with a turn of his hand changes the state of men; who, as the Scripture says,
Makes rich and poor, 1 Samuel 2. 7.
brings low and lifts up; Job 12. 21.
pours contempt upon Princes; Psalm. 107. 41. 113. 7.
raises the poor out of the dust, and lifts the beggar from the dunghill, to
set them among Princes, and to make them inherit the throne of glory: seeing, I
say, apparently such is the condition of things here, that we may soon need his
pity and help, who now requesteth ours, why should we not be very ready to
afford them to him? why should we not gladly embrace our opportunity, and use
our turn well; becoming aforehand with others, and preventing their reciprocal
contempt or neglect of us hereafter? Eccles. 11. 1.
Cast thy bread upon the waters, for thou shall find it after many days; give a
portion to seven, and also unto eight, for thou know not what evil shall be
upon the earth: that is, considering the inconstancy and uncertainty of affairs
here, and what adversity may befall thee, be liberal upon all occasions, and
thou shall (even a good while after) find returns of thy liberality upon thee:
so the Wiseman advises, and so Wisdom certainly dictates that we should do;

5. And equity does exact no less: for were any of us in the needy man's plight,
(as easily we may be reduced thereto) we should believe our case deserved
commiseration; we should importunately demand relief, we should be grievously
displeased at a repulse; we should apprehend our selves very hardly dealt with,
and sadly we should complain of inhumanity and cruelty, if succor were refused
to us. In all equity therefore we should be apt to minister the same to others;
Benefic 'um qui dare nescit, injuste petit. La^er. Mim.
for nothing can be more unreasonable or unjust, than to require or expect that
from another, which in a like case we are unwilling to render unto him; it is a
plain deviation from that Fundamental Rule, which is the Base of all Justice;
and virtually the sum (as our Savior tells us) of whatever is prescribed us:
Mat. 7. 12.
All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to
them; for this is the Law and the Prophets. I add, that upon these
Considerations, by unmerciful dealing, we put our selves into a very bad and
ticklish condition; wholly depending upon the constancy of that which is most
inconstant; so that if our fortune do fail, we can neither reasonably hope for,
nor justly pretend to any relief or comfort from others.

6. We should also remember concerning our selves, that we are mortal and
frail. Were we immortal, or could we probably retain our Possessions for ever
in our hands; yea, could we foresee some definite space of time, considerably
long, in which we might assuredly enjoy our stores, it might seem somewhat
excusable to scrape hard, and to hold fast; to do so might look like rational
Providence: Prove. 27. 24.
but since Riches are not for ever, nor does the Crown endure to all
generations, (as the Wiseman speaks) since they must infallibly be soon
left, and there is no certainty of keeping them for any time; it is very
unaccomptable why we should so greedily seek them, and hug them so fondly. Jam.
1. 10, 11.
The rich man, says St. James, as the flower of the grass shall pass away: it
is his special doom to fade away suddenly; it is obvious why in many respects
he is somewhat more than others obnoxious to the fatal stroke, and upon special
accounts of justice he may be farther more exposed thereto; considering the
case of the rich fool in the Gospel, Luke 12. 20.
we may easily discern them; we should reckon, that it may happen to us, as it
did there to him; that after we have reared great Barns, and stored up much
goods for many years, our soul this very night may be required of us; however,
if it be uncertain when, it is most certain, that after a very short time our
thread will be spun out; 1 Timothy 6. 7.
then shall we be rifled, Eccles. 5. 15.
and quite stripped of all; Job. 1. 21.
becoming stark naked, as when we came into the world: we shall not carry with
us one grain of our glistering Metals, or one rag of our gaudy Stuff; our
stately Houses, our fine Gardens, and our spacious Walks, must all be exchanged
for a close Hole under ground; Isai. 14. 11.
we must for ever bid farewell to our Pomps and Magnificences, to our Feasts and
Jollities, to our Sports and Pastimes; not one of all our numerous and splendid
retinue; no Companion of our Pleasure, no Admirer of our Fortune, no Flatterer
of our Vices can wait upon us; desolate and unattended we must go down into the
Chambers of Darkness; then shall we find, that to die rich (as men are wont
improperly to speak) is really to die most poor; that to have carefully kept
our Money, is to have lost it utterly; that by leaving much, we do indeed leave
worse than nothing: To have been wealthy, if we have been illiberal and
unmerciful, will be no advantage or satisfaction to us after we are gone hence;
yea, it will be the cause of huge damage, and bitter regret unto us: All our
Treasures will not procure us any favor, or purchase one Advocate for us in
that impartial World; yea, it shall be they which will there prosecute us with
clamorous accusations, will bear sore testimony against us, ( The rust of them,
says St. James, Jam. 5. 3.
shall be a witness against us, signifying our unjust or uncharitable detention
of them) will obtain a most heavy sentence upon us; Luke 16. 25. 6. 24. 12. 21.
they will render our audit more difficult, Matthew. 25. 30.
and inflame our reckoning; Jam. 5. 5.
they will aggravate the guilt of our sins with imputations of unfaithfulness
and ingratitude; so with their load they will press us deeper into perdition; 1 Timothy 6. 9.
to omit, that having so ill managed them, we shall leave them behind us as
marks of obloquy, and monuments of infamy upon our memories; for ordinarily of
such a rich person it is true, Job 27. 19, 23.
that Job says of him, Men shall clap their hands at him, and shall hiss him
out of his place; like one, who departs from off this stage, after having very
ill acted his part. Is it not therefore infinitely better to prevent this being
necessarily and unprofitably deprived of our goods, by seasonably disposing
them so, as may conduce to our benefit, and our comfort, and our honor; being
very indifferent and unconcerned in our affection toward them; modest and
humble in our conceits about them; moderate and sober in our enjoyments of
them; contented upon any reasonable occasion to loose or leave them; and
especially most ready to dispense them in that best way; which God has
prescribed, according to the exigencies of Humanity and Charity? By thus
ordering our Riches, we shall render them benefits and blessings to us; Luke 16
9.
we shall by them procure sure friendship and favor, great worship and respect
in the other world; having so lived (in the exercise of bounty and mercy) we
shall truly die rich, and in effect carry all our goods along with us, or
rather we have thereby sent them before us; having, like wise Merchants,
transmitted and drawn them by a most safe conveyance into our Country and Home;
where infallibly we shall find them, and with everlasting content enjoy them.
So considering our selves, and and our state will dispose us to the practice of
these duties.

Furthermore, V. Head of Discourse.
if we contemplate our Wealth it self, we may therein descry great motives to
bounty.

1. Thus to employ our Riches, is really the best use they are capable of; not
only the most innocent, most worthy, most plausible; but the most safe, most
pleasant, most advantageous, and consequently in all respects most prudent way
of disposing them. To keep them close without using or enjoying them at all, is
a most sottish extravagance, or a strange kind of madness; (...). Basil. M. Tam
deest avaro quod habe^, q^am quod non habet.
a man thence affecting to be rich, quite impoverisheth himself, dispossesseth
himself of all, and alienateth from himself his Estate: his Gold is no more
his, than when it was in the Indies, or lay hid in the Mines; his Corn is no
more his, than if it stood growing in Arabia or China; he is no more owner of
his Lands, than he is Master of Jerusalem, or Grand-Cairo; for what difference
is there, whether distance of place or baseness of mind sever things from him?
whether his own heart, or another man's hand detain them from his use? whether
he has them not at all, or has them to no purpose? whether one is a beggar
out of necessity, or by choice? is pressed to want, or a Volunteer thereto?
Such an one may fancy himself rich, and others, wise as himself, may repute him
so; but so distracted persons to themselves and to one another do seem great
Princes, and style themselves such; with as much reason almost he might pretend
to be wise, or to be good. Riches are (...), things whose nature consists in
usefulness; abstract that, they become nothing, things of no consideration or
value; he that has them, is no more concerned in them, than he that has them
not: it is the heart and skill to use affluence of things wisely and nobly,
which makes it Wealth, Desunt inopi multa, avaro omnia. Scn. Ep 108.
and constitutes him rich that has it; otherwise the Chests may be crammed,
and the Barns stuffed full, while the man is miserably poor and beggarly; it is
in this sense true, which the Wiseman says, There is that makes himself rich,
Prove. 13. 7.
yet has nothing. But the very having Riches (will such a man say) is matter
of Reputation; men do esteem and honor him that has them; true, if he knows
how, and has the mind to use them well, otherwise all the credit they yield
consists in making their Master ridiculous to wise men, and infamous among all
men: but, putting ^ase that any should be so foolish as to respect us merely
for seeming rich, why should we accommodate our practice to their vain opinion,
or be base our selves because others are not wise? But however, (may he say
again) it is a pleasant thing to see them; a heap of Gold is the most lovely
spectacle that one can behold; it does a man's heart good to view an abundance
of good things about him; for this plea indeed he has a good Author; this it
should seem was all the benefit the Wiseman observed in them, accruing to such
persons: Eccles. 5 11.
What good, says he, is there to the owners thereof, saving the beholding of
them with their eyes? But if this be all they are good for, it is, one would
think, a very slim benefit they afford, little able to balance the pain and
care requisite to the acquist and custody of them; a benefit indeed not proper
to the possessour, for any one may look on them as well as he, or on the like;
any one at pleasure may enjoy better sights; all the Riches and Ornaments of
Nature, the glorious splendours of Heaven, and the sweet beauties of the Field,
are exposed to common view; the choicest Magnificencies and Gallantries of the
World, do studiously present themselves to every man's eye; these in part every
man truly may appropriate to himself; and by imagination any man can as well
take all that he sees for his own, as the tenacious Miser does fancy his dear
pelf to be his.

But mine Heir (perhaps he will farther say) will thank me, will praise me,
will bless me for my great care and providence: If he does, what is that to
thee? Nothing of that will concern thee, or can reach thee; thou shall not hear
what he says, or feel any good from what he does: And most probably thou art
mistaken in thy opinion concerning him; as thou know not who he shall be,
Psalm. 39. 6.
that shall gather all thou heapest up, or shall rule over all thy labor,
(whither he shall be a wise man or a fool, Eccles. 2. 19.
a kinsman or a stranger, a friend or a foe) so thou can as little guess what
he will think or say: If he has wit, he may sweetly laugh at thee for thy fond
wisdom; if he has none, his commendations will little adorn thy memory; he
will to thy disgrace spend what thou leavest, as vainly, as thou did get or
keep it. But (this to be sure he will in the end say for himself) Money is a
good reserve against necessary occasions, or bad times, that may come; against
the time of old age, of sickness, of adversity; it is the surest friend a man
can have in such cases, which, when all fails, will be ready to help him: Prove.
10. 15.
The rich man's Wealth is his strong City, the Wiseman he thinks never spoke
more wisely; he therefore will not dismantle this fortress, but will keep it
well stored, letting therefore his wealth lie dead and useless by him: but (to
let pass now the profane infidelity of this plea, excluding all hope in God,
and substituting our Providence in the room of his) what a folly is it, thus to
anticipate evil, and to create to our selves a present adversity from a
suspicion of one future; to pinch our selves now, lest we should suffer
hereafter; to pine to day, because we can imagine it possible that we may
starve to morrow; to forego certain occasions of enjoying our goods, for that
perchance the like occasions may happen one day, we know not when; not to use
things now, when reason bids us, because they may be useful at another time?
Not considering also, that many intervenient accidents, more probably than a
moderate and handsome use of our Wealth, may crop the excrescencies thereof.

2. But setting aside these absurd excuses of penuriousness, we may consider,
that secluding the good use of them in beneficence, Riches are very
impertinent, very cumbersom, very dangerous, very mischievous things; either
superfluous toys, or troublesome clogs, or treacherous snares, or rather all
these in combination, productive of trouble, sorrow, and sin. A small pittance
will, and must suffice to all reasonable purposes, to satisfy our necessities,
to procure conveniences, to yield innocent delight and ease: our nature does
not require, nor cannot bear much: ( Take heed and beware of covetousness, Luke
12. 15.
says our Lord, for a man's life consists not in the abundance of the things
which he possesses: 1 Timothy 6 8.
that is, a man may live well without it) all the rest, setting beneficence
apart, can only serve vanity or vice, will make us really fools or slaves. 1 Timothy 6. 9.
( They that will be rich, (says the Apostle) fall into temptation, and a
snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men into
destruction and perdition.) They puff up our minds with vain and false
conceits; making us, as if we were in a dream or frenzy, to take our selves for
other persons, more great, more wise, more good, more happy than we are: for
constantly, as the Wiseman observed, Prove. 28. 11.
The rich man is wise in his own conceit; and Agur thus intimates in his
prayer, Prove. 3^. 8.
Remove far from me vanity and lies, give me neither poverty nor riches. They
render us insensible and forgetful of God, of our selves, of piety and virtue,
of all that is good and worthy of us: Prove 30. 9.
( Lest I be full, said that good man again, assigning a reason why he
deprecated being rich, and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord?) they swallow
up our thoughts, our affections, our endeavors, our time and leisure;
possessing our hearts with a doting love unto them, Mat. 6. 2^.
(excluding other good affections) distracting our minds with anxious cares
about them, Mat. 13. 22.
(choking other good thoughts) encumbring all our life with business about
them, Luke 10. 41.
(inconsistent with due attention to our other more weighty and necessary
concernments) filling our heads with suspicions, 2 Timothy 2. 4.
and fears, 1 Timothy 6. 10.
piercing our hearts with troubles and sorrows; they immerse our souls in all
the follies of pride, in all the filths of luxury, Jam. 5. 5.
in all the mischiefs emergent from sloth and stupidity; Luke 16. 19
they are the root of all evils unto us, 1 Timothy 6. 10.
and the greatest obstructions of our true happiness, Mat. 19. 23, 24.
rendering Salvation almost impossible, and Heaven in a manner inaccessible to
us: so that to be rich, (if severed from a sober mind, and a free heart) is a
great disease, and the source of many grievous distempers both of body and
mind; from which we cannot otherwise, well otherwise, secure or rescue our
selves, than by liberally spending them in works of bounty and mercy: so shall
we ease our selves of the burdens, so shall we elude the temptations, so shall
we abandon the vices, and so shall we escape all the sad mischiefs incident to
them: Thus to use wealth, shall turn it into a convenience, and an ornament of
our lives, into a considerable blessing, and a ground of much comfort to us.
Excluding this use of wealth, or abstracting a capacity of doing good
therewith, nothing is more pitiful and despicable than it; it is but like the
load, or the trappings of an Ass; a wise man on that condition would not choose
it, or endure to be pestered with it; but would serve it, as those Philosophers
did, who flung it away, that it might not disturb their contemplations: it is
the power it affords of benefiting men, which only can season, and ingratiate
it to the relish of such a person; otherwise it is evidently true, which the
Wiseman affirms, Prove. 15. 16.
Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, than great treasure, and trouble
therewith.

3. Again, we may consider, that to dispense our Wealth liberally, is the best
way to preserve it, and to continue Masters thereof; what we give, is not
thrown away, but saved from danger; while we detain it at home, (as it seems to
us) it really is abroad, and at adventures; it is out at Sea, sailing
perilously in storms, near rocks and shelves, among Pirates; nor can it ever be
safe, till it is brought into this port, or ensured this way; when we have
bestowed it on the poor, then have we lodged it in unquestionable safety; in a
place where no rapine, no deceit, no mishap, no corruption can ever by any
means come at it. All our Doors and Bars, all our Forces and Guards, all the
circumspection and vigilance we can use, are no defense or security at all in
comparison to this disposal thereof: The poor man's stomach is a Granary for
our Corn, which never can be exhausted; the poor man's back is a Wardrobe for
our Clothes, which never can be pillaged; the poor man's Pocket is a Bank for
our Money, which never can disappoint or deceive us; all the rich Traders in
the World may decay and break, but the Poor can never fail, except God himself
turn Bankrupt; for what we give to the poor, we deliver and entrust in his
hands, out of which no force can wring it, no craft can filch it; it is laid up
in Heaven, whither no thief can climb, where no moth or rust do abide. In
despite of all the fortune, of all the might, of all the malice in the world,
the liberal man will ever be rich; for God's Providence is his Estate; God's
Wisdom and Power are his Defense; God's Love and Favor are his Reward; God's
Word is his Assurance; who has said it, Prove. 28 27*
that He which gives to the poor, shall not lack: no vicissitude therefore of
things can surprise him, or find him unfurnished; no disaster can impoverish
him, no adversity can overwhelm him; he has a certain reserve against all
times and occasions: He that devises liberal things, Isa. 32. 8.
by liberal things shall be stand, (says the Prophet.) But on the other hand,
being niggardly is the likeliest course we can take to lose our Wealth and
Estate; we thereby expose them to danger, and leave them defenseless; we
subject them to the envious eye, to the slanderous tongue, to the ravenous and
insidious hand; we deprive them of Divine protection, which if it be away, The
watchman waketh but in vain: Psalm. 127. 1.
We provoke God irrecoverably to take it from us, as he did the Talent from
that unprofitable servant, who did not use it well. We do indeed thereby yield
God just cause of war, and enmity against us; which being, Omnia dat qui justa
negat; we do forfeit all to Divine Justice, by denying that portion which
belongs to him, and which he claims. Can we hope to live in quiet possession of
any thing, if we refuse to pay our due Tributes and Taxes imposed upon us by
our Almighty Sovereign; if we live in such rebellion against his Authority,
such violation of his right, such diffidence to his Word? Prove. 11. 28.
No: He that trusts in his riches, shall fall, but the righteous shall
flourish as a branch: such is the difference between the covetous and the
liberal in point of security and success concerning their Estate.

Even according to the humane and ordinary way of esteeming things,
(abstracting from the special Providence of God) the liberal person has in
consequence of his bounty, more real security for his Wealth, than this world
has any other: He thereby gets an interest in the gratitude and affection of
those, whom he obliges, together with the good will and respect of all men,
who are spectators of his virtuous and generous dealing: the hearts and
memories of men are repositories to him of a treasure, which nothing can extort
from him, or defraud him of. If any mischance should arrive, or any want come
near him, all men would be ready to commiserate him, every man would hasten to
his succor. As when a haughty, a greedy, or a gripple man do fall into
calamity or disgrace, scarce any one regards or pitieth him; Fortune
deserting such a person, carries all with it, few or none stick to him, his
most zealous flatterers are commonly the first that forsake him, contempt and
neglect are the only adherents to his condition; that of the Wiseman appears
verified, Prove. 28. 27.
He that hides his eyes from the poor, shall have many a curse: so the
courteous and bountiful person, when Fortune seems to frown on him, has a sure
refuge in the good will and esteem of men; all men, upon accounts of honor and
honesty, take themselves to be concerned in his case, and engaged to favor
him; even those, who before were strangers, become then his friends, and in
effect discover their affection to him: it, in the common judgment of people,
appears an indignity and a disgrace to mankind, that such a man should want or
suffer.

4. Nay farther we may consider, that exercising bounty is the most
advantageous method of improving and increasing an Estate; but that being
tenacious and illiberal, does tend to the diminution and decay thereof. The way
to obtain a great increase, is to sow much: he that sows little, how can he
expect a good Crop? It is as true in spiritual Husbandry, as in the other, that
what a man sows, Gal. 6. 7, 8.
that he shall reap, both in kind, and according to proportion; so that great
Husbandman St. Paul assures us, 2 Cor. 9. 6, 10.
He that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly; but he that sows
bountifully, shall also reap bountifully: and Solomon means the same, when he
says, To him that sows righteousness, Prove. 11. 18.
shall be a sure reward. The way to gain abundantly is, you know well, to trade
boldly; he that will not adventure any thing considerable, how can he think of
a large return? It Is so likewise in the Evangelical Negotiations; if we put out
much upon score of Conscience or Charity, we shall be sure to profit much.
Liberality is the most beneficial Traffic that can be; it is bringing our
Wares to the best Market; it is letting out our Money into the best hands; we
thereby lend our Money to God, who repays with vast Usury; an hundred to one is
the rate he allows at present, and above a hundred millions to one he will
render hereafter; so that if you will be Merchants this way, you shall be sure
to thrive, you cannot fail to grow rich most easily and speedily: The liberal
soul shall be made fat, Prove. 11. 24.
and he that waters shall be watered himself: This is that which S. Paul
again argues upon, when commending the Philippians free kindness toward him, he
says, Phil. 4. 17.
Not because I desire a gift, but I desire fruit that may abound to your
account. Bounty yields (...), a fruit that multiplies and abundantly turns to
good account; it indeed procuring Gods benediction, the fountain of all
desirable plenty and prosperity, for, The blessing of the Lord it makes rich,
Prove. 10. 12.
and he adds no sorrow with it. It is therefore the greatest want of policy,
the worst ill-husbandry and unthriftiness that can be, to be sparing this way;
he that uses it, cannot be thriving; he must spend upon the main stock, and may
be sure to get nothing considerable. God ordinarily so proceeds, as to
recompense, and retaliate men in the same kind, wherein they endeavor to
please him, or presume to offend him; so that for them who freely offer him
their goods, he in regard thereto will prosper their dealings, and bless their
estates: ( For this very thing the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy
works, Deuteronomy. 15. 10.
and in all that thou put thine hand unto, says Moses) but they who will
not lay out any thing for him, he will not concern himself in their success
otherwise than to cross it, or (which is worse) to curse it: for if he seem to
favor them for a time with some prosperity in their affairs, Psalm. 73. 17.
their condition is much worse thereby, their account will be more grievous,
and their fate more disastrous in the end.

5. Farther, the contributing part of our goods to the poor, will qualify us
to enjoy the rest with satisfaction and comfort: The Oblation of these
First Fruits, as it will sanctify the whole lump of our Estate, so it will
sweeten it; having offered this well-pleasing sacrifice of piety, having
discharged this debt of justice, having paid this tribute of gratitude, our
hearts being at rest, and our conscience well satisfied, we shall, like those
good people in the Acts, Act. 2. 46.
eat our meat with gladness, and singleness of heart; to see the poor man by
our means accommodated, eased, and refreshed, will give a delicious relish to
all our enjoyments. But withholding his portion from the poor, as it will
pollute and profane all our Estate, so it will render the fruition thereof
sour or unsavory to us: for, can we with any content taste our dainties, or
view our plenties, while the poor man stands in sight pining with hunger? Can
we without regret see our Walls clothed with Tapestry, our Horses decked with
Golden Trappings, our Attendants strutting in wanton Gaiety, while our honest
poor Brother appears half naked, and trembling with cold? Can we carry on one
finger enough to furnish ten poor people with necessaries, and have the heart
within us, without shame and displeasure, to see them want? No; the sense of
our impiety and ingratitude toward God, of our inhumanity and unworthiness
toward our Neighbor, will not fail (if ever we considerately reflect on our
behavior) to sting us with cruel remorse and self-condemnation; the clamours
of want and misery surrounding us, will pierce our ears, and wound our hearts;
the frequent objects of pity and mercy, do what we can to banish them from our
prospect or regard, will so assail, and so pursue us, as to disturb the freedom
of our enjoyments, to quash the briskness of our mirth, to allay the sweetness
of our pleasure; yea rather, if stupidity and obduration have not seized on us,
to imbitter all unto us; we shall feel that true, which Zophar speaks of the
cruel and covetous Oppessour, J^^ 10. 18, 20 22.
Surely he shall not feel quietness in his belly -- he shall not rejoice in his
substance -- in the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits.

6. I shall touch but one consideration more, persuasive of this practice; it
is this: The peculiar nature of our Religion specially requires it, and the
honor thereof exacts it from us; nothing better suits Christianity, nothing
more graces it, than liberality; nothing is more inconsistent therewith, or
more disparageth it, than being miserable and sordid. A Christian Niggard is
the veriest nonsense that can be; for, What is is a Christian? What, but a man,
who adores God alone, who loves God above all things, who reposes all his trust
and confidence in God? What is he, but one who undertaketh to imitate the most
good and bountiful God, to follow, as the best pattern of his practice, the
most benign and charitable JESUS, the Son of God; to obey the Laws of God, and
his Christ, the sum and substance of which is Charity; half whose Religion does
consist in loving his Neighbor as himself? What is he farther, but one who has
renounced this world, with all the vain pomps and pleasures of it; who
professes himself in disposition and affection of mind to forsake all things
for Christ's sake; who pretends little to value, affect, or care for any thing
under Heaven; having all his main concernments and treasures, his heart, his
hopes, and his happiness in another world? Such is a Christian; and what is a
Niggard? All things quite contrary: One whose practice manifestly shows him to
worship another thing beside, and before God; to love Mammon above God, and
more to confide in it, than in him; One, who bears small good will, kindness or
pity toward his Brother; who is little affected or concerned with things future
or celestial; whose mind and heart are riveted to this world; whose hopes and
happinesses are settled here below; whose soul is deeply immersed and buried in
earth: One who, according to constant habit, notoriously breaks the two great
heads of Christian duty, Loving God with all his heart, and his Neighbor as
himself: It is therefore, by comparing those things, very plain, that we
pretend to reconcile gross contradictions and inconsistencies, if we profess
our selves to be Christians, and are illiberal. It is indeed the special grace
and glory of our Religion, that it consists not in barren speculations, or
empty formalities, or forward professions; not in fancying curiously, or
speaking zealously, or looking demurely; but in really producing sensible
fruits of goodness; Tit. 3. 8.
in doing (as St. Paul signifies) things good and profitable unto men, such as
those chiefly are, of which we speak. The most gracious wisdom of God has so
modelled our Religion, that according to it Piety and Charity are the same
thing; that we can never express our selves more dutiful toward him, or better
please him, or more truly glorify him, than when we are kind and good to our
poor Brother. We grossly mistake, if we take giving of Alms to be a Jewish or
Popish practice, suitable to Children and Dullards in Religion, beneath so
refined, so improved, so loftily spiritual Gallants as we: No, it is a duty most
properly, and most highly Christian, as none more, a most goodly fruit of
grace, and a most faithful mark thereof: By the experiment of this
ministration, 2 Cor. 9. 13.
we (as St. Paul says) glorify God for our professed subjection unto the
Gospel of Christ, and for our liberal distribution unto our brethren, and unto
all men: without it our faith is dead and senseless; our high seize are
fond presumptions; our fine notions and delicate spiritualities are in truth
but silly dreams, the issues of a proud and ignorant fancy: he that appears
hard-hearted and close fisted toward his needy Brother, let him think or call
himself what he pleases, he plainly is no Christian, but a blemish, a
reproach, and a scandal to that honorable Name.

7. To all these Considerations and Reasons inducing to the practice of this
kind of Charity, I might subjoin examples, and set before you the fairest
Copies that can be imagined thereof. We have for it the pattern of God himself,
who is infinitely munificent and merciful; Jam. 1. 5, 17.
from whom every good and perfect gift descends; Act. 17. 25.
who gives life, and breath, and all things unto all; who gives liberally and
upbraideth not. We have the example of the Son of God, 2 Cor. 8. 9.
who out of pure charity did freely part with the riches and glories of
Eternity, voluntarily embracing extreme poverty and want for our sake, that we
who were poor, might be enriched; we that were miserable, might become happy;
Act. 10. 38.
who went about doing good; spent all his life in painful dispensation of
beneficence, and relieving the needs of men in every kind. We have the blessed
Patriarchs to follow, who at Gods pleasure and call did readily leave their
Country, their Friends, their Goods, and all they had. We have the practice of
the holy Apostles, Mat. 19. 27.
who freely let go all to follow their Lord; who cheerfully sustained all sorts
of losses, disgraces, and pains for promoting the honor of God, and procuring
good unto men; we have to move and encourage us hereto the first and best
Christians, most full of grace and holy zeal, Act. 4. 34, 35.
who so many as were possessours of lands and houses, did sell them, and did
impart the price of them to the community, so that there was none poor among
them, and that distribution was made to every one as he had need. We have all
the saints and eminent servants of God in all times, who have been high and
wonderful in the performance of these duties, (I could tell you of the blessed
Martyr St. Cyprian, Pentius in vit. Cypr.
who was liberal by whole sale, bestowing all at once, a fair Estate, on God
and the poor; of the renowned Bishop St. Basil, Greg. Naz. Orat. 40.
who constantly waited on the sick, and kissed their sores; of the most pious
Confessor St. Martin, Sulp. Severus.
who having but one Coat left, and seeing a poor man that wanted clothes, tore
it in two pieces, and gave one to that poor man; and many like instances out of
authentic History might be produced, apt to provoke our imitation: I might
also, to beget emulation and shame in us, represent exemplary practices of
Humanity and Charity even in Jews, Mahometans and Pagans, such as in these cold
days might pass for more than ordinary among us) but I shall only propound one
present and sensible example, that of this Noble City, whose public bounty and
charity in all kinds, (in education of Orphans, in curing the Diseased, both in
body and mind, in provision for the poor, in relieving all sorts of necessities
and miseries) let me earnestly entreat, and exhort us all for Gods sake, as we
are able, by our private charity to imitate, to encourage, and to assist; let
us do this so much the more willingly and freely, as the sad circumstances of
things, by Gods judgments brought upon us, do plainly require, that the Public
Charity it self (lying under so great impediments, discouragements and
distresses) should be supported, supplied, and relieved by particular
liberality. No words that I can devise will be so apt to affect and move you,
as the case it self, if you please to consider it: hear it therefore speaking,
and, I pray, with a pious and charitable disposition of mind attend thereto:

A true Report, etc.
For this excellent Pattern of pious bounty and mercy, let us heartily thank
Almighty God; let us humbly implore Gods blessing on the future management of
it; let us pay due respect to the worthy Promoters thereof, and pray for
rewards upon them answerable to their charitable care and industry employed
therein; let us also according to our ability perform our duty in following and
furthering it: for encouragement to which practice, give me leave briefly to
reflect upon the latter part of my Text; which represents some instances of the
felicity proper to a bountiful person, or some rewards peculiar to the
exercising the duties of bounty and mercy.

The first is, His righteousness endures for ever. These words are capable of
various senses, or of diverse respects; they may import that the fame and
remembrance of his bounty is very durable, or that the effects thereof do
lastingly continue, or that eternal rewards are designed thereto; they may
respect the bountiful man himself, or his posterity here; they may simply
relate to an endurance in Gods regard and care; or they may with that also
comprehend a continuance in the good memory, and honorable mention of men. Now
in truth according to all these interpretations, the bountiful man's
righteousness does endure for ever, that is, very lastingly (or so long as the
special nature of the case does bear) in any sense; or for an absolute
perpetuity, in some sense: the words in their plenitude do naturally and
without straining involve so many truths, none which therefore we think fit to
exclude, but shall briefly touch them all.

1. As for future reputation and fame, (which that it in part is intended here,
that which precedes, The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance,
does argue) it is evident, that it peculiarly attends upon this practice: the
bountiful person is especially that just man, Prove. 10. 7.
whose memory is blessed, (is (...), as the Greek renders it; that is, is
prosecuted* with commendations and praises.) No Spices can so embalm a man, no
Monument can so preserve his Name and Memory, as works of beneficence; no other
same is comparably so precious, o^ truly glorious, as that which grows from
thence: The Renown of Power and Prowess, of Wit or Learning, of any Wisdom or
Skill, may dwell in the fancies of men with some admiration; but the
remembrance of Bounty reigns in their hearts with cordial esteem and affection;
there erecting immovable Trophies over Death and Oblivion, and it thence
spreading it self through the tongues of men with sincere and sprightly
Commendations. The bountiful man's very Dust is fragrant, and his Grave
venerable; his Name is never mentioned without respect; his Actions have always
these best Echoes, with innumerable iterations resounding after them: This was
a true Friend to Mankind; This was a real Benefactour to the World; This was a
Man good in earnest, and pious to good purpose.

2. The effects of his righteousness are likewise very durable: When he is
departed hence, and in person is no more seen, he remains visible and sensible
in the footsteps and fruits of his goodness; the Poor still beholds him present
in the subsistence of himself, and his Family; the Sick-man feels him in the
refreshment, which he yet enjoys by his provision; he supervives in the heart
of the Afflicted, which still resents the comfort, and rejoices in the ease
which he procured him; all the World percieves benefit from him by the
edification it receives from his example; Religion obtains profit and
ornament, God himself enjoys glory and praise from his righteousness.

3. His righteousness also endures in respect to his posterity. It is an usual
plea for tenacity and parsimony, that care must be had of posterity, that
enough must be provided and laid up for the Family: But in truth this is a very
absurd excuse, and doing according thereto, is a very preposterous method of
proceeding toward that end; it is really the greatest improvidence in that
respect, and the truest neglect that can be of our Children: for so doing,
together with a seeming Estate, we entail a real Curse upon them; we divest
them of Gods protection and benediction, (the only sure preservatives of an
Estate) we leave them Heirs of nothing so much as of punishments due to our
ingratitude, our infidelity, our impiety and injustice both toward God and man:
whereas by liberally bestowing on the poor, we demise unto them Gods blessing,
which is the best inheritance; we recommend them to Gods especial care, which
is the best tuition; we leave them Gods protection and providence, which are a
Wealth indefectible and inexhaustible; we constitute God their Guardian, who
will most faithfully manage, and most wisely improve their substance, both that
which we leave to them, and that whith we gave for them to the poor; we thereby
in good part entitle them unto the rewards appropriate to our pious Charity,
our Faith, our Gratitude, our Self-denial, our Justice, to whatever of good is
virtually contained in our acts of bounty; to omit the honor and the good will
of men, which constantly adhere to the bountiful man's House and Family. It is
therefore expressly mentioned in Scripture as a recompense peculiar to this
virtue, that security from want, and all happiness do attend the posterity of
the bountiful person: Psalm. 37. 25, 26.
He is ever merciful and lends, and his seed is blessed, says David of him
generally; and David also particularly observed, that in all the course of his
long life, he could find no exception to the Rule: Psalm. 112. 2, 3.
I have been young, and now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken,
nor his seed begging their bread.

4. His righteousness also endures for ever in the perpetual favor of God,
and in the eternal rewards which God will confer upon him, who out of
Conscience and reverence toward God, out of good will and kindness toward his
Brother has dispersed, and given to the poor. Heb. 6. 10.
God will not (as the Apostle says) be unjust to forget his labor of charity
in ministering to his poor Brother: from the seed, which he has sown to the
Spirit, Gal. 6. 8.
he shall assuredly reap a most plentiful Crop of blessings spiritual; he shall
effectually enjoy the good foundation that he has stored up: 1 Timothy 6. 19.
for the goods he has sold and delivered, he shall bona fide receive his
Bargain, Mat. 13. 46.
the hidden treasure, and precious pearl of eternal life; for this best
improvement of his Talent of worldly Riches, he shall hear the Euge bone serve,
Mat. 25. 21, 26.
Well done good and faithful servant, enter into thy Masters joy: he shall at
last find God infinitely more bountiful to him, than he has been unto the poor.

Thus when all the flashes of sensual pleasure are quite extinct; when all the
flowers of secular glory are withered away; when all earthly glories are buried
in darkness; when this world, and all the fashion of it, are utterly vanished
and gone, the bountiful man's state will be still firm and flourishing, and His
righteousness shall endure for ever.

It follows, His horn shall be exalted with honor: A Horn is an Emblem of
Power; for in it the Beasts strength, offensive and defensive, does consist;
and of Plenty, for it has within it a capacity apt to contain what is put into
it; and of Sanctity, for that in it was put the holy Oil, 1 Samuel 16. 13.
with which Kings were Consecrated; 1 King 1. 39.
and of Dignity, both in consequence upon the Reasons mentioned, (as denoting
might, and affluence, and sacredness accompanying Sovereign Dignity) and
because also it is an especial beauty and ornament to the Creature which has
it; so that this expression (His Horn shall be exalted with honor) may be
supposed to import, that an abundance of high, and holy, of firm and solid
honor shall attend upon the bountiful person. And that so it truly shall, may
from many Considerations appear.

1. Honor is inseparably annexed thereto as its natural Companion and shadow.
God has impressed upon all Virtue a Majesty and a Beauty, which do command
respect, and with a kindly violence extort Veneration from men; such is the
natural Constitution of our Souls, that as our sense necessarily likes what is
fair and sweet, so our mind unavoidably will esteem what is virtuous and
worthy; all good Actions as such are honorable, but of all Virtues Beneficence
does with most unquestionable right claim honor, and with irresistible force
procures it; (...). A^ist.
as it is indeed the most divine of Virtues, so men are most apt to venerate
them, whom they observe eminently to practice it. Other Virtues men see, and
approve as goodly to the sight, but this they taste and feel; this by most
sensible experience they find to be pleasant and profitable, and cannot
therefore but highly prize it. Mat. 6. 1.
They, who do their alms before men, although out of unworthy vain glorious
design, have yet, as our Savior intimates, their reward; they fail not to get
Honor thereby; and even so have no bad pennyworth; for, in the Wise-mans
judgment, Prove. 21. 21.
A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches, they receive at least
fine air for gross earth; and things very spiritual, for things most material;
they obtain that which every man does naturally desire and prize, for that
which only fashion in some places endeareth, and commands: they get the end
for the means, for scarce any man seeks wealth for it self, but either for
Honor, or for Virtues sake, that he may live creditably, or may do good
therewith: (...). Arist.
Necessity is served with a little, Pleasure may be satisfied with a
competence, Abundance is required only to support Honor, or promote good; and
Honor by a natural connection adhereth to Bounty.

2. But farther, an accession of Honor according to gracious promise,
(grounded upon somewhat of special reason, of equity, and decency in the thing
it self) is due from God unto the bountiful person, and is by special
Providence surely conferred on him. There is no kind of piety, or instance of
obedience, whereby God himself is more signally honored, than by this. These
are chiefly those good works, Mat. 5. 16.
the which men seeing, are apt to glorify our Father which is in Heaven; to
these fruits that is most applicable, which our Lord says, Hereby is my Father
glorified, Joh. 15. 8.
if you bear much fruit: for, as, He that oppresses the poor, Prove. 14. 31.
reproacheth his Maker; so he honors him, that has mercy on the poor. The
comfortable experience of good in this sort of actions, will most readily
dispose men to admire and commend the excellency, the wisdom, the goodness of
the Divine Laws, will therefore procure God hearty praise, and thanks for them:
For, as St. Paul teaches us, 2 Cor. 9. 11, 12, 13.
The administration of this service not only supplyeth the want of the Saints,
but is abundant also by many thanksgivings unto God; whilst by experiment of
this ministration, they glorify God for your professed subjection unto the
Gospel of Christ, and for your liberal distribution unto them, and unto all
men. Since then God is so peculiarly honored by this practice, it is but equal
and fit, that God should remunerate it with honor; Gods noble goodness will
not let him seem defective in any sort of beneficial correspondence toward us,
we shall never be able to yield him any kind of good thing in duty, which he
will not be more apt to render us in Grace; they who (as Solomon speaks)
honor God with their substance, Prove. 3. 9.
shall by God certainly be honored with his blessing: Reason intimates so
much, and we beside have Gods express Word for it; Them (says he) who honor
me, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
I will honor. He that absolutely and independently is the Fountain of all
Honor; 1 Chro. 29. 12.
from whom (as good King David says) riches and honor comes, for that he
reigns over all, he will assuredly prefer and dignifie those, who have been
at special care and cost to advance his Honor. He that has the hearts of all
men in his hands, Prove. 21. 1.
and fashioneth them as he pleases, Psalm. 33. 15.
will raise the bountiful man in the judgments and affections of men. He that
orders all the events of things, and disposes success as he thinks fit, will
cause the bountiful persons Enterprises to prosper, and come off with credit.
He will not suffer the reputation of so real an Honourer of himself to be
extremely slurr'd by disaster, to be blasted by slander, to be supplanted by
envy or malice; Psalm. 37. 6*
but will bring forth his righteousness as the light, and his judgment as the
noonday.

3. God will thus exalt the bountiful Man's Horn even here in this World, and
to an infinitely higher pitch he will advance it in the future state: He shall
there be set at the right hand, in a most honorable place and rank; among the
chief Friends and Favorites of the Heavenly King; in happy Consortship with
the holy Angels, and blessed Saints; where, in recompense of his pious Bounty,
he shall from the bountiful hands of his most gracious Lord receive an
incorruptible Crown of Righteousness, and an unfading Crown of Glory: The which
God of his infinite mercy grant unto us all, through Jesus Christ our Lord; to
whom for ever be all praise.

AMEN.
Now the God of peace, Heb. 13. 20.
that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the
sheep, through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, make us perfect in every
good Work to do his Will, working in us that which is well-pleasing in his
sight, through Jesus Christ: to whom be Glory for ever and ever. Amen.
FINIS.

