JACOB AT HIS Journeys End: OR, Part of his last words, uttered to his Son
JOSEPH, and the rest of his Children, Immediately before his being gathered to
his Fathers.

A SERMON PREACHED At the Interment of the Truly Noble, and Right Honorable,
WILLIAM Lord Brereton of Brereton in Cheshire.

For the benefit of those who are Lovers of Piety, Virtue, Loyalty, and true
Nobility.

By A. B.

Psalm. 116. 15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Satnts.
LONDON, Printed for R. Lowndes, at the White Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1665.

IMPRIMATUR,

Joh. Hall, R. P. D. Episc. Land. a sac. Domest.
Ex adib. Londinens. Jan. 10. 1665.
Genesis 48. 21. And Israel said unto Joseph, Behold, I dye*
THe words are a part of that discourse which old Father Israel had with his
Son Joseph a little before his death.

They are so plain and intelligible considered by themselves, that I need not
(nor do I think it convenient) to wear out any part of that short time I am to
detain you here, in showing you the coherence of them with the former.

We have considerable in them,

1. The Speaker, Israel the Father;

2. The Person spoken to, Joseph the Son;

3. The Subject matter or thing spoken of, Death, the death of the Speaker, I
dye.

4. The weight or great concernment of the truth or subject spoken of,
intimated by the Ecce Attentionis, or note of Observation prefixed, Behold,
Behold I dye.

I shall trouble you but with a very short discourse of the Persons: and say
but little of Israel the Father, who is the Speaker; and less of Joseph the Son
spoken to: and yet a word or two of either.

1. Concerning Israel the Father, and here the Speaker; two things may be
considered, First his Person, who, and what manner of man he was.

It was the same person known formerly by another name: that is by the name of
Jacob. God Genesis 32. 28.
changed his name, Genesis 32. 28. (so also chap. 35. 10.) Thou shall no more be
called Jacob, but Israel. So God before had made an addition to Abrams name,
Genesis 17. 5. and changed Sarah's too, ver. 15. And it is observed by some, that
God has not usually added to, nor given a new name immediately to any, but
such as in their generations were eminent and extraordinary persons.

Such a one was Israel; as Pererius observes, totius and solius Populi Dei
Parens, The Father of Gods people, and of them only, that were in covenant with
God.

Abraham and Isaac were famous in their generation, and men of renown; yet
could it not be so said of them. For Abraham was Father to Ismael as well as
Isaac, and so Father of the Ismaelites as well as of the faithful; and Isaac
was Esaus Father as well as Jacobs, and so Father of the Edomites as well as
the Israelites: but Israel was the Father of the Israelites only; from him the
people of God had their names, and were called Israelites, as we are called
Christians from Christ. And this is enough to show he was an excellent and
extraordinary Person.

2. We may consider the name.

Concerning which I have nothing to say at present, but what I have from Rivet
in his exercitations on this book of Scripture, who tells us ^. the word
signifies Rectus Dei, a right or upright man of God; and this he says was St.
Jeroms opinion.

2. Vir videns Deum, a man seeing God. And it is indeed true, first that Israel
was an upright or a plain downright man as we use to say: as our Savior by
his allusion seems to confirm, when John ^^. 47.
he says of Nathaniel, that he was a true Israelite in whom was no guile.

And true it is, secondly, that he had several visions of God, and one
particularly when he received this name, Genesis 32. 30. when he saw God face to
face. But yet (as Rivet says) it is most probable in the third place that he
received this name because he was Princeps cum Deo, prevailed and had Hos.
(...) 3.
power with God, as the reason is given by him that gave the name, Genesis 32. 28.

Compare these three several conjectures together, and there is reason to
believe he was an eminent and illustrious person.

2. Concerning Joseph the Son, the Person here spoken to; it may be demanded
how it came to pass that Israel directed his speech to him who was the youngest
of all his sons but Benjamin? of which this perhaps might be the reason,
because Joseph was in highest power, as being advanced in Egypt above his
brethren, and able to make provision for them.

The old man looked upon him as if he had been his first born, and gave him a
portion above the rest, ver. 22. Therefore leaves he the charge of carrying his
bones out of Egypt to him; and puts him in mind that now he was near his death.
Behold I dye, which is the third particular in the Text; the Subject matter or
thing spoken o^, Death, Behold I dye.

3. The meaning I suppose to be this. I must dye, dye within a short time. So
Junius and Tremelius read it, Brevi moriturus sum. And this interpretation is
confirmed by what we read before in the 23. chap. and 29. ver. The time drew
near that Israel must dye.

I shall speak to this point in this method.

1. First by showing that what Israel said of himself was a truth, and that he
might have said it of Joseph and all his posterity as well as of himself:
Behold I, and thou, and all thy posterity must dye.

2. It is a truth to be owned, acknowledged, and applied, and every man is to
say with Israel, I dye.

3. It is a notable and observable truth, as appears from the additional note
of a^bention, Behold, I dye.

First it is a truth not to be denied or gain said. Solomon tells us of a time
to dye as well as to be born, Eccles. 3. 2. And he that denies this, does in
effect give God the lie, who told Adam (and in him his posterity) in the day
that thou eatest thou shall surely dye, Genesis 2. 17. So that it is true, First
because of man's sin, and Gods threatening and curse thereupon.

So St. Paul, Romans 5. 12. As by one man sin entered into the world, and death
by sin, so Death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. Man gave sin
its entrance into the world, and sin procures man's exit and removal out of the
world.

Secondly, there is nothing can preserve or rescue from Death; none ever yet
lived, nor do, nor ever shall live, but have dyed, or must dye; those only
excepted who were miraculously translated, and such as shall be found alive at
the second coming.

This the very Jews believed for truth, and therefore when they heard our
Savior say, if a man keep my saying he shall never see death, John 8. 51. they
mistaking his meaning, and thinking he had spoken it of bodily death, were
offended at his words, and fell foul upon him, telling him, that now they knew
that he had a Devil: for, say they, Abraham is dead, and the Prophets are dead.

If any thing could reprieve from death, probably it must be either greatness
or goodness.

1. Not Greatness, For man being in honor abides not, but is like the beasts
that perish; that is, must dye as well as they, Psalm. 49. 12. So again Psalm.
82. 6. I have said you are Gods, but ver. 7. Ye shall dye like men; Death
knocks as boldly, and enters as irresistably into the rich man's palace, as the
poor man's cottage. Lazarus died, and so did the rich man also, and was buried
with more pompous solemnity it is likely, but with less comfort and advantage,
as you may collect, if you view the passage, Luke 16. 22. Death when it comes
with its commission makes no distinction: all in this respect are alike, and go
to one place, says Solomon, and are dissolved into the like indistinguishable
dust.

2. Nor Goodness. Jacob who was loved, dyed as well as Esau that was hated: nay
though Greatness and Goodness meet, they cannot exempt nor rescue from the
grave* Israel was Princeps cum Deo, and Rectus Dei. He wrastled with God and
prevailed, yet when he came to grapple with Death he had the foyl.

None so great, none so good as our Blessed Redeemer, yet when he was pleased
to take our nature, and to bear our sins, he sunk under the unsupportable load,
and the bitter cup of Death must not pass by, but he must taste and drink it.
And sure the servant is not greater, nor has reason to expect to fare better
than his Lord. If he dyed before he entered into glory, so must we too; we
must dye with him, if we will reign with him, and partake with him in death; if
we will share with him in glory. It has been observed by others, that Moses
was bid go up and dye, but that we must dye before we can go up. But I add,
that it was but to Mount Nebo whither Moses must go up before his death.
Neither he nor we can ascend Mount Sion that is above, before we descend unto
the Hades that is below: We must stoop to the grave ere we can rise to glory.

So it is a truth, Israel and we too must dye. 2. It is a truth that Israel did
and we must apply.

I dye said old Israel. I am a stranger and a sojourner with thee, as all my
fathers were; Oh spare me before I go hence, says David, Psalm. 39. 22. My days
are swifter than a Weavers Shuttle, says Job, cap. 7. 6. and my days are
vanity says he, ver. 16.

The time of my departure is at hand, said S. Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 6. And my life
draws nigh to the grave, says David again, Psalm. 88. 2.

So that unless a man can say that he is better than David, Abraham, Isaac, or
Jacob, than Moses and the Prophets, and all his Predecessors, he must say with
Israel, I die.

And he must not say it only, but take notice of it: For,

3. This is a notable and observable Truth, as the word Behold, which is
prefixed, does imply.

1. It is a considerable Truth in respect of a man's self, and his own death:
For,

First, this consideration will make the thoughts of death less troublesome.
Elijah could pray for death, when he considered it had been the portion of his
fathers, and that he was no better than they, 1 Kin. 19. 4. Though the thoughts
of company cannot abate the miseries of the second death, they may lessen the
terrors of the first; St Paul could desire to be dissolved, when he thought of
being with Christ who was dead before him.

2. This consideration that we must die, may by Gods blessing make us more
careful how we live.

It is the indiscreetest folly, and the greatest improvidence imaginable, for a
fleeting soul to feed it self with hopes of going to this or that place, and
getting this or that gain to morrow, when it may be lost to day: To bath it
self in pleasures, when it is ready to be ravished into everlasting burnings; or
promise it self rest for many years, when it may be snatched from its deluding
delights before the approaching night. If we must die, it is fit we take time to
live: to live to the Lord, that we may dye in the Lord, and live hereafter with
the Lord.

3. This consideration that we must die, should make us strive to do all the
good we can while we live. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy
might (or, do it quickly) says Solomon, Ec. 9. 10. and he adds the reason for
his advice, for there is no work, nor device nor knowledge in the grave whither
thou go. Death is that night when no man can work; Therefore while we have
time let us do good to all, Gal. 6. 10. to our selves and to others too. Dives
(Luke 16.) had no permission to return to his Fathers house to warn his
Brethren. When a man is dead and gone hence, his place shall know him no more,
Job 7. 10.

The grave is the den of that roaring lion from whence vestigia nulla
ret^orsum; the place to which all go, and from whence none return.

But perhaps the young gallant may think, that though this doctrine may be
seasonably preached to those of old Isreal's age, and to his own decrepit
friends or father, that are as weary of the world as he is of them; it is yet
too soon to have his delights eclipsed, or his delicate ears struck with such
un welcome and terrible truths. But let him consider, he is growing up, and
ripening for death from the time he first had life. It Is true what Seneca says,
tunc quoque cum crescimus decrescit vita, each day that makes the time he has
lived longer, makes the remainder shorter. Thy glass is still running, and the
more sands are spent already, the fewer are behind.

2. And as we are concerned in respect of our own, so it does concern us to
take notice of the death of others also. First when we see or hear of the death
of another, we should remember and prepare for our own. Joseph a son is not
privileged above Israel the father; though he was born after him, he might have
dyed before him.

2. Since others as well as our selves must dye, it is our part to do all the
good we can unto them, and get all the good we can from them, before they dye.
If they live in the fear of God, imita^e them, and so shall thou dye like them,
and live for ever with them.

I shall detain you no longer in the prosecution of the Text already treated
on; there remains another subject, I mean that Honorable though liveless
spectacle that has brought us unwillingly hither, and is the sad occasion of
this solemnity.

I could wish (had God seen it good) there had been no such occasion of this
concourse; or that being met, the whole charge of entertaining you here had
been the province and task of some other of my brethren, that had been every
way more able to have discharged it than my self. It may (I hope) be a
pardonable excuse, if I allege for my self, that my meditations have been much
(very much) discomposed by my sorrows, that mine eyes have sometimes vyed drops
with my pen, while I was about this sad task. And probably, had I loved and
honored him less, I might have performed this service better.

But it is fit I leave Apologies and come to my remaining task; that is, to make
some honorable mention of our Israel now he is dead, whom we deservedly
honored while he was alive.

I shall not stick long upon the Parallel, yet shall I first observe, that our
Israel, like him in the Text, was by God made happy in the number of so many
surviving children, as were the heads of the twelve Tribes, though not all of
the same Sex, and had the addition of one grandchild more than Joseph,
presented to departing Israel to receive his benediction: Of all which our
Israel made frequent and affectionate mention, and to which together with his
own he bequeathed his blessing, as old Jacob did to the sons of his son Joseph.

2. The name Israel, as you heard before, was superadded to the former name of
Jacob (as some think) or rather given in its stead, because he was Rectus Dei,
an up right man. Jacob signifies a supplanter, some conjecture he was so called
because he got his brother Esaus birthright by a wile: but the word signifies
properly plantam tenens, and the child was in likelihood called Jacob, because
about the time of his birth he held his twin brother by the heel. Our Honored
Lord could not be called Jacob at all; for whose birthright had he taken? We
may say with St. Paul, he had wronged no man, defrauded no man; but he might be
called Israel, for he was rectus Dei, had an upright plain dealing soul; like
Nathaniel, a true Israelite in whom was no guile.

3. Israel was vir videns Deum, a man that saw God; and so I doubt not but this
Honorable Person did too, though not as Jacob face to face, yet by some such
means by which God is pleased to make discovery of himself to men in these
latter times.

Lyra (upon Genesis) thinks it was by virtue of the Spirit of prophecy that old
Israel foretold his death before it came, and said, I dye. But whether he had
the Spirit of Prophecy or no, I do not question; Sure I am there is no great
need of any extraordinary Revelation to let a man of an 147. years of age (as
Israel was) know that the time drew nigh that he should dye: but I have reason
to believe that there was something more than ordinary in it (though being a
man of singular reservedness he did not discover it) that this Honorable
Person, when he was but about 52. years of age, and under no visible distemper
of body or mind, should above three months ago, even then when he accompanied
his dear and honorable Mother to her long home, in his passage from the house
to the Church, say with some kind of confidence, that he should be the next
that should go that way; And before he was seized with any sickness, let fall
some expressions in the hearing of his dearest relations (whom he yet was most
unwilling to grieve) signifying his expectation, that ere long they should have
occasion to Mourn for him. And I am the more confident that he had some
foresight of his approaching end, from one expression uttered to my self in the
time of his visitation, which was upon this occasion.

We that were about him, and observed how little he was afraid, or spoke of
what we so much suspected, doubted that the nature of his disease had made him
insensible of his danger; and that though Death made irresistible (though slow)
assaults, he did not apprehend it; hereupon I did (as I conceived I was
obliged) make my private application to him, and dealt plainly with him;
discovering to him our just fears, and his own great danger, and admonished him
to prepare himself thoroughly for Death, which we doubted he could not avoid:
And I was satisfied that he foresaw his danger (and therefore had prepared for
it) when I heard him say (and that with a serene countenance, and a very grave
utterance) Parson, I was sensible of this before any of you were.

And we were afterward satisfied why he was so long desirous to conceal his
danger; for when he saw it was to no purpose to endeavor to hide what his
dearest relations had discovered, and therefore thought) fit to yield, and in
effect to say with old Israel, Behold I dye, and saw his dearest Confort and
the rest about him, thereupon to give vent unto their passion and let it out in
a flood of tears, he presently added these words, ( I, this is it I was afraid
of) thereby declaring, that the reason why he seemed to take so little notice
of his danger, was not because he was insensible of it, but because he would
not have his Relations understand it, nor be troubled at it.

4. Israel was so called (as most do probably think) because he was Princeps
cum Deo, and prevailed with God when he wrestled with him for a blessing, Genesis
32. 28.

It was our Isreal's custom to wrestle with God as Jacob did: Devotion was one
part of his daily exercise. And it happened to him as to Israel, Genesis 32. For
coming from his morning exercise, he was seized (as Israel) with a lameness in
his thigh. And I make no question, but that as he did, with Israel, go away
with a bodily foyl, he received a spiritual blessing; and though he came (or
rather was carried) off with a maim in the body, he was princeps cum Deo, and
prevailed for a blessing on his soul.

And I do not think fit, nor can I let pass this observation, without
commending it to the careful notice and consideration of all that hear me, that
the great stroke by which God called him to himself, befell him presently upon
his rising from his private devotions, as if God had said to him, Thy prayers
are come up, and I come down to fetch thee up likewise! Thy work is done, and
now I will do mine, and give thee a reward! Sure, happy is that devout soul
whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing, standing upon his watch, and
calling upon his God. Oh consider it, how much more comfortable it is for a man
to be found so doing, than to be snatched away with his Dalilah in his arms, or
with an intemperate cup in his hand, or a dam-me in his mouth, or any Idol in
his heart, which might make him incapable of communion with his God! But I
leave the Parallel, and offer him

2. To your consideration, as a Person of Honor, different indeed from most
other men of his age and time. The man I think is not to be found, that can
justly accuse him, or blast his reputation or honor by justly charging him
with dissimulation, ot fraud, or unfaithfulness, or lying, or incontinency, or
drunkenness, or swearing, or any other notorious vice. I have had the happiness
to be frequently near him, and often in the hearing of him for a dozen years
together, yet did I never (that I remember) hear any obscene or filthy
communication come from his mouth; nor observe him upon any provocation, let
any one of those many oaths escape his lips, that many men now adays reckon and
look upon as the greatest, if not only ornament and grace of their discourse.

But it is not enough to be extra vitia, without any nororious vice; God will
not be satisfied with a negative holiness; we must not only cease to do evil,
but learn to do well, Isa. 1. And so did he. And that you may take a short view
of his virtues, I shall present him briefly to you in all, or most of his
remarkable Relations, and offer to your considerations how he did carry himself
toward his Correlates. And then I admonish and beseech you to go and do
likewise.

1. Consider him as a Christian, and how he behaved himself toward God, both
in the time of his health and sickness.

While God enabled him to come hither, we seldom (very seldom) missed his
early company here. He was resolved that God loves the Gates of Syon, more than
all the dwellings of Jacob; and will not be put off with our pretenses of doing
our Devotions in our Closet, when he expects us in the Church. Nor was his
Devotion personated and put on to deceive the world, but he took his time for
private as well as public performances, as I have told you before.

In his sickness those three Christian graces of Faith, Hope, and Charity, were
very remarkable. He signified his Charity in forgiving all that had done him
any injury, and desiring to be reconciled to all betwixt whom and himself there
had been any misunderstanding and debate. His Faith and Hope he expressed to my
unworthy self in private while he was able: affirming he did firmly rely on
the merits and mediation of his Savior Jesus; and through him hoped for a
glorious Resurrection. And in this Faith and Hope he earnestly desired, and
received both the Absolution of the Church, and the Sacrament of the Supper of
the Lord.

When his tongue had failed to do its office, and we perceived that he endured
a great fight of afflictions; that the Lord delayed his coming, and Death made
but slow, though sure approaches; I did (as I thought I was in duty bound)
advise him to search his own heart: whether there were any thing yet undone
that God expected he should do, before he called him hence: and that he would
signify to us by some token, whether he hoped that his peace was perfected,
and his conscience quier. Whereupon he looked upon us with a more cheerful
countenance than it is ordinary for a dying man to manifest: and then casting
up his eyes to Heaven, he laid his hand upon his heart, seeming to say, that
all was quiet there, and that he died in Peace, and rested in Hope.

His Piety and Devotion all along his sickness was very exemplary. He acted his
part in all the prayers, and that with a stronger and more cheerful voice than
we conceaved he had been able to utter, or did utter upon any other occasion.
The last word (as I remember) that I heard him say, was Amen to our prayers;
but he moved his lips when he could not use his tongue to do that office, which
yet held out beyond our expectations, and failed him not till very near his end.

And as his Piety was great toward God, so was Gods mercy toward Him; for
though the stroke light on almost all the one side of his body, it missed his
brain: So that by Gods great goodness he enjoyed the use of his intellectuals,
and all, or most of his senses, in a wonderful vigor and acuteness toward his
very latter end; insomuch that he could hear our very whispers, distinguish his
drink, see and know his visitants, beyond the expectation of his friends, and
perhaps beyond the belief of Strangers.

And as his Piety, so was his patience very remarkable. He did endure much and
long, but complain little or nothing at all; Oh me I am sick, very sick, oh me
I am full of pain, was all that could he said came from him tending toward a
complaint.

You have heard of the patience of Job, said St. James, c. 5. Yes we have heard
of Jobs patience, and many of us have seen his; and I think those that have
seen and observed it will say, they never saw his Christian Patience and
Fortitude equalled, much less exceeded.

2. Consider him next in the relation of a Subject, concerning which I need to
say but little, because you all, or most of you know his loyalty and fidelity
to his Sovereign as well as my self. Only let me mind you, that in the last
engagement in this County, he did not publicly appear until there was great
cause to doubt, if not despair of any good success, which was an argument there
was no other motive but mere Loyalty and Conscience, that drew him to hazard
Himself, his Sons that accompanied him* and his Estate, rather than he would
incur the suspicion of being backward to do his King and Country service.

3. Consider him as a Son.

1 A Son of the Church, whose peace he was very careful to maintain, and whose
orders he was ready to observe.

And as God gave him a very dutiful affection* to his Mother the Church; so he
made the Church Service serviceable and comfortable unto him. I cannot think it
possible that one that does not really delight in, and reciprocally find
comfort by the service of the Church, should so frequently and cheerfully join
and bear a part in it as he did, notwithstanding all the Obstacles and
Impediments of pain and sickness; which is an argument that the Church service
is not so faulty as our selves, and that we might take pleasure in it, and reap
profit by it, if our own corrupt hearts were not indisposed and out of order.

I confess we owe much to his example if our Congregation be in practice any
thing more observant of the Churches Orders, than some of our neighbors. Let
the contemptible Priests (as some call us in scorn) say what they will, or can,
the peremptory vulgar will do as they list; If their betters will not believe
us, they will despise us; If a man of Authority, Honor or Worship will not be
persuaded to change his posture, but keep his seat, they will use neither leg
nor knee, unless it be to cross the Church in her directions and commands: but
believe it Gentlemen, it is no disparagement to use your own tongues to make
confession of, and cry God mercy for your own sins. It Is no diminution of your
worth, to appear and behave your selves with all humble reverence and
submission, as the several parts of service do require when you come before him
to whom all things in Heaven and Earth do bow and obey. I hope you do believe
this, and could wish that such as yet do not, would (after the laudable example
of this honorable Hero) in their several Congregations practice and do
accordingly. I confess this is spoken a little out of the way, but I hope it
will be looked upon as a pardonable digression, and censured as a needless
impertinency.

2. I might propose him for your example considered as a na^ural son; you know
how observant and obsequious he was to his aged and honored Parent; and so fit
to be a pattern to such as are not so.

4. As a Husband, he was chaste and careful in keeping of his contract. I
believe none more faithful to their conjugal covenant, nor more loving to his
Consort; Insomuch that I could never observe any such uncomfortable brawls or
breaches, as do too frequently disturb the peace of many both meaner and noble
families.

5. As a Father, he was very affectionate and sufficiently indulgent, yet not
so indulgent but that he knew how, upon occasion, to be severe too; it is
known, He like his Heavenly Father, Heb. 1^.) has very sharply chastised those
whom he yet very dearly loved: and as a Father he did like old Israel call his
children to him, and as he saw cause gave them his fatherly admonitions and
blessing before he parted with them. And may those blessings never be in vain,
nor those admonitions ever be forgotten.

6. As a Lord and Master, he was meek and gentle, far from the temper of many
both his equals and inferiors, who forgetting that they themselves have Col.
4. 1. a master in Heaven, do unmercifully threaten or care not to make slaves
of their servants upon Earth; and it was one argument of the great respect he
had, even to his meanest servants, in that he admitted all, and sent for some
of them to come and take their last leave and farewell from his dying lips,

7. As a Landlord, he was courteous, kind, and respective to his several
Tenants: and it is known he took not the advantages that were offered to
revenge or right himself of those that had done him the greatest injury and
wrong.

8. As a Neighbor, he was sufficiently known to be peaceable and quiet, more
ready to compose differences, than make them, and to put up injuries than offer
them.

Lastly, as a Friend, he was faithful and constant, never known to betray his
trust, nor abuse the credulity of those that put any confidence in him. He was
none of those that will profusely promise what they never purpose to perform;
It was common with him to be better than his word. If you asked him a
courtesy, his very silence was frequently a consent, and if you had not a
denial, you might be sure of a grant.

To sum up all, he was a true Christian, and therefore in all respects such a
one as I have said, a Loyal Subject, a Dutiful Son, a loving Husband, an
indulgent Father, a respective Lord and Master, a good Neighbor, and a
faithful Friend; and in his whole conversation such a pattern of Piety, as is
much more fit than easy to be (...).

God Almighty give us all Grace to follow all the good examples of Him and all
other Servants of God, living with us, or dead before us; That living and dying
like them, we may for ever hereafter reign with them, through our Savior Jesus
Christ. Amen.
FINIS.

