An Account of the Original, Nature Preparation, Virtues, and Use of the
Vatican Pill, Famous for many Years past, unto this day throughout Europe; and
particularly in this Kingdom, for the many great, and Remarkable Cures wrought
by it. Prepared exactly according to the most Correct Process: And Recommended
to Public, Use,
Medic. Land.

I Should not have suffered this Excellent Medicine, called the Vatican Pill,
to have been detained so long from Public Knowledge, and Use, had I not
Expected, that some person of greater Authority and parts then my self, should
have given it its deserved character, and thereby a more hopeful and universal
reception. But I find the cause of this reserve, to have been the fear of
Censure, because this fruitful Age, does every day prodigally create, More
Doctors then Masters of Art: But this consideration has not altered my purpose
of doing this intended good; for it is not a Strange thing, acquired by long
Study, hard labor, and far travel, which I offer, nor to be vouched by a
volumn of precarious testimonies; But I only recommend to the use and benefit
of infirm Persons, a Medicine, which from many years before my time, unto this
day, has (by infinite Experiments) advanced its fame, and repute, above
Detraction: Being well known to many Persons of great quality (who (the more
the pity) Keep and value it as a Grand Secret) to be (...), the most
powerfully operative Remedy of this kind, in all extremes, which Europe in this
Age has afforded.

Its Original was from the Imperial Court in Germany, Orige.
the Author (famous as well for his great learning as his Dignity) was
Archiater or Chief Physician in ordinary to the Emperor 1693. Es tempore Lues
Venerea Germaniam Obrepit.
Maximilian; from whence it was at first called the Imperial Pill. Afterward
being transferred to Rome, and new proofs given continually for many years
together of its wonderful Virtues, it was by the Special command of Anno 1534.
Paul the third, committed to (that Noble treasury of learning) the Vatican
Library, that it might not be lost to Posterity, and so it was called the
Vatican Pill; and the rather, to distinguish it from the Imperial Pill of
Mesue then Extant; since which, in the time of Urban the 8th. it was revised by
the most acute Physicians then being, from whom it received a very great
improvement both in the Preparation and Operation: And was made more
appropriate to some severe Distempers, then reigning, and at this day
distributed universally into all Europe.

The Nature of this Pill, Natura.
is to Penetrate, Digest, cleanse, attenuate, discuss, and open all
obstructions, to attract into the Stomach and intestines; and then carry off
from thence all crude, indigested, and corrupted humors, and such juices as
are unprofitable to the body, yet not by any violent, acrimonious quality
therein, which may furiously provoke the Expulsive faculty to a promiscuous
discharge of all humors at once, both good and bad; and so with the Tares,
root out the Wheat too: But being received into the stomach, does vertually
convey it self into all parts of the body, and by a certain familiarity and
affinity with each humor, and assimilation of Substance does draw forth and
expel each offending humor, and whatsoever is Supervacaneous, and
unserviceable to the conservation of the whole. And by this Energy alone, does
cure all humoral diseases. This is the true genuine property and Nature of this
our Vatican Pill: Which both in the Election of materials, Praeparatio
and a peculiar and most elegant Preparation, is brought into the highest
perfection of any such medicine now in being. Every particular ingredient
herein being singly extracted by a dissolvant analogous to its own Nature;
whereas Spirit of Wine, the common dissolvant of extracted Medicaments, cannot
equally act upon all; for some being of a more hard and fixed substance, resist
its force, whilst others of a more airy and light body, have their volatile
Essences totally exhaled and devout'd by it.

So that such an imperfect composition, must consequently have an imperfect and
deficient operation, whilst ours, severally imparting their essences to
appropriate, and adapted Menstruums, or dissolvants, have their virtues exalted
to an exquisite perfection, at length all those impregnated liquors being
conjoined, are united into that Mass which is the true Substance of this famous
Vatican Pill.

The virtues hereof are manifold, Vires.
it being as was said, extensive to all parts of the body, (viz) from the
stomach, to the Liver, Spleen, Gall, Mesentery, and all other parts ordained to
convey to the Body its nourishment, thence to the more remote and solid parts,
as the Muscles nerves tendons, joints; and habit of the body.

It works by stool, and urine; by sweat when required, and also by vomit, when
the stomach is overcharged, else not; by which means the body is discharged of
all Superfluous, corrupt, unnecessary, and excrementitious humors which tend
to the forming of diseases, the whole mass of the blood purified, all
obstructions of what kind, or in What part soever opened, and the cause thereof
removed; The stomach is cleansed from all crudity, and foulness; lost appetite
restored, digestion perfected; fumes, windiness, heaviness, swelling, and
flushing heats after eating, dissolved; also difficult breathing, movable
pains, in the joints, back, hips, legs, and elsewhere; palpitation of the
heart, faintings, sick qualmes, troubled and uneas, sleeps, stinking breath,
violent, and lasting pains in the head, Catarrhs or rhewms falling upon the
lungs, and other parts; and all evils which may any way happen to the Reins,
seminall vessels, and other parts, designed for generation in man or woman; and
in a word (not to trouble the Reader with a tedious Catalogue of Diseases) all
soul mixtures of the blood, corruption of humors, discrasy, or intemperature
of the whole Substance of the body, caused either by Surfeits in Eating,
drinking, labor, watching, exercise, passions of the mind, immoderate venery,
vehement pain; or whatsoever elss may (by oppression of the Spirits, or
dissipation of natural heat) drive the body into extremes, pervert the course
of nature, create or nourish Diseases, are by virtue of this Excellent
Medicine, wholly subdued, carried off, and the body restored to is wonted
health and Vigor. These are the general virtues of this Pill.

In the use of which, (that I may not amuse the Reader with many unnecessary
Rules) observe, Vsus I.
That the stomach be not overcharged with meat or drink when you take this
Pill, for thereby is its operation disappointed, and the stomach disabled to
work a due concoction of the meat.

That the Dose or portion hereof to an ordinary constitution, 2.
is 5 or 6. Pills; and more or sewer, as each one finds their own ability;
which is easily found, by beginning with a Small Dose, and increasing, as you
find your strength to answer the operation of them; and so continue with that
proper dose. Having now found the quantity agreeable to your Body, 3.
Observe well, that they are not to be taken all at once but some at night, and
the rest in the morning. As for Example, if your Dose intended be 3 Pills or 4,
take one at night, going to bed (3 or 4 hours after a very light Supper;) and
the rest in the morning following. If your Dose be 5, 6, or more, take 2 at
night, and the remainder in the morning; with this farther Caution, that your
morning dose be double the quantity at least, of those you take overnight, and
the reason is this (viz) that this little dose taken at night, is intended only
as a preparative to tnose you reserve for the morning; that is, to loosen,
dissolve, and make thin such gross, and tough humors, as lie deep, and remote
from the immediate attaque of the Medicine, and dispose them to Evacuation,
which is performed by the following greater dose, more Effectually, and with
more ease and profit to the body, then if the whole number had been taken at
once.

After that your Pills taken in the morning, 4.
have wrought once, you may drink either clear posset drink, or thin broth, and
not before; and drink not too often, least they be forced through the bowels,
before they have perfected their work.

Let your diet be of good nourishment, 5.
easy of digestion, and moderate. Salted meats, old cheese, and such course
fare are to be avoided, during the use of the Pill.

These are the general rules, which I propound in the use of this our Vatican
Pill Which being duly observed, I am well assured, that they who shall use
them, will find happy Success, and the desired effects thereof; and shall have
cause to bless God for them, in whose hands only are the issues of life.

There are yet some particular Diseases, Scurvy.
which by a specific, on more appropriate Quality they Cure, in which is
required a peculiar Regiment, or order, in the use of them: The first, whereof
is the Scurvy. A Diseases which holds a secret and dangerous faction in the
body; and though its first assaults are light and more tolerable, yet it
insensibly undermines it, and brings on certain (though gradual) ruin: its
easier symptoms, are loose teeth, sore gums, and mouth; little Spots in the
skin, faintness, and stiffness of the Limbs. Which do in time amount to soul
ulcers, larger, purple, or dark and dusky spots in diverse parts, whitish crusty
scabs like leprosy, hard to cure; sharp pains in the legs, arms, and solid
parts, which are still attended with wearyness and indisposition to move; the
whole economy of the stomach is depraved, appetite lost, much crudity and
indigested matter load the spleen and parts adjacent, which cause stubborn
obstructions there, from whence the real Miasma, or Original infection of the
Disease arises; and yet -- in varias ins est transire figuras: it takes upon
it the shapes of other Diseases, as Apoplexy, Palsy, Fevers, Agues, Dropsy,
Plurisy, intolerable Headache, Gout, Cholick, Gripings in the guts, and many
others, and often the Pox. Which it so exactly imitates, that they may be
judged to be twins of the same Parent: Yet in all these, it retains its
Scorbutic Idea, it is still the Ass in the Lions skin; and though it puts on
these various forms, it is still the Scurvy. Which by the use of this Excellent
Pill is perfectly cured; and they are to be used according to the rules before
prescribed; only the drink here appointed, is to be constantly taken during the
cure, viz.

Take of Egrimony, Tamaris, and Roman wormwood each 4 great handfuls cut
Small, Sassafras shaved thin, half a pound; Juniper berries Six onnces. Juices
of watercresses; brooklime, and Scurvy grass, each a quart; beat your berries
Small and put them all into a Rundle^t of four gallons of ordinary beer or ale;
let it stand 4 or 5 days, then use it as your common drink, at meat, and all
other times; and in the use of this, and the Pill, as aforesaid, doubt not of
your Cure by Gods help: where Roman wormwood is not to be had, use common
wormwood, but in less quantity: and put not in your ingredients till the drink
has wrought.

Another specific Cure wrought by this Pill, is of the Dropsy, Dropsy
whose symptoms are so obvious to every Eye, that they need no description,
only that there are three distinct species, or kinds thereof, called by greek
Authors, Sarcites, Ascites, and Tympanites. The first shows the whole Body
tumified with a watery humor between the Skin and the Flesh; the second, the
Belly filled and distended with water; and this is most dangerous, and (if not
taken in time) incurable, being supplied with an uncessant exudation or
dripping into the capacity of the Abdomen, caused by an habituated weakness of
the Liver, and other Bowels. The third, called Tympanites, causes the same
Belly to be swelled and stretched out with wind, as before with water in
Ascites. These are all cured by the timely use of this Pill, taken by the Rules
aforesaid; only you need not take any over night: for here the humors are thin
and fluid enough, only you are to take the drink, before prescribed in the
scurvy, adding to the composition, six handfuls of green Broom stamped, and
three handfuls of the Roots of dwarf-Elder, commonly called Danewort; and use
this drink with the Pills till you are well, which will be with as much speed
as can be expected; and more then in any other course.

The like success is found in the Gout, Gout
(provided that the nerves be not shrunk into knots, nor the substance of the
part wasted) for as there is herein a concurrence of two common causes, an
afflux of humors, and weakness of the Joints; so is there in the Pill a two
fold opperation; first it removes the offending humor from that part; and then
leaves the nerves and tendons so fortified, that no humor shall be suffered to
settle there for the future; the same is also performed in the Sciatica, or in
what part else the Gout shall fasten: The use of the Pill in this Disease, is
according to the first direction. But in the perfecting this Cure, there is
required the Cooperation of a Balsamic liquor, to be out wardly applied,
which I prepare and keep in readiness by me, which may at all times be had at a
reasonable rate: in the use of both which Medicines, I dare promise a perfect
Cure. A farther Grand proof of the excellencies of this Pill, POX.
is in the Cure of the Pox, whose superficial and lighter Symtomes it soon
removes, as little itchy pustules running over the Body, Ulcers and Warts in the
Privities, Gonorrhoea, or involuntary wasting of the Seed (with excoriation,
causing a sharp and provoking pain. in Pissing.) But when it has sunk deeper
into the Body, seized the Liver, depraved its faculties, infected the Blood,
corrupted the humors, weakened the Nerves, and Joints; loosened the solid
parts, caused filthy eating Ulcers, in diverse parts; as the Mouth, Throat, and
emunctories, in the privities and fleshy parts, and those deep malignant, and
hardly: cured also, dry crusty scabs in the Head, about the Eyebrows and
Forehead, the Chin and Beard; when it shall have fastened Nodes, or hard callous
knots, upon the Bones of the Scul, Arms, Legs, Thighs, etc. and these
accompanied with heavy gnawing pains in almost every part, and in the Night
(when the languid body expects a quiet repose) which do (if not prevented) wast
and wholly enervate the body, and bring on an irrecoverable Consumption. I say,
when these horrid and dreadful symptoms appear, which discover a Radicated or
deep rooted Pox; then shall this Pill manifest its unequalled virtues; and let
the diseased know, to their comfort, that by the use of this Pill, when other
means have failed, they shall find their Ulcers dry up, their dry hard
Elephantiack crusty scabs fall off, their pains vanish, their Nodes and
excrescencies by degrees wast, and their weakened bodies recover their former
strength and vigor. They are to be taken daily after the directions given,
Evening and Morning: but the doses ought to be larger, yet equal to the
patients strength: continue for twenty one Days at least, if your strength
will bear it; if not, you may intermit some times; leave it not off suddenly,
but by degrees; falling to thrice a week, and then twice, and so by degrees
lessen the doses; but leave them not quite off, till you are perfectly well.
During your whole course, observe a slender, but wholesome Diet: it is convenient
to eat but once a day, yet if your stomach require more, at night you may eat a
crust of bread with a few Raisins of the Sun: let your drink be small Ale, well
wrought and settled: if your business calls you abroad, cloth your self very
warm, and avoid cold, and drinking: in observing these cautions, you will with
great satisfaction reap the benefit. Jam si quis male fert indignae regna
puellae
Ne pereat; nostrae sentiat Artistopem.


Furthermore, in all Women's Distempers, Women.
it is of excellent use, to those especially who want their Monthly Issues, by
which a multitude of evils are are caused; as sweld legs, great (but
fruitless) bellies, weak back, lost appetite, frequent faintings, vomitings,
and shortness of breath, constant Headache, and (which is not the least of
griefs) loss of Beauty, a fresh, lively, airy, complexion, changed into a pale,
dull, warty hiew, with diverse other secret distempers generally known to Women;
for which there is not a more certain and present Remedy then this our Pill;
Which is in these cases to be used according to the rules first appointed.

It is a Sovereign Remedy for all intermitting Fevers, or Agues, and Cures
them after the third or fourth time taken: Observe strictly the time of the
approach of your fit; and about two hours before it, take a large dose of the
Pill, 5 or 6, or more if your body will bear it. When you find your fit
coming, drink a large draught of posset drink boyld with Carduus. If you vomit,
drink more, and urge the vomit as much as you can with the posset drink: and
when it works downward, leave drinking, and walk about your chamber to avoid
sleeping; for that is of evil consequence in this case.

To conclude, this Pill may be taken at all times of the year, and in all case,
excepting acute and peracute diseases, desperate consumptions, great
evacuations, with loss of Spirits and strength: and in these cases there ought
to be good advice taken, before any medicine be administered; Moreover, when the
body labors under some great distemper; with variety of strange Symptoms, and
accidents not usually met withal; when the signs of the disease are confused,
doubtful, and often changing; it is most probable, that it is not one single
disease which afflicts the patient, but that there is a complication of two or
more diseases a once in the same body: and there being uncertainty in the
judgment of the disease there can be no certain rule given for the use of any
one medicine; and therefore, to whomsoever this shall happen, or any other
doubt concerning the use of this Pill, I do freely invite all persons upon
this account, to apply themselves to me, and I shall give my judgment of their
distemper, and advice for the better ordering themselves in the use of the
Pill. For which, I shall not expect any gratuity. They who are far Distant,
may by Letter, use some friend in Town, to send to me.

In all such distempers, where this Pill is not of use, I have always by me,
medicines of Singular Virtue, and Efficacy, prepared with mine own hands, with
all care and diligence imaginable; among many others, I have an Excellent
Balsamic Essence for the Lungs, which restores such as have languished in
Consumptions, cures old Coughs, and all diseases of the Lungs, even to a
wonder. Also an Essential Spirit called Flammula Vitae, which wonderfully
comforts the heart, revives drooping Spirits, restores decaying nature,
preserves the Radical moisture, Supports youth, keeps back the infirmities of
Old age, and gray hairs; makes the body lusty and Vigorous; helps concoction,
and disposes the whole man to cheerfullness, and health.

I have now only one Objection to answer, in relation to the Vatican Pill. It
may possibly be said, that notwithstanding this large Encomium I have here
given of it, it may not be rightly prepared according to the true Process: I
answer, that the true Process of preparing this said Pill, is well known to
many persons of quality in this town, who have a very high esteem for it (and
not without cause) To any such peron, I do frankly offer a free access at all
times to my Laboratory, where they may see the whole preparation wrought with
mine own hands; for I give that trust to none elss. And this I conceive may be
satisfactory to all who are doubtful, and also to all who shall use this
Vatican Pill.

They are sold for 3s-6d. The Box, containing 40 Pills,

BY Mr. Sam. Lownds over again Exeter house in the Strand, Mr. Jos Robinson at
Lincolns-Inn-gate, Mr. Sim. Miller at the Star in Ludgate Street, Mr. Thomas
Parkhurst at the Bible and three Crowns near Mercers Chapel in Cheapside, and
at his Shop upon London Bridge by the Gate, Mr. Tho. Guy at the Corner Shop of
Lumbard-street and Cornhill by the Market, Mr. Rich. Northcot next door to St.
Peter's Alley in Cornhill, Mr. Will. Jacob next door to Barnards-Inn-gate in
Holbourn, and at Mr. Nests Shop next without Westminster-hall-door, Mr.
Ashbourn in York, Mr. John Tuthill in Yarmouth, Mr. Sampson Evans in Worcester,
Mr. John Handcox in Hereford, Mr. Esau Watkis in Salop, Mr. Will Hall in
Colchester, Mr. Tobie Langford in Gloucester. All Booksellers and Stationers.

And also by my self, living in Jewen-street, within the great Gate and next to
the Flower-de-luce in Bull-Head Court.


