A Brief EXPOSITION OF THE Lord's Prayer AND THE Decalogue.

To which is added The DOCTRINE of the Sacraments.

By ISAAC BARROW, D. D. And late Master of Trinity College in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons, over
against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1681.

ISAACUS BARROW S.T.P. REG. MA. A SACRIS COLL S. S. TRINI. CANTAB PRAEFEC. NEC
NON ACAD. EIUSDEM PROCANC: 1676
portrait

TO The Right Honorable HENEAGE EARL of NOTTINGHAM, Lord High CHANCELLOR OF
ENGLAND, AND One of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council;
THOMAS BARROW, the Author's Father, Humbly Dedicateth these DISCOURSES.

The Publisher to the Reader.
AMong the Remains of this pious and learned Author, fit to be communicated to
the public, none more likely to be of general use and advantage than this
Explication of the Lord's Prayer, the Decalogue, and the Doctrine of the
Sacraments; whether we regard the brevity and plainness, or the admirable
weight and fullness of it. And therefore I thought fit to publish it in a small
Manual by it self, and not to join it with other Discourses of the Author,
that so this little Treatise, which is so necessary and useful to all, might
be had upon the easiest terms.

It were to be wished, that the Creed also had been explained by him in the
same manner; but that he has handled in a larger way, in a great many
excellent Sermons upon the several Articles of it, wherein he has not only
explained and confirmed the great Doctrines of our Religion, but likewise shown
what influence every Article of our Faith ought to have upon our practice.
These Discourses will make a very considerable Treatise, which will in due time
be made public. In the mean time enjoy and make use of this.

Jo. Tillotson.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE Lord's Prayer.
Orat. Domin.
Si per omnia precationum sanctarum verba discurras, quantum existimo nihil
invenies, quod non ista Dominica contineat and concludat oration: unde liberum
est aliis atque aliis verbis, eadem tamen in orando dicere, sed non debet esse
liberum alia dicere. Aug. ad Probam Epist. CXXI.
AN EXPOSITION OF The Lord's Prayer.
AMong all the Duties, prescribed to us by our Religion, the rendering due
Worship to God is in nature, and for consequence the principal; God thereby
being most directly honored, and served, we from it immediately deriving most
ample, and high benefits; to the performance of which duty we are furnished
with excellent direction, and assistance from that Prayer, which our Lord (at
several times, and upon several occasions) dictated, and recommended to his
Disciples, both as a pattern, according to which they should regulate their
devotions (Pray thus, Matt. 6. 9.
or in this manner, says he in Saint Matthew) and as a form, in which they
should express them (When you pray, Luke 11. 2.
say; that is, say this or in these words; so he injoins them in Saint Luke):
Quamlibet alia verba dicamus, quae affectus orantis vel praecedendo format ut
clareat, vel consequendo attendit ut crescat, nihil aliud dicimus, quam quod in
ista Dominica Oratione positum est, si recte and congruenter oramus. Aug.
Epist. 121. Vide illum.
unto it therefore we should carefully attend as to our best rule; and we
should frequently use it as our best matter of devotion; to the well performing
of both which duties, it is requisite that we should distinctly understand the
particulars contained therein, in order to which purpose we shall endeavor to
explain them; but first let us premise a few words in general about Prayer.

Prayer in its latitude of acception does comprehend all devotion, 1 Timothy 2. 1.
-- (...).
or worship immediately addressed unto Almighty God; consisting of praise,
which we render to God in regard to his most excellent perfections, and
glorious works; of submissive gratulation, declaring our satisfaction in all
the dispensations of his most wise and just providence; of thanksgiving, for
the numberless great benefits we have received from him; of acknowledging our
total dependence on him, and our subjection to him; of professing faith in him,
and vowing service to him; of confessing the sins we have committed against
him, with the guilt and aggravation of them; of deprecating the wrath and
punishment due to us for our offenses; of petition for all things needful and
convenient for us; of intercession for others, whose good we according to duty
or charity are concerned to desire and promote: Prayer, I say (although
according to its most restrained sense it only does signify one of these
particulars, namely the petition of what is needful or expedient for us,
(...). Chrysostom. Tom. V. p. 185.
yet) in its larger acception, as it commonly is used, it does comprize them
all; and so we may well take it here; this form, although so very brief, being
with so admirable wisdom contrived, as without straining the words beyond
their natural importance, we may, applying a moderate attention, discern them
all, as to their main substance, couched therein; Totius Evangelii breviarium;
Tert. de Orat. 1, 9.
so that we may indeed reasonably regard this Prayer as a complete directory,
and a full exercise of all our devotion toward God: of devotion, I say, the
which (to engage, excite, and encourage us to the careful and constant
practice thereof) we may consider enjoined us as a necessary duty, commended to
us as a requisite means of good, and a special instrument of all piety, and as
a high privilege granted to us by God.

1. It is a natural duty and debt we owe to God (both in correspondence to the
design of our being made and endowed with rational capacities agreeable to our
relations; and in requital for our being, and for all the good we have, and do
continually receive from him) as most highly to love and reverence him in our
hearts; so to declare our esteem of his excellencies, and our sense of his
bounty toward us: to avow the dependence we have upon his will and providence;
the obligations we are under to his mercy and goodness; to yield our due homage
of respect, submission and obedience to him: if we do acknowledge a God, our
Maker, our Lord, our continual Benefactour to be, we must consequently
acknowledge these performances in reason, justice and gratitude due to him; and
God accordingly requires, and positively injoins them: Deuteronomy. 10. 20.
He is the Lord our God, whom we must worship and serve; the God, Matt. 4. 10.
whom praise waits for; who hears prayers, and to whom therefore all flesh
must come: Psalm. 65. 2.
the Scripture is very frequent in commanding the duty.

2. It is a most useful means, or a condition requisite for the procurement of
benefits, and blessings upon us. God has declared that he does accept, he has
promised that he will reward all devotions with an honest intention, and pure
mind offered up unto him; (...).
that he is nigh unto all them that call upon him in truth; that he will be
found of them who seek him with all their heart; Psalm. 34. 10. 145. 18, 19. 10.
17.
that he will fulfill the desire of them that fear him; Jer. 29. 13.
he will hear their cry, and will save them; that they who seek him shall not
want any good thing; 1 John 3. 22.
that, Matt. 21. 22. 7. 7.
whatever we ask in prayer believing we shall receive; Luke 11. 9.
that if we ask, Joh. 14. 13. 15. 7. 16. 23.
it shall be given us, if we seek, we shall find; if we knock, it shall be
opened to us. Prayer is also a means of procuring a blessing upon all our
undertakings; it sanctifies every performance, etc. There is no good thing so
great and precious, so high above the reach of common power; so strange to
expect or difficult to compass, which we may not easily and surely by this
means obtain; relief in all distresses both of our outward and inward estate;
supplies of all our needs both corporal and spiritual; comfort in all our
sorrows and sadnesses; satisfaction in all our doubts and darknesses of mind;
help and strength against all our temptations we may be confident to obtain, if
we duly seek them from the Almighty dispenser of all good gifts: sure promises
there are, and obvious examples hereof, too many to be now recited: as on the
other hand; they that will neglect this duty, that will not vouchsafe to seek
help and remedy of God, may be sure to want it; shall certainly suffer for
their proud contempt, profane diffidence, Joh. 5. 40.
or foolish sloth: you will not (says our Savior) come to me, that ye may
have life; no wonder then if they do not receive it, if they will not go
thither for it, where only it is to be had. All good things are in God's hand,
and we shall never by any force or policy get them thence without his will,
moved by entreaty; all good gifts come from heaven, and thence we shall never
fetch them down, without ascending thither in our hearts and affections,
spiritual goods especially are so high above us, that we can never reach them
otherwise, than by God's help by humble supplication obtained.

3. It is not only a means by impetration acquiring for us, but it is an
effectual instrument working in us all true good; It is the channel, by which
God conveyeth spiritual light into our minds, and spiritual vigor into our
hearts. It is both the seed and the food of spiritual life; by which all holy
dispositions of soul, Difficillimum est opus orare. Luth.
and all honest resolutions of practice are bred, are nourished, are augmented
and strengthened in us. It exciteth, it quickneth, it maintains all pious
affections; Fervor of Spirit. Romans 12. 11. (...).
the love of God can no otherwise than by it be kindled, fomented or kept in
life (without it we certainly shall have an enstrangement, and an aversation
from him) it alone can maintain a constant reverence and awe of God, keeping
him in our thoughts, and making us to live as in his presence; it chiefly
enliveneth and exercises our faith and our hope in God: it is that which
begets in our hearts a savoury relish of divine things; which sweetneth and
endeareth to our souls the practice of piety; which only can enable us with
delight and alacrity to obey God's commandments: It alone can raise our minds
from the cares and concernments of this world to a sense and desire of heavenly
things. By it God imparteth strength to subdue bad inclinations, to restrain
sensual appetites, to compress irregular passions; to evade the allurements to
evil, and the discouragements from good, which this world always presents; to
support also with patience and equanimity the many crosses and troubles we must
surely meet with therein. It is, in short, the only strong bulwark against
temptation and sin; the only sure guard of piety and a good conscience: no man
indeed can be a faithful servant to God, a real friend to goodness, a serious
practicer of duty without a constant tenor of devotion.

4. It is a most high privilege and advantage to us, that we are allowed to
pray and address our devotions to God. To have a free access to the presence
and audience of an earthly Prince (to the effect of receiving from him all that
we could desire) would be deemed a matter of great honor, and much advantage;
how much more is it so to us, that we are admitted to the presence and ear of
the great King of all the world; so mighty in power, so large in bounty, so
full of goodness and pity; so thoroughly able, so exceedingly willing to grant
and perform our requests? How sweet a thing, of what comfort and benefit is it,
to have the liberty of pouring out our souls and our hearts (as the Psalmist
speaks) before God; Psalm. 62. 8. 4^. 4.
of disburthening our minds of all their cares, their desires, their doubts,
their griefs and anxieties into the breast of so kind a friend, so wise a
counselor, so able a helper; who alone indeed can afford relief, ease,
satisfaction and comfort to us? Considering which things we shall appear not
only very disobedient to God, and highly ungrateful toward him (who so
infinitely condescends in vouchsafing to us dust and ashes (vile and unworthy
creatures) leave to speak and converse with him) but very injurious and
unfaithful to our selves, Genesis 18. 27.
and to our own good; if we neglect this duty commanded, or slight this
privilege indulged to us:

In the due performance of which we are directed and assisted by this Form of
Prayer, Deus solus docere potuit, ut se vellet orari. Tert. de Orat. cap. 9.
composed and dictated for that purpose by him, who best knew what we ought to
pray for, and how we ought to pray; what matter of desire, what manner of
address; what disposition of mind would be most pleasing and acceptable to his
Father, would most become and befit us in our approaches to him. We might
consequently observe many things concerning those particulars, discernible in
this Form: the sublimity, the gravity, the necessity, the singular choiceness
of the matter; together with the fit order, and just disposition thereof;
according to the natural precedence of things in dignity or necessity; the full
brevity, the deep plainness, the comely simplicity of expression; the lowly
reverence signified therein accompanied with due faith and confidence: these,
and the like virtues directive of our devotion we might observe running
generally through the whole contexture of this venerable Form; but we shall
rather choose to take notice of them as they shall offer themselves in their
particular places, to the consideration of which in order we now do apply our
selves.

Our Father which art in Heaven.
Our Father; upon this title, or manner of compellation, we may first observe,
that although our Savior prescribes this Form as a pattern, and an exercise
of private prayer to be performed in the Closet (and alone in secret as is
expressed in the Gospel) yet he directs us to make our addresses to God in a
style of plurality, Matt. 6. 6, 9.
saying, not my Father, but our Father; thereby, it seems, implying; 1. That we
should in our prayers consider and acknowledge the Universality of God's power
and goodness. 2. That we should not in our conceit proudly and vainly
appropriate or engross the regard of God unto our selves; but remember that our
brethren have an equal share with us therein. 3. That in all our devotions we
should be mindful of those common bands which knit us together as Men and as
Christians (the band of nature and humanity; the more strict ties of common
faith and hope; of manifold relations unto God that made us, and our Savior
that redeemed us, and the Holy Spirit who animateth and quickneth us, and
combineth us in spiritual union.) 4. That we should bear such hearty good will,
and charitable affection toward others, as not only to seek and desire our own
particular and private good, but that of all men; especially of all good
Christians; who in a peculiar manner are God's children and our brethren;
(...). Tom. V. p. 186.
He did not bid us say my Father, but our Father, who art in Heaven; that being
taught that we have a common Father, we might show a brotherly good will one
toward another, says S. Chrysostom.

As for the appellation Father; it does mind us of our relation to God, who
upon many grounds, and in diverse high respects is our Father (by nature, for
that he gave us our being, and made us after his own image; by providence, for
that he continually preserves and maintains us; by grace, for that he
renews us to his image in righteousness and holiness; by adoption, for that
he allows us the benefit and privilege of his children, assigning an eternal
inheritance to us) of this relation, which as Creatures, as Men, as Christians,
we bear to God it minds us, and consequently how we ought in correspondence
thereto to behave our selves; yielding to him all respect, affection and
observance; demeaning our selves in all things as becomes such a relation, and
rank: This indeed of all God's Names, Titles and Attributes is chosen as most
suitable to the nature of the present duty; as most encouraging to the
performance thereof, as most fully implying the dispositions required in us,
when we apply our selves thereto. Matt. 7. 9.
Our Savior used to compare Prayer to a Son's asking nourishment of his
Father; Luke 11. 11.
arguing thence what success, and benefit we may expect from it: we come
therein to God, not (directly) as to a Lord or Master, to receive commands; but
rather as to a Father to request from him the sustenance of our life, and
supply of our needs; to render withal unto him our thankful acknowledgments,
for having continuedly done those things for us; and to demonstrate our
dutiful respect, and affection toward him. It is natural for children in any
danger, straight, or want to fly to their parents for shelter, relief and
succor; and it is so likewise for us to have recourse unto God, in all those
cases, wherein no visible means of help appear from elsewhere: And to do so
the title of Father does encourage us, signifying not only power and authority
over us, but affection and dearness toward us: The name God, importing his
excellent perfections; the name Lord, minding us of his power, and empire over
us, with the like titles declarative of his supereminent Majesty, might deter
us, being conscious of our meanness and unworthiness, from approaching to him;
but the word Father is attractive and emboldning; thinking on that we shall be
apt to conceive hope, that how mean, how unworthy soever, yet being his
children, he will not reject, or refuse us: Matt. 6. 11.
If men being evil do give good gifts unto their children; how much more will
our Father, which is in heaven, give good things to them that ask him?

It also plainly intimates how qualified and disposed in mind we should come to
God; namely, with high reverence, with humble affection, with hearty gratitude;
as to the Author of our being, to him that has continually preserved and
brought us up; from whose care and providence we have received all the good we
have ever enjoyed; from whose mercy and favor we can only expect any good for
the future. By calling God Father, we avow our selves obliged to honor and
love him incomparably beyond all things; We also declare our faith, and hope in
God; that we believe him well affected toward us, and willing to do us good;
and that we thence hope to receive the good desirable from him (the which are
dispositions necessary to the due performance of this duty.) Matt. 21. 22.
It also implies, Jam. 1. 6.
that we should come thereto with purity of mind and good conscience, 1 Timothy 2.
8.
which is also requisite to the same intent: for if we are conscious of
undutifull and disobedient carriage toward God, how can we call him Father?
with what heart, or face can we assume to our selves the title of children? If
(says S. Peter) ye call upon him as Father, 1 Pet. 1. 17.
who impartially judges according to every man's work, (that is, who only
esteems them for his children, who truly behave themselves as becomes
children) pass the time of your pilgrimage in fear (or in reverence toward
God). We may add, that we also hereby may be supposed to express our charity
toward our brethren; who bear unto God, the Father of all men, the same common
relation. But I proceed:

Which art in Heaven.
God Almighty is substantially present every where; but he does not every where
in effects discover himself alike, nor with equal splendor in all places
display the beams of his glorious Majesty. The Scripture frequently mentions
a place of his special residence (seated in regions of inaccessible light,
above the reach not only of our sense, but of our fancy and conception) where
his royal Court, his presence Chamber, his imperial Throne are; where he is
more immediately attended upon by the glorious Angels, and blessed Saints;
which place is called Heaven, Luke 2. 14. 19. 38.
the highest heavens; Matt. 21. 9.
the (...), the highest places; by his presence wherein God is described here,
as for distinction from all other parents here on earth, so to increase
reverence in us toward him (while we reflect upon his supereminent glory and
majesty) and to raise our hearts from these inferior things unto desire, and
hope, and love of heavenly things; withdrawing (says S. Chrysostom) him that
prays from earth, (...).
and fastening him to the places on high, and to the mansions above. But so much
for the Title.

The first Sentence of our Prayer is,

Hallowed (or sanctified) be thy Name.
Let us first (with S. Chrysostom) observe the direction we hence receive in
all our prayers to have a prime, and principal regard to the glory of God; not
seeking any thing concerning our own good before his praise; that for the
order. As to the substance of this particular we may consider, that sanctity
implying a discrimination, a distance, an exaltment in nature or use of the
thing, which is denominated thereby; and God's name signifying himself with all
that we can know of him; himself, as however discovered or declared, with all
that relates to him, and bears his inscription; we do here accordingly express
our due acknowledgments and desires; for by a rare complication this Sentence
does involve both praise and petition; does express both our acknowledgment of
what is, and our desire of what should be: we do I say hereby partly
acknowledge, and praise the supereminent perfections of God above all things,
in all kind of excellency, joining in that seraphical Doxology (which to utter
is the continual employment of the blessed Spirits above) who incessantly day
and night cry out, Apoc. 4. 8.
Holy, Apoc. 4. 11.
Holy, Holy; confessing with the heavenly host in the Apocalypse, that he is
worthy of all honor, glory and power; we do also partly declare our hearty
wishes, (...). Chrysostom. Tem. V. p. 186.
that God may be every where had in highest veneration; that all things
relating to him may receive their due regard; that all honor and praise, all
duty and service may in a peculiar manner be rendered unto him by all men, by
all creatures, by our selves especially: that all minds may entertain good and
worthy opinions of him; all tongues speak well of him, celebrate and bless him;
all creatures yield adoration to his name, and obedience to his will: that he
be worshipped in truth and sincerity, with zeal and fervency; this particularly
in the Prophet Esaias, and by S. Peter is called sanctifying God's Name in
opposition to idolatrous and profane Religion (Sanctify the Lord of hosts
himself, Esa. 8. 13. 29. 23.
and let him be your fear, let him be your dread, says the Prophet; and, Fear
not their fear, 1 Pet. 3. 14, 15.
nor be troubled; but sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, says the
Apostle.) Thus do we here pray and wish in respect to all men, and to all
creatures capable of thus sanctifying God's Name; but more particularly we pray
for our selves, that God would grant to us, that we by our religious and
righteous conversation may bring honor to his name; Matt. 5. 16.
so that men seeing our good works may glorify our Father, 1 Pet. 2. 12.
which is in Heaven. (...), etc. Chrysostom. in Matt. 6.
(Vouchsafe, says he, that we may live so purely, that all men by us may
glorify thee: so descants S. Chrysostom.)

Thy Kingdom come.
This Petition, or devout wish, being subordinate to the former, as expressing
a main particular of that, which is there generally desired (we here to the
glory of God desiring a successful and speedy propagation of true Religion)
seems in its direct, and immediate sense to respect the state of things in that
time, more especially befitting our Lord's Disciples then, when the Kingdom of
God (that is, the state of Religion under the Evangelical Dispensation) was
coming and approaching; (according to that of our Savior in S. Luke: Luke 9.
27.
I say unto you of a truth, Matt. 16. 28. 3. 2.
there be some of you standing here that shall not taste death, till they see
the Kingdom of God) whence it did become them in zeal to God's glory, and
charity for men's salvation, to desire that Christianity might soon effectually
be propagated over the world, being generally entertained by men with due faith
and obedience: that is, that all men willingly might acknowledge God as their
Lord and Maker, worshipping and serving him in truth; that they might receive
his blessed Son Jesus Christ as their King and Savior, heartily embracing his
doctrine, and humbly submitting to his laws; to which purpose our Lord injoins
his Disciples to pray, Matt. 9. 38.
that the Lord of the harvest would send laborers into his harvest; and S.
Paul exhorts the Thessalonians to pray, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1.
that the word of the Lord may run and be glorified. And in parity of reason,
upon the same grounds, we are concerned, and obliged to desire, that Christian
Religion may be settled and confirmed; may grow and be increased; may prosper
and flourish in the world; that God's authority may to the largest extension of
place, to the highest intention of degree, universally and perfectly, be
maintained and promoted, both in external profession and real effect; the minds
of all men being subdued to the obedience of faith; and avowing the subjection
due to him; and truly yielding obedience to all his most just and holy laws.
(...) etc. Chrysostom.
Thus should we pray that God's Kingdom may come; particularly desiring that it
may so come into our own hearts; humbli^^ imploring his grace, that he thereby
would rule in our hearts, quelling in them all exorbitant passions, and vicious
desires; protecting them from all spiritual enemies, disposing them to an
entire subjection to his will, and a willing compliance with all his
commandments: Luke 17. 21.
for this is the Kingdom of God, which (as our Lord tells us) is within us;
the which does not (as S. Paul teaches us) consist in meat and drink (in any
outward formal performances) but in righteousness, Romans 14. 17.
and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost; that is, in obedience to God's will, and
in the comfortable consequences thereof: Matt. 6. 33.
this is the Kingdom of God, which we are enjoined, before any worldly
accommodations, first to seek.

Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.
This Sentence is likewise complicated of praise, good desire, and petition:
for we thereby first do acknowledge the wisdom, justice, and goodness of God
in all resolutions of his will, and dispensations of his providence:

1. We profess our approbation of all God's counsels, our complacence and
satisfaction in all his proceedings; our cheerful submission and consent to
all his pleasure; joining our suffrage, and saying in harmony with that blessed
Choire in the Revelation: Great, Apoc. 15. 3.
and wonderful are thy works, O Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways,
O thou King of Saints. We disclaim our own judgments and conceits; we renounce
our own desires and designs, so far as they appear inconsistent with the
determinations of Gods wisdom, or discordant with his pleasure; saying after
our Lord, Luke 22. 42.
Let not my will, but thine be done.

2. We do also express our desire, that as in heaven all things with a free,
and undisturbed course do pass according to God's will, and good liking; every
intimation of his pleasure finding there a most entire and ready compliance,
from those perfectly loyal and pious spirits (those ministers of his, Psalm.
103. 20.
that do his pleasure, as the Psalmist calls them) so that here on earth the
gracious designs of God may be accomplished without opposition or rub; that
none should presume, Luke 7. 30.
as the Pharisees and Lawyers are said to do, (...), to disappoint or defeat
God's counsel; (...), to thrust away or repulse God's word, Acts 13. 46.
as the Jews did in the Acts; to resist, provoke, or defy God by obstinate
disobedience; as many are said to do in the Scriptures; but that every where a
free, humble, hearty, and full obedience be rendered to his commands.

3. We do also pray, that God would grant us the grace willingly to perform,
whatever he requires of us, Heb. 13. 21.
(perfecting us, as the Apostle speaks, in every good work to do his will,
and working in us that which is well-pleasing in his sight) contentedly to bear
whatever he lays upon us; that God would bestow upon us a perfect resignation
of our wills unto his will; Phil. 4. 11.
a cheerful acquiescence in that state and station wherein he has placed us;
a submiss patience in all adversities, whereinto he disposes us to fall; a
constant readiness with satisfaction and thankfulness (without reluctance or
repining) to receive whatever comes from his will, whether grateful or
distastefull to our present sense; acknowledging his wisdom, his goodness, his
justice in all his dealings toward us; heartily saying with good Eli, It is the
Lord, 1 Samuel 3. 18.
let him do what seems him good; with Hezekiah; 2 King. 20. 19.
Good is the word of the Lord, which thou have spoken, with David; 2 Samuel 15.
26.
Behold here I am, let him do to me, as seems good to him; Job 2. 10. 1. 21.
with Job; Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive
evil? and, Psalm. 37. 5. 55. 22.
The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord:
Yea it were well, if we could after the Heathen Philosopher, Epict. Ench. 38.
upon all occasions with our hearts say, (...), Plat. Criton. (...), etc. Ant.
IV. 31.
(...) If God will have it so, so let be: if we could observe those rules and
precepts, which even the Philosophers so much inculcate; (...). Ant. III. 4;
16. II. 17. X. 11. XII. 1. Ant. VII. 31. X. 11.
to commit all our affairs to God, to love and embrace (hugg) all events; to
follow, and to accompany God; to yield, deliver, and resign our selves up to
him. Sen. De Or. Sap. 32. Ego secundum naturam vivo, si totum me illi dedo.
Optimum est Deum, quo auctore cuncta proveniunt sine murmuratione comitari,
etc. -- hic est magnus animus, qui se Deo tradidit -- Sen. Ep. 37, 54, 71, etc.
de Prove. 5.
(Deo se praebere, dedere, tradere, etc.) and the like.

Give us this day our daily bread.
I shall not stand to criticize upon the hard word here used, translated daily;
I only say, that of two senses offering themselves, both are probable, and by
good authority countenanced; both are proper and suitable to the matter, or
nature of the thing: according to one we pray for the bread (...) (...), of the
time to come, or of that future life, which it shall please God to allow us;
(...). Chrysostom. Tom. V. 187.
according to the other, we request bread (...), which is necessary for our
being, and the preservation of our lives; joining both together (which is more
sure and safe) we pray for a competent provision toward the maintenance of our
life hereafter, during our appointed time: that for the sense; upon the
Petition it self we observe:

1. That after we have rendered our due tribute of praise, and respect unto God,
we are allowed, and directed to request of him good things for our selves;
beginning, as nature prompteth, with the preservation of our beings, and lives;
whereby we become capable of receiving and enjoying other good things;

2. By doing which we also do imply the sense we have of our total dependence
upon God; avowing our selves to subsist by his care and bounty; disclaiming
consequently all confidence in any other means to maintain or support us; in
any store we have laid up, or estate we pretend to; in any contrivance or
industry we can use; in any succor of friends or relations; for that
notwithstanding all these, we do need our daily bread to be dealt to us by God,
and must continually beg it as a gift from his hands.

3. We are by that word, (...), this day, taught our duty (signifying withal
our performance thereof) of being willing continually to rely upon God; not
affecting to ever be so much before hand, as not to need God's constant
assistance: we ask not, that God would give us at once, what may serve us for
ever, and may put us out of any fear to want hereafter; we ask not for that
which may suffice for a long time, for many years, many months, many days; but
that God would give us to day, or rather day by day ((...), Luke 11. 3.
as it is expressed in S. Luke) that is, that he would continually dispense to
us, what is needful for us: we should not therefore desire to have an estate
settled upon us; to live by our selves, or on our own incomes; to be set out of
God's house, or immediate protection and care; this in it self cannot be (for
God cannot alienate his goods from himself, nor can we subsist out of his hand)
nor must we desire it should be; it is a part of Atheism, of Infidelity, of
Heathenish profaneness and folly to desire it (these things, Matt. 6. 32.
says our Lord, do the Gentiles seek; that is, they are covetous of wealth,
and careful for provisions to live without dependence upon God) but we must
esteem God's providence our surest estate, God's bounty our best treasure,
God's fatherly care our most certain, and most comfortable support; Matt. 6. 25.
casting all our care on him, 1 Pet. 5. 7.
as being assured that he cares for us; Heb. 13. 5.
will not leave nor forsake us; Phil. 4. 6.
will not withhold, what is necessary for our comfortable sustenance.

4. It is here intimated, how sober, and moderate our appetites should be, in
regard both to the quality and quantity of the things we use: we are directed
to ask (...) (as S. Chrysostom says) necessary food, not luxurious plenty, or
delicacy: it is bread (the most simple, homely, and common diet) that is, such
accommodations as are necessary to maintain our lives, and satisfy our natural
desires; not superfluities, serving to please our wanton appetites, or humor
our curious fancies; it is not variety, daintiness, elegancy, or splendor we
should affect to enjoy, but be content to have our necessities supplied, with
the coursest diet, and the meanest apparel, if our condition requires it, or
God's providence in an honest way allotteth no other to us: we may soberly and
thankfully enjoy what God sends; but we should not presume to ask for, or
desire other than this.

And for the measure, we learn to ask only for so much as shall be fit to
maintain us; not for rich, or plentiful store; not for full barns, or for
heaps of treasure; not for wherewith to glut, or pamper our selves; but for
daily bread, a moderate provision then to be dealt to us, when we need it.

It follows,

And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us
(our trespasses, it is our debts ((...)) in S. Matthew; our sins ((...)) in S.
Luke; and they who trespass against us are in both Evangelists called our
debtors: for he that injures another is obnoxious and in debt to him; owing him
satisfaction, either by making reparation, or undergoing punishment.)
After the preservation of our beings (the foundation of enjoying other good
things) our first care, we see, ought to be concerning the welfare of our
better part, and state; which chiefly consists in the terms, whereon we stand,
toward God, upon whose favor all our happiness depends, and from whose
displeasure all our misery must proceed: since therefore we all do stand
obnoxious to God's wrath and justice; having omitted many duties, which we own
to him, having committed manifold offenses against him; it is therefore most
expedient, that we first endeavor to get him reconciled to us, by the
forgiveness of our debts and offenses; concerning which remission, upon what
account it is necessary, upon what terms it is granted, by what means it is
obtained, in what manner it is dispensed by God, I have otherwhere touched, and
it is not seasonable now farther to insist thereon: only it may be pertinent
here to observe,

1. That this being the first of Petitions (formally such, and) purely
spiritual; we are hereby admonished to lay the foundation of our devotions in
humility; that we are obliged, before we presume to ask any thing of God
concerning our chief happiness, and well-being, to reflect upon, acknowledge,
and confess our unworthiness (not coming to our prayers as the Pharisee did,
doting upon our worthy qualities, and good deeds; but like the poor Publican,
with a sense of our infirmities and miscarriages; so as to be ready to
acknowledge our selves, as indeed we all are, guilty of many, and great sins)
this is here employed; for in requesting pardon for our sins, we confess our
selves to be sinners, and to need God's mercy.

2. We may hence learn the necessity, and the excellency of that benefit we
here beg. When the Psalmist applied himself to praise God for his benefits,
this he set in the first place, as most needful and considerable to him: Bless
the Lord, Psalm. 103. 2, 3.
O my Soul (said he) and forget not all his benefits (or rather, not any of his
benefits) who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases; and
answerably, it is the first particular benefit we pray for.

3. We must take notice, that we are obliged to go to our devotions with
universal charity, and good will toward others; 1 Timothy 2. 8.
to lift up (as S. Paul injoineth) holy hands without wrath, and doubting (or
without wrath, and dissension) to depose all enmity (as our Lord advises)
before we bring our oblation to the altar of God; Matt. 5. 23.
reserving no spite, or grudge toward any man, but having a heart clear of all
ill will, and desire of revenge; being in affection of mind toward others as we
do wish, and hope, and pray that God would be toward us: such in all reason,
equity, and ingenuity should our disposition be; and such God requires it to
be; and such we do assert, and promise it to be; implying also a compact with
God, no otherwise to desire, or expect his favor, and mercy toward us, than as
we resemble him in kind and merciful intentions toward our brethren: It is
employed on God's part, that he vouchsafes pardon only upon these terms; yea
more, that he does truly promise pardon upon our performing this condition;
Matt. 6. 14.
so our Savior, purposely reflecting on this Petition, does afterward expound
it: for, says he, if you forgive to men their trespasses, your heavenly Father
will also forgive you; it also implies a consent on our parts, and submission
to this condition, as most equal and reasonable; so that if we break it, if we
do retain any uncharitable inclinations, we deal, falsely with God; we forfeit
all pretense to favor, and mercy from him; we are neither qualified for mercy,
nor shall obtain it from God.

Lead us not into temptation.
Temptation is sometime taken in a middle, and indifferent sense for any
occasion, by which the moral quality of persons (their virtue, or vice) is
examined, and discovered: so God is said to have tempted Abraham, Genesis 22. 1.
when he propounded to him the offering up of his Son; so he tempted the
Israelites, by leading them in that long journey through the wilderness, Deuteronomy.
8. 2. (...)
that he might know what was in their heart, whether they would keep his
commandments, or no: so he likewise tempted them by permitting Seducers to do
wonderful things, Deuteronomy. 13. 3.
that he might know, whether they did love the Lord with all their heart, and
with all their soul: And because affliction is of such a nature, as to try the
temper, disposition, and intentions of men, therefore temptation often is used
for affliction. It seems also sometimes put in a good sense, for an occasion
designed to exercise, or to improve, or to declare the virtues of a person; so
the inconveniences, and crosses incident to our nature, and condition here,
the which our Lord did undergo, Luke 22. 28.
are by S. Luke, Heb. 2. 18. 4. 15.
and others of the Apostles styled temptations; 1 Pet. 4. 12. 1. 6, 7.
so the fiery trial in S. Peter was (...), to exercise and refine them, that
(says he) the trial of their faith might be to praise, and honor, and glory;
so S. James bids Christians to rejoice, Jam. 1. 2.
when they fall into diverse temptations; that is when they meet with
opportunities of exercising their faith, and patience; and so we may understand
that place in Deuteronomy: Deuteronomy. 8. 16.
Who ('it is said) sed thee with Manna, that he might humble, and prove thee (or
tempt thee, (...), say the LXX.) to do thee good at the latter end; that he
might tempt thee, that is, that he might render thee approved; might exercise,
and improve thy dependence on God, thy patience, thy obedience. But the word is
commonly taken in a worse sense, for an occasion presented with ill purpose, or
naturally tending and not easily avoided, of falling into sin; a stumbling
block, a snare; as when S. Paul says, 1 Timothy 6. 9.
that they who will be rich, do fall (...), into temptation, and a snare; Jam.
1. 13.
thus S. James assures us, that God tempts no man; that is, does not intend
to seduce, or inveagle any man into sin. Yet because nothing in the world,
either good or bad, does happen without God's permission, and governance; and
the Devil himself must obtain license from God, before he can tempt any man, or
do any mischief (as we see in Job's case, Job 2. 6.
and in the history of Ahab) since God sees whatever is done, 1 King. 21. 22.
and with greatest ease could hinder it; and does not otherwise than for some
good end suffer any evil to be designed, or achieved, it is the style of
Scripture to attribute such things in some sense to him; as when God is said to
send Joseph into Egypt to preserve life; Genesis 45. 5.
when as in truth his brethren out of envy, and ill will did sell him thither;
and, God is said to move David to number the people; 2 Samuel 24. 1.
when as indeed Satan (as it is otherwhere affirmed) provoked him to number
them; 1 Chronicles. 21. 1.
and that horrid Tragedy acted by the Jews upon our Blessed Savior is said to
be brought to pass by the hand and definite counsel of God; Act. 2. 23. 4. 28.
because God foreseeing the temptations, which those men should incurr of
committing such acts, and their inclinations to perform them, did resolve not
to interpose his power in hindrance of them, but suffering them to proceed,
would turn their mischievous practices to an excellently good end, and use them
as instruments of his just, holy, and gracious purposes: Thus then whereas by
temptation here is meant any occasion alluring, or provoking to sin, or
withdrawing from duty, with a violence, all things considered, exceeding our
strength to resist or avoid; (or however such an one, that is apt to overthrow
us) God may be said to bring them into it, whom in justice he permits to be
exposed thereto; although he do no otherwise intermeddle, or concur therein,
than by not affording, or by withdrawing his especial direction, and
assistance; leaving them without check blindly or wilfully to follow the sway
of their own tempers, the instinct of their vain minds, the bent of their
corrupt wills; the violence of their unruly passions, and appetites; letting
them to fall into the manifold snares of false opinion, evil custom, and
contagious example, which the World sets before them; (the World, which by its
fair promises, and pleasing flatteries enticeth to sin, or by its angry frowns,
and fierce threats discourageth from goodness) permitting the Devil, without
control or impediment, by his wiles to delude and seduce them; which kind of
proceeding of God with men is clearly represented in the 81 Psalm; where, of
the Israelites God says, that having signally declared his pleasure to them,
and by promise of great benefits invited them to observe it; upon their wilful
neglect, he dealth thus with them: But (says God there) my people would not
hearken to my voice, Psalm. 81. 11 12.
and Israel would none of me; So I gave them up unto their own hearts lusts;
and they walked in their own counsels. In such manner, if God, provoked thereto
by our heinous miscarriages, does justly bring us into, or does let us enter
into temptation (as our Lord otherwhere expresses it, Luke 22. 40, 46.
Pray, says he, that ye enter not into temptation) we shall infallibly run
into many grievous sins, and desperate mischiefs; no less surely, than we shall
wander, and stumble in the dark, than we shall slide, and fall in the most
slippery places; Jer. 10. 23.
and sometimes be entangled, when we do walk in the midst of snares, surrounded
with traps innumerable, most cunningly laid to catch us: It is not (says the
Prophet) in man to direct his steps; so as to go straight, and upright; it is
not in him to see his duty, to bend his inclinations to compliance therewith;
to restrain his appetites, when sensible objects forcibly press on them; to
govern his passions, when they are vehemently stirred to disorderly motion: we
do continually need God's instruction to guide us, God's hand to uphold us,
Psalm. 37. 23, 24.
God's care, and help to guard us: when therefore, I say, our condition and
circumstances do minister dangerous occasions of sin; when our vain and weak
tempers do incline, or betray us thereto; when the world would smile, or frown
us into it; when the Devil violently solicits, or thrusts on toward it; thus to
be destitute of God's grace, thus to be left to our selves, is the most
horrible judgment, that can be. In such cases and seasons God's interposal is
necessary either to remove those temptations, or to support, and defend us from
the prevalence of them, (...), Jud. 24.
keeping us from stumbling and falling (as S. Jude speaks) not suffering us (as
S. Paul expresses it) to be tempted above what we are able, 1 Cor. 10. 23.
but making with the temptation also a way to escape, so that we shall be able
to sustain it.

That God would please to do this for us, we do here pray; and in pursuance of
this Petition we subjoin that, which in part may pass for an illustration
thereof; (implying an antithesis serving to that purpose: for delivering from
evil imports the same with (...), being rescued from temptation, in S. Peter;
The Lord, 2 Pet. 2. 9.
says he, knows how to rescue the godly out of temptation, and (...), Apoc.
3. 10.
to preserve from the time of temptation, in the Revelation; which are opposed
to bringing into temptation) partly it may be supposed an improvement thereof;
delivering from evil signifying perhaps somewhat more, than not permitting us
to incur occasions strongly inviting us to evil; even the effectual keeping us
from being overborn, or complying with it; but let us consider that Petition it
self.

But deliver us from evil.
From evil, (...); S. Chrysostom takes it for the Devil; who is the (...), the
Evil one, the tempter; who seduceth us to evil: but we shall take it, according
to the more common acception: from evil, that is principally from sin, or evil
moral and spiritual; the only evil, simply and in its own nature such; and the
root of all other evil; from that, and consequently from all mischief (evil
natural, and temporal; or evil penal, and afflictive) which may grow upon, or
sprout from thence. As for such evils as these, the want of things necessary,
or convenient for us, bodily disease, and pain, disappointment in our designs
and ill success in our undertakings, disgrace and reproach upon our good names,
dangers, difficulties and distresses concerning our outward estate,
distractions, vexations, and troubles of mind about temporal matters, with the
like evils, (in some sense, in some degree evils, or appearing such to our
natural sense and fancy) we may indeed deprecate them (as even our Lord himself
did) with submission (as he did) to the wisdom and will of God, in case it
pleases him, and he thinks fit to remove them; but all these things, being
but names and empty sounds in comparison to spiritual and eternal evils (such
as are vicious distempers of mind, indispositions to serve God, ill progress in
our spiritual affairs, dissatisfaction concerning our state in respect to God;
actual transgression of God's holy will and law; incurring God's displeasure
and disfavour; being deprived of his grace and assistence; wanting the
communion and comfort of his Holy spirit; remorse of conscience, and anguish of
spirit for having violated or neglected our duty; blindness of mind, hardness
of heart; want of love, reverence, devotion toward God, of charity and
good will toward our neighbor; of sobriety, humility, regularity of passion,
and calmness of temper in respect to our selves and the inward frame of our
souls; these, I say, and such like evils) we should absolutely request of God,
that he in mercy would deliver and free us from them; they being
irreconcileably repugnant to his will and glory; and inconsistent with our
eternal welfare. Yet even these, and all other things we do request only in
general terms, leaving the distinct matter, and manner and measure, according
to which they should be dispensed, to the wisdom, and goodness of God; Matt.
6. 8.
who does (as our Lord tells us) know what things we need before we ask him;
Ephesians. 3. 20.
and is not only able (as S. Paul says, but willing also) to do for us
superabundantly above what we can ask, or think. We are hereby (it seems)
taught this point of good manners in our devotion, not to be tediously punctual
and particular in our prayers, as if God needed our information, or were apt to
neglect the particulars concerning our good.

We shut up all with a Doxology, most suitable to the nature of devotion,
signifying our due faith, our affection, and our reverence toward God:

For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever, and ever. Amen.
That is, For thou have a perpetual and unmovable authority whereby justly to
dispose of all things; thou have an indefectible, and irresistible power,
whereby thou can effect whatever seems just and good to thee; wherefore we
profess only to rely upon, and seek help from thee; with hope and confidence
we address our selves to thee for the supply of our needs; thine is the glory;
all honor and reverence, all love and thankfulness are due unto thee,
therefore we render our adorations and acknowledgments to thee. Even so to
thee, God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost be for ever ascribed
all glory and praise. Amen.

AN EXPOSITION OF The Decalogue.
ALthough this Systeme of Precepts may seem to have been in its design rather
political, than moral; to regard public, and external, rather than private,
and interior action; that great branch of morality, which respects our
selves in our private retirements, or in our particular conversation, Sobriety
of mind and manners, being scarce touched herein, at least not openly and
plainly expressed; as also devotion toward God (in any of its kinds, of praise,
thanksgiving, confession of sin, prayer and intercession) that great part of
natural Religion, being not explicitly, and positively injoined: Although also
(as by the introduction thereto, and some passages therein, especially as it is
delivered in Deuteronomy, may appear) it seems particularly to concern the
Jewish Nation; (...), etc.
a People called, and chosen by God out of all Nations, Just. M. Dial. cum
Tryph. p. ^28.
to be governed in a more special, and immediate manner by God himself, obliged
to him by peculiar benefits and favors, designed by him to a separate manner
of living; being also perhaps in temper and disposition as well as in condition
and circumstances of life different from other People; whence Laws convenient,
(or in a manner necessary) for them, might not so well suit to all others; upon
which accounts as other of their Laws, so perchance some passages in this
notable part of them may not unreasonably be deemed peculiarly to concern them;
Although however this Systeme does more directly and immediately oblige that
People, all being formally, and in style of Law directed only to them,
promulged in their ears, expressed in their language, inserted into the body of
their Laws as a principal member of them; it being also expressly called a
Covenant with that People (He declared unto you, Deuteronomy. 4. 13. 10. 2.
says the text, Exodus 34. 1, 28.
his covenant, which he commanded you to perform, even ten commandments) and
accordingly was reposed in the Ark, hence it seems named the Ark of the
Covenant, the which, when all Nations should be converted to God, and admitted
into the Church, was (as the Prophet Jeremy foretold) to be utterly discarded
and laid aside. Jer. 3. 16, 17.
(In those days, says God in him, they shall say no more the Ark of the
Covenant of the Lord; neither shall it come to mind, neither shall they
remember it, neither shall they visit it; neither shall that be done any more.)
Hence although some passages herein, according to their primary, strict, and
literal meaning might never have been intended universally and perpetually to
oblige;

Yet notwithstanding these exceptions, if we consider,

1. The manner of its delivery; with what extraordinary solemnity it was
proclaimed; how it was dictated immediately from God's own mouth; and written
with his finger; on

2. The matter of it, containing the prime dictates of natural reason, the
chief rules of piety toward God, and equity toward our neighbor (whence those
elogies conferred on it, Neh. 9. 13.
in Nehemiah: Thou came also down upon mount Sinai, and gave them right
judgments, and true laws, good statutes and commandments; and by Saint Paul:
Romans 7. 12.
The law is holy; the commandment holy, just and good; (for that commendation
does I suppose especially respect this part of the Jewish Law; out of which he
takes his instance, Romans 7. 7.
Thou shall not covet) if we also consider,

3. The end and design of these Precepts, which was to ground them in true
notions of Religion, and to dispose them to the practice of righteousness; to
render them loyal and acceptable subjects to God; to promote God's glory, and
their own good; Deuteronomy. 10. 12.
which being expressed in general concerning their Law, does more especially
agree to this Systeme; being as the base and platform, the heart and
quintessence of all their other Laws; the which seem added as superstructures
on it, or fences thereof:

4. If we also consider, that our Savior did not derogate from this Law, but
declared his intention only to expound it, or to ampliate, and extend it (they
are the words of Tertullian and Irenaeus) and how the Apostles do sometimes
allege some passages in it, Romans 7. 7.
as retaining some authority, and force to oblige. Ephesians. 6. 2.


5. Considering also farther, that there is no commandment herein (howsoever,
according to its immediate and direct sense seeming peculiar to that People)
which may not in a larger, or in a mysterious and spiritual meaning; which at
least may not according to good analogy, or parity of reason concern us;
obliging us, if not by direct authority in punctual manner to the very same
thing, yet, as a signification of God's pleasure and approbation, to somewhat
answerable and like thereto;

6. Lastly, If we consider that all, or the greatest part of, the main duties
concerning us are either plainly expressed, or closely insinuated in them; or
may at least be conveniently reduced to them; our Savior himself having gone
before, directing us in the matter and manner of doing it;

Considering, I say, these things, we have no small reason to yield great
veneration to this ancient Systeme of Precepts; and to acknowledge the great
use thereof in order to the guidance of our life, and practice: we accordingly
shall so descant thereon, as by considering the main drift, intrinsic reason,
and spiritual intention of each particular, to reduce the chief Precepts of
Christian Doctrine, which oblige us, thereto.

Premising thus much I address my discourse to the particulars; omitting all
controverted niceties concerning the division thereof; and all circumstantial
questions; touching only such things, as shall appear substantial, and useful.

God spoke all these words, saying: This is a title, or superscription like the
Par de le Roy, (by the King) at the head of a Proclamation declaring from whom,
and in what manner, that which follows does come; and therefore implying what
it is, and how it should be received.

God spoke; It comes from God as Author; and that most immediately, as it were
from his own mouth; and has consequently the nature and force of a Law,
obliging to highest regard and obedience; as that which proceeds from the
most sovereign, unquestionable, and uncontrollable authority; which is
promulged in a way most evident, and most direct: every signification of God's
purpose, or pleasure is usually called God's Word; Heb. 1. 1.
for God (as the Apostle says) in diverse kinds, and manners did speak unto the
Fathers; and to every such Word our ear should be attentive, our heart should
be submissive, our hand should be obedient; but especially they should be so,
when God himself immediately declares his mind and will; as he did notoriously
in this case, by a great voice, distinctly audible and intelligible,
miraculously formed by himself: Behold, Deuteronomy. 5. 24.
say the People, the Lord our God has showed us his glory, and his greatness,
and we have heard his voice out of the midst of the fire; we have seen this
day, that God does talk with man, and he lives: and if whatever is in God's
name (by message of Angels, by inspiration of men, or by any other ways)
revealed must be entertained with all submiss respect, what regard is due to
that Word, which God is pleased, not by his Ministers and instruments, but
himself in person, as it were, to pronounce?

These words: that is these speeches, or sentences; (for so a Word in Scripture
style signifies) or these things, and matters (for the Hebrew word debarim, as
the Greek (...), signifies both words and things: they are several times in
the Pentateuch called the ten words, Exodus 34. 28.
or ten things; whence the Systeme of them is named the Decalogue. Deuteronomy. 4. 13.
10. 2.


All these words: all, without distinction or exception, did proceed from the
same authority, and in the same manner; Jam. 2. 10, 11.
and all therefore do require the like regard, Matt. 5. 19.
and observance to be yielded to them:

I am the Lord; or, I am Jehovah, thy God, which brought thee out of the land
of Egypt: These words are by some taken for a Precept; injoining the
acknowledgment, and acceptance of God, answerable to what is here employed; and
consequently all the positive duties of Religion, deducible hence; but we see
the style is declarative, and assertive, not directly imperative; and so it may
pass rather as a Preface farther enforcing obligation to obedience; wherein are
expressed, or intimated the chief reasons, upon which it is grounded; every
word containing in it somewhat of remarkable emphasis:

I am Jehovah; or that very same God, who under this appellation discovered my
self to thy forefathers; who enacted a special Covenant with them; who received
homage, worship, and engagements to service from them; who promised especial
protection and favor to them, and to their seed; that Jehovah, who indeed am,
what this name imports, the only true and real God; eternal, independent,
and indefectible in essence; true and infallible in word; constant and
immutable in purpose; firm and faithful in performance of whatever I promise,
or threaten: that same Jehovah I am; to whose words therefore, upon all
accounts of reason, of duty, of interest thou particularly do owe most
submissive attention, and obedience.

Thy God: that supereminent being, and power, to whom thou peculiarly do owe
worship and honor, love and affection, duty, and service: who although he be
indeed the Lord of all the World, yet bears a special relation unto thee;
Deuteronomy. 7. 6. 4. ^
as having chosen, and avouched thee to be a special People to himself, above
all the People, that are upon the face of the earth; having promised thee to
make thee high above all Nations, which he has made, in praise, and in name,
and in honor; and having by many signal demonstrations of favor and mercy
confirmed to thee the performance of his covenant, and promise; thou also
reciprocally having avowed me to be thy God, Deuteronomy. 26. 16.
to walk in my ways, to keep my statutes, my commandments, my judgments, and to
hearken to my voice.

Who brought thee out of the land of Egypt; out of the house of bondage: This
is a particular, and most remarkable instance, by which it appears what God
it is, that does thus impose law upon them; and how they are obliged to
entertain it: that God it is, who in pursuance of his singular favor toward
thee, and of his Covenant made with thee, has particularly obliged thee by so
eminent a benefit, in a manner so full of wonder in it self, so full of grace
toward thee, delivering thee from saddest oppression and slavery, bringing thee
into a desirable state of present liberty, and of sure tendency (not otherwise
than by thy fault to be frustrated) toward enjoyment of rest, of plenty, of all
joy and comfort in the promised Land; declaring hereby, as his glorious and
divine perfections of wisdom, and power, so his exceeding goodness toward
thee, his faithful care over thee, his readiness and sufficiency in all thy
needs and exigencies to protect, preserve, and deliver thee:

I then being such, Jehovah, the only true God; thy God, by particular
engagement, and endearment; thy gracious and bountiful benefactour not in will
only, but in deed; do thus propound my will unto thee; and upon all accounts
of general and special duty; of reason, of justice, of gratitude require thy
regard, and observance of what follows.

Now what God in a direct, and literal sense thus speaks to the Jewish
People, may according to likeness of case, and parity of reason (especially in
a mystical and spiritual way) upon more considerable, and effectual accounts be
applied unto us: The Lord Jehovah is such no less to us than to them: Heb. 13.
8.
He is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever; to him, as to the only, true,
eternal, and Almighty God, the essential Author, Lord, and Governor of all
things, our highest respect, and observance are due; He also, in a stricter
relation, founded on higher grounds, is our God, having chosen us, and
consecrated us more especially to himself; having received us into a closer
confederacy (a new and better covenant, Heb. 8. 6. 7. 22.
as the Apostle calls it, established upon better promises) having obliged us
by granting nobler privileges, and dispensing more excellent benefits to us:
who likewise has brought us up out of a spiritual Egypt, and state of
infinitely more wretched bondage; has rescued us from the tyrannical dominion
of Satan (a far more intolerably cruel and hard Master, than any Pharaoh) has
freed us from serving sin in our souls and bodies, a far harder service, than
making bricks, or any bodily toil can be; who has conducted us in the way, and
conferred on us an assured hope (if we be not wanting to our selves, and our
duty) of entering into the heavenly Canaan, a place of perfect rest, and
unconceivable bliss: who (as S. Paul expresses it) has delivered us from the
power of darkness, Colos. 1. 13.
and translated us into the kingdom of his most beloved Son: who therefore
here, according to spiritual intent, may be understood to speak in a higher
strain to us; justly exacting a more punctual and accurate obedience to his
commandments. But so much for that part, which seems introductory.

I. Commandment.
Thou shall have no other God's before me.
It Is in the Hebrew; Matt. 4.
there shall be to thee no other Gods (or no strange Gods; for alii some render
it, some alieni) (...) (al-panai) to my face, or at my face; that is in
comparison, or competition with me; so as to be confronted to me; or together
and in consort with me: I am He (says God otherwhere) and there is no God
(...) (immadhi) with me; Deuteronomy. 3^. 39.
or beside me; (...), the LXX render it; and so the phrase commonly imports;
as in that saying of the Scribe, Mark 12. 32.
answering to this: There is one God, (...), and there is no other God beside
him: but we need not criticize on the words, the sense being plain; as
containing a prohibition of assuming any other into partnership with the one
true God; acknowledging in mind, or in outward expression any other for God.
The Precept, as most of the rest, is in form negative, and prohibitive, but
supposes and implies somewhat affirmative and positive; as the rest also may
be conceived to do. It implies this affirmative Precept, thou shall have me for
thy God: Now to have for our God, signifies as to internal disposition of mind
a most high esteem, honor, dread, and love of that Being, as endued with
attributes, and perfections superlatively excellent; the admiring all his
works, approving all his actions, acquiescing in all his proceedings and
dealings with us; the reposing our hope and trust in him as most able and
willing to help us, and do us good; in outward expression to acknowledge,
praise, and bless him as such; to yield all sitting demonstrations of respect
to his name, and to whatever is specially related to him; patiently to submit
to his will, and readily to obey his commandments: these principally and the
like acts of internal devotion, and external piety are comprised in the words,
having him for our God; and we are to understand them here injoined to us; the
same, which is in Scripture called the fearing, Matt. 2^. 37.
the serving, Luke 10. 27.
the worshipping, Deuteronomy. 6. 5.
the loving God with all our heart, and all our soul, and all our mind, and all
our might.

This is implied; and it is expressly prohibited us to yield to any other,
beside him, the like esteem, acknowledgment, or service: That there is in truth
but one such Being, to whom eminently those acts are due, nature, ancient
tradition, general consent, and especially divine Revelation do assure us;
whereupon is consequent, that yielding them (yielding, I say, those opinions,
estimations, and affections of our mind, or those acknowledgments and
expressions in word, or those performances in deed or work, which we before
specified) to any other Being whatever, whether really existent in the world,
or merely formed by our imagination, is highly unreasonable, unbeseeming us,
and unjust toward him.

1. It is highly unreasonable, as false and groundless in it self; as vain and
unprofitable to us; as productive of many bad effects. It is from error in a
matter of the highest nature, and mainest consequence; and so beyond any other
mistake hurtful to us, as reasonable and intelligent creatures; the (...);
Romans 1. 25.
the transmuting the truth of God into a lie, S. Paul calls it; reckoning it
for a grievous folly, and crime. It is a vanity of all most lamentable; a
pursuance of shadows, Jer. 2. ^3.
an embracing of clouds; a building in air, or mere vacuity; a leaning upon
that, which has no substance, or no strength to support us; Jer. 8. 19. etc.
a dreaming and doting upon mere nothing; Act. 14. 15. etc.
whence those false Deities well in Scripture are termed (...), vanities, for
that as they have no truth, or substance, or efficacy considerable in them, so
all our thoughts, affections, expectations, and labors are idly misemployed,
and unprofitably misspent upon them.

2. It is also a thing most unbeseeming us men, (whom God has placed in so
high a rank of worth and dignity, among his creatures; who are in our original
so near of kin, so like in nature, so dear in relation, and regard unto God
himself) to admire, and worship, to place our choice affections upon, to afford
lowly submissions unto, to rest our hope and confidence in any other, but him,
who alone truly so far excels us, and can worthily challenge such respects from
us; all flattery is base and unworthy, but this of all is the worst and most
unbecoming.

3. To do so, is also most unjust and injurious to God; to whom as to the
Author of our being, and of all our good received since, we do ow all that our
mind can yield of reverence, all that our heart can hold of affection, all that
our tongue can utter of praise, all that our utmost might can perform of
service; and since the exhibiting to any other thing part of these must needs
not only by that communication debase, and derogate from their worth, but also
withdraw them in great measure from him, so diminishing and embezilling his due
(for we cannot, (...). Orig. l. 8. p. 382.
as our Savior teaches us, together adhere unto, or serve diverse Masters)
therefore having any other God, but the true one, is a high indignity, and a
heinous injury to him.

This command therefore is most reasonable upon many accounts; which as it has
been in grossest manner violated by those, who have not acknowledged, or
worshipped any God at all, and by those who have acknowledged and adored many
Gods (by all Atheists and Polytheists) from which transgressions thereof we
Christians may seem totally exempt, (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. V. p. 426.
who in formal profession and practice have but one God (the Maker and Lord of
all things, infinitely perfect, Id. de Numa. p. 223.
and glorious) yet there are many subtle, Strom. I.
and perchance no less mischievous transgressions thereof, Vid. Aug. de C. D.
4. 31.
of which even we may be very guilty, and to which we are very obnoxious. If we
do not with all our hearts reverence, and love the most wise and powerful, the
most just and holy, the most good and gracious God; if we do not trust and hope
in him as the fountain of all our good; if we do not diligently worship and
praise him; if we do not humbly submit to his will, and obey his Laws, we break
the positive intent of this Law, not having him for our God; being indeed like
those, of whom S. Paul speaks, Tit. 1. 16.
who profess to know God (that is, who in words and outward pretense
acknowledge him) but in works deny him, being abominable, and disobedient, and
to every good work reprobate. Likewise if we frame in our fancy an Idea untrue,
disagreeable unto, or unworthy of that one most excellent Being, and to such a
phantasm of our own creation do yield our highest respects, and best
affections, we break this Law, and have another God to our selves. If upon any
creature (whether our selves, or any other thing) we impart our chief esteem,
or affection; or employ our most earnest care and endeavor; or chiefly rely
upon it, or most delight in it, that thing we make a God unto us, and are
guilty of breaking this Law; Ephesians. 5. 5.
hence Saint Paul more than once calls the covetous (or wrongful) person an
Idolater; Coloss. 3. 5.
and our Lord calls the ^mmoderate pursuit of riches, the serving (or
worshipping) of Mammon; 2 Timothy 3. 4.
and Saint Paul speaks of some persons, who were (...), lovers of pleasures,
rather than lovers of God; of whom otherwhere he says, Phil. 3. 19.
that their God was their belly: we meet with those in the Scripture, who put
their trusts in their horses, Psalm. 20. 7.
and their chariots; with those, who sacrifice to their net, Hab. 1. 16.
and burn incense to their drag; with them who trust in man, Jer. 17. 5.
and make flesh their arm (men of Mezentius his faith; Virgil Aen. 10.
ready to say with him, Dextra mihi Deus est, and telum quod missile libro)
with those, whose heart is lifted up (as the Prince of Tire in Ezekiel) and who
say they are Gods; Ezekiel. 28. 2.
these, Isa. 10. 13.
and whoever practice in like manner, are so many transgressors of this
Covenant: In short, whoever chiefly regards and affects, seeks and pursues,
confides and delights in wealth, or honor, or pleasure; wit, wisdom,
strength, or beauty; himself, friends, or any other creature, he has another
God, against the design, and meaning of this Holy Law.

II. Commandment.
Thou shall not make unto thee any graven image, etc.
The first Commandment determined the final object of our Religion; this does
limit the manner of exercising and expressing it; as to the chief intent of it,
interdicting that mode, which in the practice of ancient times had so generally
prevailed, of representing the Deities (apprehended so) in some corporeal
shape, and thereto yielding such expressions of respect, as they conceived
suitable and acceptable to such Deities. I cannot stand to declare the rise, and
progress of such a practice; how the Devil's malice, and some men's fraud
conspiring with other men's superstitious ignorance and fondness, prevailed so
far to impose upon mankind; I shall only observe, that men naturally are very
prone to comply with suggestions to such guises of Religion: for as the sense
of want, and pain, and manifold inconvenience, not to be removed or remedied by
any present sensible means, does prompt men to wish, and seek for help from
otherwhere; and this disposes them to entertain any hopes propounded to them
(with how little soever ground of probability) of receiving it from any absent,
or invisible power; as it also consequently engages them to undertake any
conditions required by those, who propound such hopes, as needful for
obtaining thereof; whence the ordinary sort of men are very apt to embrace any
way of Religion suggested to them, especially by persons of credit, and
authority for knowledge; so also, when the proposition thereof does come
attended with circumstantial appearances, and shows gratifying their senses, or
humouring their passions, or delightfully amusing their fancies, it most easily
allures, and takes them; as likewise on the other side, when abstraction of
mind, and restraint of passion are required, and sense or fancy are little
entertained thereby, men are somewhat averse from such proposals of Religion,
and are not so easily brought heartily to like, or earnestly to embrace them;
wherefore since the propounding of images and sensible representations
(relating to somewhat not immediately discerned, from whence men are promised
the supply of their needs, or relief from the inconveniences, which they
endure) by their magnificency, beauty, curiosity, strangeness, or even by their
sensibility it self, do make so facile, and pleasant impressions upon the dull
and low conceits of men, (...). Man. Tyr. diss. 38. Where he defends Idolatry.
it is the less wonderful, that men commonly have been so easily inveagled
into such idolatrous superstitions; so unreasonable in themselves, and of so
mischievous consequence. For what can be more senseless, than to imagine, that
that Being, which in wisdom and power is sufficient to overrule nature, and
thereby to afford us the assistance we need may be resembled by any of these
corporeal things, the best of which we cannot, without debasing our selves,
esteem superior to our selves? how unreasonable is it to conceit thus, how
unworthy is it, and unsuitable to the dignity of our nature, derived from
heaven, to crouch unto such mean representations? it is S. Paul's discourse:
Act. 17. 29.
Being (says he) the offspring of God, we ought not to think, that the
Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone graven by art, and man's device.
How injurious also to that most excellent nature must it be to frame, and
expose to view such not only homely and mean, but in respect of the divine
nature, most foul and ugly portaictures of him, which cannot but tend to
vilify him in men's conceit? (...). Clem. Strom. V. p. 408. The being
ordinarily exposed to view does (says Clem. Alex.) extenuate the venerability
of God; and to worship the intelligible nature by matter does vilify it
through the sense.
He that should form the image of a serpent, or a toad, and exhibit it as the
similitude of a King, would surely derogate much from his Majesty, and beget
very mean and unbeseeming conceits of his person in their minds, whom he should
persuade to take it for such; and infinitely more must he detract from the
dignity, and diminish the reverence due to that immense, almighty, alwise, most
pure and perfect being, who shall presume to present any sensible, any finite,
any corruptible thing as a resemblance of him; Romans 1. 23.
changing (as S. Paul expresses it) the glory of the incorruptible God into an
image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and fourfooted beasts, and
creeping things; as the Israelites are said to have changed their glory (that
is, Psalm. 106. 20.
their glorious God) into the similitude of an ox, that eats grass: No wonder
it was, that they, who used such expressions of their Religion, had so low
opinions concerning those supposed Deities whom they worshipped; that they
supposed them liable to such passions, fathered such actions upon them,
described them as vile in their dispositions and their doings, as they
represented them in their shape: Most reasonable therefore is this prohibition
of making any resemblance of what kind soever (by picture, sculpture, or
fusion) in order to religious adoration; and yielding to them any such
signification of respect, which the custom or consent of men has appropriated
to Religion; as bowing, falling down, lying prostrate before them, or the like:
most reasonable I say, for since there is but one proper, and allowable object
of our worship, as the first Commandment declares and enacts, the making an
image of any other existent in nature, or devised by our own fancy in order to
the worship thereof, is but a pursuance of that unreasonable, unhandsome, and
unjust superstition there forbidden; adding some absurdity in the manner to the
pravity in the substance of such worship.

And as for that one true object of our devotion, the eternal, immense, and all
perfect God; the glorious excellency of whose nature does infinitely transcend
our comprehension, and consequently of whom we cannot devise any resemblance
not infinitely beneath him, unlike to him, unworthy of him (whereby we shall
not disparage him, and expose him to irreverent apprehensions, especially with
the gross Vulgar; whereby indeed we shall not cloud his true inimitable
perfections, and affix imperfections to him; blending inexpressible truth with
apparent falsehood) it must be therefore a profane folly to pretend the
representing him by any image; and the doing of it is upon such accounts in
many places of Scripture forbidden; and that it is so here, according to the
intent of this Precept is plain by that place in Deuteronomy, where Moses
reports the ground of this prohibition: Deuteronomy. 4. 15.
Take ye therefore (says he) good heed unto your selves; for ye saw no manner
of similitude on the day, that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, out of the
midst of the fire, lest you corrupt, and make you a graven image: No shape
representing God did appear at his utterance of these Laws, to prevent their
framing any resemblance of God, and taking occasion to practice this sort of
worship; thereby employed to be unreasonable. And the Prophet Esaias having in
sublime language and discourse set out the incomparable greatness, power, and
majesty of God (who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and
meted out heaven with a span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a
measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance;
before whom the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small
dust of a balance -- yea before whom all nations Esa. 40. 18. -- 25.
are as nothing, and are counted to him less than nothing and vanity: who
sits upon the circle of the earth; and the inhabitants thereof are as
grasshoppers; who stretches out the heavens as a curtain, and spreads them
out as a tent to dwell in) having, I say, in this, and more such language
endeavored to describe the might, and majesty of God, he infers: To whom then
will ye liken God; or what likeness will ye compare unto him? and thereupon he
proceeds to discourse against making images for religious use. Like whereto is
the discourse of S. Paul to the Athenians: God (says he) who made the world,
and all things that are therein, being Lord of heaven and earth, dwells not
in temples made with hands; nor is worshipped by the hands of men, -- we
therefore being the offspring of God, Act. 17. 24. -- 29.
ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone,
the engravement of art, and man's device; in which place, as the forming any
image to represent divine things is manifestly prohibited; so the reasons which
we touched against such practice, are discernibly enough insinuated.

Neither should we omit, that this Law is confirmed in the New Testament, and
there made a part of God's new Law: for we are therein often commanded to flee
idols, 1 John 5. 21.
not to be idolaters, 1 Cor. 10. 7, 14.
to shun idolatry as a most heinous crime, 1 Cor. 5. 10, 11. 6. 9.
of the highest rank, Gal. 5. 20.
proceeding from fleshly pravity, inconsistent with good conscience, and
exposing to damnation: Apoc. 9. 20. 21. 8. 22. 15.
for the meaning and notion of Idolatry in which places, why should we
understand it otherwise, than according to the plain sense of the word, which
is the worship of images, or resemblances? why should we take it otherwise,
than as opposite to God's Law, then in force? why should we otherwise expound
it, than according to the common notion and acceptance of God's People at that
time? The word Idolatry was unknown to other people than the Jews; among the
Jews it signified the violation of the second Commandment; wherefore the
observance of that Commandment is established and enforced by the Apostles. The
Jews detested the worshipping any images; their detestation was grounded on
this Law; they therefore, who earnestly exhort them to continue in detestation
thereof, do confirm, and enforce the obligation of this Law; nor can we
reasonably suppose any distinction, or reservation for any Idolatry (or any
worshipping of images) as lawful, or allowable to Christians; since the
Apostles as they found it universally prohibited to the Jews, so they continued
to charge Christians against it. This discourse has more force, considering
that the same reason, upon which this Law was enacted, does still apparently
continue; men still unmeasurably affecting this fancifull way of Religion,
being apt in the exercise thereof (if not curbed by a Law) to dote upon
sensible representations; being averse from raising up their minds to the only
true object of worship, as endued with intelligible, and spiritual perfections:
this the experience of men's wild eagerness for images, relics, and other such
foolish trinkets, which had almost quite oppressed our Religion (as in many
ages the best and wisest men did observe and complain) does plainly evince.

We may add, that if the common tradition and consent of the ancient Church is
in any case a ground of persuasion, or rule of practice to us, we are thence
obliged to disapprove, and decline the worshipping images; for nothing can be
more evident than that all such worship was not only carefully eschewed, but
zealously detested by the primitive Christians: This is manifest from most
express words of the Fathers generally impugning and condemning all worship of
images; which are as applicable to that worship, which has been practiced
among Christians, as to that of the Heathens; their expressions do not
signify, nor their arguments prove any thing, if any worship of images be
allowable, if they do not as well condemn and confute the modern, as the
ancient Romans; They could not with any reason, or modesty have used such
words, or urged such reasons, if their practice had been like that, which
afterward crept into the Church; their darts then against Pagan Idolatry easily
might, surely would have been, retorted on themselves; which is so far from
having been done, that the Pagans accused them for having no Images Cur nullas
aras habent, templa nulla, nulla noia simulacra? Minut.
(Celsus objecteth, Consuestis crimen nobis maximum impietatis aff^gere, quod
neque aedes sacras venerationis ad officia construomus, non Deorum alicujus
simulacrum constituamus, aut formam, etc. Arnob. 6.
(...). 8. p. 389.
says Origin, that we shun making altars, statues, and shrines, thinking this
to be a faithful pledge (or mark) of our secret communion together: this
Origin answers by confessing the matter of fact; (...). Philo de Gig.
but defending the right; not for your reason, says he, we shun these things,
but -- (...), etc.
because we, by the doctrine of Jesus, having found the true manner of piety
toward God, do eschew those things, Vid. Tertul. de Idol. 3. 4.
which in conceit or appearance of piety do make men impious -- and p. 389.
the images of Christians are p. 39^.
(says he) their virtues, whereby they resemble God; and truly worship him;
and every good Christian, carefully imitating God, is his best statue.

Yea the Fathers were so far from practicing worship of Images that some of
them condemn the simple making of them; calling the art of doing it a
fallacious art, introduced by the Devil and forbidden by God; expounding this
Commandment so, as that in it not only the worshipping, but the forming any
similitude is forbidden: (...), etc.
(Moses, says Clem* Alex. did of old expressly give law, that no carved, or
fusile, or plaistered, Clem. Strom. V. p. 408.
or painted portraicture, or imagery should be made; (...). p. 411.
that we should not attend to sensible things, but pass to things intelligible:
and Tertul. de Spectac. cap. 23. de Idol. 3, 4, 5, etc.
Tertullian in several places says the same. Whether their exposition
(concurring it seems with the common opinion of the Jews in their time) were
true, Contra Marc. 2. 22.
I shall not now discuss; Vid. Iren. 4. 31, 32.
that making any similitudes in order to worship is prohibited, Tertul. de Id.
per tot.
is most evident. Aug. contra Faust. 15. 4, 7. and 19. 18.
Contra 2 Epist.
Pet. 3. 4.


In fine, diverse of the Fathers say, that all the commands in the Decalogue,
excepting the Sabbath, do continue in Force, as naturally obligatory, and as
confirmed by the Christian Law: for instance S. Augustine in his 119 Epistle
speaks thus: The other precepts (excepting the Sabbath) there (in the
Decalogue) we do observe properly as they are commanded without any figurate
observation; for we have manifestly learnt, not to worship idols, and not to
take the name of the Lord our God in vain, to honor father and mother, etc. do
not figurately pretend one thing and mystically signify another thing, but are
so observed as they sound.

But so much for the prohibition: I shall add, that we may conceive this
positive Precept implied, and intended here, that in our devotions and
religious services of God we should raise our mind above gross sense and fancy;
that we should entertain high and worthy conceptions of God; that we should
apprehend him incomparably superior to all things, which we do see or know;
that we direct our minds unto him as to a being transcendently perfect in
goodness, justice, wisdom and power, above what we can comprehend and think;
that which our Savior calls worshipping God in spirit and truth; Joh. 4. 23,
24.
which is (as I take it) the special positive duty of this Commandment.

I need not farther to urge, how presumptuous and dangerous the practices of
those men are, who (to the great danger, and scandal of Christianity among
Jews, and Mahometans, and men of other Religions) notwithstanding these
commandments of God, backed with others, of the same import, frequently
occurring in the Holy Scripture, (never that we find any intimation of,
repealed or relaxed) particularly against that signal one made use or by our
Savior, Thou shall worship the Lord, thy God, and him only shall thou serve;
without any ancient good authority, or example, without any necessity or good
reason inducing, do not only yield themselves, but violently force others to
yield unto angels, and unto the souls of dead men (men of dubious state in
reference to God, not having past the last trial and judgment, the result
whereof it is a profane temerity in us peremptorily to anticipate) all kinds of
worship, both internal (reposing trust and hope in them of obtaining benefits
from them; attributing unto them in their esteem the knowledge and power, which
for all that we can know are incommunicably proper unto God himself) and
external, of prayer and invocation, of praise and thanksgiving; and not only
thus as to the substance imparting a kind of divine worship to them, but as to
the manner, erecting images of them, even in the places devoted to God's own
service, and affording to them the same expressions of reverence and respect,
that we do or can present unto God himself (with great solemnity dedicating
such Images to them, with huge care and cost decking them, with great semblance
of devotion saluting them; and casting themselves down before them; carrying
them in procession, exposing them to the people, and making long pilgrimages to
them;) so that instead of the spiritual worship of God himself, peculiarly
required of Christians, and to which our Religion is perfectly suited, a
Religion chiefly employing sense, and fancy, and for the greatest part directed
unto the representations of creatures is substituted, in despite, as it were,
and in defiance of these Commandments: the plain force of which they endeavor
to elude and evade by slender pretenses, and subtle distinctions, by the like
to which there is no Law, which may not as easily be rendered insignificant, and
invalid; never in the mean time considering, that these laws were not given to
employ the wits of Sophisters and Schoolmen; but to direct the practice of rude
and plain people; to which purpose no law, after such artists have had the
handling of it, can signify any thing: nothing being so clear which by their
cavillations and quirks they cannot confound; nothing so smooth wherein they
cannot find or make knots.

There is subjoined to these two Commandments (as we reckon them; others S.
Austin, Bid, etc.
have accounted them but one; and their opinion is somewhat countenanced, by
what is added here seeming to bear a common respect to both, there is I say
subjoined) a reason, or rather a contexture of reasons strongly pressing and
encouraging to obedience, deterring and discouraging from disobedience to them;
or indeed generally to all God's Commandments, but especially unto these, most
immediately relating to Him:

For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God. (am El kanah, Exodus 34. 14.
fortis zelotes, as the Vulg. Latin reads it: it may seem to have been a name
of God, implying, as all the other names of God do, some attribute of God; for
it is in the 34th. of Exodus, said: Thou shall worship no other God, for the
Lord, whose Name is Jealous, or Kana, is a jealous God;)

I am a jealous God, that is, a God very tender of my honor, and of my right;
who am impatient of any mate, or competitour in respect to those duties, which
properly and incommunicably belong unto me; Isa. 42. 8.
I am (says God in the Prophet Esaias) the Lord, that is my name, and my glory I
will not give to another, nor my praise to graven images: this Jealousy does
contain in it not only a strong dislike, but a fierce displeasure, against the
infringers of these Laws: Deuteronomy. 4. 24*
For the Lord thy God (says Moses in Deuteronomy, pressing the observance of
this same Precept, concerning the worship of images) is a consuming fire, he is
a jealous God: And if God be thus jealous, so easily provoked to indignation by
our detracting his due honor, and imparting it to any other, we have great
reason to be afraid of incurring the guilt of either; Psalm. 76. 7.
for who can stand in his sight, when he is angry? who can support the effects
of his displeasure?

Uisiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and
fourth generation of them that hate me. Visiting the iniquities of fathers upon
the children; God does not only punish those persons themselves, who commit
notorious and heinous sins (such as these of idolatry and profaneness, whereby
he is publicly wronged and dishonored) but the more to deter men (who
naturally bear much regard to their posterity, and are afraid to be, ashamed to
appear the causes of ruin and calamity to their family) he declares that in
respect to their doings it shall go ill with their posterity; they shall
therefore be more strictly and severely dealt with; they shall upon this score
be capable of less favor and mercy from God, than otherwise they might have
been: for we must not hereby understand, that God will arbitrarily inflict
undeserved pains upon the children of bad men for the faults of their
ancestors (God does expressly disclaim such kind of proceeding; Ezekiel. 18. 20.
The Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father; the soul that sins it
shall die; says he in the Prophet: Deuteronomy. 24. 16.
and, Every one shall die for his own iniquity; Jer. 31. 30.
every man that eats the sour grape, his teeth shall be set on edge) but
that he will upon that account withdraw his free favors from them (...) that
measure of grace and indulgence, which otherwise the son of such a person (had
he not been a great Traitor against God) might according to the general course
of God's goodness have received, the which might have more effectually
restrained him from sin, and consequently have prevented his guilt and his
punishment, God may well (in consistence with his justice and goodness, to
manifest his detestation of heinous wickedness) withhold from him. Such a son,
if he do fall into personal offenses (for that also is to be understood;
otherwise such is the goodness of God, that he has declared, Ezekiel. 18. 14, 17.
if a son seeing his fathers sins, and considering does not the like, he shall
not die for the iniquity of his father, but shall surely live; if I say he
falls into personal sins) God will visit; that is, will use a close
inspection and animadversion upon him, will severely punish and avenge his sin;
not only upon his own, but on his father's account; examples of which
proceeding do in the divine histories frequently occurr; 1 Kings 11. 35.
in Solomon, in Jeroboam, 1 Kings 11. 13. 13. 34. 14. 10. 16. 3. 21. 29.
in Baasha, in Ahab, in Jehu, and in others.

Of them that hate me. 2 Kings 9. 8. 10. 30. 15. 12.
We may observe that in the Scripture style the transgressors of God's Laws
are termed haters, Job 27. 14.
and enemies of God; because their actions signify a disposition of mind in
them repugnant to the mind of God; and because by them they resist, and oppose
God's will; no wonder then if God deal thus severely with them.

But God not only deters from disobedience by threatening a train of
punishments, but he encourages to obedience by a declaration of his intention
(or promise) graciously to reward not only upon the obedient persons
themselves, but upon their posterity for ever (in a manner) unto thousands,
that is unto a thousand descents:

Showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments.
Showing mercy; Vid. Deuteronomy. 7. 9.
God does not absolutely promise, that he will forbear to punish the posterity
of good men, in case they offend, but that he will show mercy, and deal the
more favorably with them in that respect: Psalm. 89. 30.
his meaning and method in these cases are plainly represented in those words
concerning David: 2 Chronicles. 21. 7.
If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments, if they break my
statutes, and keep not my commandments; then will I visit their transgression
with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes; nevertheless my loving kindness
will I not utterly take from him --: God declares he will punish the offending
children of very good men, yet so that their misdeeds shall not interrupt his
kindness toward the rest of their posterity, or abolish his remembrance of
their goodness: so we may see God dealt with Abraham, and the Patriarchs,
passing by (in memory of their love and reverence to him; Isa. 45. 4.
and their faithful obedience to his will) the manifold provocations of their
posterity; Psalm. 105. 42.
so that he did not for a long tract of time, Deuteronomy. 4. 37.
and after many generations past suffer them (according as their personal
demeanor highly deserved) to incurr ruin; Levit. 26. 42.
upon this consideration he brought them out of Egypt, Exodus 2. 34.
he settled them in Canaan, he frequently delivered them from their enemies, he
restored them from oppressions, and captivities; as is often expressed, and
insinuated in Scripture. 1 King. 11. 12, 34. 15. 4.
So also it is frequently mentioned, Psalm. 18. 50.
that for David's sake, Isa. 37. 35.
his posterity, although highly provoking God by their miscarriages, was
protected and preserved; I cannot stand to mention places: I shall only
farther note that which is very obvious, and most remarkable here; the
difference between God's proceeding in way of severity, and in way of favor;
by a vast proportion the expressions of God's mercy do exceed those of justice,
although both insisting upon like, or correspondent grounds: he visits the
iniquities of disobedient fathers unto the third or fourth generation, but he
shows mercy to a thousand generations of those that love and obey him; he
soon forgets the wrongs done, but he long retains in memory the services
performed to him; which consideration should work upon our ingenuity, and
engage us willingly to obey so gracious a Lord.

It is also observable, that as disobedience is styled hatred of God, so loving
God and keeping his commandments are conjoined as terms equivalent: they are
indeed inseparably connected, love being a certain cause of obedience,
obedience an infallible sign of love: Joh. 1^. 21. (...).
He that has my commandments, and observes them, he it is (says our Savior)
that loves me: Joh. 23, 24.
and, If any man loves me, he will keep my word. But I pass forward to the
next,

III. Commandment.
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.
It consists we see of a Precept, and of a reason deterring from disobedience
thereto, by declaring or threatening the mischief ensuing thereon.

The Precept is: Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: it
might be rendered, Thou shall not bring the name of the Lord thy God to a vanity
(or to a lie, (...). 1^. 12.
for so the word (...), shaveh, frequently imports) that is (as it seems
interpreted in a parallel place, where most of these Laws are repeated,
inculcated, and fenced by additional injunctions) Thou shall not swear in my
name to a falsehood; and in the 24th. Psalm. ^^. 4.
Psalm, to lift up one's soul to vanity, is explained by swearing (...)
(lemirmah) to deceit, or falsehood. Jos. Ar^h. 3. 4.
Josephus expresses it by (...), To adjure God to no bad matter (or to no
false matter, as the word (...) commonly in good Writers is taken.) And our
Lord himself in his Sermon on the Mount seems to respect this Law, Matt. 5.
3^.
when he says; Ye have heard that it was said to the ancients, (...), ye shall
not forswear, but shall render to the Lord your oaths; For he does immediately
before cite other passages out of the Decalogue (thou shall not kill, thou
shall not commit adultery) with intention to explain or extend them; and
therefore probably he proceeds respecting this Law, the most conspicuous of all
those, which relate to this matter; and if this Law be (as some conceive)
supposed to signify more strictly, it had been more suitable to his purpose to
cite it, than any other of more lax importance; his drift being plainly to
extend in matter; and to streighten in obligation even the fullest, and
strictest of ancient Laws, at least as they were then commonly expounded, and
understood; yea even in this case our Lord seems to affirm that the ancients
had no Law strict and perfect enough for Evangelical practice: considering
which things, it is probable, that the prime intent of this Law is to prohibit
that great sin of Perjury, that is of invoking God's attestation to a lie;
thereupon appealing to him as witness, and judge, that what we assert is true;
as a surety, that what we promise we do steadfastly resolve and shall faithfully
endeavor to perform; implying also, that we do expect a curse, and vengeance
from him upon us, if we be found knowingly to falsify in our affirmation,
(...).
or wilfully to violate our promise.

Swearing is in its own nature immediately an act of Religion, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. 10.
20.
and as such was injoined by God (Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve
him, and shall swear by his name;) It expresses the pious persuasion we have
concerning God's chief attributes and prerogatives; of his omnipresence and
omniscience (extending to the knowledge of our most inward thoughts, and secret
purposes) of his watchful providence over what we do, of his justice, and
fidelity in maintaining truth and right; in avenging iniquity and falsehood: the
reason of using it, was derived from, or grounded upon a persuasion, about God,
which has ever been common among men, that God the Governor and Judge of the
world, the Protector and Patron of right, is always ready upon our invocation
and reference unto him to undertake the cognizance of matters in debate and
controversy between men, for the protection of truth, the maintenance of
right, and preservation of peace among them (An oath, Heb. 6. 16.
says the Apostle, for confirmation is to men an end of all strife) so that
the use thereof becomes a main instrument of promoting those purposes, the
strongest tie of fidelity, the surest ground to proceed upon in administration
of justice, the most sacred band of all society; which therefore he that shall
presume to violate, does not only most unworthily wrong this or that person,
this or that society of men, but does what in him lies to subvert the
foundations of all public justice and peace; withal most impiously abusing,
and affronting God Almighty himself; profaning his most sacred ordinance,
making his name instrumental to the compassing his deceitful and base
purposes, despising his judgment, and defying his vengeance.

This seems to be the first, and direct meaning of this Law; but it may by
parity of reason well be extended farther, so as we may hereby understand all
light and vain swearing, all wanton and irreverent use of God's holy name:
Matt. 5. 37.
and hitherto our Lord has plainly extended it, forbidding us to swear at all,
and charging us in our conversation to use only the simple and plain manner of
assertion, or promise, saying only yea, yea, or nay, nay; without presuming
upon any slight occasion to introduce the Holy Name of God; which indeed we
should not without extreme awe of spirit ever think upon, nor without high
veneration dare to mention: it is an instance of the most sottish folly, it is an
argument of most horrible impiety that can be thus (without any cause, or
temptation thereto, without any profit or pleasure thence) to trifle with the
divine Majesty; to abuse his glorious Name, and provoke his dreadful
vengeance; who will no wise hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain.

IV. Commandment.
Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy, etc.
The Decalogue is in several places of Scripture (as we before noted) called a
Covenant with the Jewish People, and the observation of this Law is likewise so
called in a particular and special manner: It is expressed to have been
appointed as a sign, or characteristical note, whereby their peculiar relation
to God might be discerned, and they distinguished from all other People. As
Circumcision was a seal of the Covenant made with Abraham and his posterity; so
keeping the Sabbath did obsignate the Covenant made with the Children of Israel
after their delivery out of Egypt: The children of Israel (says the Exodus 31.
16.
text) shall keep the Sabbath to observe the Sabbath, throughout their
generations for a perpetual Covenant, it is a sign between me, and the Children
of Israel for ever: Ezekiel. 20. 11, 12, 20.
and, I gave them (says God in Ezekiel) my statutes, and showed them my
judgments, which if a man do, he shall live in them; moreover I gave them my
Sabbaths to be a sign between me, and them, that they might know, that I am the
Lord, who sanctifies them: and, Neh. 9. 13, 14.
Thou came down from mount Sinai (say the Levites in Nehemiah) and spakest
with them from heaven, and gave them right judgments, and true laws, good
statutes, and commandments; and made known unto them thy holy Sabbaths: where
making known to them the Sabbaths, as also otherwhere giving them the Sabbath
are expressions (together with the special ends of the Sabbath's appointment,
Exodus 16. 29.
which are mentioned in those places) confirming the judgment of the ancient
Christians, (...), etc. Just. p. 236.
Justin M. Irenaeus, Tertullian, (...), etc. 261.
etc. who refer the first institution of the Sabbath to Moses, Abraham sine
circumcisione, and sine observatione Sabbatorum credidit Deo, etc. Iren. IV. 30.
affirming (that which indeed the history by its total silence concerning the
Sabbath before him sufficiently does seem to confirm) that the Patriarchs were
not obliged thereto, Tertul. adv. Jud. 2, 4.
nor did practice it.

And we may observe, that the Law concerning the Sabbath, is mentioned and
insisted upon separately from the body of their Laws, as being in nature
different from the rest, and enacted upon a special design; as from the
forecited passages appears; and farther may appear from considering how the
condition of Proselytes (those of the stricter sort, called Proselytes of
Righteousness) is described in Esaias The sons of the strangers, Isa. 56. 6. (4.)
(says God in that Prophet) that join themselves to the Lord, to serve him,
and to love the name of the Lord, to be his servants, every one that keeps
the Sabbath from polluting it, and takes hold of my Covenant; even them will I
bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer: where
to undertake the observance of the Sabbath, and to lay hold of the Jewish
Covenant are signified to be coincident, or especially coherent.

All the other Precepts indeed (one passage in the Second Commandment as it may
be understood to prohibit absolutely the making of any similitude, being liable
to exception) are immediately grounded in the reason of the thing, and have a
necessary obligation even visible to natural light; they consequently have been
acknowledged as reasonable, and obliging by the general consent of men; or
might be so propounded and asserted by argument, as easily to extort such
consent: but this Command, (although as to its general and remote matter it is
most evidently reasonable, and requires that, which no man can deny to be
matter of necessary duty, yet) as to the more immediate matter, as to the
determinate measure, and manner of performing those general duties, no reason
can discern an obligation distinct from, or antecedent to the Law givers will,
to practice according thereto: that we should frequently with grateful and
joyful sense reflect upon the glorious works of God (especially that grand and
fundamental one, Psalm. 143. 5. 92. 4. 107. 22. 26. 7. 145. 10.
wherein God's wonderful excellencies of goodness, wisdom, and power were so
illustriously displayed; the creation of the world, wherein so great
accommodations, and benefits were generally dispensed to all the creatures, and
to us eminently among them; remembering with deepest respect, and most hearty
thankfulness our bountiful Maker;) that we should be unmindfull of the special
favors by God's gracious providence vouchsafed to our country, our relations,
our selves (especially such very signal ones, as was that of the delivery from
Egyptian slavery in a manner so remarkable and miraculous); that we should not
spend our selves, and our time in perpetually carking and laboring about
affairs touching our body, and this present life, but should assign some
competent time both for the relaxation of our mind, and for attendance to the
concernments of our soul: that also we should allow fitting time of respite,
and refreshment to those of our brethren, whom divine Providence has disposed
into a meaner condition, and relation of servants to us; that their lives may
not by incessant care, and toil be rendered over burdensome, and grievous to
them; but so that they may with some comfort serve us; that also they be not
destituted of leisure and opportunity to serve God, our common Master; and to
regard the welfare of their souls, no less precious than our own: that also we
should show some kindness, and mercy even toward our beasts, allowing them some
ease from their painful drudgeries in our behalf; these are all of them
things, which reason evidently dictates; which common sense must needs admit,
as duties of piety, justice, and humanity: and to secure the performance of
them both as to the substance, due measure, and fit manner of them, common
prudence would suggest, that set times should be appointed; in which they
should be solemnly and notoriously discharged, under the public testimony and
cognizance: and accordingly we find, that in all wise and civil Societies some
provision ever has been made, by appointing Festival times, for the practice
of such duties, in some kind or degree: The founders of Laws (says Seneca) did
institute festival days, Legum conditores Festos instituerunt dies, ut ad
hilaritatem homines public cogerentur, tanquam necessarium laboribus
interponentes temperamentum. Sen. de tranq. an.
that men should publicly be constrained to cheerfulness; interposing as
necessary a temperament of their pains; Plato with a more admirable sagacity
refers the invention, or first institution of such times unto God himself; The
Gods (says he; that is, the divine providence administering affairs here by the
ministry of inferior invisible powers, according to his notion and manner of
speaking) pitying mankind, (...). Plat. de Leg. II. p. 787.
born to painful labor, appointed for an ease and cessation from their toils
the recourses of festival seasons observed to the Gods. Thus (I say) reason
acknowledges the substance of these duties, and approves the securing their
performance, as a good end, or fit matter of Law both divine and humane. But as
to the circumstantial determination of measure and manner; that a Seventh day
precisely should be assigned, that a total cessation from labor for man and
beast should be prescribed; this is above reason to discern a necessity of; or
a convenience in comparison with other limitations in those respects deviseable
and practicable: nor can we assuredly resolve the obligation thereto into any
other ground, than the pleasure of (...) most wise Author of this Law; who did
see what was most fit to be prescribed to those, whom this Law concerned. Here
is indeed mentioned a reason, why God specially did choose this day to bless,
and sanctify it in this manner to such purposes; namely, his resting upon the
Seventh day from his works of Creation; the which yet does not certainly import
a natural convenience, toward accomplishing those purposes, of this precise
quantity of time, or in this way of observing it, in preference to any other,
that might have been appointed; it only seems to imply a fitness of these
determinations, as containing somewhat of profitable significancy; that such a
correspondency in circumstance of time, and manner of practice might admonish
us concerning the substance of our duty, or a principal part thereof peculiarly
designed in the Sanction of this Law, the grateful Commemoration of God's most
glorious work (the foundation as it were of all other his acts of beneficence)
the Creation of the World: for thus in all ceremonial Institutions we may
observe, that some significant circumstance is selected, on purpose to instruct
or excite us to practice, by representing to our fancy the nature and intention
of the main duty required, as in Circumcision, in the Passover, in Baptism, and
other ritual Constitutions it is not hard to perceive: so it being God's design
to enforce the performance of that excellent duty, by appropriating a time
thereto, we may conceive that he therefore especially selected that day, as
most apt to mind them, to whom this Law was given, of the history of the
Creation; the reflecting upon and celebrating which was the main duty intended:

Seeing therefore the observation of the Sabbath is expressed to have a
peculiar respect to the children of Israel, as a sign of the Covenant made with
them, when he led them out of Egypt; seeing in its own nature it differs from
the rest of the ten Laws, the obligation thereto being not, discernibly to
natural light, grounded in the reason of the thing, we can no wise be assured,
that an universal and perpetual obligation thereto was intended, or that its
obligation did extend farther than to the Jews, to whom it was as a formal Law
delivered, and upon special considerations severely inculcated; to whose
humor, condition, and circumstances it might also perhaps be particularly
suited: Just. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 235. etc.
Justin M. was of opinion that this Law, as many others was given to the Jews,
(...), for their iniquity, and hardness of heart, by way of concession and
indulgence; for, because they by their natural disposition were apt to forget
their maker; to neglect the state of their soul, being wholly intent on worldly
affairs; to exact intolerable pains from their brethren, who served them; to
use cruelly the poor beasts, employed in tilling their ground, or bearing their
burdens; therefore God (considering this incorrigible temper of theirs) did
indulge six days to them for the prosecution of those affairs, to which they
were so devoted, contenting himself to exact from them no more, than this part
of time for his own service, for the benefit of servants, and ease of beasts;
if he had required more of them they could it seems or would hardly have
endured it; the command would perhaps not only have been disobeyed it self,
but the dislike thereof might have rendered them averse from all Religion, and
service of God; as it happens, when commands very rigorous, and exceeding
men's strength are enjoined; for we see the Prophets complain of them, that they
could hardly be induced to go thus far, or to afford God this so moderate share
of time; but were impatient even for this one day in seven to abstain from
their secular business, to relax themselves, or their servants, or their cattle
from their daily labors: Isa. 58. 3, ^3.
they impeach them for polluting, Ezekiel. 20. 13, 21, 23. 38. 22. 26.
profaning, hiding their eyes from (that is, wholly overlooking, neglecting and
disregarding) the Sabbath; for doing their own pleasure, and exacting their own
labors upon it, for not delighting therein, or not willingly observing it:
Amos 8. 4*
Hear this (says the Prophet Amos) O ye that swallow up the needy, even to
make the poor of the land to fail, saying, when will the newmoon be gone, that
we may sell corn, and the Sabbath that we may set forth wheat? this being the
disposition of that People, not bearing a greater strictness, they not being
able to preserve within their hearts a perpetual remembrance of God's works and
favors; not to moderate their pursuits of temporal good things; not to bear a
due regard and tenderness toward their brethren, and their fellow creatures
(the performing which things in a constant uninterrupted tenor the said Holy
Father, (...). page 229.
and Blessed Martyr supposes to be the Sabbatism, which Christians are bound
to observe) therefore God considering their infirmity and incapacity to comply
with higher injunctions, did use (as in the cases of Divorce, Revenge, and the
like) an indulgence toward them, permitting them on the other days to do their
pleasure (as the Prophet speaks), Isa. 58. 13.
reserving only this day for a punctual and solemn performance of the duties
specified: thus discourses that good Ancient in his Dialogue with the Jew.
However, that this Law (as to its circumstantial parts) was not intended to
oblige generally and perpetually, we have a most forcible ground to suppose; S.
Paul himself his express discharging Christians from the observation thereof;
yea his earnest reprehension of some persons for rigorously insisting thereon,
deeming themselves and urging it upon others as a necessary duty to observe it;
his conjoining it with other Ceremonial Observances, whose nature was merely
symbolical, and whose design was to continue no longer, than till the real
substance of that, which they represented, came into full force and practice:
Let no man (says he to the Colossians) judge you for meat, Coloss. 2. 16, 17.
or drink, or upon account of a festival day, or new moon, (...), are both
read; both equivalent.
or sabbath, which things are the shadow of future things, but the body is of
Christ (that is, they did only prefigure, and presignifie; the real substance
intended, and represented by them is somewhat in the Law, and Doctrine of
Christ; which coming immediately to appear, and to oblige, that shadow
vanishes, and cease to have any regard due thereto) again more sharply to
the Galatians, whom some Judaizing Dogmatists had reduced, or were reducing to
the practice of legal Rites, under conceit of needful obligation to them; Gal.
^. 10.
How says he, do ye return again to those weak, and beggarly elements, to
which back again you are pleased to be enslaved: ye observe days, and months,
and years; which words, that they relate generally to the Jewish Festivals, the
context does plainly enough show, and there is good reason to think, that they
chiefly respect the Sabbath we treat on, for which probably these men had the
greatest respect, and zeal; Romans 14. 5, etc.
Again in the 14th. to the Romans the same great Patron and Champion of
Christian Liberty, not obscurely declares his mind, that Christians of
strength in judgment did regard no day above another, but esteemed all days (he
excepteth none) alike, as to any special obligation, grounded upon divine Law
and Right; in subordination to which Doctrine we may add, that this appears
with great evidence to have been the common opinion of the wisest, and most
orthodox Christians in the Primitive Church; the most constant and strict
adherents to Catholic Tradition (who from the Apostles instruction best
understood the purport and limits of the liberty purchased by Christ) that this
Law, Inter omnia deem praecepta solum ibi quod de Sabbato positum est figurate
observandum praecipitur. Aug. Ep. 119.
as it was not known or practiced before Moses, so it ceased to oblige after
Christ; being one of the shadows which the Evangelical light dispelled; one of
the burdens, which this Law of liberty did take off us Vid. Cit. Patres.


Now although upon these accounts we cannot press the strict observation of
this Law in all its parts, according to its literal, and direct intention, yet
we may learn much of our duty, much of God's will from it: all God's laws,
spiritually and wisely, understood did tend to the promoting of piety and
virtue; and abstracting from the special circumstances of that People, to whom
they were consigned, may (so far as our case is like theirs, and wherein a
common reason does appear) pass for fit patterns for us to imitate, suggesting
proper means of exercising, nourishing, increasing those qualities in us; and
so from this Law we may learn these duties:

1. That we should frequently call to mind, and consider the great and glorious
works of God, performed for the general good of his creatures, and specially
for mankind: The Creation of the World, the Redemption of mankind; the
Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, and Exaltation of our Lord and Savior, and
the like, no less now considerable to us, both in respect of glory due to God,
and of benefit accruing to us, then was the Creation formerly to the Jews.

2. That we are bound to restrain our selves in the prosecution of worldly
business; not distracting our minds with care, not exhausting our bodies with
toil about them, but allowing our mind convenient and seasonable freedom,
affording our soul sufficient leisure with vigor and alacrity to enjoy its
nobler entertainments, and to pursue its higher interests.

3. That we are obliged to use the same indulgence toward those, whom divine
providence has disposed to be under our power, care, or governance: to allow
our children, our subjects, our servants a competent measure of rest, and
refreshment from their ordinary labors, sufficient time and leisure
undistractedly to serve God, and quietly to mind their spiritual welfare: we
must so charitably tender their good, as to permit and procure, that their life
may be easy and comfortable here; and that also they may have means to obtain
for themselves a happy immortality hereafter; not being in these respects
either harsh to their outward man, or uncharitable to their souls.

4. That we must no be unmercifull to any creature, not only abstaining from
inflicting, in wantonness of humor, needless vexation upon them, but also from
wearying and grieving them too much for our emolument or convenience: the
advantage and preeminency bestowed upon us by God over them should be managed
with moderation, and clemency; we should be gentle masters to them, not cruel
tyrants over them: we should consider, that God did make them, as to help and
serve us, so to enjoy somewhat themselves of delight and satisfaction in their
being; which if we go to deprive them of, rendering their condition intolerable
and worse than if they had no being, as we do abuse and injure them,
transgressing the bounds of our right over them, so we encroach upon,
disappoint, and wrong their maker, and cannot therein but displease him; doing
thus is a point of injustice not enough considered by them, who commit it: they
consider not how beastly they are themselves, when they misuse poor beasts.

5. We may hence farther learn, that it is fit certain times should be allotted
for the public, and solemn performance of the forenamed duties: common reason
prompteth, that God (upon whose protection, and disposal the public good
depends) should be publicly honored, and his benefits frequently
acknowledged; also that care should be taken in every society, that all states
of men should lead their lives in some competent degree of content; that all
objects of grievous pity should be removed from public view; also common sense
will inform us, that these things cannot effectually be executed, without
constituting definite periods of time, and limiting circumstances, according to
which they shall be practiced under public inspection, and censure: And these
dictates of ordinary prudence the divine wisdom has ratified by his exemplary
order; the which in cases, wherein he has not interposed his direct authority
by way of precept may serve for a good direction to Governors, what they may
with safety, what they should in wisdom establish; what provision they should
make for the promotion of piety and virtue: such a precedent requires greatest
veneration, and respect, cannot but appear of high moment in consultation about
matters of this nature.

It is indeed particularly observable, that in this command there is not an
express order concerning the natural or moral service of God (by prayer, or
hearing God's Law) to be publicly performed on this day; but the Jews were
themselves so wise as to understand these duties couched in the sanctification
of the day prescribed to them; and accordingly they practiced; they in all
places of their habitation did settle Synagogues, and Oratories; to them upon
this day they resorted; in them then they did offer devotions to God; (as the
names (...), and (...) did import) the Scribes did read the Law, and expound
it to the People: (...). Joseph. adv. App. 2. p. 946.
Moses (says Josephus) did command the people to assemble for hearing of the
law, not once or twice, or many times, but every seventh day, laying aside
their works; and exactly to learn it; whence, adds he, the people became so
skillful in the laws, that if one asked any of them concerning them, (...). Ib.
947.
he would more easily tell them all than his own name; whence also an admirable
concord in mind, and uniformity in practice did (as he farther observes) arise:
and The custom (says Philo) was always as occasion gave leave, (...), etc.
Philo de Vit. Mos.
especially upon the seventh days, to philosophate, etc. in consideration of
which practice it was, that Jews so highly valued this Precept, that it was a
saying among them, The Sabbath weighs against all the Commandments; Midrash.
Exodus 26.
as procuring them all to be known, and observed: And if that blind people
could pick these duties out of this Law, much more should we see our selves
obliged, according to analogy thereof, to appoint set times for ensuring the
practice of them.

6. Again, We may hence also learn our obligation to submit obediently to the
constitution of Governors relating to this matter; that we readily should
observe all solemn times of festivity and rest, which the Rulers of Church, or
State do appoint for the securing or the promoting those purposes of piety, or
charity, according to the measure and manner prescribed by them: for Reason
approving the thing as good and useful; and divine order more clearly and
fully confirming it to be so, and it not appearing that God has made express
determinations about it, it remains, that it is left wholly to them, to whose
care God has entrusted the public welfare, and has committed to their
judgments the providing means conducible thereto; having also consequently
injoined us in all lawful things to follow their guidance and appointment in
order thereto. God decreed death to be inflicted on those, who violated his
command concerning the Sabbath; which shows how great a fault it is to offend
in this particular; and we may reasonably esteem that command to be his, which
proceeds from his Ministers by authority from himself, and in conformity to
his own pattern.

7. We add, that whereas God required of the Jews such a portion of time to be
solemnly dedicated to Religion, and mercy, we to whom he has vouchsafed higher
benefits, and proposed greater encouragements, cannot reasonably but deem our
selves obliged to sequester and consecrate as much or more time to the same
intents: we should indeed be content to withdraw our selves more frequently
from pursuance of our own profits and pleasures to the service of God, to the
remembrance and celebration of his favors: we should willingly allow greater
relaxation to our dependents: and should the public be deficient in exacting a
performance of such duties from us, it would become us to supply such defects
by our private devoting fit and frequent seasons thereto: that in some
proportion we may exceed the Jews in grateful piety, as we surpass them in the
matter, and causes thereof; that we may appear in some degree more charitable
than they, as we have much greater reason and obligation to be so then they. So
much for this;

I proceed briefly to consider the remaining Commandments, the which
immediately concern another Object: those foregoing did chiefly serve to
regulate our religious practice in yielding due reverence toward God; these
following (which are supposed to have made up the second of those Tables, which
written by God's hand were delivered to Moses, and preserved in the Ark of the
Testimony) do guide our conversation and carriage toward our Neighbor; in the
front of which worthily is placed that which obliges to dutifulness toward our
Parents; unto whom after God, and his supreme Vicegerents we owe the highest
respect, gratitude and duty.

V. Commandment.
Honor thy father, and thy mother.
Honor; the word signifies to have in weighty regard, and aptly serves to
denote those particular acts of duty, which are otherwhere expressed in
Scripture; Levit. 9. 3.
fear and reverence (ye shall fear every man his father and his mother)
observance and obedience (children obey your parents in all things, Coloss. 3.
20.
for this is well pleasing to God) gratitude and retribution (Let children
learn (...), 1 Timothy 5. 4.
to be pious toward their own family; and (...), to render suitable returns, or
to requite their parents, for this is good, and acceptable before God.)
regarding their instruction and advice (My son hear the instruction of thy
father, Prove. 1. 8. 23. 22.
and forsake not the law of thy mother) it also comprehends a prohibition of
the contrary acts, contemning, cursing, offering violence or contumely unto,
disobedience and contumacy toward parents, the which are forbidden under
capital penalties, and dreadful comminations: Cursed be he that sets light
by his father or mother: Deuteronomy. 27. 16.
and, The eye that mocketh at his father, and despises to obey his mother, the
ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young eagles shall eat it (that
is, Exodus 21. 15* 17.
God in a fearful and strange manner will avenge that wickedness upon him) and
in the Law it is ordained that the rebellious and stubborn son, who will not
obey the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother; and that when they
have chastned him, will not hearken unto them, shall be stoned by all the men
of his City, and put to death in that manner.

Whence we may learn the nature of the duty here enjoined, and what rank it
bears among other duties; what high obligation belongs thereto, of what
consideration it is with God, and how grievous a crime the violation thereof
is; that, briefly, we are obliged to yield our parents high affection of heart,
great expressions of respect and observance in word and deed; that the neglect
of these duties is, next to that of profaneness and undutifulness toward God
himself, the greatest disorder we can be guilty of: this all civil Nations have
consented to be our duty; and if we consider the grounds, upon which it is
built, we shall find that reason, justice, and necessity do require it: S. Paul
presses his precept of observance to parents with, a (...), for this is just
and equal: Ephesians. 6. 1.
for if we look upon the disposition of parents in their mind toward children,
we may presume them always full of tender affection, and good will toward them,
full of desire, and care for their good, full of pity and compassion toward
them; in the highest and most especial degree beyond what they bear to others;
which dispositions in reason and equity do require answerable dispositions in
those, upon whom they are placed, and who from them do receive inestimable
benefits: for if we do regard the effects proceeding from them we shall
discern, that

1. From parents children do receive being and life; that good which nature
inclines so highly to value and tender, as the foundation of all the good,
happiness, and comfort we are capable of.

2. They are obliged to their parents for the preservation, maintenance, and
protection of their life: it is a long time before we came to be able (such is
the particular condition of man among all living creatures, so ordered on
purpose, as it were, to beget this obligation and endearment) anywise to
provide for, or to defend our selves; and the doing thereof, in that senseless
and helpless state, relies upon the care, pain, and solicitous vigilance of our
parents; the which they are not only always obliged, but are commonly disposed
with admirable willingness to spend on their children.

3. Parents not only thus at first undergo such care and trouble to maintain
their children, but by expensive education (often with much inconvenience and
incommodity to themselves) they provide means for their future support, and
subsistence, during life.

4. Children are so strictly tied to their parents, as by their willing
concession to partake in all the comforts of their state, and ornaments of
their fortune.

5. The goods acquired by the parents industry do usually devolve upon their
children by inheritance and succession; whence that children live handsomely
and comfortably, is the reward of their parents merit, comes from the store,
that they have carefully provided, and laid up for them.

6. To which we may add, that not only the provision for our temporal
necessities and conveniences depends upon our parents, Deuteronomy. 6. 7, 20.
but the care of our souls, and our spiritual welfare is incumbent on them:
Ephesians. 6. 4.
they are obliged to instruct us in the fear of God, and to set us in the way
toward eternal happiness.

7. We may consider also, that all this they do most frankly and out of pure
kindness; without regard to any merit antecedent, or benefit consequent to
themselves: as they received nothing to oblige and move them to such
performances, so they can seldom hope for answerable returns: it is abundant
satisfaction to them if they see their children do well; their chief delight
and contentment is in their childrens good absolutely and abstractedly, without
indirect regards to their own advantage.

Upon these, and the like accounts it appears, that as parents have the
affections most resembling those of God toward us, as they perform toward us
the actions most like to his, as they are the principal instruments of divine
providence and bounty (by which God's blessings are conveyed and conferred upon
us) so they may be deemed in a sort to represent God, and as his most lively
images have an especial veneration due to them. God himself, to endear and
render himself amiable, or in the most kindly way venerable to us, to engage us
to a more ready obedience of him, Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
to declare the nature of our duty toward him, assumes the title of Father; and
all Nations have agreed to style him so; Reciprocally also, whereas the duties
toward other men are termed justice, or charity, or courtesy, or liberality,
(...).
or gratitude, those toward parents in every Language (I suppose) are styled
piety, 1 Timothy 5. 4. Colere parents.
implying somewhat divine in the object of those duties; it is more than
injustice to wrong a parent; it is more than uncharitableness to refuse them
succor, or relief; it is more than discourtesie to be unkind to them; it is more
than sordid avarice to be in their need illiberal to them; it is rather high
impiety to offend in any of these kinds.

He that returns not love in answer to their tender affection; that does not
(as occasion requires, and his ability permits) requite the benefits received
from them, does not defer to them an especial reverence, in regard to that
sacred name and character they bear, thereby intimates, that he would in like
manner be unjust, ungrateful, and disingenuous toward God, from whom he has
received the like benefits; the beginning and continuance of his being; the
preservation, maintenance, and protection of his life: if he will not honor
his earthly Parents, whom he has seen, how will he reverence his heavenly
Father, whom he has not seen? so we may according to S. John argue.

I might subjoin, that as justice, and ingenuity do enforce this duty, so for
the good of the world there is a necessity that it should be observed: If
parents are not only by natural instinct disposed, but by divine command
obliged, and by humane Law (the preservation of the world so requiring)
constrained to undergo such hardships for the maintenance, and education of
their children, it is fit and necessary they should be supported and encouraged
in the bearing them by reciprocal obligations in children to return them
dutiful respect, observance, and requital; the world could not well subsist
without children being engaged to these duties: there were no reason to exact,
there were no ground to expect, that parents should cheerfully and faithfully
discharge their part, upon other terms.

To this Precept there is added a Promise (and it is, as S. Paul observes,
Ephesians. 6. 2.
the first precept, that has a promise formally annexed; whereby he enforces
his exhortation to the observance thereof.)

That thy days may be long upon the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee.
So God expressly promises to bless dutiful children with a long life in the
comfortable possession of those good things, (...).
which he should bestow upon them; this was the most of reward, explicitly
covenanted to the Jews, in regard to their obedience: there is also employed a
commination of a contrary curse from God upon the infringers of this Law, that
they should either be immaturely cut off from life (as Abimelech and Absalom
were upon this score) or should draw on a wretched life in banishment from the
contents thereof; by which things respectively are intimated to us the rewards
of piety in this kind, or the punishments of impiety in the future state,
whereof the land here mentioned was a shadow, or figure: what length of days in
Canaan was to them, that to us is immortal life in heaven; what being excluded
thence was then, that now is everlasting death, or banishment into the regions
of misery.

I might also note the congruity of the reward propounded, that they who are
grateful to those from whom, in subordination to God, they received life,
shall by God's dispensation enjoy that life long and well; and that they who
neglect the authors of their life, shall soon be deprived of it, or of its
comforts. Deuteronomy. 16. 20.
But I find the same reward assigned to the diligent observers of other duties;
particularly to them, Psalm. 37. 29.
who are just in their dealings; Psalm. 37. 9, 11.
to them who are charitable to the poor; Psalm. ^4. 12, 13, 16.
to them who are meek and patient; Prove. 8 16.
to them who confide in God; Deuteronomy. 26. 15.
and to all good men that obey God's commandments.

I shall only add farther, that we may, according to analogy and like ground
of reason, reduce unto this Commandment the obligation we have to honor all
those, who perform toward us beneficial offices like unto those, which we
receive from our parents; those who preserve our life by relief, protection or
defense; those who afford us maintenance, or education; those who watch over us
for the good of our body, or of our soul; those who instruct us, or advise us:
such are our Governors and Magistrates either Political or Ecclesiastical; our
Benefactours and Patrons; our Schoolmasters, and Tutours; our especial
faithful Friends; and the like; But I pass forward.

In the subsequent Precepts are contained the prime rules of justice toward our
neighbor; the observation of which is not only most equal and reasonable in
it self, but necessary for the preservation of civil society, and public peace
among men; for the procurement of our safe, and pleasant living and conversing
in the World; men thereby being secured in the quiet enjoyment of God's gifts,
and the fruits of their industry, and of whatever is dear and precious to them;
of their lives first; then of the comforts of their conjugal state; of their
possessions; of their reputations; the laws respecting these being here
disposed in order, according to the value of their respective objects, in the
nature of things, or in the opinion of men, or in regard to the consequences
arising from them.

VI. Commandment.
Thou shall not kill.
Of all good gifts conferred upon us none (according to the natural and common
esteem of men) is more precious than life it self, the foundation of enjoying
the rest. God has therefore reserved the disposal of it entirely to himself,
as his special prerogative: neither he that has it, nor any other person
having absolutely any just power or right over it; No man can take away any
man's life, but by commission or license from God, reasonably presumed to be
granted by him: So may God (the absolute King of the World) be supposed to have
committed to lawful Magistrates, as his Vicegerents and Officers, in his name
and behalf, upon reasonable cause, for preservation of public justice, peace,
and order, in a lawful course of justice, to dispose of men's lives, who have
forfeited them to the Law: (The Magistrate, Romans 13. 4.
as S. Paul says, bears not the sword in vain; 1 Pet. 2. 14.
for he is the minister of God; an avenger to execute wrath upon him that does
evil.) He has not forbidden Sovereigns (in case of necessity, and when
amicable means will not prevail) to maintain the safety or welfare of the
Societies entrusted to their care, even by armed violence, against such as
wrongfully invade them, or any wise harm them, and will not otherwise be
induced to forbear doing so; in which case the resolution of such differences
(insomuch as they cannot be tried at any other bar, or composed by other means)
is referred to God's arbitrament; who is the Lord of Hosts, the Sovereign
Protector of right, and dispenser of success; the Soldier in a just cause
being then his Minister, and carrying a tacit commission from him. God also may
be supposed together with life, with a natural love to it, with means to
preserve it, to have imparted to every man a right to defend his life, with its
necessary supports, against unjust, extreme, and inevitable violence upon it,
or them: the slaughter therefore, which may happen in these cases (or in the
like, wherein God has plainly by a general order, or by special command, or by
permission reasonably supposed, conferred on any person a power over his
neighbor's lise, in the maintenance of God's own honor, or in subserviency to
public good) is not concerned in the design, or meaning of this Precept: for
he that kills another, in a way not irregular, as a Minister of justice, or in
a lawful War as a Soldier authorized by a Sovereign power here under God, or
for his own just and necessary defense, does not, according to the intent of
this Law, kill; but rather God himself, the Lord of life and death, does then
kill; the authority of killing so being derived from him, and his work being
done thereby: Vengeance is his, and he so (by his instruments) repays it. But
here is forbidden all other voluntary taking away our neighbor's life, when a
man acts as a private person; without just and necessary cause, in any illegal
or irregular way; upon what motive, principle, or end soever (whether it be out
of hatred, spite, envy, revenge; for our presumed safety, or pretended
reparation of honor; for promoting what interest, or procuring what
satisfaction soever to our selves) by what means soever, either by direct
violence, or by fraudulent contrivance; in an open, or clandestine manner;
immediately by our selves, or by means of others; by advising, encouraging, any
wise becoming instrumental, or accessory thereto.

This is the crime expressly prohibited; but a positive duty should also be
understood; that we are obliged, so far as we are able, to preserve our
neighbor's life; by relieving him in extreme need, by succouring him in
extreme danger; by admonishing him of any destructive mischief, when he appears
tending unawares thereinto; the neglect of which things argues a murtherous
disposition toward our neighbor, is in reasonable esteem, and in God's sight a
killing of him; for we mistake, if we think with Cain, that we are not our
brother's keepers, or are not bound when we are able to preserve his life.

The violation of which Commandment is certainly the most heinous sin, that can
be committed of all those* which are not immediately directed against God
himself, or the persons which peculiarly represent him; and a sin which never
can escape vengeance and due punishment from him. It is the greatest wrong to
God; it is the extremest injury to our neighbor; it is the highest sort of
uncharitableness; it is a principal offense against public society.

1. It is an exceeding wrong and affront done unto God; in assuming the
disposal of his gifts; in dispossessing him of his rights, by robbing him of a
creature, of his child, his servant, his subject (one whose life is precious to
him, and toward whom he bears a tender regard) an usurping in a high way his
Sovereign Authority, his Throne of Majesty, his Tribunal of Justice, his Sword
of Vengeance; to omit the sacrilege (as Philo speaks) committed herein by
violating God's own Image, which every man does bear.

2. It is also an extreme injury to the person, who is thereby deprived of an
unvaluable good, which can no wise be repaired, or compensated: he that loses
his life, does therewith lose all the good he possesses, or is capable of
here, without any possibility of recovering it again: the taking therefore of
life can be no suitable revenge, no reasonable satisfaction for any injury or
damage received; it infinitely, in a manner, surpasses all the evil, which any
man can sustain from another in his estate, or fame, or welfare of any kind;
for those things have their measure, and may be capable of some reparation, but
this is altogether extreme and irreparable; and therefore does include greatest
iniquity: add hereto, that not only all temporal good is hereby at once
ravished from a man, but the soul also of the person may incur the greatest
damage or hazard in respect to its future estate by being thus snatched away:
the slayer not only robs his brother of his temporal life, but of his time
of repentance, and opportunity of making peace with God.

3. It is also the highest uncharitableness to deal thus with our neighbor;
arguing that nothing of good will, of pity, of humanity toward him is left in
us: to hate his brother to the death is the utmost pitch of hatred. If in
imitation of our Savior, and out of respect to him we ought (as S. John
instructs us) to be willing to lay down our lives for our brethren; how
enormous a crime, how opposite to Christian charity is it to take away our
brother's life?

4. It is likewise a main offense against the public; not only by unlawfully
bereaving it of a member and subject, but to its prejudice and dishonor (yea
so far as lies in us to its subversion and dissolution) assuming to our selves,
pulling away from it its rights, and prerogatives of judgment.

Such briefly is the direct intent, and importance of this Law; but our Savior
in his comment hereon has explained and extended it farther, Matt. 5. 21.
so as to interdict all, that any wise approaches in nature, or in effect tends
unto this heinous evil: he means to obstruct all the springs, and extirpate all
the roots thereof; such as are rash, causeless, outrageous, inveterate anger,
contumelious and despightfull language, reserving grudges, or spite in our
heart, not endeavoring speedily to reconcile our selves to them, who have done
us injury or displeasure; for these things as they commonly do produce the act
of murder, so they argue inclinations thereto (which if fear and self-respect
did not restrain, would produce it), and consequently in moral account, which
regards not so much the act as the will, are of the same quality therewith;
however they arise from the same bitter root of great uncharitableness; upon
which score S. John tells us, 1 John 3. 15, 17.
that He that hates his brother is a murderer; and consequently in effect all
malice, and spite, envy, hatred, malignity, rancour, immoderate, and
pertinacious anger, and animosity are here prohibited.

VII. Commandment.
Thou shall not commit adultery.
After life (if after that, for this command in the Greek Translation of Exodus
(though not in Deuteronomy) in some places of the New Testament, and in sundry
ancient Writers is placed before that against murder) nothing commonly is more
dear to men, than the comforts of their conjugal estate; the enjoyment of that
special affection, and friendship, together with those instances of
benevolence, which by divine institution and mutual contract, ratified by most
sacred and solemn promises of fidelity, are reserved peculiar to that state:
which enclosures therefore of his neighbor whoever shall invade, or trespass
upon, who shall any wise loose or slacken those holy bands, who shall attempt
the affection, or chastity of his neighbor's wife, does most grievously offend
God, and commits (as Joseph, when he was tempted thereto, did call it) a
great evil against God, against his neighbor, against himself, against the
common society of men. He violateth an institution, to which God has affixed
especial marks of respect, and sanctity; he wounds his neighbor's honor, and
interest in the most tender part, wherein the content of his mind and comfort
of his life are most deeply concerned: he as much (or rather more) dishonors
and abuses himself, not only by committing a fact of so high injustice, but
by making himself accessory to the basest perfidiousness that can be. [Whoso
commits adultery, Prove. 6. 34.
lacks understanding; he that does it, destroys his own soul; a wound and
dishonor shall he get, and his reproach shall not be wiped away; for jealousy
is the rage of a man, therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance; he
will not regard any ransom, neither will he rest content though thou give
many gifts.] He also offends against the public quiet, and welfare, breeding
inextricable confusions, and implacable dissensions in families, so that hardly
from any other cause such tragical events have issued as from this: in fine
this crime is, as Philo calls it, (...), a loathsome unrighteousness, most
odious to God; Job 31. 12.
and a fire (as Job represents it) that consurneth to destruction.

But we must further also consider, that acts of this kind contain also in them
another evil; that persons committing them do not only so highly wrong their
neighbor, but defile themselves also by the foulest turpitude; in which
respect the prohibition of all unlawful and irregular satisfactions to
lustful appetite; all compliance with that great enemy of our souls, the
flesh; all kinds of impurity and lasciviousness, not in act only, but in
thought, in speech, in gesture may be reduced to this Law: Matt. 5. 14.
Our Lord himself does so interpret it, as to make it include a forbidding of
all unchaste desires; and Christianity does in a most strict and special manner
oblige us to all kinds of sobriety and modesty, of chastity and purity in body
and spirit; 1 Pet. 2. 11.
injoining us to abstain from all fleshly lusts, as enemies to our souls,
Coloss. 3. 5.
to mortify our fleshly members; 1 Thessalonians. 4. 4.
to possess our vessels (or bodies) in sanctity and honor; not to have any
impurity, Ephesians. 5. 3.
or filthiness so much as named among us; Ephesians. 4. 29.
nor to suffer a foul word to proceed out of our mouth; not to defile our
bodies, 1 Cor. 3. 17. 6. 18, 19.
consecrated unto to God, and made temples of the Holy Spirit; excluding
persons guilty of such things from any title, or capacity of entering into God's
Kingdom; Ephesians. 5. 4, etc.
in fine representing all such practices as most dishonorable to us, most
displeasing to God, most grievous to God's Holy Spirit (the fountain of all
virtue and goodness) most contrary to the nature and design of our Religion,
and most destructive of our souls.

VIII. Commandment.
Thou shall not steal.
That every man should quietly enjoy those supports and those conveniences of
life, which in any honest manner (by God's bounty immediately dispensing it, or
by God's blessing upon his industry) he has acquired the possession of, or
right unto, as all reason and equity do require, so it must be acknowledged
absolutely necessary for the preservation of common peace, and the maintenance
of civil society among men: to secure which purposes, and to encourage honest
industry, this Law prohibiteth all invasion, or usurpation by any means
whatever (either by open violence, and extortion; or by clandestine fraud, and
surreption) of our neighbor's proper goods and rights: He that in any way,
against his neighbor's knowledge or will, gets into his power, or detaineth
therein what does in equity belong to his neighbor, and which he can restore
to him, does transgress against the intent of this Law; as we see it
interpreted in Leviticus; where it is thus expressed: Thou shall not defraud
thy neighbor, Levit. 19. 13.
nor rob him: defrauding by cunning practice, is no less forbidden, than
robbing by violent force. ^ Cor. 6. 8.
Any wise (...) (that is, to deprive our neighbor of his due) (...), Tit. 2.
10.
to purloin, or (by subtle and sly conveyance) to separate any part of our
neighbor's substance from him; 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6.
(...), to exact, or extort any thing more than ones due, (...), to go beyond,
or overreach our neighbor in dealing; to delude and cozen him by false
speeches, or fallacious pretenses, are acts in S. Paul's expression, to be
referred hither; as so many special acts of theft. I cannot stand to reckon up
all the sorts of unrighteousness included here, or reducible to this matter
(such as, Prove. 22. 18. 20. 14. 9. 24.
beside downright rapine and cheating, Ezekiel. 22. 12. 18. 7, 16.
are, Hos. 5. 10.
fould dealing in bargains and contracts; Amos 8. 5.
using false weights, Deuteronomy. 25. 13.
and measures, Levit. 19. 13.
withholding the pledge, Deuteronomy. 24. 14.
detaining the labourer's wages from him; Psalm. 15. 4.
the exercising vexatious, Isa. 1. 23.
biting, Jam. 5. 4.
and devouring usuries; removing bounds of possession, oppressing by undue, or
rigorous exaction, corrupting justice for reward or favor, raising gain by
unlawful and shameful arts, or practices; consenting, or sharing with,
advising, or instigating to these, and the like acts; these I shall not
particularly insist upon) but shall only say, that God expresses great
indignation against, and threatens most severely to punish all acts of this
kind: Deuteronomy. 15. 16.
For all (says he) that do such things (such as use deceitful measures in
trade), and all that do unrighteousness are an abomination unto the Lord, thy
God: (...), God (says S. Paul, 1 Tess. 4. 6.
speaking against the circumventing, and defrauding our neighbor) is an
avenger for all these kinds of things: Nor indeed is the Gospel more severe in
denunciation of punishment against any crime than this: 1 Cor. 6. 9.
Know ye not, that unjust persons (says S. Paul, meaning this sort of unjust
persons, so most properly and strictly called) shall not inherit the kingdom of
God; and (...), thieves, exactors (or cheaters) and rapacious persons make a
good party in the catalogue of those, who shall be excluded from eternal bliss.

I should add the positive duties, here to be understood, and referred to this
matter, the which are commended to us in Scripture; such are, diligence and
industry in our calling, whereby with God's blessing we may support our selves,
preventing the need, and escaping the temptation of encroachment upon our
neighbor's property; (whereby we may, as Saint Paul speaks, Ephesians. 4. 28.
have need of nothing, may eat our own bread, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 12.
may even have wherewith to impart to the needs of others) contentment in that
estate, 2 Thessalonians. 8. 12.
wherein God has placed us, Phil. 4. 11.
how mean soever; 1 Timothy 6. 8.
Prove. 30. 8.
trusting in God, Psalm. 55. 23.
and relying upon his providence; 1 Pet. 5. 7.
casting our burden and care upon him; who has promised to sustain us; Heb.
13. 5.
who has said, that he will never leave, or forsake us; lastly, charitable
relief of our neighbor in his need; for in such a case our neighbor has a
title to the goods we possess; derived from the appointment and donation of
God, who is the absolute proprietor of all we have, we being only his
stewards, and dispensers thereof according to the rules he has declared; so
that if we do not according to his order, supply our poor neighbor, we are in
just estimation, we shall in God's judgment appear to be thieves, both in
respect to God himself, and to our neighbor; for that we thereby detain from
God what by original right is his, and bereave our neighbor of what God has
bestowed on him.

IX. Commandment.
Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
It Is in the Hebrew, Thou shall not answer (to wit being examined, or adjured
in judgment) against thy neighbor as a false witness; so that primarily, it
seems, bearing false testimony against our neighbor (especially in matters of
capital, or of high concernment to him) is prohibited: yet that not only this
great crime, but that all injurious (even extrajudicial) prejudicing our
neighbor's reputation, and consequently of his safety, or his welfare in any
sort, is forbidden, we may collect from that explication of this Law, or that
parallel Law, which we have in Leviticus: Levit. 19. 16.
Thou shall not ('it is there said) go up and down as a talebearer among thy
people; neither shall thou stand against the blood of thy neighbor: LXX (...).
as a talebearer, (...), that is, a merchant, or trader in ill reports and
stories concerning our neighbor, to his prejudice; defaming him, or detracting
from him, or breeding in the minds of men an ill opinion of him; which vile and
mischievous practice is otherwhere under several names condemned and reproved;
such are muttering: Prove. 18. 8. (...)
(The words of a mutterer, says the Wise man, are as wounds, going into the
innermost parts of the belly): Sirac. 5. 14. 21. 30. 28. 13.
whispering, (...) we have often in the Son of Sirach, 2 Cor. 12. 20.
and in S. Paul mentioned with a bad character, Romans 1. 30.
or with prohibition, and reproof: supplanting; Ps. 15. 3. (...)
(so in the good man's description, Psalm. 15. it is said, He supplants not with
his tongue, so the word signifies) detraction or backbiting ((...), 2 Cor. 12.
20.
which is so often in the Apostolical Writings Jam. 4. 11.
Romans 1. 30.
1 Pet. 2. 1.
forbidden, Luke 3. 14. 19. 8.
and reprehended; slander, Lev. 19. 11.
or calumny, Psalm. 72. 4. 119. 134.
and sycophantry; that is, oppressing, abusing, or any way harming men by false
tales, suggestions, or pretenses; which sort of practices how base they are in
themselves (nothing being more unworthy of an honest and ingenuous mind,
nothing more ugly to the judgment of them, who have any sense of goodness) how
contrary they are to justice, which does not permit us to wrong our neighbor,
as well in his credit and good name, as in his other goods (for they perhaps
may be as much valued by him, may really be of as much consequence to him, as
any thing that he has) which binds us to abstain from hurting him as well in
word, as in deed; Prove. 10. 12.
how opposite they are to charity, 1 Cor. 13. 5* 7.
which obliges us to think the best of our neighbor, and to endeavor that
others also may do so; to conceal his real faults and blemishes; much more not
to devise, and affix false ones to him; not to gather and disperse ill reports
to his prejudice; of how mischievous consequence also they are, breeding ill
will, and sowing strife in all Societies both public, and private (even
separating chief friends, Prove. 16. 28.
as the Wise man tells us) common sense, and experience do show: they
consequently must be very odious in the sight of God, who loves the peace and
welfare of men; and very offensive to men, who do the mischiefs springing from
them.

To this Law may be reduced our obligations to be candid in our opinions, and
discourses concerning others (according to Saint Paul's excellent description
of charity:) 1 Cor. 13.
to forbear all rash and harsh censure, as you know our Savior in his most
divine Sermon on the Mount charge us; to be veracious, sincere and faithful
in all our conversation; which duties are so often taught and pressed in both
Testaments: Levit. 19. 11.
Ye shall not (says the Law) steal, nor deal falsely, nor lie one to another;
and, To walk uprightly, Psalm. 15. 2.
and work righteousness, and speak the truth from his heart, are the first
lineaments in the good man's character drawn by the Psalmist: and, These are
the things ye shall do (says God in the Prophet) speak ye every man the truth
to his neighbor; Zech. 8. 16*
execute the judgment of truth, and peace in your gates: And in the New
Testament, Ephesians. 4. 25.
To lay aside lying, Col. 3. 9.
to speak the truth every man with his neighbor; 1 Pet. 2. 1.
to lay aside all malice, all guile, all hypocrisies, envyings and backbitings
are Apostolical commands.

X. Commandment.
Thou shall not covet thy neighbor's house; thou shall not covet thy
neighbor's wife; nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor
his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbor's.
This Law is comprehensive, and recapitulatory (as it were) of the rest
concerning our neighbor, prescribing universal justice toward him (whence S.
Mark it seems means to render it in one word, Mark 10. 19.
by (...), deprive not, or bereave not your neighbor of any thing) and this
not only in outward deed, and dealing, but in inward thought, and desire, the
spring, whence they do issue forth (for, Matt. 15. 19.
from the heart, as our Savior teaches, do proceed evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies) we are obliged to
be so far from depriving our neighbor of any good thing belonging to him; that
we are not so much as to wish, or desire it; not only to abstain from
injurious action, but to repress covetous inclinations: wherein is also
employed, that we should have a delight and complacence in our neighbor's good;
not envying him any enjoyment; being in our minds content with the portion God
pleases to vouchsafe us; and entirely trusting in him, that he will supply us
with what is needful or befitting to us, without the damage of our neighbor.
Romans 7. 7, 14.
Thus God's Law is as Saint Paul observed) spiritual; not only restraining
exterior acts, but regulating our inmost thoughts, quelling all inordinate
appetites and affections of heart within us; the which may be extended so as to
respect not only matters of justice toward our neighbor, but all objects
whatever of our practice; so as to import that, which in the Christian Law is
so frequently injoined us, as the life of our Religion, Romans 2. 29.
circumcising our hearts, Phil. 3. 3.
crucifying the flesh with its passions and desires, Coloss. 2. 11.
mortifying our earthly members, Gal. 5. 24.
putting to death by the spirit the deeds of the body, Romans 6. 6.
putting off the old man, Col. 3. 5. 2. 11.
which is corrupted according to deceitful lusts: Ephesians. 4. 22.
(...), Romans 8. 13.
thou shall not unlawfully or irregularly desire does, according to the
spiritual intent, import all this.

I have done; and shall only add, that the sum and end of these, and all other
good Laws, of all Religion, and all our Duty is (as we often are taught in the
New Testament) comprised in those two Rules, 1 Timothy 1. 5.
of Loving God with all our heart, and, Loving our neighbor as our selves;
seriously and honestly attending unto which we can hardly fail of knowing what
in any case our duty is; It remains that we employ our best care and endeavor
on the conscientious practice thereof; imploring therewith the assistance of
God's grace, and that good Spirit, which God has most graciously promised to
those, who duly ask it, by which alone we can be enabled to keep God's
Commandments: To him be all glory and praise. Amen.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE Sacraments.

THE DOCTRINE OF The Sacraments.
IT is a peculiar excellency of our Religion, Cyp. Epist. 76.
that it does not much employ men's care, pains, and time, about matters of
ceremonial observance; but does chiefly (and in a manner wholly) exercise them
in works of substantial duty, agreeable to reason, perfective of man's nature,
productive of true glory to God, and solid benefit to men. Its design is not to
amuse our fancies with empty shows, nor to take up our endeavors in fruitless
performances, but to render us truly good, and like unto God; first in interior
disposition of mind, then in exterior practice; full of hearty love and
reverence to God, of tender charity and good will toward men, of moderation and
purity in the enjoyment of these things; of all true piety and virtue; whereby
we may become qualified for that life of bliss which it tendereth and
promises; for conversation in that holy Society above, to which it designeth
and calls us. Yet because Fancy is naturally a medium, and an effectual
instrument of action; and because sensible objects are apt strongly to affect
our minds; It has especially upon vulgar, and weaker minds a strong efficacy.
it has pleased the divine Wisdom to apply them, in fit measure, and to
sanctify them to those good purposes, by appointing some few solemn and
significant Rites to be observed by us, being in their own nature proper and
useful, and by God designed to declare his mind, and gracious intents to us; to
consign and convey his Grace into our Souls, to confirm our Faith in him, to
raise our devotion toward him, to quicken our resolutions of obeying his Will;
to enable and excite us to the practice of those great Duties which he
requires of us: Dominus noster leni jugo suo nos subdidit, and sarcinae levi;
Unde Sacramentis numero paucissimis, observatione facillimis, significatione
praestantissimis societatem novi populi colligavit: sicut est Baptismus
Trinitatis nomine consecratus, communicatio Corporis and Sanguinis ipsius; and
siquid aliud in Scripturis Canonicis commendatur, etc. Ep. 118. Religionem
paucissimis, and manifestissimis clebrationum Sacramentis misericordia Dei
liberam esse voluit. Id. Ep. 119.
Our Lord Jesus Christ, says S. Austin, has subjected us to his gentle yoke,
and light burden; whence with Sacraments most few in number, most easy for
observance, most excellent in signification he bound together the society of
new people. And, The mercy of God (says he again) would have Religion free, by
the celebration of a most few, and most clear Sacraments.

Of these there appear two (and S. Austin in the place cited could instance in
no more) of general and principal use, instituted by our Lord hismelf; which,
because they represent to us somewhat not subject to sense, and have a secret
influence upon us; because what is intended by them, is not immediately
discernible by what is done, without some explication, (their significancy
being not wholly grounded in the nature, but depending upon arbitrary
institution, as that of words, which is of kin to them; whence S. Austin calls
a Sacrament, Verbum visibile) have usually been called Mysteries, (that is,
actions of a close and occult importance, of deeper meaning and design, than is
obvious to ordinary perception) and thence are also called Sacraments, for no
other reason, I conceive, then because the ancientest translators of the Bible
into Latin, did usually render the word (...) by the word Sacramentum; whence
every thing containing under it somewhat of abstruse meaning, is by ancient
Writers termed a Sacrament. (So Tertullian calls all Christianity the Sacrament
of Christian Religion; and Exodus 12. 26. Sacramenti natura diserte and plane
exprimitur.
Elisha's Ax he calls the Sacrament of Wood; and S. Austin speaks of the
Sacrament of Bread, of Fish, of Numbers, of the Rock, etc. In short, he says of
all Signs, That when they belong to divine things, they are called Sacraments
Nimis autem longum est convenienter disputare de varietate signorum, quae, cum
ad res divinas pertinent, Sacramenta appellantur. Aug. Ep. 5.
; which shows to how small purpose the disputes are, yea on what small grounds
the decrees are, concerning the number, general nature, and efficacy of
Sacraments; for where a name or form of a Sacrament is of so large, ambiguous,
and indeterminate signification, there can be nothing but confusion in the
disputes about it) But those which chiefly at least, and in way of eminency
have obtained this name, are those two instituted by our Lord, Baptism, and the
Lord's Supper; of which I shall in order discourse; and so of each, as very
briefly to consider the occasion of their institution, the actions injoined in
them; In cunctis Christi actionibus Sacramentorum mysteria coruscarunt. Leo I.
Ep. 4.
the nature of them, or wherein their mystery does consist, the ends for which
they were intended, and the effects they produce; together with the
dispositions and duties (antecedent, concomitant, and consequent) required of
us in the use and practice of them. And first,

Of Baptism. (...).
Heb. 6. 1, 2.

THere were, (as the Apostle to the Hebrews tells us) in sacred use among the
Jews (...), Heb. 9. 10.
several kinds of Baptisms. Seld. de Synedriis.
The learned in their Laws and Customs teach, that they never did receive any
person into their Covenant, whether that which was more strict (to which
natural Jews, and Proselytes of Righteousness were tied) or that which was more
lax, with which Strangers and Proselytes of the gate did comply, without a
Baptism. And that Priests and Levites entering into their Office, Exodus 29. 4.
were to be sanctified by washing with water, Numb. 8. 6.
we see plainly prescribed in their Law; likewise that all persons, who had
contracted any kind of defilement, Levit. 15. 8, 16, 18, 27. and 22. 6.
were purified by the like Ceremony, particularly Children newborn, Numb. 19.
7, etc.
is expressed there. Ezekiel. 16. 4.
Moreover, that it was in use for Persons, who were conscious to themselves of
having trangressed God's Law, being in God's Name invited by some person of
eminent authority (a Prophet, Joh. 1. 25, 33.
or like a Prophet, one commissionated by God) unto repentance, and amendment
of life, to be washed by him, in testimony of their steadfast purpose to amend;
and in hope to obtain pardon from God of their past offenses, and to be
reinstated in his favor, appears probable by S. John the Baptist his
undertaking, and the success thereof. For if the manner of his proceeding had
been altogether unusual, and unknown, so many it seems would not so readily
(without any stir or obstacle) have complied therewith; especially among the
Scribes and Pharisees, those zealous adherents to traditionary practice, who to
maintain their credit and interest with the people, were so averse from all
appearance of novelty. This practice then of washing in so many cases, and to
so many purposes customary among God's people, to signify men's entering into a
new state or course of life, being withal most apt and proper for his design,
our Blessed Savior, who never favored needless innovations, was pleased to
assume and impose upon the Disciples and followers of his Religion,
accommodating it to those holy purposes, which we shall now endeavor to
declare.

What the action it self enjoined is, Mat. 28. 19.
what the manner and form thereof, Mark 16. 15.
is apparent by the words of our Lord's institution; Going forth therefore,
(says he) teach (or disciple) all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all
things which I have commanded you.

The Action is baptizing, or immersing in water; the Object thereof, those
Persons of any Nation, whom his Ministers can by their instruction and
persuasion render Disciples, that is, such as do sincerely believe the truth of
his Doctrine, and seriously resolve to obey his Commandments. It is performed
in the Name; that is, it is ministered by the authority, and bears special
relation unto the Persons of the Blessed Trinity, as the chief Objects of the
Faith professed, and the sole Objects of the obedience undertaken therein; as
exhibiting gracious favors unto the person baptized, and as receiving special
obligations from him.

Such is the Action it self declared to be; the mystery thereof consists in its
being a notable sign to represent, and an authentic Seal to ratify the
collation then made of certain great benefits to us; and our undertaking
correspondent duties toward God.

The Benefits which God then signifies, and (upon due terms) engages to confer
on us, are these:

1. The purgation or absolution of us from the guilt of past offenses, by a
free and full remission of them, (the which washing by Water, cleansing from
all stains, does most appositely represent) and consequently God's being
reconciled unto us, his receiving us into a state of grace and favor, his
freely justifying us, (that is, looking upon us, or treating us as just and
innocent Persons, although before we stood guilty of heinous sins, and
thereupon liable to grievous punishments) that these benefits are conferred in
Baptism, many places of Scripture plainly show; [and the Primitive Church, with
most firm and unanimous consent, did believe Vid. Just. Apol. 2. Tertul. de
Bapt. etc.
.] And now (said Ananias to S. Paul) Why do thou tarry? Acts 22. 16.
Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins. Acts 2. 38.
And, Repent (says S. Peter, preaching to the Jews) and let every one of you
be baptized for the remission of sins. And, Ephesians. 5. 26.
Christ (says S. Paul again to the Ephesians) loved his Church, and delivered
himself for it, that he might sanctify it, purging it by the washing of water,
(...), (that is, he effectually in Baptism consigned to the members of his
Church, that mercy and remission of sins, which he purchased and merited by his
passion). And again, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
Such (says he to the Corinthians) were some of you, (that is, ye were persons
guilty of heinous sins) but ye have been washed, ye have been sanctified, ye
have been justified in the name of our Lord, and by the spirit of our God;
where, having been washed in Christ's name, does (in congruity with what is
said in other places) denote Baptism in his name; being sanctified and
justified, do express the first benefits accompanying that Baptism. And indeed,
wherever a general remission of sins, or a full sanctification, or
consecration, and justification, or consecration, and justification of men's
persons in God's sight, are mentioned; that remission of sins, that separation,
or dedication unto God's Service, that reception into Grace, which are
consigned in Baptism, are (I conceive) understood; there being no other season
or occasion, wherein ordinarily and visibly God does exhibit those Benefits.

It may be demanded, Quid festinat innocens aetas ad remissionem peccatorum?
Tertull.
How Children, by reason of their innocent age, are capable of these Benefits;
how they can be pardoned, who never had offended, how they can be justified,
who never were capable of being unjust? I briefly answer, That because they
come from that race, which by sin had forfeited God's favor, and had alienated
it self from him; because also they have in them those seeds of pravity from
which afterward certainly, life continuing, (without God's restraining Grace)
will sprout forth innumerable evil actions; -- impletur apud nos spiritu sancto
puerorum innocens aetas, etc. Cypr. Ep. 10.
therefore that God overlooking all the defects of their nature, both relative,
and absolute, or personal, does assume them into his special favor, is no
small benefit to them, answerable to the remission of actual sin, and
restitution from the state consequent thereon in others.

2. In Baptism, the Gift of God's Holy Spirit is conferred, qualifying us for
the state into which we then come, and enabling us to perform the duties we
then undertake, which otherwise we should be unable to perform; for
purification of our hearts from vicious inclinations, and desires; for
begetting holy dispositions, and affections in our Souls; for to guide and
instruct us, to sustain and strengthen us, to encourage and comfort us in all
the course of Christian piety: The which effects are well also figured by
water, which purifieth things both from inherent and adherent filth. That this
benefit is annexed to Baptism, the Scripture also teaches us: Acts 2. 38.
Be baptized (says S. Peter) in the Name of Christ to the remission of sins,
and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost: 1 Cor. 12. 13.
(...), We being baptized in one body, are made to drink of one spirit, says
S. Paul: And with the (...). Tit. 3. 5.
Laver of Regeneration, S. Paul again joineth the renovation of the Holy Ghost:
And it is represented as an advantage of our Savior's Baptism above that of
John, that our Lord not only baptized with water to repentance, Mat. 3. 15.
but with the Holy Ghost, and Fire.

Some preventing operations of the Holy Ghost (whereby God freely draws Men
to Christianity, persuading their minds to assent thereto, inspiring their
hearts with resolutions to comply with it) do precede Baptism; but a more full
communication thereof (due by compact, assured by promise) for the confirming,
and maintaining us in the firm belief, and constant practice of Christianity,
is consequent thereon; Ephesians. 1. 14.
After ye had believed, ye were sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, says S.
Paul: To signify which benefit then conferred, the ancient Christians did to
Baptism annex the Chrism, or holy Unction, signifying the collation of that
healing and chearing Spirit to the baptized person; that which S. Paul may seem
to respect, when he says, He that establishes (or confirms) us with you
into Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 21.
and who has anointed us, is God; who also has sealed us, and has given us
the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts.

3. With those gifts is connected the benefit of Regeneration, implying our
entrance into a new state and course of life; being endowed with new faculties,
dispositions, and capacities of Souls, becoming new Creatures, and new Men,
Ephesians. 2. 22, 23, 24.
as it were, renewed after the likeness of God in righteousness and true
holiness, Colos. 3. 10.
2 Cor. 5. 17.
our being sanctified in our hearts and lives; being mortified to fleshly
lusts, and worldly affections; being quickened to a spiritual life, and heavenly
conversation: in short, becoming in relation and in disposition of mind, the
children of God. This the matter, and the action of Baptism does set out; for
as children new born, (for cleansing them from impurities adherent from the
Womb) both among the Jews and other people, Ezekiel. 16. 4.
were wont to be washed; -- (...). Theocr.
so are we in Baptism, signifying our purification from natural and worldly
defilements: The mersion also in Water, and the emersion thence, does figure
our death to the former, and receiving to a new life. Whence Baptism is by S.
Paul called the laver of Regeneration; Tit. 3. 5.
and our Lord says, John 3. 5.
that, If a man be not born again of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God; that is, every one becoming a Christian, is by Baptism
regenerated, or put into a new state of Life, gets new dispositions of Soul,
and new relations to God. Gal. 3. 26.
Ye are all (says S. Paul) the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus; that
is, by embracing his Doctrine, and submitting to his Law professedly in
Baptism. Romans 6. 4.
And, Col. 2. 12.
We (says S. Paul again) are buried with Christ through Baptism unto death;
that as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, so also we
should walk in newness of life.

4. With these Benefits is conjoined that of being inserted into God's Church,
his family, the number of his chosen people, the mystical body of Christ,
whereby we become entitled to the privileges and immunities of that heavenly
Corporation. 1 Cor. 12. 13.
We (says S. Paul) have been all baptized in one spirit into one body, the
mystical body of Christ: And, Gal. 3. 27.
so many of you (says he again) as have been baptized into Christ, (into
Christ mystical, or the Church) have put on Christ, and ye are (adds he) all
one in Christ Jesus. As Proselytes among the Jews by Baptism were admitted unto
the Communion, and privileges of the Jewish; so thereby are we received into
the like Communion and privileges of the Christian, far more excellent, Society.

5. In consequence of these things, there is with Baptism conferred a capacity
of, a title unto, an assurance (under condition of persevering in faith and
obedience to our Lord) of eternal life and salvation. We are therein, in S.
Peter's words, regenerated unto a lively hope of an incorruptible inheritance,
1 Pet. 1. 2.
by that resurrection of Christ, which is represented to us in this action; and
so therein applied, as to beget in us a title and a hope to rise again in like
manner to a blissful life; whence we are said therein to rise with him: Colos.
2. 12.
Being, says S. Paul, buried with him in Baptism, wherein also we were raised
again: whence by the two great Apostles, Baptism is said to save us: Baptism
(says S. Peter) the antitype of the delivery in the flood, 1 Pet. 3. 21.
does save us, that is, admits us into the Ark, puts us into the sure way
of Salvation; Tit. 3. 5.
and, God (says S. Paul) according to his mercy saved us, by the laver of
regeneration; Mat. 16. 16.
and, He that shall believe, and shall be baptized, shall be saved, is our
Savior's own word and promise; shall be saved, that is, shall be put into a
state and way of salvation, continuing in which state, proceeding in which way
he assuredly shall be saved: for Faith there denotes perseverance in Faith,
and Baptism implies performance of the conditions therein undertaken; which
next is to be considered.

For as this Holy Rite signifies, and seals God's collation of so many great
benefits on us; so it also implies, and on our part ratifieth our Obligation,
then in an especial manner commencing, to several most important duties toward
him. It implies, that we are in mind fully persuaded concerning the truth of
that Doctrine, which God the Father revealed by his blessed Son, and confirmed
by the miraculous operation of the Holy Ghost; we therein profess our humble
and thankful embracing the overtures of Mercy and Grace, purchased for us by
our Savior's meritorious undertaking and performances, the which are then
exhibited and tendered to us; we therein declare our hearty resolution to
forsake all wicked courses of life, repugnant to the Doctrine and Law of
Christ; fully to conform our lives to his Will, living thereafter in all piety,
righteousness, and sobriety, as loyal Subjects, faithful Servants, and dutiful
Children to God; in brief, we therein are bound, renouncing all erroneous
principles, all vicious inclinations, and all other engagements whatever,
entirely to devote our selves to the Faith and Obedience of God the Father, our
glorious and good Maker; of God the Son our gracious Redeemer; of God the Holy
Ghost our blessed Guide, Assistant, Advocate, and Comforter: These are the
duties antecedent unto, and concomitant of our Baptism (immediately and
formally required of those, who are capable of performing them, mediately and
virtually of them who are not) the which are signified by our being baptized in
the Name of the Holy Trinity.

These duties the Scripture commonly expresses by the Word, Faith and
Repentance; sometimes singly, sometimes conjunctly: Acts 8. 37.
If (said Philip to the Eunuch) thou believe with thy heart it is lawful (for
thee to be baptized); Faith was an indispensible condition prerequisite
thereto; and, Repent (says S. Peter) and let every of you be baptized; Acts 2.
38.
Repentance also was necessary to precede it; indeed both these (as they are
meant in this case) do in effect signify the same; each imports a being
renewed in Mind, in Judgment, in Will, in Affection; a serious embracing of
Christ's Doctrine, and a steadfast resolution to adhere thereto in practice.
Hence are those effects, or consequences attributed to Faith; Acts 26. 14. 5.
31. and 20. 21. and 26. 20. and 3. 19. and 17. 30.
justifying us, reconciling and bringing us near to God, Romans 5. 1, 2. and 3.
25. and 2. 4.
saying us; because it is the necessary condition required by God, Gal. 2. 16.
and 3. 8.
and by him accepted, Heb. 10. 39.
that we may be capable of these benefits conferred in Baptism; Ephesians. 2. 8.
and 3. 12.
the same being also referred to that repentance, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13.
or change of mind, 2 Timothy 2. 25.
which must accompany our entrance into Christianity; 2 Pet. 3. 9.
that good Conscience, Mat. 9. 13.
with which we stipulate a perpetual devotion and obedience to God, Luke 24. 47.
the which therefore does (as S. Peter tells us) save us; Mark 2. 17.
it contributing to our Salvation, 1 Pet. 3. 21.
as a duty necessarily required in order thereto. Romans 6. 3, 4, etc
This is that death to sin, and resurrection to righteousness, that being
buried with Christ, and rising again with him, so as to walk in newness of
life, which the baptismal action signifies, and which we then really undertake
to perform.

And as such are the duties preceding or accompanying Baptism; so making good
the engagements they contain, constantly persisting in them, maintaining and
improving them, are duties necessarily consequent thereupon. Heb. 10. 23.
Having (says the Apostle) had our bodies washed with pure water, 2 Pet. 3. 17.
let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering. We should
indeed continually remember, frequently and seriously consider, what in so
solemn a manner we (upon so valuable considerations) did then undertake,
promise, and vow to God, diligently striving to perform it; for violating our
part of the Covenant, and stipulation then made, by apostasy in profession or
practice from God and goodness, we certainly must forfeit those inestimable
benefits, which God otherwise has tied himself to bestow; the pardon of our
sins, the favor of God, the being members of Christ, the grace, guidance,
assistance, and comfort of the Holy Spirit; the right unto, and hope of
Salvation. We so doing, shall not only simply disobey, and offend God; but add
the highest breach of fidelity to our disobedience, together with the most
heinous ingratitude, abusing the greatest grace that could be vouchsafed us:
Heb. 10. 26.
If we wilfully sin, after we have taken the acknowledgment of the truth,
(says the Apostle, meaning that solmen profession of our Faith in Baptism) we
trample under foot the Son of God; we profane the blood of the Covenant; we do
despite unto the Spirit of Grace; and incurring so deep guilt, we must expect
suitable punishment. But I proceed to the other Sacrament,

The Eucharist.
AMong the wonderful works of Power, Cyp. Epist. 63.
and Grace performed by God Almighty, in favor of the Children of Israel, and
in order to their delivery from the Egyptian slavery, a most signal one, was
the smiting the firstborn in every house of the Egyptians, and passing over
the houses of the Children of Israel; wherein God declared his just wrath
against their cruel Oppressors, depriving them in a sudden and dreadful manner
of what was nearest and dearest to them; and his gracious mercy toward them, in
preserving what was alike dear to them from so woeful a calamity; thus (as the
Text expresses it) putting a difference between the Egyptians and the Children
of Israel. Now that the memory of so remarkable a Mercy might be preserved,
that their affections might be raised to a strong sense of God's goodness, and
their Faith in them confirmed, so as in the like need to hope for the same
favorable help and protection, by the consideration of so notable an
experiment, it pleased God to appoint a Sacrament, or mysterious Rite to be
annually celebrated, representing and recalling to mind, that Act of God,
wherein his special kindness was so eminently demonstrated toward his People:
The same also (as did other Rites and Sacrifices, instituted by God among that
people) looking directly forward upon that other great delivery from Sin and
Hell, which God in mercy designed toward mankind, to be achieved by our
Savior; prefiguring, that the Souls of them who should be willing to forsake
the spiritual bondage of sin, should be saved from the ruin coming upon them
who would abide therein; God regarding the blood of our Savior (that
immaculate Lamb, Exodus 12. 23.
sacrificed for them) sprinkled upon the doors of their houses, Heb. 10. 22.
that is, 1 Pet. 1. 2.
by hearty Faith and Repentance, applied to their Consciences. The occasion of
celebrating which Holy Rite, our Savior we see did improve to the institution
of this Sacrament, most agreeing therewith in design, as representative and
commemorative of the greatest blessing and mercy that we are capable of having
vouchsafed to us; some part of that ancient Rite, or Sacrifice (which was most
suitable to the special purposes of this Institution, and most conformable to
the general constitution of the Christian Religion, whereby all bloody
Sacrifices are abolished) being retained in this.

The Action it self (or rather the whole Rite, consisting of diverse actions) we
see plainly described in the Gospels, and in the first Epistle of S. Paul to
the Corinthians; distinguishable into these chief parts. 1 Timothy 4. 5.
1. The Benediction and Consecration (by Prayer and Thanksgiving) of Bread and
Wine. 2. The breaking of Bread, and handling the Cup. 3. The delivery and
distribution of them to the persons present. Luke 22. 19, 20. (...).
4. The declaration accompanying that delivery, 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25. (...).
that those symbolical things and actions did represent our Savior's Body
given and broken, Luke 22. 7. (...).
our Savior's Blood shed and poured out for us, Mark 14 23. (...).
in sanction of the new Covenant. 5. The actual partaking of those Symbols, by
eating the Bread, and drinking the Wine, done by all present. These things we
find done at the first institution and exemplary practice of this holy
Ceremony; the which our Savior obliged us to imitate, saying, Do this in
remembrance of me. Mat. 26. 30.
There follows, in S. Matthew and S. Mark, Mark 14. 26.
presently after the narration concerning these particulars, -- (...), And
having sung a Hymn, they went to the Mount of Olives: Which action was indeed
in it self proper to conclude the practice of this holy Rite, yet what
reference it has thereto, cannot thence be determined; However with these the
Church has always joined several acts of Devotion (Confessions, Prayers,
Praises, Thanksgivings, Intercessions, Vows) suitable to the nature and design
of the Sacrament, apt to glorify God, and edify the Faithful in the celebration
thereof.

Such is the practice it self instituted and injoined by our Savior; the
mysterious importance thereof, as we find it explained in Holy Scripture, (the
only solid and sure ground, upon which we can build the explication of
supernatural Mysteries) consists chiefly in these particulars:

1. It was intended for a Commemorative representation of our Savior's Passion
for us; fit to mind us of it, to move us to consider it, to beget affections in
us, suitable to the memory and consideration thereof: (...) Do this (says our
Lord) for my remembrance, Luke 22. 19.
or in commemoration of me; 1 Cor. 11. 25.
that is so, as thereby to have raised in you a reflection of mind and heart
upon those grievous pains, which I shall have endured for your sake, to procure
for you a remission of sins, and reconciliation to God: 1 Cor. 11. 26.
And, So often (says S. Paul) as you eat this Bread, and drink this Cup,
(...), Ye tell forth (or significantly express) the death of our Lord till he
come, or during his absence from us. The suffering of our Savior (the most
wonderful act of Goodness and Charity, that ever was performed in the World,
which produced effects of highest consequence to our benefit, the consideration
whereof is apt to work the best dispositions of piety in us) should very
frequently be present to our thoughts and affections; and that it may be so
with advantage, such a solemn and sensible representation thereof is very
conducible; wherein we behold him crucified, as it were in effigy, his Body
broken, his Blood poured out for us; it being in a sort a putting us into the
circumstances of those, who did behold our Savior for us hanging upon the
Cross. Our Lord being absent in Body from us, (sitting in Heaven at God's right
hand) to supply that absence, that we should not be apt to forget him, and
thereby become wholly estranged from him, is pleased to order this occasion of
being present, and conversing with us, in such a manner, as may retain in our
memories his gracious performances for us; may impress in our hearts a kindly
sense of them; may raise us up in mind and affection to him.

2. The Benefits consequent upon our Savior's Passion, rightly apprehended,
heartily believed, seriously considered by us, are hereby lively represented,
and effectually conveyed; to the sustenance and nourishment of our spiritual
Life, to the refreshment and comfort of our Souls. It is a holy Feast, a
spiritual Repast, a divine Entertainment, to which God in kindness invites us;
to which if we come with well-disposed minds, he there feeds us with most holy
and delicious Viands, with heavenly Manna, with most reviving and cherishing
Liquor. Bread is the staff of Life, the most common, most necessary, and most
wholesome, and most savory Meat; Wine is the most pleasant and wholesome also,
the most sprightly and cordial Drink; by them therefore our Lord chose to
represent that Body and Blood, by the Oblation of which a capacity of life and
health was procured to Mankind; the taking in which by right apprehension,
tasting it by hearty Faith, digesting it by careful attention and meditation,
converting it into our substance by devout, grateful, and holy affections,
joined with serious and steady resolutions of living answerable thereto, will
certainly support and maintain our spiritual Life in a vigorous Health, and
happy growth of Grace; refreshing our hearts with comfort and satisfaction
unspeakable; Joh 6. 51, 47. and 5. 36.
He that does thus, eats our Savior's Flesh, and drinks his Blood, (that is,
who as our Savior interprets it, does believe in him; that Belief importing
all other acts of Mind and Will, connected with right persuasions concerning
him) has eternal life, and shall live for ever, as himself declares and
promises: which Benefits therefore in the due performance of this holy Duty,
are conveyed unto us.

3. This Sacrament declares that Union, which good Christians partaking thereof
have with Christ; their mystical insertion into him, by a close dependence upon
him for spiritual Life, Joh. 15. 4.
Mercy, Grace, and Salvation; a constant adherence to him by Faith and
Obedience, a near conformity to him in Mind and Affection; an inseparable
conjunction with him, by the strictest bands of fidelity, and by the most
endearing Relations: Which things could not more fitly be set out, than by the
partaking our best and most necessary Food; which being taken in, soon becomes
united to us, assimilated and converted into our substance; thereby renewing
our strength, and repairing the decays of our nature: Wherefore, John 6. 56.
He (says our Savior) that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, abides in
me, and I in him; 1 Cor. 10. 16.
and, The Cup of Blessing (says S. Paul) which we bless, is it not the
Communion of the Blood of Christ? the Bread which we break, is it not the
Communion of the Body of Christ? We in the outward Action, partake of the
Symbols representing our Savior's Body and Blood; We in the spiritual
Intention, communicate of his very Person, being (according to the manner
insinuated) intimately united to him.

4. By this Sacrament consequently is signified and sealed that Union, which is
among our Savior's true Disciples communicating therein; their being together
united in consent of mind, and unity of Faith; in mutual good will and
affection, in hope and tendency to the same blessed end, in spiritual
Brotherhood and Society; especially upon account of their Communion with
Christ, which most closely ties them one to another; Vid. Cyp. Ep. 63. p. 146.
they partaking of this one individual Food, Ep. 67. p. 208.
become translated, as it were, into one Body and Substance: Seeing (says S.
Paul) we being many, 1 Cor. 10. 17.
are one Bread, one Body; for all of us do partake of one Bread.

In the representing, produceing, and promoting these things, we are taught the
Mystery of this Sacrament does consist; It was designed as a proper and
efficacious Instrument, to raise in us pious Affections toward our good God,
and gracious Redeemer; to dispose us to all holy practice; to confirm our
Faith, to nourish our Hope, to quicken our Resolutions of walking carefully in
the ways of Duty; to unite us more fastly to our Savior, and to combine us in
Charity one toward another; the accomplishing of which Intents thereof, does
suppose our faithful and diligent concurrence in the use thereof; whence arise
many Duties incumbent upon us in respect thereto, some antecedent, some
concomitant, some consequent to the use thereof.

1. Before we address our selves to the partaking of this venerable Mystery, we
should consider whither we are going, what is the nature and importance of the
Action we set our selves about; that we are approaching to our Lord's Table, 1
Cor. 10. 21.
(so S. Paul calls it) to come into his more especial presence, to be
entertained by him with the dearest welcome, and the best cheer that can be; to
receive the fullest testimonies of his Mercy, and the surest pledges of his
favor toward us; that we are going to behold our Lord in tenderest love,
offering up himself a Sacrifice to God, therein undergoing the sorest pains,
and foulest disgraces for our Good and Salvation; that we ought therefore to
bring with us dispositions of Soul, suitable to such an access unto, such an
intercourse with our gracious Lord. Had we the honor and favor to be invited
to the Table of a great Prince, what especial care should we have to dress our
Bodies in a clean and decent garb, to compose our minds in order to expression
of all due respect to him; to bring nothing about us noisome or ugly, that
might offend his sight, or displease his mind? The like surely, and greater
care we should apply, when we thus being called, do go into God's Presence and
Communion. We should, in preparation thereto, with all our power, endeavor to
cleanse our Souls from all impurity of thought and desire; from all iniquity
and perverseness; from all malice, envy, hatred, anger, and all such evil
dispositions, which are most offensive to God's all-piercing sight, and
unbeseeming his glorious Presence; we should dress our Souls with all those
comely Ornaments of Grace (with purity, humility, meekness, and charity) which
will render us acceptable and well-pleasing to him: We should compose our minds
into a frame of reverence and awful regard to the Majesty of God, into a lowly,
calm, and tender disposition of heart, apt to express all respect due to his
Presence, fit to admit the gracious illapses of his Holy Spirit; very
susceptive of all Holy and Heavenly Affections, which are suitable to such a
Communion, or may spring from it. We should therefore remove and abandon from
us, not only all vicious Inclinations, and evil purposes; but even all worldly
cares, desires, and passions, which may distract, or discompose us, that may
dull or deject us, that may cause us to behave our selves indecently or
unworthily before God, that may bereave us of the excellent Fruits from so
blessed an entertainment.

To these purposes we should, according to S. Paul's advice, (...), 1 Cor. 11.
28.
examine and approve our selves; considering our past Actions, and our present
Inclinations, and accordingly, by serious meditation, and fervent prayer to God
for his gracious assistance therein, working our Souls into a hearty remorse
for our past miscarriages, and a sincere resolution to amend for the future;
forsaking all sin, endeavoring in all our actions to serve and please God; 1
Cor. 5. 7.
purging out (as S. Paul again injoineth us) the old leaven of vice and
wickedness; so that we may feast, and celebrate this Passover, in which Christ
is mystically sacrificed for us, in the unleavened dispositions of sincerity
and truth. Such are the duties previous to our partaking this Sacrament.

2. Those Duties which accompany it, are a reverent and devout affection of
heart, with a suitable behavior therein; an awful sense of mind befitting the
Majesty of that Presence wherein we do appear, answerable to the greatness, and
goodness, and holiness of him, with whom we converse; becoming the sacredness
of those Mysteries, which are exhibited to us, (that which S. Paul seems to
call (...), 1 Cor. 11. 29.
to discern or distinguish our Lord's Body; that is, yielding a peculiar
reverence of mind and behavior in regard thereto) a devotion of heart,
consisting in hearty contrition for our sins, which did expose our Savior to
the enduring such pains, then remembered; in firm resolution to forsake the like
thereafter, as injurious, dishonorable, and displeasing to him; in fervent
love of him, as full of so wonderful goodness and charity toward us; in most
hearty thankfulness for those unconceivably great expressions of kindness
toward us; in deepest humility, upon sense of our unworthiness, to receive such
testimonies of grace and favor from him, (our unworthiness to eat the Crumbs
that fall from his Table, how much more to be admitted into such degrees of
honorable Communion, and familiarity, of close conjunction and union with
him?) of pious joy in consideration of the excellent privileges herein
imparted, and of the blessed Fruits accruing to us from his gracious
performances; in a comfortable hope of obtaining and enjoying the benefits of
his obedience and passion, by the assistance of his Grace; in steady Faith, and
full persuasion of mind, that he is (supposing our dutiful compliance) ready to
bestow upon us all the blessings then exhibited; in attentively fixing the eyes
of our Mind, and all the powers of our Soul (our Understanding, Will, Memory,
Fancy, Affection) upon him, as willingly pouring forth his Life for our
Salvation; lastly, in motions of enlarged goodwill and charity toward all our
Brethren for his sake, in obedience to his Will, and in imitation of him;
suchlike Duties should attend our participation of this holy Sacrament.

3. The effects of having duly performed which, should appear in the practice
of those Duties, which are consequent thereon; being such as these; An increase
of all pious inclinations and affections, expressing themselves in a real
amendment of our lives, and producing more goodly fruits of obedience; the
thorough digestion of that spiritual nourishment by our becoming more fastly
knit to our Savior by higher degrees of Faith and Love; the maintaining a more
lively sense of his superabundant goodness; the cherishing those influences of
Grace, which descend upon our hearts in this Communion, and improving them to
nearer degrees of perfection in all piety and virtue; a watchful care, and
endeavor in our lives to approve our selves in some measure worthy of that
great honor and favor, which God has vouchsafed us in admitting us to so
near approaches to himself; an earnest pursuance of the Resolutions,
performance of the Vows, making good the Engagements, which in so solemn a
manner, upon so great an occasion we made, and offered up unto our God and
Savior; finally, the considering, that by the breach of such Resolutions, by
the violation of such Engagements, our sins receiving so mighty aggravation of
vain inconstancy and wicked perfidiousness, our guilt will hugely be increased;
our Souls relapsing into so grievous distemper, our spiritual strength will be
exceedingly impaired; consequently hence our true Comforts will be abated, our
best hopes will be shaken; our eternal state will be desperately endangered.

There is one Duty which I should not forbear to touch, concerning this
Sacrament, that is, Our gladly embracing any opportunity presented of
communicating therein; the doing so, being not only our Duty, but a great aid
and instrument of Piety; the neglecting it a grievous sin, and productive of
great mischiefs to us.

The Primitive Christians did very frequently use it, partaking therein, as it
seems at every time of their meeting for God's Service; it is said of them, by
S. Luke, Acts 2. 42.
that They continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and Communion, and in
breaking of Bread, and in Prayers; and, when you meet together, it is not (as
according to the intent and duty of meeting it should be) to eat the Lord's
Supper, 1 Cor. 10. 20.
says S. Paul: And Just. Martyr in his second Apology, describing the
religious Service of God in their Assemblies, mentions it as a constant part
thereof; and Epiphanius reports it as a Custom in the Church, derived from
Apostolical Institution, to celebrate the Eucharist thrice every week, that is,
so often as they did meet to pray and praise God; which practice may well be
conceived, a great means of kindling and preserving in them that holy fervor
of Piety, which they so illustriously expressed in their Conversation, and in
their gladsome suffering for Christ's sake: and the remitting of that
frequency, as it is certainly a sign and an effect, so in part it may possibly
be reckoned a cause of the degeneracy of Christian Practice, into that great
coldness and slackness which afterward did seize upon it, and now does
apparently keep it in a languishing and half-dying state.

The rarer occasions therefore we now have of performing this Duty, (the which
indeed was always esteemed the principal Office of God's Service) of enjoying
this Benefit, (the being deprived whereof, was also deemed the greatest
punishment and infelicity that could arrive to a Christian) the more ready we
should be to embrace them. If we dread God's Displeasure, if we value our Lord
and his Benefits, if we tender the life, health, and welfare of our Souls, we
shall not neglect it; for how can we but extremely offend God by so extreme
rudeness, that when he kindly invites us to his Table, we are averse from
coming thither, or utterly refuse it? That when he calls us into his
Presence, we run from him; that when he, with his own hand, offers us
inestimable Mercies and Blessings, we reject them? It is not only the breach of
God's Command, who enjoined us to do this, but a direct contempt of his Favor
and Goodness, most clearly and largely exhibited in this Office. And how can we
bear any regard to our Lord, or be any wise sensible of his gracious
Performances in our behalf, if we are unwilling to join in thankful and joyful
commemoration of them? How little do we love our own Souls, if we suffer them
to pine and starve for want of that Food, which God here dispenses for its
Sustenance and Comfort; if we bereave them of enjoying so high a Privilege, so
inestimable a Benefit, so incomparable Pleasures as are to be found and felt in
this Service, or do spring and flow from it? What reasonable excuse can we
frame for such neglect? are we otherwise employed? What Business can there be
more important, than serving God, and saying our own Souls? Is it wisdom, in
pursuance of any the greatest Affair here, to disregard the principal Concern
of our Souls? Do we think our selves unfit and unworthy to appear in God's
Presence? But is any man unworthy to obey God's Commands? Is any Man unfit to
implore and partake of God's Mercy, if he be not unwilling to do it? What
unworthiness should hinder us from remembering our Lord's excessive Charity
toward us, and thanking him for it? from praying for his Grace; from resolving
to amend our lives? Must we, because we are unworthy, continue so still, by
shunning the means of correcting and curing us? Must we increase our
unworthiness, by transgressing our Duty? If we esteem things well, the
conscience of our sinfulness should rather drive us to it, as to our Medicine,
than detain us from it. There is no man indeed, who must not conceive and
confess himself unworthy; therefore must no man come thither at God's Call? If
we have a sense of our sins, and a mind to leave them; if we have a sense of
God's goodness, and a heart to thank him for it; we are so worthy, that we
shall be kindly received there, and graciously rewarded. If we will not take a
little care to work these dispositions in us, we are indeed unworthy; but the
being so, from our own perverse negligence, is a bad excuse for the neglect of
our Duty. In fine, I dare say, that he, who with an honest meaning (although with
an imperfect devotion) does address himself to the performance of this Duty, is
far more excusable, than he that upon whatever score declineth it; no
scrupulous shiness can ward us from blame; what then shall we say, if supine
sloth, or profane contempt, are the causes of such neglect?

(...), Men's deficit, quam non recepta Eucharistia erigit and accendit. Cyp.
Ep. 54.
(...) (...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Or. 24.

Thus having briefly dispatched the Considerations that offered themselves upon
these Subjects, I shall conclude all with Prayer to Almighty God, that we by
his grace and help believing rightly, strongly, constantly, and finally; being
frequent and fervent in Prayer, and all pious devotion, sincerely obeying all
God's Commandments; continuing orderly, dutiful, and worthy Members of Christ's
Church, growing continually in Grace, by the worthy participation of the Holy
Sacraments, may obtain the end of our Faith, the success of our Prayers, the
reward of our Obedience, the continuance in that Holy Society, the perfect
consummation of Grace in the possession of eternal Joy, Glory, and Bliss; which
God in his infinite Mercy grant to us, for our blessed Savior's sake; to whom
be all glory and praise for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Books writ by the Learned Dr. Isaac Barrow, and printed for Brabazon Aylmer,
at the Three Pigeons over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.
TWelve Sermons preached upon Several Occasions: In Octavo, being the First
Volume.

Ten Sermons against Evil Speaking, In Octavo, being the Second Volume.

Eight Sermons of the Love of God and our Neighbor: In Octavo, being the Third
Volume.

The Duty and Reward of Bounty to the Poor: In a Sermon, much enlarged,
preached at the Spittal upon Wednesday in Easter Week, Anno Dom. 1671. In
Octavo.

A Sermon upon the Passion of our Blessed Savior: Preached at Guild Hall
Chapel, on Good Friday, the 13th day of April, 1677. In Octavo.

A Learned Treatise of the Pope's Supremacy. To which is added a Discourse
concerning the Unity of the Church. In Quarto.

The said Discourse concerning the Unity of the Church, is also printed alone:
In Octavo.

An Exposition of the Lord's Prayer; of the Ten Commandments. And the Doctrine
of the Sacraments: In Octavo.

All the said Books of the Learned Dr. Isaac Barrow, (except the Sermon of
Bounty to the Poor) are since the Author's death Published by Dr. Tillotson
Dean of Canterbury.

The true and lively Effigies of Dr. Isaac Barrow, in a large Print; Engraven
(from the Life) by the excellent Artist D. Loggan: Price without Frame six
pence.


