Select Discourses, concerning 1. Councils, the Pope, Schism. 2. The
Privileges of the Isle of Great Britain. 3. The Popes Primacy, and the Supreme
Power of Kings, both in Temporals, and also Spirituals, accordingly as they put
on the quality of Temporals, and are means for the hindering, or procuring, the
safety of the Republic.


By F. Barnes, of the Order of St. Benedict.

LONDON, Printed by R. I. 1661.

TO THE READER.
Friend,
I Was put upon the inquiry after the Manuscript of this moderate Romanist, our
Countryman F. Barnes, by the double Posit. 4.
reference Dr. Basier makes to it in his Marginal Annotations; With some
difficulty I at last recovered a Copy of it; the same, as I remember, the
Doctor himself used at the composure of his Diatribe; which then was, with
much secrecy, conveyed from hand to hand, none of us daring to own the having
it, upon apprehension of some question, or inconvenience, from the Popes Nuncio
in Paris, the Author himself being under his Holinesse's high displeasure,
and, as was said, and still is, in the severe Discipline of the Inquisition for
it. Though I presume they will not hold their hand from chastising him, nor
withold a censure from any other of their own communion; yet I see no reason
why they should so much as blame us for improving our advantage by such
ingenuous means, as a mere Collection of what has passed the Press in their
public Writings, which might have been made by any man that had leisure and
curiosity enough for the search. Beside, those two Chapters the Doctor sends us
to, I have excerpd a third, which I found significant unto our purpose. The
benefit that may arrive to you by all, is this. From the first a satisfaction
in, or encouragement to, your Communion with that Church which subjects her
self to the spiritual Authority of Councils, and Bishops, and Priests; those
Powers at first ordained by God, and continued by a succession, uninterrupted,
among all regular and Catholic Christians in the World. By the second are
asserted to you those Privileges of the Britannick Church, so as you will be
obliged to justify her, yea though a Romanist, in the exemption, she pretends
to, from the Pope's Jurisdiction, with whom yet she denies not, but that
Christian-Communion might be held, and, why it is not you will understand from
the Confessions of his own party. From the third you will collect the reason
why the Oath of Supremacy is imposed upon you, and know your indispensable
obligation to it; no spiritual person upon earth, having power to absolve you
from it.

My endeavors were not wanting, though successeless, on the other side, to get
a Transcript of that Chapter in Mr. Justell's work, of which the Doctor had
great expectation, as you may read in my Letter, which I communicated, that you
might know the first occasion given of his writing the Diatribe, touching the
Liberty of our Church. The Reverend person, who was pleased to take the trouble
of it, a long time cherished my hopes, relying upon his own interest in, and
some promise, I think, from, Mr. Justell's Son, who is possessed of the Books
and Papers his Father writ, and, some say, of the learned abilities by which he
did. At length I was remitted to the Book it self, said to be in the Press,
from which the sheets that were for my purpose could not be spared. Whether
that reference were a mistake or delusion, I cannot tell, nor shall make my
self so much concerned in it, as to inquire, being more certainly now informed,
that the foresaid Book is some enlargement upon the Councils Mr. Chr. Justell
long since published, and that he has left his Geographia Sacro-Politica, not
half finished, which, so imperfect, the learned Gentleman, his Son, thinks not
fit to print; so that I believe we are to hope for little help from that hand.
If what you here have, be not sufficient, God be thanked, the Church of England
wants not men highly qualified to accomplish what ere it was Mr. Justell
designed in her behalf; from whom it may be looked for, when they see cause to
intend it. In the mean time accept with gratitude what is already done, and be
instructed by it. a Dieu

Yours RI. WATSON.

CHAP. I. Concerning Councils, the Pope, Schism.
WE must obey and submit our selves to Powers ordained by God for the
Government of his Church, such as are Councils, a Bishops, Priests, to all
which obedience prescribed by Canons is to be given; so that we may not
gainsay their decrees, [or opinions] canonically delivered; for he receives
damnation to himself, whosoever resists the Ordinance of God, Roman. 13. And
as in the Republic it is Rebellion, to oppose the command of the Civil
Magistrate, therefore, because he is obnoxious to error: so is it not void of
Schism in the Church, to withdraw from the Ecclesiastical Magistrate under a
pretense of error, b actual, or possible, it being not clearly proved in a
legitimate sense. Be it therefore, that only the written Word of God is, of
necessity, infallible, and that Bishops and Councils may err; yet until their
error may be convinced in judgment, they must be obeyed, for avoiding of
Schism, no less than the Civil Magistrate unconvicted of error; yea obedience
is yielded him while he errs. Now of Catholic Tribunals a Council is supreme,
unto which the Pope, all Bishops, and, beside them, all faithful people are
obliged to resign themselves in things spiritual; yea, if the Pope should
pertinaciously withstand a decree of Faith in an Oecumenick Council, he would
be presumed an Heretic, and separation from him, as from an Heretic, may be
made, without the character of Schism, by denying him obedience, fellowship and
communion, especially after the declaration of the Church, according to
prescript and Rule of the Canons.

Paralipomena.
a SEE my Tractate concerning the Supremacy of Councils, wherein I have proved
out of the Scriptures, and perpetual practice of the Church, that Popes are
subject to the Canons; That the Deacons of Rome, preferring themselves before
Priests, against the eighteenth Canon of the Council of Nice, the Pope seeing
and consenting, St. Hierom Epist. 85. ad Evagr. calls men without sense or
reason. Why (says he) do ye allege to me the custom of one City? why
vindicate you a small number, of which this pride is sprung against the Laws of
the Church? Augustine in Q. Vet. and Nov. Test. q. 10. styles the same Deacons
somewhat immodest, in that they live neither by Law, Custom, nor Example; but,
because they are Ministers of the Roman Church, think themselves more venerable
than any other.

In the second Synod, Flavianus being excommunicated by the Bishop of Rome (as
the Lib. 10. cap. 10.
Tripartite history shows) is restored against his will by the first Synod, as
appears by a Synodal Epistle in Lib. 5. cap. 9.
Theodoret, according to the Prescript of the Nicene Law and Decision, as the
Canon requires.

In the third general Synod (notwithstanding the 18 Number. in Edit. 6.55.
Epistle of Innocent the first to Alexander, wherein he declares, that the
Cyprians are not wise according to the Faith, unless they subject themselves to
the Patriarch of Antioch) it was decreed, that what the Patriarch of Antioch
attempted, was praeter-canonical, and therefore the Holy and Universal Synod
declares, that all Letters brought by him against the Cyprians, were void. So
in the 178 Canon of the Code of the Universal Church.

Et Tom. 2. Ephesin. Append. 1. cap 4.
In the Council of Chalcedon, Act. 18. the Legates of Leo the first contradicted
the Privileges of the Constantinopolitan Patriarch; but, because they were
according to the Canon of the fifty Holy Fathers assembled at Constantinople,
Leo 1. withstanding, it was Synodically defined for the Patriarch of
Constantinople.

These out of the Acts of the four general Councils, which Can. sicut. Did. 16.
Gregory receives as the four Books of the Holy Evangel. yea (as Cardinal
Deus-dedit [ i. e. God-gave] observes in his Collection of Canons) there was
an ancient form of the Popes Oath, which is yet extant, Can. sicut. Did. 16.
wherein he swears, that he will observe the four Councils to a title; out
of which the most learned In Consult. Venet.
Leschasserius wittily infers, That the Pope of Rome cannot by right contend
that he is above those Canons of the Councils, unless he arrogate to himself
a power above the four Evangels.

Agreeable to this oath of the Pope is the ancient Profession of Can. Cont.
Statut. 5. q. 5.
Pope Zozimus. The Authority of this See cannot ordain, or change, any thing
against the decrees of the Fathers. And Ibidem Canon. sunt quidam.
Pope Urban. Where the Holy Fathers have judicially defined any thing, there
the Pope of Rome ought not to give a new Law, but to the hazard of life and
blood, confirm rather what is published. The Can. 8.
Ephesine Council expressly orders, that every single Church of the Provinces,
should have its rights preserved. Hence arise the Appeals ab abusu, and
exceptions against the new Ecumenical commands. So the Gallick Bishops, under
Ludovicus Pius, except formally in these words against certain new Laws, That
they will obey them, unless the Authority of the ancient Canons order
otherwise. And Tract. de Libert. Eccles.
Leschasserius has another honest note concerning the Gallick Nation; That it
was the usual manner of the Gallick Church to profess, That she acknowledged
not the Pope of Rome, but legitimately and canonically. Which is the
restriction of the Universal Church, as he there learnedly proves. Hence the
African Fathers, in a Cap. 105.
Synod under Boniface, and Coelestine, refuse to obey the commands of those
Popes, because they found it ordained by no Synod of the Fathers, that any such
thing should be done. And, that I may pass by Hincmarus in Tom. 10. Anno 878.
number. 30.
Baronius, who says, He receives the decrees of the Popes approved by Holy
Councils, and Gerbertus (afterward called Eod. Tom. Anno 992. N. 42.
Sylvester the second) accepting the decrees of the Apostolical See, with this
clause, so they be not dissonant from these Canons; Illustrious was the
testimony of St. Ignatius the Constantinopolitan; and so of the whole Church
approving his fact even to this day, in Tom. 10. Anno 818. N. 48.
Baronius; For he passed by with a deaf ear, the Pope excommunicating him,
unless within thirty days he recalled his Priests out of Bulgaria. And
Baronius does not think Ignatius excommunicate, for that command not fulfilled,
because he defended the right of his Church, as he was bound by oath, on the
hazard of life eternal. Therefore of greater authority is a Canon granting
privilege to the Church of Constantinople, than a command of the Pope, even
Baronius being Judge.

See the very learned Collections of Vigorius Comment. in Reipub. Synodal. p.
26, 46, 22.

And because Hincmarus a most constant Defender of the Canons, is bitterly
taxed by Baronius, Dunallius, and many more Neotericks, I would have the Reader
take notice, that he is praised by Ad An. 109. N. 42.
Baronius, Tom. 2. as a man very famous for learning and piety.

Look Cassand. lib. De Officio pii viri. They which make the Pope of Rome
little less than God, and exalt his authority not only above the whole Church,
but above the Divine Scripture it self, and constitute his decree, equal to the
Divine Oracles; yea, the infallible Rule of Faith; I see no reason why you may
not call them Pseudo-Catholicks and Papists.

b That the withdrawing from the Ecclesiastical Magistracy of the Roman Church,
is deservedly reputed Schismatical, I will confirm by the testimonies of
Cassander, and the Archbishop of Spalato, yet writing in England; which may
seem to arise rather from the desert of the thing, than their blind affection
toward the Roman Church.

Cassander says thus, in Tract. De Officio pii viri. Very many of them who
have assumed their name from the Evangel, despise utterly that party which has
retained the ancient name of Catholics, and the Roman Church, and fly off from
all communion with it; nor do they account it a member of the same body, but
abominate it as the very body of Satan and Antichrist. This I know truly, and
lament, and do not see how they that are such, can be exempted from the
imputation of Schism. And he observes, that Luther himself at first confessed
as much; yea, and afterward, when made more fierce by the Popes Bull, he did
not deny, that the Roman Church, wherein the Roman Pontifie swayed, was the
true Church of Christ, although he proclaimed the Governors of it, as the
Pope, Cardinals, etc. not Members, but Tyrants and Enemies of the Church. For
be it, that the Pope is the Antichrist, who, Paul teaches, is to sit in the
true Temple, and true Church of God; yet we must abide in the true Church,
that the evil Pastor may be cast out of it; for by our departure from the
Church, he shall not the sooner be put out of doors. Beside, know, That it is
one thing to recede from communion with the Pope, another, from communion with
the Church: for in case of Heresy declared, the Canons persuade, and command,
both to adhere to her Canons, and to separate ones-self from every Bishop that
teaches amiss. To this purpose may be read the Canons of the Universal Church;
the third Canon of the Ephesine Council. We command those Clerks, who either
have, or do, disunite, by no means to obey their Bishops, (...), nor at all, in
any manner, to be subject unto them. And Can. 1. A Metropolitan, being an
Heretic, can do nothing against the Bishops of his Province. And Synod.
Constant. (...). Can. 13. They that separate themselves from communion with
their Prelate, being condemned for Heresy by the Holy Fathers, or Synods, that
is, he preaching Heresy publicly, they shall not only not be subject to
Canonical punishment, before a hearing in the Synod, having separated
themselves from communion with him, who is called their Bishop; but shall be
accounted worthy of the honor meet for Orthodox persons; for they have not
condemned their Bishops, but their Pseudo-Episcopal teachers; nor have they
rent by Schism the union of the Church; but have endeavored to free the Church
from Schisms and Divisions. The same speaks the single Canon of the
Carthaginian Synod under Cyprian, which is extant in Balsamon and Zonaras,
joined to the Synod of Carthage. Videatur Canon 6. and 9, 32, 33. Laodicenus,
and 9. Canon P. Timothei Alexandrini.

CHAP. 2. Concerning the Privileges OF THE Isle of Great Britain.
WHat some have writ, is truly to be lamented, That the Kings of Great Britain
are Feudataries of the Sea Apostolic, and consequently subject to the Holy
Pope (as Monarch independent on the Canons) as well in Temporals, as
Spirituals; whereby they have too much exasperated them, and alienated them
from their Obedience to His Holiness, and Roman Catholic Communion. It were
here to be wished, that the Holy Pope would yield somewhat to the public peace
and safety of Great Britain, and be content that the most Serene King and
Kingdom of Great Britain, might be admitted to the Communion of the Holy Roman
Church, without any actual dependence on the Sovereignty of the Holy Pope,
until, at least, in a full and free Council, a remedy might be gotten for this
misfortune. Now I shall assign a threefold Theological Foundation, out of
which (with submission to better judgment) appears, that such a Council is
probable, and convenient to be assembled.

(A) The first is a grievous fear, which the wiser Politicians conceive, as
affairs stand in Britain, from an actual subjection to be yielded to the Sea
Apostolic; and truly who would not fear to be subject unto him, that, if you
displease him, can, in a little half hours space, take away Kingdom, and Life,
and Reputation, and is able to arm his Catholic Subjects against him? The
second foundation is, because adhering to the decrees of the Councils of
Constance, and Basil, which have declared them to be accounted Heretics, who
maintain, (B) That the Pope is not subject to General Councils; it seems in
practice, the modern Popes are to be accounted (C) Heretics, especially since
they pertinaciously defend the Heresy which the said Fathers condemned, by
censures of the Bull in Coena. Which I speak not to raise a controversy
against His Holiness, but humbly to insinuate a probable foundation of
pacifying so illustrious a Kingdom, and aggregating it to the Catholic
Church. The third is, because by the Ephesine Canon the ancient privileges of
Churches ought to be conserved, yea, if ravished away by force, to be
recovered. Now the Isle of Britain, in times past, has enjoyed the Cyprian
privilege, that it should be subject to the Law of no (D) Patriarch; and
although this privilege was heretofore abolished by the tumults and violence
of wars; yet, whereas in the time of Henry the eighth, it has been recalled by
the consent of the whole Kingdom, and since that time peaceably prescribed, it
seems that, for peace-sake, it ought to be retained, without the loss of
Catholicism, or the brand of any Schism, so that in other things the Kingdom
conform it self to the Universal Canons and Customs of the Catholic Church.
These things I humbly suggest to His Holiness, ready to be corrected by Him,
if in any particular I have erred from the truth.

Paralipomena.
(A) SEarch the resolution of the Bochel. in Decret. dict. 1. Gal. l. 5. Tit.
5. Cap. 5. ss. 3.
Gallican Church in the Council of Tours, 1510. under Lewis 12. where the
question is put, Whether, for notorious hatred, and unjust assault, it be
lawful for a Prince to withdraw himself from the obedience of the Pope,
attending so long, until the Pope have stirred up other Princes and
Communities, yea, and has attempted to compel them to invade the Countries and
Dominions of the said Prince. It was concluded by the Council, That the Prince
may substract himself from the obedience of such a Pope, and withdraw for the
maintenance and defense only of his temporal rights. And Gerson Tract. de
Auferibilitate Papae ab Ecclesia; Consid. 14.
excellently. If there be any one who would convert his Presidence, and Papal
dignity into an instrument of wickedness, and destruction of some part of the
Church, in Temporals, or Spirituals, and that there appear no other sufficient
remedy, but by withdrawing himself from such a raging and self-abusing Pope;
and this for a time, until the Church or a Council shall provide; This shall be
lawful, yet so, as that a certain pious necessity urges to do it. The same he
asserteth in the question, Whether in controversies of Faith it be lawful to
appeal from the Pope? where he says, The like substractions were approved by
the holy Council of Constance, and that so was practiced in the council of
Pisa, from which the In Ep. apud Nyem. lib. 3. c. 34.
Cardinal of Liege writing, says, that what was just before affirmed by
Gerson, is most assured; and alleges for himself Augustine, Ambrose, Bid, and
others. And Gerson says, that this Proposition of Petrus de Luna, That it is
never lawful to make a substraction from the true Pope, was reputed Heretical
in the Council of Constance. Now, whether the causes of substraction, in the
Kingdom of Great Britain, are sufficient, is not a matter of Faith, but Fact,
wherein we must stand to the reasons and authority of the more wise and
skilful persons. For the Prelates of the Church, when the question is
concerning the admission of penitents to the Communion and Sacraments of the
Church, ought not, especially in matters of fact, to be so tenacious of their
own opinion. Let them beware lightly to condemn of mortal sin, when as in the
practick, for a strong reason or authority, the opinion of the penitent might
be probable. Unto which, the practick being laid down, by reason of some
circumstance, or the possession of some other, Confessors ought to conform
themselves in their own opinion. For surely they are not always obliged to
follow the safer opinion, if it be the more rigid; if they follow one that is
safe, it is enough; but if the opinion of the Penitent be not accounted very
safe, let Confessors consider whether they may leave him in ignorance, with
discharge of their trust. In doubtful cases, Confessors ought to follow the
more favorable opinion, for their penitents sake. In Sum. De Sacr. poenit. ca.
26. number. 8.
So Henriques a Divine of the Society of Jesus, out of Navarre, Sylvester, and
Cordubensis, whom he cites, and follows. I suppose it to be accounted an
opinion, not only probable, but certain, among Writers, who favor the party
of the (B) Holy Pope, (C) That that Faith is to be received for Catholic (so
as the opposite is heretical, and they accused of Heresy that defend the same)
which is delivered as such by the definition of an Oecumenick Council, approved
by an undoubted Pope; But when as De Locis l. 5. c. 4. Conclus. 3.
Canus, Lib. 4. De Romans Pontif. cap. 2.
Bellarmine, etc. do every where confess; But when as the Sess. 4. and 5.
Council of Constance, approved by the Sess. 16.
Bull of Martin 5. and Sess. 2.
that of Basil confirmed for legitimate by the Bull of Eugenius, determine the
Pope to be under an Oecumenick Council; it is at least probable that the
opposite to it is Heresy. Chronicon Chronicorum, the work of a learned
nameless Writer, in the time of Eugenius the fourth, and one that favored him,
writes, That Eugenius, by Apostolic Letters, approved their decrees. So
likewise Platina in Eugenius; and it is a matter very well known to him that
reads the Bulls. The University of Paris, in an appeal against Leo the tenth,
says, That the condemnation of the Council of Basil is against the Catholic
Faith. T. 2. Comment. de Gest. Council. Basil. 9.
Aeneas Sylvius reports, That an Almoner to the King of Arragon, a Bishop of
Eureux, an Abbot of Virgiliac, and a Bishop of Lubec, when they perceived their
hour of death to approach, having called many grave men to them, in the very
presence of Christ's body, which they were presently to receive, and before
whose Tribunal, within few hours, to appear, spoke thus; All you who are
present, pray ye God that he would convert them who acknowledge Gabriel for
the Holy Pope, because in that state they cannot be saved; professing in their
own behalf, That they died in the Faith of the Council of Basil. Lewis Cardinal
of Arles, a man famous for learning and miracles, calls Eugenius a Devastatour
of the Church, and those that adhere to him, men departing from the truth of
the Faith. And on the contrary, he says, Those that adhere to the Council of
Basil, will not refuse to dye for the truth of the Faith, and traditions of the
Holy Fathers. Aeneas Sylvius, in the same place, calls the Anti-Synodal
sentence, The Eugenian Heresy. The Council of Pisa, among these in Bochellus,
calls Cajetans little Book, concerning the Authority of the Pope, because it is
against the Councils of Constance, Basil, and Pisa, and against John Gerson,
the best defender of the Church, suspected, and full of injuries; and Cajetan
for it, is termed, a bold and dangerous man. And the most learned man Vigorius
witnesses, That, in the Pragmatical Sanction of Charles the seventh, the
Decrees of the Council of Basil, were received with the consent of all the
Orders of France, the Gallican Church, and Universities.

Moreover, Pius the second, in Bulla retract. witnesses, That honor is given
to the Council of Basil, by men almost of all Nations; so that Vigorius truly
related in the cited place, That it was pronounced by the best Lawyers, whom
he quotes, an arrogant and sacrilegious thing, to demur at the things approved
by the Council of (D) Constance, or the Conciliary authority it self.

See the Speech of St. Robert of Lincoln, in Westminster, Matthew. Paris 1253.
Polychronicon, Fabian, and Harpsfield, who thinks it would be the greatest sort
of pertinacy in the holy Pontifies, to compel men, by censures and
excommunications, to embrace those things which are bad, and which fight
against faith and good manners. But the Bull in Coena forbidding appeals to
General Councils, under pain of excommunication, does in effect forbid them to
be above the Pope; for, as the Lawyers teach, It were open iniquity, and
against the Law of Nature, to prohibit an appeal unto him, who is acknowledged
to be Superior. He therefore that will seem holily to take away Appeals to
Councils by censures, potentially takes away their Supremacy, and highest power
over the Popes. These are the words of Westminster, relating to the year 1254.
under Henry the third. He grievously reproves as well the Friars Preachers, as
the Minours, saying, That therefore their order is constituted in voluntary
poverty, that they might more freely rebuke great ones for their error; But in
that they do not reprehend the sins of great persons, he said, They were
manifest Heretics, and added, Heresy is an opinion chosen by humane sense,
contrary to Holy Scripture, openly taught, obstinately defended; But to give
cure of souls to a little child, is the opinion of a certain Prelate chosen by
humane sense, for carnal reason, or through rashness, and it is contrary to
Holy Scripture, which prohibits Pastors to be made, who are not meet to drive
away the Wolves; And it is openly taught, because it is manifestly carried in
sealed or embossed Paper, Charta sigillata vel bullata; And it is obstinately
defended, because if any one would contradict it; and does not contradict it,
he sins, and seems to be a favourer of error; according to that of
Gregory. He wants not a scruple of close co-partnership, who cease to oppose
a manifest wickedness. These things he spoke upon occasion of the Popes
Letters, appointing to have somewhat done, which seemed unjust for a Bishop of
the Church, and dissonant from reason.

The Judgment of Westminster concerning St. Robert, is of this sort. This
Robert having a good zeal unto the Lord, and his neighbor, although he vexed
much his Canonicks, and darted lightning terribly against the Religious of both
Sexes; yet I confidently aver, That his virtues have pleased God more than
his excesses have displeased him, which now is manifest, by the miracles
shining forth at his tomb. And that although our Lord the Pope being very much
moved at deeds and words of that sort, determined to precipitate him into
confusion, that he might become an astonishment, and an Example of trembling
to the whole world: yet at length being mollified by better counsel, permitted
him to pass away, without taking any notice of it, lest he might seem to raise
a greater tumult hereupon. Thus he. See the Authors before cited. I think I
shall do what will be acceptable to such as are studious of Antiquity, if I
here briefly transcribe out of my Tractate some few things, by which it may
appear that the Britains and Scots, whom we call Irish, before the coming of
Augustine into England, were Catholics, and enjoyed the same Privileges in the
Western Church, as wherewith the Cyprians were honored in the Eastern. Gildas
the Wise writes, That Britain almost from the age of the Apostles, had
Bishops, who communicated with the rest of the world in Pacificis and formatis.
Pacifique and formed letters, even from the beginning of the Gospel.
Tertullian in his Book against the Jews Number. 43. of Pamelius's Edition, after
he has reckoned up all the Catholic Churches throughout the world, adds, And
the Britains holds, inaccessible to the Romans, are subdued to the yoke of
Christ. And Pamelius upon the said place, out of Bid, and Polydore Virgil,
confesses, That Britain had publicly received the whole Evangile, not only
in the time of Marcus Antoninus Verus, under King Lucius, but asserts also out
of Lib. de excid. Britan.
Gildas, from the beginning of the Gospel; Out of Polydore Virgil, That the
Britains had received the Religion of Christ, from Blessed Joseph of Arimathea.
See thereupon In Desens. Hist. Britan.
Bilsius and In 6. primi secul. cap 1.
Harpsfield. With Gildas not only Tertullian gives suffrage, but also Hom. 4.
in Ezechiel.
Origin; yea and In secunda Apol. contra Arian.
St. Athanasius glories, That Bishops passed out of Britain to the Council of
Sardis, wherein Athanasius's absolution was obtained. And in his Epistle to
Jovinian, then Emperor, which is extant in Cap. 42.
Nicephorus Calixtus's tenth Book of Ecclesiastical History, he proves, that
he communicates with the Catholics diffused through the world, and among
others with the Spanish, Britannick, and Gallick Churches, which, he says, by
common consent receive the Catholic Faith of Athanasius. Hierom in his 85th.
Epistle. Both Gaul and Britain adore one Christ, observe one Rule of Truth.
The same thing teaches In Orat. contr. Gent.
Chrysostom; And that Catholic Bishops came from Britain to the Council of
Ariminum, is manifest out of Severus Sulpitius, Theodoret, In Chron.
Hierome, Ruffinus, Socrates, Zozomen, In 15. Primi seculi.
cited by Harpsfield. That the Britannick Church kept this Communion and unity
of Rule with the Gallicane, to the coming of St. Augustine into England, and
afterward, I have proved in a large Tractate concerning the Primacy of
Councils; and it appears out of the first book of the History of the English
Nation, Cap. 20. Hist. 6 prim. sec.
Harpsfield, and other English Writers, That the Gallick Church sent into
Britain St. German and Lupus, before the coming of Augustine into England, to
succor the Britannick Church. And Lib. 3. cap. 7.
Bid relates, That Aegilbert a Gallick Bishop resided no small time in
Ireland, being employed in reading upon the Scripture; Moreover it appears out
of Hist. lib. 4.
Bid, Hist. 7. Seculi. cap. 36.
Harpsfield, Surius, and others, That Hilda the Nun of Calice was sent into
England by St. Aidan, and had communicated with the Britannick Church. But on
the other side presently, when as she lived in the Monastery at Calice, That
St. Malo, Brendan, Samson, Polensis, about the year 550. communicated with the
Gallick and Aremorick Churches, moreover with the Britannick and Irish, as
appears out of C. 26.27. Hist.
Harpsfield, among other things, Argentraus, and such like Writers; And that
St. Turseus did the same, Ceadde, Fislan, Vetan, Eustathius, Disciple of St.
Columban, Disigod, Fridegund, Cedwall, King Oswald, Wigbert, Fiakre, Willebrod,
Columban, who communicated with both Church, the Britannick and Gallick. The
Britannick Church therefore, in the time of St. Augustine, the Apostle, as they
call him, of England, was Catholic, and consequently the Scotick or Irish; for
it is evident out of L. 2. c. 4. Hist.
Bid, That the Irish, whom they called Scots, lead the like course of life and
profession; and afterward, The Scots differed nothing in conversion from the
Britains. Now it appears out of L. 1. Hist. c. 7.
Bid, in the place last cited, and otherwise, as also Hist. l. 3.
Henry of Huntington, That neither Britains, nor Scots, would communicate with
the English, and their Bishop Augustine, more than with Pagans, as Huntington
speaks; and the reason was, because Augustine seemed to deal with them
uncanonically, by constraining them to receive him for their Archbishop, and
to submit themselves to the mandates of Foreigners, when as the ancient manners
of their Church required, that they should act all things Synodically among
themselves, as in their Ordinations of Bishops, so in other affairs of the
Church; their words out of L. 2. Eccles. Hist. c. 2.
Bid, are, Because they cannot, without the consent and license of their
[Clergy so assembled] renounce their ancient manners, when as this appears to
be against the sixth Nicene Canon, which commands ancient manners to be kept;
and the eighth of the Ephesine Council, which will not have the rights of
Churches taken away, and if they be taken away, even by what Patriarch soever,
his fact is declared void; and command is given him, that he restore the
Province, which he has made his own. In the mean time what are the manners of
the Britannick Church, appears out of c L. 3. c. 3.
Bid. St. Oswald the King, an observer of the Scotick and Britannick
communion, desiring to have a Bishop, by whose learning and Ministry he might
be ruled, the English Nation sent unto the Ancients of the Scots; they begin to
hold a great Treaty in Council, what should be done; They decree Aidan worthy
of the Episcopate, and so ordaining him, send him to preach; Which custom
continued a long time in Ireland, as appears out of Sylvester, Girald, and the
Topographie of Ireland. Did. 3. c. ^7.
In Ireland the Bishops only consecrated one another to the time of Eugenius
the 3d. wherein Papirio was sent Legate to constitute Archbishops there. And
both in Lib. 3.
Huntington and L. 2. Hist.
Bid, it is manifest, that the Scots and Britains act all their businesses by
common consent. As evident it is out of Baronius, at the year 1089. In the end
of that year Lanfrank, [Arch-Bishop] of Canterbury, relates in an Epistle to
Serdalnac, King of Ireland, That the customs of the Kingdom were, that
Bishops might be consecrated by one Bishop; Yea, that the Britannick Churches
were Catholic, in the Judgment of Augustine himself, with whom they would not
communicate, appears out of L. 2. Hist. c. 2.
Bid, for Augustine offers the Bishops of Britain his communion, if they would
conform themselves to the Roman Church, in the ceremonies of Baptism, and
observation of Easter; which show, that the Britains agree with Augustine in
matters of Faith. About this, by the way, mark a lapse of Bid; for in his Book
concerning the sixth Age, Anno Mundi 4585. he writes, That the Scots were
Quartodecimans; and yet L. 3. c. 4.
Bid says, That they celebrated Easter on the Lords day, on which it is
manifest, Anatolius, Patriarch of Constantinople celebrated it, who is asserted
to have delivered to them his use. The ancient manners of Britain were
abrogated more by the force and power of the English Saxons, then Synodical
consent; which those most holy men, Colman and his fellows, seeing, had rather
desert their Bishop and Monasteries, than their ancient manners of living, as
L. 3. cap. 16.
Bid relates. Since these things had been so, the three States of England,
willing to retrive the ancient Rites of the Kingdom, taken away more by force
and power, than by Canon, by concession of the eighth Canon of the Ephesine
Council, in the 24th. year of Henry the eighth, Cap. 12. Statut.
decreed, that controversies should be determined within the limits of the
Kingdom, without appeal to Foreiners.

CHAP. 3. Concerning The Popes Primacy, and Supreme Power of Kings, both in
temporals, and also Spirituals, as they put on a Temporal respect, and are
means for the hindering or procuring the safety of the Republic.
THe (A) Holy Fathers give a Primacy to the Roman Pontifie; That Primacy (as to
Divine Right) confers not upon the Pope more authority over the rest of the
Bishops, than has the first President of a (B) Parliamentary Court over the
rest of the (C) Senators; And there being a double Advent of Christ into this
World; the first which he has passed in the habit of a servant to minister;
the second which makes an expectation of him in the form of a Lord and Monarch,
Psalm. 2. Matthew. 2.
to rule and break in pieces the Nations with a Rod of Iron, and to subdue all
things unto himself; it is not without inconvenience, that the Disciples of
Christ, who was a Servant, should be Lords, and placed above their Master;
And, whereas Christ was subject to the (D) Royal Power, and humbly obeyed it,
that the Vicar of Christ should exercise empire and dominion in Temporals over
Temporal Lords. Kings have supreme power (E) immediately from God, and
inferior to God alone in Temporals; yet by Temporals I understand, not only
those things which are merely temporal, but also (F) Spirituals, especially
corporeal, so far as they are necessary to conserve the quiet of the Temporal
Republic, or oppose it by some necessary impediment; for under that
consideration spirituals exceed the limits of Spirituals, and enter into the
rank of Temporals; And, according to this explication, can it be defended in a
sound and Catholic sense, That Kings are Supreme Lords in Spirituals, as they
put on a temporal respect, no less than in Temporals.

Paralipomena.
(A) Matthew. 10.2. Peter is called (...) the first, and that for some singular
honor, as is observed by Ep. prima ad Jacob. Dionys. Areopag. de Divin. nomin.
c. 3. Hippolyt. Orat. De consum. Mundi. Origin. Hom. 5. in Exodus Hom. 17. in
Luc. In cap. 6. ad Romans Petr. Alexandr. Sermon. de Poenitent. Euscb. Caesar.
Hist. l. 2. c. 13, 14, Athanas^ ad Felic. Basil. in c. 2. Esal. Orat. 3. de
Peccato. Li. 2. contr. Eunom. Cyril. Hierosol. Catech. 2, 11, 14. Ephraem. Syro
in Panopl. Gregor. Nazianz. in Apologet. ad Patr. Gregor. Epiphan. Haer. 51. Et
in Anchorato. Chrysostom. Orat. 5. in Jud. Et Orat. in Petr. and Paul. Hom. 23.
in Matthew. Item 83. Et Hom. 87. in Joan. Et Hom 80. ad Pop. Antiochen. Et Tom.
9. de Poenit. Cyril. Alex. l. 2. in Joan. c. 12. Et l. 4. c. 18. Et l. 10. c.
41. Et l. 12. c. 64. Et lib. 14. Thesaur. c. 2. Isidor. Pelus. l. 1. Ep. 142,
235. L. 2. Ep. 58, 99. Sozomen. l. 7. c. 4. Theodoret. in c. 1. ad Gal. Council.
Chalced. Act. 3. Joan. Damasc. Orat. de Transfig. Domini. Et Hist. Barlaam. c.
11. Theophyl. in 16. Matthew. In 22. Luc. 21. Joan. In Epist. ad Gal. c. 1.
Oecumen. in c. 1. Act. in c. 1. ad Gal. Euthym. in 16. Matthew. Et 21. Joan. and
16. Marc.
Clement, and many other Greek Fathers [cited in the Margin.]

He is also honored by all the Latins, whom, that I be not too profuse, you
may see quoted by In These. aureo. l. 7. art. 4. and 5.
Iodoc. Coccius, who also shows how both Greek and Latin Fathers agree, that
the Roman Bishops have succeeded Peter, as Epist. 165. Et contr. Lit. Petil. l.
2. c. 5.
Augustine expressly.

(B) Vigorius In Comment. ad Epist. Synod. Basil. ss. 4. number. 1.
explains most learnedly the Primacy of the Holy Pope, in these words. The
Primacy was not for this, that the successor of St. Peter should imperiously
act all, at his pleasure; but that he should be Moderatour and President of
the Ecclesiastic Council, that is, the Clergy, as says Cyprian. And in cases
of difficulty, and great moment, that he should assemble a Council of Bishops,
over whom he might preside, as it is in the 33. Canon of the Apostles. But
what things regard the plenitude of Power in the Roman Pontifie, they
particularly accrewed to him afterward, either from Councils, or use and
custom, or by the amplitude of the City, or from the Emperors. The same
delivers De Benes. ibid.
Duarenus, and the Roman Law apertly, which Cap. Conquestus 9. q. 3. Et c. 2.
de Offic. Judic. Ord.
Vigorius cites, We define, That Primates, or Patriarchs, have no privilege
above the rest of the Bishops, but so much as the Holy Canons grant, and
ancient Custom has of old conferred upon them. And in my Tractate concerning
the Primacy of Councils, shortly to be published, I have showed at large, That
the Roman Pontifie, in respect of other Bishops, as Successor of St. Peter, by
divine right, in regard of his Primacy, has no actual Jurisdiction more than
other Bishops have, but at the highest has a certain habitual power by the
Canons of the Church, to be extended or contracted for the commodity of the
Christian Republic.

(C) The Doctors which say, That Temporal power belongs not unto the Pope, by
divine right, have been moved to assert it, for that Christ had it not in his
first Advent. Withrington cites almost forty of them in his Apology, whom you
may there see. I will be content here to produce the judgment of one Aliace^s.
in quaest. de resumpt.
Cardinal [who writes thus.] If any sayings of holy men seem to intimate, That
secular Judgments belong to Bishops, they ought to be understood, not
concerning the judgment of coaction, but the judgment of discretion; and that
this pertains to them not by natural or divine right, but by humane and
Positive. Christ and his Apostles would subject themselves humbly to the Laws
of Princes, and it seems a rash thing to affirm, that the foresaid are by
divine right. And the Cardinal proves his speech concerning Christ, out of John
19. where Christ confesses, That Pilate had power given by God to judge him.

Apologet. c. 21.
Tertullian, among the rest, distinguishes handsomely this double Advent of
Christ, where he calls the first an Advent in humility, the second, in
sublimity. The same Lib. advers. Tuel. cap. 19. Et lib. 3. contr. Marcion c. 7.
Father, otherwhere calls the power, a Royal Power in the Advent of Christ.
Concerning the Supreme Power of Kings, excellent is the confession of the
Ancient Church in Apol. cap. 29.
Tertullian. Emperors are next to God, the first after God; The Emperor is
therefore Great, because he is less than Heaven [that is, only Heaven] Thence
is the Emperor, whence is the man, before he is Emperor; thence has he
power, whence he likewise has breath. And chap. 35. I subject the Emperor
only to God. And chap. 34. Lord under God, or representative of God, Dominus
vice Dei. And to Scapula, chap. 2. He is man next to God, less than only God,
greater than all, while less than God alone. This he.

Concerning this, let the Disputation at large be viewed in the Author of the
3. Par. De Pot. Pontif. page 416. and q. 3.
Apology for Andrew Dunal, wherein the Parliamentary Custom in France is
defended against the 25th. Section of the third Canon in the Council of Trent,
according to the sense of Dunallius, who argues out of Romans 13. and Act. 25.
Paul and Chrysostom. in 13. Romans
Chrysostom. And the Gloss also maintains, That Clerks, and Monks, are
subjected to the commands of secular Princes, and to be governed by their Laws,
so far as they pertain to the common society of living in a Kingdom, that most
of all cherishes peace and tranquillity, which cannot but oblige Clerks, so
that necessarily they ought to obey them, their Clericate notwithstanding. And
by what right he says that concerning the Ecclesiastic and spiritual
personages of Clerks, he ought to aver the same concerning their corporeal
actions, yea their sacred and spiritual. And this Doctrine (as at large is
proved in the said Apology) both Chrysostom and the Gloss assert in the cited
places. Beside, the reasons which are brought by L. 5. De Romans Pontif.
Bellarmin, out of Scriptures, and Fathers, to prove, That sometimes the
temporal Power is subjected to the Ecclesiastic, in order to a spiritual end;
prove also, That the Ecclesiastic is subjected to the Temporal, in order to a
Temporal end; as often as it may hinder, or conduce necessarily unto it. L. 1.
c. 3. contr. Parmenian.
Augustine also expressly inculcates this Doctrine, and calls them most unskilful
people, that contradict it. In Tract. de Jurisd. Imperat.
Occam, in his cases of Matrimony, speaks thus. To say, That Spiritual causes
no way pertain to a faithful Emperor, is judged erroneous by some; and he
says, The Spirituals about which precisely the Episcopal Power is conversant,
are the Spirituals which are delivered only in the Divine Scriptures, and
which are no way common to the faithful and unfaithful. And Dialog. cap. 99.
otherwhere he says, It is evident, That they who perturb the peace of the
Church ought to be suppressed by secular Powers. And herein the Cap. 15. q. 5.
c. Princeps.
Gloss is of the same sense with Occam. The same has C. 3. q. 1.2. quale.
Pope Pelagius, And P. De potest. Pap. c. 14.
Joan. Parisiens: When the Pope in Spirituals, as the Simonaick collation of
Benefices, by evil teaching, etc. scandalizeth the Church, nor is there any
other remedy, the Emperor, being required, ought to proceed against the Pope.
And the Sess. 2.
Council of Basil yields a jurisdiction of punishing contemners of the Canons
by the secular Magistrate. Par. 3. q. 3. De Pot. Pap.
Dunallius says, That it is offensive unto Kings, to say, A Clerk that is a
Parricide, Sorcerer, Traitor, one that lies in wait for the life of his
Prince, cannot be punished by a secular Judge. And these things are not to be
maintained in France. The Gloss on Romans 13. cites Hierome upon Jeremiah. Vid.
Rhemens. de Pot. Reg. cap. 7.
In 9. Abus.
Cyprian says, That Princes ought to defend their Churches, even against the
abuses of Prelates. Pope Sylvester the fifth teaches it, after Innocentius.
And Lib 2. de Council. cap. 19. and ult. Paludan. Tract. de Pot. Pap.
Turrecremat. l. 3. de Eccles. 106. Jacobat. l. 8. A 3. n. 6 Hostiens. and
Antonin. quos citat. D^^al. par. ^, 9, 11. p. 8, 5. Cajetan. opusc. de Pap and
council c. 2^. Symmach. de Haeret c. 3. ss. 3. Et c. 44. ss. 31. Panormitan. in
c. sicut debuit jurando.
Bellarmin. The Pope destroying the Church, may be resisted by force and arms.
And Sayr the same in Thesaur. l. 12. cap. 8. n. 8. Joan. Parisiens. l. citat.
cap. 14. Ecclesiastics, that are incorrigibly delinquent in spirituals, may be
corrected by calling the secular arm in assistance unto the Law; which, he
says, Chiefly takes place in France; the reason is this. The act of sin
belongs to the vice that commands it; if therefore Treason commands a spiritual
act, as, for instance, the administration of Sacraments, the said
administration will belong to Treason, and put on a temporal respect or guise,
as it happened Anno 1034. in a Priest, who, by giving the communion, killed
Henry the seventh, the Emperor; as it is in Genebrard and Cario. That
administration, commanded by that crime, as such, is a temporal thing, and
corrigible by the Civil Magistrate. And so holds Widrington. Apol. number. 154,
156. where he will have the preaching of the Gospel, for so much as it
wickedly troubles the Common wealth, capable of being punished by the Secular
Judge. 3. par. q. 3. p. 393.
Dunallius, out of Cap. 27. Enchir. n. 70. Covar. ruv. in pract. q. 9. c. 31.
Citat. Johan. Fabrum, Aufrecium, Guiel. Benedict. Tirraquel. Videatur
Bochellus. l. 2. decr. Eccles. Gallic. Tit. 15. cap. 146.
Navarre, says, That the custom of France, to take cognizance of
Ecclesiastic causes by seculars, has been time out of mind. See the Lib. 5.
cap. 42. p. 122. Edit. Paris.
Capitular of Charlemaigne; where the Kings Judges punish Bishops and Priests.
In Somnio. c. 36.
Philotheus Achillinus says, Kings, so they be absolute, enjoy the privileges
and right of Emperors in their Kingdoms; But it appears out of In Can. 38.14.
Synodi.
Balsamon, That Emperors in time past could (...), make Bishoprics anew, and
exercise whatsoever Ecclesiastic Oeconomie, as seemed them good, (...). Also
upon the seventeenth Can. of the Council of Chalcedon, and the sixteenth of the
Council of Carthage. The Kings therefore have prescribed authority in
Spirituals by concession of the Church, confirming these ancient pacifick uses.
See Justinians Code, where are Imperial Laws concerning the Catholic Faith,
the holy Churches, and their privileges; concerning Bishops, Clerks, Hospitals
for Orphans, Monks, Places for Ascetick Discipline, and their Privileges; Lib.
4. Cod. de Causis matrimonialibus, ex 14. Tit. Nomocanonis Photii.
not a Book of which but abounds with Imperial Laws concerning Sacred things.
While the Bishops of the second Synod were called to Rome, Sozom. cap. 12. lib.
7. Niceph. lib. 12. c. 15. Theodoret. lib. 4. c. 8, 9.
Theodosius summons them to Constantinople. In France, from the beginning of
Christianity received there, the Kings took cognizance of Spiritual causes, as
appears out of the first Et in Praefat. Et Lib. 2. Council. Can. 2.8. Et lib. 3.
Can. 11, 13, 14, 22, 23, 24, 26.
Council of Orleans, under Clodoveus, cap. 1. and 2. and the second Council of
Orleans under Childebert, cap. 1, 5, 9, 23. the fourth Council of Arles, in
Prolog. under Charlemaigne the third of Toures, the first of Mentz in Praefat.
that of Rhemes under Charle maigne, in Praefat. 51. the third of Cavaleon, in
Praefat. the first of Aix, or Aquisgrane, under Ludovicus Pius, and Lotharius,
in their Epistles, etc. Flodoardus in the life of Hincmarus, l. 3. c. 1.
writes, That Charles the Bald called a Synod at Beauvois concerning the affairs
of the Church of Rhemes. Idem Binius Tom. 3. Council. page 344. Concilio
Meldeasi cap. 78, 79. Exempla Synodales Carolis Ealvi in Concilio Carissiaco,
Council. Pisteus. 863. cap. 1. Wormacticas in init. Tribuneus: sub Arnuspho
Impri. Ep. Synodali Aurelian. sub Rober^o 1017. Stampens Tempore sancti
Bernardi idem docent.
Whence appears, That the Kings of France acted in spiritual things, according
to the manner aforesaid. Which Authority of theirs, and prescribed Custom,
has been translated to the Court of Parliament, which began to be steady or
standing under Lewis the tenth, as Gaguin. l. 4. Nicol. Aegid. in Hulmar.
Genebrard. in Chron. l. 3. Anno 758. witness. The Parliament always observed
for invioable Law the Capitularies of Charlemaigne; in the second of which it
is thus ordained; Among Ecclesiastics, if a cause arise which belongs either
to the dishonor of the Kingdom, or the common damage, permit it not long to
be concealed from us; We ought to correct all these things; and whatsoever is
in these things, which pertain to the peace and justice of our whole people,
and to the honor of our Kingdom, and to the common utility. The Ritual of the
Consecration of the Kings of France, in Bochellus, Lib. 5. Decret. Tit. 2.
renders the Kings Oath to be, To keep and defend the Canonical privilege,
Law, and Justice, due unto the Churches; The King is called, by the Archbishop
crowning him, a partaker of his Ministry. Constantine excellently in Eusebius;
L. 4. cap. 14.
you are Bishops of what is within, and I of all without; Cause. 20 q. 5. Secular
Princes have the pinnacles of their power within the Church. I will conclude
out of Parisiensis, a most solid Divine, Tract. de Potestate Papae, cap. 21.
That the spiritual Right of Collation, etc. may appertain to a Laike by
Custom; but, he says, That a spiritual is twofold one by causality, whereby
a spiritual grace is caused: the other by concomitance, and that by
consequence, or antecedence: Now, says he, neither the first spiritual, as
the administration of Sacraments, nor the right that follows upon it, can
appertain to a Laike, but the antecedent right may well, annexed to spiritual
offices, as Praesentation, Collation, especially by concession of the Church,
and by long Custom prescribed. The King may acquire this right unto Himself,
because this is not repugnant to Him. And here let me end.

(...)

