ISAACUS BARROW S.T.P. REG. MATI. A SACRIS COLL. S.S. TRINI. CANTAB PRAEFEC.
NEC NON ACAD. EIUSDEM PROCANC: 1676.
portrait

OF THE LOVE of GOD AND OUR NEIGHBOR, In Several SERMONS.

By ISAAC BARROW, D. D. Late Master of Trinity College in Cambridge, and one of
His MAJESTY'S Chaplains in Ordinary.

The Third Volume.

LONDON, Printed by Miles Flesher, for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons,
over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1680.

TO The Right Honorable HENEAGE Lord FINCH, Baron of DAVENTRY, Lord High
CHANCELLOR OF ENGLAND, AND One of His MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Council;
THOMAS BARROW, the Author's Father, Humbly Dedicateth these SERMONS.

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I, and II.
S. Matthew 22. 37. Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart.
SERMON III, and IV.
S. Matthew 22. 39. And the Second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self.
SERMON V.
Ephesians 5. 2. And walk in love.
SERMON VI.
Hebrews 10. 24. Let us consider one another to provoke unto love, and to good
works.
SERMON VII, and VIII.
Romans 12. 18. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with
all men.
The First Sermon.
MATT. 22. 37. Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart.
THIS Text is produced by our Savior out of Moses his Law in answer to a
question, Deuteronomy. 6. 9. 10. 12.
wherewith a learned Pharisee thought to pose, or puzzle him; (...).
the question was, which was the great, and first commandment in the Law; (...).
a question which, it seems, had been examined, and determined among the
Doctors, in the Schools of those days, Luke 10. 27.
(for, in Saint Luke, to the like question intimated by our Savior, another
Lawyer readily yields the same answer, and is therefore commended by our
Savior, with a recte respondisti, thou have answered rightly) so that had our
Savior answered otherwise, he had, we may suppose, been taxed of ignorance and
unskilfulness, perhaps also of error and heterodoxie; to convict him of which
seems to have been the design of this Jewish trier or tempter (for he is said
to ask (...), trying, or tempting him.) But our Savior defeats his captious
intent, by answering, not only according to truth and the reason of the thing,
but agreeably to the doctrine then current, and as the Lawyer himself out of
his memory and learning would have resolved it: and no wonder since common
sense dictates, that the Law enjoining sincere and entire love toward God is
necessarily the first, and chief, or the most fundamental Law of all Religion;
for that whosoever does believe the being of God (according to the most common
notion that Name bears) must needs discern himself obliged first and chiefly to
perform those acts of mind and will toward him, which most true and earnest
love do imply: different expressions of love may be prescribed, peculiar
grounds of love may be declared in several ways of Religion; but in the general
and main substance of the duty all will conspire, all will acknowledge readily,
that it is love we chiefly owe to God; the duty which he may most justly
require of us, and which will be most acceptable to him. It was then indeed the
great commandment of the old (or rather of the young and less perfect) Religion
of the Jews, and it is no less of the more adult and improved Religion which
the Son of God did institute and teach; the difference only is, that
Christianity declares more fully how we should exercise it; and more highly
engages us to observe it; requires more proper and more substantial expressions
thereof; extends our obligation as to the matter, and intends it, as to the
degree thereof: for as it represents Almighty God in his nature and in his
doings more lovely than any other way of Religion (either natural, or
instituted) has done, or could do, so it proportionably raises our obligation
to love him: it is, as S. Paul speaks, (...), 1 Timothy 1. 3*
the last drift, or the supreme pitch of the Evangelical profession, and
institution to Love; to love God first, and then our neighbor out of a pure
heart, Coloss. 3. 14.
and good conscience, and faith unfeigned: it is the bond, or knot of that
perfection which the Gospel injoins us to aspire to: Matt. 5. 48.
it is the first and principal of those goodly fruits, Galat. 5. 2^.
which the Holy Spirit of Christ produces in good Christians. It is therefore
plainly with us also the great Commandment and chief Duty: chiefly great in its
extent, in its worth, in its efficacy and influence: most great it is, in that
it does (eminently at least, or virtually) contain all other Laws and Duties of
Piety; they being all as Branches making up its Body, or growing out of it as
their Root. Romans 13. 9, 10.
Saint Paul says of the love toward our neighbor, that it is (...), a full
performance of the laws concerning him; and that all commandments (...) are
recapitulated, Gal. 5. 14.
or summed up in this one saying, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self:
and by like, or greater reason are all the Duties of Piety comprised in the
Love of God; which is the chief of those two hinges, Verse. 40.
upon which (as our Savior here subjoins) the whole law and the prophets do
hang. So great is this Duty in extent: and it is no less in proper worth; both
as it immediately respects the most excellent, and most necessary performances
of Duty (employing our highest faculties in their best operations) and as it
imparts virtue and value to all other acts of Duty: for no Sacrifice is
acceptable, Levit. 2. 13. 9. 24. 20. 1.
which is not kindled by this heavenly Fire; no Offering sweet and pure, which
is not seasoned by this holy Salt; no Action is truly good or commendable,
which is not conjoined with, or does not proceed from the Love of God; that is
not performed with a design to please God, or (at least) with an opinion that
we shall do so thereby. If a man perform any good work not out of love to God,
but from any other principle, or for any other design (to please himself or
others, to get honor or gain thereby) how can it be acceptable to God; to whom
it has not any due regard? And what action has it for its principle, or its
ingredient, becomes sanctified thereby, in great measure pleasing and
acceptable to God; such is the worth and value thereof. It is also the great
Commandment for efficacy and influence, being naturally productive of Obedience
to all other Commandments; especially of the most genuine and sincere
Obedience; no other principle being in force and activity comparable thereto:
(fear may drive to a compliance with some, and hope may draw to an observance
of others, but it is Love, that with a kind of willing constraint, 2 Cor. 5. 14.
and kindly violence carries on cheerfully, vigorously and swiftly to the
performance of all God's Commandments: 1 John 2. 5.
If any man loves me, says our Savior, Joh. 14. 23.
he will keep my word; to keep his word is a natural and necessary result of
love to him; 1 John 5. 3.
this is the love of God (says Saint John) that we keep his commandments, and
his commandments are not grievous; it is the nature of that Love to beget a free
and delightful Obedience) Such then is the Subject of our Discourse; even the
sum, the soul, the spring of all our Religion and Duty. And because it is
requisite, both for our direction how to do, and the examination of our selves
whether we do as we ought; that we should understand what we are thus so far
obliged to; that we may be able to perform it, and that we be effectually
disposed thereto, I shall use this method; I will first endeavor to Explain
the nature of this Love commanded us; then to show some Means of Attaining it;
lastly to propound some Inducements to the Purchase and Practice thereof.

I. For the first part; we may describe Love in general (for it seems not so
easy to define it exactly) to be an Affection or Inclination of the Soul toward
an Object, proceeding from an Apprehension and Esteem of some Excellency or
some Convenience therein (its Beauty, Worth, or Usefulness) producing
thereupon, if the Object be absent or wanting, a proportionable desire, and
consequently an endeavor to obtain such a propriety therein, such a possession
thereof, such an approximation or union thereto, as the thing is capable of;
also a regret and displeasure in the failing so to obtain it; or in the want,
absence, and loss thereof; likewise begetting a complacence, satisfaction and
delight in its presence, possession or enjoyment; which is moreover attended
with a good will thereto, suitable to its nature; that is, with a desire that it
should arrive unto, and continue in its best state; with a delight to perceive
it so to thrive and flourish; with a displeasure to see it suffer or decay in
any wise; with a consequent endeavor to advance it in all good, and preserve
it from all evil. Which Description containing the chief Properties of Love in
common, do in some sort (not to insist upon abstracted Notions, or in Examples
remote from our purpose) all of them well agree to that Love which we owe to
God, according to the tenor of this Law, and in the degree therein expressed;
that is, in the best manner, and highest degree; for even of this Divine Love
the chief Properties (prerequisite thereto, or intimately conjoined therewith,
or naturally resulting from it) I conceive are these.

1. A right apprehension and firm persuasion concerning God, and consequently a
high esteem of him as most excellent in himself and most beneficial to us: for
such is the frame of our Soul, that the perceptive part does always go before
the appetitive, that affection follows opinion, that no object otherwise moves
our desire, then as represented by reason, or by fancy, good unto us: what
effect will the goodliest beauty, or the sweetest harmony have upon him, who
wants sense to discern, or judgment to prize them? This is our natural way of
acting; and according to it, that we may in due measure love God, He must
appear proportionably amiable, and desirable to us; we must entertain worthy
thoughts of him, as full of all Perfection in himself; as the Fountain of all
Good; as the sole Author of all that Happiness we can hope for or receive; as
He, in possession of whom we shall possess all things desirable; in effect and
virtue all riches, all honors, all pleasure, all good that we are capable of;
and without whom we can enjoy no real Good or true Content: Which Esteem of him
how can it otherwise then beget Affection toward him? If the faint
resemblances, or the slender participations of such Excellencies (of that
incomprehensible Wisdom, that uncontrollable Power, that unconfined Bounty,
that unblemished Purity, which are united in him, and shine from him with a
perfect luster; if, I say, the very faint resemblances, and imperfect
participations of these Excellencies) discerned in other things are apt to
raise our Admiration, and allure our Affection toward them; if the glimmering
of some small inconsiderable benefit, the shadow of real profit discovered in
these inferior empty things, is able so strongly to attract our eyes, and fix
our hearts upon them, why should not from a like, but so much greater Cause the
like Effect proceed? whence can it be that the apprehension of an Object so
infinitely lovely, so incomparably beneficial (if not passing cursorily through
our fancy, but deeply impressed upon our mind) should not proportionably affect
and incline us toward Him with all that desire, that delight, that good will
which are proper to Love? If we think, as the Psalmist did, Psalm. 89. 6.
that there is none in heaven or in earth comparable to God (comparable in
essential Perfection, comparable in beneficial Influence) why should we not be
disposed also to say with him; Whom have I in heaven but thee? Psalm. 73. 25.
and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. Such a reverent
Esteem is the proper foundation upon which true Love is built, and which
upholds it: whence, as the Love of God does commonly denote all the Duties of
Religion, so does Fear (or Reverence to him) likewise in Scripture style
comprehend and express them all; it being the Root from whence Love does sprout
and by which it is nourished; (...)18. (...) 23. (...) 145.
it being the beginning of that true Wisdom by which we embrace and fasten our
affection upon the Sovereign Good. Hence we may observe, that those devout
persons, whose hearts were fullest of this Love, their minds were most employed
in meditation upon the Divine Excellencies, and upon the beneficial Emanations
from them in Bounty and Mercy upon the Creatures; their Tongues being tuned by
their Thoughts, and their inward Esteem breaking forth into Praise. Psalm. 146.
7. 104. 33. 34. 1. 71. 15. 145. 2. 35. 28. 71. 8.
Every day, all the day long, at all times did they bless God, praise his name,
speak of his righteousness, show forth his salvation, as the Psalmist expresses
his practice, arising from Love enlivened by the esteem of God, and the
apprehension of his excellent Goodness: from whence also that strong Faith,
that constant Hope, that cheerful Confidence they reposed in him; that hearty
Approbation of all his Counsels and Purposes; that full Acquiescence of Mind in
his Proceedings; that entire Submission of their Understanding to his
Discipline, and Resignation of their Will to his good pleasure; that yielding
up themselves (their Souls and Bodies, their Lives and Goods) to his disposal,
with all the like high effects and pregnant signs of Love did flow: but

2. Another property of this Love is an earnest desire of obtaining a Propriety
in God; of possessing him (in a manner) and enjoying him; of approaching him
and being, so far as may be, united to him. When we stand upon such terms with
any person, that we have a free access unto and a familiar intercourse with
him; that his conversation is profitable and delightful to us; that we can
upon all occasions have his advice and assistance; that he is always ready in
our needs, and at our desire to employ what is in him of ability for our good
and advantage, we may be said to own such a person, to possess and enjoy him;
to be tied (as it were) and joined to him (as it is said the soul of Jonathan
was knit to the soul of David, 1 Samuel 18. 1.
so that he loved him as his own soul) And such a propriety in, such a
possession of, such an alliance and conjunction to himself God vouchsafes to
them, who are duly qualified for so great a good: He was not ashamed (says
the Apostle concerning the faithful Patriarchs) to be called their God; Heb.
11. 16.
to be appropriated in a manner unto them; 1 John 2. 23.
And, Psalm. 119. 2.
He that acknowledges the Son (says Saint John concerning good Christians)
(...), Isa. 65. 1.
has, Deuteronomy. 11. 22.
(or possesses) the Father also: Josh. 23. 8.
and to seek; 1 Cor. 6. 17.
to find; Act. 11. 23.
to draw near to; Joh. 15. 4. 17. 21.
to cleave unto; to abide with, to abide in, 1 John 2. 24.
and such other phrases frequently do occur in Scripture denoting that near
relation which good men stand in toward God; implying that he affords them a
continual liberty of access, and coming into his especial presence, that he
admits them to a kind of converse and communion with himself, full of spiritual
benefit and delight; that bearing an especial good will and favor toward them,
he is disposed to exert his infinite wisdom and power in their behalf; is
ready to impart all needful and convenient good unto them (help in their
needs, supply in wants, protection in dangers; the direction, assistance and
comfort of his Holy Spirit; pardon of sins and peace of conscience; all the
blessings of grace here, and all the felicities of glory hereafter) such an
interest, as it were, in God and a title unto him, such a possession and
enjoyment of him we are capable of obtaining: and as that enjoyment is in it
self infinitely above all things desirable; so if we love God, we cannot surely
but be earnestly desirous thereof: a cold indifferency about it, a faint
wishing for it, a slothful tendency after it are much on this side love; it
will inflame our heart, it will transport our mind, it will beget a vigorous
and lively motion of soul toward it: for Love you know is commonly resembled
unto, yea even assumes the name of Fire; for that it warms the breast, agitates
the spirits, quickens all the powers of Soul, and sets them on work in desire
and pursuance of the beloved Object: you may imagine as well fire without heat
or activity, as love without some ardency of desire. Psalm. 84. 2. 42. 1. 63. 1.
143. 6.
Longing, and thirsting of soul; fainting for, and panting after; crying out,
and stretching forth the hands toward God; such are the expressions signifying
the good Psalmist's love; by so apt, and so pathetical resemblances does he set
out the vehemence of his desire to enjoy God. I need not add concerning
Endeavor; for that by plain consequence does necessarily follow Desire: the
thirsty soul will never be at rest till it have found out its convenient
refreshment: if we, as David did, do long after God, we shall also with him
earnestly seek God; nor ever be at rest till we have found him. Coherent with
this is a

3. Third property of this Love, that is, a great Complacence, Satisfaction and
Delight in the Enjoyment of God: in the sense of having such a propriety in
him; in the partaking those emanations of favor and beneficence from him; and
consequently in the instruments conveying, in the means conducing to such
enjoyment: for joy and content are the natural fruits of obtaining what we
love, what we much value, what we earnestly desire. Yea what we chiefly love,
if we become possessed thereof, we easily rest satisfied therewith, although
all other comforts be wanting to us. The covetous person for instance, who
dotes upon his wealth, let him be pinched with the want of conveniences; let
his body be wearied with toil; let his mind be distracted with care; let him be
surrounded with obloquy and disgrace -- at mihi plaudo ipse domi; he
nevertheless enjoys himself in beholding his beloved pelf: the ambitious man
likewise, although his state be full of trouble and disquiet; though he be the
mark of common envy and hatred; though he be exposed to many crosses and
dangers; yet while he stands in power and dignity, among all those thorns of
care and fear, his heart enjoys much rest and pleasure. In like manner we may
observe those pious men, whose hearts were endewed with this love, by the
present sense, or assured hope of enjoying God supporting themselves under all
wants and distresses; Luke 6. 23.
rejoicing, yea boasting and exulting in their afflictions; 1 Pet. 4. 13.
and no wonder, Romans 5. 3.
while they conceived themselves secure in the possession of their hearts wish;
Col. 1. 24.
of that, which they incomparably valued and desired above all things; which by
experience they had found so comfortable and delicious: O taste and see
(exclaims the Psalmist, Psalm. 34. 8. 36. 7.
inspired with this passion) O taste and see, that the Lord is good: How
excellent is thy loving kindness, O Lord; they, (they who enjoy it) shall be
abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou shall make them
drink of the river of thy pleasures: Psalm. 84. 1, 10. 63. 5.
A day in thy courts is better than a thousand: my soul shall be satisfied as
with marrow and fatness; so did those devout practisers of this Duty express
the satisfaction they felt in God, and in those things whereby he did impart
the enjoyment of himself unto them. Neh. 9. 25.
So did the light of Gods countenance cheer their heart; Psalm. 4. 6. 63. 3.
so did his loving kindness appear better than life it self unto them. Hence do
they so frequently enjoin and exhort us to be glad; Psalm. 33. 1. 32. 11. 105.
3. 107. 12. 37. 4.
to delight our selves; to glory; to rejoice continually in the Lord; in the
sense of his goodness, in the hope of his favor; the doing so being an
inseparable property of love; to which we adjoin another.

4. The feeling much displeasure and regret in being deprived of such
enjoyment; in the absence or distance as it were of God from us; the loss or
lessening of his favor; the subtraction of his gracious influences from us:
for surely answerable to the love we bear unto any thing will be our grief for
the want or loss thereof: it was a shrewd argument which the Poet used to prove
that men loved their moneys better than their friends, because -- majore
tumultu plorantur nummi, quam funera -- they more lamented the loss of those
than the death of these; Indeed, that which a man principally affects, if he is
bereaved thereof, be his condition otherwise how prosperous and comfortable
soever, he cannot be contented; all other enjoyments become unsavory and
unsatisfactory to him. And so it is in our case, when God, although only for
trial, (according to his wisdom and good pleasure) hides his face, and
withdraws his hand; leaving the soul in a kind of desolation and darkness; not
finding that ready aid in distress, not feeling that cheefull vivacity in
obedience, not tasting that sweet relish of devotion, which have been usually
afforded thereto; if love reside in the heart, it will surely dispose it to a
sensible grief; it will inspire such exclamations as those of the Psalmist: How
long, Psalm. 89. 46. 69. 16. 30. 7. 42. 3.
Lord, will thou hide thy face? hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in
trouble; turn unto me according to the multitude of thy tender mercies; draw
nigh unto my soul and redeem it. Even our Savior himself in such a case, when
God seemed for a time to withdraw the light of his countenance, and the
protection of his helpful hand from him (or to frown and lay his heavy hand
upon him) had his soul (...), Matt. 26. 38. 27. 46.
extremely grieved and full of a deadly anguish; neither surely was it any
other cause than excess of love, which made that temporary desertion so
grievous and bitter to him, extorting from his most meek and patient heart that
woeful complaint, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me! But especially,
when our iniquities have (as the Prophet expresses it) separated between our
God and us; Isa. 59. 2.
and our sins have hid his face from us; Jer. 5. 25.
when that thick cloud has eclipsed the light of his countenance, Isa. 44. 26.
and intercepted his gracious influences; when by wilfully offending we have
(as the Israelites are said to have done) rejected our God, 1 Samuel 8. 7 10. 9.
cast him off, and driven him from us; so depriving our selves of propriety in
him, and the possession of his favor; then if any love be alive in us, it will
prompt us with those good men in their penitential agonies, Psalm. 6. 35. 38.
51. 102. 130. 143.
to be grievously sensible of, and sorely to bewail that our wretched
condition; there will not (if we so heartily love God, and value his favor as
they did) be any soundness in our flesh, Psalm. 38. 3. 143. 4. 102. 4.
or rest in our bones; our spirit will be overwhelmed within us, and our heart
within us desolate. Our heart will be smitten and withered like grass, upon the
consideration and sense of so inestimable a loss. Love will render such a
condition very sad and uneasy to us; will make all other delights insipid and
distasteful; all our life will become bitter and burden some to us; neither if
it in any measure abides in us, shall we receive content, Psalm. 6. 4. 38. 21.
51. 11. 102. 2. 143.
till by humble deprecation we have regained some glimpse of God's favor, some
hope of being reinstated in our possession of him. Farther yet,

5. Another property of this Love is to bear the highest good will toward God;
so as to wish heartily and effectually (according to our power) to procure all
good to him, and to delight in it; so as to endeavor to prevent and to remove
all evil (if I may so speak) that may befall him, and to be heartily displeased
therewith. Although no such benefit or advantage can accrue to God which may
increase his essential and indefectible happiness; Psalm. 16. 2.
no harm or damage can arrive that may impair it (for he can be neither
really more or less rich, Job 22. 3.
or glorious, or joyful than he is; neither have our desire or our fear, our
delight or our grief, our designs or our endeavors any object, any ground in
those respects) yet has he declared, that there be certain interests and
concernments, Jer. 9. 24.
which, out of his abundant goodness and condescension, he does tender and
prosecute as his own; as if he did really receive advantage by the good, and
prejudice by the bad success respectively belonging to them; that he earnestly
desires, and is greatly delighted with some things, very much dislikes, and is
grievously displeased with other things: for instance, that he bears a fatherly
affection toward his creatures, and earnestly desires their welfare; and
delights to see them enjoy the good he designed them; as also dislikes the
contrary events; does commiserate and condole their misery; that he is
consequently well pleased, when piety and justice, peace and order (the chief
means conducing to our welfare) do flourish; and displeased, when impiety and
iniquity, dissension and disorder (those certain sources of mischief to us) do
prevail; that he is well satisfied with our rendering to him that obedience,
honor and respect which are due to him; and highly offended with our injurious
and disrespectfull behavior toward him, in commission of sin and violation of
his most just and holy commandments: so that there wants not sufficient matter
of our exercising good will both in affection and action toward God; we are
capable both of wishing, and (in a manner, as he will interpret and accept it)
of doing good to him, by our concurrence with him in promoting those things
which he approves and delights in, and in removing the contrary. And so surely
shall we do if we truly love God: for love, as it would have the object to be
its own, as it tends to enjoy it, so it would have it in its best state, and
would put it thereinto, and would conserve it therein; and would thence
contribute all it is able to the welfare, to the ornament, to the pleasure and
content thereof. Quid est amare, nisi velle bonis aliquem affici quam maximis?
Cic. de Fin. 2.
What is it (says Cicero) to love, but to will or desire, that the person
loved should receive the greatest good that can be? Love also does reconcile,
conform, and unite the inclinations and affections of him who loves, to the
inclinations and affections of him who is beloved; Eadem velle and eadem nolle,
to consent in liking and disliking of things, if it be not the cause, if it be
not the formal reason or essence (as some have made it) it is at least a
certain effect of love. If then we truly love God, we shall desire that all his
designs prosper, that his pleasure be fulfilled, that all duty be performed,
all glory rendered to him: we shall be grieved at the wrong, the dishonor, the
disappointment he receives: especially we shall endeavor in our own practice,
Act. 13. 22.
with Holy David, to perform (...), all that God wills, desires, or delights
in; to eschew whatever offends him. Our desire, our delight, our endeavor will
conspire with and be subordinate to his: for it would be a strange kind of
love, that were consistent with the voluntary doing of that, which is hurtful,
injurious, or offensive to that we love; such actions being the proper effects,
the natural signs of hatred and enmity: 1 John 4. 20. 3. 17.
If any man say, I love God, and hates his brother, he is a liar, says Saint
John; and, If any man sees his brother need, and shuts his bowels toward
him, how does the love of God abide in him? He that in his affections is so
unlike, so contrary unto God; he that is unwilling to comply with God's will in
so reasonable a performance; he that in a matter, wherein God has declared
himself so much concerned, and so affected therewith, does not care to cross
him, to displease and disappoint him; how can he with any show of truth, or
with any modesty pretend to love God? Hence it is, that keeping of God's
Commandments is commonly represented to us as the most proper expression, as
the surest argument of our love to God: Exodus 20. 6.
-- showing mercy to thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments;
they are joined together as terms equivalent, or as inseparable companions in
effect: Joh. 14. 21. 23.
He that has my commandments and keeps them, Joh. 15. 14.
he it is that loves me: Ye are my friends, (that is, not only objects of my
affection, but actively friends, bearing affection unto me) if you do
whatsoever I command you, says our Savior: And, 1 John 4. 12.
whosoever keeps his word, in him is the love of God truly perfected; (he has
the truth and sincerity; he has the integrity and consummation of love;
without it love is wholly false and counterfeit, or very lame and imperfect; so
the loving and beloved Disciple teaches us). For by doing thus, as we signify
our esteem of God's wisdom which directs us, our dread of his power and
justice that can punish us, our hope in his goodness and fidelity to reward us,
our regard to his majesty and authority over us; so especially thereby (if our
obedience at least be free and cheerful)* we express our good will toward him;
showing thereby, that we are disposed to do him all the good and gratify him
all we can; that his interests, his honor, his content are dear and precious
to us. And were indeed our hearts knit unto God with this bond of perfection,
Psalm. 86. 11.
we could not in our wills, Col. 3. 14.
and consequently in our practice be so severed from him; we should also love
heartily all virtue and goodness, the nearest resemblances of him, and which he
chiefly loves; we should do, what David so often professes himself to do, love
his law, Psalm. 11. 7.
and greatly delight in his commandments. Psalm. 119. 163, 165, 113, 16, 35, 70,
47, 24, 77.
With our Savior, we should delight to perform his will; it would (as it was
to him) be our meat and our drink to do it; Psalm. 1. 2. 112. 1. 40. 8.
his yoke would be easy indeed, Heb. 10. 7.
and his burden light unto us; Joh. 4. 34. 5. 30.
his yoke so easy, that we should wear it rather as a jewel about our necks
than as a yoke; Prove. 3. 22.
his burden so light, that we should not feel it as a burden, but esteem it
our privilege. We should not be so dull in apprehending, or so slack in
performing duty; for this sharpsighted affection would presently discern, would
readily suggest it to us; by the least intimation it would perceive what
pleases God, and would snatch opportunity of doing it: we should not need any
arguments to persuade us, nor any force to compel us, love would inspire us
with sufficient vigor and alacrity; it would urge and stimulate us forward not
only to walk in, but even (as the Psalmist expresses it) to run the ways of
God's commandments. Psalm. 119. 32.


But let thus much serve for explication of the nature of this Duty; in order
(as was before said) to the direction of our Practice, and examination thereof:
The particular Duties mentioned being comprehended in, or appertaining to the
love of God, if we perceive that we practice them, we may, to our satisfaction
and comfort, infer, that proportionably we are endewed with this Grace; if not,
we have reason (such as should beget remorse and pious sorrow in us) to suspect
we abide in a state of disaffection or of indifferency toward him. If we find
the former good disposition, we should strive to cherish and improve it; if the
second bad one, we should (as we tender our own welfare and happiness, as we
would avoid utter ruin and misery) endeavor to remove it.

II. To the effecting of which purposes I shall next propound some means
conducible; some in way of removing Obstacles, others by immediately promoting
the Duty.

Of the first kind are these ensuing:

1. The destroying of all loves opposite to the love of God, extinguishing all
affection to things odious and offensive to God; mortifying all corrupt and
perverse, all unrighteous and unholy desires Psalm. 97. 10. Ye that love the
Lord, hate evil.
. It agrees with souls no less than with bodies, that they cannot at once move
or tend contrary ways; upward and downward, backward and forward at one time:
it is not possible we should together truly esteem, earnestly desire, bear
sincere good will to things in nature and inclination quite repugnant each to
other. No man ever took him for his real friend, who maintains correspondency,
secret or open; who joins in acts of hostility with his professed enemies; at
least we cannot, as we ought, love God with our whole heart, if with any part
thereof we affect his enemies; those, which are mortally and irreconcileably
so; as are all iniquity and impurity, all inordinate lusts both of flesh and
spirit: (...)
the carnal mind (the minding, Romans 8. 7.
or affecting of the flesh) is, Saint Paul tells us, enmity toward God; for
it is not subject to the law of God, nor can be; it is an enemy, even the worst
of enemies, an incorrigibly obstinate rebel against God, and can we then
retaining any love to God, or peace with him, comply and conspire therewith?
And, Jam. 4. 4.
The friendship of the world (that is I suppose of those corrupt principles,
and those vicious customs which usually prevail in the world) is also, Saint
James tells us, enmity with God; so that (he adds) if any man be a friend to
the world, he is thereby constituted (he immediately ipso facto becomes) an
enemy to God. (...).
Saint John affirms the same: 1 John 2. 15.
If any man love the world, the love of the father is not in him; explaining
himself, that by the world he means those things, which are most generally
embraced and practiced therein; (...).
the lust, or desire of the flesh, (that is, sensuality and intemperance) the
lust of the eyes, (...).
(that is, envy, covetousness, vain curiosity, and the like) the ostentation,
(...).
or boasting of life (that is, pride, ambition, vainglory, arrogance)
qualities as irreconcileably opposite to the holy nature and will of God, so
altogether inconsistent with the love of him; begetting in us an aversation and
antipathy toward him; rendering his holiness distasteful to our affections, and
his justice dreadful to our consciences; and himself consequently, his will,
his law, his presence hateful to us: while we take him to be our enemy and to
hate us, we shall certainly in like manner stand affected toward him: this
indeed is the main obstacle, the removal of which will much facilitate the
introduction of divine love; it being a great step to reconciliation and
friendship, to be disengaged from the adverse party: we should then easily
discern the beauty of divine goodness and sanctity, when the mists of
ignorance, of error, of corrupt prejudice, arising from those gross carnal
affections, were dissipated; we should better relish the sweet and savoury
graces of God, when the palate of our mind were purged from vicious tinctures;
we should be more ready to hope for peace and favor in his eyes, when our
consciences were freed from the sense of such provocations and defilements. But

2. If we would obtain this excellent Grace, we must restrain our affections
toward all other things, however in their nature innocent, and indifferent. The
young Gentleman in the Gospel had, (...).
it seems, Matt. 19. 20.
arrived to the former pitch; Mark 10. 21. (...).
having through the course of his life abstained from grosser iniquities and
impurities; Luke 18. 22.
so far, that our Savior in regard to that attaiment of his conceived an
affection for him (he loved him, it is said) yet was not he sufficiently
disposed to love God; being in one thing deficient, that he retained an
immoderate affection to his wealth and worldly conveniences; with which sort
of affections the love of God cannot consist: for we much undervalue God, and
cannot therefore duly love him, if we deem any thing comparable to him, or
considerable in worth or usefulness when he comes in competition: if we deem,
that the possession of any other thing beside him, can confer to our happiness,
or the want thereof can prejudice it, and make us miserable: no other love
should bear any proportion to the love of him; no other object should appear
(as indeed none really is) simply good, desirable or amiable to us. What value
Saint Paul had of his legal qualifications and privileges, Phil. 3. 8.
the same should we have concerning all other things in appearance pleasant or
convenient to us; they ought, in regard to God, (...).
to seem damage and dung; not only mean and despicable, but even sordid and
loathsome to us; not only unworthy of our regard and desire, but deserving our
hatred and abhorrency; we should, I say, even hate the best of them; so our
Savior expresses it; Luke 14. 26.
If any man does not hate his father and his mother, his wife and his children,
his brothers and sisters, and even his own soul (or his own life) he cannot be
my disciple; that is, if any man retain in his heart any affection not
infinitely (as it were) less than that which he bears to God; if any thing be
in comparison dear and precious to him, he is not disposed to entertain the
main point of Christ's discipline, the sincere and entire love of God. To love
him, as he requires, with all our heart, implies, that our heart be filled with
his love, so that no room be left for any other passion to enter or dwell
there. And indeed such, if we observe it, is the nature of our soul, we can
hardly together harbor earnest or serious affections toward different objects;
one of them will prevail and predominate; and so doing will not suffer the
other to remain, but will extrude or extinguish it: No heart of man can
correspond with two rivals, but, (as our Savior teaches us) it will hate and
despise one, Matt. 6. 24.
will love and stick to the other; whence he infers, that we cannot serve (that
is, affectionately adhere to) both God and Mammon. If we have (according to the
Psalmist's phrase) set our hearts upon wealth, Psalm. 62. 10.
and will be rich (are resolved to be, 1 Timothy 6, 9, 17.
as Saint Paul expresses it) if we eagerly aspire to power and honor, with
the Pharisees, Joh. 12. 43.
preferring the applause of men before the favor of God; if any worldly or
bodily pleasure, or any curiosity how plausible soever, has seized upon our
spirits and captivated our affections; if any inferior object whatever with
its apparent splendor, 2 Timothy 4. 10.
sweetness, goodliness, convenience has so inveagled our fancy, that we have
an exceeding esteem thereof, and a greedy appetite thereto; that we enjoy it
with huge content, and cannot part from it without much regret; that thing does
at present take up God's place within us; so that our heart is incapable, at
least in due measure, of divine love: but if we be indifferently affected
toward all such things, and are unconcerned in the presence or absence of them;
esteeming them as they are mean and vain; loving them as they deserve, as
inferior and trivial; if (according to Saint Paul's direction) we use them as
if we used them not; 1 Cor. 7. 31.
it is another good step toward the love of God: the divine light will shine
more brightly into so calm and serene a medium: a soul void of other
affections, will not be only more capable to receive, but apt to suck in that
heavenly one; being insensible, in any considerable degree, of all other
comforts and complacencies, we shall be apt to search after, and reach out at
that, which alone can satisfy our understanding, and satiate our desires;
especially if we add hereto,

3. The freeing of our hearts also from immoderate affection to our selves (I
mean not from a sober desire or an earnest regard to our own true good; for
this as nature enforces to, so all reason allows, and even God's command
obliges us to; nor can it be excessive; but a high conceit of our selves as
worthy or able, a high confidence in any thing we have within us or about us)
for this is a very strong bar against the entrance, as of all other charity, so
especially of this: for as the love of an external object does thrust, as it
were, our soul outward toward it; so the love of our selves detains it
within, or draws it inwards; and consequently these inclinations crossing each
other cannot both have effect, but one will subdue and destroy the other. If
our mind be -- Ipsa suis contenta bonis -- satisfied with her own (taking them
for her own) endowments, abilities, or fancied perfections; if we imagine our
selves wise enough to perceive, good enough to choose, resolute enough to
undertake, strong enough to atchieve, constant enough to pursue whatever is
conducible to our real happiness and best content; (...). Epict. 1. 9.
we shall not care to go farther; we will not be at the trouble to search
abroad for that, which in our opinion, we can so readily find, so easily enjoy
at home. If we so admire and dote upon our selves, we there by put our selves
into God's stead, and usurp the throne due to him in our hearts; comparing our
selves to God* and in effect preferring our selves before him; thereby
consequently shutting our that unparalled esteem, that predominant affection
we owe to him: while we are busy in dressing and decking, in courting and
worshipping this Idol o^ our fancy, we shall be estranged from the true object
of our devotion; both we shall willingly neglect him, and he in just
indignation will desert us. But if as all other things, so even our selves do
appear exceedingly vile and contemptible, foul and ugly in comparison to God;
If we take our selves to be (as truly we are) mere nothings, Gal. 6. 3.
or some things worse; not only destitute of all considerable perfections, but
full of great defects; blind and fond in our conceits, crooked and perverse in
our wills, infirm and unstable in all our powers, unable to discern, unwilling
to embrace, backward to set upon, inconstant in prosecuting those things, which
are truly good and advantageous to us; If we have, I say, this right opinion
and judgment of our selves, seeing within us nothing lovely or desirable, no
proper object there of our esteem or affection, no bottom to rest our mind
upon, no ground of solid comfort at home, we shall then be apt to look abroad,
to direct our eyes, and settle our affections upon somewhat more excellent in
it self, or more beneficial to us, that seems better to deserve our regard, and
more able to supply our defects. And if all other things about us appear alike
deformed and deficient (unworthy our affection and unable to satisfy our
desires) then may we be disposed to seek, to find, to fasten and repose our
soul upon the only proper object of our love; in whom we shall obtain all that
we need, infallible wisdom to guide us, omnipotent strength to help us,
infinite goodness for us to admire and enjoy.

These are the chief Obstacles, the removing of which conduce to the begetting
and increasing the love of God in us. A soul so cleansed from love to bad and
filthy things, so emptied of affection to vain and unprofitable things, so
opened and dilated by excluding all conceit of, all confidence in its self, is
a vessel proper for the divine love to be infused into; into so large and pure
a vacuity (as finer substances are apt to flow of themselves into spaces void
of grosser matter) that free and movable Spirit of divine grace will be ready
to succeed, and therein to disperse it self. As all other things in nature, the
cloggs being removed which hinder them, do presently tend with all their force
to the place of their rest and well being; so would, it seems, our souls being
loosed from baser affections obstructing them, willingly incline toward God,
the natural center (as it were) and bosom of their affection; would resume (as
Origin speaks) that natural philtre (that intrinsic spring, (...).
or incentive of love) which all creatures have toward their creator;
especially, if to these we add those positive Instruments, Orig. in Cells. p.
135.
which are more immediately and directly subservient to the production of this
love; they are these:

1. Attentive consideration of the divine Perfections, with endeavor to obtain
a right and clear apprehension of them.

2. The consideration of God's Works and Actions: his works and actions of
nature, of providence, of grace.

3. Serious regard and reflection upon the peculiar Benefits by the divine
Goodness vouchsafed to our selves.

4. An earnest resolution and endeavor to perform God's Commandments, although
upon inferior considerations of reason; upon hope, fear, desire to attain the
benefits of Obedience, to shun the mischiefs from Sin.

5. Assiduous Prayer to Almighty God, that he in mercy would please to bestow
his love upon us, and by his Grace to work it in us.

But I must forbear the prosecution of these things, rather than farther
trespass upon your patience. Let us conclude all with a good Collect, sometimes
used by our Church:

O Lord, who have taught us, that all our doings without charity are nothing
worth, send thy Holy Ghost, and pour into our hearts that most excellent gift
of charity, the very bond of peace and of all virtues, without which whosoever
lives is counted dead before thee; Grant this for thine only Son Jesus Christ
his sake Amen.

The Second Sermon.
MATT. 22. 37. Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart.
WHich is the great Commandment? was the question, in answer whereto our
Savior returns this Text; and that with highest reason (discernible by every
man) for that of necessity the love of God is the principal duty we owe unto
him; the great duty indeed, as being largest in extent, and comprehending in a
manner all other duties of piety; as that which exceeds in proper worth and
dignity (employing the noblest faculties of our souls in their best operations
upon the most excellent object) as that, which communicates virtue unto, and
has a special influence upon all other duties; in fine, as that, which is the
sum, the soul, the spring of all other duties: in discoursing whereupon, I did
formerly propound this method; first, to declare the nature thereof; then, to
show some means apt to beget and improve that excellent virtue in us; lastly,
to propose some inducements to the practice thereof.

The first part I endeavored to perform, by describing it according to its
essential properties (common to love in general, and more particularly to this)
of duly esteeming God, of desiring (according as we are capable) to possess and
enjoy him, of receiving delight and satisfaction in the enjoyment of him, of
feeling displeasure in being deprived hereof, of bearing good will unto him,
expressed by endeavors to please him, by delighting in the advancement of his
glory, by grieving when he is disserved or dishonored.

The next part I also entered upon, and offered to consideration those means,
which serve chiefly to remove the impediments of our love to God; which were,

1. The suppressing all affections opposite to this; all perverse and corrupt,
all unrighteous and unholy desires.

2. The restraining or keeping within bounds of moderation our affections
toward other things, even in their nature innocent or indifferent.

3. The freeing our hearts from immoderate affection toward our selves; from
all conceit of, and confidence in any qualities or abilities of our own; the
diligent use of which means I did suppose would conduce much to the production
and increase of divine love within us.

To them I shall now proceed to subjoin other Instruments more immediately and
directly subservient to the same purpose: whereof the first is,

1. Attentive consideration upon the divine Perfections, (...). Bas. de Jud.
Dei. Tom. 2. p. 261.
with endeavor to obtain a right and clear apprehension of them: as
counterfeit worth and beauty receive advantage by distance and darkness; so
real excellency -- si propius stes Te capiet magis -- the greater light you
view it in, the nearer you approach it, the more strictly you examine it, the
more you will approve and like it; so the more we think of God, the better we
know him, the fuller and clearer conceptions we have of him, the more we shall
be apt to esteem and desire him, the more excellent in himself, the more
beneficial to us he will appear. Hence is the knowledge of God represented in
holy Writ not only as a main instrument of Religion, but as an essential
character thereof; 2 Pet. 2. 20.
as equivalent to the being well affected toward God: Psalm. 36. 10. 9. 10.
O continue (says the Psalmist) thy loving kindness unto them that know thee;
Isa. 5. 13. 11. 9.
that is, Hos. 2. 10.
to all religious people. Joh. 17. 3.
And, Jer. 22. 16. 24. 7. 31. 34.
This (says our Savior) is life eternal, 2 Cor. 10. 5.
to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent; Isa. 1.
3.
knowledge of them implying all good affections toward them: Jer. 19. 3, 6. 10.
25.
as on the other side, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5.
ignorance of God denotes disaffection or want of affection toward God: 1 Samuel
2. 12.
Now the sons of Eli ('it is said) were sons of Belial, they knew not the Lord:
And, He that loves not (says Saint John) does not know God; 1 John 4. 8.
the want of love to God is an evident sign, a natural effect of ignorance
concerning him: indeed considering the nature of our mind, and its ordinary
method of operation, it seems impossible, that such perfection discerned should
not beget answerable reverence and affection thereto: if beautiful spectacles,
harmonious sounds, fragrant odours, delicate savours do necessarily and
certainly please the respective senses; why should not with the like sure
efficacy the proper objects of our mind affect it, if duly represented and
conveyed thereto? If the wit of the most ingenious Artists, the cunning of the
deepest Politicians, the wisdom of the sagest Philosophers are but mere
blindness and stupidity in comparison to the wisdom of God; the lowest
instance or expression of whose wisdom (his (...), his folly, 1 Cor. 1. 25.
as Saint Paul speaks) is wiser than men, does excel the results of man's
highest wisdom; yet them we admire and commend in men, why then do we not much
more adore the divine wisdom? If the abilities of them, who dexterously
manage great business, or atchieve prosperously great exploits are indeed mere
impotency in regard to God's power; whose weakness (that is, the smallest
effects of whose power) is (as Saint Paul again tells us) stronger than men,
surpasses the utmost results of humane endeavor; yet those things in men we
extol and celebrate, how can we then forbear to reverence the divine power? If
the dispensers of freest and largest bounty among men, the noblest patriots,
the most munificent benefactours, the most tenderly affectionate friends be in
respect of God unworthy to be counted or called good (as our Savior tells us;
If ye being bad know to give good things; Matt. 7. 11.
and, Luke 11. 13.
There is none good, but God;) yet such persons are much beloved and applauded;
Matt. 19. 17.
how then can we abstain from paying the like measure of affection and respect
to the divine goodness? if good qualities so inferior and defective obtain so
much from us, whence comes it that the infinitely superior and most perfect
excellencies of God do not beget in their proportion a suitable regard and
veneration in us toward him? whence, if not either from our not firmly
believing them, or not rightly apprehending them, or not attentively
considering them? Our belief of them in gross and at large we may suppose, as
connected with the belief of God's existence, and included in the very notion
of God; the defect therefore must proceed from the remaining causes, want of a
right apprehension, or neglect of attentive consideration about them: as to the
first of these; it is common for men to have confused, imperfect and wrong
conceptions about the Divine Attributes, especially in the recesses of their
mind; which although they spare to utter with their mouths, yet they vent in
their practice: if we, for instance, imagine that we can comprehend the extent
of God's designs, or fathom the depth of his counsels; if we measure and model
his reasons of proceeding according to our fancy (as if his thoughts were as
our thoughts, Isa. 55. 8.
and his ways as our ways; 1 Samuel 16. 7.
or, Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
as if he did see as man sees) if we can bless our selves in following our own
imaginations, Psalm. 81. 12. 107. 11.
counsels and devices although repugnant to the resolutions of divine wisdom;
Isa. 65. 2. 53. 6.
taking these not to befit, Jer. 18. 12.
or not to concern us, Hos. 10. 12. 8. 12.
as we find many in the Scripture reproved for doing; Psalm. 73. 11. 10. 11. 94.
7.
we greatly mistake and undervalue that glorious Attribute of God (his Wisdom)
and no wonder then, if we do not upon account thereof duly reverence and love
God: likewise if we concerning the divine Power conceit, that notwithstanding
it, we shall be able to accomplish our unlawful designs; that we may (as it is
in Job 9. 4. Isa. 45. 9. 10. 15. 54. 17. 1 Cor. 10. 22. Deuteronomy. 33. 8. Dan. 5.
23. Amos 9. 2. Isa. 2. 19. Jer. 16. 16. Deuteronomy. 28. 29. Numb. 14. 41. 2 Chr. 13.
12.
Job) harden our hearts against him and prosper; that we can any wise either
withstand, or evade his power (as also many are intimated to do, in Scripture;
even generally all those who dare presumptuously to offend God) we also
misconceive of that excellent Attribute; and the contempt of God, rather then
love of him will thence arise. If concerning the divine goodness and holiness,
we imagine that God is disaffected toward his Creatures (antecedently to all
demerits, or bad qualifications in them) yea indifferent in affection toward
them; (...). Plat. de Leg. 10.
inclinable to do them harm, or not propense to do them good; if we deem him
apt to be harsh and rigorous in his proceedings, to exact performances
unsuitable to the strength he has given us, to impose burdens intolerable upon
us; will not such thoughts be apt to breed in us toward God (as they would
toward any other person so disposed) rather a servile dread (little different
from downright hatred) or an hostile aversation, than a genuine reverence or a
kindly affection toward him? If we fancy him, like to pettish man, apt to be
displeased without cause, or beyond measure, for our doing somewhat innocent
(neither bad in it self, nor prejudicial to public or private good) or for our
omitting that, which no law, no good reason plainly requires of us; what will
such thoughts but sour our spirits toward him, make us fearful and suspicious
of him; which sort of dispositions are inconsistent with true love? If on the
other side, we judge him fond and partial in his affections; or slack and easy
(as it were) in his proceedings; apt to favor us, although we neglect him; to
indulge us in our sins, or connive at our miscarriages; will not such thoughts
rather incline us in our hearts to slight him, and in our actions insolently to
dally with him, than heartily and humbly to love him? if we conceit his favor
procured, or his anger appeased by petty observances, perhaps without any good
rule or reason affected by our selves, when we neglect duties of greater worth
and consequence (the more weighty matters of the Law); what is this but in
stead of God to reverence an Idol of our own fancy; to yield unto him (who is
only pleased with holy dispositions of mind, with real effects of goodness)
not duties of humble love, but acts of presumption and flattery? But if
contrariwise, we truly conceive of God's wisdom, that his counsels are always
thoroughly good, and that we are concerned both in duty and interest to follow
them, although exceeding the reach of our understanding, or contrary to the
suggestions of our fancy; concerning his power, that it will certainly
interpose it self to the hindrance of our bad projects, that it will be in vain
to contest therewith, that we must submit unto, or shall be crushed by his
hand; concerning his goodness, that as he is infinitely good and benign, so he
is also perfectly holy and pure; as he wishes us all good, and is ready to
promote it, so he detesteth our sins, nor will suffer us to do himself, our
selves and our neighbor any wrong; as most bountiful in dispensing his
favors, so not prodigal of them, or apt to cast them away on such as little
value them, and do not endeavor to answer them; as a faithful rewarder of all
true virtue and piety, so a severe chastiser of all iniquity and profaneness;
as full of mercy and pity toward them, who are sensible of their unworthiness,
and penitent for their faults, so an implacable avenger of obstinate and
incorrigible wickedness; in fine, as a true friend to us, if we be not wilful
enemies to him; and desirous of our welfare, if we do not perversely render our
selves incapable thereof, so withal jealous of his own honor, resolute to
maintain and vindicate his just authority; Isa. 5. 4.
careful to uphold the interests of right and truth, Hab. 1. 13.
and to show the distinction he makes between good and evil; Psalm. 5. 4. 11. 5.
etc.
if we have, I say, such conceptions of God (agreeable to what his word and his
doings represent him to us) how can we otherwise than bear a most high respect,
a most great affection unto him? A Prince surely endewed with such qualities;
wise and powerful, good and just together; tendering the good of his people,
yet preserving the force of his Laws; designing always what is best, and
constantly pursuing his good intentions; tempering bounty and clemency with
needful justice and severity; we should all commend and extol as worthy of
most affectionate veneration; how much more then shall we be so affected toward
him, in whom we apprehend all those excellencies to concur without any
imperfection or allay? especially if by attention we impress those conceptions
upon our hearts; for how true and proper soever, if they be only slight and
transient, they may not suffice to this intent; if they pass away as a slash,
they will not be able to kindle in us any strong affection. But if such
abstracted consideration of the divine perfections will not alone wholly avail,
let us add hereto as a farther help toward the production and increase of this
divine grace in us,

2. The consideration of God's Works and Actions; his works of nature, his acts
of providence, his works and acts of grace; the careful meditating upon these
will be apt to breed, to nourish, to improve and augment this affection Even
the contemplation of the lower works of nature, of this visible frame of things
(upon which indeed many perspicuous characters of divine perfection, of immense
power, of admirable wisdom, of abundant goodness are engraven) has in many
minds excited a very high degree of reverence and good affection toward God:
the devoutest persons (the holy Psalmists particularly) we may observe frequent
in this practice* enflaming their hearts with love, Psalm. 8. 19. 145. 104. 147.
and elevating them in reverence toward God by surveying the common works of
God by viewing and considering the magnificent vastness and variety, the goodly
order and beauty, the constant duration and stability of those things we see;
in remarking the general bounty and munificence with which this great
pater-familias has provided for the necessary sustenance, for the convenience,
for the defense, for the relief, for the delight and satisfaction of his
creatures: even in the contemplation of these things being ravished with
admiration and affection, how often do they thus exclaim: Psalm. 33. 5. 119. 64.
145. 10. 147. 4. etc.
O Lord how manifold are thy works, in wisdom have thou made them all. The
earth is full of the goodness of the Lord; the earth O Lord is full of thy
mercy! Great is our Lord, and of great power; his understanding is infinite;
All thy works shall praise thee, O Lord; With such reflections, I say, upon
those common, yet admirable, and excellent works of God (which we perhaps with
a regardless eye unprofitably pass over) did those good men kindle, and foment
pious affections toward God. The same effect may also the considering the very
common proceedings of divine providence beget in us; such as are discernible to
every attentive mind both from history and daily experience; considering God's
admirable condescension in regarding and ordering humane affairs both for
common benefit and for relief of particular necessities, his supplying the
general needs of men, relieving the poor, succouring the weak and helpless,
protecting and vindicating the oppressed, his seasonable encouraging and
rewarding the good, restraining and chastising the bad: Even such observations
are productive of love to God in those, who, according to that duty intimated
by the Prophet, Isa. 5. 12.
do regard the works of the Lord, Psalm. 28. 5. 107. 43. 64. 9. 111. 2. 77. 11.
143. 5.
and consider the operations of his hands; They who are wise and will observe
these things, they (a^ the Psalmist tells) shall understand the loving kindness
of the Lord; understand it practically, so as to be duly affected thereby; and
so accordingly we find the consideration of these things applied by the great
guides and patterns of our devotion. But especially the study and contemplation
of those more high and rare proceedings of God, in managing his gracious design
of our Redemption from sin and misery, wherein a wisdom so unsearchable and a
goodness so astonishing declare themselves, are most proper and effectual means
of begetting divine love: if the consideration of God's eternal care for our
welfare, of his descending to the lowest condition for our sake, of his
willingly undertaking and patiently undergoing all kinds of inconvenience, of
disgrace, of bitter pain and sorrow for us; of his freely offering us mercy,
and earnestly wooing us to receive it, even when offenders, when enemies, when
rebels against him; of his bearing with exceeding patience all our neglects of
him, all our injuries toward him; of his preparing a treasure of perfect and
endless bliss, and using all means possible to bring us unto the possession
thereof; if, I say, considering those wonderful streins of goodness will not
affect us, what can do it? How miserably cold and damp must our affections be,
if all those powerful rays (so full of heavenly light and heat) shining
through our minds cannot inflame them? how desperately hard and tough must our
hearts be, if such incentives cannot soften and melt them? is it not an apathy
more than Stoical, more than stony, which can stand immovable before so mighty
inducements to passion? is it not a horridly prodigious insensibility to think
upon such expressions of kindness without feeling affection reciprocal? But if
the consideration of God's general and public beneficence will not touch us
sufficiently; let us farther hereto adjoin

3. Serious reflections upon the peculiar (personal or private) benefits by the
divine goodness vouchsafed unto our selves. There is, I suppose, scarce any
man, who may not, if he be not very stupid and regardless, have observed
(beside the common effects of God's universal care and bounty wherein he
partakes) even some particular expressions and testimonies of divine favor
dispensed unto him by God's hand (apt to convince him of God's especial
providence, care and good will to him particularly, and thereby to draw him
unto God) both in relation to his temporal and to his spiritual state; in
preventing and preserving him from mischiefs imminent, in opportune relief,
when he was pressed with want, or surprised by danger; in directing him to good
and diverting him from evil. Every man's experience (I say and suppose) will
inform him that he has received many such benefits from a hand, invisible
indeed to sense, yet easily discernible, if he do attend to the circumstances
wherein, to the seasons when they come: it is natural to every man being in
distress (from which he cannot by any present or visible means extricate
himself) to stretch forth his hand and lift up his voice toward heaven, making
his recourse to divine help; and it is as natural for God to regard the needs,
to hearken to the cries, to satisfy the desires of such persons (for, The Lord
is nigh to all that call upon him; Psalm. 145. 16, 18. 107. 8. 34. 6, 10. 9. 9.
he opens his hand, and satisfies the desire of every living thing: He will
be a refuge to the oppressed, a refuge in times of trouble: He satisfies the
longing soul, and fills the hungry soul with goodness: They that seek the
Lord, shall not want any good thing: Ecclus. 2. 10.
Look at the generations of old and see: did ever any trust in the Lord and was
forsaken? or whom did he ever despise that called upon him? This poor man
(this, and that, any poor man) cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out
of all his troubles) since then, no man in all likelihood has not some
occasion of God's especial favor and assistance, and God is always so ready to
afford them, we may reasonably presume that every man does sometime receive
them, and is thereby obliged to return a grateful affection to him, not only
as to a common benefactour, but as to his particular friend and patron. However
there is none of us, who may not perceive himself singularly indebted to God's
patience in forbearing to punish him, to his mercy in pardoning and passing
over innumerable offenses committed against him: the renowned Penitent in the
Gospel did love much, Luke 7. 47.
because much was forgiven her; And who is there of us, that has not the same
reason to love much? who is there that, at least according to God's inclination
and intention, has not had much forgiven him? whom have not the riches of
divine goodness and long-suffering attended upon in order to his repentance?
Romans 2. 4.
who has not been in so great degree ungrateful, unfruitful and
improfitable, that he has not abundant reason to acknowledge God's especial
grace in bearing with him; Luke 17. 10.
and to confess with Jacob, Psalm. 130. 3.
that he is less than the least of all God's mercies? Genesis 32. 10.
if any such there were, he should have no less cause to be affected with the
abundance of that grace, which so preserved him from sins and provocations. For
if we stand, it is he that upholdeth us; Psalm. 37. 23. 246. 8.
if we fall, it is he that raises us; it is his especial favor that either we
avoid sin, or sinning escape punishment. Now then God having by many real
evidences declared such particular affection toward us, can we considering
thereon do otherwise than say to our selves, after Saint John, Nos ergo
diligamus Deum, quoniam prior dilexit nos, 1 John 4. 19.
Let us therefore love God, because God first loved us; surely in all
ingenuity, according to all equity, we are bound to do so; the reason and
nature of things does require it of us: all other loves (even those of the
baser sort) are able to propagate themselves; (...). Soph.
(to continue and enlarge their kind) are commonly fruitful, and effectual in
producing their like; how strangely then unnatural and monstrous is it, that
this love only (this so vigorous and perfect love) should be barren and
impotent as it were? If you love those that love you (says our Savior) what
reward have you? Matt. 5. 46.
(what reward can you pretend to for so common, so necessary a performance) do
not even the publicans do the same? (the Publicans, men not usually of the
best natures, or tenderest hearts, Luke 6. 32.
yet they do thus) And (again says he) If you love those who love you, what
thank is it, for even sinners love those that love them? (sinners, men not led
by conscience of duty, or regard to reason, but hurried, with a kind of blind
and violent force, by instinct of nature, do so much, go so far) If thus men,
both by nature and custom most untractable, the least guided by rules of right,
of reason, of ingenuity; yea not only the most barbarous men, but even the
most savage beasts are sensible of courtesies, return a kind of affection unto
them who make much of them and do them good, what temper are we of, if all that
bounty we experience cannot move us; if God's daily loading us with his
benefits, Psalm. 68. 19. 103. 14.
if his crowning us with loving kindness and tender mercies, Ezekiel. 34. 26.
if all those showers of blessings, which he continually pours down upon our
heads does not produce some good degree of correspondent affection in us? It
cannot surely proceed altogether from a wretched baseness of disposition, that
we are so cold and indifferent in our affection toward God, or are sometimes so
averse from loving him; it must rather in great part come from our not
observing carefully, not frequently calling to mind, not earnestly considering
what God has done for us, how exceedingly we stand obliged to his goodness,
from our following that untoward generation of men, who were not ('it is said)
mindful of the wonders which God did among them; Neh. 9. 17.
who remembered not his hand, Psalm. 78. 10, 42.
nor the day that he delivered them; Deuteronomy. 5. 29. 29. 4.
rather following. I say, such careless and heartless people (so they are
termed) than imitating that excellent Person's discretion, who constantly did
set God's loving kindness before his eyes, Psalm. 26. 3.
who frequently did thus raise his mind and rouse up his affections; Psalm. 103.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy name;
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits, who forgiveth all
thine iniquities and heals all thy diseases, etc. It is not for want of the
like experience, or the like obligation, but for want of the same wisdom, of
the same care, of the same honest consideration and diligence, that we do not
the like.

To these means I add that,

4. A special help to breed in us this holy disposition of soul will be the
setting our selves in good earnest, with a strong and constant resolution, to
endeavor the performance of all our duty toward God, and keeping his
commandments although upon inferior considerations of reason, such as we are
capable of applying to this purpose; regards of fear, of hope, of desire to
avoid the mischiefs arising from sin, or attaining the benefits ensuing upon
virtue. If we cannot immediately raise our hearts to that higher pitch of
acting from that nobler principle of love, let us however apply that we can
reach unto practice, striving as we are able to perform what God requires of
us; exercising our selves as to material acts, in keeping a conscience void of
offense toward God and toward man; the doing which as it may in time discover
the excellency of goodness to our mind, so it will by degrees reconcile our
affections thereto; then by God's blessing (who graciously regards the meanest
endeavors toward good; Isa. 42. 1.
who despises not the day of small things; Zech. 4. 10.
who will not quench the smoking flax nor break the bruised reed) from doing
good out of a sober regard to our own welfare, we shall come to like it in it
self, and consequently to love him, unto whose nature and to whose will it
renders us conformable: for as doing ill breeds a dislike to goodness, and an
aversion from him, who himself is full thereof, and who rigorously exacts it of
us; as bad conscience removes expectation of good from God, and begets a
suspicion of evil from him, consequently stifling all kindness toward him; so
doing well, we shall become acquainted with it, and friends thereto; a hearty
approbation, esteem and good liking thereof will ensue; finding by experience,
that indeed the ways of wisdom, virtue, and piety are pleasantness, and all
her paths are peace; that the fruits of conscientious practice are health to
our body, and to our soul, security to our estate, and to our reputation, rest
in our mind, and comfort in our conscience; goodness will become precious in
our eyes, and he who commends it to us, being himself essential goodness, will
appear most venerable and most amiable, we shall then become disposed to render
him, what we perceive he best deserves, entire reverence and affection.

5. But I commend farther, as a most necessary mean of attaining this
disposition, assiduous earnest prayer unto God, that he would in mercy bestow
it on us, and by his grace work it in us: which practice is indeed doubly
conducible to this purpose; both in way of impetration, and by real efficacy;
it will not fail to obtain it as a gift from God; it will help to produce it as
an instrument of God's grace.

Upon the first account it is absolutely necessary; for it is from God's free
representation of himself as lovely to our minds, and drawing our hearts unto
him (although ordinarily in the use of the means already mentioned, or some
like to them) that this affection is kindled; our bare consideration is too
cold, our rational discourse too faint; we cannot sufficiently recollect our
wandering thoughts, we cannot strongly enough impress those proper incentives of
love upon our hearts (our hearts so dampt with sensual desires, so clogged and
pestered with earthly inclinations) so as to kindle in our souls this holy
flame; it can only be effected by a light shining from God, by a fire coming
from heaven: As all others, so more especially this Queen of graces must
proceed from the father of lights, and giver of all good gifts: he alone, who
is love, can be the parent of so goodly an offspring, can beget this lively
image of himself within us: Gal. 5. 22.
it is the principal fruit of God's Holy Spirit, nor can it grow from any other
root than from it; it is called the love of the Spirit, Romans 15. 30.
as its most signal and peculiar effect; in fine, the love of God (as Saint
Paul expressly teaches us) is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit given
unto us; given, but that not without asking, without seeking; a grace so
excellent, God, we may be assured, will not dispense, a gift so precious he
will not bestow on them, who do not care to look after it, who will not
vouchsafe to beg it: if we are not willing to acknowledge our want thereof; if
we refuse to express our desire of it, if we will not show that we regard and
value it, if, when God freely offers it, and invites us to receive it (he does
so by offering his holy Spirit, Luke 11. 9, 13.
the fountain thereof, Matt. 21. 22. 7. 7.
unto us) we will not decently apply our selves to him for it, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.
how can we expect to obtain it? God has propounded this condition (and it is
surely no hard, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2.
no grievous condition) if we ask we shall receive; he has expressly promised
that He will give his Spirit (his Spirit of love) to them who ask it; we may be
therefore sure, performing the condition duly, to obtain it; and as sure,
neglecting that, we deserve to go without it.

Prayer then is upon this account a needful means; and it is a very profitable
one upon the score of its own immediate energy or virtue: for as by familiar
converse (together with the delights and advantages attending thereon) other
friendships are begot and nourished, so even by that acquaintance, as it were,
with God, which devotion begets, by experience therein how sweet and good he
is, this affection is produced and strengthened. (...).
As want of intercourse weakens and dissolves friendship; so if we seldom come
at God, or little converse with him, it is not only a sign, but will be a
cause of estrangement and disaffection toward him: according to the nature of
the thing, prayer has peculiar advantages above other acts of piety, to this
effect: therein not only as in contemplation the eye of our mind (our
intellectual part) is directed toward God: but our affections also (the hand of
our soul by which we embrace good, the feet thereof by which we pursue it) are
drawn out and fixed upon him; we no^ only therein behold his excellencies* but
in a manner feel them and enjoy them; our hearts also being thereby softened and
warmed by desire become more susceptive of love. We do in the performance of
this duty approach nearer to God, and consequently God draws nearer to us (as
Saint James assures; Jam. 4. 8.
Draw near, says he, unto God, and he will draw near to you) and thereby we
partake more fully and strongly of his gracious influences; therein indeed he
most freely communicates his grace, therein he makes us most sensible of his
love to us, and thereby disposes us to love him again. I add, that true
(fervent and hearty) prayer does include, and suppose* some acts of love, or
some near tendencies thereto; whence, as every habit is corroborated by acts of
its kind, so by this practice divine love will be confirmed and increased.
These are the means, which my meditation did suggest as conducing to the
production and growth of this most excellent grace in our souls.

III. I should lastly propound some Inducements apt to stir us up to the
endeavor of procuring it, and to the exercise thereof, by representing to your
consideration the blessed fruits and benefits (both by way of natural causality
and of reward) accruing from it; as also the woeful consequences and mischiefs
springing from the want thereof. How being endewed with it perfects and
advances our nature, rendering it in a manner and degree divine, by resemblance
to God (who is full thereof, so full that he is called Love) by approximation,
adherence and union (in a sort) unto him: how it ennobles us with the most
glorious alliance possible, rendering us the friends and favorites of the
Sovereign King and Lord of all, brethren of the firstborn, whose names are
written in heaven; enriches us with a right and title to the most inestimable
treasures (those which eye has not seen, 1 Cor. 2. 9.
nor ear heard, nor have entered into the heart of man to conceive, which God
has prepared for them that love him) a sure possession of the supreme good, of
all that God is able to bestow, all whose wisdom and power, whose counsel and
care it eternally engages for our benefit; how all security and welfare, all
rest and peace, all joy and happiness attend upon it; Psalm. 145. 20.
for that The Lord preserves all them that love him (preserves them in the
enjoyment of all good, in safety from all danger and mischief) and that to
those who love God all things cooperate for their good; Romans 8. 28.
how incomparable a sweetness and delight accompany the practice thereof, far
surpassing all other pleasures; perfectly able to content our minds, to sustain
and comfort us even in the want of all other satisfactions, yea under the
pressure of whatever most grievous afflictions can befall us. How contrariwise
the want thereof will depress us into a state of greatest imperfection and
baseness, setting us at the greatest distance from God in all respects, both in
similitude of nature, and as to all favorable regard, or beneficial
communication from him; casting us into a wretched and disgraceful consortship
with the most degenerate creatures, the accursed fiends, who for disaffection
and enmity toward God, are banished from all happiness; how it extremely
impoverisheth and beggereth us, devesting us of all right to any good thing,
rendering us incapable of any portion, but that of utter darkness; how it
excludes us from any safety, any rest, any true comfort or joy, and exposes
us to all mischief and misery imaginable; all that being deprived of the divine
protection, presence and favor, being made objects of the divine anger, hatred
and severe justice, being abandoned to the malice of hell, being driven into
utter darkness and eternal fire does import or can produce. I should also have
commended this love to you by comparing it with other loves, and showing how
far in its nature, in its causes, in its properties, in its effects it
excels them; even so far as the object thereof in excellency does transcend
all other objects of our affection; how this is grounded upon the highest and
surest reason; others upon accounts very low and mean, commonly upon fond
humor and mistake; this produces real, certain, immutable goods; others at
best terminate only in goods apparent, unstable and transitory; this is most
worthy of us, employing all our faculties in their noblest manner of operation
upon the best object; others misbeseem us, so that in pursuing them we disgrace
our understanding, misapply our desires, distemper our affections, mispend our
endeavors. I should have enlarged upon these considerations; and should have
adjoined some particular advantages of this grace; as for instance, that the
procuring thereof is the most sure, the most easy, the most compendious way of
attaining all others; of sweetning and ingratiating all obedience to us, of
making the hardest yoke easy, and the heaviest burden light unto us. In fine,
I should have wished you to consider, that its practice is not only a mean and
way to happiness, but our very formal happiness it self; the real enjoyment of
the best good we are capable of; that in which alone heaven it self (the
felicity of Saints and Angels) does consist; which more then comprehends in it
self all the benefits of highest dignity, richest plenty and sweetest pleasure.
But I shall forbear entering upon so ample and fruitful subjects of meditation,
and conclude with that good Collect of our Church:

O Lord, who have prepared for them that love thee such good things as pass
man's understanding; pour into our hearts such love toward thee, that we,
loving thee above all things, may obtain thy promises, which exceed all that we
can desire; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Third Sermon.
MATT. 22. 39. And the Second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self.
THE essential goodness of God, and his special benignity toward mankind are to
a considering mind diverse ways very apparent; the frame of the world, and the
natural course of things do with a thousand voices loudly and clearly proclaim
them to us; every sense does yield us affidavit to that speech of the Holy
Psalmist, Psalm. 33. 5. 119. 64.
The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord: we see it in the glorious
brightness of the skies, and in the pleasant verdure of the fields; we taste it
in the various delicacies of food, supplied by land and sea; we smell it in the
fragrancies of herbs and flowers; we hear it in the natural music of the
woods; we feel it in the comfortable warmth of heaven, and in the cheering
freshness of the air; we continually do possess and enjoy it in the numberless
accommodations of life, presented to us by the bountiful hand of nature.

Of the same goodness we may be well assured by that common providence which
continually does uphold us in our being, does opportunely relieve our needs,
does protect us in dangers, and rescue us from imminent mischiefs, does comport
with our infirmities and misdemeanors; the which (in the divine Psalmists
style) does hold our soul in life, Psalm. 66. 9. 56. 13.
and suffers not our feet to be moved; does redeem our life from destruction;
Psalm. 103. 4. 145. 16.
does crown us with loving kindness, and tender mercies.

The dispensations of grace, in the revelation of heavenly truth, in the
overtures of mercy, in the succors of our weakness, in the proposal of
glorious rewards, in all the methods and means conducing to our salvation, do
afford most admirable proofs and pledges of the same immense benignity.

But in nothing is the divine goodness toward us more illustriously
conspicuous, than in the nature and tendency of those Laws which God has been
pleased for the regulation of our lives to prescribe unto us, all which do
palpably evidence his serious desire and provident care of our welfare; so that
in imposing them he plainly does not so much exercise his Sovereignty over us,
as express his kindness toward us; neither do they more clearly declare his
will, than demonstrate his good will to us.

And among all divine Precepts this especially contained in my Text, does argue
the wonderful goodness of our heavenly Lawgiver, appearing both in the manner
of the proposal, and in the substance of it.

The Second, Luke 10. 27.
says our Lord, is like to it, that is to the Precept of loving the Lord our
God with all our heart: and is not this a mighty argument of immense goodness
in God, that he does in such a manner commend this duty to us, coupling it with
our main duty toward him, and requiring us with like earnestness to love our
neighbor as to love himself?

He is transcendently amiable for the excellency of his nature; he by
innumerable and inestimable benefits graciously conferred on us has deserved
our utmost affection; so that naturally there can be no obligation bearing any
proportion or considerable semblance to that of loving him; yet has he in
goodness been pleased to create one, and to endew it with that privilege;
making the love of a man (whom we cannot value but for his gifts, to whom we
can owe nothing but what properly we owe to him) no less obligatory, to declare
it near as acceptable as the love of himself, to whom we owe all. To him, as
the sole author and free donour of all our good, by just correspondence all
our mind and heart, all our strength and endeavor are due; and reasonably
might he engross them to himself, excluding all other beings from any share in
them; so that we might be obliged only to fix our thoughts and set our
affections on him, only to act directly for his honor and interest; saying
with the Holy Psalmist, Psalm. 73. 25.
Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none in earth that I desire
beside thee: Yet does he freely please to impart a share of these performances
on mankind; yet does he charge us to place our affection on one another; to
place it there indeed in a measure so large that we can hardly imagine a
greater; according to a rule, than which none can be devised more complete or
certain.

O mavelous condescension, O goodness truly divine; which surpasses the
nature of things, which dispenses with the highest right, and forgoeth the
greatest interest that can be! Does not God in a sort debase himself, that he
might advance us? does he not appear to wave his own due, and neglect his own
honor for our advantage? how otherwise could the love of man be capable of any
resemblance to the love of God, and not stand at an infinite distance, or in an
extreme disparity from it? how otherwise could we be obliged to affect or
regard any thing beside the Sovereign, the only goodness? how otherwise could
there be any second or like to that first, Matt. 19. 17.
that great, that peerless command, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart? Matt. 22. 38.


This indeed is the highest commendation whereof any Law is capable; for as to
be like God is the highest praise that can be given to a person; so to resemble
the divinest Law of love to God is the fairest character that can be assigned
of a Law: the which indeed represents it to be (...), as Saint James calls
it, Jam. 2. 8.
that is, a Royal and Sovereign Law; exalted above all others, and bearing a
sway on them. Saint Paul tells us, that the end of the commandment (or, the
main scope of the Evangelical doctrine) is charity out of a pure heart and a
good conscience, 1 Timothy 1. 6.
and faith unfeigned; that charity is the sum and substance of all other
duties, Romans 13. 8, 9.
and that he that loves another has fulfilled the whole law; Gal. 5. 14.
that Charity is the chief of the Theological virtues, 1 Cor. 13. 13.
and the prime fruit of the divine Spirit; Gal. 5. 22.
and the bond of perfection, Col. 3. 14.
which combineth and consummateth all other graces, 1 Cor. 16. 14.
and the general principle of all our doings. Saint Peter enjoineth us that to
all other virtues we add charity, 2 Pet. 1. 7.
as the top and crown of them; and Above all things (says he) have fervent
charity among your selves. 1 Pet. 4. 8.
Saint John calls this Law, in way of excellence, the commandment of God; 1 John 3. 23, 11. 4. 21.
and our Lord himself claims it as his peculiar Precept, Joh. 15. 12.
This (says he) is my commandment, that ye love one another as I have loved
you; Joh. 13. 34.
A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another; and makes the
observance of it the special cognizance of his followers, Joh. 13. 35.
By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another.

These indeed are lofty commendations thereof, yet all of them may worthily
veil to this; all of them seem verified in virtue of this, because God has
vouchsafed to place this command in so near adjacency to the first great Law,
conjoining the two Tables; making Charity contiguous, and as it were
commensurate to Piety.

It is true, that in many respects Charity does resemble Piety; for it is the
most genuine daughter of Piety, thence in complexion, in features, in humor
much favoring its sweet mother; It does consist in like dispositions and
motions of soul; It does grow from the same roots and principles of benignity,
ingenuity, equity, gratitude, planted in our original constitution by the
breath of God, and improved in our hearts by the divine Spirit of love; 1 John
4. 7, 11.
It produces the like fruits of beneficence toward others, and of comfort in
our selves; It in like manner does assimilate us to God, Matt. 5. 45.
rendering us conformable to his nature, Ephesians. 5. 1, 2.
followers of his practice and partakers of his felicity; It is of like use and
consequence toward the regulation of our practice, and due management of our
whole life: In such respects I say this Law is like to the other; but it is
however chiefly so for that God has pleased to lay so great stress thereon, as
to make it the other half of our Religion and duty; or because, as Saint John
says, This commandment have we from him, Matt. 22. 40.
that he who loves God, 1 John 4. 21.
love his brother also; which is to his praise a most pregnant demonstration of
his immense goodness toward us.

But no less in the very substance of this Duty will the benignity of him that
prescribes it shine forth, displaying it self in the rare beauty and sweetness
of it; together with the vast benefit and utility, which it, being observed,
will yield to mankind; which will appear by what we may discourse for pressing
its observance; but first let us explain it, as it lies before us expressed in
the words of the Text, wherein we shall consider two Particulars observable;
First, The Object of the Duty; Secondly, The Qualification annexed to it; The
Object of it, Our Neighbor, The Qualification, As our selves.

I. The Object of Charity is our Neighbor; that is (it being understood, as
the Precept now concerns us, according to our Lord's exposition, or according
to his intent, and the tenor of his Doctrine) every man, with whom we have to
do, or who is capable of our love, especially every Christian.

The Law as it was given to God's ancient people did openly regard only those
among them, who were linked together in a holy neighborhood or Society, from
which all other men being excluded were deemed strangers and foreiners; Ephesians. 2.
12.
(aliens, as Saint Paul speaks, from the commonwealth of Israel, and
strangers from the covenants of promise.) for thus the Law runs in
Leviticus, Thou shall not bear any grudge against the children of thy people,
Lev. 19. 18.
but thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; where plainly Jews and
Neighbors are terms equivalent; other men being supposed to stand at distance
without the fold or politic enclosure, which God by several Ordinances had
fenced, Lev. 20. 26, 24.
to keep that Nation unmixt, Exodus 33. 16.
and separate: nor can it be excepted against this notion, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. 14. 2.
that in the same Chapter it is enjoined, Levit. 19. 34.
But the stranger that dwells with you shall be unto you as one born among
you, and thou shall love him as thy self; for by that stranger (as the Jewish
Masters well interpret it) is meant a Proselyte of righteousness; or one who
although a stranger by birth, was yet a brother in Religion, having voluntarily
submitted to their Law, being engaged in the same Covenant, and thence admitted
to the same Privileges, as an adopted Child of that Holy Family.

But now, Ephesians. 2. 14.
such distinctions of men being voided, Gal. 3. 28.
and that wall of partition demolished, Act. 10. 36.
all the world is become one people; subject to the Laws of one common Lord;
and capable of the mercies purchased by one Redeemer. God's love to mankind did
move him to send our Lord into the world, Tit. 3. 4.
to assume humane nature, Joh. 3. 16.
and therein to become a Mediator between God and Men. 1 Timothy 2. 5.
Our Lord's kindness to all his brethren disposed him to undertake their
salvation, and to expiate their sins, 1 John 2. 2.
and to taste death for every man; Heb. 2. 9.
the effect whereof is an universal reconciliation of God to the world, 2 Cor.
5. 19.
and an union of men together. Col. 1. 20.


Now the blood of Christ has cemented mankind; Ephesians. 1. 10.
the favor of God embracing all has approximated and combined all together;
Ephesians. 2. 13.
so that now every man is our brother, not only by nature, as derived from the
same stock, but by grace, as partaker of the common redemption; Now God
desiring the salvation of all men, 1 Timothy 2. 4.
and inviting all men to mercy, Tit. 2. 11.
our duty must be coextended with God's grace, Col. 1. 23.
and our charity must follow that of our Savior.

We are therefore now to all men, that which one Jew was to another; yea more
than such, our Christianity having induced much higher obligations, stricter
alliances and stronger endearments, than were those, whereby Judaism did engage
its followers to mutual amity. The duties of common humanity, (to which our
natural frame and sense do incline us, which Philosophy recommendeth and
natural Religion does prescribe, being grounded upon our community of nature
and cognation of blood, upon apparent equity, upon general convenience and
utility) our Religion does not only enforce and confirm, but enhance and
improve; superadding higher instances and faster ties of spiritual relation,
reaching in a sort to all men (as being in duty, in design, in remote capacity
our spiritual brethren) but in especial manner to all Christians, who actually
are fellow members of the same holy fraternity, 1 Pet. 1. 23. 2. 17.
contracted by spiritual regeneration from one heavenly seed, supported by a
common faith and hope, strengthened by communion in acts of devotion and
charity.

Hereon therefore are grounded those Evangelical commands, explicatory of this
Law as it now stands in force; that as we have opportunity we should do good
unto all men, Gal. 6. 10.
especially unto them who are of the household of faith; that we should abound
in love one toward another, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 12.
and toward all men; that we should glorify God in our professed subjection
unto the Gospel of Christ, 2 Cor. 9. 12, 13.
by liberally distributing to the Saints, and to all men; Heb. 12. 24.
that we should follow peace with all men, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.
should be patient toward all men, Tit. 3. 2.
and gentle toward all men, and show all meekness toward all men; 1 Thessalonians. 5.
15.
and ever follow that which is good both among our selves, (...).
and to all men; that we should make supplications, 2 Timothy 2. 24.
intercessions, 1 Timothy 2. 1.
and thanksgivings for all men, Ephesians. 6. 18.
especially for all Saints, or all our Fellow Christians, Phil. 4. 5.
and express moderation, or ingenuity, to all men.

Such is the Object of our Charity; and thus did our Lord himself expound it,
when by a Jewish Lawyer being put to resolve this question, Luke 10. 29. (...),
etc. Just. M. c. Tryph. (p. 320.)
And who is my neighbor? he did propound a case, or history, whereby he did
extort from that Rabbi this confession, that even a Samaritan, discharging a
notable office of humanity and mercy to a Jew, did thereby most truly approve
himself a good neighbor to him; and consequently that reciprocal performances
of such offices were due from a Jew to a Samaritan; whence it might appear,
that this relation of neighborhood is universal and unlimited. So much for the
Object.

II. As for the Qualification annexed and couched in those words, as thy self,
that, as I conceive, may import both a Rule declaring the Nature, and a Measure
determining the Quantity of that Love which is due from us to our neighbor;
(...). Arist. Ephesians. 9. 4.
the comparative term As implying both Conformity or Similitude, and
Commensuration or Equality.

1. Loving our neighbor as our selves does import a Rule directing what kind
of love we should bear and exercise toward him; or informing us that our
charity does consist in having the same affections of soul, and in performing
the same acts of beneficence toward him, as we are ready by inclination, as we
are wont in practice to have or to perform toward our selves, with full
approbation of our judgment and conscience, apprehending it just and reasonable
so to do.

We cannot indeed better understand the nature of this duty, than by reflecting
on the motions of our own heart, and observing the course of our demeanor
toward our selves; for thence infallibly we may be assured how we should stand
affected, and how we should behave our selves toward others.

This is a peculiar advantage of this Rule (inferring the excellent wisdom and
goodness of him who framed it) that by it very easily and certainly we may
discern all the specialties of our duty, (...). Chrysostom. (...).
without looking abroad or having recourse to external instruction; so that by
it we may be perfect Lawgivers, and skillful Judges, and faithful Monitours
to our selves of what in any case we should do: for every one by internal
experience knows what it is to love himself, every one is conscious how he
uses to treat himself; each one consequently can prescribe and decide for
himself, what he ought to do toward his neighbor; so that we are not only
(...), 1 Thessalonians. 4. 9.
taught of God, as the Apostle says, Matt. 7. 12.
to love one another, Luke 6. 31.
but (...), taught of our selves how to exercise that duty; whence our Lord
otherwhere does propose the Law of charity in these terms, (...). Tob. 4. 15.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so unto them,
for this is the law and the prophets; Constable. Apost. 1. 1.
that is, unto this Rule all the special precepts of charity proposed in Holy
Scripture, may be reduced.

Wherefore for information concerning our duty in each case and circumstance,
we need only thus to consult and interrogate our selves, hence forming
resolutions concerning our practice.

Do we not much esteem and set by our selves, do we not strive to maintain in
our minds a good opinion of our selves; can any mischances befalling us, any
defects observable in us, any faults committed by us induce us to slight or
despise our selves? this may teach us what regard and value we should ever
preserve for our neighbor.

Do we not sincerely and earnestly desire our own welfare and advantage in
every kind; (...), etc. Just. M. c. Tryph. (p. 321.)
do we not heartily wish good success to our own designs and undertakings; are
we unconcerned or coldly affected in any case touching our own safety, our
estate, our credit, our satisfaction or pleasure? do we not especially, if we
rightly understand our selves, desire the health and happiness of our souls?
this does inform us, what we should wish and covet for our neighbor.

Have we not a sensible delight and complacency in our own prosperity? do we
ever repine at any advantages accruing to our person or condition? are we not
extremely glad to find our selves thriving and flourishing in wealth, in
reputation, in any accommodation or ornament of our state? especially if we be
sober and wise, does not our spiritual proficiency and improvement in virtue
yield joyous satisfaction to us? are we not much comforted in apprehending our
selves to proceed in a hopeful way toward everlasting felicity? this may
instruct us what content we should feel in our neighbors prosperity, both
temporal and spiritual.

Do we not seriously grieve at our own disasters and disappointments; are we
not in sad dumps, whenever we incur any damage or disgrace; do not our
diseases and pains sorely afflict us; do we not pity and bemoan our selves in
any want, calamity, or distress? can we especially, if we are our selves,
without grievous displeasure apprehend our selves enslaved to Sin and Satan,
destitute of God's favor, exposed to endless misery? hence may we learn how we
should condole and commiserate the misfortunes of our neighbor.

Do we not eagerly prosecute our own concerns? do we not with huge vigor and
industry strive to acquire all conveniences and comforts to our selves, to rid
our selves of all wants and molestations? is our solicitous care or painful
endeavor ever wanting toward the support and succor of our selves in any of
our needs? are we satisfied in merely wishing our selves well, are we not also
busy and active in procuring what we affect? especially, if we are well
advised, do we not effectually provide for the weal of our soul, and supply of
our spiritual necessities; laboring to rescue our selves from ignorance and
error, from the tyranny of sin, from the torture of a bad conscience, from the
danger of hell? this shows how ready we should be really to further our
neighbors good, ministering to him all kinds of assistance and relief suitable
to his needs, both corporal and spiritual.

Are we so proud or nice, that we disdain to yield attendance or service
needful for our own sustenance or convenience; do we not indeed gladly perform
the meanest and most sordid offices for our selves? this declares how
condescensive we should be in helping our neighbor, how ready even to wash his
feet, when occasion does require.

Do we love to vex our selves, or cross our own humor? do we not rather seek
by all means to please and gratify our selves? this may warn us, how innocent
and inoffensive, how compliant and complacent we should be in our behavior
toward others; endeavoring to please them in all things, Romans 15. 2.
especially for their good to edification.

Are we easily angry with our selves, do we retain implacable grudges against
our selves, or do we execute upon our selves mischievous revenge? are we not
rather very meek and patient toward our selves, mildly comporting with our own
great weaknesses, our troublesome humors, our impertinencies and follies;
readily forgiving our selves the most heinous offenses, neglects, affronts,
injuries, and outrages committed by us against our own interest, honor, and
welfare? hence may we derive lessons of meekness and patience, to be exercised
toward our neighbor, in bearing his infirmities and miscarriages, in remitting
any wrongs or discourtesies received from him.

Are we apt to be rude in our deportment, harsh in our language, or rigorous in
our dealing toward our selves? do we not rather in word and deed treat our
selves very softly, very indulgently? Do we use to pry for faults, or to pick
quarrels with our selves, to carp at any thing said or done by us, rashly or
upon slight grounds to charge blame on our selves, to lay heavy censures on our
actions, to make foul constructions of our words, to blazon our defects, or
aggravate our failings? do we not rather connive at, and conceal our blemishes;
do we not excuse and extenuate our own crimes?

Can we find in our hearts to frame virulent invectives, or to dart bitter
taunts and scoffs against our selves; to murder our own credit by slander, to
blast it by detraction, to maim it by reproach, to prostitute it to be
deflowred by jeering and scurrilous abuse? are we not rather very jealous of
our reputation, and studious to preserve it, as a precious ornament, a main
fence, an useful instrument of our welfare?

Do we delight to report, or like to hear ill stories of our selves? do we not
rather endeavor all we can to stifle them; to tie the tongues and stop the
ears of men against them? hence may we be acquainted how civil and courteous in
our behavior, How fair and ingenuous in our dealing, how candid and mild in
our judgment or censure we should be toward our neigbour; how very tender and
careful we should be of any wise wronging or hurting his fame.

Thus reflecting on our selves, and making our practice toward our selves the
pattern of our dealing with others, we shall not fail to discharge what is
prescribed to us in this Law; and so we have here a Rule of Charity. But
farther,

2. Loving our neighbor as our selves does also import the Measure of our love
toward him; that it should be commensurate and equal in degree to that love,
which we bear and exercise toward our selves. Saint Peter once and again does
exhort us to love one another (...), 1 Pet. 1. 22. 4. 8.
with an outstretched affection; and how far that affection should be stretched
we are here informed; even that it should reach the farthest that can be, or to
a parity with that intense love, which we do bear in heart, and express in
performance toward our selves: so that we do either bring down our self-love to
such a moderation, or raise up our charity to such a fervency, that both come
to be adjusted in the same even level: this is that pitch, at which we should
aim and aspire; this is that perfection of charity, which our Lord recommendeth
to us in that injunction, Matt. 5. 48.
Be perfect, even as your father in heaven is perfect.

That this sense of the words is included, yea chiefly intended, diverse reasons
will evince: For

1. The most natural signification and common use of the phrase does import
thus much; and any one at first hearing would so understand the words.

2. It appears by comparing this Precept with that to which it is annexed, of
loving God with all our heart and all our soul, which manifestly designeth the
quantity and degree of that love; consequently the like determination is
intended in this Precept, which is expressed to resemble that, or designed in
like manner to qualify and bound our duty toward our neighbor.

3. If the Law does not signify thus much, it does hardly signify any thing;
not at least any thing of direction or use to us; for no man is ignorant that
he is obliged to love his neighbor, but how far that love must extend, is the
point wherein most of us do need to be resolved, and without satisfaction in
which we shall hardly do any thing; for as he that owes money will not pay
except he can tell how much it is; so to know the Duty will not avail toward
effectual observance of it, if its measure be not fixed.

4. Indeed, the Law otherwise understood will rather be apt to misguide than to
direct us; inducing us to apprehend, that we shall satisfy its intent, and
sufficiently discharge our duty, by practicing charity in any low degree or
mean instance. Also,

5. The former sense, which is unquestionable, does infer and establish this;
because similitude of love, morally speaking, cannot consist with inequality
thereof; for if in considerable degrees we love our selves more than others,
assuredly we shall fail both in exerting such internal acts of affection, and
in performing such external offices of kindness toward them, as we do exert and
perform in regard to our selves; whence this Law, taken merely as a Rule,
demanding a confused and imperfect similitude of practice, will have no clear
obligation or certain efficacy.

6. But farther to assure this exposition, I shall declare that the Duty thus
interpreted is agreeable to reason, and may justly be required of us, upon
considerations, which together will serve to press the observance of it,
according to such measure.

1. It is reasonable that we should thus love our neighbor as our selves,
because he is as our selves, or really in all considerable respects the same
with us: We concur with him in all that is necessary, substantial, and stable;
we differ from him only in things contingent, circumstantial, and variable; in
the which, of course or by chance we are liable in a small time as much to
differ from our selves: in such respects we are not the same to day that we
were yesterday, and shall be to morrow; for we shift our circumstances as we do
our clothes; our bodies are in continual flux, and our souls do much conform to
their alteration; our temper and complexion do vary with our air, our diet, our
conversation, our fortunes, our age; our parts grow and decay, our principles
and judgments, our affections and desires are never fixed, and seldom rest long
in the same place; all our outward state does easily change face; so that if we
consider the same person in youth and in age, in health and in sickness, in
prosperity and in distress, may we not say quantum mutatus ab illo, how quite
another man is he grown? Yet shall a man for such alterations surcease or abate
his love to himself? why then in regard to the like differences shall we less
affect our neighbor, who is endowed with that common nature, which alone
through all those vicissitudes sticks fast in us; who is the most express
image of us, (or rather a copy, drawn by the same hand, of the same orginal)
another self, attired in a diverse garb of circumstances? do we not so far as we
despise or disaffect him, by consequence slight or hate our selves; seeing
(except bare personality, or I know not what metaphysical identity) there is
nothing in him different from what is, or what may be in us?

2. It is just that we should love our neighbor equally with our selves,
because he really no less deserves love, or because upon a fair judgment he
will appear equally amiable: justice is impartial, and regards things as they
are in themselves, abstracting from their relation to this or that person;
whence if our neighbor seem worthy of affection no less than we, it demands
that accordingly we should love him no less.

And what ground can there be of loving our selves which may not as well be
found in others? is it endowments of nature, is it accomplishments of
knowledge, is it ornaments of virtue, is it accoustrements of fortune; but is
not our neighbor possessed of the same; is he not at least capable of them,
the collation and acquist of them depending on the same arbitrary bounty of
God, 1 Cor. 4. 6, 5.
or upon faculties and means commonly dispensed to all? May not any man at
least be as wise and as good as we? why then should we not esteem, why not
affect him as much? does relation to us alter the case? is self as self lovely
or valuable, does that respect lend any worth or price to things?

Likewise, what more can justice find in our neighbor to obstruct or depress
our love than it may observe in our selves? has he greater infirmities or
defects, is he more liable to errors and miscarriages, is he guilty of worse
faults than we? If without arrogance and vinity we cannot affirm this, then are
we as unworthy of love as he can be; an^ refusing any degree thereof to him, w^
may as reasonably withdraw the sam^ from our selves.

3. It is fit that we should be obliged to love our neighbor equally with ou^
selves, because all charity beneath self love is defective, and all self-love
abov^ charity is excessive.

It is an imperfect charity which dote not respect our neighbor according to
his utmost merit and worth, which dote not heartily desire his good, which dote
not earnestly promote his advantage i^ every kind, according to our ability an^
opportunity: and what beyond this can we do for our selves?

If in kind or degree we transcend this, it is not virtuous love or true
friendship to our selves, but a vain fondness or perverse dotage; proceeding
from inordinate dispositions of soul, grounded on foolish conceits, begetting
foul qualities and practices; envy, strife, ambition, avarice, and the like.

4. Equity requires that we should love our neighbor to this degree, because
we are apt to claim the same measure of love from others: no mean respect or
slight affection will satisfy us; we cannot brook the least disregard or
coldness; to love us a little is all one to us as not to love us at all: it is
therefore equitable that we should be engaged to the same height of charity
toward others; otherwise we should be allowed in our dealings to use double
weights and measures, Prove. 22.^^
which is plain iniquity: what indeed can be more ridiculously absurd, than
that we should pretend to receive that from others, which we are not disposed
to yield to them upon the same ground and title?

5. It is needful that so great a charity should be prescribed, because none
inferior thereto will reach diverse weighty ends designed in this Law; namely,
the general convenience and comfort of our lives in mutual society and
intercourse: for if in considerable degree we do affect our selves beyond
others, we shall be continually bickering and clashing with them about points
of interest and credit; scrambling with them for what may be had, and
clambering to get over them in power and dignity; whence all the passions
annoying our souls, and all the mischiefs disturbing our lives must needs ensue.

6. That entire love which we owe to God our Creator, and to Christ our
Redeemer, does exact from us no less a measure of Charity than this: for seeing
they have so clearly demonstrated themselves to bear an immense love to men,
and have charged us therein to imitate them; it becomes us in conformity, in
duty, in gratitude to them, to bear the highest we can, that is the same as we
bear to our selves: for how can we love God enough, or with all our soul, if we
do not accord with him in loving his friends and relations, his servants, his
children with most entire affection?

If in God's judgment they are equal to us, if in his affection and care they
have an equal share, if he in all his dealings is indifferent and impartial
toward all, how can our judgment, our affection, our behavior be right, if
they do not conspire with him in the same measures?

7. Indeed the whole tenor and Genius of our Religion do imply obligation to
this pitch of charity, upon various accounts.

It represents all worldly goods and matters of private interest as very
inconsiderable and unworthy of our affection, thereby substracting the fuel of
immoderate self-love.

It enjoineth us for all our particular concerns entirely to rely upon
providence, so barring solicitude for our selves, and disposing an equal care
for others.

It declares every man so weak, so vile, so wretched, so guilty of sin and
subject to misery (so for all good wholly indebted to the pure grace and mercy
of God) that no man can have reason to dote on himself, or to prefer himself
before others: we need not cark, or prog, or scrape for our selves, being
assured that God sufficiently cares for us.

In its account the fruits and recompenses of love to others in advantage to
our selves do far surpass all present interests and enjoyments; whence in
effect the more or less we love others, answerably the more or less we love our
selves, so that charity and self-love become coincident, and both run together
evenly in one channel.

It recommendeth to us the imitation of God's love and bounty, Matt. 5. 45.
which are absolutely pure, without any regard, any capacity of benefit
redounding to himself.

It commands us heartily to love even our bitterest enemies and most cruel
persecutours; which cannot be performed without a proportionable abatement of
self-love.

It charge us not only freely to impart our substance, 1 John 3. 16.
but willingly to expose our lives for the good of our brethren; in which case
charity does plainly match self-love; for what has a man more dear or precious
than his life to lay out for himself.

It represents all men (considering their divine extraction, and being formed
after God's Image; their designation for eternal glory and happiness, their
partaking of the common redemption by the undertakings and sufferings of
Christ, their being objects of God's tender affection and care) so very
considerable, that no regard beneath the highest will befit them.

It also declares us so nearly allied to them, and so greatly concerned in
their good, Gal. 3. 28.
(we being all one in Christ, Joh. 17. 21.
and members one of another) that we ought to have a perfect complacency in
their welfare, Romans 12. 5.
and a sympathy in their adversity, 1 Cor. 12. 26.
as our own. Joh. 13. 35.


It condemns self-love, self-pleasing, self-seeking as great faults, 2 Timothy
3. 2.
which yet (even in the highest excess) do not seem absolutely bad; 2 Pet. 2.
10.
or otherwise culpable, Romans 15. 1.
than as including partiality, Phil. 2. 4.
or detracting from that equal measure of charity, 1 Cor. 10. 34. 13. 5.
which we owe to others: for surely we cannot love our selves too much, if we
love others equally with our selves; we cannot seek our own good excessively,
if with the same earnestness we seek the good of others.

It exhibiteth supernatural aids of grace, and conferreth that Holy Spirit of
love, which can serve to no meaner purposes, than to quell that sorry principle
of niggardly selfishness, to which corrupt nature does incline; and to enlarge
our hearts to this divine extent of goodness.

8. Lastly, many conspicuous examples, proposed for our direction in this kind
of practice, do imply this degree of charity to be required of us.

It may be objected to our discourse, that the duty, thus understood, is
unpracticable, nature violently swaying to those degrees of self-love, which
charity can no wise reach. This exception (would time permit) I should assoil,
by showing how far, and by what means we may attain to such a practice; (how at
least by aiming at this top of perfection we may ascend nearer and nearer
thereto) in the mean time experience does sufficiently evince possibility, and
assuredly that may be done, which we see done before us: And so it is, pure
charity has been the root of such affections and such performances (recorded
by indubitable testimony) toward others, which hardly any man can exceed in
regard to himself; nor indeed has there scarce ever appeared any heroical
virtue, or memorable piety, whereof charity overbearing selfishness, and
sacrificing private interest to public benefit, has not been a main
ingredient. For instance then

Did not Abraham even prefer the good of others before his own, when he gladly
did quit his country, patrimony, friends, and kindred to pass his days in a
wandering pilgrimage, upon no other encouragement than an overture of blessing
on his posterity?

Did not the charity of Moses stretch thus far, Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Or. 25. in
Ephesians. Or. 7.
when for the sake of his brethren he voluntarily did exchange the splendours
and delights of a Court for a condition of vagrancy and servility; choosing
rather, Heb. 11. 24.
as the Apostle speaks, to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to
enjoy the pleasures of sin? did not it overstretch, when (although having been
grievously affronted by them) he wished that rather his name should be expunged
from God's book, Exodus 32. 32. (...) -- Chrysostom. in Ephesians. Or. 7. 1 Samuel 12. 23.
than that their sin should abide unpardoned?

Did not Samuel exercise such a charity, when being ingratefully and
injuriously dismounted from his authority, he did yet retain toward that people
a zealous desire of their welfare, not ceasing earnestly to pray for them?

Did not Jonathan love David equally with himself, 1 Samuel 20. 30.
when for his sake he chose to incur the displeasure of his father and his
King; when for his advantage he was content to forfeit the privilege of his
birth, and the inheritance of a Crown; when he could without envy or grudge
look on the growing prosperity of his supplanter, could heartily wish his
safety, could effectually protect it, could purchase it to him with his own
great danger and trouble? when he, that in gallantry of courage and virtue did
yield to none, was yet willing to become inferior to one born his subject, one
raised from the dust, Psalm. 78. 70.
one taken from a sheepcoat; so that unrepiningly and without disclain he could
say, 1 Samuel 23. 17.
Thou shall be King over Israel, and I shall be next unto thee: are not these
pregnant evidences, that it was truly said in the story, 1 Samuel 18. 1. 20. 17.
The soul of Jonathan was knit to the soul of David, and he loved him as his
own soul?

Did not the Psalmist competently practice this duty; when in the sickness of
his ungrateful adversaries he clothed himself with sackcloath, Psalm. 35. 12.
he humbled his soul with fasting; he bowed down heavily as one that mourns
for his mother?

Were not Elias, Jeremy, and other Prophets as much concerned for the good of
their countrymen as for their own, when they took such pains, when they run
such hazards, when they endured such hardships not only for them, but from
them; being requited with hatred and misusage for endeavoring to reclaim them
from sin, and stop them from ruin?

May not the Holy Apostles seem to have loved mankind beyond themselves, when
for its instruction and reformation, for reconciling it to God and procuring
its salvation, they gladly did undertake and undergo so many rough
difficulties, so many formidable dangers, such irksome pains and troubles, such
extreme wants and losses, such grievous ignominies and disgraces; slighting all
concerns of their own, and reliquishing whatever was most dear to them (their
safety, their liberty, their ease, their estate, their reputation, their
pleasure, their very blood and breath) for the welfare of others; even of those
who did spitefully malign and cruelly abuse them?

Survey but the Life of one among them; mark the wearisome travels he underwent
over all the earth, the solicitous cares which did possess his mind for all the
Churches: the continual toils and drudgeries sustained by him in preaching by
word and writing: in visiting, in admonishing, in all pastoral employments; the
imprisonments, the stripes, the reproaches, the oppositions and persecutions of
every kind, and from all sorts of people, which he suffered; the pinching
wants, the desperate hazards, the lamentable distresses with the which he did
ever conflict; 2 Cor. 11. 23. 4. 8.
peruse those black catalogues of his afflictions registered by himself; 1 Cor.
4. 11.
then tell me how much his charity was inferior to his self-love? did not at
least the one vie with the other, when he for the benefit of his disciples was
content to be absent from the Lord, Phil. 1. 24.
or suspended from a certain fruition of glorious beatitude; resting in this
uncomfortable state, 2 Cor. 5. 1, etc.
in this fleshly tabernacle wherein he groaned, being burdened, and longing
for enlargement? did he not somewhat beyond himself love those men, for whose
salvation he wished himself accursed from Christ, Romans 9. 3.
or debarred from the assured enjoyment of eternal felicity; 2 Cor. 11. 24, 25.
those very men by whom he had been stoned, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15.
had been scourged, had been often beaten to extremity, from whom he had
received manifold indignities and outrages?

Did not they love their neighbors as themselves, Act. 4. 34.
who sold their possessions, and distributed the prices of them for relief of
their indigent brethren? did not most of the ancient Saints and Fathers mount
near the top of this duty, of whom it is by unquestionable records testified,
that they did freely bestow all their private estate and substance on the poor,
devoting themselves to the service of God and edification of his people?
Finally,

Did not our Lord himself in our nature exemplify this Duty, yea by his
Practice far out-doe his Precept? for, He who from the brightest glories, from
the immense riches, from the ineffable joys and felicities of his celestial
Kingdom, did willingly stoop down to assume the garb of a servant, to be
clothed with the infirmities of flesh, to become a man of sorrow, and
acquainted with grief; He who for our sake vouchsafed to live in extreme penury
and disgrace, to feel hard want, sore travel, bitter persecution, most grievous
shame and anguish; He who not only did contentedly bear, but purposely did
choose to be accused, to be slandered, to be reviled, to be mocked, to be
tortured, to pour forth his heart-bloud upon a cross, Romans 5. 6, 8, 10.
for the sake of an unprofitable, an unworthy, 1 Pet. 3. 18.
an impious, an ungrateful generation; Ephesians. 2. 1.
for the salvation of his open enemies, Col. 2. 13.
of base apostates, of perverse rebels, Chrysostom. in Ephesians. Or. 7. in 1 Cor. Or. 32.
of villainous traitors; He, who in the height of his mortal agonies did sue
for the pardon of his cruel murderers; who did send his Apostles to them, did
cause so many wonders to be done before them, did furnish all means requisite
to convert and save them; He that acted and suffered all this, and more than
can be expressed, with perfect frankness and good will; Heb. 12. 2.
did he not signally love his neighbor as himself, to the utmost measure? did
not in him virtue conquer nature, and charity triumph over self-love? This he
did to seal and impress his Doctrine; to show us what we should do, and what
we can do by his grace; to oblige us and to encourage us unto a conformity
with him in this respect: Ephesians. 5. 1.
for, Walk in love, says the Apostle, 1 John 3. 16.
as Christ has also loved us, and has given himself for us; Joh. 15. 12. 13.
34.
And, This (says he himself) is my commandment, that ye love one another as I
have loved you: And how can I better conclude than in the recommendation of
such an Example?

Now, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 16.
our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our father, who has loved us, and
has given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace, comfort
your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work.

The Fourth Sermon.
MATT. 22. 39. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
I Have formerly discoursed on these words, and then showed how they do import
two observable Particulars; first a Rule of our Charity, or that it should be
like in nature; then a Measure of it, or that it should be equal in degree to
the love which we do bear to our selves. Of this latter interpretation I did
assign diverse reasons, urging the observance of the Precept according to that
notion: but one material Point scantness of time would not allow me to
consider; which is the removal of an Exception, to which that interpretation is
very liable, and which is apt to discourage from a serious application to the
practice of this duty so expounded.

If, it may be said, the Precept be thus understood, as to oblige us to love
our neighbors equally with our selves, it will prove unpracticable, such a
charity being merely romantic and imaginary; for who does, who can love his
neighbor in this degree? nature powerfully does resist, common sense plainly
does forbid that we should do so: A natural instinct does prompt us to love
our selves, and we are forcibly driven there to by an unavoidable sense of
pleasure and pain, resulting from the constitution of our body and soul, so
that our own least good or evil are very sensible to us; whereas we have no
such potent inclination to love others; we have no sense or a very faint one of
what another does enjoy or endure: does not therefore nature plainly suggest,
that our neighbors good cannot be so considerable to us as our own? especially
when charity does clash with self-love, or when there is a competition between
our neighbors interest and our own, is it possible that we should not be
partial to our own side? is not therefore this Precept such as if we should be
commanded to fly, or to do that which natural propension will certainly hinder?

In answer to this Exception I say, first,

1. Be it so, that we can never attain to love our neighbor altogether so much
as our selves, yet may it be reasonable that we should be enjoined to do so;
for

Laws must not be depressed to our imperfection, nor rules bent to our
obliquity; but we must ascend toward the perfection of them, and strive to
conform our practice to their exactness: If what is prescribed be according to
the reason of things just and fit, it is enough although our practice will not
reach it; for what remains may be supplied by repentance and humility in him
that should obey, by mercy and pardon in him that does command.

In the prescription of duty it is just, that what may be required (even in
rigor) should be precisely determined, though in execution of justice or
dispensation of recompense consideration may be had of our weakness; whereby
both the authority of our Governor may be maintained, and his clemency
glorified.

It is of great use, that by comparing the Law with our practice, and in the
perfection of the one discerning the defect of the other, we may be humbled,
may be sensible of our impotency, may thence be forced to seek the helps of
grace and the benefit of mercy.

Were the Rule never so low, our practice would come beneath it; it is
therefore expedient that it should be high, that at least we may rise higher in
performance than otherwise we should do; for the higher we aim, the nearer we
shall go to the due pitch; as he that aims at heaven, although he cannot
reach it, will yet shoot higher than he that aims only at the house top.

The height of duty does prevent sloth and decay in virtue, keeping us in
wholesome exercise and in continual improvement, while we be always climbing
toward the top, Phil. 3. 12.
and straining unto farther attainment: the sincere prosecution of which
course, as it will be more profitable unto us, so it will be no less acceptable
to God, than if we could thoroughly fulfill the Law: for in judgment God will
only reckon upon the sincerity and earnestness of our endeavor; so that if we
have done our best, it will be taken as if we had done all. 1 Cor. 5. 28.
Our labor will not be lost in the Lord; 1 Thessalonians. 1. 13.
for the degrees of performance will be considered, Heb. 6. 10.
and he that has done his duty in part shall be proportionably recompensed;
according to that of Saint Paul; 1 Cor. 3. 8.
Every man shall receive his own reward according to his own work. Hence
sometimes we are enjoined to be perfect as our heavenly father is perfect;
Matt. 5. 48. 19. 21.
and to be holy as God is holy; 1 Pet. 1. 16.
otherwhile to go on to perfection, Col. 4. 12.
and to press toward the mark; Heb. 6. 1.
which Precepts in effect do import the same thing; Phil. 3.
but the latter implies the former, although in attainment impossible, yet in
attempt very profitable: and surely he is likely to write best, who proposes
to himself the fairest Copy for his imitation.

In fine, if we do act what is possible, or as we can, do conform to the Rule
of Duty, we may be sure that no impossibility of this, or of any other sublime
Law can prejudice us.

I say of any other Law; for it is not only this Law, to which this exception
may be made; but many others, perhaps every one Evangelical Law, are alike
repugnant to corrupt nature, and seem to surmount our ability.

But neither is the performance of this task so impossible, or so desperately
hard (if we take the right course and use proper means toward it) as is
supposed; as may somewhat appear, if we will weigh the following considerations.

1. Be it considered, that we may be mistaken in our account, when we do look
on the impossibility or difficulty of such a practice, as it appears at
present, before we have seriously attempted, and in a good method, by due
means, earnestly labored to atchieve it: for many things cannot be done at
first, or with a small practice, which by degrees and a continued endeavor may
be effected; diverse things are placed at a distance, so that without passing
through the interjacent way we cannot arrive at them; diverse things seem hard
before trial, which afterward prove very easy: it is impossible to fly up to
the top of a steeple, but we may ascend thither by steps; we cannot get to Rome
without crossing the Seas, and traveling through France or Germany; it is hard
to comprehend a subtle Theoreme in Geometry if we pitch on it first, but if we
begin at the simple principles, and go forward through the intermediate
propositions we may easily attain a demonstration of it; it is hard to swim, to
dance, to play on an Instrument, but a little trial, or a competent exercise
will render those things easy to us: So may the practice of this duty seem
impossible, or insuperably difficult, before we have employed diverse means, and
voided diverse impediments; before we have inured our minds and affections to
it, before we have tried our forces in some instances thereof, previous to
others of a higher strein, and nearer the perfection of it.

If we would set our selves to exercise charity in those instances, whereof we
are at first capable without much reluctance, and thence proceed toward others
of a higher nature, we may find such improvement, and taste such content
therein, that we may soon arise to incredible degrees thereof; and at length
perhaps we may attain to such a pitch, that it will seem to us base and vain to
consider our own good before that of others, in any sensible measure; And that
nature which now so mightily does contest in favor of our selves, may in time
give way to a better nature, born of custom, affecting the good of others. Let
not therefore a present sense or experience raise in our minds a prejudice
against the possibility or practicableness of this duty.

2. Let us consider, that in some respects, and in diverse instances it is very
feasible to love our neighbor no less than our selves.

We may love our neighbor truly and sincerely, 1 Timothy 1. 6.
out of a pure heart and a good conscience, and faith unfeigned, as Saint Paul
does prescribe; or according to Saint Peter's injunction, 1 Pet. 1. 22. (Romans
12. 9.)
from a pure heart love one another fervently; and in this respect we can do no
more toward our selves; for truth admits no degrees, sincerity is a pure and
complete thing, exclusive of all mixture or alloy.

And as to external acts at least it is plain that charity toward others may
reach self-love; for we may be as serious, as vigorous, as industrious in
acting for our neighbors good, as we can be in pursuing our own designs and
interests: for reason easily can manage and govern external practice; and
common experience shows the matter to this extent practicable, seeing that
often men do employ as much diligence on the concerns of others, as they can do
on their own (being able to do no more than their best in either case)
wherefore in this respect charity may vie with selfishness; and practicing thus
far may be a step to mount higher.

Also rational consideration will enable us to perform some interior acts of
charity in the highest degree; for if we do but, (as without much difficulty we
may do) apply our mind to weigh the qualities and the actions of our neighbor,
we may thence obtain a true opinion and just esteem of him; and (secluding
gross folly or flattery of our selves) how can we in that respect or instance
be more kind or benign to our selves?

Is it not also within the compass of our ability to repress those passions of
soul, the eruption whereof tends to the wrong, damage, and offense of our
neighbor; in regard to which practice Saint Paul affirms, that the Law may
be fulfilled, Romans 13. 10.
Love, says he, works no evil to his neighbor; therefore love is the
fulfilling of the law? And what more in this respect can we perform for our
selves?

3. We may consider, that commonly we see men inclined by other principles to
act as much or more for the sake of others, as they would for themselves.

Moral honesty has inclined some, (...) -- Arist. Eth. 9. 8.
ambition and popularity have excited others to encounter the greatest dangers,
to attaque the greatest difficulties, to expose their safety, to sacrifice
their lives for the welfare of their Country.

Common friendship has often done as much, Insana amicitia. Sen. Ep. 9.
and brutish love (that mad friendship, as Seneca calls it) commonly does far
more: for what will not a fond Lover undertake and atchieve for his Minion,
although she really be the worst enemy he can have? yet for such a Snake will
he not lavish his estate, Chrysostom. in Ephesians. p. 797.
prostitute his honor, abandon his ease, hazard his safety, shipwreck his
conscience, forfeit his salvation? what may not a Delilah obtain of her
Sampson, a Cleopatra of her Anthony, how prejudicial soever it be to his own
interest and welfare?

Why then may not a principle of Charity (grounded on so much better reason,
and backed by so much stronger motives) be conceived able to engage men to the
like practice? why may not a man be disposed to do that out of hearty
good will, which he can do out of vain conceit, or vicious appetite? why shall
other forces overbear nature, and the power of charity be unable to match it?

4. Let us consider, that those dispositions of soul which usually with so much
violence do thwart the observance of this Precept, are not ingredients of true
self-love, by the which we are directed to regulate our charity, but a spurious
brood of our folly and pravity, which imply not a sober love of our selves, but
a corrupt fondness toward an idol of our fancy mistaken for our selves.

A high conceit of our worth or ability, of our fortune or worldly state, of
our works and achievements; a great complacence or confidence in some
endowment or advantage belonging to us, a stiff adherence to our own will or
humor, a greedy appetite to some particular interest or base pleasure; these
are those, not attendants of natural self-love, but issues of unnatural
depravedness in judgment and affections, which render our practice so
exorbitant in this regard, making us seem to love our selves so immoderately,
so infinitely; so contracting our souls and drawing them inwards, that we
appear indisposed to love our neighbor in any considerable degree: If these
(as by serious consideration they may be) were voided, or much abated, it would
not be found so grievous a matter to love our neighbor as our selves; for that
sober love remaining behind, to which nature inclines, and which reason
approves, would rather help to promote than yield any obstacle to our charity;
if such perverse selfishness were checked and depressed, but natural kindness
cherished and advanced, then true self-love and charity would compose
themselves into near a just poise.

5. Indeed (which we may further consider) our nature is not so absolutely
averse or indisposed to the practice of such charity, as to those may seem, who
view it slightly, either in some particular instances, or in ordinary practice;
nature has furnished us with strong instincts for the defense and sustenance
of our life; and common practice is depraved by ill education and custom; these
some men poring on do imagine no room left for charity in the constitution of
men; but they consider not, that one of these may be so moderated, and the
other so corrected, that charity may have a fair scope in men's heart and
practice; and they slip over diverse pregnant marks of our natural inclination
thereto.

Man having received his soul from the breath of God, and being framed after
the image of his most benign parent, there do yet abide in him some features
resembling God, and relics of the divine original; there are in us seeds of
ingenuity, of equity, of pity, of benignity, which being cultivated by sober
consideration and good use (under the conduct, and aid of heavenly grace) will
produce noble fruits of charity.

The frame of our nature so far disposes us thereto, that our bowels are
touched with sensible pain upon the view of any calamitous object; our fancy is
disturbed at the report of any disaster befalling any person; we can hardly see
or read a Tragedy without motions of compassion.

The practice of benignity, of courtesy, of clemency at first sight, without
any discursive reflection, does obtain approbation and applause from us; being
no less grateful and amiable to the mind than beauty to our eyes, harmony to
our ears, fragrancy to our smell, and sweetness to our palate; and to the same
mental sense malignity, cruelty, harshness, all kinds of uncharitable dealing
are very disgustfull and loathsome.

There wants not any commendation to procure a respect for Charity; (...) --
Arist. Eth. 8. 1.
nor any invective to breed abhorrence of uncharitableness, nature sufficiently
prompting to favor the one and to detest the other.

The practice of the former in common language has ever been styled humanity,
and the disposition from whence it flows is called goodnature; the practice
of the latter is likewise termed inhumanity, and its source ill nature; as
thwarting the common notions and inclinations of mankind, devesting us of our
manhood, and rendering us a sort of monsters among men.

No quality has a clearer repute, (...). Arist. 9. 8. (...). Ibid.
or is commonly more admired than generosity, which is a kind of natural
charity, or has a great spice thereof; No disposition is more despised among
men than niggardly selfishness; whence commonly men are ashamed to avow
self-interest as a principle of their actions, (rather fathering them on some
other cause) as being conscious to themselves that it is the basest of all
principles.

Whatever the censurers and detractours of humane nature do pretend, yet even
themselves do admire pure beneficence, and contemn selfishness; for (if we look
to the bottom of their intent) it is hence, they are bent to slander mankind as
void of good nature, because out of malignity they would not allow it a quality
so excellent and divine.

Wherefore according to the general judgment and conscience of men (to omit
other considerations) our nature is not so averse from charity, or destitute of
propensions thereto; and therefore cherishing the natural seeds of it, we may
improve it to higher degrees.

6. But supposing the inclinations of nature, as it now stands in its
depraved and crazy state, do so mightily obstruct the practice of this duty in
the degree specified, so that however we cannot by any force of reason or
philosophy attain to desire so much or relish so well the good of others as our
own, yet we must remember, that a subsidiary power is by the divine mercy
dispensed, able to control and subdue nature to a compliance, to raise our
practice above our natural forces. We have a like averseness to other spiritual
duties (to the loving God with all our hearts, to the mortifying our flesh and
carnal desires, to the contempt of wordly things, and placing our happiness in
spiritual goods) yet we are able to perform them by the succor of grace, and
in virtue of that omnipotency which Saint Paul assumed to himself when he said,
Phil. 4. 13. (...) --
I can do all things by Christ enabling me. 2 Timothy 1. 7.


If we can get the Spirit of love (and assuredly we may get it, if we carefully
will seek it, with constant fervency imploring it from him, who has promised
to bestow it on those that ask it) it will infuse into our minds that light,
whereby we shall discern the excellency of this duty, together with the folly
and baseness of that selfishness which crosses it; it will kindle in our
hearts charitable affections, disposing us to wish all good to our neighbor,
and to feel pleasure therein; it will render us partakers of that divine
nature, which so will guide and urge us in due measure to affect the benefit of
others, as now corrupt nature does move us unmeasurably to covet our own; being
supported and elevated by its virtue we may, (surmounting the clogs of fleshly
sense and conceit) soar up to the due pitch of charity; 1 Thessalonians. 4. 9. Gal. 5.
22. Ephesians. 5. 9. Col. 3. 12. Ephesians. 4. 24. 2. 10.
being (...) taught of God to love one another; and endowed with the fruits of
the Spirit, which are love, gentleness, goodness, meekness, and created
according to God in Christ Jesus to the practice of answerable good works.

7. There are diverse means conducible to the abatement of difficulty in this
practice, which I shall propose, referring the matter to issue upon due trial
of them.

1. Let us carefully weigh the value of those things which immoderate self-love
does affect in prejudice to charity, together with the worth of those which
charity does set in balance to them.

Aristotle himself does observe, (...) -- (...). -- Arist. Eth. 9. 8. Vid. tot.
that the ground of culpable self-love, scraping, scrambling, scuffling for
particular interest, is men's high esteem, and passion for, and greedy appetite
of wealth, of honors, of corporeal pleasures; whereas virtuous persons not
admiring those things will constanly act for honesty sake, and out of love to
their friends or country; wherein although they most really benefit and truly
gratify them selves, yet are they not blamed for selfishness.

And so indeed it is; If we rightly did apprehend the infinite vanity of all
wordly goods, the meanness of private concerns, the true despicableness of all
those honors, those profits, those delights on which commonly men do so dote,
we should not be so fond or jealous of them, as to scrape or scuffle for them,
envying or grutching them to others; If we did conceive the transcendent worth
of future rewards allotted to this and other virtues, the great
considerableness of public good at which charity aims, the many advantages
which may accrue to us from our neighbors welfare, (entertained with
complacence, and wisely accommodated to our use) we should not be so averse
from tendering his good as our own.

2. Let us consider our real state in the world, in dependence upon the
pleasure and providence of Almighty God.

If we look upon our selves as subsisting only by our own care and endeavor,
without any other patronage or help, it may thence prove hard to regard the
interests of others as comparable to our own; seeing then in order to our
living with any convenience, it is necessary that we should be solicitous for
our own preservation and sustenance, that will engage us to contend with others
as competitours for the things we need, and incapable otherwise to attain: But
if (as we ought to do, and the true state of things requires) we consider our
selves as subsisting under the protection, and by the providence of God, who no
less cares for us than for others, and no less for others than for us (for, as
the Wiseman says, he cares for all alike) who recommendeth to us a being
mutually concerned each for other, (...). Sap. 6. 7.
and is engaged to keep us from suffering thereby; who commands us to
disburthen our cares upon himself; who assuredly will the better provide for
us, as we do more further the good of others: If we do consider thus, it will
deliver us from solicitude concerning our subsistence and personal
accommodations, whence we may be free to regard the concerns of others, with no
less application than we do regard our own.

As living under the same Government and Laws (being members of one
Commonwealth, one Corporation, one Family) disposes men not only willingly
but earnestly to serve the public interest, beyond any hopes of receiving
thence any particular advantage answerable to their pain and care; so
considering our selves as members of the world, and of the Church, under the
governance and patronage of God, may disengage us from immoderate respect of
private good, and incline us to promote the common welfare.

3. There is one plain way of rendering this duty possible, or of perfectly
reconciling charity to self-love; which is, a making the welfare of our
neighbor to be our own, which if we can do, then easily may we desire it most
seriously, then may we promote it with the greatest zeal and vigor; for then
it will be an instance of self-love to exercise charity, then both these
inclinations conspiring will march evenly together, one will not extrude nor
depress the other.

It may be hard, while our concerns appear divided, not to prefer our own, but
when they are coincident, or conspire together, the ground of that partiality
is removed.

Nor is this an imaginary course, but grounded in reason, and thereby reducible
to practice: for considering the manifold bands of relation (natural, civil, or
spiritual) between men, as naturally of the same kind and blood, as civilly
members of the same society, as spiritually linked in one brotherhood;
considering the mutual advantages derivable from the wealth and welfare of each
other, (in way of needful succor, advice and comfort, of profitable commerce,
of pleasant conversation); considering the mischiefs, which from our neighbors
indigency and affliction we may incur, they rendering him as a wild beast,
unsociable, troublesome and formidable to us; considering that we cannot be
happy without good nature, and good humor, and that good nature cannot behold
any sad object without pity and dolorous resentment, good humor cannot subsist
in prospect of such objects; considering that charity is an instrument, whereby
we may apply all our neighbors good to our selves, it being ours, if we can
find complacence therein; it may appear reasonable to reckon all our neighbors
concerns to our account.

That this is practicable, experience may confirm; for we may observe, that men
commonly do thus appropriate the concerns of others, resenting the disasters of
a friend, or of a relation with as sensible displeasure as they could their
own; and answerably finding as high a satisfaction in their good fortune. Yea
many persons do feel more pain by compassion for others, than they could do in
sustaining the same evils; diverse can with a stout heart undergo their own
afflictions, who are melted with those of a friend or brother. Seeing then in
true judgment humanity does match any other relation, and Christianity far does
exceed all other alliances, why may we not on them ground the like affections
and practices, if reason has any force, or consideration can any wise sway in
our practice?

4. It will greatly conduce to the perfect observance of this Rule, to the
depression of self-love, and advancement of charity to the highest pitch, if we
do studiously contemplate our selves, strictly examining our conscience, and
seriously reflecting on our unworthiness and vileness; the infirmities and
defects of nature, the corruptions and defilements of our soul, the sins and
miscarriages of our lives; which doing, we shall certainly be far from admiring
or doting on our selves; but rather, as Job did, we shall condemn and abhor our
selves; Job 9. 20.
when we see our selves so deformed and ugly, Job 42. 6.
how can we be amiable in our own eyes? how can we more esteem or affect our
selves than others, of whose unworthiness we can hardly be so conscious or
sure? what place can there be for that vanity and folly, for that pride and
arrogance, for that partiality and injustice, which are the sources of
immoderate self-love?

5. And lastly, we may from many conspicuous Experiments and Examples be
assured that such a practice of this Duty is not impossible; but these I have
already produced and urged in the precedent Discourse, and shall not repeat
them again.

The Fifth Sermon.
EPHESIANS 5. 2. And walk in love.
SAint Paul tells us, 1 Timothy 1. 5.
that the end of the commandment (or the main scope of the Evangelical
Doctrine) is charity, out of a pure heart and a good conscience, and faith
unfeigned; that charity is a general principle of all good practice, 1 Cor. 16.
14.
(let all your things be done in charity); that it is the sum and abridgment of
all other duties, Gal. 5. 14.
so that he that loves another, Romans 13. 8, 9.
has fulfilled the whole law; that it is the chief of the Theological virtues;
1 Cor. 13. 13.
the prime fruit of the divine Spirit, Gal. 5. 22.
and the band of perfection, which combineth and consummateth all other graces.

Saint Peter enjoineth us that to all other virtues we should add charity, 2
Pet. 1. 7.
as the top and crown of them; and, Above all things, 1 Pet. 4. 8.
says he, have fervent charity among your selves.

Saint James styleth the Law of Charity (...), Jam. 2. 8.
the royal, or Sovereign Law.

Saint John calls it, in way of excellence, 1 John 3. 23, 11. 4. 21.
the commandment of God (This is his commandment that we should love one
another.)

Our Lord claims it for his peculiar Law, Joh. 15. 12. 13. 34.
This is my commandment; and a new commandment I give unto you, that ye love
one another. And he makes the observance of it the special badge and
cognizance of his followers; Joh. 13. 35.
By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another.

It being therefore a duty of so grand importance, it is most requisite that we
should well understand it, and faithfully observe it; to which purposes I shall
by God's assistance endeavor to confer somewhat, first by explaining its
Nature, then by pressing the observance of it by several Inducements.

The nature of it will, as I conceive, be best understood by representing the
several chief Acts, which it comprizeth or implies as necessary prerequisites,
or essential ingredients, or inseparable adherents to it; some internally
resident in the soul, others discharged in external performance; together with
some special properties of it. And such are those which follow.

I. Loving our neighbor does imply, that we should value and esteem him: this
is necessary, for affection does follow opinion; so that we cannot like any
thing which we do not esteem, or wherein we do not apprehend some considerable
good, attractive of affection; that is not amiable which is wholly
contemptible; or so far as it is such.

But in right judgment no man is such; for the Wise man tells us, Prove. 14.
21.
that He that despises his neighbor, Prove. 11. 12.
sins; and, He is void of understanding that despises his neighbor; but no
man is guilty of sin or folly for despising that which is wholly despicable.

It is indeed true, that every man is subject to defects, and to mischances,
apt to breed contempt, especially in the minds of vulgar and weak people; but
no man is really despicable. For

Every man living has stamped on him the venerable Image of his glorious
Maker, which nothing incident to him can utterly deface.

Every man is of a divine extraction, and allied to heaven by nature and by
grace; as the Son of God, and the Brother of God Incarnate. Job 31. 13, 14, 15.
If I did despise the cause of my manservant or of my maidservant when they
contended with me; what then shall I do when God rises up, and when he
visits what shall I answer him? Did not he that made me in the womb, make
him? and did not one fashion us in the womb?

Every man is endewed with that celestial faculty of reason, inspired by the
Almighty, Job 32. 8.
(for There is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives them
understanding) and has an immortal spirit residing in him; or rather is
himself an Angelical spirit dwelling in a visible tabernacle.

Every man was originally designed and framed for a fruition of eternal
happiness.

Every man has an interest in the common redemption, purchased by the blood of
the Son of God, who tasted death for every one.

Every man is capable of Sovereign bliss, and has a crown of endless glory
offered to him.

In fine, every man, and all men alike, antecedently to their own will and
choice, are the objects of his love, of his care, Psalm. 145. 9.
of his mercy; who is loving unto every man; Job 34. 19.
and whose mercy is over all his works; Sap. 6. 8.
who has made the small and the great, and cares for all alike; who is rich,
Romans 10. 12. 3. 22.
in bounty and mercy, toward all that call upon him.

How then can any man be deemed contemptible, having so noble relations,
capacities, and privileges? How a man stands in esteem with God Elihu tells
us, Job 36. 5.
God (says he) is mighty and despises not any; Psalm. 69. 33.
although he be so mighty, so excellent in perfection, so infinitely in state
exalted above all, yet does not he slight any; and how can we contemn those,
whom the certain voucher and infallible judge of worth deigneth to value?
Indeed God so valued every man as to take great care, to be at great cost and
trouble, to stoop down from heaven, to assume mortal flesh, to endure pinching
wants and sore distresses, to taste death for every one.

We may ask with Saint Paul, Romans 14. 10.
Why do thou set at naught thy brother?

Is it for the lowness of his condition, or for any misfortune that has
befallen him? Jam. 2. 5.
but are not the best men, are not all men, Psalm. 38. 36. 146. 9.
art not thou thy self obnoxious to the like? has not God declared that he
has a special regard to such? and are not such things commonly disposed by his
hand with a gracious intent?

Is it for meanness of parts, or abilities, or endowments? but are not these
the gifts of God, absolutely at his disposal, and arbitrarily distributed, or
preserved; so that thou who art so wise in thy own conceit to day, may by a
disease, or from a judgment (deserved by thy pride) become an Idiot to morrow?
1 Cor. 1. 26.
have not many good and therefore many happy men wanted those things?

Is it for moral imperfections or blemishes; for vicious habits, or actual
misdemeanors? these indeed are the only debasements and disparagements of a
man; yet do they not expunge the characters of Divinity impressed on his
nature; and he may be God's mercy recover from them: And are not we our selves,
if grace do not uphold us, liable to the same? yea may we not, if without
partiality or flattery we examine our selves, discern the same within us, or
other defects equivalent? And however is not pity rather due to them than
contempt? whose character was it, that they trusted they were righteous and
despised others? Luke 18. 9. 16. 15.
That the most palpable offender should not be quite despised God had a special
care in his Law, for that end moderating punishment, and restraining the number
of stripes; Deuteronomy. 25. 2-
If (says the Law) the wicked man be worthy to be beaten, the Judge shall
cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his face, according to his
fault, by a certain number; forty stripes he may give him and not exceed; lest
if he should exceed, and beat him above these with many stripes, then thy
brother should seem vile unto thee.

We may consider, that the common things (both good and bad) wherein men agree,
are far more considerable than the peculiar things wherein they differ; to be a
Man is much beyond being a Lord, or a Wit, or a Philosopher; to be a Christian
does infinitely surpass being an Emperor, or a learned Clerk; to be a Sinner
is much worse than to be Beggar or an Idiot: The agreement of men is in the
substance and body of things; the difference is in a circumstance, a fringe, or
a shadow about them; so that we cannot despise another man, without reflecting
contempt on our selves, who are so very like him, and not considerably better
than he, or hardly can without arrogance pretend to be so.

We may therefore, and reason does require that we should value our neighbor;
and it is no impossible or unreasonable Precept which Saint Peter gives us, 1
Pet. 2. 17.
to Honor all men; and with it a charitable mind will easily comply; it ever
will descry something valuable, something honorable, something amiable in our
neighbor; it will find somewhat of dignity in the meanest, somewhat of worth
in the basest, somewhat hopeful in the most degenerate of men; it therefore
will not absolutely slight or scorn any man whatever, 1 Cor. 13. 7.
looking on him as an abject or forlorn wretch, unworthy of consideration.

It is indeed a point of charity to see more things estimable in others than in
our selves; or to be apprehensive of more defects meriting disesteem in our
selves than in others; and consequently in our opinion to prefer others before
us, according to those Apostolical Precepts, Romans 12. 10.
Be kindly affected one toward another with brotherly love, in honor
preferring one another. Phil. 2. 3.
In lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than themselves. 1 Pet. 5. 5.
Be subject one to another.

II. Loving our neighbor does imply a sincere and earnest desire of his
welfare, and good of all kinds, in due proportion: for it is a property of
love, that it would have its object most worthy of it self, and consequently
that it should attain the best state whereof it is capable, and persist firm
therein; to be fair and plump, to flourish and thrive without diminution or
decay; this is plain to experience in respect to any other thing (a horse, a
flower, a building, or any such thing) which we pretend to love; wherefore
charity should dispose us to be thus affected to our neighbor; so that we do
not look upon his condition or affairs with an indifferent eye, or cold heart,
but are much concerned for him, and put forth hearty wishes for his interests:
we should wish him adorned with all virtue, and accomplished with all worthy
endowments of soul; we should wish him prosperous success in all his designs,
and a comfortable satisfaction of his desires; we should wish him with alacrity
of mind to reap the fruits of his industry, and to enjoy the best
accommodations of his life. Not formally and in complement, as the mode is, but
really and with a cordial sense, upon his undertaking any enterprise, we should
wish him good speed; upon any prosperous success of his endeavors, we should
bid him joy; wherever he is going, whatever he is doing, we should wish him
peace and the presence of God with him: we should tender his health, his
safety, his quiet, his reputation, his wealth, his prosperity in all respects;
but especially with peculiar ardency we should desire his final welfare, and
the happiness of his soul, that being incomparably his chief concern.

Hence readily should we pour forth our prayers, which are the truest
expressions of good desire, for the welfare of our neighbor, to him who is
able to work and bestow it.

Such was the charity of Saint Paul for his Countrymen, signified in those
words, Romans 10. 1.
Brethren, my hearts desire* and prayer to God for Israel is, that they may be
saved; such was his love to the Philippians, (...).
God is my record how greatly I long after you all, Phil. 1. 8 --
in the bowels of Jesus Christ; 2 Cor. 13. 9.
and this I pray, that your love may abound more and more in knowledge, and in
all judgment --

Such was Saint John' s charity to his friend Gaius, 3 John 2.
to whom he said, Beloved, I wish above all things, that thou may prosper and
be in health even as thy soul prospers.

Such is the charity, which we are enjoined to express toward all men, by
praying for all men, 1 Timothy 2. 3.
in conformity to the charity of God, who will have all men to be saved, and to
come to the knowledge of the truth.

Such is the charity we are commanded to use toward our enemies, Matt. 5. 44.
blessing those who curse us, and praying for those who despitefully use us,
and persecute us; the which was exemplified by our Lord, Luke 23. 34.
by Saint Stephen, Act. 7. 60.
by all the Holy Apostles. 1 Cor. 4. 12.


III. Charity does imply a complacence or delightful satisfaction in the good
of our neighbor; this is consequent on the former property, for that joy
naturally does result from events agreeable to our desire: Charity has a good
eye, which is not offended or dazzled with the luster of its neighbor's virtue,
or with the splendor of his fortune, but vieweth either of them steadily with
pleasure, as a very delightful spectacle; It beholds him to prosper and
flourish, to grow in wealth and repute not only without envious repining, but
with gladsome content: Romans 12. 15.
Its property is to rejoice with them that rejoice; to partake of their
enjoyments, to feast in their pleasures, to triumph in their success.

As one member does feel the health, and the delight which another immediately
does enjoy; so has a charitable man a sensible complacence in the welfare and
joy of his neighbor. 1 Cor. 12. 26.


His prosperity of any kind, in proportion to its importance, does please him;
but especially his spiritual proficiency and improvement in virtue does yield
matter of content; and his good deeds he beholds with abundant satisfaction.

This is that instance of charity which S. Paul so frequently does express in
his Epistles, 2 Cor. 13. 9.
declaring the extreme joy he did feel in the faith, Phil. 2. 2. 4. 1.
in the virtue, in the orderly conversation of those brethren to whom he
writes. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 9. 2. 19.


This charity possessed Saint John, when he said, 3 John 4.
I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in truth.

This is the charity of heaven, which does even cheer the Angels, and does
enhance the bliss of the blessed Spirits there; Luke 15. 7, (...)
of whom it is said, There is joy in heaven over every sinner that repents.
Hence, This is the disposition of charitable persons sincerely to congratulate
any good occurrence to their neighbor; they are ready to conspire in rendering
thanks and praise to the Author of their welfare; taking the good conferred on
their neighbor as a blessing and obligation on themselves; so that they upon
such occasions are apt to say with Saint Paul; 1 Thessalonians. 3. 9.
What thanks can we render to God for you, for all the joy wherewith we joy for
your sakes before God? 2 Thessalonians. 3. ^.
and, We are bound to thank God always for you, brethren, because that your
faith grows exceedingly, and that the charity of every one of you all toward
each other abounds: 1 Cor. 1. 4, 5. (Phil. 1. 3. Romans 1. 8. Ephesians. 1. 16. Col.
1. 3. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 2.)
and, I thank my God always on your behalf for the grace of God, which is given
you by Jesus Christ, that in every thing ye are enriched by him.

It is a Precept of Saint Paul, Ephesians. 5. 2^.
Give thanks always (...), which is translated for all things, but it might as
well be rendered for all persons, according to that Injunction, 1 Timothy 2. 1.
I exhort, that first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving
of thanks be made for all men; Not only Prayers are to be made, but
Thanksgivings are to be offered for all men, out of general charity.

IV. Correspondently, Love of our neighbor does imply condolency and
commiseration of the evils befalling him: for what we love, we cannot without
displeasure behold lying in a bad condition, sinking into decay, or in danger
to perish; so to a charitable mind the bad state of any man is a most
unpleasant and painful sight.

It is the property of Charity to mourn with those that mourn; (...).
not coldly, but passionately, Romans 12. 15.
(for it is, to weep with those that weep) resenting every man's case with an
affection suitable thereto, and as he does himself resent it.

Is any man fallen into disgrace? charity does hold down its head, is abashed
and out of countenance, partaking of his shame: Is any man disappointed of his
hopes or endeavors? charity cries out alas, as if it were it self defeated:
Is any man afflicted with pain or sickness? charity looks sadly, it sigheth
and groaneth, it faints and languisheth with him: Is any man pinched with
hard want? charity if it cannot succor, it will condole: does ill news arrive?
charity does hear it with an unwilling ear, and a sad heart, although not
particularly concerned in it: The sight of a Wreck at Sea, of a Field spread
with Carcases, of a Country desolated, of Houses burnt, and Cities ruined, and
of the like calamities incident to mankind, would touch the bowels of any man;
but the very report of them would affect the heart of charity: It does not
suffer a man with comfort or ease to enjoy the accommodations of his own state,
while others before him are in distress: It cannot be merry while any man in
presence is sorrowful; it cannot seem happy while its neighbor does appear
miserable: It has a share in all the afflictions which it does behold or hear
of; according to that instance in Saint Paul of the Philippians, (...).
Ye have done well, that ye did communicate with (or partake in) my
afflictions; and according to that Precept, Heb. 13. 3.
Remember those which are in bonds, as bound with them.

Such was the charity of Job: Job 30. 25.
Did not I weep for him that was in trouble? was not my soul grieved for the
poor?

Such was the charity of the Psalmist, even toward his ungrateful enemies,
They (says he) rewarded me evil for good to the spoiling of my soul; Psalm. 35.
12, 13, 14.
but as for me, when they were sick, my clothing was sackcloath, I humbled my
soul with fasting -- I behaved my self, as though it had been my friend or my
brother, I bowed down heavily as one that mourns for his mother.

Such was the charity of Saint Paul; Who is weak, 2 Cor. 11. 29.
said he, and I am not weak* who is offended, and I burn not? with fervent
compassion.

Such was the charity of our Savior; which so reigned in his heart, that no
passion is so often attributed to him as this of pity; it being expressed to be
the motive of his great works. Matt. 14. 14.
Jesus (says Saint Matthew) went forth, and saw a great multitude, (...), and
was moved (in his bowels) with compassion toward them, and he healed their
sick; (...).
and, I have compassion on the multitude, Matt. 15. 32.
because they have nothing to eat, and I will not send them away fasting, lest
they faint in the way; and, Jesus had compassion on them, Matt. 20. 34.
and touched their eyes; Mark. 1. 41.
and, Jesus moved with compassion put forth his hand and touched him (the
Leper) and says unto him, I will, Luke 7. 13.
be thou clean; and, When the Lord saw her (the Widow of Naim, whose Son was
carried out) he had compassion on her; Luke 19. 41.
and, He beheld the city and wept over it, considering the miseries impendent
on it, as a just punishment of their outrageous injuries against himself; and
when the two good Sisters did bewail their Brother Lazarus, Joh. 11. 33, 35.
He groaned in spirit and was troubled; and wept with them; whence the Jews did
collect, Behold how he loved him.

Thus any calamity or misfortune befalling his neighbor does raise
distastefull regret and commiseration in a charitable soul; but especially
moral evils (which indeed are the great evils, in comparison whereto nothing
else is evil) do work that effect: To see men dishonor and wrong their Maker,
to provoke his anger, and incur his disfavour; to see men abuse their reason,
and disgrace their nature; to see men endammage their spiritual estate, to
endanger the loss of their souls, to discost from their happiness, and run into
eternal ruin, by distemper of mind, and an inordinate conversation; this is
most afflictive to a man endewed with any good degree of charity. Could one see
a man sprawling on the ground, weltring in his blood, with gaping wounds,
gasping for breath, without compassion? And seeing the condition of him that
lies grovelling in sin, weltring in guilt, wounded with bitter remorse and
pangs of conscience, nearly obnoxious to eternal death, is far worse and more
deplorable, how can it but touch the heart of a charitable man, and stir his
bowels with compassionate anguish?

Such was the excellent charity of the Holy Psalmist, signified in those
ejaculations, Psalm. 119. 158.
I beheld the transgressors and was grieved, because they kept not thy word;
Psalm. 119. 136.
and, Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because men keep not thy law.

Such was the charity of Saint Paul toward his incredulous and obdurate
Countrymen (notwithstanding their hatred and ill treatment of himself) the
which he so earnestly did aver in those words, Romans 9. 1, 2.
I say the truth, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy
Ghost, that I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart for them.

Such was the charity of our Lord, which disposed him as to a continual sense
of men's evils, so upon particular occasions to grieve at their sins and
spiritual wants; as when the Pharisees maligned him for his doing good, he
('it is said) did (...), Mark 3. 5.
grieve (or condole) for the hardness of their heart; and when he saw the
multitudes, Matt. 9. 36.
he was moved with compassion on them, because they fainted, and were scattered
abroad, as sheep having no shepherd; and, when he wept over Jerusalem, Luke
19. 41.
because it did not know in its day the things which belonged to its peace
(either temporal, or eternal.)

This is that charity, which God himself in a wonderful and incomprehensible
manner does exemplify to us; for he is the Father of pities; Jam. 5. 11.
(...), Luke 1. 78.
full of bowels; his bowels are troubled, Jer. 31. 20.
and do sound, Isa. 63. 15.
when he is (for upholding justice, or reclaiming sinners) constrained to
inflict punishment; of him it is said, Jud. 10. 16.
that his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel; ((...). LXX.)
and, that he was afflicted in all the afflictions of his people: Isa. 63. 9.
So incredible miracles does infinite charity work in God, (Hos. 11. 8.)
that the impassible God in a manner should suffer with us, that happiness it
self should partake take in our misery, that grief should spring up in the
fountain of joy: How this can be, we thoroughly cannot well apprehend, but
surely those expresses are used in condescension to signify the greatly
charitable benignity of God, and to show us our duty, Luke 6. 36.
that we should be merciful as our heavenly Father is merciful, Ephesians. 5. 1.
sympathizing with the miseries and sorrows of our brethren. (Luke 16. 20.)


This is that duty, which is so frequently inculcated; when we are charged to
put on bowels of pity, Col. 3. 12.
to be ((...)) tenderhearted, Phil. 2. 1.
to be ((...)) compassionate one toward another. Ephesians. 4. 32.
1 Pet. 3. 8.


Hence it is, that good men in this world cannot live in any briskness of mirth
or height of jollity, their own enjoyments being tempered by the discontents of
others; the continual obvious spectacles of sorrow, and of sin damping their
pleasures, and quashing excessive transports of joy: for who could much enjoy
himself in an hospital, in a prison, in a charnel?

V. It is generally a property of Love to appropriate its Object; in
apprehension and affection embracing it, possessing it, enjoying it as its own:
So charity does make our neighbor to be ours, engaging us to tender his case,
and his concerns as our own; so that we shall exercise about them the same
affections of soul (the same desires, the same hopes and fears, the same joys
and sorrows) as about our own nearest and most peculiar interest; so that his
danger will affright us, and in his security we shall find repose; his profit
is gain, and his losses are damages to us; we do rise by his preserment, and
sink down by his fall; his good speed is a satisfaction, and his disappointment
a cross to us; his enjoyments afford pleasure, and his sufferings bring pain to
us.

So charity does enlarge our minds beyond private considerations, conferring on
them an universal interest, and reducing all the world within the verge of
their affectionate care; so that a man's self is a very small and inconsiderable
portion of his regard; whence Charity is said not to seek its own things, 1
Cor. 13. 5. 10. 24.
and we are commanded not to look on our own things; Phil. 2. 4.
for that the regard which charity bears to its own interest in comparison to
that, which it bears toward the concerns of others, has the same proportion
as one man has to all men, being therefore exceedingly small, and as it were
none at all.

This (says Saint Chrysostom) is the Canon of most perfect Christianisme,
(...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Orat. 25.
this is an exact boundary, this is the highest top of it, to seek things
profitable to the public: And according to this rule charity does walk, Phil.
4. 16.
it prescribes that compass to it self, it aspireth to that pitch; it
disposes to act as Saint Paul did, 1 Cor. 10. 33.
I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of
many, that they may be saved.

VI. It is a property of Love to affect union, or the greatest approximation
that can be to its Object: As hatred does set things at distance, making them
to shun or chase away one another; so love does attract things, does combine
them, does hold them fast together; every one would be embracing and enjoying
what he loves in the manner whereof it is capable: So does charity dispose a
man to conjunction with others; it soon will breed acquaintance, kind
conversation, and amicable correspondence with our neighbor.

It would be a stranger to no man to whom by its intercourse it may yield any
benefit or comfort.

Its arms are always open, and its bosom free to receive all, who do not
reject or decline its amity.

It is most frankly accessible, most affable, most tractable, most sociable,
most apt to interchange good offices; most ready to oblige others, and willing
to be obliged by them.

It voideth that unreasonable suspiciousness and diffidence, that timorous
shieness, that crafty reservedness, that supercilious morosity, that fastidious
sullenness, and the like untoward dispositions, which keep men in estrangement,
stifling good inclinations to familiarity and friendship.

VII. It is a property of Love to desire a reciprocal affection; Spes mutuae
charitatis.
for that is the surest possession and firmest union, Sen. Ep. 9.
which is grounded upon voluntary conspiring in affection; and if we do value
any person, we cannot but prize his good will and esteem.

Charity is the mother of friendship, not only as inclining us to love others,
but as attracting others to love us; disposing us to affect their amity, and by
obliging means to procure it.

Hence is that Evangelical Precept so often enjoined to us, Heb. 12. 14.
of pursuing peace with all men, 2 Timothy 2. 22.
importing that we should desire and seek by all fair means the good will of
men, Romans 12. 18.
without which peace from them cannot subsist; for if they do not love us, they
will be infesting us with unkind words or deeds.

VIII. Hence also Charity disposes to please our neighbor, not only by
inoffensive but by obliging demeanor; by a ready complaisance and compliance
with his fashion, with his humor, with his desire in matters lawful, or in a
way consistent with duty and discretion.

Such charity Saint Paul did prescribe, Let every one please his neighbor for
his good to edification: Romans 15. 2.
Such he practiced himself, 1 Cor. 10. 33.
Even as I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit; and, I
have made my self a servant to all, 1 Cor. 9. 19.
that I might gain the more.

Such was the charity of our Lord, for even Christ pleased not himself: Romans
15. 3.
He indeed did stoop to converse with sorry men in their way, Joh. 2. 2.
he came when he was invited, he accepted their entertainment, he from the
frankness of his conversation with all sorts of persons did undergo the
reproach of being a winebibber, Matt. 11. 19.
a friend of Publicans and sinners: Luke 7. 34.


It is the Genius and complexion of charity to affect nothing uncouth or
singular in matters of indifferent nature; to be candid, not rigid in opinion;
to be pliable; not stiff in humor; to be smooth and gentle, not rugged and
peevish in behavior.

It does indeed not flatter, not sooth, not humor any man in bad things, or in
things very absurd and foolish; it would rather choose to displease and cross
him, than to abuse, to delude, to wrong, or hurt him; but excepting such cases,
it gladly pleases all men, denying its own will and conceit to satisfy the
pleasure and fancy of others; practicing that which Saint Peter injoined in
that Precept, (...). 1 Pet. 3. 8.
be of one mind, be compassionate, love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous;
or as Saint Paul might intend, when he bid us, Ephesians. 4. 32.
(...), Col. 3. 13.
to gratify, to indulge one another.

IX. Love of our neighbor does imply readiness upon all occasions to do him
good, to promote and advance his benefit in all kinds.

It does not rest in good opinions of mind, and good affections of heart, but
from those roots does put forth abundant fruits of real beneficence; it will
not be satisfied with faint desires, or sluggish wishes, but will be up and
doing what it can for its neighbor.

Love is a busy and active, Love is strong as death.
a vigorous and sprightfull, a courageous and industrious disposition of soul;
Cant. 8. 6.
which will prompt a man, and push him forward to undertake or undergo any
thing, to endure pains, to encounter dangers, to surmount difficulties for the
good of its object.

Such is true charity; it will dispose us to love, 1 John 3. 8.
as Saint John prescribes, (...), Jam. 2. 16.
in work and in truth; not only in mental desire, but in effectual
performance; not only in verbal pretense, but in real effect.

Hence charity will render a man a General benefactour, in all matters, upon
all occasions; (...).
affording to his neighbor all kinds of assistance and relief, according to
his neighbors need, Act. 20. 35.
and his own ability: (...). 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.
It will make him a bountiful dispenser of his goods to the poor, a comforter
of the afflicted, (...).
a visiter of the sick, an instructour of the ignorant, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.
an adviser of the doubtful, a protector of the oppressed, a hospitable
entertainer of strangers, Job 29. 17.
a reconciler of differences, Job 31. 32.
an intercessour for offenders, an advocate of those who need defense, a
succourer of all that want help.

The practice of Job describes its nature; Job 29. 12.
I (says he) delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that
had none to help him: The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon
me, and I caused the widows heart to sing for joy. I was eyes to the blind, and
feet was I to the lame; I was a father to the poor, and the cause which I knew
not I searched out; And I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil
out of his teeth. Job. 32. 16.
If I have held the poor from their desire, or have caused the eyes of the
widow to fail; Or have eaten my morsel my self alone; and the fatherless has
not eaten thereof; If I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or any poor
without covering. Job 32. 32.
The stranger did not lodge in the street; but I opened my doors to the
traveller.

Such is a charitable man; the Sun is not more liberal of his light and warmth,
than he is of beneficial influence.

He does not spare his substance, being rich in good works, ready to
distribute, willing to communicate; And where his estate fails, yet the
contribution of his endeavor will not be wanting; he will be ready to draw and
press others to beneficence; so doing good not only according to his power,
but in a manner beyond it, making the ability of others to supply his own
weakness, and being liberal with their wealth. The description of Cimon is a
good character of a charitable man, Corn. Nep. (in Cimone.)
Nulli fides ejus, nulli opera, nulli res familiaris defuit.

Thus may the poorest men be great benefactours; (1 Cor. 4. 11.)
so the poor Apostles who had nothing, 2 Cor. 6. 10.
yet did enrich many; (...).
not only in spiritual treasure, but taking care for supply of the poor, by
their precepts and moving exhortations; and he that had not where to lay his
head, was the most bountiful person that ever was; 2 Cor. 8. 9.
for our sake he became poor, that we by his poverty might be made rich.

In all kinds charity disposes to further our neighbors good, but especially
in the concerns of his soul; the which as incomparably they do surpass all
others, so it is the truest and noblest charity to promote them.

It will incline us to draw forth our soul to the hungry, Isa. 58. 7. --, 10.
and to satisfy the afflicted soul; Ezekiel. 18. 16.
to bring the poor that are cast out to our house; to cover the naked, to loose
the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, to let the oppressed go
free, to break every yoke; to supply any corporal indigency, to relieve any
temporal distress; but especially it will induce to make provision for the
soul, to relieve the spiritual needs of our neighbor; by affording him good
instruction, and taking care that he be informed in his duty, or conducted in
his way to happiness; by admonition and exhortation quickening, encouraging,
(...).
provoking, spurring him to good works; by resolving him in his doubts, and
comforting him in his troubles of conscience; Heb. 10. 24.
(lifting up the hands which hang down and the feeble knees) by seasonable and
prudent reproof; Heb. 12. 12.
by all ways serving to convert him from the error of his way; (...).
and so saving a soul from death, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.
and hiding a multitude of sins; Jam. 5. 20.
which is the proper work of charity; 1 Pet. 4. 8.
for charity (says Saint Peter) covers a multitude of sins. Prove. 10. 12.


This was the charity of our Savior, He went about doing good, Act. 10. 38.
healing the bodily infirmities, (every sickness and every disease among the
people) satisfying their bodily necessities, Matt. 4. 23. 9. 35.
comforting them in their worldly distresses, so far as to perform great
miracles for those purposes (curing inveterate maladies, restoring limbs and
senses, raising the dead, multiplying loaves and fishes) but his charity was
chiefly exercised in spiritual beneficence; in pourveying sustenance and
comfort for their souls, in feeding their minds by wholesome instruction, in
curing their spiritual distempers, in correcting their ignorances and errors,
Joh. 14. 1. 15. 11. -- 16. 33.
in exciting them to duty by powerful advices and exhortations, in supporting
them by heavenly consolations against temptations and troubles. Matt. 5. 10. --


Thus also did the charity of the holy Apostles principally exert it self: they
did not neglect affording relief to the outward needs of men; Act. 3. 6. 5. 15,
16. 8. 7. 28. 8, 9.
they did take care by earnest intercession and exhortation for support of the
poor; Act. 20. 35. --
but especally they did labor to promote the spiritual benefit of men; Romans
15. 26.
for this they 1 Cor. 16. 1.
did undertake so many cares, Gal. 2. 10.
and toils, 2 Cor. 8. 7. --
and travels; 2 Cor. 9. 1. --
for this they did undergo so 1 Timothy 6. 18.
Heb. 13. 16.
many hardships, so many hazards, so many difficulties and trouble; 2 Timothy 2.
10.
Therefore (said Saint Paul) I endure all things for the elects sake, that they
may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory.

X. This indeed is a property of Charity to make a man deny himself, to neglect
his own interest, yea to despise all selfish regards for the benefit of his
neighbor: to him that is inspired with charity his own good is not good, when
it stands in competition with the more considerable good of another; nothing
is so dear to him, which he gladly will not part with upon such considerations.

Liberty is a precious thing, which every man gladly would enjoy, yet how
little did Saint Paul's charity regard it? how absolutely did he abandon it for
his neighbors good? (...)
Though (said he) I am free from all men, 1 Cor. 9. 19.
yet I have made my self servant (or have enslaved my self) unto all, that I
might gain the more: Phil. 1. 12. --
And he did express much satisfaction in the bonds which he bare for the good
of his brethren. Ephesians. 3. 1, -- 13.
I Paul (says he) the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles; -- I suffer
trouble as an evil doer, 2 Timothy 2. 9, 10.
even unto bonds; -- endure all things for the Elects sake.

Every man loves his own humor and would please himself; but the charity of
Saint Paul did rather choose to please all men; 1 Cor. 9. 33.
making him all things to all men, 1 Cor. 10. 22.
that by all means he might save some; and the Rule he commended to others, and
imposed on himself was this, We that are strong ought to bear the infirmities
of the weak, Romans 15. 1.
and not to please our selves.

Profit is the common mark of men's designs and endeavors; but charity often
does not aim thereat, but waveth it for its neighbors advantage; for (...),
Phil. 2. 8.
Aim not every man at his own things, but every man also at the things of
others, 1 Cor. 10. 24.
is Saint Paul' s Rule; and, not to seek his own profit, but the profit of
many, that they might be saved, was his practice.

To suffer is grievous to humane nature, and every man would shun it; but
charity not only does support it, but joyeth in it, when it conduces to its
neighbors advantage; Col. 1. 24.
I rejoice, said that charitable Apostle, 2 Cor. 1. 4, 6. 7. 4.
in my sufferings for you.

Ease is a thing generally desirable and acceptable; but charity does part with
it, embracing labor, watchings, travels, and troubles for the neighbors good:
upon this account did the holy Apostles undertake abundant labors (as Saint
Paul tells us) and to this end (says he) do I labor striving according to
his working, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
which works in me mightily; 2 Thessalonians. 3. 8.
to what end? 2 Cor. 11. 23. 6. 5.
that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus: (...). --
this is that (...), Col. 1. 29.
that labor of love, Act. 21. 31, 35.
which they did commend in others, Heb. 6. 7.
and so notably themselves exercise. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3.


Life of all things is held most precious and dear; yet this charity upon
urgent occasions will expose, will sacrifice for its neighbors good; This (our
Lord tells us) is the greatest love that any man can express to his friend;
Joh. 15. 13.
and the highest instance that ever was of charity was herein showed; the
imitation whereof Saint John does not doubt to recommend to us; 1 John 3. 16.
In this (says he) have we known the love of God, Joh. 15. 12.
because he has laid down his life for us; and we ought to lay down our life
for the brethren; Ephesians. 5. 2.
and Saint Paul, Walk in love, even as Christ loved us, and gave himself for us
an offering and sacrifice to God; the which Precept he backed with his own
Example, 2 Cor. 12. 15.
I (says he) very gladly will spend and be spent for your souls; and, Phil. 2.
17.
If I be offered upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I joy and
rejoice with you all; 1 Thessalonians. 2. 8.
and, Being affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted
unto you, not the Gospel of God only, but also our own souls, because ye were
dear unto us.

Reputation to some is more dear than life, and it is worse than death to be
held a malefactor, to be loaded with odious reproaches, to have an infamous
character; yet charity will engage men hereto, willingly to sustain the most
grievous obloquy and disgrace; for this the same heroical Apostles did pass
through honor and dishonor, 2 Cor. 6. 8.
through evil report and good report, as deceivers and yet true -- for this
they were made a spectacle to the world, 1 Cor. 4. 9, 10. 13.
as fools, as weak, as despicable; -- were reviled, defamed, made as the filth
of the world, and offscouring of all things. For this Saint Paul was content to
suffer, 2 Timothy 2. 9.
(...), as a malefactor. So there was nothing which charity will not deny it
self, and lose for the good of its neighbor.

XI. It is a property of Love not to stand upon distinctions and nice respects,
but to be condescensive, and willing to perform the meanest offices, needful,
or useful for the good of its friend.

He that truly loves is a voluntary servant, and gladly will stoop to any
employment, for which the need, or considerable benefit, of him whom he loves
does call.

So the greatest Souls, and the most glorious Beings, the which are most
endewed with Charity, by it are disposed with greatest readiness to serve their
inferiors.

This made Saint Paul constitute himself a servant (we might render it a Slave)
of all men, 1 Cor. 9. 19.
absolutely devoted to the promoting their interests with his utmost labor and
diligence; undertaking toilsome drudgeries, running about upon errands for them.

This makes the blessed and glorious Angels (the principalities and powers
above) vouchsafe to wait on men, Psalm. 91. 11. 34. 7.
to be the guards of all good men, to be ministering Spirits, Heb. 1. 7, 14.
sent out to minister for them, who shall inherit salvation; not only
obedience to God enforces them, but charity disposes them gladly to serve us,
who are so much their inferiors; Luke 15. 7, 10. (...).
the same charity, which produces joy in them at the conversion of a sinner.

This made the Son of God to descend from heaven; Joh. 17. 5.
and lay aside that glory which he had with God before the world was; 2 Cor. 8.
9.
this made him, who was so rich, to become poor, that we by his poverty might
be enriched; Luke 22. 27.
this made him converse and demean himself among his servants, Matt. 20. 28.
as he that ministered; this made him to wash his Disciples feet; thereby
designing instructively to exemplify the duty and nature of Charity, Joh. 13.
14.
for If (said he) I your Lord and Master have washed your feet, then ye also
ought to wash one another feet; for I have given you an example, that ye
should do as I have done to you.

This makes God himself (the high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity.)
Isa. 57. 15.
to condescend so far, as to be continually employed in carefully watching
over, in providing for, in protecting, and assisting us vile and wretched
worms; for though he dwells on high, Psalm. 113. 6.
yet humbles he himself to behold the things that are in heaven and earth.
(Psalm. 8. 4. 144. 3. Job. 7. 17.)
This makes him with so much pain and patience to support our infirmities, to
bear with our offenses, to wait for our conversion; according to that
Protestation in the Prophet, Isa. 43. 24.
Thou have made me to serve with thy sins, thou have wearied me with thine
iniquities.

In conformity to this wonderful practice, whose actions are the best rules
and patterns of our deportment, charity should dispose us, according to Saint
Paul's practice, Gal. 5. 13.
by love to serve one another.

Indeed it will not suffer any man to look down on another with supercilious
contempt or neglect; as if he were unworthy or beneath our regard. It will
incline superiors to look on their inferiors (their subjects, their servants,
their meanest and poorest neighbors) not as beasts or as slaves; but as men,
as brethren; Job 31. 13, 14, 15.
as descending from the same stock, as partakers of the common nature and
reason; 2 Pet. 1. 1.
as those who have obtained the like precious faith; as heirs of the same
precious promises and glorious hopes; as their equals in the best things, and
in all considerable advantages; equals Ephesians. 6. 9. Col. 4. 1.
in God's sight, and according to our Lord's intent, when he said, Matt. 23. 9.
One is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are brethren; according to Saint
Paul's exhortation to Philemon, that he would receive Onesimus, Philem. 16.
not now as a servant, but above a servant, a brother beloved in the Lord.

Accordingly charity will dispose men of rank in their behavior to be
condescensive, lowly, meek, courteous, obliging and helpful to those, who in
humane eye or in worldly state are most below them; remembering that ordinance
of our Lord, charged on all his Disciples, and enforced by his own pattern,
Matt. 23. 11.
He that is greatest among you let him be your servant. Luke 22. 27.


Love indeed is the great Leveller, Amicitia pares invenit, aut facit.
which in a manner sets all things on even ground, and reduces to a just
poise; which brings down heaven to earth, and raises up earth to heaven;
which inclines the highest to wait upon the lowest, which ingageth the
strength of the mightiest to help the weakest, and the wealth of the richest to
supply the poorest, (...), that there may be an equality; ^ Cor. 8. 14.
that no where there may be an useless abundance, or a helpless indigence.

XII. Charity does regulate our dealing, our deportment, our conversation
toward our neighbor, implying good usage, and fair treatment of him on all
occasions; for no man does handle that which he loves rudely or roughly, so as
to endanger the loss, the detriment, the hurt or offense thereof.

Wherefore the language of charity is soft and sweet, not wounding the heart,
not grating on the ear of any with whom a man converseth; like the language of
which the Wise man says, Prove. 15. 26.
The words of the pure are pleasant words --; such as are sweet to the soul,
Prove. 16. 24.
and health to the bones; Eccles. 10. 12.
and, The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious; such as our Lords were, Luke
4. 22.
(...), words of grace; such as the Apostle speaks of, Let your speech be
always, Col. 4. 6. (...).
(...), with grace -- such as may give grace to the hearers; being entertained,
Ephesians. 4. 9.
not with aversation, but with favorable acceptance.

Its carriage is gentle, courteous, benign; bearing in it marks of affection,
and kind respect.

Its dealing is equal, moderate, fair, yielding no occasion of disgust, or
complaint; not catching at, or taking advantages, not meting hard measure.

It does not foster any bad passion or humor, which may embitter or sour
conversation, so that it renders a man continually good company.

If a man be harsh or surly in his discourse, rugged or rude in his demeanor,
hard and rigorous in his dealing, it is a certain argument of his defect in
charity; for that calmeth and sweetneth the mind, it quasheth keen, fierce, and
boisterous passions; it discardeth those conceits, and those humors, from
whence such practice does issue.

Charity (says Saint Paul) (...), 1 Cor. 13. 5.
behaveth not it self unhandsomely; is not untoward, unseemly, uncivil, or
clownish in word, or in carriage, or in deed; It is in truth the most
civilizing, and most polishing disposition that can be: Nothing does render a
man so completely Gentile; (not in an affected, or artificial way, consisting
in certain postures or motions of body; (dopping, cringing, etc.) in forms of
expression, or modish addresses, which men learn like Parrots, and vent by
rote, usually not meaning any thing by them, often with them disguising fraud
and rancour) but in a real and natural manner, suggested by good judgment and
hearty affection.

A charitable man may perhaps not be guilty of courtship, or may be unpractised
in the modes of address; but he will not be deficient in the substance of
paying every man proper and due respect: this indeed is true courtesy,
grounded on reason, and proceeding from the heart, which therefore is far more
genuine, more solid, more steady, than that which is built on fashion and
issues from affectation; the which indeed only does ape, or counterfeit the
deportment of charity; for what a charitable man truly is, that a gallant would
seem to be.

Such are the properties of Charity.

There be also further many particular Acts, which have a very close alliance
to it; being ever coherent with it, or springing from it; which are recommended
to us by precepts in the holy Scripture; the which it will be convenient to
mention.

1. It is a proper act of Charity to forbear anger upon provocation, or to
repress its motions, to resent injuries and discourtesies either not at all, or
very calmly and mildly: for

Charity (...), 1 Cor. 13. 5.
is not easily provoked.

Charity (...), V. 4.
suffers long and is kind.

Charity (...), V. 7.
does endure all things.

Anger is a violent insurrection of the mind against a person; but love is not
apt to rise up in opposition against any; anger is an intemperate heat, love
has a pure warmth quite of another nature; as natural heat is from a fever;
or as the heat of the Sun from that of a culinary fire; which puts that out,
as the Sunbeams do extinguish a culinary fire; anger has an (...), an
appetite of revenge, or doing mischief to the object of it; but love is
innocent and works no evil. Romans 13. 10.


Love disposes, if our neighbor does misbehave himself toward us (by
wrongful usage, or unkind carriage) to be sorry for him, and to pity him;
which are passions contrary to anger, and slaking the violences of it.

It is said in the Canticles, Cant. 8. 7.
Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it; charity would
hold out against many neglects, many provocations.

Hence the Precepts, (...).
Walk with all lowliness, and meekness, with long-suffering, Ephesians. 4. 1, 2.
forbearing one another in love: Let all bitterness, Ephesians. 4. 31.
and wrath, and anger, and clamor, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 14. (...).
and evil-speaking be put away from you, Col. 3. 8.
with all malice: Put off anger, Jam. 1. 19.
wrath, malice, etc. Be slow to wrath.

2. It is a proper Act of Charity to remit offenses, suppressing all designs of
revenge, and not retaining any grudge: for,

Charity, 1 Cor. 13. 7*
(...), does cover all things; Prove. 10. 12.
and in this sense does hide a multitude of sins: 1 Pet. 4. 8.
all dispositions, all intents to do harm are inconsistent with it, Jam. 5. 20.
are quite repugnant to it.

Hence those Precepts, Col. 3. 12, 13.
Put on, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering, forbearing one another, and
forgiving one another, if any man has a quarrel against any, (...).
even as Christ forgave you, Ephesians. 4. 32.
so also do ye: Be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one
another; even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you: 1 Thessalonians. 5. 15.
See that none render evil for evil, but ever follow that which is good both
among your selves and to all men: 1 Pet. 3. ^.
And many the like Precepts occur in the Gospels, Romans 12. 17.
the Apostolical Writings; Matt. 6. 14. 5. 44.
yea even in the old Testament, Prove. 20. 22. 25. 21.
wherein charity did not run in so high a strain.

3. It is a Duty coherent with Charity, to maintain concord and peace; to
abstain from contention and strife; together with the sources of them, pride,
envy, emulation, malice.

We are commanded to be (...), and (...), Phil. 2. 2.
of one soul, 1 Pet. 3. 8.
of one mind (like the multitude of believers in the Acts, Act. 4. 32.
who had one heart and one soul) that we should keep the unity of spirit in the
bond of peace; Ephesians. 4. 3.
that we should be of one accord, Phil. 2. 2. 1. 27.
of one mind, 1 Cor. 1. 10.
standing fast in one spirit, 2 Cor. 13. 11.
with one mind: Romans 15. 5, 6. 12. 16.
that we should all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among
us, Phil. 3. 16.
but that we be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same
judgment: that there be no factions, or schisms in the body: 1 Cor. 12. 25.
11. 18. 1. 11. 3. 3.
that all dissensions, all clamours, 2 Cor. 12. 20.
all murmurings, all emulations should be abandoned and put away from us; Phil.
2. 14.
that we should pursue and maintain peace with all men: Heb. 12. 14.
obedience to which commands can only be the result of charity, Romans 12. 18.
esteeming the person and judgment of our neighbor; 2 Timothy 2. 22.
desiring his good will, tendering his good; curbing those fleshly lusts, Jam.
4. 1.
and those fierce passions, 1 Cor. 3. 3.
from the predominancy whereof Gal. 5. 20.
discords and strifes do spring. 1 Timothy 6. 4.


4. Another charitable practice is being candid in opinion, and mild in censure
about our neighbor, and his actions; having a good conceit of his person and
representing him to our selves under the best character we can; making the most
favorable construction of his words, and the fairest interpretation of his
designs.

Charity disposes us to entertain a good opinion of our neighbor, for
desiring his good we shall be concerned for him, and prejudiced (as it were) on
his side; being unwilling to discover any blemish in him to our own
disappointment and regret.

Love cannot subsist without esteem; and it would not willingly by destroying
that lose its own subsistence.

Love would preserve any good of its friend, and therefore his reputation,
which is a good in it self precious, and ever very dear to him.

Love would bestow any good, and therefore its esteem; which is a considerable
good.

Harsh censure is a very rude kind of treatment, grievously vexing a man, and
really hurting him; charity therefore will not be guilty of it.

It disposes rather to oversee, and connive at faults, than to find them, or
to pore on them, rather to hide and smother, than to disclose or divulge them;
rather to extenuate and excuse, than to exaggerate or aggravate them.

Are words capable of a good sense? charity will expound them thereto: may an
action be imputed to any good intent? charity will ever refer it thither: does
a fault admit any plea, apology, or diminution? charity will be sure to allege
it: may a quality admit a good name? charity will call it thereby.

It does not (...), 1 Cor. 13. 5.
not impute evil, or put it to any man's account, beyond absolute necessity.

It hops all things, 1 Cor. 13. 7.
and believes all things; hops and believes all things for the best in
favor to its neighbor, concerning his intentions, and actions, liable to
doubt.

It banisheth all evil surmises; 1 Timothy 6. 4.
it rejects all ill stories, malicious insinuations, perverse glosses and
descants.

5. Another charitable practice is to comport with the infirmities of our
neighbor; according to that Rule of Saint Paul, (...).
We that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, Act. 20. 35.
and not to please our selves; 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.
and that Precept, Bear one another burdens, Romans 15. 1.
and so fulfill the law of Christ. Gal. 6. 2.


Is a man wiser than his neighbor, (or in any case freer of defects) charity
will dispose to use that advantage so as not to contemn him, or insult over
him; but to instruct him, to help him, to comfort him.

As we deal with children, allowing to the infirmities of their age, bearing
their ignorance, frowardness, untoward humors, without distasting them; so
should we with our brethren who labor under any weakness of mind or humor.

6. It Is an act of charity to abstain from offending, or scandalizing our
brethren; by doing any thing, which either may occasion him to commit sin, or
disaffect him to Religion, or discourage him in the practice of duty, (that
which Saint Paul calls to (...). 1 Cor. 10. 7. (...). 1 Cor. 8. 12. Romans 14.
15. (...). 1 Cor. 10. 32. 8. 13. Romans 14. 21.
defile and smite his weak conscience) or which any-wise may discompose, vex,
and grieve him: for, If thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou
not charitably.

The Sixth Sermon.
HEBREWS 10. 24. Let us consider one another to provoke unto love, and to good
works.
THAT which is here recommended by the Apostle, as the common Duty of
Christians toward each other, upon emergent occasions, with zeal and care to
provoke one another to the practice of Charity and Beneficence, may well be
conceived the special Duty of those, whose Office it is to instruct and guide
others, when opportunity is afforded: with that obligation I shall now comply,
by representing diverse considerations serving to excite and encourage us to
that practice: this (without premising any description or explication of the
Duty; the Nature, special Acts and Properties whereof I have already declared)
I shall immediately undertake,

I. First then, I desire you to remember and consider that you are men, and as
such obliged to this Duty; as being very agreeable to humane nature; the which
(not being corrupted, or distempered by ill use) does incline to it, does call
for it, does like and approve it, does find satisfaction and delight therein.

Saint Paul charge us to be (...); Romans 12. 10.
or to have a natural affection one toward another; that supposes a (...)
inbred to men, which should be rowsed up, improved, and exercised: Such an one
indeed there is, which although often raked up and smothered in the common
attendances on the providing for our needs, and prosecuting our affairs, will
upon occasion, more or less break forth and discover it self.

That the constitution and frame of our nature disposes to it, we cannot but
feel, when our bowels are touched with a sensible pain at the view of any
calamitous object, when our fancies are disturbed at the report of any disaster
befalling a man; (...). Arist. Eth. 9. 9.
when the sight of a Tragedy wringeth compassion and tears from us; which
affections we can hardly quash by any reflection, that such events (true or
feigned) do not concern our selves.

Hence does nature so strongly affect society, Hominem homini natura conciliat.
Sen. Ep. 9.
and abhor solitude; so that a man cannot enjoy himself alone, Nullius boni
sine socio jucunda possessio est. Sen. Ep. 6.
or find satisfaction in any good without a companion; not only for that he
then cannot receive, (...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Or. 25.
but also because he cannot impart assistance, consolation and delight in
converse; for men do not affect society only that they may obtain benefits
thereby; but as much or more, that they may be enabled to communicate them;
nothing being more distastefull than to be always on the taking hand: neither
indeed has any thing a more pleasant and savoury relish than to do Good; as
even Epicurus, the great Patron of pleasure did confess.

The practice of benignity, of courtesy, of clemency do at first sight, without
aid of any discursive reflection, obtain approbation and applause from men;
being acceptable and amiable to their mind, as beauty to their sight, harmony
to their hearing, fragrancy to their smell and sweetness to their taste; And
correspondently uncharitable dispositions and practices (malignity, harshness,
cruelty) do offend the mind^ with a disgustfull resentment of them.

We may appeal to the conscience of each man if he does not feel
dissatisfaction in that fierceness or frowardness of temper, which produces
uncharitableness; if we have not a complacence in that sweet and calm
disposition of soul, whence charity does issue; if he do not condemn himself
for the one, and approve himself in the other practice.

This is the common judgment of men; (...). Flavian. CP. Ep. in Syn. Chalc.
Act. 1. (p. III.)
and therefore in common language this practice is styled humanity, as best
sorting with our nature, and becoming it; and the principle whence it springs
is called good nature; and the contrary practice is styled inhumanity, as
thwarting our natural inclinations, or devesting us of manhood; and its source
likewise is termed ill nature, or a corruption of our nature.

It is therefore a monstrous paradox, crossing the common sense of men, which
in this loose and vain world has lately got such vogue, that all men naturally
are enemies one to another: it pretends to be grounded on common observation
and experience; but it is only an observing the worst actions of the worst
men; of dissolute ruffians, of villainous cheats, of ravenous oppressors, of
malicious politicians, of such degenerate Apostates from humanity; by whose
practice (debauched by vain conceits and naughty customs) an ill measure is
taken of mankind: Aristotle himself, who had observed things as well as any of
these men and with as sharp a judgment, (...). Arist. Eth. 8. 1. Rhet. 1. 11.
affirms the contrary, that all men are friends, and disposed to entertain
friendly correspondence with one another: (...). Chrysostom. in Ephesians. Orat. 2.
Indeed to say the contrary is a blasphemy against the Author of our nature;
and is spoken no less out of profane enmity against him, (...). Proclus
Constantinopl. Syn. Chalc. Act. 14.
than out of venomous malignity against men: out of hatred to God and Goodness
they would disparage and vilify the noblest work of God's Creation; yet do
they (if we sound the bottom of their mind) imply themselves to admire this
quality, and by their decrying it do commend it; for it is easy to discern
that therefore only they slander mankind as incapable of goodness, because out
of malignity they would not allow it so excellent a quality.

II. Let us consider what our neighbor is, how near in blood, how like in
nature, how much in all considerable respects the same with us he is.

Should any one wrong or defame our brother, we should be displeased; should we
do it our selves, or should we omit any office of kindness toward him, we
should blame our selves; Every man is such, of one stock, of one blood with us;
and as such may challenge and call for real affection from us.

Should any one mar, tear, or deface our Picture, or show any kind of
disrespect thereto, we should be offended, taking it for an indignity put on
our selves; and as for our selves we should never in such a manner affront or
despite our selves; (...). Plato Symp.
Every man is such, our most lively image, representing us most exactly in all
the main figures and features of body, of soul, of state; we thence do owe
respect to every one.

Every man is another self, partaker of the same nature, endewed with the same
faculties, subject to the same Laws, liable to the same fortunes; distinguished
from us only in accidental, and variable circumstances; whence if we be
amiable or estimable, so is he upon the same grounds; and acting impartially
(according to right judgment) we should yield love and esteem to him: by
slighting, hating, injuring, hurting him we do consequentially abuse our
selves, or acknowledge our selves deservedly liable to the same usage.

Every man as a Christian, is in a higher and nobler way allied, assimilated,
and identified to us; to him therefore upon the like grounds improved charity
is more due; and we wrong our heavenly relations, our better nature, our more
considerable selves, in withholding it from him.

III. Equity does plainly require Charity from us; for every one is ready not
only to wish and seek, but to demand and claim love from others; so as to be
much offended, and grievously to complain if he do not find it.

We do all conceive love and respect due to us from all men; we take all men
bound to wish and tender our welfare, we suppose our need to require
commiseration and succor from every man; if it be refused, we think it a hard
case, and that we are ill used; we cry out of wrong, of discourtesie, of
inhumanity, of baseness practiced toward us.

A moderate respect and affection will hardly satisfy us, we pretend to them
in the highest degree, disgusting the least appearance of disregard or
disaffection; we can scarce better digest indifference than hatred.

This evidenceth our opinion and conscience to be, that we ought to pay the
greatest respect and kindness to our neighbor; for it is plainly unjust and
ridiculously vain, to require that from others, which we refuse to others, who
may demand it upon the same title; nor can we without self-condemnation
practice that which we detest in others.

In all reason and equity, if I would have another my friend, I must be a
friend to him; if I pretend to charity from all men, I must render it to all in
the same kind and measure.

Hence is the Law of Charity well expressed in those terms, Matt. 7.
of doing to others whatever we would have them do to us; whereby the palpable
equity of this practice is demonstrated.

IV. Let us consider, that Charity is a right noble and worthy thing; greatly
perfective of our nature, much dignifying and beautifying our soul.

It renders a man truly great, enlarging his mind unto a vast circumference,
and to a capacity near infinite; so that it by a general care does reach all
things; by an universal affection does embrace and grasp the world.

By it our reason obtains a field, or scope of employment worthy of it, not
confined to the slender interests of one person or one place, but extending to
the concerns of all men.

Charity is the imitation and copy of that immense love, Chrysostom. in Ephesians. Or. 9.
which is the fountain of all being and all good; which made all things, which
preserves the world, which sustaineth every creature; (...). Naz. Or. 14.
Nothing advances us so near to a resemblance of him, who is essential love
and goodness; who freely and purely, without any regard to his own advantage,
or capacity of finding any beneficial return, does bear and express the highest
good will, with a liberal hand pouring down showers of bounty and mercy on all
his creatures: (...), etc. Chrysostom. (...).
who daily puts up numberless indignities and injuries; upholding and
maintaining those who offend and provoke him.

Charity rendereth us as Angels, or Peers to those glorious and blessed
Creatures, who without receiving or expecting any requital from us, do heartily
desire and delight in our good, are ready to promote it, do willingly serve and
labor for it. Nothing is more amiable, more admirable, more venerable even in
the common eye and opinion of men; it has in it a beauty and a majesty apt to
ravish every heart: Even a spark of it in generosity of dealing breeds
admiration, a glimpse of it in formal courtesy of behavior procures much
esteem, being deemed to accomplish and adorn a man; how lovely therefore and
truly gallant is an entire, sincere, constant, and uniform practice thereof,
issuing from pure good will and affection!

Love indeed or goodness (for true love is nothing else but goodness exerting
it self, in direction toward objects capable of its influence) is the only
amiable, and only honorable thing: Power and Wit may be admired by some, or
have some fond Idolaters; but being severed from goodness, or abstracted from
their subserviency to it, they cannot obtain real love, they deserve not any
esteem; for the worst, the most unhappy, the most odious and contemptible of
Beings do partake of them in a high measure: The Prince of Darkness has more
power; and reigns with absolute Sovereignty over more Subjects by many than
the Great Turk; One Devil may have more wit than all the politic Achitophels,
and all the profane Hectors in the world; yet with all his Power and all his
Wit he is most wretched, most detestable, and most despicable: and such in
proportion is every one, who partaketh in his accursed dispositions of malice
and uncharitableness. For,

On the other side Uncharitableness is a very mean and base thing: Sen. de
Tranq. 3.
It contracteth a man's soul into a narrow compass, or streightneth it as it
were into one point; drawing all his thoughts, his desires, his affections into
himself, as to their center; so that his reason, his will, his activity have
but one pitiful object to exercise themselves about: To scrape together a
little pelf, to catch a vapor of fame, to progg for a frivolous semblance of
power or dignity, to sooth the humor, or pamper the sensuality of one poor
worm, is the ignoble subject of his busy care and endeavor.

By it we debase our selves into an affinity with the meanest things; becoming
either like Beasts or Fiends; like Beasts, affecting only our own present
sensible good; or like Fiends, designing mischief and trouble to others.

It is indeed hard for a man without Charity, not to be worse than an innocent
Beast; not at least to be as a Fox, or a Wolf; Ezekiel. 22. 27.
either cunningly lurching, or violently ravening for prey: Love only can
restrain a man from flying at all, and seizing on whatever he meets; from
biting, from worrying, from devouring every one that is weaker than himself, or
who cannot defend himself from his paws and teeth.

V. The practice of Charity is productive of many great benefits and advantages
to us; so that to love our neighbor does involve the truest love to our
selves; and we are not only obliged in duty, but may be encouraged by our
interest thereto: Beatitude is often pronounced to it, or to some particular
instances of it; and well may it be so, for it indeed will constitute a man
happy, producing to him manifold comforts and conveniences of life: some
whereof we shall touch.

VI. (1.) Charity does free our souls of all those bad dispositions and
passions which vex and disquiet them; from those gloomy passions, (...). Chrysostom.
in 1 Cor. Orat. 32.
which cloud our mind, from those keen passions, which fret our heart, from
those tumultuous passions, which ruffle us and discompose the frame of our soul.

It stifleth anger, (that swoon of reason, transporting a man out of himself)
for a man hardly can be incensed against those whom he tenderly loves: a petty
neglect, a hard word, a small discourtesie will not fire a charitable soul; the
greatest affront or wrong can hardly kindle rage therein.

It banisheth envy (that severely just vice, which never fails to punish it
self) for no man will repine at his wealth or prosperity, (...). Gr. Naz. Orat.
27.
no man will malign his worth or virtue, whose good he charitably desires and
wishes.

It excludes rancour and spite, those dispositions which create a hell in our
soul; which are directly repugnant to charity, and thereby dispelled as
darkness by light, cold by heat.

It suffers not revenge (that canker of the heart) to harbor in our breast;
for who can intend mischief to him, in whose good he delights, in whose evil
he feels displeasure?

It voideth fear, 1 John 4. 18.
suspicion, jealousy of mischief designed against us; (...).
the which passions have torment, or do punish us (as Saint John says) racking
us with anxious expectation of evil; wherefore there is, says he, no fear in
love, but perfect love casts out fear: Oderunt quem metuunt.
No man indeed is apt to fear him whom he loves, or is able much to love him
whom he fears; for love esteems its object as innocent, fear apprehends
it as hurtful; love disposes to follow and embrace, fear inclines to decline
and shun: To suspect a friend therefore is to disavow him for such; and upon
slender grounds to conceit ill of him, is to deem him unworthy of our love: The
innocence and inoffensiveness of charity, which provokes no man to do us harm,
does also breed great security and confidence; any man will think he may walk
unarmed and unguarded among those to whom he bears good will, to whom he
neither means, nor does any harm; being guarded by a good conscience and
shielded with innocence.

It removes discontent or dissatisfaction in our state; the which usually does
spring from ill conceits and surmises about our neighbor, or from wrathful
and spiteful affections toward him; for while men have good respect and
kindness for their neighbors, they seldom are dissatisfied in their own
condition; they can never want comfort or despair of succor.

It curbeth ambition and avarice; those impetuous, those insatiable, those
troublesome dispositions; for a man will not affect to climb above those, in
whose honor he finds satisfaction; nor to scramble with them for the goods,
which he gladly would have them to enjoy: a competency will satisfy him who
takes himself but for one among the rest, (...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Or. 32.
and who can as little endure to see others want as himself: who would trouble
himself to get power over those, to o'retop them in dignity and fame, to
surpass them in wealth, whom he is ready to serve in the meanest offices of
kindness, whom he would in honor prefer to himself, unto whom he will
liberally communicate what he has, for his comfort and relief?

In the prevalence of such bad passions and dispositions of soul our misery
does most consist; thence the chief troubles and inconveniences of our life do
proceed; wherefore charity does highly deserve of us in freeing us from them.

VII. (2.) It consequently does settle our mind in a serene, calm, sweet, and
cheerful state; in an even temper and good humor, and harmonious order of
soul, which ever will result from the evacuation of bad passions, from the
composure of such as are indifferent, from the excitement of those which are
good and pleasant: Gal. 5. 22.
The fruits of the Spirit, Ephesians. 5. 12.
says Saint Paul, are love, joy, peace, long-suffering, Col. 3. 12.
gentleness, goodness (or benignity): love precedeth, joy and peace follow as
its Eldest Daughter.
constant attendants, gentleness and benignity come after as its certain
effects.

Love indeed is the sweetest of all passions, ever accompanied with a secret
delectation and pleasant sense; whenever it is placed upon a good object, when
it acts in a rational way, when it is vigorous, it must needs yield much joy.

It therefore greatly conduces to our happiness, or rather alone does suffice
to constitute us happy.

VIII. (3.) Charity will preserve us from diverse external mischiefs and
inconveniences, to which our life is exposed, and which otherwise we shall
incur.

If we have not charity toward men, we shall have enmity with them; and upon
that do wait troops of mischief; we shall enjoy nothing quietly or safely, we
shall do nothing without opposition or contention; no conversation, no commerce
will be pleasant; clamor, obloquy, tumult, and trouble will surround us; we
shall live in perpetual danger; the enmity of the meanest and weakest Creature
being formidable.

But all such mischiefs charity will prevent or remove; damming up the
fountains, (...). Clem. Str. 7. (p. 532.)
or extirpating the roots of them: for who will hate a person that apparently
loves him; who can be so barbarous or base as to hurt that man, Chrysostom. in 1 Thessalonians. Or. 4. (...), etc.
whom he finds ever ready to do himself good? what brute, what devil can find
in his heart to be a foe to him, (...). Hier.
who is a sure friend to all? (...). Chrysostom. in Genesis Or. 32.
No Publican can be so wretchedly vile, no sinner so destitute of goodness;
Matt. 5. 46.
for, If (says our Lord, upon common experience) you love them which love you,
what reward have you, do not even the publicans the same? and, If you do good
to them which do good to you, what thank have you? for sinners also do even the
same: It seems beyond the greatest degeneracy and corruption whereof humane
nature is capable, to requite charity with enmity, yea not to return some
kindness for it: (...); 1 Pet. 3. 13. (...).
Who (says Saint Peter) is he that will do you hurt, if you be followers of
that which is good; or imitatours of him that is good; (of the Sovereign
goodness)? none surely can be so unjust, or so unworthy.

As charity restrains us from doing any wrong, or yielding any offense to
others in thought, in word, in deed; from entertaining any bad conceits without
ground, from hatching any mischievous designs against our neighbor; from using
any harsh, virulent, biting language; from any rugged, discourteous,
disobliging behavior; from any wrongful, rigorous, severe dealing toward him;
from any contemptuous pride, or supercilious arrogance; so it consequently will
defend us from the like treatment; for scarce any man is so malicious as
without any provocation to do mischief; Vincit malos pertinax bonitas. Sen.
no man is so incorrigibly savage, as to persist in committing outrage upon
perfect innocence, joined with patience, with meekness, with courtesy: Charity
surely will melt the hardest heart, and charm the fiercest spirit; it will bind
the most violent hand, it will still the most obstreperous tongue; it will
reconcile the most offended, most prejudiced heart: Carbones ignis congregabis
super caput ejus; non in maledictum and condemnationem, ut plerique existimant,
sed in correctionem and poenitudinem; ut superatus beneficiis, excoctus fervore
charitatis, inimicus esse desistat. Hier. in Pelag. 1. cap. 9.
it is the best guard that can be of our safety from assaults, of our interest
from damage, of our reputation from slander, detraction, and reproach.

If you would have Examples of this, experience will afford many; and some we
have in the Sacred Records commended to our Observation; Genesis 32. 20.
Esau was a rough man, and one who had been exceedingly provoked by his brother
Jacob; yet how did meek and respectfull demeanor overcome him! so that Esau
(it is said in the history) ran to meet him (Jacob), Genesis 33. 4.
and fell on his neck, and kissed him, and they wept.

Saul was a man possessed with a furious envy and spite against David; yet into
what expressions did the sense of his kind dealing force him! 1 Samuel 24. 16,
17. 26. 17, 21.
Is this thy voice, my Son David? -- Thou art more righteous than I; for thou
have rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil; -- behold I have
played the fool, and have erred exceedingly. So does charity subdue and triumph
over the most inveterate prejudices, and the most violent passions of men.

If peace and quiet be desirable things, as certainly they are, Cadit statim
simultas ab altera part deserta. -- Sen. de Ir. 2. 34.
and that form implies, when by wishing peace with men, we are understood to
wish all good to them, it is charity only that preserves them; which more
surely than any power or policy does quash all war and strife; for war must
have parties, and strife implies resistance; be it the first or second blow
which makes the fray, charity will avoid it; for it neither will strike the
first in offense, nor the second in revenge. Charity therefore may well be
styled the band of peace, Ephesians. 4. 3.
it being that only which can knit men's souls together, and keep them from
breaking out into dissensions.

It alone is that, which will prevent bickering and clashing about points of
credit or interest; if we love not our neighbor, or tender not his good as our
own, we shall be ever in competition and debate with him about those things,
not suffering him to enjoy any thing quietly; struggling to get above him,
scrambling with him for what is to be had.

IX. (4.) As charity preserves from mischiefs, so it procures many sweet
comforts and fair accommodations of life.

Friendship is a most useful and pleasant thing; and charity will conciliate
good store thereof; it is apt to make all men friends: Ego tibi monstrabo
amatorium sine medicamento, sine herba, sine ullius veneficae carmine, Si vis
amari, ama. Sen. Ep. 9.
for love is the only general philtre, and effectual charm of souls; the fire
which kindles all it touches, and propagateth it self in every capable
subject; and such a subject is every man in whom humanity is not quite extinct,
and hardly can any such man be, seeing every man has some good humor in him,
some blood, some kindly juice flowing in his veins; no man wholly does consist
of dusky melancholy, or fiery choler; whence all men may be presumed liable to
the powerful impressions of charity; its mild and serene countenance, its
sweet and gentle speech, its courteous and obliging gesture, its fair dealing,
its benign conversation, its readiness to do any good or service to any man,
will insinuate good will and respect into all hearts.

It thence will encompass a man with friends, with many guards of his safety,
with many supports of his fortune, with many patrons of his reputation, with
many succourers of his necessity, with many comforters of his affliction: for
is a charitable man in danger, who will not defend him? is he falling, who will
not uphold him? is he falsely accused or aspersed, who will not vindicate him?
is he in distress, who will not pity him, who will not endeavor to relieve and
restore him? who will insult over his calamity? will it not in such cases
appear a common duty, a common interest to assist and countenance a common
friend, a common benefactour to mankind?

Whereas most of our life is spent in society and discourse, charity is that
which does season and sweeten these, rendering them grateful to others, and
commodious to ones self; for a charitable heart is a sweet spring, from whence
do issue streams of wholesome and pleasant discourse; Prove. 15. 26. 16. 24.
it not being troubled with any bad passion or design, which may sour or foul
conversation, does ever make him good company to others, and renders them such
to himself; which is a mighty convenience. In short, a charitable man, or, true
lover of men will (says S. Chrysostom) inhabit earth as a heaven, (...).
Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Or. 32.
everywhere carrying a serenity with him, and plaiting ten thousand crowns for
himself. Again,

X. (5.) Charity does in every estate yield advantages suitable thereto;
bettering it, and improving it to our benefit.

It renders prosperity not only innocent and safe, but useful and fruitful
to us; we then indeed enjoy it, if we feel the comfort of doing good by it: It
solaceth adversity, considering that it does not arise as a punishment or fruit
of ill-doing to others; that it is not attended with the deserved ill will of
men; that no man has reason to delight for it, or insult over us therein; that
we may probably expect commiseration and relief, having been ready to show the
like to others.

It tempereth both states; for in prosperity a man cannot be transported with
immoderate joy, when so many objects of pity and grief do present themselves
before him, which he is apt deeply to resent; in prosperity he cannot be
dejected with extreme sorrow, being refreshed by so many good successes
befalling those whom he loves: One condition will not puff him up, being
sensible of his neighbors misery; the other will not sink him down, having
complacence in his neighbors welfare. Uncharitableness (proceeding from
contrary causes, and producing contrary effects) does spoil all conditions,
rendering prosperity fruitless, and adversity comfortless.

XI. (6.) We may consider, that secluding the exercise of charity, all the
goods and advantages we have (our best faculties of nature, our best endowments
of soul, the gifts of providence, and the fruits of our industry) will become
vain and fruitless, or noxious and banefull to us: for what is our reason
worth, what does it signify, if it serves only for contriving sorry designs,
or transacting petty affairs about our selves? what is wit good for, if it must
be spent only in making sport, or hatching mischief? to what purpose is
knowledge, if it be not applied to the instruction, direction, admonition, or
consolation of others? what mattereth abundance of wealth, if it be to be
uselesly hoarded up, or vainly flung away, in wicked or wanton profuseness; if
it be not employed in affording succor to our neighbors indigency and
distress? what is our credit but a mere noise or a puff of air, Paulum sepultae
distat inertiae Celata virtus. Hor. Ca^m. 4. 9.
if we do not give a solidity and substance to it, by making it an engine of
doing good? what is our virtue it self, if it be buried in obscurity or choked
with idleness, yielding no benefit to others by the luster of its example, or
by its real influence? What is any talent if it be wrapped up in a napkin, any
light if it be hid under a bushel; any thing private if it be not by good use
spread out and improved to public benefit? If these gifts do minister only to
our own particular advantage, to our personal convenience, glory, or pleasure,
how slimme things are they, how inconsiderable is their worth?

But they being managed by charity become precious and excellent things; they
are great in proportion to the greatness of their use, or the extent of their
beneficial influence: as they carry forth good to the world, so they bring back
various benefits to our selves; Luke 6. 38.
they return into our bosom laden with respect and reward from God and from
man; they yield thanks and commendation from without, they work comfort and
satisfaction within: Yea which is infinitely more considerable, and enhanceth
the price of our gifts to a vast rate, Joh. 15. 8.
they procure glory and blessing to God; Phil. 1. 11.
for hereby is God glorified, Matt. 5. 16.
if we bring forth much fruit; Prove. 4. 31.
and no good fruit can grow from any other stock than that of charity. 2 Cor.
9. 11.
1 Cor. 13.


Uncharitableness therefore should be loathed and shunned by us, as that which
robs us of all our ornaments and advantages; which indeed marreth and
corrupts all our good things, which turns blessings into curses, and
renders the means of our welfare to be causes of mischief to us; for without
charity a man can have no goods, but goods worldly and temporal; and such goods
thence do prove impertinent baubles, burdensome encumbrances, dangerous
snares, banefull poisons to him.

XII. (7.) Charity does hugely advance and amplify a man's state, putting him
into the possession or fruition of all good things: It will endow, enrich,
ennoble, embelish us with all the world has of precious, of glorious, of fair;
by appropriation thereof to our selves, and acquiring of a real interest
therein* What men commonly out of fond self-love do vainly affect, that
infallibly by being charitable they may compass, the engrossing to themselves
all kinds of good: most easily, most innocently, in a compendious and sure way,
without any sin or blame, without any care or pain, without any danger or
trouble, they may come to attain and to enjoy whatever in common esteem is
desirable or valuable; they may without greedy avarice, or the carkings, the
drudgeries, the disgraces going with it procure to themselves abundant wealth;
without fond ambition, or the difficulties, the hazards, the emulations, the
strugglings to which it is liable, they may arrive to great honor; without
sordid voluptuousness, or the satieties, the maladies, the regrets consequent
thereon, they may enjoy all pleasure; without any wildness or wantonness,
pride, luxury, sloth, any of its temptations and snares, they may have all
prosperity; they may get all learning and wisdom without laborious study, all
virtue and goodness without the fatigues of continual exercise: for are not all
these things yours, if you do esteem them so, if you do make them so, by
finding much delight and satisfaction in them? does not your neighbors wealth
enrich you, if you feel content in his possessing and using it? does not his
preferment advance you, if your spirit rises with it in a gladsome
complacence? does not his pleasure delight you, if you relish his enjoyment of
it? does not his prosperity bless you, if your heart does exult and triumph in
it? do not his endowments adorn you, if you like them, if you commend them, if
the use of them does minister comfort and joy to you? This is the divine Magic
of charity, which conveyeth all things into our hands, and enstateth us in a
dominion of them, whereof nothing can disseise us; by virtue whereof being (as
Saint Paul speaks of himself) sorrowful we yet always rejoice, 2 Cor. 6. 10.
having nothing we yet possess all things.

Neither is this property in things merely imaginary or fantastic (like that
of Lunaticks, who fancy themselves mighty Princes, or rich Aldermen) but very
substantial and real; yea far more real to the charitable person, than it is
commonly to those, who in legal or popular account are masters of them; for how
is propriety in things otherwise considerable, than for the content and
pleasure which they yield to the presumed owner? the which if a charitable
person abundantly draws from them, why are they not truly his? why is not the
Tree his, if he can pull and taste its Fruits without injury or blame? yea does
not the propriety more really belong to him, as to the gross possessour, if he
does equally enjoy the benefit, without partaking the inconveniences and
impurities adherent to them; if he taste them innocently and purely, without
being cloyed, without being distracted, without being puffed, without being
encumbred, ensnared, or corrupted by them?

A charitable man therefore can never (in a moral account) be poor, or vile, or
any-wise miserable; except all the world should be cast into penury and
distress; for while his neighbor has any thing, he will enjoy it; rejoicing
with those that rejoice, as the Apostle does enjoin.

XIII. (8.) If therefore we love our selves, we must love others, and do others
good; charitable beneficence carrying with it so many advantages to our selves.

We by charitable complacence do partake in their welfare, reaping pleasure
from all the fruits of their industry and fortune.

We by charitable assistance do enable and dispose them to make grateful
returns of succor in our need.

We thence assuredly shall obtain their good will, their esteem, their
commendation: we shall maintain peaceable and comfortable intercourse with
them, in safety, in quiet, in good humor and cheer.

Besides all other benefits we shall get that of their prayers; the which of
all prayers have a most favorable audience and assured efficacy: Jam. 5. 4.
for if the complaints and curses of those who are oppressed or neglected by
uncharitable dealing, Deuteronomy. 24. 15.
do certainly reach God's ears, Ecclus. 4. 6.
and pull down vengeance from above; how much more will the intercessions and
blessings of the poor pierce the heavens, and thence draw recompense; seeing
God is more ready to perform his proper and pleasant works of bounty and mercy,
Psalm. 62. 12.
than to execute his strange and unpleasing work of punishment; Mic. 7. 18.
Especially the blessings of the poor being always accompanied with praises and
glorifications of him, Isa. 28. 21.
who enableth and disposes men to do good; the which praises will ever be
reckoned on the account of him, who drew them forth by his beneficence; it will
be (as the Apostle says) fruit redounding to his account; Phil. 4. 17.
while it abounds by many thanksgivings to God. 2 Cor. 9. 11. 8. 19.


So in virtue of Charity the poorest man amply may requite the wealthiest; and
a peasant may out-doe the greatest Prince in beneficence.

XIV. We may consider, that Charity is a practice specially grateful to God,
and a most excellent part of our Duty; not only because he has commanded it
as such with greatest earnestness; nor only because it does constitute us in
nearest resemblance of him; but as a peculiar expression of love and good will
toward him; for if we love him, we must for his sake have a kindness for his
friends, we must tender his interests, we must favor his reputation, we must
desire his content and pleasure, we must contribute our endeavors toward the
furtherance of these his concerns: Seeing then God is an assured friend to all
men, seeing he has a property in all men (for he is God and Lord of all)
seeing he much concerns himself for all men's welfare; seeing from the
prosperity, from the virtue, from the happiness of every man he gains honor
and praise; Ezekiel. 18.
seeing he is greatly satisfied and delighted in the good of men, we also must
love them: otherwise we greatly shall disoblige and disgust him.

Is it not indeed a practice guilty of notorious enmity toward him, (...). Vid.
Anthol.
inconsistent with the maintenance of any friendship or peace with him, to
discord in affection from him, (...). Chrysostom in 1 Cor. Or. 32.
maligning or disaffecting those whom he dearly loves and favors, who are
so nearly allied to him by manifold relations, as his Creatures, his Subjects,
his Servants, his Children, whom he designeth and desires to crown with
eternal glory and bliss?

XV. Seeing God vouchsafes to esteem whatever is done in Charity to our
neighbor (if done with an honest and pious mind, as to his friends) to be done
unto himself; that in feeding our indigent neighbor, we refresh him, in
clothing our neighbor we comfort him; we do by charitable beneficence oblige
God, and become in a manner benefactours to him; and as such assuredly shall be
requited by him; and is not this a high privilege, a great honor, a mighty
advantage to us? If a man had opportunity to do that, which his Prince would
acknowledge a courtesy and obligation to him, what a happiness would he
account it? and how far more considerable is it, that we can so easily do that
which the Lord of all, in whose disposal all things are, will take so kindly at
our hands?

XVI. We may consider, that Charity is a very feasible and very easy Duty: it
requires no sore pain, no grievous trouble, no great cost; for it consists
only in good will, Romans 12. 8. (...) -- Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Or. 32.
and that which naturally springs thence; willingness and cheerfulness are
necessary ingredients or adjuncts of it; 2 Cor. 9. 7. 8. 12. (...); -- Chrysostom.
(...).
the which imply facility: whence the weakest and poorest man is no less able
to perform it than the greatest potentate; his heart may be as charitable,
though his hand cannot be so liberal; one of the most noble and most famous
charities that ever was, Luke 21. 2.
was the giving two mites; and the giving a cup of cold water is the instance
of that beneficence, Matt. 10. 42.
which shall not fail of being rewarded. At nunc cum omnia quae difficiliora
sunt vel modica ex part faciamus, hoc solum non facimus quod and factu
facilius est, and absque quo casa sunt universa quae facimus: Jejunii corpus
sentit injuriam, vigiliae carnem macerant -- haec omnia sunt qui faciant, sola
charitas sine labor est. Hier. in Gal. 5. 13.


XVII. We may consider, that Charity is the best, the most assured, the most
easy and expedite way, or instrument of performing all other duty toward our
neighbor: If we would dispatch, love and all is done; if we would be perfect
in obedience, love and we shall not fail in any point; Romans 13. 10.
for love is the fulfilling of the law; Gal. 5. 14.
love is the bond of perfectedness: would we be secure in the practice of
justice, of meekness, of humility toward all men, of constant fidelity toward
our friends, of gentle moderation toward our enemies, of loyalty toward our
superiors, of benignity toward our inferiors; if we would be sure to purify
our minds from ill thoughts, to restrain our tongues from ill speaking, to
abstain from all bad demeanor and dealing? it is but having charity, and
infallibly you will do all this; Romans 12.
for love works no ill to its neighbor; 1 Cor. 13. 5.
love thinks no evil; love behaveth not it self unseemly.

Would we discharge all our Duties without any reluctance or regret, (...),
etc. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Or. 32.
with much satisfaction, and pleasure? love will certainly dispose us thereto;
for it always acts freely and cheerfully, It is winged.
without any compulsion or straining; It is fire.
it is ever accompanied with delectation: Amor obsequitur sponte, gratis
optempenat, libere reveretur. Bern. ad Eug. Prol.
If we would know its way and virtue of acting, we may see it represented in
the proceeding of Jacob, Vid. Bern. Ep. 11. p. 1404. --
who being inspired by love did contentedly and without regret endure so long
and hard toil, such disappointments and such affronts; Genesis 29. 20.
And Jacob, says the Text, served seven years for Rachel, and they seemed to
him but a few days for the love he had to her.

This is the root, from whence voluntary obedience does naturally grow; (...),
etc. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Or. 32.
if it be planted in our heart, we need not fear but that all kind of good
fruit will sprout forth into conversation and practice.

But without it we shall not ever perform any good work perfectly, steadily, in
a kindly manner; no other principle will serve, if we are only moved by whip
and spur, driven on by fear, or incited by hope, we shall go forward
unwillingly and dully, often halting, ever flagging; those principles, which do
put slaves and mercenaries on action, as they are not so noble and worthy, so
neither are they so effectual and sure; as ambition, vainglory, self-interest,
design of security, of profit, of compliance with the expectation of men, etc.

XVIII. Charity gives worth, form, and life to all virtue, Chrysostom. in 1 Cor.
Or. 25.
so that without it no action is valuable in it self, or acceptable to God.

Sever it from courage; and what is that, but the boldness or fierceness of a
beast? from meekness; and what is that, but the softness of a woman, or
weakness of a child? from courtesy; and what is that, but affectation or
artifice? from justice; what is that, but humor or policy? from wisdom; what
is that, but craft and subtilty?

What means faith without it, but dry opinion; what hope, but blind
presumption; what alms-doing, but ambitious ostentation; what undergoing
martyrdom, but stiffness or sturdiness of resolution; what is devotion, but
glozing or mocking with God? what is any practice (how specious soever in
appearance, or materially good) but an issue of self-conceit, or self-will, of
servile fear, or mercenary design? Though I have faith, 1 Cor. 13. 2, 3.
so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing; though I
bestow all my goods to feed the poor; and though I give my body to be burned,
and have not charity, it profits me nothing.

But Charity does sanctify every action, and impregnate all our practice with
a savor of goodness, turning all we do into virtue; it is true fortitude, and
gallantry indeed, when a man out of charity and hearty design to promote his
neighbors good does encounter dangers and difficulties; it is genuine
meekness, when a man out of charity and unwillingness to hurt his neighbor,
does patiently comport with injuries and discourtesies; it is virtuous
courtesy, when cordial affection venteth it self in civil language, in
respectfull deportment, in obliging performances; it is excellent justice, when
a man regarding his neighbors case as his own, does unto him, as he would have
it done to himself; it is admirable wisdom, which sagaciously contriveth and
dexterously manageth things with the best advantage toward its neighbors
good: It is a worthy faith, Gal. 5. 6.
which being spirited and actuated by charity, Jam. 2. 26.
does produce goodly fruits of beneficence; it is a sound and solid hope, which
is grounded on that everlasting foundation of charity, which never does fail, 1
Cor. 3. 8.
or fall away; it is sincere alms, which not only the hand, but the heart does
reach forth; it is an acceptable sacrifice, which is kindled by the holy fire
of fervent affection; it is a pure devotion, which is offered up with a calm
and benign mind, 1 Timothy 2. 8.
resembling the disposition of that goodness which it adoreth. Matt. 5. 23.


If therefore we would do any thing well, if we would not lose all the virtue,
and forfeit all the benefit of what we perform, we must follow the Rule of
Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 16. 14.
to do all our works in charity.

XIX. So great benefits does Charity yield; yet if it did not yield any of
them, it would deserve and claim our observance; without regard to its sweet
fruits, and beneficial consequences, it were to be embraced and cherished; for
it carries a reward, and a heaven in it self; the very same which constituteth
God himself infinitely happy, and which beatifieth every blessed Spirit, in
proportion to its capacity and exercise thereof: A man does abundantly enjoy
himself in that steady composedness, and savoury complacence of mind which ever
does attend it; and as the present sense, so is the memory of it, or the good
conscience of having done good, very delicious and satisfactory.

As it is a raskally delight (tempered with regret, and vanishing into
bitterness) which men feel in wreaking spite, or doing mischief; such as they
cannot reflect upon without disgust and condemning their base impotency of
soul; so is the pleasure which charity does breed altogether pure, grateful to
the mind, and increasing by reflection; never perishing or decaying; a man
eternally enjoying the good he has done, by remembering and ruminating thereon.
In fine,

XX. Whereas the great obstacle to Charity is self-love, or an extravagant
fondness of our own interests, yet uncharitableness destroys that: for how
can we love our selves, if we do want charity, how can we appear lovely to our
selves if we are destitute of so worthy an endowment, or if we can discern
those unworthy dispositions, which accompany the defect of it? can we esteem so
mean, so vile, so ugly things as we then are? Aristotle says, that bad men
cannot be friends to themselves, because having in themselves nothing amiable,
(...). Arist. Eth. 9. 4.
they can feel no affection toward themselves; and certainly, if we are not
stark blind, or can but see wrath, spite, envy, revenge in their own black and
ugly hue, we must needs (if they do possess our souls) grow odious and
despicable to our selves. And being they do rob us of so many great benefits,
and bring so many grievous mischiefs on us, we cannot be otherwise than enemies
to our selves by cherishing them, or suffering them to lodge in us.

These are some very considerable Inducements to the practice of this great
virtue; there are diverse others, of a higher nature, derivable from the inmost
bowels of our Religion, grounded on its peculiar Constitution and Obligations,
which I shall now forbear to mention, reserving them for a particular Discourse
by themselves.

O Lord, Quinquag. Sund.
who have taught us, that all our doings without Charity are nothing worth;
Send thy Holy Ghost, and pour into our hearts that most excellent gift of
Charity, the very bond of peace and of all virtues, without which whosoever
lives is counted dead before thee. Grant this for thine only Son Jesus
Christ's sake.

The Seventh Sermon.
ROMANS 12. 18. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with
all men.
THIS Chapter contains many excellent Precepts, and wholesome Advices (scarce
any portion of Holy Scripture so many in so little compass.) From among them I
have selected one, alas, but too seasonable and pertinent to the unhappy
condition of our distracted Age, wherein to observe this, and such like
Injunctions, is by many esteemed an impossibility, by others a wonder, by some
a crime. It has an apt coherence with, yet no necessary dependence upon the
parts adjoining; whence I may presume to treat upon it distinctly by it self;
and without farther preface or circumstance we may consider several particulars
therein.

I. And First, Concerning the Advice it self, or the Substance of the Duty
charged on us, (...), (to be in peace, or live peaceably) we may take notice,
that, whether according to the more usual acception it be applied to the
public estate of things, or as here does relate only to private conversation,
it does import,

1. Not barely a negation of doing, or suffering harm; or an abstinence from
strise and violence (for a mere strangeness this may be, a want of occasion, or
a truce, rather than a peace) but a positive Amity, and disposition to perform
such kind offices, without which good correspondence among men cannot subsist.
For they who by reason of distance of place, non-acquaintance, or defect of
opportunity maintain no intercourse, cannot properly be said to be in peace
with one another: But those who have frequent occasion of commerce, whose
conditions require enterchanges of courtesy and relief, who are some way
obliged and disposed to afford needful succor, and safe retreat to each
other; These may be said to live in peace together; and these only; it being
in a manner impossible, that they who are not disposed to do good to others (if
they have power and opportunity) should long abstain from doing harm.

2. Living peaceably implies not some few transitory performances, proceeding
from casual humor or the like; but a constant, stable, and well-settled
condition of being; a continual cessation from injury, and promptitude to do
good offices. For as one blow does not make a battle, nor one skirmish a war;
so cannot single forbearances from doing mischief, or some few particular acts
of kindness (such as mere strangers may afford each other) be worthily styled a
being in peace: but an habitual inclination to these, a firm and durable estate
of innocence and beneficence.

3. Living in peace supposes a reciprocal condition of being: not only a
performing good, and forbearing to do bad offices, but a receiving the like
treatment from others. For he, that being assaulted is constrained to stand
upon his defense, may not be said to be in peace, though his not being so
(involuntarily) is not to be imputed to him.

4. Being in peace imports not only an outward cessation of violence and
seeming demonstration of amity, but an inward will and resolution to continue
therein. For he that intends, when occasion is presented, to do mischief to
another, is nevertheless an enemy, because more secret and dangerous: an
ambuscado is no less a piece of war, than confronting the enemy in open field.
Proclaiming and denouncing signify, but good and ill intention constitute, and
are the souls of peace and war. From these considerations we may infer a
description of being in peace, viz, that it is, to bear mutual good will, to
continue in amity, to maintain good correspondence, to be upon terms of mutual
courtesy and benevolence; to be disposed to perform reciprocally all offices
of humanity; assistance in need, comfort in sorrow, relief in distress; to
please and satisfy one another, by advancing the innocent delight, and
promoting the just advantage of each other; to converse with confidence and
security, without suspicion on either hand of any fraudulent, malicious, or
hurtful practices against either: Or, negatively; Not to be in a state of
enmity, personal hatred, pertinacious anger, jealousy, envy, or ill will; not
to be apt to provoke, to reproach, to harm, or hinder another, nor to have
reasonable grounds of expecting the same bad usage from others: to be removed
from danger of vexatious quarrels, intercourse of odious language, offending
others, or being disquieted ones self. This I take to be the meaning of living,
or being in peace, differing only in degree of obligation, and latitude of
object, from the state of friendship properly so called, and opposed to a
condition of enmity, defiance, contention, hatred, suspicion, animosity.

II. In the next place we may consider the Object of this Duty, signified in
those words, With all men. We often meet in Scripture with exhortations
directed peculiarly to Christians, to be at peace among themselves; as (Mark 9.
5.) Our Savior lays this Injunction upon his Disciples, (...), Have peace one
with another; inculcated by Saint Paul upon the Thessalonians in the same
words: and the like we have in the Second Epistle to Timothy Chap. 2. Ver. 22.
Follow righteousness, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13.
faith, charity, peace with them that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart;
and to the Romans (14. 17.) Vid. Ephesians. 4. 3.
Let us therefore follow after the things that make for peace, and things
wherewith one may edify another. But here the Duty has a more large and
comprehensive Object: (...), all men: as likewise it has in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, Chap. 12. Ver. 14. Pursue peace with all men; with all men without any
exception, with men of all Nations, Jews and Gentiles, Greeks and Barbarians;
of all Sects and Religions; persecuting Jews and Idolatrous Heathens; (for of
such consisted the generality of men at that time) and so Saint Paul expressly
in a like advice, (1 Cor. 10. 32. Give no offense neither to the Jews, nor to
the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God; Even as I please all men.) And I may
add by evident parity of reason, with men of all degrees and estates, high and
low, noble and base, rich and poor; of all tempers and dispositions, meek and
angry, gentle and froward, pliable and perverse; of all endowments, wise and
foolish, virtuous and vicious; of all judgments and persuasions, Orthodox and
Heretical, peaceable and schismatical persons: this universally vast and
boundless term, All men, contains them all. Neither is there any evading our
obligation to this Duty, by pretending about others, that they differ from us
in humor and complexion of soul, that they entertain opinions irreconcileably
contrary to ours; that they adhere to sects and parties which we dislike and
disavow; that they are not so virtuous, so religious, so holy as they should
be, or at least not in such a manner as we would have them; for be this
allegation true or false, it will not excuse us; while they are not divested of
humane nature, and can truly lay claim to the name and title of men, we are by
virtue of this Precept obliged to live peaceably with them.

III. We may consider the Qualification of the Duty here expressed, and what
those words mean; If it be possible, as much as lies in you. To which purpose
we may advert, from our description of living peaceably, that it consists
mainly of two parts: one active, or proceeding from us, and terminated on
others, To bear good will, to do good offices, to procure the profit, delight
and welfare, to abstain from the displeasure, damage and disturbance of
others: The other passive, issuing from others, and terminated on our selves;
That they be well affected toward us, inclinable to do us good, and no wise
disposed to wish, design, or bring any harm, trouble, or vexation upon us.
Whereof the former is altogether in our power, consisting of acts or omissions
depending upon our free choice and counsel; and we are directly obliged to it,
by virtue of those words, (...), as much as lies in you: the latter is not
fully so, yet commonly there be probable means of effecting it, which we are
hence bound to use, though sometimes they may fail of success. For the words
(...), if it be possible, as they signify the utmost endeavor is to be
employed; and that no difficulty (beneath the degree of impossibility) can
discharge us from it, so they intimate plainly, that sometime our labor may be
lost, and our purpose defeated; and that by the default of others it may be
impossible we should arrive to a peaceable condition of life with all men.
However, by this Rule we are directed not only our selves not to infringe the
terms of peace toward others, but to endeavor earnestly by all honest and
prudent means to obtain the good will, favor and respect of others, by which
they may be disposed to all friendly correspondence with us, and not to disturb
the quiet and tranquillity of our lives.

Having thus by way of Explication superficially glanced upon the words, we
will proceed to a more large and punctual review of them; and shall consider
more distinctly the Particulars grossly mentioned; and

I. What those especial Duties are, included in this more comprehensive one of
living peaceably with all men; both those which are directly required of us, as
the necessary causes, or immediate results of a peaceable disposition in us
toward others; and also those which are to be performed by us, as just and
reasonable means conducible to beget or preserve in others a peaceable
inclination toward us: these I shall consider promiscuously: and

1. We are by this Precept directly obliged heartily to love, that is to be
bear good will to, to wish well to, to rejoice in the welfare, and commiserate
the adversities of all men: at least not to hate, or bear ill will to, to
desire, or design the harm, to repine at the happy success, or delight in the
misfortunes of any: for as it is very hard to maintain peace and amicable
correspondence with those we do not truly love; so it is absolutely impossible
to do it long with those we hate; this Satanick passion (or disposition of
soul) always prompting the mind possessed therewith to the contrivance and
execution of mischief; whence he that hates his brother, 1 John 3. 15.
is said to be a murderer, as having in him that bitter root, from whence, if
power and occasion conspire, will probably spring that most extreme of
outrages, and capital breach of peace. Love is the only sure cement, that
knits and combines men in friendly society; and hatred the certain fountain of
that violence which rends and dissolves it. We cannot easily hurt, or strive
with those we love and wish well to: we cannot possibly long agree with those
we hate and malign. Peace without love can be esteemed little more than
politic dissimulation; and peace with hatred is really nothing less than an
artificial disguise, or an insidious covert of enmity.

2. We are hence obliged to perform all kind offices of humanity, which the
condition of any man can require, and may by us be performed without
considerable inconvenience or detriment to our selves or others. When for the
preservation, or comfortable accommodation of life, they need our help or our
advice, we are readily to afford them; when they are in want or distress, we
are to minister to them what comfort and relief we can. We are (upon this very
score) to obey that Injunction of Saint Paul to the Galatians; Gal. 6. 10.
As we have opportunity, let us do good to all men. For without this
beneficence a man's carriage (though otherwise harmless and inoffensive) appears
rather a suspicious strangeness, than a peaceable demeanor, and naturally
produces an enmity in those that are concerned in it. For he to whom, being
pressed with necessity, requisite assistance is denied, will infallibly be apt
to think himself not only neglected and disesteemed, but affronted also and
injured; (Need in the general conceit of men, and especially of those that feel
it, begets a kind of title to some competent relief) and consequently will
heinously resent, and complain bitterly of such supposed wrong, and if ever he
become able, repay it with advantage. And much more are we upon the same
account not to perform ill offices toward any man; not to disturb him in the
enjoyment of his innocent pleasure, nor to hinder him in the advancing his
lawful profit, nor to interrupt him in the prosecution of his reasonable
designs; nor any wise to vex and grieve him needlessly; and (above all) not to
detain him in, nor to aggravate his affliction. For these are actual violations
of peace, and impediments of good correspondence among men. Farther,

3. In this Duty of living peaceably is included an obligation to all kind of
just and honest dealing with all men: punctually to observe contracts,
impartially to decide controversies, equally to distribute rewards; to injure
no man either in his estate, by violent or fraudulent encroachments upon his
just possessions; or in his reputation, by raising or dispersing slanderous
reports concerning him: For these courses of all others are most destructive to
peace, and upon the pretense of them most quarrels, that ever were, have been
commenced.

Justice in its own nature is, and by the common agreement of men has been
designed the Guardian of peace, and sovereign remedy of contention: but not to
insist long upon such obvious subjects.

4. It much conduces to the preservation of peace, and upholding amicable
correspondence, in our dealings and transactions with men, liable to doubt and
debate, not to insist upon nice and rigorous points of right, not to take all
advantage offered us, not to deal hard measure, nor to use extremities to the
damage or hindrance of others, especially when no comparable benefit will
thence accrue to our selves. For such proceedings, Vid. Tit. 3. 2. (...).
as they discover in us little kindness to, or tenderness of our neighbors
good, so they exceedingly exasperate them, and persuade them we are their
enemies, and render them ours, and so utterly destroy peace between us. When as
abating something from the height and strictness of our pretenses, and a
favorable recession in such cases will greatly engage men to have an
honorable opinion, and a peaceable affection toward us.

5. If we would attain to this peaceable estate of life, we must use toward all
men such demonstrations of respect and courtesy, which according to their
degree and station custom does entitle them to, or which upon the common score
of humanity they may be reasonably deemed to expect from us: respective
gestures, civil salutations, free access, affable demeanor, cheerful looks,
and courteous discourse. These as they betoken good will in them that use them,
so they beget, cherish, and increase it in those, whom they refer to: and the
necessary fruit of mutual good will is peace. But the contrary carriages;
contemptuous or disregardfull behavior, difficulty of admission to converse, a
tetrical or sullen aspect, rough and fastidious language, as they discover a
mind averse from friendly commerce, so they beget a more potent disdain in
others: Men generally (especially those of generous and hearty temper) valuing
their due respect beyond all other interests, and more contentedly brooking
injury than neglect. Whence this skill and dexterity of deportment (though
immediately, and in its own nature of no great worth, and regulating actions of
small importance, gestures, looks, and forms of speech) yet because it is a
nurse of peace, and greatly contributes to the delightfulness of society, has
been always much commended, and has obtained a conspicuous place in the
honorable rank of virtues, under the titles of courtesy, comity, and
affability; and the opposites thereto, rudeness and rusticity, have been
deservedly counted and called vices in morality.

6. This Precept directly prohibits the use of all reproachful, scornful, and
provoking language; these being the immediate results of enmity, and actual
breaches of peace. Whence Saint Paul conjoins, Tit. 3. 2.
(...), and (...), Tit. 3. 2. To speak evil of no man, to be no quarrellers (or
fighters) but gentle, showing all meekness unto all men. For war is managed
(and that with more deadly animosity) with the tongue, (...). Jul. 2. Orat.
as well as with the hand (There is that speaks like the piercings of a
sword, says Solomon; and whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a
sharp sword, says David.) Words are with more anguish felt than blows; Prove.
12. 18.
their wounds are more incurable, Psalm. 57. 4. and 64. 3.
and they leave a deeper scarr. Prove. 18. 8.
Men usually dread more the loss of their honor than their lives, and take
more grievously the ravishing of their credit than the depredation of their
estate. Living peaceably therefore implies as much abstaining from opprobrious
words as injurious actions; (...). Chrysostom. Tom. 5. page 32.
yea more: for reviling is not only a violation of peace, but a dishonorable
waging of war; like shooting arrows dipped in poison, and discharging sluggs
against our neighbors reputation; practices condemned by all as base and
inhumane, and contrary to the laws of a noble warfare; being arguments, we
affect rather our adversaries utter ruin, than a gallant victory over him.
There be fair ways of disputing our cause without contumelious reflections upon
persons; and the errors of men may be sufficiently refuted without Satirical
virulency. One good reason modestly propounded has in it naturally more power
and efficacy to convince him that is in a mistake, or to confound him with
shame that is guilty of a fault, than ten thousand scoffs and ignominious
taunts. Vid. Egregium Antonini locum, lib. 11. 18. 9. (...).
When we are to express those deeds of nature (the performance of which is
concealed, as containing in it something of supposed turpitude) we are wont to
veil them in such modest circumlocutions, that by the hearers without offense
to their bashfulness may sufficiently be understood. So when it is needful or
expedient to confute the opinions, or reprove the actions of men, if we either
charitably design their amendment, or desire to maintain peaceable
correspondence with them, it behooves that we do not by using the most broad and
distasteful language immoderately trespass upon their modesty and patience;
that (to use Seneca's phrase) we do Agere cardm non tantum salutis, sed and
honestae cicatricis, De Clem. lib. 1. c. 17. Have a care not only to cure the
wound, but to leave a comely scar, and not to deform him, whom we endeavor to
reform; for no sore is the easilier cured for being roughly handled, and least
of all those in manners and opinion. Prove. 15. 1.
A soft hand and a tender heart, and a gentle tongue are most convenient
qualities of a spiritual Surgeon. But farther to this purpose*

7. If we desire to live peaceably with all men we are to be equal in censuring
men's actions, candid in interpreting their meanings, mild in reprehending, and
sparing to relate their miscarriages, to derive their actions from the best
principles (from which in the judgment of charity they may be supposed to
proceed, as from casual mistake rather than from wilful prejudice; from humane
infirmity rather than from malicious design) to construe ambiguous expressions
to the most favorable sense they may admit; not to condemn men's practices
without distinct knowledge of the case, and examining the reasons, which
possibly may absolve or excuse them: to extenuate their acknowledged faults by
such circumstances as aptly serve that purpose, and not to exaggerate them by
streined consequences, or uncertain conjectures. To rebuke them (if need be) so
as they may perceive we sincerely pity their errors, and tender their good;
and wish nothing more then their recovery, and do not design to upbraid,
deride, or insult over them being fallen; and finally not to recount their
misdeeds over-frequently, Prove. 17. 9.
unseasonably, and with complacence. He that thus demeaneth himself, manifestly
shows himself to prize his neighbors good will, and to be desirous to
continue in amity with him; and assuredly obliges him to be in the same manner
affected toward him. But he that is rigidly severe and censorious in his
judgments, blaming in them things indifferent, condemning actions allowable,
detracting from qualities commendable, deducing men's doings from the worst
causes, and imputing them to the worst ends, and representing them under the
most odious appellations, (that calls all Impositions of superiors, which he
dislikes, Tyranny, and all manners of divine worship, that suit not to his
fancy, superstition, and all pretenses to conscience in those that dissent from
him, hypocrisy; and all opinions different from his, heresy: that is suspicious
of ill intention without sufficient ground, and prejudicates men's meanings
before he well apprehends them, and captiously perverts sayings capable of good
construction; That flies like a Vulture to Carrion only. Plut. de util. cap. ex
inim.
That is curiously inquisitive into his neighbors life, and gladly observes
failings therein, and upon all occasions recites stories to his disgrace and
disadvantage: Prove. 17. 9.
that is immoderately bitter, Prove. 24. 17.
fierce and vehement in accusing and inveighing against others, painting such,
as he assumes to impugn, with the blackest colors, in the most horrid shape
and ugly dress, converting all matter of discourse (though never so
unseasonably and impertinently) into declamation, and therein copiously
expatiating, in fine employing his utmost might of wit and eloquence and
confidence in rendering that to others as hateful, as he signifies they are to
himself, such men, what do they else but loudly proclaim that they despise
their neighbors good will, purposely provoke his anger, and defy his utmost
enmity? for it is impossible such dealing should not by them, who are therein
concerned, be accounted extremely unjust, and to proceed from desperate hatred.

8. He that would effectually observe this Apostolic rule, must be disposed to
overlook such lesser faults committed against him, as make no great breach upon
his interest or credit, yea, Sen. Ben. 7. 31. Vincit malos pertinax bonitas.
(...). Romans 12. 21.
to forget or forgive the greatest and most grievous injuries: To excuse the
mistakes, and connive at the neglects, Irascitur aliquis? tu contra beneficiis
provoca: cadit statim simultas ab altera part deserta; nisi par non pugnat: si
utrinque certabitur, ille est melior, qui prior pedem retulit; victus est qui
vicit. Sen. de Ira. 2. 34.
and bear patiently the hasty passions of his neighbor, and to embrace readily
any sea^sonable overture, and accept any tolerable conditions of reconcilement.
For even in common life that observation of our Savior most exactly holds, It
is impossible that offenses should not come. The air may sooner become wholly
fixed, and the sea continue in a perfect rest without waves, or undulations,
than humane conversation be altogether free from occasions of distaste, which he
that cannot either prudently dissemble, or patiently digest, must renounce all
hopes of living peaceably here. He that like tinder is inflammable by the least
spark, and is enraged by every angry word, and resents deeply every petty
affront, and cannot endure the memory of a past unkindness should upon any
terms be defaced; resolves surely to live in eternal tumult and combustion; to
multiply daily upon himself fresh quarrels, and to perpetuate all enmity
already begun. When as by total passing by those little causes of disgust, the
present contention is altogether avoided, or instantly appeased, our neighbors
passion suddenly evaporates, and consumes it self; no remarkable footsteps of
dissension remain; our neighbor reflecting upon what is past sees himself
obliged by our discreet forbearance, however all possible means are used to
prevent trouble and preserve peace. To this purpose (The discretion of a man
deferreth his anger, Prove. 19. 11.
and it is his glory to pass over a transgression) says Solomon: Prove. 17. 9.
and He that covers a transgression seeks love, says the same wise Prince.
But farther

9. If we would live peaceably with all men, we must not over highly value our
selves, nor over eagerly pursue our own things. We must not admire our own
endowments, nor insist upon our deserts, for this will make us apt to
depreciate others, and them to loath us. We must not be over tender of our
credit, and covetous of respect; for this will render us apt to take
exceptions, and engage us in troublesome competitions for superiority of place,
and preeminence in the vain opinions of men. Prove. 28. 25.
(He that is of a proud heart stirs up strife: Prove. 13. 10.
and Only (i. e. chiefly) from pride comes contention, says Solomon.) We must
not be much addicted to our own interests, for this will dispose us to encroach
upon the concernments of others, and them to resist our attempts, whence
conflict and enmity will necessarily arise. We must not prefer our own
judgments, and imperiously obtrude them upon others; nor be pertinacious in
persuading them to embrace our private opinions, nor violently urgent to a
compliance with our humor. For these things are intolerably fastidious in
conversation, and obnoxious to be charged with usurpation and iniquity; all men
naturally challenging to themselves an equal, or at least a proportionable
share of reason, together with the free conduct of their lives uncontrollable
by private dictates. If therefore we desire to live quietly, and not needlessly
to disoblige, or displease others, we should be modest in esteeming our own
abilities, and moderate in pursuing our own advantages, and in our converse not
less complacent to others then we desire they should be to us; and as liberal
in allowing leave to dissent from us, as we are bold in taking freedom to
abound in our own sense. And if in debate a modest declaration of our opinion,
and the reasons inducing us thereto, will not prevail, it behooves us to give
over such a succesless combat, and to retire into the silent enjoyment of our
own thoughts. From not observing which rule discourse grows into contention,
and contention improves into feud and enmity.

10. If we would live peaceably, it concerns us to abstain from needless
contests about matters of opinion, and questions either merely vain and
frivolous, of little use or concernment, or over nice and subtle, and thence
indeterminable by reason; or that are agitated with extraordinary eagerness and
heat of passion; or such as are already defined by general consent, or such
upon the decision of which the public peace and safety do depend. There are
some controversies prickly like brambles, and apt to scratch those that handle
them, but yielding no savoury or wholesome fruit: such as concern the
consequences of imaginary suppositions, the state and circumstances of Beings
to us unknown, the right application of artificial terms, and the like
impertinent matters; which serve to no other purpose but the exercise of
curious wits, and exciting emulation among them. Others there be concerning
matters of more weighty moment, yet having their resolution depending upon
secrets unsearchable, or the interpretation of ambiguous words, and obscure
phrases, or upon some other uncertain conjectures; and are yet rendered more
difficult by being entangled with inextricable folds of subtilty, nice
distinctions, Non amplius inveniri licet quam quod a Deo discitur. Tertull. de
Anim. cap. 2.
and crafty evasions, devised by the parties engaged in them for the
maintenance of their causes respectively, whence it has happened, though with
immense care and diligence of both parts they have been long canvased; that yet
they do, and in all probability will for ever remain undecided. So that now to
engage in contest about them, may be reasonably deemed nothing more than a
wilful mispense of our time, labor and good humor; by vainly reciprocating
the saw of endless contention. Other questions there be in themselves of more
easy resolution, and of considerable importance, which yet by extreme
opposition of parties are so clouded and overgrown with insuperable prejudices,
that the disputing them is seldom attended with other success, than an
inflaming our selves and others with passion. Others are by small and obscure
parties managed against the common consent, and against the positive decrees of
the most venerable authoities among men, by ventilating which as truth is like
to gain little, so peace is sure to suffer much. For as it is no wise a safe or
advised course (except in case of necessary defense) to subject received
opinions to the hazardous trial of a tumultuary conflict, their credit being
better upheld by a stately reservedness, than by a popular forwardness of
discourse; as buildings stand fastest that are never shaken, and those
possessions remain most secure that are never called in question: so on the
other hand to countenance new and uncouth paradoxes, as it argues too much
arrogance and presumption in confronting our single apprehensions against the
deliberate sense and suffrage of so many men, yea so many ages of men; and is
likely to prove a succesless attempt, like swimming against the current,
accompanied with much toil and little progress, so it serves no good end, but
only foments divisions, and disturbs both our private and the publik peace. But
most of all we are to be cautelous of meddling with controversies of dangerous
consequence, wherein the public weal and quiet are concerned, which bare the
roots of sacred authority, and prostitute the mysteries of government to vulgar
inspection. Such points ought to be subjects of law, not of syllogism, and the
errors in them to be corrected by punishment, (...). Arist. Top. 1. 8.
rather then confuted by argument: neither can it be thought reasonable that
the interest of public peace should depend upon the event of private
disputation. It concerns us therefore, if we would live peaceably in such
disputable matters, reserving all due reverence to the judgments of the most,
the best and wisest persons, to be content in a modest privacy, to enjoy the
results of a serious and impartial disquisition, patiently enduring others to
dissent from us, and not attempting by needless, fruitless, and endless
contentions to gain others to our persuasions; especially since the truth
contended for may not be worth the passion employed upon it, and the benefits
of the victory not countervail the prejudices sustained in the combat. For
goodness and virtue may often consist with ignorance and error, seldom with
strife and discord. And this consideration I shall conclude with those
exhortations of Saint Paul, Tit. 3. 9. But foolish questions, and genealogies,
and contentions, and law-contests decline, for they are unprofitable and vain.
And in 2 Ep. to Tim. cap. 2. v. 23. But foolish and unlearned questions avoid,
knowing that they gender strifes; And the servant of the Lord (that is a
minister of Religion) must not strive, but be gentle to all men, apt to teach,
patient, In meekness instructing those that are * contrarily disposed. (...).
And in the same Chapter, v. 14. Of these things put them in remembrance,
charging them before the Lord, that they strive not about words to no profit,
to the subverting of the hearers: Of so pernicious consequence did Saint Paul
esteem unnecessary wrangling and disputing to be. But farther

11. If we desire to live peaceably we must restrain our pragmatical curiosity
within the bounds of our proper business and concernment, According to St.
Paul' s advice (1 Thessalonians. 4. 11.) Strive (or be ambitious) to be quiet, and to
mind your own business. ((...).)
not [being curiosi in aliena Republ.] invading other men's provinces, and
without leave or commission intermeddling with their affairs; not rushing into
their Closets, prying into their concealed designs, or dictating counsel to
them without due invitation thereto; not controlling their actions, nor
subjecting their proceedings to our censure without competent authority. For
these courses men usually look upon as rash intrusions, both injurious and
reproachful to them, usurping upon that freedom of choice (which all men
passionately affect to preserve entire to themselves) and arguing them of
weakness and incapacity to manage their own business: neither do men more
naturally drive away flies that buzze about their ears and molest them in their
employments, than they with disdain repel such immodest and unseasonable
medlers in their affairs. Let no man suffer (says Saint Peter) as a busy body
in other men's matters: 1 Pet. 4. 15.
intimating that those who are impertinently inquisitive into other men's
matters, make themselves liable to suffer (and that deservedly) for their fond
curiosity, Prove. 26. ^7.
and bold presumption. And He that passes by, and medleth with strife
belonging not to him, is like one that takes a dog by the ears, (says
Solomon;) that is, he catches at that which he cannot hold, and vainly aims at
that which he cannot effect, and rashly irritates those which will turn upon
him and bite him. If therefore we would neither molest others, nor be
disquieted our selves, we must be like natural agents, never working ought
beyond our proper sphere of activity. But especially, if we desire to live
peaceably, we must beware of assuming to our selves a liberty to censure the
designs, decrees, or transactions of public authority, and of saying to our
Superiors, what do thou? and much more, by querulous murmurings, or
clamorous declamations, of bringing envy and odium upon them. Few private men
are capable of judging aright concerning those things, as being placed beneath
in a valley, and wanting a due prospect upon the ground and causes of their
proceedings, who by reason of their eminent station can see more and farther
then they; and therefore are incompetent Judges, and unjustly presume to
interpose their sentence in such cases. But suppose the actions of Superiors
notoriously blameable and scandalous, and that by infallible arguments we are
persuaded thereof; yet seeing neither the taxing of, nor complaint against them
does in any wise regularly belong to us, nor the discovery of our mind therein
can probably be an efficacious means of procuring redress, and immediately
tends to diminish the reputation, and weaken the affection due to government,
and consequently to impair the peaceable estate of things, which by them is
sustained, we are wholly to abstain from such unwarrantable, unprofitable and
turbulent practices; and with a submiss and discreet silence, passing over the
miscarriages of our Superiors, to wait patiently upon the providence, and
implore the assistence of Him, who is the only competent Judge of such, and
sovereign disposer of all things, who has their hearts in his hands, Prove. 21.
1.
and fashioneth them as he thinks good. Prove. 33. 15.
Farther,

12. If we would live peaceably with all men, it behooves us not to engage our
selves so deeply in any singular friendship, or in devotion to any one party of
men, as to be entirely partial to their interests, and prejudiced in their
behalf, without distinct consideration of the truth and equity of their
pretenses in the particular matters of difference; not to approve, favor or
applaud that which is bad in some, to dislike, discountenance or disparage that
which is good in others: not out of excessive kindness to some, to give just
cause of distaste to others: not for the sake of a fortuitous agreement in
disposition, opinion, interest or relation to violate the duties of justice or
humanity. For he that upon such terms is a friend to any one man, or party of
men, as to be resolved (with an implicit faith, or blind obedience) to maintain
whatever he or they shall affirm to be true, and whatever they shall do to
be good, does in a manner undertake enmity against all men beside, and as it
may happen does oblige himself to contradict plain truth, to deviate from the
rules of virtue, and to offend Almighty God himself. This unlimited partiality
we owe only to truth and goodness, and to God (the fountain of them) in no case
to swerve from their dictates and prescriptions. He that followed Tiberius
Gracchus in his seditious practices, upon the bare account of friendship, and
alleged in his excuse, that if his friend had required it of him, he should as
readily have put fire to the Capitol, Cic. in Laelio.
was much more abominable for his disloyalty to his Country, and horrible
impiety against God, than commendable for his constant fidelity to his friend.
And that Soldier, Luc. lib. 1.
which is said to have told Caesar (in his first expedition against Rome) that
in obedience to his commands he would not refuse to sheath his sword in the
breast of his Brother, or in the throat of his aged Father, or in the bowels of
his pregnant Mother, was for his unnatural barbarity rather to be abhorred,
than to be esteemed for his loyal affection to his General. And in like manner
he that to please or gratify the humor of his friend, Prove. 24. 24. He that
says to the wicked thou art righteous, him shall the people curse, nations
shall abhor him.
can be either injurious, or treacherous, or notably discourteous to any man
else, is very blameable, and renders himself deservedly odious to all others.
Laelius, who incomparably well both understood and practiced the rules of
friendship, is by Cicero reported to have made this the first and chief Law
thereof. Cic. in Laelio.
Vt neque rogemus res turpes, nec faciamus rogati, That we neither require of
our friends the performance of base and naughty things; nor being requested of
them, perform such our selves. And in the heraldry, or comparison of duties, as
all others must give place to those of piety, verity and virtue, so after them
the duties of humanity justly challenge the next place of respect, even above
those which belong to the highest degree of friendship (due to our nearest
relations, yea to our Country it self) precisely taken, abstracted, and
distinguished from those of humanity. For the World is in nature the first, the
most comprehensive and dearest Country of us all; and our general obligations
to mankind are more ancient, more fundamental, and more indispensable, than
those particular ones superadded to or superstructed on them. The peace
therefore of the World, and the general welfare of men its Citizens, ought to
be more dear to us, and the means conducing thereto more carefully regarded by
us in our actions, than either the love, favor or satisfaction of any
particular persons is to be valued or pursued. And the not observing this rule
may reasonably be esteemed to have a great influence upon the continuance of
those implacable feuds and dissensions wherewith the world is so miserably torn
and shattered. Men's being peremptorily resolved to extol, countenance, or
excuse promiscuously all the principles and proceedings of the party to which
they have addicted themselves, and to see no error, fault or abuse in them;
but by all means to depress, vilify and condemn (if not to reproach, calumniate
and persecute) the opinions and practices of others, and not to acknowledge in
them any thing considerably good or commendable; whence commonly all apprehend
their adversaries extremely unjust and disingenuous toward them, and are
alienated from all thoughts, (or however discouraged from all hopes) of
friendly accommodation and reconcilement. But he that would live peaceably with
all men, must be free in his judgment, impartial in his dealing, and ingenuous
in his carriage toward all: Jud. 16.
not (...), admiring, or wondering at some men (as if they were impeccable, or
infallible) nor having the truth in respect of persons, Jam. 2. 1.
abetting in his friends only what is just and true, and allowing the same in
others, but in neither by signal approbation countenancing any thing false or
evil; for so demeaning himself, he gives no man just occasion of displeasure
or enmity against him.

13. If we would live peaceably our selves, we should endeavor to preserve
peace, and prevent differences, and reconcile dissensions among others, by
doing good offices, and making fair representations of intercurrent passages
between them; by concealing causes of future disgust, and removing present
misunderstandings, and excusing past mistakes; by allaying their passions, and
rightly informing their minds, by friendly intercessions, and pacifick advices.
For the fire that devoureth our neighbors house threatens and endangereth
ours, and it is hard to approach contention without being engaged therein. It Is
not easy to keep our selves indifferent or neutral, and doing so we shall in
likelihood be maligned and persecuted by both the contending parties. Matt. 5.
9.
Blessed are the peacemakers, says our Savior; for they shall be called the
sons of God; that is, they shall be highly esteemed and reverenced for this
divine quality, wherein they so nearly resemble the God of peace, and his
blessed Son the great Mediator: but farther, without respect to other
recompense, and from the nature of their employment, such are immediately
happy, and in this their virtuous practice rewards it self, that by appeasing
others quarrels, they save themselves from trouble, and enjoy themselves that
tranquillity which they procure to others To the Counselors of peace is joy.
. But those informing Sycophants, Prove. 12. 20.
those internuncio's of pestilent tales, and incendiaries of discord, that
(from bad nature, or upon base design) by the still breath of clandestine
whispers, or by the more violent blasts of impudent calumnies kindle the flames
of dissension, or foment them among others; that, by disseminating infamous
rumors, and by malicious suggestions, instill jealousies into, and nourish
malevolent surmises in the minds of men, separating (as it is in the Proverbs)
between chief friends, Prove. 16. 28.
and widening the distance between others; These (I say) from the seeds of
variance they scatter among others, reap in the end mischief and disturbance to
themselves; nor can expect to enjoy the benefit of that quiet, which they
labor to deprive others of. The beginning of strife (says Solomon) is as when
one lets out water; Prove. 17. 14.
and he that to the intent his neighbors Lands should be overflown with a
torrent of dissension, does unloose the damms, and cut the banks of former
friendship, may (if he be wise) expect the merciless flood should at length
reach himself, Prove. 25. 8.
and that his own habitation should be at last surrounded therewith. For when
men at length begin to be weary, and to repent of their needless quarrels, and
the mischievous consequences attending them, and to be inquisitive into the
causes and instruments of their vexation, they will certainly find out, detest
and invert the edge of their displeasure upon these wretched makebates; and so
the poison they mingled for others they themselves drink up; Vid.
the Catastrophe of the Tragedy (begun by them) is acted upon themselves; Prove.
11. 27.
they sink down into the pit they made for others, He that diligently seeks
good procures favor; but he that seeks mischief it shall come upon him.
and in the net which they hid is their own foot taken: Et delator habet quod
dedit exitium.

Lastly, If we would effectually observe this Precept, we must readily comply
with the innocent customs, and obey the established laws of the places where we
live. I say first comply with the customs; which also are in effect inferior
laws enacted by the tacit agreement of the generality of men; the
non-observation of which is upon many accounts very prejudicial to peaceable
life. For to those concerned in it, it will always seem to intimate a squeamish
niceness a froward perverseness, an arrogant self-conceitedness, a manifest
despising other men's judgments, and a virtual condemning their practices of
fault or folly, and consequently a monopolizing all goodness, and appropriating
all wisdom to himself; qualities intolerably odious to men and productive of
enmity. It incenses the people (hugely susceptive of provocation) with a sense
of notable injury done, and contempt cast upon it. For the only authority,
which the commonalty can lay claim to, consists in prescribing Rules of decency
in language, habit, gesture, ceremony, and other circumstances of action,
declared and ratified by ordinary practice; nonconformity to which is by them
adjudged a mavelous irregularity, contumacy, and rebellion against the
Majesty of the people, and is infallibly revenged and punished by them.

There Is no preserving peace, nor preventing broils and stirs, but by
punctually observing that ordinary Rule of equity, Id agamus, ut meliorem vitam
sequamur quam vulgus non ut contrariam, alioqui quos emendari volumus fugamus
and a nobis avertimus.
That in cases of doubtful debate, and points of controverted practice, the
fewest should yield to the most, the weakest bend to the strongest, and that to
the greatest number should be allowed at least the greates appearance of
reason. To which purpose we may observe, that the best and wisest men, (not to
displease those with whom they conversed, Temperetur vita inter bonos mores and
publicos, etc. Sen. Epist. 5.
as far as their Duty to God, and their conscience would permit) have commonly
in their manners of life followed not what in their retired judgment they most
approved, but what suited to the customs of their times and places, avoiding a
morose singularity as offensive to others, and productive of disquiet to
themselves. Epist. ad At. Lib. 2. Ep. 1.
You know how Cicero censured Cato for endeavoring against the grain, and
predominant genius of those times to reduce things to a strict agreement with
his private notions: Ille optimo animo utens, and summa fide nocet interdum
Reipublicae. Dicit enim tanquam in Platonis (...), non tanquam in Romuli foece
sententiam. But a more clear and pertinent instance we have in Saint Paul; who
thus represents his own practice: 1 Cor. 9. 22. 10. 33.
I have made my self a servant to all: Unto the Jews I became as a Jew; to them
that are without law as without law: To the weak became I as weak: I am made
all things to all men, that I might by all means save some. Saint Paul wisely
knew, Vid. Act. 21.
that by a prudent compliance with men's customs, and condescension to their
capacities, he engaged to him, or at least did not alienate from him their
affections; and thereby became more capable of infusing good Doctrine into
their minds, and promoting their spiritual good. And the same course was
generally taken by the primitive Christians, who in all things (not
inconsistent with the rules and principles of their Religion) did industriously
conform their conversation to the usual practices of men; thereby shunning
those scandalous imputations of pride and perverseness, which then rendered the
Jews so odious to the world, as appears by diverse passages in the ancient
Apologists for Christian Religion: particularly Justin Martyr (in his Epistle
to Diognetus) has these words: (...), etc. The Christians neither in dwelling,
language, or customs differ from the rest of men; they neither inhabit towns
proper to themselves, nor use any peculiar dialect, nor exercise an uncouth
manner of living, but as by chance it is allotted to them, inhabiting cities
belonging both to Greeks and Barbarians, comply with the customs of the
country. And much more has he there; and much Tertullian likewise in his
Apologetick, to the same purpose. Neither do we find in the life of our
Savior, that exact pattern of all wisdom and goodness, that in any thing he
did affect to differ from the received customs of his time and country, except
such as were grounded upon vain conceits, extremely prejudicial to piety, or
directly repugnant thereto.

And I cannot except from this Rule the compliance with religious customs used
in the Worship and Service of God: since a wilful discrepancy from them does
much more destroy peace, and kindle the flame of contention, in as much as men
are apt to apprehend themselves much more slighted and more condemned by a
disagreement in those, than in matters of lesser concernment. And it cannot
reasonably be imagined, that the God of love and peace, who questionless
delights to see men converse in peace and amity, and who therefore in general
terms enjoins us, Romans 14. 19.
to pursue the things that make for peace (whereof certainly in reason and to
experience, following indifferent and harmless customs, not expressly repugnant
to his law, nor to the dictates of natural reason, is one thing, and not the
least) in our addresses to himself (partly designed and mainly serving more
strictly to unite, not to dissociate men in affection) should dislike, or
disapprove the use of this course so expedient and conducible to peace:
especially since he infinitely more regards the substance of the Duty, and the
devotion of the heart therein, than the manner or any circumstantial appendages
thereof: It Is certain however, that Saint Paul intimates a wilful departure
from ordinary practice in such cases, to proceed from a contentious
disposition: 1 Cor. 11. 16.
But if any man (says he) have a mind to be contentious (so (...), imports) we
have no such custom, nor the Churches of God.

But yet much more is peaceable conversation impeached by disobedience to
established Laws, those great bulwarks of Society, fences of Order, and
supports of Peace; which he that refuses to obey, is so far from living
peaceably with all men, that he may reasonably be presumed unwilling to have
peace with any man; since in a manner he defies all mankind, vilifies its most
solemn Judgments, endeavors to dissolve those sacred bands, by which its union
is contained, and to subvert the only foundations of public tranquillity. He
declares himself either to affect an universal tyranny over, or an abhorrency
from society with other men, to be unwilling to live with them upon equal
terms, or to submit to any fair arbitration, to desire that strifes should be
endless and controversies never decided, who declines the verdict of Law, the
most solemn issue of deliberate advice, proceeding from the most honorable,
most wise, most worthy, and select persons, and involving in it the consent of
the whole Commonwealth. 1 Timothy 2. 2.
Saint Paul directing that prayers should be made for Princes, and those in
Authority, assigns the reason, that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in
all godliness and honesty: And certainly if we are to pray for, we are also
obliged to obey them in order to the same end, which to do is absolutely in our
power, and more immediately requisite to that purpose. For as no peace can be
preserved without the influence of authority; so no authority can subsist
without obedience to its sanctions. He that is desirous to enjoy the privileges
of this happy estate of peace, must in reason be content to perform the Duties
injoined, and bear the common burdens imposed by those who are the protectours
of it.

Thus as plainly as I could have I described what it is to live peaceably, and
what the means are that principally conduce thereto: I should now proceed to
consider the Object of the Duty, and the Reasons why it respects all men: As
also whence it comes, that sometimes we may fail in our endeavor of attaining
this desirable condition: And lastly to propound some Inducements persuasive of
its practice. But I must not farther encroach on your patience, and shall
therefore reserve these things to the next opportunity.

Now: The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and
minds in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord;
and the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost be among you,
and remain with you always. Amen.

The Eighth Sermon.
ROMANS 12. 18. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with
all men.
I Have very lately considered what it is to live peaceably, and what are the
Duties included therein; and what Means conduce thereto.

II. I proceed now to consider the Object thereof, and why the duty of living
peaceably extends to all men, that is, why we are bound to bear good will, and
do good offices, and show civil respects to all men: and to endeavor, that
all men reciprocally be well affected toward us. For it might with some color
of reason be objected, and said: Why should I be obliged heartily to love
those, that desperately hate me, to treat them kindly, that use me
despitefully; to help them, that would hinder me; to relieve them, that would
plunge me into utter distress; to comfort them, that delight in my affliction;
to be respective to, and tender of their reputation, who despise, defame, and
reproach me: to be indulgent, and favorable to them, who are harsh, and
rigorous in their dealings with me; to spare and pardon them, who with
implacable malice persecute me? why should I seek their friendship, who
disdainfully reject mine; why prize their favor, who scorn mine; why strive to
please them, who purposely offend me? or why should I have any regard to men
void of all faith, goodness, or desert? And most of all, why should I be bound
to maintain amicable correspondence with those, who are professed enemies to
piety, and virtue, who oppugn truth, and disturb peace, and countenance vice,
error, and faction? How can any love, consent of mind, or communion of good
offices intercede between persons so contrarily disposed? I answer, they may
and ought, and that because the obligation to these ordinary performances is
not grounded upon any peculiar respects, special qualifications, or singular
actions of men, (which are contingent and variable) but upon the indefectible
score of common humanity. We owe them, (as the Philosopher alleged, when he
dispensed his alms to an unworthy person) (...): not to the men, but to humane
nature, resident in them. There be indeed diverse other sorts of love, in nature
and object more restrained, built upon narrower foundations, and requiring more
extraordinary acts of duty, and respect (not competent to all men;) as a love
of friendship, founded upon long acquaintance, sutableness of disposition, and
frequent exchanges of mutual kindness; a love of gratitude due to the reception
of valuable benefits; a love of esteem belonging to persons endued with worth
and virtue; a love of relation resulting from kindred, affinity, neighborhood,
and other common engagements. But the love of benevolence (which is precedent
to these, and more deeply rooted in nature, more ancient, more unconfined, and
more immutable) and the duties mentioned consequent on it, are grounded upon
the natural constitution, necessary properties, and unalterable condition of
humanity, and are upon several accounts due thereto.

1. Upon account of universal cognation, agreement, and similitude of nature.
For (...). All men naturally are of kinn, and friends to each other, says
Aristotle. 8 Eth. cap. 1.
Et fratres etiam vestri sumus jure naturae matris unius; We are also your
brethren in the right of nature our common mother, In Apolog. (...). etc.
said Tertullian of old, in the name of the Christians, to the Heathens. We are
but several streams issuing from one primitive source; several branches
sprouting from the same stock, several stones hewed out of the same quarry. One
substance, by miraculous efficacy of the divine benediction diffused, and
multiplied. Epict. 1. 13.
One element affords us matter, and one fire actuates it, Act. 17. 26.
kindled at first by the breath of God. Nemo est in genere humano, cui non
dilectio, etsi non pro mutua charitate, pro ipsa tamen communis naturae
societate debeatur.
One blood flows in all our veins; one nourishment repairs our decayed bodies,
and one common air refreshes our languishing spirits. We are cohabitants of
the same earth, and fellow-citizens of the same great Commonwealth; Aug.
Epist. 121. ad Probam.
Vnam Remp. omnium agnoscimus mundum, said the forementioned Apologist for
Christianity. We were all fashioned according to the same original Idea
(resembling God our common father) all endowed with the same faculties,
inclinations, and affections; all conspire in the essential, and more notable
ingredients of our constitution; and are only distinguished by some accidental
inconsiderable circumstances, of age, place, color, stature, fortune, and the
like; in which we differ as much from our selves in successions of time. So
that what Aristotle said of a friend, is applicable to every man: Every man is
(...), Another our-self; And he that hates another, detests his own most lively
picture; he that harms another, Cic. Nihil est enim unum uni tam simile, tam
par, quam omnes inter nosmetipsos sumus, etc. de Legib. 1. page 161.
injures his own nature; he that denies relief to another, starves a member of
his own body, and withers a branch of his own tree. The merciful man does
good to his own soul; but he that is cruel troubles his own flesh. Prove. 11.
17.
Neither can any personal demerit of vicious habit, erroneous opinion, enormous
practice, or signal discourtesy toward us, dissolve these bands: for as no
unkindness of a brother can wholly rescind that relation, or disoblige us from
the duties annexed thereto: so neither upon the faults, See Deuteronomy. 25. 3. --
lest thy brother seem vile unto thee.
or injuries of any man can we ground a total dispensation from the offices of
humanity, especially if the injuries be not irreparable, nor the faults
incurable.

2. We are indispensably obliged to these duties, because the best of our
natural inclinations prompt us to the performance of them; especially those of
pity and benignity, which are manifestly discernible in all, but most powerful
and vigorous in the best natures; and which questionless by the most wise, and
good Author of our beings were implanted therein both as monitors to direct,
and as spurrs to incite us to the performance of our duty. For the same bowels,
that in our want of necessary sustenance, do by a lively sense of pain inform
us thereof, and instigate us to provide against it; do in like manner
grievously resent the distresses of another, and thereby admonish us of our
duty, and provoke us to relieve them. Even the stories of calamities, that in
ages long since past have happened to persons, no-wise related to us, yea the
fabulous reports of tragical events, do (even against the bent of our wills,
and all resistance of reason) melt our hearts with compassion, and draw tears
from our eyes: and thereby evidently signify that general sympathy, which
naturally interceeds between all men ^^fince we can neither see, nor hear or,
nor imagine another grief without being afflicted our selves. Antipathies may
be natural to wild beasts; but to rational creatures they are wholly unnatural
And on the other side, as nature to eating and drinking, and such acts
requisite to the preservation of our life, -- haec nostri pars optima sensus,
-- mutuus ut nos Affectus petere auxilium, and praestare juberet. Juven. Sat.
15.
has adjoined a sensible pleasure and satisfaction, enticing us to and
encouraging us in the performance of them; so, and doubtless to the same end,
has she made relieving the necessities of others, and doing good offices to
them, to be accompanied with a very contentfull and delicious relish to the
mind of the doer. Epicurus, that great Master of pleasure, did himself confess;
that to bestow benefits was not only more brave, but more pleasant, then to
receive them; ((...), says De philos. convictu cum Princip.
Plutarch, (...)) And certainly no kind of actions, (...). M. Ant.
a man can perform, are attended with a more pure, more perfect, more savoury
delight, then those of beneficence are. Since nature therefore has made our
neighbors misery our pain, and his content our pleasure; since with
indissoluble bands of mutual sympathy she has concatenated our fortunes, and
affections together; since by the discipline of our sense she instructs us, and
by the importunity thereof solicits us to the observance of our duty, let us
follow her wise directions, and conspire with her kindly motions; let us not
stifle, or weaken by disuse, or contrary practice, but by conformable action
cherish and confirm the good inclinations of nature.

3. We are obliged to these duties upon account of common equity. We have all
(the most sour and Stoical of us all) implanted in us a natural ambition, and
a desire (which we can by no means eradicate) of being beloved, and respected
by all; and are disposed in our need to demand assistance, commiseration of our
misfortunes, and relief in our distress of all that are in capacity to afford
them; and are apt to be vehemently displeased, to think our selves hardly dealt
with, and to complain of cruelty and inhumanity in those that refuse them to
us: and therefore in all reason and equity we should readily pay the same love,
respect, aid, and comfort to others, which we expect from others; for
Beneficium qui dare nescit, injuste petit: Nothing is more unreasonable, or
unequal, then to require from others those good turns, which upon like occasion
we are unwilling to render to others.

4. We are obliged to these duties of humanity, upon account of common
interest, benefit, and advantage. The welfare, and safety, the honor, and
reputation, the pleasure, and quiet of our lives are concerned in our
maintaining a loving correspondence with all men. For so uncertain is our
condition, so obnoxious are we to manifold necessities, that there is no man,
whose good will we may not need, whose good word may not stand us in stead,
whose helpful endeavor may not sometime oblige us. The Great Pompey, the
glorious Triumpher over Nations, and admired darling of fortune, was beholden
at last to a slave for the composing his ashes, and celebrating his funeral
obsequies. The honor of the greatest men depends on the estimation of the
least, and the good will of the meanest peasant is a brighter ornament to the
fortune, a greater accession to the grandeur of a Prince, than the most radiant
gemme in his royal diadem. However the spite and enmity of one (and him the
most weak otherwise and contemptible) person, may happen to spoil the content
of our whole life, and deprive us of the most comfortable enjoyments thereof;
may divert our thoughts from our delightful employments to a solicitous care
of self-preservation, and defense; may discompose our minds with vexatious
passions; may by false reports, odious suggestions, and slanderous defamations
blast our credit, raise a storm of general hatred, and conjure up thousands of
enemies against us; may by insidious practices supplant, and undermine us,
prejudice our welfare, endanger our estate, and involve us in a bottomless gulf
of trouble: it is but reasonable therefore, if we desire to live securely,
comfortably, and quietly, that by all honest means we should endeavor to
purchase the good will of all men, and provoke no man's enmity needlessly; since
any man's love may be useful, and every man's hatred is dangerous.

5. We are obliged to these duties by a tacit compact, and fundamental
constitution of mankind, in pursuance of those principal designs, for which
men were incorporated, and are still contained in civil society. For to this
purpose do men congregate, cohabite, and combine themselves in sociable
communion, that thereby they may enjoy a delightful conversation, void of
fear, free from suspicion, and free from danger; promote mutual advantage, and
satisfaction; be helpful, and beneficial each to other: abstracting from which
commodities the retirements of a cloister, or the solitudes of a desert; the
life of a recluse, or of a wild beast, would perhaps be more desirable, then
these of gregarious converse: For as men being pleased and well affected to
each other, are the most obliging friends, and pleasant companions; so being
enraged, they are the most mischievous, and dangerous neighbors, the most
fierce and savage enemies. By neglecting therefore, or contravening these
duties of humanity, we frustrate the main ends of society, disappoint the
expectations of each other, subvert the grounds of ordinary civility, and in
the commonwealth deal as unpolitickly, as the members in the body should act
unnaturally, in subtracting mutual assistance, or harming each other; as if the
eye should deny to the hands the direction of sight, and the hands in revenge
should pluck out the eyes.

6. We are by observing these rules to oblige, and render men well affected to
us, because being upon such terms with men conduces to our living (not only
delightfully and quietly, but) honestly and religiously in this world. How
peace, and edification, spiritual comfort, and temporal quiet do concur, and
cooperate, we see intimated Act. 9. 31. Then had the Churches peace throughout
all Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria, and were edifyed, and walking in the fear
of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost were multiplied. St. Paul
advised the Christians of his times, liable to persecution, to make prayers for
all men (and especially for those in eminent power,) 1 Timothy 2. 2.
that they might lead (...) (a retired and quiet life)
a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness, and honesty; to pray for them,
that is, to pray that they might be so disposed, as not to molest, interrupt,
or discourage them in the exercise of virtue, and practice of piety. For these
by a tranquillity of mind, a sedateness of affections, a competency of rest and
leisure and retirement, a freedom from amazing fear, distracting care, and
painful sense are greatly advanced; of which advantages by contentious broiles
and enmities we are deprived, and encumbred with the contrary impediments. They
breed thorny anxieties, and by them choke the seeds of good intention: they
raise dusky fumes of melancholy, by them intercepting the beams of spiritual
light, and stifling the flames of devout affection. By them our thoughts are
affixed upon the basest, and taken off from the most excellent objects; our
fancies are disordered by turbulent animosities; our time is spent, and our
endeavor taken up in the most ungrateful, and unprofitable employments, of
defeating the attempts, resisting the assaults, disproving the calumnies,
countermining the plots of adversaries; They bring us upon the stage against
our will, and make us act parts in Tragedies, neither becoming, nor delighting
us. They disturb often our natural rest, and hinder us in the dispatch of our
ordinary business; and much more impeach the steadiness of our devotion, and
obstruct the course of religious practice. They tempt us also to omissions of
our duty, to unseemingly behavior, and to the commissions of grievous sin; to
harsh censure, envious detraction, unwarrantable, revenge, repining at the good
successes, and delighting in the misfortunes of others. Many examples occurr in
history, like those of Hanno the Carthaginian, and Quint. Metellus (Pompeys
antagonist) who in pursuance of some private grudges, have not only betrayed
their own interests, and sullyed their own reputations; but notably disserved,
and damnifyed the public weal of their country: And so will our being engaged
in enmity with men cause us to neglect, if not to contradict our dearest
concernments: Whence we should carefully avoid the occasions thereof, and by an
innocent and beneficent conversation oblige men to a friendly correspondence
with us.

7. We are obliged to perform these duties of humanity, because by so doing we
become more capable of promoting goodness in others, and so of fulfilling the
highest duties of Christian Charity; of successfully advising and admonishing
others; of instructing their ignorance, and convincing their mistakes; of
removing their prejudices, and satisfying their scruples; of reclaiming them
from vice, error, faction; and reconciling them to virtue, truth, and peace.
For by no force of reason, or stratagem of wit are men so easily subdued, by no
bait so thoroughly allured and caught, as by real courtesy, gentleness and
affability; as on the other side, by a sour and peevish humor, supercilious
looks, bitter language, and harsh dealing men are rendered indocile, and
intractable, averse from better instruction, obstinate in their ways, and
pertinacious in their conceits. Easily do men swallow the pill gilded with fair
carriage, and sweetened by kind speech; readily do they afford a favorable ear
to the advice seeming to proceed from good will, and a tender care of their
good; But the physic of wholesome admonition being steeped in the vinegar of
reproach, and tempered with the gall of passion, becomes distasteful and
loathsome to the patient; neither will men willingly listen to the reasonings
of those, whom they apprehend disaffected to their persons, and more desirous
to wound their reputations, than to cure their distempers. The slightest
argument, the most simple and unpolished oration issuing from the mouth of a
friend, is wonderfully more prevalent, than the strongest demonstration, than
the most powerful eloquence of an enemy. For obliging usage, and courteous
speech unlock the affections, and by them insinuate into the reason of men; but
surly deportment, and froward expressions damme up the attention with
prejudice, and interclude all avenues to the understanding. An illustration of
which discourse we have from comparing the different practice of the Jews, and
the ancient Christians, with the contrary successes thereof. The Jews by their
seditious, and turbulent practices, by their insolent contempt, and implacable
hatred of others (for you know what Tacitus says of them: Hist. lib. 5.
Apud ipsos fides obstinata, misericordia in promptu, sed adversus omnes alios
hostile odium) by their perverse and unsociable humors, declining all
intercourse, and refusing ordinary offices of humanity (so much as to show the
way, or to direct the thirsty traveller to the fountain) to any not of their
own sect, did procure an odium, scorn, and infamy upon their religion, rendered
all men averse from inquiring into, or entertaining any good opinion thereof,
and so very little enlarged its bounds, and gained few proselytes thereto. But
the Christians by a mild, patient, and peaceable behavior; by obedience to
laws, and compliance with harmless customs; by perfect innocence, and
abstinence from doing injury; Thus the ancient Christians; but when religion
declined, dissension and ill will did grow; so that the heathen Historian (Am.
Marc. lib. 22.) could say of Julian: Nullas infest as hominibus bestias, ut
sunt sibi ferales plerique Christianorum, expertus.
by paying due respects, and performing civil offices, and demonstrations of
benevolence; by loving conversation, and friendly commerce with all, commended
their doctrine to the regard of men: and by this only piece of Rhetoric
(without terror of arms, or countenance of power, or plausibility of
discourse, or promise of temporal reward) subdued the faith of men, and
persuaded a great part of the world to embrace their excellent profession.

We converse with you like men, Tertul. Apol.
we use the same diet, habit, and necessary furniture: We have recourse to your
tribunals; we frequent your markets, your fairs, your shops, your stalls, your
shambles, your baths: We cohabit, we sail, we war, we till, we trade, we
maintain all manner of commerce with you says the Christian Apologist, to the
Pagans, in behalf of the ancient Christians. Which kind of practice they
derived not only from the sweet temper and noble Genius of their Religion, but
from the express institution of the first teachers thereof, and from their
exemplary practice therein. For both by doctrine did the Apostles exhort, and
by their example incite them to adorn the Gospel, and render the discipline of
Christ amiable by their meek, gentle, compliant and inoffensive conversation;
and thereby to allure others to a willing entertainment thereof. To this
purpose are those exhortations. Phil. 4. 5. Let your moderation ((...), your
equity, or gentleness) be known to all men: and 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14. -- Comfort the
(...).
afflicted, support the weak, be long-suffering toward all. Be ye all careful
not to render evil for evil; but always pursue goodness toward each other,
and toward all: and Gal. 6. 10. As we have opportunity, let us do good to all
men: and Tit. 3. 1. Put them in mind to be subject to principalities, and
powers, to be ready to every good work; to reproach no man, not to be
contentious, but gentle, showing all meekness to all men: and 1 Timothy 2. 24. The
Minister of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach,
patient: In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves: (or those that
are otherwise disposed, (...)) if peradventure God will give them repentance to
the acknowledgment of the truth: where gentleness toward all, and meekness
toward adversaries are oppositely conjoined, with aptness to teach, and
instruct; the one qualification so effectually predisposing to the other: and
it is beside intimated that gentle and meek treatment are suitable instruments
ordinarily employed by God to convert men from error to truth.

8. We are bound hereto in compliance and conformity to the best patterns: God,
Christ, the Apostles, the Primitive Saints: This illustrious Doctor of
Christian Religion St. Paul did not fail to second this his doctrine with his
own example. For Give none offense (says he) neither to the Jews nor to the
Gentiles, nor to the Church of God; 1 Cor. 10. ult.
Even as I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the
profit of many, that they may be saved: Please all men in all things; what
could St. Paul say, or what do more? 1 Cor. 19* etc.
and again. For though (says he) I be free from all men, yet have I made my
self a servant unto all, that I might gain the more: To the weak became I as
weak, that I might gain the weak: I am made all things to all men, that by all
means I might save some. See how far this charitable design of doing good to
others transported him: He parted with his own freedom, that he might redeem
them from the slavery of a wicked life; He denied his own present satisfaction
that he might procure them a lasting content: he despised his own profit, that
he might promote their spiritual advantage; He prostituted his own reputation,
that he might advance them to a condition of true glory. He underwent grievous
afflictions for their comfort; sustained restless pains for their ease, and
hazarded his own safety for their salvation. He condescended to their
infirmities, suited his demeanor to their tempers, complied with their various
humors, and contrary customs: He differed from himself, that he might agree
with them, and transformed himself into all shapes, that he might convert them
into what they should be, reform their manners, and translate them into a happy
estate. But above all is the practice of our Lord himself most remarkable to
this purpose: and discovers plainly to him that observes an universally large,
and unrestrained Philanthropie. For having from a wonderful conspiracy of
kindness and goodwill (between him and his eternal Father) toward the world of
men, descended willingly from the throne of his celestial Majesty, and
inveloped his divine glory in a cloud of mortal frailty, and that (as the
Apostle says) he might reconcile all things in heaven and earth, Coloss. 1. 20.
conjoine God and man by a nearer alliance, and unite men together by the more
sacred bands of common relation to himself: Having assumed not only the outward
shape and corporeal resemblance of man, but the inward frame, and real passions
of humane souls; he disdained not accordingly to obey the laws, to follow the
inclinations, to observe the duties of the best and most perfect humanity; with
an equal and impartial bounty imparting free admittance, familiar converse,
friendly aid and succor unto all, even the worst of men in all appearance (and
that so far, that some rigorous censurers thence presumed to tax him as a
glutton; Matt. 11. 19.
and a good fellow, a friend to publicans, and sinners) distributing liberally
to all the incomparable benefits of his heavenly doctrine, of his holy example,
of his miraculous power; instructing the ignorances, detecting the errors,
dispossessing the devils; sustaining the weaknesses, overlooking the injuries,
comforting the afflictions, supplying the necessities, healing the diseases,
and remedying all the miseries of all, that did not wilfully reject their own
welfare: Acts 10. 38.
He went about (says St. Peter in the Acts) doing good, and healing all that
were oppressed of the devil: And Matt. 9. 35.
He went about all the cities and villages teaching in their Synagogues, and
preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, and healing every sickness, and every
disease among the people (says St. Matthew's Gospel.) He despised not the
meanest, either in outward estate, or spiritual improvement. He invited all
unto him, repelled, or discouraged none; nor refused to any that came unto him,
his counsel, or his help. He was averse from no man's society (and if in any
degree from any, chiefly from those, Luc. 18. 9.
who confidently pretended to extraordinary sanctity, and proudly contemned
others.) Meek and gentle he was, mild and patient; courteous and benign; lowly
and condescensive; tender and compassionate in his conversation unto all. And
for a compliment of his transcendent charity, and for an enforcement unto ours,
Romans 8. 21.
he laid down his life for us all, as a common price to purchase remission of
sins; a general ransom to redeem the humane creation from the captivity of
hell, and slavery of corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God;
demolishing by his pacifick death all partition walls, and laying open all
enclosures of the divine favor; reconciling God to man, and combining man to
himself by the fresh cement of his precious blood: so that now not only as
fellow creatures; but (which is exceedingly more) as partakers of the same
common redemption, as objects of the same mercy, as obliged in the same common
debt, and as capable of the same eternal happiness, by new and firmer
engagements we are bound to all mutual kindness, Romans 14.
and benevolence toward all. For Destroy not (says St. Paul, and by like
reason I may say, Harm not, vex not, be not unkind to) him, for whom Christ
dyed.

Nay, farther we have the example of Almighty God himself directing, and by our
Saviors express admonition obliging us to this universal beneficence,
compassion, and patience toward all. Who by express testimony of sacred writ,
and by palpable sings of continual experience declares himself to be a Tit. 3.
4. etc.
lover of mankind; to be good to all, Ps. 145. 9.
and tenderly merciful over all his works: not to afflict willingly, nor
grieve the children of men: to compassionate the miseries, and supply the
needs, and relieve the distresses; to desire the salvation, and to delight in
the happiness of men. Who with an indifferent, unlimited munificence dispenses
his blessings, extends his watchful providence, and imparts his loving care
unto all: Causing his Sun with comfortable beams to shine, and the refreshing
showers to descend upon, the earth to yield her pleasant fruits; the temperate
seasons to recurr, and all the elements to minister succor, joy, and
satisfaction even to the most impious, Vid. Clement.
and ungrateful toward him. Epist. ad Cor. page 27.
Who with immense clemency and long-sufferance overlooks the sacrilegious
affronts offered daily to his Majesty; the outrageous violations of his laws,
and the contemptuous neglects of his unexpressible goodness: Who patiently
waits for the repentance, and incessantly solicits the reconcilement, courts
the amity, and in a manner begs the good will of his most deadly enemies: whom
he has always in his hand, and can crush to nothing at his pleasure. For, We
are Ambassadors for Christ, as if God by us did entreat you: We beseech you in
Christ's behalf; be reconciled to God (says Saint Paul.)

Since therefore upon account of natural consanguinity, of our best
inclinations, of common equity, and general advantage, and an implicit compact
between men; of securing our, and promoting other's virtue and piety; from the
exhortations of Scripture mentioned, and many more tending to the same purpose,
from the example of the ancient Christians, the Leaders, and Champions of our
Religion, of the Apostles, the Masters and Patriarchs thereof, of our Blessed
Redeemer, and of Almighty God himself, we are obliged to this Universal
benevolence, and beneficence toward all; No misapprehensions of judgment, no
miscarriages in practice, no ill-dispositions of soul, no demerits in himself,
no discourtesies toward us ought wholly to alienate our affections from, or to
avert us from doing good, or to incline us to render evil for evil unto any
person; especially considering, that the omissions of others, cannot excuse us
from the performance of our duty; that no man is to be presumed incorrigible,
nor (like the lapsed Angels) concluded in desperate impenitence; and that our
loving and gentle demeanor toward them may be instrumental to their amendment,
and the contrary may contribute to their progress and continuance in offenses;
that God has promised to us a reward of our patience, and has reserved to
them a reason of judgment and punishment, if they persist obstinate in their
disorderly courses; that to avenge their trespasses belongs not to us, but to
Almighty God, who is more nearly concerned in, and more injured by them, and is
yet content to endure them, to prolong their lives, to continue his benefits to
them, and to expect their conversion: That our differing from them is not to be
attributed to our selves, but wholly, or chiefly to the goodness of God; that
we always were, are, and shall be liable to the same errors, vices, and
misdemeanors: that (lastly) the faults and follies of others, like the maims
of body, distempers of soul, or crosses of fortune (being their own greatest
unhappinesses) require rather our pity then our hatred, to be eased by our
help, then aggravated by our unkindness. It Is too scant therefore and narrow a
Charity that is limited by correspondence of courtesy, or by the personal
merits of others: We are bound to live peaceably with, that is, to be innocent,
beneficial, respective to all, and to seek the reciprocal good will, love and
amity of all. But I have insisted too long upon this particular, concerning the
Object of this duty, and its extension.

III. I proceed briefly to consider whence it comes, that (as I before observed
was intimated in these words, If it be possible, as much as lies in you)
though we do our parts, and perform carefully the duties incumbent on us,
though we bear good will, and do good offices, and yield due respects, and
abstain from all not only injurious, but rigorous dealings toward all; though
we revile none, nor censure harshly, nor presumptuosly intermeddle with others
affairs; though we obey laws, and comply with received customs, and avoid all
occasions of contention, though our tempers be meek, our principles peaceable,
and our conversations inoffensive, we may yet prove successless in our
endeavors to live peaceably, and may be hated, harmed, and disquieted in our
course of life. That it so happens, we find by plain experience, and manifold
example. For Moses, the meekest man upon earth, and commended beside by all
circumstances of divine favor, and humane worth, was yet often envied,
impugned, and molested by those, whom by all manner of benefits he had most
highly obliged. And we find David frequently complaining, that by those, whose
good will by performing all offices of friendly kindness, and brotherly
affection, he had studiously labored to deserve, Vid. Ps. 55. 10.
whose maladies and calamities he had not only tenderly commiserated, but had
prayed and humbled his soul with fasting for their recovery and deliverance
from them, was yet recompensed by their treacherous devices against his safety,
by grievous reproaches, and scornful insultings over him in his affliction; as
we see at large in Psalms the 35. and 69. And in Psalm 120. he thus lamentably
bemoans his condition: Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the
tents of Kedar: My soul has long dwelt with him that hates peace: I am for
peace but when I speak, they are for war: And our Blessed Savior himself,
though in the whole tenor of his life he demonstrated an incomparable meekness
and sweetness of disposition, and exercised continually all manner of kindness
and beneficence toward all men, was notwithstanding loaded with all kinds of
injuries and contumelies, was bitterly hated, ignominiously disgraced, and
maliciously persecuted unto death: and the same lot befell his faithful
Disciples, that although their design was benign and charitable, their carriage
blameless and obliging toward all, they were yet pursued constantly both by the
outrageous clamours of the people, and cruel usages from those in eminent
power. Now though it seem strange and almost incredible, that they who are
truly friends to all, and are ready to do to all what good they can; who
willingly displease none, but industriously strive to acquire (not with glozing
shows of popularity, but by real expressions of kindness) the good will and
favor of all, should yet be maligned, or molested by any; yet seeing it so
happens, if we inquire into the reason, we shall find this miracle in morality,
to proceed (to omit the neglect of the duties mentioned in our former
discourse) chiefly from the exceeding variety, difference and contrariety of
men's dispositions, joined with the morosity, aptness to mistake, envy, or
unreasonable perverseness of some; which necessarily render the means of
attaining all men's good will insufficient, and the endeavors unsuccessfull.
For men seeing by several lights, relishing with diversely disposed palates, and
measuring things by different standards, we can hardly do or say any thing,
which if approved and applauded by some, will not be disliked and blamed by
others; if it advance us in the opinion of some, will not as much depress us in
the judgment of others; so that in this irreconcilable diversity and
inconsistency of men's apprehensions, it is impossible not to displease many:
Especially since some men either by their natural temper, or from the influence
of some sour principles they have imbibed, are so morose, rigid, and
self-willed; so impatient of all contradiction to, or discrepancy from their
sentiments, that they cannot endure any to dissent in judgment, or vary in
practice from them, without incurring their heavy disdain and censure. And
which makes the matter more desperate and remediless, such men commonly being
least able either to manage their reason, or to command their passion, as
guided wholly by certain blind impulses of fancy, or groundless prejudices of
conceit, or by a partial admiration of some men's persons, examples, and
authorities, are usually most resolute and peremptory in their courses, and
thence hardly capable of any change, mitigation, or amendment. Of which sort
there being diverse engaged in several ways, it is impossible to please some
without disgusting the other; and difficult altogether to approach any of these
wasps, without being stung, or vexed by them. Some also are so apt to
misunderstand men's meanings, to misconstrue their words, and to make ill
descants upon, or draw bad consequences from their actions, that it is not
possible to prevent their entertaining ill-favored prejudices against even
those that are heartily their friends, and wish them the best. To others the
good and prosperous estate of their Neighbor, that he flourishes in wealth,
power or reputation, is ground sufficient of hatred and enmity against him: for
so we see that Cain hated his innocent brother Abel, because his brothers works
were more righteous, and his sacrifices better accepted then his own: that
Joseph's brethren were mortally offended at him, because his father especially
loved, and delighted in him: that Saul was enraged against David, because his
gallant deeds were celebrated with due praises, and joyful acclamations of the
people: and that the Babylonian Princes, upon no other score, maligned Daniel,
but because he enjoyed the favor of the King, and a dignity answerable to his
deserts: And who that loves his own welfare, can possibly avoid such enmities
as these? But the fatal rock, upon which peaceable designs are most inevitably
split, and which by no prudent steering our course can sometimes be evaded, is
the unreasonable perverseness of men's pretenses, who sometimes will upon no
terms be friends with us, or allow us their good will, but upon condition of
concurring with them in dishonest, and unwarrantable practices: of omitting
some duties to which by the express command of God, or evident dictates of
right reason we are obliged, or performing some action repugnant to those
indispensable rules. But though peace with men is highly valuable, and
possessing their good will in worth not inferior to any other indifferent
accommodation of life, yet are these nothing comparable to the favor of God,
or the internal satisfaction of conscience; nor though we were assured thereby
to gain the entire love and favor of all men living, are we to purchase them
at so dear a rate as with the loss of these. We must not to please or gratify
men, commit any thing prohibited, or omit any thing enjoined by God, the least
glimpse of whose favorable aspect is infinitely more to be prized, then the
most intimate friendship of the mightiest Monarchs upon earth: and the least
spark of whose indignation is more to be dreaded, then the extremest
displeasure of the whole world. In case of such competition, we must resolve
with Saint Paul, Gal. 1. 10. Do I yet (...)
conciliate God, or do I endeavor to sooth men? for if I yet soothed (or
flattered) men (so you know (...) signifies) I were not the servant of Christ.
Nor are we, that we may satisfy any man's pleasure, to contravene the dictates
of Reason (that subordinate guide of our actions) to do any dishonorable or
uncomely action, unworthy of a man, misbeseemour education, or incongruous to
our station in humane society, so as to make our selves worthily despicable to
the most by contenting some: Nor are we bound always to desert our own
considerable interest, or betray our just liberty, that we may avoid the enmity
of such as would violently, or fraudulently encroach upon them. Nor are we in
the administration of justice, distribution of rewards, or arbitration of
controversies to respect the particular favor of any, but the merits only of
the cause, or the worth of the persons concerned. Nor are we by feeding men's
distempered humors, or gratifying their abused fancies to prejudice or neglect
their real good; to encourage them in bad practices, to foment their irregular
passions, to applaud their unjust or uncharitable censures, or to puff up their
minds with vain conceit, by servile flattery: but rather, like faithful
Physicians, to administer wholesome, though unsavory, advice; to reveal to them
their mistakes, to check their intended progress in bad courses, to reprove
their faults seasonably, and when it may probably do them good, though
possibly thereby we may provoke their anger and procure their ill will, Gal. 4.
16.
and (as S. Paul says) become their enemies, for telling them the truth. Nor
are we ever explicitly to assent to falsehoods (so apprehended by us,) to belly
our consciences, or contradict our real judgments (though we may sometimes for
peace-sake prudently conceal them;) Nor to deny the truth our defense and
patronage, when in order to some good purpose it needs and requires them,
though thereby we may incur the dislike, and forfeit the good will of some
men. Nor are we by entertaining any extraordinary friendship, intimate
familiarity, or frequent converse with persons notoriously dissolute in their
manners, disorderly in their behavior, or erroneous in weighty points of
opinion, to countenance their misdemeanors, dishonor our profession, render
our selves justly suspected, run the hazard of contagion, or hinder their
reformation. And especially we are warily to decline the particular
acquaintance of men of contentious dispositions, mischievous principles, and
factious designs; a bare keeping company with whom looks like a conspiracy, an
approving, or abetting their proceedings; The refusing any encouragement,
signification of esteem, or vouchsafing any peculiar respect to such, we owe to
the honor of virtue, which they disgrace, to the love of truth which they
oppugn, to the peace of the world which they disturb, and to the general good
of mankind, which they impeach. And so S. Paul warns us not to mingle or
consort, 1 Cor. 5.
not to diet, or common ((...), and (...)) with men of a dissolute and
disorderly conversation: (...).
And to mark them which cause seditions, and scandals, contrary to Christian
doctrine, and to shun, or decline them ((...)) and to repudiate, Romans 16. 17.
deprecate the familiarity of Heretics ((...).) Tit. 3. 10.
And S. John forbids us to wish joy, 2 John 10.
or to allow the ordinary respects of civil salutation to Apostates, and
Impostours: lest (by such demonstration of favor) we communicate with them in
their wicked works. None of which Precepts are intended to interdict to us, or
to disoblige us from bearing real goodwill, or dispensing needful benefits to
any, but to deter us from yielding any signal countenance to vice and impiety;
and to excite us to declare such dislike and detestation of those heinous
enormities as may confer to the reclaiming of these, and prevent the seduction
of others. So Saint Paul expressly, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. But if any man obeys not
our injunction by epistle, do not consort with him, that he may by shame be
reclaimed ((...)) And account him not an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.
Nor ought lastly the love of peace, and desire of friendly correspondence with
any men, avert us from an honest zeal, (proportionable to our abilities and
opportunities) of promoting the concernments of truth and goodness, though
against powerful and dangerous opposition: I say an honest zeal, meaning
thereby not that blind heady passion, or inflammation of spirit, transporting
men beyond the bounds of reason and discretion, upon some superficially
plausible pretenses, to violent and irregular practices; but a considerate and
steady resolution of mind, effectually animating a man by warrantable and
decent means vigorously to prosecute commendable designs; Jude 3.
like that S. Jude mentions, of striving earnestly for the faith once delivered
to the Saints. For this zeal may be very consistent with, yea greatly
conducible to the designs of peace. And it is not a drousiness, a slack
remissness, a heartless diffidence, or a cowardly flinching from the face of
danger and opposition, we discourse about, or plead for, but a wise and wary
declining the occasions of needless and unprofitable disturbance to our selves
and others.

To conclude this point (which if time would have permitted, I should have
handled more fully and distinctly) though to preserve peace, and purchase the
good will of men, we may and ought to quit much of our private interest and
satisfaction, yet ought we not to sacrifice to them what is not our own, nor
committed absolutely to our disposal, and which in value incomparably
transcends them, the maintenance of truth, the advancement of justice, the
practice of virtue, the quiet of our conscience, the favor of Almighty God.
And if for being dutiful to God, and faithful to our selves in these
particulars, any men will hate, vex and despite us; frustrate our desires, and
defeat our purposes of living peaceably with all men in this world: we may
comfort our selves in the enjoyment of eternal peace and satisfaction of mind,
in the assurance of the divine favor, in the hopes of eternal rest and
tranquillity in the world to come.

Now briefly to induce us to the practice of this duty of living peaceably, we
may consider,

1. How good and pleasant a thing it is (as David says) for brethren (and so
we are all at least by nature) to live together in unity. Psalm. 133. 1.
How, that (as Solomon says) better is a dry morsel, and quietness therewith,
then a house full of sacrifices with strife. Prove. 17. 1.
How delicious that conversation is, which is accompanied with a mutual
confidence, freedom, courtesy, and complacence: how calm the mind, how composed
and affections, how serene the countenance, how melodious the voice, how sweet
the sleep, how contentfull the whole life is of him that neither devises
mischief against others, nor suspects any to be contrived against himself: and
contrariwise, how ungrateful and loathsome a thing it is to abide in a state of
enmity, wrath, dissension: having the thoughts distracted with solicitous care,
anxious suspicion, envious regret; the heart boiling with choler, the face
overclouded with discontent, the tongue jarring and out of tune, the ears
filled with discordant noises of contradiction, clamor and reproach; the whole
frame of body and soul distempered, and disturbed with the worst of passions.
How much more comfortable it is to walk in smooth and even paths, then to
wander in rugged ways, overgrown with briars, obstructed with rubs, and beset
with snares; to sail steadily in a quiet, then to be tossed in a tempestuous Sea;
to behold the lovely face of Heaven smiling with a cheerful serenity, then to
see it frowning with clouds, or raging with storms; to hear harmonious
consents, then dissonant janglings; to see objects correspondent in graceful
symmetry, then lying disorderly in confused heaps; to be in health, and have
the natural humors consent in moderate temper, then (as it happens in
diseases) agitated with tumultuous commotions: How all senses and faculties of
man unanimously rejoice in those emblems of peace, order, harmony, and
proportion. Yea how nature universally delights in a quiet stability, or
undisturbed progress of motion; the beauty, strength and vigor of every thing
requires a concurrence of force, cooperation, Vide Clem. ad Cor. page 27, etc.
and contribution of help; all things thrive and flourish by communicating
reciprocal aid, and the world subsists by a friendly conspiracy of its parts;
and especially that political society of men chiefly aims at peace as its end,
depends on it as its cause, relies on it as its support. How much a peaceful
state resembles Heaven, into which neither complaint, pain, nor clamor ((...),
as it is in the Apocalypse) do ever enter; Apoc. 21.
but blessed souls converse together in perfect love, and in perpetual concord;
and how a condition of enmity represents the state of Hell, that black and
dismal Region of dark hatred, fiery wrath, and horrible tumult. How like a
paradise the world would be, Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, then a
stalled ox and hatred therewith. Prove. 15. 17.
flourishing in joy and rest, if men would cheerfully conspire in affection,
and helpfully contribute to each others content: and how like a savage
wilderness now it is, when like wild beasts; they vex and persecute, worry and
devour each other. How not only Philosophy has placed the supreme pitch of
happiness in a calmness of mind, (...).
and tranquillity of life, void of care and trouble, of irregular passions and
perturbations; but that Holy Scripture it self in that one term of peace most
usually comprehends all joy and content, all felicity and prosperity: so that
the heavenly consort of Angels, Luc. 2. 14.
when they agree most highly to bless, and to wish the greatest happiness to
mankind, could not better express their sense, then by saying Be on earth
peace, and goodwill among men.

2. That as nothing is more sweet and delightful, so nothing more comely and
agreeable to humane nature then peaceable living, Prove. 20. 3.
it being (as Solomon says) an honor to a man to cease from strife; and
consequently also a disgrace to him to continue therein: That rage and fury may
be the excellencies of beasts, and the exerting their natural animosity in
strife and combat may become them; but reason and discretion are the singular
eminencies of men, and the use of these the most natural and commendable method
of deciding controversies among them: and that it extremely misbecomes them
that are endowed with those excellent faculties so to abuse them, as not to
apprehend each others meanings, but to ground vexatious quarrels upon the
mistake of them: not to be able by reasonable expedients to compound
differences, but with mutual damage and inconvenience to prorogue and increase
them: not to discern how exceedingly better it is to be helpful and
beneficial, than to be mischievous and troublesome to one another, How
foolishly and unskilfully they judge, that think by unkind speech and harsh
dealing to allay men's distempers, alter their opinions, or remove their
prejudices; as if they should attempt to kill by ministering nourishment, or to
extinguish a flame by pouring oil upon it. How childish a thing it is eagerly
to contend about trifles, for the superiority in some impertinent contest, for
the satisfaction of some petty humor, for the possession of some
inconsiderable toy: yea how barbarous and brutish a thing it is to be fierce
and impetuous in the pursuit of things that please us, snarling at, biting and
tearing all competitors of our game, or opposers of our undertaking. But how
divine and amiable, how worthy of humane nature, of civil breeding, of prudent
consideration it is, to restrain partial desires, to condescend to equal terms,
to abate from rigorous pretenses, to appease discords, and vanquish enmities by
courtesy and discretion; like the best and wisest Commanders, who by skillful
conduct, and patient attendance upon opportunity, without striking of stroke of
shedding of blood, subdue their Enemy.

3. How that peace with its near alliance and concomitants, its causes and
effects, love, meekness, gentleness and patience, are in Sacred Writ reputed
the genuine fruits of the Holy Spirit, Gal. 5.
issues of Divine Grace, and offsprings of heavenly Wisdom; producing like
themselves a goodly progeny of righteous deeds. But that emulation, hatred,
wrath, variance and strife derive their extraction from fleshly lust, hellish
craft, or beastly folly; propagating themselves also into a like ugly brood of
wicked works. Jam. 3. 14.
For so says Saint James, If you have bitter zeal and strife in your hearts,
glory not, (...).
nor be deceived untruly: This wisdom descends not from above, but is
earthly, sensual, and devilish: For where emulation and strife are, there is
(...), confusion.
tumult, and every (...).
naughty thing: but the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, (...).
obsequious, full of mercy (or beneficence) and of good fruits, without
partiality and dissimulation; And the fruit of righteousness is sowed in peace
to those that make peace: and from whence are wars, and quarrels among you? Are
they not hence, even from your lusts, that war in your members? Prove. 17. 19.
Likewise, He loves transgression that loves strife: Prove. 18. 6.
and A fools lips enter into contention, and his mouth calls for strokes, Qui
posuit in coelo bellum, in paradiso fraudem, odium inter primos fratres. Aug.
says Solomon. That the most wicked and miserable of creatures is described by
titles denoting enmity and discord: Mat. 13. 28. (...),
1 Pet. 5. 8. A murderer, Joh. 8. 44.
the hater (Satan) the enemy ((...)) the accuser ((...)) the slanderer ((...))
the destroyer ((...)) 1 Cor. 7. 15. 14. 39.
the furious dragon, and mischievously treacherous snake: and how sad it is to
imitate him in his practices, 2 Cor. 13. 11.
to resemble him in his qualities: Philip. 4. 9.
But that the best, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
most excellent, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 16.
and most happy of Beings delights to be styled, and accordingly to express
himself, The God of love, mercy and peace; and his blessed Son to be called,
Heb. 7.
and to be, the Prince of peace, the great Mediator, Reconciler, and
Peacemaker, who is also said from on high to have visited us, Luc. 1. 79.
To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and to
guide our feet in the ways of peace. That lastly no devotion is pleasing,
(...). Orig. c. Cells. 8. (p. 424.)
no oblation acceptable to God, conjoined with hatred, or proceeding from an
unreconciled mind: For, If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there
remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee; Leave there thy gift
before the altar, Mat. 5. 23, 24.
and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer
thy gift, says our Savior.

I close up all with this Corollary: that if we must live lovingly, and
peaceably with all men, then much more are we obliged to do so with all
Christians: to whom by nearer and firmer bands of holy alliance we are related;
by more precious communions in faith and devotion we are endeared; by more
peculiar and powerful obligations of divine commands, sacramental vows, and
formal professions we are engaged: Our spiritual brethren, members of the same
mystical body, temples of the same Holy Spirit, servants of the same Lord,
subjects of the same Prince, professors of the same truth, partakers of the
same hope, heirs of the same promise, and candidates of the same everlasting
happiness.

Now Almighty God, the most good and beneficent Maker, gracious Lord, and
merciful preserver of all things, infuse into our hearts those heavenly graces
of meekness, patience, and benignity, grant us and his whole Church, and all
his Creation to serve him quietly here, and in a blissfull rest to praise and
magnify him for ever: To whom with his blessed Son, the great Mediator and
Prince of peace, and with his Holy Spirit, the ever-flowing Spring of all love,
joy, comfort and peace, be all honor, glory and praise. And

The peace of God which passes all understanding keep your hearts and minds in
the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jsesus Christ our Lord: And the
blessing of God Almighty, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be among you, and
remain with you for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Books writ by the Learned Dr. Isaac Barrow, and printed for Brabazon Aylmer,
at the Three Pigeons, over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.
TWelve Sermons preached upon Several Occasions: In Octavo, being the First
Volume.

Ten Sermons against Evil Speaking. In Octavo, being the Second Volume.

Eight Sermons of the Love of God and our Neighbor: In Octavo, being the Third
Volume.

The Duty and Reward of Bounty to the Poor: In a Sermon, much enlarged,
preached at the Spittal upon Wednesday in Easter Week, Anno Dom. 1671. In
Octavo.

A Sermon upon the Passion of our Blessed Savior: Preached at Guild Hall
Chapel, on Good Friday the 13th day of April 1677. In Octavo.

A Learned Treatise of the Pope's Supremacy. To which is added a Disourse
concerning the Unity of the Church. In Quarto.

The said Discourse concerning the Unity of the Church, is also printed alone;
In Octavo.

All the said Books of the Learned Dr. Isaac Barrow, (except the Sermon of
Bounty to the Poor) are since the Authors death Published by Dr. Tillotson
Dean of Canterbury.

The true and lively Effigies of Dr. Isaac Barrow, in a large Print; Ingraved
(from the Life,) by the excellent Artist D. Loggan; Price without Frame six
pence.


