AN APOLOGY For PARIS. For rejecting of Juno, and Pallas, and presenting of
ATE's Golden Ball to VENUS. With a discussion of the Reasons that might induce
him to favor either of the three. Occasioned by a Private Discourse, wherein
the Trojans Judgment was carped at by some, And defended By R: B. Gent. Ann.
Aetatis suae 18.

Ovid. -- Vincant quibus alma Dione
Faverit, and toto qui volat orb Puer.
LONDON, Printed for Th. Dring, and are to be sold at his shop at the Sign of
the George near Cliffords-Inne in Fleetstreet. 1649.

To my Noble LADY, THE LADY, E: R.
Madam,
YOur will is a Law to me, and the least beck of your commands the Alarm that
calls all my Intellects and Faculties into a posture of serving you, to which
they are so addicted by a natural propensitie, as they are never more in their
own Sphere, then when they be moving upon your Ladyships Errand.

Nor is this without good reason, since that rare cumble of Graces and Virtues,
that Venus and Minerva have treasured up in the fair Tablet of your face, and
rich Closet of your mind, have made such a perfect conquest of me, that my will
is but the Echo of yours, or rather I have no will but your pleasure; the
palpitation of my heart, and pulse of my affections, so observe, and keep such
even time and measure with yours, as they are no longer mine, but your own.
And ( Curious wonder of Natures sweat) proud am I that you will make use of
your own, in giving a Theme to my Muse, who nor knows, nor delights in any
other, than the praises, or (cause that's too high a flight for her flaggie
pinion) the admiration of your Ladyship. But such as she is, she glories to be
yours, and in that Liverie comes to prostrate at your feet a Jargon of a few
rambling passages, thought upon only in obedience to your Commands.

For may it please your Ladyship to remember, that among other passages of
entertainment, at Sir John's, there happened a conference concerning the
omnipotency of Love, and triumph of Beauty, in pursuance of which the Trojan
Prince Paris his Judgment was called in question, and he blamed for disposing
of the Ball (as he did) to Loves Mistress, when two other great Deities were her
competitors; Your well-worded Brother (compared with whom I am less than a
shadow) pleaded stiffly for Juno, Sir T. B. Bartt for Pallas, and there being
none that had taken up the Bucklar for Venus, your Ladyship commanded me to
become her Advocate; so that there was rather a necessity of, than an
Arrogance in, my undertaking it.

Now ( Excellent Lady) so auspicious were my Stars to me (above merit) that
these course-waled Passages found good acceptance from that noble Company, but
especially (which I was most ambitious of) from your Dear self, who bad me
file them upon the Register of time, lest they should evaporate into air, and
be lost, and enjoined me to give you an exact Copy of them, promising to
overvalue them so far, as to let them find room in your Cabinet.

See here then ( Fair Queen of Hearts) these few Flowers by me stuck upon Venus
her tresses, expanding themselves (like the Marigold to Phoebus) to the Sunnie
beams of your eyes, in whom it lies either to cherish, or scorch them.

Nor Madam durst I own the thought, that you would once open those starry
Casements of your Soul, to glance upon these creeping Ideas, but that I may
call them (in a manner) your own, for it was your breath that gave them birth,
though they were conceived by,

Madam, Your Ladyships Most enchained Servitor, ROBERT BARON.
From Grayes Inn.
To the same.
An Epigram.
Madam,
WHen last I came to kiss your hands, you were
Reading the Legend of the Trojan War.
Then did you wish to have seen that peerlesse Dame,
Whose form (rarer then wonder) partial fame
Proclameth with so loud a blast, as it
Fires coldest hearts, and deafest ears does hit.
You mused of what fine clay Titan did make
Her, better than the rest, that for her sake
The hot Phrygian Prince thought it not much to come
To scarce known Greece, from remote Ilium;
And that Greece thought not millions lives too dear,
With all her Mines to boot, to ransom her;
And that the Teu^rans did not stick to fill
Their Trenches with their bloods to guard her still.
If her Effigies, or a better face,
Madam, you long to see, look in your Glass.
Your Ladyships to the Altar, ROBERT BARON.

To his worthily esteemed friend M. R. Baron, upon his Apology for PARIS.
VEnus deserved not so much, I Will swear,
From the other two the Prize away to bear
Of Beauty, as thou do the prize of wit
From all, that ever on this subject writ.
Thou'st made great Juno boast, with such a grace
Her Acts, and plead in such a wealthy Phrase
For the Golden Ball, as she does owe to thee
Much of that metal for a Salarie.
Thou'st made wise Pallas speak such very charms,
Urging the Glory of her Arts, and Arms,
As she, in recompense, must slift a bough
From Daphne's trunk, and therewith grace thy brow.
And 'cause thou'st helped Loves Goddess to declare
The pleasures of her Nymph, so sweet, so fair,
(For whose sake she obtained the Prize) may She
One such ( fair as her self) bestow on thee.
D: S. Gent.

To the Author.
Ana Robert Baron Born to be rare.
gram.

Thy Letters, as so many Stars, do tell,
Thou shall be rare, without a Parallel.
Sic vaticinatur, Robert Freeman, GENT.

AN Apology for PARIS: For rejecting of Juno and Pallas, and presenting of
Ate's Golden Ball to Venus: With a discussion of the Reasons that might induce
him to favor either of the three.
WHen the Ilian flocks, laden with rich fleeces, were feasting themselves with
the dainties of Ida's Painted Meades, whose Princely Shepherd Paris (for even
such in time of yore disdained not the Sheep-hook, and to converse with old
russet honesty) sat sheltring himself from the fiery lashes of heavens
curle-pate waggoner, under the courteous shade of a broad beech, warbling upon
his seaven-fold Syrinx some amorous sonnet, that spoke high the encomiums of
some neighboring shepherdess, having the pretty Songsters of the woods
bearing part in his Lyribliring melody, whilst the conspiring arms of the
trees danced to the Concord, and the complisant Nymph, Echo, in the vaulted
bower approved, and imitated each of his aires, as greedily as if her dear
Narcissus had lent breath to them.

On a sudden the blew enamelled Portcullis of heaven flew open, and there
issued out three Triumphant Chariots, the first drawn by an harnassed teame of
Peacocks, and decked with boughs of Cedar; Herein sat Juno, wife and sister to
mighty Jove, Queen of Crowns and Mines, the Nuptial Goddess, and
Protectresse of the Geniall bed. The second Chariot was drawn by Marius his
Eagle, and Prometheus his Vulture, and stuck about with wreaths of Oak, Palm,
and Bays; Herein sat prudent and Potent Pallas, the Issue of Jove's better part
his brain, Empress of Arts and Arms, Commandresse in chief in the Pierian
green, and the Pharsalian field. The last and lightest Chariot, (before which
ran a Bevie of naked Nymphs and little Cupids, strewing Roses and Violets in
the way, and singing of wanton Ditties,) was beset with branches of myrtle, and
hung thick with hearts transfixt with arrows, others flaming, Virgins
girdles, Garlands, and worlds of such like Love-Trophies; it was drawn by a
pair of milkie Doves, who bild and wantonized as they went, as if they were
inamoured of eithers whiteness, which excelled Winters finest down, the neck
of L^da's aged Swan, and what ever else knows a name, but the hand of her whom
they drew, which was Lovely Venus, Crowned with her star, Queen of hearts,
Sovereign Mistress of Love and Beauty. Now alighted those three Deities from
their shining Chariots, and came marching with awful pace, (lackyed with Glory
and Majesty) over the honey suckled plains of Ida, by Cloris spread with
verdant plush for them to tread upon. The timorous Stripling was extasied at
their Angelick presence, as the Arcadian Fishermen were when they saw that
brave Triton, the incomparable Prince Pyrocles riding (as on horseback) upon
the mast of his mangled ship, (full of unmoved Majesty, as if he had been the
Neptune of that Ocean, waving his sword about his Crown, as though he would
threaten the world in that extremity) and (as they their sweating Oars) he
was about moving his heels to carry him out of the dint of such glorious
spirits; but that Monsieur Mercury their winged Postillion, beckened to him
with his Caduceus, and staid him with these words:

See ( noble Prince) how much thou art in Jove's books, and what a large share
thou possessest of his Royal favor, who has sent the three Deities majorum
Gentium, his own Wife, Daughter, and Niece, through the spangled Orbs, to
plead a writ of Honor at thy Bar, and has given in errand to me, his
feathered Herald, to make the motion, and procute them audience; thus then the
Cause is stated;

Dame Ate an exploded common Barretter, Mistress of revenge and debate, Neve
foret terris securior arduus ether, Lest Crystal mantled heaven should be
Securer than the Earth, and Sea, puzzled its Peace, and conspired to sow her
seeds of dissension among the Celestials; nor did it suffice her to play at
small game, but she has set at enmity the goddesses of the first rank,
Saturnia the Great, Tritonia the wise, and Aphrodite the fair, by casting of a
Golden Globe among them (as they sat enjoying themselves at a Banquet-Royall
whence she was excluded) with this Inscription, Give this to the fairest, to
which each lays claim, and swells with disdain to hear her title questioned,
for the clearing of which they all attend thy sentence, and are to stand to thy
award.

His Celestial Majesty waved the determination of this controversy himself,
because he would not disoblige any such Deities; wherefore he removed the Suit
from Heavens high Court of Chancery, hither, where he constitutes thee the
Judge, and commands thee to make Ida the Court of Equity. Take then High borne
Prince, this wager of three Goddesses contention, designed for the best
deserver, and let thy impartial judgment in disposing of it to her, evidence,
that Astrea has not yet taken her flight from Earth.

Mercury retreated, having made Paris Guardian of the Ball, whose amorous eyes
were now more clogged with change of Beauties, than King Mydas was once with
gold. Now this, now that, now one by one he beheld; this seemed fair, that as
fair, the other fairest; one was full of awful Majesty, the other of
audacitie tempered with meekness, the third of beauty waited upon by all the
graces; whilst every winning feature did entangle his intricate fancy, as
liking all alike, he loved, confounded in his election, Juno (with a sleeke
forehead) advanced forward, and thus became her own Advocate.

Grow Royal Plant, and bourgeon every moment, till thy touring top invades
Heaven, and thy magnitude fills Earth, and all the Inhabitants shelter
themselves under the shadow of thy Imperial branches; which is all in thine
own power to command, if thou will obey me, and that but in being just to thy
self, and me, in preferring before two meaner Nymphs (with whom my spleen
swells to be ranked) me, that have the Monopoly of Crowns and Scepters in mine
hands, in reward of which I Will turn over my Patent to thee, and for that
little yellow Globe, make this great one thine. Thy most ambitious and avarous
thoughts are too narrow to comprehend the moitie of those honors and treasures
that shall spread and prostrate themselves before thee ( my young ambition)
I Will swell a Diamond into a gross Mountain, lofty as Tenariff, spacious as
Ida, and will congeale a heap of Pearls into a lucid Rock, then command
Vulcan and his Cyclopean Journeymen to hew them into two fair Palaces, which
I will most about with the wealthy streams of Tagus, and his golden-sanded
Brothers, I Will furnish them with spoils of Sea and Land, and environ them with
a shade of golden Apple trees, transplanted from Hesperides, and these ( my
Darling) shall call thy Palaces of Pleasure. I will begirt thy brows with
such a circle as shall seem to be made to shame Earths spangled Canopie, even
when most gorgiously sparkling with stars, in nights chief pomp; and
(believe it) no face shows so beautiful as that that looks from under a
Crown.

I Will rifle all Natures secret Cabinets to find Jewels worthy to embellish thy
shining Scepter withal, with the wagging of which thou shall charm all minds
to subjection, as Mercuries Caduceus did Argus his eyes to slumbering.

Make but these petty Goddesses subject to me, and I Will make all subject to
thee, thee to none; all the Spheres shall seem to move as thou byasest them,
the whole frame of the Creation depend upon thy will, thy frown shall shake
the world off the hinges, and both the Poles into an ague; thy command shall
level mountains and raise valleys, make aspiring spires kiss the Center, and
lowly stones the Sun; thou, not fortune, shall make of a Consul a Rhetor, of a
Rhetor a Consul, as if there were not any fate but thy favor, no
all-disposing Providence, but thy pleasure.

I Will furnish thee with a spruce Regiment of supple Courtiers, which shall
Echo thee, and observe thee as thy watch does thy clock; And turn like Turkise
in thy Ring, and look well or ill with thee, and be true Heliotropes to you
their Sun.

-- Erit satis una
Vox ad decretum, Nutus ad Imperium.
Thy sleightest word like Persian Law shall stand*
One Nod shall be sufficient to command.
Every Look of thine shall be a Law, every Syllable a Statute, confirmed and
ratified, with a Sic jubet Paris, a foundation as strong as the Center.

I Will prevail with Nature to create some new Beasts, whose precious skins
shall make the Bever and motley Ermine of none account, and with them I Will clad
thy body. I Will make a sturdy Unicorn come and crooch at thy feet, thou
mounted, he shall exalt his horn, and scorn the Ass that carried the
Egyptian Osiris, and by his strutting pace prouder than ordinary, show he
knows what weight he bears.

The Sun shall be thy Helmet, and he only with his feather-footed Coursiers
shall be able to make the Four of thy Dominions. Each City which thou shall
visit in thy Royal Progress shall seem on fire, all Steeples shall Echo thy
(...) all Pies and Parrots shall be taught that note, which the wild Burgesses
of the Woods shall learn of them (as once they did of Psappho's flatterers)
and sing it every morning. All Conduits shall run with the richest Falernian
Wine, all thy paths shall be spread with Simyrimis Tapestry, every street shall
be thronged with Pageants, every harth shall smoke with bruised Nard and
Masculine odours: the Virgins shall keep Holy Day, and crown their dangling
tresses with wild Ivy, every one shall assume a leavy spear; every hand shall
be wearied with binding its head with Fillets, to bear thine health. Every
mouth shall be full of thy praises, every tongue shall sing Io, and salute
thine ear with Songs, whose burdens shall be, Jupiter in caelis, Paris egit
omnia terris,
Divisum Imperiu^ cum Jove Paris habet.
In Heaven Jove, on Earth Paris sway does bear,
And Territories with the Thunderer share.


Now did Saturnia retrograde, leaving Paris thoughts gilt with the reflection
of Oar and Crowns, and the birth of Jove's brain took her place and spoke
after this manner.

I know ( green Bud of Honor) that every accent and Particle of this Queens
Oration tickled, and spoke music to thine eat, and me thinks I see thee even
feast, nay surfeit thine eye with those mountains of profits and glories she
boasts of; but make not thy sense the measure of things: For sense like the Sun
expands and reveals the face of the Terrestrial Globe, but conceales and
seals up the face of the Celestial. Give eyes to thy Reason, and try if thou
be so Eagle-sighted as to discover Wisdom and Knowledge in their Courtly
dress, which had thou once glanced upon with thy corporeal eyes (as thou
may with thy mental, by contemplation) thou would allow nothing else fair.

(...) shall stop their ears with wax, for fear of doting upon thee, as once
Ulysses did his, for fear of being betrayed to their treacherous charm.

5. Philosophy shall bestow her Stone on thee, and turn all thou touchest
into gold, or which is more, all thou treatest on into satisfaction, the truest
treasure. Labirynthian Paradoxes that are bones to others shall be milk to
thee; Aenigma's that rest in clouds to the rest, shall be all Sun to thee; and
heights which others cannot soar unto by strong faith, thou shall reach with
Reason.

6. Thou shall make a new edition of, and addition to, Arithmeticke, and
complete her with numbers enough to count those many Atoms whose accidental
concourse made this big-bellied earth, and how many minutes have thrust out one
another since that accident happened.

7. Thou shall make a geometrical girdle for the massy ball, and reckon how
many inches make up her vast dimensions; that done, like a Palmer with thy
Jacobs staff thou shall pass beyond the firmament.

And that thou may mix pleasure with profit, the sister quire shall make thy
head their Parnassus, thy mouth their Hipocrene, whence shall flow such
streams of Poetic Nectar, as shall water thy name many Century's of years
hence, and render it odoriferous as the East. Thy verse shall turn Prometheus
his Vulture into a wanton Pigeon, and bespangle Heaven with new Stars, and
fill fames Roll with Hero's: so shall thou live by them, they by thy story;
they the glory of men, thou of wits. Yet to complete thee, for that small
circle, thou shall ride in circuit upon the Vehiculae Scientiarum, Languages,
through all the several Provinces of Learning; and how profitable and pleasing
a thing is it to have the orbs of the mind concentrique with the orbs of the
world.

By this thou shall be rendered more thy self than thou art now; for a man's
understanding is the chiefest part of himself, according to most men's
accounts, as is evident, in that they abhor more to be reputed fools, which
is a defect contrary to the understanding, than to be counted vicious, which is
a defect contrary to the will.

The swiftness of thy apprehension, thy penetrating judgment and soaring
invention, shall render thee the theme of honors tongue, and make every
moment of thy life notable; together with thy energency of fancy, which thou
(being borne to a Crown) have more use for than thy neighbors, that thou
may know how to mix moralls with politics. For knowledge (which is not only
the excellentest thing in man, but the very excellency of man,) is the Basis,
and Mother of all the virtues Royal; without it there can be no true
fortitude: for Perils are the daughters of Fury, and Fury is a passion, and
passions always turn to their contraries, and therefore the most furious
Orlando's when their first blast is spent, are usually the most pusillanimous
Dametases or Clineases. Without it there can be no Liberality; for giving is
but want of audacity to deny, or discretion to poise.

Without it there can be no Justice; for giving to a man what is his own, is
but fortune, or want of a corrupter, or seducer.

Without it there can be no Constancy, or Patience; for suffering is but
stupidity.

Without it there can be no Temperance; for we shall restrain our selves from
virtue, as well as from vice: for he that cannot discern, cannot elect or
choose. Well therefore said one of the scientificallest of my sons. Then shall
people enjoy the height and influence of felicity, when either Kings be
Philosophers, or Philosophers Kings.

Neither ( Delight of fortune, if thou please) judge of my gifts by what thou
know of them already; no more than thou would do of a Jeweller or
Lapidaries store, by that only which is set out toward the street in his
shop. I have another donative in store for thee, if thou be not thine own
foe; thou shall share as much of Mars in the hand, as of Mercury in the head;
so that fame shall find it task enough to employ all her breath in, to tell
the admiring world how many stubborn Nations thou have subjugated, and how many
high and arduous attempts thine own single prowess has atcheived; which shall
at the same instant both delight and affright the Auditors. Thy name shall
conquer like Zisca's Drum, and thy triumph be certain before the Battle;
who so stands against Paris, by Paris shall fall; thy foes shall be to thee as
waves to a rock, thou to them as fireto fern. Philosophers and Generals shall
fetch their Authorities and Stratagems from thee, then Oracle of wit and war;
every day shall present thee with a new Palm; to thy honor Games shall be
invented which shall thrust the Pythia and Olympiads out of esteem: every
champion field and plain shall stand thick with Pillars, and cloud-high
Pyramids, Temples, Statues, and Agulieos erected in memorial of thy Trophies
and Victories, which shall make thy terrible name Rival with time, for the
victory of perpetuity.

Now retreated Tritonia, leaving Paris building castles in the air, and
erecting Trophies in his thoughts, when fair Aphrodite approached with a world
of winning majesty in her looks; and as the Elixar turns all things into
gold, so the Sunny beams of this illustrious Deities eyes, (whose every motion
shot ten thousand Cupids into the hot Phrygians soul) reflecting upon his,
soon affected him with her passion, and made him ready to prostrate (without
further cunctation) the Ball, with his glowing heart, at her feet. First she
slipped down her loose flower-embroydered mantle, and enriched his gullon eyes
with the wealth of her lovely breasts, those nectar running fountains, as
far excelling those two Palaces of pleasure which Juno even now promised, as
they did the humble colleges that were the mothers of the Capitol; and before
she opened the cherry of her lips, she emparadised him with a winning smile,
such a one as if hell afforded the like, who would not post thither, esteeming
the sulphurous flames cool, in comparison of his desire of the fruition of
such loveliness?

Having pleaded with his eye with such silent (though flexanimous) Oratory; she
next charmed his ear, the other principal sense of inquisition, with such
such like raptures,

Place not thy heaven ( Noblest of hearts) in those things that have
transformed earth to Hell, viz. Gold and Iron, I would have thy life ( Dearest)
more of kin to the Golden age, when no Viper cared to rip up the bowels of his
mother Earth, or plunder her entrails of her best concocted dust; when there
needed no elaborate circumvallations, or Trenches, no Palizad^'s or art of
Enginery, to keep out hostile Troops, but the unarmed people had for their
defense a wall of innocence and love,

It will better beseem thy tongue to bear a part in some sweet oyly-melting
ditties, highly penned, and sung by a fair Queen in a summers bower, with
ravishing division on her Lute, than to speak terms of manage to a bounding
steed.

That fresh and blooming cheek (sweet as April, flourishing as June) was not
made to be withered with night watchings, like an old Apple John; nor were
those blossoms of beauty bestowed on thee to be weltred in a study, or nipt by
tedious marches. It better becomes thy bud of youth, and the flowring spring
time of thine Age, to spend the naked summer in the cooler shade, and the
slower winter by the hearth.

Make me ( Dear Wanton) mistress of that narrow sphere, and thou shall always
move in one of delight, as spacious as desire.

On this pleasant rising ground i will plant a checkered Myrtle grove for thy
divertisement, on each branch whereof shall perch a plumed Chorister, and
there shall Philomela (the harmless Siren of the woods) ply the nimble wing
from tree to tree, teaching the groves to chant the Legends of her Loves, and
the heaven she found in Tereus his strict embraces, to taste which once more,
she shall wish as often as there are trees wagging to her song, to reassume her
pristine shape, that she might be ravished again.

The pavement shall be enamelled wiih Violets that rol'd themselves in the
cooling blood of my tender Adonis, and wear it still for a Livery. There shall
the Dazies jet it in their double ruffes, and grieved Clyte now an Heliotrope
pursue her coy Titan whom I made once to follow coyer Daphne to as little
purpose. There shall the Daffadiles pour all their tears out of their dewie
cups; for there is not a leaf shall be an Vmbrella for sorrow, but the pretty
mixture of Flora's treasury shall make the gaudy earth seem another Glaxia,
embossed with Stars, which shall never know sunburned Autum of frozen winter,
but by Zephyrs flowery Brises shall be perfumed and rendered as thy self
flourishing.

Here the toyling Bee's (the Muses birds) shall make another Hybla, and every
hollow tree shall present thee with the sweet sweat of their labor. This
palace of the spring will I water with serpent Rivolets of Milk, and Nectar,
(fragrant as my breath) which I will sluice into small winding Cataracts, (as
the veins in the body) to indent the ground, and moisten every part, and
musically play with the blew pebles, as they wantonly glide by, and make thy
sleep softer than it is.

Here shall thou wash away the sweating of August in the flowing juice of the
rocks, and bath in the spirits of July flowers, Musk-Roses, and blew veined
Violets.

Hither will I send a wanton Bevie of sportive waggish Nymphs to attend thee,
and to gather for thee (as it was in the Saturnian times of yore) Wildings and
Strawberries of the Wood (which shall wrinkle their cheeks with laughter, for
joy to be thy mess) and to feast thy palate with delicious Honey, dropping
from green Holy-Oakes, and with sweeter too distilling from their prettily
swelling lips, which shall be balm to cure the deep wounds of Love; balm
sweeter than the dew that lies on Roses when the morning opens, and ushers in
the day with dubious light. Here shall thou see nothing not excellent, so among
such equally eminent variety, thy observing eye shall not know of which to
serve thine heart; this shall seem mildly majesticall, that of a sweet
complexion, this pleasantly entertain, that charmingly allure; here shall
stand a proper Girl, there strut a goodly ambling Nymph, the next a gay
Brownetta, as if Jupiter had hither brought his thefts; among these, might
wandering Cadmus have sought his missed sister, and Ceres her Proserpine, every
of their looks shall be as attractive as the Thracian Lyre, and lead all thy
senses captive after them.

I Will weave the tops of four comely Sycamores and Mulberies (the wisest of
trees) that mourn in the bloods of Pyramus and Thisbe, (having friendly Vines
lovingly clasping about their Barks) into a retiring room; the dropping
Woodbine and odorous Suckling, with the Roses of both hewes, shall be the Arras
to line this bower within.

Under this shady canopy shall thou repose, upon a green couch embroybered with
Hyacinths and Crowtoes, and whereon my young soft Paramore shall live in a pale
anenomy; and there shall Crocus and Smilax (whereof the one might have filled
Nectar in Ganimeds room, the other have waited in Hebes stead) now changed
into two pretty flowers, embrace one another, and smell fragrant as of late did
their desires.

And now ( young Dardanian) unless thou be frosty spirited, unless
Alecto's cold poison fills thy veins, I Will melt thee into amorous thoughts,
and speak charms to all thy senses, and make thee all flame.

Make me thy friend and (Goddess like) I swear by the black Stygian fen, to
throw into thine arms the only perfect piece of natures pencill, by it
(scorning art) painted of such a color, as is the Ivory of India, distained
with vermillion, or the snow of a Lilly married to the scarlet of a Rose. A
matchless Paragon whose perfections shall be many and years few. A beauty
whom the best verses and pencils have extolled, the fair argument on which all
wits shall employ their oratory; fresher and sweeter than a new blown Rose-bud,
whiter and softer then a dying Swans down, or the down of a Thistle; nimble and
sportive as a young Roe, wanton as the wind, that curles her hair; fair as the
morning, clear as the noone, ruddy as the evening, sweet as the spring (the
fair mother of flowers) ripe as Autum, better in all things than desire; one
for whom Prometheus tempered better clay than ordinary, or (to say better) he
composed her of soul stuff; one for whom Clotho kept her best and finest
wool; one in whom the fates meant to shame all their former works, and in her
composition so exhausted their treasury, as ever since, such fragments of woman
as others are, be daily thrust into the world; one upon whose peerless face
(so full of loves and Cupids,) millions have waited for Alms; one to whom
Princes and and wits have bent, and homaged, and whole squadrons of Lovers have
besieged and sought to storm, with whole volleies of obedientiall oaths, and
the hollow Granado's of complement. She that has been the rack of thousand
souls, the flame of thousands hearts; (who would willingly have offered up
themselves in their own fires sacrifices to her) she shall not cost thee one
sigh, or tear of despair, but shall freely come to meet thy embraces, and
shall every day increase thy affection by new merits. Tell me for Loves sake,
is it not more lovely to lie intwined in her foulding arms, like a Lilly
imprisoned in a Jaile of snow, or Jvory in a band of Alablaster, than to sit
muffled in furs like a bedrid Miser?

Let desperate persons endure the thunder of war, and the haile-shot of often
redoubled strokes; then show a rent scarce stained with (perhaps innocent)
blood, as a trophe, or a fragment of a torn banner; the meanest of her favors
will make a goodlier show. How can thou be mean, being Lord of her who is
beauties Kingdom? or poor, enjoying the wealth of her golden hair?

1 She shall be the feast of all thy senses; thou shall see the Sun (the great
Lynx of Heaven) divided in her eyes, lightning with such splendour as put out
the beholders, killing and reviving with frowns and smiles at pleasure; in
short, thou shall behold before thee the model of heaven, and pride of earth.

2 Thou shall smell in her breath a fragrancy that admits no comparison with
the Panthers breath gathered in bags, and mixed with Cretan wines, or with the
Eastern spices on the Phoenix pile, when she her self is both the Priest and
the Sacrifice.

3 Thy taste shall find in the swelling Apples of her breast, the Katherine
Pears on her cheeks, and the balme-bedewed Cherries of her lips, such sweets,
with which the tongues of Nightingales, the heads of Parrats, the brains of
Peacocks and Estriches, prepared (in sawced dishes) by the cunningest
cost-neglecting Cooks, are not worthy to be named the same day.

4 To thy touch shall ly open the warm snow and soft pollished Jvory of her
body, which excels in softness the ranging clouds, the Indian Cotton, or
Cotshold Wool, in sleekness the smoothest cut Diamond, or Looking-glass.

And thus (to the suspense of the listening Nightingales who grieving to hear a
sweeter voice than their own, shall fall down and die upon her Lute,) shall
she (the Orpheus of the world) charm thine ear.

Song.
1.
From the early Dawne, till Sol retires,
On beds of violets we will lie toying.
We Will quench, then kissing, fan loves fires:
Happy bliss, there is none to this,
A Lovers heaven is enjoying.
2.
Cockles our Lips shall teach to cleave,
(whilst no Argus eye controules,)
Our spirits out at our mouths we will breath,
Mine into thee, thine into me,
So in each kiss we will exchange souls.
3.
We Will mix our selves till our bloods turn
Elixar, which the Fates shall mould
To moddels of us, they shall burn
With desires, hot as our fires,
Whilst we in eithers arms grow old.
Nay most of all, she shall be sprung of the seed of the Gods, and what an
honor is it to call Jove Father in law!

Would have thy Nymph described? I might borrow heavens milkie way to paint
out her forehead by, I might call it a plain of Lillies, or a shrine of snow
whither multitudes have come Pilgrimages.

I might compare her eyes to those of night, or rather that of noone, and call
them Spheres of light, flaming strongly and inkindling all others, but that
were to dishonor them with the beggarlinesse of the similitude. Suppose her
cheeks two fair gardens planted with the choicest flowers of Paradise, but
the Lilly and the Rose are but obscure types, and shadows of those delicate
tinctures laid on her blooming cheeks by Natures Pencil. Imagine her neck a
Tower of Alablaster, her breasts hillocks of snow inlaid with Saphires, her
mouth Musicks Temple, decked with two railes of Pearl, her voice the chiming of
the Spheres: But these are but faint Metaphors of her, to represent whom, words
are too narrow, and freshest colors too dim.

Rather I wish that thy enfanched eyes were as sharp as an Eagles, or Tiberius
his whilst thou do survey my form, and if they spy any thing in me that
may challenge their liking, be confident thou shall enjoy it in as high a
perfection in that Beauties heaven, who shall every minute coin new artfull
postures, and try the variety of my stealths, to make thy delight immortal; So
that you shall be the happiest pair that fry under the Torrid Zone of Love,
hourly in that Elysium quenching and renewing your heats, and letting your
selves loose to the freedom of uncontrouled embraces.

If thou have a fancy to invent arts and try conclusions, here shall thou have
fit opportunity to surpass Ovid and Aretine, and become Professor in THE
CYPRIAN ACADEMY.

If Arms and Duells comply with thy Humor, thou shall never want action, the
soul of Love, her paps like two Pomegranates rising up on either side with a
gentle and tempting swelling, shall as they beat, give both a signal, and a
challenge to the encounter. And when thou art foiled, and cast into a qualmie
sound, one kiss shall infuse new spirits into thy panting limbs, and arm thee
for a fresh charge; and thou shall always be above thy sweet foe (the ex^ract
of delight) in these feats of Arms; these not destructive but productive
wars, instead of killing the Champions shall produce new ones. Thus ( Happy
wanton so loved of all the Stars) shall pleasure become thine handmaid, and
the crop of thy joys be ripe as harvest in the April of thy years.

These airy blandishments and raptures, made the hot Phrygian big with the
desire of their accomplishment, and quite chased the glory of Crowns and
Triumphant Charriots out of his head, and drowned all their pleasures in the
thoughts of the sweet fruition of his Queen of sport and Loveliness, who did
already swim in his fancy, his thoughts dwelt no where but on her, whom like
another soul, he longed to enjoy. As Phaeton at the first did fearfully
admire even the Palace of Phoebus, but anon fearelesse adventure even the
presence of Phoebus: So Paris who even now trembled at the Goddesses Port, was
now bold enough to reject two of them; without the least conflict in himself
which to make his Patroness, with a fixed resolution, and a wandering eye, he
spoke in such a Dialect.

A flowery chaplet subtly woven by the cunning hand of a Wood Nymph, is a
sweeter and lighter wear than a Crown, which causes the headache with its
weight, and carries a cross on its top; and is commonly as deep and thick
inlaid with troubles as Jemmes. The whole lives of Princes are like a
Chesseboord, or their Ermynes, they have as many black spots as white, wherefore
they shake hands with freedom (the splendour of life) that gape after such
gilded toiles, which when they are possessed of, they had need borrow ambitious
men's conceits to think themselves happy, the Gall is so predominant over the
Honey.

I am heir to one Crown by birth, and Jove grant that Liberty and Privilege do
not justle that off my head, which if they do, I will scarce lift it thither
again; for Sovereign Monarchs are like the celestial bodies, they have much
veneration, but no rest. It was the desire of power that flung Angels out of
Heaven, and the fever of knowledge that thrust man out of Paradise: wherefore
neither do I desire to be reared to that slippery height, whence a fall will
dash me in pieces, like those wretched creatures that are drawn higher the more
to be strapado'd; nor do I thirst to drink of the Horses spring, or drench my
self in Castaly, I mean not to undertake a Pilgrimage to Athens, an unwearied
travel after wit, nor care I (like worms) to feed upon old books, some
whereof tell us that Pride precedes a fall; now what is a greater stirrup for
pride than much knowledge? which to this day retains in it somewhat of the
Serpent (its first Attorney) wherefore when it enters into a man it makes him
swell, Scientia inflat.

I Will never be Rival to those candle-wasters, that always stink of Lamp
oil, in woing any coy Art but Music: for what serves your sleepy Astronomy
but to enhance the price of Night caps, and furred Gowns, and to make men
catch cold? I Will not tie mine eyes to the Stars as if I were made the Argus
of the Heavens, to watch the wandering planets motions, none of which I Will ever
trace but Venus. If you will needs have me taken with Arts, I like better the
art of giving than taking of lives. I desire not to warm me by that fire
struck in the Devils tinderbox, War alias Woe, that common wrack of
commonweals. Let my brother Hector deck his pride with scarres, and make
fine lame shows of his wounds, in hope rotten Fame will make him the burden of
her song; for my part I desire not to see the inside of Ianus his temple; but
may Turtle footed peace ever dance Fairy rings in my Land.

I love not black and blew prowess, nor is it music to mine ear to hear
bones rattle with magnanimity. Fortitude is a virtue of the Iron Age, and a
goodly virtue sure which even drunkenness can induce? Shall I learn of the
Giants (that God contemning race) to affect thrones, and so become a mark for
Jove's Thunderbolts? or of Cadmus his harvest of men to love fighting, and so
water the earth with my blood in recompense for bearing me? No, with Regality
dwells cares, with arts unrest, with arms danger; but Love is the true emblem
of Heaven, or rather Heaven upon Earth, for Heaven is more the joy than the
place. Love is made up of the Elixar of delights; shall I then invite fear for
my Comrade, and Trouble for my bedfellow? and reject that excellently excellent
Nymph, so fair, so gentle, so good, so shaped, so quallified? no Dear
arme-full of Roses and Lillies, thy embrace shall be my ambition, thy arms my
court, thy breast my field, thy bed my tent, thy eyes my books; And you fair
Cypria my Patroness, to whom as to the worthiest I adjudge the Golden Orb,
which with my better service, (rare Summary of beauty, therefore of desert) may
it please your Deity to accept.

This disposal made the two rejected Goddesses his inexorable adversaries, and
most Philomathies and Martialists his critical censurers, he is only cried up
for a Minos of good judgment among Amorists and Beauties, one out of which
number (between whom and her that bore away the Golden prize there is no
difference but a Mole and a Name) one (who had she been in the number of the
competitors the Apple must have been divided between Erycina and her) whose
least command is more obligatory with me than an act of Parliament, have
enjoined me to Apologize for him, and to say somewhat in applause of his
preferring before the rest the fair Paphyan Queen, whom I implore to be
President at the rites, and to inspire me whilst I plead hers and her Judges
cause; and I wish that to delineate her deserts and omnipotence, I had a quill
snatched from the wing of her amifying Son, and dipped in the Nectar of her own
Milk.

But I will not make Minda's large gates to my little City, nor dwell long upon
a Proem, for to make too much preamble is tedious, and to make none at all, but
blunt.

To unpassioned men, this Trojans judgment will not appear like that of
Aesops Cock, that preferred the Barley kernel before the Jewel; or of Ulysses
Qui vetulam praetulit immortalitati; or of Mydas, who being elected Judge
between Apollo President of the Muses, and Pan Captain of the sheepish
Squadrons, judged for plenty; or of the Ass in the fable, who preferred the
Cucko's note before the Nightingales; but of a nobler, and more reasonable
nature, as will concisely appear by these few animadversions.

First, in respect of himself, common policy prompted this Prince to this
disposal, for he being made Umpire between three Deities whereof he must make
one his friend, and two his enemies, it was his wisdom to win favor with
the most Potent, which was indubitably Venus, if we may take an estimate of
power from the extent of dominions, and largeness of command and conquest; all
which are so clearly Cypria's as they leave no place for opposition, or
objection. Its true Juno commands the World, but Venus monarchizes in the most
unlimited manner of sovereignty over millions of worlds, if it will pass for
sterling that every man is a Microcosme; and though some sons of Earth are so
inthrall'd to sense as Saturnia swaies in some of these lesser worlds too, yet
many are so refined from earth and ignorance, as they acknowledge no alleagance
unto her, but he that submits not to the scepter of the Paphian Queen is a
Rebel against nature, and but the shadow of a man; but such stubborn ones are
as rare as a horse in the streets of Venice, or a beggar in Holland. Petronius
indeed once blasphemed and wrote Satyrs against our Goddess, but he soon sung
a Palinodia, and spent his last breath in chanting of amorous Odes.

This is that powerful Planet that makes not only rational but irrational,
not only the animate, but inanimate creatures, and vegetables feel her
influxious power. So that she commands the three souls that animate the world,
the vegetative, the sensitive, and the rational, one whereof is infused into
Plants, two into Beasts, all into Men. No creature (as Saint Hierome concludes)
is to be found Quod non aliquid amat, no stock or stone that has not some
feeling of Love.

Even Flowers and Plants feel her influence, the fair Primrose (the first
borne of the spring) if forsaken of the masculine flower, droopes and withers
disconsolate, as if she kept her beauty only for him. The Heliotrope was
inamoured of Goldenhair'd Titan, and still at his presence unmaskes (as if he
came to court her) and converts toward him; the Vine, the Elm, the Cabbage
and the Olive dote upon and manacle one another in their arms; the Olive and
the Myrtle intwine their roots and branches if they grow near.

Palm trees are of both sexes, and express not a sympathy, but a Love passion.

Vivunt in Venerem frondes, omnisque vicissim,
Felix arbor amat, nutant ad mutua Palmae
Faedera, Populeo suspirat Populus ictu,
Et Platano Platanus, Alnoque assibilat Alnus.
Leaves sing their Loves, Each complementall tree
In courtship bows, the amourous Palms we see
Confirm their leagues with nods, Poplars inchaine
Their arms, the Plane infettereth the Plane.
Florentius tells us of a Palm that loved most fervently, and would not be
comforted until her Love applied it self unto her, you might see the two
trees bend, and of their own accord stretch out their boughs to embrace, and
kiss each other. They marry one another, and when the wind brings the smell to
them they are marvelously affected: they will be sick for love, ready to die
and Pine away, which the Husbandman perceiving, strokes those Palms that grow
togetogether, and so stroaking again the Palm that is inamoured, they carry
kisses from the one to the other, or weaving their Leaves or Boughs into a
Love-net, they will prosper and flourish with a greater braverie. But the
greatest Triumph of Love in these kind of Vegetalls was in the two Italian
Palms, the Male growing at Brundusium, the Female at Otranto, which continued
Barren, till they saw another (growing up higher) though many Stadiums asunder.

Dionea is that Omnipotent Power that puts motion into a Stone, and strikes
fire from Ice, and makes cold water sensible of her heat: this is she that
made the amorous Brook Alpeus pursue the coy and flying River Arethusa, from
the Stymphalin Woods, (piercing earths hidden Bowels) through cold Emyranthus
and Ellis, till they ran both in one Channel, and mingled Waves.

Flumina senserunt ipsa quid esset amor.
Triumphant Love has made cold water fire,
And give and take the flame of warm Desire.
The nimble Birds are overtaken by Cupids nimbler wings, and annually elect
their Valentines. What a perfect Harmonia of affection is there between the
Turtle and his dear mate? whose continual billing shames Diana, and her
Icy-fouled train. What a zealous adorer of our Goddess is the wanton Sparrow,
who empties himself of all his Radical moisture in her Rites, and at three
years end, (when that Column of life fails him) offers up his dry bones a
Sacrifice to her. The Eagle of Sestos, and Peacocke of Leucadia were both
betrayed to the Love of Virgins, and having zealously served them here,
followed them to Elysium, as that wonder of a Dog did his Master Sabinus.
Aristotle will have birds to sing ob futuram Venerem, for joy and hope of their
stealthes to come.

The Idalian Archer makes the Inhabitants of the floods his Bulls too, and
pierces the Armor of their glittering scales; he placed among his Trophies the
sluggish Whales, the Triton of Epirus, the crook-backt Dolphin that was
inamored of Hernias, and him (at Puteoli) that loved a child and would carry
him upon his back as the Lord of his Affections, and after dyed for loss of
him. Pisces ob amorem marcescunt, pallescunt, etc. Fishes pine away for love,
and wax lean, if Gomesius Authority may be taken, and are Rampant too, some of
them. Venus takes Diana's work out of her hands, and wounds and intangles in
her toils the four-footed Citizens of the Forest. Furor est insignis equarum.
How insatiable is the Leacherous Goat? The Cowes run and lough in the Valley,
and the fiercer beasts make the trees quiver and be all Aspin, at their roaring
not for their Prey, but absent Loves; Cupid is as familiar with Lions as
Children with Cosset Lambs, and oftentimes gets on their backs, holding them
by the Maines, and riding them about like Horses, whilst they fawn upon him
with their tails.

Omne adeo Genus in terris hominumque ferarum,
Et genus aequoreum, pecudes, pictaeque volucres
In furias ignemque ruunt, amor omnibus idem.
All kind of Creatures in the earth, beasts grim,
And men, and fish with golden gills that swim,
And painted birds alike to rage do fly,
Thus Love bears equal sway, in Earth, Sea, Sky.
Lest any thing should escape her, she catched that nimble wonder of volacity,
the Wind its self Boreas, he that in his rage tosses the blew Billows,
curling their monstrous heads, and tears up knotty Oaks, and makes the massy
Ball to stagger (like a drunken man) when he flies through her hollow entrails
and crannies, she made this Fury turn all mildness, and convert himself into
gentle brieses, to fan Orythia's rosy fair hair, whom being denied he bore
away in a blast.

The Spirits of the Air, and Devils of Hell are subject to Love, else what
mean the Stories of Incubus and Succubus, of Nymphs, Faunes, Satyrs, Faires,
and those lascivious Telchines, about whom the Platonists spent so many
Pen-ploughed Reams of Paper?

Excellently said that well-worded Noble Italian, Baptista Guarini, in his
Matchless Pastoral, Il Pastor fido, upon this Theme: -- Look round about,
Examine the whole Universe throughout,
All that is fair or good, here or above,
Or is a Lover, or the work of Love.
The all-seeing Heaven, the fruitful Earth's a Lover,
The Sea with Love is ready to boil over.


Pallas has but few Subjects, and these adore Venus too; nay, she her self
may be called (without Solaecisme) Venus her handmaid, for Valor is a Page to
Love, not Love to Valor; for none in that Valiant are taken with this Love,
but once wounded with Love, they become so, and undantedly undergo all
perrills for the beloved.

Improbe amor quid non mortalia pectora cogis.
Tyrant Love, what can not thou
Compel poor mortal men do do?
The valiantest Field-men have been no Niggards of their blood in Loves
quarrel, which sharpens their Swords as well as their Spirits. What made
Persius combat that immense Prodigy of Nature and the deep, Medusa, that
drove the broad-spread waves before his mighty breast, but the Love of
Andromede? and having loosed her from her Gyves, (far unworthy of so fair a
Prisoner) and changed them for Hymen's sweeter Bands, What made Phineus rashly
turn the Nuptial Feast into a Sanguinary Fray, and make the clashing of
bruised Armor and groans of his dying friends his Epithalamion Notes, but the
Love he bore to the same illustrious Lady?

Arithmetic wants Numbers to reckon the Tilts and Tournaments, the Combats,
Wounds, and Deaths, that such quarrels have caused, whilst the brave Aspects
of lovely Dames did Tantara to the fight, and their favors wag in sight.

It Is no news to hear that Erycina takes Victory its self Prisoner, and
makes the Victor Captive to his Captive, as she did the redoubted Amphialus to
the divinely divine Philoclea, Jupiter to Calisto, and Hercules (the scourge of
Monsters) to fair Omphale; to comply with whose humor, he left off his Lions
spoil, to wear ( Sardanapalus-like) women's soft Robes, and with those hands
with which he drew blood, he drew the slender thread, (which trembled to be
spun by such terrible fingers) and held a feeble Distaffe with that arm which
used to bear the knotty Club, and thresh Tyrant Champions like a bunch of
Hemp, or a Stock Fish. These were his Interludes between his Acts, and when
his Ribs were well beaten, and grew crasie, then would he retreat into her Lap
(the Bay of sweet Delight) as into Loves Port, to be new built for further
engagement.

Cupid has made the whole body of Philosophy and Divinity too, to tremble at
the twang of his bow, the greatest Masters of Wit and Reason have coveted no
higher subject to heighten their Fancies than great Loves Supremacy, and the
Encomiums of some Beauty. How did sweet-tongu'd Petrarch trudge up and down
after Laura? How was Loves great Master Ovid enamoured of bright Iulia, (the
Jewel of his soul) and Celebrated her excellencies and their stealths under
the mask of Corinna? Did not Cytheris possess Cornelius Gallus his soul, and
Plautia Tibullus his? Did not smooth Propertius place his heaven in Cynthia's
Love, who being ravished from him by injurious Atropos in the heat and hight of
their best days, how did it crack his Sinews, shrink his Veins, and make
his very heart strings jarre, and so enthralled him to Melancholy Don Saturn,
as he locked himself up in her Tomb, who alive served in stead of a tenth
Muse unto him: of which wittily the Epagrammatist: Cynthia te vatem fecit
Lascive Properti,
Ingenium Galli Pulchra Lycoris babet,
Famaest Arguti Nemesis formosa Tibulli,
Lesbia dictavit docte Catulle tibi.
Non me Pelignus, nec speruit Mantua vatem,
Si qua Corinna mihi, si quis Alexis erit.
Wanton Propertius, and witty Gallus,
Learned Catullus, and subtle Tibullus,
To Cynthia, Lychoris, Lesbie,
And Nemesis you owe your Poetry:
Naso, nor Maro should not call me bad,
If I a Corinna, or Alexis had.


Mercury, (whose Caduceus is said to assuage the rage of the Sea, in that
contentions are appeased by the flexanimous power of Eloquence, and discreet
Negotiation of Ambassadors) he who was said to steal Apollo's Arrow out of
Quiver, Vulcans Tools out of his shop, and Jupiters Scepter, (showing the
bewitching force of his facundity) was not he Love-strucke when he saw Hearse
bearing to Tritonia's fane her Sacrifice, in a crowned Basket, upon her shining
hair? and how did he bend his wits to solicit her sister Aglauros to
procure him access?

Nay, Apollo himself, the Inventer of Poesy, Music, and Physic, elated for
his Victory over the ugly Python, found Cupids Shaft the most prevalent, when
he pursued the overmuch loved, but overmuch hating Daphne, over the uncouth
Rocks, craggie Clifts, and untrod Mazes of the Woods.

Again, the Celestial heat was inflamed by a Terrestrial, and he who used to
look indifferently upon all, cared to see none but Leucoe, for whom his looks
waxed so pale, a color suitable to his grief. Afterward being banished heaven
for a year, for slaying the Cyclops that made the Lightning that slew his Son
Phaeton, he turned Herds-man, and kept the cattle of Aametus King of Thessaly,
for the love he bore to his fair Daughter.

Afterward he assumed those Weeds again, to enjoy Issa, Daughter of Macarius
Prince of Lesbos, so unmajesticall is Majesty where Love has a footing. This
is that ancient passion that vies Antiquity with any time, as Phaedrus
contends, and was (according to Hesiod) begot by Terra and Chaos, before the
gods were borne.

Ante Deos omnes primum generavit amorem.
Love is the elder Sister of the gods,
Or Mother that gave them beings, and abodes.
Cupid is more than quarter Master among the gods; Thetide aequor, Vmbras
Aeaco, Coelum Jove, etc. For proof of this Antiquity of Loves Supremacy,
History tells us that this Fire (which some think to be that that Prometh^us
fetched down from heaven) burnt so hot in old Saturn, (the Father of the gods)
as it made him willing to go out of himself, and become a horse to beget
Chiron the Centaure on Philira, and ever since it has ruled the three
Provinces, (with their Rulers) that his Dominions were divided into, viz. Hell,
Sea, and Heaven; excellently expressed by that Poet Laureat (to whose Name, Wit
and Art must bow, and are justified only by honoring it) in his Hue and Cry
after Cupid in his Marriage Mask.

At his sight the Sun has turned,
Neptune in the Waters burned,
Hell has found a greater heat;
Jove himself forsook his Seat.
From the Center to the Sky,
Are his Trophies reared high.
So that it was no Heresy in Orpheus to make a petty Pope of him, and give him
the Keys of heaven and hell, Claves habet superorum and inferorum. Nor was his
Herald Ovid out of the Story, when he thus blazed his Style; Regnat and in
superos jus habet ille Deos.

Love commanded Pitchy Pluto (that holds the inferior Province of the triparted
world) to ravish Proserpina, from the sedgy Banks of Pergusa Lake. Love made
the green Glassie god of Waves to bow his Trident to her Scepter.

In mare nimirum jus habet orta mari.
She that from the Ocean sprung,
Has right to rule the Waves among.
This watery Proteus became for Arne a Bull, for Ephimedia the turbulent River
Enipus, for Bisalpida a Ram, for Ceres and Medusa a Horse, for Melanthe a
Dolphin, etc.

And lest Heaven should remain freer than Earth, Sea, and Hell, Love struck
great Jupiter, the scatterer of three-forked lightning, with the likings of Io,
Semele, Latone, Alcuma, etc. And made him Metamorphose himself for Europa into
a Bull, (and put himself to graze that he might lick her hands who fed him with
flowers) for Danae into a storm of Gold, in which shape he stormed Acrisius
his Tower, (and here he made Juno, Gold, serve Venus, Love,) for Astrea into an
Eagle, for Leda into a Swan, for Antiope into a Satyr, for Aegina into a Flame,
for Mnemosyne into a Shepherd, for Dois into a Serpent, for Calisto into a
Wood-Nymph or Nun, so much he esteemed his pleasure above his state: So as
Lucians Juno called him Ludus amoris, Cupids Whirlegig.

I need not here insert how Bacchus became a Grape for Erigone, or remember the
rest of the Gods stealths; it is sufficient to prove Aphrodite the potentest of
them all, in that all veil to her and her son, she to none. Wisely therefore
did Paris to dispose of the Ball, so as he made the Ruler of the triple world
his friend with it.

Secondly, I applaud his judging for the Sea-born Queen, when I consider the
quality of the gifts that the three goddesses were Mistresses of. The one could
lade his head with Starry Crowns, the Badges of the gods, and ambition of men:
but why should his great mind stoop to that Lure which even a Cynick could
disdain? Did not Diogenes prefer his Tub before the Luculent Throne of
Alexander the Great, the whole worlds terror? which proud humility so pleased
that mighty Hero, as he thought that careless Snails condition better than
all men's, but his own, wherefore he broke out into such expressions, I could
wish to be Diogenes rf I were not Alexander; but he and they that stand upon
the pinacles of State, need not boast their slippery height, but remember they
walk not upon a Helix that still enlarges, but upon Fortunes wheel, whereof
having reached the top they must descend to the lower spokes, as did Darius the
Potent, Osman the Proud, (whom a Ianizarie dispatched) Belizarius the valiant,
Crasus the rich, Priamu^ the fair, Nero the cruel, Seianus the haughty, cum
multis aliis quae nunc, etc. More wretched in the evening of their lives than
Irus, for miserum est fuisse felicem, Had I wist is an idle speech. Whether do
these Crowns and Scepters the worlds magnalia, but indeed the bals and rackets
of Fortune, hurri^ men? through how many restless nights and less restfull
thoughts do they chase these sweet bitter joys? as the more we grasp the
theevish sands, the faster they steal through our fingers: so is content the
farther from them the more they seek it in the fading glories of the world,
which like an Ignis fatuus first lead them through wild untrodden paths, then
by vast aerie thoughts to that Precipice, whence they fall and are torn like
Absyrtus.

Juno could also have made him Master of inexhaustible mines of gold, the soul
of the world, the price of lives and Laws, the Terminus ad quem, to which most
actions are byased: but why should a Prince make that his Ruler which Plato
banisheth from his Commonwealth, as the mother and nurse of vice, and an
envious spirit exciting to sacrilege and murder? This was too poor a bait to
take Nobility, which was slighted even by the Shepherds of Arcadia, a happy
people, wanting little, because they desired not much. But this means Paris
kept himself from the fever of avarice, for such is the sacred hunger of gold,
that who so enjoyes most of it, seeks ( Volpone like) by sordid penury to
accumulate more. But is it not the height of folly to live poor all a man's
life, to die rich?

The other Goddess could have decked his head with ever springing bays, and
filled his hand with triumphant Palm, the price of blood and sweat. I confess
it was some unhappiness that he looked upon these with so transient, and
careless an eye: eye said I? had it been in the power of his Optics to have
reached such objects, as Prowess (the metal) and Knowledge (the varnish of a
man,) it would have removed all hesitations and scruples from him, and made him
have devoted himself to the Lady of such treasure, and Loveliness:

Non per Deos, aut Pictor posset,
Aut Statuarius ullus fingere,
Talem pulchritudinem, quale^ Pallas habet.
Nor Gods, nor rare Vandicke, nor Raphael brave,
Nor nice Pyrgoteles, that in Pearls did grave,
Can feign such Beauty as Arts and Prowess have.
But how could he be taken with this amability since it was not visible? since
Aristotle (Natures great Secretary) affirms, Nemo amore capitur, nisi qui
fuerit ante forma specieque delectatus, no man loves but he who was first
delighted with the comeliness and formositie of the object?

The true Idea of valor and wisdom Paris could hardly form in his mind, but
he might easily throng his head with thoughts of tedious marches, dangerfull
attempts, sleep-breakings, night-watchings, mortal wounds, and thousand other
Gorgons heads that sense held out to deter him; so that who could imagine he
should aspire to that as a reward, of the peril and trouble whereof he had a
full prospect, and but an eclipsed glimpse of the glory? He saw but the thorns
that hid the Roses, and even this glimpse was much clouded by the refulgence of
the third Deity, the beams of whose eyes (those twins of light) so dazzled
his, as he could look at no other object, so fares it with a man that forces
his eyes against the Sun. The eye and the ear be the Cardinal senses of
inquisition; and though the ear is the conduit-pipe of Faith, which (as sacred
Rolls report) comes by hearing, yet certain it is that the eye takes in the
perfecter notions, and presents the truest Idea's to the mind, and that one
ocular witness is worth ten auricular.

Suppose a couple of Apples were proffered to a child, the one as fair as any
in Sunburned Autumns store, as beautuous as that which tempted Eve, but of no
extraordinary operation, the other but of an indifferent rind, and somewhat
withered with lying, but restorative, and of an excellent virtue, would any one
blame the child (seeing he cannot see the intrinsique worth of the other) for
choosing that which gave a pleasant taste to the eye, before it was seized by
the teeth? No more cause have we to chide with Paris for rejecting of Pallas
for Venus, since he could not discern the worth and beauty of the one, (it
being hid in the secret Cabinet of her soul) but might of the other, since his
eyes were full Masters of the rare object of her exquisite Phisnomy, and divine
feature, with which sweet looks she caught all her beholders by the eyelids;
and being so rarely fair, he might well think her as rarely virtuous, for
vultus index animi, the frame and composition of the mind does follow the frame
and composition of the body: so where the bodies furniture is beauty, the minds
must needs be virtue, grace and beauty are so wonderfully annexed, so sweetly
and gently allure our souls, that they confound our judgment, and cannot be
distinguished, which made the ancient Poets put the three Graces still in Venus
company, as attending upon her, and holding up her train.

Neither is the reward that Venus could have bestowed on Paris to be set in the
reere, but deserves to be ranked in the first file of desert; and if we
consider Paris as Paris, and not as a Prince, hers of all the rest was most
necessary for him, she could restore his rib to his side, which who so misseth,
wants half of himself.

His fortune might play her self, and suffer one that had more iron than he,
to take away all his gold, for fortune is like April in rain, or the Moon in
the last Quarter, it will soon change; but Venus could throw into his arms a
friend without change, a Play-fellow without strife, that after his thoughts
had kept full Term, and been drowned in the deep Idea's of State, could have
brought him cheerful and vacant intervalls, and proved the best Heleborum
against Melancholy. Did he desire to extend his life beyond his life, and make
the Ages to come his own? she in requital of his Princely embraces, could
yield him real fruits of his love, little living Pictures of himself, that
should always carry him about them, and transmit him to posterity, they to
eternity. Thus might he swallow time its self, and outlive himself.

Even Juno afterward thought this the most prevalent Argument, and therefore
the chief motive she used to Aeolus to let loose his destructive breath upon
Aeneas, and his fragments of Troy, as he was transporting of Ilium over the
angry Sea to Italy, was, that she would give him Deiopeia for a Salary.

Incute vim ventis, submersasque obrue puppes,
Aut age diversas, and disjice corpora ponto.
Sunt mihi bis septem praestanti corpore Nymphae,
Quarum, quae forma pulcherrima, Deiopeiam
Connnbio jungam stabili, propriamque dicabo:
Omnes ut tecum meritis pro talibas annos
Exigat, and pulchra faciat te prole parentem.
Lend cross winds strength to make the capring brine
To kiss the Moon, and swallow every Pine;
A beavie of twice seven fair Nymphs are mine:
Bright Deiopeia, that the rest outshine
As far as they do others, shall be thine;
And her to thee with Nuptial bands I Will twine;
She for such merits shall spend all years with thee,
And make thee Sire of a fair Progeny.
And its more than probable that Juno would have used this Argument to Paris,
but that she knew she should have been outbidden by the Queen and Monopolist of
Beauty.

Thirdly, I cannot but subscribe to Paris his sentence, when I ruminate upon
the penalties that either of the Deities could inflict upon him for rejecting
of them.

Juno could damme up the rich streams of yellow Tagus (whose foame is Amber,
and gravel Gold) from running into his coffers, but no matter, for how could
he know want that enjoyed Jove's daughters fair hair? and the freshest Coral
(alas too mean a word) the rubies of her Lips, and her Sunny eyes (the stain
of Diamonds) the two centers of beauty, wherein all the lines of Love met? In
tota rerum Natura, nihil forma divinius, nihil augustius, nihil pretiosus,
says Isocrates, In all Natures treasure there is nothing so divine and sacred,
nothing so precious and Majesticall as Beauty, its Natures Crown, Gold, and
Glory; bonum si non summum de summis tamen non infrequenter triumphans. Minerva
might make her Mysteries of Philosophy strangers to him, and unlock her secrets
to more quicksilver'd spirits, who yet were below his envy; for how many
Princes break their sleep with the Qui^iti^ of Ens, or poring upon Aristotle's
intricate questions in the realitie of Numerus? And yet their governments
miscarry not, they having the most refined wits, and mature judgments to be
their Participes curarum, and band opinions with them for the safety of their
Monarchies. As for her other gift, Conquest, he desired rather (like a good
Patriot) to have his Land decked with Peace, and the child of Peace, good
husbandry, than watered with his enemies blood, or glutted with their fat,
knowing that the shining title of a Conqueror did indeed little help to the
happiness of life. But what if he had been strong as Hercules, valiant as
Hector, could his force have ransomed Troy from ruin? or nnderpropt the proud
Palaces of Priamus? No, said his excellent Brother that dyed laden with so many
trophies of Honor: -- Si Pergama dextra
Defendi possunt, etiam hac defensa fuissent.
If any Hand could have defended Troy,
This hand had stav'd off her annoy.
Few Columns are gilded with the Memorials of any victory obtained only by the
Generals single Valor.

But Venus that had his heart in her hand could have made the torrent of his
affections run in what channel she pleased, and doted upon some deformed Mopsa,
some rotten trunk and rusty face, the spoil of Age and triumph of ugliness,
whom (when the scales were fallen from his eyes) he should have discovered to
have been a Beldame foul as the beast that suckled him, then would her harsh
hair (which once he thought finer than flax) appear near allied to Foxes
Furre, her complexion Cousin germane to the swart Indian, or tawney Moore; her
breath (which once he thought fragrant as the West wind) should then smell like
an Obolet able to blast a flower, and her whole composition prove the torment
of his eyes, and this plague he could no way fly: Quo fugis ah demens, nulla
est fuga, tu licet usque
Ad Tanaim fugias, usque sequetur amor.
Ho whither Lover? no flight is left for you,
Clime heaven, sound hell, still will your flame pursue.
Or Venus in revenge might have transfixt his heart with a golden shaft, his
Mistresses with a leaden one, to make her hate; her that might have carried
life in her looks, death in her mouth, June in her eyes, January in her heart,
and what a torment this would have proved, let the pale cheeks of Apollo and
Petrarch testify.

4. Another reason that induces me to stand to his award, is, because he
judged for the most innocent and blameless of the competitors, her whose life
was not stained with so many spots as the others. Juno had a black soul in her
not fair body. No visor can mask her cruelty to Pious Aeneas, and his
weather-beaten Navy (which the high hand of Providence had plucked (as
firebrands) out of Troyes flames) and to poor Io, whom her anger transformed
to a heifer, and committed to so rigorous a Guardian as boorish Argus, who
bound her yvory neck with an unworthy halter, and fed her with bitter sallads,
(who deserved Ambrosia) and watered her at the brook (which when she went to
taste, she often ran back, as afraid of her own face) who merited Nectar, and
allowed her the earth only (not always green) for her bed, once not unworthy
of the thunderer himself. No less cruel was Juno to the divine Nonacrine
Calisto (who once inflamed her old Letcher) in lading her whileome lovely skin
with horrid rough hair, and converting her limber fingers (once compacts of
warm snow and soft yvory) into ugly Paws, and making that mouth to grin (so
that she was afraid of her own voice) which was erst so praised of Jove.

None will excuse her malice against Semele, whom she sought by unworthy covert
treachery to destroy, metamorphising her self into her old Beldame Nurse Beroe
of Epidaure. No hate so deadly and certain, as that which is masked under the
visor of love; for that like thunder hits before it speaks: Tuta frequensque
via est per amici fallere nomen,
Tuta frequensque licet sit via, crimen habet.
T'maske fraud with Love has safe and common been,
Though a safe and common way, yet is it a sin.


See her spite, who contending in a wanton quarrel with Jove which Sex had
most pleasure in the act of Venery, he saying the Female, she the Masculine,
Tiresias (who had twice changed his Sex) being elected Umpire, confirmed Jove's
words, and affirmed that in coiture men had but three ounces of the vigor of
Love, women nine; for which her deadly hate deprived him of both his eyes.

With what fury did she agitate the subversion of the house of Cadmus? did not
she too excite the Furies to the ruin of Athamas and Ino, (for no other cause
than for their pity and piety in fostring their Nephew Bacchus, whose mother
Semele her rage had already tragedized) descend by the horrid shades of deadly
Eve, to Dis his dire Palace, and there commanded, promised, and entreated all
in one breath, and at last incensed Tisiphone to prepare for them bruised
Hemlocke, the spurgings of dead men's eyes, mad dogs foame, Frogs blood, the
juice of Mandrakes, Adders ears, horned Poppey, Cypress boughs, Basilisks
blood, Infants fat, Scritchowles eggs, black Cats brain, Henbane, Nightshade,
etc? with these and more such poisonous drugs, she so infuriated them, as the
father Athamas dashed out the brains of his own son Clearchus, and the
mother Ino, (having snakes hissing about her head) precipitated her self, with
her other child Malacertes, from a rock into the Ionian Sea; then Juno (like an
enemy to the humane race) turned all the fleshy hearted Theban Ladies that
pitied them into Cadmean Fowls, or Statues and Monuments of her revenge and
envy.

I need not remember her turning of Hemus a King, and Rhodope a Queen, into
Thracian Mountains; the Pigmean Matron Gerannica into a Crane (who now bids
battle to her own subjects) Antigone the fair daughter of Laomedon into a
Storke, who still claps her wings to her own Plaudite. Certain it is that
none was more cruel, malicious, or jealous than she, none more revengefull in
her jealousy, insomuch as she could not forbear the Dedalian Statue, which
angry Jove threatened to marry, but upon the reconciliation caused it to feed
its own destruction, fire.

Nor was Pallas altogether immaculate, the pride of her haughty spirit would
not let her acknowledge any equal, no not in the common Art of spinning, no
not Arachne her self, Arachne that made the pretty Nymphs of Tmolus often
forsake their Vines, and the sleek Pactolian Nymphs their prattling streams, to
look upon her rare warps, but her her cruelty made a contemptible Spider, who
still intangles Art (like flies) in her cunning Network, which the subtilest
hand is too gross to imitate.

This Goddess also gave somewhat too much way to Anger and fury when she sent
a fury to torture poor Aglauros (one of the Cycropides) only for being a
little long tongued, like the tyrannous Fairy that entailes the sides of
Tell-tales to the print of her nails.

But some grave streight-laced Matron (who is constant to one, because her
superannuated feature does not please any other) may cavil that Venus was not
without her Mole, but was guilty of falsifying her Conjugall trust, she looked
with one eye upon Adulterous Mars, with the other upon Horned Vulcan, whom she
taught the note of April, and made his black brows to bud.

But this Peccadillo is too light to weigh with the others gross enormities;
this fault (if it deserves that name) falls under a capacity of Pardon, as
proceeding from infirmity, but murder and malice from presumption; she was so
far from murdering any, as she would rather make more; she was so far from
sending Furies to torture any, as she was willing to prevent their tortures.

What Fury is more terrible than Love, the Queen of Passions, to whom all other
are subject, she to none?

Mallem cum Leone, Cervo, and Apro Aetolico,
Cum Anteo, and Stymphalicis avibus luctari mavelim,
Quam cum amore --
I Would rather cope with the Aetolian Boar,
Anteus, or beasts that in Nemea roar,
Against the Stymphalides my strength I Would prove
With better hope of Palm, than against great Love.
This powerful Conqueror leading the King and God of Conquerours prisoner to
Venus in a red Rose chain, so that he whose sinewie neck never bowed in
battle, he whose stronger strength the strong tempered steel did obey, became
servile to her coyness, she pitying the hell he burnt in for the heaven of
her embrace, let him take her bed for his tent. This was only the fruit of a
fleshy heart, and good Nature. Do we not exclame against those who having
abundant store of wealth, yet suffer the needy to perish at their doors for
want? With as good reason may we chide with those Ladies, who being rich in
Beauty (scorning Art) suffer their Loyal Amorists to dye for love of them
unpittyed. And why might not one Venus serve both Mars and Vulcan within heaven
(both being twins in love to her) as well as one Virgo do the Gemini without
heaven? 5. But it cannot be with any forehead denied, that Astrea her self
prompted him to this disposal, because therein he followed the will of the
Donor, of this prize of beauty, which was the Motto it bore; Detur pulchriori,
Give this to the fairest: Which if we expound literally to be meant of exterior
beauty, doubtless to her it belonged, if we judge it meant of interior beauty
of the mind, yet to her, because she was not spotted and contaminated with so
many vices as the rest.

But some may object that Paris did violate the League and Law of Nations, in
robbing of Menelaus a Sovereign Prince of the best jewel of his life, his
dear Helena.

This I may answer with that Proverbiall axiom, Fallere fallentem non est
fraus, to deceive a deceiver is no deceit. His Aunt Hesione was detained
Captive in Salamis by Thelamon, under pretense that Hercules when he razed
Troy, bestowed her on him, she not restored, being demanded by her brother
Priamus his Legates, Paris by stealing of the Spartan Queen cried the Grecians
quit.

Who ever blamed Dido and the Tyrian Lords, for robbing avarous Pigmalion of
his heaps of gold? as little cause have we to wrangle with Paris for this
amorous stealth: For if we be angry with Corn-ingrossers, and misers that hoord
up a little worldly pelf, why should we not as well blame them that ingrosse
rich beauties, so much the more, by how much the treasure that they ingrosse is
more divine and precious than their trifling riches?

But some may object, that Paris by this judgment made himself as his mother
Hecuba dreamt he would prove, the firebrand of his Country; 'twas he that did
devast and destroy Troy, sometimes strong in wealth and walls: -- Notissima fama
Insula, dives opum, Priami dum Regna manebant,
Nunc tamen sinus, and statio malefida carinis.
An I Will whose wealth (as fame of old did know)
Within as free, as Seas without did flow,
Whilst Priam did her flourishing Scepter sway,
Now rubbish, and to Ships a treacherous Bay.


This brought seventy Kings and Kingly Peers from Greece with twelve hundred
fifty five War ships (whose golden Poops did gild and stain the blew ennamell
of the deep) to block and coop him up for ten years ten months, and twice six
days. This waked the Lion War, and made eight hundred sixty thousand Greeks
stain the Trojan weapons with their dearest blood, and sent six hundred fifty
six thousands of Trojans fighting men, (besides the slaughtered at the Sack) to
engarrison, and take up their Quarters in the Kingdom of perpetual night;
omitting more of little lesser fame, the noble blood of forty Kings ran A Tilt,
if we allow Hector, Troilus, and Paris that title. The free sword took liberty
to act all that it pleased, and was as familiar with entrails as the Augures;
all hate had license given it, all fury had loose reins, slaughter and death
bestrid the streets, whilst the gore he shed flowed up, and stained his thighs,
and carried down whole heaps of limbs, and mangled bodies, which the coals of
their own flaming houses roasted; no sex or age escaped, infants in the Porch
of Life, the sick, the aged that could not hope one day more from natures
bounty, fell, some to fill up the number, some to make the prey, it was crime
enough that they had lives. Pluto's covetous boat-swaine fainted, and asked a
Fleet rather than a Boat to ferrie over those sad souls to the black world,
whose bodies the mawes and Dens of Beasts could scarce contain, the whole
Earth became a Grave, and all to satisfy a hot Lust.

But if this had not happened, the world had lost that high Example of filial
duty and piety that Aeneas gave, in burthening his shoulders with his feeble
and most aged Father Anchises, and (leading by the hand his son Ascanius of
the age of twelve years) bearing him through the wastfull flames, maugre the
wrathful foes into the fields of Phrygia.

Out of these ashes also sprung the worlds Phaenix, the Roman Nation, that gave
Laws to all the rest, and the British that performed acts of more Palm than
Fame has breath to blaze.

And we have no reason to call Paris the Viper that eat out the bowels of his
Country, because this sad event of his judgment was hid from his eyes. If
Nature had made every man a Prometheus to contemplate, or a Tiresias to
prognosticate the event of things before the action of them, or if we all had
our Nativities calculated to our hands, and were forewarned of, and so
fore-armed against those Legions of perils that should encounter us in our
lives warfare, there would be no need of the veneration of Fortune, or
repairing to her fane to implore her Protean Deity to be auspicious to us in
the conduct of our affairs; for a disease when known is half cured, a wound
discovered is recovered, and a danger that is expected is toothlesse and half
prevented; but we are not all allied to the Sybils, nor have we the gift of
divination shared amongst us, because we should have our minds intense upon
heroicke achievements, and still aemulari meliora, and leave the sequel to
virtue, who never fails to elevate her patient sons above the reach of
chance.

And as Ignorance is held to be the Mother of Devotion; so (in this point) its
the cause of most men's industry: For if all carried their destinies inscribed
on their foreheads, such as were condemned to hew their livings out of the
Rocks, would never appeal to Fortune to divert her harsh sentence, but would
sit down in despair, and sigh out with Tacitus; Fortunae saevienti
submittendus est animus, or with Seneca, Fatis Agimur, cedite fatis,
Non sollicitae possunt curae
Mutare rati stamina fusi.
By resolute Fates we guided be,
To their pleasures submit we,
No care can alter their decree.
The Median and Persian Fates are not like that pack of petty Tyrants that make
Acts and Ordinances to day, and vote them void too morrow, no, their
inalterable Order is out, that we should always tug at the Oar, nor can our
anxious care contrive a way to ransom us from these hatches, under which we
must ever lie at dead Anchor; wherefore its better for us to subject our necks
to the iron yoke of servitude (forged for us) with Sheepish patience, than like
the wild Bull strangle our selves with struggling to break that net from which
we shall never unintangle our feet, and so by their sighs of desperation (as
with bellows) they augment the fury of the enraged wind, whereas if the love
of Virtue could make them swell their sails with breathings after the Cape of
good Hope, they might perhaps arrive at the Port of Honor. E contra, if men
were no greater strangers to their ends than to their beginnings, those that
Fortune had selected for her minions, would expect still to be dandled upon her
knee, and that the Cornucopia and redundancy of her best favors should drop
into their mouths, whilst they (like Marcus Lepidus) stretched themselves upon
Flora's green Carpet.

Therefore lest the ardour and breathings after fame should be refrigerated in
Cadets by their despair of soaring above the gutter, though they should spread
and try to flutter with their Estrich wings of faint hope, or in others by
their presumption of being borne up to Promotions hill on the shoulders of
their smiling Fate, and there to find warm lodgings which they never swet for,
prudent Nature lets no man know what the plot is that she intends in the
several Scenes of his life, till he comes to act the Epilogue, which (contrary
to other Comedians) he usually desires to protract.

Some in their passage through this elementary world find their way strewed
with Roses, and their paths spread with butter, others prick their feet with
briars and thorns, and stick fast in the muddy sloughs of trouble, and are
compelled like Haniball (upon the Alps) vel viam invenire, vel facere, to find
or make way over the hedges and ditches of incombrance: And as a Pilgrim that
steeres his unknown course to some remote shrine, when he comes at a cross
way, is apt to take the fairest path; Semblably we, when we meet with any thing
ambiguous, take our own construction, which is ever such as the pulse of our
affections beats after, and we sooth up our selves that herein we deviate not
from truth; for facile credimus quod volumus. Thus Aeacides demanding of the
Oracle what event his War with Troy should have, he interpreted the Oracles
answer, which was, Aio te Aeacides Trojanos vincere posse.
Aeacides to vanquish Troy, I able do pronounce.
Thus, I Say thou art able to subdue the Trojans, whereas he should have
construed this Amphiboly in this wise, I tell thee the Trojans are able to
vanquish thee. And that other Prince who enquired whether or no he should make
a prosperous expedition against his enemies, and had this in a scroule, Ibis
redibis nunquam per bella peribis.
Thou shall go thou shall return never war shall end thee.
Put the second comma where he would have had it meant, viz. next that verb
Redibis, whereas he should have placed it next the Adverb nunquam, and thus
falsely animated he engaged, and breathed his last, in the Attempt.

Thus the Ilian Prince Paris having the 3 Goddesses standing before him, and
pleading for the prize of beauty conferred it upon Venus, because he conceived,
she being the potentest of the three (in that she boasted her Trophies over the
chief of the rest) was most able to do him good or hurt, and that he should be
so perfectly felicified in what she could confer upon him, as all the scruples
of gall that the other two Deities could cast into his sweet mess could not be
able to imbitter it.

FINIS.

