ISACUS BARROW S.T.P. REG. MATI. A SACRIS COLL. S.S. TRINI. CANTAB PRAEFEC. NEC
NON ACAD. EIUSDEM PROCANC: 1676.
portrait

OF INDUSTRY, IN Five Discourses: Viz. In General. In our General Calling, as
Christians. In our Particular Calling, as Gentlemen. In our Particular Calling,
as Scholars.


By ISAAC BARROW, D. D. late Master of Trinity-College in Cambridge.

Published by His Grace, JOHN Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Brab. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons, over against
the Royal Exchange, in Cornhill, 1693.

The Bookseller's ADVERTISEMENT.
AT the Desire of several Persons, I have here Reprinted Five Excellent
Discourses of the Learned Dr. Isaac Barrow: which were formerly Printed in the
Third Volume of His Works in Folio (and which Volume is, at present, become
very scarce) being too dear and bulky for every one, do suppose this small
Volume may come into more Hands, and thereby become very Useful to all sorts
of Persons, by stirring up an honest and industrious Spirit into the Age.

B.A.

DISCOURSES OF Industry in general.
ECCLES. IX. 10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might.
IN St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans, among diverse excellent rules of life,
prescribed by that great Master, this is one, (...). Romans 12. 1^.
Be not slothful in business, or to business; And in the 2d Epistle to the
Corinthians, among other principal virtues, or worthy accomplishments, for
abounding wherein the Apostle commends those Christians, (...), 2 Cor. 8. 7.
he ranketh all diligence, or industry exercised in all affairs and duties
incumbent on them: this is that virtue, the practice whereof in this moral
precept or advice the Royal Preacher does recommend unto us; being indeed an
eminent virtue, of very general use, and powerful influence upon the
management of all our affairs, or in the conduct of our whole life.

Industry, I say, in general touching all matters incident, which our hand
finds to do, that is, which dispensation of providence does offer, or which
choice of reason embraces, for employing our active powers of soul and body,
the Wiseman does recommend; and to pressing the observance of his advice
(waving all curious remarks either Critical or Logical upon the words) I shall
presently apply my discourse, proposing diverse considerations apt to excite us
thereto; only first let me briefly describe it, for our better apprehension of
its true notion and nature.

By Industry we understand a serious and steady application of mind, joined
with a vigorous exercise of our active faculties in prosecution of any
reasonable, honest, useful design, in order to the accomplishment, or
attainment of some considerable good; as for instance, a Merchant is
industrious, who continues intent and active in driving on his trade for
acquiring wealth; a Soldier is industrious, who is watchful for occasion, and
earnest in action toward obtaining the victory; And a Scholar is industrious,
who does assiduously bend his mind to study for getting knowledge.

Industry does not consist merely in action; for that is incessant in all
persons, (...), etc. Chrysostom. in Act. Or. 35*
our mind being a restless thing, never abiding in a total cessation from
thought or from design, (being, like a ship in the sea, if not steered to some
good purpose by reason, yet tossed by the waves of fancy, or driven by the
winds of temptation somewhither.) But the direction of our mind to some good
end, without roving or flinching, in a straight and steady course, drawing
after it our active powers in execution thereof, does constitute industry; the
which therefore usually is attended with labor and pain; for our mind (which
naturally does affect variety and liberty, being apt to loath familiar objects,
and to be weary of any constraint) is not easily kept in a constant attention
to the same thing; And the Spirits employed in thought are prone to flutter and
fly away, so that it is hard to fix them; And the corporeal instruments of
action being strained to a high pitch, or detained in a tone will soon feel a
lassitude, somewhat offensive to nature; Whence labor or pain is commonly
reckoned an ingredient of industry; and laboriousness is a name signifying it;
upon which account this virtue (as involving labor) deserves a peculiar
commendation; it being then most laudable to follow the dictates of reason,
when so doing is attended with difficulty and trouble.

Such in general I conceive to be the nature of Industry; to the practice
whereof the following considerations may induce.

1. We may consider that Industry does befit the constitution and frame of our
nature; all the faculties of our soul and organs of our body being adapted in a
congruity and tendency thereto: Our hands are suited for work, our feet for
travel, our senses to watch for occasion of pursuing good and eschewing evil;
our reason to plod and contrive ways of employing the other parts and powers;
all these, I say, are formed for action; and that not in a loose and gadding
way, or in a slack and remiss degree, but in regard to determinate ends, with
vigor requisite to attain them; and especially our appetites do prompt to
industry, as inclining to things not obtainable without it; according to that
Aphorism of the Wiseman, (...) -- The desire of the slothful kills him,
Prove. 21. 25. 13. 4.
for his hands refuse to labor; that is, he is apt to desire things which he
cannot attain without pains; and not enduring them, he for want thereof does
feel a deadly smart and anguish: wherefore in not being industrious we defeat
the intent of our Maker; we pervert his work and gifts; we forfeit the use and
benefit of our faculties; we are bad husbands of nature's stock.

2. In consequence hereto Industry does preserve and perfect our nature;
keeping it in good tune and temper; improving and advancing it toward its best
state. The labor of our mind in attentive meditation and study does render it
capable and patient of thinking upon any object or occasion; does polish and
refine it by use; does enlarge it by accession of habits; does quicken and
rowse our Spirits, dilating and diffusing them into their proper channels: The
very labor of our body does keep the organs of action sound and clean,
discussing fogs and superfluous humors, opening passages, distributing
nourishment, exciting vital heat: Barring the use of it, no good constitution
of soul or body can subsist; (...), etc. Chrysostom. in Act. Orat. 35.
but a foul rust, a dull numness, a resty listlesness, a heavy unwieldiness
must seize on us; our spirits will be stifled and choked, our hearts will grow
faint and languid, (...), etc. Ibid.
our parts will flag and decay; the vigor of our mind, and the health of our
body will be much impaired.

It is with us as with other things in nature, (...), etc. Chrysostom. ibid.
which by motion are preserved in their native purity and perfection, in their
sweetness, in their luster, rest corrupting, debasing and defiling them; If the
water runs, it holds clear, sweet and fresh; but stagnation turns it
into a noisome puddle; If the air is fanned by winds, it is pure and wholesome,
but from being shut up it grows thick and putrid; If metals be employed, they
abide smooth and splendid; but lay them up, and they soon contract rust; If the
earth is belabored with culture, Neglectis urenda silix innascitur agris.
Hor. Sermon. 1. 3.
it yields corn; but lying neglected, it will be overgrown with brakes and
thistles; Plut. (...). p. 3.
and the better its soil is, the ranker weeds it will produce; all nature is
upheld in its being, order and state by constant agitation; every creature is
incessantly employed in action conformable to its designed end and use; In like
manner the preservation and improvement of our faculties depends on their
constant exercise.

3. As we naturally were composed, so by divine appointment we were originally
designed for industry; God did not intend that man should live idl^ even in his
best state; or should enjoy happiness without taking pains; but did provide
work enough even in Paradise it self; for The Lord God (says the Text) took
man, Genesis 2. 15.
and put him into the garden of Eden to dress it, and to keep it; so that had
we continued happy, we must have been ever busy, by our industry sustaining
our life, and securing our pleasure; otherwise weeds might have overgrown
Paradise, and that of Solomon might have been applicable to Adam, Prove. 24. 30,
31.
I went by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard of the man void of
understanding, and lo it was all grown over with thorns, and nettles had
covered the face thereof.

4. By our transgression and fall the necessity of industry (together with a
difficulty of obtaining good, and avoiding evil) was increased to us; being
ordained both as a just punishment for our offense, and as an expedient remedy
of our needs: for thereupon the ground was cursed to bring forth thorns and
thistles to us, Genesis 3. 17 -- *
and it was our doom pronounced by God's own mouth, In the sweat of thy face
shall thou eat bread till thou return unto the ground; so that now labor is
fatally natural to us; now Man (as Job says) is born to labor as the sparks
fly upward, Job 5. 7. (...). LXX. Interp. Now great travel ( as the Son of
Sirach says) is created for every man; ((...), etc. Ecclus. 40. 1.) and a
heavy yoke is upon the sons of Adam, etc.
(or as the Vultur's Chickens soar aloft, according to the Greek Interpreters.

5. Accordingly our condition and circumstances in the World are so ordered, as
to require industry; so that without it we cannot support our life in any
comfort or convenience; whence St. Paul's charge upon the Thessalonians, ^ Thessalonians. 3. 10.
that If any one would not work, neither should he eat, is in a manner a
general law imposed on mankind by the exigency of our state; according to that
of Solomon; Prove. 19. 15.
The idle soul shall suffer hunger, Prove. 20. 4.
and, The sluggard who will not plow by reason of the cold, shall beg in
harvest, and have nothing.

Of all our many necessities none can be supplied without pains, wherein all
men are obliged to bear a share; Every man is to work for his food, for his
apparel, for all his accommodations, either immediately and directly, or by
commutation and equivalence; for the Gentleman himself cannot (at least
worthily, and inculpably) obtain them otherwise, than by redeeming them from
the Plowman, and the Artificer by compensation of other cares and pains,
conducible to public good.

The wise Poet did observe well, Virg. Georg. ^.
when he said, -- Pater ipse colendi Haud facilem esse viam voluit -- and St.
Chrysostom does propose the same observation, that God to whet our mind, and
keep us from moping, -- curis acuens mortalia corda*
Nec torpere gravi passus sua regna veterno.
Virg. Ibid.
would not that we should easily come by the fruits of the earth, without
employing much art and many pains; (...), etc. Chrysostom. in Act. Hom. 35.
in order thereto there must be skill used i^ observing seasons, and preparing
the ground; there must be labor spen^ in manuring, in delving and plowing, in
sowing, in weeding, in fencing it; there must be pains taken in reaping, in
gathering, in laying up, in threshing, and dressing the fruit ever we can enjoy
it: so much industry is needful to get bread and if we list to fare more
daintily we must either hunt for it, using craft and toil to catch it out of
the woods, the water, the air; or we must carefully wait on those creatures, of
which we would serve ou^ selves, feeding them that they may feed us; such
industry is required to preserve mankind from starving* And to guard it from
other inconveniences, mischiefs and dangers surrounding us, it is no less
requisite; for to shelter us from impressions of weather, we must spin, we must
weave, we must build; and in order thereto we must scrape into the bowels of
the earth to find our tools, we must sweat at the Anvil to forge them for our
use; we must frame arms to defend our safety, and our store from the assaults
of wild beasts, or of more dangerous neighbors, wild men. To furnish
accommodations for our curiosity and pleasure, or to provide for the
convenience and ornament of our life, still greater measures of industry are
demanded; to satisfy those intents a thousand contrivances of art, a thousand
ways of trade and business do serve, without which they are not attainable. In
whatever condition any man is, in what state soever he be placed, whatsoever
calling or way of life he does embrace, some peculiar business is thence
imposed on him, which he cannot with any advantage or good success, with any
grace, with any comfort to himself, or satisfaction to others manage without
competent industry; nothing will go on of it self, without our care to direct
it, and our pains to hold it, and forward it in the right course: A^^ which
things show, that Divine Wisdom did intend, that we should liv^ in the exercise
of industry, or no well without it; having so many needs to be supplied, so
many desires to be appeased thereby; being exposed to so many troubles an^
difficulties, from which we cannon extricate our selves without it. Bu^ farther
yet,

6. Let us consider; that industry has annexed thereto, by divine appointment
and promise, the fairest fruits, and the richest rewards: Al^ good things
(being either such in themselves, or made such by humane esteem) are the fruits
of industry; ordered to sprout from it under the protection, and influence of
God's blessing, which commonly does attend it.

All good things indeed are the gifts of God, and freely dispensed by his hand;
but he does not give them absolutely without condition, nor miraculously
without concurrence of ordinary means; By supporting our active powers, and
supplying needful aid to our endeavors; Psalm. 37. 3, 23.
by directing and upholding us in the course of our actions; Prove. 3. 6.
by preventing or removing obstacles that might cross us; by granting that
final success, which depends on his pleasure, Dii laboribus omnia vendunt.
Jud. 6. 36. 7. 7.
he does confer them on us; Our hand commonly is God's hand, by which he
works good, 2 Kings 5. 2.
and reaches out benefits to us; Josh. 1. 7, 9.
governing and wielding it as he pleases.

God indeed could not well proceed otherwise in dispensing his favors to us;
not well, I say; that is, not without subverting the method of things which
himself has established; not without slighting and voiding his own first
bounty, or rendering the common gifts of nature (our reason, (...). Chrysostom. in
Ephesians. Orat. 2.
our senses, our active powers) vain and useless; not without making us
incapable of any praise, or any reward, which suppose works achieved by our
earnest endeavor; not without depriving us of that sweetest content, which
springs from enjoying the fruit of our labor.

Hence it is, (...). Chrysostom. in Joh. Or. 36. Josh. 1. 7. --
that whatever in Holy Scripture is called the gift of God, is otherwhile
affirmed to be the effect of industry; it being the useful condition upon
which, and the instrument whereby divine providence conveyeth good things to
us: What God said to Joshua, does imply the general method of his proceeding,
Only be thou strong and courageous -- that thou may prosper whithersoever
thou go. (...). Chrysostom. Tom. 5. Or. 28.


Hence whatever we are directed to pray for, (...).
we are also exhorted to work for; declaring thereby, that we are serious in
our devotion, and do not mock God, asking that of him, which we deem not worth
our pains to acquire; Cato apud Sall. in bello Catil.
It was well said of Cato in Sallust; Vigilando, agendo, consulendo prospere
omnia cedunt, ubi socordiae te atque ignaviae tradideris, nequicquam Deos
implores, irati infestique sunt. (...). Plut. Apopth. Lac.
We are bid to pray even for our daily bread, yet we may starve if we do not
work for it; and in S. Paul's judgment deserve to do so.

Hence we are bound to thank God for all those things, for the want of which we
must thank our selves, and condemn our own sloth.

Hence although we should cast our care on God, and rely on his providence,
being solicitous for nothing; yet we must not so trust him, as to tempt him, by
neglecting the means, which he does offer, of relieving our selves; to be
presumptuously slothful, being no less blameable, than to be distrustfully
careful.

Hence God in all such cases, when we do need any good thing, is said to be our
helper and succourer to the obtaining it; which does imply that we must
cooperate with him; and join our forces to those, which He does afford; so
that as we can do nothing without him, so he will do nothing without us; yea
so that sometime we are said also to help God; Curse ye Meroz, curse ye
bitterly the inhabitants thereof, Judge. 5. 13.
because they came not to the help of the Lord; to the help of the Lord against
the mighty. If ever God does perform all, Psalm. 72. 12. 22. 11.
without humane labor conspiring, it is only in behalf of those, 2 Cor. 12.
10.
who are ready to do their best, 2 Chronicles. 14. 11.
but unable to do any thing, being overpowered by the insuperable difficulty
of things: 1 Samuel 14. 6.
But He never does act miracles, or control nature; he never does stretch
forth his arm, or interpose special power in favor of wilful and affected
sluggards.

In fine, it is very plain both in common experience, declaring the course of
providence; and in Holy Scripture, expressing God's intention, that Almighty
God does hold forth all good things as the prizes and recompenses of our
vigilant care, and painful endeavor; as by surveying particulars we may
clearly discern.

Nothing is more grateful to men, than prosperous success in their
undertakings, (...). Antiph.
whereby they attain their ends, satisfy their desires, save their pains,
Quodcunque imperavit sibi animus, obtinuit, etc. Sen. de Ir. 2. 12.
and come off with credit; this commonly is the effect of Industry, (which
commands fortune, to which all things submit and serve,) and scarce ever is
found without it; An industrious person, who as such is not apt to attempt
things impossible or unpracticable, can hardly fail of compassing his designs,
because he will apply all means requisite, and bend all his forces thereto;
striving to break through all difficulties, and to subdue all oppositions
thwarting his purposes: but nothing of worth or weight, can be achieved with
half a mind, with a faint heart, with a lame endeavor; Any enterprise
undertaken without resolution, managed without care, prosecuted without vigor,
will easily be dashed and prove abortive, ending in disappointment, damage,
disgrace and dissatisfaction; so the Wiseman does assure us; Prove. 13. 4. 21.
25.
The soul (says he) of the sluggard desires and has nothing, but the soul of
the diligent shall be made fat; the one pineth away with ineffectual and
fruitless desires; the other thriveth upon satisfaction in prosperous success.

Plentiful accommodations for our sustenance and convenience all men will
agree to be very desirable; Prove. 15. 30.
and these are indeed the blessings of him, Psalm. 65. 9, 11.
who visits the earth and enricheth it; Genesis 21. 28.
who crowns the year with his goodness; and whose clouds drop fatness; but
they are so dispensed by Heaven, that industry must concur therewith in
deriving them to us, and sloth will debar us of them; Prove. 21. 11.
for He (says the Holy Oracle) that tilleth his land, Prove 21. 5. ( deest in
LXX.)
shall be satisfied with bread; and the thoughts of the diligent alone tend to
plenteousness; Prove. 20. 4.
Prove. 19. 15.
but The sluggard shall beg in harvest, and have nothing; and The idle soul
shall suffer hunger.

Wealth is that, which generally men of all things are wont to affect and covet
with most ardent desire, as the great storehouse of their needs and
conveniences; the sure bulwark of their state and dignity; the universal
instrument of compassing their designs, and pleasures; And most evident it is,
that in the natural course of things industry is the way to acquire it, to
secure it, to improve and enlarge it; the which course pursued innocently and
modestly, God will be so far from obstructing, that he will further, and bless
it; for that indeed it would be a flaw in providence, if honest industry, using
the means it affords should fail of procuring a competency; which joined with
a pious contentedness in St. Paul's computation is great wealth. 1 Timothy 6. 6.
Prove. 15. 16.
Wherefore although Solomon tells us, Prove. 10. 22. 22. 4.
2 Chronicles. 29. 1^.
Eccles. 5. 19.
that the blessing of the Lord is that which makes rich; yet does he not
forget or contradict himself, when he also does affirm, that The hand of the
diligent makes rich; Prove. 10. 4. 13. 11.
and that He who gathers by labor shall increase; Eccles. 6. 1, 2. St. Paul
exhorts to work with our hands, (...).
because God blesses the industrious, and by his own hand, as the most proper
instrument, makes him rich; 1 Thessalonians. 4. 12.
when the Preacher said, Prove. 23. 21.
There is a man, Prove. 18. 9.
to whom God has given riches and wealth, he knew well enough what man it was,
to whom God gives them, and that sluggards were not fit objects of that
liberality; for he had observed it to be their doom to be poor and beggarly,
their nature to waste and imbezil an estate; He could assure us, that
drowsiness shall cloth a man with rags; He could propound it as a certain
observation, that He who is slothful in his work, is brother to a great
waster; or that want of industry in our business will no less impair our
estate, than prodigality it self; He could more than once warn the slothful,
Prove. 10. 4.
that if he did sleep on, or persist in his sluggish way, indigency would
surprise and seize on him with an insupportable violence; So (says he) shall
thy poverty come as one that travelleth, Prove. 6. 11. 24. 32.
and thy want as an armed man.

Another darling of humane affection (and a jewel indeed of considerable worth
and use in our life) is honor, or reputation among men: this also plainly,
after the common reason and course of things, is purchased and preserved by
industry; For he that aspireth to worthy things, and assayeth laudable designs,
pursuing them steadily with serious application of heart, and resolute
activity, will rarely fail of good success, and consequently will not miss
honor, which ever does crown victory; And if he should hap to fail in his
design, yet he will not lose his credit; for having meant well, and done his
best, all will be ready to excuse, many to commend him; The very qualities
which industry does exercise, and the effects which it does produce, do beget
honor; as being ornaments of our person and state. God himself (from whom
honor comes, 1 Chronicles. 29. 11.
and whose special prerogative it is to bestow it, Dan. 5. 18.
he, Eccles. 5. 19.
as King of the World, being the fountain of honor) will be concerned to
dignifie an industrious management of his gifts with that natural and proper
recompense thereof; conducting him, who fairly treads in the path of honor,
that he shall safely arrive unto it. It is therefore a matter of easy
observation which the wise Prince does prompt us to mark; See thou a man
diligent in his business, Prove. 22. 29.
he shall stand before kings, he shall not stand before mean men; that is,
diligence, as it is the fairest, so it is the surest way to the best
preferment; as it qualifieth a man for employment, and renders him useful to
the World, so it will procure worthy employment for him, and attract the World
to him; as the same great Author again does assert; The hand, Prove. 12. 24.
says he, of the diligent shall bear rule; Yea, so honorable a thing is
Industry it self; that an exercise thereof in the meanest rank is productive of
esteem, Prove. 27. 18. (...).
as the Wiseman again does observe and tell us; He that waits on his master,
(that is, with diligence attends on the business committed to him) shall be
honored.

No industrious man is contemptible: for he is ever looked upon as being in a
way of thriving, of working himself out from any straits, of advancing himself
into a better condition. But without industry we cannot expect any thing, but
disrespect, shame and reproach, which are the certain portion of the slothful;
he not having the heart to enterprise, or the resolution and patience to
atchieve any thing, deserving regard, or apt to procure it; he wanting all the
ornaments, and good fruits that grow from industry; he being only fit for a
sordid, and servile condition; whence the slothful (says Solomon) shall be
under tribute; Prove. 12. 24. (...). Prove. 10. 5.
and, He that sleeps in harvest, is a son that causes shame; He causes it
to his relations by his beggarly accoustrements, he causes it much more to
himself, by his despicable faultiness, and by the disgraceful consequences of
it.

Another yet more precious good, far surpassing all external advantages of our
state; the which in the judgment of him who (together with it having a full
possession of all secular prosperity, wealth, dignity and power) was best able
to prize it, Prove. 8. 11. 3. 14, 15. 4. 7. Job 28. 18.
is better than rubies, and incomparably does excel all things, that may be
desired, as ennobling, enriching, and imbellishing our better part; Wisdom, I
mean, or a good comprehension, and right judgment about matters of highest
importance to us, is the prize of industry, and not to be gained without it;
Nature conferreth little thereto, fortune contributeth much less; it cannot be
bought at any rate; It cannot (says Job) be gotten for gold, Nec rude quid
prosit video ingenium.
Hor. de Art.
neither shall silver be weighed for the price thereof; It cannot be valued
with the gold of Ophir, Job 28. 15 --
with the precious Onyx, or the Sapphire; It is the offspring of watchful
observation and experience, of serious meditation and study; of careful
reflection on things, marking, comparing and weighing their nature, their worth,
their tendencies and consequences; these are needful to the getting of
wisdom, because truth which it seeks commonly does not lie in the surface,
obvious to a superficial glance, nor only depends on a simple consideration
of few things; but is lodged deep in the bowels of things, and under a knotty
complication of various matters; so that we must dig to come at it, and labor
in unfolding it; Nor is it an easy task to void the prejudices springing from
inclination or temper, from education or custom, from passion and interest,
which cloud the mind, and obstruct the attainment of wisdom.

If we will have it, we must get it as Solomon himself did, that great Master
of it; Eccles. 1. 17. 2. 3.
how was that? I gave, says he, my heart to know wisdom: He, who made it his
option and choice before all things; 1 King. 3. 9. 4. 29.
who so earnestly and so happily did pray for it; Sap. 8. 21. 9. 17.
upon whom it is so expressly said, Eccles. 2. 26.
that God in a special manner, and plentiful measure did bestow it; Jam. 1. 5.
who averreth God to be the sole donour of it, (for, The Lord, says he) gives
wisdom, Prove. 2. 6.
out of his mouth comes knowledge and understanding,) yet even he, did first
give his heart to it, before it was given into his heart: he did not only gape
for it, to receive it by mere infusion; but he worked and studied hard for it:
he was indeed a great student, an inquisitive searcher into nature, a curious
observer of the World, a profound considerer and comparer of things; and by
that industrious course, promoted by divine blessing, he did arrive to that
great stock of so renowned a wisdom.

And the same method it is, which he prescribes to us for getting it;
exhorting us, Prove. 22. 3, 4. 1. 5.
that we incline our ear unto wisdom, and apply our heart to understanding;
that we cry after knowledge, and lift up our voice for understanding; that we
seek her as silver, and search for her, as for hid treasures; in following
which course he does assure us of good success; for then (says he) shall thou
understand the fear of the Lord, Prove. 2. 5.
and find the knowledge of God, which is the head or chief part of wisdom; And
Blessed (says he again, in the person and place of wisdom it self) is the
man, Prove. 8. 34 --
that hears me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors;
for he that finds me finds life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord; It is
the way, he supposes of finding wisdom, to watch assiduously, to wait
diligently upon the means of attaining her; and how infallible the acquist of
her i^ thereby, she does again by his mouth thus acquaint us; Prove. 8. 17.
I love them tha^ love me, and those that seek me ear^^ shall find me; Sap. 6.
12, 13, 14.
and She (says hi^ imitatour) is easily seen of them tha^ love her, and found
of such as see^ her; whosoever seeks her early, shall have no great travel, for
he shall fin^ her sitting at his doors.

This indeed is the only way idleness is not capable of so rich and noble a
purchase; a slothful person may be conceited (yea needs must be so) but he can
never be wise* A sluggard (says Solomon) is wiser in his own conceit, Prove.
26. 16.
than seven men that can render a reason; this conceit o^ wisdom is a natural
issue of his ignorance; and it is indeed no small part of his folly, that he
does not perceive it; being no less stupid in reflection on his own mind, than
in considering other matters; Being always in a slumber, he will often fall
into such pleasant dreams; and no wonder that he should presume upon abundance
of knowledge who not listening to take any pains in the search or discussion of
things, does snatch the first appearances, does embrace every suggestion of his
fancy, every conceit gratifying his humor, for truth.

What should I speak of learning, or the knowledge of various things,
transcending vulgar apprehension? who knows not that we cannot otherwise
reach any part of that than by assiduous study and contemplation? who does not
find that all the power in the World is not able to command, nor all the wealth
of the Indies to purchase one notion? who can be ignorant, that no wit alone,
or strength of parts can suffice, without great industry to frame any science,
to learn any one tongue, to know the history of nature, Qui cupit optatam cursu
contingere metam,
Multa tulit, fecitque puer, sudavit and alsit.
Hor. de Art.
or of providence? It is certainly by Horace's method, Multa tulit, fecitque
puer, -- by much exercise and endurance of pains, that any one can arrive to
the mark of being learned or skillful in any sort of knowledge.

But farther yet, Virtue, the noblest endowment, (...). Chrysostom. in Joh. Or. 36.
and richest possession whereof man is capable; the glory of our nature, the
beauty of our soul, the goodliest ornament, and the firmest support of our
life; that also is the fruit and blessing of industry; that of all things most
indispensably does need and require it. (...). Syn. de Provid. 2.
It does not grow in us by nature, nor befall us by fortune; for nature is so
far from producing it, that it yields mighty obstacles and resistences to its
birth, there being in the best dispositions much averseness from good, and
great proneness to evil; Fortune does not further its acquists, but casts in
rubs and hindrances thereto, every condition presenting its allurements, or
its affrightments from it; all things within us, and about us conspire to
render its production, and its practice laborious.

It is ('it is true) a gift of Heaven, and cannot be obtained without a special
influence of Divine grace, but it is given as children are (of whom it is said,
Psalm. 127. 3.
Lo children are an heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb is his
reward) not without sore travel and labor of the mother, not without grievous
difficulty and pangs in the birth: In our conversion to embrace virtue God does
guide us; but to what? to sit still? no, to walk, to run in his ways; Grace
does move us, but whereto? to do nothing? no, but to stir, Romans 8. 26. (...).
and act vigorously; The holy Spirit does help our infirmities; but how could
it help them, if we did not conjoin our best (though weak) endeavors with its
operations? to what does it (...), Heb. 12. 4.
or co-help us, Romans 2. 10.
but to strive against sin, to work righteousness, Act. 10. 35.
to perform duty with earnest intention of mind, (...), etc. Chrysostom. Tom. 5. Or.
28.
and laborious activity? God (says S. Chrysostom) has parted virtue with us,
and neither has left all to be in us, lest we should be elated to pride, nor
himself has taken all, lest we should decline to sloth (...). Bas. Constable. Mon.
cap. 15.
.

Indeed the very nature and essence of virtue does consist in the most
difficult and painful efforts of soul; in the extirpating rooted prejudices
and notions from our understanding; in bending a stiff will, and rectifying
crooked inclinations; in overruling a rebellious temper; in curbing eager and
importunate appetites; in taming wild passions; in withstanding violent
temptations; in surmounting many difficulties, and sustaining many troubles; in
struggling with various unruly lusts within, and encountering many stout enemies
abroad, which assault our reason, and war against our soul: In such exercises
its very being lies; its birth, its growth, its subsistence depends on them;
so that from any discontinuance or remission of them it would soon decay,
languish away, and perish.

What attention, what circumspection, and vigilance of mind, what intention of
spirit, what force of resolution, what command and care over our selves does it
require, to keep our hearts from vain thoughts, and evil desires; to guard our
tongue from wanton, unjust, uncharitable discourse; to order our steps
uprightly and steadily in all the paths of duty? (...); Chrysostom. in Joh. Or. 36.
and what (as St. Chrysostom asks) of all things belonging to virtue is not
laborious? it is no small task to know it, wherein it consists, and what it
demands of us; it is a far more painful thing to conform our practice unto
its rules and dictates.

If traveling in a rough way; (...)
(...),
(...) --
Hes. (...).
if climbing up a steep hill; if combating stern foes, and fighting sharp
battles; if crossing the grain of our nature and desires; if continually
holding a strict rein over all our parts and powers, be things of labor and
trouble, then greatly such is the practice of virtue.

Indeed each virtue has its peculiar difficulty, needing much labor to master
it: 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3.
Faith is called (...), 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11.
the work of faith, and it is no such easy work, Joh. 6. 29.
as may be imagined, to bring our hearts unto a thorough persuasion about
truths crossing our sensual conceits, and controlling our peevish humors; unto
a perfect submission of our understanding, and resignation of our will to
whatever God teaches or prescribes; to a firm resolution of adhering to that
profession, which exacteth of us so much pains, and exposes us to so many
troubles.

Charity is also a laborious exercise of many good works, and he that will
practice it must in diverse ways labor hardly; He must labor in voiding from
his soul many dispositions deeply radicated therein by nature, opinion and
custom (envy, frowardness, stubbornness, perverse and vain selfishness, from
whence wrath, revenge, spite and malice do spring forth;) Gal. 6. 10.
He must labor in effectual performance of all good offices, and in catching
all occasions of doing good; He must exert that (...), 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3.
that labor of love, Heb. 6. 10.
whereof St. Paul does speak; He must (as that holy Apostle directs, Ephesians. 4.
28.
not only in precept, Act. 20. 35.
but by his own practice) work with his own hands, that he may supply the wants
of his neighbor.

Hope it self (which one would think, (...).
when grounded well, Heb. 10. 23.
should be a no less easy, Heb. 6. 19.
than pleasant duty) does need much labor to preserve it safe, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3.
straight and stable, Heb. 10. 36.
among the many waves and billows of temptation assaying to shake and subvert
it; Heb. 6. 11.
whence a patience of hope is recommended to us; (...).
and we so often are exhorted to hold it fast, Heb. 3. 6, 14.
to keep it sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10.
firm and unshaken to the end.

Temperance also surely demands no small pains; (...). Plat. de Rep. 2.
it being no slight business to check our greedy appetites, to shun the
enticements of pleasure, to escape the snares of company and example, to
support the ill will and reproaches of those zelots and bigots for vice; who
cannot tolerate any nonconformity to their extravagancies; but (as St. Peter
does express it) think it strange, ^ Pet. 4. 4.
if others do not run with them to the same excess of riot, speaking ill of
them for it.

What should I speak of meekness, of patience, of humility, of contentedness?
is it not manifest, how laborious those virtues are, and what pains are
necessary in the obtaining, in the exercise of them? what pains, I say, they
require, in the voidance of fond conceits, in the suppression of froward
humors, in the quelling fierce passions, in the brooking grievous crosses and
adversities, in the bearing heinous injuries and affronts?

Thus does all virtue require much industry, and it therefore necessarily must
it self be a great virtue, which is the mother, the nurse, the guardian of all
virtues; yea which indeed is an ingredient and constitutive part of every
virtue; for if virtue were easily obtainable or practicable without a good
measure of pains, how could it be virtue? what excellency could it have, what
praise could it claim, what reward could it expect? God has indeed made the
best things not easily obtainable, has set them high out of our reach, to
exercise our industry in getting them, that we might raise up our selves to
them, that being obtained they may the more deserve our esteem, and his reward.

Lastly, The Sovereign good, the last scope of our actions, the top and sum of
our desires, Happiness it self, or eternal life in perfect rest, joy and glory;
although it be the supreme gift of God, and special boon of divine grace
((...), Romans 6. 23.
But, says St. Paul, the gift of God^s grace is eternal life) Yet it also by
God himself is declared to be the result and reward of industry; Ephesians. 2. 8.
for we are commanded to work out our salvation with fear and trembling; Phil.
2. 12.
and to give diligence in making our calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10.
by virtuous practice; Romans 2. 6, 7, 10. 6. 22.
and God (says St. Paul) will render to every man according to his works,
Apoc. 22.
to them who by patient continuance in well doing seek glory, and honor, and
immortality, eternal life; and, in the close of God's Book it is proclaimed, as
a truth of greatest moment, and special point of God's will, Prove. 22. 14.
Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the
tree life. It is plainly industry, Heb. 12. 22.
which climbeth the Holy Mount; it is industry, which takes the Kingdom of
Heaven by force; Matt. 11. 12.
it is industry, 1 Cor. 9. 24.
which so runs, Jac. 1. 12.
as to obtain the prize; Matt. 24. 42. 25. 13.
which so fights as to receive the crown; Luc. 12. 37.
which so watches as to secure our everlasting interest to us. Apoc. 3. 3.


Thus do the choicest good things, of which we are capable, spring from
industry, or depend upon it; and no considerable good can be attained without
it; thus all the gifts of God are by it conveyed to us, or are rendered in
effect beneficial to us; for the gifts of nature are but capacities, which it
improveth; the gifts of fortune or providence are but instruments, which it
employeth to our use; the gifts of grace are the supports and succors of it;
and the very gift of glory is its fruit and recompense.

There are farther several other material considerations, and weighty motives
to the practice of this duty; which meditation has suggested to me; but these,
in regard to your patience, must suffice at present; the other (together with
an application proper to our condition and calling) being reserved to another
occasion.

OF Industry in general.
ECCLES. IX. 10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might.
INdustry, which the divine Preacher in this Text recommendeth to us, is a
virtue of a very diffusive nature and influence; stretching it self through all
our affairs, and twisting it self with every concern we have; so that no
business can be well managed, no design accomplished, no good obtained without
it: it therefore behooves us to conceive a high opinion of it, and to inure our
souls to the practice of it, upon all occasions: in furtherance of which
purposes I formerly, not long since, did propound several motives and
inducements; And now proceeding on shall represent diverse other considerations
serviceable to the same end.

1. We may consider, that Industry is productive of ease it self, and
preventive of trouble: It was no less solidly, than acutely and smartly advised
by the Philosopher Crates, (...). Crates, Ep. 4.
Whether (said he) labor be to be chosen, labor; or whether it be to be
eschewed, labor, that thou may not labor; for by not laboring, labor is
not escaped, but is rather pursued; and St. Chrysostom does upon the same
consideration urge Industry, (...). Chrysostom. in Joh. Orat. 36.
because Sloth (says he) is wont to spoil us, and to yield us much pain; No
man can cozen nature, escaping the labor to which he was born; but rather
attempting it will delude himself, then finding most, when he shunneth all
labor.

Sloth indeed does affect ease and quiet; but by affecting them does lose them;
It hates labor and trouble, but by hating them, does incur them; It is a
self-destroying vice, not suffering those, who cherish it, to be idle, but
creating much work, and multiplying pains unto them; engaging them into diverse
necessities and straits, which they cannot support with ease, and out of which
without extreme trouble they cannot extricate themselves: of this the Preacher
does afford us a plain instance; Eccles 10. 18.
By much slothfulness (says he) the building decays, and through idleness of
the hands the house droppeth through; A little care taken at first about
repairing the house, would have saved its decay and ruin; and consequently the
vast charge and trouble, becoming needful to re-edify it: and the like does
happen in most other cases and occurrences of life; idleness commonly does let
slip opportunities and advantages, which cannot with ease be retrieved; it
lets things fall into a bad case, out of which they can hardly be recovered.

The certain consequences of it (disgrace, penury, want of experience,
disobliging and losing friends, with all the like mischiefs) cannot be
supported without much disquiet; and they disable a man from redressing the
inconveniences into which he is plunged.

But Industry by a little voluntary labor taken in due place and season does
save much necessary labor afterward, and by moderate care does prevent
intolerable distress; And the fruits of it (wealth reputation, skill and
dexterity in affairs, friendships, all advantages of fortune) do enable a man
to pass his life with great ease, comfort and delight.

2. Industry does beget ease by procuring good habits, and facility of acting
things expedient for us to do. By taking pains to day we shall need less pains
the morrow; and by continuing the exercise, within a while we shall need no
pains at all, but perform the most difficult tasks of duty, or of benefit to us
with perfect ease, yea commonly with great pleasure. What sluggish people
account hard and irksome (as to rise early, to hold close to study, or
business, to bear some hardship) will be natural and sweet; as proceeding from
another nature, raised in us by use.

Industry does breed assurance and courage, needful for the undertaking and
prosecution of all necessary business, or for the performance of all duties
incumbent on us.

No man can quite decline business, or disengage himself from duty, without
infinite damage and mischief accruing to himself; but these an industrious man
(confiding in this efficacious quality) will set upon with alacrity, and
dispatch with facility; his diligence voiding obstacles, and smoothing the way
to him; whenas idleness finding some difficulties, and fansying more, soon
disheartneth, and causes a man to desist from action, rather choosing to crouch
under the burden, then by endeavor to carry it through to discharge himself
thereof: whence as to an industrious man things seeming difficult will prove
easy, so to a slothful person the easiest things will appear impossible;
according to Solomon's observation, The way (says he) of (...) Prove. 15. 19.
(...).
a slothful man is an hedge of thorns, but the way of the upright is made
plain; whereas a slothful man, being apt to neglect his obligations, is
opposed to an upright man, who has a conscionable regard to them, and is
willing to take pains in the discharge of them; so it is declared, that to the
one the way is rough and thorny, to the other beaten and expedite.

And again, Prove. 22. 13. 26. 13. (...).
The slothful man (says he) does say, there is a Lion without, I shall be
slain in the streets; he is very apt to conceit, or to pretend imaginary
difficulties and hazards, and thence to be deterred from going about his
business, or doing his duty: This consideration St. Chrysostom does propose,
exciting to an earnest pursuit of virtue; (...). Chrysostom. Tom. 6. Or. 15. p. 144.
(...). Plut. de Educ.
because, There is (says he) nothing so easy, which our great sloth does not
represent very grievous and burdensome; nothing so painful and difficult,
which diligence and willingness do not show to be very easy.

3. We may consider, that industry will sweeten all our enjoyments, and season
them with a grateful relish; for as no man can well enjoy himself, or find
sound content in any thing, while business or duty lie unfinished on his hand;
so when he has done his best toward the dispatch of his work, he will then
comfortably take his ease, and enjoy his pleasure; then his food does taste
savourily, then his divertisements and recreations have a lively gustfulness,
then his sleep is very sound and pleasant; according to that of the Preacher,
Eccles 5. 12. (...).
The sleep of a laboring man is sweet.

4. Especially those accommodations prove most delightful, Cui sit conditio
dulcis sine pulvere palmae?
Hor. Ep l. 1.
which our industry has procured to us; we looking on them with a special
tenderness of affection, as on the children of our endeavor; we being sensible
at what costs of care and pain we did purchase them. I^ a man gets wealth by
fraud or violence, if he rises to preferment by flattery, detraction, or any
bad arts, he can never taste any good savor, or find sound comfort in them;
And from what comes merely by chance, as there is no commendation due, so much
satisfaction will not arise; It Is the Wiseman's observation, The slothful man
rosteth not that which he took in hunting, and therefore it cannot be very
grateful to him; but (adds he) the substance of a diligent man is precious;
Prove. 12. 27.
that is, what a man compasses by honest industry, that he is apt highly to
prize; he triumphs in it, 1 Cor. 9. 15.
and (in St. Paul's sense innocently) boasts of it; he feels a solid
pleasure, and a pure complacency therein; the manner of getting it does more
please him, than the thing it self; as true Hunters do love the sport more than
the quarry, and generous Warriors more rejoice in the victory, (...). Chrysostom.
in Joh. Orat. 36.
than in the spoil; for our soul (as St. Chrysostom discourses) is more
affected with those things, for which it has labored; for which reason
(adds he) God has mixed labors with virtue it self, that he might endear it
to us. Yea farther,

5. The very exercise of industry immediately in it self is delightful, and
has an innate satisfaction, which tempereth all annoyances, and even
ingratiateth the pains going with it.

The very settlement of our mind on fit objects, or its acquiescence in
determinate action, conducing to a good end, whereby we are freed of doubt,
distraction, and fastidious listlesness, does minister content.

The reflection upon our having embraced a wise choice, our proceeding in a fair
way, our being in chase of a good purpose, does breed complacence.

To consider that we are spending our time accomptably, and improving our
talents to good advantage (to the service of God, the benefit of our neighbor,
the bettering of our own state) is very chearing and comfortable.

And whereas In all labor (as the Wiseman tells us) there is profit, Prove.
14. 23.
the foresight of that profit affords pleasure, the foretasting the good
fruits of our industry is very delicious.

Hope indeed does ever wait on industry; and what is more delightful than
hope? this is the incentive, the support, the condiment of all honest labor;
in virtue whereof the Husbandman toileth, the Merchant trudgeth, 1 Cor. 9. 10
-- ipsa operis difficultate laetus spem segetis de labor metitur. Apud Aug.
Ep. 142.
the Scholar ploddeth, the Soldier dares with alacrity and courage, not
resenting any pains, not regarding any hazards, which attend their
undertakings: Romans 12. 12. 5. 2.
this the holy Apostles tell us did enable them with joy to sustain all their
painful work, Heb. 3. 6.
and hazardous warfare; 1 Timothy 4. 10. (Col. 1. 5. 2 Cor. 3. 12. 1 John 3. 3. 1
Pet. 1. 3. Tit. 2. 13.)
injoining us also as to work with fear; so to rejoice in hope.

In fine, Industry does free us from great displeasure, by redeeming us from
the molestations of idleness, Otio qui nescit uti plus habet negotii, etc.
which is the most tedious and irksome thing in the World; racking our soul
with anxious suspense, Otioso in otio animus nescit quid quidem velit, etc.
Ennius apud Agell. 19. 10.
and perplexing distraction; starving it for want of satisfactory
entertainment, or causing it to feed on its own heart by doleful
considerations; infesting it with crowds of frivolous, melancholic,
troublesome, stinging thoughts; galling it with a sense of our squandring away
precious time, of our slipping fair opportunities, of our not using the
abilities and advantages granted us, to any profit or fruit: whence St.
Chrysostom says very truly, (...); Chrysostom. in Act. Or. 35.
that there is nothing more unpleasant, more painful, more miserable, than a
man that has nothing to do; Is not this (says he) worse than ten thousand
chains to hang in suspense, and be continually gaping, looking on those, who
are present? Indeed the strictest imprisonment is far more tolerable, than
being under restraint by a lazy humor from profitable employment; this
enchaineth a man, hand and foot, with more than iron fetters; Otium est vivi
hominis sepultura.
this is beyond any imprisonment, it is the very entombment of a man, quite in
effect sequestring him from the World, or debarring him from any valuable
concerns therein. And if liberty be (...), a power of doing what one likes
best, then is he, who by his sloth is disabled from doing any thing, wherein he
can find any reasonable satisfaction, the veriest slave that can be; from which
slavery industry freeing us, and disposing us to perform cheerfully whatever is
convenient, thereby does us a great pleasure. Farther.

6. Let us consider, that industry does afford a lasting comfort, deposited in
the memory and conscience of him, that practices it. It will ever-upon his
reviewing the passages of his life, be sweet to him to behold in them
testimonies and monuments of his diligence; it will please him to consider,
that he has lived to purpose, having done somewhat considerable; that he has
made an advantageous use of his time; that he has well husbanded the talents
committed to him; that he has accomplished (in some measure) the intents of
God's bounty, and made some return for his excellent gifts. What comfort indeed
can any man have, yea how sore remorse must he feel in reflecting upon a life
spent in unfruitful and unprofitable idleness? How can he otherwise than
bewail his folly and baseness in having lived (or rather having only been) in
vain; Diu fuit, non diu vixit.
as the shadow and appearance of a man; in having lavished his days, in having
buried his talents, in having imbezilled his faculties of nature, and his
advantages from providence; in having defeated the good will of God, and
endeavored no requital to the munificent goodness of his Maker, of his
Preserver, his benign Lord and Master, Matt. 25. 26.
his gracious Savior and Redeemer? How without confusion, can he in his mind
revolve, that he has no-wise benefited the World, and profited his neighbor,
or obliged his friends, or rendered to his Country, (to the society, or
community of which he is a member) amends for all the safety and quiet, the
support, the convenience, and the pleasure he has enjoyed under its
protection, and in its bosom? that he has not born a competent share in the
common burdens, or paid a due contribution of his care and labor to the
public welfare? how can such a man look inward upon himself with a favorable
eye, or pardon himself for so loathsome defaults?

7. Let us consider, that industry does argue a generous and ingenuous
complexion of soul.

It implies a mind not content with mean and vulgar things (such as nature
deals to all, or fortune scatters about) but aspiring to things of high
worth, and pursuing them in a brave way, with adventurous courage, by its own
forces, through difficulties and obstacles.

It signifies in a man a heart, not enduring to owe the sustenance or
convenience of his life to the labor or the liberality of others; to pilfer a
livelihood from the World; to reap the benefit of other men's care and toil,
without rendering a full compensation, or out-doing his private obligations by
considerable service and beneficence to the public.

A noble heart will disdain to subsist like a drone upon the honey gathered by
others labor; like a vermin to filtch its food out of the public granary; or
like a shark to prey on the lesser fry; but will, one way or other earn his
subsistence; for he that does not earn, can hardly own his bread, as St. Paul
implies, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 12.
when he says, Them that are such we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus
Christ, (...).
that with quietness they work, and eat their own bread.

Of this generous ingenuity we have a notable instance in that great Apostle
himself; 1 Cor. 9. 15.
which he does often represent as a pattern to us, professing much complacence
therein; He with all right and reason might have challenged a comfortable
subsistence from his Disciples, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 9.
in recompense for the incomparable benefits he did confer on them, 1 Cor. 9.
11.
and of the excessive pains he did endure for their good; 1 Thessalonians. 2. 6.
this he knew well, but yet did rather choose to support himself by his own
labor, than any-wise to seem burdensome or troublesome to them; These hands
(said he) have ministered to my necessities, Act. 20. 34, 35. 18. 3.
and to them that are with me; 1 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
I have showed you all things, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 8.
that so laboring ye ought to support the weak, 1 Cor. 4. 12.
and to remember the words of our Lord Jesus, 2 Cor. 11. 9.
how he said, 2 Cor. 11. 23.
It is more blessed to give than to receive. This was the practice of him, who
was in labors most abundant; and such is the genius of every man, who upon
principles of conscience, reason and honor, is industrious. Of him it may be
said, as of Solomon's good housewife, She seeks wool and flax, Prove. 31. 13.
14, 27.
and works willingly with her hands; she is like the merchants ship, she
brings her food from afar; she looks well to her household, and eats not
the bread of idleness.

Sloth is a base quality, the argument of a mind wretchedly degenerate and
mean; which is content to grovel in a despicable state; which aims at no
worthy thing, nor pursues any thing in a laudable way; which disposes a man
to live gratis (precariously) and ingratefully on the public stock; as an
insignificant cipher among men, as a burden of the Earth, as a wen^ of any
Society; sucking aliment from it, but yielding no benefit or ornament thereto.

8. Industry is a fence to innocence and virtue; a bar to all kinds of sin and
vice; guarding the avenues of our heart, keeping off the occasions and
temptations to vicious practice. When a man is engaged in honest employment,
and seriously intent thereon, his mind is prepossessed and filled, so that
there is no room or vacancy for ill thoughts, or base designs to creep in; his
senses do not lie open to ensnaring objects; he wants leisure, and opportunity
of granting audience to the solicitations of sinful pleasure; Semper te
diabolus inveniat occupatum.
and is apt to answer them with a non vacat; Bern. form. hon. v. cap. 7.
the Devil can hardly find advantage of tempting him, at least many Devils
cannot get access to him; according to that observation in Cassian, Operans
monachus uno daemone pulsatur, otiosus vero innumeris Spiritibus devastatur.
Cass de Instit. 10. 23.
A working Monk is assaulted by one Devil, but an idle one is spoiled by
numberless bad Spirits. The case of men ordinarily is like to that of Aegysthus
-- ne nil ageretur, Ovid. de Remed.
amavit, rather than do nothing, he was ready to do ill; he not having
business to employ his thoughts, wanton desires did insinuate themselves into
his heart, and transported him to that disastrous wickedness, which supplied
matter to so many tragedies: And the like instance the Sacred History
suggesteth in King David, 2 Samuel 11. 2.
who walking ('it is said) on the roof of his house, his mind then roving, and
being untacked from honest cares, that temptation seized on him, whereby he was
plunged into that woeful misdemeanour, which did create to him so much sorrow,
did make such a spot in his life, and leave such a blur on his memory; whence
yet we may draw some benefit, taking it as a profitable document and warning,
how idleness does expose the best men to danger.

Idleness is indeed the nursery of sins, which as naturally grow up therein as
weeds in a neglected field, or insects in a standing puddle; Idleness teaches
much evil. Ecclus 33. 27.
It is the general trap, whereby every tempter assayeth to catch our soul; for
the mind being loose from care, Satan is ready to step in with his suggestions,
the World presents its allurements, fleshly desires rise up; proud, froward,
wanton cogitations slip in; ill company does entice, ill example is regarded,
every temptation does object and impress it self with great advantage and
force; men in such a case being apt to close and comply with temptations even
to divert their mind; -- si non Intendes animum studiis, and rebus honestis,
Invidia vel amore vigil torquebere --
Hor. Ep. 1. 2.
and entertain themselves, to cure their listlesness, to pass their time;
committing sin, for want of better occupation. Hence in places, where there is
least work, the worst sins do most prevail; and idleness therefore was by the
Prophet reckoned one of the three great sins of Sodom, parents of the rest,
Ezekiel. 16. 49.
Behold (says Ezekiel) this was the iniquity of thy Sister Sodom; pride,
fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her: Hence it seldom does
happen in any way of life, that a sluggard and a rakel do not go together, or
that he who is idle is not also dissolute.

9. Particularly industry does prevent the sins of vain curiosity,
pragmaticalness, troublesome impertinency, and the like pests of common life;
into which persons not diligently following their own business, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 11.
will assuredly fall. We hear (says St. Paul to the Thessalonians) that there
are some, (...), Working nothing, but over-working.
who walk among you disorderly, working not at all, but are busybodies; it is
no wonder, if they did not work at all, that they should walk disorderly; or
that quite neglecting their own concerns, they should (...), over-work, or be
too busy in matters not belonging to them, intruding themselves into the
affairs of their neighbors; for there is a natural connection between these
things; since every man must be thinking, must be doing, must be saying
somewhat, to spend his leisure, to uphold conversation, to please himself and
gratify others, to appear somebody among his companions; to avoid the shame
of being quite out of employment; wherefore not having the heart to mind his
own affairs, he will take the boldness to meddle with the concerns of other
men; If he cannot have the substance, he will set up an Idol of business, and
seem very active in his impertinency. In order thereto being curiously
inquisitive, and prying into the discourse, actions and affairs of all men.
This men are apt to do in their own defense; and besides, idleness does put
men into a loose, garish, wanton humor, disposing them without heed or regard
to meddle with any thing, to prattle at any rate. In fine, whoever has no work
at home, will be gadding to seek entertainments abroad, like those gossips of
whom St. Paul says, 1 Timothy 5. 3.
They learn to be idle, wandering about from house to house; and not only idle,
but tatlers also, and busybodies, speaking things, which they ought not: If
indeed we consider all the frivolous and petulant discourse, the impertinent
chattings, the rash censures, the spiteful detractions which are so rife in
the World, and so much poison all conversation, we shall find the main root of
them to be a want of industry in men, or of diligent attendance on their own
matters; which would so much take up their spirit and time, that they would
have little heart or leisure to search into, or comment upon other men's actions
and concerns.

10. Let us consider that industry is needful in every condition and station,
in every calling and way of life, in all relations, for our good behavior, and
right discharge of our duty in them. Without it we cannot in any state act
decently, or usefully, either to the benefit and satisfaction of others, or to
our own advantage and comfort.

Are we rich? then is industry requisite for keeping and securing our wealth,
for managing it wisely, for employing it to its proper uses, and best
advantages; (in the service of God, in beneficence to our neighbor, in
advancing public good) so that we may render a good account to him, who has
entrusted us with the stewardship thereof Industry is very needful to guard us
from the temptations and mischiefs to which wealth does expose us, that it do
not prove a treacherous snare, an unwieldy burden, a destructive poison and
plague to us, throwing us into pride and vanity, into luxury, into stupidity,
into distracting solicitude, into a base worldly and earthly temper of heart,
into a profane oblivion of God, and of our own souls.

Are we in conspicuous rank of dignity, or in honor and repute among men? then
is industry requisite to keep us fast in that state, to hold us from tumbling
from that pinnacle down into extreme disgrace; for then all eyes are upon us,
strictly observing what we do, and ready to pass censure on our actions; so
that great diligence is necessary to approve our selves, and shun obloquy.
Vitrea fama.
Hor.
Nothing is more brittle than honor, every little thing hitting on it, Eccl.
10. 1.
is able to break it, and therefore without exceeding care we cannot preserve
it; Nothing is more variable or fickle than the opinions of men (wherein honor
consists) it is therefore no easy matter to fix, or detain them in the same
place.

Honor cannot live without food, or fuel; it must be nourished by worthy
actions; without a continual supply of them, it will decay, languish, and pine
away: Industry therefore is required to keep it; and no less is necessary to
use it well, in a due subordination to God's honor, and reference to his
service; that instead of an ornament and convenience, it do not prove a
banefull mischief to us; puffing up our minds with vain conceits and
complacencies, inclining us to arrogance and contempt of others, tempting us by
assuming to our selves to rob God of his due glory; to decline which evils
great care is requisite; we must have a steady balast, and we must hold the
rudder warily, when we carry so great sail.

On the other hand, are we poor, and low in the World; or do we lie under
disgrace? then do we much need industry to shun extremities of want and
ignominy; that that we be not swallowed up, and overwhelmed by need or
contempt; to support us under our pressures, to keep up our spirits from
dejection and disconsolateness; to preserve us from impious discontentedness
and impatience: Industry is the only remedy of that condition, enabling us to
get out of it, retrieving a competence of wealth or credit; or disposing us to
bear it handsomely, and with comfort; so as not to become forelorn or abject
wretches.

It is so needful to every condition; and it is so for all vocations; for,

Is a man a Governor, or a Superior in any capacity? then what is he, but a
public servant, doomed to continual labor, hired for the wages of respect and
pomp to wait on his people; in providing for their needs, protecting their
safety, preserving their peace and welfare? where is he but on a stage, whereon
he cannot well act his part, without vigilant attendance to his charge, and
constant activity in performing all the functions thereof? He is engaged in
great obligations and necessities of using extreme diligence; both in regard to
himself, and others. Homer's description of a Prince is a good one; one who
has much people, and many cares committed to him; (...). He must watchfully
look to his own steps, who is to guide others by his authority, and his
example. All his actions require special conduct, not only his own credit and
interest, but the common welfare depending thereon. He must heedfully advise
what to do, he must diligently execute what he resolves on. He has the most
ticklish things that can be (the rights and interests, the opinions and humors
of men) to manage. He has his own affections to curb and guide, that they be
not perverted by any sinister respects, not swayed by any unjust partiality,
not corrupted by flattery or fear. He will find, that to wield power
innocently, to brandish the sword of justice discreetly and worthily, for the
maintenance of right, and encouragement of virtue, for the suppression of
injury, and correction of vice is a matter of no small skill, or slight care.

Industry is indeed a quality most proper for persons of high rank and dignity,
or of great power and authority; who have special opportunities to employ it in
weighty affairs to great advantage; whose undertakings being of vast moment do
need answerable efforts to move and guide them: The industry of a Mechanic, or
a Rustic, acting in a low and narrow sphere can effect no great matter, and
therefore it self need not to be great; but the industry of a Prince, of a
Nobleman, of a Gentleman may have a large and potent influence, so as to render
a Nation, a County, a Town happy, prosperous, glorious, flourishing in peace,
in plenty, in virtue; it therefore for atchieving such purposes need be, and
should be proportionably great; a small power not being able to move a great
weight, nor a weak cause to produce a mighty effect. Wherefore Cicero
recommending Pompey for a public charge, does reckon these to be the
Imperatoriae virtutes, Labor in negotio, fortitudo in periculis, industria in
agendo, celeritas in consiciendo, consilium in providendo, etc. Cic. pro lege
Mauil.
qualities befitting a Prince or General, wherein he did excel, labor in
business, valor in dangers, industry in acting, nimbleness in performance,
counsel in providing. -- And Alexander the Great, reflecting on his friends
degenerating into sloth and luxury, (...). Plut. in Alex. page 1262.
told them, that it was a most slavish thing to luxuriate, and a most royal
thing to labor.

And for those who move in a lower orb of subjection or service, I need not
show how needful industry is for them: who knows not that to be a good
subject, does exact a careful regard to the commands of superiors, and a
painful diligence in observing them? that to make a good servant fidelity and
diligence must concur; whereof the first does suppose the last, it being a part
of honesty in a servant to be diligent; whence (...), O thou wicked and
slothful servant, Matt. 25. 26.
were in the Gospel well coupled; and the first epithet was grounded on the
second, he being therefore wicked, because he had been slothful.

Neither can a man be a true friend, or a good neighbor, or any-wise a good
relative, without industry disposing him to undergo pains, in performing good
offices, whenever need does require, or occasion invite.

In fine, it is palpable, that there is no calling of any sort, from the
scepter to the spade, the management whereof with any good success, any credit,
any satisfaction does not demand much work of the head, or of the hand, or of
both.

If wit or wisdom be the head, if honesty be the heart, industry is the right
hand of every vocation; without which the shrewdest insight, and the best
intention can execute nothing.

A sluggard is qualified for no office, no calling, no station among men; he is
a mere nobody; taking up room, pestering and clogging the World.

11. It also may deserve our consideration, that it is industry, whereto the
public state of the World, and of each Commonweal therein is indebted for its
being, in all conveniences and embellishments belonging to life, advanced above
rude and sordid barbarism; yea whereto mankind does owe all that good learning,
that morality, those improvements of soul, which elevate us beyond brutes.

To industrious study is to be ascribed the invention and perfection of all
those arts, whereby humane life is civilized, and the World cultivated with
numberless accommodations, ornaments and beauties.

All the comely, the stately, the pleasant, and useful works, which we do view
with delight, or enjoy with comfort, industry did contrive them, industry did
frame them.

Industry reared those magnificent Fabrics, and those commodious houses; it
formed those goodly Pictures and Statues; it raised those convenient Causeways,
those Bridges, those Aqueducts; it planted those fine Gardens with various
Flowers and Fruits; it clothed those pleasant Fields with Corn and Grass; it
built those Ships, whereby we plow the Seas, reaping the Commodities of foreign
Regions. It has subjected all Creatures to our Command and Service, enabling
us to subdue the fiercest, to catch the wildest, to render the gentler sort
most tractable, and useful to us. It taught us from the wool of the sheep,
from the hair of the goat, from the labors of the silkworm to weave us
clothes, to keep us warm, to make us fine and gay. It helped us from the inmost
bowels of the Earth to fetch diverse needful tools and utensils.

It collected mankind into Cities, and compacted them into orderly Societies,
and devised wholesome Laws, under shelter whereof we enjoy safety and peace,
wealth and plenty, mutual succor and defense, sweet conversation and
beneficial commerce.

It by meditation did invent all those sciences, Ut varias usus meditando
extunderet arts
Paullatim, etc.
Virg. Georg. I.
whereby our minds are enriched and enabled, our manners are refined and
polished, our curiosity is satisfied, our life is benefited.

What is there, which we admire, or wherein we delight, that pleases our mind,
or gratifieth our sense, for the which we are not beholden to industry?

Does any Country flourish in wealth, in grandeur, in prosperity? it must be
imputed to industry, to the industry of its Governors settling good order, to
the industry of its People following profitable occupations: so did Cato, in
that notable Oration of his in Sallust, Cato apud Sall. in bello Catil.
tell the Roman Senate, that it was not by the force of their Arms, but by the
industry of their Ancestors that Commonwealth did arise to such a pitch of
greatness. When sloth creeps in, then all things corrupt and decay; then ^he
public state does sink into diso^^^r, penury, and a disgraceful condition.

12. Industry is commended to us by all sorts of examples, deserving our regard
and imitation. All nature is a copy thereof, and the whole World a glass,
wherein we may behold this duty represented to us.

We may easily observe every creature about us incessantly working toward the
end for which it was designed, indefatigably exercising the powers, with which
it is endewed; diligently observing the Laws of its creation. Even Beings void
of reason, of sense, of life it self do suggest unto us resemblances of
industry; they being set in continual action toward the effecting reasonable
purposes, conducing to the preservation of their own beings, or to the
furtherance of common good.

The Heavens do roll about with unwearied motion; the Sun and Stars do
perpetually dart their influences; the Earth is ever laboring in the birth and
nourishment of plants; the plants are drawing sap, and sprouting out fruits,
and seeds (to feed us, and propagate themselves;) the rivers are running, the
seas are tossing, the winds are blustering to keep the elements sweet, in which
we live.

Solomon sends us to the ant, and bids us to consider her ways (which
provideth her meat in the summer, Prove. 6. 6.
and gathers her food in the harvest) many such instructours we may find in
nature; the like industrious providence we may observe in every living
creature; we may see this running about, that swimming, another flying in
purveyance of its food and support.

If we look up higher to rational and intelligent natures, still more noble and
apposite paterns do object themselves to us.

Here below every field, every shop, every street, the hall, the exchange, the
court it self (all full of business, and fraught with the fruits of industry)
do mind us how necessary industry is to us.

If we consult History, we shall there find, that the best men have been most
industrious; that all great persons, renowned for heroical goodness (the worthy
Patriarchs, the holy Prophets, the blessed Apostles) were for this most
commendable, that neglecting their private ease, they did undertake difficult
enterprises, they did undergo painful labors for the benefit of mankind; they
did pass their days, like Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 11. 27.
(...), in labors, and toilsome pains for those purposes.

Our great example, the life of our Blessed Lord himself, what was it but one
continual exercise of labor? his mind did ever stand bent in careful
attention, studying to do good; Acts 10.
his body was ever moving in wearisome travel to the same divine intent.

If we yet soar farther in our meditation to the superior regions, we shall
there find the blessed inhabitants of Heaven, the courtiers and ministers of
God, very busy and active; They do vigilantly wait on God's Throne, in
readiness to receive and to dispatch his commands; they are ever on the wing,
and fly about like lightning to do his pleasure. (...). Orph.
They are attentive to our needs, and ever ready to protect, to assist, to
relieve us; especially they are diligent guardians and succourers of good men;
Ps. 103. 21, 22.
officious spirits, Psalm. 34. 8. 91. 11.
sent forth to minister for the heirs of salvation; Heb. 1. 14.
so even the seat of perfect rest is no place of idleness.

Yea God himself, although immoveably and infinitely happy, is yet immensly
careful, and everlastingly busy; He rested once from that great work of
creation, but yet my Father (says our Lord) works still; Genesis 2. 2.
and he never will rest from his works of providence, John 5. 27.
and of grace. Psalm. 121. 3. 127. 1.
His eyes continue watchful over the World, Zech. 4. 10.
and his hands stretched out in upholding it. 2 Chronicles. 16. 9.
He has a singular regard to every creature, O tu bone omnipotens, qui sic
curas unumquemque nostrum tanquam solum cures, and sic omnes tanquam singulos.
Aug. Conf. 4. 11.
supplying the needs of each, and satisfying the desires of all.

And shall we alone be idle, Ps. 145. 15, 16.
while all things are so busy? (Prove. 5. 21. 15. 3. Psalm. 34. 15. Genesis 31. 49.
Jer. 31. 18.)
shall we keep our hands in our bosom, or stretch our selves on our beds of
laziness* while all the World about us is hard at work, in pursuing the designs
o^ its creation? shall we be wanting to our selves, while so many things labor
for our benefit? shall not such a cloud of examples stir us to some industry?
not to comply with so universal a practice, to cross all the World, to disagree
with every creature, is it not very monstrous and extravagant?

I should close all this discourse with that, at which in pitching on this
subject I chiefly did aim, an application exhortatory to our selves urging the
practice of this virtue by considerations peculiar to us as Scholars, and
derived from the nature of our calling; but the doing this, requiring a larger
discourse than the time now will allow, I shall reserve to another occasion;
adding only one consideration more.

13. Lastly, If we consider, we shall find the root and source of all the
inconveniences, the mischiefs, the wants, of which we are so apt to complain,
to be our sloth; and that there is hardly any of them, which commonly we might
not easily prevent or remove by industry: Why is any man a beggar, why
contemptible, why ignorant, why vicious, why miserable? why, but for this one
reason, because he is slothful; because he will not labor to rid himself of
those evils? What could we want, if we would but take the pains to seek it,
either by our industry, or by our devotion? for where the first will not do,
the second cannot fail, to procure any good thing from him, who gives to all
men liberally, Jac. 1. 5.
and has promised to supply the defect of our ability by his free bounty; so
that if we join these two industries (industrious action, and industrious
prayer) there is nothing in the world so good, or so great, of which, if we are
capable, we may not assuredly become Masters: And even for industry it self,
especially in the performance of all our duties toward God, let us
industriously pray; (...).
Even so, The God of peace sanctify us wholly; Jam. 5. 16.
and make us perfect in every good work to do his will working in us that
which is well-pleasing in his sight; (...). Ephesians. 6. 18.
through our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ, Romans 12. 12.
to whom for ever be all glory and praise. Col. 4. 2. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
Amen. Heb. 13. 20.


OF INDUSTRY IN OUR General Calling, AS CHRISTIANS.
ROMANS XII. 11. Not slothful in business. (...).
Solicitudine non pigri.
Vulg.

INdustry is a very eminent virtue, being an ingredient (or the parent) of all
other virtues, of constant use upon all occasions, and having influence upon
all our affairs.

For it is our nature framed; all our powers of soul and body being fitted for
it, tending to it, requiring it for their preservation and perfection.

We were designed for it in our first happy state; and upon our lapse thence
were farther doomed to it, as the sole remedy of our needs and the
inconveniences, to which we became exposed. For

Without it we cannot well sustain or secure our life in the enjoyment of any
comfort or convenience; we must work to earn our food, our clothing, our
shelter; and to supply every indigency of accommodations, which our nature does
crave.

To it God has annexed the best, and most desirable rewards; success to our
undertakings, wealth, honor, wisdom, virtue, salvation* all which as they
flow from God's bounty, and depend on his blessing* so from them they are
usually conveyed to us through our industry, as the ordinary chanel and
instrument of attaining them.

It is requisite to us even for procuring ease, and preventing a necessity of
immoderate labor.

It is in it self sweet and satisfactory; as freeing our mind from distraction,
and wrecking irresolution; as feeding us with good hope, and yielding a
foretaste of its good fruits.

It furnishes us with courage to attempt, and resolution to atchieve things
needful, worthy of us, and profitable to us.

It is attended with a good conscience, and cheerful reflections, of having
well spent our time, and employed our talents to good advantage.

It sweetneth our enjoyments, and seasoneth our seize with a delightful
relish.

It is the guard of innocence, and barreth out temptations to vice, to
wantonness, to vain curiosity and pragmaticalness.

It argues an ingenuous and generous disposition of soul; aspiring to worthy
things, and pursuing them in the fairest way; disdaining to enjoy the common
benefits, or the fruits of other men's labor without deserving them from the
World, and requiting it for them.

It is necessary for every condition and station, for every calling, for every
relation; no man without it being able to deport himself well in any state, to
manage any business, to discharge any sort of duty.

To it the World is indebted for all the culture, which advances it above rude
and sordid barbarism; for whatever in common life is stately, or comely, or
useful, industry has contrived it, industry has composed and framed it.

It is recommended to us by all sort of patterns considerable; for all nature
is continually busy and active in tendency toward its proper designs; Heaven
and Earth do work in uncessant motion; Every living Creature is employed in
progging for its sustenance; The blessed Spirits are always on the wing in
dispatching the commands of God, and ministering succor to us; God himself is
ever watchful, and ever busy in preserving the World, and providing for the
needs of every Creature.

The lives of our Blessed Savior, of all the Patriarchs, the Prophets, the
Apostles, the Saints in this respect have been more exemplary; no virtue being
more conspicuous in their practice than industry in performing the hard duties,
and painful tasks imposed on them for the service of God, and the benefit of
mankind.

Such is the virtue upon which I have formerly discoursed in general and at
large, but shall now more specially consider, according to St. Paul's
prescription, in reference to its most proper matter, business, explaining and
pressing it accordingly.

Be not slothful in business (that is in discharge of it) or to business (that
is to undertake it) this is the rule; the nature and needfulness whereof we
shall declare.

By (...) (business) we may understand any object of our care and endeavors
which does require them, and may deserve them; which by reason of its
difficulty cannot well be accomplished or attained without them; and which is
productive of some fruit or recompense answerable to them; the which has
operoe causam, a need of labor, and operoe pretium, some effect worth our
pains; if it be not such it is not a due matter of virtuous and laudable
industry.

There are many things, about which men with great earnestness employ
themselves, called business, but not deserving that name; there are diverse
spurious kinds of industry, (...). Chrysostom. Tom. 5. Orat. 64.
which may not pretend to commendation, but rather do merit blame; according to
that of Saint Chrysostom, Labor which has no profit, cannot obtain any
praise.

There is a (...), a vain industry and a (...), a naughty industry, both
agreeing with genuine virtuous industry in the act, as implying careful and
painful activity, but discording from it in object and design; and
consequently in worth, and moral esteem.

Aliud agere, to be impertinently busy, doing that which conduces to no good
purpose, is in some respect worse than to do nothing, or to forbear all
action; for it is a positive abuse of our faculties, (...). Plut. de commun.
not. p. 1949.
and trifling with God's gifts; it is a throwing away labor and care, things
valuable in themselves; it is often a running out of the way, which is worse
than standing still; (...). Arist. Eth. 10. 6.
it is a debasing our reason, and declining from our manhood, nothing being more
foolish or childish, (...). Plut. ibid.
than to be solicitous and serious about trifles; Vid. de glor. Ath. p. 621.
for who are more busy and active than children, (...). Cat. Maj. apud Plut.
in Apoph.
who are fuller of thoughts and designs, or more eager in prosecution of them
than they? but all is about ridiculous toys, the shadows of business, suggested
to them by apish curiosity, and imitation. Of such industry we may understand
that of the Preacher, Eccles. 10. 15.
The labor of the foolish wearieth every one of them; for that a man soon will
be weary of that labor, which yields no profit, or beneficial return.

But there is another industry worse than that, when men are very busy in
devising and compassing mischiefs; and industry, whereof the Devil affords a
great instance; for the cursed Fiend is very diligent, Luke 22. 31.
ever watching for occasions to supplant us, 2 Cor. 2. 11.
ever plotting methods and means to do harm, ever driving on his mischievous
designs with unwearied activity; Job 1. 7.
going to and fro in the earth; running about as a roaring Lion looking for
prey, 1 Pet. 5. 8.
and seeking whom he may devour.

And his wicked brood are commonly like him, (...).
being workers of iniquity, Luke 13. 27.
(...) painful men, (...), Psalm. 6. 8.
men that will do all things; who will spare no pains, nor leave any stone
unturned, for satisfying their lusts, and accomplishing their bad designs.

So indeed it is, that as no great good, so neither can any great mischief be
effected without much pains; And if we consider either the characters, or the
practices of those, who have been famous mischief-doers, Catiline, Marius,
Stilico, Caesar, etc.
the pests of mankind, and disturbers of the World, we shall find them to have
been no sluggards.

These two sorts of vain and bad industry the Prophet Isay seems to describe
in those words, They hatch cockatrice eggs, Isa. 59. 5.
and weave the spiders web; of which expressions one may denote mischievous,
the other frivolous diligence, in contrivance or execution of naughty or vain
designs; and to them both that of the Prophet Hosea may be referred, Hos. 8. 7.
They have sowed the wind, Ecclus 34. 2.
and they shall reap the whirlwind; Prove. 22. 8.
guilt, Hos. 10. 13.
remorse and punishment being the consequences of both. And of them both common
experience does afford very frequent and obvious instances, a great part of
humane life being taken up with them For,

How assiduously intent and eager may we observe men to be at sports how soon
will they rise to go forth to them? with what constancy and patience will they
toil in them all the day? how indefatigable are they in riding and running
about after a dog or a hawk, to catch a poor beast, or silly bird?

How long will men sit poring on their games, (...). Lib. Orat. 31.
dispensing with their food and sleep for it?

How long and serious attention will men yield to a wanton play, how many hours
will they contentedly sit thereat? What study will men employ on jests, and
impertinent wit? how earnest will they be to satisfy their vain curiosity?

How in such cases do men forget what they are doing, (...). Plut.
that sport should be sport, not work; to divert and relax us, not to employ
and busy us; to take off our minds a little, not wholly to take them up; not
to exhaust or tire our spirits, but to refresh and cheer them, that they may
become more fit for grave and serious occupations?

How painful will others be in hewing them out cisterns, Jer. 2. 13.
broken cisterns, that will hold no water; that is, in immoderate pursuit of
worldly designs? how studiously will they plod, how restlessly will they
trudge, what carking and drudgery will they endure in driving on projects of
ambition and avarice? what will not they gladly do or suffer to get a little
preferment, or a little profit; it was a common practice of old, and sure the
World is not greatly mended since the Psalmist did thus reflect, Psalm. 39. 6.
Surely every man walks in a vain show, surely they are disquieted in vain,
He heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them.

How many vigilant, and stout pursuers are there of sensuality, and riotous
excess; such as those of whom the Prophet speaks, Woe unto them that rise up
early in the morning, Isa. 5. 11.
that they may follow strong drink, that continue until night, till wine
inflame them?

How busy (O shame, O misery; how fiercely busy) are some in accomplishing
designs of malice and revenge? how intent are some to overreach, to
circumvent, to supplant their neighbor? how sore pains will some take to
seduce, corrupt, (...), etc. Chrysostom. (...). 16.
or debauch others? how active will some be in sowing strifes, in raising
factions, in fomenting disorders in the World? how many industrious slaves has
the Devil, who will spare no pains about any kind of work, which he puts
them to? how many like those of whom the Wiseman says, their feet run to
evil, Prove. 6. 8. 1. 16.
and are swift in running to mischief; they sleep not except they have done
mischief, and their sleep is taken away, unless they cause some to fall.

Now with all these Laborers we may well expostulate in the words of the
Prophet; Isa. 55. 2.
Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread, and your labor for
that which satisfies not?

Such labors are unworthy of men, much less do they beseem Christians.

It becomes us not as rational Creatures to employ the excellent gifts of our
nature, and noble faculties of our highborn soul, the forces of our mind, the
advantages of our fortune, our precious time, our very care and labor vainly
or unprofitably upon any thing base or mean; being that our reason is capable
of atchieving great and worthy things, we much debase it by stooping to regard
toys, we do extremely abuse it by working mischief.

Much more does it misbecome us as Christians (that is persons devoted to so
high a calling, who have so worthy employments assigned to us, Ephesians. 1. 18.
so glorious hopes, so rich encouragements proposed to us for our work) to
spend our thoughts and endeavors on things impertinent to our great design, or
mainly thwarting it.

The proper matter and object of our industry (those false ones being excluded)
is true business; or that which is incumbent on a man to do, either in way of
duty, being required by God; or by dictate of reason, as conducing to some good
purpose; so that in effect it will turn to account, and finally in advantageous
return will pay him for his labor of mind or body; that which the Wiseman did
intend, Eccles 9. 10.
when he advised, Whatever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might;
whatever thy hand finds, that is, whatever by divine appointment (by the
command or providence of God) or which upon rational deliberation, does occur
as matter of our action; comprizing every good purpose and reasonable
undertaking incident to us.

But our business, according to the holy Apostle's intent, may be supposed
especially to be the work of our calling; to which each man has a peculiar
obligation; and which therefore is most properly his business, or (...)
emphatically, the business allotted to him.

Now this business, our calling, is double; Our general calling, which is
common to us all as Christians; and our particular calling, which peculiarly
belongs to us, as placed in a certain station, either in the Church or State.
In both which vocations that we are much obliged and concerned to be
industrious, shall be now my business to declare.

I. As to our general calling, (...). Phil. 3. 14. (...). Heb. 3. 1. (...). 1 Timothy 1. 9. (Ephesians. 1. 18. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11.)
(that sublime, that heavenly, that holy vocation) in which by divine grace,
according to the Evangelical Dispensation, we are engaged, that necessarily
requires, and most highly deserves from us a great measure of industry; the
nature and design of it requires, the fruit and result of it deserves our
utmost diligence; all sloth is inconsistent with discharging the duties, with
enjoying the hopes, with obtaining the benefits thereof. For,

It is a state of continual work, and is expressed in terms importing abundant,
incessant, intense care and pain; for to be indeed Christians, We must work out
our salvation with fear and trembling; Phil. 2. 12.
We must by patient continuance in well-doing seek for glory and honor, Romans
2. 7.
and immortality. We must walk worthy of the Lord to all well-pleasing, Col. 1.
10.
being fruitful in every good work; 1 Timothy 6. 18.
We must be rich in good works, Phil. 1. 11.
and filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ to the
praise and glory of God; We are God's workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto
good works, (1 John 15. 5, 8, 16.
which God has before ordained that we should walk in them. Jam. 3. 17.)
Ephesians. 2. 10.


We have a soul to save, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9.
and are appointed (...), to make an acquist of salvation.

We have a mind to improve with virtue and wisdom, qualifying us for entrance
into Heaven, for enjoyment of God's favor, for conversation with Angels.

As Christians we are assumed to be servants of God, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9.
and readmitted into his family, Romans 7. 6. 6. 22.
from which for our disloyalty we had been discarded; Ephesians. 2. 19.
so that as he was our natural Lord, so he is now such also by special grace;
who did make us, who does maintain us, under whose protection, and at whose
disposal we subsist; whence we are obliged to be faithfully diligent in his
service; We must constantly wait upon him in devotional addresses; we must
carefully study to know his pleasure; Ephesians. 5. 10.
we must endeavor exactly to perform his will, Romans 12. 2.
and obey his commands; Luke 11. 28.
we must strive to advance his glory, to promote his interest, to improve all
talents and advantages committed to us for those purposes; Matt. 25. 27.
we must as (St. Paul expresses it) always abound in the work of the Lord. 1
Cor. 15. 58.


We must also look upon our selves as servants of Christ our Redeemer; Col. 3.
25.
who by his blood has purchased us to himself, Ephesians. 6. 7.
that we might be zealous of good works; 1. Cor. 7. 23. 6. 20.
performing a service to him, Tit. 2. 14.
which consists in a faithful discharge of manifold duties; and in pursuance
of all virtue; with most intent application of mind, with expedite promptitude,
with accurate circumspection; 2 Pet. 1. 5. (...). Tit. 3. 1. (...) -- Ephesians. 5.
15.
giving all diligence (as St. Peter speaks) in adding one virtue to another;
being ready (as St. Paul says) to every good work; and seeing that we walk
circumspectly, or behave our selves exactly according to the rules of duty in
all our conversation.

This service requires of us assiduous attendance on works of piety and
devotion; Col. 4. 2.
that we do incessantly watch to prayers, Ephesians. 6. 18.
that we always give thanks, Romans 12. 12.
that we continually do offer up the sacrifice of praise to God. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
Luke 18. 1.
1 Thessalonians. 5. 18.
Ephesians. 5. 20.
Col. 3. 17.
Heb. 13. 15.


It demands from us a continual labor of charity; 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3. (...). Gal.
5. 13. (...). Gal. 6. 10. (...). 1 Thessalonians. 5. 15.
that we serve one another in love; that we should as we have opportunity work
good to all men; that we should always pursue good toward one another, and
toward all men.

It obliges us with all our powers, Romans 12. 18. (...). Heb. 12. 14. 2 Timothy 2.
22.
to pursue peace with all men, (which considering our natural peevishness,
pride, and perverseness is often no easy task) and that we do (...), Ephesians. 4. 3.
studiously endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.

It charge on us contentedly and patiently to undergo whatever God does
impose of burden or sufferance, Jam. 1. 4.
so that patience have its perfect work; and it is a crabbed work, to bend our
stiff inclinations, to quell our refractory passions, to make our sturdy humor
buckle thereto.

It does exact that we should govern and regulate according to very strict and
severe Laws all the faculties of our soul, all the members of our body, all
internal motions, and all external actions proceeding from us; that we should
check our inclinations, curb our appetites, and compose our passions; that we
should guard our hearts from vain thoughts and bad desires; that we should
bridle our tongues from evil and from idle discourses; that we should order our
steps in the straight way of righteousness, not deflecting to the right hand or
to the left.

In the discharge of this service how many rough difficulties are there to be
surmounted, how many great obstacles to be removed, how many stout oppositions
to be encountered, how many potent enemies to be vanquished, how many sore
hardships, crosses and tribulations to be endured?

How shrewd a task must we find it to circumcise our hearts, to mortify our
earthly members, to crucify our flesh with its affections and lusts, to pull
out our right eyes, and cut off our right hands, to renounce our worldly
interests, to hate our nearest relations, to take up, and bear our cross;
whenever conscience or duty shall call us thereto?

Our calling therefore does require great industry; and the business of it
consequently is well represented by those performances, which demand the
greatest intention, and laborious activity: It is styled exercise (agonistick
and ascetick exercise; (...). 1 Timothy 4. 7.
(...), Exercise thy self to godliness; and, (...), (...). Acts 24.
Herein I exercise my self to have always a conscience void of offense toward
God and toward men;) 16. Heb. 12. 11.
wrestling ((...), Ephesians. 6. 12.
Our wrestling is not (only) against flesh and blood, 1 Cor. 9. 25.
but against principalities and powers;) running a race (Let us run with
patience the race that is set before us; Heb. 12. 1.
So run that ye may obtain; 1 Cor. 9. 24.
I press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling.) Phil. 3. 14.
A warfare, 2 Timothy 4. 7.
a combating (War a good warfare, 1 Timothy 1. 18. 6. 12.
holding faith and a good conscience; 2 Timothy 4. 7.
fight the good fight; 2 Timothy 2. 3.
thou therefore endure hardship as a good soldier of Jesus Christ; 1 Cor. 9.
25.
Every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things;) Matt. 11.
12.
offering violence; (The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence; and the violent
take it by force;) 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6.
watching, (Let us not sleep as do others, 1 Cor. 16. 13.
but let us watch and be sober; Matt. 26. 41. 24. 42.
Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, Luke 12. 37.
quit you like men, 1 Pet. 5. 8.
be strong; watch and pray, Apoc. 3. 2. 16. 15.
that ye enter not into temptation.)

Hence the Precepts importing the general tenor of Christian practice are
usually couched in terms implying great sedulity and contention of soul; Luke
13. (...).
(...), Strive to enter in at the strait gate; Heb. 4. 11. (...).
Let us labor therefore to enter into that rest; John 6. 27. (...).
Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for that meat which endures to
everlasting life. 2 Pet. 1. 10.
Give diligence to make your calling and election sure; 1 Pet. 1. 13.
Gird up the loins of your minds; Luke 12. 35.
be sober and hope to the end; Ephesians. 6. 14.
Wherefore, 2 Pet. 3. 14.
brethren, seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent, that ye may be
found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless.

Such is the work of our general calling, and so much industry it challenges
from us; with great reason indeed, for that such work is needful to our
happiness, and that our labor will certainly be rewarded therewith.

The work indeed of it self is most worthy to employ us; does most become us,
does much adorn us, does best befit our divine extraction and large capacity;
is the noblest, the handsomest, the sweetest employment that could take us up;
John 4. 36.
but we have also the greatest inducements and encouragements possible for our
industry therein.

There are by the divine bounty and mercy wages assigned abundantly
correspondent to our work, yea infinitely surpassing it; Matt. 5. 12.
there is (...), a great (or a manifold) hire for our slender and simple
performances; there are several noble prizes highly worth our striving for with
our utmost strength and contention of soul.

In recompense thereof we shall assuredly gain even here in this transitory
state the special favor and love of God, Romans 14. 18. He that in these things
serves Christ is acceptable to God, and approved of men.
with his constant protection and care for our good; his faithful direction,
and friendly assistence to guide us, and uphold us in all our ways, to bless
and prosper our undertakings, to supply us in our needs, and comfort us in our
distresses; Psalm. 34. 9. 84. 11. 33. 19. 37. 3, 19.
so that we shall lack nothing that is good, that no evil shall happen to us,
Psalm. 91. 10. --
that all things shall concur and cooperate for our benefit. Prove. 12. 21.
Romans 8. 38.


We shall thereby taste the satisfactions of a calm mind, and a sound
conscience, quickened by the consolations of the divine spirit; Col. 3. 15.
the peace of God ruling in our hearts, Phil. 4. 7.
which passes all understanding.

We shall afterward, when this moment is passed over, and our short day's work
dispatched, receive from God's bountiful hand an unconceivable affluence of
good things, an eternal permanence of life; undisturbed rest, Jam. 1. 12.
indefectible wealth, ineffable joy, 1 Pet. 5. 4.
incorruptible glory, 1 Cor. 9. 25.
a kingdom unshakeable.

He ( says our Lord) that reapeth, John 4. 30.
receives wages, and gathers fruit unto life everlasting.

To them ( says St. Paul) who by patient continuance in well-doing seek for
glory, (...) -- Romans 2. 6. --
and honor, and immortality, God in recompense will bestow eternal life. And,

I have (says that blessed Labourer of himself) fought the good fight, 2 Timothy
4. 8.
I have finished my course, I have kept the faith; henceforth there is laid up
for me a crown of righteousness.

What more effectual spur or incentive can there be to industry in this
business, than to consider that which St. Paul does so often inculcate; 2 Cor.
5. 10.
Knowing that whatsoever good thing any man does, the same (a recompense for
the same) he shall receive of the Lord; and knowing that (in consideration of
our service done to the Lord) of the Lord we shall receive the reward of the
inheritance? Col. 3. 24.


What exhortation can be more firmly grounded or strongly backed, 1 Cor. 15. 58.
than is that of the Apostle, Therefore, my brethren, be ye steadfast,
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord; for as much as ye know,
that your labor is not in vain in the Lord?

May it not also much encourage us to industry to be assured, that not only
the kind of our work, but the degree of our labor shall be considered and
requited, in just proportion; so that the harder we work, the higher we shall
be rewarded; (...). Matt. 16. 27.
for, to each one (says our Lord) the Son of man shall render a reward (...),
according to his performance; Every one says St. Paul) shall receive (...), 1
Cor. 3. 8.
his proper reward, Rev. 22* 12. 2. 23.
according to his proper work; Matt. 25. 21.
whence we have reason to observe St. John's advice, Luke 19. 12.
Look to your selves, that ye lose not those things which ye have gained, (...).
but that ye receive a full reward. 2 John 8.


To be negligent or slothful in such a case, for want of little care and pains
to forfeit such advantages, what a pity, what a folly is it? Were an
opportunity presented by a little minding our business, and bestirring our
selves to procure a fair estate, or a good preferment, would not he be deemed
mad or sottish who should sit still, and forego that his advantage? how much
more wildness is it to be drowsy and sluggish in this case, thereby losing
eternal bliss and glory? well therefore might the Apostle say, How shall we
escape, Heb. 2. 3.
if we neglect so great salvation? how shall we escape not only the sin, and
guilt of basest ingratitude toward him that graciously does offer it, but the
imputation of most wretched folly, in being so much wanting to our own interest
and welfare?

Is it not a sad thing, a woeful shame, to observe what pains men will throw
away upon things of small or no concernment to them? yea, what toil and
drudgery they will sustain in the service of Satan, in pursuit of sin, in the
gratification of their vanities and lusts?

What pains will a covetous wretch take in scraping for pelf, how will he rack
his mind with carking solicitude to get, to keep, to spare it? how will he tire
his spirits with restless travel? how will he pinch his carkase for want of
what nature craveth? what infamy and obloquy will he endure for his niggardly
parsimony and sordidness?

How much labor will an ambitious fop undergo for preferment, or vain honor?
to how many tedious attendances, to how pitiful servilities will he submit?
what sore crosses and disappointments will he swallow, what affronts and
indignities will he patiently digest, without desisting from his enterprise.

How will a man (as St. Paul observed) (...), 1 Cor. 9. 25
endure all painful abstinence and continence in order to the obtaining a
corruptible crown, a fading garland of bays, a puff of vain applause?

What diligence will men use to compass the enjoyment of forbidden pleasures;
how watchful in catching opportunities, how eager in quest of them will they
be; what difficulties will they undertake, what hazards will they incur, what
damages and inconveniences will they sustain rather than fail of satisfying
their desires?

What akings of head and heart, what pangs of mind and gripes of conscience,
what anxieties of regret and fear, will every worker of iniquity undergo? So
faithful friends has this vain and evil world; so diligent servants has the
accursed Lord thereof: Chrysostom. (...).
so careful and laborious will men be to destroy and damn themselves: O that
we could be willing to spend as much care and pains in the service of our God;
O that we were as true friends of our selves; O that we could be as industrious
for our salvation; that is, in the business of our general calling; which
having considered, let us proceed to the other business belonging to us, which
is,

II. The business of our particular calling; that in reference whereto St. Paul
does prescribe, 1 Cor. 7. 17.
Every man, as the Lord has called him, so let him walk. 20.
Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called; let him so
abide, as faithfully to prosecute the work, and discharge the duty of it; the
doing which otherwhere he terms (...), 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11.
to do our own business (working with our hands) and enjoineth it in
opposition to those two great pests of life, Ephesians. 4. 28.
sloth and pragmatical curiosity; or the neglect of our own, and meddling with
other men's affairs.

This the Apostle names our calling, because we are called or appointed
thereto by divine providence; for he supposes and takes it for granted, that
to each man in this World God has assigned a certain station, unto which
peculiar action is suited; in which station he bids him quietly to abide,
till providence fairly does translate him, 1 Cor. 7. 22.
and during his abode therein diligently to execute the work thereof.

Every man is a member of a double body, of the civil Commonwealth, and of the
Christian-church; in relation to the latter whereof St. Paul tells us (and
what he says by parity of reason may be referred likewise to the former) that
God has set the members every one in the body, 1 Cor. 12. 8.
as it pleases him; and as it is in the natural, so it is in every political
and spiritual body, every member has its proper use and function; All members
(says St. Paul) have not (...), Romans 12. 4.
the same office, or the same work and operation; yet every one has some work;
there is no member designed to be idle or useless, conferring no benefit to the
whole; Ephesians. 4. 16.
but the whole body (says the Apostle) fitly joined together, and compacted by
that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the
measure of every part makes increase of the body, unto the edifying it self in
love; each member does conspire and cooperate to the strength, nourishment,
thriving, and welfare of the whole.

Every man (who continues a man in his senses, (...). 1 Cor. 7. 17.
or in any good degree of natural integrity) is by God endowed with competent
abilities to discharge some function, useful to common good, or at least
needful to his own sustenance; to every one some talent is committed, which in
subordination to God's service he may improve to the benefit of the World,
God's temporal, or of the Church, God's spiritual Kingdom.

It is plainly necessary, that the greatest part of men should have a
determinate work allotted to them, that they may support their life and get
their food without being injurious, offensive, or burdensome to others; for
their living, they must either follow some trade, or they must shark and filch,
or they must beg, or they must starve.

And the rest are obliged to do somewhat conducible to public good, that they
may deserve to live: for a drone should not be among the bees; nor has right
to devour the honey: If any man does pretend, or presume that he has nothing to
do but to eat, to sleep, to play, to laugh; to enjoy his ease, his pleasure,
his humor, he thereby does as it were disclaim a reasonable title of living
among men, and sharing in the fruits of their industry; he, in St. Paul's
judgment, should be debarred of food, for this (says the Holy Apostle) we
commanded you, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10.
that if any man would not work, neither should he eat.

Such an one in the body of men, what is he but an unnatural excrescence,
sucking nutriment from it, without yielding ornament or use? what is he but a
wen deforming and encombring the body, or a canker infesting and corrupting it?

As no man (at least with decency, convenience and comfort) can live in the
World, without being obliged to diverse other men for their help in providing
accommodations for him, so justice and ingenuity (corroborated by divine
sanctions) do require of him, that in commutation he, one way or other, should
undertake some pains redounding to the benefit of others.

So has the great Author of Order distributed the ranks and offices of men in
order to mutual benefit and comfort; that one man should plow, another thresh,
another grind, another labor at the forge, another knit or weave; another
sail, another trade, another supravise all these, laboring to keep them all in
order and peace; that one should work with his hands and feet, another with his
head and tongue; all conspiring to one common end, the welfare of the whole,
and the supply of what is useful to each particular member; Every man so
reciprocally obliging and being obliged; the Prince being obliged to the
Husbandman for his bread, to the Weaver for his clothes, to the Mason for his
palace, to the Smith for his sword; those being all obliged to him for his
vigilant care in protecting them; for their security in pursuing the work, and
enjoying the fruit of their industry.

So every man has a calling, and proper business; whereto that industry is
required, I need not much to prove, the thing it self in reason and experience
being so clearly evident; for what business can be well dispatched, what
success can be expected to any undertaking, in what calling can any man thrive
without industry? what business is there that will go on of it self, or proceed
to any good issue, if we do not carefully look to it, steadily hold it in its
course, constantly push and drive it forward? It is true as in nature, so in
all affairs, Nihil movet non motum, nothing moves without being moved.

Our own interest should move us to be industrious in our calling, that we may
obtain the good effects, of being so in a comfortable and creditable
subsistence; that we may not suffer the damages and wants, the disappointments
and disgraces ensuing on sloth; but the chief motive should be from piety and
conscience; for that it is a duty which we owe to God. For God having placed us
in our station; he having apportioned to us our task, we being in transaction
of our business his servants, we do owe to him that necessary property of good
servants, without which fidelity cannot subsist; for how can he be looked on as
a faithful servant, 1 Cor. 4. 2.
who does not effectually perform the work charged on him? or diligently
execute the orders of his Master?

St. Paul does injoin servants, that they should in all things obey their
Masters, Col. 3. 22.
with conscientious regard to God, Ephesians. 6. 5.
as therein performing service to God, 1 Cor. 7. 22, 23.
and expecting recompense from him; And of Princes he says, that they in
dispensation of justice, enacting Laws, imposing Taxes, and all political
administrations, Romans 13. 6.
are the Ministers of God, (...), attending constantly upon this very thing:
And if these extremes, the highest and lowest of all vocations, are services of
God; if the highest upon that score be tied to so much diligence, then surely
all middle places, upon the same account of conscience toward God, do exact no
less.

If he that has one talent, and he that has ten must both improve them for
God's interest, then he that has two, or three, or more, is obliged to the
same duty proportionably.

Every one should consider the World as the family of that great Pater-familias
(of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named) and himself as an
officer or servant therein, Ephesians. 3. 15.
by God's will and designation constituted in that employment, into which
providence has cast him; to confer in his order and way somewhat toward a
provision for the maintenance of himself, and of his fellow servants. Of a
superior officer our Lord says, Who is that faithful and wise servant,
Matthew. 24. 45.
whom his Lord has made ruler over his household, Luke 12. 42.
to give them their meat in due season? so the greatest men are as stewards,
treasurers, controllers, or pourveyers; the rest are inferior servants, in
their proper rank and capacity.

And he that with diligence performs his respective duty (be it high and
honorable, or mean and contemptible in outward appearance) will please God, as
keeping good order, and as being useful to his service; so that upon the
reckoning God will say to him, 1 Cor. 14. 33.
Well done good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful over a few
things; I will make thee ruler over many things; Matt. 25. 21.
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. But he that does otherwise (behaving
himself carelessly, or sluggishly in his business) will offend God, as
committing disorder, and as being unprofitable;

He commits disorder according to that of St. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 11.
We hear there are some, which walk among you disorderly, not working at all.
His sentence and doom will be, according to our Lord, Matt. 25. 26. 30.
O thou wicked and slothful servant -- Cast the unprofitable servant into
utter darkness; which words are spoken in relation to one, who being a
flatterer or sluggard in his calling did not improve the special talent
entrusted with him for God's service.

In fine, if we are conscientiously industrious in our vocation, we shall
assuredly find the blessing of God thereon; and that he thereby will convey
good success, comfort, competent wealth, a fair reputation, all desirable good
unto us; for as all these things are promised to industry, so the promise
especially does belong to that industry, which a man does exercise in an
orderly course of action in his own way; or rather in God's way, wherein divine
providence has set him.

An irregular or impertinent laboriousness, out of a man's calling or sphere; a
being diligent in other men's affairs, invading their office, (as if I a Priest
will be trading, a Layman preaching) may not claim the benefit of those
promises, or the blessings of industry; But a Husbandman, who (with
conscientious regard to God, and confidence in him) is painful in tilling his
ground, Prove. 21. 11.
may expect a good crop; a Merchant who (upon the same principle, with the like
disposition) earnestly follows his trade, may hope for safe voyages and good
markets; Prove. 10. 4. 13. 11.
a Prince carefully minding his affairs may look for peace and prosperity to
his country; a Scholar studying hard may be well assured of getting knowledge,
and finding truth; all who with honest diligence constantly do pursue their
business may confidently and cheerfully hope to reap the advantages suitable to
it from the favorable blessing of God. So that we have all reason to observe
the Apostle's precept, not to be slothful in business.

I should apply this doctrine to our own case, urging its practice by
considerations peculiar to our vocation; but having already passed the bounds
of time, I reserve the doing it to another opportunity.

Now the God of peace sanctify you wholly, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
and make you perfect in every good work to do his will; Heb. 13. 20.
working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight; through our Blessed
Savior Jesus Christ; to whom for ever be all glory and praise. Amen.

OF INDUSTRY IN OUR Particular Calling, AS GENTLEMEN.
ROMANS XII. 11. Not slothful in business.
I Have largely treated upon the duty recommended in this precept, and urged
the observance of it in general, at a distance; I now intend more particularly
and closely to apply it, in reference to those persons, who seem more
especially obliged to it, and whose observing it may prove of greatest
consequence to public good; the which application may also be most suitable and
profitable to this audience; those persons are of two sorts; the one Gentlemen,
the other Scholars.

I. The First place, as civility demands, we assign to Gentlemen; or persons
of eminent rank in the World, well allied, graced with honor, and furnished
with wealth; the which sort of persons I conceive in a high degree obliged to
exercise industry in business.

This at first hearing may seem a little paradoxical and strange; for who have
less business than Gentlemen, who do need less industry, than they? He that
has a fair estate, and can live on his means, what has he to do, what labor
or trouble can be exacted of him; what has he to think on, or trouble his head
with, but how to invent recreations and pastimes to divert himself, and spend
his wast leisure pleasantly? why should not he be allowed to enjoy himself, and
the benefits, which nature or fortune have freely dispensed to him, as he
thinks best, without offense? why may he not say with the rich man in the
Gospel, Luke 12. 19.
Soul thou have much goods laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink
and be merry? Is it not often said by the Wiseman, Eccles 2. 24. 3. 22. 5. 18.
8. 15.
that there is nothing better under the sun, than that a man should make his
soul to enjoy good in a cheerful and comfortable fruition of his estate?
According to the passable notion and definition, What is a Gentleman but his
pleasure?

If this be true, if a Gentleman be nothing else but this; then truly he is a
sad piece, the most inconsiderable, the most despicable, the most pitiful and
wretched Creature in the World: If it is his privilege to do nothing, it is
his privilege to be most unhappy; and to be so will be his fate, if he live
according to it; for he that is of no worth or use, who produces no beneficial
fruit, who performs no service to God, or to the World, what title can he
have to happiness, what capacity thereof? what reward can he claim, what
comfort can he feel? to what temptations is he exposed, what guilts will he
incur?

But in truth it is far otherwise; to suppose that a Gentleman is loose from
business is a great mistake; for indeed no man has more to do, no man lies
under greater engagements to industry than he.

He is deeply obliged to be continually busy in more ways than other men who
have but one simple calling or occupation allotted to them; and that upon a
triple account; in respect to God, to the World, and to himself.

1. He is first obliged to continual employment in respect to God.

He out of a grateful regard to divine bounty for the eminency of his station,
adorned with dignity and repute, for the plentiful accommodations and comforts
of his life, for his exemption from those pinching wants, those meaner cares,
those sordid entertainments, and those toilsome drudgeries, to which other men
are subject, is bound to be more diligent in God's service, employing all the
advantages of his state to the glory of his munificent benefactour, to whose
good providence alone he does owe them; for who makes him to differ from
another? 1 Cor. 4. 7.
and what has he that he did not receive from God's free bounty?

In proportion to the bulk of his fortune his heart should be enlarged with a
thankful sense of God's goodness to him; his mouth should ever be filled with
acknowledgment and praise, he should always be ready to express his grateful
resentment of so great and peculiar obligations.

He should dedicate larger portions of that free leisure, which God has
granted to him, in waiting upon God, and constant performances of devotion.

He in frequently reflecting on the particular ample favors of God to him
should imitate the holy Psalmist, that illustrious pattern of great and
fortunate men; saying after him, with his spirit, and disposition of soul;
Psalm. 71. 21-
Thou have brought me to great honor, and comforted me on every side,
therefore will I praise thee and thy faithfulness, O God.

Lord, Psalm. 30. 7-
by thy favor thou have made my mountain to stand strong: Psalm. 31. 8.
Thou have set my feet in a large room: Psalm. 23. 5.
Thou preparest a table before me; Psalm. 30. 12.
-- thou anointest my head with oil, my cup runs over; -- to the end that my
glory may sing praise unto thee, and not be silent: The Lord is the portion of
mine inheritance, and of my cup; thou maintainest my lot; The lines are fallen
unto me in pleasant places, Psalm. 16. 5.
yea I have a goodly heritage; therefore I will bless the Lord.

In conceiving such meditations his head and his heart should constantly be
employed; as also in contriving ways of declaring and discharging real
gratitude; asking himself, Psalm. 116. 12.
What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits? What shall I render to
him, not only as a man for all the gifts of nature, as a Christian for all the
blessings of grace, but as a Gentleman also, for the many advantages of this my
condition, beyond so many of my brethren, by special providence indulged to me?

He has all the common duties of piety, of charity, of sobriety to discharge
with fidelity; for being a Gentleman does not exempt him from being a
Christian, but rather more strictly does engage him to be such in a higher
degree than others; It is an obligation peculiarly incumbent on him, in return
for God's peculiar favors, to pay God all due obedience, and to exercise
himself in all good works; disobedience being a more heinous crime in him than
in others, who have not such encouragements to serve God.

His obedience may be inculcated by those arguments which Joshua and Samuel did
use in pressing it on the Israelites; 1 Samuel 12. 24.
Only ( said Samuel) fear the Lord and serve him in truth, for consider how
great things God has done for you; and, I have given you ( says God by
Joshua) a land for which ye did not labor; Josh. 24. 13.
and cities which ye built not, and ye dwell in them; Of the vineyards and
oliveyards which ye planted not, do ye eat; Now therefore fear the Lord, and
serve him in sincerity and in truth.

His disobedience may be aggravated, Neh. 9. 25 -- (Isa. 63. 9. Psalm. 106. 6.
Jer. 2. 7. Ezekiel. 16. 7 -- 1 Samuel 15. 17. 2 Samuel 12. 7. 1 King. 16. --) 26, 35.
as Nehemiah did that of the Israelites, They took strong cities, and a fat
land, and possessed houses full of all goods, wells dug, vineyards and
olive-yards, and fruit trees in abundance; so they did eat and were filled, and
became fat; and delighted themselves in thy great goodness; nevertheless they
were disobedient and rebelled against thee, and cast thy law behind their backs
-- they have not served thee in their kingdom, and in thy great goodness, which
thou gave them; neither turned they from their wicked works.

A Gentleman has more talents committed to him, and consequently more
employment required of him; If a rustic Labourer, or a mechanic Artisan has
one talent, a Gentleman has ten; He has innate vigor of spirit, and height
of courage fortified by use, he has accomplishment and refinement of parts by
liberal education, he has the succors of parentage, alliance and friendship;
Luke 19. 20.
he has wealth, he has honor, Matt. 25. 25. (...).
he has power and authority, he has command of time and leisure; Luke 19. 13.
(...).
he has so many precious and useful talents entrusted to him, Matt. 25. 16.
not to be wrapped up in a napkin, Matt. 25. 27.
or hidden under ground; Matt. 25. 14. (...) --
nor to be squandred away in private satisfactions; but for negotiation, to be
put out to use, to be improved in the most advantageous way to God's service:
Every talent does require a particular care and pains to manage it well.

He particularly is God's Steward, entrusted with God's substance, for the
sustenance and supply of God's family; to relieve his fellow servants in their
need, upon seasonable occasions, by hospitality, mercy and charitable
beneficence; according to that intimation of our Lord, Luke 12. 42.
Who is that faithful and wise steward, whom his Lord shall make ruler of his
household, to give them their portion and meat in due season? and according to
those Apostolical precepts, (...).
As every one has received a gift (or special favor,) 1 Pet. 4. 10.
even so minister the same to one another, as good stewards of the manifold
grace of God; and, Charge the rich in this world, 1 Timothy 6. 17.
-- that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate.

And he that is obliged to purvey for so many, and so to abound in good works,
how can he want business? how can he pretend to a Writ of ease?

Surely that Gentleman is very blind, and very barren of invention, who is to
seek for work fit for him, or cannot easily discern many employments belonging
to him, of great concern and consequence.

It is easy to prompt and show him many businesses indispensably belonging to
him, as such.

It is his business to minister relief to his poor neighbors in their wants
and distresses by his wealth. It is his business to direct and advise the
ignorant, to comfort the afflicted, to reclaim the wicked, and encourage the
good by his wisdom. It is his business to protect the weak, to rescue the
oppressed, to ease those who groan under heavy burdens by his power; to be
such a Gentleman and so employed as Job was; Job 31. 17.
who did not eat his morsel alone so that the fatherless did not eat thereof;
Job 31. 16,
who did not withhold the poor from their desire, or cause the eyes of the
widow to fail; 19.
who did not see any perish for want of clothing, or any poor without covering;
29. 12.
who delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none
to help him.

It is his business to be hospitable; 1 Pet. 4. 9.
kind and helpful to strangers; Heb. 13. 2.
following those noble Gentlemen, Romans 12. 13.
Abraham and Lot, Genesis 18. 1. 19. 1.
who were so ready to invite and entertain strangers with bountiful courtesy.

It is his business to maintain peace, and appease dissentions among his
neighbors, interposing his counsel and authority in order thereto; whereto he
has that brave Gentleman Moses recommended for his pattern. Exodus 2. 13.


It is his business to promote the welfare and prosperity of his Country with
his best endeavors, Acts 7. 26.
and by all his interest; in which practice the sacred History does propound
diverse gallant Gentlemen ( Joseph, (Jud. 5. 9.)
Moses, Samuel, Nehemiah, Daniel, Mordecay, and all such renowned Patriots) to
guide him.

It is his business to govern his family well; Josh. 24. 15.
to educate his children in piety and virtue; Psalm. 101. --
to keep his servants in good order.

It is his business to look to his estate, and to keep it from wasting; that he
may sustain the repute of his person and quality with decency; that he may be
furnished with ability to do good, may provide well for his family, may be
hospitable, may have wherewith to help his brethren; for if, according to St.
Paul's injunction, a man should work with his own hands, (...).
that he may have somewhat to impart to him that needs; Ephesians. 4. 28.
then must he that has an estate, be careful to preserve it, for the same
good purpose.

It is his business to cultivate his mind with knowledge, with generous
dispositions, with all worthy accomplishments befitting his condition, and
qualifying him for honorable action; so that he may excel, and bear himself
above the vulgar level no less in real inward worth, than in exterior garb;
that he be not a Gentleman merely in name or show.

It is his business (and that no slight and easy business) to eschew the
vices, Arduae nam res est opibus non tradere mores.
to check the passions, to withstand the temptations, to which his condition is
liable; taking heed, that his wealth, honor and power do not betray him unto
pride, insolence, or contempt of his poorer brethren; unto injustice, or
oppression; unto luxury, and riotous excess; unto sloth, stupidity,
forgetfulness of God, and irreligious profaneness.

It is a business especially incumbent on him to be careful of his ways, that
they may have good influence on others, who are apt to look upon him as their
guide and pattern.

He should labor and study to be a leader unto virtue, and a notable promoter
thereof; directing and exciting men thereto by his exemplary conversation;
encouraging them by his countenance and authority; rewarding the goodness of
meaner people by his bounty and favor: He should be such a Gentleman as Noah,
who preached righteousness by his words and works before a profane World.

Such particular affairs has every person of quality, credit, wealth and
interest, allotted to him by God, and laid on him as duties; the which to
discharge faithfully will enough employ a man, and does require industry, much
care, much pains, excluding sloth and negligence: so that it is impossible for
a sluggard to be a worthy Gentleman, virtuously disposed, a charitable
neighbor, a good patriot, a good husband of his estate; any thing of that, to
which God, by setting him in such a station, does call him.

Thus is a Gentleman obliged to industry in respect of God, who justly does
exact those labors of piety, charity, and all virtue from him. Farther,

2. He has also obligations to mankind, demanding industry from him, upon
accounts of common humanity, equity and ingenuity. For,

How can he fairly subsist upon the common industry of mankind without bearing
a share thereof? how can he well satisfy himself to dwell statelily, to feed
daintily, to be finely clad, to maintain a pompous retinue merely upon the
sweat and toil of others, without himself rendering a compensation, or making
some competent returns of care and pain, redounding to the good of his
neighbor?

How can he justly claim, or reasonably expect from the World the respect
agreeable to his rank, if he does not by worthy performances conduce to the
benefit of it? can men be obliged to regard those, from whom they receive no
good?

If no Gentleman be tied to serve the public, or to yield help in sustaining
the common burdens, and supplying the needs of mankind, then is the whole
order merely a burden and an offense to the World; a race of drones, a pack of
ciphers in the commonwealth, standing for nothing, deserving no consideration
or regard: And if any are bound, then all are; for why should the whole burden
lie on some, while others are exempted?

It is indeed supposed, that all are bound thereto, seeing that all have
recompenses publicly allowed to them upon such consideration; diverse respects
and privileges peculiar to the order, grounded upon this supposition, that they
deserve such advantages by conferring notable benefit to the public; the which
indeed it were an arrogance to seek, and an iniquity to accept for doing
nothing.

It is an unsufferable pride for any man to pretend or conceit himself to
differ so much from his brethren, that he may be allowed to live in ease and
sloth, while the rest of mankind are subject to continual toil and trouble.
Moreover,

3. A Gentleman is bound to be industrious for his own sake; it is a duty which
he owes to himself, to his honor, to his interest, to his welfare. He cannot
without industry continue like himself, or maintain the honor and repute
becoming his quality and state; or secure himself from contempt and disgrace;
for to be honorable and slothful are things inconsistent; seeing honor does
not grow, nor can subsist without undertaking worthy designs, constantly
pursuing them, and happily atchieving them; it is the fruit and reward of such
actions, which are not performed with ease.

External respect, and semblance of honor, for the sake of public order, may
be due to an exterior rank, or title; but to pay this is not to honor the
person, but his title, because it is supposed that men of real worth and use do
bear it; or lest by refusing it to one, the whole order may seem disrespected;
but yet true honor or mental esteem is not due upon such accounts; nor is it
possible to render it unto any person, who does not by worthy qualities, and
good deeds appear to merit it.

Nor can a Gentleman without industry uphold his real interests against the
attempts of envy, of treachery, of flattery, of sycophantry, of avarice, to
which his condition is obnoxious; to preserve his wealth and estate, which are
the supports of his quality, he must endure care and pains; otherwise he will
by greedy harpyes and crafty lurchers be rifled or cozened of his substance; it
will of it self go to wreck, and be imbezill'd by negligence.

He cannot without industry guard his personal welfare from manifold
inconveniences, molestations and mischiefs; Idleness it self will be very
troublesome and irksome to him. His time will lie upon his hands, as a pestring
encumbrance. His mind will be infested with various distractions and
distempers; vain and sad thoughts, foul lusts, and unquiet passions will spring
up therein, as weeds in a neglected soil. His body will languish, and become
destitute of health, of vigor, of activity, for want of due exercise. All the
mischiefs which naturally do spring from sloth and stupidity will seize upon
him.

4. Thus upon various accounts a Gentleman is engaged to business, and
concerned to exercise industry therein; we may add, that indeed the very nature
of gentility, or the true notion of a Gentleman does imply so much.

For what, I pray, is a Gentleman, what properties has he, what qualities are
characteristical or peculiar to him, whereby he is distinguished from others,
and raised above the vulgar? are they not especially two, Courage and
Courtesy? which he that wants is not otherwise than equivocally a Gentleman,
as an Image or a Carkase is a Man; without which gentility in a conspicuous
degree is no more than a vain show or an empty name: And these plainly do
involve industry, do exclude slothfulness; for Courage does prompt boldly to
undertake, and resolutely to dispatch great enterprises, and employments of
difficulty; It is not seen in a flaunting garb, or strutting deportment; not in
hectorly, ruffian-like swaggering or huffing; not in high looks, or big words;
but in stout and gallant deeds, employing vigor of mind and heart to atcheive
them; how can a man otherwise approve himself for courageous, than by
signalizing himself in such a way?

And for Courtesy, how otherwise can it be well displayed, than in sedulous
activity for the good of men? It surely does not consist in modish forms of
address or complemental expressions, or hollow professions (commonly void of
meaning, or of sincerity;) but in real performances of beneficence, when
occasion does invite, and in waiting for opportunities to do good; the which
practice is accompanied with some care and pain, adding a price to it; for an
easy courtesy is therefore small because easy, and may be deemed to proceed
rather from ordinary humanity, than from gentile disposition; so that in fine
he alone does appear truly a Gentleman, who has the heart to undergo hard
tasks for public good, and willingly takes pains to oblige his neighbors and
friends.

5. The work indeed of Gentlemen is not so gross, but it may be as smart and
painful as any other. For all hard work is not manual; there are other
instruments of action beside the plow, the spade, the hammer, the shuttle; nor
does every work produce sweat, and visible tiring of body; the head may work
hard in contrivance of good designs, the tongue may be very active in
dispensing advice, persuasion, comfort, and edification in virtue; A man may
bestir himself in going about to do good; these are works employing the
cleanly industry of a Gentleman.

6. In such works it was, that the truest and greatest pattern of gentility
that ever was did employ himself: who was that? Even our Lord himself; for he
had no particular trade, or profession; no man can be more loose from any
engagement to the World than he was; no man had less need of business, or
pains-taking than he; for he had a vast estate, being heir of all things, all
the World being at his disposal, yea infinitely more, it being in his power
with a word to create whatever he would to serve his need, or satisfy his
pleasure; Omnipotency being his treasure and supply; He had a retinue of Angels
to wait on him, and minister to him; whatever sufficiency any man can fancy to
himself to dispense with his taking pains, that had he in a far higher degree;
Yet did he find work for himself, and continually was employed in performing
service to God, and imparting benefits to men; Isa. 53. 11.
nor was ever industry exercised upon Earth comparable to his.

Gentlemen therefore would do well to make him the pattern of their life, to
whose industry they must be beholden for their salvation: in order whereto we
recommend them to his grace.

OF INDUSTRY IN OUR Particular Calling, AS SCHOLARS.
ROMANS XII. 11. Not slothful in business.
I Proceed to the other sort of persons, whom we did propound, namely

II. Scholars, and that on them particularly great engagements do lie to be
industrious, is most evident, from various considerations.

The nature and design of this calling does suppose industry; the matter, and
extent of it does require industry; the worth of it does highly deserve
industry. We are in special gratitude to God, in charity to men, in due regard
to our selves bound unto it.

1. First, I say, the nature and design of our calling does suppose industry:
Eccles 2. 21.
There is (says the divine Preacher) a man, whose labor is in wisdom, in
knowledge, and in equity; Such men are Scholars; so that we are indeed no
Scholars, but absurd usurpers of the name, if we are not laborious; for what is
a Scholar, but one who retireth his person, and avocateth his mind from other
occupations, and worldly entertainments, (...).
that he may (...), vacare studiis, employ his mind and leisure on study and
learning, in the search of truth, the quest of knowledge, the improvement of
his reason. Wherefore an idle Scholar, a lazy student, a sluggish man of
learning is nonsense.

What is learning but a diligent attendance to instruction of Masters, skilled
in any knowledge, and conveying their notions to us in word or writing?

What is study, but an earnest, steady, persevering application of mind to some
matter, on which we fix our thoughts, with intent to see through it; what in
Solomon's language are these Scholastic occupations, Prove. 2. 2.
but inclining the ear, and applying our heart to understanding? than which
commonly there is nothing more laborious, more straining nature, and more
tiring our spirits; whence it is well compared to the most painful exercises
of body and soul.

The Wiseman advising men to seek wisdom, the which is the proper design of
our calling, does intimate that work to be like digging in the mines for
silver, and like searching all about for concealed treasure; than which there
can hardly be any more difficult and painful task, If (says he) thou seek
her as silver, Prove. 2. 4.
and searchest for her as for hid treasures, then shall thou understand --
Otherwhere he compares the same work to assiduous watching and waiting, like
that of a guard or a client, which are the greatest instances of diligence,
Blessed (says he; or wisdom by him says, Prove. 8. 34.
blessed) is the man that hears me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at
the posts of my doors.

Wherefore if we will approve our selves to be what we are called, and what we
pretend to be, if we will avoid being Impostours, assuming a name not due to
us, we must not be slothful. Farther,

2. The matter and extent of our business does require industry from us: the
matter of it, which is truth and knowledge; the extent, which is very large and
comprehensive, taking in all truth, all knowledge; worthy our study, and
useful for the designs of it.

Our business is to find truth; the which (even in matters of high importance)
is not easily to be discovered; being (as a vain of silver, encompassed with
earth, and mixed with dross) deeply laid in the obscurity of things, wrapped up
in false appearances, entangled with objections, and perplexed with debates;
being therefore not readily discoverable; especially by minds clouded with
prejudices, lusts, passions, partial affections, appetites of honor and
interest; whence to descry it requires the most curious observation, and
solicitous circumspection that can be; together with great pains in the
preparation and purgation of our minds toward the inquiry of it.

Our business is to attain knowledge, not concerning obvious and vulgar
matters, but about sublime, abstruse, intricate and knotty subjects, remote
from common observation and sense; to get sure and exact notions about which
will try the best forces of our mind with their utmost endeavors; in firmly
settling principles, in strictly deducing consequences, in orderly digesting
conclusions, in faithfully retaining what we learn by our contemplation and
study.

And if to get a competent knowledge about a few things, or to be reasonably
skillful in any sort of learning, be difficult, how much industry does it
require to be well seen in many, or to have waded through the vast compass of
learning, in no part whereof a Scholar may conveniently or handsomely be
ignorant; seeing there is such a connection of things, and dependence of
notions, that one part of learning does confer light to another, that a man can
hardly well understand any thing without knowing diverse other things; that he
will be a lame Scholar, who has not an insight into many kinds of knowledge,
that he can hardly be a good Scholar, who is not a general one.

To understand so many Languages (which are the shells of knowledge,) to
comprehend so many Sciences (full of various theoremes and problemes) to peruse
so many Histories (of ancient and modern times;) to know the World, both
natural and humane; to be acquainted with the various inventions, inquiries,
opinions and controversies of learned men; to skill the arts of expressing our
mind, and imparting our conceptions with advantage, so as to instruct or
persuade others; these are works indeed, which will exercise and strain all our
faculties (our reason, our fancy, our memory) in painful study.

The knowledge of such things is not innate to us; it does not of it self
spring up in our minds; it is not any-wise incident by chance, or infused by
grace (except rarely by miracle;) common observation does not produce it; it
cannot be purchased at any rate, except by that, for which it was said of old,
the gods sell all things, Dii laboribus omnia vendunt.
that is for pains; without which the best wit and greatest capacity may not
render a man learned; as the best soil will not yield good fruit or grain, if
they be not planted or sown therein.

Consider, if you please, what a Scholar Solomon was; Beside his skill in
politics, which was his principal faculty and profession, whereby he did with
admirable dexterity and prudence manage the affairs of that great Kingdom, 1
Kings 3. 9.
judging his people, and discerning what was good and bad; accurately
dispensing justice; settling his Country in a most flourishing state of peace,
1 Kings 4. 20. 25. 10. 27.
order, plenty and wealth; 1 Kings 4. 2^ --
largely extending his territory; 1 Kings 10. 6, 24.
so that his wisdom of this kind was famous over the earth; beside, 1 Kings 4.
33.
I say, this civil wisdom, He had an exquisite skill in natural Philosophy and
Medicine, for He spoke of trees (or plants) from the cedar that is in Lebanon,
even unto the hysop that springs out of the wall; he spoke also of beasts,
and of fowl, and of creeping things, and of fishes.

He was well versed in Mathematics; for it is said, 1 Kings 4. 30.
Solomon's wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the children of the
East-countrey, and all the wisdom of Egypt; the wisdom of which Nations did
consist in those Sciences. And of his Mechanic skill he left for a monument
the most glorious structure that ever stood on earth.

He was very skillful in Poetry and Music, 1 Kings 4. 32.
for he did himself compose above a thousand songs; whereof one yet extant
declares the loftiness of his fancy, the richness of his vain, and the
elegancy of his style.

He had great ability in Rhetoric; Sap. 7. 15.
according to that in Wisdom, God granted me to speak as I would; and that in
Ecclesiastes, Eccles 12. 10.
The Preacher sought to find out acceptable words; a great instance of which
faculty we have in that admirable Prayer of his composure, 1 Kings 8.
at the dedication of the Temple.

He did wonderfully excel in Ethics; concerning which he spoke three thousand
Proverbs, 1 Kings 4. 32.
or moral Aphorisms; Eccles 2. 9.
and Moreover (says Ecclesiastes) because the preacher was wise, he still
taught the people knowledge; yea he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in
order many proverbs; the which did contain a great variety of notable
observations, and useful directions for common life, couched in pithy
expressions.

As for Theology, as the study of that was the chief study to which he
exhorts others (as to the head, or principal part of wisdom) so questionless
he was himself most conversant therein; Prove. 2. 5-
for proof whereof he did leave so many excellent theoremes, and precepts of
divinity to us.

In fine, there is no sort of knowledge, to which he did not apply his study;
witness himself in those words, Eccles 1. 13.
I gave my heart to seek and search out by wisdom concerning all things, that
are done under heaven.

Such a Scholar was He; and such if we have a noble ambition to be, we must use
the course he did; which was first in his heart to prefer wisdom before all
worldly things; then to pray to God for it, or for his blessing in our quest of
it; then to use the means of attaining it, diligent searching, and hard study;
for that this was his method he tells us, Eccles. 7. 25.
I (says he) applied my heart, to know, and to search, and to seek out
wisdom, and the reason of things.

Such considerations show the necessity of industry for a Scholar; but

3. The worth, and excellency, and great utility, together with the
pleasantness of his vocation, deserving the highest industry, do superadd much
obligation thereto.

We are much bound to be diligent out of ingenuity, and in gratitude to God,
who by his gracious providence has assigned to us a calling so worthy, an
employment so comfortable, a way of life no less commodious, beneficial and
delightful to our selves, than serviceable to God, and useful to the World.

If we had our option and choice, what calling could we desire before this of
any whereto men are affixed? how could we better employ our mind, or place our
labor, or spend our time, or pass our pilgrimage in this World, than in
scholastical occupations?

It were hard to reckon up, or to express the numberless great advantages of
this calling, I shall therefore only touch some, which readily fall under my
thought, recommending its value to us.

It is a calling, the design whereof conspireth with the general end of our
being; the perfection of our nature in its endowments, and the fruition of it
in its best operations.

It is a calling, which does not employ us in bodily toil, in worldly care, in
pursuit of trivial affairs, in sordid drudgeries; but in those angelical
operations of soul, the contemplation of truth, and attainment of wisdom;
which are the worthiest exercises of our reason, and sweetest entertainments of
our mind; the most precious wealth, and most beautiful ornaments of our soul;
whereby our faculties are improved, are polished and refined, are enlarged in
their power and use by habitual accessions: the which are conducible to our own
greatest profit and benefit, as serving to rectify our wills, Prove. 2. 4, 10.
to compose our affections, to guide our lives in the ways of virtue, to bring
us unto felicity.

It is a calling, which being duly followed will most sever us from the vulgar
sort of men, and advance us above the common pitch; endewing us with light to
see farther than other men, disposing us to affect better things, and to slight
those meaner objects of humane desire, on which men commonly dote: freeing us
from the erroneous conceits, and from the perverse affections of common people.
It is said (...), men of learning are double-sighted; but it is true, that in
many cases they see infinitely farther than a vulgar sight does reach; and if a
man by serious study does acquire a clear and solid judgment of things, so as
to assign to each its due weight and price; if he accordingly be inclined in
his heart to affect and pursue them; if from clear and right notions of things
a meek and ingenuous temper of mind, a command and moderation of passions, a
firm integrity, and a cordial love of goodness do spring, he thereby becomes
another kind of thing, much different from those brutish men (beasts of the
people) who blindly follow the motions of their sensual appetite, or the
suggestions of their fancy, or their mistaken prejudices.

It is a calling which has these considerable advantages, that by virtue of
improvement therein, we can see with our own eyes, and guide our selves by our
reasons, not being led blindfold about, or depending precariously on the
conduct of others in matters of highest concern to us. That we are exempted
from giddy credulity, from wavering levity, from fond admiration of persons and
things, being able to distinguish of things, and to settle our judgments about
them, and to get an intimate acquaintance with them, assuring to us their true
nature and worth: that we are also thereby rescued from admiring our selves,
and that overweening selfconceitedness, of which the Wiseman says, Prove. 26.
16.
The sluggard is wiser in his own conceit, than seven men that can render a
reason.

It is a calling, whereby we are qualified and enabled to do God service; to
gratify his desires, to promote his honor, to advance his interests; to render
his name glorious in the World; by teaching, maintaining and propagating his
truth; by persuading men to render their due love, reverence and obedience to
him; than which we can have no more honorable or satisfactory employment; more
like to that of the glorious and blessed Spirits.

It is a calling, the due prosecution whereof does ingratiate us with God, and
procures his favor; rendering us fit objects of his love, and entitling us
thereto in regard to our qualities, and recompense of our works; Sap. 7. 28.
(Psalm. 5. 5.) Prove. 3. 4.
for God loves none but him that dwells with wisdom; and, So shall thou
find favor and good understanding in the sight of God and man.

It is a calling, whereby with greatest advantage we may benefit men, and
deserve well of the World; drawing men to the knowledge and service of God,
reclaiming them from error and sin, rescuing them from misery, and conducting
them to happiness; by clear instruction, by faithful admonition, by powerful
exhortation; And what can be more noble, than to be the lights of the World,
the guides of practice to men, the authors of so much good, so egregious
benefactours to mankind?

It is a calling most exempt from the cares, the crosses, the turmoils, the
factious jars, the anxious intrigues, the vexatious molestations of the World;
its business lying out of the road of those mischiefs; wholly lying in solitary
retirement, or being transacted in the most innocent, and ingenuous company.

It is a calling least subject to any danger or disappointment; wherein we may
well be assured not to miscarry or lose our labor; for the Merchant indeed by
manifold accidents may lose his voyage, or find a bad market; the Husbandman
may plow and sow in vain; but the Student hardly can fail of improving his
stock, and reaping a good crop of knowledge; especially if he study with a
conscientious mind, and pious reverence to God, imploring his gracious help and
blessing.

It is a calling, the industry used wherein does abundantly recompense it self,
by the pleasure and sweetness; which it carries in it; so that the more pains
one takes, the more delight he finds, feeling himself proportionably to grow
in knowledge; and that his work becomes continually more easy to him.

It is a calling, the business whereof does so exercise as not to weary, so
entertain as not to cloy us; being not (as other occupations are) a drawing in
a mill, or a nauseous (tedious) repetition of the same work; but a continued
progress toward fresh objects; our mind not being staked to one or a few poor
matters, but having immense fields of contemplation, (...).
wherein it may everlastingly expatiate, with great proficiency and pleasure.

It is a calling which does ever afford plentiful fruit, even in regard to the
conveniences of this present and temporal state; the which sufficiently will
requite the pains expended thereon: for if we be honestly industrious we shall
not want success; and succeeding we shall not want a competence of wealth, of
reputation, of interest in the World: for concerning wisdom, which is the
result of honest study, the Wiseman tells us, Prove. 8. 18. 3. 16. 4. 9, 10.
Riches and honor are with her, yea durable riches, and righteousness: Length
of days are in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and honor: Exalt
her, and she shall promote thee, she shall bring thee to honor, when thou do
embrace her; she shall give to thine head an ornament of grace; a crown of
glory shall she deliver to thee; In common experience, the wealth of the mind
does qualify for employments, which have good recompenses annexed to them; and
neither God nor man will suffer him long to want, who is endowed with worthy
accomplishments of knowledge; It was a ridiculous providence in Nero, that if
he should chance to lose his Empire, he might live by sidling; yet his motto
was good; and Dionysius, another Tyrant, found the benefit of it; (...), he
that has any good art, has therein an estate, and land in every place; he is
secured against being reduced to extremity of any misfortune: Wisdom (says
the Wiseman) is a defense, Eccl. 7. 12.
and money is a defense; but the excellency of knowledge is, that wisdom
gives life to them that have it: money is a defense, of which fortune may
bereave us; but wisdom is beyond its attacks; being a treasure seated in a
place inaccessible to external impressions.

And as a learned man cannot be destitute of substance; Prove. 12. 8.
so he cannot want credit; A man shall be commended according to the wisdom.
having such an ornament, than which none has a more general estimation; and
which can be of low rate only among that sort of folk, to whom Solomon says,
Prove. 1. 22. 1. 7.
How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity; -- and fools hate
knowledge? It is that which recommendeth a man in all company, and procures
regard, every one yielding Prove. 22. 17.
attention and acceptance to instructive, neat, apposite discourse (that which
the Scripture calls acceptable, pleasant, gracious words) men think
themselves obliged thereby, by receiving information, and satisfaction, from
it; and accordingly Every man (says the Wiseman) shall kiss his lips, Prove.
24. 26.
that gives a right answer; Prove. 22. 15, 16.
and, -- for the grace of his lips the King shall be his friend; Eccles 10. 12.
and, The words of a wise-man's mouth are gracious. It is that an eminency
wherein purchases lasting same, and a life after death, in the good memory and
opinion of posterity; Ecclus 39. 9.
Many shall commend his understanding, and so long as the world endures, it
shall not be blotted out, his memorial shall not depart away, and his name
shall live from generation to generation. A fame no less great, and far more
innocent than acts of Chivalry and Martial prowess; for is not Aristotle as
renowned for teaching the World with his Pen, as Alexander for conquering it
with his Sword? is not one far oftener mentioned, than the other; do not men
hold themselves much more obliged to the learning of the Philosopher, than to
the valor of the Warrior? Indeed the fame of all others is indebted to the
pains of the Scholar, and could not subsist but with and by his fame, Dignum
laud virum Musa vetat mori, learning consecrateth it self and its subject
together, to immortal remembrance.

It is a calling that fitteth a man for all conditions and fortunes; so that he
can enjoy prosperity with moderation, and sustain adversity with comfort; He
that loves a Book will never want a faithful friend, a wholesome counselor,
a cheerful companion, an effectual comforter. By study, by reading, by
thinking one may innocently divert, and pleasantly entertain himself, as in all
weathers, so in all fortunes.

In fine, it is a calling, which Solomon, who had curiously observed, and
exactly compared and scanned by reason and by experience all other occupations
and ways of life, did prefer above all others; and we may presume would sooner
have parted with his royal state, than with his learning; Prove. 4. 7.
for Wisdom (says he) is the principal thing, therefore get wisdom, and with
all thy getting get understanding; and Then I saw (then, Eccles.
that is, after a serious disquisition and discussion of things, I saw) that
wisdom exceeds folly (that is, knowledge excels ignorance) as light
excels darkness.

These things and much more may be said of learning in general; but if more
distinctly we survey each part and each object of it; we shall find that each
does yield considerable emoluments and delights; benefit to our soul, advantage
to our life, satisfaction to our mind.

The observation of things, and collection of experiments how does it enrich
the mind with Idea's, and breed a kind of familiar acquaintance with all
things, so that nothing does surpize us, or strike our mind with astonishment
and admiration? Eccles 1. 8.
and if our eye be not satisfied with seeing, nor our ear filled with hearing,
how much less is our mind satiated with the pleasures of speculating and
observing that immense variety of objects subject to its view?

The exercise of our mind in rational discursiveness, about things, in quest of
truth; canvasing questions, examining arguments for and against; how greatly
does it better us, fortifying our natural parts, enabling us to fix our
thoughts on objects without roving, enuring us to weigh, and resolve, and judge
well about matters proposed; preserving us from being easily abused by captious
fallacies, gulled by specious pretenses, tossed about with every doubt or
objection started before us.

Invention of any kind (in discerning the causes of abstruse effects, in
resolving hard problemes, in demonstrating theoremes, in framing composures of
witty description, or forcible persuasion) how much does it exceed the pleasure
of hunting for any game, or of combating for any victory? do any man's children
so much please him, as these creatures of his brain?

The reading of Books what is it, but conversing with the wisest men of all
ages and all countries, who thereby communicate to us their most deliberate
thoughts, choicest notions, and best inventions, couched in good expression,
and digested in exact method.

And as to the particular matters or objects of study, all have their use and
pleasure. I shall only touch them.

The very initial studies of Tongues and Grammatical Literature are very
profitable and necessary, as the inlets to knowledge, whereby we are enabled to
understand wise men speaking their sense in their own terms and lively strain;
whereby especially we are assisted to drink sacred knowledge out of the
fountains, the divine Oracles.

Luther would not part with a little Hebrew he had for all the Turkish Empire.

Rhetoric, or the part of conveying our thoughts to others by speech with
advantages of clearness, force and elegancy, so as to instruct, to persuade, to
delight the auditors; of how great benefit is it, if it be well used? how much
may it conduce to the service of God, and edification of men? what has been a
more effectual instrument of doing good, and working wonders not only in the
World, but in the Church? how many souls have been converted from error,
vanity and vice, to truth, soberness and virtue, (...) -- Acts 18. 24.
by an eloquent Apollos, a Basil, a Chrysostom?

The perusal of History, how pleasant illumination o^ mind, how useful
direction of life, how spirtely incentives to virtue does it afford? how does
it supply the room of experience, and furnish us with prudence at the expense
of others; informing us about the ways of action, and the consequences thereof
by examples, without our own danger or trouble? how may it instruct and
encourage us in piety, while therein we trace the paths of God in men, or
observe the methods of divine providence, how the Lord and Judge of the World
in due season protecteth, prospers, blesses, rewards innocence and
integrity; how he crosses, defeateth, blasteth, crusheth, punishes iniquity
and outrage; managing things with admirable temper of wisdom to the good of
mankind, and advancement of his own glory?

The Mathematical Sciences, how pleasant is the speculation of them to the
mind, how useful is the practice to common life? how do they whet and excite
the mind? how do they inure it to strict reasoning, and patient meditation?

Natural Philosophy, the contemplation of this great Theater, or visible system
presented before us; observing the various appearances therein, and inquiring
into their causes; reflecting on the order, connection, and harmony of things;
considering their original source, and their final design; how does it enlarge
our minds and advance them above vulgar amusements, and the admiration of those
petty things, about which men cark and bicker? how may it serve to work in us
pious affections of admiration, reverence and love toward our great Creator,
Romans 1. 20.
whose eternal divinity is clearly seen, Psalm. 19. 1.
whose glory is declared, whose transcendent perfections, and attributes of
immense power, wisdom and goodness are conspicuously displayed, Psalm. 8.
whose particular kindness toward us men does evidently shine in those his
works of nature?

The study of Moral Philosophy, how exceedingly beneficial may it be to us,
suggesting to us the dictates of reason concerning the nature and faculties of
our soul, the chief good and end of our life, the way and means of attaining
happiness; the best rules and methods of practice; the distinctions between
good and evil; the nature of each virtue, and motives to embrace it; the rank
wherein we stand in the World, and the duties proper to our relations; by
rightly understanding and estimating which things we may know how to behave our
selves decently and soberly toward our selves, justly and prudently toward our
neighbors; we may learn to correct our inclinations, to regulate our
appetites, to moderate our passions, to govern our actions, to conduct and
wield all our practice well in prosecution of our end; so as to enjoy our being
and conveniences of life in constant quiet and peace, with tranquillity and
satisfaction of mind?

But especially the study of Theology, how numberless unexpressible advantages
does it yield? for,

It enlightneth our minds with the best knowledge concerning the most high and
worthy objects, in order to the most happy end, with the firmest assurance.

It certainly and perfectly does inform us concerning the nature and
attributes, the will and intentions, the works and providence of God.

It fully declares to us our own nature, our original, our designed end, our
whole duty, our certain way of attaining eternal life, and felicity.

It exactly teaches us how we should demean our selves in all respects,
piously toward God, justly and charitably toward our neighbor, soberly toward
our selves; without blame in the World, with satisfaction of our conscience,
with assured hope of blessed rewards.

It proposes those encouragements, and exhibiteth assurances of those helps,
which serve potently to engage us in all good practice.

It sets before us a most complete and lively pattern of all goodness; apt
most clearly to direct, most strongly to excite, most obligingly to engage us
thereto; especially instructing and inclining to the practice of the most high
and hard duties, meekness, humility, patience, self-denial, contempt of all
worldly vanities.

It discovers those sublime mysteries, and stupendous wonders of grace,
whereby God has demonstrated an incomprehensible kindness to mankind, 1 Pet.
1. 12.
and our obligation to correspondent gratitude. Tit. 3. 4.


It represents manifold arguments and incentives to love God with most
intense affection, to confide in him with most firm assurance, to delight in
him continually with joy unspeakable; which are the noblest, the sweetest, the
happiest opperations of our soul.

It reareth our hearts from vain thoughts and mean desires concerning these
poor, Cor. 4. 18.
transitory, earthly things, to contemplations, affections, and hopes toward
objects most excellent, eternal and celestial.

It engages us to study the Book of God, the Book of Books, the richest mine
of most excellent knowledge, containing infallible Oracles of truth, and
heavenly rules of life; which are able to make us wise to salvation, (^ Tim 3.
15.)
and perfect to every good work. Psalm. 19. 10.


And how can we otherwise be so well employed, as in meditation about such
things? what occupation does nearer approach to that of the blessed Angels?
what Heaven is there upon Earth like to that of constantly feasting our minds
and hearts in the contemplation of such objects? Especially considering that
this study does not only yield private benefit to our selves, in forwarding
our own salvation, but enableth us by our guidance and encouragement to promote
the eternal welfare of others, and by our endeavors to people Heaven;
according to that exhortation of St. Paul pressing on Timothy this study with
diligence; Meditate upon these things; 1 Timothy 4. 16.
give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to all; take heed
unto thy self, and unto the doctrine, continue in them; for in doing this, thou
shall both save thy self, and them that hear the.

So considerable is each part of learning, so extremely profitable are some
parts of; indeed the skill of any liberal art is valuable, as a handsome
ornament, as an harmless divertisement, as an useful instrument upon
occasions; as preferible to all other accomplishments and advantages of person
or fortune (beauty, strength, wealth, power, or the like;) for who would not
purchase any kind of such knowledge at any rate; who would sell it for any
price; who would not choose rather to be deformed or impotent in his body, than
to have a misshapen and weak mind; to have rather a lank purse, than an empty
brain; to have no title at all, than no worth to bear it out? if any would, 1
King. 4. 29-
he is not of Solomon's mind; for of wisdom (by which he means a
comprehension of all knowledge, divine and humane; into which the knowledge of
natural things, of Mathematics, of Poetry, are reckoned ingredients) he says,
The merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of silver, Prove. 2. 14. 8.
11.
and the gain thereof than fine gold; she is more precious than rubies, and all
the things thou can desire, are not to be compared unto her: Prove. 8. 19. 16.
16. 20. 15. 4. ^.
Her fruit is better than gold, yea than fine gold; and her revenue than choice
silver.

Now then, considering all these advantages of our calling, if we by our
negligence or sluggishness therein do lose them, are we not very ungrateful to
God, who gave them, as with a gracious intent for our good, so with expectation
that we should improve them to his service? If God had allotted to us the
calling of Rusticks, or of Artificers, we had been impious in not diligently
following it; but we are abominably ungrateful in neglecting this most
incomparably excellent vocation.

Are we not extremely defective to our selves, if indulging a wretched humor
of laziness we will not enjoy those sweet pleasures, nor embrace those great
profits to which God in mercy calls us?

If Solomon said true, Prove. 19. 8.
He that gets wisdom, loves his own soul, he that keeps understanding
shall find good; how little friends are we to our selves, how neglectfull of
our own welfare, by not using the means of getting wisdom?

The heart of him that has understanding, Prove. 15. 14.
seeks knowledge, says Solomon; what a fool then is he that shunneth it?
who, though it be his way, and his special duty to seek it, yet neglects it;
choosing rather to do nothing, or to do worse.

And do we not deserve great blame, displeasure and disgrace from mankind, if
having such opportunities of qualifying our selves to do good, and serve the
public, we by our idleness render our selves worthless and useless?

How, being slothful in our business, can we answer for our violating the
wills, for abusing the goodness, for perverting the charity and bounty of our
worthy Founders and Benefactours, who gave us the good things we enjoy, not to
maintain us in idleness, but for supports and encouragements of our industry?
how can we excuse our selves from dishonesty, and perfidious dealing, seeing
that we are admitted to these enjoyments under condition, and upon confidence
(confirmed by our free promises, and most solemn engagements) of using them
according to their pious intent, that is in a diligent prosecution of our
studies, in order to the service of God, and of the public?

Let every Scholar, when he mispendeth an hour, or sluggeth on his bed but
imagine, that he hears the voice of those glorious Kings, or venerable
Prelates, or worthy Gentlemen, complaining thus, and rating him; why, sluggard,
do thou against my will possess my estate? why do thou presume to occupy
the place due to an industrious person? why do thou forget, or despise thy
obligations to my kindness? thou art an usurper, a robber, or a purloiner of my
goods, which I never intended for such as thee; I challenge thee of wrong to my
self, and of sacrilege toward my God, to whose service I devoted those his
gifts to me.

How reproachful will it be to us, if that expostulation may concern us, Prove.
17. 16.
Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, seeing he
has no heart to it?

If to be a dunce, or a bungler in any profession be shameful, how much more
ignominious, and infamous to a Scholar to be such? from whom all men expect,
that he should excel in intellectual abilities; and be able to help others by
his instruction and advice.

Nothing surely would more grate on the heart of one, that has a spark of
ingenuity, of modesty, of generous good nature, than to be liable to such an
imputation.

To avoid it therefore (together with all the guilt, and all the mischiefs
attending on sloth) let each of us in God's name, carefully mind his business;
And let the grace and blessing of God prosper you therein. Amen.

FINIS.

