REGULA Quinque Ordinum ARCHITECTURAE Aucthore I. B. VIGNOLA. Aucta et Emendata
per Josephum Moxon.

LONDINI. Ex Officina Josephi Moxon*



VIGNOLA: OR THE COMPLETE Architect. Showing in a Plain and Easy way the Rules
of the Five Orders in ARCHITECTVRE: VIZ. TUSCAN, DORICK, IONICK, CORINTHIAN and
COMPOSITE.

Whereby, any that can but Read and Understand English, may readily learn the
Proportious that all Members in a Building have one unto another.

Set forth by Mr. James Barozzio of Vignola.

Translated into English, By Joseph Moxon.

The Third Edition, with Additions.

2 Chronicles. 33, Now these are the things wherein Solomon was instructed for the
building of the house of God, etc LONON. Printed for Joseph Moxon and sold at
his Shop on Ludgate Hill, near Fleet Bridge, at the Sign of ATLAS. 1673.

To the Ingenious Artist.
I Have here presented you with the Works of Mr. James Barozzio of Vignola in
English, who for his great Skill and knowledge in the Art of Architecture, is
much respected, and highly applauded among all Artificers throughout
Christendom, there being few Nations of any note, that have not his works
translated into their own Language: only we here in England (I know not
whether it be through carelessness in Artists, or else covetousness) mind not
those things which make other Countries (that have nothing else to boast of) so
famous among their Neighbors: Certain I am that England breeds as good wits as
other Lands do, and would they but show themselves more forward in commendable
Studies, would doubtless share with them in their Praises.

Our Author first collected these things together for his own private use: and
by the solicitations of many Persons of Worth and Honor, did at last (though
unwillingly consent to make the World for a small price partakers of that which
cost him so much labor, study and travel.

And whereas former Authors left their Works uncertain, or at least doubtful
to all but their own Nations, in respect of the several measures they used; as
some the Fathom, some the Foot, some the Span, some the Inch of their own
particular Country, which seldom agrees with the Fathom, Foot or Inch of any
other Land; our Author to avoid that great inconven^ence, and certain
uncertainty has reduced all his measures to a convenient and universal
measure, which is ^alled by the name of a Model: the invention whereof has
made the whole Art of Architecture very easy to all Students therein: for it
is nothing else but the half Diamter of the Column at the lower end thereof; as
if the whole Diameter should be 10, 12, 14 or 16 inches, then will the half
Diameter be 5, 6, 7, or 8 inches, and that is called the Model: which Model he
divides into 12 equal parts, when he frames the Tu^can and Dorick Order: and
into 18 for the Ionick, Corinthian and Composite.

In the Translation of this Book, I have followed (so near as I could) the
words of our Author, unless here and there I have been a little more large,
thereby endeavoring the better to express his meaning, and instruct the young
Practitioner. I confess the Book was formerly translated by another hand, but
it was so generally disliked (indeed not without cause) that I chose rather to
take the pains to translate it a new, than run the hazard of discouraging
young Artists with those dark and unproper directions.

Now for the better instructions of such as desire to study this pleasant,
profitable and commendable Art, and yet are disheartened by the strange words
used therein, I have collected all the hard words together, and given you the
meaning of them: that so when you find your self puzzeled with any word of Art,
you need but have recourse to this Alphabetical Table, and find the explanation
of any hard word used in this Book.

A
Abacus; the member ma^ked L in number V. Anulets, G numb X. Architrave. numb.
I. word Architr. Astragaloes, B numb. XV.
B
Band, B numb. IV. Base, word Base numb. I.
C
Capital, numb. I. word Capital. Cathetus, a line drawn from the top of any
thing to the bottom. Cimatium, L numb. V. Composite Order, read numb. XXV.
Corinthian Order, The name of Columns made after the manner described in numb.
XIX. Cornice, numb. I word Cornice.
D
Dentils, B numb. X. Diagonal line, a line drawn from the two opposite Angles
in a Square.
E
Equilaterial Triangle, a Triangle whose sides are all of equal length.
F
Flutes, D numb. X. Friese, numb. I. word Friese.
G
Groeves, A numb. IX. Gula or throat F. numb. V.
I
Ichnography, the ground or Plot on which any thing is projected. Intersection,
the point where two lines cross one the other. Ionick Order, The name of
Columns made after the manner discribed in numb. XII.
L
List, C numb. V.
M
Metops, D numb. X. Model, I have just now told you what it is in this Epistle.
Modilion, B numb. X.
O
Overture, an arch as is described between the Columns in numb. VII. Ovolo, A
numb. V.
P
Pedestal, that whereon the Column stands, as in numb. VI. Perpendicular, a
line that cuts a second line at right angles, is said to be perpendicular to
the second line. Pilasters, the Pillars that stand behind the Columns, whereon
the Arches rests: see numb. VII. Plinthus, D numb. IV. Profile, see
Ichnography.
Q
Quadrant, the fourth part of a Circle.
R
Right angles, right angles are neither more nor less then square Corners.
S
Scroll, the winding figure in numb. XVIII is called a Scroll. Scotia, A numb.
XV. Semicircle, half the circumference of a circle. Spiral line, the two
outmostlines of the wreathed Column, numb. XXX. are called Spiral lines.
Swathe, the same that Band is.
T
Triglyph, D numb. X. Tondino, B numb. V. Torus, A and B numb. XXII. Tuscan
Order, the names of Columns made after the manner described in numb. I.
V
Voluta the same that Scroll is.
The understanding of this Table is so easy, that I shall not need to explain
any thing in it, that I know of: only take notice that where you see a Letter,
as BC, etc, and numb. I. V. X. or the like follow any word, that then you are
referred to the leaf marked with that number; therefore in that leaf seek for
the same Letter, and the Member that that Letter stands in, is called by that
name.

I know some that are already sufficient Artists) may think the sleighter of
this Book, merely because I have made it plain to common Capacities: But if
such will but look back upon their own younger endeavors, they may perhaps
remember the time when themselves would have been glad of any help that might
have furthered them in their then-thought tedious and difficult Studies.
Besides, they may also know, that it is easier for themselves to know the
meaning of plain and easy expressions, than for young Students to understand
the directions of hard and difficult Instructions.

Joseph Moxon.

I
BEcause I have not found among the Antiquities of Rome any Tuscan Ornaments,
from whence I might frame a Rule, as I have done in the other Orders, viz.
Dorick, Ionick, Corinthian and Composite, I have made use of Vitruvius his
Authority, in his 4th Book and 7th Chapter: where he says, The Tuscan Order
with Base and Capital must be 7 times its thickness: In the rest of the
Ornaments, namely, the Achitrave Friese and Cornice, I believe that Rule ought
to be followed which I found in the other four Orders, viz. that the Architrave
Friese and Cornice must be one fourth part of the Column with Base and Capital,
which is 14 Models, as may be seen in the figure; And therefore the Architrave
Friese and Cornice ought to be 3 Models and an half, that being one fourth part
of the 14 Models contained in the Column; as shall be mentioned in several
other places.



II.
WHen you make the Tuscan Order without a Pedestal, you must divide its whole
height into 17 parts and a half, and call them Models; which Models you must
again divide into 12 equal parts; and from the same is the whole Order made
with its several members, as may be seen in this Figure, described in whole
and broken Numbers.



III.
WHen you make the same Order with a Pedestal, the whole height must be divided
into 22 and one sixth part, by reason that the Pedestal does require the height
of one third part of the Column, with Base and Capital, which being 14 Models,
its third part does contain 4 Models, and two third parts, which being added to
17 and a half, make together 22; and one sixth part.



IV.
THough it seldom happen in the Tuscan Order to have a Pedestal, yet to follow
the Order, I have set it forth in this Figure; advising you that in all the
five Orders I have followed this for a general rule, that the Pedestal with
its Ornaments, must be one third part of the Column with its Basis and Capital:
even as in the Ornaments above, the Architrave, Friese and Cornice must make
one fourth part of the same. This being well understood, will prove very
profitable and delightful unto your labor; for being to make any of the five
Orders, you must divide the height of the Column with its Ornaments into 19
parts, then take the height of the Column with its Basis and Capital, and make
the divisions of the Models according to its Order, Dorick, Ionick, etc. then
you must frame the Fabric with this Model, dividing its parts as may be seen
in the Figure: where A represents the Body of the Column, B the nether Band or
Swathe of the Column, C the Torus, D the Plinthus, E the List, (a general name
used in all members alike, whether less or more,) F the Gula or throat,
reversed in the Pedestal.



V.
HAving heretofore described in general the chiefest Dimensions to make the
Tuscan Order by; and having here and in the foregoing leaf set down the parts
at large, to the end you may see in the particulars the division of every small
member, and also the Draughts (though the Draughts with the Members alone might
be sufficiently understood of any ingenious capacity without any Comment upon
them) yet for the more easy instructing of all Lovers of Art, I shall also
give you the meaning of some general Terms used in Art; as for Example, the
Member marked with A in this Figure, is called the Ovolo, or the Egg, B the
Tondino, or round, C the List or Rule, D the Crown, E the List, F the Gula or
Throat reversed, G the Friese, H the List of the Architrave, I the Architrave,
K the List of the Abacus, L the Abacus or Cimatium, M the Ovolo. N the List, O
the Friese of the Capital, P the Neck of the Column, Q the hanging over of the
Capital, R the Body of the Column.



VI.
TO make the Dorick Order without a Pedestal, you must divide the whole height
into 20 parts, and one of those parts shall be the Model; which Model you must
divide into 12 parts, as in the Tuscan Order; The Foot or Basis, with the
nethermost Swathe or Band, shall be of one Model; the height of the Column
between the Base and Capital, shall be 14 Models; the Capital 1 Model, which
added together, make 16 Models, for the height of the Column, with Base and
Capital: Then (as I told you before in the Tuscan Order) the Architrave, Friese
and Cornice, must be one fourth part of the Column with its Base and Capital,
as you may see in the Figure: where the Architrave is 1 Model, the Friese 1 and
a half, and the Cornice 1 and an half, which added together, make 4 Models, for
the height of the Architrave, Friese and Cornice, which is one quarter of 16.
the height of the Column with its Base and Capital. And if you add the 4
Models for the Architrave, Friese and Cornice to 16, there will arise 20
Models, for the height of the Column with its Base and Capital; which is the
whole height, as aforesaid.



VII.
WHen you make Galleries of the Dorick Order, you must (as aforesaid) divide
the height into 20 parts, and one of those shall be the Model: the distance
between the two Pilasters must be 7 Models, and the breadth of the Pilasters
must be 3 Models; the width of the Overture or Arch must be half the length of
the Column, which is 7 Models; and for the division of the Metops and
Trygliphs, you may make them as you see in this Figure.

But this you must note, that the Column must stand out before the Pilaster one
third part of a Model more then its half; because the Projectors of the Arch
are no more then half the length of the Column. And this you may observe for a
Rule in all the other Orders upon the like occasion.



VIII.
WHen Galleries are to be made after the Dorick Order, with Pedestals, you must
divide the Column into 25 and one third part; and one of these make the Model:
the breadth of the Pilaster shall be 5 Models, and the distance between the
Pilasters shall be 10 Models; so shall the divisions of the Metopes and
Trigliphs fall into a proportional Dimension: the width of the Arch shall be
10 Models; which is half the height of the Arch, as may be seen in the Figure.



IX
THe height of the Pedestal of the Dorick Order, must be 5 Models and one third
part; the Impost, or seting on of the Arch, must be 1 Model: and the other
particular Members must be divided according to the numbers set down in the
Figure.

A, shows the Groeves or Gutters of the Column (as it shall be called in all
the other Orders) and the Round.



X.
THis piece of the Dorick Order is taken out of Marcellus his Theater in Rome,
and is laid down here only for a Pattern: And because the Dimensions of every
Member is sufficiently set down in the Figure, I shall not need to say any
thing to the Proportions of them.

A The Grove or hollowing of the Upper List. B The Dentils or Teeth. C The
Capital of the Triglyph. D The Triglyph in which those parts that are framed
inwards are called Flutes, or Hollows, and the square place of the Friese
between the Triglyphs is called a Metops. E The Props or little Bells. F The
Cimatium. G The Annulets, Bands, or Lists.
In Figure XXXIII, and XXXIV, you have other Ornaments to set under the Cornice
of the Dorick Order.



XI.
THis other piece of the Dorick Order is taken from the remainder of some of
the Antiquities of ROME, of which Work I have seen such a comely Composure,
that it has been very pleasant and graceful to behold. A The Gola reversed,
or upright. B The Modillion (by which name all such Members are called, though
they be severally framed) or Underprop to bear up the Cornice. C The Bead
string.




XII.
WHen you make the Jonick Order without a Pedestal, you must divide its whole
height into 22 parts and an half, and one of those parts shall be a Model; then
divide each Model into 18 parts: The reason why each Model is divided into more
parts than the Tuscan, or Dorick Order, is, because this being a more curious
and spritely Order, does require more small and acute divisions for the more
exact setting down of the Dimensions of every particular Member.

The length of the Column with Base and Capital, must be 18 Models, the
Architrave 1 and one quarter, the Friese 1 and an half, the Cornice 1 and three
quarters; which numbers and fractions added together, make 22 and an half, as
aforesaid.

And if you add the numbers and fractions of the Architrave, Frise, and Cornice
together, they will make 4 Models and an half, which is one quarter of the
Column with Base and Capital.



XIII.
WHen you make Galleries or Lodges after the Ionick Order, you must make the
Breadth of the Pilasters 3 Models, the Breadth of the Arch 8 Models and an half,
the Height of the Arch 17 Models, which is twice the breadth of the Arch: and
this rule is strictly to be observed in all the Arches of the like Order,
unless by necessity you are compelled to the contrary.



XIV.
NOw when you make Galleries or Lodges after the Ionick Order with Pedestals,
you must divide the whole height into 28 parts and an half, and allow for the
height of the Pedestal with its Ornaments 6 Models, which is one third part of
the height of the Column with its Base and Capital, which (as was said before)
ought to be observed in all the Orders.

The breadth of the Arch shall be 11 Models, the height 22 Models, and the
breadth of the Pilasters shall be 4 Models; as you may see in the Figure.



XV.
THe upper List or Cornice of the Impost is one Model, and its Out-jetting one
third part of a Model; the Dimensions of the other particular Members may be
known by their several Numbers in the Figure. A The Scotia, or
Upper-hollowing. B The Astragaloes, or Rounds. C The Scotia, or
Nethermost-hollowing.




XVI.
THough the manner of making the Jonick Capital be designed in this Figure,
with the Ichnography thereof, and Profile; yet for the better understanding
thereof, you ought to draw two Cathetus, or Perpendicular lines distant from
one another the space of two Models, through the Centers of the Eyes of the
Voluta or Scroll. The whole height of the Voluta, or Scroll, ought to be 16
parts of a Model, 8 parts whereof are above the Center, or Eye, and 6 parts
under the Eye, so that there will remain two parts of a Model for the depth of
the Eye.

The manner of designing this Scroll is set down in the Figure over the leaf,
together with as ample a description upon it, as can be expected in so small a
Room.



XVII.
The manner of making the Voluta or Scroll.
FIrst, Draw a Cathetus, whose length must be 16 parts of a Model, and upon the
7th* part upwards, make the Center of the eye of the Scroll, and upon that
Center describe a Circle, whose half Diameter shall be one part, and that
Circle shall be the eye of the Scroll, then through the Center of the Eye draw
a straight line, that shall both cut the Cathetus at right Angles, and divide
the Circle into 4 equal parts; then from the points of Intersection of the
straight lines with the Circle, describe a Square within the Eye, and every
side of this square divide into two equal parts, and from each Division to its
Opposite, draw straight lines; then divide each of these lines from the Center
into 3 equal parts, and with figures mark every point of Division (as in the
Draft) with 1, 2, 3, etc. and from this groundwork you may with great ease
describe the whole Scroll, as follows.

First place one foot of your Compasses upon the side of the Square, at the
point 1, and extend the other to the top of the Cathetus, and from thence
describe a Quadrant, which will reach from the top of the Cathetus aforesaid,
to the straight line that is perpendicular to the Cathetus: then remove the one
foot of your Compasses to figure 2, and bring the other foot to the ending of
the former Quadrant, and from thence describe another Quadrant, which shall end
at the bottom of the Cathetus: then move your Compasses again, and place one
foot at figure 3, and the other foot where the second Quadrant ended, and from
thence describe another Quadrant: then move your Compasses to figure 4, and
where your last Quadrant ended, describe another; then move one foot of your
Compasses into the point of Division marked with Figure 5, and fit the other
foot to the place where your last Quadrant ended, and from thence describe
another Quadrant; from thence move to 6, and describe another Quadrant; then to
7; then to 8, etc.

To make the thickness of the List of the Scroll.
THe thickness of the List must be one quarter of the space of the shortest
distance between the two edges in the Scroll; therefore when you draw a List
about it, you must divide the space between every one of the 12 Centers, into 4
equal parts, and place one foot of your Compasses upon the division that falls
next to the Center of that Arch whose List you mean to draw, and with the other
foot you may describe the Arch that shall be the bounds of the List of the
Scroll in that place. Do the like in all the rest, and your Scroll, and List
about it will be finished.



XVIII. A Second way to make the Voluta.
DEscribe the Triangle BCD after this manner. Let the side CD be 7 parts of a
Model, then let fall the perpendicular BC upon the point C, whose length must
be 9 parts of a Model, and from the points BD, draw the other line in the
Triangle. Then upon the point C, describe a Circle, whose half Diameter shall
be 1 part of a Model, and this Circle shall represent the Eye of the Scroll:
Then set one foot of your Compasses upon the point D, and extend the other to
the point C, and so describe the Arch OF: Then divide that Arch OF into 24
equal parts, and from the Center D, draw a straight line through every
Division of the Arch, and let those straight lines be prolonged to the
perpendicular BC, and where those straight lines divide the perpendicular BC,
there mark every division with Arithmetical figures, beginning at the top with
1, 2, 3, etc. and so proceed downwards to 25, and so shall you have a Scale of
the perpendicular that will give you the Center of every arch in the Scroll, as
you shall see hereafter.

Therefore draw your Cathetus of 16 parts of a Model (as was said before) and
place your Center of the eye of the Scroll upon 7 parts upwards, and upon that
Center describe a Circle, whose half Diameter shall be 1 part of a Model, and
this Circle shall be the Eye of the Scroll: Then draw a straight line through
the Center that shall cut the Cathetus at right Angles; so have you the Eye
divided into 4 equal parts or Quadrants; then divide every Quadrant into 2
equal parts, and through the two opposite divisions draw straight lines (which
must be continued out to a convenient length, that will comprehend the breadth
of the Scroll in that place) so shall you have the Eye divided into 8 equal
parts; then set the one foot of your Compasses in the point C of the Triangle,
and extend the other to the Division marked 1, and so transfer that distance to
the Scroll, placing one foot at the Center of the Eye, and the other foot to
the top of the Cathetus, and mark that with figure 1; having so done, remove
your Compasses to the Scale again, and placing the one foot in the Center of
the Eye, as before, extend the other to the division marked 2, then remove your
Compasses again to the Scroll, and placing one foot upon the Center of the Eye,
mark where the other foot falls upon the second line, and there mark: Then
remove your Compasses again to the Scale, as before, and take the distance of
number 3 from the Center of the Eye, and transfer that to the third line of the
Scroll, as before, and mark that with 3. Then remove to the fourth in the
Scale, and do as before, then to the fifth, and so to all the rest till you
come to 25, as you may see in the figure.

Then to describe the Arches of the Scroll, do thus: Place one foot of your
Compasses upon the point marked 1, and extend the other to the Center of the
Eye; then keeping your first foot of your Compasses at the figure, with the
other foot describe a small occult Arch; then remove the first point of your
Compasses to figure 1, and with the other foot describe another small Arch,
that may intersect the former, and the very point of the Intersection shall be
the Center of the Arch 1, 2. Then setting the one foot of your Compasses to
figure 2, upon the second line of the Scroll, extend the other to the Center of
the Eye, and your Compasses being at that distance, describe another small Arch
through the Center of the Eye of the Scroll: Then remove the first foot of your
Compasses to the point 3, upon the third line, and with the second foot
describe another small Arch, that shall cut the former Arch, and the very point
of Intersection shall be the Center of the Arch 2, 3, as you may see in the
Figure. Do the like with all the other Figures, till the whole Scroll is
finished.



XIX.
TO make the Corinthian Order without Pedestals, you must divide the whole
height into 25 parts, and one of those parts shall be the Model; which Model
you must divide into 18 parts, as in the Jonick Order. The distance between the
Columns must be 4 Models, and two third parts of a Model; both because the
Architrave above may not bear too much, and also because the Models in the
Cornice may be just over the middle of the Column, in their due proportions and
proper places. The other Divisions and Dimensions of every particular Member,
may be seen in the Figure, and therefore will need no further Explanation.



XX.
IF you make Arches of Galleries according to the Corinthian Order, you must
make the distance between the Pilasters 9 Models, and the height to the top of
the Arch 18 Models; and the breadth of the Pilasters 3 Models: For the rest of
the work, you may proceed according to the figures in the Description.



XXI.
But if you make Lodges or Galleries with Pedestals, you must divide the whole
height into 32 equal parts, and one of them shall be a Model: The distance
between the Pilasters must be 12 Models, and the height to the top of the Arch
must be 25 Models; the breadth of the Pilasters must be 4 Models; the height
ought to contain more then twice the breadth, yet for Neatness sake it must be
born withal in this Order.



XXII.
IF the Pedestal of this Corinthian Order were the third part of the Column; it
should be 6 Models, and two third parts of a Model; but for the greater
strength, it may be made of 7 Models; which in this Order will not do amiss;
and also, because the mere Pedestal without the Cimatia and Base, may be twice
the length of its breadth. A The upper Torus, or Swathe. B The nether Torus, or
Swathe.




XXIII.
FIrst measure the Ground or Compass, and upon it describe a square, whose 4
sides shall be equal thereunto, and whose Diagonal line shall be 4 Models;
then upon the sides of the Square make 4 Equilateral Triangles, like that in
the Figure marked thus: and at the Angle opposite to the side of the Square,
set one foot of your Compasses, and with the other foot describe an Arch of a
Circle, which shall be the Hollow of the Abacus.

For the height of the Leaves, Stalks and Abacus, you must follow the
directions in the Figure; which because they are so very plain to be
understood, will not need any Explanation.

Then for the standing out of the Leaves and Stalks, you must draw a line from
the utmost point of the Abacus, to the upper Band of the Column, and let the
Leaves and Stalks reach just to the line, as you may see in the Figure.

AB together are called the Abacus of the Capital, but for distinction, A is
taken for the Cimatium of the Abacus, C the Stalks, D the lesser Leaves, E the
middle Leaves, F the under Leaves, G the Flower.



XXIV.
THe Corinthian Cornice is taken out of several places in ROME, but especially
out of the Church called La Rotunda, and from 3 Columns standing in the Market
place: Now I having compared its principal Members together, have found their
several Dimensions, and have here set them down; that so when you have occasion
to use the like, you shall not need to be to seek of a Rule to work it by,
which Rule differs not a straws breadth from the Antiquities themselves.

Wherefore one Model comes to the middle of the Column, and its Ovals, Beads
and Dentils, are strung right over one another, in a decent Order, as may be
seen in the Figure.

The numbers in the Figure consist of Models, and parts of Models, every Model
being divided into 18 parts.

For the Divisions of the several Members, I shall not need to say any thing
here, it being so plainly set down in the Figure it self, that any (though but
meanly skilled in the Art,) may easily understand it.



XXV.
THis Pedestal of the Composite Order, keeps the proportions of the Corinthian,
there being no other difference but in the Members of the Cimatium and Base, as
you may see in the Figure. And because the Composite Ornaments observe the same
proportion as the Corinthian does, I have not judged it needful to make any
several Columns or Arches thereof, referring you therein to the Corinthian
Order: Only here I have shown you the varieties of the Base and Capital, and
its other Ornaments, as you may see in their proper places.



XXVI.
THis Ichnography and Profile, or Compass of the Composite Capital, is made
after the same manner as the Corinthian Capital is made: only where the
Corinthian has its small Stalks, the Composite has Voluta's, or Scrolls,
after the Jonick Order. This Invention came from the Ancient Romans, who
borrowing one part of the Jonick, and another of the Corinthian Order, strove
thereby to join as much Beauty and Bravery as they could together.



XXVII.
THis piece of Composite Order, namely, the Capital, Architrave, Friese, and
Cornice, is also taken out of several places among the Antiquities of Rome,
and brought into the Proportion shown you in the Corinthian; wherefore the
Proportion of the several Members being marked in the Figure, I shall omit
speaking of them in this place.



XXVIII.
WE find among the Antiquities of Rome, almost infinite varieties of Capitals,
which have no proper name at all* but may be comprehended under this general
name Composite. They do likewise agree in their Dimensions with the other
Composite, derived from the Ion^ck and Corinthian; only in some of them you
find Beasts instead of Stalks* in others Cornucopia's, and in others other
varieties, even what pleased the Fancy of the Artist best; as you may see here
in this Design: where you have 4 Eagles instead of Stalks, and instead of
Fruits and Flowers, 4 Jupiters faces, with Thunderbolts under them; from
whence you may gather, that it stood in some Temple dedicated to Jupiter. The
like we may concieve of the other (which has 4 Griffins instead of Stalks, and
4 Eagl^s in the midst, with Dogs in their Tallons or Claws) that it did
properly belong to some of their Idols. The proportions (excepting the Beasts)
is like unto the Corinthian Capitals.

The Base (which is last delineated) Vetruvius in his th^^d chapter of his
third Book calls A^ticurga as being first invented and wrought in A^hens. In
our times we use indefinitely to make use of it under the Dorick, Corinthian,
Jonick and Composite Order; but it agrees best with the Composite, and is
tolerable in the Jonick:



XXIX.
THere are diverse ways to lessen Collumns, whereof I have here and in the
following page set down those two which are most esteemed of. The first and
best is this* After you know the height and thickness of the Column, you must
divide the Cathetus thereon into 3 equal parts, and in the point of the first
division upwards, draw a thwart line through the Column, that shall cut the
Cathetus at right Angles, then in the point of Intersection, set one foot of
your Compasses, and extend the other foot to one of the sides of the Column, or
to half the breadth, which is all one, and so describe a Semicircle upon the
thwart line, then divide half that Semicircle into so many parts as you please,
as into 6, 9, 12, 15, or more, and no^e that into so many parts as you divide
the Semicircle, so many equal parts you must divide the two upper thirds of
the Cathetus into, and upon every Division draw straight Lines through the
Column, that shall cut the Cathetus at right Angles; then from every point of
Division in the Semicircle, draw straight Lines parallel to the Cathetus, and
where these straight lin^s intersect the Lines drawn athwart the Column, there
shall be the several points that you must lessen the Column into in every
particular place. But you must take notice, that the Line drawn from the first
point of Division in the Sem^circle, must intersect the line drawn from the
first Division in the Cathetus; and the second in the Semicircle, the line
drawn from the second in the Cathetus; the third in the Semicircle, from the
third in the Cathetus, and so forth; every line drawn from the several points
of Division in the Semicircle, must intersect the line drawn from the same
number of Divisions in the Cathetus.

Having thus drawn one side of the Column, you may by the same Rules draw the
other side also, or else measuring with your Compasses the distance of every
point of lessening from the Cathetus, you need but turn your Comp^sses about
upon the point that stands in the Cathetus, and so transfer the distance to the
other side of the Column.

This kind of lessening may be used in the Tuscan and Dorick Order, which
Orders are not to be lessened below the nethermost third part of the Column.



XXX.
Another way to lessen Collumns.
THis second way of lessening Collumns, our Author found out by his own study
and Invention, and though it be not very common, yet it is easy enough to be
understood by the Figure: Wherefore in the first place, ^ou must divide the
whole Cathetus into 3 equal parts, and through the first point of Division
(counting upwards) you must draw a thwart line, as CD that shall cut the
Cathetus at right Angles, which line must be continued to a convenient length,
as to E, that so it may be intersected by the lines drawn from the divisions in
the Cathetus, as you shall learn hereafter: then divide each of them three
equal parts into four equal parts more, and if you intend to have your Collumn
wreathed, divide every one of those four parts, into four equal parts more* so
shall your Cathetus be divided into 48 equal parts: Then with your Compasses
meas^ure the length of the line CD, and carry that length to the top of the
Collumn, placing one foot of your Compass; in the point A, and noting where
the other foot falls upon the Cathetus, as in the point B, and through these
two points draw a straight line, and continue it till it interlect the line
CDE, as here it does in the point E: Then from the point E, draw straight lines
through every fou^th Di^ision in the Cathetus, as in the Figure, or if you
lease (for more exactness) through every single division in the Cathetus, and
continue them to the outside of the Collumn: Then keeping your Compasses to
their former distance, place one foot upon the point of Intersection of every
one of the slope lines with the Cathetus, and extend the other toward the
outside of the Collumn upon the same slope line; and where the other fo^^ of
you^ Compasses falls, there shall be the point of the Collumns lessening in
that place. And note that though the former Collumn was lessened but from one
third part upwards, yet this which (...) for other Orders viz. for the Jonick,
Corinthian and Composite orders, must be lessened from the first third part
both upwards and downwards, as you may see in the Figure; and therefore you
must as well draw slope lines through the Divisions in the nether part of the
Cathetus, as through the upper.

Having thus divided and wrought upr^ght Collumns, if you will have your
Collumns w^eathed (as those of St. Peter's Church at Rome) y^u mu^t draw
straight lines through every one of the 48 divisions in the Cathetus to the
outsides of the Collumn, whish streigh^ lines must be Parallel to the line CDE;
then on the Plot or Groundwork, upon the Cathetus, describe a small Circle, and
divide it into 8 equal parts, and draw lines through the opposite points of
divisions; and upon the same Center that you drew this Circle, describe another
smaller Circle within the former, which by the Lines drawn through the Center,
will also be divided into the same parts that the greater Circle is: Then from
the points of Division in the small Circle, draw 4 lines through the Collumn
parallel to the Cathetus, and where those lines intersect the thwart line;
drawn before, there shall be the several points, through which you must carry
on a Spiral line a l^ng by the Cathetus, as in the figure. But you must note,
that at the four first lines at the bottom and top of the Collumn, the Spiral
line must not touch the outmost Parallel line, but must run as you see in the
Figure. Then on the Cathetus most you measure the thickness of the straight
Collumn in every Division, and transfer that thickness to the same Division in
he wreathed Collumn, placing one foot of your Compasses at the intersection of
the spiral line with the divisions of the Cathetus, and the lines parallel to
the Cathe us, and extending the other to the sides of the wreathed Collumn; and
where the other f^ot of your Compasses falls, there shall be the bounds of the
sides of the wreathed Collumn in that place.

Note, that if you make the little inmost Circle bigger, then will the Collumn
be more wreathed; if less, then will the Collumn be less wreathed.



XXXI.
WInding Stairs that belong to Steeples, or high Ascents, are projected on a
round Profile, which has its circumference divided into 12 or 16 equal parts,
according to the convenience of the Room you have to place them in, and
according to the number of Steps you intend shall wind once about the Newel.
The Semi-Diameter of the Profile is sometimes divided into 6 equal parts, and
one of them taken for the Newel, sometimes into 4 parts, and one of them taken
for the Newel, and sometimes into 3 parts, and one taken for the Newel,
according to the convenience of the Room, etc.

Thus in the Figure you have the Semidiameter of the Profile, divided into 4
equal parts, one whereof is allowed the Newel, and the rest for the length of
the Steps: You have the Circumference divided into 16 equal parts, and lines
drawn from each part to the Newel; each space contained between two of those
lines on the Profile, is the true figure of a Step; and if they were all cut
out, and placed one above another, over their true place on the Profile, round
about a Newel, whose Diameter should be one quarter of the length of each Step;
you would by supporting each Step underneath, already have the Model of a true
pair of Stairs, as they are laid down in the Figure.



XXXII.
THis Cornice I have often made use of for finishing of a Frontispiece, and
has been very well liked of: and though it be of my own invention, yet I have
thought fitting to set it down at the end of this little work, for the benefit
of them that shall think fitting to make use of it: its proportion with the
Frontispiece is such, that the whole height being divided into 11 parts, there
remains 1 for the Cornice, and 10 for the Frontispiece, and the rest is plain
enough to be seen in the Figure.



XXXIII.
THis Figure and Ornament under the Cornice of the Dorick Order, is set down
also in the tenth figure.




