OF CONTENTMENT, Patience and Resignation TO THE WILL of GOD. SEVERAL SERMONS.

By ISAAC BARROW, D. D. Late Master of Trinity College in Cambridge, and One of
his MAJESTY'S Chaplains in Ordinary.

Never before Printed.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons
against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1685.



TO Her Royal Highness THE PRINCESS ANNE OF DENMARK.
MADAM,
THE acceptance his late Majesty of Glorious Clemency vouchsafed to some
surviving Sermons of this Author, my deceased Son, incourages me to beg the
like from your Royal Highness now that I am to expose another of his
productions, as a little Moses in a paper Ark, and I hope the Subject of these
Discourses (Contentment, Patience, Resignation) will not render them an
improper present; for, as all loyal Subjects rejoice in, and thereby in some
measure partake of, the prosperities of the Royal Family; so, your Royal
Highnesses Goodness, which crowns the other felicities of your Person and
Fortune, will not permit you to be exempted from a sympathy with their
condition whom the Harmony of Divine Providence requires to move in a lower
sphere. May your Royal Highness never have the occasion to exercise the Virtues
of the afflicted, but only the opportunity to pity and relieve them, shall
ever be the hearty prayer of

Your Royal Highnesses most humble and most obedient Servant, Thomas Barrow.

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I, II, III, IV, V. PHIL. IV. 11. I have learned in whatever state I am,
therewith to be content. Page 1, 42, 68, 105, 156.

SERMON VI. 1 PET. II. 21. Because also Christ suffered for us, leaving us an
example, that ye should follow his steps. Page 195.

SERMON VII. LUKE XXII. 42. Nevertheless, let not my will, but thine be done.
Page 239.

OF CONTENTMENT.
The First Sermon.
PHIL. IV. 11. I have learned in whatever state I am, (...).
therewith to be content.
IN these words by the example of an eminent Saint is recommended to us the
practice of an excellent duty, or virtue: a practice in it self most worthy,
very grateful to God, and immediately of great benefit to our selves; being
indeed necessary toward the comfortable enjoyment of our lives: It is
contentedness, the virtue, which of all other does most render this world
acceptable, (...). Arist. Eth. I. 7.
and constituteth a kind of temporal heaven; which he that has, is thereby
ipso facto in good measure happy, whatever other things he may seem to want;
which he that wants, does, however otherwise he be furnished, become
miserable, and carries a kind of hell within him: it cannot therefore but well
deserve our best study about it, and care to get it; in imitation of S. Paul,
who had learned in whatever state he was, therein to be content.

In discoursing upon which words I shall consider two particulars; first the
virtue it self (contentedness in every state) the nature of which I shall
endeavor to explain; then the way of attaining or producing it, employed by S.
Paul in the words, I have learned.

I. For explication of the virtue: The word here expressing it is, (...), which
signifies self-sufficiency, or having enough of ones self; (...). Arr. 3. 24.
the which is not to be understood absolutely, as if he took himself to be
independent in nature, able to subsist of himself, not wanting any support or
comfort without himself (for this is the property and privilege of the great
El-shaddai, who alone subsisteth of himself, needing toward his being and
felicity nothing without himself; this is repugnant to the nature of man, who
is a creature essentially dependent for his being and subsistence, indigent of
many things for his satisfaction and welfare) but relatively, considering his
present state, the circumstances wherein he was, and the capacities he had;
which by God's disposal and providence were such, that he could not want more,
than he had in his possession, or reach. He meant not to exclude God, and his
providence; but rather supposed that as the ground and cause of his
self-sufficiency; according as otherwhere he expresses it: Not as if we were
sufficient 2 Cor. 3. 5.
of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God: Nor did he intend to exclude the
need of other creatures otherwise than as considered without his possession, or
beyond his power; But he means only, that he did not desire or lack more
than what God had supplied him with; had put into his hand, or had set within
his reach; that his will did suit to his state, his desire did not exceed his
power.

This is the meaning of the word, which the Apostle uses; but for the more
full and clear understanding the virtue it self, we shall first consider the
object, about which it is conversant, then the several acts, which it
requires, or wherein the exercise thereof consists.

1. The object of contentedness is the present state of things whatever it be
(whether prosperous or adverse, of eminency or meanness, of abundance or
scantness) wherein by divine providence we are set: (...), the things in which
we are, that is our present condition, with all its circumstances: so it may be
generally supposed, considering that it is ordinary, and almost natural for men
(who have not learned as S. Paul had done, or are not instructed, and exercised
in the practice of this duty) to be dissatisfied, and disquieted in every
state; to be always in want of something; to find defects in every fortune; to
fancy they may be in better case, and to desire it earnestly: If we estimate
things wisely, rich men are more liable to discontent than poor men. It is
observable, that prosperity is a peevish thing, and men of highest fortune are
apt most easily to resent the smallest things: a little neglect, a slight word,
an unpleasing look does affect them more, than reproaches, blows, wrongs do
those of a mean condition.

Prosperity is a nice and squeamish thing, and it is hard to find any thing
able to please men of a full and prosperous state, which being incapable of
bettering in substantial things they can hardly find matter of solid delight.
Whereas a poor estate is easily comforted by the accession of many things which
it wants: a good meal, a small gift, a little gain, or good success of his
labor does greatly please a poor man with a very solid pleasure: but a rich
man has nothing to please him, but a new toy, a puff of applause, success at a
horse-race, at bowls, at hunting; in some petty sport and pastime, which can
yield but a very thinn and transitory satisfaction to any man not quite
brutified and void of sense: whence contentedness has place, and is needful
in every condition, be it in appearance never so prosperous, so plentiful, so
pleasant. In the fullness of his sufficiency, Job 20. 22.
he shall be in straits.

The formal object thereof may indeed seem to be a condition distasteful Chrysostom.
Tom. 7. p. 68.
to our sense, or cross to our fancy; an adverse or strait condition; a
condition of poverty, of disgrace, of any great inconvenience or distress
incident to us in this world; but since the most men are absolutely in such a
condition, exposed to so many wants and troubles; since many more are needy
comparatively, wanting the conveniences that others enjoy, and which
themselves affect; since there are few, who in right estimation are not
indigent and poor, that is who do not desire and fancy themselves to want many
things which they have not (for wealth consists not so much in the possession
of goods, as ^n apprehension of freedom from want, and in satisfaction of
desires) since care, trouble, disappointment, satiety and discontent following
them, do not only haunt cottages, and stick to the lowest sort of people, but
do even frequent palaces, and pursue men of highest rank; therefore any state
may be the object of contentedness; and the duty is of a very general
concernment; Princes themselves need to learn it; the lessons teaching it, and
the arguments persuading it may as well suit the rich and noble, as the poor
and the paisant; so our Apostle himself does intimate in the words immediately
following our Text; I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound;
Every Phil. 4. 12.
where, and in all things I am instructed both to be full, and to be hungry;
both to abound and to suffer need; he had the art not only to manage well both
conditions, but to be satisfied in either.

But seeing real adversity, poverty and disgrace have naturally the strongest
influence in disturbing and disordering our minds; that contentedness is
plainly most needful in such cases, as the proper support, or medicine of our
mind in them; that other states do need it only as they, by fancy or
infirmity, do symbolize or conspire with these; therefore unto persons in these
states we shall more explicitly apply our directions, and persuasions, as to
the proper and primary subjects of contentedness; the which by analogy, or
parity of reason may be extended to all others, who from imaginary wants and
distresses do create displeasure to themselves. So much for the object, or the
subject of the virtue.

2. The acts, wherein the practice thereof consists (which are necessary
ingredients, or constant symptoms of it) belong either to the mind and
understanding, or to the will and appetite, or to external demeanor and
practice; being 1. right opinions and judgments of mind, 2. fit dispositions
and affections of heart, 3. outward good actions and behaviors, in regard to
our condition and the events befalling us; the former being as the root and
stock, the latter as the fruits and the flowers of the duty: unto which may be
reduced the correspondent negations, or absence of bad judgments, affections
and deportments in respect to the same objects.

(1.) As to our opinions and judgments of things contentedness requires, that

1. We should believe our condition whatever it be to be determined by God; and
that all events befalling us do proceed from him; at least that he permits
and orders them, according to his judgment and pleasure: that (...), Soph.
Aj. Lor.

Lam. 3. 38.

Amos 3. 6.

1 King. 12. 15, 24.


all (as the Prophet sings) both good and evil proceeds out of the mouth of
the most High; that Affliction (as Job said) comes not forth of the dust,
neither does trouble spring out of the ground; as a thing arising
spontaneously, or sowed by the hand of some creature, but rather descends
from him, who says, I form the Es. 45. 7.
light, and create darkness; I make peace, and create evil; I the Lord do all
these things.

We are apt, when any thing falls out unpleasant to us, to exclaim against
fortune, and to accuse our Atque Deos, atque astra vocat crudelia matter.
stars; or to inveigh against the second causes, which immediately offend us,
ascribing all to their influence; which proceeding does argue in us a
Heathenish ignorance and infidelity, or at least much inconsiderateness, and
impotency of mind; that our judgment is blinded and clouded, or perverted and
seduced by ill passions; for that in truth there is not in the world any
occurrence merely fortuitous, or fatal (all being guided and wielded by the
powerful hand of the All-wise, and Almighty God) there is no creature which in
its agency does not depend on God, as the instrument of his will, or
subordinate thereto; wherefore upon every event, we should, raising our minds
above all other causes, discern and acknowledge God's hand; as David did, when
Shimei cursed him; Let him 2 Samuel 15. 10.
(said the good King) curse, because the Lord has said unto him, Curse David;
as Job did, when he was risled of his goods, The Lord (said he) gave, and the
Lord has taken away; as our Savior Job 1. 21.
did, when in regard to the sore hardships he was designed to undergo, he said,
The Cup which my Father has Joh. 18. 11.
given me, shall I not drink?

2. Hence we should always judge every thing which happens to be thoroughly
good and fit, worthy (all (...), etc.

Theod. Ep. 136.


things considered) to be appointed, or permitted by that Sovereign Governor
of things; not entertaining any harsh thoughts of God, as if he were not enough
wise, just, or benign in ordering us to be afflicted or crossed; but taking all
occurrences to be well consistent with all God's holy perfections and
attributes.

We are apt to conceit, that the world is ill ordered, when we do not thrive
and prosper therein; that every thing is irregular, Placeat homini quicquid Deo
placuit. Sen. Ep. 75.
which squareth not to the models of our fancy; that things had gone much
(...). Theod. Ep. 15.
better, if our designs had found success; but these are vain, and perverse
conceits; for that certainly is (...). Id. Ep. 18.
most good, which seems good to God; his will is a perfect standard of right,
and convenience, his eye never aims wrong, his hand never fails to hit the
mark of what is best; All his Psalm. 25. 10. 145. 17.
paths are mercy, and truth; He is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all
his works: So did King Hezekiah rightly judge, when upon denunciation of a sad
doom to his country and posterity, he replied to the Prophet; Good is the word
of the Lord, which 2 King. 20. 19.
thou have spoken; so even the Pagan Sage discerned, when he thus rebuked a
malecontent; You slave, do you forsooth (...); Arr. 11. 7.
desire any thing, but what is best? and is not that only best, which seems
best to God?

3. We should even be satisfied in our mind that according to God's purpose all
events do tend and conduce to our particular welfare; being not only good to
us as members of the world, and in order to more general ends, but serving
toward our private benefit and advantage. We may be ready perhaps to confess,
that whatever happens may be indeed just and fit in some distant, and occult
respects, but hardly can we be induced to allow, that what we feel offensive to
our sense and fancy, is really good for us, or was meant for our benefit; we
cannot easily discern any thing of love or favor in such matters: Those sort
of Aphorisms, in Holy Scripture, Happy is the man, Job 5. 17.

Jam. 1. 12.

Rev. 3. 19.

Prove. 3. 12.


whom God corrects; As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten; sound strangely,
and are huge Paradoxes to us; such is our blindness of mind, and dullness of
apprehension: but God knows with so exact a skilfulness to manage things,
that every particular occurrence shall be advantageous to the person, whom it
touches; and accordingly to each one he dispenses that which is most suitable
to him; whence, as frequently it is necessary for our good that we should be
crossed (for that indeed otherwise we should often much harm, sometime we
should quite undo our selves) so it always, when God so orders it, is to be
deemed most profitable, and wholesome for us: we are therefore in reason obliged
to take the saddest accidents, and sharpest afflictions, coming upon us by
providence, to be no other than fatherly corrections, or friendly rebukes,
designed to render us good and happy; as arguments therefore and instances of
especial good will toward us; conceiving under every dispensation that we do as
it were hear God speaking to us, as he did to those in the Prophet: I Jer. 29.
11.
know the thoughts, that I think toward you, thoughts of peace, and not of
evil, to give you an expected end.

4. Hence we are to believe, that our present condition (whatever it be to
carnal, or worldly sense) is in right judgment, all things considered, the
best; most proper, most desirable for us; better than we, if it were at our
discretion and choice, should put our selves into: for that God (the Savior 1 Timothy 2. 4.

Ezekiel. 33. 11.

2 Pet. 3. 9.

Psalm. 145. 9.


of all men, who desires that no man should perish; who is good to all, and
whose tender mercies are over all his works; who exceedingly tendreth the
welfare of his children and subjects) does ever (here in this life, the time of
merit and trial) with a most wise good will design our best good; and by the
most proper methods (such as do best suit our circumstances and capacities)
does aim to draw us unto happiness; and accordingly does assign a station for
us most befitting in order to that great end; we therefore should think our
selves well placed, because we are where God does set us, that we have enough,
because we have what God allotteth us.

There are other more particular judgments, which contentedness involveth, or
which are required toward it; such as these; that nothing originally is due to
us, but all comes purely from divine favor and bounty; that all adversities
are justly, and deservedly inflicted on us, as the due wages, or natural fruits
of our sins; that our happiness depends not on any present enjoyments or
possessions, but may well subsist without them; that a competency (or so much
as suffices to maintain our life without intolerable pain) ought to satisfy
our desires; but these, and the like judgments will come opportunely to be
considered as motives to the practice of the duty.

(2.) From such acts of our mind or intellective part concerning things
incident to us, should proceed the following dispositions of will and affection.

1. We should entertain all occurrences, how grievous soever to us with entire
submission, and resignation of our will to the will of God; wholly acquiescing
in his good pleasure; saying in our hearts after our Lord; Let not my will, but
thine be Luke 22. 42.
done; with good Eli, It is the Lord, 1 Samuel 3. 18.
let him do what seems him good; with David, Behold here I am, let 2 Samuel
15. 26.
him do to me as seems good to him; even with Socrates, If so it pleases
(...).

Arr. 3. 7.

M. Anton. 3. 4. 2. 17. 10. 11. 12. 1.


God, so let it be; with Epictetus, I always chiefly will that, which comes to
pass; for I account that better which God wills, than what I will my self; I
will adhere as a minister and follower to him, I pursue, I affect, I simply
will with him: looking upon them as sent from God we should heartily bid them
welcome, we should kindly embrace them, we should use them with all fair
respect: (...) (to hug, or kindly to embrace things incident) (...) (to love
things dispensed by providence) are precepts, which even as dictated by natural
reason Philosophers do much inculcate.

This excludes all rebellious insurrections, and swellings of mind against
providence, such as argue that we dislike God's government; that were we able
we should struggle with God's will; that we gladly would shake off his yoke;
all such ill resentment and repining at our lot, which makes God's hand
grievous, and his yoke uneasy to us; such affections as the Wiseman touches,
when he says; The foolishness of man perverteth his Prove. 19. 3.
way, and his heart fretteth against the Lord.

2. We should bear all things with steady calmness and composedness of mind,
suppressing, or quelling those tumults, those storms, those excesses of
passion, which the sense of things disgustfull is apt to excite; such as Let no
man be moved by these afflictions, (...). Chrysostom.)

1 Thessalonians. 3. 3.


are immoderate grief, fierce anger, irksome despair, and the like. No
adversity should so ruffle our minds, as to defeat or pervert the use of our
reason, so as to hinder us from perceiving, or performing what becomes us, so
as to engage us into any irregular, or unseemly behavior.

3. We should indeed bear the worst events with an (...), that is with a sweet
and cheerful disposition of (...).

2 Cor. 7. 10.


mind, so as not to be put out of humor; not to be dejected, or quite
discouraged by them, not to fall into that heaviness, which (as the Wiseman
Prove. 12. 22.
says) makes the heart of man to stoop; but rather finding delight and
complacence in them, (...).

2 Cor. 12. 10.


as considering whence they come, whither they aim and tend: such was the
disposition and demeanor of the Apostles and primitive (...).

Col. 1. 11.


good Christians in the midst of their most grievous adversities and
sufferings; they Act. 5. 41.
rejoiced, etc. they did take joyfully the Heb. 10. 34.
spoiling of their goods, they did account it all joy, when they fell into
diverse Jam. 1. 2.
tribulations; they were (...), as grieved but 2 Cor. 6. 10.
always rejoicing; their state was grievous, but their heart was constantly
cheerful. Such a constant frame of mind we should maintain, so continually
prepared we should be against all contingencies, that nothing should happen
amiss to us, so as deeply to affect us, or to unsettle us in our humor; that
every thing from God's hand should be acceptable; that no sadness may seize on
us, at least that we do not indulge or cherish it; that in no wise we suffer
any regret to quench that spiritual comfort and joy in God; which becomes the
upright Psalm. 33. 1. 97. 12.

Phil. 4. 4. 3. 1.

2 Cor. 13. 11.

1 Pet. 4. 13.


(as the Psalmist says) and which we are so often enjoined perpetually to
maintain, as in all cases, so particularly under afflictions and trials. We
cannot indeed hardly be content, if we are not cheerful: for it is hard to be
altogether on the suffering and bearing hand, without any pleasure: the mind
can hardly stand in a poise, so as neither to sorrow or joy: we cannot digest
adversity, if we do not relish it; we shall not submit to it as his will, if we
do not take it for an argument of his love: (...), I (says 2 Cor. 12. 10.
S. Paul) have a liking or pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in
necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake; for when I am
weak then I am strong.

4. We should with faith and hope rely and wait on God for the removal, or
easement of our afflictions; or however we should confide in him for grace, and
strength to support them well: as our Savior did, when he prayed, Father, if
thou be willing remove Luke 22. 42.
this Cup; as they did in the Prophet, who said, In the way of thy judgments, O
Lord, we have waited on Isa. 26. 8. 33. 2.
thee; according to that rule in the Lamentations; It is good that a man Lam.
3. 26.
should both hope, and wait quietly for the Salvation of the Lord; and those
precepts in the Psalms; Rest in the Psalm. 37. 7. 24. 17.

Psalm. 40. 1. 33. 20. 62. 1. 25. 3. 69. 6. 44. 19. 16. 8.


Lord, and wait patiently for him; wait upon the Lord, be of good courage, and
he shall strengthen thine heart.

We should in any case be ready with the holy Psalmist thus to interrogate, and
sustain our selves: Why Psalm. 42. 2.
art thou cast down, O my Soul, why art thou so disquieted within me? Hope thou
in God, for I shall yet praise him, for the help of his countenance.

Remembering, and considering, that (as we are expressly taught in Scripture, and
as all our Religion does clearly suppose) God knows to rescue 2 Pet. 2. 3.

1 Pet. 5. 7.


the Godly out of tribulation, (he knows the proper season, when it is fit to
do it) that he is faithful, and will Matt. 6. 25.

1 Cor. 10. 13.


not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able, but will with the
temptation also make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear it;
reflecting, I say, on these certain points of Christian truth, we should never
sorrow 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13.
as those who are without hope; we should never despair of a good riddance from
our adversity, when it shall be seasonable or beneficial for us; we should
always be assured of a comfortable Isa. 40. 31.

Mic. 7. 7.


support under it, which is usually better than deliverance from it; our minds
should never sink into despondency, or disconsolateness: that this is
practicable in the worst case, we have conspicuous instances to assure us; it
has been the practice of most illustrious and excellent persons, particularly
of the holy Apostles; never 2 Cor. 4. 8.

1 Cor. 4. 11.


was any condition, in outward respects and appearance, more forlorn and
dismal than was theirs; yet it no-wise bereaved them of hope, or courage; We
(they could say) are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are
perplexed but not in despair, persecuted but not forsaken, cast down but not
destroyed.

5. We should indeed not so much as faint, or languish in our minds upon any
such occasion; no adversity should impair the forces of our reason or our
spirit; should enervate our courage, or slacken our industry; should render us
sick, or weak in heart; for, If (says the Wiseman) thou faint Prove. 24. 10.
in the day of adversity, thy strength is small; ('it is the sign of an infirm
mind) 2 Cor. 4. 16.

Rev. 2. 3.

2 Thessalonians. 3. 13.

Gal. 6. 9.

Heb. 12. 3.


and (...), not to faultre or decay, (...), not to be dissolved or disjointed
in our souls (as the body is in scorbutic distempers) are rules prescribed to
us in such cases: we do -- nunc animis opus est, nunc pectore firmo.
then indeed need a sirm and robust constitution of soul; we should then bear
up most resolutely and stoutly: the encouragement of Moses to the people,
entering upon battle, may well be accommodated to us, in regard to our conflict
with adversities; Let not Deuteronomy. 20. 3.
your hearts faint, fear not and do not tremble, neither be ye terrified
because of them.

6. We should not be weary of our condition, or have irksome longings for
alteration; but with a quiet indifferency, and willingness of mind lie under
it, during God's pleasure; according to the Wise-man's advice; My Son, despise
not the chastning of Prove. 3. 11.
the Lord, neither be weary of his correction; and that of the Apostle,
enforced by our Lord's example; Consider Heb. 12. 3.
him, that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be
wearied, and faint in your minds. We should not think God slow, or his time
long and tedious, as if he were forgetful of us, or backward to succor us; as
the Psalmist was inclined to do, when in the day of trouble he brake forth
into these conceits and expressions; Will the Lord cast off for Psalm. 77. 7, 1^.
ever, and will he be favorable no more; Is his mercy clean gone for ever,
does his promise fail for evermore; Has God forgotten to be gracious; has he
in anger shut up his tender mercies? thus he in a sad mood was apt to think and
speak; but recollecting himself he perceived it was his error, and confessed
it was his fault thus to imagine; I said, it was mine infirmity; and it will be
ours likewise, if we entertain such conceptions and resentments: we should with
the same mind endure our present state, as we do pass through a hard winter, or
a time of foul weather, taking it for seasonable and fit, because the wise
Author of nature has so appointed and ordered it.

7. We should by adverse accidents be rendered lowly in our own eyes, and sober
in our conceits of our selves; meek and gentle, tender and pliable in our
temper and frame of spirit; sensible of our unworthiness and meanness, of our
natural frailty, penury and misery, of our actual offenses and miscarriages;
deeply affected in regard to the awful majesty and power, to the perfect
holiness, and strict justice of God: they should quell our haughty stomach,
they should supple our stiff wilfulness, they should soften our hard hearts,
they should mitigate our peevish humors; to effect these things is usually the
design of such accidents and it is ever the best fruit of them: this is that,
which S. Peter advises to, when he says: Be humbled 1 Pet. 5. 6.
under the mighty hand of God; which God approves, and encourages with a
gracious promise, when he says; -- To this man will I look, even to him, that
is of a poor and Esa. 66. 2.
contrite spirit, and trembles at my word: this disposition is an inseparable
adherent to contentedness; he that has not his spirit thus broken, or
mollified, will hardly be content in any state; he that is haughty in conceit,
and sturdy in humor will every where find that, which will cross, and disturb
him.

8. It is required that we should, notwithstanding any meanness, any hardness
of our condition, be meekly and kindly affected It a plerumque contingit, ut
dum aliquos fratres nostros in quantulacunque requie constitutos in mediis
nostris anxietatibus cogitamus, non parva ex part recreemur, tanquam and nos
ideo ipsi quietius tranquilliusque vivamus. Aug. Ep. 144.
toward others, being satisfied and pleased with their more prosperous state.
We should not be angry with the world, because we do not thrive, or flourish in
it; we should not be sullen, or peevish toward any man, because his fortune is
better than ours; we should not repine or grudge at the good success of any our
brethren, because we want the like our selves; we should rather rejoice Romans
12. 15.
with those that rejoice; innocently filching some pleasure from them, or
borrowing some satisfaction from their enjoyments. It is humane thus to do,
because of the natural cognation and friendship of men; it is more especially
Christian, because of our spiritual consanguinity; by virtue whereof we are so
knit together, and made members each to other, that Romans 12 15.
if (as S. Paul tells us) one member 1 Cor. 12. 26.
suffer, all the members suffer with it, and if one member be honored, all the
members should rejoice with it: we can hardly be content without thus
appropriating the goods, and sharing in the delights of others; he can never be
content, who looks with an evil eye upon other men's prosperity; he cannot do
well himself who loves not to see his neighbor do well; numberless occasions
will happen to discompose and vex him.

Adversity impatiently born is apt to sour our spirits, and render us froward
toward men; especially when it proceeds from the unkindness, ingratitude, or
treachery of friends, or of persons obliged to us for our good will, or for
benefits done to them; but nothing should render us unkindly disposed toward
the world, nothing should extinguish charity in us toward any man; so plain
reason teaches us, so great examples enforce; Moses did not lose his affection
toward his Countrymen, because he was by one of them threatened away into
banishment and vagrancy; the Apostles became not disaffected to the world,
because it misused and persecuted them; our Lord did continue most earnestly to
desire, and laboriously to endeavor the good of those who most despitefully
used him; Like theirs, in all cases, should our disposition be; we should ever
observe the Psalmist's advice; Cease from anger, forsake wrath, fret not thy
self in any wise to Psalm. 37. 8.
do evil.

Again,

9. Contentedness does imply a freedom from all solicitude and anxiety of mind,
in reference to provision for our needs, and conveniences of life; according
to those rules and precepts of casting our burden and care 1 Pet. 5. 7.

Psalm. 37. 5. 55. 23.

Phil. 4. 6.


upon the Lord, of being careful for nothing, but commending our affairs to
God's ordering; according to that most comfortable Precept of our Lord, Take
Matt. 6. 31.
no care, saying, what shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or how shall we be
clothed; for your heavenly Father knows, that ye want all these things: If
we do not thus, it is hardly possible that we should be content; if we do not
depend on Providence, we cannot escape being often distracted with care, and
perplexed with fear; we cannot cheerfully hope for any thing we need, nor be
quietly secure of any thing we possess.

10. It requires also that we should curb our desires, and confine them in the
narrowest bounds we can; so as not to affect more in quantity, or better (...).
Epic. ad Menoec.

Ventre nihil novi frugalius. Juv. Sat. 5.


in quality, than our nature and state do require: if we must have
superfluities, if we can only relish dainties, we shall never be pleased; for
as nature has limits, and is content with little; as there is no state in this
world, the exigencies whereof may not be answered with a competence; so
curiosity is an infinite, and insatiable thing: He that loves pleasure shall
Prove. 21. 17.
be a poor man; he that loves wine and oil shall not be rich; that is, he
(...). Cl. Alex. Paed. 2. 1.

1 Timothy 6. 8.


which is curious and nice in his desires, will never have enough: The rule,
which (according to St. Paul) should regulate our desires, is this; Having food
and raiment, let us with them be satisfied: if this will satisfy us, we may Si
ad naturam vives nunquam eris pauper; si ad opinionem, nunquam dives. Epic.
Sen. Ep. 16.
easily obtain satisfaction; a moderate industry, with God's blessing, will
procure so much; God has promised to bestow it; if this will not suffice,
there is no sure way of getting or keeping more; As God is no-wise obliged to
provide us superfluites, or concerned to relieve our extravagant longings; so
we may fear, that Providence will be ready to cross us in our cares and
endeavors tending to those purposes; so that we shall be disappointed in the
procurement, or disturbed in the fruition of such needless things: However he
that is most scant in his desires, (...). Socr. in Xenoph. Apomn. 3.
is likely to be most content in his mind: He (as Socrates said) is nearest the
Gods (who need nothing) that needs fewest things.

In fine, contentedness does import, that whatever our condition is, our mind
and affections should be modelled, and squared just according to it; so that
our inclinations be complyant, our desires be congruous thereto, so that easily
we can comport with the inconveniences, can relish the comforts, can improve
the advantages sticking thereto; otherwise like an ill made Garment, it will
sit unhandsomely upon us, and be troublesome to us. It is not usually our
condition it self, but the unsutableness thereof to our disposition and desires
(which sowreth all its sweets, and renders its advantages fruitless) that
creates discontent; for (although it be very mean) others bear the same
cheerfully; many would be glad thereof; if therefore we will be content, we
must bend our inclinations, and adapt our desires to a correspondence with our
state.

If we are rich, we should get a large and bountiful heart, otherwise our
wealth will hang loose about us; the care and trouble in keeping it, the
suspicion and fear of losing it, the desire of amplifying it, the unwillingness
to spend or use it, will bereave us of all true satisfaction therein, and
render it no less unfavoury to us, than unprofitable to others.

If we are poor, we should have a frugal, provident, industrious mind, sparing
in desires, free from curiosity, willing to take pains, able to digest
hardships, otherwise the straitness of our condition will pinch and gall us.

Are we high in dignity or reputation? we then need a mind well ballasted with
sober thoughts, otherwise the wind of vanity will drive us into absurd
behaviors, thence will dash us upon disappointments, and consequently will
plunge us into vexation and discontent.

Are we mean and low? we need a meek and lowly, a calm and steady spirit; not
affecting little respects, or resenting the want of them; apt to pass over or
to bear quietly petty affronts and neglects; not apt to be moved by words
signifying contempt or disdain; else (being fretted with such things, which in
this ill-natured and hard-hearted World we may be sure often to meet with) we
shall be uneasy in our minds, and impatiently wish a change of our state.

These, and the like dispositions and affections of soul this duty contains,
or requires: from hence should arise a correspondent external demeanor, and
such actions as these which follow.

1. We should restrain our Tongues from all unseemly and unsavory expressions,
implying dissatisfaction in God's proceedings, or displeasure at his
Providence; arguing desperation or distrust in God; such as were those of the
discontented and impatient Israelites; They (says the Psalmist, Psalm. 78. 19.

Number. 21. 5.


spoke against God; they said, Can God furnish a table in the wilderness?
behold he smote the rock that the waters gushed out, and the streams
overflowed; can he give bread also, can he provide flesh for his people? Such
as they used, of whom the Prophet says -- When Isa. 3. 21.

Rev. 19. 9, 11, 21.


they shall be hungry, they will fret themselves, and curse their King and
their God; as those in the Apocalypse, who being afflicted with deserved
judgments, did blaspheme the name of God, which had power over those plagues --
blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and their sores. Into such
prosane enormities of language is discontent apt to break forth, questioning
the power of God, or his willingness to succor us; venting wrath and
displeasure toward him; charging him foolishly with injustice, or with
unkindness, or with negligence, or with impotency; the abstaining from which
behavior, under the sense of his bitter calamities, is a great commendation of
Job; In all Job. 1. 22.

(...).


this ('it is said) Job sinned not, neither charged God foolishly.

2. We should indeed forbear any the least complaint, or murmuring, in (...).
Hom. Od. (...).

Jud. 15, 16.


regard to the dispensations of Providence; or upon dissatisfaction in the
state allotted us: St. Jude says, that God in the last day will come, to
execute judgment, and to convince men of all their hard speeches, which ungodly
sinners have spoken against him: these (subjoineth he) are (...), murmurers,
that complain of their lot; which signifies the heinousness and extreme
dangerousness of this practice. Wherefore does the Lam. 3. 39.
living man complain? is the Prophet's question, implying it to be an
unreasonable and blameable practice. Wherefore the advice of David is good; to
suppress all complaint, to be still and silent in such cases: Be still (says
Psalm. 46. 10. 4. 4. 37. 7.
he) and know that I am God, and Be silent to the Lord; the which Precepts his
practice may seem well to interpret and back; I was, says he, dumb, Psalm. 39.
9.

(...). Hom. (...). v.

Job 40. 4.


I opened not my mouth, because it was thy doing: and accordingly Job, Behold
(said he, after having considered all the reasons he could imagine of God's
proceedings) I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my
mouth. And thus our Savior, when he was oppressed and afflicted, opened not
his mouth. Is. 53. 7.


3. Yea it is our duty, in these cases, to spend our breath in declaring our
satisfaction in God's dealing with us; (...). Chrysostom. ad Olymp. Ep. 11.

Psalm. 119. 75.


acknowledging his wisdom, justice and goodness therein; blessing and praising
him for all that has befallen us; each of us confessing after David; I know, O
Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness have
afflicted me; imitating Job, who upon the loss of all his goods did say no more
than this; The Lord gave, Job 1. 21.
and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord.

4. We should abstain from all irregular, unlawful and unworthy courses toward
the removal or remedy of our needs, or crosses, choosing rather to abide quietly
under their pressure, than by any unwarrantable means to relieve, or relaxe our
selves; rather bearing patiently, than violently, like those in the Prophet,
breaking our yoke, Jer. 5. 5.
and bursting our bands. Take heed, regard Job 36. 21.
not iniquity; for this have thou chosen rather than affliction. We should
rather continue poor, than by couzenage, or rapine endeavor to raise our
fortune; we should rather lie under disgrace and contempt, than by sinful or
sordid compliances strive to acquire the respect and favor of Men; we should
rather willingly rest in the lowest condition, than do as those, who by
disturbing the world, by fomenting disorders and factions, by supplanting their
neighbors welfare, by venting slanders and detractions, do labor to amplify
their estate: we should rather endure any inconvenience or distress, than have
recourse to ways of evading them, disallowed by God; doing as the Jews did, who
in their straits, against the declared pleasure of God, set their faces toward
Jer. 42. 15. 2. 18. 13.

Isa. 30. 2. 36. 6. 31. 1.

Ezekiel. 17. 15.


Egypt, strengthened themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, trusted in the
staff of that broken reed. In neglect or diffidence toward God, to embrace such
aids, is (as God in the Prophet declares) a very blameable and mischievous
folly: Ephraim (says he) is like a silly dove without heart; they call to
Egypt, they go to Assyria -- Woe unto them, for they have fled from me;
destruction unto them, because they Hos. 7. 11, 13.
have transgressed against me. We may consider how St. Paul reproves the
Corinthians for seeking a redress of wrong, scandalous and dishonorable to the
Church: Now therefore it is 1 Cor. 6. 7.
utterly a fault among you, that ye go to law one with another; Why do ye not
rather take wrong; why do ye not rather suffer your selves to be defrauded?
even to right our selves in a way, whereby any dishonor may come to God, or
damage to his Church is not to be approved; and better it is in the Apostle's
judgment, to bear any injury or damage our selves: Better it is (says St.
Peter) if the will 1 Pet. 3. 17. 4. 19.
of God be so, that we suffer for welldoing, than to do ill. And, Let them,
who suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their souls to
him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator; is another wholesome advice of
that great Apostle.

5. We should, notwithstanding any adversity, proceed in our affairs (such as
God requires, or reason puts us upon) with alacrity, courage and industry;
performing however, so far as our circumstances do permit, what is good and fit
for us: No disappointment or cross, no straits or grievances of condition
should render us listless, or lazy; but rather it should quicken and inflame
our activity; this being a good way to divert us from the sense of our
misfortunes, and to comfort us under their pressure; as also the readiest way
to remove or to abate them, (...), to order the present well, what ever it be;
to make the best of a bad matter, (...).

Ant. 4. 26. 6. 2.


to march forward whither reason calls (how difficultly soever, or slowly it
be) in a rough or dirty way; not to yield to difficulties, but resolutely to
encounter them to struggle lustily (...). Id. 12. 1.

Taken cede malis, ^ed contra audenti^ i. ^.


with them, to endeav^our with all our might to surmount them; are acts worthy
of a manly reason and courage; to direct ill accidents to good ends, and
improve them to honest uses, is the work of a noble virtue. If a bad game be
dealt us, we should not presently throw up, but play it out so well as we can;
so perhaps we may save somewhat, we shall at least be busy till a better come.
Put thy trust in the Lord, and be doing good, Psalm. 37. 3.
is the Psalmist's advice in such a case; and it is a practice necessary to the
procuring and maintaining content; If we be not otherwise well employed, we
shall be apt, in our thoughts, to melancholize, and dote upon our mischances,
the sense of them will fasten upon our spirits, and gnaw our hearts.

6. We should behave our selves fairly and kindly toward the instruments and
abettors of our adversity; toward those who brought us into it, and those who
detain us under it, by keeping off relief, and those who forbear to afford the
succor we might expect; forbearing to express any wrath or displeasure, to
exercise any revenge or enmity toward them; but rather, even upon that score,
bearing good will, and expressing kindness toward them; not only as to our
brethren, whom, according to the general Law of Charity, we are bound to love,
but as to the servants of God in this particular case, and the instruments of
his pleasure toward us; considering, that by maligning or molesting them, we do
express ill resentments of God's dealing with us, and, in effect, through their
sides, do wound his Providence; thus did the good King behave himself toward
Shimei, when he was bitterly reproached and cursed by him; not suffering (upon
this account, because he was God's instrument of afflicting himself) that 2 Samuel 15. 7.
any harm should be done unto him: thus the holy Apostles being reviled 1 Cor.
4. 1^.
did bless, being defamed did entreat; thus our Lord demeaned himself toward
his spiteful adversaries; who, when he was reviled, did not revile again; 1
Pet. 2. 23. 3. 9.
when he suffered, did not threaten, but committed it to him that judges
righteously. In all these cases we should at least observe the rules and
advices of the Wiseman; Say not, I Prove. 24. 29. 20. 22.
will do so to him as he has done to me, I will render to the man according
to his work; Say thou not I will recompense evil; but wait on the Lord, and he
shall save thee.

Discontent usually consists not so much in displeasure for the things we
suffer, as at the persons who bring them on us, or who do not help to rid us
from them; it is their presumed injury or discourtesie which we do fret at;
such passions therefore toward men being discarded, our evils presently will
become supportable, and content easily will ensue. As men in any sickness or
pain, if their friends are about them (affording comfort or assistence) do not
seem to feel any thing, and forbear complaining; so if the world about us does
please us, if we bear no disaffection or grudge toward any person in view, our
adversity will appear less grievous, it will indeed commonly be scarce sensible
to us.

In these and such like acts, the duty and virtue of contentedness does
especially reside; or it is employed and exercised by them: And so much may
suffice for the explication of its nature: I come now to consider the way of
attaining it, intimated by St. Paul here, when he says, I have learned.

The Second Sermon.
PHIL. IV. 11. I have learned, etc.
THESE words signify how contentedness may be attained, or how it is produced:
It is not an endowment innate to us; it does not arrive by chance into us; it
is not to be purchased by any price; it springs not up of it self, nor
arises from the quality of any state; but it is a product of discipline; I
have learned.

It is a question debated in Plato, (...), whether virtue be to be learned: St.
Paul plainly resolves it in this case by his own experience and testimony.
What Seneca says in general of virtue (Nature gives not Non dat natura
virtutem, ars est bmunt fieri. Sen. Ep. 89.

Virtus etiamsi quosdam impetus exnatura sumit, tamen persicienda doctrina est.
Quintil. 12. 2.


virtue; it is an art to become good) is most true of this virtue; it is an
art, with which we are not born, no more than with any other art or science;
the which, as other arts, cannot be acquired without studious application of
mind, and industrious exercise: No art indeed requires more hard study and
pain toward the acquiry of it, there being so many difficulties, so many
obstacles in the way thereto: We have no great capacity, no towardly
disposition to learn it; We must, in doing it, deny our carnal sense, we must
settle our wild fancy, and suppress fond conceits; we must bend our stiff and
stubborn inclinations; we must repress and restrain wanton desires; we must
allay and still tumultuous passions; we must cross our humor, and curb our
temper; which to do is a hard chapter to learn: Much consideration, much
practice, much contention and diligence are required thereto.

Hence it is an art which we may observe few do much study; and of the students
therein few are great proficients; so that Qui fit, Mecoenas? Horace's
question, How comes it to pass, that no body lives content with the lot
assigned by God? wanted not sufficient ground.

However it is not like the Quadrature of the circle, or the Philosophers
Stone, an art impossible to be learned, and which will baffle all study: there
are examples which show it to be obtainable; there are rules and precepts, by
observing which we may arrive to it.

And it is certainly a most excellent piece of learning; most deserving our
earnest study: no other science will yield so great satisfaction, or good use;
all other sciences, in comparison thereto, are dry and fruitless curiosities;
for were we Masters of all other knowledge, yet wanted the skill of being
content, we should not be wise or happy; happiness and discontent are (...)
(things incompatible.)

But how then may this skill be learned? I answer, chiefly (divine grace
concurring) by these three ways. 1. By understanding the rules and precepts,
wherein the practice thereof consists. 2. By diligent exercise, or
application of those rules to practice; whereby the habit will be produced. 3.
By seriously considering, and impressing upon our minds those rational
inducements (suggested by the nature and reason of things) which are apt to
persuade the practice thereof. The first way I have already endeavored to
declare; the second wholly depends upon the will and endeavor of the
learner; the third I shall now insist upon, propounding some rational
considerations, apt (by God's help) to persuade contentedness, and serving to
cure the malady of discontent. They may be drawn from several heads; from God,
from our selves, from our particular condition or state; from the world, or
general state of men here; from the particular state of other men in comparison
to ours; from the nature and consequences of the duty it self; Every thing
about us well examined and pondered, will minister somewhat inducing and
assisting thereto.

I. In regard to God we may consider, that equity does exact, and gratitude 1 Samuel 3. 18.
requires, and all reason dictateth, that we should be content; or that in
being discontented we behave our selves very unbeseemingly and unworthily, are
very unjust, very ungrateful, and very foolish toward him.

1. Equity does exact this duty of us, and in performing it we act justly
toward God, both admitting his due right, and acknowledging his good exercise
thereof: That saying in the Gospel, Is it not lawful for me to do Matt. 20.
15.
what I will with mine own? is a most evident maxim of equity; it is therefore
the natural right, and prerogative of God (as the Creator and Preserver, and
consequently the absolute Lord, Owner and Governor of all things) to assign
his station, and allot his portion to every person, as he judges good and
convenient; it is most just that inviolably he should enjoy this right; He
being also infinitely wise and good, it is likewise most just to acknowledge
that he does perfectly well manage this right; Now by contentfull submission to
God's disposal of things, we do worthily express our due regard to both these,
avowing his right, and approving his exercise thereof; but by discontent and
regret at what happens, we do in effect injure God in both those respects,
disavowing his right, and impeaching his management. We do thereby so renounce
his right, as (so far as conceit and wish do reach) to invade it, and usurp it
to our selves; signifying, that in our opinion things ought not to be ordered
according to his judgment and pleasure, but after our fancy and humor; we
claim to our selves the privilege of controlling his estate, and dispensing his
goods, so as to be our own carvers, and to assume to our selves so much as we
think good; we imply, that, if we were able, we would extort the power out of
his hands, and manage it our selves, modelling the world according to our
conceits and desires.

We do also (since we cannot but perceive the other attempt of dispossessing
God to be frivolous and fruitless) Multos inveni aequos adversus homines,
adversus Deos neminem: Sen. Ep. 93.
in effect charge God with misdemeanour, with iniquity or infirmity in his
distribution and disposal of things; intimating, that in our opinion he does
not order them so justly, or so wisely as might be (not so well as we in our
wisdom and justice should order them) for did we conceive them managed for the
best, we could not but judge it most unreasonable to be aggrieved, or to
complain: so heinously insolent, and unjust are we in being discontent. In
earnest, Which is most equal, that God should have his will, or we? For shame
we shall say God: Why then do we not contentedly let him have it?

It Is indeed, if we consider it, the highest piece of injustice that we can be
guilty of; exceeding that which we commit in any other sort of disobedience.
For as in any State Seditious Mutining is the greatest crime, as most directly
violating the Majesty, and subverting the authority of the Prince; so in the
World, none may be supposed more to offend and wrong its Sovereign Governor,
than such malcontents, who dislike and blame his proceedings: Even a Heathen
could teach (...). Arr. 1. 12.
us, that it is our duty to subject our mind to him that administreth all
things, as good Citizens to the Law of the Commonwealth; if we do not we are
rebellious and seditious, which is the highest pitch of injustice toward our
most Gracious Sovereign.

Again, there can be no greater injury, or affront offered to God, than to give
him the lie, by questioning his 1 John 5. 10.
veracity or fidelity; this discontent plainly does involve: for God has
expressly declared himself ready upon all occasions to do us good; he has
promised to care for us, and never to Matt. 6. 25, 36.

Heb. 13. 5.


forsake us, or leave us destitute; which word of his if we did not distrust,
and take him to be unfaithful, we could not be discontent: As no man is
displeased with his condition, or suspicious of want, who knows that he has
abundant supply of all he can need in a sure place; that he has a person most
able, most willing, most faithful engaged to succor him; so did we believe
God to be true, who has promised to help us, we could not be discontented for
fear of any want.

We must at least, in so doing, suspect God to be deficient in goodness toward
us, or unwilling to help us; or we must apprehend him impotent, and unable to
perform what he would, and what he has promised, for us (like those Infidels,
who said, Can God furnish a table in the wilderness? Psalm. 78. 19.
Can he give bread also, can he provide flesh for his people?) which conceits
of God are also very unworthy, and injurious to him.

2. Gratitude requires of us this duty: for we having no right, or title to
any thing; all that we have coming from God's pure bounty; he having upon us
all (whatever our condition comparatively is, or may seem to us) freely
conferred many great Iniquus est qui muneris sui arbitrium danti non relinquit,
avidus qui non lucri loco habet quod accepit, sed damni quod reddidit, etc.
Sen. ad Polyb. 29.
benefits, common to all men among us (our being, life, reason, capacity of
eternal happiness, manifold spiritual blessings, incomparably precious and
excellent) we in all reason should be thankful for these, without craving
more, or complaining for the want of other things. Whereas also all events (how
cross soever to our sensual conceits, or appetites) are by God designed, and
dispensed for our good, gratitude requires, that we should thank God for them,
and not murmur against them.

Surely if instead of rendering God thanks for all the excellent gifts, which he
most liberally (without any previous obligation to us, or desert of ours) has
bestowed on us, and continues to bestow, we fret, and quarrel, that he does
not in smaller matters seem to cocker us, we are extremely ungrateful, and
disingenuous toward him: If any great person here should freely bestow on us
gifts of huge value (high preferment, or much wealth) but with good reason, as
we might presume, should withhold from us some trisle, that we fancy or dote
on, should we not be very unworthy, if we should take it ill, and be angry with
him for that cause? The case is plainly the same; God has in the frankest
manner bestowed on us innumerable and inestimable goods, in comparison whereto
any comfort or convenience of our state here is very trivial and despicable;
Are we not therefore very ungrateful, if we heinously resent the want of any
such things; if upon any such account we disgust his Providence? Do we not
deal, beyond all expression, unworthily with God, in so much undervaluing the
goods which he has given us, or does offer us, and has put in our reach? He
has made us capable of the greatest goods imaginable, and faithfully upon
easy terms proffereth them to us; he even tendereth himself (himself, the
immense and allcomprehending good, the fountain of all joy and bliss) to be
fully enjoyed by us; his wisdom he offers to instruct and guide us, his
power to protect and guard us, his fullness to supply us, his goodness to
comfort us; he offers his love and favor to us, in having which we
virtually, and in effect have all things; becoming thereby, in the highest
degree, rich and honorable and happy; And is it not then outrageous
unworthiness to prize any other thing (any petty accommodation of this
transitory life, any pitiful toy here) so much, as to be displeased for the
want thereof; as if all this were not enough to satisfy our needs, or satiate
our desires; as if notwithstanding all these immense effusions (yea as it were
profusions) of bounty upon us, we could be indigent or unhappy? Shall we (to
use that holy and most ingenuous consideration of Job) receive so much good Job
2. 10.
from the bountiful hand of God, and shall we not contentedly receive, or bear
so small evils from him? Evils indeed in name, and to gross sense, but not so
in reality, not so in effect, at least not so in God's design; but rather
(...), etc. said Philagrius in a grievous Disease. Naz. Ep. 66.

(...). Naz. de se. Ep. 63.

Prove. 3. 11.


things very convenient and profitable for us; which is another aggravation of
our ingratitude; for

Are we not also very ungrateful in misapprehending, and disliking that, which
God does out of very gracious intentions toward us; in loathing his fatherly
and friendly dispensations; the fatherly chastisements and friendly
disciplines, which he unwillingly is forced (is I say forced by his own great
love, and by our pressing needs) to inflict or impose upon us? Surely our ill
opinion of, or despising (as the Wiseman calls it) these unpleasant
blessings is no small fault; Neither will our not discerning (out of affected
dullness, and stupid pravity not discerning) the wisdom of God's methods, and
the wholsomeness of the means he uses to better us, excuse us from foul
ingratitude.

3. Again, upon many accounts, reason farther dictateth in respect to (...).
Xenoph. de Socr.
God, that we should be content: because it is most reasonable to acquiesce in
God's choice of our state, he being infinitely more wise than we, and
infinitely better understanding what is good for us than we can do: because he
is well affected to us, and more truly loves us than we do our selves;
because he has a just right, Charior est illis homo quam sibi.
and irresistible power to dispose of us, the which (whatever we can do,
however we resent it) he will effectually make use of, whence it is extremely
foolish to be discontent: foolish it is to be dissatisfied with the results of
his wisdom, adhering to our vain apprehensions; foolish to distrust his
goodness in compliance with our fond selflove; foolish to contest his
unquestionable right and uncontrollable power, having nothing but mere
impotency to oppose against them; no less than downright madness it is to fret
and fume at that which we can no-wise (...).

Philem.


help, to bark at that which lodges in heaven so far high above us, to
solicit deaf necessity with our ineffectual wailings; for if we think, that
our displeasure will affect God, that our complaints will incline him to alter
our condition, or comply with our wishes, we do conceit vainly, and without any
ground; sooner may we, by our imagination, stop the tides of the Sea, or turn
the streams of Rivers backward; sooner, by our cries, may we stay the (...).
Hom. Il. (...).
Sun, and change all the courses of the Stars, than by our passionate
resentments or moanfull clamours we can check the current of affairs, or alter
that state of things, which is by God's high decree established: discontented
behavior will rather fasten our condition, or remove it into a worse place;
(...). Eurip.
as it highly does offend God, and increases our guilt, so it moves God to
continue, and to augment our evils. Thus lifting up our eyes to heaven, and
considering the reference our disposition and demeanor has to God, will
induce us to bear our case contentedly.

II. Again, Reflecting upon our selves, we may observe much reason Lam. 3. 39.
to be content with our state; in whatever capacity we look upon our selves, it
in reason becomes us, we in duty are obliged to be so.

As men and creatures we naturally are indigent and impotent; we have no just
claim to any thing, nor any possession maintainable by our power; all that we
have, or can have, comes from most pure courtesy and bounty; wherefore how
little soever is allowed us, we have no wrong done us, nor can we justly
complain thereat: Such beggars as we are must not pretend to be chusers; if any
thing be given us we may beglad, we should be thankful. It is for those who
have a right, and a power to maintain it, to resent and expostulate, if their
due be withheld; but for us that never had any thing, which we could call our
own; that have no power to get or keep any thing, for us that came into the
world naked and defenseless, that live here in continual, absolute and
arbitrary dependence for all our livelihood and subsistence, to contest with
him that maintains us, or to complain of his dealing, is ridiculously absurd
and vain.

Upon a moral account we have less reason to challenge ought, or to complain of
any thing; for we deserve nothing but evil: If we rightly esteem and value our
selves, any thing will seem good enough for us, any condition will appear
better than we deserve: duly examining the imperfections and infirmities of our
nature, the disorder and depravedness of our hearts, the demeanours and
enormities of our lives, we cannot but apprehend, that we are even unworthy of
the crumbs which fall from our masters table; Matt. 15. 17.
we cannot but acknowledge with the good Patriarch, that we are less than the
least of God's mercies. Considering Genesis 32. 10.
our natural unworthiness, we shall see that we deserve not so much as those
common benefits which all men enjoy, and without which we cannot subsist; so
that in regard to them we shall be ready to acknowledge with the Psalmist; Lord
what is man that thou take knowledge of him, or the Son of man, that thou
make account Psalm. 44. 3.

Job 7. 27.


of him? Trying our hearts, and examining our ways, we shall soon discover it
to be abundant mercy, that we are not utterly deprived of all good things,
stripped of all comforts, yea dispossessed of our very being and life it self;
that we are obliged to acknowledge with those in the Lamentations, It is of the
Lord's mercies that we are Lam. 3. 22.
not consumed, because his compassions fail not. Were we sar better than we
are, yet it would not become us to contest with him, to whose disposal and
judgment we are subject; as Job teaches us: Behold (says he) God Job 9. 12,
etc.
takes away, who can hinder him, who will say unto him, what do thou? If he
will not withdraw his anger, the proud (...)
helpers do stoop under him; how much less shall I answer him, and choose out my
words to reason with him; whom though I were righteous, I would not answer, but
I would make supplication to my judge; but for us, men so unrighteous (Job 9.
32.)
and guilty, to debate with, to question the proceedings of our Judge it is
much more unseemly.

Nothing can be more absurd, than for men so deeply indebted, than for sinners
so very obnoxious to wrath, to be aggrieved in any state: Shall we, who are
conscious to our selves of so many great sins against our God; who by wilful
transgressions, or slothful neglects, have so much affronted and offended him;
who have so little requited his love, and so much abused his patience; who have
born so little fruit, and rendered him so little service, shall we be angry that
our humor is not pleased in all things? Shall we affect to swim in plenty, to
wallow in pleasure, to bask our selves in ease; to be fed with dainties, to be
gaily clothed, to flourish in a brave and splendid condition, to be worshipped
and honored, who deserve not the meanest competence, or lowest respect, to
whom it is a great favor that we are permitted to subsist, whom strict justice
would often have cast into utter misery and disconsolateness? It is not surely
for such persons to be dissatisfied with any thing in this world, but to bless
God's exceeding mercy, that they abide there on this side of the bottomless
pit; it is their part, with most submissive patience, to bear whatever is
inflicted on them, humbly saying with him in the Prophet, I will bear the
indignation of the Lord, Mic. 7. 9.
because I have sinned against him. Seeing, whatever our crosses or sufferings
be, we cannot but confess to God with those in Ezra, Thou have punished F^r. 9.
13.
us less than our iniquities deserve; being gainers upon the matter, having so
much of our debt remitted in effect, being in comparison to what was due to us
very tolerably, yea very favorably dealt with, Why should we be dissatisfied?
If in such cases men should deal so favorably with us, we should be much
pleased, and ready to thank them; Why then should we take it ill of God, when
he, even in his hardest proceedings against us, expresses so much indulgence
and mercy?

If we must be displeased, and lust to complain, we have reason much rather to
accuse our selves, than to exclaim at Providence, to bewail our sins, than to
deplore our fortune: for our evils are not indeed so much the voluntary works
of God, who does not afflict willingly, or grieve the children Lam. 3. 33.

(...).


of men, as the natural products of our sins, which we do wilfully commit: It
is (as the Prophet speaks) our Jer. 5. 25.
sins that withhold good things from us; and bring evil things upon us: Fools,
Psalm. 107. 17.
because of their transgression, and because of their iniquities, are
afflicted. We make adversity necessary, or expedient for us, then we cry out
upon Jer. 17. 10. 21. 14. 32. 19. 6. 19.
it: we labor in Planting, but cannot brook the fruit of our doings; we, like
prodigals, fling away our estate in wanton profusions, then complain of want;
we affect and choose the causes, but loath, and cannot abide the certain
consequences; so fond in our conceits, so perverse are we in our affections:
Wherefore does the living man complain, for the punishment of his Lam. 3. 39.
sins? so well might the Prophet demand and expostulate. (...)


We may farther, looking on our selves, consider our selves as servants to God,
or rather as slaves, absolutely subject to his disposal; And shall any servant,
shall a mere slave presume to choose his place, or determine his rank in the
family? Shall he appoint to himself what office he will discharge, what garb he
shall go in, what diet he must have; what he will do, and how he shall be
accommodated? Is it not fit that all these things should be left to our
Master's discretion and pleasure, it is most reasonable that we should
thoroughly acquiesce in his determination: even a Pagan Philosopher could teach
us, that this is reasonable; who thus piously directs his Speech to God: For
the rest use me to what thou (...). Arr. 2. 16.
please. I do consent unto thee, and am indifferent. I refuse nothing which
seems good to thee; lead me whither thou will; put on me what garment thou
please: Will thou have me to be a governor or a private man, to stay at home
or to be banished away, to be poor or to be rich? I will, in respect to all
these things, apologize for thee with men; thus did Epictetus say, and such
speech well becomes our relation to God: servants should be content with their
Masters appointments and allowances; they should not only themselves forbear
to find fault with, but be ready to maintain his proceedings against any, who
shall presume to reprehend or blame them. Especially such servants as we are,
who, after we have done all things Luc. 17. 10.
commanded us, must acknowledge, that we are unprofitable servants; such as can
bring no considerable benefit to our Lord, or any-wise advance his state; such
as therefore cannot challenge any wages from him, more than he out of mere
favor is pleased to allow: Could we, by our labors, enrich God, or raise him
in dignity, or procure delight to him, it might seem congruous that he should
answerably reward us; but as he gets nothing by us, so we cannot require any
thing from him: our best services do indeed rather need pardon, than deserve
any reward; No man has lived so well, that he can pretend any thing from God,
that he is not indeed much behind-hand in his accounts with God, having
received from God far more of benefit than he can return to him in service: No
man, without extreme presumption and arrogance, can offer to prescribe, in what
measure, or what manner God should reward him.

Again, if we consider our selves as the children of God, either by birth or
nature, or by adoption and grace, How can we be discontent for any thing? Have
we not thence great reason to hope, or rather to be confident, that we shall
never want any good thing (necessary or convenient for us) that no great evil
shall ever oppress us? For is not God hence by paternal disposition inclined,
is he not, in a manner, by paternal duty, engaged, in all needful occasions,
to supply and succor us? Can we (without great profaneness, and no less folly)
surmise, that he, which is so immensly good, will be a bad (an unkind, or a
neglectfull) Father to us? No, as there is no other Father in goodness
comparable to him, so none, in real effects of benignity, can come near him; so
our Lord assures us: If ye (says he) being evil, know how Matt. 7. 11.
to give good things to your children; How much more will your heavenly Father
give good things to his children that ask him?

If we consider our selves as Christians, we have still more reason to practice
this duty: As such, we are not only possessed of goods abundantly sufficient
to satisfy our desires; we have hopes able to raise our minds above the sense
of all present things; we have entertainments that ever may divert our minds,
and fill our hearts with comfort; but we have also an assurance of competent
supplies of temporal goods; for, Godliness 1 Timothy 4. ^.
is profitable to all things, having the promise both of the present life, and
of that which is to come: and, If we seek Matt. 6. 33.
first the kingdom of heaven, and its righteousness, all these things shall be
added unto us. It is indeed strangely unhandsome for a Christian ever to droop,
or to be disconsolate; for a friend of God, and an heir of heaven to think he
wants any thing, or fear that he shall ever want, for him, whose treasure and
heart are above, to be so concerned with any thing here, as deeply to resent it.

Again, if we reflect upon our selves as rational men, How for shame can we be
discontent? Do we not therein much disparage that excellent perfection of our
nature? Is it not the proper work of reason to prevent things hurtful or
offensive to us, when that may be done; to remove them, if they are removeable;
if neither of these can be compassed, to allay and mitigate them; so that we
may be able well to support them? Is it not its principal use to drive away
those fond conceits, and to quell those troublesome passions, which create, or
foment disquiet, and displeasure to us? if it cannot do this, What does it
signify? To what purpose have we it? Is not our condition really worse than
that of brute beasts, if reason serves only to descry the causes of trouble,
but cannot enable to bear it? All the reasons we have produced, and all that we
shall produce against discontent, will, if we are reasonable men, and reason
avails any thing, have this effect upon us.

Wherefore considering our selves, our capacities, our relations, our actions,
it is most reasonable to be content with our condition, and with whatever does
befall us.

The Third Sermon.
PHIL. IV. 11. I have learned in whatever state, etc.
III. FArther, if we consider our condition (be it what it will, how poor, how
mean, how despicable and forlorn soever) we can have from it no reasonable
ground of discontent.

1. Our condition in this world cannot (if rightly estimated, and well managed)
be extremely bad, or sorrowful; nothing here can occur insupportable, or very
grievous in it self; we cannot, if we please, want any thing considerable, and
the defect whereof may not be supplied, or supported by far better enjoyments.
If we have high opinions of some things, as very excellent, or very needful
for us, it is no wonder if we do want them, that our condition is unpleasant to
us; if we take other things for huge evils, then, if they be incumbent on us,
we can hardly escape being displeased; but if we thoroughly look through such
things, and scan them exactly, valuing them, not according to fallacious
impressions of sense, or illusive dreamings of fancy, but according to sound
dictates of reason, we may find, that neither the absence of the former, nor
the presence of the latter does make our condition much worse, or render our
case deplorable.

We are, for instance, poor: that condition, rightly weighed, is not so very
sad: for what is poverty? what but the absence of a few superfluous Tert. de
Pat. 7.
things, which please wanton fancy rather than answer need; without which
nature is easily satisfied, and which if we do not affect, we cannot want? what
is it but to (...)

(...). Socrat.


wear course clothes, to feed on plain and simple fare, to work and take some
pains, to sit or go in a lower place, to have no heaps of cash, or hoards of
grain, to keep no retinue, to have few Vid. Plut. in Arist.
friends, and not one flatterer? and what great harm in this? It is a state,
which has its no small conveniences and comforts, its happy fruits and
consequences; which freeth us from many cares and distractions, from many
troubles and crosses, from many Si vis vacare animo aut pauper sis oportet, aut
pauperi similis.

Multis ad philosophandum obstitere divitiae; paupertas expedita est, secura
est. Sen. Ep. 17.

Saepius pauper, and fidelius ridet.

Sen. Ep. 80.


encombrances, many dangers, many temptations, many sore distempers of body and
soul, many grievous mischiefs, to which wealth is exposed; which maintains
health, industry and sobriety; disposes us to feed heartily, to move nimbly,
to sleep sweetly; which preserves us from luxury, from satiety, from sloth and
unwieldiness. It yields disposition of mind, freedom and leisure to attend
the study of truth, the acquist of virtue. It is a state, which many have born
with great cheerfulness; many (very wise men) have voluntarily embraced; which
is allotted by divine wisdom to most men; and which the best men often do
endure; to which God has declared an especial Psalm. 10. 14. 35. 10. 68. 10.
69. 33. 72. 4, 13. 140. 12. 146. 7. 147. 2.

Luke 6. 20.

Jam. 2. 5.

Isa. 66. 2.


regard, which the mouth of truth has proclaimed happy; which the Son of God
has dignified by his choice, and sanctified by his partaking deeply thereof:
and can such a condition be very loathsome; can it reasonably displease us?

Again, thou art suppose fallen into disgrace, or from honor and credit art
depressed into a state of contempt and infamy? this also rightly prized is no
such wretchedness; for what does this import? what, but a change of opinion in
giddy men, which thou do not feel, which thou art not concerned in, if thou
please; which thou never had reason much to regard, or at all to rely upon?
what is thy loss therein? it is the breaking of a bubble, the sinking of a
wave, the changing of a wind, the cracking of a thing most brittle, the
slipping away of a thing most fugacious and slippery; what is honor, and fame,
but thought, and what more slitting, what sooner gone away than a thought? and
why art thou displeased at the loss of a thing so very slender, and slimme? if
thou did know its nature, thou can not be disappointed; if thou did not,
it was worth thy while to be thus informed by experience, that thou may not
any more regard it. Is the contempt, thou have incurred, from thy fault? bear
the consequence thereof patiently, and do thy best by removing the cause to
reverse the effect: is it undeserved and causeless? be satisfied in thy
innocence, and be glad that thou art above the folly and injustice of those,
who contemn thee. Let thy affections rather be employed in pity of theirs, than
in displeasure for thy own case. Did (let me ask thee again) the good opinion
of men please thee? that pleasure was fond and vain, and it is well thou art
rid of it; did it not much affect thee? why then do thou much grieve at the
loss thereof? Is not also thy fortune in this kind the same with that of the
best men? have not those who have deserved most honor, been exposed to most
contempt? But now (Job could say) Job 30. 1, 10.
they that are younger than I have me in derision, -- they abhor me, they slay
far from me, and spare not to spit in my face. And, I am, (could that Psalm. 22.
6, 7.
great and good King say) a worm, and no man; a reproach of men, and despised
of the people; All they that see me, laugh me to scorn; they shoot out the lip,
they shake the head. -- and, we are defamed, we are reviled, 1 Cor. 4. 12, 13.
we are made as the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things unto
this day, could the holy Apostles say; and He is despised and rejected of Isa.
53. 3.
men -- he was despised and we esteemed him not, was said of our Lord himself;
and can this condition then in just esteem be so very pitiful, or grievous?

But thou art perhaps troubled because thou art wrongfully censured, odiously
traduced and defamed, abused by slander, or by detraction; Exempl. Jeremiae.
Chrysostom. ad Olymp. 16.

Gratias ago Deo meo, quod dignus sum quem mundus oderit. Hier. Ep. 39. (ad
Asellam.)


which asperseth thee with things whereof thou art no-wise guilty, or
represents thee in a character unworthy of thee: Be it so; what then? why
does this so much affect thee?

Is not every man subject to these things? are not the greatest men, are not
the wisest men, are not the best men liable to the same? yea chiefly liable,
excellency being the special mark of envy and obloquy? can any good men escape
free of them among so many bad men, whose doings as goodness does reproach, so
it provokes (...). Theod. Ep. 80.
their malignity? Can thou imagine to pass thy days in so unjust and
spiteful a world without incurring such bad usage? can so many vain, so many
bold, so many lawless, tongues be tied up, or kept within compass of truth, or
equity? Will thou suffer it to be in the power of any man at his pleasure so
easily to discompose and vex thee? because he will be bad, shall thou be
miserable? why do thou not rather please thy self in the conscience of thy
endeavoring to deserve and do well; in thy innocence, and clearness from the
blame which they impose on thee; in thy having given no cause of such offense
and outrage? why do thou not rather pity their unworthiness, and unhappiness,
who stoop to so mean and base practices, than fret at them, as bad to thee?
they do themselves far more mischief, than they can do thee.

And why do thou not consider, that indeed thou art guilty of many faults,
and full of real imperfections, so that no man can easily derogate from thee
more than thou deservest: he may indeed tax thee unjustly, he may miss in the
particulars of his charge, he may discover groundless contempt, and ill will
toward thee; but thou know thy self to be a grievous sinner, and it is just
that thou should be reproached (God, for thy humiliation, or thy correction,
may have ordered him, as David said he might have ordered Shimei, to curse
thee) thou have therefore more need to be humble in reflection on thy self, than
to swell with disdain in regard to his injury.

Thou should improve this dealing, and make it wholesome to thee, by taking
occasion thence to correct thy real faults, and endeavoring to become truly
more worthy; that so thy conscience may be a firm bulwark against all
detraction and obloquy: In fine, satisfy thy self by committing thy soul with
patience in well-doing unto thy Judge, who assuredly will do thee right, will
protect thy reputation, and clear thy innocence: his judgment is only worth
regarding, be little concerned with any other. Theodor. Ep. 83.


Again, Being disappointed and crossed in the success of their projects, or
undertakings, is wont to put men, as they conceive, into a woeful case: but why
so? why (let me ask thee, who art discontented upon this score) did thou
build much expectation upon uncertainties? did thou not foresee a
possibility, that thy design might miscarry, and if so, why art thou not
prepared to receive what happens? was it not an adventure, why then art thou
troubled with thy chance? Is he not a silly gamester, that will fret and fume
at a bad cast, or at the loss of a game? did thou refer the business to God's
disposal and arbitrament, if not, thou deservedst to be crossed, and rather
confess thy fault, than complain of thy fortune; if thou did so, then be
consistent with thy self, and acquiesce in his determination: In fine, what is
thy loss it is of thy care and pain? would it have been much better, that thou
had been careless or idle? but have thou not in lieu of them got some wisdom
and experience? have thou not (if thy attempt was reasonable and worthy)
exercised thy wit, thy courage, thy industry? have thou not (by thy defeat) got
an opportunity to express equanimity and patience? if thou so improvest thy
disappointment, thou art a gainer by thy loss, thou do more, than conquer by
thy defeat: however since the gain, the credit, the preferment thou did aim
at, and have missed, are things in themselves of no great value, and such as
thou may well live without, as other good men have done, thou can not have
much reason to be displeased upon this account, or to reckon thy condition very
disastrous.

But friends, will some man say, have been unkind, have been ungrateful, have
been fickle and false, have neglected, have deserted, have betrayed me? It was
not an enemy, that Psalm. 55. 7.
reproached me, then I could have born it, etc. this is indeed commonly most
grievous; yet being scanned will not render a man's condition so lamentable:
Jam sibi poenas dedit qui peccavit. Sen. de Gr. 2. 30.
for, such misbehaviour of friends is more their calamity than ours: the loss
of bad friends is no damage, but an advantage; it is but the loss of a mischief,
and a trouble: the fewer we come to have of such, the more time we save, the
less trouble we meet with, the greater security we enjoy. The kindness we have
showed, the obligations we have put on such, are not quite lost, they will
bring the reward due to humanity, and fidelity; it will yield satisfaction to
us, that however we have been kind and faithful to them. The fidelity of
remaining true friends may satisfy us; however if all other friendships should
fail, there is one remains, worth millions of other friends, who can never
prove unfaithful, or inconstant, who never will be unmindfull of us, or
deficient in kindness toward us.

The death of friends does it may be oppress thee with sorrow. Vid. Sen. Ep. 63.


But can thou lose thy best friend; can thou lose the presence, the
conversation, the protection, the advice, the succor of God? is he (...),
Theod. Ep. 68.
not immortal, is he not immutable, is he not inseparable from thee? can thou
be destitute of friends, whilst he stands by thee? Is it not an affront, an
heinous (...), etc. Theod. Ep. 14.
indignity to him, to behave thy self, as if thy happiness, thy welfare, thy
comfort had dependence on any other but him? is it not a great fault to be
unwilling to part with any thing, Vid. Greg. Naz. Ep. 202.
when he calls for it?

Neither is it a loss of thy friend, but a separation for a small time; he is
only parted from thee as taking a little journey, Cur doles si periisse non
credis? cur impatienter fer as subductum interim quem credis reversurum?
profectio est quam put as mortem. Tert. de Pat. 9. Sen. Ep. 63.
or going for a small time to repose; within a while we shall be sure to meet
again, and joyfully to congratulate, if we are fit in a better place, and more
happy state; proemisimus, non amisimus; we have sent him thither before, not
quite lost him from us.

Thy friend, if he be a good man (and in such friendships only we can have
true satisfaction) is Impatientia in ejusmodi and spei nostrae male ominatur,
and fidem praevaricatur, etc. Tert. ibid.
himself in no bad condition, and does not want thee; thou can not therefore
reasonably grieve for (...); Naz. Or. 19.
him; and to grieve only for thy self is perverse selfishness and fondness.

But thou have lost a great comfort of thy life, and advantage to thy affairs
here? is it truly so? is it indeed an irreparable loss, even secluding the
consideration of God, whose friendship repaireth all possible loss? what is it,
I pray, that was pleasant, convenient, or useful to thee in thy friend, which
may not in good measure be supplied here? was it a sense of hearty good will,
was it a sweet freedom of conversation, was it sound advice or kind assistence
in thy affairs? and may thou not find those left, which are alike able, and
willing to minister those benefits? may not the same means, which knit him to
thee, conciliate others also to be thy friends? he did not alone surely Vid.
Sen. Ep. 63.
possess all the goodnature, all the fidelity, all the wisdom in the world,
nor has carried them all away with him? other friends therefore thou may
find to supply his room: all good men will be ready, if thou art good, to be
thy friends, they will heartily love thee; they will be ready to cheer thee
with their sweet and wholesome society, to yield thee their best counsel and
help upon any occasion: Is it not therefore a fond and unaccomptable affection
to a kind of personality, rather than want of a real convenience that
disturbeth thee?

In fine, the same reasons, which in any other loss may comfort us, should do
it also in this: neither a friend nor any other good thing we can enjoy under
any security of not soon loosing it; our welfare is not annexed to one man no
more than to any other inferior thing; this is the condition of all good
things here to be transient and separable from us; and accordingly we should be
affected toward them.

Fragile fractum est, mortale mortuum est. But farther, it perhaps displeases
us, that the course of the world does not go right, or according to our mind;
that justice is not well dispensed, that virtue is under hatches, that worth is
not considered, that industry is not rewarded, that innocence and modesty are
trampled upon; that favor, partiality, corruption, flattery, craft, impudence
do carry all before them; devouring all the encouragements due to honest
industry: This may be observed, but why should it displease? art thou guilty of
contributing to this? then mend; if not, then bear; especially seeing thou
can not help it; for so it has always been, and ever will be in the world,
that things never have gone there as the wisest judge, or the best men desire:
there have never been good men enough to sway the world, nor will the few good
men that are, be so active in promoting public good, as bad are in driving on
their private designs; does not this course of things necessarily spring from
the nature of men, which therefore we should no more be vexed at, than for that
a serpent has poison, or that a wasp has a sting? we cannot wonder at it, why
then should we be strangely affected by it? could any man ever have been
pleased, if this were a sufficient cause of displeasure? However the world
goes, we may yet make a tolerable shift, God is engaged competently to provide
for us; that should satisfy us. God observes these things no less than we,
and he can easily hinder them, yet he thinks good to suffer them; and shall
not we do so likewise? there is in fine appointed a judgment hereafter, when
all these things shall be redressed and set straight; when justice and virtue
shall triumph, when integrity and industry shall find their due recompense,
it is but a moment to that time, and till then we may rest satisfied.

Thus if we do survey and rightly state things, which cause discontent, and
seem to render our condition hard and sad, we shall find, that not from the
things, but from our selves all the mischief proceeds: we by our imagination
give to the lightest things a weight, and swell the smallest things into a vast
bulk; we fancy them very frightfull and doleful, then we tremble and grieve
at them. Mere names (the names of poverty, of disgrace, of defeat) do scare us,
without consulting reason, and considering how little terrible the things are
themselves. We follow silly prejudices, judging that highly good, which the
vulgar admireth, that very evil, which the weakest sort of men are wont to
complain of; hence so commonly does our case seem grievous. But in truth there
is no condition so bad, but if we manage it well and wisely, if we bend our
mind to comply with it, if we moderate our passions about the accidents
thereof, if we vigilantly embrace and enjoy the advantages thereof, may not be
easily supportable, yea prove very comfortable to us; it is our fond conceits,
our froward humors, our perverse behaviors, which do create the trouble,
which seems adherent to any condition, and embittereth every state; which
from any slight occasion does create vexation, and turns every event into
disaster.

2. As there is no condition here perfectly and purely good (not deficient in
some conveniences, not blended with some -- usque adeo nulla est sincera
voluntas

Solicitique aliquid laetis intervenit -- Ovid.


troubles) so there is none so thoroughly bad, that it has not somewhat
convenient and comfortable therein; seldom or never all good things do forsake
a man at once, or all mischiefs together assail him; somewhat usually abides,
which Assuescendum conditioni suae; and quam minimum de illa querendum, and
quicquid habet circa se commodi apprehendendum est: nihil tam acerbum est, ex
quo non aequus animus solatium inveniat. Sen. de Tranq. an. cap. 10.
well improved, or wisely enjoyed may satisfy a man, yea render his estate
comparable to theirs, who to vulgar eyes appear to be in the best condition:
there is in every condition somewhat of good compensating for its evils, and
reducing it to a balance with other more plausible states. We are, suppose
again, in poverty (that instance I propound usually, as the most ordinary
ground of discontent) but have we therewith good health? then most rich men may
envy us, and reasonably we should not exchange our state with many crazy
Princes: have we therewith our liberty? that is an inestimable good, which
often times the greatest men have wanted, and would have purchased with heaps
of gold: have we therein a quiet mind, and a free use of our time? it is that,
which wisest men have prized above any wealth, and which the chief men of the
world would be glad to taste of: have we a clear reputation? we have then the
best good that any wealth can yield, we have more than many can obtain in the
most splendid fortune: have we any friends sticking to us? that is more than
the richest persons can assure themselves of, to whom it is near impossible to
distinguish the friends of their person from the flatterers of their fortune;
it is a privilege and solace, which Princes are hardly capable to arrive at:
have we a bare competency, sufficient to maintain our life? we thereby keep our
appetites in better compass, and Prove. 27. 7.
our faculties in greater vigor; we thence better relish all things; we in
consequence thereof avoid the burdens, the diseases, the vices of sloth and
luxury: have we farther (as if we are not very bad, we shall in this case
assuredly have, humanity disposing all men thereto) the compassion of men; is
not this somewhat better, than that envy, that ill will, that obloquy, which
usually do attend wealth and prosperity? why then, if our poor state has so
manifold conveniences, do we so much distaste it? why do we so dwell and pore
on the small inconveniences we feel under it, overlooking or slighting the
benefits we may enjoy thereby? This indeed ordinarily is our folly and
infirmity, that the want of any little thing, which we fancy or affect, does
hinder us from satisfaction in all other things; One dead fly causes all our
Eccles. 10. 1.
ointment to stink; the possession of a Kingdom will not keep us from being
heavy and displeased (as Ahab was) 1 King. 21. 4.
if we cannot acquire a small vineyard near us; on that one thing our head runs
continually, our heart is wholly set, we can think on, we can taste nothing
else; the want of that notwithstanding all our affluence does pinch us, our
dainties thence do prove insipid, our splendours appear dim, every thing but
that is a toy unto us: So capriciously, and unaccomptably prone are we to
discontent.

3. Is our condition (let me ask again) so extremely bad, that it cannot be
much worse? Are we sunk to the bottom of all calamity? No surely; God's
Providence will not suffer, the state of things here can never admit that to
be: here are succors always ready against extremities; our own wit and
industry, the help of relations or friends, the natural pity and charity of our
neighbors will preserve us from them; especially persons in any measure
innocent can never come near them; there will therefore never fail some good
matter of content in what remains; a few good things, well improved, may
greatly solace us; but however, let us imagine our case to be the worst that
can be; that a confluence of all temporal mischiefs and wants has arrived,
that we are utterly bereaved of all the comforts this world afforded; that we
are stripped of all our wealth, quite sunk in our reputation, deserted of every
friend, deprived of our health and our liberty; that all the losses, all the
disgraces, all the pains which poor Job sustained, or far more and Job, who
(...), etc. Chrysostom. ad Olymp. 2.
greater than those have together seized on us; yet we cannot have sufficient
reason to be discontent; for that nevertheless we have goods left to us in our
hands, or within our reach, far surpassing all those goods we have lost, much
outweighing the evils we do undergo: when the world has done its worst, we
remain Masters of things incomparably better than it, and all it contains;
the possession whereof may, and (if we be wise) will abundantly satisfy us. We
are Men still, and have our reason left behind, which alone, in worth,
exceeds all the treasures of the world; in well using which, and thereby
ordering all things for the best, we become more worthy, and more happy than
the most fortunate fool on earth; we may therein find more true satisfaction,
than any wealth, or any glory here can minister: we may have a good conscience
left, (the sense of having lived well heretofore, or at least a serious
resolution to live well hereafter) and that is a continual feast, Prove. 15. 15.
yielding a far more solid and savoury pleasure, than the most ample revenue
can afford: we may have hope in God (the author and donour of all good things)
and thereby far greater assurance of our convenient subsistence and welfare,
than all present possessions can bestow; we have reserved a free access to the
throne of Grace, and thereby a sure means (grounded on God's infallible word
and promise) of obtaining whatever is good for us; we have a firm right to
innumerable spiritual blessings, and privileges, each of them justly valuable
beyond whole worlds of pelf; we can, in a word (we can if we please) enjoy
God's favor, which immensly transcendeth all other enjoyments, which vastly
more than countervaileth the absence of all other things; of this, by applying
our selves to the love and service of God, we are infallibly capable; of this
no wordly force or fortune can despoile us; we having this, our condition
cannot be poor, contemptible, or pitiful; it is indeed thereby most rich,
glorious and happy: For how can he be poor that has the Lord of all things
always ready to supply him; who has God (as the Psalmist is wont to speak) to
be Psalm. 73. 26. 16. 5. 119. 57. 142. 5.
his portion for ever? How can he be despicable, that has the honor to have
the Sovereign Majesty of the world for his especial friend? How can he be
miserable who enjoys the fountain of all happiness, who has the light of
God's countenance to cheer him, who has the consolations of God's holy Spirit
to refresh and revive him? What can he want, who, beside his present interest
in all the needful effects of God's bountiful love, is an heir of heaven and
everlasting bliss? Seeing therefore it is in our power to be religious, seeing
we may, if we will (God's grace concurring, which preventeth us to seek, which
never is withheld from those who seek it) be good Christians; seeing nothing
can hinder us from fearing God, or can separate us from his love, neither can
any thing render Romans 8. 39.
our condition bad or unhappy, really distressed or needy: O fear the Lord
(says the Psalmist) for there Psalm. 34. 9.
is no want to them that fear him: The young Lions (or the rich, as the LXX.
render it) do lack and suffer (...). LXX.
hunger; but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing; and, Whosoever
keeps the commandment, shall Eccles. 8. 5.
feel no evil thing, says the Wiseman; and, The hand of our God is upon all
them that seek him, says the Prophet; and, Who is he that shall Ezr. 8. 22.
harm you; (or do ill to you, or make you worse) if ye be followers of that 1
Pet. 3. 13.

(...).


which is good? says St. Peter; and We know (says St. Paul) that to Romans 8.
28.
them who love God all things cooperate for good; and Godliness (says he
again) 1 Timothy 6. 6.
with contentedness is great gain; that is, supposing we have the goods which
piety ministers, although we have nothing more, we are, if we can be content,
very well to pass; it is abundantly sufficient for us.

Why then, I pray, are we discontent? what we do we groan or grieve for: What
is it that we do want? Is it the use of reason, is it virtue, is it God's
favor? then indeed we have good cause to be displeased; for the want of those
things is indeed lamentable; but if we do want them, it is only our selves
that we should complain of; for we may have them if we will, and who can help
it if we will not? Who, if we shall wilfully deprive our selves of them, will
be concerned to mind our complaints? But is it only a lump of trash, or a puff
of honor, or a flash of pleasure, that we do need? Is it that we cannot so
delicately glut our bellies, or so finely cloth our backs, or so thoroughly
sooth our fancies, as we could wish, that we so pitifully moan? Is it being
restrained in some respects from the swinge of our humor, is it that we are
not so much regarded, or are slighted by some persons, is it that we are
crossed in some design, that so discomposeth and discourageth us? then are we
sottishly fond and childish in our conceits, and our affections: for proper it
is to children, when as they want no solid or substantial goods, to wail for
worthless toies and trinkets; it is for children, when they have not their will
in petty and impertinent matters, to cry and lament; children are much affected
with every word, or little show that crosses them; If we were (as St. Paul
charge us to be) perfect men, 1 Cor. 14. 20.
if we had manly judgments, and manly affections toward things, we should not
so regard or value any of these temporal and transitory things, either good or
evil, as by the want of one sort, or by the presence of the other, to be much
disturbed; we should, with St. Paul, style any present evil (...), a lightness
of affliction: we should with him 2 Cor. 4. 17.

Romans 8. 18.


reckon, that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared
with the glories which shall be revealed to us; we should with Saint Peter
greatly rejoice, though for a season 1 Pet. 1. 6.
we are in heaviness, through manifold trials, or afflictions: We should esteem
any condition here very tolerable, yea very good.

4. In truth (if we will not mince the matter, and can bear a truth sounding
like a Paradox) usually our condition is then better, when it seems worse;
then we have most cause to be glad, when we are aptest to grieve; then we
should be thankful, when we do complain; that it appears otherwise to us, it
is because in our taxations of things we do ordinarily judge (or rather not
judge, but fancy, not hearing or regarding any dictate of reason) like beasts;
prizing things merely according to present sense, or show, not examining their
intrinsic natures, or looking forward into their proper fruits and
consequences.

Adversity (or a state, wherein we are not furnished with all accommodations
grateful to sense or fancy; or wherein -- Multoque in rebus acerbis,

Acrius advertunt animos ad relligionem. Lucret. 3. p. 64.


somewhat does cleave to us offensive to those inferior powers of soul) is the
thing which we chiefly (...), etc. Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. Orat. 26.
loath and abominate; whereas, in true judgment, nothing commonly is more
necessary, more wholesome, more useful and beneficial to us; nothing is more
needful, or conducible to the health of our soul, and to our real happiness,
than it: It is the school of wisdom, wherein our minds are disciplined and
improved in the knowledge of the best things, whence it is termed (...), that
is, instructive chastisement; Psalm. 119. 71. 1 Cor. 11. 32.
so David found it; It is, said he, good for me that I have been afflicted,
that I might learn thy statutes; and, our (...).
Lord himself, (...), Heb. 5. 8.
He learned obedience from what he suffered. It is the Academy Miraris tu, si
Deus, ille bonorum amantissimus qui illos quam optimos esse atque
excellentissimos vult, fortunam illis cum qua exerceantur assignat? Sen de
Prove. 2.

Deuteronomy. 8. 2.


wherein virtue is acquired and exercised; so God meant it to his people; The
Lord thy God (says Moses) led thee this forty years in the wilderness, that he
might humble thee, and prove thee. So the Wiseman says, that by the sadness
of the countenance the heart is made better; and, that stripes do cleanse the
Eccles. 7. 3.
inward parts of the belly. And, It Prove. 20. 30.
yields (says the Apostle) the peaceable Heb. 12. 11.

Jam. 1. 3.

Romans 5. 3.


fruit of righteousness to them that are exercised thereby.

It is the furnace of the soul, wherein it is tried, cleansed and refined from
the dross of vain conceits, of perverse humors, of vicious distempers: When
(says Job 23. 10. (Psalm. 66. 10.)

Eccles. 2. 5.

Sap. 3. 5.

(Isa. 1. 25. 48. 10.

Mal. 3. 23. Dan. 11. 35.)


Job) he has tried me, I shall come forth as gold: and, Gold (says the
Wiseman) is tried in the fire, and acceptable men in the furnace of Hence (...)
(trial) is the usual word signifying it. 1 Pet. 1. 6, etc.
adversity.

It is the method whereby God reclaimeth sturdy sinners to goodness, engages
them to seek and serve himself; so of the Israelites the Prophet says, Lord,
in Isa. 26. 16. 29. 19.

Hos. 5. 15.

Psalm. 78. 34. 107. 4, etc. 84. 16.


trouble have they visited thee, they poured out a prayer when thy chastning
was upon them; so Manasses, when he 2 Chronicles. 23, 12.
was in affliction he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly
before the God of his Fathers; so Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3. 34.
after being driven from his Kingdom, his understanding returned unto him, and
he blessed the most high, and praised and honored him that lives for ever. So
David Psalm. 119. 67.
himself, Before, said he, I was afflicted I went astray, but now have I kept
thy word.

It is that whereby God does prepare men, and (...), etc. Chrysostom. Tom. 6. Or. 9.
does entitle them to the blessed rewards hereafter: Our light affliction
(says 2 Cor. 4. 17.
St. Paul) which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory; and, Ye (says St Peter) Heb. 10. 36. (...), etc.
greatly rejoice, though now for a season, if need be, ye are in heaviness 1
Pet. 1. 6. 4. 14.
through manifold temptations; that the trial of your faith being much more
precious than of gold that perishes, though it be tried with fire, may be
found unto praise, and honor, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ.
Such is the nature, such the use, such the fruits of adversity.

It is indeed scarce possible, that without tasting it somewhat deeply, any man
Nihil infelicius eo, cui nihil unquam evenit adversi, non licuit enim illi se
experiri. Sen. de Provid. 3.
should become in good measure either wise or good. He must be very ignorant of
himself (of his own temper and inclinations, Non fert ullum ictum illaesa
felicitas, Ib,
of the strength and forces of his reason) who has not met with some rubs and
crosses to try himself and them with: the greater part of things he must little
understand, who has not experienced the worst part: he cannot skill to wield
and govern his passions, who never had them stirred up, and tossed about by
cross accidents: he can be no good Pilot in matters of humane life, who has
not for some time sailed in a rough Sea, in foul weather, among sands and
shelves: he could have no good opportunity of employing thoroughly, or
improving his wit, his courage, his industry, who has had no straits to
extricate himself from, no difficulties Quae latet, inque bonis cessat non
cognita rebus,

Apparet virtus, arguiturque malis.

Ovid. Trist. 4. 3.


to surmount, no hardships to sustain: The virtues of humility, of patience, of
contentedness necessarily must be unknown to him, to whom no disgraces, no
wants, no sore pains have arrived, by well enduring which, those virtues are
learnt, and planted in the soul: Scarce can he become very charitable, or
compassionate to others, who never himself has felt the smart of affliction,
or inconveniences Non ignara mali miseris succurrere disco. Aen. 2.
of any distress; for even, as the Apostle teaches us, our Savior himself was
obliged to suffer tribulation, that he Heb. 2. 17, 18. 4. 15, 16.
thence might become merciful, and disposed to succor the afflicted. (No
wonder, if he that lives in continual prosperity, be a Nabal, churlish and
discourteous, 1 Samuel 25. 6. 3.
insensible of other men's grievances:) And how can he express much piety or
love to God, who is not (in submission to God's will, and for his Cum molestiae
in hujus vitae fragilitate crebrescunt, aeternam requiem nos desiderare
compellunt. Mundus quippe iste periculosior est blandus, quam molestus, and
magis cavendus quum se illicit diligi, quam cum admonet, cogitque contemni.
Aug. Ep. 144.
sake) put to suffer any thing grievous, or want any thing desirable? When can
he employ any great faith or hope in God, who never has any visible need of
succor, or relief from him, who has other present aids to confide in? How can
he purely delight in God, and place his sole felicity in him? How can he
thoroughly relish spiritual things, whose affections are taken up by an
affluence of other goods, whose appetites are glutted with enjoyment of other
delights? What but deprivation of these things can lay open the vanity, the
deceitfulness Ardua nam res est opibus non tradere mores. Mart.
and slipperiness of them? What but crosses and disappointments here can
withdraw our minds Munera ista fortunae putatis? insidiae sunt. Sen. Ep. 8.

Viscata beneficia. Ib.


from a fond admiration, and eager affection toward this world? What but the
want of these joys and satisfactions, can drive us to seek our felicity
otherwhere? when the deceit Matt. 13. 22.
of riches possesses us, How can we judge right of things? when cares about
them distract us, How can we think about any thing that is good? 1 Timothy 6. 9.

Luc. 10. 41.


when their snares entangle us, and their clogs encumber us, How can we be free
and expedite in doing good? when abundance Deuteronomy. 32. 15.

Prove. 1. 32. 30. 9.

Hos. 13. 6.

Psalm. 30. 6. Jer. 2^. 21.

Amos 6. 1, etc.


fatneth our hearts, and ease softneth our spirits, and success pusseth up our
minds; when pride, sensuality, stupidity and sloth (the almost inseparable
adherents to large and prosperous estates) do continually insinuate ^
themselves into us, What wisdom, what virtue are we like to have? Seeing then
adversity is so wholesome and useful, Gratulari and gaudere nos decet
dignatione divinae castigationis -- O servum illum beatum, cujus emendationi
Dominus instat; cui dignatur irasci, quem admonendi dissimulatione non decipit.
Tertull. de Pat. 11.
the remedy of so great mischiefs, the cause of so great benefits to us, Why
should we be displeased therewith? to be displeased with it, is to be
displeased (...), etc. Chrysostom. (...). 5.
with that which is most needful, or most convenient for us, to be displeased
with the health and welfare of our souls; that we are rescued from errors and
vices, with all their black train of miseries and mischiefs; to be displeased
that we are not detained under the reign of folly and wickedness, that we are
not inevitably made fools and beasts. To be disgusted with Providence for
affliction or poverty, is no other (...). Simpl.
than as if we should be angry with our Physician for administering a purge, or
for prescribing abstinence to (...). Naz. Ep. 66.
us; as if we should fret at our Surgeon for searching our wounds, or
applying needful corrosives; as if we should complain of the hand which
draws us from a precipice, or pulls us out of the Jud. 23.
fire. Many benefits (says Seneca) have a sad and rough countenance, as to
Beneficia multa trislem and asperam frontem habent, quemadmodum urere, and
secare, ut sanes. Sen. de Benef. 5. 20.
burn and cut in order to healing: Such a benefit of God is adversity to us;
and as such with a gladsome and thankful mind should we receive it.

If with a diligent observation we consult experience, we shall find, that
Horrorem operis fructus excusat. Tert. Scorp. 5.
as many have great cause to bewail, that they have been rich, that they have
been blinded and corrupted with prosperity, that they have received their
consolation here; Luc. 6. 24.

Jam. 5. 1.

Am 6. 1, etc.


so many have great reason to be glad, that they have been poor, Let our
condition be what it will, we are the same. It does not change us in our
intrinsic worth, or state. It is but a garment about us, or as weather.

-- Ego utrum,

Nave ferar magna an parva, ferar unus and idem. Hor. Epist. 2. 2.


that they have been disappointed, that they have tasted the bitter cup; it
having instructed and corrected them; it having rendered them sober and
considerate; industrious and frugal, mindful of God, and devout toward him:
And what we may rejoice in, when past, Why should we not bear contentedly when
present? Why should not the expectation of such good fruits satisfy us?

Why should not such a condition, being so plainly better in it self, seem also
better unto us? we cannot, if we are reasonable, but approve it in our
judgment; Why then are we not fully reconciled unto it in our affection?

The Fourth Sermon.
PHIL. IV. 11. I have learned in whatsoever state, etc.
5. BUT farther; Let our state be, as to quality, what it will, good or bad,
joyful or unpleasant, we may yet consider, that it cannot be desperate, it may
not be lasting; for there is not any necessary connection between the present
and the future; wherefore, as the present being momentany and transient, can
little trouble us, so the future being unknown, and uncertain, should not
dismay us. As no man reasonably can be elevated with confidence in a good
state, presuming on its duration, (Boast not thy self of tomorrow, for thou
know not what a Prove. 27. 1.
day may bring forth;) so no man should be dejected for a bad one, in suspicion
that Multa intervenient quibus vicinum periculum vel prepe admotum aut
subsistat aut desinat, aut in alienum caput transeat. Sen.
it will abide long; seeing neither (considering the frequent vicissitudes that
occur, and the flux nature of all things here) is each of them, in it self,
stable; and the continuance of each absolutely depends on God's arbitrary
disposal; and as God often does overturn prosperity, to humane judgment most
firmly grounded, so he most easily can redress the to appearance most forlorn
adversity; and he, being especially the helper of the helpless, does frequently
Psalm. 72. 12. 107. 9. 10. 4. 106. 9.

Job 12. 21. Psalm. 107. 40.

Isa. 25. 5. Job 5. 11.

Isa. 2. 11. Psalm. 18. 27.


perform it: As he pours contempt upon Princes, and weakeneth the strength of
the mighty; so he raises the poor out of the dust, and lifts the needy out
of the Psalm. 113. 7. 107. 41.
dunghill: He casts down the mighty from their seat, and exalts the humble
and meek: He sends the rich empty away, and fills the hungry with good
things. He makes Job 5. 18.
sore, and binds up, he wounds, 1 Samuel 2. 7.
and his hands make whole.

Considering therefore the reason of things, and (...), etc. Theod. Ep. 14.
the nature of God, if our state be at present bad or sorrowful, we have more
reason to hope for its amendment, than to fear its continuance. If indeed
Sperat adversis, metuit secundis,

Alteram sortem been praeparatum pectus. Hor. Carm. 2. 10.


things went on in a fatal track, merely according to a blind and heedless
chance, or a stiff and unalterable necessity; if there were no remedy from
God's Providence, or support by his grace to be expected (although even then
there would be no reason to grieve, or complain (grief would be unreasonable
because unprofitable, complaint would be vain, because fortune and fate are
deaf) yet our infirmity might somewhat excuse that idle proceeding; but since
not a Sparrow falls to the ground, not a hair of our Matt. 10. 29, 30.

Luc. 21. 18.


head perishes; nothing at all passes otherwise, than by the voluntary
disposition of a most wise and gracious God; since he does always strictly
view, and is very sensible of our griefs; yea does in a manner sympathize with
them (according to those pathetical expressions in the Prophets; His bowels
Hos. 11. 8. Jer. 31. 10.

Isa. 63. 9, 15.


sound; and are troubled, his heart is turned within him; In all their
afflictions Luc. 12. 29, 31. Heb. 13. 5. Matt. 6. 33. Phil. 4. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 7.
Psalm. 55. 23. 37. 5.
he was afflicted.) Since he farther has by promise obliged himself to care
for us, to support, and succor us; we have all reason to hope, yea firmly to
believe (if at least we can find in our hearts to hope, and to believe) that we
shall, as soon as it is good and expedient for us, find relief and ease; we
shall have that (...), that seasonable succor, of which the Apostle to the
Hebrews speaks. Heb. 4. 6.


Hope lies at the bottom of the worst condition that can be; The Job 5. 16.
poor (says Job's friend) has hope; and the rich can have no more; the future
being equally close to both; the one can have no greater assurance to keep what
he has, than the other has to get what he needs; yea clearly the poor has
the advantage in the case; for God has more declared, that he will relieve the
poor man's want, than that he will preserve the rich man's store: If then we
have in every condition a hope present to us, Why do we grieve as those 1 These.
4. 13.

Heb. 6. 19.


who have no hope? having ever ready the best anchor that can be to rest upon
(for in this rolling sea of humane affairs, there is no firmer anchor than
hope) Why do we let our minds be tossed with discontentfull solicitudes and
fears? Why do we not rather (as the Apostle injoineth) rejoice in hope, Romans
12. 12.
than grieve out of despair? Why do we not as the Prophet advises, hope and
wait quietly for the salvation of Lam. 3. 25.
the Lord? the effect of so reposing our selves for the future on God's
Providence would be perfect content, and peace, according to that of the
Prophet, Thou will keep him in perfect Isa. 26. 3.
peace, whose mind is stayed in thee, because he trusts in thee; And that of
the Wiseman, A patient man will bear for Ecclus. 1. 23.
a time, and afterward joy shall spring up unto him.

The truth is, and it seems very observable, in order to our purpose, that
most discontent arises not from the sense of incumbent evil, but from
fuspicion, or fear of somewhat to come; Although God at present dispenses a
competency of food and raiment, although we are in a tolerable condition, and
feel no extremity of want or pain, yet not descrying the way of a future
provision for us, answerable to our desires, we do trouble our selves; which
demeanor implies great ignorance, and infidelity; We think God (...), Chrysostom.
ad Stagir. 2.
obliged in kindness, not only to bestow upon us what is needful in its
season, but to furnish us with stores, and allow us securities; we must have
somewhat in hand, or we cannot trust him for the future; this is that which our
Savior cautioneth against, as the root of discontent and sign of diffidence;
Take no thought for the morrow, for the Matt. 6. 34.
morrow shall take thought for the things of it self, sufficient to the day is
the evil thereof: An advice no less pious, than Calamitosus est animus futuri
anxius, and ante miseriam miser. Sen. Ep. 18.
manifestly full of reason and wisdom; For what a palpable folly is it to
anticipate that evil which we would avoid; then, Ne sis miser ante tempus; cum
illa quae velut imminentia expavisti, fortasse nunquam ventura sint, certe
nondum venerint, etc. Sen. Ep. 13.
when we earnestly desire to put off sorrow, to pull it toward us; to feel that
mischief, which possibly shall never be; to give it a being in our fancy, Quod
juvat dolori suo occurrere? satis cito dolebis cum venerit. Ibid.
which it may never have in nature? Could we follow this advice, never
resenting evils before they Quoties incerta erunt maria, tibi fave. Ib.
come, never prejudging about future events against God's Providence, and our
own quiet; constantly depending on the Divine care for us; not taking false
alarms, and trembling at things, which shall never come near us; not being
disturbed with panick fears, no discontent could ever seize upon us; for the
present is ever supportable; our mind cannot be overwhelmed by the pangs of a
transitory moment.

If we need farther encouragement for application of this remedy, we have
manifold experiments to assure its virtue: as there are innumerable Promises,
that Lam. 3. 25.

Isa. 30. 18. 40. 31. 49. 23.

Psalm. 25. 3. 37. 9. 9. 10.

2 Chronicles. 28. 9. Ezra 8. 22.

Amos 5. 4. 2 Chronicles. 15. 2.


none who hope in God shall be disappointed, so there are many illustrious
examples of those, whom God has in remarkable manner, and wonderful measure
relieved from wants and distresses, raising them out of deepest poverty,
contempt and worldly wretchedness, into most eminent degrees of wealth and
prosperity: Look (says the Hebrew Sage) Ecclus. 2. 10.
into the ancient generations, and see; Who has trusted in the Lord, and has
been ashamed? Or who has abiden in his fear, and has been forsaken? Or who
has invoked him, and he did overlook (or despise him?) If we look into those
generations, we may there find Joseph out of slavery, and out of prison,
advanced to be the chief Governor of a most flourishing Kingdom: Moses from an
exile, and a vagrant, made the Redeemer and Commander of a populous Nation: Job
out of extreme poverty and Job 42. 10. 1. 3.
disgrace, restored to be in wealth and honor twice greater than the greatest
men of the East: Daniel out of captivity, and persecution, become President of
the greatest Monarchy on earth David raised out of great meanness to highest
dignity, restored out of extreme straits into a most prosperous state;
according to those Psalm. 71. 18. 69. 29. 18. 36.
words of admiration and acknowledgment; O what great troubles and adversities
have thou showed me; and yet did thou turn and refresh me, yea and broughtest
me from the deep of the earth again: Thou have brought me to great honor, and
comforted me on every side: Thus has God eminently done with diverse, thus we
may be assured that he will do competently with us, if with the like faith and
patience, we do, as they did, rely and wait upon him.

6. But farther, imagine or suppose, that our condition (so irksome to us at
present) will certainly hold on to the utmost; yet consider also, that it soon
will cease, and change of it self: since we are mortal, our evils cannot be
perpetual, we cannot long be infested with them.

As it may debase, and embitter all the prosperity in the world, to consider,
that it is very fading and short-lived, that its splendor is but a blaze, its
pleasure but a flash, its joy but as the crackling of thorns; so it should
abate, and sweeten any adversity, Eccl. 7. 6.

(Psalm. 27. 13. I had fainted, if I had not believed to see the goodness of the
Lord in the land of the living.


to remember, that it is passing away, and suddenly will be gone. Put, I say,
the worst case that can be, that it were certainly determined, and we did as
certainly know it, that those things which cause our displeasure, should
continue through our whole life; yet since our life it self will soon be spun
out, and with it all our worldly evils will vanish, Why are we troubled? What
is said of our selves must in consequence be truly applied to them; They flee
like a shadow, and continue 1 Chronicles. 29. 15.

Psalm. 78. 39.

Jam. 4. 14.


not; they are winds passing and coming not again; they are vapors appearing
for a little time, and then vanishing away; they wither like grass, Psalm. 90. 5.

Isa. 64. 6. 40. 6.


and fade away as a leaf; they may die before us, they cannot outlive us: our
life is but a hand breadth; And Psalm. 39. 5.
can then our evils have any vast bulk? Our age is as nothing. And can any
crosses Omnia brevia tolerabilia esse debent etiamsi magna. Cic. Lael.
therein be then any great matter? How can any thing so very short be very
intolerable? It is but (...), being (as St. Peter speaks) a little while yet
aggrieved; it is but 1 Pet. 1. 6.
(...), a small quantity whatever it be of time, as the Apostle to the Hebrews
says, that we need Heb. 10. 26, 27.
patience; it is but (...), an affliction for a 2 Cor. 4. 17.
present moment; and therefore, as St. Paul intimates, light and
inconsiderable that we are to undergo. We have but a very narrow strait of time
to pass over, but we shall land on the firm, and vast continent of eternity;
when we shall be freed from all the troublesome agitations, from all the
perilous storms, from all the nauseous qualms of this navigation; death (which
may be very near, which cannot be far off) is a sure haven from all the
tempests of life, a safe refuge from all the persecutions of the world, an
infallible medicine for all the diseases of our mind, and of our state: it will
enlarge us from all restraints, it will discharge all our debts, it will ease
us from all our toils, it will stifle all our cares, it will veil all our
disgraces; it will still all our complaints, and bury all our disquiets; it
will wipe all tears from our eyes, and banish all sorrow from our hearts: it
perfectly will level all conditions, setting the high (...).

(...). P^ocyl.


and low, the rich and poor, the wise and ignorant all together upon even
ground; smothering all the pomp and glories, swallowing all the wealth and
treasures of the world.

It is therefore but holding out a while, and all our molestation, of its own
accord, (...)

(...). Plut. ad Apoll.


will expire; time certainly will cure us; but it is better that we should owe
that benefit to reason, and let it presently comfort us: It is better, by
rational consideration, to work content in our selves, using the brevity and
frailty of our life as an argument to sustain us in our adversity, than only
to find the end thereof as a natural and necessary means of evasion from it.

Serious reflections upon our mortality, is indeed, upon many accounts, a
powerful antidote against discontent; being apt to extirpate the most radical
causes thereof.

Is it because we much admire these worldly things, that we so much grieve for
the want of them? this will quell that admiration; For how can we admire them,
if we consider, how in regard to us they are so very transitory, and evanid?
How can we deem them much worth the having, when we can, for so little time,
enjoy them, must so very soon quite part from them?

How can we dote on the world, seeing The world (as St. John says) 1 John 2.
27.

1 Cor. 7. 31.

Eccl. 1. 3, etc.

1 Pet. 2. 24.


passes away, and the desire thereof?

How can we value any worldly glory, since All the glory of men is (as St.
Peter tells us) as the flower of the grass; since, as the Psalmist says) Man
in honor abides not, but is like Psalm. 49. 12. 82. 6.
the beasts that perish?

How can we set our heart on riches, Prove. 27. 24. 11. 4.
considering that Riches are not for ever, nor can (as the Wiseman says)
deliver from death; that, as Saint James admonishes, The rich man fades Jam.
1. 11.
in his ways; that it may be said to any rich man, as it was to him in the
Gospel; Thou fool, this night thy life shall be required of thee, and what Heb.
11. 25.
thou have prepared to whom shall it fall? How can we fancy pleasure, seeing
it is but (...), a very temporary fruition; seeing however Cor. 15. 32.
we do eat, or drink, or play, it follows, the morrow we shall die?

How can we even admire any secular wisdom, or knowledge, seeing that it is
(as the Psalmist tells us) true of every man, that -- his breath goes forth,
he returns to Psalm. 46. 4.
his earth, in that very day his thoughts perish; particularly it is seen that
wisemen die, no otherwise than as the foolish, and brutish person perishes;
that, Psalm. 49. 10.
as Solomon with regret observed, There Eccles. 9. 10. 3. 14.
is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither we are
going.

Do we admire the condition of those, who, upon the stage, do appear in the
state of Kings, do act the part of wealthy men, do talk gravely and wisely like
Judges or Philosophers for an hour or two? If we do not admire those shadows
and mockeries of state, Why do we admire any appearances upon this theater of
the world, which are scarce a whit less deceitful, or more durable than they?

Is it an envious or disdainful regret at the advantages of others before us
(of others perhaps that are unworthy and unfit, or that are, as we conceit, no
more worthy and capable than our selves) that gnaweth our heart? is it, that
such persons are more wealthy, more honorable, in greater favor or repute,
than we, that vexes us? the consideration how little time those slender
preeminences will last, may (if better remedies want due efficacy) serve toward
rooting out that disease; the Psalmist does several times prescribe it; Fret
not Psalm. 37. 1, 2.
thy self (says he) against evil doers, neither be thou envious against the
workers of iniquity, for they shall soon be cut down like the grass, and wither
as the green herb; and, again, Be not Psalm. 49. 17.
afraid when one is made rich, and when the glory of his house is increased;
for when he dies he shall carry nothing away, his glory shall not descend
after him: and he being fallen into this scurvy distemper, did follow his own
prescription, I was, says he, envious Psalm. 73. 3, 17.
at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked -- until I went into
the sanctuary of God, then understood I their end; surely thou did set them
in slippery places -- How are they brought into desolation as in a moment? So
likewise does Solomon prescribe: Let not (says he) thine heart envy Prove. 23.
17, 18.
sinners; Why not? because surely there is an end, and thine expectation shall
not be cut off: there will be a close of his undeserved prosperity, and a good
success to thy well-grounded hope. So whatever does breed discontent, the
reflection upon our mortal and frail state will be apt to remove it.

It was that which comforted Job, and fortified his patience under so grievous
pressures; All the days of my appointed time (said he) I will wait till Job 14.
14, 1.
my change come: He would not be weary while he lived of his afflictions,
because the days of man are few, and full Genesis 47. 9.
of trouble: If they are full of trouble, and that be a sadning consideration;
yet they are few, and that makes amends, that is comfortable.

7. I add, that it is somewhat consolatory to consider, that the worse our
condition is here, the better we may hope our future state will be; the more
trouble and sorrow we endure, the less of worldly satisfaction we enjoy here,
the less punishment we have to fear, the more comfort we may hope to find
hereafter; for as it is a woeful thing to have received our portion, to have
enjoyed our consolation in this life, so it is a happy thing to have undergone
our pain here. A Purgatory under ground is probably a fable; but a purgatory
upon earth has good foundations; God is wont so to order it, that all men,
that especially good men, shall undergo it: for, What Son is there whom the
Father Heb. 12. 7.

^ Tim. 3. 12.


does not chasten? All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer
persecution.

8. A like consolation it is to consider, that wealth and prosperity are great
talents, for the improvement of which we must render a strict account, so that
to whom much is given, from him much shall be required; so that they are, in
effect, a burden; from which poverty includes an exemption; for the less we
have, the less we have to do, the less we are responsible for; our burden is
smaller, our account will be more easy.

9. I shall in reference to our condition, and the nature of those things which
cause our discontent, but propose one consideration more, or ask one question:
What is it that we do want, or wait (...). Epict. 3. 24.
for? Is it any good we want, which by our care and industry we can procure? Is
it any evil that afflicts us, which by the like means we can evade? if it be
so, Why then do we not vigorously apply our selves to the business? Why do we
not, instead of idle vexation, and ineffectual complaints, use (...)

(...). Aur. Carm.


the means offered for our relief? Do we like and love trouble? let us then be
content to bear it; let us hug it, and keep it close; if not, let us employ the
forces afforded us by nature, and by occasion, to repel and remove it.

But if we grieve and moan, because we cannot obtain some good above our reach,
or not decline some unavoidable evil, what do we thereby but palpably express
our folly, and wilfully heighten our woe; adding voluntary displeasure to the
heap of necessary want or pain; impressing more deeply on our selves the sense
of them? in such a case patience is instead of a remedy, -- Levius sit
patientia Quicquid corrigere est nefas. Hor.
which, though it do not thoroughly cure the malady, yet it somewhat
alleviateth it, preventing many bad symptoms, and Animus aequus optimum est
aerumnae condimentum. Plaut. Rud.
asswaging the paroxysms thereof. What booteth it to winse and kick against our
fortune? to do so will inflame us, and (...). Chrysostom. (...). 3.

(...). Theod. Ep. 15.


make us foam, but will not relieve or ease us: If we cannot get out of the
net, or the cage, to flutter and flounce will do nothing but batter and bruise
us.

But farther, to allay our discontents, let us consider the world, and general
state of men here.

1. Look first upon the world, as it is commonly managed, and ordered by men:
thou perhaps art displeased, that thou do not prosper and thrive therein,
that thou do not share in the goods of it; that its accommodations and
preferments are all snapt from thee; that thy pretenses are not satisfied, and
thy designs fail; this thou do take to be somewhat hard, and unequal; and
therefore art grieved. But if thou art wise, thou should not wonder; if thou
art good, thou should not be vexed hereat: for thou have not, perhaps, any
capacity for this world; thy temper and disposition are not framed to s^^e with
its way; thy principles and rules do clash with it, thy resolutions and designs
do not well comport with prosperity here; thou can not, or wilt not use the
means needful to compass worldly ends: Thou perhaps have a meek, quiet,
modest, sincere, steady disposition; thou can not be pragmatical, and
boisterous, eager and fierce, importunately troublesome, intolerably confident,
unaccomptably versatile, and various: Thou have certain pedantick notions about
right and wrong, certain Romantic fancies about another world (unlike to this)
which thou do stiffly adhere to, and which have an influence upon thy
actions: thou have a squeamish conscience, which cannot relish this, cannot
digest that advantageous course of proceeding; a scrupulous humor, that
hampereth thee, and curbeth thee from attempting many things which would serve
thy purpose; thou have a spice of silly generosity, which makes diverse
profitable ways of acting (such as forging and feigning, supplanting others by
detraction and calumny, soothing and flattering people) to be below thee, and
unworthy of thee; Thou think thy self obliged, and art peremptorily resolved
to observe strict rules of justice, of humanity, of charity, to speak as thou
meanest, to do as thou would be done to, to wrong no man any-wise, to
consider and tender the case of other men as thine own: Thy designs are honest
and moderate, conducible to (or at least consistent with) the public good,
injurious, or hurtful to no man; Thou carriest on thy designs by fair ways, by
a modest care, and harmless diligence; nor can be drawn to use any other, how
seemingly needful soever, which do savor of fraud, violence, any sort of
wrong or baseness: Thou have an honest pride and haughtiness of mind, which
will not let thee condescend to use those sly tricks, crooked ways and shifts,
which commonly are the compendious and most effectual ways of accomplishing
designs here: Thou art, in fine (like Helvidius Priscus) in thy dealings and
proceedings, pervicax recti, wilfully and peevishly honest: Such an one perhaps
thou art, and such is thy way; And can thou hope to be any body, or get any
thing here? Shall such a superstitious fop, such a conscientious simpleton,
such a bashful sneaksby, so fantastic a philosopher pretend to any (...).
Naz. Ep. 63.
thing here? No, thou art here piscis in arido, quite out of thy element; this
world is not for thee to thrive in.

This world is for worldlings to possess, and enjoy: It was (say the Rabbis)
made for the presumptuous; and although God did not altogether design it for
them, yet men have almost made it so: They are best qualified to thrive in it,
who can lustily bustle, and scramble; who can fiercely swagger and huff; who
can fawn; who can wind and wriggle like a Serpent; who can finely cog and
gloze; who can neatly shuffle and juggle; who can shrewdly Quod facillimum
factu est, pravus, and callidus b^nos and modestos antcibus, Tac. Hist. 1.
overreach and undermine others; those slippery wily artists, who can veere
any whither with any wind; those men of impregnable confidence, who can insist
upon any pretenses; who can be indefatigably and irresistibly urgent, nor will
be repulsed or baffled by any means; those who have a temper so laxe and
supple, that they can bend it to any compliance advantageous to them; who have
a spirit so limber, that they can stretch it any whither; who have face enough,
and conscience little enough to do any thing; who have no certain principles,
but such as will sort with their interests; no rules but such Lesbian and
leaden ones, that easily may be accommodated (...). Ael. 13. 39.
to their purposes: whose designs all tend to their own private advantage,
without any regard to the public, or to the good of others; who can use any
means conducible to such designs, bogling at nothing which serves their
purpose; not caring what they say, be it true or false; what they do, be it
right or wrong, so it seem profitable: this is called wisdom, prudence,
dexterity, ability, knowledge of men, and of the world, and I know not what
beside; in the Scripture, the wisdom of the world, and of the flesh, craft,
guile, deceit, (...), etc. For such persons it is to flourish in this world;
Behold, these (says the Psalmist) Psalm. 73. 12. 5, 7.
are the ungodly, who prosper in the world; and who increase in riches; They
are not in trouble as other men, neither are they plagued like other men; Their
eyes stand out with fatness, they have more than heart could wish: They it is
who love the world, 1 John 2. 16.
who seek it, who study and labor for it, who spend all their time, and employ
all their care about it; And is it not fit they should have it? Is it not a
pity they should miss it? Is it not natural, that they who sow to the flesh,
should reap from the flesh? Should not they who use the proper means, obtain
the end? Should not they arrive at the place, who proceed in the direct road
thither?

But for thee, who can not find in thy heart to use the means, why do thou
hope to compass the end; or grieve for not attaining it? Why do thou blend
and jumble such inconsistences together, as the eager desires of this, and the
hopes of another world? It becomes not such a gallant to whine, and pule. If
thou will be brave, be brave indeed; singly, and thoroughly; be not a
double-hearted mongrel; think not of satisfying thy mind, and driving on other
interests together; of enjoying the conceit of being an honest man, with the
design of being a rich or great man; of arriving to the happiness of the other
world, and attaining prosperity in this; Would thou enjoy both these? What
conscience is there in that? Leave rather this world unto those, who are more
fit for it, who seem better to deserve it, who venture so much, and take such
pains for it; do not go to rob them of this slender reward; but with content
see them to enjoy the fruits of their labor and hazard: Be thou satisfied with
the consequences of thy virtuous resolutions and proceedings; if it be worth
thy while to live innocently, modestly and conscientiously, do it, and be
satisfied; spoil not thine expectations by repining at the want of those
things, which thy circumstances render incompatible with them; Follow
effectually the holy Patriarchs, and Apostles, who, without regret, forsook
all, and cheerfully went thither, whither conscience and duty called them; if
thou art not willing to do so, Why do thou pretend to the same principles,
or hope for the like rewards? But leaving the consideration of the world as man
has made it; Consider that this world is not in its nature, or design, a 1
Cor. 10. 13.

(...).

Job. 7. 1. Chrysostom. ad Stag. 2. (p. 106.)


place of perfect ease and convenience, of pure delight and satisfaction: What
is this world but a region of tumult and trouble; a theater of vanity and
disasters; the kingdom of care, of fear, of grief and pain; of satiety, of
disappointment, of regret and repentance? we came not hither to do our will,
or enjoy our pleasure; we are not born (...), etc. Plut. ad Apollon.
to make laws for our selves, or to pick our condition here: No, this world is
a place of banishment from our first country, and the original felicity we
were designed to; this life is a state of travel toward another better
country, and seat of rest: and well it is, in such cases, (well it is, I say,
for us as exiles, and travelers) if we can find any tolerable accommodation,
if we can make any hard shift; It should not be strange to us, if in this our
peregrination we do meet with rough passages, foul ways, hard lodging, scant or
course fare; if we complain of such things, we do not surely consider where we
are, whence we came, whither we are going; we forget that we are the sons of
Adam, the heirs of sin and sorrow, who have sorfeited our rest and joy upon
earth; we consider not, how unavoidable the effects are of that fatal
condemnation and curse, which followed our first transgression; we mind not
that the perfection and purity of the blessings we have lost is not (...), etc.
Chrysostom. (...). 5.
to be found on this side the celestial paradise. This world is purposely made
somewhat unpleasant to us, lest we should overmuch delight in it, be unwilling
to part with it, wish to set up our rest here, and say, Bonum est esse hic; It
is good for us to be here.

This life is a state of probation and exercise, like to that (which prefigured
and represented it) of God's people in the wilderness, wherein God leads us
Deuteronomy. 8. 23.

(...). Chrysostom. ad Stagir. 2.


through many difficulties and hazards, in many wants and hardships, to humble
and prove us, in order to the fitting us for another more happy state.

No temptation therefore (or affliction) can seize (...).

1 Cor. 10. 3.


upon us, but such as is humane; that is, such as is natural and proper to men,
it is the consideration, which Ecclus. 40. 1. (...), etc.
St. Paul uses to comfort and support us in troubles; and a plainly good one
it is, for seeing Man (as Eliphaz says) is born Job 5. 7.
to trouble as the sparks fly upward; that nothing is more natural to any
thing, than trouble is Vid. Max. Tyr. diss. 25. p. 244.
to us; if we are displeased therewith, we are in effect pleased that we are
men; it implies that we gladly It was the doom of man to eat his bread in
sorrow all the days of his life. Genesis 3. 17.
would put off our nature, and cease to be our selves; we grieve that we are
come to live in this world; and as well might we be vexed that we are not
Angels; or that we are not yet in heaven, Eccl. 1. 14. All is vanity and
vexation of spirit.
which is the only place exempt from inconveniences and troubles, where alone
there is no sorrow, no clamor, no pain. Apoc. 21. 4.


It has always been, and it will ever be an universal complaint and
lamentation, (...).
that the life of man and trouble are individual companions, (...). Eu^ip.
continually, and closely sticking one to the other; that life and misery are
but several names of Quid est diu vivere, nisi diu torqueri? Aug.
the same thing; that our state here is nothing else, but a combination of
various evils (made up of cares, of labors, of dangers, of disappointments, of
discords, of disquiets, of diseases, of manifold pains and sorrows) that all
ages, from wailing infancy to querulous decrepitness, and all conditions, from
the careful scepter to the painful spade, are fraught with many great
inconveniences peculiar (...). Hesiod.
to each of them; that all the face of the earth is overspread with mischiefs
as with a general and perpetual deluge; that nothing perfectly sound, nothing
safe, nothing stable, nothing serene is here to be found; this with one sad
voice all mankind resoundeth; this our Poets are ever moanfully singing, this
our Philosophers do gravely inculcate; this the experience of all times loudly
proclameth; For what are all histories but continual registers of the evils
incident to men; what do they all describe, but wars and slaughters, mutinies
and seditions, tumults and confusions, devastations and ruins? What do they
tell us, but of men furiously striving together, circumventing, spoiling,
destroying one another? What do we daily hear reported, but cruel broils,
bloody battles, and tragical events; great numbers of men slain, wounded,
hurried into captivity; cities sacked and rased, countries harassed and
depopulated; kingdoms and commonwealths overturned? What do we see before us
but men carking, toiling, bickering; some worn out with labor, some pining
away for want, some groaning under pain? And amidst so many common miseries and
misfortunes, in so generally Far quam sortem patiuntur omnes Nemo recuset.
Sen. Troad.
confused and dismal a state of things, is it not ridiculously absurd for us,
does it not argue in us Ideo mihi videtur rerum naturae, quod gravissimum
fecit, commune fecisse, ut crudelitatem fati consolaretur aequalitas. Sen. ad
Polyb. 21.
a prodigious sondness of self-love, heinously to resent, or impatiently to
bemoan our particular, and private crosses? May not reasonably that
expostulation of Jeremy to Baruch reach us? The Lord says thus, Behold that
which I have built, I Jer. 45. 4, 5.
will break down; and that which I have planted I will pluck up, even this
whole land; And seek thou great things for thy self? seek them not; for
behold I will bring evil on all flesh.

4. Again, if we more closely and particularly survey the states of other men
(of our brethren every where, of our neighbors all about us) and compare our
case with theirs, our condition hardly can appear to us so bad, but that we
have many consorts and associates therein; many as ill, many far worse bestead
than our selves. How many of our brethren in the world may we observe
conflicting with extreme penury and distress; how many undergoing continual
hard drudgeries to maintain their lives; how many sorely pinched with hunger
and cold; how many tortured with grievous sickness; how many oppressed with
debt; how many shut up under close restraint; how many detained in horrible
slavery; how many by the wasting rage of war rifled of their goods, driven from
their homes, dispossessed of all comfortable subsistence? How many, in sine,
passing their lives in all the inconveniences of rude, beggarly, sordid and
savage barbarism? And who of us have, in any measure, tasted of these, or of
the like calamities? Yet are these sufferers, all of them, the same, in nature,
with us; many of them (as reason, as humility, as charity do oblige us to
believe) deserve as well, diverse of them much better than our selves: What
reason then can we have to conceive our case so hard, or to complain thereof?
Were we the only persons exposed to trouble, or the single marks of adverse
fortune; could we truly say with the Prophet; Behold, if there be any sorrow
like my sorrow: We might seem Lam. 1. 12.
a little unhappy; but since we have so much good company in our conceived woe;
since it is so ordinary a thing to be poor, and distressed; since -- Nec rara
videmus Quae pateris; casus multis, hic cognitus and jam.
our case is (as the Poet speaks) not rare, but Tritus, and e medio fortunae
ductus acervo. Juv. Sat. 13. v. 8.
commonly known, trite, and drawn out from the heap of lots, offered to men by
fortune: since pitiful objects do thus environ and enclose us; it is plainly
reasonable, humane and just, that we should without murmuring Te nunc delicias
extra communia censes

Ponendum, etc. Juv. Sat. 13. v. 140.


take, and bear our lot: For what privilege have we to allege, that we rather
than others should be untouched by the grievances, to which mankind is
obnoxious? Whence may we pretend to be the special favorites, mignons,
privado's and darlings of fortune? Why may not God well deal with us, as he
does with other men; what grounds have we to challenge, or to expect, that he
should be partial toward us; why should we imagine, that he must continually
do miracles in our behalf, causing all those evils, which fall upon our
neighbors all about, to skip over us; bedewing us, like Gideon's Jud. 6. 37.
fleece, with plenty and joy, while all the earth beside is dry; causing us,
like the three children, to walk in this Dan. 3. 25.
wide furnace, unscorched and unsinged by the flames encompassing us? Are we
not men framed of the same mold; are we not sinners guilty of like offenses,
with the meanest peasant, the poorest beggar, the most wretched slave (if so,
then a parity of fortune with any men does become us, and may be due to us;
then it is a perverse and unjust frowardness to be displeased with our lot; we
may, if we please, pity the common state of men, but we cannot reasonably
complain of our own; doing so plainly does argue, that we do unmeasurably
overprize, and overlove our selves. When once a great King did excessively, and
obstinately grieve for the death of his wife, whom he tenderly loved, a
Philosopher observing it, told him, That he was ready to comfort him by
restoring her to life, supposing only, that he would supply what was needful
toward the performing it; the King said he was ready to furnish him with any
thing; the Philosopher answered, That he was provided with all things
necessary, except one thing; what that was the King demanded; he replied, That
if he would upon his wifes Tomb inscribe the names of three persons, who never
mourned, she presently would revive: the King, after enquiry, told the
Philosopher, That he could not find one such man: Why (...). Jul. Ep. 38.
then, O absurdest of all men (said the Philosopher smiling) art thou not
ashamed to moan as if thou had alone fallen into so grievous a case; whenas
thou can not find one person, that ever was free from such domestic
affliction: So might the naming one person, exempted from inconveniences, like
to those we undergo, be safely proposed to us as a certain cure of ours; but if
we find the condition impossible, then is the generality of the case a
sufficient ground of content to us; then may we, as the wise Poet advises,
(...). Menand.
solace our own evils by the evils of others, so frequent and obvious to us.

5. We are indeed very apt to look upward toward those few, who, in supposed
advantages Nulli ad aliena respicienti sua placent. Sen. de Ira. 3. 31.
of life (in wealth, dignity, or reputation) do seem to transcend, or to
precede us, grudging and repining at their fortune; but seldom do we cast down
our eyes on those innumerably many good people, who lie beneath us in all
manner of -- Neque se majori pauperiorum

Turbae comparet, hunc atque hunc superare laboret:

Ut cum carceribus, etc. Hor. Sat. 1.


accommodations, pitying their mean, or hard condition; like racers we look
forward, and pursue those who go before us, but reflect not backward, or
consider those who come behind us: two or three out-shining us in some slender
piece of prosperity, does raise dissatisfaction in us; while the doleful state
of millions does little affect us with any Inde fit ut nemo, qui se vixisse
beatum

Dicat, etc. Hor. Sat. 1.


regard or compassion: hence so general discontent springs, hence so few are
satisfied with their condition; an epidemical eyesore molesting every man; for
there is no man, of whatsoever condition, Si vis gratus esse adversus Deos, and
adversus vitam tuam, cogita quam multos antecesseris. Sen. Ep. 15.
who is not in some desirable things out-stripped by others; none is so high in
fortune, but another Nunquam erit felix, quem torquebit felicior. Sen. de Ira.
3. 31. Vid. Ib.
in wit or wisdom, in health, or strength, or beauty, in reputation or esteem
of men may seem to excel him; he therefore looking with an evil or envious eye
on such persons, and with senseless disregard passing over the rest of men,
does easily thereby lose his ease and satisfaction from his own estate: whereas
if we would consider the case of most men, we should see abundant reason to be
satisfied with our own; if we would a little feel the calamities of our
neighbors, we should little resent our own crosses; a kindly commiseration of
others more grievous disasters would drown the sense of our lesser
disappointments.

If with any competent heedfullness we view persons and things before us, we
shall easily discern, that what absolutely seems great and weighty, is indeed
comparatively very small and light; that things are not so unequally dispensed,
(...). Plut. Apoll.
but that we have our full share in good, and no more than our part in evil;
That at worst we are Extremi primorum, extremis usque priores. Hor. Epist. 2. 2.
that Socrates had reason to suppose, that, if we should bring into one common
stock all our mishaps, so that each should receive his portion of them, gladly
the most would take up their own, and go their ways; that consequently it is
both iniquity, and folly in us to complain of our lot.

6. If even we would take care diligently to compare our state with the state
of those, whom we are apt most to admire and Magna servitus est magna fortuna,
etc. Sen. ad Polyb. 26.
envy, it would afford matter of consolation, and content unto us. What is the
state of the greatest persons (of the worlds Princes and Grandees) what but a
state encompassed with snares, and temptations numberless; which without
extreme caution, and constancy, force of reason, and command of all appetites,
and passions cannot be avoided; and seldom are? What but a state of pompous
trouble, and gay servility, of living in continual noise and stir, environed
with crowds and throngs, of being subject to the urgency of business, and the
tediousness of ceremony; of being abused by perfidious servants, and mocked by
vile slatterers; of being exposed to common censure and obloquy, to
misrepresentation, misconstruction and slander; having the eyes of all men
intent upon their actions, and as many severe judges as watchful spectatours
of them; of being accomptable for many men's faults, and bearing the blame of
all miscarriages about them; of being responsible, in conscience, for the
miscarriages, and mishaps which come from the influence of our counfels, our
examples, etc. of being pestered and pursued with pretenses, with suits, with
complaints, the necessary result whereof is to displease or provoke very many,
to oblige or satisfy very few; of being frequently engaged in resentments of
ingratitude, of treachery, of neglects, of defects in duty, and breaches of
trust toward them; of being constrained to comply with the humors and opinions
of men; of anxious care to keep, and jealous fear of losing all; of danger and
being objected to the traitorous attempts of bold malcontents, of fierce
zealots and wild fanatics; of wanting the most solid and savoury comforts of
life, true friendship, free conversation, certain leisure, privacy, and
retiredness, for enjoying themselves, their time, their thoughts as they think
good; of satiety and being cloyed with all sorts of enjoyments: In fine, of
being paid with false coin for all their cares and pains, receiving for them
scarce any thing more, but empty shows of respect, and hollow acclamations of
praise; (whence the Psalmist Personata felicitas. Seh. Ep. 80.
might well say, Surely men of low degree are Psalm. 62. 9.
vanity, and men of high degree a lie; a lie, for that their state cheateth us,
appearing -- Adulandi certamen est, and unum omnium amicorum officium, una
cententio quis blandissime fallat. Sen. de Benef. 6. 30.
so specious, yet being really so inconvenient, and troublesome.) Such is the
state of the greatest Vid. optime disserentem. Vid. and de Clem. 1. 19. Et ad
Polyb. 26.
men; such as has made wise Princes weary of themselves, ready to acknowledge,
Antigonus. Nescitis amici, quid mali sit imperare, etc. Saturninus apud
Vopiseum.
that if men knew the weight of a Crown, none would take it up; apt to think
with Hic situs est Adrianus VI. qui nihil sibi in vita infelicius duxit, quam
qu d imperavit. Lud. Guicciard. P. Jovius in vit.
Pope Adrian, who made this Epitaph for himself; Here lies Adrian the Sixth,
who thought nothing in his life to have befallen him more unhappy, than that he
ruled: Such, in fine, their state, as upon due consideration we should, were it
offered to our choice, never embrace; such indeed, as in sober judgment, we
cannot prefer before the most narrow and inferior fortune: How then can we
reasonably be displeased with our condition, when we may even pity Emperors
and Kings, when, in reality, we are as well, Nihil difficilius quam been
imperare. Diocles. apud Vopisc. in Aureliano.
perhaps are much better than they?

7. Farther, it may induce, and engage us to be content, to consider what
commonly has been the lot of good men in the Consider what calamities great,
powerful, glorious men have endured; Croesus, Polycrates, Pompey, etc. Sen. de
Ira. 3. 25.
world: we shall, if we survey the histories of all times, find the best men to
have sustained most grievous crosses and troubles; (...). (Aristides, Phocion,
Epaminondas, Pelopidas) Ael. xi. 9. 11. 43.
fcarce is there in holy Scripture recorded any person eminent and illustrious
for goodness, who has not tasted deeply of Lamachus, Socrates, Ephialtes.
wants and distresses. Abraham, the Father of the Abel, N^e, etc. Chrysostom. Tom.
6. p. 107.
faithful, and especial friend of God, was called out of his country, and
from his kindred, to wander in a strange land, andlodge in tents, without any
fixed habitation.

Jacob spent a great part of his life in slavish toil, and in his old age was
in reflection upon his life moved to say, that the days of his pilgrimage had
Genesis 47. 9.
been few and evil. Joseph was maligned and persecuted by his brethren, sold
away for a slave, slandered for a Psalm. 105. 18.
most heinous crime, thrust into a grievous prison, where his feet were hurt
with fetters, and (...)
his soul came into iron. Moses was forced to fly away for his life, to become
Socrates, Cato, Regulus, Phocion, and c. Magnum exemplum nisi mala fortuna non
invenit.
a vagabond in a foreign place, to feed sheep for his livelihood; to spend
afterward the best of his life in contesting with an obstinately perverse
Prince, and in leading a mistrustfull, refractary, mutinous people, for forty
years time, through a vast and wild desert. Job, what a stupendous heap of
mischiefs did together Vid. Chrysostom. Tom. 5. Orat. 27. p. 168. and Tom. 6. Or.
10. p. 107.

Job 13. 27.


fall, and lie heavy upon him? (Thou writest bitter things against me, he might
well say.) David, How often was he plunged in saddest extremity, and reduced to
the hardest shifts; being hunted like a partridge in the wilderness by 1 Samuel
26. 20.
an envious Master, forced to counterfeit madness for (...). Chrysostom. in Mart.
Egypt. T. 5. 522.
his security among barbarous infidels; dispossessed of his kingdom, and
persecuted by his own most favored son; deserted by his servants, reproached
and scorned by his subjects. (...), Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. Orat. 27.
Elias was driven long to sculk for his life, and to shift for his livelihood
in the wilderness. Jeremy was treated as an impostour and a traitor, and cast
into a miry dungeon; finding matter from his sufferings for his dolesull
lamentations, and having thence occasion to exclaim, I am the Lam. 3. 1.
man that have seen affliction by the rod of his wrath, etc. Which of the
Prophets Act. 7. 52.
were not persecuted, and misused? as St. Stephen asked. The Apostles were
pinched with all kinds of 1 Cor. 4 and 7.
want, harassed with all sorts of toil, exposed to all manner of hazards,
persecuted with all variety of contumelies, and pains that can be imagined:
Above all, our Lord himself beyond Chrysostom. Tom. 6. Or. 93.

Isa. 53. 3.


expression was a man of sorrow, and acquainted with grief, surpassing all men
in suffering as he did excel them in dignity, and in virtue; extreme poverty,
having not so much as where Matt. 8. 20.
to lay his head, was his portion; to undergo continual (...). Theod. Ep. 132.
labor, and travel, without any mixture of carnal ease or pleasure, was his
state; in return for the highest good will, and choicest benefits, to receive
most cruel hatred, and grievous injuries, to be loaded with the bitterest
reproaches, the foulest slanders, the forest pains, which most spiteful malice
could invent, or fiercest rage inflict, this was his lot: Am I poor? so may one
say, was he to extremity; am I slighted of the world? so was he notoriously; Am
I disappointed, and crossed in my designs? so was he continually, all his most
painful endeavors having small effect; Am I deserted, or betrayed of friends?
so was he by those who were most intimate, and most obliged to him? Am I
reviled, slandered, misused? Was not he so beyond all comparison most
outrageously?

Have all these, and many more, of whom the world was not worthy, undergone
Heb. 11. 38.
all sorts of inconvenience, being destitute, afflicted, tormented; And shall
we then disdain, or be sorry to be found in such company? Having Heb. 12. 1.
such a cloud of Martyrs, let us run with patience the race that is set before
us. Is it not an honor, should it not be a comfort to us, that we do, in
condition, resemble them? If God has thus dealt with those, who of all men
have been dearest to him, shall we take it ill at his hands, that he, in any
manner, deals so with us? Can we pretend, can we hope, can we even wish to be
used better, than God's firstborn, and our Lord himself has been? If we do,
are we not monstrously fond and arrogant? especially considering, that it is
not only an ordinary fortune, but the peculiar character of God's chosen, and
children, to be often crossed, checked and corrected; Even Pagans have observed
it, and avowed there is great reason for it; God (says Seneca) has a fatherly
Sen. de Provid. c. 2.
mind toward good men; and strongly loves them -- therefore after the manner
of severe parents, he educateth them hardly, etc. The Apostle does in express
terms assure us thereof; for, whom (says he) the Lord loves, he chastneth,
and scourges every son whom he receives. If ye endure chastning, God deals
with you as with sons -- but if ye be without chastisement, Heb. 12. 6, 7, 8.
whereof all (that is, all good men, and genuine sons of God) are partakers,
then are ye bastards, and not sons. Would we be illegitimated, or expunged from
the number of God's true children; would we be divested of his special regard
and good will? if not, Why do we not gladly embrace, and willingly sustain
adversity, which is by himself Ecclus. 2. 1. (...)
declared so peculiar a badge of his children, so constant a mark of his
favor? If all good men do (as the Apostle asserteth) partake thereof; shall
we, by displeasure at it, show, that we desire to be assuredly none of that
party, that we affect to be discarded from that holy and happy society? Verily;
verily I say unto you, that ye shall weep and lament, but the Joh. 16. 20.
world shall rejoice. It is peculiarly the lot of Christians, as such, in
conformity to their afflicted Savior; they are herein predestined to be
conformable Romans 8. 29.
to his image; to this they are appointed. (Let no man, says Saint Paul, be
moved by these afflictions, for 1 These. 3. 3.

Phil. 3. 10.


ye know, that we are appointed thereunto:) to this they are called (if when ye
do well, says St. Peter, and 1 Pet. 2. 20, 21.
suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God; for even
hereunto were ye called) this is propounded to them as a condition to be
undertaken, and undergone by them as such; they are by profession crucigeri,
bearers of the cross; (If any one will come after me, let him deny himself, and
take Matt. 16. 24. 10. 38.

2 Timothy 3. 12.

Joh. 16. 33. (...)

Quotam partem angustiarum perpessus sum qui cruci milito. Hier. ad Asellam,
Ep. 99.

Act. 14. 22.

Vid. Greg. Naz. Ep. 201. (ad Theclam.)


up his cross and follow me; Every one that will live godly in Christ Jesus,
must suffer persecution) by this are they admitted into the state of
Christians; (by many afflictions we must enter into the Kingdom of heaven) this
does qualify them for enjoying the glorious rewards, which their religion
propounds; (We are coheirs with Christ; so that, if we suffer together, 2 Timothy 2. 12.
we shall also together be glorified with him; If we endure, we shall (Phil. 3.
10.)
also reign with him; It is a privilege of Christians, in favor bestowed on
them; (...). Phil. 1. 29.

Our glory. Ephesians. 3. 13.

(...). Heb. 10. 36.

Faith and Patience are consorts. Heb. 6. 12.

Apoc. 13. 10.


And shall we then pretend to be Christians, shall we claim any benefit from
thence, if we are unwilling to submit to the Law, to attend the call, to comply
with the terms thereof? Will we enjoy its privileges, can we hope for its
rewards, if we will not contentedly undergo what it requires? Shall we arrive
to the end it propounds, without going in the way it prescribes, the way
which our Lord himself does lead us in, and himself has trod before us?

In fine, seeing adversity is, as has been declared, a thing so natural to all
men, so common to most men, so incident to great men, so proper to good men, so
peculiar to Christians, we have great reason to observe the Apostles advice;
Beloved, wonder 1 Pet. 4. 12.
not concerning the fiery trial, which is to try you, as if some strange thing
happened to you; we should not wonder at it as a strange, or uncouth thing,
that we are engaged in any trouble or inconvenience here; we are consequently
not to be affected with it as a thing very grievous.

The Fifth Sermon.
PHIL. IV. 11. I have learned in whatsoever state I am, etc.
MOreover considering the nature 1 Timothy 6. 6. (...).
of this duty it self, may be a great inducement and aid to the practice of it.

1. It is it self a sovereign remedy for all poverty and all sufferance;
removing them, or allaying all the mischief they can do us. It is well and
truly said by S. Austine, Interest non Aug. de Civ. Dei. 1. 8.
qualia, sed qualis quis patiatur; It is no matter what, but how disposed a man
suffers: the chief mischief any adversity can do us is to render us
discontent, in that consists all the sting, and all the venom thereof; which
thereby being voided, adversity can signify nothing prejudicial, or noxious to
us; all distraction, all distemper, all disturbance from it is by the antidote
of contentedness prevented or corrected. He that has his desires moderated to
a temper suitable with his condition, that has his passions composed and
settled agreeably to his circumstances, what can make any grievous impression
on him, or render him any-wise miserable? He that takes himself to have
enough, what does he need? he that is wellpleased to be as he is, how can he be
better? what can the largest wealth, or highest prosperity in the world yield
more, or Cui cum paupertate bent convenit, dives est. Sen. Ep. 2.

Nemo aliorum sensu miser est, sed suo; and ideo non possunt cujusquam falso
judicio esse miseri, qui funt vere conscientia sua beati. Nulli beatiores sunt,
quam qui hoc sunt quod volunt. Salv. de Gubern. Dei, 1.


better than satisfaction of mind? he that has this most essential ingredient
of felicity, is he not thence in effect most fortunate? is not at least his
condition as good as that of the most prosperous?

2. As good do I say? yea is it not plainly much better, than can arise merely
from any secular prosperity? for satisfaction springing (...), etc. Chrysostom. ad
Olymp. Ep. 3. Vid. p. 73.

(...). Chrysostom. ad Olymp. Ep. 16. Vid. Epist. 6. and ad Olymp. Ep. 3. (p. 75.)
de Josepho.


from rational consideration, and virtuous disposition of mind is indeed far
more precious, more noble and worthy, more solid and durable, more sweet and
delectable, than that which any possession, or fruition of worldly goods can
afford: The (...), 1 Pet. 3. 4.
incorruptibility (as St. Peter speaks) of a meek and quiet spirit is before
God of great price; before God, that is, according to the most upright and
certain judgment it is the most precious and valuable thing in the world: There
is (the Philosopher Ecce par Deo dignum vir bonus cum mala fortuna compositus.
Sen. de Provid.
could say) no spectacle more worthy of God (or grateful to him) than a good
man gallantly combating with ill fortune. Not to be discomposed or distempered
in mind, not to fret or whine, when all things flow prosperously and according
to our mind, is no great praise, no sign of wisdom, or argument of goodness;
it cannot be reckoned an effect of sound judgment, or virtuous affection, but a
natural consequent of such a state: But when there are evident occasions, and
urgent temptations to displeasure, when present sense and fancy do prompt and
provoke to murmuring, then to be satisfied in our mind, then to keep our
passions in order, then to maintain good humor, then to restrain our tongue
from complaint, and to govern our demeanor sweetly, this is indeed honorable
and handsome; to see a worthy man sustain crosses, wants, disgraces with
equanimity and cheerfulness is a most goodly sight: such a person to a
judicious mind appears in a far more honorable and invidious state, than any
prosperous man: his virtue shining in the dark is far more bright and fair:
this (as St. Peter says, in 1 Pet. 2. 19.
a like case) is thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward God suffers
grief; if, in our case (we may say after him) a man out of conscientious
deference to God's will, does contentedly undergo adversity, this God is ready
to take for an obligation on himself, and will be disposed, Honesta res est
lata paupertas. Epic.

(...). Chrysostom. (...).


in a manner to thank him (or to reward him) for it: this indeed amounts to a
demonstration that such a person is truly wise and really good: so is the
satisfaction of a contented poor man more worthy: And it is no less more sweet
and comfortable, than that of any rich man, pleasing himself in his enjoyments:
contentedness satisfies the mind of the one, abundance does only satiate the
appetites of the other; the former is immaterial and sprightly, the complacence
of a man; the latter is gross and dull, like the sensuality of a beast; the
delight of that sinketh deep into the heart, the pleasure of this does only
float in the outward senses, or in the fancy; one is a positive comfort, the
other but a negative indolency in regard to the mind: The poor good man's joy
is wholly his own, and home-born, a lovely child of reason and virtue; the full
rich man's pleasure comes from without, and is thrust into him by impulses of
sensible objects.

Hence is the satisfaction of contented adversity far more constant, solid and
durable, than that of prosperity; it being the product of immutable reason
abides in the mind, and cannot easily be driven thence by any corporeal
impressions, which immediately cannot touch the mind; whereas the other,
issuing from sense, is subject to all the changes, inducible from the restless
commotions of outward causes affecting and altering sense: whence the
satisfaction proceeding from reason and virtue, the longer it stays the
firmer and sweeter it grows, turning into habit, and working nature to an
agreement with it; whereas usually the joys of wealth and prosperity do soon
degenerate into fastidiousness, and terminate in bitterness; being honey in the
mouth, but Apoc. 10. 10.

Job 20. 20, 22.


soon becoming gall in the bowels. Nothing indeed can affect the mind with a
truer pleasure, than the very conscience of discharging our duty toward God in
bearing hardship, imposed by his providence, willingly and well. We have
therefore much reason not only to acquiesce in our straits but to be glad of
them, seeing they do yield us an opportunity of immediately obtaining goods
more excellent and more desirable, than any prosperous or wealthy man can
easily have, since they furnish us with means of acquiring and exercising a
virtue worth the most ample fortune; yea justly preferable to the best estate
in the world; a virtue, which indeed does not only render any condition
tolerable, but sweetneth any thing, yea sanctifies all states, and turns all
occurrences into blessings.

3. Even the sensible smart of adversity is by contentedness somewhat tempered
and eased; the stiller and quieter we lie under it, the less we feel its
violence and pungency: It is tumbling and tossing, that stirs the ill
humors, and drives them to the parts most weak, and apt to be affected with
them; the rubbing of our sores is that which enflameth and exasperateth them:
where the mind is calm, and the passions settled, the pain of any grievance is
in comparison less acute, less sensible.

4. Whence if others in our distress are uncharitable to us, refusing the help
they might, or should afford toward the rescuing us from it, or relieving us in
it, we hereby may be charitable and great benefactours to our selves; we should
need no anodyne to be ministered from without, no succor to come from any
creature, if we would not be wanting to our selves, in harkening to our own
reason, and enjoying the consolation which it affords. In not doing this, we
are more uncharitable and cruel to our selves, than any spiteful enemy or
treacherous friend can be; no man can so wrong or molest us, as we do our
selves by admitting or fostering discontent.

5. The contented bearing of our condition is also the most hopeful and ready
means of bettering it, and of removing the pressures we lie under.

It is partly so in a natural way, as disposing us to embrace and employ the
advantages which occur conducible thereto; for as discontent blinds men so
that they cannot descry the ways of escape from evil, it disspiriteth and
discourageth them from endeavoring to help themselves, it depriveth them of
many succors and expedients, which occasion would afford for their relief; so
he that being undisturbed in his spirit has his eyes open, and his courage up,
and all his natural powers in order, will be always ready and able to do his
best, to act vigorously, to snatch any opportunity and employ, any means toward
the freeing himself from what appears grievous to him.

Upon a supernatural account content is yet more efficacious to the same
purpose: for cheerful submission to God's will does please him much, does
strongly move him to withdraw his afflicting hand, does effectually induce him
to advance us into a more comfortable state: Of all virtues there is none more
acceptable to God than patience. God will take it well at our hands if we do
contentedly receive from his hand the worst things: it is a monstrous thing not
to receive prosperity with grateful sense, but it is heroical with the same
mind to receive things unpleasant: he that does so (...), Chrysostom. Tom. 6. Or. 89.
he suffers loss as a man, but is crowned as a lover of God. Besides that it
is an unreasonable Vid. Chrysostom. ad Stag. 1. and 2. (p. 106.)
thing to think of enjoying both rest and pleasure here, and the rewards
hereafter; our consolation here with Dives, and our refreshment hereafter with
Lazarus.

Be humbled (says S. Peter) under 1 Pet. 5. 6.
the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time ((...), when it is
opportune and seasonable) and, Be humbled (says S. James) before Jam. 4. 10.
the Lord, and he will exalt you, and, When (says Job's friends) men are cast
Job 22 29. (Luke 14. 11. 18. 14.)
down, then thou shall say there is lifting up, and he will save the humble
person. God with favorable pity hearkeneth to the groans of them who are
humbly contrite under his hand, and reverently tremble at his Isa. 66. 2. 57.
15.
word; he reviveth the spirit of the humble; He is nigh to the broken of heart,
and saves such as are of a contrite Psalm. 34. 18. 51. 17. 147. 3.
spirit; He heals the broken in heart, and binds up their wounds; He
proclaims blessedness to the poor in spirit, and to those that mourn, Matt.
5. 3, 4.
because they shall find comfort and mercy; all which declarations and promises
are made concerning those, who bear adversity with a submiss and contented
mind; and we see them effectually performed in the cases of Ahab, of the
Ninivites, of Nebuchadnezzar, of Manasses, of Hezekiah, of David; of all
persons mentioned in holy Scripture, upon whom adversities had such kindly
operations. But discontent and impatience do offend God, and provoke him to
continue his judgments, yea to increase the load of them: to be sullen and
stubborn is the sure way to render our condition worse and more intolerable:
for, who has hardened himself Job 9. 4.
against God and prospered? The Pharaohs and Saul's, and such like persons, Jer.
2. 30. 5. 3.

Isa. 9. 13. ^. 5. 26. 10.


who rather would break than bend, who being dissatisfied with their condition
chose rather to lay hold on other imaginary succors, than to have recourse to
God's mercy and help; those, who (like the refractary Israelites) have been
smitten in vain as to any quiet submission or conversion unto God, what have
they but plunged themselves deeper into wretchedness?

It is indeed to quell our haughty stomach, to check our froward humor, to
curb our impetuous desires, to calm our disorderly passions, to suppress our
fond admiration and eager affection toward these worldly things, in short to
work a contented mind in us, that God ever does inflict any hardships on us,
that he crosses us in our projects, that he detaineth us in any troublesome
state; until this be achieved, as it is not expedient that we should be
eased, as relief would really be no blessing to us; so God (except in anger and
judgment) will no-wise grant or dispense it; it would be a cruel mercy for him
to do it; If therefore we do wish ever to be in a good case as to this world,
let us learn to be contented in a bad one: Having got this disposition firmly
rooted in our hearts, we are qualified for deliverance and preferment; nor will
God sail in that due season to perform for us what he so often has declared
and promised; his nature disposes him, his word has engaged him to help and
comfort us.

These are the most proper inducements unto contentedness, which considering
(in the light of reason and holy Scripture) the nature of the thing, suggested
unto my meditation: there are beside some other means advisable, (some general,
some more particular) which are very conducible to the production of content,
or removing discontent; which I shall touch, and then conclude.

1. A constant endeavor to live well, and to maintain a good conscience: he
that does this can hardly be dismayed or disturbed with any occurrence here;
this will yield a man so ample and firm a satisfaction of mind, as will bear
down the sense of any incumbent evils; this will beget such hope in God, and so
good assurance of his favor, as will supply the want of all other things, and
fully satisfy us, that we have no cause to be troubled with any thing here; He
that by conscientious practice has obtained such a hope is prepared against
all assaults of fortune with an undaunted mind and force impregnable; He will
(as the Psalmist says) Psalm. 112. 1. 119. 6.
not be afraid of any evil tidings, for his heart is fixed trusting in the
Lord. Maintaining this will free us from all anxious care, transferring it upon
God; it will breed a sure confidence, that he will ever be ready to supply us
with all things convenient, to protect and deliver us from all things hurtful;
ensuring to us the effect of that promise, by the conscience of having
performed the condition thereof: Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and Matt. 6.
33.
its righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you.

This was that which supported the Apostles and kept them cheerful under all
that heavy load of distresses which lay upon them; Our rejoicing 1 Cor. 1. 12.

1 Pet. 3. 16.

Act. 23. 1. 24. 16.


is this (could they say) the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity
and godly sincerity -- we have had our conversation in this world.

It Is the want of this best pleasure, that both renders the absence of all
other pleasures grievous, and their presence insipid; Had we a good conscience
we could not seem to want comfort; as we could not truly be unhappy, so we
could hardly be discontent; without it no affluence of other things can suffice
to content us. It is an evil conscience that gives an edge to all other evils,
and enableth them sorely to afflict us, which otherwise would but slightly
touch us; we become thence incapable of comfort, seeing not only things here
upon earth to cross us, but heaven to lowre upon us; finding no visible
succor, and having no hope from the power invisible; yea having reason to be
discouraged with the fear of God's displeasure. As he that has a powerful
enemy near, cannot abide in peace, without anxious suspicion and fear; so he
that is at variance with the Almighty, who is ever at hand, ready to cross and
punish him, what quiet of mind can he enjoy? There is no peace to the wicked.

2. The contemplation of our future state is a sovereign medicine to work
contentedness, and to cure discontent: 1 Thessalonians. 4. 18.

Vid. Naz. Ep. 201. (ad Theclam.)


as discontent easily does seize upon, and cleaves fast to souls, which
earnestly do pore and dote upon these present things, which have in them
nothing satisfactory or stable; so if we can raise our minds firmly to believe,
seriously to consider, and worthily to prize the future state and its
concernments, we can hardly ever be discontent in regard to these things.
Considering heaven and its happiness, how low and mean, how sorbid and vile,
how unworthy of our care and our affection will these inferior things appear?
how very unconcerned shall we 2 Cor. 7. 31.
see our selves to be in them, and how easily thence shall we be content to
want them? What, shall any of us be then ready to say, does it concern me in
what rank or garb I pass my few days here? what considerable interest can I
have in this uncertain and transitory state? what is any loss, any disgrace,
any cross in this world to me, who am a citizen of heaven, who have a capacity
and hope of the immense riches, the incorruptible glories, the perfect and
endless joys of eternity? This was that which sustained the holy Apostles in
all their distresses; For this cause (says S. Paul) 2 Cor. 4. 16. etc. 5. 7.
we faint not -- while we look not on the things which are seen, but on the
things which are not seen, for the things which are seen are temporal, but the
things which are not seen are eternal; and I reckon (says he again) Romans 8. 18.
that the sufferings of this present life are not worthy to be compared with
the glory which shall be revealed in us.

If likewise we do with faith and seriousness consider the dismal state below
of those, who are eternally secluded from all joy and bliss, who are
irrecoverably condemned to utter darkness, and the extremity of horrible pain,
how tolerable, how pleasant, how very happy will the meanest state here appear
to be? how vain a thing will it then seem to us to be to dislike, or to be
troubled with any worldly thing; to account any chance happening to us to be
sad, or disastrous? What, shall we say then each of us, is this same loss to
the loss of my soul and all its comforts for ever? what is this want to the
perpetual want of heavenly bliss? what is this short and faint pain to the
cruel pangs of endless remorse, to the weeping and gnashing of teeth in outward
darkness, to everlasting burnings?

Thus infinitely silly and petty must all concernments of this life appear to
him, who is possessed with the belief and consideration of matters relating to
the future state; whence discontent in regard to them can hardly find access to
his mind.

3. Constant devotion is an excellent instrument and guard of content, an
excellent remedy and fence against discontent.

It is such in way of impetration, procuring the removal, or alleviation of our
crosses: for God has promised that he will give good things to those Matt. 7.
11.

Psalm. 145. 18.

Jam. 4. 8.

Psalm. 34. 6. 107. 6.


that ask him; The Lord is nigh unto all that call upon him in truth; he will
fulfill the desire of them that fear him; he also will hear their cry, and will
save them. The poor man cries, and the Lord hears him, and saves him out of
all his troubles; the holy Scripture is full of such declarations and promises
assuring us of succor from our distresses, upon our supplication to God;
whence S. Paul thus advises against all solicitude: Be careful for Phil. 4.
7. (Psalm. 25. 16. 86. 1, 4, 17. 44. 23.)
nothing, but in every thing by prayer, and supplication with thanksgiving, let
your requests be made known to God: And (adds signifying the consequence of
this practice) the peace of God, which passes all understanding, shall keep
your hearts and minds through Jesus Christ.

It likewise performs the same by procuring grace and aid from God, which may
enable and dispose us to bear all evils well, which is really much better than
a removal of them; for that hence they become wholesome and profitable to us,
and causes of present good, and grounds of future reward; thus when St. Paul
besought 2 Cor. 12. 9.
God for deliverance from his thorn in the flesh, the return to him was; My 1
Cor. 10. 13.
grace is sufficient for thee; for my strength is made perfect in weakness: it
was a greater favor to receive an improvement of spiritual strength,
occasioned by that cross, than to be quite freed from it.

Devotion also has immediately of it self a special efficacy to produce
content. As in any distress it is a great consolation, that we can have
recourse to a good friend, that we may discharge our cares and our resentments
into his bosom; that we may demand advice from him, and, if need be, request
his succor; so much more it must be a great comfort, that we can in our need
approach to God, who is infinitely the most faithful, the most affectionate,
the most sufficient friend that can be; always most ready, most willing, most
able to direct and to relieve us: he desires, and delights, that in the day of
our trouble we should seek him; Psalm. 77. 2. 27. 8. 105. 4. 62. 8.

1 Samuel 1. 15.

Psalm. 55. 22.

1 Pet. 5. 7.

Psalm. 5. 8. 27. 11. 31. 3. 43. 3. 139. 24. 143. 10. 61. 2.

Jer. 31. 9.


that we should pour forth our hearts before him, that we should cast our
burdens, and our cares upon him; that we should upon all occasions implore his
guidance and aid: And complying with his desires as we shall assuredly find a
successful event of our devotions, so we shall immediately enjoy great comfort
and pleasure in them.

The God of all consolation does especially by this chanel convey his comforts
into our hearts; his very presence (that presence, in which the Psalm. 16. 11.
Psalmist says there is fullness of joy) does mightily warm and cheer us; his
Holy Spirit does in our religious intercourse with him insinuate a lightsome
serenity of mind, does kindle sweet and kindly affections, does scatter the
gloomy clouds of sadness; practicing it we shall be able to say with the
Psalmist, In the multitude of Psalm. 94. 19.
my thoughts within me thy comforts delight my soul.

Humbly addressing our selves to God, and reverently conversing with him does
compose our minds, and charm our passions, does sweeten our humor, does
refresh and raise our spirits, and so does immediately breed and nourish
contentedness.

It also strengthens our faith, and quickneth our hope in God, whereby we are
enabled to support our present Isa. 26. 3.
evils, and peace of mind does spring up within us.

It enflameth our love unto God, in sense of his gracious illapses, thence
Psalm. 73. 26. 69. 16. 23. 4. 71. 20.
rendering us willing to endure any want or pain for his sake, or at his
appointment.

It in fine does minister a ravishing delight, abundantly able to supply the
defect of any other pleasures, and to allay the smart of any pains whatever;
rendering thereby the meanest estate more acceptable and pleasant, than any
prosperity without it can be. So that if we be truly devout we can hardly be
discontent; It is discosting from God by a neglect of devotion, or by a
negligence therein, that does expose us to the incursions of worldly regret and
sorrow.

These are general remedies and duties both in this and all other regards
necessary, the which yet we may be induced to perform in contemplation of this
happy fruit (contentedness) arising from them. Farther

4. It serves toward production of contentedness to reflect much upon our
imperfection, unworthiness and guilt; so as thereby to work in our hearts a
lively sense of them, and a hearty sorrow for them; this will divert our
sadness into its right chanel, this will drown our lesser grief by the influx
of a greater. It is the nature of a greater apprehension or pain incumbent to
extinguish in a manner, and swallow up the sense of a lesser, although in it
self grievous; as he that is under a fit of the stone does scarce feel a pang
of the gout; he that is assaulted by a wolf will not regard the biting of a
flea. Whereas then of all evils and mischiefs moral evils are incomparably far
the greatest, in nature the most ugly and abominable, in consequence the most
hurtful and horrible; seeing (in Saint Chrysostom's language) Excepting sin,
there is nothing (...), etc.

Chrysostom. (...). 6.

Vid. ad Olymp. Ep. 13. ad Theod. 1.


grievous or terrible among humane things; not poverty, not sickness, not
disgrace, not that which seems the most extreme of all evils, death it self;
those being names only among such as philosophate, names of calamity, void of
reality, but the real calamity this, to be at variance with God, and to do
that which displeases him; seeing evidently according to just estimation no
evil bears any proportion to the evil of sin, if we have a due sense thereof,
we can hardly be affected with any other accident; If we can keep our minds
intent upon the heinous nature, and the lamentable consequences of sin, all
other evils cannot but seem exceedingly light and inconsiderable; we cannot but
apprehend it a very silly and unhandsome thing to resent or regard them: what
(shall we then judge) is poverty in comparison to the want of a good
conscience? what is sickness compared to distemper of mind, and decay of
spiritual strength? what is any disappointment to the being defeated and
overthrown by temptation? what any loss to the being deprived of God's love and
favor? what any disgrace to the being out of esteem and respect with God? what
any unfaithfulness or inconstancy of friends to having deserted or betrayed our
own soul? what can any danger signify to that of eternal misery, incurred by
offending God? what pressure can weigh against the load of guilt, or what pain
equal that of stinging remorse? in fine, what condition can be so bad as that
of a wretched sinner? any case surely is tolerable, is desirable, is lovely and
sweet in comparison to this: would to God, may a man in this case reasonably
say, that I were poor and forlorn as any beggar; that I were covered all over
with botches and blains as any Lazar; that I were bound to pass my days in an
hospital or a dungeon; might I be chained to an oar, might I lie upon the rack,
so I were clear and innocent: Such thoughts and affections if reflecting on our
sinful doings and state do suggest and impress, what place can there be for
resentment of other petty crosses?

Contrition also upon this score is productive of a certain sweetness and joy
apt to quash or to allay all worldly grief: as it works a salutary repentance
2 Cor. 7. 10.

Vid. Chrysostom. ad Demet. and ad Stelech. Tom. 6.


not to be repented of, so it therewith breeds a satisfactory comfort, which
does ever attend repentance: He that is very sensible of his guilt, cannot but
consequently much value the remedy thereof, mercy; and thence earnestly be
moved to seek it; then in contemplation of divine goodness, and considering
God's gracious promises, will be apt to conceive faith and hope, upon his
imploring mercy, and resolution to amend; thence will spring up a cheerful
satisfaction, so possessing the heart, as to expel or to exclude other
displeasures: a holy and a worldly sadness cannot well consist together.

5. Another good instrument of contentedness is sedulous application of our
minds to honest employment. Honest studies and cares divert our minds, and
drive sad thoughts from them: they cheer our spirits with wholesome food and
pleasant entertainments; they yield good fruits, and a success accompanied with
satisfaction, which will extinguish or temper discontent: while we are studious
or active, discontent cannot easily creep in, and soon will be stifled.

Idleness is the great mother and the nurse of discontent; it lays the mind
open for melancholy conceits to enter; it yields harbor to them, and
entertainment there; it depriveth of all the remedies and allays which business
affords.

Reciprocally discontent also begets idleness, and by it grows: they are
like ice and water, arising Matter me genuit.
each out of the other: we should therefore not suffer any sadness so to
encroach upon us, as to hinder us from attending to our business (the honest
works and studies of our calling) for it thereby will grow stronger and more
hardly vincible.

6. A like expedient to remove discontent is good company. It not (...).
only sometimes ministers advices and arguments for content, but raises the
drooping spirit, erecting it to a loving complaisance, drawing it out toward
others in expressions of kindness, and yielding delight in those which we
receive from others, infecting us by a kind of contagion with good humor, and
instilling pleasant Idea's into our fancy, agreeably diverting us from sad and
irksome thoughts: discontent affects retirement and solitude, as its element
and food; good company partly starveth it by smothering sad thoughts, partly
cures it by exhilerating discourse. No man hardly can feel displeasure, while
friendly conversation entertaineth him; no man returns from it without some
refreshment and ease of mind.

7. Having right and lowly conceits of our selves is a most sure guardian and
procurer of content: for answerable to a man's judgment of himself are his
resentments of the dealing he meets with from God or man. He that thinks
meanly as he ought of himself, will not easily be offended at any thing; any
thing, will he think, is good enough for me; I deserve nothing from God, I
cannot deserve much of man; if I have any competence of provision for my life,
any tolerable usage, any respect, it is more than my due, I am bound to be
thankful: but he that conceiteth highly (that is vainly) of himself, nothing
will satisfy him; nothing, thinks he, is good enough for him, or answerable to
his deserts; no body can yield him sufficient respect; any small neglect
disturbeth and enrageth him: he cannot endure that any man should thwart his
interest, should cross his humor, should dissent from his opinion; Hence
seeing the world will not easily be induced to conceit of him as he does of
himself, nor to comply with his humors and pretenses, it is impossible that he
should be content.

8. It conduces to this purpose to contemplate and resent the public state of
things, the interest of the world, of our country, of God's Church. The sense
of public calamities will drown that of private, as unworthy to be considered
or compared with them; The sense of public prosperity will allay that of
particular misfortune. How (will a wise and good man say) can I desire to
prosper and flourish, while the State is in danger or distress? how can I
grieve, seeing my country is in good condition? is it just, is it handsome
that I should be a nonconformist either in the public sorrow or joy? Indeed

9. All Hearty Charity does greatly alleviate discontent. If we bear such a
good will to our neighbor as to have a sincere compassion of his evils, and
complacence in his good, our case will not much afflict us. If we can
appropriate and enjoy the prosperity, the wealth, the reputation, of our
neighbor, by delighting in them, what can we want; what can displease us? If
our heart is enlarged in pity for the misfortunes of others, it cannot be
contracted with grief for our own: our sorrow, like water, being thus diffused,
cannot be so deep but it will be more fruitful; it will produce such effects
as will comfort and please us; It is a stingy selfishness which makes us so
very sensible of crosses and so incapable of comfort.

10. Again, if we will attain contentment, we must take heed of setting our
affection upon any worldly thing whatever, so as very highly to prize it, very
passionately to affect it, very eagerly to pursue it; so as to conceive our
happiness in any measure to hang on it or stick thereto: If there be any such
thing, we shall be disappointed in the acquist, or the retention of it; or we
shall be dissatisfied in its enjoyment.

So to adhere in affection to any thing is an adulterous disloyalty toward our
Maker and Best friend; from which it is expedient that we should be reclaimed;
whence God (in just anger, or in kind mercy) will be apt to cross us in our
attempts to get it, or to deprive us of its possession; whence the displeasure
will follow, which always attends a separation from things we love. But if we
be suffered to obtain or to retain it, we shall soon find dissatisfaction
therein; being either disgusted with some bitterness in it (such as does lurk
in every sensible good) or being cloyed with its lusciousness: it after a small
enjoyment will become either distasteful or insipid.

This, according to continual experience, is the nature of all things, pleasant
only to sense or fancy, presently to satiate: no beauty can long please the
eye, no melody the ear, no delicacy the palate, no curiosity the fancy; a
little time does waste away, a small use does wear out the pleasure, which at
first they afford: novelty commends and ingratiateth them; distance
represents them fair and lovely; the want or absence of them renders them
desirable; but the presence of them dulleth their grace, the possession of them
deadneth the appetite to them.

New objects with a gentle and grateful touch warble upon the corporeal
organs, or excite the spirits into a pleasant frisk of motion; but when use
has levigated the organs, and made the way so smooth and easy that the
spirits pass without any stop, those objects are no longer felt, or very
faintly; so that the pleasure cease.

Only those things which reason (religious and sound reason) does approve, do
yield a lasting (undecaying, unalterable) satisfaction; if we set our
affections on them, we cannot fail of content: In seeking them we cannot be
disappointed, for God (without any reservation or exception) has promised to
bestow them upon those who seriously and diligently seek them: nor can we be
dispossessed of them; God will not take them away, and they lie beyond the
reach of any other hand: Having them then we cannot but fully and durably be
satisfied in the fruition of them; the longer we have them the more we shall
like them; the more we taste them the better we shall relish them: time wastes
not, but improveth the sense of their unfading beauty and indefectible
sweetness.

11. It is of great influence toward contentedness with an earnest and
impartial regard to contemplate things, as they are in themselves, divested of
tragical appearances, in which they are wrapped by our own inconsiderate fancy,
or which vulgar prejudices do throw upon them: As all things, looked upon by
the corporeal eye through a mist, do seem bigger than in reality they are, so
to the eye of our mind all things (both good and evil) seem hugely enlarged,
when viewed through the foggs of our dusky imagination, or of popular conceit.
If we will esteem that very good, which with a gay appearance dazleth our
imagination, or which the common admiration and applause of men recommendeth,
the most vain and worthless, the most dangerous, the most mischievous things
often will appear such; and if we please to account those things greatly bad
which look ugly or horridly to imagination, which are defamed by the
injudicious part of men; or which men commonly do loath, do fret at, do wail
for, we shall take the best, most innocent, most useful, most wholesome things
for such; and accordingly these errors of our minds will be followed by a
perverse practice, productive of dissatisfaction and displeasure to us. No man
ever will be satisfied, who values things according to the price which fancy
sets on them, or according to the rate they bear in the common market; who
distinguishes not between good and famous, bad and infamous; who is affected
accordingly with the want of those things, which men call good, with the
presence of those, which they term bad.

But if we judge of things as God declares, as impartial and cautious reason
dictateth, as experience diligently observed (by their fruits and consequences)
discovers them to be, we shall have little cause to be affected by the want,
or presence of any such thing which is wont to produce discontent.

12. We should to this purpose take especial care to search out through our
condition, and pick thence the good that is therein, making the best we can of
it, enjoying and improving it; but what is inconvenient or offensive therein
declining it, diminishing it, tempering it so well as we may, always forbearing
to aggravate it. There are in nature diverse simples, which have in them some
part, or some juice very noxious, which being severed and cast away, the rest
becomes wholesome food; neither indeed is there any thing in nature so
venomous, but that from it by art and industry may be extracted somewhat
medicinal, and of good use, when duly applied; so in most apparent evils lies
enclosed much good, which if we carefully separate (casting away the intermixed
dross and refuse) we shall find benefit and taste comfort thence; there is
nothing so thoroughly bad, as being well ordered, and opportunely ministered
will not do us much good: So if from poverty we cast away or bear quietly that
which a little pincheth the sense or grateth on the fancy, and enjoy the
undistractedness of mind, the liberty, the leisure, the health, the security
from envy, obloquy, strife, which it affords, how satisfactory may it become
to us? The like conveniences are in disgrace, disappointment, and other such
evils, which being improved may endear them to us: Even sin it self (the worst
of evils, the only true evil) may yield great benefits to us; it may render us
sober and lowly in our own eyes, devout in imploring mercy, and thankful to
God for it; merciful and charitable toward others in our opinions and
censures; more laborious in our good practice, and watchful over our steps:
and if this deadly poison well administered yields effects so exceedingly
beneficial and salutary, what may other harmless (though unhandsome, and
unpleasant) things do, being skilfully managed?

13. It is a most effectual means of producing content, and curing discontent,
to rowse and fortify our faith in God, by with most serious attention
reflecting upon the arguments and experiments, which assure us concerning God's
particular providence over all, over us. It is really infidelity (in whole, or
in part, no faith, or a small and weak faith) which is at the root as of all
sin, so particularly of discontent: for how is it possible, did we firmly
believe, and with any measure of attention consider, that God takes care of
us, that he tendereth our good, that he is ready at hand to succor us, (how
then, I say, is it possible) that we should fear any want, or grievously resent
any thing incident? But we like St. Peter are (...), of little faith, therefore
we cannot walk on the sea; but in despair sink down: sometimes our faith is
buried in oblivion or carelessness; we forget, or mind not that there is a
providence; but look on things as if they sell out casually or fatally; thence
expect no redress from heaven, so tumble into despair and disconsolateness.
Sometimes because God does not in our time and our way relieve us or gratify
us we slip into profane doubt, questioning in our hearts whether he does indeed
regard us, or whether any relief is to be expected from him; not considering,
that only God can tell when, and how it is best to proceed; that often it is
not expedient our wishes should be granted; that we are not wise enough, or
just enough to appoint or choose for our selves; that it is impossible for God
to gratify every man; that it would be a mad world, if God in his government
thereof should satisfy all our desires.

We forget how often God has succored us in our needs and straits, how
continually he has provided for us; how patiently and mercifully he has born
with us; what miracles of bounty and mercy he has performed in our behalf; we
are like that distrustful and inconsiderate people, who remembered not the hand
of God, Psalm. 78. 42.
nor the day when he delivered them; remembered not the multitude of his Psalm.
106. 7, 13, 21.
mercies; but soon forgot his works, and waited not for his counsel; They
forgot God their Savior, who had done great things in Egypt, wondrous works in
the land of Ham, and terrible things in the red Sea.

From such dispositions in us our discontents do spring; and we cannot cure
them, but by recollecting our selves from such forgetfulness and negligence; by
shaking off such wicked Psalm. 22. 19. 46. 1. 81. 1. 59. 7. 144. 1.
doubts and distrusts; by fixing our hearts and hopes on him, who alone can
help us; who is our strength, Psalm. 73. 26. 27. 1. 140. 7.
the strength of our heart, of our life, of our salvation.

Of him (to conclude) let us humbly implore, that he in mercy would bestow upon
us grace to submit in all things to his will, to acquiesce in all his
dispensations, gladly to embrace and undergo whatever he allotteth to us; in
every condition, and for all events befalling us heartily to adore, thank and
bless him: Even so to the Ever Blessed God, our gracious maker and preserver,
be eternally rendered all glory, thanksgiving and praise.

Amen.
OF PATIENCE.
The Sixth Sermon.
1 PET. II. 21. Because also Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example,
that ye should follow his steps.
IN these words two things appear especially observable; a duty implied (the
duty of patience) and a reason expressed, which enforces the practice of that
duty (the example of Christ.) We shall (using no more Preface, or circumstance)
first briefly, in way of explication and direction, touch the duty it self,
then more largely describe, and urge the example.

The word patience has, in common usage, a double meaning, taken from the
respect it has unto two sorts of objects, somewhat different. As it respects
provocations to anger, and revenge by injuries, or discourtesies, it signifies
a disposition of mind to bear them with charitable meekness; as it relates to
adversities and crosses disposed to us by providence, it imports a pious
undergoing and sustaining them. That both these kinds of patience may here be
understood, we may, consulting and considering the context, easily discern:
that which immediately precedeth, If when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye
take it patiently, this is acceptable to God, relates to good endurance of
adversity; that which presently follows, who when he was reviled, reviled not
again, when he suffered he threatened not, refers to meek comporting with
provocations: The Text therefore, as it looks backward, does recommend the
patience of adversities, as forward, the patience of contumelies. But seeing
both these objects are reducible to one more general, comprizing both, that is,
things seeming evil to us, or offensive to our sense, we may so explicate the
duty of patience, as to include them both.

Patience then is that virtue, which qualifieth us to bear all conditions, and
all events, by God's disposal incident to us, with such apprehensions and
persuasions of mind, such dispositions and affections of heart, such external
deportments, and practices of life as God requires, and good reason directs.
Its nature will, I conceive, be understood best by considering the chief acts
which it produces, and wherein especially the practice thereof consists; the
which briefly are these.

1. A thorough persuasion, that nothing befalls us by fate, or by chance, or
by the mere agency of inferior causes, but that all proceeds from the
dispensation, or with the allowance of God, (that, Affliction does not come
forth of the dust, nor does trouble spring out Joh 5. 6.
of the ground; but that all, both good Lam. 3. 38.
and evil proceeds out of the mouth of the most high) according as David
reflected, when Shimei reviled him; Let him (said the good King) curse, 2 Samuel
16. 10.
because the Lord has said unto him, curse David; and as Job, when he was
spoiled of all his goods, acknowledged, The Lord gave, and the Lord has ^ob 1.
21.
taken away.

2. A firm belief, that all occurrences (however adverse, and cross to our
desires) are well consistent with the justice, wisdom and goodness of God; so
that we cannot reasonably disapprove, repine at, or complain of them; but are
bound and ready to avow with the Psalmist, that, All his paths are mercy and
truth; He is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his Psalm. 25. 10. 145.
17.
works; to judge and say with Hezekiah, Good is the word of the Lord, which
thou have spoken; to confess with David 2 King. 20. 19.
unto him, I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right; and that thou Psalm.
119. 75.
in faithfulness have afflicted me.

3. A full satisfaction of mind, that all (even the most bitter, and sad
accidents) do (according to God's Job 5. 17.

Jam. 1. 12.

Prove. 3. 12.

Heb. 12. 5.

Rev. 3. 19.


purpose) tend, and conduce to our good; acknowledging the truth of those
divine Aphorisms; Happy is the man whom God corrects; whom the Lord loves
he corrects, even as a Father the Son, in whom he delights. As many as I
love I rebuke, and chasten.

4. An entire submission, and resignation of our wills to the will of God;
suppressing all rebellious insurrections, and grievous resentments of heart
against his providence; which may dispose us heartily to say after our Lord,
Let not my will, but thine be Luc. 22. 42.
done; with good Eli, It is the Lord, 1 Samuel 3. 18.
Let him do what seems him good; with David, Here I am, let him 2 Samuel 15.
26.
do to me as seems good to him; yea even with Socrates, If so it pleases
God, so let it be.

5. Bearing adversities calmly, cheerfully and courageously; so as not to be
discomposed with anger, or grief; not to be put out of humor, not to be
dejected or disheartened; but in our disposition of mind to resemble the
primitive Saints, who were (...), 2 Cor. 6. 10.
as grieved, but always rejoicing; who took joyfully Heb. 10. 34.
the spoiling of their goods, who accounted Jam. 1. 2.
it all joy when they fell into diverse tribulations.

6. A hopeful confidence in God for the removal or easement of our
afflictions, and for his gracious aid to support them well; agreeable to those
good rules and precepts? It is good that a man should both hope, and wait Lam.
3. 26.
quietly for the salvation of the Lord; Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently
for him; wait on the Lord, be of good Psalm. 37. 7. 37. 14.
courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart; according to the pattern of
David, who, in such a case, thus roused and staid himself: Why art thou Psalm.
42. 5.
cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in God,
for I shall yet praise him for the help of his countenance; and after the holy
Apostles, who in their most forlorn estate could say, We are troubled on every
side, yet not distressed; we are ^ Cor. 4. 8.
perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but
not destroyed.

7. A willingness to continue, during God's pleasure, in our afflicted state,
without weariness, or irksome longings for alteration; according to that advice
of the Wiseman; My son, despise not the chastning of the Lord, Prove. 3. 11.
neither be weary of his correction; and that of the Apostle, backed with our
Lord's example; Considering him that endured such contradiction of sinners Heb.
12. 3.
against himself, lest ye be weary, and faint in your minds.

8. A lowly frame of mind (that is, being sober in our conceits of our selves,
sensible of our unworthiness, and meanness, of our natural frailty, penury, and
wretchedness; of our manifold defects and miscarriages in practice; being meek
and gentle, tender and pliable in our temper, and frame of spirit; being deeply
affected with reverence and dread toward the awful majesty, mighty power,
perfect justice and sanctity of God; all this) wrought by our adversity
effectually, according to its design, quelling our haughty stomach, softning
our hard hearts, mitigating our peevish humors; according to Saint Peter's
injunction, Be humbled under the mighty hand of God; and God's 1 Pet. 5. 6.
own approbation joined with a gracious promise, To this man will I look; even
to him that is of a poor and Ez. 66 2.
contrite spirit, and trembles at my word.

9. Restraining our tongues from all discontentfull complaints, and murmurings,
all profane, harsh, unsavory expressions, importing displeasure, or
dissatisfaction in God's dealings toward us, arguing desperation or distrust in
him; such as were those of the impatient and incredulous Israelites; They spoke
against God, and said, can God furnish a table in the Psalm. 78. 19, 20.
wilderness? behold he smote the rock, that the waters gushed out, and the
streams overflowed; can he give bread also, can he provide flesh for his
people? Such as they used, of whom the Prophet said -- When they shall be
hungry, they will fret themselves, and curse Isa. 8. 21.
their King, and their God; such as they were guilty of, whom St. Jude calls
(...), murmurers, and querulous persons (or such as found fault with their lot)
Jud. 16.
that which is styled, charging God foolishly; for abstaining from which
(notwithstanding the pressure of his most grievous calamities) Job is commended
(where it is said, Job sinned not, neither charged God foolishly) that which the
Prophet condemns Job 1. 22.
as unreasonable in that expostulation; Wherefore does the living man complain?
Lam. 3. 39.
In such cases we should smother our passions in a still and silent Psalm. 37.
7. 46. 10. 4. 4.
demeanor, as the Psalmist advised, and as he practiced himself: I was Psalm.
39. 9.
dumb (says he) and opened not my mouth, because it was thy doing. Yea
contrariwise patience requires

10. Blessing and praising God (that is, declaring our hearty satisfaction in
God's proceedings with us, acknowledging his wisdom, justice and goodness
therein, expressing a grateful sense thereof, as wholesome and beneficial to
us) in conformity to Job, who, upon the loss of all his comforts, did thus vent
his mind: The Lord gave, and the Lord has Job 1. 21.
taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord.

11. Abstaining from all irregular and unworthy courses toward the removal, or
redress of our crosses; choosing rather to abide quietly under their pressure,
than by any unwarrantable means to relieve or relaxe our selves; contentedly
wearing, rather than violently breaking our yoke, Jer. 5. 5.
or bursting our bonds; rather continuing poor, than striving to enrich our
selves by fraud or rapine; rather lying under contempt, than by sinful or
sordid compliances attempting to gain the favor and respect of men; rather
embracing the meanest condition, than laboring by any turbulent, unjust, or
uncharitable practices to amplify our estate; rather enduring any
inconvenience, or distress, than setting our faces toward Egypt, or having
recourse Jer. 42. 15.
to any succor, which God disalloweth; according to what is implied in that
reprehension of St. Paul, Now therefore it is utterly a fault among you,
because ye go to law one 1 Cor. 6. 7.
with another; Why do ye not rather take wrong; why do ye not rather suffer
your selves to be defrauded? and in that advice of St. Peter; Let them that
suffer according to the will of God, 1 Pet. 4. 19.
commit the keeping of their souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful
creator.

12. A fair behavior toward the instruments and abettors of our affliction;
those who brought us into it, or who detain us under it, by keeping off relief,
or sparing to yield the succor which we might expect; the forbearing to
express any wrath or displeasure, to exercise any revenge, to retain any
grudge, or enmity toward them; but rather even upon that score bearing
good will, and showing kindness unto them; unto them, not only as to our
brethren, whom according to the general law of charity we are bound to love,
but as to the servants of God in this particular case, or as to the instruments
of his pleasure toward us; considering that by maligning or mischiefing them,
we do signify ill resentment of God's dealings with us, and in effect through
their sides, do wound his providence: thus did the pious King demean himself,
when he was bitterly reproached, and cursed by Shimei; 2 Samuel 16. 7.
not suffering (upon this account) any harm or requital to be offered to him;
thus did the holy Apostles, who being reviled did bless, being persecuted 1
Cor. 4. 12.
did bear it, being defamed did entreat; thus did our Lord deport himself
toward his spiteful adversaries, who being reviled did not revile again; 1
Pet. 2. 23. 3. 9.
when he suffered did not threaten, but committed it to him that judges
righteously.

13. Particularly in regard to those, who by injurious and offensive usage, do
provoke us; patience imports,

1. That we be not hastily, overeasily, not immoderately, not pertinaciously
incensed with anger toward them; according to those divine precepts, and
aphorisms; Be slow to Jam. 1. 19.

Eccles. 7. 9.

Prove. 16. 32. 14, 17, 29.

Romans 12. 19.


wrath; Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry; for anger rests in the bosom
of fools. Give place to wrath (that is remove it.) Let all bitterness, and
wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil Ephesians. 4. 31, 26.

Coloss. 3. 8.

Matt. 5. 21, 24.

Psalm. 37. 8.


speaking be put away from you, with all malice. Cease from anger, let go
displeasure, fret not thy self any wise to do evil.

2. That we do not in our hearts harbor any ill will, or ill-wishes, or ill
designs toward them, but that we truly desire their good, and purpose to
further it, as we shall have ability and occasion; according to that law (even
charged on the Jews,) Thou shall not bear any grudge against the Levit. 19. 18.
children of thy people; but thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; and
according to that noble command of our Savior; Love your enemies, pray for
them which despitefully use you, and Matt. 5. 44.

Luc. 6. 27.


persecute you.

3. That in effect we do not execute any revenge, or for requital do any
mischief to them, either in word or deed; but for their reproaches exchange
blessings (or good words and wishes) for their outrages repay benefits, and
good turns; according to those Evangelical rules; Do good to Matt. 5. 44, 39.
them that hate you, Bless them that curse you: Bless them that persecute you,
bless and curse not: See that none Romans 12. 14.

1 These. 5. 15.


render evil for evil: Be pitiful, be 1 Pet. 3. 9.
courteous, not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing, but
contrariwise blessing: If thine enemy hunger, feed Prove. 25. 21.

Romans 12. 20.


him; if he thirst, give him drink: Say not I will do to him as he has Prove.
24. 29. 20. 22.
done to me; I will render to the man according to his work: Say thou not I
will recompense evil, but wait on the Lord, and he shall save thee.

14. In fine, patience does include and produce a general meekness and kindness
of affection, together with an enlarged sweetness, and pleasantness in
conversation and carriage toward all men; implying, that, how hard soever our
case, how sorry or sad our condition is, we are not therefore angry with the
world, because we do not thrive, or flourish in it; that we are not
dissatisfied, or disgusted with the prosperous estate of other men; that we are
not become sullen or froward toward any man, because his fortune excels
ours; but that rather we do rejoice with them that Romans 12. 15.
rejoice; we do find complacence, and delight in their good success, we borrow
satisfaction and pleasure from their enjoyments.

In these, and the like acts, the practice of this virtue (a virtue, which all
men, in this state of inward weakness, and outward trouble, shall have much
need and frequent occasion to exercise) consists; unto which practice, even
Philosophy, natural reason, and common sense do suggest many inducements; the
tenor of our holy faith and religion do supply more and better; but nothing
can more clearly direct, or more powerfully excite thereto, than that admirable
example, by which our Text does enforce it: some principal of those rational
inducements we shall cursorily touch, then insist upon this example.

It will generally induce us to bear patiently all things incident, if we
consider, That it is the natural right and prerogative of God to dispose of all
things, to assign our station here, and allot our portion to us; whence it is a
most wrongful insolence in us, by complaining of our state, to contest his
right, or impeach his management thereof; That we are obliged to God's free
bounty for numberless great benefits and favors; whence it is vile ingratitude
to be displeased for the want of some lesser conveniences; That God having
undertaken, and promised to support and succor us, it is a heinous affront to
distrust him, and consequently to be dissatisfied with our condition; That
seeing God does infinitely better understand what is good for us, than we can
do; he is better affected toward us, and more truly loves us than we do our
selves; he with an unquestionable right has an uncontrollable power to dispose
of us, it is most reasonable to acquiesce in his choice of our state; That
since we have no claim to any good, or any pleasure, and thence in withholding
any, no wrong is done to us, it is unjust and frivolous to murmur, or grumble;
since we are, by nature, God's servants, it is fit the appointment of our rank,
our garb, our diet, all our accommodations, and employments in his family,
should be left entirely to his discretion and pleasure; That we being grievous
sinners, less than the least of God's mercies, meriting no good, but deserving
sore punishment from him, it is just, that we should be highly content and
thankful for any thing on this side death and damnation; That our afflictions,
being the natural fruits and results of our choice, or voluntary miscarriages,
it is reasonable we should blame our selves rather than pick quarrels with
Providence for them. That our condition, be it what it will, cannot, being duly
estimated, be extremely bad, or insupportably grievous; for that as no
condition here is perfectly and purely good (not deficient in some
accommodations, not blended with some troubles) so there is none that has not
its conveniences and comforts; for that it is our fond conceits, our froward
humors, our perverse behaviors, which create the mischiefs adherent to any
state; for that also how forlorn soever our case is, we cannot fail, if we
please, of a capacity to enjoy goods far more than countervailing all possible
want of these goods, or presence of these evils; we may have the use of our
reason, a good conscience, hope in God, assurance of God's love and favor,
abundance of spiritual blessings here, and a certain title to eternal glory and
bliss hereafter; which if we can have, our condition cannot be deemed
uncomfortable. That indeed our adversity is a thing very good and wholesome,
very profitable and desirable, as a means of breeding, improving and exercising
the best virtues, of preparing us for, and entitling us to the best rewards.
That our state cannot ever be desperate, our adversity probably may not be
lasting (there being no connection between the present and the future,
vicissitudes being frequent, all things depending on the arbitrary dispensation
of God, who does always pity us, and is apt to relieve us.) That however our
affliction will not outlive our selves, and certainly must soon expire with our
life. That this world is not a place of perfect convenience, or pure delight;
we come not hither to do our will, or enjoy our pleasure, we are not born to
make laws, or pick our condition here; but that trouble is natural and proper
to us (We are born thereto, as the sparks Job 5. 7.

1 Cor. 10. 13.


fly upwards.) No tribulation seiseth us, but such as is humane; whence it is
reasonable that we contentedly bear the crosses suitable to our nature and
state. That no adversity is in kind, or degree, peculiar to us, but if we
survey the conditions of other men (of our brethren every where, of our
neighbors all about us) and compare our case with theirs, we shall find, that
we have many consorts, and associates in adversity, most as ill, many far worse
bestead than our selves; whence it must be a great fondness and perverseness to
be displeased that we are not exempted from, but exposed to bear a share in the
common troubles and burdens of mankind. That it has particularly been the lot
of the best men (persons most excellent in virtue, and most deep in God's
favor) to sustain adversity; and it therefore becomes us willingly and
cheerfully to accept it. That, in fine, patience it self is the best remedy to
ease us in, to rescue us from adversity; for it cannot much annoy us, if we
bear it patiently, God will, in mercy, remove it, if we please him, by
demeaning our selves well under it; but that impatience does not at all conduce
to our relief, does indeed exasperate, and augment our pain: Such
considerations may induce us to a patience in general respecting all sorts of
evil.

There are also reasons particularly disposing to bear injuries and contumelies
from men calmly and meekly, without immoderate wrath, rancorous hatred, or
spiteful revenge toward them: Because they do proceed from divine providence,
disposing or permitting them (for the trial of our patience, the abasing our
pride, the exercising of some other virtues, or for other good purposes) to
fall upon us; Because vindication of misdemeanors committed against us does
not appertain to us; we not being competent Judges of them, nor rightful
executours of the punishments due to them; God having reserved to himself the
right of decision, and power of execution: Vengeance is mine, says the Lord, I
will repay Romans 12. 19.

Heb. 10. 30.

Deuteronomy. 32. 35, 36.

Vid. Tert. de pat. cap. 10.


it. Because we are obliged to interpret charitably the actions of our
neighbor, supposing his miscarriages to proceed from infirmity, from mistake,
or from some cause, which we should be rather inclinable to excuse, than to
prosecute with hatred, or revenge. Because indeed our neighbors most culpable
offenses, as issuing from distemper of mind, are more reasonably the objects of
compassion, and charity, than of anger, or ill will. Because we are bound to
forgive all injuries by the command of God, and in conformity to his example,
who passes by innumerable most heinous offenses committed against himself:
Gracious is the Lord, and full of compassion, Psalm. 145. 8. 86. 15.
slow to anger, and of great mercy; long-suffering, and plenteous in mercy and
truth; so must we be also, if we will be like him, or please him. Because we
our selves, being subject to incur the same faults in kind, or greater in
value, do need much pardon, and should thence be ready to allow it unto others;
both in equity, and in gratitude toward God; lest that in the Gospel be applied
to us; O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that Matt. 18. 32*
debt, because thou desiredst me; Should not thou also have had compassion
upon thy fellow servant, even as I had pity on thee? Because God has made it a
necessary condition of our obtaining mercy; promising us favor if we yield it,
menacing us extremity, if we refuse it: If ye forgive men their trespasses,
your heavenly Matt. 6. 14.

Ecclus. 8. 2.

Matt. 18. 35.

Ma^^. 11. 25.


father will also forgive you; But if ye forgive not men their trespasses,
neither will your father forgive your trespasses. Because our neighbor
suffering by our revenge in any manner (in his body, interest, or reputation)
does not any-wise profit us, or benefit our estate, but needlessly does multiply
and increase the stock of mischief in the world; yea commonly does bring
farther evil upon our selves, provoking him to go on in offending us, rendering
him more implacably bent against us, engaging us consequently deeper in strife
and trouble: Because no wrong, no disgrace, no prejudice we can receive from
men is of much consequence to us, if our mind be not disordered if we are free
from those bad passions, which really are the worst evils that can befall us.
Because, in fine, impatience it self is insignificant, and ineffectual to any
good purpose; or rather produces ill effects; It does not cure our wound, or
assuage our grief; it removes Idcirco quis te laedit ut doleas, quia fructus
laedentis in dolo^e laesi est. Tert. de pat. 8.

Si patientiae incubabo, non dolebo; si non dolebo, ulcisci non desiderabo. Ib.
10.


no inconvenience, nor repaireth any damage we have received; but rather
enflameth our distemper, and aggravateth our pain; more really indeed molesting
and hurting us, than the injury or discourtesie which causes it: Thus briefly
does reason dictate to us the practice of all patience.

But the example proposed by the Apostle here, and otherwhere by Saint Paul
(Let the same mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus -- (by Phil. 2. 5.
the Apostle to the Hebrews (Let us run with patience the race that is set Heb.
12. 1, 2.
before us, Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith --) by our
Lord himself (Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly) that does in Matt. 11. 29.
a more lively manner express how in such cases we should deport our selves,
and most strongly engages us to comply with duties of this nature. Let us now
therefore describe it, and recommend it to your consideration.

The example of our Lord was indeed Vid. Tertull. de Pat. c. 3.

Cypr. de Pat. T. 2. p. 315.


in this kind the most remarkable that ever was presented, the most perfect
that can be imagined: He was, above all expression, a man of sorrows and
acquainted with grief; he did Is. 53. 3.
undertake, as to perform the best works, so to endure the worst accidents, to
which humane nature is subject; his whole life being no other than one
continual exercise of patience, and meekness, in all the parts, and to the
utmost degrees of them: If we trace the footsteps of his life, from the sordid
manger to the bloody cross, we shall not be able to observe any matter of
complacence, scarce any of comfort (in respect to his natural or worldly state)
to have befallen him.

His parentage was mean, to appearance, and his birth, in all exterior
circumstances, despicable: Is not this the Carpenter's Son? were words of Matt.
13. 55.

Marc. 6. 3.


contempt and offense, upon all occasions thrown upon him.

His life was spent not only in continual labor, and restless travel, but in
hard poverty, yea in extreme penury, beneath the state, not only of the
meanest men, but of the most shifting beasts: The foxes have holes, Matt. 8. 20.
and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man has not where to lay
his head.

For his necessary sustenance we find him often destitute of ordinary provision
Matt. 21. 18, 19.

Nullius mensam, tectumve despexit. Tert.


(as when he sought food from the barren fig tree) often indebted for it to the
courtesy, and (as it were) alms of the vilest people, of Publicans and
Sinners: so (...), he was (as the Apostle says) a beggar 2 Cor. 8. 9.
for us.

Yet may we never perceive him any-wise discontented with, or complaining of
his condition; not discouraged, or depressed in spirit thereby, not
solicitously endeavoring any correction or change thereof; but willingly
embracing it, heartily acquiescing therein; and, notwithstanding all its
inconveniences, cheerfully discharging his duties, vigorously pursuing his
main designs of procuring glory to God, and benefit to men.

Nor did he only with content undergo the incommodities of a poor estate, but
he was surrounded with continual dangers; the most powerful men of those times
(enraged with envy, ambition, and avarice) desperately maligning him; and being
incessantly attentive upon all occasions to molest, hurt and destroy him: The
world (as he says himself, that Joh. 15. 18.
is, all the powerful and formidable part of the world) hating me; Yet did not
this any-wise dismay, or distemper him, nor cause him either to repine at his
condition, or decline his duty. He utterly disregarded all their spiteful
machinations, persisting immovable in the prosecution of his pious and
charitable undertakings, to the admiration of those who observed his demeanor:
Is not this he (said they) whom they seek to kill? but lo Joh. 7. 25.
he speaks boldly.

He did indeed sometimes opportunely shun their fury, and prudently Luc. 4. 30.

Matt. 21. 27. 22. 18.


did elude their snares, but never went violently to repel them, or to execute
any revenge for them; improving the wonderful power he was endewed with,
altogether to the advantage of mankind, never to the bane or hurt of his
malicious enemies.

Sensible enough he was of the causeless hatred they bare him; ((...), They,
said he, have hated Joh. 15. 25.
me for nothing;) and of their extreme ingratitude; yet never could he be
provoked to resent, or requite their dealing; see how mildly he did expostulate
the case with them; Then (says St. John) the Jews took up stones to stone him:
Jesus answered them, Many Joh. 10. 31.
good works have I showed you from my Father, for which of those do ye stone me?

To be extremely hated, and inhumanely persecuted without any fault committed,
or just occasion offered, is greatly incensive of humane passion; but for the
purest, and strongest good will, for the most unexpressible beneficence, to be
recompensed with most virulent reproaches, most odious slanders, most
outrageous misusages, How exceeding was that meekness, which without any
signification of regret, or disgust, could endure it?

Out of most tender charity, and ardent desire of their salvation, he
instructed them, and instilled heavenly Matt. 23. 37.
doctrine into their minds, what thanks, what reward did he receive for that
great favor? to be reputed, and reported an impostour: (...), he (said they)
does impose Joh 7. 12.

Matt. 27. 63.


upon the people.

He took occasion to impart the great blessing of pardon for sin to some of
them, confirming his authority of doing it by a miraculous work of goodness;
How did they resent such an obligation? by accompting Matt. 9. 3. etc.
him a blasphemer: Behold (says Saint Matthew) certain of the Scribes said
within themselves, this man blasphemeth: which most harsh and uncharitable
censure of theirs he did not fiercely reprehend, but calmly discussed, and
refuted by a clear reasoning; (...); Wherefore conceive ye evil in your hearts;
for whether is easier to say, thy sins are forgiven thee, or to say arise and
walk? that is, Is it not credible that he, who can perform the one, may
dispense Ingratos curavit, insidiatoribus cessit. Tert.
the other?

He freed them from most grievous diseases, yea rescued them from the greatest
mischief possible in nature, being possessed by the unclean Fiend; Act. 10. 38.
How did they entertain this mighty benefit, by most horrible calumny, accusing
him of Sorcery, or conspiracy with the Devil himself? The Pharisees said, he
casts out Devils by the Matt. 9. 34. 12. 24.
Prince of the Devils; yea thence attributing to him the very name and title of
the grand Devil: If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, Matt.
10. 25.
how much more (shall they defame) them of his household? Yet this most
injurious defamation he no otherwise rebukes, than by a mild discourse,
strongly confuting it; Every Matt. 12. 25.
Kingdom (said he) divided against it self is brought to desolation -- and if
Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself; how then shall his Kingdom
stand? that is, the Devil better understands his interest, than to assist any
man in dispossessing himself.

He did constantly labor in reclaiming them from error and sin, in converting
them to God and goodness, in proposing fair overtures of grace and mercy to
them, in showing them by word and practice the sure way to happiness; What
issue was there of all his care and pains? What but neglect, distrust,
disappointment, rejection of himself, of what he said, and what he did? Who
has believed Joh. 12. 38.
our report, and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed? was a
Prophecy, abundantly verified by their carriage toward him.

These, and the like usages, which he perpetually did encounter, he constantly
received without any passionate disturbance of mind, any bitter reflections upon
that generation, any revengefull enterprises against them; yea requited them
with continued earnestness of hearty desires, and laborious endeavors for
their good.

We might observe the ungrateful disrespects of his own Countrymen, and
kindred toward him, which he passes over without any grievous disdain; rather
excusing it, by noting that entertainment to have been no peculiar accident to
himself, but usual to all of like employment; No Prophet (said he) is
acceptable in his Luc. 4. 24.

Matt. 13. 57.


own country.

We might also mention his patient Non illi saltem civitati quae cum recipere
noluer at iratus est, cum etiam discipuli tam contumelioso oppido coelestes
ignes repraesentari voluissent.

Tert.


suffering repulses from strangers; as when being refused admittance into a
Samaritane Village, and his disciples being incensed with that rude
discourtesie, would have fire called down from heaven to consume those churls,
he restrained their unadvised wrath, and thus expressed his admirable meekness;
The Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them. Luc. 9. 53,
56.


We might likewise remark his meek comporting with the stupid and Luc. 9. 41.

Matt. 17. 17.

Non peccatores, non publicanos aspernatus est. Tert.


perverse incredulity of his disciples, notwithstanding so many pregnant, and
palpable inducements continually exhibited for confirmation of their faith; the
which he no otherwise, than sometime gently, admonishes them of, saying,
(...); Matt. 8. 26. 14. 31.
Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? (...); O thou of small faith, why
did thou doubt?

What should I insist on these, although very remarkable instances? since that
one scene of his most grievous (shall I say, or glorious) passion does
represent unto us a perfect, and most lively image of the highest patience and
meekness possible: of the greatest sorrow that ever was or could be, yet of a
patience surmounting it; of the extremest malice that ever was conceived, yet
of a charity overswaying it; of injury most intolerable, yet of a meekness
willingly and sweetly bearing it? There may we observe the greatest
provocations from all hands to passionate animosity of spirit, and intemperate
heat of speech, yet no discovery of the least disorderly, angry, or revengefull
thought, the least rash, bitter, or reproachful word, but all undergone with
clearest serenity of mind, and sweetness of carriage toward all persons.

To Judas, who betrayed him, How does he address himself? Does he use such
terms as the Man deserved, or as passion would have suggested, and reason would
not have disallowed? Did he say, Thou most perfidious villain, thou monster of
iniquity and ingratitude; thou desperately wicked wretch; Do thou, prompted
by thy base covetousness, treacherously attempt to ruin thy gracious Master,
and best Friend; thy most benign and bountiful Savior? No, in stead of such
proper language, he uses the most courteous and endearing terms: (...); Matt.
26. 50.
Friend (or companion) for what do thou come? Or what is thy business here? a
tacit charitable warning there is to reflect upon his unworthy and wicked
action, but nothing apparent of wrath, or reproach.

From his own disciples and servants, who had beheld his many miraculous works,
and were indebted to him for the greatest favors, he reasonably might have
expected a most faithful adherence, and most diligent attendance on him in
that juncture; yet he found them careless, and slothful: What then? How did he
take it? Was he angry, did he upbraid, did he storm at them? Did he threaten to
discard them? No; he only first gently admonishes them: What could ye not
watch one hour with Matt. 26. 40, 45.
me? then a little exciteth them, Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation: he withal suggesteth an excuse for their drowsiness and dullness;
The Spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak; in fine, he indulgeth to their
weakness, letting them alone, and saying, (...), Slay on now and take your rest.

When he foresaw they would be offended at his (to appearance) disastrous
estate, and fearfully would desert him, he yet expressed no indignation Matt.
26. 31.
against them, or decrease of affection toward them upon that score; but simply
mentions it, as unconcerned in it, and not affected thereby.

And the unworthy Apostasy of that disciple, whom he had especially favored
and dignified, he only did mildly forewarn him of, requiting it foreseen by
the promise of his own effectual prayers for his support and recovery; and when
St. Peter had Luc. 22. 61, 62.

(...).


committed that heinous fact, our good Lord only looked on him with an eye of
charity and compassion; which more efficaciously struck him, than the most
dreadful threat, or sharp reprehension could have done; Peter thereupon went
out, and wept bitterly.

When the Highpriests officer, upon no reasonable occasion, did injuriously
and ignominiously strike him, he returned only this mild expostulation: If I
have spoken evil, bear Joh. 18. 23.

Cypr. Epist. 65.


witness of the evil; if well, why smitest thou me? that is, I advise thee to
proceed in a fair and legal way against me, not to deal thus boisterously and
wrongfully, to thy own harm.

Even careful and tender he was of those, who were the instruments of his
suffering; he protected them from harm, who conducted him to execution; as we
see in the case of the Highpriests servant, whom (with Luc. 22. 51, etc.
more zeal, than wherewith he ever regarded his own safety) he defended from
the fury of his own friend, and cured of the wounds received in the way of
persecuting himself.

All his demeanor under that great trial was perfectly calm, not the least
regret, or reluctance of mind, the least contradiction, or obloquy of speech
appearing therein; such it was as became the lamb of God, who Isa. 53. 7.
was to take away the sins of the world, by a willing oblation of himself; such
as did exactly correspond to the ancient Prophecies; He was oppressed, and he
was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; he was brought as a Lamb to the
slaughter, and as a sheep before the shearer is dumb, so he opened not his
mouth; and, I gave Isa. 50. 6.
my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair; I hid
not my face from shame and spitting.

Neither did the wrongful slanders devised and alleged against him by
suborned witnesses, nor the virulent invectives of the Priests, nor the
barbarous clamours of the people, nor the contemptuous spitting upon him, and
buffeting him, nor the cruel scorgings, nor the contumelious mockeries, nor all
the bloody tortures inflicted upon him, wring from him one syllable importing
any dissatisfaction in his case, any wrath conceived for his misusages, any
grudge or illwill in his mind toward his persecutours; but on the contrary,
instead of hatred and revenge he declared the greatest kindness and charity
toward them, praying heartily to God his Father for the pardon of their sins.
Instead of aggravating their crime and injury against him, he did in a sort
extenuate and excuse it, by consideration of their ignorance and mistake: Lord,
(said he, in the height of his Luke 23. 34.
sufferings) forgive them, for they know not what they do. The life they so
violently bereaved him of, he did willingly mean to lay down for the ransom of
their lives; the blood they spilt he wished to be a salutary balsame for their
wounds and maladies; he most cheerfully did offer himself by their hands a
sacrifice for their offenses. No small part of his afflictions was a sense of
their so grievously displeasing God, and pulling mischief on their own heads, a
foresight of his kind intentions being frustrated by their obstinate
incredulity and impenitence, a reflection upon that inevitable vengeance, which
from the divine justice would attend them; this foreseen did work in him a
distasteful sense, (more grievous than what his own pain could produce) and
drew from him tears of compassion (such as no resentment of his own case could
extort) for, When he was come near Luke 19. 41. 13. 34.
he beheld the City, and wept over it, saying; O that thou had known, even
thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace.

If ever he did express any commotion of mind in reference to this matter, it
was only then when one of his friends, out of a blind fondness of affection
did presume to dissuade him from undergoing these evils; then indeed being
somewhat moved with indignation he said to St. Peter, Get thee Matt. 16. 23.
behind me, Satan, for thou art an offense unto me; for thou savourest not the
things that be of God, but those that be of men.

Neither was it out of a stupid insensibility or stubborn resolution that he
did thus behave himself; for he Matt. 26. 37, 38.

Luke 22. 44.

Joh. 12. 27.

Matt. 26. 39.

Heb. 5. 7.


had a most vigorous sense of all those grievances, and a strong (natural)
aversation from undergoing them; as those dolorous agonies wherewith he
struggled; those deadly groans he uttered; those monstrous lumps of blood he
swet out; those earnest prayers he made to be freed from them, declare; but
from a perfect submission to the divine will, an entire command over his
passions, an excessive charity toward mankind this patient and meek behavior
did spring: The Cup which my Joh. 18. 11.
father has given me, shall I not drink it? O my Father, if it be possible,
let Matt. 26. 39.

Luke 22. 42.


this cup pass from me; nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will? Let Joh.
10. 18. 6. 51.
not my will, but thine be done. No man takes away my life, but I lay it down
of my own accord; I will give my flesh for the life of the world: So does our
Lord himself express the true grounds of his passion and his patience.

Such is the example of our Lord; the serious consideration whereof how can it
otherwise than work patience and meekness in us; If He, that was the Lord of
glory (infinitely excellent in dignity and virtue) did so readily embrace, did
so contentedly endure such extremities of penury, hardship, disgrace and pain,
how can we refuse them or repine at them? can we pretend to a better lot than
he received, or presume that God must deal better with us than he did with his
own dearest Son? Can we be displeased at a conformity to our Lord and Master?
Can we without shame affect to live more splendidly, or to fare more
deliciously than he chose to do? Shall we fret or wail, because our desires
are crossed, our projects defeated, our interests any-wise prejudiced; whenas
his most earnest desires, and his most painful endeavors had so little of due
and desired success: when He was ever ready, and had so constant occasion to
say, Let not my will be done? Can we despise that state of meanness and sorrow
which He from the highest sublimities of glory and beatitude was pleased to
stoop unto? Can we take our selves for the want of any present conveniences or
comforts to be wretched, whenas the fountain of all happiness was destitute of
all such things, and scarce did ever taste any worldly pleasure? Are we fit or
worthy to be his disciples, if Luke 14. 27. 9. 23.

Matt. 10. 38. 16. 24.


we will not take up his cross and follow him; if we will not go to his School
(that School wherein he is said himself to have learnt obedience) Heb. 5. 8.
if we will not con that lesson which he so loudly has read out, and
transcribe that copy which he so fairly has set before us? Can we pretend to
those great benefits, those high privileges, those rich and excellent rewards,
which he has attained for us, and which he proposes to us, if we will not go
on toward them in that way of patience which Heb. 2. 9, 10.

Phil. 2. 9.


he has trod before us?

Can we also, if we consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners,
Heb. 12. 3.
be transported with any wrathful or revengefull passion, upon any provocation
from our brethren? Can we hope, or wish for better usage from men than our Lord
did ever find? Can we be much displeased Quam gravis causa sit hominis
Christiani servum pati (...) cum prior (...) (...) Dominu (...) Cypr. E^.
with any man for thwarting our desires or interests, for dissenting from our
conceits, for crossing our humors, whenas he (to whom all respect and
observance was due) did meet with so little regard or compliance in any way;
continually did encounter repulses, disappointments, oppositions from the
perverse and spiteful world? Can we be very jealous of our credit, or furious
when our imaginary honor (honor, that we never really deserved, or can justly
claim, being guilty of so many great faults and sins) is touched with the least
disgraceful reflection, if we do well observe and mind, that the most truly,
and indeed only honorable personage (only honorable, because only innocent
person) that ever was, had his reputation aspersed by the most odious
reproaches, which deepest envy and malice could devise, without any grievous
resentment, or being folicitous otherwise to assert or clear it than by a
constant silence? Can we be exasperated by every petty affront, (real or
supposed) when the most noble, most courteous, most obliging person that ever
breathed upon earth was treacherously exposed to violence by his own servant,
shamefully deserted by his own most beloved friends, despitefully treated by
those whom he never had offended, by those upon whom he had heaped the greatest
benefits, without expressing any anger or displeasure against them, but
yielding many signal testimonies of tenderest pity and love toward them? Can we
see our Lord treated like a slave and a thief, without any disturbance or
commotion of heart; and we vile wretches upon every slight occasion swell with
fierce disdain, pour forth reproachful language, execute horrible mischief
upon our brethren? He indeed was surrounded with injuries and affronts; every
sin that since the foundation of things has been committed was an offense
against him, and a burden upon him; (God laid upon him the Isa. 53. 6.
iniquities of us all) so many declared enemies, so many rebels, so many
persecutours, so many murderers he had as there have lived men in the world;
for every sinner did in truth conspire to his affliction and destruction; we
all in effect did betray him, did accuse him, did mock, did scourge, did pierce
and crucify him; yet he forgave all offenses, he died for all persons; while
we were yet enemies, Romans 5. 6, 8, 10.
yet sinners he died for us, to rescue us from death and misery: And shall we
not then in imitation of him, for his dear sake, in gratitude, respect and
obedience to him, be ready to bear the infirmities of our brethren, to forgive
any small wrongs or offenses from them; whatever they do Rependamus illi
patientiam, quam pro nobis ipse dependit. Tert. de Pat. 16.
to us, to love them, and do them what good we can? If so admirable a pattern
of patience and meekness so immense cannot, what is there that can oblige or
move us? I conclude with those doxologies to our so patient and meek Redeemer;

Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, Apoc. 5. 12, 13.
to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and
glory, and blessing. Blessing, and honor, and glory, and power be unto him
that sits upon the throne and to the Lamb for ever and ever.

Unto him that loved us, and washed Apoc. 1. 5.
us from our sins in his blood, and has made us Kings and Priests unto God and
his Father, to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever.

Amen.
OF RESIGNATION TO THE DIVINE WILL.
The Seventh Sermon.
LUKE XXII. 42. Nevertheless let not my will, but thine Matt. 26. 39.
be done.
THE great Controversy, managed with such earnestness and obstinacy between
God and Man, is this, whose will shall take place, his or ours: Almighty God,
by whose constant protection and great mercy we subsist, does claim to himself
the authority of regulating our practice, and disposing our fortunes; but we
affect to be our own masters and carvers; not willingly admitting any law, not
patiently brooking any condition, which does not sort with our fancy and
pleasure: to make good his right, God bends all his sorces, and applies all
proper means both of sweetness and severity (persuading us by arguments,
soliciting us by entreaties, alluring us by fair promises, scaring us by fierce
menaces, indulging ample benefits to us, inslicting sore corrections on us,
working in us and upon us by secret influences of grace, by visible
dispensations of providence) yet so it is, that commonly nothing does avail,
our will opposing it self with invincible resolution and stiffness.

Here indeed the business pincheth; herein as the chief worth, so the main
difficulty of religious practice consists, in bending that iron sinew; in
bringing our proud hearts to stoop, and our sturdy humors to buckle, so as to
surrender and resign our wills to the just, the wise, the gracious will of our
God, prescribing our duty, and assigning our lot unto us. We may accuse our
nature, but it is our pleasure; we may pretend weakness, but Chrysostom. Tom. 6. Or.
12. in 1 Cor. Or. 17.

Tom. 5. Or. 28, 43.


it is wilfulness, which is the guilty cause of our misdemeanors; for by God's
help (which does always prevent our needs, and is never wanting to those who
seriously desire it) we may be as good as we please, if we can please to be
good; there is nothing within us that can resist, if our wills do yield
themselves up to duty: to conquer our reason is not hard; for what reason of
man can withstand the infinite cogency of those motives, which induce to
obedience? What can be more easy, than by a thousand arguments, clear as day,
to convince any man, that to cross God's will is the greatest absurdity in the
world, and that there is no madness comparable thereto? Nor is it difficult, if
we Quodeunque sibi imperavit animus obtinuit. Sen. de Ira. 2. 12.
resolve upon it, to govern any other part or power of our nature; for what
cannot we do, if we are willing? what inclination cannot we check, what
appetite cannot we restrain, what passion cannot we quell or moderate; what
faculty of our soul, or member of our body is not obsequious to our will? Even
half the resolution with which we pursue vanity and sin, would serve to engage
us in the ways of wisdom and virtue.

Wherefore in overcoming our will the stress lies; this is that impregnable
fortress, which everlastingly does hold out against all the batteries of reason
and of grace; which no force of persuasion, no allurement of favor, no
discouragement of terror can reduce: this puny, this impotent thing it is,
which grappleth with Omnipotency, and often in a manner baffleth it: And no
wonder; for that God does not intend to overpower our will, or to make any
violent impression on it, but only to draw it (as it Hos. 11. 4.
is in the Prophet) with the cords of a man, or by rational inducements to win
its consent and compliance; our service is not so considerable to him, that he
should extort it from us; nor does he value our happiness at so low a rate, as
to obtrude it on us. His victory indeed were no true victory over us, if he
should gain it by main sorce, or without the concurrence of our will; our works
not being our works, if they do not issue from our will; and our will not being
our will, if it be not free; to compel it were to destroy it, together with
all the worth of our virtue and obedience: wherefore the Almighty does suffer
himself to be (...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Orat. 2.
withstood, and bears repulses from us; nor commonly does he master our will
otherwise, than by its own spontaneous conversion and submission to him: if
ever we be conquered, as we shall share in the benefit, and wear a crown; so we
must join in the combat, and partake of the victory, by subduing our selves: we
must take the yoke upon us; for God is only served by volunteers; he summoneth
us by his Word, he attracteth us by his Grace, but we must freely come unto him.

Our will indeed of all things is most our own; the only gift, the most proper
sacrifice we have to offer; which therefore God does chiefly desire, does most
highly prize, does most kindly accept from us. Seeing then our duty chiefly
moves on this hinge, the free submission and resignation of our will to the
will of God; it is this practice, which our Lord (who came to guide us in the
way to happiness, not only as a teacher by his word and excellent doctrine,
but as a leader, by his actions and perfect example) did especially set before
us; as in the constant tenor of his life, so particularly in that great
exigency which occasioned these words, wherein, renouncing and deprecating his
own will, he did express an entire submission to God's will, a hearty
complacence therein, and a serious desire that it might take place.

For the fuller understanding of which case, we may consider, that our Lord, as
partaker of our nature, and, in all things (bating sin) like unto us, had a
natural humane will, attended with senses, appetites and affections, apt from
objects incident to receive congruous impressions of pleasure and pain; so that
whatever is innocently grateful and pleasant to us, that he relished with
delight, and thence did incline to embrace; whatever is distasteful and
afflictive to us, that he resented with grief, and thence was moved to eschew;
to this probably he was liable in a degree beyond our ordinary rate; for that
in him nature was most perfect, his complexion very delicate, his temper
exquisitely sound and fine; for so we find, that by how much any man's
constitution is more sound, by so much he has a smarter gust of what is
agreeable or offensive to nature: If perhaps sometimes infirmity of body, or
distemper of soul (a savage ferity, a stupid dullness, a fondness of conceit, or
stiffness of humor, supported by wild opinions, or vain hopes) may keep men
from being thus affected by sensible objects; yet in him pure nature did work
vigorously, with a clear apprehension and lively sense, according to the design
of our maker, when into our constitution he did implant those passive faculties
disposing objects to affect them so and so, for our need and advantage: if this
be deemeed weakness, it is a weakness connected with our nature, which he
therewith did take, and with which (...).

Heb. 5. 2.


(as the Apostle says) he was encompassed. Such a will our Lord had, and it
was requisite that he should have it; that he thence might be qualified to
discharge the principal instances of obedience, for procuring God's favor to
us, and for setting an exact pattern before us; for God imposing on him duties
to perform, and dispensing accidents to endure, very cross to that natural
will, in his compliance, and acquiescence thereto, his obedience was thoroughly
tried; his virtue did shine most brightly; therefore (as the Apostle says) he
was in Heb. 4. 15. 2. 10, 18.
all points tempted; thence, as to meritorious capacity, and exemplary
influence, he was perfected through suffering.

Hence was the whole course of his life and conversation among men, so
designed, so modelled, as to be one continual exercise of thwarting that humane
will, and closing with the Divine pleasure: it was predicted of him, Lo I come
to do thy will, O God; Heb. 10. 7.

Psalm. 40. 7.

Joh. 6. 38. 5. 30. 4. 34.


and of himself he affirmed, I came down from heaven not to do my own will,
but the will of him that sent me; whereas therefore such a practice is little
seen in atchieving easy matters, or in admitting pleasant occurrences; it was
ordered for him, that he should encounter the roughest difficulties, and be
engaged in circumstances, most harsh to natural apprehension and appetite; so
that if we trace the footsteps of his life from the sordid manger to the bloody
cross, we can hardly mark any thing to have befallen him apt to satisfy the
will of nature. Nature likes respect, and loatheth contempt; therefore was he
born of mean parentage, and in a most homely condition; therefore did he live
in no garb, did assume no office, did exercise no power, did meddle in no
affairs, which procure to men consideration and regard; therefore an impostour,
a blasphemer, a sorcerer, a loose companion, a seditious incendiary were the
titles of honor, and the elogies of praise conferred on him; therefore was he
exposed to the lash of every slanderous, every scurrilous, every petulant and
ungoverned tongue.

Nature does affect the good opinion, and good will of men, especially when due
in grateful return for great courtesy and beneficence; nor does any thing
more grate thereon, than abuse of kindness; therefore, could he (the world's
great friend and benefactour) say, the world hates me; Joh. 5. 18, 25.
therefore were those, whom he, with so much charity and bounty had instructed,
had fed, had cured of diseases (both corporal and spiritual) so ready to
clamor, and commit outrage upon him; therefore could he thus expostulate, Many
good works Joh. 10. 31.
have I showed you from my father, for which of those works do ye stone me?
therefore did his kindred slight him, therefore did his disciples abandon him,
Joh. 13. 18.
therefore did the grand traitor issue from his own bosom; therefore did that
whole Nation, which he chiefly sought and labored to save, conspire to
persecute him, with most rancorous spite and cruel misusage.

Nature loves plentiful accommodations, and abhors to be pinched with any
want; therefore was extreme penury appointed to him; he had no revenue, no
estate, no certain livelihood, not so much as a house Matt. 8. 20. 17. 25. 21.
19.

Luke 8. 3.


where to lay his head, or a piece of money to discharge the tax for it; he
owed his ordinary support to alms, or voluntary benesicence; he was to seek his
food from a fig tree on the 2 Cor. 8. 9.
way; and sometimes was beholden for it to the courtesy of Publicans; (...),
he was (says Saint Paul) a beggar for us.

Nature delights in case, in quiet, in liberty; therefore did he spend his
days in continual labor, in restless travel, in endless vagrancy, going about
Joh. 4. 16.

Matt. 4. 23. 8. 35.

Act. 10. 38.

Phil. 2. 7.

Luke 22. 27.

Mark. 6. 6.

Matt. 21. 28.


and doing good; ever hastening thither, whither the needs of men did call, or
their benefit invite; therefore did he take on him the form of a servant, and
was among his own followers as one that ministers; therefore he pleased not
himself, but suited his demeanor to the state and circumstances of things,
complied with the manners and fashions, comported with the humors and
infirmities of men.

Nature coveteth good success to its design and undertakings, hardly brooking
to be disappointed and defeated in them: therefore was he put to water dry
sticks, and to wash Negroes; that is, to instruct a most dull and stupid, to
reform a most perverse and stubborn generation; therefore his ardent desires,
his solicitous cares, his painful endeavors for the good of men did obtain so
little fruit; had indeed a contrary effect, rather aggravating their sins than
removing them, rather hardening than turning their hearts, rather plunging them
deeper into perdition, than rescuing them from it: therefore so much in vain
did he, in numberless miraculous works, display his power and goodness,
convincing few, converting fewer by them; therefore although he taught with
most powerful authority, with most charming gracefulness, with most convincing
evidence, yet, Who (could he say) has believed Luke 4. 22, 3

Ioh. 12. 38.


our report? though he most earnestly did invite and allure men to him,
offering the richest boons that heaven it self could dispense, yet, Ye will not
Ioh. 5. 40.
(was he forced to say) come unto me, that ye may be saved; although with
assiduous fervency of affection he strove to reclaim them from courses tending
to their ruin, yet how he prospered, sad experience declares, and we may
learn from that doleful complaint, How often would I have gathered thy Luke
13. 34. 19. 42.
children together, as a hen does gather her brood under her wings, but ye
would not: (...), your will did not concur, your will did not submit.

In fine, natural will seeks pleasure, Mark 1. 13, 35.

Luke 5. 16.

Joh. 4. 6, 31.

Luke 6. 12.

Matt. 14. 23.


and shunneth pain; But what pleasure did he taste; what inclination, what
appetite, what sense did he gratify? How did he feast, or revell? How, but in
tedious fastings, in frequent hungers, by passing whole nights in prayer, and
retirement for devotion upon the cold mountains? What sports had he, what
recreation Matt. 18. 12.
did he take, but feeling incessant gripes of compassion, and wearisome roving
in quest of the lost sheep? In what conversation could he divert himself, but
among those, whose doltish incapacity, and froward humor, did wring from his
patience those words, How long shall I be with you, Matt. 17. 17.
how long shall I suffer you? What music did he hear? What but the ratlings of
clamorous obloquy, and furious accusations against him? to be desperately
maligned, to be insolently mocked, to be styled a King, and treated as a slave;
to be spit on, to be buffeted, to be scourged, to be drenched with gall, to be
crowned with thorns, to be nailed to a cross; these were the delights which our
Lord enjoyed, these the sweet comforts of his life, and the notable
prosperities of his fortune: such a portion was allotted to him, the which he
did accept from God's hand with all patient submission, with perfect
contentedness, with exceeding alacrity, never repining at it, never complaining
of it, never flinching from it, or fainting under it; but proceeding on in the
performance of all his duty, and prosecution of his great designs, with
undaunted courage, with unwearied industry, with undisturbed tranquillity and
satisfaction of mind.

Had indeed his condition and fortune been otherwise framed; had he come into
the world qualified with a noble extraction; had he lived in a splendid
equipage, had he enjoyed a plentiful estate and a fair reputation, had he been
favored and caressed by men; had he found a current of prosperous success, had
safety, ease and pleasure waited on him; Where had been the pious resignation
of his will, where the precious merit of his obedience, where the glorious
luster of his example? how then had our frailty in him become victorious over
all its enemies; how had he triumphed over the solicitations and allurements of
the flesh; over the frowns and flatteries of the world; over the malice and
fury of hell; how then could he have so demonstrated his immense charity toward
us, or laid so mighty obligations upon us?

Such in general was the case, and such the deportment of our Lord; but there
was somewhat peculiar and beyond all this occurring to him, which drew forth
the words of our Text: God had tempered for him a potion of all the most bitter
and loathsome ingredients that could be; a drop whereof no man ever has, or
could endure to sip; for he was not only to undergo whatever load humane rage
could impose, of ignominious (...).

Lit. Gr.

Lam. 2. 12.


disgrace, and grievous pain; but to feel dismal agonies of Spirit, and those
unknown sufferings, which God alone could inflict, God only could sustain:
Behold, and see, he might well say, if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow,
which is done unto me; wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his
fierce anger? He was to labor with pangs of charity, and through his heart to
be pierced with deepest commiseration of our wretched case: he was to crouch
under the burden of all the sins (the numberless most heinous sins and
abominations) ever committed by mankind: he was to pass through the hottest
furnace of divine vengeance, and by his blood to quench the wrath of Heaven
flaming out against iniquity; he was to stand (as it were) before the mouth of
Hell, belching fire and brimstone on his face: his grief was to supply the
defects of our remorse, and his suffering in those few moments to countervail
the eternal torments due to us: He was to bear the hiding of God's face, and an
eclipse of that favorable aspect in which all bliss does reside; a case which
he that so perfectly understood, could not but infinitely resent: these things
with the clearest apprehension he saw coming on him; and no wonder that our
nature started at so ghastly a sight; or that humane instinct should dictate
that petition, Father if thou will, let this cup pass from me; words implying
his most real participation of our infirmity; words denoting the height of
those sad evils which encompassed him with his lively and lowly resentment of
them; words informing us, how we should entertain God's chastisements, and
whence we must seek relief of our pressures (that we should receive them, not
with a scornful neglect or sullen insensibility, but with a meek contrition of
soul; that we should entirely depend on God's pleasure for support under them,
or a releasement from them) words which, in conjunction with those following,
do show how instantly we should quash and overruled any insurrection of natural
desire against the command or providence of God. We must not take that prayer
to signify any purpose in our Lord to shift off his passion, or any wavering
in resolution about it; for he could not any-wise mean to undo that, which he
knew done with God before the world's foundation; he would not unsettle that,
which was by his own free undertaking, and irreversible decree; He that so
often with satisfaction did (...),

Luke 22. 15.


foretell this event, who with so earnest desire longed for its approach; who
with that sharpness of indignation did rebuke his friend offering to divert him
from it; who did again repress St. Peter's animosity with that serious
expostulation, The cup which Joh. 18. 11.
my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? who had advisedly laid such
trains for its accomplishment, would he decline it? Could that heart all
burning with zeal for God and charity to men admit the least thought or motion
of averseness from drinking that cup, which was the Sovereign medicine
administered by divine wisdom for the recovery of God's Creation? No; had he
spoke with such Matt. 26. 53.
intent, legions of Angels had flown to his rescue; that word, which framed the
worlds, which stilled the tempests, which ejected Devils, would immediately
have scattered his enemies, and dashed all their projects against him;
wherefore those words did not proceed from intention, but as from instinct, and
for instruction; importing, that what our humane frailty was apt to suggest,
that his divine virtue was more ready to smother; neither did he vent the
former, but that he might express the latter.

He did express it in real effect; immediately with all readiness addressing
himself to receive that unsavory potion; he reached out his hand for it,
yielding fair opportunity and advantages to his persecutours; he lifted it up
to his mouth, innocently provoking their envy and malice, he drank it off with
a most steady calmness, and sweet composure of mind, with the silence, the
simplicity, the meekness of a lamb, carried to the slaughter; no fretfull
thought rising up, no angry word breaking forth, but a clear patience,
enlivened with a warm charity, shining in all his behavior, and through every
circumstance of his passion.

Such in his life, such at his death was the practice of our Lord; in
conformity whereto we also readily should undertake whatever God proposes, we
gladly should accept whatever God offers, we vigorously should perform
whatever God enjoineth, we patiently should undergo whatever God imposes or
inflicteth, how cross soever any duty, any dispensation may prove to our carnal
sense or humor.

To do thus, the contemplation of this example may strongly engage us: for if
our Lord had not his will, can we in reason expect, can we in modesty desire to
have ours? must we be cockered and pleased in every thing, whenas he was
treated so coursely, and crossed in all things? can we grutch at any kind of
service, or sufferance; can we think much (for our trial, our exercise, our
correction) to bear a little want, a little disgrace, a little pain, when the
Son of God was put to discharge the hardest tasks, to endure the sorest
adversities?

But farther to enforce these duties, be pleased to cast a glance on two
considerations. 1. What the will is to which, 2. Who the willer is to whom we
must submit.

1. What is the will of God? is it any thing unjust, unworthy, or
dishonorable, any thing incommodious or hurtful, any thing extremely
difficult, or intolerably grievous that God requires of us, to do or bear?
No: he wills nothing from us, or to us, which does not best become us, and
most behove us; which is not attended with safety, with ease, with the solidest
profit, the fairest reputation, and the sweetest pleasure.

Two things he wills, that we should be good, and that we should be happy;
the first in order to the second, for that virtue is the certain way, and a
necessary qualification to felicity.

The will of God, says St. Paul, is 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3.
our sanctification; what is that? what, but that the decays of our frame, and
the defacements of God's image within us should be repaired; that the faculties
of our Soul should be restored to their original integrity and vigor; that
from most wretched slaveries we should be translated into a happy freedom, yea,
into a glorious kingdom; that from despicable beggary and baseness we should be
advanced to substantial wealth, and sublime dignity; that we should be cleansed
from the foulest desilements, and decked with the goodliest ornaments; that we
should be cured of most loathsome diseases, and settled in a firm health of
soul; that we should be delivered from those brutish lusts, and those devilish
passions, which create in us a hell of darkness, of consusion, of vexation;
which dishonor our nature, deform our soul, ruffle our mind, and wrack our
conscience; that we should be endowed with those worthy dispositions and
affections, which do constitute in our hearts a heaven of light, of order, of
joy and peace; dignifie our nature, beautify our soul, clarify and cheer our
mind; that we should eschew those practices, which never go without a retinue
of woeful mischiefs and sorrows, embracing those which always yield abundant
fruits of convenience and comfort; that in short, we should become friends of
God, fit to converse with Angels, and capable of paradise.

God (says St. Paul again) wills 1 Timothy 2. 7.
all men to be saved; He wills not 2 Pet. 3. 9.
(says St. Peter) that any man should perish; He says it himself, yea, he
swears it, that he has no pleasure Ezekiel. 33. 11c
in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked should turn from his way and
live: And what is this will? what, but that we should obtain all the good
whereof we are capable; that we should be filled with joy, and crowned with
glory; that we should be fixed in an immovable state of happiness, in the
perpetual enjoyment of God's favor, and in the light of his blissfull
presence: that we should be rid of all the evils, to which we are liable; that
we should be released from inextricable cable chains of guilt, from incurable
stings of remorse, from being irrecoverably engaged to pass a disconsolate
eternity in utter darkness, and extreme woe? Such is God's will; to such
purposes every command, every dispensation of God (how grim, how rough soever
it may seem) does tend: and do we refuse to comply with that good will; do we
set against it a will of our own, affecting things unworthy of us, things
unprofitable to us, things prejudicial to our best interests; things utterly
banefull to our souls? Do we reject the will that would save us, and adhere to
a will that would ruin us; a foolish and a senseless will, which slighting the
immense treasures of Heaven, the unfading glories of God's Kingdom, the
ineffable joys of eternity does catch at specious nothings, does pursue
mischievous trifles; a shadow of base profit, a smoke of vain honor, a flash
of sordid pleasure; which passes away like the mirth of fools, or the
crackling of Eccles. 7. 6.
thorns, leaving only foot, black and bitter behind it?

But at least ever we do thus, let us consider, whose will it is, that
requires our compliance.

It is the will of Him, whose will Psalm. 148. 5.
did found the earth and rear the heavens; Apoc. 4. 11.
whose will sustaineth all things in their existence and operation; whose will
is the great law of the world, which universal nature in all its motions does
observe; which reigns in heaven, the blessed Spirits adoring it, which
swayeth in hell it self, the cursed Fiends trembling at it; And shall we alone
(we pitiful worms, crawling on earth) presume to murmr, or dare to kick
against it?

It is the will of our Maker, who together with all our other faculties did
create and confer on us the very power of willing: and shall we turn the work
of his hands, the gift of his bounty against him?

It is the will of our Preserver, who together with all that we are or have,
continually does uphold our very will it self; so that without employing any
positive force, merely by letting us fall out of his hand, he can send us and
it back to nothing: and shall our will clash with that, on which it so wholly
depends; without which it cannot subsist one moment, or move one step forward
in action?

It is the will of our sovereign Lord, who upon various indisputable accounts
has a just right to govern us, and an absolute power to dispose of us: ought
we not therefore to say with old Eli, It is the Lord, let him 1 Samuel 3. 8.
do to me as it seems good to him? Is it not extreme iniquity, is it not
monstrous arrogance for us, in derogation to his will, to pretend giving law,
or picking a station to our selves? Do we not manifestly incur high treason
against the King of Heaven by so invading his office, usurping his authority,
snatching his scepter into our hands, and setting our wills in his throne?

It is the will of our Judge, from whose mouth our doom must proceed, awarding
life or death, weal or woe unto us; and what sentence can we expect, what
favor can we pretend to, if we presumptuously shall offend, oppose that will,
which is the supreme rule of justice, and sole fountain of mercy?

It is the will of our Redeemer; who has bought us with an inestimable price,
and with infinite pains has rescued us from miserable captivity under most
barbarous enemies, that obeying his will we might command our own, and serving
him we might enjoy perfect freedom; And shall we, declining his call and
conduct out of that unhappy state, bereave him of his purchase, frustrate his
undertakings, and sorfeit to our selves the benefit of so great redemption?

It is the will of our best Friend; who loves us much better than we do love
our selves; who is concerned for our welfare as his own dearest interest, and
greatly delights therein; who by innumerable experiments has demonstrated an
excess of kindness to us; who in all his dealings with us purely does aim at
our good, never charging any duty on us, or dispensing any event to us, so much
with intent to exercise his power over us, as to express his goodness toward
us; who never does afflict or Lam. 3. 39.
grieve us more against our will than against his own desire; never indeed but
when goodness it self calls for it, and even mercy does urge thereto; to whom
we are much obliged, that he vouchsafes to govern and guide us, our service
being altogether unprofitable to him, his governance exceedingly beneficial to
us: And does not such a will deserve regard, may it not demand compliance from
us? to neglect or infringe it, what is it; is it not palpable folly, is it not
foul disingenuity, is it not detestable ingratitude?

So does every relation of God recommend his will to us; and each of his
attributes does no less: for,

It is the will of him, who is most holy, or whose will is essential rectitude:
how then can we thwart it, without being stained with the guilt, and wounded
with a sense of great irregularity and iniquity?

It is the will of him, who is perfectly just; who therefore cannot but assert
his own righteous will, and avenge the violation thereof: is it then advisable
to drive him to that point by wilful provocation; or to run upon the edge of
necessary severity?

It is the will of him, who is infinitely wise; who therefore does infallibly
know what is best for us, what does most besit our capacities and
circumstances; what in the final result will conduce to our greatest advantage
and comfort: shall we then prefer the dreams of our vain mind before the
oracles of his wisdom; shall we, forsaking the direction of his unerring will,
follow the impulse of our giddy humor?

It is the will of him, who is immensely good and benign; whose will therefore
can be no other than good will to us; who can mean nothing thereby but to
derive bounty and mercy on us: Can we then fail of doing well, if we put our
selves entirely into his hands; are we not our own greatest enemies, in
withstanding his gracious intentions?

It is finally the will of him, who is uncontrollably powerful; whose will
therefore must prevail one way or other: either with our will, or against it,
either so as to bow and satisfy us, or so as to break and plague us: for, My
counsel (says he) shall stand, and Isa. 46. 11.
I will do all my pleasure. As to his dispensations, we may fret, we may wail,
we may bark at them, but we cannot alter or avoid them: sooner may we by our
moans check the tides, or by our cries stop the Sun in his carriere, than
divert the current of affairs, or change the state of things established by
God's high decree; what he lays on, no hand can remove; what he has
destined, no power can reverse; our anger therefore will be ineffectual, our
impatience will have no other fruit than to aggravate our guilt, and augment
our grief.

As to his commands, we may lift Dan. 5. 23.
up our selves against them, we may fight stoutly, we may in a sort prove
Conquerours; but it will be a miserable Victory, the Trophies whereof shall be
erected in Hell, and stand upon the ruins of our happiness; for while we
insult over abused grace, we must fall under incensed justice: If God cannot
fairly procure his will of us in way of due obedience, he will surely execute
his will upon us in way of righteous vengeance; if we do not surrender our
wills to the overtures of his goodness, we must submit our backs to the strokes
of his anger: He must reign over us, if not as over loyal Subjects to our
comfort, yet as over stubborn Rebels to our confusion; for this in that case
will be our doom, and the last words God will design to spend upon us, Those
mine Luke 19. 27.
enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring them hither, and
slay them before me.

Now the God of peace, that brought again Heb. 13. 20.
from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, through the
blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do
his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through
Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever:

Amen.
FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books and Sermons, Writ by the Reverend Dr. Tillotson, Dean of
Canterbury. Viz.
1. SErmons Preached upon several Occasions in two Volumes in Octavo.

2. The Rule of Faith, etc.

3. A Sermon Preached on the 5th. of November, 1678. at St. Margarets
Westminster, before the Honorable House of Commons, upon St. Luke 9. 55, 56.
But he turned, and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye
are of; For the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

4. A Sermon Preached at the first General Meeting of the Gentlemen and others
in and near London, who were Born within the County of York. Upon John 13. 34,
35. A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another, etc.

5. A Sermon Preached before the King, at White hall, April 4th. 1679, upon 1
John 4. 1. Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they
are of God, etc.

6. A Sermon Preached before the King, at White Hall, April 2d. 1680, upon
Joshua 24. 15. If it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose ye this day
whom ye will serve.

7. The Lawfulness, and Obligation of Oaths: A Sermon Preached at the Assizes
held at Kingstone upon Thames, July 21. 1681, upon Heb. 6. 16. And an Oath for
Confirmation is to them an end of all Strife.

8. A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Gouge, November
4th. 1681, with an account of his Life, upon Luke 20. 37, 38. Now that the Dead
are raised, even Moses showed at the bush, etc.

9. A Persuasive to Frequent Communion in the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, Preached in two Sermons upon 1 Cor. 11. 26, 27, 28. For as often as ye
eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lord's Death till he come,
etc.

10. A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of the Reverend Benjamin Whichcot, D. D.
and Minister of Saint Lawrence Jewry, London, May 24th. 1683, upon 2 Cor. 5. 6.
Wherefore we are always confident, knowing that whilst we are at home in the
body we are absent from the Lord.

11. A Discourse against Transubstantiation.

THE WORKS of the Learned Dr. Isaac Barrow, late Master of Trinity College in
Cambridge: Published by the Reverend Dr. Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury: in two
Volumes in Folio.

The first containing Thirty two Sermons, preached upon several Occasions; an
Exposition of the Lord's Prayer and the Decalogue; a Learned Treatise of the
Pope's Supremacy, a Discourse concerning the Unity of the Church: also some
Account of the Life of the Author, with Alphabetical Tables.

The Second Volume containing Sermons and Expositions upon all the Apostles
Creed: with an Alphabetical Table; and to which may be also added the Life of
the Author.

Of Contentment, Patience and Resignation to the Will of God: By Isaac Barrow,
D. D.

All Printed for Brabazon Aylmer.


