Davies Mayor.

Martis xxiiij die Aprilis, 1677, Annoque Regis Caroli Secundi Angliae, etc.
vicesimo nono.

THis Court does earnestly desire Dr. Barrow to Print his Sermon Preached at
the Guild Hall Chapel on Good Friday last before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen
of this City.

Wagstaffe.

A SERMON UPON THE PASSION OF OUR Blessed Savior: PREACHED At Guild Hall
Chapel on Good Friday, the 13th day of April, 1677. By ISAAC BARROW D.D. late
Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty, and Master of Trinity-Colledge in
Cambridge.

Sacramentum salutis humanae non licet tacere, etiamsi nequeat explicari,

P. Leo I. Sermon. de Pass. 7. LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Sign
of the three Pigeons in Cornhill, over against the Royal Exchange, MDCLXXVII.

A SERMON UPON THE Passion of our Blessed Savior.
Phil. 2.8. -- And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.
WHen, Cyril. c. Jul. 8. (p. 278.) 9. (p. 303.)
in consequence of the original apostasy from God, which did banish us from
Paradise; and by continued rebellions against him, inevitable to our corrupt
and impotent nature, mankind had forfeited the amity of God (the chief of all
goods, Joh. 3.36. Col. 3.6.
the fountain of all happiness) and had incurred his displeasure (the greatest
of all evils, the foundation of all misery:)

When poor man, Iren. 3.33, 34.
having deserted his natural Lord and Protector, other Lords had got dominion
over him, ^s. 26.13.
so that he was captivated by the foul, malicious, cruel Spirits, Iren. 3.8.
and enslaved to his own vain mind, to vile lusts, to wild passions:

When, Genesis 4.7.
according to an eternal rule of justice, that sin deserves punishment, Genesis
2.17.
and by an express Law, wherein death was enacted to the transgressors of Gods
command, the root of our stock, Iren. 5.16.
and consequentially all its branches stood adjudged to utter destruction:

When, (...) Romans 3.19. Romans 3.9. To. 5.16, 18. Gal. 3.10. Romans 11.32. (...).
Gal. 3.22. Romans 3.23. Romans 5.22.
according to St. Paul's expressions, all the World was become guilty before
God (or subjected to Gods Judgment; all men ( Jews and Gentiles) were under
sin, under condemnation, under the curse; all men were concluded into
disobedience, and shut up together (as close Prisoners) under sin; all men had
sinned, and come short of the glory of God; Death had passed over all, because
all had sinned:

When, for us, being plunged into so wretched a condition, no visible remedy
did appear, no possible redress could be obtained here below; for what means
could we have of recovering Gods favor, who were apt perpetually to contract
new, debts and guilts, but not able to discharge any old scores? what capacity
of mind or will had we to entertain mercy, who were no less stubbornly perverse
and obdurate in our crimes, than ignorant or infirm? How could we be reconciled
unto Heaven, who had an innate antipathy to God and goodness; [ sin (according
to our natural state, and secluding evangelical grace) reigning, Romans 6.12,
14.20, 22. Romans 7.18, 5. Romans 7.23.
in our mortal bodies; no good thing dwelling in us; there being a predominant
law in our members, warring against the law of our mind, and bringing us into
captivity, Romans 6.6. Col. 3.9. Ephesians. 4.22. Romans 8.7. (...). Ephesians. 4.18. Col.
1.21. Romans 5.10
to the law of sin; a main ingredient of our old man, being a carnal mind,
which is enmity to God, and cannot submit to his law; we being alienated from
the life of God by the blindness of our hearts, and enemies in our minds by
wicked works? How could we revive to any good hope, Ephesians. 2.5. Romans 6.13, 11.
who were dead in trespasses and sins, God having withdrawn his quickening
Spirit? How at least could we for one moment stand upright in Gods sight, upon
the natural terms, excluding all sin, and exacting perfect obedience? Ps.
143.2. Exodus 34.7.


When this, I say, was our forlorn and desperate case, then almighty God out of
his infinite goodness was pleased to look upon us (as he sometime did upon
Jerusalem, lying polluted in her blood) with an eye of pity and mercy, Ezik.
16.6.
so as graciously to design a redemption for us out of all that woeful distress:
And no sooner by his incomprehensible wisdom did he foresee we should lose our
selves, Ephesians. 1.4, 9, 11, 3.11. 2 Timothy 1.9. 1 Pet. 1.20. Rev. 13.8. Romans 16.25.
Tit. 2.2.
than by his immense grace he did conclude to restore us.

But how could this happy design well be compassed? how, in consistence with
the glory, with the justice, with the truth of God, could such enemies be
reconciled, such offenders be pardoned, such wretches be saved? Would the
omnipotent Majesty so affronted, design to treat with his rebels immediately,
without an intercessour or advocate? Would the sovereign governor of the world
suffer thus notoriously his right to be violated, his authority to be slighted,
his honor to be trampled on, without some notable vindication or satisfaction?
Would the great Patron of justice relax the terms of it, or ever permit a gross
breach thereof to pass with impunity? Athan. de I^carn.
Would the immutable God of truth expose his veracity, or his constancy to
suspicion, by so reversing that peremptory sentence of death upon sinners, Genesis
2.17.
that it should not in a sort eminently be accomplished? Would the most
righteous and most holy God let slip an opportunity so advantageous for
demonstrating his perfect love of innocence, and abhorrence of iniquity? Could
we therefore well be cleared from our guilt without an expiation, or
re-instated in freedom without a ransom, or exempted from condemnation without
some punishment?

No; God was so pleased to prosecute his designs of goodness and mercy; as
thereby no wise to impair or obscure, but rather to advance and illustrate the
glories of his sovereign dignity, of his severe justice, of his immaculate
holiness, of his unchangeable steddiness in word and purpose: He accordingly
would be sued to for peace and mercy; nor would he grant them absolutely,
without due compensations for the wrongs he had sustained; yet so, that his
goodness did find us a mediator, and furnish us with means to satisfy him: He
would not condescend to a simple remission of our debts; yet so, that, saving
his right and honor, he did stoop lower for an effectual abolition of them: He
would make good his word not to let our trespasses go unpunished; yet so, that
by our punishment we might receive advantage: He would manifest his detestation
of wickedness in a way more illustrious, than if he had persecuted it down to
Hell, and irreversibly doomed it to endless torment.

But how might these things be effected? where was there a mediator proper and
worthy to intercede for us? Who could presume to solicit and plead in our
behalf? Who should dare to put himself between God and us, or offer to skreen
mankind from the Divine wrath and vengeance? Who had so great an interest in
the Court of Heaven, as to ingratiate such a brood of apostate enemies thereto?
Who could assume the confidence to propose terms of reconciliation, or to
agitate a new covenant, wherewith God might be satisfied, and whereby we might
be saved? Where, in heaven or earth, could there be found a Priest sit to atone
for sins so vastly numerous, so extremely hoinous? And whence should a
sacrifice be taken, of value sufficient to expiate for so manifold enormities,
committed against the infinite Majesty of Heaven? (...), Heb. 9.12.
Who could find out the everlasting redemption of innumerable souls, or lay
down a competent ransom for them all; not to say, could also purchase for them
eternal life and bliss?

These are Questions which would puzzle all the wit of man, yea, would gravel
all the wisdom of Angels to resolve; for plain it is, that no creature on
earth; none in heaven, could well undertake or perform this work.

Where on earth, among the degenerate sons of Adam, could be found such an High
Priest, as became us; holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners? Heb.
7.26.
and, how could a man, however innocent and pure as a Seraphin, so perform his
duty, as to do more than merit or satisfy for himself? how many lives could
the life of one man serve to ransom; seeing that it is asserted of the
greatest and richest among men, Psalm. 49.7.
that None of them can by any means redeem his brother, or give to God a
ransom for him?

And how could available help in this case be expected from any of the
angelical Host; seeing (beside their being in nature different from us, and
thence improper to merit or satisfy for us; beside their comparative meanness,
and infinite distance from the Majesty of God) they are but out
fellow servants, and have obligations to discharge for themselves, and cannot
be solvent for more than for their own debts of gratitude and service to their
infinitely bountiful Creator; they also themselves needing a Savior, to
preserve them by his grace in their happy state?

Indeed no creature might aspire to so august an honor, none could atchieve so
mavelous a work, as to redeem from infinite guilt and misery the noblest part
of all the visible Creation; none could presume to invade that high prerogative
of God, or attempt to infringe the truth of that reiterated Proclamation; Isa.
43, 11.45.21. Hos. 13, 4.
I, even I am the Lord, and beside me there is no Savior.

Wherefore, seeing that a supereminent dignity of person was required in our
Mediator, and that an immense value was to be presented for our ransom;
seeing that God saw there was no man, Is. 59, 16. (...). LXX.
and wondered (or took special notice) that there was no intercessor; it must be
his arm alone that could bring salvation; none beside God himself could
intermeddle therein.

But how could God undertake the business? could he become a suitor or
intercessor to his offended self? could he present a sacrifice, or disburse a
satisfaction to his own justice? Could God alone contract and stipulate with
God in our behalf? No, surely Man also must concur in the transaction; some
amends must issue from him, somewhat must be paid out of our stock; humane will
and consent must be interposed to ratify a firm covenant with us, inducing
obligation on our part; It was decent and expedient, that as man by wilful
transgression and presumptuous self-pleasing had so highly offended, injured,
and dishonored his Maker, so man also by willing obedience, and patient
submission to Gods pleasure should greatly content, right, and glorify him.

Ephesians. 1.8.
Here then did lie the stress; This was the knot which only divine wisdom could
loose; And so indeed it did in a most effectual and admirable way; for in
correspondence to all the exigencies of the case, Luc. 1.78. Ephesians. 1.5. Tit.
3.4. Romans 5.
(that God and man both might act their parts in saving us) the Blessed eternal
Word, the only Son of God, by the good will of his Father, did vouchsafe to
intercede for us, and to undertake our redemption; Gal. 4.4. Joh. 6.38. Heb.
10.7. Job. 1.4. Heb. 5, 2.4, 15.
in order thereto voluntarily being sent down from Heaven, assuming humane
flesh, subjecting himself to all the infirmities of our frail nature, and to
the worst inconveniences of our low condition; therein meriting Gods favor to
us, Ephesians. 1.6.
by a perfect obedience to the Law, Conslit. Apost. 8.12. 1 Timothy 2.6. Tit.
2.14. Heb. 9, 15.2, 9. Col. 1, 22.
and satisfying Gods justice by a most patient endurance of pains in our
behalf; in completion of all willingly laying down his life for the ransom of
our souls, and pouring forth his blood in sacrifice for our sins.

1 Timothy 3.16.
This is that great and wonderful mystery of godliness (or of our Holy
Religion) the which St. Paul here does express, in these words, concerning our
B. Savior; Who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal
with God, but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
servant, and was made in the likeness of men; And being found in fashion as a
man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
Cross.

In which words are contained diverse points very observable; but seeing the
time will not allow me to treat on them in any measure as they deserve; I shall
(waving all the rest) insist but upon one particular, couched in the last
words, Even the death of the Cross; (...).
which by a special emphasis do excite us to consider the manner of that Holy
Passion, which we now commemorate; the contemplation whereof, as it is now most
seasonable, so it is ever very profitable.

Now then in this kind of Passion we may consider diverse notable adjuncts;
namely these, 1. Its being in appearance criminal. 2. Its being most bitter and
painful. 3. Its being most ignominious and shameful. 4. Its peculiar
advantageousness to the designs of our Lord in suffering. 5. Its practical
efficacy.

I. We may consider our Lords suffering as Criminal; He (as the Prophet
foretold of him) was numbered among the transgressors; Is. 53.12.
and God (says St. Paul) made him sin for us, who knew no sin; 2 Cor. 5.21.
that is, God ordered him to be treated as a most sinful or criminous person,
who in himself was perfectly innocent, and void of the least inclination to
offend.

So in effect it was, that he was impeached of the highest crimes; as a
violatour of the Divine Laws in diverse instances, Joh. 5, 18.1^, 30.7, 12. Mat.
26, 61.27, 40.
as a designer to subvert their religion and temple, as an impostor deluding
and seducing the people; as a blasphemer, assuming to himself the properties
and prerogatives of God; as a seditious and rebellious person, perverting the
nation, Luc. 23.2. Mat. 27.63. Constable. Apo. 5.14. (...).
inhibiting payments of tribute to Caesar, usurping Royal Authority, and
styling himself Christ a King: In a word, as a malefector, or one guilty of
enormous offenses; so his persecutors avowed to Pilate, If, said they, Joh.
18.30.
he were not a malefactor, we should not have delivered him up unto thee; As
such he was represented and arraigned; as such, although by a sentence wrested
by malicious importunity, against the will and conscience of the Judge, he was
condemned, and accordingly suffered death.

Now whereas any death or passion of our Lord, as being in it self immensely
valuable, and most precious in the sight of God, might have been sufficient
toward the accomplishment of his general designs (the appeasing Gods wrath, the
satisfaction of Divine Justice, the expiation of our guilt) it may be inquired
why God should thus expose him, Cur si Deus fuit, and mori voluit, non saltem
honesto aliquo mortis genere affectus est? etc. Lact. 4.26.
or why he should choose to suffer under this odious and ugly character; which
inquiry is the more considerable, because it is especially this circumstance
which crosses the fleshly sense, and worldly prejudices of men, so as to have
rendered the Gospel offensive to the superstitious Jews, and despicable to
conceited Gentiles; Just. M. Hal. p. 317.
for so Tryphon in Justin M. although from conviction by testimonies of
Scripture, he did admit the Messiah was to suffer hardly, yet that it should be
in this accursed manner, he could not digest; so the great adversaries of
Christianity ( Celsus, Porphyrie, Julian,) did with most contempt urge this
exception against it; Orig. c. c^ls. 2. p. 83.7. p. 368. Aug. de Civ. D. 10.28.
Cyril. c. Jul. 6. p. 194.
So S. Paul did observe, that 1 Cor. 1.23.
Christ crucified was unto the Jews a stumblingblock, and unto the Greeks
foolishness; wherefore to avoid those scandals, and that we may better admire
the Wisdom of God in this dispensation, it may be fit to assign some reasons
intimated in H. Scriptrue, or bearing conformity to its Doctrine, why it was
thus ordered: such are these.

1. As our Savior freely did undertake a life of greatest meanness and
hardship, so upon the like accounts he might be pleased to undergo a death most
loathsome and uncomfortable. There is nothing to man's nature (especially to the
best natures, in which modesty and ingenuity do survive) more abominable than
such a death; God for good purposes has planted in our constitution a quick
sense of disgrace, and of all disgraces that which proceeds from an
imputation of crimes is most pungent; and being conscious of our innocence does
heighten the smart; and to reflect upon our selves dying under it, leaving the
World with an indelible stain upon our name and memory, is yet more grievous;
even to languish by degrees, enduring the torments of a long, however sharp
disease, would to an honest mind seem more eligible, than in this manner, being
reputed and handled as a villain, to find a quick and easy dispatch.

Of which humane resentment may we not observe a touch in that expostulation,
Luc. 22, 52. Matt. 26.55.
Be ye come out as against a thief with swords and staves? If as a man he did
not like to be prosecuted as a thief, yet willingly did he choose it, as he did
other most distastful things, pertaining to our nature, ( the likeness of man)
and incident to that low condition, ( the form of a servant) into which he did
put himself; such as were to endure penury and to fare hardly, to be slighted,
envied, hated, reproached through all his course of Life.

It is well said by a Pagan Philosopher, Nemo mihi videtur pluris aestimare
virtutem, nemo illi magis esse devotus, quam qui boni viri famam perdidit, ne
conscientiam perderet. Sen. Ep. 81.
that no man does express such a respect and devotion to virtue, as does he,
who forfeiteth the repute of being a good man, that he may not lose the
conscience of being such; this our Lord willingly made his case, being content
not only to expose his life, but to prostitute his fame, for the interests of
goodness.

Had he died otherwise, he might have seemed to purchase our welfare at a
somewhat easy rate, he had not been so complete a sufferer, he had not tasted
the worst that man is liable to endure; there had been a comfort in seeming
innocent, detracting from the perfection of his sufferance.

Whereas therefore he often was in hazard of death, Joh. 5.18.8.37, 40, 59.7.1,
19, 25.10.32, 38.
both from the clandestine machinations, and the outrageous violences of those
who maligned him, he did industriously shun a death so plausible, and
honorable, if I may so speak; it being not so disgraceful to fall by private
malice, or by sudden rage, as by the solemn deliberate proceeding of men in
public authority and principal credit:

Accordingly this kind of death did not fall upon him by surprise, Joh. 6.64.
or by chance; but he did from the beginning foresee it; He plainly with
satisfaction did aim at it; He (as it is related in the Gospels) did show his
Disciples, that it was incumbent on him by Gods appointment and his own choice;
that he ought ('it is said) to suffer many things, Matt. 16.21. Luc. 9.22. Marc.
6.12.
to be rejected by the chief Priests, Elders, and Scribes, to be vilified by
them, to be delivered up to the Gentiles; to be mocked, and scourged, and
crucified, as a flagitious slave. Thus would our B. Savior, in conformity to
the rest of his voluntary afflictions, and for a consummation of them, not only
suffer in his body by sore wounds and bruises, and in his soul by doleful
agonies, but in his name also and reputation by the foulest scandals;
undergoing as well all the infamy as the infirmity, which did belong to us, or
might befall us; thus meaning by all means thoroughly to express his charity,
and exercise his compassion toward us; thus advancing his merit, and
discharging the utmost satisfaction in our behalf.

2. Death passing on him as a malefactor by public sentence, did best suit to
the nature of his undertaking, was most congruous to his intent, did most aptly
represent what he was doing, and imply the reason of his performance: for We
all are guilty in a most high degree, and in a manner very notorious; the
foulest shame together with the sharpest pain is due to us for affronting our
glorious Maker, we deserve an open condemnation and exemplary punishment;
wherefore he undertaking in our stead to bear all, and fully to satisfy for
us, was pleased to undergo the like Judgment and usage; being termed, being
treated as we should have been, in quality of an heinous malefactor, as we in
truth are. What we had really acted in dishonouring and usurping upon God, in
disordering the world, in perverting others, that was imputed to him; and the
punishment due to that guilt was inflicted on him: Isa. 53.6.
All we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way,
and the Lord has laid on him the iniquities of us all; he therefore did not
only sustain an equivalent pain for us, but in a sort did bear an equal blame
with us, before God and man.

3. Seeing by the determinate counsel of God it was appointed, Act. 2.23.
that our Lord should die for us, and that not in a natural but violent way, so
as perfectly to satisfy Gods justice, to vindicate his honor, to evidence
both his indignation against sin, and willingness to be appeased; it was most
fit that affair should be transacted in a way, wherein Gods right is most
nearly concerned, and his providence most plainly discernible; wherein it
should be most apparent that God did exact and inflict the punishment, that our
Lord did freely yield to it, and submissively undergo it, upon those very
accounts: Deuteronomy. 1.17.
All judgment (as Moses of old did say) is Gods, or is administered by authority
derived from him, in his name, for his interest; all Magistrates being his
Officers, and instruments, whereby he governs and orders the world, his
natural Kingdom; whence that which is acted in way of formal judgment by
persons in authority, God himself may be deemed in a more special and immediate
manner to execute it, as being done by his commission, in his stead, on his
behalf, with his peculiar superintendance: It was therefore in our Lord a
signal act of deference to Gods authority and justice, becoming the person
sustained by him of our Mediator and proxy, to undergo such a judgment, and
such a punishment; whereby he received a doom as it were from Gods own mouth,
uttered by his Ministers; and bare the stroke of justice from Gods hand,
represented by his instruments: Joh. 19.11. (...)
whence very seasonably and patiently did he reply to Pilate, Thou had no
power over me (or against me) except it were given thee from above, implying,
that it was in regard to the originally Supreme authority of God his Father,
and to his particular appointment upon this occasion, that our Savior did then
frankly subject himself to those inferior powers, as to the proper ministers
of divine justice: Had he suffered in any other way, by the private malice or
passion of men, Gods special providence in that case had been less visible, and
our Lords obedience not so remarkable: And if he must die by public hands, it
must be as a criminal, under a pretense of guilt and demerit; there must be a
formal process, how full soever of mockery and outrage; there must be
testimonies produced, how void soever of truth or probability; there must be a
sentence pronounced, although most corrupt and injurious; for no man is in this
way persecuted, without color of desert; otherwise it would cease to be
public authority, and become lawless violence; the prosecutor then would put
off the face of a Magistrate, and appear as a cutthroat, or a robber.

4. In fine, our Savior hardly with such advantage, in any other way, could
have displayed all kinds of virtue and goodness, to the honor of God, to the
edification of men, to the furtherance of our salvation.

The judgment Hall with all the passages leading him thither, and thence to
execution, attended with guards of soldiers, amidst the crowds and clamours of
people, were as so many theaters, on which he had opportune convenience, in the
full eye of the world, to act diverse parts of sublimest virtue; to express his
insuperable constancy in attesting truth, Joh. 18.37. 1 Timothy 6.13.
and maintaining a good conscience; his meekness in calmly bearing the greatest
wrongs; his patience in contentedly enduring the saddest adversities; his
entire resignation to the will and providence of God; his peaceable submission
to the law and power of man; his admirable charity in pitying, in excusing, in
obliging those by his good wishes and earnest prayers for their pardon, who in
a manner so injurious, so despiteful, so cruel, did persecute him; yea, in
gladly suffering all this from their hands for their salvation; his unshakeable
faith in God, and unalterable love toward him, under so fierce a trial, so
dreadful a temptation: All these excellent virtues and graces by the matter
being thus ordered, in a degree most eminent, and in a manner very conspicuous
were demonstrated, to the praise of Gods name, and the commendation of his
truth; for the settlement of our faith and hope; for an instruction and an
encouragement to us of good practice in those highest instances of virtue.

[It is a passable notion among the most eminent Pagan Sages, that no very
exemplary virtue can well appear otherwise then in notable misfortune; Magnum
exemplum nisi mala fortuna non invenit. Sen. de Prove. c. 3.
whence it is said in Plato, that to approve a man heartily righteous, (...),
Plat. de Rep. 2. Cap. 594.
he must be scourged, tortured, bound, have his two eyes burnt out, and in the
close having suffered all evils, must be impailed, or crucified: And, Cicuta
magnum Socratem fecit. Sen. Ep. 13.
it was, (says Seneca) the cup of poison, which made Socrates a great man,
Calix venenatus, qni Socratem transtulit e carcere in coelum. Sen. Ep. 67.
and which out of prison did transferr him to heaven, or did procure to him
that lofty esteem; Aequalis suit in tanta inaequalitate fortunae, etc. Sen. Ep.
104.
affording him opportunity to signalize his constancy, his equanimity, his
unconcernedness for this world and life; And, Rutilii innocentia ac virtus
lateret, nisi accepisset injuriam, dum violatur effulsit. Sen. Ep. 79.
The virtue (says he again) and the innocence of Rutilius would have lien hid,
if it had not (by condemnation and exile) received injury; while it was
violated, it brightly shone forth; And he that said this of others, was himself
in nothing so illustrious, as in handsomely entertaining that death, to which he
was by the bloody tyrant adjudged: And generally the most honorable persons in
the judgment of posterity for gallant worth, Sen. de Provid. 2, 3, etc. Plut.
de Stoic. Contr. cp. 1931.
to this very end (as such Philosophers teach) were by divine providence
delivered up to suffer opprobrious condemnations and punishments by the
ungrateful malignity of their times: So that the Greeks, in consistence with
their own wisdom and experience, could not reasonably scorn that cross, which
our good Lord (did not only as did their best Worthies by forcible accidental
constraint undergo, but) advisedly by free choice did undertake, to recommend
the most excellent virtues to imitation, and to promote the most noble designs
that could be, by its influence:] So great reason there was, that our Lord
should thus suffer as a criminal.

bitter and painful. Easily we may imagine what acerbity of pain must be
endured by our Lord, in his tender limbs being stretched forth, racked, and
tentered, and continuing for a good time in such a posture; by the piercing his
hands and his feet, parts very nervous and exquisitely sensible, with sharp
nails (so that as it is said of Joseph, Ps. 105.18.
the iron entered into his Soul) by abiding exposed to the injuries of the Sun
scorching, the wind beating, the weather searching his grievous wounds and
sores: Such a pain it was, and that no stupifying, no transient pain, but one
both very acute, and lingering; for we see, that he together with his
fellow sufferers had both presence of mind and time to discourse; Marc. 15.25,
34.
Even six long hours did he remain under such torture, sustaining in each
moment of them beyond the pangs of an ordinary death: But as the case was so
hard and sad, so the reason of it was great, and the fruit answerably good; Our
Savior did embrace such a passion, that in being thus content to endure the
most intolerable smarts for us, he might demonstrate the vehemence of his love;
that he might signify the heinousness of our sins, which deserved that from
such a person so heavy punishment should be exacted; that he might appear to
yield a valuable compensation for those pains, which we should have suffered;
that he thoroughly might exemplify the hardest duties of obedience and
patience.

III. This manner of suffering was (as most sharp and shameful; being proper to
the basest condition of the worst men, and unworthy of a free man, however
nocent and guilty. Quod etiam homine libero quamvis nocente videatur indignum.
Lact. 4.26.
It was servile supplicium, a punishment never by the Romans, under whose law
our Lord suffered, legally inflicted upon free men, but upon slaves only; that
is upon people, scarce regarded as men, having in a sort, forfeited or lost
themselves; And among the Jews that execution, which most approached thereto,
and in part agreed with it (for their Law did not allow any so inhumane
punishment) hanging up the dead bodies of some that had been put to death, was
held most infamous and execrable; Deuteronomy. 21.23. Gal. 3.16. (...). Chrysostom. Tom. 6.
Or. 61.
for Cursed, said the Law, is every one that hangs upon a tree; cursed, that
is devoted to reproach and malediction; accursed by God, says the Hebrew, that
is seeming to be rejected by God, and by his special order exposed to
affliction.

Indeed, according to the course of things, to be set on high, and for
continuance of time to be objected to the view of all that pass by, in that
calamitous posture, does infuse bad suspicion, does provoke censure, does
invite contempt and scorn, does naturally draw forth language of derision,
despite and detestation, especially from the inconsiderate, hard hearted, and
rude vulgar, which commonly does think, speak, and deal according to event and
appearance; ( -- Sequitur fortunam semper, and odit Damnatos --) Whence, (...),
to be made a gazing stock, Heb. 10.33.
or an object of reproach to the multitude, is by the Apostle mentioned as an
aggravation of the hardships endured by the Primitive Christians. And thus in
extremity did it befall our Lord; (...). Luc. 23.35, 36. Matt. 27.38.
for we read, that the people did in that condition mock, jeer, and revile him;
drawing up their noses, abusing him by scurrilous gestures, letting out their
virulent and wanton tongues against him; so as to verify that prediction, I am
a reproach of men, and despised of the people; Ps. 22.6, 7.
all they that see me laugh me to scorn; they shoot out the lip, they shake the
head, saying, He trusted in the Lord, let him deliver him, seeing he delighted
in him.

The same persons, who formerly had admired his glorious works, Matthew. 9.33.
21.9. 12.23. Luke 4.15.
who had been ravished with his excellent discourses, who had followed and
favored him so earnestly, who had blessed and magnified him, ( for he, says
S. Luke, taught in the Synagogues being glorified by all) even those very
persons did then behold him with pitiless contempt and despite; In
correspondence to that prophecy, they look and stare upon me, Ps. 22.17. Luke
23.35.
(...), the people stood gazing on him, in a most scornful manner; venting
contemptuous and spiteful reproaches, as we see reported in the Evangelical
Story.

Thus did our Blessed Savior endure the cross, despising the shame; Heb. 12.2.
despising the shame, that is not simply disregarding it, or (with a Stoical
haughtiness, with a Cynical immodesty, with a stupid carelessness) slighting it
as no evil; but not eschewing it, or not rating it for so great an evil, that
to decline it he would neglect the prosecution of his great and glorious
designs.

There is innate to man an aversation and abhorrency from disgraceful abuse, no
less strong, then are the like antipathies to pain; Heb. 11.36.
whence cruel mockings and scourgings are coupled as ingredients of the sore
persecutions sustained by Gods faithful Martyrs; And generally men with more
readiness will embrace, with more contentedness will endure the cruelty of the
latter, than of the former; pain not so smartly affecting the lower sense, as
being insolently contemned does grate upon the fancy, and wound even the mind
it self; Prove. 18, 8.12, 18.
for the wounds of infamy do (as the wise man tells us) go down into the
innermost parts of the belly, reaching the very heart, and touching the soul to
the quick.

We therefore need not doubt, but that our Savior as a man, endowed with
humane passions, was sensible of this natural evil; and that such indignities
did add somewhat of loathsomness to his cup of affliction; especially
considering, that his great charity disposed him to grieve, observing men to
act so indecently, so unworthily, so unjustly toward him; yet in consideration
of the glory that would thence accrue to God, of the benefit that would redound
to us, of the joy that was set before him, Heb. 12.2.
when he should see of the travel of his soul and be satisfied, Is. 53.11.
he most willingly did accept, and most gladly did comport with it. He became a
curse for us, Gal. 3.13.
exposed to malediction and reviling; Heb. 12.13.
He endured the contradiction (or obloquy) of sinful men; He was despised,
rejected, Is. 53.3, 4.
and dis-esteemed of men; He in common apprehension was deserted by God,
according to that of the Prophet, We did esteem him stricken, smitten of God,
and afflicted; himself even seeming to concur in that opinion; So was he made a
curse for us, that we, as the Apostle teaches, Gal. 3.13.
might be redeemed from the curse of the Law, that is, that we might be freed
from the exemplary punishment, due to our transgressions of the Law, with the
displeasure of God appearing therein, and the disgrace before the world
attending it: He chose thus to make himself of no reputation, vouchsafing to be
dealt with as a wretched slave, and a wicked miscreant, that we might be
exempted not only from the torment, but also from the ignominy which we had
merited; that together with our life, our safety, our liberty, we might even
recover that honor which we had forfeited and imbezled.

But lest any should be tempted not sufficiently to value these sufferances of
our Lord, as not so rare, but that other men have tasted the like; lest any
should presume to compare them with afflictions incident to other persons,
Orig. c. Cells. 7. (p. 368.)
as Celsus did compare them with those of Anaxarchus and Epictetus; it is
requisite to consider some remarkable particulars about them.

We may then consider, that not only the infinite dignity of his person, and
the perfect innocence of his life did enhance the price of his sufferings; but
some endowments peculiar to him, and some circumstances adhering to his design,
did much augment their force.

He was not only according to the frame and temper of humane nature sensibly
touched with the pain, the shame, the whole combination of disasters,
apparently waiting on his passion; as God (when he did insert sense and passion
into our nature, ordering objects to affect them) did intend we should be, and
as other men in like circumstances would have been; but in many respects beyond
that ordinary rate; so that no man, we may suppose, could have felt such grief
from them as he did, no man ever has been sensible of any thing comparable to
what he did endure; that passage being truly applicable to him, Lam. 1.22.
Behold and see, if there be any sorrow like to my sorrow, which is done unto
me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger; as
that unparalled sweating out great lumps of blood may argue; and as the terms
expressing his resentments do intimate; for in respect of present evils he said
of himself, Mat. 26.37, 38.
My soul is exceedingly sorrowful to death; Luc. 22.44. Joh. 13, 21.12, 27.
he is said (...), to be in great anguish and anxiety, to be in an agony or
pang of sorrow; In regard to mischiefs which he saw coming on, he is said to be
disturbed in spirit, Mar. 14.33.
and to be sore amazed, or dismayed at them; To such an exceeding height did
the sense of incumbent evils, and the prospect of impendent calamities, the
apprehension of his case, together with a reflection on our condition, skrew up
his affections.

And no wonder, that such a burden, even the weight of all the sins (the
numberless most heinous sins and abominations) that ever were committed by
mankind, by appropriation of them to himself, lying on his shoulders, he should
feel it heavy, or seem to crouch and groan under it; that in the mystical
Psalm, Heb. 12.5.
applied by the Apostle to him, he should cry out, Innumerable evils have
compassed me about, mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not
able to look up; Ps. 40, 12.
they are more than the hairs of my head, and my heart fails me. The sight of
Gods indignation so dreadfully flaming out against sin, might well astonish and
terrify him: To stand, as it were, before the mouth of hell belching fire and
brimstone in his face; to lie down in the hottest furnace of divine vengeance;
to quench with his own heart-blood the wrath of heaven, and the infernal fire
(as he did in regard to those who will not re-kindle them to themselves) might
well in the heart of a man beget unconceivable and unexpressible pressures of
affliction. When such a Father (so infinitely good and kind to him, whom he so
dearly and perfectly loved) did hide his face from him, did frown on him, how
could he otherwise than be mightily troubled? Is it strange that so hearty a
love, so tender a pity, contemplating our sinfulness, and experimenting our
wretchedness, should be deeply touched? To see, I say, so plainly, to feel so
thoroughly the horrible blindness, the folly, the infidelity, the imbecility,
the ingratitude, the incorrigibility; the strange perverseness, perfidiousness,
malice, and cruelty of mankind in so many instances (in the treason of Judas,
in the denial of Peter, in the desertion of all the Apostles, in the spite and
rage of the persecutors, in the falsehood of the witnesses, in the abuses of the
people, in the compliance of Pilate, in a general conspiracy of friends and
foes to sin) all these surrounding him, all invading him, all discharging
themselves upon him, would it not astone a mind so pure, would it not wound a
heart so tender, and full of charity?

Surely, any of those persons, who fondly do pretend unto, or vainly do glory
in a sullen apathy, or a stubborn contempt of the evils incident to our nature
and state, would in such a case have been utterly dejected; The most resolved
Philosopher would have been dashed into confusion at the sight, would have been
crushed into desperation under the sense of those evils which did assault Him.

With the greatness of the causes, the goodness of his constitution did
conspire to increase his sufferings; for surely as his complexion was most pure
and delicate, his spirit most vivid and apprehensive, his affections most
pliant and tractable; so accordingly would the impressions upon him be most
sensible, and consequently the pains which he felt (in body or soul) most
afflictive.

That we in like cases are not alike moved, that we do not tremble at the
apprehensions of Gods displeasure, that we are not affrighted with the sense of
our sins, that we do not with sad horror resent our danger and our misery,
does arise from that we have very glimmering and faint conceptions of those
matters; or that they do not in so clear and lively a manner strike our fancy
(not appearing in their true nature and proper shape, so heinous and so hideous
as they really are, in themselves and in their consequences); or because we
have but weak persuasions about them; or because we do but slightly consider
them; or from that our hearts are very hard and callous, our affections very
cold and dull, so that nothing of this nature (nothing beside gross material
affairs) can mollify or melt them; Or for that we have in us small love to
God, and a slender regard to our own welfare; in fine, for that in spiritual
matters we are neither so wise, so sober, so serious, nor so good or ingenuous
in any reasonable measure, as we should be: But our Savior in all those
respects was otherwise disposed; He most evidently discerned the wrath of God,
the grievousness of sin, the wretchedness of man, most truly, most fully, most
strongly represented to his mind; He most firmly believed, yea most certainly
knew, whatever Gods law had declared about them; He did exactly consider and
weigh them; His heart was most soft and sensible, his affections were most
quick and excitable by their due objects; He was full of dutiful love to God,
and most ardently desirous of our good, bearing a more than fraternal good will
toward us: whence it is not so mavelous that as a man, as a transcendently
wise and good man, he was so vehemently affected by those occurrences, that his
imagination was so troubled, and his passions so stirred by them; so that he
thence did suffer in a manner, and to a degree unconceivable; according to that
ejaculation in the Greek Liturgies, (...), By thy unknown sufferings, O Christ,
have mercy on us. But farther,

IV. We may consider, that this way of suffering had in

Its being very notorious, and lasting a competent time were good advantages;
for if he had been privately made away, or suddenly dispatched, no such great
notice would have been taken of it, nor would the matter of fact have been so
fully proved, to the confirmation of our faith, and conviction of infidelity:
Nor had that his excellent deportment under such bitter affliction (his most
divine patience, meekness and charity) so illustriously shone forth. Wherefore
to prevent all exceptions, and excuses of unbelief (together with other
collateral good purposes) divine providence did so manage the business, that as
the course of his life, so also the manner of his death, should be most
conspicuously remarkable: I spoke freely to the world, Joh. 18.20.
and in secret have I done nothing, said he of himself; Act. 26.26.
and These things (said S. Paul to King Agrippa) were not done in a corner;
such were the proceedings of his life, not close or clancular, but frank and
open; not presently hushed up, but leisurely carried on in the face of the
world, that men might have the advantage to observe and examine them; And as he
lived, so he dyed most publicly and visibly; the world being witness of his
death, and so prepared to believe his resurrection, and thence disposed to
embrace his doctrine; according to what he did foretell, Joh. 12.32.
I being lifted up from the earth shall draw all men to me; for he drew all men
by so obvious a death to take notice of it, (Iren. 2.26.)
he drew all well-disposed persons from the wondrous consequences of it to
believe on him: Joh. 13.14.
And as (said he again) Moses did exalt the serpent in the wilderness, so must
the son of man be exalted; As the elevation of that mysterious serpent did
render it visible, and did attract the eyes of people toward it; Iren. 4.5.
whereby, Gods power invisibly accompanying that Sacramental performance, they
were cured of those mortiferous stings which they had received: so our Lord
being mounted on the Cross, allured the eyes of men to behold him, and their
hearts to close with him; whereby, the heavenly virtue of Gods spirit
cooperating, they become saved from those destructive sins, which from the
Devils serpentine instigations they had incurred.

Another advantage of this kind of suffering was, that by it the nature of that
Kingdom, which he did intend to erect was evidently signified; that it was not
such as the carnal people did expect, an external, earthly, temporal kingdom,
consisting in domination over the bodies and estates of men, dignified by
outward wealth and splendor, managed by worldly power and policy, promoted by
forcible compulsion and terror of Arms, affording the advantages of safety,
quiet, and prosperity here; But a kingdom purely spiritual, celestial, eternal;
consisting in the governance of men's hearts and minds, adorned with endowments
of wisdom and virtue; administered by the conduct and grace of Gods Holy Spirit,
upheld and propagated by meek instruction, by virtuous example, by hearty
devotion, and humble patience; rewarding its loyal subjects with spiritual joys
and consolations now, with heavenly rest and bliss hereafter; No other kingdom
could he presume to design, who submitted to this dolorous and disgraceful way
of suffering; No other exploits could he pretend to atchieve by expiring on a
cross; No other way could he rule, who gave himself to be managed by the will
of his adversaries; No other benefits would this forlorn case allow him to
dispense; so that well might he then assert, Joh. 18.36.
My kingdom is not of this world, when he was going in this signal way to
demonstrate that important truth.

Luc. 2.35.
It was also a most convenient touchstone to prove the genuine disposition and
worth of men; so as to discriminate those wise, sober, ingenuous, sincere,
generous souls, who could discern true goodness through so dark a cloud, who
could love it though so ill-favouredly disfigured, who could embrace and avow
it, notwithstanding so terrible disadvantages; it served, I say, to distinguish
those blessed ones, Mat. 11.6.
who would not be offended in him, Gal. 5.11. 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. 1 Cor. 1.33.
or by the scandal of the cross be discouraged from adhering to him, from the
crew of blind, vain, perverse, haughty people, who being scandalized at his
adversity, would contemn and reject him.

Another considerable advantage was this, that by it Gods special providence
was discovered, Chrysostom. Tom. 6, Orat. 61.
and his glory illustrated in the propagation of the Gospel: for how could it
be, that a person of so low parentage, of so mean garb, of so poor condition,
who underwent so lamentable and despicable a kind of death, falling under the
pride and spite of his enemies, so easily should gain so general an opinion in
the world (even among the best, the wisest, the greatest persons) of being the
Lord of life and glory; how, I say, could it happen, that such a miracle could
be effected without Gods aid and special concurrence? That King Herod, who from
a long reign in flourishing state with prosperous success in his enterprises,
did attain the name of Great; or that Vespasian, who triumphantly did ascend
the Imperial throne, should either of them by a few admirers of worldly vanity,
seriously be held, or in flattery be called the Messiah, is not so strange; but
that one who was trampled on so miserably, and treated as a wretched caitiff,
should instantly conquer innumerable hearts, and from such a depth of extreme
adversity should be advanced to the sublimest pitch of glory; Ps. 118.22.
that the stone, which the builders with so much scorn did refuse, should
become the head stone of the corner, this (with good assurance we may say) was
the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

2 Cor. 4.7. 1 Cor. 1.27.
Hereby indeed the excellency of divine power and wisdom was much glorified; by
so impotent, so improbable, so implausible means accomplishing so great
effects; subduing the world to obedience of God, not by the active valor of an
illustrious Hero, but through the patient submission of a poor, abused, and
oppressed person; restoring mankind to life and happiness by the sorrowful
death of a crucified Savior.



1. Are we not hence infinitely obliged with most humble affection and hearty
gratitude to adore each person of the B. Trinity?

That God the Father should design such a redemption for us; not sparing his
own Son (the Son of his love, Romans 8.32. Col. 1.13.
dear to him as himself) but delivering him up for us, to be thus dealt with
for our sake; That God would endure to see his son in so pitiful a condition,
to hear him groaning under so grievous pressures, to let him be so horribly
abused; and that for us, who deserved nothing from him, who had demerited so
much against him; for us, who were no friends to him, (for even when we were
enemies, Romans 5.10.
we were reconciled to God by the death of his son;) who were not any ways
commendable for goodness, or righteousness; (for Christ did suffer for sinners,
the just for the unjust; 1 Pet. 3.18. Romans 5.6. 1 Cor. 5.19. Romans 5.8. 1 John
4.10.
and God commended his love to us, that while we were sinful, Christ died for
us;) that God thus should love us, sending his son to be a propitiation for our
sins, in so dismal a way of suffering, how stupendous is that goodness, how
vast an obligation does it lay upon us to reciprocal affection? If we do owe
all to God, as our Maker, from whose undeserved bounty we did receive all that
we have, how much farther do we stand indebted to him as the author of our
Redemption, from whose ill-deserved mercy we receive a new being, and better
state; and that in a way far more obliging; for God created us with a word,
without more cost or trouble; but to redeem us stood him in huge expenses and
pains; no less than the debasing his only son to our frailty, the exposing him
to more than our misery; the withdrawing his face, and restraining his bowels
from his best beloved: If a Jew then were commanded by law, if a Gentile were
obliged by nature, to love God with all his heart and all his soul, what
affection does a Christian, under the law and duty of Grace, owe unto him? by
what computation can we reckon that debt? what faculties have we sufficient to
discharge it? what finite heart can hold an affection commensurate to such an
obligation?

And how can it otherwise than inflame our heart with love toward the Blessed
Son of God, our Savior, to consider, Ephesians. 3, 19.5.2, 25. Gal. 2.20. Apoc. 1.5.
that merely out of charitable pity toward us, he purposely came down from
heaven, and took our flesh upon him, that he might therein undergo those
extreme acerbities of pain, and those most ugly indignities of shame for us?
Joh. 15.13. (...); --
Greater love (said he) has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for
his friends; But that God should lay down his life, should pour forth his
blood, should be aspersed with the worst crimes, and clothed with foulest
shame, should be executed on a cross as a malefactor and a slave, for his
enemies and rebellious traitors, what imagination can devise any expression of
charity or friendship comparable to this? Wherefore if love naturally be
productive of love, if friendship justly meriteth a correspondence in good
will, what effect should the consideration of so ineffable a love, of so
unparalled friendship have upon us?

How can any serious reflection on this event fail to work hearty gratitude in
us toward our good Lord? For put case any person for our sake (that he might
rescue us from the greatest mischiefs, and purchase for us the highest
benefits) willingly should deprive himself of all his estate (and that a very
large one) of his honor (and that a very high one) of his ease and pleasure
(and those the most perfect and assured that could be;) that he should expose
himself to the greatest hazards, should endure the sorest pains, and most
disgraceful ignominies; should prostitute his life, and in most hideous manner
lose it, to those ends for our sake; Should we not then apprehend and confess
our selves monstrously ungrateful, if we did not most deeply resent such
kindness, if upon all occasions we did not express our thankfulness for it; if
we did not ever readily yield all the acknowledgment and all the requital we
were able? The case in regard to our Blessed Savior is like in kind, but in
degree whatever we can suppose does infinitely fall below the performances for
us of him, who stooped from the top of heaven, who laid aside the Majesty and
the felicity of God for the infamies and the dolours of a cross, that he might
redeem us from the torments of hell, and instate us in the joys of Paradise; so
that our obligations of gratitude to him are unexpressibly great, and we cannot
with any face deny our selves to be most basely unworthy, if the effects in our
heart and life be not answerable.

Nor should we forget, that also upon this account we do owe great love and
thanks to God the Holy Ghost, who as he did originally conspire in the
wonderful project of our redemption, as he did executively by miraculous
operation conduct our Savior into his fleshly tabernacle, Joh. 3.34.
as he did by unmeasurable communications of divine virtue assist his humanity
through all the course of his life; so in this juncture he did inspire him with
charity more than humane, and did support him to undergo those pressures with
invincible patience; and so did sanctify all this Sacerdotal performance, that
our Lord, as the Apostle does affirm, Heb. 9.14.
did through the eternal Spirit offer himself without spot to God.

2. What surer ground can there be of faith in God, 1 Pet. 1.20. Ephesians. 1. --
Luc. 1. --
for if God steadfastly did hold his purpose, and faithfully did accomplish his
word in an instance so distastful to his own heart and bowels, how can we ever
suspect his constancy and fidelity in any case, how can we distrust the
completion of any divine promise?

If God spared not his own Son, Romans 8.32.
but delivered him up for us, to the suffering of so contumelious affliction,
how can we any ways be diffident of his bounty, or despair of his mercy? how
(as the Apostle does argue) shall he not also with him freely give us all
things?

If ever we be tempted to doubt of Gods goodness, will not this experiment
thereof convince and satisfy us? for what higher kindness could God express,
what lower condescension could he vouchsafe, by what pledge could he more
clearly or surely testify his willingness and his delight to do us good, than
by thus ordering his dearest Son to undergo such miseries for us?

Quis de se desperet, pro quo tam humilis esse voluit filius Dei? Aug. de Ag.
Chr.c. 11.
If the greatness of our sins discourageth us from entertaining comfortable
hopes of mercy, will it not rear our hearts to consider that such a punishment
has been inflicted to expiate them, which might content the most rigorous
severity; that such a price is laid down to redeem us from the curse, Gal. 3.13.
which richly may suffice to discharge it; that such a sacrifice has been
offered, which God has avowed for most available, Ephesians. 5.2. 1 Pet. 1.19.
and acceptable to himself? so that now what can Justice exact more from us?
what have we farther to do, than with a penitent and thankful heart to embrace
the mercy purchased for us? Romans 8.34. 1. Pet. 2.24.
Who is he that condemns, seeing Christ has died, and has his own self born
our sins in his own body on the tree? Whatever the wounds of our conscience be,
is not the blood of the cross, tempered with our hearty repentance, and applied
by a lively faith, a sovereign balsam, of virtue sufficient to cure them; and
may we not by his stripes be healed? 1 Pet. 2.24.
Have we not abundant reason with the Holy Apostle, Romans 9.11.
to joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have received the
atonement? Is it not to depretiate the worth, to disparage the efficacy of our
Lords passion, any ways to despair of mercy, or to be disconsolate for guilt;
as if the cross were not enough worthy to compensate for our unworthiness, or
our Saviors patience could not balance our disobedience?

3. It indeed may yield great joy, and sprightly consolation

May we not delectably consider him as there stretching forth his arms of
kindness, Extendit in passione manus suas, etc. Last. 4.26. Is. 65.2.
with them to embrace the world, and to receive all mankind under the wings of
his protection? as there spreading out his hands, with them earnestly inviting
and entreating us to accept the overtures of grace, procured by him for us?

( Lev. 9.22. 2 Chr. 4.1.) Chrysostom. Tom. 6. Or. 82. P. Leo 1. Ep, 83.
Is it not sweet and satisfactory to view our great HighPriest on that high
altar offering up his own pure flesh, and pouring out his precious blood, as an
universal complete sacrifice, propitiatory for the sins of mankind?

Is it not a goodly object to behold humility and patience so gloriously
rearing themselves above all worldly, all infernal pride and insolence; by the
cross ascending unto the celestial throne of dignity and Majesty superlative?

Is it not pleasant to contemplate our Lord there standing erect, not only as a
resolute sufferer, but as a noble conqueror, where having spoiled
principalities and powers, Col. 2. 15.
he made a solemn show triumphing over them? Did ever any Conqueror loftily
seated in his triumphal chariot yield a spectacle so gallant and magnificent?
was ever tree adorned with trophies so pompous and splendid?

To the exterior view and carnal sense of men our Lord was then indeed exposed
to scorn and shame; but to spiritual and sincere discerning, all his and our
enemies did there hang up as objects of contempt, utterly overthrown and undone.

There the Devil, that strong and sturdy one, (...). Mat. 12.29. Luc. 11.22.
Heb. 2.14.
did hang up bound in chains, disarmed and rifled, quite baffled and
confounded, mankind being rescued from his tyrannick power.

There the world with its vain pomps, its counterfeit beauties, its bewitching
pleasures, its fondly admired excellencies, Gal. 6.14.
did hang up all defaced and disparaged; as it appeared to St. Paul, for God
(says he) forbid that I should glory save in the cross of Christ, by which the
world is crucified to me, and I unto the world.

There in a most lively representation, and most admirable pattern was
exhibited the mortification of our flesh with its affections and lusts, Gal. 2,
2^.5, 24. Col. 3.5. Romans 8.13.
and our old man was crucified, that the body of sin might be destroyed.

There our sins, 1 Pet. 2.24.
being (as St. Peter tells us) carried up by him unto the gibbet, did hang as
marks of his victorious prowess, Romans 8.3.
as malefactors by him condemned in the flesh, as objects of our horror and
hatred.

There death it self hung gasping, 1 Cor. 15.54. 2 Timothy 1.10. Heb. 2.14.
with its sting pulled out, and all its terrors quelled; his death having
prevented ours, and induced immortality.

There all wrath, enmity, strife (the banes of comfortable life) did hang
abolished in his flesh, Col. 1.10. Ephesians. 2.15, 16.
and slain upon the cross, by the blood whereof he made peace, and reconciled
all things in heaven and earth.

There manifold yokes of bondage, instruments of vexation, Col. 2.14.
and principles of variance; even all the handwriting of ordinances that was
against us, did hang up cancelled and nailed to the cross.

So much sweet comfort by spiritual consideration may be extracted from this
event, which in appearance was most doleful, but in effect the most happy that
ever by providence was dispensed to the world. Farther,

that iniquity, which might not be expiated without so costly a sacrifice? how
deplorable is that misery, which could not be removed without commutation of so
strange a suffering? Would the Son of God have so emptied, (...). Phil. 2.7.
and abased himself for nothing? would he have endured such pains and
ignominies for a trifle? No surely, if our guilt had been slight, if our case
had been tolerable, the divine wisdom would have chose a more cheap and easy
remedy for us.

Is it not madness for us to be conceited of any worth in our selves, to
confide in any merit of our works, to glory in any thing belonging to us, to
fancy our selves brave, fine, happy persons, worthy of great respect and
esteem; whenas our unworthiness, our demerit, our forlorn estate did extort
from the most gracious God a displeasure needing such a reconciliation, did
impose upon the most glorious Son of God a necessity to undergo such a
punishment in our behalf?

How can we reasonably pretend to any honor, or justly assume any regard to
our selves, whenas the firstborn of heaven, the Lord of glory, partaker of
divine Majesty, was fain to make himself of no reputation, to put himself into
the garb of a servant, and under the imputation of a malefactor, to bear such
disgrace and infamy in our room, in lieu of the confusion due to us?

What more palpable confutation can there be of humane vanity and arrogance, of
all lofty imaginations, 2 Cor. 10.5.
all presumptuous confidences, all turgid humors, all fond self-pleasings and
self-admirings, than is that tragical cross, wherein, as in a glass, our foul
deformity, our pitiful meanness, our helpless infirmity, our sad wofulness are
so plainly represented?

Well surely may we say with St. Austin, Jam tandem erubeseat homo esse
superbus, propter quem factus est humilis Deus. Aug. in Ps. 18.
Let man now at length blush to be proud, for whom God is made so humble; [And
since (as he does add) this great disease of soul did bring down the Almighty
Physician from heaven, Iste ingens morbus omnipotentem medicum de coelo
deduxit, usque ad formam servi humiliavit, contumeliis egit, ligno suspendit,
ut per salutem tantae medicinae curetur hic tumor. ibid.
did humble him to the form of a servant, did subject him to contumelies, did
suspend him on a cross, that this tumor by virtue of so great a medicine might
be cured;] may not he well be presumed incurable, who is not cured of his pride
by this medicine; Quae superbia sanari potest, si humilitate filii Dei non
sanatur? Aug. de Agone Chr. cap. 11.
in whom neither the reason of the case, not the force of such an example can
work humility?

Aut vero pro minimo haber Deus hominem, propter quem mori voluit filium suum?
Aug. in Ps. 148.
for surely, had not God much esteemed and respected us, he would not for our
sakes have so debased himself, or deigned to endure so much for our recovery;
Divine Justice would not have exacted or accepted such a ransom for our souls,
had they been of little worth: Si vobis ex terrena fragilitate viles estis, ex
pretio vestro vos aestimate. Aug.
We should not therefore slight our selves, nor demean our selves like sorry
contemptible wretches, as if we deserved no consideration, no pity from our
selves; as if we thought our souls not worth saving, Acts 13.46.
which yet our Lord thought good to purchase at so dear a rate: By so despising
or disregarding our selves, do we not condemn the sentiments, do we not vilify
the sufferings of our Lord; so with a pitiful meanness of spirit joining the
most unworthy injustice and ingratitude? Again,

sins? those sins which indeed did bring such tortures and such disgraces upon
our blessed Redeemer? Judas, the wretch who betrayed him; the Jewish Priests
who did accuse and prosecute him; the wicked rout, which did abusively insult
over him; those cruel hands that smote him, those pitiless hearts that scorned
him, those poisonous tongues that mocked him, and reviled him; all those who
were the instruments and abetters of his affliction, how do we loath and abhor
them, how do we detest their names, and execrate their memories! But how much
greater reason have we to abominate our sins, which were the true, the
principal actors of all that woeful tragedy: Romans 4.25.
He was delivered for our offenses, they were indeed the traitors, which by
the hands of Judas delivered him up, He that knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21.
was made sin for us, that is, was accused, was condemned, was executed as a
sinner for us; it was therefore we, who by our sins did impeach him, the
spiteful Priests were but our advocates; we by them did adjudge and sentence
him; Pilate was but drawn in against his will and conscience, to be our
spokes-man in that behalf; We by them did inflict that horrid punishment on
him, the Roman executioners were but our representatives therein; He became a
curse for us; that is, all the mockery, derision, Gal. 3.13.
and contumely he endured, did proceed from us; the silly people were but
properties acting our parts; our sins were they that cried out Crucifige (
Crucify him, crucify him) with clamours more loud and more importunate than did
all the Jewish rabble; it was they, which by the borrowed throats of that base
people did so outragiously persecute him: Is. 53.5.
He was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities; it was
they which by the hands of the fierce soldiers, and of the rude populacy, as
by senseless engines, did buffet and scourge him; they by the nails and thorns
did pierce his flesh, and rend his Sacred body; upon them therefore it is most
just and fit that we should turn our hatred, that we should discharge our
indignation.



Psalm. 119.120.
for can we otherwise than tremble to think upon the heinous guilt of our sins,
upon the dreadful fierceness of Gods wrath against them, upon the impartial
severity of divine judgment for them, all so manifestly discovered, all so
livelily set forth in this dismal spectacle? If the view of an ordinary
execution is apt to beget in us some terror, some dread of the law, some
reverence toward authority, what awful impressions should this singular example
of divine justice work upon us?

How greatly we should be moved thereby, what affections it should raise in us,
we may even learn from the most inanimate creatures; for the whole world did
seem affected thereat with horror and confusion; the frame of things was
discomposed and disturbed; all nature did feel a kind of compassion and
compunction for it; The Sun (as from aversion and shame) did hide his face,
leaving the world covered for three hours with mournful blackness; the bowels
of the earth did yern and quake; the rocks did split, the veil of the Temple
was rent, the graves did open themselves, and the dead bodies were roused up;
And can we then (who are the most concerned in the event) be more stupid than
the earth, more obdurate than rocks, more drowsy than interred carcases, the
most insensible and immovable things in nature? But farther,

9. How can the meditation on this event do otherwise than hugely deterr us
from all wilful disobedience and commission of sin? for how thereby can we
violate such engagements, and thwart such an example of obedience? how thereby
can we abuse so wonderful goodness, and disoblige so transcendent charity? how
thereby can we reject that gentle dominion over us, Tit. 2.14. 1 Pet. 1.18.
Romans 14.9. 2 Cor. 5 15. 2 Pet. 2.1. 1 Cor. 6.20.
which our Redeemer did so dearly purchase, or renounce the Lord that bought us
at so high a rate? with what heart can we bring up on the stage, and act over
that direful tragedy, renewing all that pain and all that disgrace to our
Savior; as the Apostle teaches that we do by Apostasy, Heb. 6.6. (...).
crucifying to our selves the Son of God afresh, and putting him to an open
shame? Can we without horror tread under foot the son of God, Heb. 10.26, 29.
(...).
and count the blood of the covenant an unholy thing (as the same divine
Apostle says, all wilful transgressors do) vilifying that most sacred and
precious blood, so freely shed for the demonstration of Gods mercy, and
ratification of his gracious intentions toward us; as a thing of no special
worth or consideration; (...).
despising all his so kind and painful endeavors for our salvation, defeating
his most charitable purposes, and earnest desires for our welfare; rendering all
his so bitter and loathsome sufferings in regard to us utterly vain and
fruitless; yea indeed very hurtful and pernicious; for if the cross do not
save us from our sins, it will much aggravate their guilt, and augment their
punishment; bringing a severer condemnation, and a sadder ruin on us. Again,

10. This consideration affords very strong engagements to the practice of
charity toward our neighbor: For what heart can be so hard, that the blood of
the cross cannot mollisie into a charitable and compassionate sense? can we
forbear to love those, toward whom our Savior did bear so tender affection,
for whom he was pleased to sustain so woeful tortures and indignities? Shall we
not in obedience to his most urgent commands, in conformity to his most notable
example, in grateful return to him for his benefits, who thus did gladly suffer
for us, discharge this most sweet and easy duty toward his beloved friends?
Shall we not be willing by parting with a little superfluous stuff for the
relief of our poor brother, to requite and gratify him, 2 Cor. 8.9.
who to succor us in our distress most bountifully did part with his wealth,
with his glory, with his pleasure, with his life it self? Shall we not meekly
comport with an infirmity, Ephesians. 4.32. Col. 3.13.
not bear a petty neglect, not forgive a small injury to our brother, whenas
our Lord did for us, and from us bear a cross, to procure remission for our
innumerable most heinous affronts and offenses against Almighty God? Can a
heart void of mercy and pity with any reason or modesty pretend to the mercies
and compassions of the cross? Can we hope, that God for Christ's sake will
pardon us, if we for Christ's sake will not forgive our neighbor?

Can we hear our Lord saying to us, Joh. 15, 12.13, 35.
This is my command that ye love one another, as I have loved you; and, Hereby
shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another? Ephesians. 5.2.
Can we hear S. Paul exhorting, Walk in love, as Christ also has loved us, and
has given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for a
sweet smelling savor; and We that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of
the weak -- Romans 15.1. --
for even Christ pleased not himself, but as it is written, The reproaches of
them that reproached thee, fell on me? Can we attend to S. John's arguing,
Beloved, if God so loved us, then ought we also to love one another; Hereby we
perceive the love of God, 1 John 4, 11.3, 16.
because he laid down his life for us; wherefore we ought to lay down our lives
for the brethren?

Can we, I say, consider such precepts, and such discourses, without
effectually being disposed to comply with them for the sake of our crucified
Savior; all whose life was nothing else but one continual recommendation and
enforcement of this duty; but his death especially was a pattern most obliging,
most incentive thereto? This use of the point is the more to be regarded,
because the Apostle does apply it hereto, our text coming in upon that
occasion; for having pathetically exhorted the Philippians to all kinds of
charity and humble condescension, he subjoyneth, Let this mind be in you which
was in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God, etc.

11. But farthermore, What can be more operative and the contraries whereof he
dying chose to feel in all extremity? Who can disdain or despise a state of
sorrow and disgrace, which he by voluntary susception of it, has so dignified
and graced? by which we so near resemble and become conformable to him; Romans
8.17. Phil. 3.10. Apoc. 1.9. 1 Pet. 4.13. Colos. 1.24.
by which we concur and partake with him; yea, by which in some cases we may
promote, and after a sort complete his designs, filling up, as St. Paul
speaks, that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in our flesh?

Who now can hugely prefer being esteemed, approved, favored, commended by men
before infamy, reproach, derision, and persecution from them, especially when
these do follow conscientious adherence to righteousness? Cogitemus crucem
ejus, and divitias lutum esse putabimus. Hier. ad Nepot. Epist. 2.
Who can be very ambitious of worldly honor or repute, covetous of wealth, or
greedy of pleasure, who does observe the Son of God choosing rather to hang upon
a cross, than to sit upon a throne; inviting the clamours of scorn and spite
rather than acclamations of blessing and praise; devesting himself of all
secular power, pomp, plenty, conveniences and solaces; embracing the garb of a
slave, and the repute of a malefactor, before the dignity and respect of a
Prince, which were his due, which he most easily could have obtained?

Quis beatam vitam esse arbitretur in iis, quae contemnenda esse docuit filius
Dei? Aug. de Ag. Chr. cap. 11.
Can we imagine it a very happy thing to be high and prosperous in this world,
to swim in affluence and pleasure? Can we take it for a misery to be mean and
low, to conflict with some wants and streights here; seeing the fountain of all
happiness did himself purposely condescend to so forlorn a state, and was
pleased to become so deep a sufferer? If with devout eyes of our mind we do
behold our Lord, hanging naked upon a gibbet, besmeared all over with streams
of his own blood, groaning under smart anguish of pain, encompassed with all
sorts of disgraceful abuses, yielding (as it was foretold of him) his back to
the smiters, Is. 50.6.
and his cheeks to them who plucked off the hair, hiding not his face from
shame and spitting, will not the imagination of such a spectacle dim the luster
of all earthly grandeurs and beauties, damp the sense of all carnal delights
and satisfactions, quash all that extravagant glee, which we can find in any
wild frolicks, or riotous merriments? will it not stain all our pride, and
check our wantonness? will it not dispose our minds to be sober, placing our
happiness in things of another nature, seeking our content in matters of higher
importance; preferring obedience to the will of God before compliance with the
fancies and desires of men? according to that precept of S Peter, 1 Pet. 4.1,
2. Graec.
For as much then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves
likewise with the same mind -- so as no longer to live the remaining time in
the flesh, to the lusts of men, but to the will of God.

12. This indeed will instruct and incline us cheerfully to submit unto Gods
will, and gladly to accept from his hand whatever he disposes, however
grievous and afflictive to our natural will; this point suggesting great
commendation of afflictions, and strong consolation under them. For if such
hardship was to our Lord himself a school of duty, (...), Heb. 5.8.
he (as the Apostle says) learning obedience from what he suffered; if it was
to him a fit mean of perfection, as the Apostle does again imply when he says,
Heb. 2.10.
that it became God to perfect the captain of our salvation by suffering; If it
was an attractive of the divine favor even to him, as those words import,
Therefore the Father loves me, because I lay down my life; Joh. 10.17.
If it was to him a step toward glory, according to that saying, Was not Christ
to suffer, and so to enter into his glory? Luc. 24.26.
Yea, if it was a ground of conferring on him a sublime pitch of dignity above
all creatures, Phil. 2.9.
God for this obedience having exalted him, and given him a name above all
names; Heb. 2.9.
We seeing Jesus for the suffering of death crowned with glory and honor; the
heavenly society in the Revelations with one voice crying out, Rev. 5.12, 9.
Worthy is the Lamb that was slain (who redeemed us to God by his blood) to
receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and
blessing; If affliction did minister such advantages to him; and if by our
conformity to him in undergoing it, ( Romans 5.3. Col. 1.24. Mat. 5.12. Luc.
6.23. Phil. 1.29. Act. 5.41. Jam. 1.2. Heb. 10.34. 1 Pet. 1.7. Heb. 12.2. -- 1
Cor. 1.4. --)
(with like equanimity, humility, and patience) it may afford the like to us,
what reason is there that we should any wise be discomposed at it, or
disconsolate under it? much greater reason surely there is, that with S. Paul,
and all the Holy Apostles we should rejoice, boast, and exult in our
tribulations; far more cause we have with them to esteem it a favor, a
privilege, an ornament, a felicity to us, than to be displeased and
discontented therewith.

To do thus is a duty incumbent on us as Christians, 1 These. 3.3. Romans 8.29.
Act. 14.22. 2 Timothy 3.12.
for He, says our Master, that does not take up his cross and follow me, Luc.
14, 27.9, 23. Mat. 10, 38.16, 24.
is not worthy of me; He that does not carry his cross, and go after me, cannot
be my disciple: Greg. Naz. Orat. 38. (p. 623.)
He that does not willingly take the cross when it is presented to him by Gods
hand; he that does not contentedly bear it, when it is by providence imposed on
him, is no wise worthy of the honor to wait on Christ, he is not capable to be
reckoned among the disciples of our heavenly Master: He is not worthy of
Christ, as not having the courage, the constancy, the sincerity of a Christian;
or of one pretending to such great benefits, such high privileges, such
excellent rewards as Christ our Lord and Savior does propose; He cannot be
Christ's disciple, showing such an incapacity to learn those needful lessons of
humility and patience dictated by him, declaring such an indisposition to
transcribe those Copies of submission to the divine will, self-denial, and
self-resignation, so fairly set him by the instruction and example of Christ;
for Christ (says S. Peter) suffered for us, (...). 1 Pet. 2.21.
leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps.

13. The willing susception, and the cheerful sustenance (...). Constable. Apost.
8.12.
and erect his glorious trophies over all the enemies thereof, was well assumed
to be the badge of our profession, the ensign of our spiritual warfare, the
pledge of our constant adherence to our crucified Savior; in relation to whom
our chief hope is grounded, our great joy and sole glory does consist, for God
forbid, says S. Paul, Gal. 6.14.
that I should glory save in the cross of Christ.

14. Let it be to the Jews a scandal, or offensive to 1 Cor. 1.23.
prepossessed with expectations of a Messiah flourishing in secular pomp and
prosperity; let it be folly to the Greeks, or seem absurd to men puffed up and
corrupted in mind with fleshly notions and maxims of worldly craft, disposing
them to value nothing which is not grateful to present sense or fancy; that God
should put his own most beloved Son into so very sad and despicable a
condition; that salvation from death and misery should be procured by so
miserable a death; that eternal joy, glory, ( Orig. in Cells. 2. p. 79.)
and happiness should issue from these fountains of sorrow and shame; that a
person in external semblance devoted to so opprobrious usage, should be the
Lord and Redeemer of mankind, the King and Judge of all the world; Let, I say,
this doctrine be scandalous and distastful to some persons tainted with
prejudice; let it be strange and incredible to others blinded with
self-conceit; let all the inconsiderate, all the proud, all the profane part of
mankind openly with their mouth, or closely in heart, slight and reject it; yet
to us it must appear grateful and joyous; to us it is (...), a faithful and
most credible proposition, 1 Timothy 1.15. 2 Timothy 2.11.
worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners, in this way of suffering for them; To us, who discern by a clearer
light, and are endowed with a purer sense, kindled by the divine spirit; from
whence we may with comfortable satisfaction of mind apprehend and taste, that
God could not in a higher measure, or fitter manner illustrate his glorious
attributes of goodness and Justice; his infinite grace and mercy toward his
poor creatures; his holy displeasure against wickedness; his impartial severity
in punishing iniquity and impiety, or in vindicating his own sacred honor and
authority; than by thus ordering his only Son, clothed with our nature, to
suffer for us; that also true virtue and goodness, could not otherwise be
taught, be exemplified, be commended and impressed with greater advantage.

Since thereby indeed a charity and humanity so unparalled (far transcending
theirs, who have been celebrated for devoting their lives out of love to their
country* or kindness to their friends) a meekness so incomparable, a resolution
so invincible, a patience so heroical, were manifested for the instruction and
direction of men; Since never were the vices and the vanities of the world (so
prejudicial to the welfare of mankind) so remarkably discountenanced; Since
never any suffering could pretend to so worthy and beneficial effects, the
expiation of the whole worlds sins, 1 John 2.2. 2 Cor. 5.19.
and reconciliation of mankind to God, the which no other performance, no other
sacrifice did ever aim to procure; since, in fine, no virtue had ever so
glorious rewards, as sovereign dignity to him that exercised it, and eternal
happiness to those who imitate it; Since, I say, there be such excellent uses
and fruits of the Cross born by our Savior, we can have no reason to be
offended at it, or ashamed of it; but with all reason heartily should approve,
and humbly adore the deep wisdom of God, together with all other his glorious
attributes displayed therein; to whom therefore, as is most due, let us
devoutly render all glory and praise. And,

Unto him that loved us, Apoc. 1.5.
and washed us from our sins in his blood; and has made us Kings and Priests
unto God, and his Father, to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever.
Blessing, and honor, and glory, and power, Apoc. 5.13.
be unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.
Amen.

FINIS.

