PROPOSALS For the First Volume of the WORKS of the eminently Learned Dr. ISAAC
BARROW, late Master of Trinity College in Cambridge: and since his Death
Published by the Reverend Dr. TILLOTSON, Dean of Canterbury: Now Printing in
Folio. 1682.
THE Undertaker, Brabazon Aylmer, having had encouragement by Printing the said
Learned Author's WORKS in several small Volumes; Does now, for the
accommodation of all Persons, and making more public the said WORKS, Propose
as follows.

1. That this First Volume contains all the Works in English of the said
Author's which have already been Published: viz. 1. Twelve Sermons upon
several Occasions. 2. Ten Sermons against Evil-speaking, or Vices of the
Tongue. 3. Eight Sermons of the Love of God and our Neighbor. 4. The Duty and
Reward of Bounty to the Poor. 5. A Sermon on the Passion of our Blessed
Savior. 6. An Exposition of the Lord's Prayer and the Decalogue; also the
Doctrine of the Sacraments. 7. A Learned Treatise of the Pope's Supremacy: To
which is added, A Discourse concerning the Unity of the Church.
2. That to this Volume will be prefixed the Life of the said incomparable
Author: and an exact alphabetical Table of the most material Things in the
whole Volume: as also his Effigies exactly engraved. 3. That this Volume will
contain about 235 Sheets, or 940 Pages, of excellent Paper and Print. 4. That
the Subscribers pay to the Undertaker 18 shillings for each Book ^nbound, viz
10 shillings present money; and the remaining 8 shillings upon the Delivery of
the said Book to the Subscriber or his Assigns: which cannot be thought dear,
being not a penny a sheet: and so well printed as aforesaid: the Undertaker also
paying considerable Copy-money. 5. For the Encouragement of all Persons who
shall subscribe, or procure Subscriptions for six Books, at the rate aforesaid,
shall be presented with a seventh gratis. 6. That no Persons expect the Benefit
of these Proposals who pay not the First Payment before the first of February:
After which time, the Undertaker resolves not to sell it under 20 shillings
unbound; and possibly not so cheap. 7. That the said Book is now in the Press,
and will be finished by the twenty fifth of March next at farthest.
Vide the Proposals for a Second Volume on the other side.

PROPOSALS For the Second Volume of the WORKS of ISAAC BARROW, D. D. and late
Master of Trinity College in Cambridge: and since his Death Published by the
Reverend Dr. TILLOTSON, Dean of Canterbury: Now Printing in Folio: (Never
Printed before) 1682.
AMongst all the WORKS that this Learned Author has left, none has been more
earnestly desired than this incomparable Piece upon the CREED; wherein he has
not only explained and confirmed the great Doctrine of our Religion; but
likewise shown what influence every Article of our Faith ought to have upon our
Practice. The Undertaker, for the accommodation of all Persons, and making more
public the said Book, does propose as follows; viz.

1. That this Second Volume does contain many large Sermons upon the several
Articles of the Apostles CREED: with an exact alphabetical Table of the most
material Things treated of. 2. That the said Book will contain about 140
Sheets, or 560 Pages: of an excellent Paper and Print: also the Author's
Effigies exactly engraved. 3. That the Subscribers pay to the Undertaker 12
shillings for each Book unbound, as follows: 6 shillings present money; and
the remaining 6 shillings upon the Delivery of the said Book to the Subscriber
or his Assigns. 4. That for the Encouragement of all Persons who shall
subscribe, or procure Subscriptions for six Books, at the rate aforesaid, shall
be presented with a seventh gratis. 5. That this Book is also in the Press, and
will be finished by the twenty fifth of March next at farthest. 6. That no
Persons expect the Benefit of these Proposals who pay not the First Payment
before the first of February: After which time the Undertaker resolves not to
sell it under 13 s. 6 d. unbound; and possibly not so cheap. 7. That they which
have the First Volume in parts already may have this Volume alone.
The Undertaker, Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons in Cornhill, over
against the Royal Exchange in London.

For the ease of Subscribers that live in the Country, the Undertaker has
appointed the Booksellers here mentioned to receive their Subscriptions and
money; who give these Proposals gratis.

Henry Dickenson in Cambridge. Sam. Simpson in Cambridge. Richard Davis in
Oxford. George West in Oxford. George Rose in Norwich. Edward Giles in Norwich.
Tho. Wall in Bristol. Chapter Allen in Bristol. George. Tongue in Warwick. Richard
Lambert in York. John Goodri^k in Hull. Sam. Evans in Worcester. John Jones in
Worcester. Sam. Richards in Nottingham. Robert Eveleigh in Exeter. Mich. Hide
in Exeter. John Conneber in Barnstable. Will. Churchill in Dorchester. Robert
Foster in Shrewsbury. Richard Hunt in Hereford. Samuel Palmer in Gloucester.
John Tuthil in Yarmouth. William Bailey in Lichfeild. Edward Pawlet in
Grantham.

