THE POLLUTION OF Vniversitie-Learning, OR, SCIENCES ( Falsely so called)

Whereby most of the youth are so infected, and both they and their Parents so
deceived, that when they come to age, they prove either unprofitable or
hurtful Members to the Commonwealth, as now in these dangerous days all the
truly godly have doleful exeperience; As it was well observed almost
threescore years ago, by that faithful Martyr of Jesus Christ, Mr. Henry
Barrow, in diverse of his Books for Separate or independent CHVRCHES.

The evil of which kind of learning so attained, with many others flowing
from thence, may be remedied henceforth by the grave determination of the King
and Parliament.

Read 1 Timothy 6.20, 21. and Colloss. 1.2, 8.

LONDON, Printed in the year, Anno Dom. 1642.

The Preface to the READER.
IF thou that read this Treatise, be one that have drunken of those polluted
Fountains of Vniverstie learning, which (upon the terms thou did believe
it) is so much the more poysonable for the soul, then the waters of Mara were
bitter for the body, as the soul is more excellent then the body, yet if thou
have any true desire (though never so small) to be refreshed with the clear
and fresh waters of life; or if thou will awaite at the Poole of Bethesda,
until the Angel of the Covenant come and cure thee, surely there is a
possibility of thy recovery, and God that separated light from darkness, can
easily make a separation between the evil thou have received there, in thy
tender years, and the good thou have attained otherwise; even as he did both in
Moses when he was pleased to call and fit him for his special service being
trained up in all the wisdom as well as the profits and pleasures of Egypt;
and also in Paul, who was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, and could speak
more languages then all the Philosophers of Corinth.

Or if thou be one that bast been taught in all godly learning (which truly
both deserves and gets the name in Gods Word) as the sons of the Prophets
were of old, and wherein Timothy was brought up from a child, though thou be
ignorant of all University learning (especially upon such hard, or rather
intolerable terms as whereby it is obtained) surely thou have great cause to
rest contented, use it to the right end, and praise the wise God, who knows
best what is for thy good.

And as for the tongues, which God gave at the first for a curse or judgment,
to binder the building of the Tower of Babel, the same God that can bring good
out of evil, did at the first preaching of the Gospel, change that curse or
judgment into a blessing or mercy to all Nations, through the divulging
thereof to each Nation in their own language; if these (I say) or any godly
learning may be had in a holy way, doubtless a happy and sanctified use may be
made thereof, to the glory of God and good of his Church, but no otherwise, nor
upon any unlawful terms, such as wicked oaths, orders, degrees and
ceremonies, neither Idolatrous places, nor yet in, nor amongst the company of
such ungodly Docters, Batchelors, graduates, Masters of Arts, Fellows,
Professors nor Students, whose lives and conversations are in this Treatise
described to be like Rome if not like Sodom.

And although these days be very hard and harsh unto many thousands, as I and
mine have had long and doleful experience; yet in many respects, especially of
a hopeful plantation of Christ's glorious Gospel in the purity and authorithy
thereof (for any other reformation can hardly or possibly be good) these days
(I say) are far better then the former days, wherein we, and our predecessors
went on superstition, sin and ignorance, and when we would not commit sin
enough, and that with greediness, there were both wicked laws and
taske-masters to urge us, as it was both in Egypt and (...) in the days of
Phraoh and Jeroboam; but praised be our good and (...), that has so mercifully
and beyond both our expectation and deserving infinite degrees, raised up the
Scottish nation, both to break all their bands, and cut their cords, yea, and
to make such a happy way for us, that both live and sojourne here, whereby to
escape the crafty snares of the bloody enemies, as a bird out of the hands of
the fowler: Many Prophets and righteous men in Christ, would have been glad to
see the days that we see, and could not see them, and to hear the things that
we hear, but could not hear them.

But lest I be too tedious, I will not insist by way of preamble, beeause few
words are sufficient for the wise, (I mean for the godly wise, and not those
mentioned, 1 Cor. 1.18, 19.) I refer thee to this little portion of a worthy
Martyrs observations (of never dying memory, notwithstanding all the Clergies
cruelty) who, when he was close prisoner in the Fleet many years, being not
only urged to write anumber of books against ambitious and covetous Clergy
men, but to answer all their objections in many several disputations and
examinations, two of them being sent after, two by the Bishops to forge
quarrels, and to try if they could entangle either him in speech, or Master
Greenwood, who was a close prisoner also, and executed with him early in a
morning, before either any competent number of people gathered; or Queen
Elizabeth heard (being twice rescued by her before) whose several
examinations, excellent observations, and their adversaries calumniations, as
also those of that that other worthy martyr, Master Penry, are yet extant in
print, though the light thereof bath been long eclipsed and obscured, with
many other worthy men's Works through the injury and iniquity of the times,
until now, that by Gods special providence, undederserved and unexpected love
to us in Christ, that the strong deludge of books which (has been so long by
such wicked laws, decrees and persecutions stopped, as that most severe book
of statutes made in the Star Chamber against printers, and the cruelty used
against John Lilbourne can testify) does (I say) overflow all the banks, both
of hellish and Romish limitation.

All whose Works, with learned Master Henry Ainsworths. Wilkinsons, Robinsons,
with many others of the separation, I wish thee to peruse, and so regard them
for thine own good, as thou see them tend to the glory of God, being tried
by the touchstone of his Word, and then, I hope, thou will give him the whole
praise, and howsoever thou esteems either of the Author or me, his frail
instruments, I bid thee farewell.

Faults escaped in the aforegoing page.
In the preceding page, line 3. for believe, read receive. and line 20. read
only wise God.

The unlawfulness of University Learning, Or Sciences, falsely so called,
extracted out of Mr. HENRY BARROWS Book.
ONE sort of the Ministry of the Church of England is the Collegiat or idle
Ministry, which may be divided, or rather distinguished, because sometimes
they are mixed and joined, one man being a Master of a College and a Deane, a
Fellow of a House, and a Preband, and each of them have a Parsonage or two for
a need) into these two kinds, Academicall and Cathedral. The third sort the
Monastical, being by the hand of God and the Magistrates sword cut off and
suppressed. These Academicall Divines live, have their education and degrees in
the Colleges, Halls and Cells of the two Universities. The original corrupt
customs and use of which places it is not my purpose here to discourse;
neither indeed have I skill aright to discuss whether, and how they sprang
from the Heathens, or from the Papists. Only this I dare affirm, that from the
Book of God they never derived these their Colleges, Schools, Halls, Orders,
Degrees, Vows Customs, Ceremonies, Attire, that I say not their Arts,
Authors, exercise and use of their learnings, disputations, commencements,
etc. But as they have received them elsewhere, so have they ever belonged to
another head and Kingdom, and can by no means (in this state they now stand,
and have time out of mind continued) be made to accord to the Gospel and
Kingdom of Christ, whereof these University Divines have ever been the
professed and most bitter enemies, furnishing Antichrists Host in all the
rooms and places even from the Popes chair, to the Parish Priests pulpit or
pue, with fresh servitors continually, corrupting the pure Fountains, and
perverting the text it sefe with their glosses, paraphrases, notes, figures
etc. fighting with their Schoole-learning, vain arts, philosophy, rethoricke,
and logic against the truth and servants of God, striving hereby to uphold
Antichrists ruinous kingdom and abominable wares, which these merchantmen set
to sail for gains as we by present experience see (now their portion and idle
Monastical life, begins but even a little to be reproved by the light and
power of the Gospel) how these crafts-men, these University Clerks rage and
take on, and with their Schoole-learning seek to turn away the evident truth
of God, to color and plead for all the abomination and sin of the times, to
heal the wound and uphold the throne of the Beast, to rend, reproach, and
blaspheme such as speak and witness against it, as their vituperous,
unchristian and erroneous books which they daily publish, declare.

Neither is their education and learning (if they be duly examined) such as is
required in the holy Ministry of Christ: All of them (as is said) being
nourished even from their Cradles with the milk of superstition, instructed in
the Schools of heathen vanity, brought up in the Colleges of more then Monkish
idleness and disorder, exercised in vain and curious arts, whose divinity is
by tradition, etc. The truth of these things Mr. Giffard not being able to
gainsay, seeks to shuffle off with a bold boasting challenge against men unto
himself unknown upon the dispense of bearing the shame, If he find not in the
Universities many Bachelours of Art for exceeding in the knowledge of the
liberal Arts, the three Tongues, Hebrew, Greek and Latin, or in sound
judgment of Divinity, even the Principal Masters of Brownisme; which if it
could in so few years be obtained with more then Monkish idleness, then may
the Brownists in some thing be believed. First, we give him, to wit, that there
are of those he calls Brownists, sundry of greater continuance, and that
have as high degree in those Schools with as high commendation as himself,
although they boast not of such things whereof they ought to be ashamed. Then
that there are, as many of his brethren the Monks, that think themselves as
skillful as himself, or the greatest Clerk in the University. But now, in all
this, what will our ignorance help him or their store of learning show, that
they have not been, and are not thus initiate and brought up. In their Grammar
School it cannot be denied, but they learned, and learn the Latin tongue,
from the most heathenish and profane authors, lascivious Poets, etc. which are
allowed with the privilege of the Church of England, as most Christian
rudiments to be taught the youth in the public School. When they have passed
all these forms, and can both say much of those Authors by heart, and use
their phrase, then are they sent to the University to learn the arts, and to
be instructed in Philosophy, etc. Hitherto it cannot be denied, but
Heathenisme, and such execrable Idolatry as is found in those Authors, is
written and engraven upon the tables of their heart, and filed upon their
tongues; even from their infancy. Well and when they are come to the
University, there are they first salted, as they call it in the College, and
matriculate in the public Schools solemnly sworn upon the Proctors book,
to keep their mothers statutes and secrets, and not to reveal her Mysteries,
or teach her Arts any where but in the University. Then are they instructed
both publicly and privately in Logique and Retorick in the Elenches and
Topics, in the Tropes and Figures of all kinds; wherein they must be perfect,
for these Arts are of special use unto them and to serve at all assayes. Then
proceed to Philosophy, and there Aristotle is (...) amongst them, out of whose
mouth and writing they fetch their Positions and Axioms; Definitions,
Aphorisms, Distinctions, etc. out of his Ethics, Oeconomicks and Politics
they fetch the order and government of their manners, private estates, and
commonwealth. He yet further instructs them of the Soul, and of the World,
in large and special books; of the heaven, of natural and supernatural
things, of Nature, Fortune, the eternity of the world, and perpetuity of all
creatures in their kind in specie, of the regions of the air and several
things in them contained, the Meteors, etc. there learn they the causes of the
Rainbow, the making of the winds, clouds, and of the whole sky, far
otherwise then is set down in Genesis. Yet leads he them higher, and shows
them the celestial Spheres. Planers Stars, Quintessences, even from the Moon
to their Caelum cristallinum empiraeum, and their Primum Mobile, with their
several places, dimensurations, motions and Motors: yea, yet learn they more
secret things with their constellations, radiations, influence, and
predomination according to their signs, houses, oppositions, aspects,
eclipses, etc. whereby most strange and wonderful things are prognosticate and
foretold concerning the weather and seasons of the year the state of
Kingdoms, the diseases and dangers to come, etc. concerning nativities and
times of death (commonly called Fortanes) concerning things to come, or things
past, stolen, lost, found, etc. These things, it were frenzy, if not
blasphemy, to call vain and curious Arts. Master Giffard would never bear it
at the hands of such blind Schismatics (whose bane such deep learning is)
seeing these Sciences are vulgarly taught, studied, practiced, allowed and
maintained, not only in the Universities, but of the whole Church of England,
as by their yearly Prognostications every where to be sold, is to be seen.
These studies and Arts we may not call perierga, curious, because Mr. Giffard
says, Luke speaks only of conjuration, Acts 19. But let him approve these
lawful by the Scriptures, and surely I will gladly confess mine ignorance and
sin, in calling these studies and Arts profane, curious, unfit for a
Christian, much more for a Minister of the Church. Otherwise let not any
through mine unskilfulnesse (who peradventure repeat not aright, or in due
place the terms of these Arts, as having either forgotten them through long
discontinuance, or it may be, never learned them a right) take occasion either
to carpe at me therefore, or especially to think the better of these vain and
curious, yea, unlawful and unchristian Arts and studies, which have not only
no warrant in Gods Word, but are directly contrary unto, and expressly forbidden
in the same, as were not hard to show and prove, if the subject were not too
large, and should not make too wide a Parenthesis in this Treatise, and draw it
out to a greater length then I would. I will not therefore stand here to
discuss their philosophical problemes, paradoxes, axioms, or several
sentences and opinions, which are authentical and current amongst them, how
evil they agree to the Word of God; or to show how far these curiors
Inquisitors, these Star-gazers, Astrologians, Calcars, Wizards Devines, exceed
the bounds of faith and sobrietiy, and pass the limits of Gods revealed Will:
or, whether they may wander by these heathenish or divellish opinions of the
Heavens, Stars, and their revolutions, influence, etc. Motors, Demones or
Spirits, and how near this approaches to conjuration: Or to show how far
they are suffered to proceed, yea, profess and practice in these divellish
Arts: Let the books (that I charge no persons) which are commonly bought and
studied in the Universities, and in all other parts of the Realm without their
controlement show. Neither will I here proceed to repeat their other vain,
curious, fond, trifling and vile Arts and Studies, which were endless. Only in
this place I must here add unto those public professed Arts above recited,
the study of all Heathen and profane Histories of all ages, nations, persons
wherein they must of necessity be prompt and expert; as from those fountains
to draw their examples and platformes of manners and the government of States;
as from whence to fetch the chief ornaments of their style, Orations, Sermons,
Books, to exemplyfie, illustrate, prove or improve: yea, as whereby to open
and expound the Scriptures both of the old and new Testament, chiefly the old
Prophets, without which they cannot be understood, but especially Esaias and
Daniel. As to Rethoricke and Logique they are so necessary, as without which it
is impossible to understand or divide any part of the Scriptures aright; as
without which they cannot understand or declare to the people by what trope or
figure, by what form of argument or Syllogism the holy Ghost speaks.

In these Arts and Studies, are the Academicall Divines, or rather
Peripateticke Philosophers, trained and exercised. In these they must needs
spend seven of their first years at the least, else should they be unfit to
take those degrees of Bachelor and Master of Art; or to make that public
profession they do of the Arts at their Commencements. In these Arts and
Studies when they are once a little exercised and instructed, that they begin
to perceive the grounds and method thereof, then are they trained both
publicly and privately to defend or oppose against some of these Axioms or
Positions, both by way of Oration and Argument in their Sophismes and
Disputations, and therein all being approved (or at the least allowed) they
then take the first degrees of Schocles, and commence Bachellors of Art; and
have as ensigns of their degree and knowledge, special attire and furniture
assigned them to be known from other common scholars; as the square Cap,
troncke Gown, the Hood of one shoulder, the habit, etc. which they must
wear. Afteward having spent more then three years in study on these Arts, and
having done their public acts Pro gradu, then they commence Masters of the
said Arts, and are again solemnly sworn and made Regents and Lecturers of
their Schools, and sit, read, and dispute of the same Arts publicly in a
solemn high Seat, Pulpit or Chair for Orations; as also read private
Lectures thereof in their Colleges. Now I would here by the way know of Master
Giffard, what time and leisure a Bachelor of Art that continues in the
University, and proceeds in those orders and degrees can have, to study
Divinity, or to grow so prompt in the knowledge, judgment, and exercise
thereof, as he dare engage his credit he shall be found far to pass therein
such as in therein (...) been allowed publicly to preach, and of the Bishops
been made full Ministers. But to our purpose, when these Clerks are thus
instituted and furnished with these liberal sciences, and this groundwork
thoroughly laid, then may they in good time proceed to the study of Divinity,
(as they call it) which is set out unto them in great volumes and infinite
books of men's writings, both old and new, where they have such variety of
Paraphrases, Commentaries, Common places, Catechises. etc. (Not to trouble them
at the first with the Primitive Histories, Doctors, Counsels) as they may in
short space (if they study hard) become pretty Divines, and be able to show
their Authors judgment, yea (through the help of Rotoricke and a good memory)
to make a Sermon an hour long: Always carefully provided that they utter no
more, then that they have read in some allowed Author, having the privilege of
the Church of England and presume not either to understand the Text otherwise
then their Authors interpret it, or to add one note of their own observation,
for that (how consonant soever to the truth) were great presumption and
rashness. Neither may they over-far apply or enforce the judgment of their
Authors against any present enormity established by authority in the Church of
England, for that were intolerable against the peace of the Church, yea,
seditious against the Magistrates authority, etc. Thus, whilst these Divines
are held within these limits of modesty and sobriety, and continue with their
Mother the University, they may in due time set up their bills of challenge
upon the School doors that they mean to dispute upon such and such questions
of Divinity, and do their acts pro gradu. Which being dispatched, either in
tenebris or in luce, then are they fit for the Commencement to be made
Batchelors of Divinity. In like manner against that day must such of them as
have before passed all these degrees, and now are fit to proceed Doctors of
Divinity, do their acts in the public School accordingly in these Divinity
Disputation Sermons ad derum, etc. And against this solemn Commencement must
especial choice be made of those that are to commence Batchelors and Doctors
of Divinity, to keep the public acts that day. And these for their further
credits often times will undertake to defend against all comers, such
Propositions as are most odious to all men, in whom is any light, conscience,
knowledge, or fear of God. As that it is lawful for one man to have more
Benefices and Flocks to attend on, then one at one time; That it is lawful to
be a Non resident, to live from his flock whereof he takes charge; That the
unpreaching Ministers are true and lawful Pastors, and the Sacraments by them
delivered true and holy Sacraments; That Christ's outward government in his
Church, practice and set down by his Apostles, is not of necessity or
perpetual, but variable and arbitrable at the will of men, according to times
estates etc. These and such like, these Graduates publish and defend, the
Vice-Chancelor and and whole Senate of the University conclude and confirm, as
Catholic Orthodox and most sound, rejecting whatsoever Scriptures or Reasons
shall by these comicall Disputers eithe University Doctors and Divines, be
brought against them. Well, unto this famous act are these Commencers solemnly
brought in their several attires and arrayes, in their scarlet gowns, hoods,
habits, caps, tippets, etc. with the Bedells proclaiming and carrying staves
and maces before them, with a great troop of Graduates and Clerks following
them. And thus they march through the streets to the place appointed and
prepared for these prizes, where they have their sticklers and moderators ready
to rescue, when they are in any distress and where their adversaries fight
booty, being of their own confederacy. Where it is not lawful for any that
will to oppose or to speak for the truth of God. Neither are these questions
discussed in the English tongue before those multitude of people and strangers,
but in the Latin tongue after their Syllogisticall and Romish manner lest the
folly of these Prophet should be laid open unto all men, and these gamesters be
hissed off the Stage by the people. Thus though with many other trifling
ceremonies and circumstances then either I can, or care to recite, are these
Academicall Divines, advanced to their degrees. Which degrees, titles,
ceremonies, orders oaths vows, manner of disputations, etc. how consonant
they are to the Ministry of Christ by the Apostles rules, let Master Giffard or
those learned Divines approve by Christ's Testament, as it stands them upon,
that bring them in and exercise them in the Church. For our selves we protest
we never there read or heard of any such: and therefore cannot but think them
fond strange, and Antichristian, such as no way belong to or beseem the
Ministry of Christ, neither are necessary or tolerable in Christ's Church. Thus,
even by this very brief and insufficient recital of but some of their Arts,
studies, orders, degrees etc. I hope this assertion will not prove so false or
incredible That the learned Ministry of the Church of England is nourished even
from their cradles with the make of superstition instructed in the Schools of
heathen vanity, brought up in the Collidges of more then Monkish idleness and
disorder.

For of such kind of Societies and Colleges of Ministers and Clerks, to live
together after this Monastical manner, we never read in the whole Book of
God. How like they are to the Schools of the Prophets at Naioth, Rama Jericho
let their Arts studies vows customs, orders, ceremonies, degrees disputations
exercises etc. declare. And as to the holy exercise of prophecy spoken of in
the new Testament, it belonged unto and always was exercised in some Christian
Congregation, in a more holy, reverent, and free manner, and not after those
Heathenish Popish customs above said. We in Christ's Testament never read of
such a Monastical Ministry so withdrawn and sequestered from any particular
Congregation, Office, Charge and Function, as these University Divines and
Ministers are in their Colleges, Halls, Cells: Where they must needs live in
idleness and disorder, that are thus licentiate and dissolute, that will
beheld within no Christian bonds or order. We never read in Christ's Testament
of any such Societies or Ministers, that lived in no particular Congregation,
that were called to no particular Office, or Flock, that live idly,
professing to be Ministers, and yet execute no certain Ministry or Function.
When Master Giffard shall directly prove by the Scriptures these things to be
lawful, then so far forth we shall allow of these Vniversitte Divines,
these Collegiat Ministers: And the rather, if he also approve by Gods Word
their worship in their Service-booke; and last of all (not to comber him with
their manifold other superstitious enstomes, Commemoratons, etc.) if he can
show it to be lawful for any Minister or Christian to join unto and live in
any such College, Society or Fellowship, where Gods holy Ordinance of honest
marriage is by express law forbidden all the Fellows and Scholars of these
Colleges, they being no longer to remain in that Society, then they live
unmarried, I say not now chastely: For how possibly or likely that is, for so
many young men in the flower of their youth and prime of their strength,
especially being noseled in such heathen vanity profaneness, vainglory,
curiosity, superstition, disorder, dissoluteness, and (as is said) contempt
of Gods Ordinances, let any judge: yea, let the Scripture it self judge; where
God shows the reward of these sins, how he therefore gives them up to the
lusts of their own hearts, unto uncleanness, to shameful lusts, Romans 1.
contrary to nature, to work filthiness, and to dishonor their own bodies
amongst themselves etc. And so until some of them can justify this their
life, orders, custom, vows and proceedings of these Academicall Devines in
their Schools and Colleges, we must number and leave them with their brethren
and sisters, the Monks, Friars, Nuns, etc. under Gods fearful judgments,
utterly in this estate unfit for the Ministry or Church of Christ.

Yet would I not here, that any should deem or suppose that we condemn any
lawful Arts or necessary Sciences, or any holy Exercises, or Schools of
institution; and so do labor to bring in barbarism, as Master Giffard,
Master Some, and others have given out. No, we are so far from it, as we blame
these Universities, Colleges and Schools, for their heathen, profane,
superstitious unchristian societies disorders, customs, ceremonies, for their
vain, curious, unlawful Arts and studies, and their manner of teaching and
exercising them, etc. We desire with our whole hearts that the tongues and
other godly Arts were taught not in the Universities, or a few places only,
but in all places where an established Church is, at the least in every City of
the land. Yet this indeed we hold, That every Christian man ought to have his
abiding and dwelling, and to bring up his children in some such place where a
Christian Congregation is, and that all Schools of learning ought to be kept in
such places, where both Teachers and Scholars may be under the holy government
and censures of Christ in his Church, and may live and be kept in holy order.
Then, that the Arts and Sciences which are thus taught or studied, be not
vain, curious, or unlawful but necessary and godly. Thirdly, that they be not
taught, exercised or practiced after any profane, vainglorious or
superstitious manner, but in all sobriety, modesty, and in the fear of God. To
these few rules; if their Universities, Colleges, Schools, were reformed,
then should they not be as they now are, the Seminaries of Antichrist, the bane
of the Church, the corruption of all youth in the Land: But then should they be
(that which they now pretend) the Schools of all godly learning to garnish the
Church, to furnish the Commonwealth with fit and virtuous men for every place,
office, and estate.

Here they will with one voice answer, that the Universities are the Seminaries
of Religon, of the Ministry of the land; the Schools and Colleges of
learning wherein the sons of the Prophets are trained up as they were in
Naioth, in Bethel Ieriche Iorusalem and Corinth.

If the tree be known by the fruit, the Cockatrice by the poisoned Eggs the
Viper by the spawne the nest by the birds; then let the Religion and Priests of
the Land show what kind of Seminaries and Colleges these Universities are. If
these be the best fruit and famoufest men (that are instructed in nothing but
(...) corrupt and cavil against the truth) then let them take heed for the Axe
is laid to the root of the tree, etc. If also these your Universities be
compared to the Cities, whither these faithful men repaired (because of these
famous Prophets) to be instructed in the Laws of God, we shall find them more
like to the Sodomiticall Colleges and Fellowships of the Idolatrous Monks and
Friors, brethren of a birth, even by both parents; then unto the holy
assemblies of the Prophets. And this will appear, if we compare them either in
the persons assembled, or in the manner and ends of their education and
training.

What the sons of the Prophets were, is already showed; namely, godly men
that repaired to the Cities where these famous Prophets were most resident, to
be instructed in the Law of God. But the persons that resort to these
Universities are the children of all the profane in the Land, that repair
thither to be instructed in heathen and vain Arts, whereby they may get their
living; or if they study Divinity, (as they call it) they make an occupation,
of it: It is but for their belly, for worldly promotion, and not for the glory
of God, as the greedy seeking after their Ecclesiastical livings by the one
sort, the selling of their cunning, and letting forth their tongues to hire of
the other sort, declares.

Third holy companies of Prophets mentioned in the Scriptures, were trained up
in the Law of God, lived orderly in the fear of God together with their wives
and families. But these Vnivensity Colleges are a miss line rowte of very
young men for the most part, and boys together, leading their lives in
Idolaity, confusion; disorder; spending their lives if vanity, folly,
idleness, living neither in the fear of God, not in an well established order
of his Church, neither in any lawful calling in the Commonwealth. They are
forbidden in these societies to live in holy wedlock: If he be married, he may
not there enter: If he being entered marry, he may not there tarry. An endless
discourse it were, but to recite their several Idolatrous profane usages
mysteries, others, vows, ceremonies; all which evidently show from whence they
had their original, namely, from Antichrists chair, to which they have ever
served, and still mall places do serve, fighting stoutly under his banner
against the Faith and Church of Christ, supplying him continually with fresh
soldiers to carry abroad his merchandise, and fet abroach the deceits of Satan.

Neither are they more like unto the Churches of Christ, Revel (...) 1 John
(...) 2 Cor. (...)
then unto the Schools of the Prophets: the Church of Christ is no cage of
such unclean and hateful birds of their fry and offspring: the Churches of
Christ have no such Colleges, Societies, Fellowships; the Churches of Christ
have no such heathenish and Idolatrous customs, excercises usages, oaths,
vows, ceremonies; they have no such profane Arts, 1 Timothy (...) and 4. (...)
3.4.5 (...) 1 Timothy (...) Tit. (...) 1 Pet. (...) Acts (...) 1 Cor. (...) Mat
(...) Acts (...)
vain education and literature; they have no such degrees and ostentations of
learning, neither are there found either Batchelors or Doctors of Divinity.
Their Pastors and Teachers are chosen for their knowledge, gravity, goodness
of life; they have no such fastuous and blasphemous titles, but are called to a
labor and a charge; for the faithful performance whereof, they rather desire
to be commended, then to be thus greeted in the Marketplace. As they are by
the Church wherein they serve, called to to this office; so are they orderly
and reverently ordained by and in the same Congregation, with fasting and
prayer, etc. and not arrayed in searlet with the habit, hood, tippet,
corner-cap, with their maces and beadles proclaiming before them, and such a
train of the Popes Olerks, young and old following them through the streets,
till they march to the place where they play their prifes: Neither are they in
this manner dubbed Doctors by the delivering a book unto them, sworn upon a
book to their fathers fidelity, and their mothers mysteries adopted their
son by a ring and a kiss, or enthronized in a chair, with many other
ceremonies, and made Doctors of Divinity, Doctors in name and title only, Act
(...) 1 (...)
without any certain office or Church wherein and whereunto to administer.

For this title of Divinity, I know not how to give it unto any mortal man
without blasphemy, Christ only excepted, Col. (...)
in whom the fullness of the God head dwells bodily. Rev. (...) Rev. (...)
The English of Christian Religion and Profession of the Gospel and faith of
Christ, I can well away with and digest; but this English, Romish abstract of
Divinity, I am assured came from the same forge that their title of the supreme
Head of the Church did, and cannot with all the glosses, scholions, and learned
interpretations they can devise, be made other then most high blasphemy against
the sacred person of Christ, (...)
who is only universal Doctor of all his Disciples, and of all true Religion.
And evil may D. S. either defend or pattern his Doctorhood by Saint Paul, who
in the same verse, by him alleged, 1 Timothy 2.7. shows a lawful calling, a
lawful and certain office, and also a sincere and faithful administration
thereof. But now, as Saint Paul's Apostolic office is ceased, the Church being
established and delivered to other certain offices; so if Paul's Apostolic
room of Doctorship (as he calls it) were void, I suppose, D. Some not the
fittest man in the world for it; although (if it be as I hear) he can be no
less then an Apostle by his offices, he being a Pastor, if not a double or
plurified Nonresident Pastor of many Churches; a Doctor you see by privilege
and style, and a Deacon I mean also at Ely. And what was or could any Apostle
be more? Yet, seeing all these are but forged stuff, and that he has neither
any true office in the Church neither any true calling thereunto, etc. we can
take him but for a false Apostle at the best, if he sit not in an Apostataes
chair, that I say not an Apostataes gown somewhere else, and so leave him
either to repentance, or to follow his predecessors to his appointed place.

But by following this bird over far, I had almost been trained from the
nest. I was showing what little affinity there is betwixt the Churches of
Christ, and these Universities, these Colleges of Clerks, these Schools of
Prophets. In the churches of Christ, the names and offices of Chancellor,
Vice Chancellor, Commissary, Proctors, Taskers, Bedells, Provosts, Masters of
Colleges, vice-Masters, Bowcers, Deanes, Fellows, etc. are all strange and
unheard of; as also their several statutes, customs, ceremonies their manner
of degrees, and disputing for their degrees and order of teaching, which were
no small labor but to reckon up.

All which, as they are strange to the Church of Christ, who find not in all
Gods Word, any of these offices, degrees, statutes, orders, customs,
ceremonies, vows etc. neither any such Universities, colleges, Societies of
Scholars; so (seeing they have no ground in the Word of God, no fellowship or
communion with the Church) I see not why they should have any more toleration
then their elder brethren the Monks, who every way had as great show of
holiness and color of utility to the Church as they, or these other
Cathedral Collegiate dens have, yea, and might both as soon and as well have
been purged of their Mass and Latine-service, as these are: so that the same
end that is besalne the one remains the other. The Lord is not pleased with
any voluntary Religion. That building that has not the Word of God for the
foundation, though it be dawbed with never so great cunning and learning, (...)
and undershored with never so great policy and power, though it be built as
high as Babel, yet shall it assuredly fall, and the greater shall be the fall
thereof. As there is no building without the Word of God for the foundation; so
is there no fellowship or communion out of the Church of God. And therefore no
such consused Colleges, no such Idolatrous assemblies as are not gathered unto
Christ, but unto Antichrist, as live not in that Christian order and fellowship
which Christ has appointed to all his servants in his Church, but lead their
lives in Antichristian disorder, in Babylonish, if not Sodomitish confusion; no
such heathen Schools wherein youth is not trained up in the fear, knowledge
and order of Christ, but in vain Arts, Ephesians (...) Prove. (...)
superstition, Idolatry, disorder, etc. have any foundation in the Word of God,
any fellowship with or allowance in the Church of God.

But here will the University Knights draw me within the compass of these two
absurdities: First, that I condemn all good Arts and Literature; then, that I
quite drive them out of the world by taking away the Schools of the same,
wherein youth might be trained and brought up.

Nothing less, I with my whole heart allow of any Art or Science that is
consonant to the Word of God, and to the Doctrine which is according to
godliness; only the curious and heathen Arts profane and vain babblings and
oppositions of Science falsely so called, which they profess, and wherewith
they poison and corrupt all the youth of the Land I abhor, because God
condemnech.

As sor Schools to teach the Tongues or any laudable or necessary Art, I wish
them in abundance; that if it were possible, not only the youth, but even the
whole Church might be trained therein: I with my whole heart wish that all the
Lords people were Prophets: such an enemy am I to the true knowledge and
learning that I would not have it any longer kept secret in a mystery, but
even proclaimed upon the house top in every Cit, and in every street; yet still
and ever with this caution, that these Schools both be in an established
Church (I mean in such places where the Saints live together in the faith
order obedience and communion of Christ) and not in such Monkish, Idolatrous
confused idle, profane Colleges and Fellowships as theirs are: Likewise, that
the Tongues or Sciences be here taught in an holy, sanctified, reverend grave
manner, and not in such an unsanctified vain manner as they use: So shall the
earth be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters that cover the sea:
for in the Church of Christ are all his springs enclosed which by this means
should run at every conduct and water the whole land abundantly, whereas now
they lie in miserable darkness, wholly overgrowne with brambles and briers.

And surely, I even with marvel wonder, how these men can be so blinded to
compare these wicked Idolatrous societies, to the assemblies of the Prophets or
unto the Church of Christ, when you see they have nothing common with them, or
like unto them, either in the people assembled, Doctrine taught, manner of
teaching and learning, or order of life; when they utterly want warrant in the
Word of God for such kind of Colleges, Societies and Schools, these having
been derived either from the Heathens, Egyptians, Greeks, Persians, that had
their peculiar Colleges and Schools to their peculiar Sects, or else have
issued out of the smoke of Antichrists inventions out of the bottomless pit.
They always have been, and still are the very hives and nurseries of these
armed poisoned Locusts and venomous Scorpions, I mean, either that false
Ministry of Antichrist, even all the governing and teaching Priests as
Cardinals, Archbishop. Bish. Suffraganes, Archdeacons, Chancellors,
Commissaries, Civil Doctors, Advocates, Proctors, Vagrant, roving Ministers
and Preachers, parish Priests, etc. or those counterfeit religious hypocrites,
Monks, Friars, Nuns, Clerks, or (as we now of late call them) Scholars. All
which have in innumerable multitudes from time to time, and at all times
swarmed and issued out of these hives into the face of the whole earth,
corrupting and destroying every green thing, poisoning the pure founraines of
Gods Word with their accursed glosses, deep learning, subtle and figurative
interpretations, darkning the sun and infecting the air therewith; as also
with the blasphemous traditions of their King Apolluon that Angel of the
bottomless pit. They have always most pestilently fought under this their
Captain against the Lamb, his Gospel and Church, plentifully furnishing and
continually supplying all the offices and rooms belonging to that huge
Midianitish Host of Antichrist: the Leaders, Captains, and Officers whereof,
are, and ever have been, wholly taken out of these Seraliaes; even from the
Popes person to the lowest Priest.

How they are reformed by having this English portesse their service-booke in
stead of their old masse-booke, may partly by that which is above written
concerning the same, appear: but more manifestly, by taking a view of foam of
the blasphemous Idolatrous customs which still remain in practice with them
in the same manner, as they did under the Pope: all or any of which it is not
here my purpose any further to describe. It suffices me to have showed them to
be confused, Idotrous, unchristian, unlawful assemblies and societies; so
far from being to be compared unto, or justified by the assemblies of the
Prophets or that heavenly exercise of prophecy now in the Church of Christ, as
they are not to be suffered in a Christian Commonwealth. And therefore here
again once more I conlude, that both these ungodly assemblies, as also the
Cathedral Dens and Colleges, ought by as good right to be abolished, as
their other brethen and sisters of a birth, the Monasteries and Nunneries are,
seeing they all want foundation in the Word, had one and the same hellish
original, had and these still retain the same blasphemous incurable abuses,
which can by no way be reformed but by their utter dissolution.

FINIS.
A PROTESTANTS ACCOUNT Of His Orthodox Holding in Matters of Religion, at this
present in difference in the CHURCH: For his own and others better confirmation
or rectification in the points treated on, Humbly submitted to the censure of
the Church of ENGLAND.

Printed by ROGER DANIEL, Printer to the Universitie of Cambridge. 1642.

And are to be sold by John Milleson, Stationer over against great St. Mary's
in Cambridge.


