The CASE of the BOOKS ELLERS and PRINTERS Stated; with Answers to the
Objections of the PATENTEE.
IT is humbly conceived, First, That the Author of every Manuscript or Copy
has (in all reason) as good right thereunto, as any Man has to the Estate
wherein he has the most absolute property; and consequently the taking from him
the one (without his own consent) will be equivalent to the bereaving him of
the other, contrary to his Will.

Secondly, Those who purchased such Copies for valuable considerations, having
the Authors right thereby transferred to them (and a due License and Entrance
according to Law) 'twill be as prejudicial to deprive them of the benefit of
their Purchase, as to Disseise them of their Freehold.

Thirdly, The Art, Craft, and Mystery of Printing, if it be made to appear to
be a Common Trade and Occupation, whereby many hundred Families are maintained;
then the consequence must be, That the Pattent now in question, granted to John
Moore, for the sole Printing of all Books, touching or concerning the Common
Law of England, Must be a Monopoly.

Now, that it is a Common Trade, will be made evident, by considering, how, and
when the Art of Printing came into this Kingdom, which was in the Reign of H.
6. and yet no Patent for Printing Law Books was granted until the Reign of Edw.
the sixth, which was about 100 years after. And not long after H. 6. the Art
and Mystery of Printing (being found a thing very useful for the Commonweal)
The number of Printers much increased, and Printing improved at the Subjects
charge; after which, they took Apprentices, and had Servants, and many Families
were supported by it; and so by the use and necessity thereof, it then became a
Common Trade, whereon the Subsistence of many Families have ever since
depended: Insomuch, That by the Stat. 35 H. 8. c. 15. it is in the preamble
declared, That great numbers of Englishmen are well skilled in the Craft and
Mystery of Printing, in all points therefore the Statute prohibites any
Foreigners to bring in any Books bound up, and lays likewise a penalty upon
any persons that shall buy any manner of Printed Books of any Foreigners by
Retail. Which Act of Parliament did not only declare Printing here to be a
Common Craft and Trade, but likewise made Provisions for the encouraging of the
Trade for the future, the success whereof is visible to all Men; and this
present Parliament calls Printing, An Art and Manufacture which for many years
has been in this Kingdom; and says further for the encouragement thereof, Be
it enacted, etc.

This being taken for a Ground, which cannot with any Reason or Authority be
denied; It is to be considered, Whether the Pattent, 19 Jan. 15 Jac. which
grants to Moore the sole Printing of all, and all manner of Books, which touch
or concern the Common Laws of the Realm of England, with a Prohibition to
others not to Print, Be a Monopoly, or not? And it is conceived, it is a
Monopoly for these Reasons.

I. It is a Restraint of Trade; for by the same reason as the King may grant
the sole Printing of Law Books, by the same reason he may grant the sole
Printing of all manner of Books to any person, which never any King of England
did. In the Fiftieth year of King Edw. the Third, lone had procured a Pattent
under the Great Seal for the sole Selling of Sweet Wines in London, and it was
adjudged a Void Patent, as much as if it had a grant for the sole Selling of
all manner of Wines, Cook 3 Inst. 181. Note That Case exactly agrees with the
Case now in Question, and the Patent condemned in Parliament: II. It will much
inhance the Prizes of Law Books; for if the Pattentee shall have a power to
restrain others from Printing, he may advance the Rates of Books as he
pleases; and the rather now at this time, because vast quantities of Law Books
were burnt in the late Fire. III. If the Patentee should Engross the whole
Trade of Printing Law Books, he may Print the Books with bad Impressions, and
yet make the Subject pay as dear for them, as for the best. All which
particulars before mentioned, are declared by the Laws of England to be
incidents inseparable to all Monopolies, and the Case now in Question, has all
those inconveniences attending it.
Now it is to be considered where lies the strength of the Arguments on the
other side.

Object. 1. Say they, Printing was brought in at the proper Costs and Charges
of King Henry the Sixth, therefore the King has the Right.
Answ. At the first invention of Printing, the King might grant it to the
Inventor (if he had been at the sole Charge) and it would be good; or Moors
Rep. 672.
the King being at the charge, might have the new Invention at his disposal:
But when in process of time, the Invention becomes a Common Trade, or Mystery,
then the Subjects come to have an Interest in it, as it is an Occupation which
supports many People and Families. And this is proved by 21 Jac. cap. 3. which
Enacts, That of any new Invention, the Kings grant shall Moors Rep. before
cited.
be good but for Twenty one years. But Printing was not brought in at the sole
Charge of the King, but at the Charge of the King and Subject; for Bishop
Bourchier gave 300 Marks toward it, as appears upon Record.

Obj. 2. They object the Proviso, 21 Jac. cap. 3. which provides, that that
Statute shall not extend to any Letters Patents, or Grants of Privilege
heretofore made, or hereafter to be made, concerning Printing, so they urge,
That by that Proviso the Parliament seems to pass their Judgments, that such
Patents were good.
Answ. It Is denied that this Proviso adds any thing to make Patents good, which
were void in Law; and the Lord Cook in his third Inst. fol. 185. (who was the
principal Instrument in sorwarding that Act) says, That it only excepts it out
of the penalty of the Act, but leaves it of like force and effect as it was
before. And without question, the true reason of that Proviso was to save the
Patents which were granted of particular Copies, as the Year-books, etc. which
were made at the Kings own charge, and the Bible, etc. which he purchased with
his money; and such as he had the sole right of disposal, as, Acts of
Parliament, Proclamations, etc.

3 Obj. They make, is, Upon the Proviso in the late Act for Printing, which
provides, That that Act should not prejudice the just Rights and Privileges
granted by any Letters Patents.
Answ. Observe the Proviso takes notice of the just Rights, such as are
consonant to Law, but not to any Patent which grants a Monopoly: besides, the
nature of the Proviso is, that it will neither add any force to the Patent, nor
diminish it, but leave it as it was before this Statute was made.

4 Obj. and principal one is, That Printing is at the Kings dispose by his
Prerogative; because necessary for the safety and peace of the Realm, as it is
said, Moors Rep. 673.
Answ. That the King has by his Prerogative the sole disposing of Printing all
sorts of Books, is not so much as pretended by the Patenttee: Which answers,
That it is not the Kings Prerogative, for Books of History and Policy assert
the Arcana Imperii more then the Reports of Law, which the Judges upon all
occasions approve or condemn: and The Case in Moors Reports is no Opinion, but
put by the by, by Council in arguing. And in caseby reason of the charge of
introducing Printing, the Crown had any Prerogative as to the sole Printing,
the same is most graciously transferred by the Charter of Incorporation; and
the Act of this present Parliament. And the Subjects using this Freedom of
Printing, is no more an Inchroachment upon the Kings Prerogative, then the
common usage of most Trades or Arts Mechanical, in their ordinary way of
Commerce.

Lastly, If this Patent should not be condemned as a Monopoly, there are many
Families as well Booksellers as Printers must be ruined: for the Trade of the
most vendible Books will be Engrossed by the Patenttee, and so will have the
true effect of a Monopoly to depauperate many Families, etc. But on the other
hand, the late Act made by this present Parliament has well provided for the
settling of the Trade of Printing, and encouragement of Tradesmen: And for all
sorts of Books to be Printed, the Parliament has appointed proper persons for
the Licencing of them; as for the Law, the Lord Chancellor, Lords chief
Justices, and Lordchief Baron; for Divinity, Archbishops, etc. Whereas, if the
Patenttee should enjoy this Privilege, he will take his liberty and Print what
Books he pleases, without being liable to the order and direction of the late
Act of this present Parliament, and so make the Act illusory and of no effect:
for directly contrary to the said Act, the Farmers of this Patent did declare
to the Committee for Printing, on the 26th of October last, That by virtue of
their Patent, they may Print Law Books without the Sheppards Clerk of the
Market Exact Constable The Solicitor Trial per Pals Complete Attorney
Complete Clerk Wingates Abridgment, and many others.
License of the Judges, etc. And accordingly have since the Act, Printed many
Books lately Printed by the Patentee without License.
Law Books without such License as aforesaid, and those very full of Errors.

And whereas it is suggested, That the Company of Stationers disowns this
Complaint, and but three or four Booksellers, and no Printers are
Complainants, it is a notorious untruth, for there is hardly a Bookseller or
Printer (except the Farmers of the Patent, who are but Three) but what are
concerned in the Complaint against the sad effects which this Patent, if
continued, will certainly bring upon them.

This Patent brings not any thing into the Kings Revenue, and Colonel Atkins,
the present Patenttee, has Farmed it out but for 100 l. a year; for which
inconsiderable sum, they endeavor the ruin of so many Families.

It is alleged, That no Law Books were Printed from the Patent, before 1641.
It is answered, That there were diverse Law Books Printed before 1641, and since
the Kings most happy Restoration, by particular persons, without any respect
to the Patent, some of which were produced before the Honorable Committee for
Printing. And whereas great quantities of Law Books have been burnt in the late
Fire, which now need Reprinting; as Three Parts of the Lord Coke's Institutes,
and Three Volumes of Judge Croke's Reports, and diverse others; the Copies of
which Books cost those who first Printed them many 100 pounds, and only whose
right it is to Reprint them, as first Purchasers: yet the said Farmers of the
Patent did the said 26th of October, declare to the Committee, That by virtue
of their Patent, they claimed the sole Printing of all Law Books, old and new,
though other men's Copies.

And to make it more plainly appear, that this Patent is a very great
Grievance, several of the Complainants having purchased the Manuscript or Copy
of a Law-book writ by Sergeant Rolls, Licenced and Prepared for the Press by the
Lord chief Baron Hales, ( and Registered according to the Act of this
Parliament.) Bought a great quantity of Paper to Print the said Book, and have
already Printed 100 Sheets; but by Virtue of the Patent, a Stop has been put
to the Press ever since August last, and is yet continued, to the great Damage
of the Owners, who have already expended above 1000 pounds upon the said Book.

Whereas it is alleged, That Wingate's Abridgment is now sold for 6 s. It is
answered, That before the late dreadful Fire, it was not sold for above 5 s.
and until the Farmers of the Patent wrested it out of the hands of the
Proprietors, not for above Four shillings.

And the treasonable Book suggested in the close of their Case, said to be
Published by one of the Complainants as a new Book this year 1666, is a
notorious untruth, for it was Printed in the times of the late Rebellion, and
not since, and looked upon to be Printed by one of the Farmers of this Patent
who used then to Write and Print Books of that nature.

And the Honorable Committee of Parliament having upon this occasion voted the
Patent (according to the pretended Extent) to be a Monopoly.

It is humbly submitted to the consideration of the Honorable Assembly of
Parliament, whether the said Patent (as to the pretense of Sole Printing all
Books touching or concerning the Common Law of England) ought not to be made
void?

CASE. The Case of the Booksellers and Printers stated: with answers to the
Objections of the patentee (John Moore). [1666.] 8. 8h. sol. C. 18. o. 1. (52.)


