THE CASE OF THE CITY OF Londonderry in Ireland.
THE City of Londonderry, since it was first Built, has been always a Refuge
and Defense to the Protestants in that Kingdom, and very Fatal to their
Enemies, as by many Instances might be shown. It was remarkably so in that
long, Bloody War which began there in the Year 1641. when so many Thousand
Protestants were barbarously Massacred and Destroyed by the Irish all over that
Kingdom; no other Place of Note; besides Dublin, in all Ireland, held out for
the Protestants at that time, of whom it saved many.

IT has been Eminently so again on this late Happy Revolution, as cannot be
forgotten; Nor of what Importance its Services and Sufferings were to these
Kingdoms, and the Protestant Interest; That when all looked Desperate in
Ireland, the whole Kingdom, the Sword, and all Power in Popish Hands, the
Protestants all disarmed and discouraged, and a General Massacre of them all
greatly feared, and believed very nigh them, as before in 1641.

Londonderry, tho in a weak Condition, and in provided at that time, yet to
save what it could in such Danger, was the First Place that appeared in that
Kingdom, laid all at Stake, and gave the First Check to the Popish Power there,
when it shut up its Gates against them, on the Seventh of December 1688, and
stood from thence-forward on its Defense, till the end of the Siege, the last
Day of July 1689, about Eight Months together, and near Four of them, in that
Memorable Siege, wherein the Great GOD so signally owned it, in its wonderful
Preservation and Defense against all possible Discouragements, the Charge of
all which it bore on its Own Head, which it has sunk under to this day.

IT was Fatal to the Irish every way, it broke all their Measures, and ruined
all their Designs, and so Baffled and Consumed the best of their Troops, as
they never after retrieved it. It stood in the Gap for these Kingdoms, and
prevented the coming over of all those Irish and French Forces, with what had
ensued, and made the Reduction of Ireland far more easy and cheap, than it
could otherwise have been. It kept a Footing in that Kingdom, which had been
otherwise quite lost, and saved many Protestants that fled thither for Refuge.

Its Losses, Disbursements and Damage by all this, (besides Personal
Sufferings, hardly to be expressed) has been exceeding great, and of a singular
and extraordinary Nature, and amounted (as on a moderate Computation appeared)
to the Sum or Value of about 30000 l. Sterling, (the ruined Houses by the Siege
being about one half thereof) by all which it has been reduced to a poor and
ruinous Condition, as is still too apparent, and having lain under its Miseries
so long, till the Wars are now ended: In hopes of finding then the happy
Effects of what it has undergone, Does by its Petition, in the Name of the
Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens thereof, to this Honorable House of Commons,

PRAY That its Case and Sufferings may be taken into Consideration, and so laid
before His Sacred Majesty, for the Petitioners effectual Relief in the Kingdom
of Ireland, As They in Their Great Wisdoms shall think meet.


