Mr. BARTON's FAST-SERMON BEFORE THE Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen, JULY
16th. 1690.

Pilkington Mayor.
Jovis xvii die Julii 1690. Annoque Regni Regis and Reginae Willielmi and
Mariae Angliae, etc. Secundo.
THIS Court does desire Mr. Barton to Print his Sermon Preached on the 16th. of
this Instant July, at St. Mary le Bow, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen.

per Cur. Aldr.

A SERMON Preached at St. Mary le Bow BEFORE THE Right HONORABLE THE Lord
Mayor And COURT of ALDERMEN, ON Wednesday the 16th. of July, BEING THE FAST
DAY. By SAMUEL BARTON, B. D.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1690.

The Epistle Dedicatory. To the Right Honorable Sir THOMAS PILKINGTON, Lord
MAYOR of the City of LONDON.
My Lord,
WHen I Preached this Sermon at your Invitation before your Lordship and the
Court of Aldermen, whatever fault was in it was imputable wholly to my self:
But now that I Publish it by your Lordships and their Order, you will pardon me
if I tell you, you have made your selves sharers in the Blame. Yet I must needs
say, had I bin convinced there was any thing in it that justly deserved
Censure, I should not easily have bin prevailed with to expose it to Public
view, unaltered as it is. But such is my Unhappiness, that though I have bin
told that many were offended at it, yet I have not met with any one that knew a
good Reason why, or that was himself persuaded there was any Reason for it. The
only Passage I have heard of (though there may be many more for ought I know)
that gave so much Offense, is that toward the Conclusion wherein I express my
detestation of such a Wickedness as the inviting in the French would be, in an
Englishman and a Protestant. I am not yet persuaded that the declaring my
Abhorrence of it in the manner that I have done, is so much as a tacit accusing
any Person of it: Neither can I think that I have aggravated the Crime in an
undue manner, when I make it next to the worst that can be imagined. But if any
one will tell me of a greater that ought to come between, I shall not be
backward to acknowledge such a Mistake. Neither lastly, can I think it worth my
while to answer such a weak and peevish Objection as some I hear have made, as
if it were Blasphemy forsooth to suppose that wicked men may account the
Government of Almighty God a Tyranny. And yet if nothing of all this be the
Fault that is to be found in that Expression, I must needs say, I am yet to
seek where it lies. In composing of the Sermon it was my real desire to promote
as well as I could the great End for which the Day was set apart, viz.
Repentance and Reformation whereby the Judgments of God might be prevented. And
I am not out of hope that it may have had, and may yet have by virtue of this
Publication, some little Effect that way. And therefore I humbly present it to
your Lordship as a Testimony that I am

My Lord, Your Lordships most Obedient and Humble Servant, SAMUEL BARTON.

AMOS IV. 12. Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel; And because I will
do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God O Israel.


IT is an easy matter especially out of the Prophetical books of Scripture to
choose out a Text proper enough to the occasion of our present meeting. For the
people of the Jews (in whose place and stead the Christian Church, and at this
time the Reformed part thereof does succeed) had, in their latter time
especially, before they were carried into Captivity, and before God would
execute the severest of his Judgments upon them for their Apostacies, many
Prophets sent unto them to warn them, whose Writings, and the Messages that
they delivered, it has pleased God should be conveyed down to us, to the intent
that from thence we might learn to take warning also, and to understand the
Methods of Gods dealing, and the Discipline we must expect he should exercise
toward those whom he favors with the knowledge of his Will, when they behave
themselves unthankfully and unworthily toward him. We have the History of the
Old Testament, to let us know what befell the People of God in those early Ages
of the World, and how he chastised them for their Offenses, and delivered them
oft-times upon their Repentance. And we have the very words of the Prophets
whom God sent among them (many times very pungent and penetrating words, such
as carry a more than ordinary force and spirit in them) very applicable in many
instances, to our own condition. These things were written for our Example and
Admonition. And indeed, setting aside the Divine Authority, there is no other
Book in the whole World containing so many wholesome and useful Instructions,
such Comforts and Supports in the time of Adversity, nor such necessary
Directions, and useful Cautions for all times, as are to be found in Holy
Scripture.

But though the Scripture abound, as I said, with Directions very useful and
applicable to every emergency, and to every state and condition we can be in,
and particularly have many Texts proper enough to a day of Humiliation (as this
is) of which number I take this which I have read to you, to be one. And though
it be not difficult, either to explain the meaning of it, or to make such
Observations and Inferences from it, as may be very useful to every one of us;
yet how to press these things so home, and to speak with such force and
cogency, as the present time and state of things does require, and as may cause
such necessary Truths to sink deep into every one of our minds, is I confess a
work that seems too difficult for me. However with Gods Assistance I shall
apply my self to it in the best manner that I can.

These words then (to begin with an Explanation of them) are a plain
Declaration of Gods intention to proceed in executing Judgments on his People,
and chastising them severely for their sins. For the Prophet in the Verses
before had bin recounting to them what Judgments God had already sent upon them
for their Wickedness, and that without any good effect. He begins this
Enumeration at the 6th. ver. telling them of a Famine that had bin amongst
them. I have given you cleanness of teeth in all your Cities, and want of bread
in all your places, yet have you not returned unto me, says the Lord. That
Chastisement, it seems, had done them little good. He therefore adds farther at
the 7. and 8. verses, And also I have withholden the rain from you, when there
were yet three months to the harvest, and this was in such a manner as did
plainly show the finger of God in it; for it follows, and I caused it to rain
upon one City, and caused it not to rain upon another city, one piece was
rained upon, and the piece whereon it rained not withered; so two or three
cities wandered unto one city to drink water, but they were not satisfied; yet
have ye not returned unto me says the Lord. Still they amended not their ways,
nor would forsake their sins, though the strange difference that was made
between some places and others in the Execution of this Judgment, made it
evident that the hand of God was in it. It follows at the 9th. verse. I have
smitten you with blasting and mildew, when your Gardens, and your Vineyards and
your Fig Trees, and your Olive Trees increased, the Palmer-worm devoured them;
yet have ye not returned unto me says the Lord. That is still the Burden, and
the complaint of God against his people, that nothing of all this would awaken
them so far as to make them return to their Duty. Therefore he proceeds at the
10th. verse to mind them of yet heavier Judgments that had bin executed upon
them. I have sent among you the Pestilence after the manner of Egypt, your
young men have I slain with the sword, and have taken away your horses, and I
have made the stink of your camps to come up into your nostrils; Yet have ye
not returned unto me says the Lord. Here is still the same complaint entered
against them, that all this had not wrought a Reformation. Yea still farther at
the 11th. ver. I have overthrown some of you as God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah, and ye were as a Firebrand plucked out of the burning; yet have ye
not returned unto me says the Lord. This was a dreadful aggravation of their
wickedness, that all this would work no good effect upon them, nor bring them
to a Reformation, but like those mentioned in the 9th. of the Revelations at
the sounding of the Sixth Trumpet which brought such dismal Judgments upon the
World, yet they, the rest of the men, it is said, which were not killed by these
Plagues, yet repented not of the works of their hands. One might expect upon
this Instance of the Jews Incorrigibleness, that God should either have
totally cut them off and destroyed them, or else that he should at least have
given them over, and no longer owned them as his People. But he was more
merciful than so; and therefore sends them a farther Summons by the Prophet to
try if at last their stout hearts would yield, or whether they would resolve to
abide the worst of it; and that in the words of my Text, Therefore thus will I
do unto thee, O Israel; And because I will do this unto thee, prepare to meet
thy God O Israel. In which words you see God still speaks to them as his
People, and own himself to be their God. But he threatens them severely in the
former part of the words. Therefore thus will I do unto thee. Therefore,
because thou have hitherto showed thy self so incorrigible, I will try if I can
overcome thy stubbornness; thus will I do unto thee; some refer the particle
thus back to what is said at the second verse where the Prophet tells them,
that God had sworn by his holiness, that lo the days should come upon them,
that he would take them away with hooks, and their Posterity with Fishhooks, i.
e. cause them to be carried into Captivity as easily as men take little Fishes.
Others understand it more generally, and that seems better then to look back so
far, thus will I do unto thee, i. e. I will proceed and still multiply
Judgments upon thee, whilst thou continuest in this manner impenitent. And then
it follows very seasonably after such a Threatening; And because I will do this
unto thee, prepare to meet thy God O Israel. Which words, some understand as
spoken ironically; as if he should have said, since thou seem resolved thus
to contend with me, and to defeat all my designs in chastizing thee, prepare
thy self and try whether thou art able to stand against me, whether thou can
divert the strokes of my Indignation, or how well thou can bear them when
they come upon thee. This is no ill sense of the words, for God might thus by
his Prophet upbraid his People with their weakness and folly, that would act as
if they thought themselves able to encounter him, or had no need to fear the
effects of his displeasure: And the following words at the last Verse of this
Chapter seem to favor this sense, as expressing and setting forth the
Greatness and Majesty of God, and the irresistibility of his Power. For lo, he
that forms the mountains, and creates the wind, and declares unto man what
is his thought, that makes the morning darkness, and treads upon the high
places of the earth, the Lord the God of Hosts is his name. But others, and I
think the greatest part of Interpreters, choose rather to understand it in
somewhat a milder sense, as an Exhortation to Repentance, by which possibly the
wrath of God might yet be appeased, and his Judgments averted, or at least if
not so, if the Decree were peremptorily and irreversibly gone out against them,
yet they might be the better able to submit to the stroke, and bear with
patience and fortitude the evil that was coming upon them. For were there no
more in it than so, it is a very useful and necessary warning. When Troubles
are a coming it is very good to be well prepared. Yet that Repentance would
still have prevented the Evil that was threatened, seems very probable as for
other Reasons, so because of that saying which you have twice repeated in the
beginning of the next Chapter, Seek the Lord and ye shall live. I therefore
look on the former part of the words as a Threatening, and the latter as an
Exhortation to Repentance, whereby the Threatened Evil might be prevented; yet
not so as to exclude either of the other senses, wherein they may be taken to
denote the impotence and utter inability of men to resist or fight against God,
or the need of a prepared mind when Evil is certainly a-coming. Accordingly
therefore from the words thus opened we may draw these following Observations.

1. That it is the incorrigibleness of a People under former and lesser
Judgments, that causes Almighty God to send more and greater. Therefore thus
will I do unto thee. Because thou have not yet returned unto me and amended thy
ways, I will proceed to farther degrees of severity toward thee.

2. That when Judgment is going forth against a People they have no other help
or remedy but a true Repentance. They may prepare to meet their God with a
humble Submission and Acknowledgement of their Fault, and so perhaps may avert
his Anger, but there is no other possible way of doing it, no Force nor Policy,
without that, will put by the stroke.

3. That though Judgments be never so peremptorily denounced, yet still there
is a door of Hope open this way, the wrath of God may be averted, or at least
greatly asswag'd and mitigated, or the time of its continuance shortened.

4. That when Judgments do fall heaviest upon a People, yet by a due
Preparation the burden of them may be greatly lightened. I shall speak
something to each of these Observations, and then proceed to make some
Application. And,

1. We may observe hence, That it is the incorrigibleness of a People under
former and lesser Judgments, which causes Almighty God to send more and
greater. It is very evident from the Text and Context that this was the Case
with the People of the Jows. For their not returning to their Duty after so
many Chastisements is given as the Reason why God would proceed to a farther
exercise of severity. And it is not so much Gods indignation against sin that
causes him to do thus, as his Love to his People and desire of their
Reformation. For Affliction is found to be a very proper means in order to that
End, and reduces those many times to their Duty, whom forbearance and
indulgence would but have spoiled. And therefore this Discipline God chiefly
exercises toward his own People, those whom he has most favored with the
knowledge of his Will, and that with an intent to bring them to a better mind
by it. When there is no longer any hope of that, he then proceeds either to a
total excision and destruction of such a People, or else leaves them wholly to
themselves to follow the Conduct of their own Lusts, takes away the light from
them, and lets them grope in darkness and blindness, till they so fill up the
measure of their Iniquities, that in his wise Providence he judges it no longer
fit to let them live upon the Earth, and so brings a sweeping destruction upon
them. In the mean while that Reformation is the end he seeks in chastizing, and
that where there is no hope of that, he is wont to forbear, we may learn from
that Expostulation of the Prophet Esaias with the Jews, for their stubbornness
and backslidings; Why should ye be stricken any more, ye will revolt more and
more. Elay 1.5. And we have no reason to wonder that those People whom God has
favored in a peculiar manner should be more especially exercised with a severe
Discipline when they sin against the Mercy and Loving Kindness of God. Such
have more to answer for, have more Talents entrusted with them; And we know
it is usual with men to take it more heinously when their own Children or
Favorites, or such as they have very much obliged, offend against them, then
when it is done by others: And it is usual also for them, so long as they have
any hopes, to seek the reclaiming of such by chastizing them. No wonder
therefore if God proceeds in his dealing with men, according to the same Rules,
and the same Principles of Reason which he himself has engrafted into our
Nature. And hence it is that he tells this People of the Jews by his Prophet in
the Chapter before that where my Text is. You only have I known of all the
Families of the Earth, therefore will I punish you for your iniquities. Am. 3.2.

And there are many places in the Prophets wherein we find this People highly
taxed, and even reproached for their stubbornness and incorrigibleness,
notwithstanding all the warnings God could give them. If you look into the
History of them, the 17. Chap. of the 2d. book of Kings will give you a sad
account of the Causes that moved God to give them over into the hands of their
Enemies. At the 13. and 14. verses of that Chap. you read, how that the Lord
testified against Israel and against Judah, by all the Prophets, and by all the
Seers, saying, Turn ye from your evil ways and keep my Commandments and my
Statutes, according to all the Law which I commanded your Fathers, and which I
sent to you by my servants the Prophets. Notwithstanding they would not hear,
but hardened their necks, like to the neck of their fathers, they did not
believe in the Lord. And if you look into the Writings of the Prophets, it is
endless almost to reckon up the many several places wherein God upbraids this
People, with their stubbornness, and hard-heartedness, and impudence in Sin. In
the 48. of Isa. at the 5. I knew (says he there) that thou art obstinate, and
thy neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow brass. And in the 6. of Jer. at the 10.
ver. we have that Prophet complaining and expostulating to the same effect. To
whom shall I speak and give warning that they may hear? Behold their ear is
uncircumsised, and they cannot hearken, behold the word of the Lord is unto
them as a Reproach, they have no delight in it. And when he gives them good
Counsel at the 16. ver. of the same Chap. Stand ye in the ways and see and ask
for the old paths, where is the good way? and walk therein, and ye shall find
rest for your Souls; their answer is, (but they said) we will not walk therein.
And we will not hearken, ver. 17. Just as you have it in the 2d. Chap. of the
same Prophecy at the 25. ver. where is a lively description how they were bent
and set upon their Idolatrous Practices, Withold thy foot from being unshod,
and thy throat from thirst, i.e. Forbear such Practices as will certainly bring
thee to Poverty and Misery. It follows, but thou said, There is no hope, No,
for I have loved other Gods, and after them will I go. It was but lost labor
to dissuade them. Like that desperate Lover in the Comoedian, who says of
himself, Et prudens sciens vivus vidensque pereo nec quid agam scio. He saw
destruction and misery before him but he could not refrain. This was a sad
case. But God we see was resolved to try yet farther with his People whether
they might not be reclaimed by the Rod. Therefore thus will I do unto thee. It
was their stubbornness which made him take up this Resolution. But I proceed to
the 2d. Observation, which was

2. That when God is thus resolved; and Judgment is going forth against a
People, they have then no other help or Remedy but a true Repentance. Alas
what other can they have? All other Remedies must suppose God either impotent
or ignorant. But this only supposes him Merciful and Gracious, and that his
Goodness can overcome his Indignation and Displeasure when nothing else can. If
we would seek to oppose our selves against the strokes of his Anger, or to meet
him in any other way, it must be upon a mad supposition that we are wiser or
stronger than he, But this only supposes that there is a certain force and
efficacy in Repentance, and a kind of Magic in Prayers and Tears, which
Almighty God himself, such is his Goodness, cannot resist. Too many indeed when
they see Evils a-coming, are apt to put their whole Trust in other Remedies,
and to think that their own Strength or Policy shall be able to put by the
stroke; and God may permit the success sometimes to answer their Expectation,
being entreated perhaps by others that behave themselves better. And this does
but harden them in a vain conceit that it is they themselves and not the
Providence of God that does it. But most certainly whenever God sets himself to
punish or chastise a Nation, it is easy for him to bring it about, be they
never so great, or strong, or well provided, or watchful against their Enemies.
And therefore whenever Judgments are threatened or Evil seems to be coming
upon a Nation, though all fit and proper means and ways are to be vigorously
used, whereby to ward off the Blow, yet if Repentance and Amendment of Life be
not joined with them, there is little hope in them all, they are but broken
Reeds, that may easily sink under us and deceive us. And the reason is because
God the Supreme Orderer and Governor of all Affairs, finds no difficulty in
overcoming any other opposition, except that of the humble Prayers and
Supplications of a penitent People. And this brings me to the 3d. Observation
that was made, viz.

3. That though Judgments are never so peremptorily denounced, yet still there
is a door of Hope open this way. For this is the ground of the Prophets
Exhortation in the words of the Text, Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel, viz.
that thou may yet turn away his wrath from thee, and shorten at least or
mitigate, if not totally put by the Judgments that are going forth against
thee. For to this purpose Rab. David glosses upon the words. Praepara te and
dispone ut obviam eas and exeas in occursum ejus per paenitentiam, and bona
opera, and experieris bonitatem and benignitatem ejus, convertetque tibi mala
in bona. Prepare and dispose thy self to go out and meet him, by Repentance and
good Works; and then thou shall experience his goodness and bounty to thee, and
he will turn the threatened evil into good. And for confirmation hereof, in the
Chapter next after this you have a promise of mercy still upon this condition
that they would but seek the Lord with Penitent and humble Prayer. Seek the
Lord and ye shall live. And this is most agreeable to the Declarations that God
makes frequently in the Prophets concerning himself, and the manner of his
dealing with men. Fury is not in me, says he, by the Prophet Esaias, Isa. 27.4.
He is not implacable but may be appeased if men will use the means. And
therefore in the following ver. he declares how that is to be done; Or let him
take hold of my strength that he may make peace with me, and he shall make
peace with me. As much as to say, If at any time I seem to be enraged against a
sinful People, yet let them but use the right means, let them but apply
themselves to that which is the proper method to assuage my Anger, and they
shall find the effect of it. He calls it a taking hold of his strength (this
applying themselves to him by Humiliation and Prayer) because it is the only
thing that renders him in a manner unable to punish those that do so; such is
his Goodness and Compassion toward returning Sinners, that he cannot find in
his Heart to execute the fierceness of his wrath upon them; but finds himself
in a manner disabled, though it is not indeed from want of Power, but from want
of Will that he forbears, or ceases to punish. He is not wont therefore to go
to the utmost so long as there is any hope of a Peoples Amendment or
Reformation; and so soon as that appears in any good degree, he begins to
mitigate and withdraw his Judgments; according to that of the same Prophet
Esaias, In measure when it shoots forth thou will debate with it; he stays
his rough wind in the day of the East Wind, Isa. 27.8. In the former part of
which words God is compared to a Vine-dresser, that prunes his Vine with
discretion, lopping off the superfluous branches, but not hurting the body of
the Tree. So God proportions his Chastisements to the end which he designs by
them, which is indeed the good of his People, and therefore many times gives a
check to his own Anger in the very middle, or stops when his hand was as it
were lifted up to strike, and the fatal blow was within a little of being
given, not considering so much what a sinful Nation has deserved, as what is
most agreeable to his Wisdom and Goodness to do in the World. He stays his
rough wind in the day of his East Wind. But I proceed to my 4th. and last
Observation, of which but in a word.

4. That where Judgments do fall heaviest upon a People, yet by a due
Preparation the burden of them may be greatly lightened. Sometimes, yea too
often, the bulk or body of a People show themselves to be so stubborn and
obstinate in their Sins, that God is, as it were compelled to exercise great
severities toward them. Yea many times they draw down Judgments upon themselves
by their wickedness. And their sins are of such a nature, that unless God would
interpose by an extraordinary power to hinder it, they must needs bring
National Calamities upon them. And sometimes God has bin so far provoked that
he will hear of no intercession for them, but though Noah, Daniel and Job stood
before him, it would be to no purpose. Now in such Cases as these there is no
Remedy but Judgment must have its course. Yet good men are not therefore left
in a hopeless or miserable Condition. They may prepare to meet their God going
forth thus in Judgment against a People, and it will not only be a likely means
to avert Gods Wrath in time, but it will also be a means to lighten the Burden
for the present, and enable them to bear it with Patience and Fortitude. For in
a time of greatest Calamities, if a man have but peace with God and his own
Conscience, it will be a mighty support to him. And though a man should be
encompassed with the saddest spectacles of misery all about him, and see the
ruin of his Country, and have a large share in it himself, yet so long as he
has hope in God, and peace in his own Bosom, provided that he has truly
repented of his Sins, and fitted himself for the Happiness of another World,
such a one, though he cannot but be under much grief and trouble, yet he ought
not to be accounted miserable. Every good man will have a tender and
compassionate sense of the Miseries of others, especially any that are near
him, and it is Natural for all men to have sense and feeling enough of those
temporal Evils which themselves lie under. But nevertheless a quiet Conscience
and a well-grounded hope in God are so strong a Cordial, and have such a mighty
virtue in them as may be sufficient to keep a man's Spirits from sinking under
his Burden. It was that that supported holy Job under all those grievous
miseries and calamities which befell both him and all his Family. And though a
man have not all the same Conscience of the Innocence and Integrity of his past
life, that that good man had, yet if he be but truly penitent, and do really
amend for the future, he may even be thankful for those temporal Evils which
were the occasion of his so doing, and cheerfully submit to them, as but a just
and necessary chastisement.

But I proceed next to the second part of my discourse, to make some
Application of what has bin said. And every one of these Observations that have
bin made from the words will afford us some inferences deserving our
Consideration. For,

1. If Incorrigibleness be that which provokes God to send farther Judgments;
then may we of this Nation have just cause to fear. For we cannot sure but be
sensible that we have already tried Gods Patience very far. He has punished us
in diverse of the very same ways that are here recounted in this Chapter, and
which I repeated to you in the beginning of my Discourse. Not indeed by Famine:
but by Pestilence, and by a dreadful Fire, so that the Remainders and the
Inhabitants of this great City may justly be said, in the Prophets Expression,
to have bin as a firebrand plucked out of the burning, and as justly I doubt
we may add that which follows, yet have ye not returned unto me, says the
Lord. Since that time therefore we have fallen into many great troubles,
through intestine Divisions, and Animosities between one Party and another,
industriously cherished by those who designed the ruin of both: Many illegal
and arbitrary things have bin done amongst us for the bringing in those two
most dreadful Evils (which ever go hand in hand together) Popery and Slavery.
And though our Suffering in this kind was comparatively but little, yet it
carried a high degree of Terror in it, when we saw our selves in the hands of
such men as would stick at nothing to bring about their Ends, and whose very
tender mercies were cruel; When we saw the Foundation laid and expected nothing
less than the erection of a French Model of Religion and Government. And truly
when we were at the height of those our Fears, I must needs say that then, if
any, was the time when we began to look somewhat like a reforming People. For
when we thought we were like shortly to be deprived of the Public Worship of
God in a known Tongue, People did seem a little more zealously to frequent it,
when we saw and had occasion to consider more narrowly what the Doctrines and
Principles of Popery were, we began a little more closely to adhere to those of
the Reformation, and when we thought that all Protestants must be like to
suffer together, we began to lay aside our quarrels and differences in a great
measure, and promised our selves we should not easily fall into the same again.
And so merciful was God to us, that in a little time, when there was but this
little Appearance and this good hope of a Reformation among us, he sent us a
most gracious and wonderful Deliverance, the very thing that we wished for, and
beyond our Hopes. And is it not a sad and an ill boding consideration to us
that no better fruit should follow? May not God justly say to us as to Ephraim
and Judah by the Prophet Hosea, O Ephraim what shall I do unto thee? O Judah
what shall I do unto thee? For your goodness is as a morning Cloud, and as the
early dew it goes away. Is it not strange that men should so soon forget what
were their thoughts in the day of their Affliction? Is it not a wonderful thing
that we should disagree and fall out again as much as ever, before we are got
rid of the Common Enemy? And is it not a thing very provoking to Almighty God
that we should bring forth no better fruit, after such warnings and so much
mercy showed us? One would think the consideration of those dreadful Evils we
have hitherto escaped, should make us look on our selves as under some
obligation to walk worthy of the good Providence of God, and the prospect of
those Miseries that are before us, if our Enemies should prevail, should make
us fearful of offending. He must be very blind, and I doubt wilfully so, that
does not see and believe that if the late designs, that had so long bin carried
on against our Religion and Government had not met with that wonderful and
seasonable interruption that they did, not we only but even all the Christians
of the Reformation had in a little time, in all probability, bin reduced to as
deplorable a Condition, as those of France or Savoy have bin. And shall any
little Creature now that has got some nice and foolish scruples concerning our
present settlement, and knows not what he would have himself, pretend to murmur
and repine because God does not bring about his work just in the way that he
would have it, and according to the model of his Fancy? Is it nothing to such
narrow souls that the whole Protestant interest which was in a manner expiring,
is now through Gods wonderful Providence beginning to revive again, that the most
ancient of all Protestant Churches, the poor Inhabitants of the valleys of
Piedmont, that have born their Testimony through so many Ages, are already
restored to the liberty of their Religion, and become a Terror to him that
stirred up Persecution against them, and that there is hope the like may ere
long befall our poor Brethren of France? Or do all these people deserve no
consideration? Is it no matter what becomes of them? since that perhaps in all
things they may not be just of our minds. So some Bigots seem to think who
would cut themselves off from the Body of the Reformation. But certainly till
we are reduced to a better temper of Mind, till we can love one another, and
have a hearty Charity for all that hold the same Fundamentals of Christianity,
tho differing from us in lesser matters, provided they live but according to
their profession, and till we our selves learn to walk as becomes the Gospel,
and to adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior by a holy and exemplary
Conversation, till this be done, we are not fit for a complete Deliverance; And
it is no wonder therefore if God still continue to chastise us; If after he has
brought us out of Egypt, he yet lead us about in the Wilderness, and cause us
like the murmuring Israelites to consume our days in Vanity and our years in
Trouble. Yea if he should make us to drink up the dregs of that bitter Cup
which has already gone about in almost all the Reformed Churches round about
us, we must acknowledge the Justice of his Providence in it; yea we ought to
wonder at his Mercy if we escape it. But,

2. From the 2d Observation that was made we may draw this Inference. That
since when Judgment is going forth, and God is about to chastise a people,
nothing else can deliver them but Repentance; We, who by reason of our former
Impenitency and Wickedness have so much cause to expect severity, and who
according to the present posture of our Affairs seem to be upon the brink
either of a happy Deliverance or a miserable Downfall, ought to beware that we
put not our Trust and Confidence in any other help or means so much as that.
Many of us I doubt are too apt with the Jews to put their trust in Arm of
Flesh, to reason from second Causes and Appearances without considering
sufficiently how easily the Providence of God, if he be angry with us, and set
himself against us, can blast and defeat all our likeliest and most probable
Hopes. We may be apt to reckon upon the strength of our Forces, the number of
our Confederates, the Valor of our King, the Situation of our Country and the
like; but not only a little sense of Religion, and a small consideration of the
overruling Providence of God, but even our own fresh experience may serve to
convince us, that except we have him on our side nothing else can do us any
good. For have we not lately bin forced to turn our backs upon our Enemies in
that very Element wherein we were wont to think our greatest strength lay? And
though God has bin pleased to bless us with better Success in Ireland (for
which for ever praised be his Name) yet in the very manner of doing it he has
showed us how easily he could have brought about a quite contrary event, and
given us such a blow as was not to have bin recovered. We may even tremble to
think how near we were to ruin, when the Breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed
of the Lord, so narrowly escaped that fatal Bullet, and how dismal the
consequence must in all probability have bin not to us only but to all the
Protestant Churches abroad had he fallen by it. But if God be for us who can be
against us? If he will undertake the defense and protection of any man, all the
World cannot hurt him, though he walk in the midst of dangers, it is the same
thing; A thousand may fall beside him, and ten thousand at his right hand, but
it shall not come nigh him, as the Psalmist speaks of him whom God protects. It
is good for us therefore to make our peace with God, and to put our Trust in
him; To say with the Psalmist, I will not Trust in my Bow, neither is it my
sword that shall help me. But it is thou, O God, who, we hope, wilt save us
from our Enemies, and put them to confusion that hate us. All necessary and
proper means indeed are to be diligently and vigorously used; For God will not
help those that take no care to help themselves, when he has put into their
hands the power and means of doing it; And we see St. Paul though he was before
hand assured of the Event, being told by an Angel that God had given him all
them that sailed with him, Acts 27.24. yet was careful nevertheless not to omit
the necessary means of Preservation. But when all is done, our main Confidence
must be, not in any force or strength of our own, but in the merciful
Providence of God, who is always able, and never unwilling to deliver us if we
are but duly prepared for it. To which purpose therefore the Inference that I
make from my 3d Observation is this;

3. That since God is so gracious, that though Judgments be never so peremptorily
denounced or seem never so likely to come upon a people, yet there is always a
door of hope open to the Penitent. We should therefore magnify his Goodness,
and set our selves seriously to use the means of averting his Anger. It is that
which is the end that God designs in chastizing a Nation, even to bring it to
Repentance, and if the Threatening, and the Terror of his Judgments before they
come, will but have that Effect, it will please him far better than if we force
him to exercise severity first, and he will be glad to be excused from that his
strange work, which he has so often declared he does not delight in.

Almighty God seems now by his Providence to be doing great things in the World
for the good of his Church, and the bringing down it is most cruel and
implacable Enemies. He can, and we see does, make use of those who are no
Friends to his Truth to bring about those good Ends which his Wisdom has
designed; And if we will set our selves to obstruct and hinder the good Work
that he is doing, we may bring on our selves a great deal of Trouble and
involve our selves in much Misery; But his work will be done, his Counsel that
shall stand, and the opposition of foolish and wicked men shall but help to
promote and establish it. How much better therefore were it for us, to
reconcile our selves to him by a hearty Repentance, and become the willing
Instruments of advancing his Glory.

There are some great and crying sins amongst us, which every one ought in his
place, and those especially who are entrusted with Power, to set themselves
against. We cannot be ignorant to what a height Vice and Debauchery has grown
amongst us, having bin I doubt purposely cherished, in order to the preparing
us for a false Religion. It concerns us therefore not only to reform our selves
if we have bin infected with the too general Contagion, but to set our selves
what in us lies to oppose the Torrent of Vice and Licentiousness, to declare
openly our dislike of it, and to show it no manner of Favor or Countenance. It
ought to be a sufficient Bar to any man's Advancement whatever he be otherwise,
if he be known to be vicious and immoral in his Life. For we may easily see the
Folly of trusting any thing in the hands of such Persons as have not the fear
of God before their Eyes. Neither ought we to fear (as some seem to have done)
that this will be the way to promote Hypocrisy; For admitting that it were so,
yet it is a thousand times better, and more for the benefit of the World that
Men should have but an outside and appearance of Godliness, than be openly
profane and Irreligious. And besides, if it be once for a man's advantage and
Reputation generally in the World that he appear sober and pious in his
demeanor, no question but many more will be really and truly so, than would be
otherwise where Vice is become fashionable.

We should consider how our Vices and Immoralities have brought us within a
little of utter destruction. And therefore if ever we hope for better times,
it is absolutely necessary that we amend. If we have bin seduced and led astray
by ill Example, or carried down with the Torrent of Looseness and
Licentiousness that has broke in amongst us, it is high time now at last to
consider of it, and accept the Invitation that God gives us to become better.
It Is time for every man to begin a Reformation of himself and his Family, and
all as far as he has Influence, and therein to follow the Conduct and advance
the Work of that Good Providence which seems now to be vindicating the
oppressed Cause of True Religion, and which, though we have highly deserved
Gods Anger, yet has opened a way to us to become yet a very happy, if we will
but be a reformed People.

And I insist the more on this because I verily believe that were men's Vices
and Debaucheries well cured, it would prove a great healing of all our
Divisions and Differences; it being but too notorious that many seek to
increase and set forward these, not so much for any real concern they have at
the bottom for one side of the question or the other, as for fear that if we
should agree there would in time be a more strict Rein of Discipline laid upon
their Necks, and they should not be suffered to be so openly Profane and
Licentious. This makes too many list themselves in that Party which they think
will give least restraint to their beloved Vices, who in the mean time little
concern themselves which side has the Truth, or so much as where the real
difference lies. But certainly it seems a very plain case, that it is the Duty
of every Christian, as to live according to the certain and uncontested Rules
of Piety and Virtue, so to join himself in the worshipping of God with those
who have the Advantage of a Public and Legal Establishment, so far as he may
do it without Sin. And if but so much as this were well considered and
conscientiously put in Practice, it were enough to make us a very happy Nation,
and to Cure many of our worst Distempers.

Such Admonitions as these if we would be persuaded to take, we need not at all
question the good Effects of it. But if after all that God has done for us (by
his Providence in a way of Chastisement or in a way of Mercy) there still
appear no amendment among us, as we shall highly deserve, so I know no Reason
but we should expect, to fall under severe Judgments. And though God may give us
that success at present which he sees necessary to the carrying on other ends
of his Providence in the World, yet we may assure our selves of this, that he
can never want means to punish us. And though we were totally delivered out of
all the dangers that at present seem to surround us, yet more and greater Evils
may still arise, and are like to do so, so long as Wickedness shall continue
uncontrol'd, and our Lives unreform'd.

If too general an Impenitence shall still prevent our happiness (which God
forbid) and provoke him to exercise severity toward us, there is yet this
Comfort to every particular Person, that will but be faithful in doing his
Duty, that by a due Preparation to meet the Evil, the Burden of it may be
greatly lightened, which was the 4th. Observation drawn from the words, and from
it I shall only make this my last Inference, and so conclude, viz.

4. That whatever evil may come upon us, it is our greatest Wisdom not to be
taken unprepared. We see what Misery some would bring upon us. For we have too
great cause to suspect there are those among us that cared not though they
ventured the subjecting this whole Nation to a foreign Yoke of most miserable
Slavery, so they might but have their Ends for the present. And we are
confidently told what I am very loath to believe, and am resolved I will not
believe till I see it evidently proved, that there are some who call themselves
Protestants, who yet stick not in a most lewd and flattering Address to invite
the Common Enemy of their Religion and Liberty to rescue them from what they
call a cruel Usurpation. But I cannot persuade my self that so great a
Wickedness should enter into the Hearts of any number of Men that go under that
Character. And if it did, I should think that in the next place they would
apply themselves to the great Enemy of Mankind to free them from the Tyranny of
God Almighty. But we have seen also that which gives us far more just cause to
apprehend our selves in danger; That our manifold Provocations and great
incorrigibleness that has hitherto appeared may very justly expose us to heavy
Sufferings. A general Repentance and Reformation would no doubt prevent any
such thing; Yea the great Mercy that God has so lately showed us, is a manifest
indication that he is not willing to deal with us as we have deserved. But
since we cannot promise our selves any security, it is our wisest-way to prepare
for the worst. It will not be lost labor though it never come. We are never so
fit for a prosperous condition as when we are ready if God call us to it to
submit to an adverse, and can heartily pray that his Will may be done. If we
have Peace in our own Consciences, and Peace with God, we are then ready to
meet him in any of the Varieties of his Providence; and may say with the
Prophet Habakkuk, Although the Figtree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit
be in the Vines, though the labor of the Olive shall fail and the fields shall
yield no meat, though the flocks shall be cut off from the fold, and there
shall be no herd in the stalls, yet we will rejoice in the Lord, we will joy in
the God of our salvation, Hab. 3.17, 18. But till we be reconciled to God, and
have Peace with him, it is impossible we should be ever safe in any times amidst
the manifold Vicissitudes of this Life. Let us labor therefore to obtain this
Peace by a true Repentance and forsaking all our past sins, and by bringing
forth fruits meet for Repentance; by Universal Righteousness and Holiness of
Life, and more particularly at this time, by Charity and Almsgiving to such as
are in need, which is a Sacrifice always acceptable and well-pleasing to God,
and then especially most proper when we would appease his Anger, or implore his
Blessing, or render our thanks to him for his great Mercy and Goodness to us;
All which we have now occasion to do. I conclude therefore with those words of
the Psalmist which are a great Encouragement to Liberality and Bounty to the
Poor, especially in times when men are apprehensive of any Danger. Blessed is
he that considers the poor, the Lord will deliver him in the time of Trouble,
The Lord will preserve him and keep him alive that he may be blessed upon the
Earth, and will not deliver him to the Will of his Enemies.

Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, which has loved
us and has given us Everlasting Consolation and good Hope through Grace,
Comfort your Hearts and stablish you in every good Word and Work. To him be
Glory for ever and ever.

FINIS.

