THE CASE OF THE Makers and Wholesale Traders in the Manufacture of English
Bone-Lace.
BY an Act of Parliament held in the Eighth and Ninth Years of King William
III. Chapter 24. which has been since continued by several subsequent Acts; it was
Enacted, That there should be paid to his said Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, by every Hawker, Pedlar, Petty-Chapman, and every other Trading
Person going from Town to Town, or to other Men's Houses, and traveling either
on Foot, or with Horse, Horses, etc. (except as therein is excepted) carrying
to Sell, or exposing to Sale, any Goods, Wares, or Merchandises, the Yearly Sum
of 4 l. And upon Payment, or giving Security for the Duty in such manner as is
thereby directed, a License was to be granted to him or her, so to Travel or
Trade.

And if any such Hawker, Pedlar, etc. should be found Trading as aforesaid,
without such License; such Person should for every Offense forfeit 12 l. one
Moiety to th e Informer, the other to the Poor of the Parish: Which Penalty was
by Warrant from a Justice of the Peace, to be levied by Distress and Sale of
the Offender's Goods.

Provided, That the said Act should not extend to hinder the real Workers or
Makers of Goods, etc. from carrying abroad, or exposing to Sale, any Goods of
his or her making, in any Mart, Fair, Market, or elsewhere.

The Makers and Wholesale Traders in English Bone-Lace, most of them living in
the Counties of Bucks, Bedford, and other adjacent Counties, usually come to
London once a Week to the Lace-Chambers, where they have fixed certain Shops
and Standings. And sometimes it so happens, that they carry some Goods to the
Houses or Shops of Milliners, and other Retailers, who are their Customers: For
which some of the said Makers, and Wholesale Traders, have been informed
against, and forced to pay the Penalty of 12 l. although it is apprehended, that
they are not Hawkers, Pedlars, or Petty-Chapmen, within the Meaning of the said
Act, for the Reasons following:

I. That by the said Act, such only were intended, who had no fixed Shops, or
Standings, where they carried on their Trades; but carried them on chiefly (if
not altogether) by traveling from Place to Place. But the same was not
intended to extend to those that chiefly or constantly kept and traded in
certain Shops or Standings, and only casually carried out some Goods to the
Houses or Shops of their Customers.

II. That those who Sell by Wholesale to the Retailers, were never intended by
the said Act to be obliged to take Licenses, but only such as go from Place to
Place to Sell their Goods by Retail: And only such can be intended or described
by the Names of Pedlars, or Petty-Chapmen.

III. That they being Makers, as well as Wholesale Sellers of their
Manufacture, are exempted by the abovementioned Clause in the said Bill.

N.B. That soon after the making the said Act, viz. March 13. School. upon the
Petition of Edward Hooton preferred to the House of Commons, complaining of the
Hardships put upon them, as aforesaid. The Consideration of the said Petition
was referred to a Committee: Which Committee made their Report. And thereupon
it was resolved, That the Workers of Bone-Lace, his, her, or their Children,
Apprentices, Servants, or Agents; and all Wholesale Dealers in the said
Manufacture, though they go about from Shop to Shop to any of their Customers who
sell the same by Retail again, shall not be deemed Hawkers and Pedlars, by the
said Act of the Ninth and Tenth of his Majesty's Reign.

The said Makers and Wholesale Traders having lately been disturbed and
prosecuted upon the Pretenses aforesaid, a Bill is now depending for their
Relief.


