The CASE OF THE Four Hundred Coach Men, their Widows and Assigns, formerly
Licensed by virtue of an Act of Parliament, made in the Thirteenth and
Fourteenth Years of King Charles II. to drive Hackney Coaches in the Cities of
London and Westminster, and the Suburbs thereof. Humbly offered to the
Consideration of Parliament.
AN Act Intitutled, among other things, 13, 14 Car. 2.]
An Act for Regulating and Licensing Hackney Coaches to be driven for Hire
about the Cities of London and Westminster, and Parishes within the Weekly
Bills of Mortality was Passed; whereby it was Enacted,

1. That Four Hundred and no more should be Licensed for that purpose. 2. That
his Majesty should appoint Commissioners to License the same, and that Five
Pound per An. should be paid for every License, and directed for what Uses, to
wit, for removing Nusances, widening and paving Streets, and mending Shewers.
3. That no one Coach Man should have above Two Licenses. 4. That they should
observe the Rules prescribed therein. 5. That none take more for Hire by the
Day or Hour, or from Place to Place, than therein was directed. 6. No other
Persons were permitted to drive Coaches, for Hire, within the Limits aforesaid.
Pursuant whereunto

Commissioners were appointed.

Four Hundred and no more Licensed.

Those Licenses continued for Seventeen Years; in which time the Coach Men so
Licensed, paid to the Uses by the said Act directed 34000 lb.

Besides they laid out their Stocks in Coaches and Horses.

Took Leases of Houses, Coach-houses, and Stables for a long term of Years; a
great Number of which are yet to come.

Paid great Fines, besides Yearly Rent they are obliged to pay.

All this they did for the Service of his Late Majesty's Subjects, and were
encouraged so to do in some Measure.

1. Because during the Act its continuance, if any Coach Man Licensed, by
virtue thereof happened to dye, leaving a Widow behind him, she was to enjoy his
License after his Death.

2. Because each Coach Man Licensed was permitted, if not able to keep a Coach
and Horses himself, to transfer his Figure to another, or Let it by the Week
to work out his Debt, and provide for the Subsistence of him and his Wife and
Children.

This Act Expired in 1679, or 1680.

Since which time the Four Hundred were Licensed by Act of Common Council of
the City of London, to drive within the said City and Liberties thereof, and to
stand at several Places in the Streets. Other Coaches Prohibited standing there
to take up Fares; which said Act directed their Government, like that appointed
by the Act of Parliament of 13, 14 of King Charles the Second, and limited
them to take the same Hire settled by Act of Parliament; and they have observed
the Rules and Orders, and taken the Prices directed.

Nevertheless many of them are Ruined for want of Work, occasioned by about 130
Interloping Coach Men set up without Licenses; who, if continued, will undo the
rest, there not being Employment sufficient within the Cities of London and
Westminster, and the Weekly Bills of Mortality for the Four Hundred, whereby
they can earn Money to defray the necessary Charges, and the casual Losses, pay
the Five Pound per An. to the Public out of their hard Labor, and provide a
mean Subsistence for their Families.

Of this the Four Hundred complained to the Parliament in 1680, and Petitioned
to have the aforesaid Act revived.

A Bill for that purpose was Prepared, Read and Committed, and the Committee
often met upon it; but before any Report made, the Parliament was Prorogued,
and after was Dissolved.

The like Address they were ready to have made to the Parliament at Oxford, had
not the sudden Dissolution thereof prevented the same.

The Four Hundred Petitioned the Parliament then Sitting, May 1685.
Praying that the Act of 13, 14 of King Charles II. before recited, might be
revived, so far is it related to the Coaches; and that there might be but Four
Hundred, as formerly; and the Petitioners to be those Four Hundred, for the
Reasons aforesaid; and under the Rents, and subject to Rules and Orders before
mentioned.

Thereupon the Interlopers made Application to be added to the Four Hundred.

And some on behalf of Chelsey College prosecuted for an addition to the Four
Hundred.

Several Bills were brought in, Read and Committed; and several Petitions
referred to the same Committee.

The Committee several times Sat, and were attended by all Parties, and made a
Report.

Whereupon it was referred to a Select Committee to prepare one Bill out of the
several then depending.

And, in so doing, to have regard to the subject Matter of the Houses debate,
had upon the aforesaid Report:

Viz. How the said Money should be disposed, that should be raised by Licenses.

But before any Proceedings thereupon had, the Parliament was Adjourned until
November 1685.

In the Interval of their Sitting, the Committee met, and a short Bill was
prepared, the purport whereof was, to revive the aforesaid Act of 13, 14 of
King Charles II.

So far as it related to the Regulating the Hackney Coaches, with a Blank for
the Number, and Yearly Rent.

The Parliament Sat, November 85.
but before the Committee had agreed upon, and made their Report, it was
Prorogued, and after Dissolved.

This being the Condition of the Four Hundred Coach Men.

They most Humbly Implore the Favor of this Honorable House to take the same
into their Serious Consideration, and to pass an Act for the reviving of the
Act of the 13, 14 of King Charles II. entitled, An Act amongst other things,
For the Regulating and Licensing of Hackney Coaches, and for the Enlarging of
the several Streets and Passages; with such Alteration, as to your great Wisdom
shall seem meet.

1. And that by the said Act, the Number of Coaches to be Licensed to drive for
Hire, may not exceed Four Hundred. 2. That those formerly Licensed may be
continued. 3. That the Yearly Sum to be by each of them paid, may not be above
Five Pounds. 4. That they may now, as formerly they were, be permitted to
transfer, or let their Licenses, if necessitated thereunto by Means and Losses,
as aforesaid.
Objection, If it shall be Objected, That the City and the Suburbs are Enlarged
above a Fifth part, since the Passing the Act of 13, 14 of King Charles II. for
limitting the Number of Coaches to be Four Hundred; and that therefore Four
Hundred are not sufficient to do the Work now.

Answer, That though it be true, the Buildings are much Enlarged since 13, 14
of King Charles II. and consequently the City more Populous now than then; yet
it is certain, that a very great Part of those New Buildings are Unhabited, and
so like to be; Thousands of them standing now empty.

And the Increase of the Buildings is no Argument to prove, that there is a
Necessity for more Hackney Coaches now than then.

Rather the contrary will appear, if it be Considered, That there is above
Thirty Coaches kept now by Gentlemen, and Tradesmen about London, for every One
that was kept when that Act was made, and near as many Chairs; so that most of
those, who formerly made use of Hackney Coaches and Chairs, now make use of
their own.

Besides, in Rebuilding of London, and Erecting those New Buildings in the City
and Suburbs, such care has been taken to enlarge the Streets and pave them
smooth, and to build such good Penthouses over them, that few or none now that
have health and are able to walk, but choose rather to go on foot than to ride
in Hackney Coaches.

So, that by the best Estimate that can be made, it appears that there is not
so much Money spent in Hackney Coaches as was about Twenty three Years ago.

When only Four Hundred were allowed, consequently no occasion to increase
their Number.

That when there were but Four Hundred, and each paid but Five Pound per an'
many of them broke Yearly, and were compelled to sell their Licenses to pay the
Debts they contracted, by keeping their Coaches and Horses; others forfeited
their Licenses for non-payment of Rent. And since the Act Expired, although
they have not paid Rent, as formerly they did when the Act was in Force, yet
they, by reason of the Interlopers driving, can hardly Live and get Bread for
their Families.

These Instances are full Demonstration that their Advantage was not so great.

If so many broke and forfeited when there was but Four Hundred, at Five Pound
per an' each, what can be expected to be the consequence of more being added to
that Number, but that they all of them, in a short time, fall under the same
misfortune? And many of them of late Years have been Ruined by the Interlopers.

This being the Truth of their Case,

It may be worth the Consideration of this Honorable House, That if more than
Four Hundred be Licensed, they will not only undo each other, but be a great
Anoyance to the Public. For there is now but One Hundred and Thirty more that
keep Coaches, besides the Four Hundred; and it is Humbly submitted to every
Man's Judgment, Whether they do not find the same mischievous. Every Day what
stops there are in the Streets, by their standing in Multitudes, how the
Nobilities and Gentries Coaches, Foot Passengers, and others their Majesty's
Trading Subjects, and Shopkeepers are hindered in their passing the same
(sometimes for an Hour together.) What spoils are frequently done to the Lords
and Gentlemen's Coaches and Horses. What Quarrels and Fightings are often
occasioned, And what Mischiefs have ensued thereupon.

For further Reasons why there should be but Four Hundred.
1. This will agree with the Judgment of that Parliament, which declared the
Four Hundred sufficient; which Judgment of theirs remains, though their Act be
determined. 2. It will prevent the stops met with daily in the Streets, whereby
Business is hindered, and frequently Meetings about Matters of great Consequence
prevented. 3. It will prevent the Quarrels that are daily between them, and the
Servants of the Nobillity and Gentry. 4. It will put an end to these Losses the
Subjects sustain by Unfigured Coaches, in which they frequently leave their
Goods, and can never retrieve, not knowing how to find out their Coach. And it
will prevent the frequent Affronts and ill Treatments those Coach Men give to
their Fares, (especially if Women) unless they will pay them their own
Unreasonable demands. 5. It will prevent the Ruin of many Hundreds of
Tradesmen they deal with, to whom most of the Four Hundred are Indebted,
because they have no other way to get Money to pay them. 6. It will prevent the
Ruin of the Four Hundred now Licensed Coach Men, who Humbly hope their
Licenses shall be continued, and no more Granted, upon the Considerations
following. 1. Because they are such, as were Originally Licensed by the
aforesaid Act, or Claim under them, by reason of their Figures being
transferred to them. 2. Ever since the Act passed they have observed the Rules,
Orders, and Directions thereof, and has been under such Government as therein
limited. 3. They have laid out their Stocks, in providing Coaches and able
Horses. 4. And have taken Leases of Houses, Coach-houses, and Stables, for a
considerable time to come, which they must pay the Rent of; and have no other
way to do the same, but by following their present Callings. 5. They have
always behaved themselves Loyal Subjects. 6. They have already paid 34000 lb.
in Seventeen Years time for the Public. 7. They are many of them Widows left
with Children, and others very Ancient Men, who have nothing left but their
Licenses whereby to support Themselves and Families; though the Interlopers, do
many, if not most of them, follow other Trades.

FINIS.
The 400 Licensed Hackney-Coach-Mens Case.


