The Case of the Stanneries stated: with the Grounds and Reasons of their
Petition to the Honorable House of Parliament, together with the Answers to
several Objections that are usually made against them, humbly proposed.
THE Tynners of Cornwall having served out their time, wherein (by the late
Kings grant) they were bound to the old Farmers and Preemptors, and being no
longer able to preserve themselves and their Families from ruin by the low
prizes and rates appointed to them formerly for their Tyn, in regard of the
small quantity that is made at present, and yet the excessive charg in digging
and working of it, occasioned by the decay and discontinuance of their Mines,
the increase of Waters, the paucity of Laborers, and the great dearth of all
Commodities, above double the ancient and usual prizes, did therefore about 3.
years fithence humbly Petition the Parliament that they might have the liberty
and common privilege of other Subjects, to sell and make the best advantage of
their Tynn, paying the Coynage and all oath duties anciently due: Now though
their request be but the common privilege and Interest of English men, to
which they were born, yet either through great opposition, or the greater and
more important affairs of State, it has bin their unhappines hitherto, not to
obtain the resolution of Parl. upon their Petition.

It Is true that there are not wanting many men, who have long, and still do,
make it their business (upon what ground let others judge) to amuse the Parl.
with great pretenses of some right to the Tyn, inherent lately in the Crown, as
if the poor Tynners were born in chains, and more like Indian slaves then
English men did work for others not for themselves, and by reason of these
pretenses they have bin forced with great expense to attend long with Council
to argue their Rights, and during all that time, and long after complied with
the Orders of the Committee of Revenue, and parted with their Tyn to Farmers
appointed by them, though at a price imposed upon them, being 20. or 30. in
every hundred weight below the Common and Current value thereof: But because
they could not continue their work and maintain their Families with such low
prices after the expiration of one year and half they forbore any longer to
part with their Tynn to the said Farmers, whereupon their issued an Order from
the Committee of Revenue to forbid the Coynage of their Tyn, unless upon the
acceptance of the former price with a prohibition for any to buy or sell, or
suffer any Tynn to be exported, or Excise, or Custom to be taken; whereupon
it is confessed, that after long expectation of some resolution in Parliament,
most of the Tynners having no other means to preserve themselves, and their
Families from perishing, when they could stand out no longer against the
highest Law of necessity, were forced to sell their Tynn to any that would buy,
and for this Crime, because they would not rather starve then disobey the said
Order, they were in September last convented to appear before some
Commissioners, and required to take Oaths, to betray and confess against
themselves, and one another, how they had sold their Tynn; and because many of
them declined the taking of such Oaths, Ex officio, in December following, a
Messenger is sent down, who Subpena'd them into the Exchequer, to appear and
answer informations to be laid against them by the Kings Solliciter: Whereupon
they knew no other course, but once more to renew their humble address by
Petition to the Parliament, and that upon a better hopes and confidence then
before, because of the Parliaments late proceedings (for though all that the
Tynners desire be no new thing or extraordinary immunity, but what their
Predecessors enjoyed for many ages during the Reign of many Kings, and which
some yet living can remember to have enjoyed before the Forty third year of
Queen Elizabeth, and therefore might have owned their suit under Monarchy:)
Yet much more are their hopes raised at present, that since the Parliament have
Declared against Kingly Government, no Prerogatives incident thereunto, and to
the prejudice of the People, will now be insisted on, nor any Monopoly or
Restraint of free Trade receive countenance in a time when the Common and
Native Freedom of the People is declared for, yet since it is desired that
Preemption may yet be further unbow^l'd and laid open, what this clamor of
right pretended, amounts to (the matter of fact being truly set forth) you
may be pleased to observe what bottom and ground Preemption has by any color
of Law, and thereby the equity and reason of the Stannaries Petition laid open
in that which follows.

First, the Tynners do not deny the Kings Right ad Stagnariam and Cundagium.
the Stannaries and Coynages, but the legality of Preemption, which is distinct
from both: See Dodri^^ of the Duchy o^ Cornw. li^ fol.
The Coynage Custom of 40s. payable out of every 1000d. weight of Tynn is
confessed to be a right anciently belonging to the Earls of Cornwall, and
annexed afterward to the Duchy, and as it cannot be proved, that for near 200
years before the forty third year of Queen Elizabeth, there was any more
paid to the Crown, so they are very willing and contented to pay it still:
It Is likewise confessed, that the Earls of Cornwall, and some Kings of England,
before Edw. 1. have made several Grants of the Stannaries, and the profits
thereof, but it was never proved that this amounted to more then a Grant of the
ancient Custom before mentioned, and of the toll Tyn, and other emergent
profits, when Tynn has been dug out of any of the Princes Lands, and which
are paid and payable to this day; for, that the right of Tyn working was by
prescription, and ab initio, is manifest by ancient Historians, quoted by Judge
Dodrige in his Book of the Duchy of Cornwall, and diverse words in their
ancientest Charters, as Sicut ab antiqua consuetudino, Chart. K. John. Chart.
Edw. 1.
sicut hactenus usitatum, etc. So that their Charters seem to be in the
general, rather confirmations of their old Customs, then indowments with any
new Right, however they were great Acts of Grace as to some particular
privileges and immunities, and the ground of that Act made, 52. Edward 3. upon
Prince Richards Petition, fully confirms those Rights which they had so gained
by Custom and ancient usage. And they acknowledge it likewise to be true, that
by the Charter of 32. Ed. 1. the King reserves a power of Preemption in this
Clause, Nisi nos vel heredes nostri Stann' illud emere voluerint. Which
Charters and clause is believed to be the most specious and probable foundation
of Preemption, because there is found no mention of the word in the elder
times, or ever any Grant of the Emption of Tyn, til after this Charter. Now if
the nature and extent of this Preemption be examined, and what was the
judgment of these times which succeeded that Charter down along to latter
times within the memory of man, concerning Preemption, when ever it was in use,
it will easily clear the whole business.

For the first; it does appear, that it amounted to no more then a benefit and
preferment of buying the Tynn before any Subject at the price current, or at
the King and they could agree, as his fully expressed in Brighams Patients,
when after near 200 years sleep it was revived in 43. Queen Elizabeth's, which
has bin publicly and often acknowledged by the Council that hertofore
pl^^d^d for P^^^^ption; and that this Clause cannot reasonably be extended
further may be proved by reason, and the very construction which the words in
that Charter will bear, which immediately precede this Clause, which are these,
E^ quod omnes Stannatores nostri Stann' illud sic ponderatu^^ litite venders
possint euicunque voluerint in villis predict faciend inde nobis Ca^^^agi^^,
and alias consuetudines debitas and usitat^s, nisi nos vel beredes n^stri, etc.
By which they have leave to sell their Tyn to whom they will, unless the King
will buy, and then it will follow, that he must buy as they can sell, which is
to whom they will, or that offers most; otherwise the first and last Clause
will seem to fight one against another; and this will more fully appear from
the nature of the word it self, for the privilege and prerogative reserved in
this Clause is Pre-emption, now all Emption does presuppose a Contract, and as
there is a correlation between the Contractors and the Contractee, so in every
Contract of Emption, the Law of Nations requires two things, first a voluntary
and mutual consent of two parties, the buyer and the seller; and then the
Tynner cannot be compelled to sell his Tynn against his will. And secondly, a
proportion of price to the value of the commodity, and then the KING cannot
impose a price upon their Tynn, and consequently cannot take it at his own
price, by any thing in this Clause.

Secondly, As to the judgment of every Age since that Charter, concerning
Preemption when it was in use, it will appear that (though there have been but
few presidents for it (not so many as for Shiymoney) and but few Grants made of
the Emption of Tyn by some of the Kings of England, and those still at the
prizes which were then current, and never imposed; for they desire it may be
observed there never was, nor can be urged in any age till of late, the
imposing of a price upon the Tynners goods; yet seldom or never were there any
such Grants, but they were from first to last complained of as oppressions, and
so presented in succeeding Parliaments; yea commonly made null, and revoked by
those Kings that granted them, whereof you may take a short view in these
particular Instances.

The first Grant found after this Charter of 32 Edw. 1. was made by his Son
Edw. 2. to Anthony de Pessaigne, which was revoked in the 10. year of his
Reign, and left by him to the Barons of the Exchequer (who could be no Fermors)
to do therein, prout unto Concession^^ predictam sieri solebat; yet the same
year there was another Grant made, de ^^^ptions Stagmini^, to one Abington the
Kings Butler, which was afterward revoked in the 14 year of his Reign upon
those grounds that it was in oppressionem populi, and contra tenorem Charte
pris sui, etc. and commands the Sher^ffe to make Proclamation throughout the
County, that all Tynners that had any Tyn to sell after the Coynage, and
Coynage due paid, might sell their Tyn (prout decet) without any impediment or
contradiction according to the Charter of his Father, wherein there is both a
construction of that Charter, and the judgment of that time concerning
Preemption.

The next Grant that appears to be made, was 12 Ed. 3. to Richard Suthorp and
Moneron (upon pretense of the Kings most urgent occasions for the defense and
saving of the Kingdom) to se^ze the Tyn of Cornwall and Devon into their hands
for his use, yet so, that they, should give good security for it; according to
such a price as should be agreed between them and the Tynner; yet the same
year upon complaint to the Parliament held at Northampton, there was a
revocation of their Grant, and a restoration of the Tyn.

In the 21 year of Edw. 3. there was another Lease granted of the Tyn to one
Tydeman of Lymbrick, which was complained of the same year in Parliament by the
Merchants of England, for that the Tynne was engrossed by one man, which was
wont to be sold to all the Merchants of the Kindome; and receiving no
satisfactory answer that Parliament, the Tynners of Cornwall Petitioned the
next year in Parliament, Come il's ont fait de tout temp.
that they might sell their Tynne to all that would buy it, without the
restraint of the Prince, as they had done heretofore at all times.

From Edw. 3. down along to Edw. 6. there is not found or urged any one Grant
or Lease of the Emption of Tyn, th^ugh in the long intervall of that time,
their Charters have been confirmed by all or most of the Viz. 8.^2. 1 Edw. 4 3
H. 7. 27 H. 7 3 H. 8. 1 Edw. ^ Empson Dudley.
Kings that intervened; yea, twice by Henry the seventh, in one of whose
Charters, viz. 27 Hen. 7. this Clause concerning Preemption of Nisi nos, etc.
is wholly declined and omitted, though it be well known he was a Prince, wife and
wary, and had Instruments active enough to promote and execute what ever might
advance his Revenue by any colorable pretense, from Prerogative or Law: And
though 7 Edw. 6. there was then a Lease made to Gilbert Brock-house of the
Preemption of Tyn, with as much easiness and respect to the Tynners as could
be desired: viz. that he should give as much as any other Merchant had, or did
give and sell, but at a half penny profit in every pound to others, yet this
was revoked 1. Q. Mary, by the Lords of the Counsel as prejudicial to the
Tynner: So it continued free till the latter end of Q. Elizabeth's Reign, and
then a Lease was granted to Brigham and Wymes for the first buying of Tyn, at
such prices as they and the Tynners could agree, with the reservation of 2000.
l. per annum rent to her Majesty and no more, yet this Lease was understood and
comprehended by K. James, under the notion of a Monopoly, and an Invasion of
the liberty of the Subject (as well as some other Patients) and so after long
debate with his Council, revoked by Proclamation in the first year of his
Reign, as therein may at large appear: It Is very true that 5. Jacobi, there
being a glut of Tyn in the Country, more then the Kingdom, or Foreign parts
could take off, the Tynners easily consented to a new Farm of their Tynne, for
the price then current, of 28 l. per 1000. d. to the Tynner, and 2000 li. to
the King, but within a few yeare^ after, tha^ the gain of the sole Emption and
transportation of their Tyn came to be felt and understood by the Merchants,
Preemption was advanced to 8000. p. per annum, and so grew higher and higher,
as the times grew worse, with some petry increase of price to the Tynner, till
it came to 14000 ^. per annum, and more, and so continued till the expiration
of the late Farmers Pattent, which was since the beginning of this Parliament.
There remains only two or three Objections more to be answered.

One is, That Tyn is a Royal Mine, because it has a mixture of Silver in it.

Answ. There is not an ounce of Silver in many thousand weight, and the Judges
of England have resolved it to the contrary, in Star Chamber, as appears in
Cooks Iurisdict. of Court, and yet it were heretofore a favor, and for the
Tynners advantage, to suffer his base Metal to go under the name of a Royal
Mine, so it might receive the same Justice: For the King had bu^ a fifth p^rt
by Prerogative of all Royal Mines, whereas a third part has been taken ou^ of
the labors of the Tynnes, by the horrible abuse of Preemption.

2. Another great Objection is, That if the Tyn we^e out of Farm, and at
liberty, the Tynner would be but a prey to every Merchant, and the Tynners by
under-selling one another, would qu^ckly destroy themselve and all Tyn working.

Answ. This Objection though it be countenanced by wise men, is yet a Mystery,
and it must necessarily argue a great weakness and want of Common discretion
in the Tynner above other men, to dispose of his goods to his best advantage,
from whence this must proceed, otherwise why should not the same mischief and
inconvenience befall those that trade in Fish, and other not so choice
commodities as this, peculiar to this Kingdom, and that County alone: But
secondly, this inconvenience never followed but upon a glut of Tyn as is before
said, but there is no ground for this fear now, when the quantity is so small,
that the Manufactures of the Kingdom as are able to employ near the whole bulk
of Tyn that is made in the year, as it is at present. Thirdly, admit that this
would follow thereupon, cannot the Tynners, being a Corporation of themselves,
contract with some few Merchants at such a price that they may have the
Managery and trade of Tyn, but that not only Merchants but prices must be
imposed on them; and for this favor of making a ^argaine and sale of their
goods, there must be one half, or a third part of the value of their goods
defaulked for a Revenue, this is such a grievance and misery, which no Subjects
of England groans under besides the Tynner; and then which it is believed, there
is no particular oppression cries louder in the ears of the Parliament, nor
which in its redress by them, will give a clearer demonstration to the
Kingdom, that they really intend to break every yoke, and to let the
oppressed go free.

Another great Objection is, that this Concession of L^berty and Freedom to
the Tynner, would be with the loss of a great R^venue to the State, as the
Tynners taking leave of late, h^t^^l^st the State all manner of Revenue for
this year last past.

To this it is answered, First in general, if by Revenue be meant that ancient
Custom of 40 s. per 1000 d. before expressed, they are very willing to pay it
still, with all the Fa^mand Toll Tyn, and other profits anciently payable out
of the Stannaries; but if by it be meant all that Revenue which grew by
prevention, revived and heig^tned since these last and worst times, and for
which many Kings of England never received a penny, if that be sound to have the
same bottom and foundation with other grievances taken away, and be ^ith r^an
abused Prerogative or a Monopoly, ^is believed no profit or advantage can
preva^le with the just^ce of Parliament from bringing it under the same Law.

But secondly, it is certain, the best way to advance a Revenue ^o the State,
is by giving the Tynner the best encouragement, for then there will be the more
Tyn dig'd and wrought, and consequently the more money paid to the State, for
the Duchy dues, Exise and Custom, whereas if they should be discouraged and
kept under by oppressions, this is unav^ydably like to follow, that knowing
they cannot be compelled to work for Tynne, and cannot live poorer in any
t^ade, that they quite give over their working in Tynne, and betake themselves
to other employments, as they have done in Devon already, which would of it
self destroy all manner of Revenue, together with that ancient and staple
Commodity, peculiar to this Kingdom and that County only, and be an utter
ruin to many thousand Families in England, whose livelyhoods depend on the
Manufactures of that Commodity: And as to the loss of all manner of Revenue
for the last year, let the blame be charged where it will lie; it cannot be
reasonably charged upon the Tynner, who never denied to submit to a Farm for a
time, till the Parliament should determine their Rights, if they might have a
confiderable price: But being denied such a price, together with the Coynage of
their Tyn, and the acceptance of the ancient dues, though tendered their
necessities notwithstanding, enforced them to sell, which because they could
not do in open Market, without Seizure and Forfeiture, ^o their best Merchants,
they were glad to sell it to any, and so lost in the price of every hundred
weight, more then the price of the ancient Dutchey dues amounted to, though
they never sold it so low, but it was for much more then was offered, and to be
paid by the Farmers.

And now if it be demanded what will satisfy the Tynner all he desires at
length is, but that it may be declared that he has and shall have free liberty
and right to dispose of his own Tyn to his best advantage, and consequently
may not be under any restraint in price, or from the Farmers, by Preemption, or
the Pewterers, or any other more then other Natives; Their next desire is, for
the advantage of the State, that Coynages, at the accustomed times and places,
may be appointed, that so dues may be received and paid.

Many lesser Grievances there are, in weights, and other things, which time and
Tyranny his contracted upon them, which they desire may be regulated by a
Convocation called among themselves, by Order from the Lord Warden.

FINIS.

