The Case of the Exported Coals.
It is said, that the abatement of the Custom on Coals exported (as now
intended) from 8 s. to 1 s. in English, and from 16 s. to 8 s. (in Strangers
Ships) per Chaldron, will occasion a greater Export of the Commodity (because
cheapness supposes Increase of Consumption,) and consequently advantage the
Coal-Owner, increase the Navigation, and be a great benefit to the English
Nation.

Against which it is Humbly opposed.

1 THat this Commodity is not subject to Luxury, which in some other
Commodities is a great Consumer, and is often provoked by Cheapness, and this
Commodity is not three half pence per Bushel cheaper, if the whole Custom
were taken off, and ^ small a matter in price can make little (if any)
difference in the Consumption for common burning, as every observing Man has
found by his own experience: and it cannot make 6 d. difference in 5 l. worth
of Manufacture.

2. That Coal beyond the Seas is used in Manufacture: not for common burning
as in England, not only for that Coal (Custom free) cannot be delivered
abroad so cheap as the fuel there, but for that Coal is offensive and not
burnable in the Stoves used abroad. In Amsterdam, and all the Linnen-bleaching
parts (of the United Provinces) the burning thereof is absolutely forbidden: A
Tunn or large Herring-Barrell of Turffe (a pleasant and sweet substantial
Fyring; and they have plenty of it) is bought (in the season) for the value of
8 d. sterling money; and yet of that 8 d. part is for Excise to the State,
which they will not suffer our Coal to impede, nor to abate the production and
manufacture of their own Country.

That a Tunn of Turffe is a Bushel and half, and will go farther then that
quantity of Coal, which cannot be (...): (though no Custom paid) for 8 d.

In the East Country wood is in great plenty, and its often brought hither and
sold us (...) per (...) (being (...) Cart Load.) In France the French King has
imposed upon the Commodity by the Tunnage and otherwise, that its not possible
to render them cheaper there then Wood, if the burning of Coal were at all
affected and not abhorred; and if we abate, he may raise his duties for
increase of his Revenue, and yet his Subjects pay no more for the Commodity
then now they do. The Navyes of Portugal and Spain use a little of this
Commodity, the rest of the World none. And for Manufacture the said Stranger
abroad must have Coal, though it should cost him 4 l. a Chalder, English Coal
was sold in Holland at the Close of the late War for 25 Guilders per Hoodt, of
which two makes about a Newcastle Chalder, and yet they had Coal brought
thither from Luyck and other parts. He that has a Commodity that another wants
will make the most of it.

3. When the Custom was 11 s. 4 d. 22 s. 8 d. the Exportation was not less; as
by the books may appear. And if it were raised to that again, a proportionable
augmentation of Rent is proffered, and will be given for it, if farmed.

4. That the English have already beat the Scots out of this Trade (and many of
their works are failed) by selling the Commodity so very cheap as it now is;
(so that no benefit on that side is to be expected from the intended
abatement;) and Coals are now dearer at London then in Holland. The bare
duties of a Chalder of Coals brought from Newcastle to London, are now 6 s. 6
d. and according to this intended abatement the same quantity shall be shipped
for Holland for 12 d. And every Newcastle Chalder of Coals carried to Ireland,
or the Plantations, shall also still pay 20 d. The Parent is not kinder to
Strangers then to his own Children.

5. The dearer we sell a Commodity abroad, which the Stranger cannot be
without(and will not increase his Consumption for Cheapness, any more then we
would spend more Salt if it were cheaper,) the more we bring back to enrich the
Nation.

If it be asked whence the present great Consumption of the Commodity in
England was introduced? It is answered, not from Cheapness (for Coal is
gradually grown dearer) but from the decay and destruction of Wood, which by
degrees has brought us to so great use of Coal.

6. It has not been the Custom of this Nation to impose upon the Stranger
more then double Custom for our Native Commodities, That both they and we
might go to market; but as the duty is now intended the Stranger shall pay
eight times as much (...) as the Native. If they retalliate upon that, as
Egland did upon the French Tonnage, That part of the English Navigation will be
lost for this Commodity will be wholly carried away by the Stranger (as it was
before the year 1642. that the 11 s. 4 d. and 22 s. 8 d, was first laid) to the
great damage of our Nation. By which particulars (ready to be proved when
required) it appears that the public Revenue will be lessened, the
Navigation diminisht, and a necessary Commodity under-valued, to the benefit of
the Stranger, without other recompense to the Nation. Unless the few
Coale-Owners hope to raise their price; which, if but 2 s. per Chalde^, would
cost the home-Consumers above 60000 l. per annum, as may plainly be
demonstrated.


