THE CASE Of the Sitting Members that Serve for The Borough of Southwark.
THe Election began the Twelfth day of January, 1688/9. and upon the View it
did appear the Sitting Members, had much the greater Number; but in regard a
Poll was demanded, the Bailiff immediately complied with it: and was
prosecuted, persuant to the Articles hereunto annexed.

The Petition is in the Name of the Inhabitants of Southwark, who do pay Scot
and Lot, and have the only right to Elect, etc. It does allow that the Bailiffs
has the right of Inspection and Ordering the Election; But complains that the
Bailiff suffered persons to Poll who had no right, and hindering the Petitioners
to discover them.

By removing the Poll from a convenient place, and continued it Three days at
St. Georges near the Kings Bench and Marshalsea Prisons.

That those which came to Poll for the persons Nominated by the Petitioners
were forcibly kept out, Beaten and Wounded. And returned Sir Peter Rich and
John Arnold Esquire when as (say the Petitioners) Anthony Bowyer and Edward Smith
Esquires were duly Elected by the Major part, who had right to Elect, etc.

I answer to this disingenious Petition, The Sitting Members, doubt not to make
it appear, That all the matters therein contained, are false and untruly
suggested. For they will prove

That at all times whenever a Poll was taken, the Burgesses were chosen by
the Inhabitants, Housekeepers of this Borough, who did not receive Alms of the
respective Parishes.

That in Five succeeding Elections these very Petitioners did give their Votes,
as the Ancient Usage of this Borough, according to the Articles Signed by the
Candidates.

That diverse of these Petitioners in former Elections did Poll for Sir Richard
How and Sir Peter Rich, according to the Usage now practiced, as being the
Custom of the Borough.

That all persons who had right to Poll, had free access in his Turn to the
Poll-Table, where all necessary Questions were put by the Bailiff or his
Deputy; That is to say, The persons Abode, his Trade, and what sort of
Habitation he had, Before he declared for whom he gave his Poll.

That to avoid all Contests and Disturbance, in so great an Election; This
Article was assented and agreed unto. That any Candidate might make his Queries
upon any person, he suspected to be a false Poller, and every night
successively, before the Books were closed; Copies of the same were either
given or sent to the Candidates on each side, to enquire after such suspected
Pollers, to the end, they might be detected, and disallowed before the Close of
the Poll.

That in all former Elections where a Poll was demanded and taken, the Bailiff
for Accommodation of the Inhabitants who are distant from each other, did take
the Poll in the same places, they now were taken at.

That no Force was used by the Sitting Members or their Agents, the Constables
who usually attended the Poll, being generally inclined to favor the
Petitioners side. Did use indirect means to feed the Poll with their party,
thereby disencouraging several that would have given their Poll for Arnold and
Rich to decline it.

That neither the Petitioners or the Candidates ever complained of any
irregular or undue practice of the Bailiff, during the taking of this Poll
(which held six days) until the Books were cast up, and the disproportion
appeared so great.

For John Arnold Esquire Polled -- 2130 For Anthony Bowyer Esquire -- 1360 For Sir
Peter Rich -- 1677 For Edward Smith Esquire -- 1526 So Mr. Arnold had more Votes
than Mr. Bowyer -- 770 More than Mr. Smith -- 604 Sir. Peter Rich had more than
Mr. Bowyer -- 317 More than Mr. Smith -- 151

And whereas the Petition is said to be in behalf of themselves and others that
have right to Elect. The Siting Members believe they shall be able to prove,
that some of the Petitioners went from House to House to get Hands, and collect
Moneys to carry on this Petition; but were refused by some persons that Polled
for Smith and Bower, declaring to this effect. They were satisfied with the
fairness of the Poll.


