THE CONFORMISTS CHARITY TO DISSENTERS, And Concurrence with the Favor Granted
them in the ACT for Toleration: PROVED From the Works of the Most Eminent
Divines of the Church of England.

By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to
another, John 13.35.

Neither our Religion nor our Church is of a Persecuting Spirit: I know not how
it may be in particular persons, but I say again, it is not the Genius of our
Church; she has no Doctrine that Teaches Persecution. Bish. of St. Asaphs
Sermon. on Nov. 5th. 1680. Before the House of Lords.

LONDON, Printed by J. R. for John Salusbury, at the Rising Sun, near the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil, 1689.

To the Christian READER.
THE World is so well acquainted with Collections in Learning, Morality and
Divinity, Exemplifying Virtue and Vice, etc. that there needs no Apology for
Works of this sort, which may have their use as well as others; I chose this
way as most Authorative and convincing. And as to the Matter and Subject of the
Book, it cannot but be highly necessary, and seasonable to plead in the behalf
of Love and Peace, when the Church is so miserably divided. Worthy men have
complained, Glanv. Cath. Char.
That our Divisions have brought things to such a pass, that men take it ill to
hear of Charity. And Bishop Gauden.
That a Treatise of Peace would be thought like Snow in Summer, or Rain in
Harvest. And a Third, Bishop Tailor.
That one had as good Till the Air, or plow the Sands, as persuade such
Doctrines. And a Fourth, Doctor Fowler.
That it has been the common Fate of Reconcilers to suffer from both Parties.
But however we fare, it is our Duty to mind the contentious World of so
important a part of Christ's Discipleship, which it seems to have forgot, and to
have unlearnt that Lesson their Master taught them, to love one another. We are
indeed to contend earnestly for the Faith, once delivered to the Saints, and
yet to seek the Truth and Peace. Zech. 8.19. If we be never so certain the
thing we contend for is Truth, we must (...), follow the Truth in Love. If ever
this Church flourish, Moderation must at last be the Temper of her Members,
says the Reverend Dean of Canterbury. Pref. to Bishop Wilkins Sermons.
And, Though we agree not with our brethren in all their Opinions, yet while we
hold the same Creed, and walk by the same Rule, why should we not hope to meet
in the same Heaven? For sure Heaven is wide enough to hold men of several
judgments, else few are gone thither already, and fewer would follow after in
these times of division. A man may almost as soon expect that all the Clocks in
the City should strike One together, as that Men of so many several Sects, as
are to be found in England, should agree in any one alone. The Church of
England, the Protestant Dissenters, the Quakers, and the Romanists are no more
like to meet together in one place, and join in the same Religious Worship,
than London, Geneva, Rome, etc. to move out of their several places, and join
together into one City. For my part, I do believe that there will be to the end
of the World some for Episcopacy, some for Presbitery, some for Ana-Baptism,
and perhaps some for Independent Congregations, though against the whole
current of Antiquity. For besides that Scripture is not so very clear and
convincing by necessary consequence, against their received Opinions, as it is
in matters of Faith, the difference of Educations, and variety of
apprehensions, which men (who here know but in part) have about the sense of
the same Scriptures does mightily confirm it: In every one there is not the
same knowledge, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8.7. What Course is then to be taken?
Must we use force and violence, blood and wounds, fire and faggot, fines and
imprisonments, Curses and Excommunications against Dissenters from our Way and
Worship? We have not so learned Christ. I presume this savours of that other
manner of Spirit, which Christ rebuked in his Disciples (who would have
consumed the Samaritans with fire from Heaven) telling them they knew not what
spirit they were of; for Christ came not to destroy men's lives but to save
them. Upon which words, says a Learned Prelate of our Church, Bishop Andrews's
Sermon. p. 918.
Not to destroy, that they which cannot save, may yet be sure not to destroy
any. The World has used to practice the contrary, if men cannot save others
(and their saving of them is no more than to bring them to be of their Sect and
Persuasion; and perhaps a putting them farther off from salvation than they
were before) the next Course is to destroy, and root out the Generation of
them. But it was excellently said by as excellent a Person, Bishop of St.
Asaph's Sermon. Nov. 5. 1680. before the House of Lords, page 8.
"That they who are most given to hate and destroy others, especially those
others who differ from them in Religion, they are not the Church of God, or at
least they are so far corrupt in that particular. For Christ says save, and
destroy not; bless, and curse not; and love your enemies, enemies to our
Religion as well as others, and that with all the Properties of true Charity,
set down by St. Paul, 1 Cor. 13.4,5,6,7. For want of this we have suffered so
much from each other, and each side felt it smart, and found it grievous, when
it was their turn to suffer; as it has been too too common with us, whatever
Party has got uppermost to carry it with a severe hand toward the rest,
following the Advice given to King Charles the Second in respect of the
Dissenters, to crush them when he had got them under the Hatches: Whereas
common Humanity and Christianity teach us mutual favor, bowels of mercies,
kindness, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one
another, etc. Col. 3.12,13. And blessed be God who has endued our Gracious
Prince, and the Great Council of the Nation with this Christian Spirit, to show
mercy to men's Consciences. And surely if men will be but so wise as to know and
consider, so good as to desire, and so humble as to yield to the things which
make for Peace, they cannot be ignorant, how much the present Act for
Toleration may contribute to our Peace and Prosperity. I am sure it has put a
stop to three very considerable Evils; To those Fines and Imprisonments which
have been the ruin of some Families, by disabling the Master of the Family
from carrying on his Trade, and bringing in Provision for the ^est which
depended on him. We should have thought it hard measure, if it had been our own
case, to have been confined to a Prison instead of a Shop, and to have the Act
of Forty Pounds for each Month levied upon us for one or two Months, upon the
account of our difference from our Brethren; and then quod tibi fieri non vis
alteri ne feceris. Again, It has put a stop to that great abuse of
Excommunication, designed by Christ against men of the greatest and most
incorrigible wickedness, or the most obstinate Heresies, and not for any lesser
differences in things of no necessity to Salvation: Which has made this holy
means of Reformation despised, while the fomer sort escaped notwithstanding
their profaneness and debauchery; but the latter, though sound in the same
Faith with us, and much unblameable in their lives, have fallen under the
heaviest censures of the Church. Further this Toleration has taken away the
scurvyness of the Churchwardens Oath, which (in a strict sense of the words,
if no latitude could be allowed, or mitigations of it) called for a Presentment
of Dissenters without any favor, or difference between the weak and the
wilful: Which because of the ill consequence which too often followed,
Excommunication, and Imprisonment, many Churchwardens were more backward and
averse unto. Their Consciences would not suffer them to work such evil and
trouble to their Christian Brethren, Fellow Protestants, Loving Neighbors for
some small difference not destructive of their Salvation. And if we do not like
every thing that is in the Act of Toleration best, as if any unordained men be
allowed Preachers or Teachers of any Congregation (if I am not misinformed,
scarce any settled constant Preachers even among the Independents, and
Anabaptists, but what are Ordained by laying on of Hands, Fasting and Prayer,)
the guilt will be to themselves, and their hearers, etc. and not to us. Mr.
Mason has proved in his excellent Defense of the Ordination of Ministers
beyond the Seas, that Ordination by Presbyters is valid. See more in Iren. 2d.
part, chapter 8. Bishop Jewel, Downam, Alley, Pilkington, Bridges, Bilson, Andrews,
Davenant, Prideaux, Usher, Dr. Field, Nowel, Saravia, etc. And in the
Conformist Plea for Non-Conformists, part 2d. p. 36. and 37. and 50. Those that
have the internal call of knowledge and piety are not to be reckoned as Laymen,
but next to Presbyters. As Abbot Bucer, and Bishop Jewel, Bilson, Dr.
Benefield, etc. If we can but bear and forbear with one another in love,
notwithstanding the diversity of our Judgments, we may live happily, and hope
to see good days. Men will now be free from the many fears and jealousies,
which made them sit uneasy under former Princes, and not to enjoy themselves
so comfortably, when they were so often in danger upon their difference in
Religion. It is not so long since, that almost all Sects were jealous one of
another; the Church of England of the Church of Rome, and her designs; and of
the Dissenters, least they for present ease and Toleration in their Religion
should have given away the Test, the common security of the Protestant
Religion: And the Dissenters seemed to be afraid of both, of the severities
which they had felt from the Church of England, and its penal Laws, and of
greater from the Church of Rome, if she got uppermost, and to have the power in
her own hands. And all this because our love was grown cold, and our spirits
hot with such a zeal got among us, which like wildfire threatened to consume
us, and our Religion both: But sure St. Paul was not mistaken when he called
love a more excellent way, that love which works no ill to its Neighbor. Job
6.8,9. And O that I might have my request! That God would grant me the thing
that I long for! even that it would please God to take away the occasions of
our unChristian divisions and animosities. As he has begun the work, that so
it may be continued and ended in him, creating peace out of that Chaos of
confusion into which we have fallen, that Christians as brethren may dwell
together in Unity, and Christianity again become lovely to those that are
without, who used to say of the Primitive Christians, vide ut Christiani amant,
see how these Christians love one another. And though to be of one mind and of
one judgment is rather to be wished then hoped for in our days, yet to be of
one heart, why should it be thought a thing incredible or impossible? I am sure
Christ's Commandments are not grievous, and his command is plain and peremptory
for it. A new commandment give I unto you, John 13.34. to love one another. It
was put to me at my Ordination in these words, or to this effect; Will you
promote Love and Concord among all Christian people, but especially those of
your Charge? My Answer was, I will do so by the help of God. And I trust I have
done so herein. And since the most effectual means for love and peace is as
full an Union as we can attain unto, lessening our differences, and enlarging
our Communion as much as may be: And since as Mr. Wake on Romans 15,5,6,7. p. 31.
Never certainly was there a time since our Divisions first began, in which we
had greater reason to consider of an Union; or I hope a fairer opportunity to
promise our selves an accomplishment of it (says he;) Let us all be as careful
to improve it, as I am persuaded we have all of us not only seemed to desire,
but indeed earnestly longed for it. And I hope, my Fathers will show themselves
Patres Patriae by their Fatherly care and concern for the Churches good and
peace; and will not think it too much for so great and good a work as an happy
Reunion. (which, as Mr. De L'Angle in his Letter to his Lordship the Bishop of
London, Will rejoice Men and Angels, and bring down a thousand blessings of
Heaven and Earth upon those that shall contribute the most unto it. Vnreason.
of Sep. p. 424.) to part with a Ceremony, to alter an expression or two in the
Common Prayers, and to do somewhat more for peace, now that there is a time for
such a thing. And surely there is no such wide breach, and great a difference
but that there might be a closing, if we did but heartily desire it, and each
side would yield somewhat for peace sake. And as our Church has yielded to
accept of a subscription to the thirty six Articles, leaving out those in
controversy, she shows thereby that she knows how to yield in other things, in
case it will attain the end, and our dissenting Brethren in any considerable
number can be persuaded to return into the Communion of our Church. God who is
the Author of Peace, and Lover of Concord make us all in love with Peace, that
we may be followers of these burning and shining lights, guiding our feet into
the way of peace, 2 Cor. 13.11. That the God of Love and Peace may be with us.
For which I shall never cease to intercede at the Throne of Grace, as

A Friend of Peace, R. C.

A Copy of Verses made by the Author of the Collections.
CHerubims and Seraphims the Host of Love,
And Numbers numberless of Saints above,
Free from strife, (which wretched Mortals below,
Ever contending, to their sorrow know;)
Exalt ye Loves praise, make it heard on high:
All our life we strive, and last struggling dye.
Ah Jesu's Spouse! Christian called of old,
By Sectarian names now manifold;
Wedded to Peter and the Vatican;
Become Calvinist else a Lutheran:
One Church of the East, the other of the West:
Divisions have made bad of the best.
Our Mother's not of Sons of Peace bereft:
Praise to our God for seven thousand left,
Who under Prince of Peace his Banners go,
To fight out fights, and strife the Common Foe:
Brave Worthies! Armed with courage from above
To win for Truth, and overcome with love.
WILLIAM the Third high in Glory raised;
The Worlds wonder: All Europe stands amazed:
Behold Great Britains Scepter in his hand:
Peace established. Triumphant sing O Land,
Blessed with a Prince by Heaven sure designed
For Great, Good and Just: An Heroic Mind!
Love ours, and thine, King of Kings, guard his Throne;
To be de-thron'd by none but thee alone:
Him with peaceful thoughts God of Peace inspire:
Him, ye ages yet to come be Just, admire;
And call our Great Assembly wise to yield,
Wise to stand, that Truth and Peace win the Field.
Doom to the bottomless that spright of ire,
Which Abimelech and Shechem set on fire; Judge. 9.23.

And made them with infused fury mad,
Each other to consume by vengeance sad,
When much incensed their God his Peace withdrew:
Tremble powers: But he has his coming too,
Not in violent Earthquakes, blustering Winds:
But small still voice to calm and peaceful minds:
When he to work for peace the World must know,
He makes rough places smooth, lays mountains low:
Euphrates rapid torrents mighty pride
Must as Shiloa's waters gently glide:
The Lamb and Wolf must dwell like brothers then,
The Calf and Fatling lodge at the Lions Den; Isa. 11.6,7,8,9.

The Cow and Savage Bear together feed,
And a little Child those wild creatures lead;
The Asp not sting, nor Cockatrice annoy,
Nor those Beasts hurt which used to destroy.
When thus men calm their passions, still their rage,
We shall enjoy another Golden age.
Hopes, love will tame us with its gentle arts,
Close our gaping wounds, melt our frozen hearts.
The contentious World grown wise in time
Pleads guilty now, conscious of her crime,
And sounds a retreat that her feuds may cease
In a thrice-blest Philadelphian Peace.
Jehovah's Thunderbolts which fly against the proud,
And Zion covered with a dismal cloud,
Have made men's neck's (more stiff then sturdy Oak)
Submit to Christ, and bear loves easy Yoke:
Which Badge on Earth Christ true disciples wear,
And the Crown in Heaven, high exalted there.
God is love; and they that with him dwell
Embraced by Love in unity excel:
And with sweet delights at the Fountain still
They drink his Love, and ever have their fill.
Conformists Acknowledge that there are Good and Worthy Men among the
Dissenters from the Church of England.
BIshop Jewel in Answer to Mr. Harding; The thing is indifferent and may be
yielded to, says the one Sect; The other that they be the Popes rags, and may
not be worn: Says Jewel, the Godly Learned men, at whose persons you so rudely
scoff, that refuse to go in your Apparel, or otherwise to show themselves like
you, have age sufficient, and can answer for themselves: Notwithstanding, thus
much I may say in their behalf, neither do they commend any manner of Apparel,
as holy, nor condemn any manner of Apparel, as unholy. That is your proper and
peculiar Error, Mr. Harding to make so deep account of outward shows. They may
justly say the same Apparel on your parts has been foully abused, etc. Defense
of the Apology, part. 3. chap. 5. Divis. 1. p. 325.

(...), Or King James the first Instructions to his Son; I do equally Love and
Honor the Learned and Grave Men of either of these opinions, ( i. e. for or
against Ceremonials) which for mine own part I ever held indifferent. Again I
exhort my Son to be beneficial to the good men of the Ministry, praising God,
that there is a sufficient number of good men of them in this Kingdom, ( i. e.
of Scotland;) and yet are they all known to be against the form of the English
Church.

The Speech of the Bishop of St. David's, ( Dr. Rudde) in the Convocation, May
23. 1604; I put a great difference between them that are Schismatical, or open
disturbers of the state Ecclesiastical established, and them that are
scrupulous only of some Ceremonies, and other circumstances, being otherwise
Learned, Studious, Grave and Honest Men, and whose labors have been both
painful in the Church, and profitable to their several Congregations:
Concerning those Preachers last mentioned, I suppose, that if upon urging them
to the use of Ceremonies and Attire prescribed, they should stand out stiffly,
and choose rather to forgo their Livings and exercise of their Ministry; and
tho I do not justify their doings therein, yet surely there service would be
missed at such a time, as need shall require them and us to give the right hand
of Fellowship one to another, and to go Arm in Arm against the common
Adversary, that so there might be, Vis unita fortior, etc. Also remember that
when the Benjamites (though for their desert in maintaining of a bad cause)
were all destroyed saving six hundred, and the Men of Israel swear in their
fury that none of them would give his daughter to the Benjamites to Wife: yet
when their hot blood was over they lamented, and said there is one Tribe cut
off from Israel this day, and they used all their wits to the utmost of their
Policy to restore that Tribe again: In like sort, if these our Brethren
aforesaid should be deprived of their places for the matters premised, I think
we should find cause to bend our wits to the uttermost extent of our skill to
provide some Cure of Souls for them, where they may exercise their Talents;
verily I know not where to find so many able Preachers within this Realm
(unprovided for) to succeed them.

Hookers Eccles. Pol. Pref. Otherwise ( i. e. set aside their Errors and
Misconceits, speaking of the Dissenters) right well affected, and most
Religiously inclined minds. Again, heartily beseeching you by the meekness of
Jesus Christ, whom I trust, ye love, that as ye tender the peace and quietness
of the Church; If your own Souls, hearts and consciences be, as I doubt not but
they are, things most dear and precious unto you, be not blemished with
partialities.

Bishop Halls Apology against the Brownist, p. 137, and 138. Sect. 56. Edit.
1610: Those men which you say complain so much of their miserable condition
under the Prelates impositions, have notwithstanding with the same Pens and
Tongues not only justified our Church, but extolled it. You have found no
sharper Adversaries in this very accusation, for which you maliciously cite
them. How freely; how fully, have they evinced the Truth! Yea the happiness of
the Church of England against your false Challenges: and your forehead dares
challenge them for Authors! So has their Moderation opposed some appendancies,
that they have both acknowledged, and defended the substance with equal
vehemence to your opposition; neither do they suffer (as you traduce them) for
seeking another Church Government. -- Would God you could follow those men in
Moderate and Charitable carriage, as you have outrun them in complaints!

Doctor Crakanthorp In his Defensio Ecclesiae Anglicanae chapter 33. Sect. 15.
Puritanum, qui Haereticus sit, tu, opinor, in Anglia neminem unquam
comspexisti. -- You never saw in England, I believe, any Puritan Heretical in
his Judgment. -- Certe eorum fere nullus, cui quisquam inter vos pietate, and
vitae Sanctimonia, doctrina etiam (ne tu quidem, qui Magister es in tuo
Israele) paucis eorum conferendus es. Certainly, scarce any one of them, with
whom any men of yours can be compared in Holiness of Life, in Learning also
(not you indeed who are a Master in your Israel) worthy to be named in
comparison with them.

Doctor Edward Bulkley in his Apology for the Religion Established, being an
Answer to Wrights Articles, Edit. 1608. Art. 5. p. 105, 106. There is neither
Protestant, nor such as it pleases you to call Puritans, so far forth as I
know and believe, but as they deny the Popes wicked Supremacy, which he has
usurped over the Church of God, and Sovereign Princes, so they do unfeignedly
confess and acknowledge the Kings Power and Authority in his Kingdoms and
Dominions, and in all Causes, and over all persons, both Ecclesiastical and
Temporal, or Political: They all say with St. Paul, that every Soul ought to be
subject to the higher Powers, whether they be (as St. Chrysostom says) Apostle
or Evangelist, or Prophet, whatsoever he be,) for this subjection does not
overthrow Godliness: They all confess, that it belongs to his Royal dignity,
to see and procure not only Justice to be executed, and peace maintained, but
also that God be truly and sincerely served, according to his will revealed in
his Word, etc.

Bishop Andrews Respons. ad Bellarmini Apologiam, Edit. 1610. p. 29. Bellarm.
In Britannia magna multitudo Puritanorum, qui Primatum non ad Regem, sed ad
Senatum Ministrorum pertinere: Resp. Putida hac calumnia est, Presbyterio forte
lis est cum Episcopis, cum Rege nulla est; Vtrobique regi desertur ultro,
utrinque quod Caesaris est Caesari redditur.

Doctor Caves Gospel Preached, etc. p. 98. Many of the Presbyterian persuasion
are not only sound and Orthodox in the main Articles of the Reformed Religion,
but Learned and able Defenders of it, zealous Protestors against all the Horrid
wickedness of this Day, ( Jan. 30.) and active Instruments in bringing home our
Banished King.

Doctor Burgess Pref. to Vindicat. of our Ceremonies. Some peaceable, and very
worthy Ministers were cast out after the Conference at Hampton Court: Whereupon
it was intended to bring them in by a kind of necessity, or to loosen from them
others, etc.

Postscript. To Serious and Compassionate Enquiry. The modesty, and excellent
temper of several ancient Nonconformist of this Nation is a fair Copy for
those to Write after, that cannot yet be persuaded to come completely over to
the Church; and I will entreat all sober Nonconformist to remember after the
conference at Hampton Court, when the Non-conformists could not obtain their
desire, they were not Transported with heat and passion; but ingenuously
promised the Bishops that they would nevertheless Reverence them as spiritual
Fathers, and join with them against the common Enemy.

Hookers Discourse of Justification, p. 41; I doubt not, but God was merciful
to save thousands of our Fathers living in Popish Superstition, inasmuch as
they sinned ignorantly. Item p. 87. That Churches Deceit has prevailed over
none unto death, but only such as took a pleasure in unrighteousness. They in
all ages, whose hearts have delighted in the principal Truth, and whose Souls
have thirsted after Righteousness, if they received the mark of Error, the
mercy of God, even erring and dangerously erring, might save them.

True state of the Primitive Church Epistle to the Reader. I verily believe,
there are thousands of Papists, Lutherans and Calvinists, both Learned and
Religious, who would lay down their Lives for the Truth they profess.

King Charles the first upon the Covenant Sect. 4. Touching the Discipline and
Government of the Church, etc. Things which are of no clear and moral
necessity, but very disputable, and controverted among Learned and Godly men,
Sect. 7. Yet as things now stand, good men shall least offend God or me, by
keeping their Covenant in honest and lawful ways, since I have the charity to
think that the chief end of the Covenant in such men's intentions, was to
preserve Religion in purity and the Kingdoms in peace.

Idem, to the Prince of Wales, Be confident as I am, that the most of all sides
who have done amiss, have done so not out of Malice, but misinformation or
mis-apprehension. I allege this not to excuse or justify those persons, much
less their Solemn League or Covenant, but to show his charitable Sentiment of
them, allowing good men to have been in the number, lead away with that Error
of the times.

King Charles the Seconds Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, 1660.
page 5. When we were in Holland, we were attended by many grave and Learned
Ministers from home, who were looked upon as the most able and principal
Assertors of the Presbyterian Opinions, with whom we had as much Conference, as
the multitude of Affairs which were then upon us, would permit, and to our
great Satisfaction and Comfort, found them persons full of affection to us, of
Zeal for the peace of the Church and State, and neither Enemies (as they have
been given out to be) to Episcopacy and Liturgy, but modestly to desire such
alterations in either, as without shaking the Foundations, might best allay the
present distempers, which the indisposition of the Times, and Tenderness of
some Men's Consciences had contracted. Page 17. Item, Because some men,
otherwise Pious, and Learned, say, they cannot conform unto the Subscription
required by the Cannon, nor take the Oath of Canonical Obedience, etc.

Appendix to the third part of the Friendly Debate, page 143. Tells us that
Doctor Jackson always reverenced their Excellent Parts, and good Labors,
though he disliked the deformity of their Zeal, etc.

Bishop Saunderson on Romans 14.3. Sect. 29. I make no doubt, neither dare I be
so uncharitable, as not to think, but that many of them ( i. e.
Non-conformists) have honest, and upright, and sincere hearts to Godward, and
are unfeignedly Zealous for Gods Truth, and for Religion. They that are such,
no doubt feel the Comfort of it in their own Souls, and we see the Fruits of it
in their Conversations, and rejoice at it.

Judge Hales Discourse of Religion, page 21. Some persons truly Conscientious,
observing the many corruptions that the Romish Church has brought into the
Worship of God, are very suspicious of any thing that may look, as they think,
that way; though they are otherwise Men, of sound and Orthodox Principles, and
of a truly Righteous and Sober Life. Item. p. 13. Scrupulous of the Ceremonies,
otherwise sound in the principles of Faith, Pious and Strict in their Lives,
Just and Honest to all men, and Sober, Temperate and Blameless.

Mr. Smithies Spirit of Meekness, page 71. It may be, they are good Men, and
were converted by that Minister, or some other of the same persuasion, from the
ways of Wickedness, to the practice of Religion: It Is well quoted by a late
Learned Writer for the Church, in the division of hearts that is in the World,
it is certain some good may Dissent. Bishop Tailor Duct. Dub. P. 3. chapter 4. Rule
23. Sect. 8. Item Collect. of Discourse, Epist. Dedic. before Liberty of
Prophecy. Its an hard Case, that we should think all Papists and Anabaptists
and Sacramentaries bad men; certainly among all these Sects there are very many
Wise Men, and Good Men, as well as Erring.

Mr. D' l'Angles Letter to the Bishop of London. It is certain, that among the
multitude that follow them ( i. e. the Separatists) there is a very great
Number of good Men, whose Faith is pure, and whose Piety is sincere; and seems
to me, that the good and charitable Bishops ought to say of them, though in
something a different sense, as Optatus Milevitanus said of the Donatists in
his time; Si Collegium Episcopale nobiscum habere nolunt, tamen fratres sunt.

Doctor Stillingfleet Mischief of Separation. p. 9. I cannot persuade my self,
that so many scrupulous, and conscientious men, as are at this day among us,
would live so many years in a known sin, ( i. e. in a state of Separation from
the Communion of a Church which in Conscience they thought themselves obliged
to communicate with.)

Conformists Plea for the Nonconformists, Part 4. page 17. Some have their
Indiscretions, and their Mistakes, and their Heats, and their Blemishes; and
what Party have not? But if the Grace of God has appeared to any men, and if
any are taught to deny Ungodliness, and Worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly,
Righteously, and Godlily in this present World, as I am sure there are, there
are such among them.

Page 20. What an Example was the most faithful and successful Mr. Baxter,
whose practice was copied after his Gildas Salvianus, and the Ministers of that
Association? How diligent was Mr. Stubbs, Mr. Allen, Mr. Wadsworth, and others?

Idem page 27. The chief of the Congregational, are Men of great Worth,
Learning, Sobriety, and Holiness.

The Anabaptist such as are simply scrupulous in the point of Baptism, are
reputed peaceable and holy men by them that write against them; as Mr. Baxter,
Mr. Obad. Wills, and Mr. Joseph Whiston.

Lastly, The Quaker must have the right of Humanity; they who scrupled swearing
did call God to witness, and did protest and promise Loyalty and Obedience:
They offered the security of their words and bodies to the Law when found
Transgressors against the Peace: There are many things commendable in them.

Idem p. 101. As far as my Acquaintance does extend to the Nonconformists, I
must do them this Justice, that they are of a Loving, Healing, and Uniting
Spirit. I have heard them speak very well of good Conformists, and as free to
acknowledge the Grace of God in them as in those of their own persuasion.

Principles and Practice, etc. p. 28. The matters in Controversy ( i. e. of
Conformity) between men of confessedly great worth and goodness, I declare for
my part, and care not who knows it, that I love with my heart a sober and
peaceable minded Nonconformist, as much Conformist as I am my self, and I think
him never the worse man, that is so; supposing I perceive him Conscientious in
other Matters, and particularly that he is not of a Censorious, Seditious and
Tumultuous Spirit, but yet such I would not hate neither, but pity, and pray
for them.

Car's peaceable Moderator, Pref. Some of the disaffected to the Book of
Common Prayers, I take to be good Christians, Honest, Moderate, and well
meaning people, etc. Item in another place. I make no Question, but some are
right honest Men, and truly pretend Conscience, that they cannot submit to such
Orders, and to such and such Rites.

Testimony of above an 100 Non conformists for the Lawfulness of Lay-Communion,
speaking of the Nonconformists, those good men, who met after the Plague
(having preached to the People in the time of the Plague.)

Mr. Dodwell 's Letters of Holy Orders. Our Conscientious dissenting brethren,
etc. page 22. Their Errors themselves are innocent to such as are more intent
on the improvement of Christianity it self, then any subdividing Denomination.

Stop to the Course of Separation, page 37. I will not deny, but that some, yea
many of the Ministers that are now laid aside, while they had their Ministerial
standing in the Parish Churches, and Catholic Communion, were profitable.

Memorial from the English Protestants to his present Majesty, when Prince of
Orange, page 28. Four of our succeeding Parliaments perceived the abuse of
these Penal Laws, and the mischief thereby to conscious Christians, and
declared there intention of relieving them.

Doctor Burnet Bishop of Salisbury on Matthew. 12.25. Of the Dissenters, who
though in Errors, yet may be good men in the main, for ought we know.

Doctor Barrow 's Sermons against Evil Speaking. He that loves and Reverenceth
God, will acknowledge and approve his Goodness in bestowing gifts and graces to
his Brethren; he will be afraid to disavow, or disgrace them, that he may not
rob God himself of the glory due to his Favor and Mercy. Item page 20. God is
jealous of his Glory, and therefore cannot endure it to be abused by slurring
his good gifts and graces.

Glanv. Cathol. Char. page 55. That our Brethren may be good men, though they
understand not many things, in which we judge aright. Item. page 22. Let us
then be so ingenuous as to own the virtue and goodness that is in all Parties
and Opinions. Let us commend and love it. And Page 56. We should converse
indifferently with all persuasions, without wrangling or discord; and exercise
our Charity and good will toward the good men of any sort. This will be a
means to sweeten our Spirits, and to remove the Animosities we are apt to
conceive against the persons of Dissenters; and it will engage them on the
other hand to a greater kindness for us, and so lessen our distance and
disagreements.

Doctor Ham. Catech. on Blessed Peacemakers. There must be no affixing
Holiness to Opinions, or thinking them the best men, that are most of our
persuasion.

Salvation for such as are Faithful in the Common Duties of Christianity.
BIshop Andrew 's Sermons, Ed. 3. Such a way shall there always be (do all the
Controversy Writers what they can) a fair way agreed upon on all sides,
questioned by none, in which whosoever orders his steps aright, may see the
Salvation of our God. Page 105.

Bishop Saunderson in Sermon. 9. Ad aulam, Sect. 21. It may be a greater comfort
to every well meaning Soul, that the simple belief of those certain Truths,
wherein all parties are in a manner agreed, may be, and ordinarily is
sufficient for the Salvation of all those, who are sincerely careful according
to that measure of Light and means which God has vouchsafed them, to actuate
their Faith with Piety, Charity, and good Works.

Bishop Tailors Collection of Discourse Polem. and Moral. p. 403. He takes it
for granted that one Heaven shall hold men of several Opinions, and the Unity
of the Faith is not destroyed by that which men call different Religions.

Item, p. 595. Speaking of the Papists, they keep the Foundation, they build
upon God in Jesus Christ, they profess the Apostles Creed, they retain Faith
and Repentance, as the supporters of all their hope of Heaven, and believe many
more Truths than can be proved to be of simple and original necessity to
Salvation; and therefore all the wisest personages of the adverse party allow
to them possibility of Salvation, whilst their Errors are not Faults of their
Wills, but weaknesses and deceptions of their Understandings.

Item. p. 713. Now thus much also your men allow to us; those who Live well,
and Die in a true, though but general Repentance of their Sins and Errors, even
amongst us, your best and wisest men pronounce to be in a saveable Condition,
(spoken of the Papists Charity to us.)

Bishop of Salisbury 's Remarks on the Methods for Converting Protestants, p.
104. A Church may be a true Church (which is a Society of Men, among whom are
the certain means of Salvation) and yet be corrupted with many Errors; and thus
as long as the Church of Rome acknowledges the Expiation and Satisfaction made
by the Death of Christ, and applies it to all that truly believe, and amend
their Lives, so long she is a true Church; so that those in that Communion who
adhere truly to that which is the great Fundamental of the Christian Religion,
may be saved.

Mr. Chillingsworth 's Religion of Protestants a safe way to Salvation, In his
Answer to the Preface of Charity maintained, page 14. How of dis-agreeing
Protestants both parties may hope for Salvation: If they use their best
endeavors to believe the Scripture in the true Sense, and to live according to
it, (as I hope many of all sides do) it is impossible but they should believe
aright, and if they perform the condition of sincere Obedience, why should they
not expect that God will perform his promise, and give them Salvation?

Mr. Hooker 's Discourse of Justification, page 56. As many as hold the
Foundation, and as it were with a slender Thread, although they frame many base
and unsuitable things upon it, things that cannot abide the Trial of the Fire,
yet they shall pass the Fiery Trial and be saved.

Collection of Sermons of Mr. Samuel Ward of Ipswich, page 18. With God, I dare
be bold to say, there is neither Calvinist nor Lutheran, Protestant nor
Puritan, Conformitan or Inconformitan; but Faith and Love in Christ is all in
all.

Bishop Reynold 's Brotherly Agreement, page 15. Where one and the same
straight Road is kept, a small difference of Paths does not hinder Travelers
from coming to the same Inn at Night. [Spoken with reference to the different
Sects of Christians who may yet in their several ways meet at the same Heaven.]

Glanvel 's Catholic Charity, page 35, 36. Its very true indeed that the way
to Heaven is but one; and to walk in that, is the one thing necessary: but then
that is not this or that particular Path, but the way of an Holy Life, which
may be practiced under very different Forms of Apprehension and Belief: The
paths may be many in this Royal Road; he that goes in the plainest and nearest
is in the best condition for pleasure and safety, but another that goes about,
or in a Rugged or uneven path, may come to the same Journeys end, though with
more difficulty and danger.

Judge Hales Discourse of Religion, page 33. He that fears the Lord of Heaven
and Earth, walks humbly before him, thankfully lays hold on the Message of
Redemption by Christ Jesus, strives to express his Thankfulness by the
sincerity of his Obedience; if he falls in any measure, is restless till he
has made his peace by true Repentance, etc. Such a man, whether he be an
Episcopal or Presbyterian, or Independent, or Anabaptist, he has the Life of
Religion in him, and that Life acts in him, and will conform his Soul to the
Image of his Savior, and walk along with him to Eternity. The Quakers, take
away their affected singularities, the men are as other men. Some indeed very
sober, honest, just and plain-hearted-men, and sound in most, if not all the
important Doctrines and Practices of Christianity, page 17.

Bishop Wilkins Sermons, page 63. If a man be truly Conscientious and sincere
in those most substantial Duties of Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the
Holy Ghost, it is not his mistake or failing in any other lesser things that
shall make him incapable of the Kingdom of God. Again in the same Sermon, we
are not to think the worse of others for their differences, so as to despise
them, or censure such persons as to their Estates and Conditions, as if they
were not sincerely Religious, nor in favor with God; for though they should be
Erroneous and mistaken in their judgment in such things, yet if their
Conversations be more just and righteous than ours, if more humble and
peaceable, they are thereupon to be accounted better than we are, both more
acceptable of God, and approved of men.

Doctor Sherlock in Religious Assemblies, page 96. Others are scandalized at
the great variety of Religions, but if wise, seeing there is so much dispute,
which is the true Religion, they would use the greater diligence and honesty to
find it out; and hope, that God would pardon those mistakes which are merely
the Errors of their Understandings, when they offer unto him a pious and devout
Soul; that an honest man who is not biased by Interest, and does not choose a
false Religion upon a Design, will be accepted for his Sincerity and Devotion.

Dr. Patrick 's Parable of the Pilgrim, describing the Safe guide to the
Heavenly Jerusalem, page 14. He has Faith enough to save himself, and Charity
enough to believe, that others may be saved, that are not in all points just of
his belief.

Doctor Fowler 's Principles and Practices, page 108. Be so charitable, as to
believe well of Dissenters from us, who lead good lives, are of a modest and
peaceable deportment, and hold no Opinions, that directly oppose the design of
the Christian Religion.

Mr. Dodwell in his Letters about Holy Orders. When you have reduced them to
this, to practice such Duties, as are by all Parties owned essentially
Obligatory under the State of Christianity (as God be praised) principles
sufficient for most of these are admitted by all considerable parties, that
violate the peace of Christendom) and brought them to a carefulness of their
ways, and a tenderness of Conscience, and Inquisitiveness after their Duty
universally, if you could not persuade them to assent to what you say, etc. you
must be as Charitable in your judgment, as you believe, God will prove
favorable in his Final Sentence. Page 19. and 22.

Love and Truth in two Modest and Peaceable Letters from a quiet Conformable
Citizen of London. page 39. Almighty God has appointed me to live in an Age,
in which contention increases, and Charity decays: And its certain, that
variety of Opinions and Controversies in Religion declare difficulty to know
them truly; but my Comfort is, that there is so much Religion without
Controversy, as by the true Practice of what is so, my Soul may be saved.

The Conformists Declare that the several Sects of Protestants are agreed in
the Main.
BIshop Jewels Defense of the Apology, page 740. We say, that we agree among
our selves touching the whole judgment and chief substance of Christian
Religion, and with one Mouth, and with one Spirit do worship God and the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

(...), Or, King James the First his Instructions to his Son. We all (God be
praised) do agree in the grounds of Religion.

Bishop Andrews Sermons Edit. 3. page 18, 19. And without controversy great is
the mystery of Godliness, etc. We see in our days, how men languish about some
points, which they would have thought to be great, and great Controversies
there be, and great Books of Controversies about them; yet Blessed be God, that
has left us some Mysteries clear and without controversy; this here a
Mystery, a great one (Religion has no greater) yet manifest, and in Confesso
with all Christians. A way of peace then there shall be in the midst of a World
of Controversies, in which way of peace even all parts shall agree.

Bishop William Barlow in his Defense of the Articles of the Protestant
Religion against Wright 's Articles. Objecting the irreconcilable Jars between
the Protestants of the Church of England, and the Puritans in the Essential
points of Faith, Answers, page 20. or 21. The Jars between us, though unkind,
yet not in this kind, only for Ceremonies External, no points Substantial.

Doctor Crakanthorp in his Defensio Eccl. Anglicanae, chap. 33. Sect. 15.
Puritanum, qui Hereticus sit, tu, opinor, in Anglia neminem unquam conspexisti:
cum illis, quos tu puritanos vocas, non est nobis de fide aut fidei Dogmatelis
ulla; de Ritibus illi and Disciplina Ecclesiae nostrae contendunt; In fide
consensus, in Ritibus solum and Disciplina dissentimus.

Bishop George Carlton 's Answer to Montagues Appeal, first Edit. page 5. It
was then [in Qu. Eliz. Reign] the open Confession both of the Bishops and of
the Puritans that both parts embraced a mutual consent in Doctrine, only the
difference was in matters of Inconformity. Page 78. To that passage in
Montagues Appeal. Page 28. Just your Puritan Doctrine. He Answers, A Puritan
Doctrine is a strange thing, because it has been confessed on both sides, that
protestants and and puritans have held the same Doctrines without variance:
What is your end in this, but to make Divisions where there were none?

Bishop Hall's Apol. against the Brownists Edit. 1610. Sect. 56. page 138. So
has their ( i. e. Nonconformists) Moderation opposed some Appendancies, that
they have both acknowledged and defended the substance with equal vehemence to
your opposition.

Hooker 's Eccles. Polity, L. 3. Sect. 1. With Rome we do not communicate,
concerning sundry her gross and grievous abominations; yet touching those main
parts of Christian Truths, wherein they constantly still persist, we gladly
acknowledge them to be of the Family of Jesus Christ; and our hearty prayer to
Almighty God is, that being conjoined so far forth with them, they may at
length (if it be his Will) so yield and reform themselves, that no distraction
remain in any thing, but that we may all with one heart and voice glorify God
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose Church we are.

Mr. Hierons Sermons, page 500. God be praised, the Foundation of Religion is
on both sides held and taught sincerely.

Mr. Sprints Cassand. Anglicanum, Epist. to the Reader. In the Foundation we
all agree, Time and Day will try the Hay and Stubble from the Gold and Silver,
1 Cor. 3.11,12. etc.

Mr. Virtues Plea for Peace; page 44. The differences among us are only in
superstructures and less principal Truths, whilst in the Main and Fundamental
points of our Religion we have (God be thanked) a firm Concord, as may appear
by the Harmony of Confessions.

Doctor Featly his Roma ruens; page 22. Differences among us in Matters of
Faith necessary to Salvation there are not; our Controversies are de Fimbriis,
non de Textu, of the Lace and Fringe of Ceremonies.

Mr. Pygots Sermon, 2 Samuel 2.26. page 46. When the Gospel of Truth has been
preached amongst us now upwards Fourscore years, do we stick at Pilates
Question, What is Truth? John. 18.38. Beloved, for the substance of our
Religion, I say with St. Paul; If an Angel from Heaven shall preach any other
Gospel, or discover any other [Fundamental] Truths to us, then what we have
received, let him be accursed. And if this unhappy difference be about
Circumstances and Ceremonies, God grant that whilst we are so earnest in
contention about niceties and shadows we do not lose the Substance.

Glanvel 's Cath. Charity, page 2. It Is very strange, that Christians should be
so at odds, whose Religion is Peace and Love, and the reasons of whose
Differences are so small in proportion to the degree of their Animosities: Our
God is one, and we have the one common Savior, we profess one Gospel, and
believe the same Creeds, we have the same Sacraments, and the same Fundamental
Ordinances, and since we are agreed in these, what is there left, that is worth
the heat of a Dispute?

Dr. Stillingfleet Dean of St. Paul's Epist. Dedic. before the Mischief of
Separation: That there is an Agreement in Doctrine and the substantial parts of
Worship is acknowledged in our Case. And page 13. The people apprehend the
differences to be much greater than the Teachers will allow, when they are put
to declare their Minds; and our common Enemies take as much advantages from our
differences, as if they were really far greater than they are.

Conformists Plea for the Non conformists, Part 3. page 75. Indeed the
Separation with which the Nonconformists are charged is not as Separation from
a Church, but as Separation in a Church, fundamentally and essentially the
same, but differing in Modes and Accidents, which must needs be the lowest kind
of difference; For the Conformists and Non-conformists are all one in Christ,
agreeing in all the parts of Christian Catholic Communion with us.

Mr. Kidder 's Sermon. on 1 Pet. 3.11. The things in which we all agree, these
things are many, and of great weight; what we differ about bears no proportion
to those things, which we are agreed in.

Mr. Hancock 's Sermon on Luke 19.42. page 24, 25. The Mortification of our
Lust and Passion, living a life of Spiritual Purity, and Devotion, Self-denial
and Meekness, Justice and Charity, Peaceableness and Patience, Sobriety and
Chastity, and a trusting in the Merits of Christ for pardon of our Sins, and
acceptance of our imperfect Righteousness, these are the substantials of our
Religion, about which all wise and good men are Agreed, however we differ about
other Matters.

Difference of Case between Separation of Protestants from Rome, and the
Separation of Dissenters, page 69. As for the Dissenters, methinks it should
not be hard to dissuade the most of them from breaking the Communion of the
Church, any longer with which they agree in the Substance of Faith and Worship.

Mr. Wake 's Sermon on Romans 15.5,6,7. page 16, 17. Our differences do not at
all concern the Foundations either of Faith or Worship; and are therefore such
in which good men, if they be otherwise diligent and sincere in their enquiry,
may differ without any prejudice to themselves, or any just reflection upon the
truth of their common profession.

To conclude this Head. Bish. Reynold's Br. Reconcil. p. 7. Why should not the
many Truths wherein we agree teach us to join in Love, which is a Christian
Duty, rather than the few opinions in which we dis-agree cause breach in
affection, which at best is but an human Infirmity.

That the Creed contains all Truths necessary to Salvation.
IN the Common Prayer at the Visitation of the Sick, the Minister by the
Churches order, says thus to the Sick; I shall rehearse to you the Articles of
our Christian Faith, that you may know whether you do believe as a Christian
man should or no. And so Bishop Tailor on the Credenda in the Holy Catholic
Church, The Creed, which whosoever beleives, is a Catholic and a Christian;
but he that beleiveth it not is neither. In Baptism according to the Church of
England, The question put to the person to be baptized, do thou believe in
God the Father? and so to the end of the Creed: And will thou be Baptized into
this Faith? And in the Church Catechism, That in our Vow at Baptism we promised
to believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith; And in the beginning of the
Reformation, it was agreed upon, that the Bishops and Preachers ought to
instruct the people according to the Scripture, the Three Creeds, and the four
first General Councels. The Fathers are cited by the Reverend Bishops in
testimony that the Creed contains all Truths necessary to Salvation; as by
Archbishop Laud, against Fisher, Bishop Tailors Ductor Dub. and Bishop Bramhal
especially Tertullian, Clemens Romanus, Ambrose, Augustine, etc. who made the
Creed to be the only standing immovable, and irreformable Rule of Faith; the
sum of the whole Catholic Faith; the Key of the Christian Faith; the rule and
square of the Apostical Sermons, ( i. e. after the making of it;) wherein the
Apostles have collected into one breviary all the points of the Catholic
Faith, which are diffused throughout all the Scriptures. The Creed is one
perfect collection and sum, plain, short and full, that the plainness might
help the weakness of the Hearers, the shortness their Memory, the Fullness their
Instruction.

The General Council of Ephesus, did forbid all men to exact any more of a
Christian at his Baptismal profession: and again the same Council, That it
should be lawful for no man to publish or compose another Faith or Creed, then
that which was defined by the Nicene Council, and that whosoever should dare to
compose, or offer any such to any persons willing to be converted from
Paganism, Judaism, or Heresy, if they should be Bishops, or Clergymen, should
be deposed; if Laymen, Anathematised, i. e. Accursed with Excommunication. It
was the Universal practice of the Primitive Church, Credisne at Baptism? On
Palm Sunday, the Christian converts from Heathenism, as yet under Catechizing,
petitioned for Baptism; and from that day forward had some assigned to expound
the Creed unto them, whereof they were to make solemn profession at Baptism.

All the Divines of the Reformed Church confessedly and generally own this
Truth, that the Creed contains all Truths necessary to Salvation.

Bishop Halls Works, p. 637. It Is not Cassander's Speech only, but every wise
and honest man's, the Creed is the common cognizance of our Faith; surely,
says he, Theodoret, when he would allay the bitter contentions of those
ancient Christians of Antioch, writes thus, both parts made one and the same
confession of their Faith; for both maintained the Creed of the Nicene Council,
and blames the Romanists, that the confession of the same Creed is not
sufficient with them for peace. Item Resolution of Practical Cases of
Conscience, Case 5. Dec. 3 d. If there were not some special Truths, the belief
whereof makes and distinguishes a Christian, the authors of the Creed
Apostolic, besides the other symbols received anciently in the Church, were
much deceived in their aim.

Doctor Potters Answer to Charity Mistaken, p. 221. How can it be necessary for
any Christian to have more in his Creed, than the Apostles had in the Church of
their time; may the Church of after ages make the way to Heaven narrower, than
our Savior left it, etc. The Apostles profess, they revealed to the Church the
whole Council of God, keeping back nothing needful for our Salvation; What
Tyranny then is it to impose any new matters on the Faith of Christians,
especially as the late Popes have done, under that high commanding Form, Qui
non crediderit, aut fe^rit, damnabitur.

Bishop Tailor Coll. of Discourses, p. 524. It is a strange Boldness in the
Church of Rome, first to add Twelve new Articles to the Apostles Creed, and
then to add the appendix of Athanasius; this is the Catholic Faith, without
which no man can be saved. For I demand, can any man say and justify, that the
Apostles did deny Communion to any man, that believed the Apostles Creed, and
lived a good Life? Let them remember Pope Pelagius, who when the Bishops of
Istria deserted his Communion in causa trium Capitulorum, he gave them an
account of his Faith by recitation of the Creed, and by attesting the Four
General Councels, and is confident upon this, that de fidei firmitate nulla
poterit esse question, vel suspicio generari.

Bishop Usher, In those Propositions, which without all controversy are
universally received in the whole Christian World, [i. e. Articles of the
Creed] so much Truth is contained as being joined with an holy obedience, may
be sufficient to bring a man unto Everlasting Salvation; and that as many as
walk according to this Rule, peace shall be upon them. Upon which says Doctor
Chillingworth, this is a great and as good a Truth, and as necessary for these
miserable Times, as can be uttered.

Hookers Eccles. Polit. p. 266. We have received from the Apostles of our Lord
Jesus Christ that brief confession of Faith, which has been always a badge of
the Church, a mark whereby to discern Christian men from Infidels and Jews.

Dr. Hammond of Schism, p. 58. Calls the Creed the Apostolic badge or mark, A
tessera or token of the Apostles having planted the Faith in any Church, the
known summary of that belief which had been received from the Apostles, p. 211.
It cannot be affirmed of all the Articles of the Creed, that they are thus
absolutely necessary, ( i. e. that no man can be imagined to Reform his Life,
so as to be acceptable to God, but he to whom every one of those Articles has
been intelligibly revealed;) for as to many plain yet pious Christians, its not
certain that can be affirmed.

Bishop Tailor Coll of disc. p. 536. The Religion of Jesus Christ is the Form
of sound Doctrine, set down in Scripture, separated as to the Question of
necessary, or not necessary, by the symbol of the Apostles. Item p. 407. Now if
more were necessary than the Articles of the Creed, I demand, why was it made
the characteristick note of a Christian from an Heretic, Jew or an Infidel? or
to what purpose was it composed? or if this were intended as sufficient, did
the Apostles or those Churches which they founded know any thing else to be
necessary?

Bishop Sparrows Rationale upon the Common Prayer, p. 50. In the time of the
stay at Jerusalem, they agreed upon this Creed as a Rule of Faith, according to
the Analogy of which they and all others should teach; and as a word of
distinction, by which they should know Friend from Foes; for as the Gileadits
by the word Shibboleth, Judges 12.6. etc. So the Apostles and the Church should
know who were right believers, who false, by this word of Faith: for all that
walked according to this Rule, and Professed this Faith, she acknowledged for
hers, and gave them her peace; but all others that went contrary to this Rule
and Word, she accounted enemies, (Tertull. de praescriptione) and lead by false
Spirits, as 1 John 4.6. Item, a Christian evidences to the Church his sound
belief, by expressly repeating the Creed, and every particular thereof, which
is, and always has been accounted the mark and character, whereby to
distinguish a true beleiver from an Heretic or Infidel.

Judge Hales discourse of Religion, p. 4. The Credenda or things to be known,
or believed, are but few, and intelligible, briefly delivered in that summary
of Christian Religion, usually called the Apostles Creed; and in brief the
Baptismal Covenant, as it is contained in the Liturgy, and Explanation thereof
in the Church Catechism, [ i. e. by the Covenant Mercies and Covenant-duties]
together with the precepts of the Decalogue, contain in effect the summary, or
brief Epitome of our Christian duty.

Cars peaceable Mother. p. 43. The Creed is a short Abridgment and Epitome of
the Apostles Doctrine which they received from Christ our Savior, and
delivered to us in the New Testament, the Rule of our Faith, Touchstone of
Truth, the pith and substance of our Christian Religion, the very badge and
cognizance of a Christian, whereby he is not only known from Pagans, but also
distinguished from Heretics.

Bishop Pearson, The Creed without controversy is a brief comprehension of the
objects of our Christian Faith, and is generally taken to contain all things
necessary to be believed, in praef. to his Exposition on the Apostles Creed.

Glanvell's Catholic Charity p. 30. The Fundamentals of belief are few and
plain; for certainly the Divine goodness would not lay our Eternal interest in
difficulties and multitudes, things hard to be understood, and retained. Item,
Agreement of Reason and Religion, page 5. In the Creed are all the Fundamentals
of Religion, and though our Church require our Assent (Ministers he means) to
more propositions, yet those are only Articles of Communion, not Doctrines
absolutely necessary to Salvation: And if we go beyond the Creed for Essentials
of Faith, who can tell where we shall stop?

Doctor Tillotson. I doubt not, but that the belief of the Ancient Creed,
provided we entertain nothing, that is destructive of it, together with a good
Life will certainly save a Man.

True state of the Primitive Church; Part First. That which we commonly call
the Apostles Creed, if it were not composed by them, yet certainly by Primitive
and Apostolic men, and proposed as the sum of Christian Faith, the sum total
necessary to Salvation. It cannot be supposed, that they left out any thing
which they thought necessary to Salvation; they might as well have omitted
half, or all.

Dr. Steward 's Englands Case, page 20. In our Reformation we still adhering
unto the Three Creeds, which are the Faith of the Church Catholic.

Mr. Hancock 's Sermon on Luke 19.42. page 26. To the Honor of the Church of
England let it be said, whatsoever is imposed on us as necessary to the
Salvation of all men, is contained in the Apostles Creed. This is the Faith of
the first and best times of Christianity; the Faith into which we are Baptized,
and the Belief of this Creed has a direct influence on our Christian practice,
which is the great business of Religion.

Bishop Sanderson in his nine Cases of Conscience, page 8. Whosoever well
considers, may rest satisfied in his judgment and conscience, that the Faith
professed and taught in the Church of England, is a plain and safe way to lead
a Christian Believer to Eternal Salvation, if he withal lead his life and
conversation answerable thereunto.

Dr. Barrow 's Discourse of the Unity of the Church annexed to his Treatise
against the Popes Supremacy. In regard to this Union of Faith, among
Christians, the Body of Christians adhering to it, was called the Catholic
Church, from which all those were esteemed Ipso facto, to be cut off and
separated, who in any point deserted that Faith, page 9.

Conformists not forward in Censuring any as guilty of Heretical and Damnable
Errors.
HOmily of Contention, First Part. May help with other Citations to explain the
Hereticalness of an Error. He that is faulty let him rather amend, than defend
that which he has spoken a miss, least he fall by contention from a foolish
Error into an obstinate Heresy.

Bishop Jewel's Def. of Apol. page 46. For just proof of Heresy three things
necessarily be required. 1. That it be an Error. 2. That it be an Error against
the Truth of Gods Word; for otherwise every Error makes not an Heresy. 3.
That it be stoutly and wilfully maintained; otherwise an Error in Gods Truth
without wilful maintenance is not an Heresy. St. Augustine says, Errare
possum Hereticus esse non possum. Item p. 67. The Catholic Fathers and Bishops
made no doubt but our Religion might be proved out of the Scriptures; neither
were they ever so hardy to take any for an Heretic, whose Error could not
evidently and apparently be reproved by the self-same Scriptures.

Bishop Andrews cited in Appendix to the third Part of the Friendly Debate. Let
but obstinacy and perverseness be wanting, it will be no Heresy; and if it be
Heresy, being about a point not of Faith but of Discipline, [whether
Episcopacy be a distinct order from Presbitery] it will not be among those
things which St. Peter calls Damnable Heresies.

Bishop Hall 's Resolutions of diverse Cases of Conscience, Dec. 3. Case 5.
Whosoever shall wilfully impugn any of the Articles of the Christian Faith,
refuse to acknowledge and receive the Sacraments expressly instituted by Christ,
comes within the verge of Heresy: Wilfully I say; for mere Error makes not an
Heresy; If out of simplicity, or gross Ignorance a man shall take upon him to
maintain a contradiction to a point of Faith, being ready to repent upon better
light, he may not be thus Branded: Eviction and Contumacy must improve his
Error to be Heretical.

Bishop Bramhall 's Just Vindication of the Church of England, page 26. A man
may render himself guilty of Heretical pravity, 1. By dis believing any
Fundamental Article of Faith, and necessary part of saving Truth, etc. 2. By
believing any Superstitious Errors or Additions, which do vertually and by
necessary and evident consequences subvert the Faith, and overthrow fundamental
Truths. 3. By maintaining lesser Errors obstinately after sufficient
Conviction, etc. But because that consequence, which seems clear and necessary
to one man, may seem weak to another; and because we cannot penetrate into the
hearts of men, to judge whether they be obstinate, or do implicitly and in the
preparation of their Mind believe the Truth, its good to be sparing and
reserved in Censuring Heretics for Obstinacy.

Bishop Tailor 's Collection of Discourses, page 117. When I reckoned Obstinacy
among those things which make a false opinion Criminal, there is an obstinacy
of the will, which is indeed highly guilty of Mis-demeanor; and when the School
makes pertinacy or obstinacy to be the Formality of Heresy they say not true
at all, unless it be meant the obstinacy of the Will, or Choice. The Adequate
and perfect formality of Heresy is whatsoever makes the Error voluntary or
vicious, as is clear in Scripture, reckoning Covetousness, Pride, and Lust, and
whatsoever is vicious to be its causes: but there is also an Obstinacy (you may
call it) but indeed, is nothing but a resolution and a confirmation of
Understanding, which is not in a man's power honestly to alter; and it is not
all the commands of Humanity, that can be Arguments sufficient to make a man
leave believing that for which he thinks he has reason, for which he has such
Arguments as heartily convince him.

Item. page 417. It is very hard to be discerned, because those accidental and
Inherent Crimes, which make a man an Heretic in Questions not simply
Fundamental, or of necessary practice, are actions so Internal, and Spiritual,
that cognizance can but seldom be taken of them.

Dr. William 's Truth, page 32. Because is is a sin so fearful to persist
maliciously and obstinately in a known Heresy, and because of mine own
Ignorance of Men's hearts what their thoughts be, how far their knowledge
reaches, or how much their Malice prevails with them, I dare not be so bold
as in my thoughts to lay a sin so grievous to any man's Charge.

Glanvil 's Cath. Charity. Its very true, that Error many times is occasioned
by a corrupt Byas in the Will and Affections: but then, if our Erring Brother
be sincere in other matters, we are not to conclude, that his understanding is
this way corrupted, and we can scarce be certain of it in any case.

Design of Christianity, page 232. Would we know whether we Embrace all the
Fundamentals of Christianity, and are guilty of no Damnable and Destructive
Errors? Examine we our selves, are we sincerely willing to obey in all things
commanded, and heartily endeavor to have a right understanding of the Holy
Scripture, in order to the bettering of our Souls by the Doctrines, etc.? This
obedient temper is the most infallible mark of an Orthodox man; such an one
though he may err, cannot be an Heretic.

Dr. Hammond of Schism, page 24. How light and inconsiderable (and extrinsecal
to the Foundation) soever the Error may be supposed to be; yet if there be
Obstinacy in the continuing in it against light and conviction, this certainly
is a sin, neither light, nor inconsiderable, nor reconcilable with Christian
Practice.

Hooker 's Discourse of Justification, page 43. Many are partakers of the
Error, which are not of the Heresy of the Church of Rome. Put a difference,
[saith St. Jude] have compassion upon some. Shall we lay up all in one
Condition? Shall we cast them all headlong? Shall we plunge them all into that
infernal Everlasting Flaming Lake? Them that have been partakers of the Errors
of Babylon together with them which are in Heresy? Them that have been
Authors of Heresy with them that by Terror and Violence have been forced to
receive it? They who have Taught it, with them whose simplicity has by sleight
and conveyances of false Teachers been seduced to believe it? Them which have
been partakers in one, with them which have been partakers in many? Them which
in many, with them which in all?

Item page 64. Considering how many Virtuous and just men, how many Saints, how
many Martyrs, how many Ancient Fathers of the Church have had their sundry
perilous opinions, (and St. Augustine says of himself, Errare possum,
Hereticus esse nolo, except we put a difference between them that Err, and
obstinately persist in Error, how is it possible that ever any man should hope
to be saved?

Mr. Chillingworth chap. 1. Sect. 13. The intended sense of Scripture is not so
fully declared in points not necessary, but that they which oppose it, may
verily believe, that they indeed maintain it, and have great show of Reason to
induce them to believe so; and therefore are not to be Damned, as men opposing
that which they know to be a Truth delivered in Scripture, or have no probable
Reasons to believe the contrary; but rather in Charity to be acquitted and
absolved, as men, who endeavor to find the Truth, but fail of it, through
Humane Frailty. Item chap. 3. Sect. 19. He opposes not that, which he does
know to be true, but only that you know to be so, and which he might know, were
he void of prejudice, which is a Fault, I confess, but a fault incident to good
and honest men very often.

That none are to be shut out of the Church, and denied Communion for Lesser
Sins and Errors.
BIshop Tailors Ductor Dubitantium. In what case is Excommunication to be
inflicted? I choose to give it in the words of the Fathers, because there is in
this case Reason and Authority too. 1. Unless the offense be evident, no man
must be excommunicated, says Origin [agreeably Hooker Eccl. Pol. page 408. As
for Iniquity and Sin, it lies many times hid; and because we be all offenders,
it becomes us, not to incline toward hard and severe sentences touching
others, unless upon notorious wickedness.] 2. None but peccator gravis and
scandalosus: Why should a man proceed to violent remedies, when a gentle
application will make the cure? Therefore the Fathers in the Council of Worms
in Can. 2. Decreed; Nullus Sacerdotum, etc. no Priest shall excommunicate any
man sound in the Faith, for small and light causes, but only for some very
grievous fault, according to the practice of the Fathers. St. Leo in the 93.
Epist. forbade, Let not the Communion be easily or lightly denied to any
Christian, nor at the pleasure of every angry Priest. It was a worthy cause of
complaint in St. Leo, to consider, that this evil was done for so little
things; and therefore if the Church do Excommunicate him, whose Actions or
Words though faulty, yet can consist with the state of a good man, and do not
destroy the Love of God, the Censure was too heavy as to the External, and
false as to the Internal Communion. For the man is not fallen from God, but
does communicate with the head, and continue to receive of the Spirit of
Christ. 3. Neither is this sufficient; a scandalous sin alone is not enough:
for Excommunication is the last remedy: Omnia prius tentanda. When nothing else
will do it, then is this to be used for his amendment.

Bishop Usher 's Directions concerning Liturgy; and Episcopal Government. That
none might be excommunicated but by the Bishop himself, with the consent of the
Pastor, in those Parishes the Delinquent dwells; and that for heinous and
scandalous Crimes, joined with obstinacy and wilful contempt. Idem In his Body
of Divinity.

Bishop Pearson on the Creed, page 350. By great and scandalous offenses, by
incorrigible mis-demeanors we my incur the Censure of the Church of God; and
while we are shut out thence, we stand excluded out of Heaven.

Item Doctor More 's Mystery of Godliness, 14. chap. That none are to be
excluded from Communion that profess the belief of the Holy Scripture, and the
Creed, unless they stand guilty for some gross and scandalous sins, and do
persist therein impenitent and unreclaim'd.

Item, The Judgment of the Church being nothing else, but an effective and
terrible Declaration of the Judgment of God, must not be exterminating and
Final, for things of little concernment, but according to the Mercy which we
hope for: Again, If the Church kills on Earth ( i. e. Excommunicates) and God
saves in Heaven, its clear, she has not used her power aright; Whoever
deserves Excommunication, deserves Damnation, page 530. in Collection of
Discourse Polemical and Moral.

In the Commination. The persons coming under the Discipline of the Church,
said to be such, as stood convict of Notorious Sin. And further, the Wrath of
God which obstinate sinners through the stubbornness of their Hearts have
heaped unto themselves, which despised the Goodness, Patience, and
Long-sufferance of God, when he called them continually to Repentance, etc. And
the Curses therein are denounced against wilful and open Evil-Livers.

Article 33. of the Church of England. That person, which by open denunciation
of the Church, is rightly cut off that is Excommunicate, etc. On which Mr.
Rogers Exposition reckons two sorts of men to be rightly Excommunicated,
whereof the one pervert the sound Doctrine of the Truth, as did Hymeneus and
Philetus the Resurrection; the other sort, such as be defiled with notorious
wickedness.

Bishop Jewel 's Defense of the Apol. page 140. The Minister, we say, shuts
up the gate of the Kingdom of Heaven against unbelieving and stubborn persons,
denouncing unto them Gods Vengeance and Everlasting punishment; or else quite
shutting them out of the Bosom of the Church by open Excommunication.

Item page 146. That the wicked and wilful, and such as would not believe, etc.
Item. Reply to Harding, page 32. Persons Excommunicate upon great and notorious
Crimes could not be suffered to communicate with the rest of the Faithful.
Item. page 88. The apparent wicked and ungodly were removed from the
Congregation.

Bishop Andrew 's Latter Sermons, page 32. It has ever been held good Divinity
that the Church from Christ received power to censure and separate wilful
offenders. Item page 55. Speaking of the same power given to Edification and
not to Destruction, I say not first and principally to Destruction, nor of any
save only of the wilful and impenitent Sinner.

Item Bishop Andrew 's Sermons, Edit. 3. page 727. Then is not every Error
repugnant to Gods Grace. God is able to pardon, and not impute Error in
Opinion, as well as Error in Practice; did not the High Priest offer as well
for the Errors, as the Transgressions of the people? This only we are to look
to, that with St. Peter we be not wilful; if there come a clear comperi as
ready to relent in the one, as to repent of the other.

Archbishop Laud cited in Dr. Puller 's Moderation of the Church of England,
page 391. The Church of England is not such a shrew to her children, as to deny
her Blessing, or denounce an Anathema against them, if some peaceably dissent
in Points remoter from the Foundation.

Bishop Davenant 's Letter to Duraeus. The Apostles Creed, says he, and the
Articles therein contained he that believes, and endeavors to lead a Life
conformable to the commands of Christ, is not to be blotted out of the Roll of
Christians, nor expelled from Communion with other Members of any Christian
Church whatsoever, Item. That Church does too much please it self, which
rejects others (in which neither Tyranny, nor Idolatry, nor Deadly Heresy is
found) as men unworthy of Communion with her, for some Infirmity of
Understanding: the Fathers of the Ancient Church did not so.

Why should men be more rigid than God? Why should any Error exclude any man
from the Churches communion, which will not deprive him of Eternal Salvation?
Dr. Chill. chap. 4. Sect. 40. of his Book.

Doctor Chillingw. chap. 4. Sect. 13. What Man or Church believes the Creed,
and all the evident consequences of it, if also he believe the Scripture
sincerely and heartily, cannot possibly be in any Error of simple belief
offensive unto God, nor deserve for any such Error to be deprived of his Life,
or cut off from the Churches communion, and hope of Salvation.

Sir Francis Bacon. In his Advertisement of the controversies of the Church of
England, and of his works, page 138. page 192. Of the abuse of Excommunication,
vide etc.

Hooker 's Discourse of Justification, page 54. If was a perilous Error that
the Galatians held about Justification, yet so far was St. Paul from striking
their Names out of Christ's Book, that he commands others to receive them [
i. e. to have communion with them] with singular Humanity, use them as
Brethren: he knew man's imbecility, had a feeling of our blindness, which are
Mortal Men, how great it is.

The Judgment of the Professors of Divinity in the University of Aberdeen,
mentioned page 707, is not unsuitable to this Subject. That the condition of
that Church is worse, and incomparably more lamentable, that is so swelled and
puffed up with the splendor of its Golden Edifice upon the Foundation, or of its
Orthodoxy, that neglecting Charity and Equanimity, and trampling on the Law of
Christ, fastidiously rejects, and Anathematizeth other Churches, Orthodox in
the Foundation, and willing to maintain place with it, than is the condition of
those Churches, who, though they are infirm in Faith, inferior in knowledge,
do yet hold in the Foundation, maintain inviolable Charity, and after the
Example of Blessed Cyprian, do neither judge nor separate from Communion, those
who think otherwise then themselves.

Dr. Casaubon 's Necessity of Reformation, page 142. cited by Dr. Puller 's
Moderation etc. page 436. Were there nothing else objected to Papists but this
one thing, their uncharitable proscribing and Excommunicating all Christians,
in all parts of the World [as in the Council of Trent imposing her Doctrines
which were but disputable before, to be de fide, with an Anathema to such as
thought of them otherwise] who are not of their Communion, and obliging all
that adhere unto them to profess the same; I should think that one thing a just
ground of Separation or forsaking their Communion.

Dr. Steward 's Englands Case, page 26. When Men cast out of the Church
Catholic, and so damn to Hell all those that hold not their Opinions; this St.
Augustine oft-times calls Schism in the Donatists: I could name you those who
are guilty of this; but I am sure, our dear Mother is not, who has been so
mild to those who have most highly opposed her.

Dr. Hammond's Pract. Catech. Upon Blessed are the Peacemakers. We are not to
think our own Opinions in Religion, such as are not of Faith, of such
importance, as to deny Communion or Salvation to those who differ from us. Item
of Schism, page 165. and page 166. That as we exclude no Christian from our
Communion, that will either Filially and Fraternally embrace it with us, being
ready to admit any to our Assemblies, that acknowledge the Foundation laid by
Christ and his Apostles; so we as earnestly desire to be admitted to the like
Freedom of External Communion with all the Members of all other Christian
Churches, as often as occasion makes us capable of that Blessing. And page 5.
Tell us, the Governors of the Church use to inflict that punishment of
Excommunication on the most scandalous Sinner. And page 15. Calls it that very
condition into which the Adulterer and obstinate offender is cast by the
Censures of the Church.

Hammond of the Keys, chap. 5. Sect. 18. The more shame for the over-easie
denouncers of that censure, that inflict it for every trivial commission,
without consideration whether or no repented of; or that use this Sovereign
Recipe unadvisedly for any other end than Reforming the Profane.

Dr. Puller 's Moderation of the Church of England, page 366. It is evident
that the Divine Moderation of our Church considers the frame of Man, and the
uncertainty, difficulty, and imperfection of Humane Knowledge, the weakness and
variety of Humane Understandings, she allows much to the force of Prejudice,
Education, and the power and artifice of Seducers: Our Church makes a great
reserve of Dispensation to persons of Modest, Humble, Docible, and peaceable
Spirits, and proportions her Censures to the degrees of Malice, and the
Unchristian Temper which appears in Offenders.

Dr. Cumber on the Common Prayer in the Commination. Discipline withheld in
favor of Dissenters, least the imposing it there should make this Holy Means
of Reformation despised rather than obeyed.

Item page 369. Dr. Puller. Wherefore the Institution of a Christian Man [made
by Cranmer] says, the Bishops are not bound so precisely, but they may
attemper and forbear the execution of their Jurisdiction, when by so doing the
cure of the offenders and the tranquillity of the Church may be furthered. Item
page 35. According to Equity our Church desires all her Laws may be
Interpreted; Benignius Leges interpretandae sunt, etc. She admits of a
Mitigation of a rigid Sentence. And page 11. Disposes them, where the Laws
press too hard upon particular persons, to relax the Rigor of them. Page 370.
Wherefore those who in Execution of the Church Discipline, abuse the most
excellent Temper of the Church, in the constitution of her Laws, under the
pretense of Ecclesiastical Authority, verily, they most of all deserve the
Churches Rod, and the dire point of her Anathema. Let it be considered, said
Bishop Tailor, Ductor Dub. L. 3. page 259. How Great a reproach it is to
Ecclesiastical Discipline, if it be made to Minister to Covetousness, and to
the needs of Proctors and Advocates.

Bishop Bramhall, page 14. Vindicat. of the Church. To exclude none from
Catholic communion and hope of Salvation, either Eastern, or Western, or
Southern, or Northern Christians which profess the Faith of the Apostles and
Primitive Fathers established in the first General Councils, and comprehended
in the Apostolic, Nicene, and Athanasian Creeds, and lastly to hold an Actual
External Communion with them in votis, in our desires, and to endeavor it by
all lawful means. Item, page 17. There is not the like necessity of
communicating in all Externals, there is not so great conformity to be expected
in ceremonies as in the Essentials of Sacraments.

Bishop Bilson of Subjection, Part 2. page 223. Edit. 4. It is a most
pernicious fancy to think that diverse Nations and Countries differing by
Customs, Laws, and Manners (so they hold one and the same Rule of Faith in the
Bond of Peace) cannot be parts of the Catholic Church, Communicant one with
another. The Communion of Saints stands not in External Rights, Customs, and
Manners; but in believing the same truth, tasting of the same grace, resting on
the same Hope, calling on the same God, rejoicing in the same Spirit, whereby
they be scaled, sanctified, and preserved unto the day of Redemption.

Causes of Decay of Christian Piety, page 285. As Christ, when he forewarned
his Disciples of the ensuing persecution, tells them not only, they should be
killed, but they should be put out of the Synagogue; so now, as if Christians
were emulous of every branch of Jewish Cruelty, we transcribe that part of the
Copy too, and either by causeless Excommunicating others, or separating our
selves, we deny the benefit of Public Communion to each other.

Item, page 280. Every Petty difference, etc. page 287. Would we indeed comport
with the Example of those happy Times [of the Primitive Church] we should have
prayed for the Conversion of Dissenters, not laid Anathema's upon them, and
prayed for their confusion.

Item, In his whole Duty of Man: If one that holds all necessary Christian
Truths happen yet to be in some Error, we are not for this to despise his
Person, or forsake his Communion.

Bishop Reynold 's Brotherly Agreement. In the case of unavoidable Differences
amongst good Men, there ought to be mutual Charity, etc. not to judge, despise,
reject, insult over one another, not to deal with the weaker as Aliens, but as
Brethren; not to proceed presently unto Separation, Rejection,
Anathematization; but to restore those that are overtaken with an Error, in the
spirit of Meekness.

Dr. Alestry, Sermon. 9. page 170. Censuring the abuse of Excommunication. If
they be not so happy as to be Orthodox, sending them down to Hell directly.

Dr. Barrow, In his Unity of the Church, Speaking of the Roman Churches. If
Churches do maintain impious Errors, if they do prescribe naughty practices, if
they do reject communion and peace upon reasonable Terms, if they vent unjust
and uncharitable censures, etc. If they damn, and persecute all that refuse to
be their Subjects in such cases we may Reject such Churches as Heretical, or
Schismatical, or wickedly uncharitable, and unjust in their proceedings.

Dr. More in his Pref. to the Mystery of Godliness, page 19. The Object of
Church discipline ought to contain nothing but the indisputable Truths of our
Religion, namely the generally acknowledged Articles of the Christian Faith,
and plain indispensable Duties of Life, for these are such, as deserve to be
held up with all possible care and strictness: Other things so gently
recommended, that no conscientious man may be pinched by them.

Dr. Stillingfleet 's Preface to Irenicum. What possible Reason can be
assigned, why such things should not be sufficient for communion with a Church,
which are sufficient for Eternal Salvatition? And certainly those things are
sufficient for that, which are laid down as necessary Duty's of Christianity by
our Lord and Savior in his Word.

Dr. Cave 's Gospel preached to the Romans, Sermon. 4. page 89. God be thanked,
such is the present Moderation of our Churches Ecclesiastical constitutions,
our penalties are not for Destruction, but for correction and amendment; we
punish none for their bare opinions, and readily embrace every Returning
Penitent.

Item, page 87. We must above all things put on Charity, and when we come to
reprove, rebuke, and to inflict Spiritual Censures and Punishments, we must
distinguish as tenderly as we can, between the wilful and the weak, the
obstinate and the Ignorant; the obstinate we must endeavor to save with Fear,
plucking them out of the Fire, with them we must be more sharp and severe in
our Admonitions and Threatenings; But on the weak we must have Compassion, who
may be supposed to Err through simplicity, or the fervors of Devotion, and
ought to be treated with a fatherly Tenderness, for to be restored, if
possible, (conformable unto the Doctrine of St. Paul to Timothy) with the
Spirit of meekness.

Stop to the Course of Separation. The just Reasons of Excommunication are the
same all over the World, which is obstinate persisting in great Transgressions
of the general Precepts of the Gospel. At the end of the Book.

Union of the Catholic Church, page 10. Every difference in Judgment, when no
violence is offered to the Catholic Faith and Unity, must not break this
Communion, according to that profession of St. Cyprian, judging no man, nor
excluding him from the Right of Communion if he think otherwise; where the
dispute was thought of no mean concernment: Which St. Augustine often alleges
against the Donatists, and condemns Victor, page 11 th. who was hastening to
Excommunicate the Asian Churches for their difference in Celebration of Easter.

True State of the Primitive Church. Be charitable to the weak, proceed not so
severely against them in your Courts of Judicature; but Remember what St. Paul
says, Col. 2. in respect of Ceremonies, Let no man judge you, etc. Will you in
respect of such shadows judge, Excommunicate, Sentence to Everlasting Flames
the Soul that holds of the Body of Christ, believes all his Holy Gospel,
accords with you in one Faith, one Baptism, etc. Will you condemn such an one
to Eternal Death? God Forbid.

Conformists Plea for the Nonconformists, Part 4. page 101. We can represent
and inveigh against Schism, as the sin against the Holy Ghost. A Sin unto Death
indeed in some sense, because it is so contrary to Charity and Peace, and
destructive of the Life of Saints, which does much consist in their Communion.
But were we impartial, we should as warmly admonish our own hearts to take heed
of Schismatical Passions, and excommunicate them from within us, as admonish,
and cast out others that differ from us.

Idem, page 20. We are forward to blame the more rigid sort of Separatists, for
not coming to our Worship; and why are we so rigid as to forbear all Christian
Communion with them, as if Christianity were all lost among them. I do declare,
that I hold Mental Communion with all the Holy Brethren, and am prepared for
Local and External Communion with them in all Christian Duties and Ordinances.

Dr. Hammond 's Annotations on the New Testament; Romans 14.17,18. Christianity
consists not in such External Matters, [as Meats] but in the practice of
Christian Virtues, such are Mercifulness, and Peaceableness, etc. not dividing,
and hating, and Excommunicating one another, and 14. chap. ver. 13. And
therefore let this Fault be mended: do not any longer Censure, and separate
from one another Communion for such things as these.

Doctor Hammond of Schism, p. 16. Because the Governors being men, may
possibly Err, and consequently censure, and Excommunicate the innocent, its
possible the person excluded may be innocent: he that is Excommunicate
unjustly, cannot be rendered criminous by that misfortune, p. 17. he cites
Photius Patriarch of Constantinople, the Excommunication of the Jewish
Sanhedrim sent out against Christ's Disciples brought them so much nearer to
their Lord and Master, and Alien'd the Jews themselves, removed them so much
the farther from the Kingdom of Heaven: and so does all unjust Excommunication
unite us to the Apostles by this Conformity with and participation of their
sufferings.

Bishop Jewels defense of the Apol. p. 583. Brings in St. Augustine saying,
Quid obest homini, What is a man the worse if the ignorance of a man strike him
out of the Book of the Church, if ill conscience strike him not out of the Book
of Life. In this case St. Augustine says it comes sometime to pass, Vt
plurimae sint foris oves, intus Lupi. That there be many Sheep without the
Church, and many Wolves within: And in your own Law (Mr, Harding) it is written
thus, Qui illicite alium Excom. etc. He that unlawfully Excommunicates another
condemns himself and not another.

That our Love must be Catholic.
HOmily of Christian Love and Charity, p. 36. Charity is to love every man,
good and evil, friend and foe; and whatsoever Cause be given to the Contrary,
yet nevertheless to bear good will and heart to every man, to use our-selves
well unto them, as well in Words and countenances, as in all other Acts and
deeds; for so Christ himself taught, and so also he performed indeed, and for
as much as the Pharisees with their false glosses had Corrupted this love of
our neighbor, teaching that this love and Charity pertained only unto a man's
friends, Christ gave this Godly law of Charity a true and clear interpretation,
that we ought to love every man, both friend and foe, adding thereto the
Commodity to be the Children of our heavenly Father: and this we shall be sure
of, says Christ, if we love every man without exception.

Conformists Plea for Nonconformists, Part 4. page 106. The salutations of the
Holy Apostles expressed their largeness and their Catholic love to the
Corinthians, among whom were great divisions; to the Galatians and Colossians,
among whom were some very Erroneous: so did their Benedictions, peace be to
Brethren, and Love, etc. And Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus in
sincerity. Ephesians. 6.23. and verse 2.

Bishop Davenants Letter to Duraeus. Whether we will or no, its necessary that
we all own Christ as our elder Brother, and join in strict and Brotherly
Communion with all that are his Brethren. Moreover, all must confess, true and
genuine Charity is as necessary to the Salvation of all the Members of the
Christan Churches, as the true and entire profession of Saving faith, Christ
having made this love the Cognizance, Whereby to discriminate his disciples,
and those who falsely profess his name, he puts this question, Whether it be
safe, Pious, or suitable to the duty of Christian Churches, not to stretch
forth the right hand of Brotherly affection to those Churches, which, though
they differ, and in some lesser matters err, may notwithstanding be Christ's
Martyrs, and our holy Brethren.

Mr. Thomas Pierce on St. John the 13.35. Our love must be so extensive, that
it must reach even to all, not only to our fellow-disciples, but to all men
living upon earth: it must reach even to our enemies, not only to those
without the pale of the Church, who do us little or no hurt, even Jews, Turks,
Infidels, and Heretics, for whom we pray once in a year in our English
Liturgy, but to our Crualler enemies within the Church. P. 414. item 282. Whom
our Lord has enjoined us not only to forgive, but pray for, to love their
souls, to pray for their repentance, and desire they may be sharers of
immortality and bliss: of which we shall not have the less, but rather the
more, for having sharers: and tells us on St. John 13.35. By this shall all men
know that ye are my disciples, etc Love to Christians as Christians is as the
badge and Cognizance, the testimony and proof of our real discipleship under
Christ, and the firmest bond to hold us together in peace and love, not so much
that we are of one Country, but that we are of one Christ, or to express it
with St. Paul, that we have but One Faith, One Baptism.

Doct. Hammonds Pract. Catechism, under meekness, to continue constant to the
doctrine of the Catholic Church; and maintain the inward Communion, that of
Charity, with all the true Church of God wheresoever they are, and with
particular Churches so far as to embrace them with the arms of Christian
Charity, to join even with the erroneous Churches, so far as they are not
erroneous, Separating only from their Corruptions, Idem, on first Epist. of
St. John 3.14. We know that we are regenerate Christians by our Chariry to
other men, which he that has not, is clearly an unregenerate, unchristian
person.

Idem the first Epist. St. John 4.7. And evidence of our being from God, is
Charity to our fellow Christians; for that is most strictly commanded and
exemplified to us from God, and no practice renders us so like to Gods example,
and so concordant to his precepts, as the sincere exercise of this duty.

Dr. Barrow 's. Unity of the Church, annexed to his Treatise against the Popes
Supremacy. P. 36. The genuine meaning of that article, Catholic Church, may
reasonably be deemed this, that we profess our adhering to the body of
Christians, which diffused over the World, does retain the faith taught, the
Discipline settled, the practices appointed by our Lord and Savior, and his
Apostles, that we maintain general Charity toward all good Christians, that we
are ready to entertain Communion in holy offices with all such. Item on Romans
12.18. page 230, 231. Sermon. 3. pursue peace with all, without any exception,
with men of all Nations, Jews, and Greeks, and Barbarians: of all Sects, and
Religions, persecuteing Jews, and Idolatrous Heathens (as at that time;) men of
all judgments and persuasions; Neither is there any evading our obligation to
this duty, by pretending of others, that they entertain opinions
irreconcileably contrary to ours, that they adhere to Sects and Parties which
we dislike and disavow; that they are not so virtuous, so Religious, so Holy,
as they should be, or at least not in such a mannner as we would have them.

Bishop Saundersons Sermon. 3. Ad Aulam sect. 39. Here is that evil partiality
we are to take heed of when we restrain the Brotherhood (or Neighbor) to some
one party or society (in the Church) such as we think good of, and exclude the
rest, as if they had no part or fellowship in this Brotherhood, nor
consequently any right to that special affection where with we are to love the
Brethren: which partiailty has indeed been the very bane of the Churches unity
and peace, and the chief Cause both of the beginning, and of the Continuance of
most of the Schisms, under which Christendom has groaned from time to time.

Englands Black Tribunal, p. 222. As I am a Member of this Church, so I am a
Member of the Holy Catholic Church; as I hold Communion with, so I love and
honor all Christians in the World, that love the same Lord Jesus in sincerity,
and call on his name, agreeing with those Truths, that are absolutely
necessary, and clearly demonstrated in the Word of God, though in charity
dissenting from some others, that are not necessary, Dr. Hewyt's Speech at the
Scaffold.

Dr Alestrey's Sermon, p. 168. Our Saviors addition, Matthew. 5.44. says, that
we must love our Enemies. The Christians has no Canaanites, as Deuteronomy. 7. but
the most prostigate Adversaries of his Religion he must love, and pray for
them, although they persecute him, which makes appear, it does at least include
enemies of Religion; for persecutions seldom were upon any other ground: And
Christ has proved that the Samaritan, he whom the Disciples would consume,
that Schismatic and rejector of Christ, is yet our Neighbor, Luke 10. and
therefore him also we must love and pray for.

Item p. 322. Sermon. 18. There is no sort of men, nor any man, whom it is lawful
for a Christian not to love, and all the reasons urged here by our Savior do
prove, that all mankind, whether good or bad, is the object of a Christians
love.

Mr. Kettlewells measures of Christian Obedience, Edit. 2. chapter 3. l. 2. p. 133,
and 134. It is not either distance of Country, nor contrariety of interest,
no, nor what is most of all presumed to exempt us from the obligations of this
duty, diversity of opinions, or persuasions in matters of Religion, which takes
away from any man his right to all that kindness and advantage from us; but of
whatsoever Country, Calling or Religion he be, he is our Neighbor meant in
Luke 10. to whom all the instances of love must be performed; for what Religion
was ever more odious to any one than the Samaritan was to the Jews, John 8.48.
Insinuating thereby that any man, though so contrary in Religion, as those two
were to one another, is the neighbor whom the Law intends.

Mr. Glanvell 's Essay upon Preaching, page 32. Catholic Universal Charity is
a Doctrine exceeding fit for these times, in which Divisions and mutual
Animosities have produced so many fatal and deplorable effects; and though the
doing this will displease the Bygots and Beautefeus of all sides, yet we must
go on armed with Courage and Patience of the Gospel, and be instant in
preaching Peace and Love though we are torn in pieces for it.

Idem, Usefulness of Real Philosophy to Religion, page 32. I secure Charity for
all the Diversities of Belief, and equally offer my Friendship and Converses to
the several Sects and Persuasions that stick to the plain principles of the
Gospel and a virtuous life, overlooking their particular Fondnesses and Follies.

Bishop Tailor 's Advice to his Clergy, p. 29. Let no names of Sects or
differing Religion be kept up among you, to the disturbance of the public
Peace, and private Charity; and teach not the people to estimate their Piety by
their distance from any Opinion, but by their Faith in Christ, Obedience, and
love to all Christian people, even though they be deceived.

Again Rule 47. Let the business of your Sermons be to preach Holy Life,
Obedience, Peace, Love, among Neighbors Hearty Love, to live as the Old
Christians did, and the New should.

Dr. Tillotson 's Sermon on Luke 9.55,56. page 7. The Gospel designs Universal
Love and peace and Good Will; and now no difference of Religion, no pretense of
Zeal for God and Christ can warrant and justify the contrary.

Idem. Vol. 1. of Sermons, page 213. When we come to Heaven we shall enter into
the Society of the Blessed Angels, and of the Spirits of just Men made perfect;
that is freed from all those passions and infirmities which do now render the
conversation even of the best men, sometimes troublesome to one another. We
shall then meet with all those excellent persons, those innocent and charitable
Souls, whom we have seen, and heard, and read of in this World, with all
intimate Friends, and perhaps with many of our Enemies, to whom we shall then
be perfectly reconciled, notwithstanding all the warm contests, and peevish
differences which we have had while in this World, even about matters of
Religion: For Heaven is a state of perfect Love and Friendship; all Quarrels
and Contentions, Schisms and Divisions will then be effectually hindered, not
by Force but by Love, and all those Controversies of Religion, which are now so
hotly agitated, will then be finally determined by a perfect knowledge, and
convincing Light.

Lloyd Bishop of St. Asaph in Sermon November 5. 1680. page 9. We know that
Christ gave love for the Character by which his Disciples were to be known,
Joh. 13.35. and least men should unchristian others, that they may hate them
and destroy them afterward, Christ enlarged his precept of love, and extended
it even to Enemies, and not only to ours, but to the Enemies of our Religion,
Mat. 5.43,44.

Mr. Cook 's Sermon on Romans 12.18. page 6. The Church of Christ allows no
Enemies at all, but like it, Charity is Oecumenick and Universal, nay, like God
himself Infinite and Eternal, it knows no bounds of Love, nor respect of
Persons, and must never fail; surely then Christianity must fail, utterly
vanish and perish so long as we are at variance among our selves.

Idem, page 10. The grand Duties of Humility, Peace and Universal Charity, are
delivered in the Scriptures, in the most plain express and entire manner, as to
all Points and Circumstances of obligation; and therefore whatsoever places are
erected against those fundamentals of Practice, destroy the very essence and
being of Christianity.

Unity of the Catholic Church, page 7. Catholic Unity consists in Unity of
Belief, and in the Unity of Charity, having an intimate Fellow-feeling of all
the good or evil which befalls any, joined in so near a relation as
fellow members, beyond the compass of ordinary Humanity, whereby we are bound
not only to pray for, but by all Offices of Kindness and most intimate
Affection, to assist and relieve each other in the same Household of Faith.

Item. page 53. Many of our Church, yea the constitution it self has been
often charged and reviled, though most unjustly, with too favorable an
inclination to them of Rome, because we are not so hasty and peremptory in
unchurching them altogether, or damning presently all that have been, or are
still of their communion, as some would have us; which is in effect for being
more tender of preserving the Principles of true Catholic Unity then in
pleasing some private Humors or Prejudices.

Mr. Pygot 's Abners Plea for Accom. page 38, 39. Now whatsoever Breaches or
Divisions happen in other Kingdoms, which are without God in the World, and
Strangers from the Covenant of Grace, Psalm. 122.3. yet let Jerusalem the Church
of God be always like a City which is at Unity within it self: Methinks
Philadelphia (the name of one of the Seven Golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1.) is a
fitting name for a Church, which signifies brotherly Love; and every
Congregation ought to be in a good Sense the Family of Love.

Item. page 43. Consider there is but one Body, Ephesians. 4.4. the whole Church is
but one Body, and the Members of the same Body do not use to contend one with
another.

Dr. Barrow 's Sermon. 8. page 316. I close up all with this Corollary, that if
we must live lovingly and peaceably with all men, then much more are we obliged
to do so with all Christians. -- Our Spiritual Brethren, Members of the same
Mystical Body, Temples of the same Holy Ghost, Servants of the same Lord,
Subjects of same Prince, Professors of the same Truth, partakers of the same
Hopes, Heirs of the same Promise, and Candidates of the same Everlasting
Happiness.

That an Agreement of all Christians in any one Sect or Persuasion is never to
be Expected.
BIshop Jewel 's Answer to Mr. Harding 's Preface. It were above all things to
be desired of God, that his Heavenly Truth may pass forth without these
contrarieties and Quarrels of judgments; and many Godly Wise Men are much
offended to see it otherwise; but thus it has been ever from the beginning.

Sir Francis Bacon in his Advertisements of the Controversies of the Church of
England, page 183. of his works. It is excellently alluded by that Father, that
noted that Christ's Garment was without Seams, and yet the Churches Garment was
of diverse colors; and sets down as a Rule, In vest varietas sit, scissura non
sit.

King James the First's (...), Epistle to the Reader; That the variety of Men's
Minds is such, that tot Capita tot Sensus; yea, and that even the very Faces,
that God has by Nature brought forth in the World, do every one of them in
some of their particular Lineaments differ from any other.

Bishop Andrew 's Sermon. page 519. Contentions there were, when St. Paul and his
fellow Apostles lived, in the Churches under them of their times, in the very
prime of the Primitive Church then were there contentions; this I note, that we
may not think it strange if there be contentions in our times, they shall be no
strangers with us in ours, they were not with them in theirs.

(...); Of the difference in point of Church Government, Sect. 21. Nor is it
any point of Wisdom or Charity, where Christians differ, (as many do in some
points) there to widen the differences. Item, Upon the many Jealousies and
Scandals raised upon the King; It Is strange, that so Wise Men as they would be
esteemed, should not conceive, that difference of persuasion in Matters of
Religion may easily fall out, etc.

Mr. Hooker of Justification, page 68. Ye are not now to learn that as of it
self it is not hurtful, so neither should it be to any scandalous and
offensive, in doubtful cases to hear the different Judgments of men, be it that
Cephas has one interpretation, and Apollos another, that Paul is of this mind,
that Barnabas of that: if this offend you the fault is yours. Carry peaceable
Minds, and you may have comfort in this variety.

Dr. Edward Bulkley, In his Apology for the Church of England, Article 5. page
104. Edit. 1608. in Answer to Wright 's Articles. You vainly and falsely
exaggerate Controversies and irreconcilable Jarrs (as you term them) among us
in essential points of Faith. I confess, there has been in our Church some
Controversy concerning External Ceremonies, and Form of Covernment, as there
has been heretofore between good men, as between Peter and Paul, between Paul
and Barnabas, between Anicetus Bishop of Rome and Polycarpus, between
Chrysostom and Epiphanius, and many others, who all were godly men, agreeing in
unity of Faith, and knowledge of the Son of God.

Mr. Hieron 's Sermons in Bargain of Salt. Now among our selves, betwixt us and
other Churches there are some differences in Opinion, as it cannot be helped so
long as we carry with us our natural imperfections.

Mr. Chillingworth chap. 1. Sect. 13. Because the contrary belief may be in
such points, in which Scripture may with great probability be alleged on both
sides; a sure note of a point not necessary, that men of honest and upright
hearts, true lovers of God and of Truth, such as desire above all things to
know Gods will, and to do it, without any fault at all some go one way, some
another, and some suspend their judgments.

Bishop Bramhals Just Vindication of the Church, We see that all the famous and
principal Churches of the World, the Grecian, Roman, Protestant, Armenian,
Abyssine have their peculiar differences one with another, and each of them
among themselves.

Item p. 19. Though I am far from beleiving, when Logomachies are taken away
their real dissentions are not half so numerous, or their errors half so foul
as they are pointed out by their Adversaries, yet to hold Communion with them
in all things is neither lawful nor possible.

Bishop Tailors Coll. of discourses in Epist. Dedic. before Liberty of Proph.
No part of this discourse teaches, or encourages variety of Sects and
contradictions, but supposes and finds them already in being, and therefore
since there are, and ever were, and ever will be variety of opinions, because
there is variety of human understandings, and uncertainty in things. Few men
consider, since men have such variety of principles such several constitutions,
educations, tempers, and distempers, hopes, interests, and weaknesses, degrees
of light, and degrees of understanding, impossible all should be of one mind.

Item p. 401. This variety of opinions in several persons, an Argument only of
diversities of operations while the Spirit is the same.

Bishops Reynolds Brotherly Reconciler; In that the Apostle says, if in any
thing ye be otherwise minded, we may from hence learn that in the best ages of
the Church there have been, and therefore we cannot but expect that there ever
will be, variety and difference of Judgment among the members thereof; first,
while we know but in part. Secondly, While there is difficulty in the
disquisition of Truth. Thirdly, Weakness of judgment in men to make that
enquiry, etc. p. 17.

Item p. 19. Till all the members of the Church have attained unto their full
Stature, there cannot be expected such an universal consent of Judgments, and
harmony of Doctrines, even amongst good men themselves as shall not admit of
some variety and dissonancy.

Bishop Saundersons Sermon. 8. Ad Aulam, Sect. 25. Men's understandings are not
all of one size and temper, even they that have the largest and clearest
understanding, yet know but in part, and are therefore subject to errors and
misapprehensions; therefore it cannot be hoped there should be such a
consonancy and uniformity of Judgment, no not among wise and Godly men, but
that in many things, yea and things sometime of great importance, they may and
will dissent one from another unto the Worlds end.

Bishop Wilkins Sermon. 13. p. 407, 408; It Is a thing most reasonable and fitting
in it self, [speaking of Moderation] because of the fallibility of human
judgment, and that not only from the impotency of our faculties, and the
prejudices we are liable to from the account of interests, but likely from the
difficulty and obscurity of things, the most Learned and inquisitive men many
times differing in their judgments, all which put together show how exceeding
difficult, and next to impossible it is that men should ever agree in the same
apprehensions of things.

Glanvell's Catholic Charity, p. 34. The Learned and the prudent Churches, and
Councels, Confessors, and Fathers, the former and the latter ages, the
virtuous, and the devout, the credulous and the inquisitive, they have all
differed in the lesser matters of belief, and every man differs from almost
every other in something. p. 37. It Is a frequent wish with some that all men
were once of one mind, but then it must be theirs no doubt, for they would not
judge it reasonable upon other terms. They may as well wish that we were all of
one age, complexion, humor, and degree of understanding. It Is enough that such
agreement is not necessary, yea I take the other step, it is impossible. Our
Tempers, Capacities, Educations, Genius's, Converses, Interests, Accidents are
strangely diverse, therefore our apprehensions must needs be different.

Decay of Piety, p. 409; Not that I suppose it possible to extinguish all
diversities of opinions among men, who from their differing faculties, and
other guiltless occurrents may and will have their judgments severally disposed.

Doctor Barrows Vol. 3. Sermon. 8. Men seeing by several lights, relishing by
diversely disposed palates, and measuring things by differing standards, we can
hardly do or say any thing Religious or Civil, which if approved or applauded
by some, will not be disliked and blamed by others in this irreconcilable
diversities and inconsistency of men's apprehensions.

Design of Christianity, Christians because of the diversities of their
capacities, educations, and other means and advantages, some points may be most
plainly perceived by some to be delivered in the Scripture, which cannot be so
by others with the like ease.

Doctor Stillingfleets Irenicum, p. 21. Argu. 2. The peace and settlement of
Christ's Church not depending upon a condition never likely to be attained in
this world, which is the agreement and uniformity of men's opinions; for as long
as men's faces differ their judgments will.

The True state of the primitive Church, p. 2. Men's understandings are as
various as their speech or their countenance; otherwise it were impossible
there should be so many understanding and moderate, yea and conscientious men
also Papists, Lutherans, Calvinists, all in such opposition one against another.

Conf. Plea for the Non-Conformists, part. 4. page 40. How various are the
degrees of light, and the dictates of Conscience even in good, wise, and
self-searching men, and that even in a division of judgment and practice! The
first cause is different degrees of Light, and means of attaining knowledge:
Some are more deep and quick, searching and industrious, have better means and
opportunities of knowing: I do not now take notice of the biasses of education,
prejudice, pre-possessions, and passions of Men, nor the influence of the world
upon men's alterations.

Kidders Sermon of peace, p. 24. It is indeed very possible after all that the
best men may differ from each other.

Mr. Wakes Sermon on Romans 15.5,6,7. p. 8. Men's different capacities, and
opportunities, and tempers, and educations considered, it is in vain to expect
that all good men should agree in all their notions of Religion, any more then
we see they do in any other concerns whatsoever. And p. 9. That men's
understandings are different, and they will argue different ways, and entertain
different opinions from one another about the same things, and yet may
nevertheless deserve on all sides to be esteemed very good and wise men for all
that.

Serious and Compassionate Enquiry, It is true indeed there may be, and must be
diversities of apprehensions in several points of Christianity, while men are
of different capacities.

Mr. Cooks Sermon, on Romans 12,18, p. 7. It cannot possibly be meant their
agreement in judgment, Romans 12,16. for that you know cannot be forced, one man's
mind (though he would himself) cannot always be bent to another persuasion:
yet there are some among us, great pretenders too to holiness, who value no
agreement like that in principles; if they can but meet with a man that jumps
with them in sentiments, he is cherished and embraced as a knowing man, well
inclined and disposed to good things.

Argument for Tol. in differences of Opinion, Printed 81. p. 2. Had God
intended we should be all of one opinion, as indeed that we should be of one
Faith, he could have made every thing as clear and plain in the Holy Scripture,
and as undoubted as any p. 4. Idem. By way of illustration let us make a
supposal, that a Master bids three or four of his Servants do such or such a
thing, and that the Servants differ about the sense and meaning of the command,
one understanding it one way, another another way, and a third in this, the
fourth in that, according to the judgment of their own discretion; and this is
our Case we all are equally servants not bound to that sense of the word which
another gives, indeed some servants are to bring the word to others, but those
others not bound to the sense of it further than they are persuaded it is their
Masters: search the Scriptures, and try the spirits, etc.

Principles and Practices of Moderation. etc. p. 310. It is no less
unreasonable to malign our brethren because they are not in every thing of our
judgment, than to quarrel with each other upon the account of the unlikeness we
observe in our faces and constitutions.

Mr. Tulli's Sermon of Moderation, p. 17. Let us not therefore, if we have any
sense of Moderation and temper, persist to dress up things in hideous and
portentous shapes to frighten and exasperate one another, but let us rather
ascribe the differences amongst us to error of judgment, the prejudices of
education, infelicity of Constitution, or to any other of those either innocent
or excusable causes, which render an entire unity of opinions an impossible
thing.

That Mutual Favor and Forbearance of one another in Love is necessary among
Christians in their Diversities of Judgments.
EDward the Sixth, Queen Elizabeth, King James the First, King Charles the
First and Second, and King James the Second, all gave their Toleration and
Indulgence to the several Churches Dissenting from us; the Dutch at Colchester,
Walloones at Norwich, and French at London, and at Canterbury, or elsewhere.

King James the First of Blessed Memory, in his Letters to the States of the
United Provinces, March 6. 1613. Magis Autem e re fore, si Ministris vestris
stricte imperetis, ut pacem colant se invicem tolerando in ista opinionum and
sententiarum discrepantia. -- Eoque justius videmur vobis hoc ipsum suadere
debere, quod neutram comperimus adeo deviam, ut non possint and cum fidei
Christianae veritate, and cum animarum salute consistere. But it would be more
advantageous, if you did give a strict charge to your Ministers, to keep the
Peace by mutual Toleration of one another in the difference of Opinions and
Judgments. And therefore we seem more justly to give you this Counsel, because
we find neither of these Opinions so Erroneous, but that they may consist with
the Truth of the Christian Faith, and the Salvation of their Souls.

Bishop Hall 's Letters to Duraeus. Why do we profess Christian Charity if we
do pertinaciously refuse to Indulge the difference of our Brethren from us in
these Scholastic Problems (so he calls the differences between Lutherans and
Calvinists) when we know that our benign Savior most mildly tolerated, and
silently passed by more grievous in his own Domestics.

King Charles the First's Message of a Treaty from Oxford, March 3. 1643. He
desired the Members of both Houses of Parliament to consult and agree upon such
things, as might conduce to the maintenance and defense of the Reformed
Protestant Religion, with due consideration for all just and reasonable ease to
tender Consciences.

Item in the Kings Second Message for Peace, January 29, 1645. That by the
Liberty offered in the fifteenth present for the ease of their Consciences, who
communicate not in the Service already established by Act of Parliament in this
Kingdom, he intends, that all other Protestants behaving themselves peaceably
in and toward the Civil Government shall have the free exercise of their
Religion in their own way.

Item to the Prince of Wales. The charitable connivance, and Christian
Toleration often dissipates their strength whom rougher opposition fortifies.

Dr. Hammond 's Sermons page 72. I am confident, there were no such way of
designing a prosperous flourishing durable Kingdom, as to found its Polity upon
Gospel Principles, and maintain it by the Gospel Spirit ( id est, of Love and
Meekness) I have Authority to think that was the meaning of the Prophecy of
Christ's turning Swords into Plough-shares, etc.

Advice to the Church of England, Roman Catholics, and Protestant Dissenters
tells us, page 23. Dr. Hammond left it to the Witnesses of his End as his dying
Counsel to the Church of England, that they displaced no man out of the
Universities, or present Church; but that by Love, and an Holy Life they should
prevail upon those in possession then, to come into their Church. Which he had
(as he tells us) from an eminent hand in Oxford, a year or two after the
Doctors Death.

Mr. Hales of Erring Christians, page 26. Edit. 2. The Christians were called
Chrestiani from a word signifying benignity and sweetness. What reason is there
why that should not be one of the chiefest notes of the Church of Christ, which
did so especially characterize a Christian man, except there were a decay of it
at this day in the Church? Georgius a Factious Bishop of Alexandria is said
oblitus professionis suae, quae nil nisi justum suadet and been; Quite besides
his profession, whose especial notes were Gentleness and Equity, in the sense
of the Heathen Ammianus Marcellinus.

King Charles the Second in a Declaration from Breda, was for Liberty to Tender
Consciences, and says that no man shall be disquieted for Differences in
Opinion in Matters of Religion, which do not disturb the Peace of the Kingdom,
page 5. and 18. This Declaration his Majesty afterward, May 8. 1661. terms a
Promise solemnly made. This Declaration or Promise he tells both Houses, July
8, 1661. that so often as he comes to them he mentions his Declaration from
Breda, that himself as well as they might mind it. In his Majesty's Declaration
of December. 26, 1662. He tells us, that he remembers the very words of the
Promises from Breda that concerned Liberty of Conscience, and the confirmations
he has made of them since upon several Occasions, and that he is still firm in
Resolution of performing them to the full. He tells what hindered; But it must
not be wondered at, since that Parliament to which those promises were made in
relation to an Act, never thought fit to offer us any to that purpose. His
Majesty publicly declared his avowed readiness in his Proclamation, July 16.
1669. to indulge Tender Consciences.

Bishop Bramhall 's Just Vindication, etc. page 279. Men may vary in their
Judgments, and yet preserve Christian Unity and Charity in their Affections one
toward another, so as Errors be not destructive to Fundamental Articles.

Bishop Gauden of slight Healing, page 102. That Lenitive of Equanimity,
Forbearance, and Moderation (in respect of Conscientious Dissenters from the
public Consent, Customs and Constitutions in the Church) which Christian
Charity requires, and public peace with safety may bear.

Idem, page 93. Scandalous for any to plead that they may have Liberty or
Toleration for that, which by public Advice, and upon due search is found to
be such, as is prone to endanger, or disorder and infect the whole.

Bishop Reynold 's Brotherly Reconciliation, page 19. In this case of
unavoidable differences among good men, there ought to be Mutual Charity,
Meekness, Moderation, Tolerance, Humanity used.

Idem, page 25. Brings in a saying of Mr. Calvin; such a man (says he) is a
sincere Minister of Christ, a godly and a moderate Man, therefore, though he
dissent from us, I will not cease to love him still.

Bishop Tailor 's Collection of Discourses, page 603. To refuse our Charity to
those who have the same Faith, because they have not all our Opinions, and
believe not every thing necessary which we overvalue, is Impious and
Schismatical; and to this sense is that of St. Paul, If I had all Faith, and
have not Charity, I am nothing, etc.

Idem. If men please, whatever advantages would be consequent to an Unity of
persuasion may be supplied by a charitable compliance, and mutual permission of
Opinion, prescribed us by the Laws of Christianity.

Idem, Epist. before Lib. of Proph. in Collection of Discourses, etc. I thought
it might not misbecome my duty and endeavors, to plead for Peace and Charity,
and Forgiveness, and Permissions mutual. And in Defense of that Piece in the
Second Edition. Now I have done all that I can do; only I cannot repent me of
speaking Truth, or doing Charity. I Answer, whatsoever is against the
Foundation of Faith, or contrary to good Life, and the Laws of Obedience, or
destructive to humane Societies, and the public and just interests of Bodies
Politic; is out of the limits of my Question for Toleration.

Idem, I think I have spoken reason in my Book, and examined it with all the
severity that I have, I writ this, because I thought it was necessary, and
seasonable, and charitable, and agreeable to the great precepts and design of
Christianity, consonant to the practice of the Apostles, and of the best Ages
of the Church, and of the nature of the thing.

Bishop Hacket 's Sermon on Acts 5.39. p. 22. An Unanimity of Opinions is not
necessary to Friendships, says Aristotle very well. Dear Friends may retain
the sweetness of love together, and yet vary in some conclusion of Judgments; a
little more may be granted that each may be earnest to win the other to assent.

Idem, page 25. But if sundry shapes and appearances of reason will not suffer
us all to enjoy the same Knowledge, and the same Conscience, yet let us Dissent
as Brethren, and not as Enemies.

Bishop Saunderson 's Sermon. 9. ad Aulam, Sect. 23. We see Philosophers,
Lawyers, and Physicians, confuting one another Opinions in great Volumes, and
we allow it in them; but difference in Opinions is more tolerable in Divinity,
by how much the things about which we are conversant are of a more sublime,
mysterious, and of an incomprehensible Nature, than are those of other Sciences.

Bishop Wilkins Sermons on Romans 14. p. 57. There are several Truths which are
not of so great consequence as Unity, Peace and Charity; and therefore in such
things there ought to be a mutual forbearance toward one another. Idem Sermon
13. It is no difficult matter for men to be fair and kind, and moderate toward
such as are of the same way and agree with them in the main. Idem page 413. 414.
This virtue Moderation will be very advantageous to the peace and welfare of
human society in the general, which does very much depend upon the mutual
condescension and forbearance of men toward one another with things about
which they differ.

In the Preface to Dr. Worthingtons Scripture-Catechism, describing the Author
deceased; among other there were no virtues he was observed to be more an
example of then a Dove-like innocence, simplicity, Meekness, Humility, and
peaceableness, candor and ingenuity the most Christian, because the greatest
and most universal Charity, in which those that dissented in matters of
Religion, (which is rare in these days) had not only a real but a great
interest.

Dr. Alestries Sermons; If you would discover what the temper of the Gospel is,
you may see it in its Prophecy and Picture in the Prophet, Isaiah 11.6,7.65,25.
The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the
Kid, etc. Whatever mischief these have in themselves there is nothing of
devouring, or of hurt to one another in this state, they lie down and dwell
together.

Again Sermon 18. p. 36. In the name of God what did Christ mean when he
prescribed this Precept, when he disputed, pressed it thus upon us, Math. 5.44.
Or what do Christians mean when they do break and tear this precept and
themselves. Though I be far from any hopes to reconcile our parties, (as by
Gods help I shall ever be from making any) yet I will offer an expedient to
make them not so noxious, namely if they will keep the difference of their
judgments from breaking out into their affections and actions.

Dr. Barrow Vol. 3. Sermon 7. p. 250, 251. It concerns us therefore if we would
live peaceably in such disputable matters, reserving all due reverence to the
judgments of the most, the best, and wisest persons, to be contented in a
modest privacy to enjoy the results of a serious and impartial disquisition,
patiently enduring others to dissent from us; and not attempting by needless
fruitless and endless contentions to gain others to our persuasions, especially
since the Truth contended for may not be worth the passion employed about it.
Idem Sermon. 8th* against Evil-speaking p. 67. It Is very unjust when as we do
need the candid judgment, and forbearance, and pardon of others for many things
faulty and offensive that we commit, to refuse the like to others.

Glanvells Catholic Charity, p. 29. Seeing then that Charity is necessary, and
agreement in opinions is neither necessary, nor possible we ought to comply
with our main duty notwithstanding our lesser difference. If this were
considered unity of affection might be preserved amidst diversity of opinions.

And p. 20. Then will the Church be glorious indeed when Christians shall make
differences in opinions, and dispensable practices, the objects of their mutual
forbearance.

Idem p. 59. If any should now ask me whether this Doctrine of Universal Love
does not tend to universal Toleration, I should answer that thus far it does,
that all private persons should Tolerate each other, and bear with their
brothers infirmities, that every man should allow another that Liberty, which
he desires himself in what the Laws of God and Man have left him free, and
permit him his own opinion without censure or displeasure: But as to the
public, I do by no means think it modest for us to determine what the
Government should do.

Doctor Mores Mystery of Iniquity, and Answer touching Liberty in Religion, p.
542. I say then for all Protestants Churches whose Religion is the Bible, it is
little detriment or indecorum for them to use so well a limited indulgence (as
I have above described) to their weak but sincere nurslings, who are so
thorough formed Christians, as cordially to believe all the essential parts of
our Religion, but are only puzzled in some opinions and scrupulosities that are
preter-essentials. It is no more unseemly to permit something to them
peculiarly, than for a tender Mother to indulge something to a Child that
breeds teeth, or is any otherways weak or sickly; or a Master of a Family to
permit, if not provide some proper accommodations for those of his Family a
part, whose infirmities or constitutions make them less fit to dine or sup at
his common Table.

Idem Mystery of Godliness, Preface p. 19. A mutual Agreement in bearing with
one another dissents in the non fundamentals of Religion is really a greater
ornament of Christianity than the most exact Uniformity imaginable, it being an
eminent exercise of Charity, the flower of all Christian Graces, and the best
way (I think) at a long run to make the Church as uniform, as can justly be
desired.

The Author of the Whole Duty of Man. The lesser differences in opinion, must
be born with on both sides and must not in the least abate our brotherly
Charity to each other.

Bishop of St. Asaph's Sermon on 5 th. November before the House of of Lords.
As our Holy Religion excells all other in this admirable temper of love, so by
this we may usually judge who they are that excel among Christian Churches,
when there happens any difference between them.

Bishop of Salisbury's History of the Rights of Princes, page 257, 258. It is
observable, the best of Clergymen have been the most gentle to those that
differed from them. But the unworthy who will not trouble themselves with the
laborious methods of conquering errors, are always apt to extreme and cruel
courses, since they know they must prevail with these, or none at all.

Doctor Caves Gospel Preached to the Romans, page 84; The precepts which our
Lord gives, and most earnestly recommends in order to the general benefit of
mankind, are those of Meekness, Mercy, Forbearance, Long-suffering, brotherly
Kindness, and Charity.

Doctor Stillingfleets Irenicum Preface; There were after this Decree at
Jerusalem, Acts 15.29. great diversities of practice, and diversities of
Observations among Christians, but the Holy Ghost never thought them fit to be
made matters of Law, to which all parties should conform; all that the Apostles
required as to these was mutual forbearance, and condescentions toward each
other in them. And in Pref. to Unreasonableness of Separation he pleads for
favor for them and forbearance.

Mr. De l' Angle, In the Name of God my Lord (in his Letter to the Bishop of
London) do all that possibly you can to bring them back to their duty by
sweetness and Charity which is only able to do great things on these
occasions; for men who have always something of pride, do commonly oppose every
thing thot seems to them to act by bare Authority only, they scarce ever fail
to yield themselves up to forbearance and condescension. I shall also here
mention the judgment of diverse eminent Pastors of the French Church in those
Irenical discourses, Gesel Hist. part 2. It were in the first place to be
wished that all who do profess the Discipline of Christ would think and speak
the same thing: but since the weakness of humane understandings, this
difficulty of Divine things is so great, that such an absolute consent amongst
pious persons is scarcely to be expected in this World, the next thing to be
endeavored after is that they may agree in the belief of the principle Heads
of our Religion; and as for other things which neither of necessity belong to
Holiness of Life, nor the comfort of Souls, nor the Kingdom of God, that men
would so believe them, as to bear with them who think otherwise concerning
them. For that this may lawfully be done the thing it self declares, and St.
Paul pronounces; not only in many places does permit, but even commands us to
bear with Dissenters: This is the common opinion of all persons, which from the
first ages of Christianity to the present times have been of any esteem or
honor in the Church.

Principles and Practices of some Moderate Divines, p. 308. Let the Professors
of Christianity labor for the true spirit and temper of Christians, and it
will be as well with the Christian World as if we were all of the same mind; I
mean let us not Magisterially impose upon one another, and be so Charitable as
to believe well of Dissenters from us that live good lives. Item p. 348. That
we may contend with each other about nothing more then who shall express in the
midst of our different persuasions most Charity and most Candor.

Conformist Plea to the Nonconformist, part 3. p. 62. Does Christian Love and
Compassion prompt us, to with our persecuted Brethren in France enjoyed the
liberty of the true Religion there? And if they should enjoy a freedom there,
shall we deny a liberty to Protestant Brethren here? I can see no ways to avoid
a Justification of the barbarous usage of Protestants there, by them that
prosecute Protestants here?

Idem part 4. p. 1. Peace, Love, and Forbearance have a greater place assigned
them in Religion, than the things in controversy, which cause our Divisions.
And whether it be Meeter for the greater things to suffer by the lesser, or the
lesser to give place to the greater, let common reason judge, and common
experience come in as an evidence.

Mr. Kidder 's Sermon. of Peace, page 24. The best men as they may differ from
each other, but then their Christian charity will dispose them to forbear, and
forgive, and to debate with great calmness and temper; which is the way at once
to Truth and Peace.

Mr. Tully 's Sermon. of Moderation, page 2. Those Homiletic, or if I may so
speak, conversable Graces of Meekness, Gentleness, Forgiveness, Forbearance,
etc. are so frequently pressed upon us in the Sacred Writings, upon this
prospect partly, no doubt, that they all of them tend mightily to the sweetning
of Societies, and to the prevention, or healing those differences which are apt
to embroil us.

Argument for Toleration and Indulgence in relation to differences in Opinion,
page 2. We must distinguish between points of Faith and Points of Opinion; that
we ought to bear one with another in respect of differing Opinions as God does
bear with us all: he has left somethings less plain and clear then others as
matters both to exercise the reasonable faculties of good and pious men, and to
afford them subjects of mutual Charity and Forbearance in their different
Sentiments and Apprehensions about them.

Item, page 25. As for Separations into several and distinct Conventions, I see
no cause of fearing any greater inconvenience in them to the Church, or to the
State, if mutual Toleration and Indulgence be the received Principle, than is
in so many several Clubs of Friendship, or Companies of Trade. However
different they may be from one another, in other respects, in this they will
all agree to love one another for that of God they see, and to maintain the
public Liberty, the common Interest of all, and so though they are as many
Conventions as you can imagine, (and the more the less dangerous, one will
balance another) yet they are not Factions.

Form of Prayer, Dec. 22. 1680. By the power of thy Holy Spirit of Peace,
dispose all our Hearts to such Meekness of Wisdom, such calm and deliberate
Long-Suffering and Forbearance of one another in Love, that so we may live in
Peace, and the God of Peace may be with us.

That Force and Capital Punishments are not to be Inflicted on Christians for
their difference in Opinions from us.
GOod Advice to the Church of England, etc. page 22. And to the end that I may
do the Reformation Right, and the Principles of the Church of England Justice,
those in Queen Mary's Time, particularly Latimer, Philpot, Bradford, Rogers,
very eminent Reformers, hardly one person of any Note but did pass Sentence on
Persecution as Antichristian; the Apologies afterward of the same strain as
may be seen in Juel, Haddon, Reynolds, etc. censuring the Papists for the
Persecutions that they raised against the Protestants for matters of pure
Religion.

Bishop Juel 's Defense of the Apol. page 484. St. Augustine says, Nullis
bonis in Catholica Ecclesia hoc placet si usque ad mortem in quenquam licet
haereticum saeviatur. No good man in the Catholic Church likes that any
Heretic should be punished with Death. As for our parts, speaking of our
Church, we were never yet guilty to one drop of your blood. We seek no Aid at
Fire and Sword, we will rather say with St. Jerome; Vtinam filios haereticorum,
etc. Would God we may kill the Children of Heretics, and of all them that be
deceived with Spiritual Arrows, that is to say with the Testimonies of
Scripture. And with St. Augustine, O si occidas eos gladio bis acuto, etc.

Bishop Andrew's Sermons on Luke 9.54,55,56. page 912. He puts the case;
whether the Town of Samaria for not receiving Christ upon pretense he was not
of their Religion might not be consumed; but Christ rules the Case for the
Town, that it ought not to be done. It was an Error, this of the two
Disciples, we see it plain by Nescitis; but of it may well be said that Gregory
says of another of theirs, O salutaris error, etc. Blessed Error it was, for
by it the World was rid of the like Error ever after. For so long as this
verse shall stand in this Gospel it will serve for a resolution to this
Question. Any of his Disciples may do that which they here would have done.
This rebuke here of these will reach to all undertakers in the same kind; this
Non perdere sed salvare saves all our Towns, Cities and States from consuming
by fire, from any of Christ's Company.

Item page 919. And where they move him in specie for a destruction by Fire, he
not content to deny that alone, denies it in genere, not to destroy at all,
neither by Fire, nor any other way. Here we have a case of Fire; will ye have
another of the Sword?

St. Peter, St. John 22.49. Shall we smite with the Sword? that he denies too:
Out with your Fire James and John, up with your Sword Peter. So that neither by
fire here, nor by Sword there, does Christ like of these Motions. If so often as
Christ suffers indignity, fire should come down from Heaven, Domine quis
sustinebit? Psalm. 130.3. We were all in an hard case, Jews and Samaritans, yea
Disciples, yea this James and John and all. The Samaritans they received not
Christ, let them be gone, burnt all. When he came to Jerusalem, why, there he
was murdered, worse used then in Samaria; then we must call for more fire,
Jerusalem must be burnt too. Now for the Disciples, it is true, they had
received him; but when most need was, thrust him from them, utterly denied,
that ever they knew him: then we must trouble Heaven once more, and call for
fire for James and John too: nay, then the World is at an end, facti sumus
sicut Sodoma, Romans 9.12. all an heap of ashes, if this Doctrine go forward.

Item, page 913. And for our comfort it is, that our Savior Christ was none of
these Zelotae, but showed himself on that side that inclined to Humanity and
Peace.

King James the First's Speech to the Lords and Commons at White Hall, March
21, 1609. I never found that Blood, and too much severity did good in Matters
of Religion; For besides that it is a sure Rule in Divinity, and God never
loves to plant his Church by Violence and Bloodshed, Natural Reason may even
persuade us, and all Experience proves it true.

(...), Upon his Majesty's retirement from Westminster. Sure it cease to be
Counsel, when not Reason is used as to men, but Force and Terror as to Beasts;
to drive men, and compel them to assent.

Idem, Upon the calling in of the Scots and their coming. Sect. 11. Sure in
Matters of Religion those Truths gain most on men's Judgments and Consciences,
which are least urged with secular Violence, which weakens Truth with
Prejudices.

Idem, Upon the Covenant, Ejac. 2. Nothing violent or injurious can be
Religious.

Idem, On the Rebellions and Troubles in Ireland, Sect. 12. O my God, thou
see how much Cruelty among Christians is acted under the color of Religion,
as if we could not be Christians, unless we Crucify one another.

Dr. Chillingsworth, chap. 4. Sect. 16. Take away this persecuting, burning,
cursing, damning of men for not subscribing to the words of men, as the words
of God, etc. In a word, take away Tyranny, which is the Devils instrument to
support Errors, and Superstitions, and Impieties in the several parts of the
World, which could not otherwise long with-stand the Power of Truth.

Sir Robert Pointz Vindication of Monarchy, page 27. The Sword avails little
with the Souls of Men, unless to destroy them with their Bodies, and to make
them desperate, or dissemblers in Religion, and when they find opportunity, to
fall into Rebellion; as there are many Examples.

Pygot 's Abners Plea. Shall we prove homo homini lupus, one man a Wolf to
another, to hunt and to worry and to kill one another? It is against nature.
It Is for bruit beasts that have no understanding to bite and tear, and gore one
another; but as for men, they should be Meek and Gentle, homo homini Deus, one
man should be Godlike to another, to help, and to defend, and to comfort one
another. Page 46. Consider that such things will bring a scandal upon our
Religion. The Kings of Israel were noted to be merciful Kings. And the
Protestant Religion has hitherto been noted to be a merciful, a peaceable
Religion. -- They are our Spiritual Brethren, our Christian Brethren; and
though nature cannot, yet Grace should prevail with us, to return from
following our Christian Brethren, those that profess the same Faith, and the
same Protestant Religion with us.

King Charles the Second, December 26, 1662. It Is evident (said his Majesty) by
the sad Experience of Twelve Years, there is very little fruit of all those
forcible Courses, that have been used.

Feb. 5. 1672. The then Lord Chancellor in his Speech of his Majesty Charles
the 2d. He loves not blood, nor rigorous severities; but where mild or gentle
ways may be used by a wise Prince, he is certain to choose them, -- And
concludes that head thus; But His Majesty is not convinced that violent ways
are the interest of Religion or the Church.

Bishop Gauden of slight Healing, p. 46. While men of the same Polity are like
Pikes in a Pond, or Fish in the Sea, or beasts of prey in a Wilderness,
pursuing and devouring one another. While they have so little Equity, so no
Piety or Charity to each other; but every party designs to subdue others, to
set up it self, and to oppress the common liberty, and public welfare, what
peace in Church or State. Item p. 25. When true Religion is either corrupted in
its soundness of Doctrine, or overgrown by Superstition, broken by Faction, or
persecuted by misguided Zeal, etc.

Bishop Tailor 's Advice to his Clergy, p. 25. Use no violence to any man to
bring him to your opinion, but by the word of your Ministry, etc. -- Constrain
them to come in. Rule 28. Stir up no violence against them, but leave them if
they be incurable, to the wise and merciful disposition of the Law. Idem, if a
man cannot change his opinion when he list, nor ever does heartily, but when he
cannot do otherwise, ( i. e. through his own conviction) then to use force may
make him an Hypocrite, but never a right believer.

Bishop Saunderson ad Aulam Sermon. 3. Sect. 34. A sad thing it is, and very
grievous it is to the Soul of every good man, when in the Church, which is the
house of God, Christians that call themselves brethren, fall foul upon one
another, not only girding at, and clashing against, but biting and nipping,
and devouring one another, as if they were bent to consume and to destroy one
another.

Bishop Hackets Sermon. on Acts 15.39. p. 38. I have cast my mite at this time
into the Treasury, to remind them who are of the same lot before Christ with
Paul and Barnabas, to stop contentions, and as they dread the sharp wrath of
God to mitigate all sharpness.

Doctor Barrows Treatise of the Popes Supremacy, p. 219: Men not to prescribe
to others or not to Persecute for them. And Unity of the Church annexed to it,
p. 11. Who ever therefore does highly offend against Charity, maligning or
mischieving his brethren, does thereby separate himself from Christ's body, and
cease to be a Christian, and cites St. Augustine de Bapt. 3. 19. They that are
enemies to brotherly Charity they are Pseudo-Christians, and Antichrist, they
are separate from the Church of Christ.

Doctor Allestries Sermons, p. 165. To destroy men's lives, or other temporal
rights, on this account merely because they are Apostates, Schismatics, or
otherwise reject the true Religion, or Christ himself, this is that which
Christ reproves here, telling them that would do so, you know not what manner
of Spirit you are of. Item Sermon. 9 p. 170. If men's false opinions make no
parties, nor mischief in the State, we are not to make them Martyrs to their
false opinions.

Causes of Decay of Piety, p. 184. They know little of Ancient, and less of
modern times, that are not acquainted with the mutual persecutions, which
almost all parties have alternately raised one against another among
Christians; Confiscations and Banishments, Gibbets and Flames, Weapons, God
knows, much too carnal for a spiritual Warfare; yet much more in use, then
those St. Paul recommends to Timothy, Gentleness and Meek instructing of
opposers, 2 Timothy 2.25,26.

Dr. Stewards Sermons on 2 Kings 18.22. p. 15. A case of Conscience deci^ed by
our Saviors own mouth in St. Luke 9. James and John the two sons of Thunder
begins straightway to show their temper. What! not receive Christ, nor the
Christian Faith! Master, shall we command fire from heaven? Our Savior
replies, you know not what manner of Spirit you are of, ye understand not at
all what it is to be a Christian, I came not to destroy, to plant Religion in
blood, no, I leave that to Turks and to Mahometans p. 16. Its not lawful by
blood to bring in Christian Faith: Its not lawful to plant a Church by such
force, nor is it lawful thus to reform it.

Doctor Henry Mores Mystery of Iniquity, p. 546. The person I plead exemption
for from any harsh usage must be of a conversation blameless, of an unshaken
belief in all the essentials of Christian Religion, of impregnable Loyalty,
etc. compliant with his Church to the utmost his Conscience will permit. Item
p. 543. That also is remarkable which Bishop Jewel in Defense of his Apol.
Notes out of Chrysostom in 19. Hom. on Matthew. Nunquid ovis Lupum per sequitur
aliquando, non sed lupus ovem. Sic enim Cain persecutus est Abel; non Abel
Cain. Sic Ishmael persecutus est Isaac, sic Judaei Christum, non Christus
Judaeos: Haeretici Christianos, non Christiani Haereticos. Ergo ex fructibus
eorum cognoscetis eos. And smartly again in the same Hom. Quem videris in
sanguine persecutionis gaudentem, lupus est.

Bishop of Asaph's Sermon on November 5 th. 1680. p. 9. They give a strong
presumption against themselves that they are not truly Christians. Item p. 20.
Neither our Religion, nor our Church is of a persecuting Spirit: I know not how
it may be in particular persons, but I say again, it is not the genius of our
Church; she has no Doctrine that Teaches Persecution. She has not practiced
it, as others when they were in the Authority. I thank God for it, and I hope
she will always continue in that temper.

Doctor Tillotsons Sermon on November. 5 th. 1678. Before the House of Commons.
Where he says upon our Saviors words, ye know not what manner of Spirit ye
are of; not that surely which my doctrine designs to mould and fashion you
into, which is not a furious and persecuting and destructive Spirit, but mild
and gentle and saving, tender of the lives and interests of men, even of those
who are our greatest enemies. p. 6, 7. Item p. 30. True Christianity is not
only the best, but best natured institution in the World, and so far as any
Church is departed from good nature, and become cruel and barbarous, so far it
is degenerated from Christianity.

Mr. Hales of Erring Christians; Wherefore if a perfect pattern of dealing with
erring Christians were to be sought, there were not any like this of ours;
which as it takes not to it self the liberty of cruelty, so it leaves not any
the liberty of destroying their own Souls.

Doctor Caves Gospel Preached to the Romans, Sermon. 4. p. 89. 1680. Yea, such of
late has been the tenderness and indulgence of our Gracious King and our
Bishops, that Mercy has triumphed over Justice, and our Dissenters have had
more favor showed them then the Laws allow: yet too many of them are as
querulous and discontented still, as ever, like froward humorous Children that
cry, not because of whipping, but because they may not scratch their nurses,
and have their foolish wills in every thing.

Dr. Burnet Bishop of Salisbury in his Remarks on the Methods for Converting of
Prot. p. 30. Cites St. Augustine saying, Let them exercise cruelty upon you,
who do not know with what difficulty truth is found out, and how hardly errors
are avoided; and let them exercise cruelty upon you, who were never themselves
deceived with any error like that with which you (i. e. the Manichees) are now
deceived.

Item, Exhortation to Peace and Unity, p. 15, 16. Violence alienates those
farther whom we ought to gain upon, and likewise increases their party by the
compassions of all good natured people, who are thereby first inclined to pity
them, then to love them, and so the sharpness of rigor instead of being a
security often proves the ruin of those who depend on it. Item, p. 29. I am
sure, we ought to carry it so toward them ( i. e. the Papist) that it may
appear we do not hate their persons, and do nothing against them, but as we are
compelled to it for self-preservation, and even in the hardest things that a
prudent care of our own quiet and safety may force us to all personal softness
and gentleness toward them, is indispensably necessary to such as would show
themselves to be truly reformed Christians.

Dr. Hascard on Ephesians. 4.32. And be ye kind one to another, etc. p. 24. It Is not
the nature of God willingly to grieve the children of men, and shall we please
our selves with severities? -- And must our dealings and conversations in
rigours, in extremities, with our fellow Christians, of the same stamp of
nature and Religion with us, and so useful to us, be so far unlike to the
methods of this mighty being?

True state of Primitive Church, p. 8. As for those who keep their erroneous
opinions to themselves, and only refuse to conform to the Churches established
Doctrine or Discipline, pardon me if I say that really I cannot find any
warrant, or so much as any hint from the Gospel to use any force to compel
them; and from Reason sure there is no motive to use force, because (says he)
as I showed before, fear cannot make a man believe your doctrine, but only as
an hypocrite professes what he believes not.

Serious and Compassionate Enquiry, etc. It becomes a Christian Magistrate who
considers he governs Men and not Beasts, to afford means of Instruction and
competent time for those instructions to take place: It has always been found,
that Force without Instruction has been prevalent only on the worst of men.
-- When the Public is secured, yet there is great scope for his Compassion;
and consequently it is the Duty of a good Magistrate to drive, as the Cattle
can go, page 211, 212. Not to resort to such severities, as are abhorred by all
Englishmen, page 113.

Mr. Dodwel 's two Letters to Mr. Baxter, page 216. You mean that all truly
Pious and Conscientious persons ought to be treated with Candor and Respect
before severe means be used, or that the use of severe means is utterly to be
forborne, as far as may be, that is, as far as such forbearance may be
reconcilable with the public Interest, which is to be preferred before the
private of any person whatsoever; I could for my part heartily wish it were so
too.

Kidder 's Sermon. 1 Pet. 3.11. page 22. We Quarrel first, then we hate and when
we are strong enough, we persecute each other.

Union of the Catholic Church, page 50. Men may make a noise with the Odious
Names of Persecutions, yet our Adversaries of both the Extremes have little
reason to object that, of which they themselves stand so deeply chargeable,
when in their power.

Principles and Practices of Moderation, etc. These persons (the Moderate
Divines of the Church of England) are desirous that Mercy and Indulgence should
be shown toward those, whose Consciences will not permit them to comply with
their Governors in some things disputable, judging it a piece too near of kin
to that of the cruel Procrustres, ever to endeavor to force others to be just
of their pitch and size in Opinions, and to approve of their Sentiments.

Mr. Smythies Spirit of Meekness, page 68. As the Galathians were overtaken in
a fault, Galat. 6.1. So we must account them likewise who have dissented from
us. Men that are guilty of Errors of practice, they are wilful, for they know
they are wrong, and yet they are to be treated with a Spirit of Meekness, that
they may be made sensible of their wickedness, that they may be reclaimed
without punishment by the Execution of Laws, if it may be effected; Much more
then are others to be dealt tenderly with in their Errors of Judgment through
weakness and inability of Mind, for which they are to be pitied.

Conformists Plea for the Nonconformists, Part 4. page 28. Whether men shall
forfeit their Goods and Liberties, for a Dissent in Religion, by any
Gospel-Rule, or Rules of Christian Equity is a great Question, and the Negative
past doubt as yet.

Idem, Part 3. page 5. The men speaking of Dissenters are given to pray, hear
Sermons, sing Psalms, and other pious Exercises, and live, if not better, yet
no worse than many that go to Church: People think and say surely, it is hard
to drive honest Men's Cattle, seize their goods, break open houses, for doing
well.

Argument for Toleration and Indulgence in Difference of Opinion, Printed 1681,
page 3. Instead of bearing and Indulging to compel a person to serve the Deity
in a way against the light and apprehensions he has, is the greatest Tyranny
that can be; for it is to compel him to the doing of a thing, which on pain of
Damnation he holds himself obliged not to do.

Item, page 5, 6. To be rigid and severe to others in matters of Opinion, is
not to comport with the Golden Rule of all our Actions, prescribed by our
Blessed Savior, which is to do as we would be done unto. Would thou be
compelled thy self to another opinion that do compel others. -- Arguments
and Reasons (and not Capiasses and Imprisonments, Fire and Faggot) are proper
means to effect it: Thus the Ancient Fathers in all their Apologies to the
Heathen in defense of themselves and the Christian Religion ever pleaded.

Mr. Kettlewel 's Measure of Obedience, Edit. 3. page 631. If we are rigorous
and severe with our Brethren, God will be so with us also, and when he comes to
judge us, we shall find as little allowance at his hands, as they have done at
ours. For he shall have judgment from God without Mercy, who to men has showed
no mercy: but if any man has been merciful to his Brethren, God will be much
more so to him. This will be the best Plea, that can be urged to obtain Mercy
at Gods Hand, Mat. 5.7.

Peaceable Sentiments about Confessions and Articles of Faith.
BIshop Davenant 's Letter to Duraeus: Unless the Forms of Public Confessions
be restrained to necessary and uncontroverted Doctrines, this mischief will
ensue; that many Learned, Pious, and peaceable Pastors, will be excluded, and
made unserviceable to the Churches where they live; that therefore it does
behove the Rulers of the Church, as being conscious of their own and of the
infirmities of Mankind, to be cautious least while they do require a too rigid,
and exact Confession, they seem to weaken that sweetly necessary Communion
which should be among themselves.

King Charles the Seconds Declaration from Breda: That none forfeit his
Benefice that subscribes all the Articles of Religion, which only concern the
Confession of the true Christian Faith, and the Doctrine of the Sacraments.

Historia quinque Articularis, Part 2. chap. 8. Cited by Dr. Puller 's Mother.
page 127. The Articles of this Protestant Church in the Infancy thereof were
drawn up in general Terms, foreseeing that Posterity would grow up to fill the
same; meaning, that those Holy Men did prudently discover, that difference in
Judgments would unavoidably happen in the Church, and were loath to unchurch any
and drive them off from any Ecclesiastical Communion for petty differences,
which made them Pen the Articles in comprehensive words to take in all who
differing in Branches meet in the Root of the same Religion.

Out of a Letter of the Bishops of Rochester, Oxford, and St. David's, to the
Duke of Buckingham, August 2. 1625. Exemplified in Heylin 's History of
Archbishop Laud, page 131. The Church of England when it was reformed from the
Superstitious Opinions broached and maintained by the Church of Rome, refused
their apparent and Dangerous Errors, and would not be too busy with every
particular School point. The Cause why she held this Moderation was, because
she could not be able to preserve any Unity amongst Christians, if men were
forced to subscribe to curious particulars disputed in Schools. -- Some of them
[ Montagues Opinions] are such as are fit only for Schools, and to be left at
more Liberty for Learned Men to abound in their own Sense, etc.

Bishop Tailor 's Ductor Dubitant, L. 3. chap. 4. R. 28. Sect. 8. No particular
Church ought with rigor to require subscription to Articles which are not
evidently true and necessary to be professed, because in the Division of Hearts
that is in the World, it is certain that some good men may dissent; and then
either they shall be afflicted, or tempted to Hypocrisy, either of which if
Ecclesiastical Laws be guilty, they are not for Edification, they are neither
Just, nor Pious, and therefore oblige not --.

Doctor Stillingfleet 's Unreasonableness of Separation, page 9. In the
Preface. If any Temper can be found out, as to the manner of Subscription, that
may give ease to the scruples of our brethren, and secure the peace of the
Church; and this I suppose may be done by an absolute subscription to all those
Articles which concern the Doctrine of the true Christian Faith, and the use of
the Sacraments, [even so Bishop Bramhall required of the Clergy in Ireland] and
a solemn Promise under their hands or Subscription of peaceable submission as
to the rest, so as not to oppose or contradict them, either in Preaching, or
Writing, upon the same penalty as if they had not subscribed to the 36.

I shall mention two or three of those Testimonies referred to in the Preface
about Ordination. Dr. Chillingsworths Religion of Protestants, etc. Epist. 1.
chapter 6. Sect. 8. by way of Question; whether any one kind of the external Forms
of Church Government ( i. e. by Bishops or Presbyters) be so necessary to the
being of a Church, but that they may be diverse in diverse places, and that a
good and peaceable Christian may and ought to submit himself to the Government
of the place where he lives, whosoever he be. Which Question (we are told in
Iren. part. 2. chapter 8. p. 394.) according to the tenor of the rest to which it
is joined, must as to the former part be resolved in the Negative, [no one Form
of Church Government so necessary but they may be diverse in diverse places;] and
as to the latter in the Affirmative [ i. e. That a peaceable Christian ought to
submit himself to the Government which he lives under.]

Judge Hale's discourse of Religion p. 11. That the Episcopal form of
Government constituted in England is a most excellent Form of Ecclesiastical
Government, and exceeds all others may easily be evinced; and that it is the
best adapted to the Civil Government in this Kingdom is visible to any
intelligent person. And yet I do not think that the Essence of Christian
Religion consists in this or any other particular Form of Government. -- Though
the wise and sober sort of Conformists know and profess this that a man may be
a good and excellent Christian under this Episcopal or any other Form of Church
Government, etc.

Bishop Carletons Consensus Eccles. Cathol. contra Trident, praelectionibus, c.
11. de Ecclesia p. 289. cited out of Conf. Plea for the Non-Corformist, part.
3. p. 36. It is the custom of the Catholic Church, ut, Episcopi legitime
ordinent, sed si quis a Presbytero Ordinatus fuerit, ordinatio illa etiam vera
est ex ejusdem Ecclesiae Catholicae judicio. Idem. p. 283. Ordination is not to
be repeated, although it be disorderly and out of course, any more than Baptism
in the Catholic Church.

But further even they who have the internal call, consisting of good Learning,
Knowledge in the Scripture, and are of a good exemplary Conversation, and moved
by the Spirit, are not to be reckoned as Laymen, but next to Presbyters or
Ministers, according to the declared judgment of great and eminent Protestants,
as Conf. Plea for Non-Corformist, part. 3. p. 37. Archbishop Abbot added this
observation to the 9 Section of the 2d. chapter de Circumcisione and Baptismo.
Quaestiones sex discussae per Georgium Abbatium. p. 109.

Martin Bucer says in Epist. ad Ephesians. c. 4. That some of the Laymen were
admitted to read and interpret the Holy Scriptures, in the Primitive and purer
Church; which they sometimes did perform in the presence of the Bishops; and
names Origin and others. And says he if any man add what the truly learned
Hieron Zanchius speaks indefinitely, -- When from the practice of the purer
Church, they who were not in Holy Orders, did Preach the Gospel. We answer
there is a difference to be made between the simple Layman, or the common sort
to whom power is given in the Roman Church to Baptize, and them who are instar
Ministrorum Evangelii; and who not only excel the common sort of men, for their
Learning in holy things, but are (or were) called by the special, public and
common Decree of the Bishop and them set over the Congregation, publicly to
interpret Scripture, And these, and not others the words of Bucer do note or
point at, etc. Istos ego non audeo ad ordinariorum, et vulgarium Laicorum
conditiones revocare cum ad Presbyteros tam prope accedant. I dare not bring
down these to the condition of ordinary and vulgar Laymen, that come so near to
Presbyters (or Ministers) says the Learned Abbot of this sort. And whether
Tertullian speak of such as these, that were permitted to Baptize, I leave to
the Judgment of the Learned.

Bishop Jewels Sermon. on 1 Cor. 4.1,2. fol. 223. In these our days the Ministers
of God, and Preachers of his Gospel are evil spoken of among all men; some say
they are unlearned, they are Craftsmen. Some say they preach they cannot tell
what. Let us examine and try their Doctrine with the touchstone of Gods Word,
and then be you Judges, if you see that we teach you nothing but the mysteries
of God; that we disclose to you the will of God, esteem us to be the Servants
of God, the Ministers of Christ, etc.

This is but a taste of what is referred to in Iren. part. 2. chapter 8. and in
Conf. Plea for Non-Conf. part. 3.

Hearty desires and Prayers for Love and Peace.
BIshop Davenant 's Letter to Duraeus. That which all pious persons are with
fervent supplications to desire they ought as earnestly to endeavor after. Now
who does not daily solicit God for the peaceable State of the Church, who does
not pray that all those things which vex, disturb or any way hinder the
Edification of the Church, should be removed: this was the wish of the Royal
Psalmist, and ought to be the desire of Princes, Doctors and all Christians;
and surely what they sincerely should desire they should as sincerely endeavor
after.

Bishop Hall 's Works, page 426. Yea, let me beg peace as for Life, by your
filial piety to the Church of God, by your love of Gods Truth, by the Graces of
that one blessed Spirit, whereby we are all informed and quickened, by the
precious Blood of the Son of God, shed for our Redemption be inclined to peace
and Love, and though our brains be different let our hearts be one.

(...), Upon the Treaty at Uxbridge, Ejac. 1. Oh thou that art the God of
reason and of peace, etc. Soften our hearts by the blood of our Redeemer, and
persuade us to accept of peace with thy self, and both procure and preserve
peace among our selves as Men and Christians. Condemn us not to our passions.
Clear up our understandings to see thy Truth, and incline all our hearts to
hold the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Give us that Charity which
should be among our selves, and bestow upon us that peace which only Christ
our great peacemaker can merit.

Bishop Salisburies Exhortation to Peace and Union, p. 34. Let us all resolve
to spend some portion of our tlme, at least an hour every Week in earnest
prayers to him for the peace of his Jerusalem among us, and for continuing our
Religion still with us. It is his cause and we ought chiefly to offer it up to
him for his protection and defense; and if our sins do not defeat our prayers,
we may hope that a considerable number of such Intercessions will procure great
blessings to us; especially we having the assistance of those who have taken
Sanctuary among us.

Mr. Pygots Abners Plea for Accommodation, p. 15. Never leave wrestling with
the God of peace, by uncessant and earnest prayers, till he be entreated for
the land to settle peace amongst us, that the Lion and the Lamb might lie down
together.

Causes of decay of Christian Piety, p. 419. Oh that we might see our
impertinent strifes superseded, and all molded into the one Noble emulation,
who shall fastest unravel his own mischief, and promote that peace he has
hitherto disturbed. This indeed were worthy to be the united design of all
Learned men, and were it once so who knows how prosperous it might be, Item p.
227. Who knows what a powerful exorcism the United Intercessions of the
Christian World might have been, had we jointly deprecated our quarrels, God
might have found a way to have composed them tho we could not.

Forms of Prayer upon the Fast Day 22 d. Dec. 1680. In the prayer for Union
amongst our Selves; Blessed Jesu, aur Savior and our Peace, -- Look down in
much Pity and Compassion upon this distressed Church and Nation, whose bleeding
wounds occasioned by the lamentable divisions that are among us, cry aloud for
thy speedy help and saving relief, stir up we beseech thee every Soul of us
carefully (as becomes sincere Christians) to root out of our hearts all Pride
and vain Glory, all wrath and bitterness, all unjust prejudice and causeless
jealousy, all Hatred and Malice, and desire of Revenge, and whatsoever it is
that may any way exasperate our minds, or hinder us from discerning the things
that belong unto our peace. -- That as there is but one body, and one Spirit,
and one Hope of our Calling, one Lord, one Faith, etc. So we may henceforth be
all of one heart, and of one Soul, closely united in one Holy bond of Truth and
Peace, of Faith and Charity; and (so far as it is possible and an Union is
attainable) with one mind and one mouth glorify God.

Licensed according to Order.

FINIS.
A Table of the several Heads.
ACknowledged by Conformists that there are Good and Worthy Men amongst the
Dissenters. Salvation for such as are faithful in the common duties of
Christianity. That Protestants are agreed in the main. The Creed contains all
Truths necessary to Salvation. Conformists not forward in censuring men as
guilty of Heretical and damnable Errors. None to be shut out of the Church and
denied Communion for lesser sins or Errors. That our Love must be Catholic. An
Agreement of all Christians in one Persuasion not to be expected. Mutual Favor
and Forbearance to be practiced in our diversity of Judgments. Force and
capital Severities, censured in matters of Religion. Of Confessions of Faith,
and their Articles, etc.

