The Case of the City of EXON.
FOR Prevention of Wools going to France from Ireland; The Port of Exon was
shut up, lest Vessels coming about Lands End with Wool for Exon, might thereby
have an opportunity to go for France.

Since which time, viz, in the 10 and 11th of King Willam, by an Act,
Entitled, An Act, To prevent the Exportation of Wool, out of the Kingdom of
Ireland and England, into Foreign Parts, and for the Encouraging the Woollen
Manufacture in Eng amongst other things it is Enacted,

That the Merchant who intends to Import any Wool from Ireland, must give in
the Quantity, Marks, Numbers, Package, with the Name of the Vessel, and Mastre,
and must take a License, and enter into Bond with sufficient Sureties in treble
the Value, to bring it to such a particular Port in England.

That no Vessel shall take any Wool on Board in Ireland, until Bond be given
by two Inhabitants of the place, Who are known to the Officer to be Sufficient
Responsible Men, in double the value of the Wool, to Land it in England.

That a Register be kept in the Custom-House of London, to whom Certificates
are to be returned of all Wool Exported, from Ireland, and Imported in England,
with the Marks, Numbers, Quantities, Qualities, Duplicates of the Bonds,
Certificates, Names of the Persons, Signing all Cockets, and Returns, which
shall be Writ on Paper, and not on Parchment, with the Names of the Vessels,
Persons Exporting and Importing.

Under Diverse other Limitations, and Restrictions required in the said Act,
besides the Officers Forfeiting their places, and 500 l. for Omitting their
Duty or for neglecting, or Coniving at any thing contrary to this Act.

All which, with other things which the said Act requires, being considered it
is very unlikely that a Man in his Wits, who has entered in the Custom-House,
should attempt to go for France, by coming about Lands End.

2. By means of shutting up the Port of Exon, there is seldom a Vessel coming
about the Lands End, so that the way is clear to all Owlers, and if they get
off Shore, there is none to discover them. A Thief would think he had a great
Privilege, if the Watch were removed, and none to go in the Streets. 3.
Vessels may come from Chester, Wales, or any Port of Scotland, or England,
about the Lands End, for Exon, on a single Bond, and why not from Ireland,
under all the aforesaid Restrictions. 4. Vessels may come from London to Exon,
where they must Sail within 7 Leagues. of Callis, why may they not then come
from Ireland, where they need not Sail within 40 Leagues of any Foreign Port.
The Damage of the City of Exon, by means of shutting up their Port.

1. by Computation of the Serge-makers, they Work up Two Hundred Bags of Wool
in the City and Subburbs Weekly, and in Crediton, Ashburton, Tottness, Newton
and other Places Adjacent, they convert the Value of Two Hundred Packs more
into Serges, which Four Hundred Packs Cost the Carriage, being near Forty
Miles, Five Shillings the Pack, which is One Hundred Pound per Week, and is Per
annum Five Thousand Pounds. 2. Wool is a Commodity known to draw Water
Insensibly, on Shipboard, be the Vessel never so tight, and therefore it is
the custom in Exon, to take the Packs at the weight they weighed at the
Weigh-house in Ireland, without breaking the Packs, but now they must carry it
Forty Miles, the Packs are broaken, and they cannot take them by Invoyces, and
many hundred Makers, not being able to Buy a Months Wool and pay for it before
hand, are necessitated to have it in Exon, and either to pay for all the Water
it gained on Shipboard, and all the Dirt and Rain it gathered in Forty Miles
Carraiage; or otherwise must run all hazards. For if the Carrier take a Stone
out of a Pack, the Rain (if it be wet weather) or the dashing of the Horses,
carrying all on Horseback, will makeup the weight so that no Man can possibly
know how much Wool, and how much Water he has for his Money; and not one Man
living that drives such a Trade, can tell what he does; it cannot be computed
that they pay so little, as for 12 Pound of Water upon a Pack, which at 8 d.
the Pound, is 8 s. a Pack, and on 400 Packs a Week, is 200 Pound, and is 10000
l. per annum. It is found by Experience, that Wool has Increased a Tenth part,
and not to be discerned by handling.
All which Premises being Humbly Referred to the Wisdom of this Honorable
House, it is Prayed and Hoped, that a Clause may be brought in for Wool to be
Imported at the Key of EXON, under what ever Restrictions, and Limitations,
shall be further Required.


