THE CASE OF Theodore Bathurst, Esquire; Relating to his BILL IN PARLIAMENT.
KING James the First seized in Fee of the Manor Arkilgarthdale in Yorkshire,
wherein were great Wastes, 21 Jacobi.
as well as Enclosures (extending into the Parish of Arkingarth, alias
Arkilgarth, where were Mines, called the Lead Mines into the Parish of
Kirby-Hill, where was New-Forrest Parcel of the Parish comprising the whole
Forest, and into the Parish of Barningham, where Hopes Farms lie) Demised to
Ambrose Appleby for twenty one Years at 3 l. 10 s. per Annum all those Mines of
Lead, called the Lead Mines, in all Places, Wastes, Moors, and Heaths, within
the Manor of Arthgarthdale, alias Arkilgarthdale, and within New-Forrest, and
all that Coal-Mine within the said Manor and Forest, Parcel of the Manors of
Middleham and Richmond, or either of them, and Liberty of Digging and gaining
Lead and Coal in the said Mines, or any of them, and in the Places, Wastes,
Moors, Heaths of the said Manor, and New-Forrest, and all Profits from the
said Mines, or any of them from time to time arising; And he demised all his
Tenements in the said New-forrest, which comprised all New-Forrest, save the
Soil of the Commonable Wastes, for forty Years at 12 l. 6 d. per Annum.

King Charles by Letters Patents, 25 Sepi. 4. Caroli.
for valuable Consideration granted to Edward Ditchfield, and others in
Fee-Farm, in trust for the City of London, the Manor of Arkilgarthdale with
its Rights, Members, and Appurtenances, and all his Lands and Tenements in the
Parishes of Arkilgarthdale and Arkilgarth, and all his Lands and Tenements in
the Possession of Tenants in New-Forrest, in Arkilgarthdale, by particular of
12 l. 6 d. per Annum, and all that Giest Room there, ( viz. a large Several)
And all that Farm of Punishaws there, and all those Mines of Lead, called the
Lead Mines, in all Places, Wastes, Moors, and Heaths, within the Manor of
Archgarthdale, alias Arkilgarthdale, and within the New-Forrest, and all those
Coal Mines within the said Manor and Forest, parcel of the Manors of
Middleham and Richmond, or in either of them, and liberty of digging and
gaining Lead and Coal in the said Mines, or in any of them, in the Wastes,
Places, Moors, and Heaths of the said Manor, and New-Forrest, and all profits
from the said Mines, or any of them, from time to time arising, then or late in
the tenure or occupation of Ambrose Appleby, by particular thereof mentioned to
be of the yearly Rent or value of 3 l. 10 s. Except all Liberties, and
Jurisdictions of Forests, so far as the said New-Forest extends it self; And
all Messuages, Lands, Woods, Wastes, Courts, Felongs good, and all other
Hereditaments, tot, tant, tal, to the said Premises in his Letters Patents
comprised, or to any of them belonging, or taken as part thereof, in as large a
manner, as enjoyed by him, any of his Predecessors, or any other Person
whatsoever, Except all Forests and Chafes, and all Parks then used and
replenished with Deer, Knights Fees, Wards and Marriages, and several
Ecclesiastical Privileges, and all Mines of Gold and Silver; rendering 53 l. 5
s. 1 d. per Annum. Under agreement to give the Royal Assent to to any Bill in
Parliament for better assurance.

Doctor Bathurst, Father of Theodore, purchased the Premises in Fee, in
Trustees Names, and purchased in Fee, partly in his own Name, and partly in the
name of Trustees, several Manors, Messuages, and Hereditaments, in
Skutterskelfe, Thoralby, Braworth, Langton, alias Laugton upon Swale, Clints,
and Richmond in the said County of York, in the whole of the value of 1100 l.
per Annum, and was seized in Fee of several Tenements in London and the Strand,
and was possessed of a Lease for Years in Tenements and Grounds, Rederiff in
Surry of 600 l. per Annum.

Dr. Bathurst by his Will in Writing, 25 April 59.
devised all the Premises to his Executors and their Heirs, to the intent,
they should convey the Premises in London, the Strand and Rederiff, when his
Son John attained twenty five years of Age; so as the same might be held by him
for his Life, and after his Death, by his first and every other Son
successively in Tail; (...) by his Daughters in Tail; remainder by Theodore for
Life, with like remainders for his Sons and Daughters: Remainder by the
Testatours right Heirs for ever. And to the intent they should convey the
Premises in Arkilgarthdale, New-Forrest, Skutterskelfe, Thoralby Braworth,
great Langton, alias Langton upon Swale, Clints, Kirby-Hill, and Richmond, when
his Son Theodore attained twenty five years of Age, so as the same might be
held by him for Life, without Impeachment of Waste; And after his Death, by his
first and every other Son successively in Tail, remainder by his Daughters in
Tail, remainder by his Son John Bathurst for Life, with like Remainders for his
Sons and Daughters; remainder by the Testatours right Heirs for ever (only as
to Arkilgarthdale, and New-Forrest, Clints, Richmond, and Kirby-Hill; the
Intail to the Daughters of either of them was omitted.

The Testator soon after died Interested, as aforesaid, and his Executors
proved his Will, and when John Bathurst the Son attained twenty five years of
Age, they conveyed the Premises in London, the Strand, and Rederiff to him
with such limitations as the Will directed. John Bathurst the Son having Issue,
sold the Premises in Rederiff, whereby Theodore can have no benefit by that
Estate. Theodore married with Lettice, one of the Daughters of Sir John
Repington, with whom he received 1500 l. Portion, and gave Bond to Jointure her
in 300 l. per Annum, and has Issue by her, two Sons, and three Daughters, and
his Eldest Son Charles is about fifteen years old.

The Executors made a Lease for twenty one Years of the Lead Mines, 20. Nov.
1672.
as well open as not open, in the Wastes of Arbilgarthdale, and New-Forrest,
together with a Lead Mill in parcel of Clints Farm, and Liberty of taking Wood
from the demeasne of the Manor of Arkilgarthdale, for the use of the Mines; to
John Bathurst the Son, at 150 l. per. Annum.

The Executors conveyed the Premises in Arkilgarthdale, 20 Sept. 1677.
and New-Forrest, Kirkby-Hill, Skutterskelfe, Thoralby, Braworth, great
Langton, Clints, and Richmond, to the said Theodore, with such limitations, as
the Will directed, with Covenants against their Encumbrances; excepting the
said twenty one Years Lease.

John Bathurst opened new Lead Mines in the Wastes of parcel of the Manor of
Arkilgarthdale, within the Parish of Arkilgarth; But none has ever been
wrought in the New-Forrest.

A constant and quiet Possession has gone along with the Grant from the King,
ever since the Patent, which is above sixty years, and all the Forest was
thereby enjoyed.

By Perambulation, 31 H. 8. The Bounds of the Forest were set out, and extend
not to any parcel of the Manor, but what lies within the Parish of
Kirkby-Hill, and no Forest Courts, Verderers, nor Regard have been ever since
there used.

An Inquisition founded on a Commission under the great Seal, 15 Sept. 87.
was clandestinely and illegally taken, by promotion of several Papists, and
Forrest-Officers, with whom some Persons of worth were joined to color the
Matter, and incautelously acted, at the Instigation of the then Lieutenant
Colonel, Archibald Douglas, at that time a Papist, Note, though these are
supposed to be concealed Lands; yet the fee Farm rent has been from time to
time always answered for them.
and late Convert; who forcibly kept Theodore from giving his Title in
Evidence, and thereby its found by a Jury, whereof six were Papists, and before
Commissioners; that had not sufficient Freehold, and were most of them Papists,
That the Lands and Tenements therein specified (being all the Farms in
Arkilgarth, and New-Forrest: And all the Manor of Arkilgarthdale, except the
Farms of Hopes, comprised in the Patent 4 Car.) were parcel of the Forest of
Arkilgarthdale, of 300 l. per Annum, and were concealed, and detained by
Thodore, from the King; and that John Bathurst aforesaid, had incroached Parcel
of the said Forest in Lead Mines there dug, and that the Commissioners
therein had seized all into the King's Hands.

The inquisition being certained into the Petty-bag, Mich. Term. 1687.
and Field the first of December, 87. The then Attorney General exhibited a
Bill in Chancery, suggesting the Inquisition, and that all Forests, Chases and
Parks then used and stored with Deer, were excepted in the Patent 4 Car. And
prayed an Injunction to stay working the Mines.

Upon the then Attorney-Generals Motion for such Inquisition, 14. Dec. 87.
it was ordered, he be attended with the Patent 4 Car. which, as well as the
Affidavits of Illegal Proceedings in the Inquisition, Theodore objected against
the Injunction, and the Attorney was accordingly attended.

Theodore by Answer sets forth the Patent, and his Title thereby, 15 Jan. 87.
11 Feb. 87. 13 Feb. 87.
and that the Exception of Forests extended only to such Forests where
Jurisdiction of Forests was not excepted in particular, and that the
Jurisdiction was taken away by Stat. 16. Car. 1. for default of Courts and
Verderers, and Regard for sixty Years before 1 Car. 1. And he pleaded in due
time his Title, to the said Inquisition and Traverseth any Concealment or
Detention from the King, and pursuant to Orders for continuing his Possession,
gave 2000 l. Recognizance to prosecute his Traverse with Effect.

Theodore complained of double Vexation; 14 March 87.
but the Court refused to stay any Proceedings: vid. Stat. 36. E. 3.13. and
Stat. 8. H. 6.16.

Attorney reported, That John Bathurst was willing to attorn Tenant to the
King, and to bring his Rent into Court, and that Theodore, and the other
Parties had consented thereto, and that therefore the Mines might be wrought.
May 23. 88.


Theodore insisting for Payment of the Rent to himself, and by Affidavit
denying any Consent to the contrary; It was ordered that the Rents stay in the
Tenants Hands.

Attorney General caused the Commission and Inquisition to be transmitted into
the Exchequer; May 26. 88.
and there exhibited an Information of Intrusion against Theodore, for the
Lands and Mines in the Inquisition mentioned.

At instance of Attorney General, Vide Stat. 8 H. 6.16. Stat. 1. H. 8.10.
a Lease was granted under the Broad Seal, to the said Douglass (in
consideration of his Costs in Prosecution) of the Forest of Arkiglarchdale,
alias New-Forrest, in Arkilgarthdale, and of the Premises in the Inquisition;
except Fee-Farm Rents, for one and fifty Years, at six ^ound-eight Shillings
per annum.

Theodore made Affidavit of his Possession, Novem. 12. 88.
pursuant to the Statute, 21 Jacob. and pleaded Not Guilty to the Information
of Intrusion. Note, This Indictment was prosecuted against Theodore, at the
Instigation of some that bore him Malice, because he stood to serve in
Parliament for a Borough, to the Inconvenience of thethen fashionabe Interest,
they promoted, and was found upon the Testimony of one, who was afterward
convicted or Perjury for it.

Note, The defense of these Suits concerned not only the Interest of Theodore
Bathurst, but also the Remainder to his Children, and the Remainders to John
Bathurst and his Children; which all would have been destroyed, if the Suits
had not been defended.


By these multiplicities of Suits and Vexations Proceedings, and a Suit in the
Exchequer, touching the Executors Breach of Trust in granting the twenty one
Years Lease to John Bathurst, and also by a false and malicious Indictment,
whereof he was acquitted; Theodore has been put to above fifteen hundred Pound
Charge; and by stocking part of the Premises, thrown into his Hands about
Ladyday 1687, he has been further put to one thousand Pound Charges, and was
forced to borrow all the Money; and having no other Estate, he is unable,
without an Act of Parliament, to make any Jointure for his Wife, any Provision
for his Daughters and younger Children, or for payment of his Debts; and if a
speedy stop be not put to the vexatious Suits, he shall be forced to spend five
hundred Pound more, without any prospect of reimbursement; which, with the
unjust detention of his Rents, occasioned thereby, will tend to his utter
Ruin. The which Troubles most likely had not fallen upon him, would he have
granted to John Bathurst another term of the Mines, he and his Agents having
often confessed and promised on so doing, that they would undertake to take up
the Suits, or manage them at their own Charge.

Printed in the Year, 1689.


