XXI Salvation laid on its Right Foundation: OR, The Free Grace of God proved
to be the only ground of, and to have the alone stroke in, the matter of our
Salvation.

Being the Sum of Two SERMONS, Preached to a Country AUDITORY.

By an Admirer of Grace, and the Freeness of it.

2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy Calling, not
according to our Works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was
given us in Christ Jesus before the World began.

Titus 3.5. Not by Works of Righteousness which we have done, but according to
his Mercy he saved us.

Dei gratia non erit gratia ullo modo nisi gratuita fuerit omni modo. Aug. de
pec. Orig. l. 2. c. 24.

LONDON Printed, and are to be sold by R. Baldwin at the Oxford Arms in
Warwick Lane. School.

To his much Honored, and his very good Friends, Capt. William Thompson, Esquire.
AND TO Madam Katherina, his Pious Consort. Salvation.
Much Honored in our Lord,
THE great Acquaintance You have with, Honor for, and Delight in the Truths
treated upon in the Subsequent Tract, strongly inclined me to this Dedication.
--

I have no Design in publishing these Labors, of Courting the Applause of any,
nor Recovering the Esteem I once had among some: I have Learned, Rom ^
to My own Master I stand or fall. That which engaged me in the Work, was a
desire to put to my poor help in hand, for the clearing up, and magnifying of
that Glorious, Weighty and Soul-Refreshing Doctrine of Salvation by Grace,
which of late has been so strangely over clouded by the Mists and Fogs the
Legalists have Raised. I confess I have all Reasons in my self to bow down
under a sense of my Inability for so great a Work. But as one who desires to be
found Faithful, I cannot but endeavor an Improvement of my One Talent; and
should be much Raised in my Spirits, if God should incline others to Employ
their Five in a Work so necessary at this day, in which the Doctrine of
Salvation by Grace is Contemned, and greatly Aspersed; not only to the great
Debilitating, but indeed Amazement of the Honourers of this Glorious Truth,
though indeed the Wonder is somewhat lessened when we consider, That Every Man
is an Arminian born; i. e. such he is by nature, and therefore greatly in love
with himself, and fond of his own Improvements, and so stiffly bent to a
Covenant of Works, that it is no easy matter to draw him off from priding
himself with the Pharasaical Feathers of his own Performances; ^. 65 5. ^ke
18.11.
Stand by, for I am holier than thou, is a Distemper somewhat Epidemical; and
God I thank thee, I am not as other Men are, has strangely seized the
generality of Mankind; the folly of which, they shall readily acknowledge, when
set on the other side of Eternity: for then those Justiciaries who have
magnified Man, and presumed to exalt him at so high a rate, shall then freely
own, that Man fallen, is poor, blind, wretched and naked, and at enmity with
all that is truly good, and that he is never more remote, and far off from God,
than whiles in high thoughts of himself, glorying in his own Understanding,
Strength, Worthiness, and freedom of Will; which the stroaking himself with,
makes him proud and presumptuous; I say, this they shall then own, and the
admirers of free distinguishing Grace, would count it hall joy to see God
convincing them of it now. Arminianism is a dangerous bottom, and the more,
because it is so agreeable with corrupt Nature; it being natural to Men to
think, that if they be saved, it must be by their own Merits and Worthiness,
not from the free special distinguishing grace of God; and it is that which
Arminianism brings Men to at last: for if God have not laid the Foundation of
their Salvation on the bottom of free Grace, then they with what Helps they had
common to them that are saved, and to them that perish, do make themselves to
differ; and how God dishonouring a Principle this is, let our Enemies
themselves consider, it is no less than a robbing God of his Glory, which he
has declared, (...) 2.8.
He will not give to another; to which end, it is the Apostle bars and shuts
out the desert of Works, from being causes of Salvation, (...). 9.
Not of Works, least any Man should boast; clearly intimating, that nothing
which we do, does merit our Salvation, or is a cause procuring it unto us.

Thus, Sir, and Madam, I am persuaded you have learned Christ; God having by
his Servants, fed You with the finest of the Wheat, and happily placed You in
Your relation to a Church, where You are blessed with the Sound of the true
Shibboleth; the Strength that God in his rich mercy, is pleased yet to (...) to
your Worthy Pastor, being greatly employed in magnifying the freeness of God's
Grace, and debasing proud Man, and all his empty performances; a Work which not
only He, but all of an Evangelical Cast delight in, and Rejoice to be promoters
of; well knowing that as this is what they now own and preach, so it is what
they shall Triumph in, in the Great Day, when such as have Exalted Grace, and
the Freeness of it shall be Exalted by it: when, on the contrary, such as have
Exalted empty Man, so as to detract or lessen the Glory of God, which is all in
all in the matter of Man's Salvation, shall hang down their heads with shame
and confusion of Face, and be Rejected as Friends to Antichrist, and Preachers
of Popish, yea, Devilish Doctrine; for no better is that which puts Men upon
seeing most in the Creature, and least in the Creator, who is God blessed for
ever more.

I Will not detain You any longer in the Porch, only to hint, that it might have
been thought necessary, by some that I should have given the World some account
of those Graces which so eminently shine in each of You; a Theme so copious,
that I should sooner want Words than Matter; but being well acquainted, how
little You delight in it, and how every way unfit I am for it, I shall wave
Encomiums of Praise, to bow my knees in Prayer, that God in the riches of his
grace, would more and more enable each of You to put the hopes of Your
Salvation out of your Selves, upon that which God has done for you in Christ,
and fling your selves by Faith, into the meritorious Arms of the Lord Jesus,
adoring that grace, by which you have hope of being made meet to be partakers
of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light.

Now that our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God, even our Father, which has
loved us, and has given us everlasting Consolation and good Hope, through
grace, may comfort your Hearts, and establish you in every good Word and Work;
shall be the earnest desire of him, who is for the temporal and eternal
Happiness of You and Yours.

SIR and MADAM, Your most humble Supplicant at the Throne of Grace. R.C.
Jan. xxix. School.
A Word to the Admirers of Free Grace, especially those who were hearers of
these Sermons.
Dear Friends,
ONE would think the Doctrine of Free Grace is so Illustrious in Scripture as
not to be spoken against but seeing it meets with great opposition from the
Arminian Party, who are desirous not only to be Teachers, but Thunderers of the
Law, understanding not what they say, nor whereof they affirm; especially when
they charge Antinomianism upon the Preachers of Free Grace, who are so far from
being Enemies to the Law, that it may be easily made appear they are better
Friends to it than our Opponents, who instead of yiedling a full and perfect
Obedience to the Law, put it off with Lame, Imperfect Performances, when the
Admirers of Free Grace are for having it satisfied to the full, in that they
plead the complete and plenary satisfaction made by their Elder Brother the
Lord Jesus. (...) 1.
The Opposition, I say, the Doctrine of Free Grace meets with was a means to
Midwife these Sermons into the world, which otherwise would have been buried in
Oblivion, the Author retaining a deep sense of his Inability for such a work;
as also the great discouragement he at present lies under, having of late been
tossed upon the blustering Waves and Billows of Envy and Reproach; which Storm
was so violent and tempestuous, one Wave beating in upon the Neck of another
that his sinking Spirits are scarce recovered: in which Storm he will not tell
you now how sorely he was shot at by some, nor how Indecorously he was dealt
with by others, seeing it may be said of all these Storms as of Julian's
Persecution, Nubecula cito Transitura; they will soon be blown over, and then
follows a perpetual Calm. This short Night of Sorrow will produce such a bright
and lasting Morning of Joy as will never suffer Eclipse more, in which you will
see many Heirs of Grace in Heaven, whom you thought hardly sit to live upon the
Earth. And a matchless mercy it is that God sees not as Man sees. Man looks at
the outward Appearance, the Worthiness and Towardliness in us above others, but
God looks upon us as clothed in the Righteousness of his own Son, which he of
his Free Grace has bemantled us with, and wrapped us in.

The Design of the ensuing Discourse is to magnify God's Grace, and the
Freeness of it, and to prove we are saved wholly by Grace from first to last;
our Election, Redemption, Conversion, all is from special Discriminating,
distinguishing Grace; we have not the least thing to Glory in, as if we had
made our selves to differ from those that Perish. But we must wonder here, and
to all Eternity in Heaven, that we should find Grace in the sight of the Lord.
In handling the point, I have endeavored the avoiding all Rhetorical
Flourishes as no way Condecent to a Truth so weighty and misterious in it self,
and in this it is masticated and prepared for the more unintelligible Reader.

The Author hopes, those many Reflections cast upon him (which were exhaled out
of the Bog of Ignorance and Malice) will not prejudice those to whom he is
known; against the Truths treated upon in the following Tract, because
Published by him, and also that his real weaknesses, which he humbly
acknowledges to have been not a few, Will no ways Impede the cheerful Embracing
of, and closing in with the Soul-Refreshing Truths laid down in the following
Discourse. He is sensible it has been his Lot to have his Actions viewed, with
the Green Spectacles of prejudice, and you know through a Green Glass every
thing appears Green; and he also knows it is the Easiest thing of a Thousand,
for a malicious mind to soil the Glory of the bravest and most beautiful
Actions, with ill and wrong Interpretations; And it were well if both Ministers
and People would Learn, more tenderly to handle the Reputation of one another,
it being like a white Ball, which sully's by being tossed from hand to hand,
professors themselves being (in this case) too well acquainted with Addition
and Multiplication; And where is that Man which does not sometimes such Actions
as he would not have discretion scan. Integrity it self would not be awed by a
blabbing spy; It is therefore to be wished, that Men in all their Commerce would
make appeals to their own Consciences, would I have this measure meeted out to
my own Soul. And Oh! That Men would abhor speaking that of another, which they
would not have another speak of them; or Condemn that in any one, which we
would not but have pardoned in our selves; And Oh! know, if that Man or Woman
you defame be a Child of God, you must expect to pay dearly for it. What says
God to Aaron and Miriam (Saints. (...). 12.8.
) Were you not afraid to speak against my Servant Moses, seeing they were not,
Miriam suffers sorely for it? Ver. 9.10. And so shall those, who upon the
Malicious Instigation of a Viperine Brood, or their own base Hearts deride,
Reproach, or disgrace any of the Members of Christ: For most dangerous it is to
Rake in those sores, which the Blood of Christ has healed. The Author would
not have dwelt so long upon what is so disgressive, from the matter contained
in the subsequent Tract, had he not been sorely pounded in the mortar of
Reproach; In which State he (through Grace) being free from that Gunpowder
Spirit, which every little spark blows up, has pressed after, having a heart
fraught full of Holy Magnanimity and Heavenly Greatness, which walks so high as
to slight and disregard the Frowns of Honored Insolency, and to Trample upon
the Scorns and Taunts of Dunghill Malice, still keeping on his way of admiring
Free Grace, and Relying upon it. To conclude, the Sermons you are presented
with, might have been more Polite and Accurate, had the Author designed the
Accumulating any praise to himself, which he being no ways Ambitious of, offers
them to you as they are, begging that for you, (which he often does for
himself) even that your Souls may be gathered to that People who have a
Principle and Heart given them of God; (...) 15.
to say to Eternity, Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name be all
the Praise of the hopes of our Salvation.

R. C.

Salvation laid on its Right Foundation. SERMON I.
EPHESIANS. II. 8. For by Grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God.


AS this Great and Blessed Apostle was Eminently carried forth in Magnifying
the Riches of God's Free Grace, in all his Epistles, so was he in a Superlative
manner in this to the Ephesians, which in general may be called (by the
Apostle's own Direction) his Knowledge in the Mystery of Christ, Chap. 3 Ver 4.

In the Two First Chapters, he discourses of Election, the foundation of every
Believers happiness; showing the freeness of God's grace, in saving his people
by Christ, Gentiles as well as Jews

In the Third Chapter, he recapitulates or repeats his Doctrine to the Church
of Ephesus, begging, that they may have the sense, use, and comfort of it, in
those troublesome times, into which the Churches were soon cast.

In the Three last Chapters, he exhorts them to all holy Duties, as best
suiting with that holy Doctrine he had delivered; and if in these
Church-rending Times, this blessed Apostle were consulted withal, as such a
famous Oracle deserves, we should be more free from that Soul destroying Error
of Arminianism on the one hand, and from that Spirit of Profaneness, which
turns the grace of God into Wantonness on the other hand.

In this Chapter of the Text, the Apostle shows, first, what we are by nature,
(...). 3. ^ 5.^.3.2.
scil. dead in Trespasses and Sins. Secondly, What we are by grace, that is,
saved as Firebrands, plucked out of the burning, snatched or delivered out of a
State of Nature, and placed or set over into the Kingdom of Grace. Thirdly,
Here is what Grace makes, viz. fruitful in good Works. By Grace are ye saved
through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God The Apostle
having in the aforegoing Verses, showed the Ephesians, now quickened in Christ,
what they were by nature, and giving every one of them to understand withal,
that God did only thus, for the manifestation of the glory of his rich grace;
supposing, that they would thus conclude, if God has done all for us out of
our selves in Christ, if there is nothing but his rich grace that may glory,
then it seems all our Salvation is of grace. This conclusion the Apostle
readily grants, and lays down this Apostolical Doctrine more at large, so as he
pulls down every thing which would advance it self against this great truth of
God; and this he does, by laying down the true causes of our Salvation,
positively in this 8th verse, By Grace are ye saved.

Secondly, By rejecting in the Verse following, the false supposed Causes,
negatively, not of Works, we shall give you the Explication of the Words, and
so come to a Doctrinal Observation. By Grace are ye saved.

Grace is put sometimes for the Favor of God, sometimes for the Effect of
God's Favor in us, when the Apostle says, Not I, but the grace of God in me.
Here it is to be understood of the rich grace in God out of us, which only
stands in love, good will, and kindness in Christ, and Works, and the new
Creature, which is the life of Grace, are afterward executed. Now the favor
of God is Twofold; First, a more common and inferior Grace: Secondly, a more
special rich Grace, not Grace derived from the Law, but Rich Gospel Grace, in
which the New Testament, with all the Benefits of it, have their Foundation. We
are Saved; there is a double Salvation for Man: God is the Savior of all He
Saves, Man and Beast, but He is in an especial manner, the Savior of them that
Believe. Now this Salvation is to be considered two Ways, either as begun, or
complete. Now He speaks roundly and fully of our Salvation, from beginning to
the ending, as the Context clears against all Exception. By Grace are ye Saved,
through Faith. Faith is considered two Ways, the one absolutely in it self as a
Virtue, and a Radical Virtue, the other in Relation to Christ. Thus we are here
to understand it, Faith on Christ. Christ now believed on, and Faith which is
through Him, are equipotent, of equal Force, taken both as one. Faith therefore
notes Christ applied in us by Belief; these two you may see ranked under Grace,
as which can only stand with it, Romans 3.24. we are Justified freely, by His
Grace. The Apostle comes to prevent the Corruption of Man thus surmising that
if we are to be Saved by Faith, then something is to be given to us; why?
because we, of our own free will Believed no; tho of Faith, yet you cannot
challenge any thing, because it is not from any strength in you, by which you
Believed, but the Lord, He bestowed this upon you, He drawed you, or you could
never have Believed, and therefore the Apostle adds, it is the Gift of God.
Whatsoever we can do, it is not to be trusted upon, nor rejoiced in, because it
is of God; and this is your bounden Duty, Ver. ^
as being Created to this very purpose. That which we are not of our selves, we
must not boast our selves, as deserving the same, but our Salvation is not of
our selves, it is of God. Whatsoever you are, you are it of God, His Grace
makes you to differ, and therefore we have no Cause or Matter to trust upon, or
rejoice in, not of your selves, not by reason of any desert of Graces in us, or
good Works that come from us, as is Confirmed in the Verse following. Ver. 9.
So then what we may collect and gather by way of Doctrine or Observation, is
this,

Doct. That the Free Grace of God, or God's Free Favor, is the Ground of our
Salvation; and the Reasons why God will Save his by mere Free Grace, and
undeserved Favor, are these.

Rea. 1.
First, That in the Ages to come He might show the exceeding Riches of His
Grace, in His Kindness toward us, through Christ Jesus; and that this is the
very Reason the Apostle himself produces, to Confirm the Doctrine of Salvation
by Grace, clearly appears, by comparing the fifth Verse with the Seventh. God
Saves His by mere Free Grace, and undeserved Favor, because He will make way
for the Manifestation of the exeeeding Riches of his Grace to after
Generations. Which Grace would have lain hid, and never have been admired and
esteemed, if we were to be Saved either in whole, or in part, by our own
Performances: if the Saints (as a Holy Man of God was wont to say) were not
Saved by Free Grace, by mere Grace, and nothing else, they would make but poor
Music in Heaven, for they would be ready to ascribe the Praise due to the
Riches of God's Grace, to their own good Works, and look upon their
Performances, as their Saviors; they would look upon what they have done, as
the procuring Cause that brought them thither; and then you may easily imagine,
their would be but cold Singing before the Throne of God, but little setting
forth of the Riches of his Grace, to lay Salvation upon any other Basis,
besides the Free Grace and Favor of God would be to frustrate the principal
end of Man's Salvation, namely, the Glory of God's Grace, which Attribute of
all the rest, he will not have Eclipsed, nor Entrenched upon, it is so Divinely
Sacred, as not to admit the least Humane touch, for which very Cause the Lord
has so contrived that blessed Design of his Glory, That all boasting is shut
out, and no Flesh suffered to Glory in his Presence. But if any thing in the
Creature be entitled to the Causalty of Salvation, Cor. 1.
Flesh will glory, and instead of excluding Man's boasting, Grace it self will
be excluded, which is far from a Glorifying of it, as is plain from Romans 11.6.

So that this is one Reason why God will Save His by Free Grace, and undeserved
Favor, because He will make way for the Manifestation of the Riches of his
Grace, to after Generations, that they may be Admirers of it, and rely upon it.

Secondly, A Second Reason why God will Save His by mere Free Grace and
undeserved Favor is, because He will utterly Exclude Works. Grace and Works
being Inconsistent in the Cause of Salvation; the Scripture is very wary and
cautelous of admitting any thing as a Co-Partner with Grace in this Matter, the
design of which is to take us off from Leaning on the Graces in us, or good
Works that come from us; and that God takes this way in Saving His People, is
very clear and evident, from that Weighty and Soul-Refreshing Scripture, 2 Timothy
1.9. Who has Saved and Called us, with an Holy Calling, n t according to our
Works, but according to his Purpose and Grace, which was given us in Christ
Jesus, before the World began. Whence it does undeniably appear, That it is not
from any thing in us, but God's Favor, which does work all for us. Now that
this may shine the clearer, let us consider the difference between the Covenant
of the Law, and of the Gospel. For the First, there was the Grace of God in
this, that He would stoop so low, as to Contract a Covenant with Man, of
Righteousness and Life; when a l that Man could do, were Offices due for that
which he had already received in his Creation. But first, this Covenant was not
stricken, or made up, in a Mediator. Secondly, this Covenant was not to be
performed for any other, but for the Righteousness which should have been found
in our selves. Thirdly, we should in this Covenant have procured the Blessings
of God unto our selves; so that though there was Grace in a large Sense, that
God would enter into Covenant, when He was not (...), yet (...) consider, that
in the Gifts inherent in us by Creation, (...) founded, that for our
Righteousness and Works we should have had the things covenanted applied; that
we should then have procured these things. Here is Grace, that God entered into
Covenant, but it is not Rich, Free Grace, because Man, if He had stood, might
have challenged his Justification and Life, as a Debt due for his performances,
not as a mere gift from Grace. But now the Lord does all of Grace.

For, First, The Foundation of our Righteousness and Life, he has made out of
us in his Son Jesus Christ.

Secondly, The Lord, for his Christ apprehended by us, performs all things, not
for any thing in us, but for his Christ. He does not make us procurers of those
things, but, in Christ, does himself prepare them for us, that our Rejoicing
might be in him. In this there is Grace, yea and Rich Gospel Grace, that God
does covenant in the Mediator, that He bestows his Precious Son upon us, and
reveals him to us, and does for him, make us partakers of Righteousness and
Life. Here is Grace, othergates Grace than that under the Law; for that
required inherent Righteousness, as that which alone could Justify us. This
Rich Grace Pelagians, Arminians, Free-willers, etc. are strangers too, they are
unacquainted with the Grace of the New Covenant; for this is not that Rich
Grace, because God having pardoned our Sins, does give us the graces of His
Spirit, that we might be Righteous, and Live; for if this were all, that we are
saved; And First, of Grace, because God undeservedly has given those Graces
which makes us Righteous and deserve Salvation: Then Adam thus standing might
be saved by Grace, because those deservings were given him of the Grace of God;
So that the point is very clear, that God in the Riches of his Free Grace and
Favor does justify us. 2.11.
The Grace of God bringing Salvation unto all Men, has appeared: So that the
mere Grace of God, not excited by any works but working of its own accord, has
the whole stroke in the matter of our salvation, and this is what was well
known in the time of the Old Testament, The Lord having declared himself a God,
Gracious to whom he would be Gracious, Exodus 33.19.
and God will thus save his (in a way of excluding works) because his Glory is
most dear unto him: He has said, Isa. 42.8.
He will not give it to another. God will have no Co-partner with him in the
work of salvation, he hares and abhors that Arrogance and Impudence in Man, in
going about to Intrude something of his own, so be sharers with him in that
Great work; and therefore God does so save us, to the barring and shuting out
of Works, and so work in the business of our Salvation, that Man may have no
matter of rejoicing out of God, Who does all this work in himself out of man,
that whosoever rejoices might rejoice in the Lord, according to that of the
Apostle, He that Glories, let him Glory in the Lord. Notwithstanding, 1 Cor.
1. ult.
all which we readily join with, and bow before the Apostles assertion, That
they which believe, Tit. 3.8.
ought to maintain good works. Grace does not exclude works in the way of
salvation, only when they are brought in as Co partners, or joint causers
thereof, and in this case they are to be wholly excluded. Grace being the true
and only cause of our salvation, and works (if right and truly good) will
always be ready to own their Original, and to keep in their own place, where
also they will appear most amiable and be most serviceable.

But Thirdly, a third Reason, Rea. 3d.
why God will save his by mere Free Grace and undeserved favor, why Free Grace
is the ground of their salvation, Is, because it could not consist with the
wisdom and goodness of God, to found the salvation of his People on a failable
bottom, which it must be said to be if dependent on any thing besides his
unchangeable Grace and Love, for whatever it was that salvation had being from,
by that also it must be maintained. What then would have become of it, if built
on that Goodness; Which is as the Morning Cloud and early dew? H^^ 6.4
God therefore build it (...) a firmer Foundation, ( Viz. His own Free Grace
(...) the Creatures Goodness, even whilst in a State of Perfection, to be too
sickle and slight a thing, to build so great a work upon.

Fourthly, a Fourth Reason, Why Free Grace is the ground of our salvation, or
why God will save his by mere grace and undeserved favor, Is, because such is
the Nature and Substance of the Covenant of Grace, to give freely without being
moved from any thing in Man. All that God does for those he will save, is for
his Names sake, which Name is recorded in Exodus 34.5, and 6. The Lord God,
gracious and merciful. To be gracious is to do well to one that deserves ill;
and if otherwise, it would be but after the Covenant of Works, or first
Covenant; which yet was not faulty, or defective in it self; for it gave a
Sufficiency to obtain the Benefits proposed by it; which if they had used and
improved as they might, there would not have needed a Second; but the Lord
foreknowing the Creatures Mutability, and consequently what need there would be
of another Kind of Power and Grace than that Adam was Created with; did
therefore resolve of a Second, which in Scripture is called, Tit. 1.2.
The hope of Eternal Life; which God, that cannot Lie, promised before the
World began. It is styled, The Covenant of Grace, not only as designing the
Glory of his Grace, in the saving of Men, but as giving freely, and of Mere
Grace and Favor, whatever must bring about that salvation; for where else can
lie the difference between the Two Covenants? It cannot be in respect of the
Duties enjoined by either (for Faith and Repentance are much more above the
Compass of Natural Power, than to forbear the Forbidden Tree) but the differ
noe lies in this, that the New Covenant consists of better Promises. And this
Excellency lies in the free and absolute Engagement of God himself to invest
his covenanted ones with all things conducing to the Blessedness held forth;
That is, to give to them, and work in them, whatever he in this Covenant
requires of them. The Law shows us our Duty, but does not give strength to
perform it. The Covenant of Grace does both, by writing the Law in the Heart.
The Covenant of Grace runs not upon Conditional, or failable Terms (I will [if]
ye will) but Absolute and Sovereign, I will and ye shall. And further, this
Covenant Gives salvation, not upon your Ingenious compliance with what it
prescribes, or better Improvement of what you have in Communion with others.
Such claims and pretensions the Lord disallows and often cautions against, but
of Grace, that all our Hope might be in God and the Riches of his Grace; This
being the nature and Substance of the Covenant of Grace, is a sufficient
Reason, Why God will save his by mere Free Grace and Undeserved favor.

The uses of the point are several. First, It is so that we are saved by mere
Free Grace and undeserved favor, Then this Confutes the Error of Arminians,
Free Willers, etc. In holding a Concurrence of our works. Whereas it is
evident, That if our Justification be of Grace, then there can be no room for
any Inherent Holiness, or works of ours, to make up or Concur with it. For the
Apostle makes a flat Opposition between Grace and Works; otherwise Grace were
no Grace; Romans 11.
they are so opposite, that like Fire and Water, they expel each other, and as
one says, Grace is no more to be Accounted Grace, unless it be every way most
Free. By Grace, is meant, The free favor of God, who is not moved by any thing
without himself: But what he does, he does freely, without respect to Men's
desert: Nay, their undesert rather is an expedient consideration in this Act of
Grace. By Works we are to understand, All that self Righteousness, Goodness, or
whatever else is performable by Men there, Viz Grace and Works he proves as
Inconsistent as Contraries can be: Grace and Works have always clashed. To him
that works the reward, Romans 4.4.
is reckoned not of Grace but of Debt: The setting up of the one, is the
deposing of the other; it is dangerous daubing with things unmixable, and thus
are Grace and Works in no wise to be mingled. If you take in any part (tho
never so little) of your own performances as necessary to that being justified,
you forfeit the whole benefit of Gospel Grace. By Grace are ye saved, is the
Language of the Text, and in Romans 3.24. It is said, We are justified freely by
his Grace, which word freely is very Emphatical, and is especially taken up in
three Cases.

First, When a Man does a thing without hope of the least profit.

Secondly, When a Man does a thing rashly or inconsiderately, but this sense is
not proper here.

Thirdly, When a Man does a thing undeservedly, nothing moving him thereunto,
but much, which might lead him to the contrary, and thus it is here to be
understood. For when there was nothing in us, which might procure it. Nay,
much, which might Exasperate the Lord against us, even then he saved us freely
of his Grace. zek. 16.6.
When we were in our Blood, then he said, Live, and even then resolved to make
us Eternally happy, and that against the Natural bent of our own will. leaving
us to admire, that his Love should be fixed on such as we. Crying out, What are
we, and what is our Fathers House, Sam. 7.18.
that God should bring us hitherto? And how is it, That thou have manifested
thy self to us, and not unto the World. John 14.22.


Secondly, By way of Consolation. Is it so, that we are saved by mere Free
Grace and undeserved Favor? Then this affords matter of great Comfort and
Consolation to true Believers; for if our Salvation be of mere Grace, and
depends not on any Worth or Holiness in us, why should we fear? Indeed, if we
were to be saved by what we have done, then we might be in daily despair, and
indeed utterly despair. Alas! what are we unclean Wretches, that we should be
of any worth in God's sight, (...) 25.5, 6.
before whom the Stars are unclean? Yea, the Stars are unclean in his sight;
How much less Man, that is a Worm, and the Son of Man, which is a Worm? Alas!
what are the best Performances of such poor Creatures, (...) 15.15,
when it is said, The Heavens are not clean in his sight? Nay, He charges his
Angels with Folly; (...) 4.8.
How much more Abominable and Filthy is Man, which drinks up Iniquity like
water; as at the 16th of the 15th of Job. Oh! what is our Holiness but as a
Menstruous Clout; and our Righteousness, not Righteousness in this or that Act,
but our Righteousnesies, all of them, and the best of them are but as silthy
Rags.

But now, seeing it is not of him that wills, Isa. 64.6.
nor of him that runs, but in God that shows, we may boldly accept, and
confidently trust in this Free Grace of God. Romans 7.16.
We are to bear our selves upon it, although as of our selves we are unworthy of
it: For why should we put away this Rich Grace held forth and offered to us?
Why should we not cheerfully embrace it, and rejoice in it, especially since it
has appeared unto all, and God, without respect of Persons, makes tender of it
to the poor, base, despised ones of the World, as well as to the Rich, Mighty
and Noble.

And let it be observed, That it is not a true Humility, but a sottish Pride,
to put away, and Judge our selves unworthy of this salvation, whereof it has
pleased God, in the Riches of his Grace, to esteem us worthy; therefore let it
be your work to Rely upon, and Rejoice in this Grace and Favor, against all
the Suggestions of Satan and your own Heart, touching your Weakness and
Unworthiness; and let not these ore whelm you, but rather plead them as the
occasions, by which Grace will be manifested, and show it self to be what it
is. Thus did Paul, who when speaking of Christ's dying for sinners, says, 2 Timothy 1.1
of whom I am chief. Thus David, Psalm. 25.1 Luke 15.1
in begging the pardon of his sins, says, for they are great. Thus the
Prodigal, I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee. Here is no mention of
any Worthiness, or Towardliness in them above others. No, there is none of this
Stuff in any of their Pleas; they quit all that to rely on Free Grace, and mere
Mercy; they knew, that to look for Salvation from any thing on this side, that
would be to forsake a Living Fountain, and rest on a Cistern, a broken Cistern;
and feeding themselves with Dreams and Fancies, which when they a woke, would
leave them hardly bestead and hungry; and therefore would by no means sit down
under the shadow of that Gourd.

Use 3. Thirdly, Is it so thao we are saved by Free Grace, and undeserved
Favor? Then, by way of Exhortation, be stirred up to Two Things:

First, To be Adorers of it. And,

Secondly, Endeavor a walking suitable to it.

And First, Is it so that we are saved by mere Grace? Then magnify and adore
the Matchless Love of God in the discovery of his rich Grace to any of your
Souls. It is rich mercy that God would not betrust us with salvation in our own
keeping, but has laid it on the sure Foundation of his own Grace, but the mercy
is heightened, and so might our Praise in that, God has not only done thus for
us, but also revealed it to us. Oh! The height and depth of this Love, that
what has been hid from Ages, and is at this day hid from Millions of Souls,
should be revealed to such worthless Creatures, that others should be left
groping in their Natural Darkness, seeking for help and find none; And that God
should make our way so clear, is a mercy we can never admire enough: Alas! Had
we a Thousand Hearts, and every heart cut into Ten Thousand Pieces, and every
piece capable of Admiring and Adoring this Love, it were all too little. But
then,

Secondly, As we must be adorers of it, so we must endeavor a walking suitable
to it, where we Read, That the Grace of God bringing salvation, has appeared
unto all Men; We see what Lesson it teaches, (...). 2.11.12.
That denying Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should live Soberly,
Righteously and Godly in this present World. Beware of turning the Grace of God
into wantonness, when Ministers Preached up the Riches of Gods Grace, don't
think it is to bolster you in your Sins, but that by a Sense of the Riches of
Gods Grace, your hearts might be drawn out, to walk worthy of it unto all
pleasing, as the Apostle expresses it. Pos. 1.10.
If it have not this effect, then hear your dreadful Doom, that thou art yet in
the Gall of bitterness and bond of Iniquity, And have (as the Apostle told
Simon Magus) Neither Lot nor part in this matter. (...). 8.21.23.
Tho salvation is made sure to us by Grace, Yet self-denial and duly walking,
is what we must press after, as the matter of our Employment in this Life, and
as that which clears up our further hopes of salvation by Grace in another.

And although we are saved by Grace, yet let us not sin that Grace may abound. Let
us take heed of that, for that would be a horrid conclusion. To take
encouragement to sin from the Freeness of Gods Grace, would be a ba^e requital.
Salvation by Grace, requires another Guess kind of requital, than this; a
requital of the highest Love, Gratitude and Obedience, that can be manifested.
Any Ingenious Spirit must needs confess, that it is highly base and ingrate to
requite Evil for Good, seeing we are saved by rich free Grace, and mere Mercy.

Let the Apostles Exhortation to the Romans prevail with you; I beseech you
therefore, Brethren, by the Mercies of God, Romans 1^
that you present your bodies a Living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God,
which is your Reasonable Service. Oh! be entreated by that matchless mercy of
Free Grace, that you don't trample upon God's Love; but seeing we have such
Promises of Life and Salvation by Grace, be Honoring of it, in a walking
suitable to it. Oh, who would Abuse Love, by taking Liberty from the Freeness
of God's Grace to sin! Who among you is not ready to blame Judas for betraying
so good a Master? And who would not abhor the Conspiracy of such a Subject,
whose Life his Prince has spared of mere Grace? The Prophet Ezra argues thus
with the People, Ezra ^
after their Deliverance out of Bondage; Seeing that our God has punished us
less than our Iniquities deserve, should we again break thy Commandments? Let
us Reason thus with our own Souls, seeing God, in the Riches of his Grace, is
inclined to save such a worthless Creature as I am, and to bring me to the
Glory and Dignity of Saints and Angels, shall I go on to sin against such
Endearing Love as this? Some (says an Holy Man of God) please themselves with a
strange kind of Doctrine, such as never entered into the mind of God, That
seeing they are saved by Grace. they may live as they list, in Rebellion to God
and Godliness, following Iniquity with greediness, and yet go to Heaven.
Certainly had God opened such a Gap to Wickedness, He could never have justly
complained of the Deluge of Impiety that overflows the World. Far be it from
the Holy God, whose Purity abhors Impiety, to allow such Licentiousness. No,
no, God's Aim in the Large Discoveries of his Grace, is to make you and I, and
every Soul in Love with it, and to fall down in highest Adoration before it;
For when the Soul is truly made sensible of the Free Grace of God in Christ, it
makes that Soul cry out in Joseph's Language, Genesis 39 9. Oh, how shall this
Soul, thus saved by Grace, dare to sin against the God of all Grace! Oh that
this might be the continual Frame of our Souls, that the God of Grace may have
no Cause to complain of us, as of Israel, Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do ye thus requite the
Lord, O Foolish People and unwise?

Salvation laid on its Right Foundation. SERMON II.
EPHESIANS. II. 8. For by Grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God.


HAving finished the former part of the Text, wherein we have proved the
Doctrine of Salvation by Grace, we come to see the way God takes in conveying
this Salvation down to us (through Faith) By Grace are ye saved through Faith,
That is, as I told you in the Explication of the words by Christ, believed on,
or Faith on Christ; for you must always take it with the object, we are not to
place Righteousness in our Act of believing, for by our believing, we add
nothing to our justifying Righteousness, but do only apply it as wholly derived
from Christ alone, John 5.12. He that has the Son has Life, We are not to
take up our Standing partly in the Act of Faith, and partly in the Object of
faith, making up (as a Holy Man now with the Lord, was wont to say, a
Righteousness partly from our selves and partly from Christ. But we are by
Faith to go out of our selves unto Christ, for our whole, sole and Justifying
Righteousness. The Scripture does not ascribe our Justification to the Act, but
wholly to the Object of Faith; not to our believing, but to Christ believed,
etc.

Now Faith being thus taken, with the Object, we may hence note, by way of
Doctrine, or Observation,

That the Free Grace of God, and Faith, may stand together.

They don't one take away the other. Faith has been always Requisite, as the
the Instrument, to apprehend and take Christ our Righteousnoss, that so we
might in God's sight be Justified. This (as the Apostle tells us) the Scripture
plainly holds forth. (...) 12.
The Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the Promise by Faith of Jesus
Christ, might be given to them that believe. And it is said, God so loved the
World, that he has given his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on
him, should have Everlasting Life. (...) 16.
Where we see Faith to be brought in as the Instrument, without which, neither
the Promise can be appropriated, nor Salvation attained. When the Jailer cried,
Sirs! what must I do to be saved? You hear what Answer is given to the
Question, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ. (...) 30,
And therefore, as the Righteousness of Christ has been bestowed upon Men, so
it is true, That Faith has been all along appointed as the Receiver thereof.
Faith, as one well notes, is our Modus Habendi; it is the Way and Means by
which we come to have God and Christ, and an Interest in Salvation by Grace. We
cannot have the Son but by Faith, nor be in Christ but by believing.

but here some may object (what I have already said) namely, That the grace of
God cannot stand with any thing in man, how then may such say, can it stand
with Faith? I answer, It is true, that the grace of God does not brook any
thing inherent in man, and of man, and yet notwithstanding may well agree with
faith, for faith is not of man, no not in man by nature; for says the Apostle,
all men have not faith, 2 These. 3.2.
but it is only in Renewed Men and Women, and in them as a gift of mere grace.

2dly. Faith does not justify as it is an inherent quality in us, but as it
apprehends Christ Jesus the Redeemer, 1 Cor. 3.30.
who is made of God to us, Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Purity: God does not
justify us because of any antecedent act of Faith we have lying by us, and
which we could produce as a price (as it were) and a meritorious means of our
Justification: God justifies us by working Faith in us, and therefore the
Apostle says, it is of faith, Romans 4.16.
that it might be of grace; thus you see that Faith is not at all prejudicial
to the free grace of God: And this is not the only Reason, because that faith
is given of grace, for then all the gifts of the Holy Ghost might come likewise
into the Article of Justification.

For, 3dly. Faith receives only, and shows to God, that righteousness of Christ
which God has given, and only for that thing received, and not for the
receiving that it seeks to be justified. Oh that these great Truths (which are
the fundamental Points in our Religion) were more advanced by Ministers, and
admired by Hearers.

4thly. Faith receiving Christ, stands with the free grace of God, because it
is of Grace that the believing soul, laying hold on Christ, is justified; for
the Law knows not this Righteousness, but bids us bring one of our own; it is
therefore of the Lords grace that we have faith to lay hold on the
Righteousness of his Son: so that it is clear that the free grace of God and
faith may stand together; hence by way of Use it is so, that free grace and
faith may stand together, and that faith is (though not our righteousness) yet of
singular use and excellency, in that it apprehends the righteousness of Christ,
and for that righteousness seeks to be justified; Oh then magnify and adore
the free grace of God for this gift; if it had not been for faith, Christ and
our souls would have never met, we had never tasted any preciousness in him,
nor have been led out in desires after him: Oh therefore be bowing your selves
before the Lord for the gift of Faith bestowed on you, tho withheld from others.

But 2dly, Seeing faith, tho it be instrumental, yet it is not causal in the
matter of our Justification; let this reprove those who would put in claim for
justification on account of their faith, as if that were materially or
influentially causal of Justification: Faith it self (as it is the Believers
Act) comes under the notion of a work, it may be necessary therefore to
consider what part it is that faith holds in this matter, lest whiles we
exclude works as inconsistent with grace (I mean as a procuring cause of our
Salvation) we make a work of faith; it is the Office or Work of Faith to make
the soul live wholly on the fullness of another, and to get emptied of it self,
to apprehend that righteousness by which grace justifies, therefore such are
highly reproveable who presume upon coming to God with price in their hand,
they never truly received the gift of Faith, for that comes empty handed to
God, and leads the soul to God as a forlorn worthless Creature, looking for
justification and salvation from nothing on this side the free grace of God.
True faith moulds the soul into the frame of spirit old Jacob was when he
cried, Genesis 32.10.
I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies, it bows down under a sense of
its own nothingness, which is fixed upon Christ's fullness.

But 3dly. It is so, that faith (though not causal) is very instrumental in the
matter of justification and salvation. Oh then, as ever you would suck and be
satisfied with the breasts of her consolations: ^sa. 66.11.
as ever you would see any beauty or loveliness in faith, or reap comfort and
satisfaction by the abundance of faith; beg earnestly that God would strenghen
your faith, imitate the man in the Gospel, who cried, Lord, I believe, Mark
9.23.
help my unbelief, q. d. Lord, I cannot hold it, my faith will fail if thou put
me not under thine everlasting Arms. You know reflection upon sin, and sinful
practices often raises a very great Storm in the Soul: Now as ever you would have
this Tempest becalmed, be frequently entreating God to strengthen your faith,
whereby you may courageously confide in the wise and faithful conduct of our
skilful Pilot, the Lord Jesus, who himself steers at Helm, that he may (as he
has undertaken) set us safe a shore in the Haven of Eternal Happiness. By grace
are we saved through faith. Hence I note, that God's grace does so save, that
first we must be true Believers; it is Believers alone that partake of grace;
grace and faith must not be severed in the matter of salvation; God so loved
the world as to give his only begotten Son, that whosoever believed on him,
they and no other, are to have everlasting life. Look, as in the Covenant of
the Law, do this and live, no deed no life; so in this Covenant of the Gospel,
wherein the Lord promises for Christ to pardon sin, to justify, to accept to
eternal life; here it may be said, no faith no portion in the promises of God,
in the grace of God in Christ Jesus; for look, as Plasters unapplied, so is
Christ unbelieved on; God does so save us (sinners in our selves) that first he
makes us (through Christ applied) righteous and worthy of salvation, worthy in
regard of his just acceptance, seeing that the Lord does so justify us of
grace, that we are also made just in the Redemption, we learn to view and
contemplate on that admirable Mystery of Reconciling Justice and Mercy in
Christ; here we see how Gods Justice and Mercy accord in one. First There is
all Justice in respect of Christ, whose Soul felt the Indignation of God in
that extremity, that his Body touched therewith sweat as it were great drops of
Blood, who was wrackt and broken even with cruel Torments by the hand of God
for our sins, Phil. 2.8.
and was humbled even to that death of the Cross. 2dly. There is all Mercy to
us, it is Mercy, High Rich Mercy, that the satisfaction of Christ should be
ours, that all he did should be accounted as done by our selves; and then, Oh
what Rich Mercy is it, that Christ the satisfier should be given and bestowed
upon us, this is Mercy with a witness, our Souls may cry, Oh, the height and
depth of this matchless Mercy; but I pass on. By Grace ye are saved through
Faith, and (that not of your selves) hence I note, that nothing which we are or
do, does merit our salvation, or is a cause procuring it unto us: The Apostle
counts all his indwelling Righteousness, Phil. 3.7, 8.
conformable to the Law, Dross and Dung, that which was not fit to be trusted
in, nor accounted of. Oh, what can this Righteousness do, which is in us as
Water in a muddy Channel; you must needs confess there is little power in that
to work salvation (which if the strength of God should not for his mercies sake
uphold) it would be quenched uncessantly; we have nothing in us to merit
salvation, the best of our performances being attended with a great deal of sin
and weakness. Here some will object, and say, If nothing of ours can merit or
procure salvation for us, why then does God promise life everlasting to works,
as if ye mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live; if ye sow to the
spirit, ye shall reap of the spirit life everlasting. I Answer, There are some
Conditions simply conditional, that may very well stand with grace. First, Such
are those Conditions, wherein men only entreating, we promise and undertake to
do a matter, or bestow a kindness on them; as go with me to such a Place, and
you shall partake of such Pleasures or Profits; or come to me such a day, I
will give you such a sum of money; where is Merit in this case: A Beggars
receiving an Alms, argues no merit in the Receiver, but mere grace in the
Donor: We count that he who only receives a Benefit, he does nothing for it, it
comes freely: Indeed he does something naturally in receiving, but nothing
morally by way of merit for the thing received.

But Secondly, There are other Conditions which have the Reason of a
Meritorious Cause, as when Men don't only entreat or desire, but deserve upon
Contract what is promised; as do my work well, and I will pay you faithfully.
Of this kind are these Cenditions contained in the Law; Do this and live. As
for those in the Gospel, they are only bare and simple Conditions; which
deserve nothing, yet must intercede and precede the bestowing of Eternal Life.

Again some Object, That Life Everlasting is a Reward, and that Rewards are
deserved. I answer, All Rewards are not due upon, nor given for Desert; there
is a Reward given by Grace; for the Apostle says, To him that works the
Reward is counted not of Grace, but of Debt: Intimating, that some often
receive very Liberal Rewards, only upon the Free Grace and Favor of the Giver;
and a Reward of Grace imports thus much, that what Reward Men have of God, even
upon the Account of their best Services, it is but a Gratuity, no Debt upon
Desert. But it may be further objected, That which is given according to Works,
is deserved by Works; therefore so is Eternal Life. I answer, That indeed which
is given according to Works, as the meritorious Causes thereof, that may well
be said to be deserved by Works; but now Eternal Life is not so given, but is
bestowed according to Works, as they are Testimonies of our Faith, whereby we
rest and rely alone on Christ for Life and Salvation; and for whose sake only
believed on, they expect Eternal Life. From these Objections we learn to see
the Pride and Arrogance of Mankind; who, when they come to deal with God, would
have a Value put upon their own Performances; we would have a Value put upon
every thing; upon our Coming, upon our Asking, upon our Believing. As if Christ
was beholding to us for our accepting of him: So naturally fond are we of
resting upon any thing that looks like our own Performances. Ah Sirs! how
little a hole will Self-Righteousness creep in? How fain would we have
somewhat, whereof to Glory. But,

Use 2. Secondly, Hence we also learn to see how our Religion magnifies the
Grace of God, and debases Man to manifest Tokens of the true Religion. For that
Religion which sincerely defends the Grace of God, and only rejoices in the
Advancement of that; not in the setting up the Works of proved Man so
pernicious to the Glory of God, which pulls down the Pharisaical Feathers,
wherewith Men pride themselves, and so exalt Grace, and the Freeness of it, as
not daring to thrust in any thing of their own, whereby to lessen his Glory,
but willingly ascribing all to his Free Grace, and Undeserved Favor. This only
is the true Religion, and this is what we now own and Preach, and shall Triumph
in in the great Day. ^se 3.
But Thirdly, seeing it is so, that Works are no way a procuring Cause of our
Salvation, then hence lets be exhorted to renounce all our good Duties
whatsoever; our Praying, Weeping, Fasting, let us no way sacrifice to our own
Net, but reject all those, in regard of resting on them, as Causes of our
Salvation. It is not of our selves, says the Apostle, no, nor of any we can do,
in the 9th. of Deuteronomy 4. and there the Lord strictly charges the Children
of Israel concerning this very thing; Say not in thine Heart, for my
Righteousness the Lord has brought me in to possess the Land. The Lord abhors
the naming our Righteousness before him, as a Cause of our Salvation; he will
have us pass all over to the Free Grace of God in Christ, confessing all our
Righteousnesses to be as filthy Rags, and esteeming them as Dross and Dung, to
win Christ; desiring with the Apostle, To be found, (...). 3.9.
not having our own Righteousness, which is of God by Faith. By Grace are ye
saved through Faith, and that not of your selves. It is the Gift of God; we are
now come to the last Clause; it is the Gift of God. Hence note by way of
Doctrine, that Salvation is matter of Free Gift, not desert Christ's Language
to his Disciples, is a Confirmation of the Point; Fear not, ^ke 12.32.
little Flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you a Kingdom. He does
not say they were to have it upon desert, but the Father out of his Grace and
good Pleasure would bestow it as a Gift. Eternal Life is the Gift of God; Romans
6. ult.
it were horrid and desperately sinful to think God gives us Heaven in a way of
Exchange; for our good Works the Scripture shows, that the Word Gift is
properly taken for a Bequeathing, without the Desert of any thing in us, or
good Works, that can come from us; nothing more Free than Gift. And thus let us
look upon our Salvation as the Free Gift of God; by way of Use is it so, that
Salvation is bestowed not upon our desert, but as a Gift of Free Grace, and
undeserved Favor. Then hence we learn to what we must betake our selves;
namely, to the Riches of God's Free Grace we are to rely upon this, and for
ever discard and cashier that Groundless and Blindfold Opinion of Salvation,
Job 9.15.
partly by Grace, and partly by Works, imitating Holy Job, who says, Tho he
were Righteous, he would not answer God, and would plead it, but make such
Supplication to his Judge. Oh! that Free Grace were more exalted, and proud Man
and his empty Performances more debased.

Secondly, Seeing Salvation is bestowed not upon desert, but as a Gift of Free
Grace, and undeserved Favor. Then take heed what you hear, and how; beware of
those Teachets and Doctrines, that tend to justle out Christ and Grace, to make
room for Self-Righteousness in the matter of our Justification and Salvation,
who would have you work for Life still; to work for Salvation, is to work for
Life. Beware that you are not Imposed upon by such as would turn the Gospel
into Law. But then, lastly, Seeing Salvation is bestowed not upon Desert, but
as a Gift of Free Grace, then let such as have closed with this Truth, sit
down, and take the comfort of it. Sun your selves in the Light of this Grace;
Eat your Bread, Romans 5.5.
and drink your Wine (or Water) with a merry Heart. Since God has accepted
you; since his Grace and Love has been shed abroad in your Hearts: Are you in
the number of those who are Wise and Noble according to the Flesh; then (as one
fitted with an holy Amazement) admire that the great God, (to whom you are no
more than others your Consorts that are left, and who commonly choosest the
base and foolish to magnify his Grace) should thus go out of his way, Cor.
1.27.
to call in you, to taste of this Heavenly Banquet of his Free Grace and
undeserved Favor. And if you are a Man of low degree (poor, weak, foolish, and
of no account among Men, even as one that is not and has the Lord regarded you
in your low Estate, and magnified you by revealing the Freeness of his Grace
unto your Soul. Has He drawn you to taste of his Free Grace, and to see your
Salvation by it? Has He taken you from the Dunghill, to set you among Princes,
even the Princes of the World to come? This is that Exaltation the Poor should
always Rejoice in. What though you are in low Estate now, ^^m. 1.9.
and others swim in Streams of Honor and worldly greatness? What though you
are Chastened every Morning, yet think not you are hardly dealt with. Remember
your good things are to come, they are growing in the other World, and your
Harvest is hastening on a pace. What though the Skies be red and lowering, God
has his Bow in the Cloud set there, as a sure Sign, between Him and you? What
though the Billows of Troubles and Temptations go over your heads? you shall
not be Deluged by them: By Free Grace you are hedged about, and Walled up to
Heaven; in this Free Grace, and undeserved Favor, Let us Exult and Triumph,
yea, let all the Sons of God Shout for Joy.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Notwithstanding the Authors Attendance upon the Press these Errata's have
escaped, which be pleased to Correct with your Pen In the Dedication, l. 1 for
his r. the p. 15 l. 7 for so r. to p. 17 l. 5 for Communion r. common, ib. l.
27 r. Men; these, 16 l. 34 for that r. your p. 19 l. 5 r. shows mercy p. 20
l. 1 after so r. that ib. l. 11 for might r. ought.


