ANTITEIXISA, OR, A Counter-scarfe prepared Anno 1642. for the eviction of
those Zealots, that in their Works defy all external bowing at the Name of
JESUS. OR, The Exaltation of his Person and Name, by God and us, in Ten Tracts,
against Jews, Turks, Pagans, Heretics, Schismatickes, etc. that oppose
both, or either.

By THO. BARTON Master of Arts in OXFORD, and now Rector of Westminston in
Suffex.

Whereto is added a trial thereof.

(...) (...), Psalm. 111.9. Utilitas proximo: Gloria Deo.

LONDON, Printed by R. C. for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at his shop at
the sign of the Green Dragon in Saint Paul's Churchyard, 1643.

TO THE SACRED MAJESTY OF THE Most High, Mighty, and Illustrious Prince
CHARLES, By the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
Dread Sovereign,
I Have beheld with regard the crucifying of our Savior in his name, and the
shameful handling of his Church for not assenting to the act. A Paper-statue
is extant of both, and Dedicated to a Member in Your House of Commons. Against
it my pen adventures. Whereto Conscience binds, thither I tend. No clouds of
horror shall frighten my obedience from God and the King. Acknowledging
therefore your Majesty's Supremacy, the next under Christ, I appeal unto
Caesar. At the footestoole of your Sacred Throne, Mercy may be had in
Judgment. Who hold this against any right, I sue not to them for pardon. That
is one way, I am sure, and enacted too, to strangle the independent Monster. An
evil daily felt: and let me not live to pray, if I pray not God heartily for
the Reformation. My Petition to your most Excellent Majesty humbly begges a
gracious acceptance of this Primetiall, and the forgiveness of such
presumption. The Almighty settle peace, continue the Gospel, and prosper both:
Both under your Majesty's Highness, and your Highness Progeny, till Christ
come in power and glory.

Most loyal to Your Majesty, and obedient to the Church, THO. BARTON,

TO THE HONORABLE THE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS, AND Burgesses of the House of Commons
Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Most Renowned Worthies,
THis Antiteichisma stands under high Protection fortified. Opposition it had,
and shall have still. But your honor advances Truth, and nothing more.
Nothing has been more obscured is seen, and how. Age does not, cannot
wrinckle her. Where the clouds of Sophistry be dispelled, her Face shines with
beauty. To begin this belief, J published this. The common charms of
superstition take not me. Whereat J aim, the mark is hit. J beseech you
embolden me, and I can speak plain. Whilst the close followers of Truth and
Peace are pursued, the two sacred Sisters be forced by Humorists. And so
impetuously, as if their being present were the present being of incendiaries.
A strange Paradiastole: observe it, I have done. Be You ever under the divine
influence, and J

the humblest of your Servants, THO. BARTON.

To the Reader.
WHo will correct, not desame? I fear not the Learned and Judicious.
Dis-favour of the Vulgar has little force to hurt. The Schismatic may lay
his will, or me by. Momus goes chocking hence, and Zoilus chafes himself unto
madness. If any one think here is no good, let him look, and find. He that
gets by, has fully repaid me. To him that proves so thankful, I give all;
that does not, nothing.

T. B.

Errata.
Page 3. l. 9. read intention, p. 10. l. 20. r. (...), p. 17. l. 13. r. for, p.
26. l. 27. r. earth, p. 32. l. 7. r. fist, p. 52. l. 5. r. Helcesaits, p. 56.
l. 36. r. they, p. 70. l. 7. r. in it. p. 71. l, 24. r. faith, p. 76. l. 24. r.
confess, p. 90. l. 34. r. the eleventh, p. 100. l. 31. r. that.

ANTITEIXISA, OR, A counterscarfe, prepared Anno 1642. for the eviction of
those Zealots that in their Works defy all external bowing at the Name of
JESUS.
Tract. I.
PHIL. 2.9, 10, 11. (...), etc.

9. Wherefore also God has highly exalted him, and given him a Name above
every Name:

10. That at the Name of Jesus, every Knee should bow, of things in heaven, and
in earth, and under the earth.

11. And the every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the
glory of God the Father.


THE Apostle, in the five first verses of this Chapter, makes an adjuring
proposal to the Philippians, and in them to us. The (...), or Proposition is,
that mutual love be in all humility zealously preserved in the Church. To
settle this, observe the vehemence of his charge.

If ye will have any, or will that I shall have any comfort in Christ; If ye
will partake, or will have me partake of the goods in the Church; If ye will be
joyful, or will that my joy should be full in the unity of the Spirit; If ye
have any pity one to another, or piety toward me, ver. 1. (...), be of like
mind, keep love without dissimulation, ver. 2. With all meekness prefer
one another, ver. 3. Look one upon another affectionately, and inflame my
affections toward you by doing what I command, ver. 4.

Having thus induced what he would, Saint Paul does (...) next, prepare them to
receive the force of his argument. Ye all inspect one Savior, are all called
Christians; why will ye be distracted? (...), Let the same mind be in you
which was in Christ Jesus, ver. 5.

In the six following verses is, (...), the confirmation it self illustrated,
ab exemplo, in the person of Christ. First, by his Divine Majesty before his
incarnation, ver. 6. Secondly, by his humiliation at the assumption, and after,
unto the end of his passion, ver. 7, 8. Thirdly, by his exaltation at, and
after his resurrection, ver. 9, 10, 11.

Did the eternal Son of God so much for us? and shall not we do any thing
for his sake? How obedient was he to his Father? may his adopted then be
immorigerous? Was not he exalted after his humility, that we might be advanced
through him? and shall not we be humbled now before him, by whom we hope to be
glorified? If this hope be in us, in us is charity; in charity humiliated we
will do all things, endure all things, waiting with patience for the appearing
of our Lord Jesus.

Having seen the scope of the Apostle, we descend into the particulars of the
Text.

These three verses denote to us, that whom God exalted, we must, and for the
same cause extol our Savior.

The general Parts are two. First, Summum* Opus, the highest work. Exaltatio
personae, and exaltatio nominis, the exaltation of his person, and the
exaltation of his name. Either of them by God, and by us either. By God in the
9. verse, Wherefore also God has highly exalted him, and given him a Name
above every Name. And by us in the 10, and 11. verses. That at the Name of
Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and in earth, and under the
earth. And that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord.
Secondly, finis summus, the highest end; Gloria Dei, the glory of God. All that
is done, is to the glory of God the Father. Both are raised on sure ground.
There is a propter quod at the entrance to tell us that. A supernatural
conjunction, and a supernatural effect. God and man in one to set at unity God
and man. For the union and for our salvation; therefore God has highly exalted
him.

We have now gained these praecognita; God is prime efficient in the
exaltation, we subservient; God and man the material cause, the union the
formal; Our Salvation the next final, and the glory of God the last.

The formal, and the final first in execution, are first in hand. The
efficient; and material will be next; The subservient after; But the first
intension in execution last.

(...), Wherefore also. The two first words, wherefore, and also, are, as the
most reverend and learned Bishop Andrews said, the Axis, and Cardo, (...).
the very point whereupon the whole Text turns. It concerns us then to be
wary here. For if we mistake this, we run into a Labyrinth of errors.

In the Text there is a cause preceding, but what this cause is, that is it.

The Papist will have humanitatis meritum, Bellarin. To. 1: contr. general. 2.
l. 5. c. 9.
his humility and obedience the meritorious cause of his glorification. Which
if we grant, it may be thought that Christ had greater respect to himself,
then of us. Secondly, Vid. Amand. Pol. Synt. Tom. 2. l. 6. c. 26.
it will be inferred that man may merit Divine honor. And thirdly, it may be
denied, that Christ had his clarification by nature, which is Arrianisme.

The Fathers whom they urge, Ambrose, Hierome, Chrysostom, Calvin. Institu. l.
2. c. 17. par. 6. Polan. ibid. Conrad.

Vorst. in 1 Tom. R Bellar. Controv. genesis 2. the 11 v.

Tilen. Synt par. 2. cap. 10. these. 34.

R. Bellar. T. 1. contr. genesis 2. l. 5. c. 9.

August. Tract. 104. in Ioh. de c. 17.


Augustine, Vigilius, Beda, etc. understand by merit, Viam, ordinem, and seriem
perveniendi ad gloriam, the way and order of the eternal purpose unto glory.
Meritum (...) dicitur opus per quod pervenitur ad honorem, quamvis gratuito
destinatum and donatum, Merit figuratively is a means whereby that honor is
obtained which was freely given, So Calvin, Polanus, Tilenus, Vorstius, etc.
And who will ponder Saint Augustines words immediate to those Bellarmin cites,
shall find no other then merit abusively taken. That the Mediator of God and
men, the man Christ Jesus, says he, might be glorified by the Resurrection,
Prius humiliatus passione, he was first humbled in the passion. Non enim a
mortuis resurrexisset, si mortuus non fuisset, for he had not risen from the
dead, if he had not first been dead. By his next words then, humilitas
claritatis est meritum, humility is the merit of glory; What intends he but
that humility goes before glory, and glory follows humility? Descend we but
six lines, and he sets humility and glory in order, as the seed before the
fruit. Most evident it is in Saint Luke 24.26. Christ ought to suffer, and so
go into glory.

Propter quod, or the Wherefore in the Text, does not tell us that Christ's
humility was the efficient of his exaltation, or his exaltation the reward
merited by his obedience; But declares the cause of his coming to and for us,
and the going out of his submission, In Tract 10.
whereby he acquired glory. Or if you will, his humility is there propounded as
an example unto us, that we might know how and by whom to obtain glory, as in
the Moral. For if (...) here may be paralleled at Psalm. 45.7. Act. 20.26. Heb.
3 7. 2 Pet. 1.10. it is a note of consequence. Athanas^^ ^ at. 2. cont. Arria.

Cyril Alexand. l. 3. These. c. 2.


And this Saint Athanasius, and Saint Cyrill have observed against the Arrians.
No cause other of Christ's exaltation was the prevening humility, unless that
which is called sin^ qua non, as the race may be said to be the cause of
attaining the bell. Aug. Tract. 51. in Ioh. de cap. 12.
Indeed, Oportuit ut praecederet humilitas, a necessity there was that the
humility of his passion should be before the height of his glorification, says
Saint Augustine. But we must find another cause of his exaltation, unless we
will seem to abet dangerous errors.

The Text is not simply (...), wherefore, but (...), wherefore also; so is the
Syriacke, so the Vulgar, and so does Arias Montanus, Erasmus, Beza, etc.
interpret. There is then another wherefore, or the same wherefore was before,
either understood, or expressed.

Look we back unto the 6. verse, and then forward unto this; and tell how the
Son of God came to be humbled. Amavit quem precio redemit, Tertul. de car.
Chr. c. 4.
his love moved him to it, says Tertullian. And his love gratia unionis, by
the gracious dispensation, or the uniting of the divine and humane nature in
one person, did it. The same that caused the Son of God to be humiliated,
caused also the Son of man to be exalted. God could not be humbled, but by
the humanity, nor man exalted but by the divinity. Nor did the humanity, or
possibly could it, merit to be assumed into the Godhead. To be so assumed was
that grace we term the grace of union. Nor was this grace for himself, he
wanted not our nature, but for us, we wanted him. Because he would do good to
us, he would do it this way. And this way, that what was fittest for our
remedy, one and the same, (...), might dye in the one nature, and rise by the
other, Leo in Epist. Synod. ad Flavia.
said Leo.

Secondly, if at the former Verses demand be, Isa. 9.6. Luke 2.10.11. Gal. 4 4.
Romans 4.25.
why he was so humbled? The Articles of our faith, and the Fathers according to
the Scriptures, answer, Ex causa humanae salutis, that the whole obedience of
Christ points out our salvation, as the efficient meritorious cause does its
proper effect. Athanas. cont. Arria. orat. 2.
The propter quod of his humiliation tends to us; propter nos and de nobis
dictum est [exaltavit and Donavit:] and for us also is the propter quod of his
exaltation, as Athanasius. In his own person both, but for himself neither
the one nor the other. So bountiful he, that whatsoever he did, was done to
make us partakers of his excellencies, Mat. 20.28. Surrexit Christus, exultet
universus mundus, August.
as Saint Augustine, for whom Christ dyed, let the whole world exult, now he is
risen. He undertook death, ne mori timeremus, that we might not fear to dye:
Grego. in M^ r. super Ioh, Solo quod redemptor etc.
oftendit resurrectionem ut nos posse resurgere confidamus, he rose that we
also may be sure to rise, says Gregory For us only his humiliation, and his
exaltation acquired in his person, merited for us only. For us both, that we
might give him the more glory. This is Ecclesiastical and in primis, Athanas.
ibid.
says Athanasius.

We deny therefore that Christ's humiliation secundum carnem, as a work of his
humanity, was the propter quod, that merited his exaltation. But are positive
that propter quod formale, the internal, impulsive, or formal cause,
wherefore God highly exalted him, is the grace of union: And satisfaction being
made by his death for us, that glory may be ours also is, propter quod finale,
the external impulsive, or first final Wherefore of his exaltation.

The Papist here slander us in saying, we allow not Christ to merit ought. For
first our tenet is, that not for any thing in the flesh, but for the Word
whereto the flesh is united, was the flesh exalted. Secondly, that God being
made man, in the person of God and Man, was worthiness to deserve over and
over what we can conceive. Thirdly, that it is supercilious curiosity, wherein
Scriptures are silent to define what Christ merited to himself. Fourthly, that
it is expressed throughout the Testaments, old and new, that he had little or
no regard of himself, but for us; All that might be for our Salvation. Lastly,
that the humility, and the glory being set down in the eternal decree, the
glorification followed the humiliation, sua sponte, of its own accord, or by
the union necessarily. And this is held the principal reason, wherefore the
man so humbled both might and ought to be so highly exalted. Bring these
together, and the Lutherans, and Calvinists so well agree here, that who oppose
in what follows, will be condemned at (...), by that which went before.

True Christians we refer the Wherefore in the Text, not to Christ's being
made obedient only, but to the cause also of his humiliation. It was his
charity there: He would be humbled unto, that we might be delivered from death.
And his Charity here also: He would be exalted, that we through him might be
glorified. Our freedom then from hell, and entrance into Heaven beginning at
his love, have perfection after his obedience by his exaltation. His
humiliation merited our exaltation, though not his own. His own was by the
union, and not in any thing else measured unto him. We find not why he should
merit any thing to himself, whose perfection wanted nothing that might be
acquired by merit. This we know, it was decreed, that God should be inhumanated
to dye, and rise again for us. As inhumanated he dyed; and is exalted as
inhumanated. The flesh is the instrument of the Word, wherein it does subsist.
The flesh therefore subsisting in the person of the Son of God we determine
the propter quod, or wherefore, why the Son of God did dye. The same
subsistence, propter quod etiam, the wherefore also, why he is exalted. He
dyed; How? As man; Why? For us. He is exalted; How? As man; Why? For us. For us
then is the other propter quod, or Wherefore in the Text. Wherefore also God
has highly exalted him.

Tract. II.
(...).
God has highly exalted him.
WHerefore has been declared, we now are at the exaltation, and that first of
the person by God.

(...), God is agent; (...), high exaltation, the work; (...), the whole
person of God and Man, the object. These three may not be separated: For none
can super-exalt, save God, and none be super-exalted save Jesus. God is the
only powerful, and Jesus the only worthy.

Before it was said, Christ humbled himself, ver. 7. but now it is God that
exalts Christ. In the low estate the humane nature was very busy, but this
high advancement must be a divine act only. As God only could never have
dyed, so man only could never have been exalted. Man did nothing in the
exaltation, God was all in all, Romans 1.4.

The Original is Emphaticall, (...), the God, (...).
which Christ was in his humiliation; For he resumed his Soul by the same
power, wherein he laid it down, John 10.17. Though the Scripture ascribes
Christ's exaltation to the Father, Acts 2.24. yet does not exclude the power of
the Son. It shows, Essentiae and operationis (...), the identity of essence
and power in them: The very same God, which the Father, the Son and the Holy
Ghost are, is (...), the God.

The God which the Father is; For God the Father raised him from the dead, 2
Cor. 2.21. and set him at his right hand, Act. 2.33.

The God, which the Son is; For God the Son raised again the Temple of his
body, John 2.19. ascended into heaven, John 3.13. and is set down at the right
hand of the throne of God, Heb. 12.2

The God, which the Holy Ghost is; For God the Holy Ghost shall quicken us,
Romans 8.11. with the same Spirit was Christ anointed above his fellows, Psalm.
45.7. and beyond measure, John 3.34.

The exaltation then is a work of the whole Trinity undivided, and essentially
common to the three persons. Not that it is essential; for then the Father,
and the Holy Ghost must be exalted, and not the Son only. But the work is
personal, because terminated in the person of the Son of God. The Father and
the Holy Ghost did exalt, but neither the Father, nor the Holy Ghost is the
person exalted. It is the real distinction of the persons makes this
distinction real. This is the Symphony of the Church; the Fathers in all the
Councels expound it thus, and so ^ s it understood in the Articles of our
Faith. One and the same God in three persons exalting, and yet not three but
one exalted person.

The God it was is proved, but what the God did, would be declared.

(...).
(...), says the Apostle, that is, multiplicavit sublimitatem, he multiplied
his sublimity, as the Syriacke: he exalted him, as the Vulgar: super-exalted,
as Arias Montanus: insummam extulit sublimitatem, he lifted him up unto the
height of all heights, as Erasmus, Beza, etc. highly exalted, as our
Translatours.

We have here as the most reverend Bishop observed, a decompound,
super-exaltavit, his exalting has an ex, and a super, whence and whither his
person was exalted.

Gen 40.15. Dan. 6.23. Jona. 2.10.
Whence? From the Dungeon with Joseph, from the Den with Daniel, from the Whales
belly with Jonas. Or if you will from the three extremes of his exinanition,
Death, the Grave, and Hell.

Whither? To life, to Heaven, to the Throne of God. The full of his exaltation
is his Resurrection, Ascension, and sitting down in the highest glory.

Three to three; the highest three answer the three lowest. First he dyed, then
was buried, last of all descended into Hell: So at his exaltation, first he
rose, then ascended, last of all sat down at the right hand of the Father.
The amends is full. For Death, Shame, and a death of shame in the former verse,
he has Life, Glory, and the life of glory in this. These all, and ever all;
For he is factus Dominus, made the Lord of life and glory. This last is ultimus
gradus, the super, or that above, super quod non est super, above which there
is nothing above.

The day in deed of his Resurrection was the Feast of the first fruits, Levit.
23.10. For then was the Passover, and then in Canaan corn began to be ripe.
The sheafe of first fruits was on that day, being the day after the Sabbath,
brought to the Priest, and waved before the Lord, that the whole harvest might
be sanctified. Christ was that day, primitiae dormientium, the first fruits of
them that slept, 1 Cor. 15.20. (...), the first begotten of the dead, Colos.
1.18. Thenceforth was the whole lump sanctified. But on that day he had the
first fruits only; had he therefore gone no higher, we could go no further.
An exaltation he had then, but his super-exaltation forty days after.

The stay he made was not from any defect in himself. To confirm the truth of
his Resurrection was one cause, and to show the glory of himself risen,
another.

The first, per (...), by frequent apparitions, and per (...), by external
works of humane nature.

The second, per (...), by showing himself in other forms, and per (...), by
sudden vanishings.

When his Disciples were informed, their Ministry consecrated; when all was
done that he would, he let them see, that though his humiliation had an usque,
so far, and no further, yet his Exaltation was higher and higher. Beyond the
sight, and above our conceit. He was lifted up, Act. 1.9. exalted to the right
hand of God, Act. 2.33. and the protomartyr Saint Stephen saw him standing
there, Act. 7.56. Ruffin in Symb. Apost.
Non ubi verbum Deus ante non fuerat, not where the Word God never was, but
where the Word made flesh sat not before, says Ruffinus.

That is his high Exaltation, and to it his Resurrection, and Ascension were
the motions. Glorificatio Christi resurgendo, and Ascendendo completa est, by
rising, and ascending he went into eternal glory. So high, ut nos desuper
protegeret, that from above he may protect us below. Non ergo turbemur in
terra, as Saint Augustine Preached, Our Savior is in Heaven, Aug. de temp.
seu. 174, and 175 in fest. Ascens. 1, and 2.
we need not therefore be troubled on earth. We need not, if rising from sin
to Righteousness, we ascend in heart to Christ, that his Grace may descend on
us to keep our hearts still exalted unto him.

The high exaltation of the Person is past, the Person exalted is next, (...),
him. (...).


Him, that is, Christ; not according to the one or the other nature scorsum, a
part, but totam personam (...), the whole person of God and Man, according to
both Natures. Indeed, In forma Dei semper suit, semper erit claritas; in the
form of God ever was, Aug. 104. tract. Io^ 17.
ever will be clarity. One and the same without alteration. But if we consider
with the Fathers, (...), one reason of the Deity in and by it self, and
another according to the dispensation, that may be said of the Godhead in the
personal union, which otherwise would derogate from God. As therefore Christ
emptyed himself according to the Deity, in the former verses, so is he
according to the Deity exalted here. He emptyed himself, non suis se viribus
exercendo, Novat de Trin. ^. 17.
as Novatianus, by vailing, and is exalted by manifesting the Godhead in the
flesh. The first was (...), in a respect only, and so is this. The Exaltation
then according to the Deity is no accession thereto, a declaration only of the
high power, authority, and Majesty thereof, Romans 1.4.

But though the Deity was not, could not, save in that respect, be exalted, yet
the person of Christ according to the humane nature was highly exalted, (...),
really, simply. For whatsoever is spoken of the one nature, does (...), by
communion between the parts and the whole truly predicate of the whole
person. Highly therefore exalted properly as man, omne quod insirmum and
fragile absolvendo, Ruffin. in Symb. Apost.
as Ruffinus, by deposing the assumed infirmities. For the humane nature wanted
something in it self, though there was nothing wanting in the person wherein
the flesh subsisted. It wanted, that through those wants the work might be
done; when that was past, all those supernatural excellencies were
communicated to it, which might possibly stand with God and Man. The gifts of
Christ's body and soul are more, and more perfect then all other Creatures,
Angels, and Men, can comprehend. Yet, as high as they be above, are not against
nature. Nature still remains created, and so in her essentials, that our
flesh, and the seed of David, shall in celestial glory reign for ever and
ever.

The Majesty of Christ is not the same in both natures. Increated the one,
created the other. No creature can be equal to the Creator. We extol his
humane nature to the height, but convert it not into God. God and Man as one
Immanuel, we worship with one worship; but not God as one, and Man as another.
For then Christ must be (...), a common man like us, and partaker of Divine
glory by grace, Cyril. Alex in responsi^ ne, advers. Theod^. Reperhensio, 8.
and 12 Anathe. Council. Ephesians.
says Cyrillus Alexandrinus. By the dispensation of union he has this honor,
but by this one adoration the natures are not confounded, nor by the two
natures is the adoration doubled. Hold here, and err not. For as Christ was
exalted quoad loeum, in place out of the grave, above the earth, and from the
earth, far above all the Heavens, Ephesians. 4.10. So was he, quoad dignitatem,
in dignity, above all rule, power, might, dominion, and every name that is
named, not only in this world, but also in the world to come, Ephesians. 1.21.
Thus highly according to his humanity properly, and yet his proper humanity is
far inferior to his Deity. Fitted so to it it is, that all things are under
him. Every knee of things in Heaven, on the earth, and beneath the earth do,
and must bow unto his super-exalted person.

The Ebionites, that make Christ a mere man; the Arrians, that grant him no
true Deity; and the Apollinarists, that confound the persons in the Trinity,
are condemned by the Apostle at (...) for the God, the blessed Trinity exalted
him. The Philosophers, and Sadduces who scoff at the Resurrection of the
flesh; the Jews and Corinthians, that deny Christ's Resurrection; the
Appellites, who counted his Ascension a dissolution of his body into the four
Elements; and the Manichees, that withstand his sitting at the right hand of
God, in respect of his flesh, are condemned at (...) for to the height of
heights, so highly did God exalt him. The Christolites, that attribute the
exaltation to the Deity only; the Valentinians, who will have Christ's body
Aethereall after the Resurrection; the Carpocratians, that say his Soul not
his Body ascended; the Eutychians, that imagining a real effusion of the
Divine proprieties into the humane nature deifie his flesh; and the Romanists,
who by a Magical demurmuration detract Christ from the third Heaven, not into
the globe of the Sun, where the Seleucians placed him, but into the very
accidents of the Bread at the Communion Table, are condemned at (...) for him
perfect God, and perfect Man, God has highly exalted him. This and all we
maintain from (...), and still our Argument is the union, and our Salvation.

True Christians we acknowledge the omnipotent power of God the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost to be the efficient of the exaltation. The work was individedly
of the three, though fitted but to one. The second person, by the eternal
counsel of the Holy Trinity, undertaking the humiliation, with him the other
two exalted him. We seclude not the person exalted, from the agent exalting:
because their essence is but one. Who are Holy, Holy, Holy, are the same Lord
and God. The Godhead then exalting, the advancement might be high. As high say
we, as God would. We know not how high, sure above death; Not to dye again, to
be immortal; Not on earth, above the Heavens; Not to glory created only,
above, to the glory of the Father. At the right hand of God, thither we
believe; but the immensity of the power, dominion, and honor we comprehend
not. It is enough for us that his Authority royal is so manifested, that we
doubt it not. And our comfort is, he has so dispensed with the manhood, that
our nature remains for ever entire in his person. Being therefore our head,
and such a head, he can no more forget us, then not remember himself; and
remembering us, is both able and willing to bring us unto himself. Rejoice we
may and be glad; we are his members; he is gone before, we shall follow after.
His humiliation was to purchase us, his exaltation to provide for us: whom he
purchased by his blood, he will at the time receive us into his glory. For, for
our sake he humbled himself; and our cause is the cause, Propter quam,
Wherefore also God has highly exalted him.

Tract. III.
(...).
And has given him a Name, which is above every name.
(...).
THe conjunction, (...), and, brings (...), Wherefore also, hither. We may not
forget the union, nor for whom the union is. These are praecognita in the Text,
and were fore set to set forth the Truth. Nor does the particle, (...), and,
tell us why a name was given only, but who also gave, and who received the
name. It carries back to (...), and to (...) and now we have no more to say,
why a name was given, who gave it, and to whom, then was before of why, who,
and whom exalted. The grace of union is first in why, and that we may be of
high esteem in him is final. The Trinne God is the efficient giver, and God
and man the person named. How then God gave him a name, and what a name he
gave, is next.

(...).
He gave.
There is no difference in the Translation. The Syriacke, the Vulgar, Arias
Montanus, Erasmus, Beza, etc. and our English version is the same. The Greek
word signifies a gift, (...), Saint Chrysostom so expounds it, per gratiam and
gratis; Not by grace of Adoption here, but of union, as before. (...).
It is not then a giving, ab aeterno, without beginning; but such a giving as
being from eternity decreed, was executed in time.

I see not why any should here mind the natural donation in the eternal
generation of the Son; whereby the Father communicates suum esse, his being
to another, which still is his own. For if this be it, Christ has no other
essence then the Father, or this donation is not the full of his person. Non.
Marcel. de propriet. Sermon. cap. 4.
Dare significantiam habet manifestam, says Nonius Marcellus, to give has a
manifest signification. It tells out and leaves nothing untold. Christ is more
then the Son of God; the Son of Man is he also. This he was made in time,
that he was begotten before all time. As begotten and made, this giving must be
according to both.

It is true, Christ has no other person then the Son of God is; yet in his
person are two disparate natures. The Son of God then does express his whole
person; but not totum personae, the whole of his person. Another giving
therefore to make all apparent, and this is temporal. Not momentary; beginning
in time has no time to end.

As the Son of God Christ was ever named, and never not named; because ever
borne, and never not borne the Son of God.

As the Son of God and Man he was once borne to be for ever named, what he
was borne, Emmanuel, God with us. For ever named; because he will be for ever
in ours, that we may be for ever in his.

Lastly, as risen from death, he was the first borne of the dead. A giving
then, and more and more after, as he was exalted more and more.

Of these three the first is really distinct from the other two; and being
before all time begotten, found no time to be so given. We seek not after
this; a time the eternal begotten had, and when the fullness of time was come,
began the time of this giving. Then God sent his Son, Gal. 4.4. and by his
Angel gave him a name then, Mat. 1.21. Then was the giving, but the
illustration not till now. Now no other Name; no other person now. Now no other
person; the person before humiliated, as you have seen, is the same exalted
now. Nor any other name now; the name before scorned, is the same glorious now.

Chry^^ st in Philip. H^ n ^
Given, at first, as Saint Chrysostom said to the Heretics, (...), it was of
no esteem in the world; And when given for gone, by an ignominious death, God
gave it again, or set it sorth to be known, as eminent it was in it self, by
his powerful resurrection. For to give here is as elsewhere, to manifest. All
power in Heaven and in Earth is given me, says our Savior, Mat. 28.18. Not
that all the power he now has, was not his before now, but what he ever had
was not opened till now. Nomen tune accepit a Patre, cum a creatura caepit
sciri; Ambros. in c. loc.
he then received the name of the Father, when he began to be acknowledged by
the Creature, as Saint Ambrose. Manifestationem ergo illius Nominis donavit ei
Deus, Peter Lomb. Sent. l. 3. D. 18.
God therefore after the Resurrection, gave to him the manifestation of his
Name, says the Master of the Sentences. This Name-giving then was to the
exaltation, as the Epiphany to the Nativity. For hodie genui te, to day I have
begotten thee, is applied to it, Act. 13.33. That exaltation the Nativity, and
this giving the publication. For therefore are things lifted up, that they may
be in view. Because, as the most reverend Bishop Andrews said, they which be
exalted, seem not so to be, till their so being be made public in the world.

This exposition of (...), has given, is out of question. The Fathers, Greek,
and Latin, make no other gloss. The maine doubt is, what the Name so given is.

Nomina, says Cicero, sunt tanquam rerum notae, Names are the expressions of
things. Nomen quasi notamen, as Saint Augustine, M. T. Cicero de fin. l. 5.
(...).
Isidore, etc. Name is a note of that which the understanding cannot behold,
but by representation in it. The Greek word is (...) of (...), according to
some Etymologists. As if there were a similitude between (...), a Law, and
(...), a Name. For as the Law does present to every one his own, so do names
the species, or forms of nature by a secondary image of things. Others derive
it from (...), as if it were, (...), a help, and did bring to the
understanding. Nomen quasi novimen, as Festus, a Name tells what we know not.
Then if we know not the Name, Sextus Pomp. Festus de verb. significa. page 23.
we cannot teach what you would know. Nomina si nescis cognitio rerum perit.
Though man in his integrity was able to impose names to all things according to
their nature, yet by his fall is so weakened that he knows only the manner of
being, Genesis 2.20.
not the being of things in nature. And though we know nothing but names, yet
through them, as the Vines do by their Palmites, we lay hold of the Elm. When
we shall be perfectly renewed, we know no more by deduction of terms, but by
vision of things, 1 Cor. 13.12.

A Name therefore was given to him, that by it he might be acknowledged of us.
Whatsoever then the name is, such a one it, as does name what he is, whose it
is. Isocra. Nicoclan fine.
(...), for Isocrates could say, that as the names of things are, (...), so
should their virtues be esteemed. Here is no Hebraisme, we mean not the person
only, nor only his power and glory, but a name of the person, which may
signify his excellency according to both natures, in himself, and to us. This
is Jesus, and can be no other. The Wherefore, we had at first, tells us so. If
we bring it hither, to Why was a name given him? answer is made, gratia
unionis, for the union of God and man. To show that he was true God, as well as
perfect man; the Savior of his people from their sins, Matthew. 1.21, 23.

For before the Incarnation no man called Jesus was ever God. God and man were
before appointed to be one, and God was our Savior; but our Savior was never
God and man before. As God (...) and (...), saving, or the Savior he. But as
God and man, (...), the Savior, which is Christ the Lord.

Or if you will look no farther then the giving of a Name, to know what Name
was given, you may be satisfied there. For it is granted by all, that the
giving of a Name here, is the exaltation of his Name. Dicitur res fieri, quando
innoteseit; For in Scripture often a thing is said to be done, when it is made
to be known, Pet. Lomb. Sent l. 3. D. 18.
as Peter Lombard has observed. I find not that any one of the Fathers, nor
any one of our Church, or of the Churches beyond the Seas, denies this. This
granted, the Name exalted was the Name humbled. Because nothing can be lifted
up, but must have an unde, whence it was lifted.

Neither the Name God, nor the Name Christ was despighted in him. For his
enemies neither acknowledged him God, nor Christ. Jesus was the Name called his
at his Circumcision, by it he was known, and in it revealed. It among the
Jews signified nothing, Luke 2.21.
save a vile man, a Carpenter, a friend of sinners, a drunkard, a Glutton, a
Sorcerer, a Devil, one ambitious, a Seducer, a Blasphemer; to put out it, they
crucified him, and after his Resurrection hired the Soldiers to say his
Disciples had stolen him away. No doubt of this, we have it recorded in the
four Evangelists. If any man can show me how any other Name of Christ was so
abased, or near so, as this, i will yield to that. But since no other can be
found so aviled, this must be it. The Name of God the Jews highly reverenced,
and in the Name of Messiah, that is, Christ, or the Anointed, they gloryed.
Only Jesus was the Name of scorn throughout his humiliation. If then there
were a Name to be advanced highest, Jesus is it. For from the lowest to the
highest, is the highest advancement ever.

Have some faith in going with me unto the next words, and you shall as
plainly see that this is the Name, as in the text you see plainly that the
Name given is, (...), a Name which is above every name.

To the Question, what Name is given; Answer is, (...).
that Name which is above every Name. If this be proved to be Jesus, the
resolution is made. To make this good, and not delude any, i will tie my self
unto the very words of the Apostle.

In the Translation there is no material difference, the Syriack and Montanus
leave out (...), the particle which: the Vulgar, Erasmus, Beza, and our Bibles
express it. Whether then we read a Name above all Names, or a Name which is
above all, that is the Name given, which is above every Name.

The super-exaltation is evident, and by the evidence thereof the name
appears, in super, above all. Tor the super omnia, above all, in the Syriack
is praestantius omnibus, more excellent then any, and that we are sure is the
Name of Jesus. Because there is no salvation in any other, neither is there any
other Name under Heaven given wherein we must be saved, Act. 4.12.

Fourteen hundred years ago Origin so interpreted it, Orig. in Ies. Na.
cap. 1. Hom. 1.
Est Nomen, quod est supra omne Nomen, Jesus, the Name which is above every
Name is Jesus. Saint Cyrill thinks that, (...), the Name Jesus is the new
Name at Isaiah 62.2. Cyril. Alex. lib. de fide ad Theodos. c. 29.
And infers that when Christ was (...), the first begotten, and of many
brethren, (...), then he who is his Father by nature, following, if I may so
say, the Laws of Fatherhood, defined it, or set it out in full to us. What
other Name does Saint Augustine understand at Phil. 2.9? Aug. in Psalm. 109.

Bernar. in circumcis. Domini ser. 2. and in cant. ser. 15. and 16.


Chrysologus in one of his Sermons preaches this the Name, and so does Saint
Bernard, Hoc Nomen novum, quod os Domini vocavit, quod and vocatum est ab
Angelo priusquam in utero concipitur; This Name above every Name is the new
Name which God named, Isa. 62.2. and which was named by the Angel before Christ
was conceived in the womb, Luke 1.31. Thus Gorran, Ambrosius Catharinus, Gorr.
and Catha. in loc.

Stel. and Aret. in Luc. 2.21.

Hay. Eras. Corn. in loc.


Stella, Aretius, Haymo, Erasmus, Cornelius a Lapide, etc. Thus also the most
eminent for Religion and Learning in our Church have expounded it; and in the
next verse it is so named. Nor without reason, for at Luke 1.32, 33. all this
by the Angel was foretold then, to be fulfilled now, (...), this Jesus shall be
great, How great? even so great, that he shall be called the Son of the
Highest; he shall Reign, and of his Kingdom shall be no end. No end of it,
none greater then he: The prediction is here answered, God has given him a
Name which is above every Name.

This Name Jesus, and no other: nor prefer I, excepting no Name, no not the
Name of God, any person before another. For the glory of this Name is, as in
the end will be declared, the glory of the Trinne God. The most learned Bishop
shows it is above all to him, above all to us; and without Blasphemy, to the
other attributes, I prove it above all in it self too.

Above all to him, says that reverend Father. For though many titles of the
Deity sound and seem to be more glorious, yet he esteems them all not like
this. Why? For no other reason, but that they had not, nos homines, us men, and
nostram salutem, our salvation in them. No name he sets by like that, wherein
with his glory is joined our safety. And this of all he made choice of (as to
him above all) that we might accordingly esteem of him, that esteems it above
all only for our sakes.

August. tract. 3. in Epist. 1. loan. Isid. Orig. l. 7. c. 2.
To this I add, first, that it is his proper Name; for though our Savior be
one Lord Jesus Christ, yet Christ the Name is communicated by him to others.
Sic enim Judaei Reges suos appellabant, for so the Jews called their Kings.
Non proprium nomen sed nuncupatio potestaris, Lact. l. 4 c. 7.
as Lactantius. Accidens nomini res, not a Name, Tertul. advers. Prax. c. 28.
but an accidental thing to a Name: the clothing of his name, says
Tertullian. Yea Christ is not, cannot be the Name of God; Qui corpus non
habuit, ungi omnino non potuit. But the Name Jesus is his chief Name, and
goes not beyond him. Ego, Tertul. advers. Marcio. l. 3. c. 15.
ego Dominus, and non praeter me Salvator. I, I am the Lord, and beside me is
no Savior, Isa. 43.11. It is his peculiar, and therefore to him above that
which is in common.

Secondly, he was anointed King, Priest, and Prophet; Why? that he might be a
perfect Savior. The end is highest, to be Jesus he was Christ. For Christus
Sacramenti Nomen, says Saint Augustine, August in Epist. 1. Joan. tract. 3.
Christ is the Name of a Sacrament, and a Sacrament of inauguration. He is
enstalled our Savior, or by the Father, and the holy Ghost consecrated to it.
Only for it was he the word incarnate, and gave his life and all for it only.
If all his undertakings tended thereto, then it is the full of all. A Name
therefore above every Name to him is his Name Jesus.

If to him, certainly above all to us. For we fallen in Adam are subject to
death temporal and eternal. Not so, as not to be, but so as to be tormented
ever. Gods wrath is the consuming fire, and we the unconsuming fuel. His
justice cannot, as we in our selves, look on us in mercy, nor his mercy
without justice. Satisfaction then must be some way made, or there can be
reconciliation no way. We have nothing will do it, if nothing sufficient may
else where be had, we shall pay the utmost farthing. But God be thanked, the
Son of God out of his impervestigable treasure brought enough, over and over,
to adopt us into the peace of the blessed Trinity. Christ has done this, and
no other could. Not incidently this, but, ex officio, he was anointed unto the
three saving offices, that he might be the absolute Jesus to save his people
from their sins. His people, not the Jews only, but the Gentiles also. All
are invited to him, Mat. 11.28. and he is the Savior of all men, 1 Timothy 4.11.
God in him reconcileth the world, 2 Cor. 5.19. without him enemy to it, and us
is God, Heb. 12.29. His Name we hold by, and by no other our salvation, Acts
4.12. If salvation then unto wretches guilty of the never-dying death be
precious, of what worth is the Name that assures it unto us? Can any thing be
sweet above without it? or any thing below sour with it? With it comfort,
none without it in the Name of God. The Devil may object sin against, and
crosses come, as Wave after Wave, on us, yet if we adjure him by it, rem
Nominis implebit, he will make good his Name. Bold we ought to be with it,
Matthew. 7.7. Mark 11.24. Luke 11.9.
for he has commanded us to prefer his Name, and made a strong asseveration
that whatsoever we ask of the Father in his Name shall be given us, John
16.23.24. It is our duty, and therefore no presumption to fly with it, a Deo
irato ad Deum placatum, from God angry, unto him pleased, says Saint
Augustine. August. in Psalm. 74.
Such good speed have we, if our tongues carry it from our hearts by faith unto
God, that the peace of God will rest within our souls here, and we shall rest
in his eternal peace hereafter. So joyful therefore was it to the Saints,
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Fathers, that nothing sounded well
without Jesus. Jacobs melody this, Genesis 49.18. This David's rest, Psalm. 62.2.
Simeon exults in this, Luke 2.29. In this Saint Paul gloried. And this was more
then life to Saint Stephen, Acts 7.59. Quicquid sine hoc Nomine suisset non me
totum rapiebat, Aug. l. 3. conf. c. 4.

Bern. in Cant. ser. 15.


nothing took Saint Augustine, but this Name. And in Saint Bernards mouth it
was, mel, honey, in his ear, melos, music, in his heart, jubilus, a jubilee.
To whom salvation is highest, the Name of our Savior is the highest Name. Who
prise nothing before the one, will have no Name get above the other.

Nay none can get above it. I meddle not with the Relations. The Super of the
Name I am about, and about it in the third respect. Bern in cireum. Domini
sermon. 2
All the other Names of God admit a translation approved by the holy Ghost, but
this endures none. Forte ex omnibus unum, as Saint Bernard, it may be all other
are accumulated in it, and it is one of all. What contains all other, no other
can contain it.

First then, this Name is more then (...), the ineffable Name of God among the
Jews, vulgarly called Jehovah. Not more, as if any thing in God did Suscipere
magis and minus, and might be more or less. But more, as, ad extra, one work
is greater then another, Redemption, then Creation. The goodness of God is
more expressed by this Name then any other. Jehovah indeed signifies God as
Lord and Creator, Sed nihil nasci profuit nisi redimi profuisset, yet it were
better not to be, then not to be redeemed. Or what profit is it with the Jew
to acknowledge Jehovah, and not with the Christian to believe in Jesus?

Secondly, Redemption presupposes Creation, and, not defining Redemption
without the Father and the Holy Ghost, we say, the Name of the Redeemer
includes with the Name of God the Creator, the Name of man the Creature, and
signifies God and man reconciled. Not on the contrary, though he that redeemed
created also. For I am that I am, is one expression, and I am that I am the
Savior, a further. God in his Name Jehovah denotes the being whence all things
took their original. In his Name Jesus he shows himself not only the
Author of being, but the Recoverer of the lost, and Clarifier of the Elect. In
the one he overthrew Pharaoh and the Egyptians; in th other, the Devil and
Hell. In the one he gave the Old Law, in the other he established the New. In
the one he led the Israelites through the Red sea into the Land of Canaan; in
the other through his blood, wherewith we are Baptized, he carries us unto
Heaven. The one was known before the other, and that this other was
represented in the Name Jehovah, Cornelius a Lapide affirms. But what if we
say that Jehovah were, quasi aenigma, as it were the riddle? Corn. a Lap. in
loc.

Isay 45.15.


Was not God (...), Acts 17.23. the hidden God then? (...), we knew him not,
say the Seventy. What ever Jehovah intimated, we are sure Jesus is the highest
declaration. For by this Name we find that the fullness of the Godhead dwells
(...), and our nature personally in him. I insist not on the many Mysteries,
Lucas Tuden^ i. 2. c. 16.

Corn. a Lap. in Number. 13.17. (...)


that Lucas Tudensas has found in the Letters of Jesus; nor do I with
Cornelius a Lapide aver that this proper Name of Christ in Hebrew contains
all the Letters of Jehovah, aliasque proprias superaddit, and super-addes its
own other. Inspect them who will, there they may be had, but not expressly
there.

Thirdly, this adequate Name of the word Incarnate comprehending transcends all
the other many excellent Attributes given unto Christ in the Scriptures: for of
all are found none which sound not either, pietatis gratiam, the grace of
piety, or potentiam Majestatis, the power of Majesty. The Names of power are
poured forth into the Names of piety. As for example, Isa. 9.6. it is said, His
Name shall be called wonderful, Counselor, God, Mighty, Everlasting Father,
Prince of peace. The first, third, and fourth, Wonderful, God, Mighty, argue
Majesty; the rest, Counselor, Everlasting Father, Prince of peace, show
piety. Which of these therefore is poured forth? Which? The Name of Power is
abundantly effused by Jesus Christ our Savior, says Saint Bernard, into the
Name of piety. Bern. in cant. sermon. 17:
Admirable into Counselor, God and Mighty into Everlasting Father and Prince
of peace. All of might and mercy are full in Jesus. This is the name wherein
all other do liquescere, it is mercy full of might, and might full of mercy.
The Oil that is poured forth, Cant. 1.3. aliisque liquoribus supernatat, and
as Oil it swimmes above other liquours, Wine, Water, or whatsoever. Inferior
to none, and above all, confessed in Heaven, Earth, and Hell.

Chrysostom. in loc.
Lastly, Saint Chrysostom says, (...), that this name is not of nature so, but
made so by dispensation high. Seeing then the most equal three have decreed,
and in the text expressly set this Name highest, wherein without disparagement
to any one person the whole Trinity will be ever honored; why doubt we? Add
this also, that they have limited an act, as peculiar to it, above other Names,
and the holy Church observing our neglect, binds us to it; Can it be Gods
pleasure, the Churches desire, and not our glory that it is so? Alphon. Abulen.
in 20. Exedi paulo ante quas. 7.
Bring these together, and Alphonsus Abulensis shall never be condemned by me
for saying, it is majus peccatum, a greater sin to take the Name Jesus in
vain, then the Name God.

To close this, God will be glorified in this Name above others, above other it
is in it self, and to sinners the life of all. Life, light, joy, glory, and
whatsoever I can conceive superexcellent, haec omnia mihi simul sonant, cum
insonuerit Jesus, these all, and more in the sense of this Name sound to me.
When I name it, or hear it named, I mind one, whose example we following
shall be advanced in his grace unto the height of glory. Orig. in Luc. Hom. 14.
Have we, with Origin, found it to be vocabulum gloriosum? In heart then, and
hand; within and without, be it the Signet, that all our thoughts, words, and
works, may be directed unto Jesus. Of him we receive all, unto him return
we all. Above all he, and let his Name be so to us. For God has given the Name
above every Name unto him.

(...)
(...), to him, exclusive, to him and to no other. To no other so as to him; The
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are the three saving persons; yet neither
is the Father, nor the Holy Ghost (...): The Son by the dispensation is Jesus
only. For in our Salvation the Godhead and Manhood meet in one. Nor to him
man as to other men. To him at first, by the Spirit and Moses, in Jehoshuah as
the Figure; But before his conception, by the Spirit, and the Angel Gabriel, to
him as the Substance. To him the Name and the Thing. To him, the Son of his
Father without a Mother; and the Son of his Mother without a Father, to him
God and man. To him without sin to save soul and body, his own and others,
from carnal enemies, and ghostly, from sin and misery; not for a time, for
ever; not by any other, of himself. He is not a Savior only, but (...), the
salvation, Luke 2.30. None challenge it as he, not the son of Nun, nor the
son of Josedek, nor the son of Syrach. To them given by men, to them the
Name, not the thing; to them sons of their Fathers by their Mothers, of their
Mothers by their Fathers; to them sinful men to save the body, not to quicken
the soul, from bodily enemies, not spiritual, from some worldly calamity, not
from sin; for a time, not forever; by their and our Jesus, not of themselves.
They, figura futuri, the shadow, he the substance. Tertul. adver. Judae. c. 9.
and advers. Man. l. 3. c. 16.

Orig. in Exed. 17.18. Hom. 11 Eusebius. demonstr. Evang. l. 4. c. 29 August.
cont. Faust. Manich. l. 12. c. 36.

Zanchi. in Phil. 2.9.


So Tertullian, Origin, Eusebius, Saint Augustine, etc. He is so manifestly
different from all other, that who believe in him will never mistake him by any
other. All else be like Elishas staff, which laid on the Child could do no
good till the Master came.

To him only, and to him according to both natures. This is orthodox, though
all agree not in this.

Some here understand Christ, secundum humanam naturam, as man. Because as God
nothing can in time be really given to him. So the Scholiasts, so Theodoret,
Hierome, and others, as Zanchius recites. Indeed if we mind an increment of
blessedness, or power, or wisdom, etc. no such thing can in time be given to
him according to his Deity. Yet that he received nothing as God whereby our
happiness might be furthered, and further known, is false. For to the Divine
nature of Christ was the humane nature given, fitted, and personally united in
time, Heb. 2.16. Heb. 10.5.
To him according to both natures was given in time the office of a Mediator
between God offended and men offending. To him as God and man was the Name
above all Names given, and in that Name does the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost in time above and below of Angels and men receive the glory of our
redemption, Rev. 5.13.

Saint Ambrose and others expound it of Christ as the Son of God. Hoc natus
accepit ut post crucem manifestaretur, quid a Patre, dum generaretur,
acceperit, this Name he received being borne, that what he received of the
Father in his generation might be manifested after he was crucified. That is,
as Zanchius opens the Fathers mind, in the eternal generation God the
Father communicated to the Son that he should be true God, remain so in the
assumed flesh, and after the Resurrection be every where so proclaimed.

The truth is, both these are to be conjoined. For he that was ever, (...), a
Savior according to his Deity, is now for ever, and, (...), inchangeably Jesus
according to his humanity also. Not that what the son of God is, as the Son
of man, is he. Christ, (...), essentially God is man, (...), by the Union. The
Deity is united really to the flesh, but not communicated really. By the
identity of the Person the Name reaches both natures. Jesus is the son of
God, and the Son of Man is Jesus. Tota res Nominis est persona, the whole
thing of the Name is the Person. God only is not it, nor only Man it, God and
Man, one Christ, is all. The Name then includes all the Attributes of God and
Man, and more then of God and Man, seorsum, severally, all of God and Man
united.

And here the Argument for the exaltation of the Name is yet more evident. Such
a person is Christ, as not the like, and therefore such a Name is Jesus as no
such. Not that this Name adds an higher degree to Gods essence, or to his
essential glory. But this Name showing the Union of God and man, shows also
that in this Name God will by his Church, in Heaven and on Earth, and by his
enemies on Earth and in Hell, be most glorified. Nor that his Name does make an
inequality in the Trinity. Ambros. l. 2. de Sp. Sancto. c. 12
For as Saint Ambrose said, on Matthew 11.27. Plus dixit de filio quam de
patre, non quod plus habet, quam pater, sed quod ne minus esse videatur, the
text speaks more of the Son then of the Father; not because the Son has
more authority then the Father: but because the Son should not seem to be
inferior to the Father. So is it said, the Father has given all authority to
him, and all things are put under him, 1 Cor. 15.27. Not that he is exalted
above the Father, but there is nothing which shall not be subject unto Christ,
he excepted, who subjecteth all things to him. And though he be the Judge of
quick and dead, he is not Judge only; but he and not the Father does judge,
in forma visibili, in a visible form. So neither does the Name given him above
all names seclude the Father and the Holy Ghost from the act of Salvation, but
shows that our Salvation appointed by the eternal purpose was finished in
the person of the Son. And because all was finished in Jesus, that Name is the
Name, wherein the glorious Trinity, as appears throughout the New Testament,
will be honored for ever and ever. So be it now and ever; and let all people
say Amen.

The Marcionits, who affirm that Christ is not the Son of God the Creator;
the Benosians, that he is an adopted Son; the Samosatenians, that he was not
God before the Incarnation; the Nativitaries, that he was with, before he was
begotten of the Father; the Symonians, that he was not the word Incarnate; the
Sabellians, that the Father was made flesh; and the Theodotians, that what
Christ was, was all mortal, are condemned at (...). For the giving there, is
the then manifesting of God the Son in the flesh. The Jews, who term Christ
a Demoniake; the Gnostics, that separate Jesus from Christ, as two persons;
the Menandrians, that styled Menander the Savior of the World; the Ophits,
that conferred the Name on the Serpent; and the Sethians, that attributed
Salvation unto Seth, are condemned at (...). For that Name which no man could
receive, who was not God also, none but God could give. The Arrians, who hold
that Christ was God by grace; the Donatists, that deny him to be (...), equal
with the Father; the Melchisedecians, that make him inferior to Melchisedec;
the Acatians, that will have him only like the Father in substance; the
Eunomians, that think him in all things unlike the Father; the Dulians, that
call him the servant of the Father; and our Catharists, Anabaptists, Brownists,
Precisians, who are so far from esteeming the Name above all Names, that they
count it beneath all other Names of Christ, and use the most sacred Name Jesus
carelessly, very blasphemously often, are condemned at (...). For there Christ
is consubstantiall with the Father, and the Name of Jesus above every Name in
many respects, is in no respect inferior to any. The Nestorians, that seigne
one person of the Deity, another of the humanity; the Apollinarists, that
convert the word into the flesh; the Arrians, that yield the Name to Christ as
man made a God in repute, not as God made man indeed; and the Jesuits, who
presumptuously arrogate Christ's saving Name, are condemned at (...). For to the
Person of Christ, not to the one or other nature only; to him only, and to be
for ever his, was the Name above all Names given. This and all we maintain
from (...), and still the argument is the Union and our Salvation.

True Christians we considering wherefore God exalted Christ, believe that for
the Union and for us he spread abroad his Name. God and Man being known to be
one, we know that men have grace with God. He being notified to us we take
notice of him. The Essence of things is brought to our understanding by second
notions. For in the cloud of our first fall, we so lost the sight of all things
in their being, that now we see not the Essence but by expression. Of the
highest expression the substance is the highest. That Name then, which
contains all, God and us, and our salvation, is the fullest. That God fully
manifested by the visible sending of the Holy Ghost, and that is acknowledged,
in Heaven, on Hearth, and in Hell, to be Jesus. This sounds glory to God in the
highest, on Earth peace to the elect, and in Hell terror to the Devils. No
name like this for sweetness; it brings God to us, and carries us to God. No
Name like this in power; it delivers us not only out of the power of our
enemies, but chains them in eternal torments also. To God, to us, in it self
most delightful. Nothing above it, and below it all things. Nor ascribe we
this to the second intention, we receive it not without the first. The person
with the Name, and not the Name without the person. Not part, but whole Christ
apprehend we at the Name of Jesus. Nor do we extend it beyond the proper
subject. The Son of Nun had it not, nor any other as Christ: Christ actively
to save, others passively to be saved. They resigned that they had to him, he
will not resign his unto any. Who therefore impropriate this to be called
thereby, against them we determine, that they endeavor, as much as in them is,
to bring it beneath it self. It is blasphemy not to regard it as his, much
more to remove it from him. For God has given him, and none but him, the Name,
which is above every Name.

Tract. IV.
(...), etc.
That at the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow, etc.
WE are now proceeded from the exaltation of the Person and Name by God, unto
the exaltation of the Name and Person by us. Which God exalted, we are here
enjoined by him to exalt both. Not the Name without the Person, nor either
according to our humors, but after his prescription. Not inwardly alone, and
always, nor outwardly alone at any time. Outwardly and inwardly, that who
saved the outward and inward, may by both be acknowledged the Savior of body
and soul. The text is plain, and the duty precisely set. First, of the Knee;
that at the Name of Jesus it should bow. Secondly, of the Tongue; that it
should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord. Nor is this of some, and not
others, but of all and every one; every knee, and every tongue, in Heaven, on
Earth, and under the Earth. All leaves out none. Nor let any think that any of
this is in vain, but to the highest purpose all. For the utmost end of the
knees insinuation, and the tongues expression, is to the glory of God the
Father. Hunt not after figurative constructions, believe the plain text, do
the work faithfully; do so, and you shall practice no more then ye ought,
and the duty so done will redound to the Majesty of the incomprehensible
Trinity.

There is not a tittle in Gods writings without weight. Every one is therefore
to be pondered that ye may receive the fuller satisfaction; and that ye may, I
will begin with, (...), that.

(...).
That is the conjunction of this to the verse before: and, e rationativis, such
a conjunction as is perfective, or declares the final cause of the Antecedent
say the Grammarians. Quia est istud Nomen super omne Nomen, idcirco in Nomine
Jesu omne genu fiectitur, Orig. in I^ s. Na. c. 1. Hon. 1.
because the Name is above every Name, therefore at the Name of Jesus every
knee is bowed, says Origin. That then makes the former verse the ground of
this text. This text therefore must be understood according to the dependence
on that. Literally that, and this literally.

All was full before. Full the person, God and man; full our redemption, God
and Man reconciled; full his exaltation, as God and Man; and his Name full to
express all. The full person, the full redemption, the full exaltation, the
full Name, all and every one call for full acknowledgement. But full
acknowledgement cannot be, if this text be taken tropically. It is mental
only when the joints are stiff, and the tongue still: and though the service
may be right to God in the heart, to others it is not at all known to be there
without either outward subjection or confession outward. Yea where God has
manisted his Son to be the high exalted Savior of soul and body, it is
contempt, or at least neglect, if the body and soul do not humbly in the
Church show themselves, as is commanded, to be his saved. Tertullian, Origin,
Cyprian, Hierome, Chrysostom, Augustine, Cyrill, Bernard, all the Fathers that
ever I saw like this consequence, nor have I yet met with any late Orthodox
Writer that contradicts it. I need not stand long on, (...), that, the text is
plain. Wherefore God exalted him, therefore must we be humbled; and wherein
thereof should we most highly esteem. There is cause enough in the one to
induce the other, and the sequel is so necessary, that without blasphemy no
man can deny it.

For my part I dare not break the general rule of the Ancient and Modern
Churches to broach, and maintain singularity. The perpetual truth is that
those places only in the Old and New Testament are necessarily allegorical,
which either in the History, (...), according to the letter, vary from the
truth; or (...), in the explication of the cause, are repugnant to the Law of
God. Gods third Commandment, and our Lords first Petition will have the most
sacred Name handled with all manner of reverence. I go not then beside the
Analogy of the Scripture in following the simple sense of this text; but sure I
am, who take it figuratively, chop off the visible part of Gods service, and
show no regard of the super-exalted Name at all.

The Apostle would have us be imitatours of God, Ephesians. 5.1. If imitatours, then
whose person God exalted, and set forth his name, exalt we his Name and person.
God his way, we ours. He by giving, we in acknowledging. If you doubt, read and
believe. God has highly exalted him, and given him a Name above every Name;
Why? that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow. This bowing at is one
end, who is not wilfully blind does plainly see.

In, (...), that, having made good the ground, I am now ready for the work.
The Apostle could best place his words, and in our Dialect standing right, I
will not disorder them.

(...).
At the Name of Jesus.
At which sacred Name I humbly bow unto the blessed Trinity imploring the grace
of the one-most God, that in the Name of Jesus, by the power of the holy
Spirit, (...)
I may interpret, and all learn this text to the glory of God the Father.

The Syriack, the Vulgar, Arias Montanus, Erasmus, read in the Name of Jesus,
Beza, Zanchius, and our Kings translation, at the Name. Indeed the Hebrew is
(...) and the Greek (...) but the preposition according to both languages,
which we in the general sense, as a note of rest, translate in, in Scripture
varies often.

by, as Acts 4.10.12. (...), by the Name of Jesus, (...) by it this man stands
whole, and that is it, (...), whereby we are saved. For (...) with the
Grecians, as (...) among the Hebrews, comprehends genera causarum.

among, as Mat. 11.11. (...), among, not in them, that are borne of women, John
1.14. The word was made flesh and dwelt, (...), among us.

with, as Luke 4.32. his word was, (...), with power, 2 Cor. 13.4. we are
weak, (...), with, not in, him. For in the next words it is said, that we
shall live, (...), with him.

from, as John 1.1. (...), that is, (...), 1 John 1.1. from the beginning was
the Word. Nonnus therefore adds in his Paraphrase, (...), without, or before
all time. For no time was in that beginning. So 2 Cor. 4.3. If the Gospel be
hid, it is hid, (...), from, not in, them, that perish.

Mark 1.15. repent and believe, (...), the, not in the, Gospel. Where
therefore Saint Matthew has (...), Math. 3.11. Saint Luke, that does less
Hebraize, leaves out the preposition. For in casu instrumenti, to express it,
is an Hebraisme.

Matthew. 6.9. Our Father which art, (...), in Heaven, is if the Articisme be
observed in (...) as well as the Hebraisme in (...), O our heavenly Father.
Acts 26.7. (...), which the Vulgar has omitted, is, (...), instantly.

to, unto, etc. as Luke 1.17. He shall go before to turn the disobedient,
(...), to, not in, the wisdom of the just. Romans 5.21. As sin has reigned,
(...), unto, not in, death, the (...) makes it plain, so might grace reign,
(...), unto life.

at, as Romans 8.34. who is (...), at the right hand of God. Matthew. 18.1. (...),
at that time. Mar. 16.5. they saw a young man sitting (...), at the right side.
Luke 13.1. (...), at the same season, and 14.1. (...), at his coming in; nor
have Grecians a more proper word to express this sense.

These are the several acceptions of (...), which I have observed in the new
Testament. The same they may find in humane Authors, who are not satisfied
with this.

To our purpose now: All will grant that, if we should translate in the Name,
by in, could not be meant among, nor with; For that were nonsense. So of the
eight variations, two are absolutely cast hence. But if in (...), we will
understand by, or from, then by the Name occasion is offered, and from the Name
a sound argument drawn for bowing. Or will we have a Pleonasme here, and make
a redundance? for in case of the instrument in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, if in
be expressed, it is not felt, if omitted, it is not required. The Name then
expressed, or pronounced will be the external impulsive of genuflection. Or if
you will have it periphrasticall, it must either be of the Adverb, and then it
is namely unto Jesus; or of the Adjective, and then it is unto glorious Jesus;
or of the Verb, and then it is when Jesus is named. Or will you have it to the
Name; then it is in honor of the Name. Or will you have at the Name; then in,
or at the mentioning of Jesus. For what is a Name save the expression of a
thing? The Greek therefore is emphatically set down, (...), in or at the very
Name. The very Name is the external mover of the mind unto the internal
object. Accept then any one of these six takings, and the first term of the
Act is the Name Jesus. That is it, because the Apostle says it was therefore
given; and no other it, because it is the Name above every Name, as before.

I would not seem to dazzle your eyes, I say not to the elements, the letters,
syllables, or sound of the Name, but to the sense. At the Name, that is, when
the Name is named, to the person whose Name is mentioned. At the Name we mind
the person, and are incited to the duty. This divine motion therefore from the
Name is by the Name directed to the end, wherein it rests. Nor can we
ordinarily proceed otherwise. From Names we go unto things, and without Names
we know nothing was at large before.

Indeed God firsts exalts the person, and then gives the Name, he sees the
person as he is, but we by his Name discern the person. At the Name beginning,
by the most highly extolled Name most highly we extol the person.

Shall I illustrate it? I will by that, which every one acknowledges to be
just. In, or at, or by, or from the consigned words of the Scriptures we know
the truth of God thereby expressed; Because we know whose they are, and what is
contained in them, in, or at, or to the reading, preaching, and hearing of them
we address our selves in all reverence with bended knees, uncovered heads, and
with hearts, hands, and eyes lifted up unto the Author. Is this damnable
superstition? Or will any sound-hearted Christian think it in vain? Behold,
the name at which we bow, discovers unto us the substance of the whole
Scriptures. All are to bring us unto Christ, and Jesus is the sum of all. At
the mentioning then of that Name were we left to our own wills, would we not
hear, and speak it with honor to our Savior? Or did the Church only command
the reverence thereat, is it not the breach of the first Commandment not to
do it? But God requires all manner of honor to his Name, Exodus 20.7. Christ
prayed for the due performance thereof, Matthew. 6.9. and here the Holy Ghost
dictated in what Name the glorious Trinity will be most honored, and how at
that. Who gain-saies this, gain-saies the Law and Gospel, and who wilfully
damneth it, does, as much as in him lies, shake the very foundation of true
Religion. The Father will not have the Name neglected, the Son will have it
sanctified, and the Holy Ghost shows us how. The Father gave the Name, that at
the Name; the Son received the Name, that at the Name; and the Holy Ghost
declared the Name, that at the Name of Jesus every knee should how. It is
plain then that to bow at the Name is another gift unto Christ. To give him
such a Name is one; to give him, that for such a one, it should be taken, is
another, said the reverend Bishop. For given it may be on Gods part, and not
acknowledged on ours. Yea if we recall, (...), the rationative particle, that,
it seems God counts not the Name so exalted, unless we signify, as he would
have us, that we esteem it, super omne Nomen, above every Name.

Indeed they are not few, who make in, or at, a simple note of rest; and by the
Name understand the person to whom they, and all must bow; yet will not only
not do it themselves, but travel sore to keep others also from it.

To discover how they deceive themselves, and others, observe me a little.

That in, or at is a note of rest; that the Name concludes the person; that to
bow to the person is a precept, are true. But these, that the whole of in or
at, is a note of rest; that the whole of the Name is the person; that the whole
of the precept is to bow unto the person, are false. For the whole of in, or
at, is not a note of rest, as before was proved. Nor is the Name the whole of
the person, but significatively, nor the person the whole of the Name, but
subjectively. Nor is bowing to the person the whole of the precept as has
been already, and shall be further opened. But in the Name to bow, that is, in
the person, is neither from the Letter, nor by any consequence of the Text. It
is (...), and will not hold in common sense. For who can bow in the person of
God and Man? He once humbled himself for us, but who in his person, either
when he was in swatheling clothes, ever bowed before Herod, or, in the
Council falsely accused, before Pilat. Much less now he is exalted wants he
such humility. Nay, who can bow at his person now he is out of our sight, and
above our reach? His Name is with us, then in, or at his Name we may.

Yet in his person, they say, because in our proper persons we are unworthy to
accede unto God.

A very proper shift to put off a peculiar duty. It is true, we are unworthy;
but I grant not all the rest, unless at in, be understood by: For although
what we are, we refer to Christ, and without him are nothing, yet this is no
(...), or refuge for the not doing what is commanded. Because it is the precept
of God, not an institution only of the Church. The first word of this verse
inferres the one, and (...), every knee, the other.

We therefore resting in Christ, who reposed all his in himself for us, every
one in his proper person, body and soul, by the person intervening, worship
God. For his Majesty, hid of it self, existing (...), essentially in Christ,
through him becomes visible to us. But yielding all this, that it is in, or by
the person; or more, that it is to the person, and in the glory of the person,
yet this is not all. For beside, (...), faith or acquiescence in the person,
and the end thereof, here implicitly, is expressly commanded a work of faith
beginning at the Name and ending in the Person. A work that shows his
super-exaltation indeed. He is exalted to whose person we bow; but he, at whose
Name only, much more. Bowing then, not at the person only, as some, nor at
the glory only of the person, as others, which are both out of our sight: Nor
at the power only of the person, as many, which sets no time for the act; but
at the Name also which is below, and has a time with us, we show our high
respect of him in his power, and glory. Yet thus respecting him, do not with
the Heretics in Saint Chrysostomes time, Chrisost in loc.
think (...), this glory to be above all glory. Infinite that as himself is,
this from us finite. That he has by nature, this we give, and no doubt should,
at the Name. For God has made his Name his memorial, Exodus 3.15. Psalm.
135.13. Hosea 12.5. His memorial wherein, or at he will be remembered, and
whereby he will be mentioned. How remembered? How mentioned? With no regard? Not
so. It brings him before us, how then shall we behave our selves before him? No
otherwise, then did the Israelites, by bending down the head, and bowing
themselves, Exodus 4.31. For the same memorial is from generation to
generation, as in the former quoted places. The Prophet David invites us to it,
Psalm. 95.6. and the blessed Virgin will not have it otherwise handled, Luke
1.49 Quod semper apud se sanctum est, sanctum etiam ab hominibus hab^^^^^,
August. d^ spi^. and lit. ad Ma^cel. c. 26.
says Saint Augustine. Holy things must be valued as they are. The most holy
most highly. Not high enough unless with the motions of the mind go also the
gestures of the body.

Nor is this Doctrine new: It was figured in Joseph's dream, Genesis 37. ver. 9.
The Sun, the Moon, and the eleven Stars made obeisance to me. This Jacob
interpreted thus: Shall I, and thy Mother, and thy Brethren indeed come to bow
down our selves to thee unto the earth? v. 10. How can this be taken, but in a
mystery, his Mother being then dead? This was not therefore accomplished when
Joseph was advanced in Egypt; For neither did his Father adore him, nor could
his Mother being dead. In Christi ergo persona facile intelligi potest etiam de
mortuis, In the person of Christ therefore it may be well understood, even of
the dead, according to that of the Apostle, Aug. quast. super Genesis 123. l. 1
Phil. 2.10. For God gave him a Name above every name, that in, or at the Name
of Jesus every knee, celestial, terrestrial, and infernal, should bow, says
Saint Augustine.

The first that I find in the practice was Moses, and then when Joshuah, whom
by the Spirit of God he so called, as a figure in Name and action of Jesus,
sought with Amaleck. For whilst Hoseas now called Joshuah was in fight, Moses,
being on the top of the hill, beholding the typical deliverer, does homage to
the substantial, Exodus 17.11. Expansis manibus orabat residens, Te^ t. adve^.
Mar. l 3 c. 18.
quia illi Nomen Domini Jesu dimicabat, dimicaturi quandoque adversus diabolum;
He there residing prayed, because the Name of the Lord Jesus, who was to fight
against the devil, did skirmish there: and with his hands extended, to show
the necessary habit of the Cross, wherein Christ should obtain the victory,
says Tertullian. The Name which by the Spirit he gave to Hoseas, as the
shadow, was the external mover to the work. And now the name was in action,
the honor might well be in act. But not till now; because till now, Beati
Nrminis Jesu nusquam facta est mentio, never was that blessed name mentioned,
says Origin. Orig. in Exodus 17. and 18. Hom. 11.
Now it was known unto Moses, and by him exalted now. Because what he found
victorious on the Hill, must needs be glorious on the Mount.

With the Psalmist his Name is great, Psalm. 75.1. Ibi magnum, ubi pro suae
majestatis magnitudine nominatur, there great, where mentioned according to the
greatness of his Majesty, as Molerus. Holy and reverend is his Name, Psalm.
111.9. Sanctum Nomen ejus, ubi eum veneratione and offensionis timore
nominatur, holy his Name when named with veneration, and fear of offense,
August. de sermon. Dom. in monte l. 2.
says Saint Augustine: So great, so reverend, that the Prophet David will have
us extol the Lord (...), in or at Jah his Name. How in or at? Even, Laud
abiliter nominando, by mentioning it worthily. And so worthily that he invites
us to bend the knee, (...) at the faces, representations, or Symboles whereby
he is principally known, Psalm. 95.6. But he is principally known by the Name
above every name; at the Name then, and in that special manner. What was
therefore prophesied and confirmed by oath, Isa. 45.23. is spoken of our
Savior in that Chapter: applied to Christ, Romans 14.11. and fulfilled according
to this Text, Phil. 2.10. For that bowing to him in Isaiah, without the
mentioning of his Name, is here expressly at the Name. As if it had been
said; to me, who am the Savior, and though, when I will be in the flesh, I
shall be contemned; yet after my exaltation at my Name shall every knee bow.

As these Texts then are paralleled by the Fathers, the last leaves not out the
former, but sets them forth unto the full. Tertul. l. 4. adv. Marc. de Marc.
antithesibus, c. 2.
Tertullian thought so: There is, says he, one Christ, Ad quem se curvare genu
plane omne fatetur, to whom every knee does visibly show it self to bow.
Bishop Andrews could find no ancient Writer (save he that turned all into
Allegories) but literally understands it. Save he; who is that? Indeed there
are now extant that strangely transform every Text which makes against them;
but who, if the Parenthesis be his, must be understood there, I confess I know
not. Orig in Jes. Nave. c. 1. H^ n. 1. In Iud^^. c. 2. H^ m. 2.
Not Origin I am sure: for he speaks it out. Quia Nomen Jesus est super omne
nomen, idcirco in nomine Jesu omne genu flectitur; because the Name Jesus is
above every name, therefore at the name of Jesus every knee is bowed. Again,
Non in hoc vocati sumus, In Luc. c. 2. Hom. 14.
etc. ut genua flectamus diabolo, sed ut flectamus genua in nomine Domini Jesu,
we are not called unto this, that we should bow the knees unto the devil, but
that we might bow the knees at the Name of the Lord Jesus. Again, Vocabulum
Jesu omni adoratu, cultuque appel ari, etc. the glorious Name of Jesus ought to
be named with all manner of adoration and worship. And again, De principiis.
l. 1. c. 6.
Omnes hi qui in Nomine Jesu flectentes, per hoc ipsum subjectionis suae
insignia declararunt, all these who are bowers at the name of Jesus, by this
very thing have given notable tokens of their subjection. Cypr. de bono patient.
Saint Cyprian is as plain: God the Father commanded that his Son should be
worshipped, and the Apostle Saint Paul, mindful of the precept, Ponit and
dicit in Nomine, etc. sets down how, Novat. de Trinit. c. 17.

Athanas. cont. Arria. orat. 2. ad Episc. Egyp. and lib.

Ad Adelph. ora. 5.


and says, at the Name. Novatianus says, omne se in Nomine ejus genu flecter^
t, every knee should bow it self at the name of him. Saint Athanasius tells us,
the Son of God, Homo factus and Jesus appellatus, made man, and called Jesus,
has this honor, that every Creature does flectere sibi in Nomine suo, bow the
knees to him at his Name. And in another place he says, that the Church did,
and shall bow in nomine Jesu, at the name of Jesus. Ambros. Hexe. l. 6 c. 9. et
in loc. Ruffin. in Sym. Apostol.

Hierom. in Isa. 45.23.

Chrysostom. in loc. August. de Trin. l. 1. c. 13. and in Psalm. 109. et in job.
Tract. 104.


Saint Ambrose has no other Exposition of it; nor other has Ruffinus. Saint
Hierome, on the Text, Unto me every knee shall bow, recites this of the
Apostle, and says, Perspicue significatur populus Christianus, there is
plainly signified the Christian people. Moris enim Ecclesiastici, etc. For so
to bow is the custom of the Church. Saint Chrysostom denies it not to be the
glory of Christ, but says it is not (...), the highest glory to bow at his
name. Saint Augustine affirms that Christ after his suffering received, Quae
consequenter contexit Apostolos, all that the Apostle by consequence has
linked together at Philip. 2.9, 10, 11. As if the Exaltation of his person
appeared not, but by our Exalting of his Name. Cyrillus Alexandrinus calls it,
(...), a most significant Sacrament, Cyril. Alexand. in lib. Relig. Reg
nuncupat.

In orat. Relig. Reg. de recta fide.


declaring that Christ one, is God in, and with the humane nature, (...),
remaining still what he was before. And at the same council of Ephesus, in his
Oration he says, this is illustrious to show that Christ's obedience made him,
(...), both glorious, and worthy of admiration, and conciliative of all
goodness unto us. The Fathers in the Councels render it in, or at the Name,
and I find it not otherwise interpreted in any Church. It seems there was
either neglect, Council. Basil. in sess. 21.

Alphons. Abul. in Exodus 20. paulo ante quaest. 7.


or irreverent performance of it among some at the time of the Council of
Basil. For there it was constituted, that when the glorious Name of Jesus was
mentioned, whereat every knee ought to bow, Omnes caput inclinent, all should
bow the head. The devout faithful, audito Nomine, hearing the name Jesus bow
the head, or bend the knee, so Alphonsus Abulensis. Estius ex Vine. de Valent.
in Phil. 2.10.
According to the custom of the ancient Christians, Soli Nomini Jesu, quando
nominatur, fit reverentia, reverence is done to the Name, when it is named, so
Estius. We bow the knee and uncover the head, Ad mentionem Domini Jesu, at the
mentioning of the Lord Jesus, Osiand. in Phil. 2.10.

Gorra. in loc.


so Osiander. In hoc Nomine, quod est Jesus, at this name, which is Jesus, so
Gorran. Musculus tells us, Omnino in usurpatione Nominis Dei declaratur, quam
sancte and reverenter de Deo sentiamus, Musc. in 3. praecep.
that the usage of Gods Name does declare our esteem of God. For he that
Religiously thinks of him, cannot usurp his name irreligiously. You shall see
many, says he, that will put off their caps, and show some other token of
reverence, when any mention is made of the King, to declare how reverently they
do judge of their Ruler. And among Christian men you may find many that make
mention of God the Father, of his Son Christ Jesu our Lord and Savior, and
of the Holy Ghost, and hear it also of others without any token of honor.
Stupiditas ista plane indicium leniter de Deo sentientis, quicquid tandem ore
proferatur, this blockishnesse does verily betoken a light opinion of God in
heart, whatsoever be said in word. I know Master Calvin is of no small esteem,
and he brings this for an argument of our Saviors Deity; Calv. in ^ om. 14 11.
that God gave a Name to his Christ, whereat every knee should bow. If Zanchius
have any repute, Zan^ h. i^ 3. prae^^ p.
it is required, that signification of reverence be given, ad Nomen Dei ^ um
prosertur, at the Name of God when it is pronounced, as many men do when they
hear the name of their King. May he be of note among us? then in, or at the
name, is, ad solam momi^ nem Nominis, at the only mentioning of the Name of
Jesus, for so he expounds it. Nor doubted he, In Philip. 2.10
but thence the most ancient custom arose in the Churches, that when Jesus was
named, Omnes aperiant c^ put, all men should uncover their heads in testimony
of adoration. What though the Sorbonists, Rhemists, Papists, hold it a duty of
the Text? Shall not we therefore, and without superstition we? See what
Conradus Vorstius, Conrad. V^^ st. p^ o Eccles. Orthod. disp. 2 part 5.6.
in behalf of the Reformed Churches, writes. Si quis ad mentionem Dei, aut
Christi, aut Jesu, etc. signum aliquod honoris exhibere velit, per nos sane
licet, id que passim in Ecclesiis nostris fieri videmus, nomine re^ lamante,
nomine indignante. If any man will at the Name of God, or of Christ, or of
Jesus, etc. exhibit some token of honor, truly among us it is lawful, and we
see it every where done in our Churches, no man disclaiming, no man disdaining
it. Nor did Master Calvin, what are the Schismatickes say, reprove the Sorbon
Sophisters, for bowing at the name, but for bowing at the sound, not to the
sense, as there Vorstius testifies.

If we come unto our own Churches, at the first year of Queen Elizabeth,
1559. it is enjoined, that whenever the Name of Jesus shall be in any Lesson,
Injunct. 52.
Sermon, or otherwise in the Church pronounced, due reverence be made of al
persons, young and old, with lowliness of cursie, and uncovering of heads of
the mankind, as thereunto does necessarily belong, and heretofore has been
accustomed. Cap. concerning the matter of the complaint of some Puritans, part.
10, Can. 18.
In the first of King James of blessed memory, 1603. both the Vnirversities,
Oxford, and Cambridge, do affirm, that reverence done at the Name of Jesus is
no superstition, but an outward sign of inward subjection to his divine
Majesty, and apparent token of our devotion. In the Synod begun at London,
1603. it is thus expressed: When in the time of Divine Service the Lord Jesus
shall be mentioned, due and lowly reverence shall be done by all persons
present, as it has been accustomed. This was among the rest published under
the Great Seal of England, has continued, and is still in force, for ought I
know, at these times.

Doctor Whitaker did honor at the Name of Jesus; Dr. Whit. cont. Rainold. ^^
fu^. c. 16.

Dr. Whitg. in his answer to T. ^. in the defense of the answer to the Admonit.
Eccles pol. l. 5. Nu. 30.

Dr. Page Iustifica. of Bowing. Widd. in confu. of an Appendix concerning
bowing a^ the Name of Jesus.


Bishop Whitgift says, to bow at the name is of many hundred years
continuance, and Christians used it in the beginning. Doctor W^ llet allows
it, when the mind is free from superstition; So does Doctor Fulke, Doctor
Airy, Doctor B^ yes. The most learned Bishop Andrews will satisfy any man
that shall not be wilfully blind. Master Hooker calls it harmless, there is
no superstition at all in it. Doctor Page refuteth all Master Prynns arguments,
and justifies bowing at the Name of Jesus, most Christianly and Learnedly.
Master Giles Widows, maintains it stoutly against the lawless, kneelesse
Schismatic Puritan. And it at this day is Preached and practiced by the most
learned in the Kingdom.

In all Churches, old and new; Eastern and Western, Romish and Reformed this
Exposition has been well liked. Master Cartwright knew not what to say
against it, and therefore his followers cannot abide it.

We dare not so much as speak of an earthly King unreverently. Dare we not?
Then what reverence do we owe unto Christ the King of Heaven and Earth? says
Master Perkins on this Text. We owe much indeed, and have promised much, but
God help, Mr. Perkins in his exposition of the Creed.
we perform little, and our little performance has made a great disturbance
in the Church of England. So great that this very duty of the Text is by too
many held superstition. Certainly there is irreligion in them that so vainly
handle the Text, but in the duty can be no superstition. For the Apostle says
it is done at the Name unto the glory of the Father. From whom it has
beginning, in him it ends. Where it is so done, is no vain honoring of that
which should not be honored, and therefore no superstition.

But grant there has been superstition used in it, Zanch. in loc.
as Zanchius says, there was in bowing of the head, and many other godly
constitutions. Suppose there has, must therefore the divine institution be
cast away? In running after Sermons is there not superstition among a great
many now? What will you do then? will you abandon hearing? God forbid. Remove,
says Bishop Andrews, the superstition; and retain Sermons still. Do but
even so here, and all is at an end. We may be in fault, the duty can be in
none. If the fault be in us, we ought to amend. Gods prescription may not be
annihilated for our miscarriage. It is excellent to sweep superstition out of
the Church; but chief wisdom not to sweep any of Gods Religion out with it.
Reverence begins to abate on all hands, I pray God, that we by this guile of
the devil may never lose our Religion.

It is not the crying superstition, and damnable superstition, that can make it
such. Stop we our ears at such foul blasphemy: Look to the Text, follow it,
and pay, as God requires, a reverent carriage even to his Sons Name. What
God has exalted, exalt we and fear not. For God being honored by it, we, at
the general day, shall, when all knees must bow at once, find comfort, that we
on earth have so bowed at the Name of Jesus.

What the Name signifies, and why at this name rather then any other, was in
the former Verse.

If any insinuate the mind, that thus exalting the Name, I prefer one person
before another in the Trinity: It is answered, that cannot be. For God will
have us this way declare that we acknowledge Jesus to be Lord equal with the
Father, and the Holy Ghost; and that he received this Name, (...), according to
his humane nature, which he ever possessed in himself according to the divine.
The Text therefore is not simply at the name, (...).
but at the Name of Jesus. Which is the Name of one person consisting of two
natures, divine and humane, as before.

At the Name then of Jesus inferres that the whole person is to be adored; the
word and the flesh, (...), with one and the same honor, Council. Ephesians. Anathe.
8.
as the Fathers in the Council of Ephesus defined. The worship may not be
divided, because undivided is the person. Yet true it is, that the Godhead, by
and of it self simply, ought to be worshipped, and not the flesh, save in the
person, and for the Godhead. But seeing the Apostle directs the worship to the
whole person, Zanch. in loc.
Non est cur ab adoratione deitatis separetur caro, there is no reason why the
flesh should be separated from the honor of the Deity, says Zanchius. And if
it be (...), honorificall for the Father to have his own Son, (...), Lord of
all; Who can doubt, Cyril. Alexan. de recta fide ad Relig. Reg.
says Cyrillus Alexandrinus, but that he kept for him, (...), the free and
superexcellent dignity of power and domination above all?

In this adoration then is nothing taken from the Father, or from the Holy
Ghost, and given to the Son? nor any thing given to the Son, which is not
equally to the honor of the three persons in the unity of the essence. But
hereby is manifested, that the person vilified in this Name, was the Son of
God and Man, and is now in the same Name to be adored by all as God and Man,
which cannot be said of the Father, or of the Holy Ghost. Of the Son alone,
because he only was incarnate, and yet, as I have ever taught, to the glory of
the most transcendent Trinity.

It is apparent now, that we cautelously observing the idiotisme vary not from
the sense of the phrase. At the Name we rest not vainly in the sound, but are
carried to the substance of the name, or object of our faith, the person of
Jesus Christ. Not to the humane nature, Seorsum, and per se, severally, and by
it self. For so doing we divide the person, overthrow the communication of
proprieties, and the due unto the Creator we render to the creature, which is
Idolatry. Yea, if in our worship we can consider the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, three subsistences, and one substance; yet all this availes not,
unless we take with us our Mediator. If we mind not a true Manhood,
gloriously united to the Godhead, without change of either nature, without
mixture of both, whose presence, whose merits must give passage, vigor, and
acceptance, our prayers ascend in vain. At this work thoughts should be
holily mixed of a Godhead and humanity, two natures in one person, and of the
same Deity in diverse persons, and one nature. Bestirre our selves we ought so
to distinguish these apprehensions, that none be neglected, so to conjoyne
them, that they be not confounded. We sin, if fixing the heart on one, we
exclude the other: retaining all and mentioning one we offend not. Who rest
their thoughts upon the humanity must still adore the Deity, and thence climb
up unto the holy consideration of the blessed Trinity. For in Jesus only is
that Mystery revealed to us, and through him only is our worship directed to
the sacred Trinity in Unity. Following this short weak counsel, study and
pray that you may apprehend right, and worship well. Be thus minded, and bowing
at the name you shall not be superstitious. Bow and honor Jesus heartily: for
the more we honor him, the more we honor the whole Trinity. If you cannot
believe me, yet let not the Apostle miss your faith. It is Gods command, he
says, and therefore our duty. Minding the one, we shall not forget to pay the
other. Endeavor we to pay it sincerely, and the God of Heaven direct us, enable
us, that when we worship him, we may neither prove sacrilegious nor idolatrous.

The Jews, Infidels, and Philosophers, that abjure, scorn, and deride the
Name of Jesus; the Schismatickes, whether Catharists, Anabaptists, Brownists,
Separatists, or whatsoever called, that neglect, and contemn all manner of
outward reverence at this Name; the Papists, that superstitiously use it, and
the Profane, that in their debauchednesse, most impiously blaspheme it, are
condemned at (...) for there the Holy Ghost will have the Name super-exalted by
God, by us also super-exalted with respect and honor. The Arrians, and other
Heretics, that hold Christ a mere man only, or a God in Name, not indeed;
the Cerinthians and Colarbasians, that make Jesus one, and Christ another; the
Nestorians, that determine two persons in Christ, one of the divinity, and
another of the humanity; the Timotheans, that think him one person of two
natures mixed and confounded; and the Romanists, that constitute the Pope, as
another head, beside Christ, of the Church, are condemned at (...) for the
honor at the Name is to Immanuel, in one person perfect God, and perfect Man.
God has so made him head of all, above and below, that at the Name of Jesus
every knee should bow. This and all we maintain from (...), and still the
argument is the union, and our Salvation.

True Christians we seeing that God has exalted the person and the Name, and
knowing why, are bound in conscience for the same reason to exalt the Name and
Person. Not according to our own humors, but in Analogy of that Truth, which
is set forth for us to believe and do. We seek no by-ways to avoid the duty,
nor lead we others from it. A plain Text paralleled by others literally, must
we understand properly, as the other are. The truth expressed in the Letter
cannot be mistaken, but by a figurative construction the Letter may be forced
to a wrong sense. The sense of the former verse, which is the ground of this,
being literal, makes this literal also. We have proved it ever so conceived
in the Church, and will not alter it now. Nay dare not; because we are sure
that by the third commandment, and the first petition Gods Name, whether
spoken, read, heard, or written, must have reverent usage. And if it must, may
we deny that manner, which himself has expressly prescribed? The anathema
sounds still in our ears, Cursed be he, that takes from, or adds to. If God
then will have outward worship exhibited at the Name, in the Name of God let
him have it. If he will be so honored, that is reason enough, why he should.
But he has given reasons store, if we will not do it now, we are now in
contempt, and without repentance shall be without excuse hereafter. Nor may we
think to leave the duty undone, because some count it superstition. Indeed at
the Name, and no more were vain. But at the Name to bow unto our Savior is
one way we worship him, and we have no other way to come at him, save by his
Name. He is gone, his Name is left, that by his Name we may mind him, and
through him adore the blessed Trinity. At the Name therefore let the heart
ascend unto the person, and outward obeisance express our faith in, and high
esteem of whole Christ. As true God, and true man; for as God and man he is
exalted in person and Name, that at the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow.

Tract. V.
(...)
Every Knee should bow.
GOD who made the whole creature, looks after all he made. The soul
principally, because it principally resembles him: and the body next; because
in that Organ he will have the soul glorify him, 1 Cor. 6.20. The Fathers
therefore according to the Scriptures carefully set forth a twofold worship of
God. Internal the one, external the other. Both congruous to the word, and
from a heart purified by faith proceed both. Both spiritual, because both are
motions of our spirit renewed by the Holy Ghost. For such worshippers will God
have, as shall serve him in spirit and truth. Theophyl. in Joh. 4. v. 23.
John 4. verse. 23. Such as in spirit practically mortify the works of the
flesh, and in truth contemplatively maintain sound doctrine, is one of
Theophylacts expositions. Such as moved by his Spirit do all things sincerely
in faith, according to his will, and unto his glory, is Polanus full
interpretation. Such as include not God, like the Samaritanes, in a certain
place only; in spirit therefore, not locally: and such as worship not, like
the Jews, in the vanished shadows; in truth therefore, not typically, is the
general consent of Divines. Who then by this text exclude all outward worship,
do both wrong it, and teach their own ignorance. Because the outward worship
is not separated from the inward, but with it proceeding from the spirit, with
it also is spiritual. Not Saint Paul's, (...), corporal exercise good for
little, but, (...), the godliness profitable unto all things. 1 Timothy 4.8. Quid
mibi prodest si genua corporis mei ad orationem veniens flectam Deo, and genua
cordis mei flectam diabolo? For what does it profit me, Orig. in Iudie. 2. Hom.
2.
says Origin, if coming unto prayers I bow the knees of my body unto God, and
bend the knees of my heart to the Devil? He means, not that the knees should
not bow, but not bow without the heart. Without the heart the outward worship,
(...), gains nothing; Join both, and the pious act, Chrysostom. in Epi. 1. Tim.
c. 4. v. 8.
(...), gives fruit in time to come, (...), and does now refresh, and then,
says Saint Chrysostom.

Of the body it, therefore bodily it; not of the body only, and therefore is
godly. Going with the mind it is holy by the Spirit that sanctifies the
soul. Whom God has joined together, let no man put asunder, soul and body in
his service. For true Christian obedience comprehends, totos nos, us whole.
Quanti quanti sumus, we, such compounds, as God made us, ought in all things,
and with all we are, simply to submit unto his pleasure. What and as he wills,
is required of us in the powers both of soul and body.

Indeed Prove. 23.26. Wisdom calls for the heart; but not for it only. For, in
the very same verse, it is said, the eyes must observe. God will have every
member faithful in its office, the heart and all; not all, or any of them
without the heart. The heart is most acceptable, yet the rest are not left at
random. They subordinate, the principal being right, will be conformable all;
chaste the eyes, obedient the ears, undefiled the lips, pure the hands, and
flexible the knees. Every one according to the use, more or less, is charged
in the Scriptures. To a more special use more specially some. The Knee and
Tongue here, because they are sit for the work in hand; The Knee for
humiliation, and for confession the Tongue.

I free not any man from this duty, (...).
the Holy Ghost by the Apostle has bound, (...), every one. None are exempted,
not one of the Ministry, nor one of the Laity, not one of the Lords, nor one
of the Princes; learned, and unlearned, mean, and mighty, let all look to it.
All, Psalm. 22.29, 30. All, Isa. 45.23. All, Romans 14.11. and here every Knee of
things in Heaven, in earth, and under the earth. Above the earth I teach none,
and under the earth none will be taught. We are in the midst, and of us all and
every one make a full comprehension wheresoever we are. No man has a
privilege not to do it, nor will simple ignorance, much less wilful, excuse
the neglect. For who preferres not the Name, which God has given Christ, above
every Name, puts the lie on him. God says it is above every Name, yet there
be, that say it is not. Here is high contradiction, and being it is such, I
believe God, who will not may do what they please. By the grace of God I do,
who do not, and do hinder others, shall, at last, in horror, if mercy
prevent not, be compelled unto it: For, for such ill agents (...), Chrysostom. in
loc.
is no ignoscence left, says Saint Chrysostom. No ancient Fathers, no modern
Divines gainsay this.

O, how excellent is it for every one to practice that in the time of grace,
which all confess shall be in full execution at our entrance into glory!
Assure your selves nothing may be required of every one then, which is
unlawful for any one now. For grace, and glory differ not in essence, but
degrees. The nearer therefore the Militant Church comes to the Triumphant,
the more perfect she. Perfect here no man can be, yet that every one ought to
contend unto perfection is very Apostolical. Not in one thing only, and not
in others, in every thing, as is revealed, the action and manner should be
observed by every one.

God speaks not without purpose we all know, take we heed then, lest any of us
hear with a purpose not to do as he speaks. Much has been said of this
duty, and much more follows. God give us obedient hearts, that our reverend
esteem of the Name, which he has superexalted, may appear before men to his
glory, and our peace. Remember who have learned, and amend who have neglected.
It is no shame for either sex, old or young, to deceive the Devil. The white
Devil says it is Idolatry to bow at the Name. The Holy Ghost says, At the
Name of Jesus every Knee shall bow. What will we do? Can any Christian do
other then obey God? If the Name be an Image, it is metaphorically, and can it
not be so, and be not an Idol? Can men be so injurious to their Savior, as to
think that, whom he sent to begin, and further our devotions will beguile us
in them? God forbid: Submit every one therefore to the motion of the Spirit:
give Jesus his honor, and the Devil will fly. A lier he from the beginning,
and so shall appear in the end.

The universality will be at full in the several ranks: the subjection is
next, (...), the Knee should bow.

(...).
It is (...) in the Hebrew, because it has the peculiar faculty of bowing.
Another part may bow and nothing else with it, but if the Knees once bow, all
the members are in submission. For in genibus, vel in nervis, and musculis
circa genua, consistit robur corporis, Schind. ad radie. (...).
in the knees, or in the nerves and muscles about the Knees, consists the
strength of the body, as Schindler. If they then yield, no member of the body
does stand out. (...), therefore, say Etymologists, as well, (...), for the
energie there, as, (...), for the inclination, or pronenesse toward the earth.
The Knees are made to sink down the whole frame, and enabled to raise it
again, and uphold it standing. For they are commissiones femorum, Isid. Etym.
11. c. 1.
and crurum, as Isidore, the setting together of the thighs and legs. The
strongest supporters are united by them. By them only are they at once
humbled, and being humiliated, are at once advanced by them only.

Plin. Not Hist. l. 11. c. 45.
But it is not my part to Anatomize the Knees: Pliny can tell us, hominis
genibus quaedam religio inost, and to teach that God cares for our Knees, and
will be served by them, is mine. By the Knee properly, and really. There is no
Metonymy, nor Metaphor in the word. The material I intend, and all that rises
and falls with it. Because the action is real and proper, as the the Hebrew
word, (...). Schind. ad radi. (...):
(...), Isa. 45.23. does declare. For (...), signifies, inclinationem capitis
cum aliqua part corporis, a bowing of the head with some part of the body, as
Schindler expounds it. This suits with our bowing at the Name of Jesus, and may
answer them who object the Easter stations in the Primitive Church enjoined by
the Council of Nice. For standing there opposes sitting or lying down, Con.
Nicae. Can. 30,
or kneeling on the ground, but not this kind of b^^^^^^. Stand and bow thus
we may, and so they did, as is to be seen in the collections of Alphonsus
Pisanus. Con. Nicae. Can. 29. per Te^ lionem and Thearist. Constan. de graeco
verse.
In oratione Diei Dominici a Pascha usque ad Pentecosten, etc. non oportet
flectere genua, sed stantes orare and inclinari, at prayer on the Lords day,
from the Passover to Pentecost, etc. they were not not permitted to kneel or
sit, but standing they prayed and bowed. Can. Nicae. Fran Turri. Can. 29.
The very same words has Franciscus Turrianus in his Translation of the Nicene
Canons out of the Arabic. But if we look a hundred years further, Tertullian
may be seen opposing the Stations unto Processions. Nonne solennior erit
statio tua, Tertul. de Orati. c. 14.
si and ad aram Dei steteris? Will not thy staying be more solemn, if also
thou stay at the Altar of God? They were not therefore called stations, because
there might be no bowing; But being times of public Convents were termed
Stationum dies, because in them all the godly were commanded, stare in
Ecclesiis diutius, Fran. Iun. Not. in Tertul. ibid.
to abide longer in the Churches, and humbly appear before the Lord at the
Sacred actions, says Junius. Join these, and as there was no bending the
Knees to sit, so neither was there walking suffered, nor going forth before the
participation of the Sacrifice, Tertul. ibid. c. 13.
and execution of the office. All other gestures of reverence, as lifting up
the hands temperately, bowing the head and other members in humility, etc. I
find in use. Our practice then is not crossed by their Stations, their
Stations reprove our running out and in at the time of Divine service: Nay,
they proclaim our sitting most irreligious, nisi exprobramus Deo quod nos
oration fatigaverit, unless we upbraid God that his service has wearied us,
says Tertullian. Tertul. ibid. c. 12.


Our purpose is not lost, nor are we diverted from it. There was ever corporal
bowing unto God, and I believe the Hebrew word we stand upon is never taken
improperly in the Old Testament. A Synecdoche I know is in it, part is put for
the whole, one outward act for the outward and inward. And if I say this one
principal implies all other, uncovering the head, humbling the face,
lowliness of cursie, etc. I still keep the simple sense, and err not. Not
from the Moral Law, for in the negative precept, Exodus 20.4.
(...), the very lowest humiliation, even of the face to the earth being
forbidden, no other may be admitted before Idols. Nor from the meaning of
Christ in the Gospel, for, (...), Matthew. 4.10.
adoration, concludes all the external ceremonies of worship. Nor from the
Septuagint at Isa. 45.23. for they render it (...). Nor from the Apostle at
Romans 14.11. and Phil. 2.10. for he follows the Seventy, and (...) thus
referred is even an outward expression of true humility, or pretended within.

If we observe translations, in the Vulgar we see the Knee must be bowed, and
so in Arias Montanus. If it will not, it shall be made to bow. The Syriack
says, it should bow, so does Erasmus, Beza, etc. if it do not, it ought to
bow. Some Passively, Actively others, the word carries both, and the difference
makes no odds.

If the Fathers call it subjection, adoration, or worship; what if they do?
May it not therefore come at the body? Nay, the outward bowing proceeding from
the lowly mind, unto the right object is the real and full subjection,
adoration, or worship, which God requires at the Name. For the bowing of the
Knee is not only a sign of inward subjection, but being with the heart is
true subjection it self.

Adoration it is, and to adore is to honor in the highest degree, that is with
the lowest expression. For in adoration is ever employed a threefold act. First,
an apprehension of excellency: If there be no preeminence, it is adulation.
Secondly, an acknowledgement of what is so apprehended; If the acknowledgement
be not serious, it is derision. Thirdly, an evidence of our subjection: If
there be no clear demonstration, either by prostration, or genuflection, or
inclination, or other expression, the worship is not complete.

We may be in the Temple, and our minds far off; if there, they must show, or
cannot be known there. For how may we glorify God for his good service, who
will not let it appear before men? M^^^^. 2.11.
The Wisemen, (...), falling down did worship Christ. And was it not the manner
of old? when they came into the Sanctuary, it was. O come let us worship, and
bow, and kneel before the Lord our Maker, Psalm. 95.6. And when they went out
too. For Hezekiah and all his company having made an end of offering, bowed
themselves, and worshipped, 2 Chronicles. 29.29. There is adoration, inclination,
ingeniculation; no full worship without visible humiliation.

The argument is pitiful: Hypocrites draw near with their lips, therefore
true Christians may not use theirs in the service of God. Do the Papists bow
the Knee? suppose they do superstitiously, and idolatrously, are we therefore,
ad libitum, free to do what we list? For their abuse shall we stand as if we
had no joints in ours knees, or use our joints either for our own ease, or an
exprobration of his service? Now we are at a loose, what prodigious worship do
some begin to form? But take they heed, lest leaving all reverence before
God in his Assembly, God leave not them and their Assemblies. We know the
disobedient are threatened to be smitten in the knees, and in the legs with a
sore botch, that cannot be healed, Deuteronomy. 8.35.

But is it disobedience not to bow the Knee at the Name of Jesus? Yes, for God
that will not have it bow to Baal, 2 King. 19.18. has sworn by himself it
shall bow to him, Isa. 45.23. Nor may the common plea of old Testament hold,
for it is applied unto Christ in the New, as meant to be fulfilled in and to
him, Romans 14.11. Nor may it be shifted off unto the general day, no more then
our confession. For if the time of grace be for the confession of the tongue,
the acknowledgement of the Knee should be in the time of grace also. More of
this at (...), as more proper there.

Isidore says there is affinity between the Knees and the Eyes. Isid. Etym.
l. 11. c. 1.
Because men, dum ad genua se prosternunt, statim lacrymantur, when they are
on, or do bend themselves toward their Knees, be aptest to weep. If tears be
so acceptable to God, that he, Psalm.
as the Psalmist desires, will bottle them up, can the posture be displeasing,
which helps them forward? I do not make this the Apostles argument, but this
shows that bowing being of outward gestures the humblest, is also the
heartiest. For it is a quick sense at the heart, that causes tears to distill
at the eyes. An outward, humble, and hearty motion, that is required.

Holy Kings have performed it in the worship of God, as David, Psalm. 95.6.
Solomon, 1 King. 8.54. Ezechias, 2 Chronicles. 29.30. So did the Prophets, as
Daniel, Dan. 6.10. Esras, Esr. 9.5. Micah, Mic. 6.6. The Wisemen did so, Matthew.
2.11. To us our Savior is the president, Luke 22.41. and the Apostles ever
kept it in practice; as S. Stephen, Acts 7.60. S. Peter, Acts 9.4. S. Paul,
Ephesians. 3.14. So did the whole Church, Acts 20.36. and 21.5.

But that was in prayer; True, then we bow lowest, when we name Jesus unto God.
But is the act lawful then, and may it not be lawful, when God in his word,
or by his Ministers names Jesus unto us? Is not prayer an humble
acknowledgement of our unworthiness, and Gods superiority? Is bowing at the
Name of Jesus any less, or any more? Yea no man sues unto God, and not in, or
at his Name. If we be not prepared to carry it before us, our petitions will be
preferred in vain. For God hears us not except we come in that Name, nor can
we see how to honor him, but through it. In, or at, or through it, as was
before expressed, we may.

Bow the Knee the devout will at prayer, and at the Sacrament of the Lords
body, and blood. It is well, and wished that all would: examples I know, are
store in the old and new Testament for the one, but none for the other. Nor can
any produce a more evident precept for either, then this, that at the Name of
Jesus every Knee should bow. For we beginning prayer in his Name, conclude with
it: and the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is the most lively expression of
Jesus to our souls. So is the one, and the other so. Why then is not the
naming, or mentioning of Jesus sufficient reason of geniculation? The person
signified to us, and by us minded is the same, and we are sure the text is
plain for this whilst we infer the other.

Eus^ b. Eccl^^. Hist. l. 5. ^ 5.
That in the Primitive times this bowing was in use Eusebius tells, where he
records a ^ egion of Christians on their bare Knees unto Jesus at the fight
of Marcus Aurelius against the Germans and Sarmatians about the year of our
Lord 178. Tertul. adv. Marc. de Man. anti these. l. 4 c. 2. Orig. ad Romans c. 14.
and in loc. citat.

Cypr. de l^ n. pat. Novati. de Trinit. c. 17. Eusebius. Pamp. Eccles. Hist. l. 5.
^ 5.

Atha. ad Adelph. c^ nt. Arrian. orat. 5. and ad I^pi^^. E^ ypt. and Libyae o^
at. 2. Council. Nicae. Can. 20 and ut supra.

Council. B^ sil. sess. 21.


Tertullian says that at Philip. 2.10. genu plane fatetur, the Knee does
openly confess, securvande, by bowing it self. Flectere-genu, to bow the Knee
declares, not a carnal subjection only, but a spiritual obedience also to
the worship of God; so Origin, and in the forecited places he takes it
literally. So does Saint Cyprian, and Novatianus so. It was the accustomed
manner in Eusebius time; Athanasius speaks for the time past and to come, Omne
genu flectebatur, and in posterum fl^ ctetur, every Knee did, does, and shall
bow. Saint Ambrose meant it corporally, Ruffinus likewise, and Saint Hierome,
Saint Ch^ ys^ st^ me, Saint Augustine, and Saint Bernard, in the former
quotations. The Council of Nice mentions genuflections in use; The Fathers at
the Council of Ephesus read this verse, (...), and give all adoration outward,
and inward unto Jesus. At the Council of Basil it was in practice still.
Alphonsus Abulensis, Osiander, Gorran, Musculus, Calvin, Zanchius, Aretius,
Polanus, etc. conclude the literal sense, and like that this duty should be
thus paid. The Church of England ever since the first reformation observed it
thus in the special time of Divine Service. For at the general confession of
our sins acknowledging Jesus to be Lord we kneel. When the Apostles Creed is
rehearsed we bow the knee, head and all. When the second Lesson is read, if we
sit, yet we bow at the Name, and at the Gospel we bow standing. Sitting or
standing when the word is read, or preached, we bow at the Name of Jesus.

This precept then is now observed, but the full observance is not extant now,
nor ever will be in this world. For God reigns now by the Gospel, Calv. in
Romans 14. v. 11.
and his Majesty is no otherwise honored right, then whiles the same, being
known by his word, is reverenced, says Master Calvin.

Grace does owe her knees, and her knees are not in, but governed by the heart.
With heart and knee, bowing at the Name, we both testify that he is Lord, who
died to save sinners, and retribute glory for the inestimable benefit. For the
meaning of the Holy Ghost is simply to affirm, says he, Ibid.
that all men should not only acknowledge Christ's power with the heart, but by
external gesture of the body, which he notes by the bowing of the knee, show
forth the yielding of obedience also. But the word of God has always enemies,
that frowardly resist, and contemners, that profanely scoff at it, as
trifling, or fabulous. At this day are many such, God amend them, and give his
children patience till all things be renewed. Such there are, and ever will be
scorners. Areti. in loc.
Whereby it appears that this bowing is indeed begun in this life, not
perfected. When all the enemies of Christ shall be thrown down, that they may
be the footstool of his feet, then at the Name of Jesus shall every knee bow,
ad plenum, of those in Heaven, in earth, and under the earth.

The Patricians that deny the substance of humane flesh to be of God; the
Paternians, that give the inferior parts of man's body as peculiar to the
service of the Devil; the nefarious Postellus of Sorbon, that said his Harlot
and not Christ, redeemed us from the navill downward; all Heretics also, that
worship in spirit, not in truth; all Hypocrites that worship neither in spirit,
nor in truth, but in show; and all lukewarm Christians who have some
affection, yet because many will break, leaving the Church, and God too,
rather then bend, do keep the knee for their own use, or bring it into Gods
service, as if they were ashamed it should be known there, are condemned at
(...). For the whole of man according to every part is Gods, and the outward
worship proceeding from the inward, the knee at times to express the obedience
of the heart, does he challenge of every one. All Neuters, or indifferent
souls, Halcesaits I may call them, that hold it equal to bow, or not to bow;
all Jews, Turks, and Pagans, that yield no obedience unto Jesus; all
Agnoclyts, Ethicoproscopts, Puritans, Anabaptists, Brownists, or other
perturbers of the Church peace, that will not outwardly bow, are condemned at
(...). For there God, who will have all glorified bodies bow at the last day,
commands regenerate knees to bow in the time of grace. This and all we
maintain from (...), and still the argument is the union, and our salvation.

True Christians we are disciplined by God, as well in the state of our body,
as in the habit of our mind. Both being his creatures, it is most just they
should according to his will be ordered both. He has not circumscribed the
one, and left the other boundless. Our body must pay its due, and the soul
hers, and not the body without the soul, that both may be spiritual. We join
them together; and worship not without bodies, but in a singular adoration, and
on special restraint. Were we forced to be present at idolatry, we may subject
to God in mind, but not bow down to Baal. Submitting then in heart to God,
and not in body to any other, we give all to whom the whole is due. God will
have no sharer; in all places, at all times, upon all occasions the knee must
be the Lords, and his only. No man has license to restrain it, when it may
be yielded, not they whom none control, save God. Kings as well as the meanest
of the people come under every knee, and are called unto obedience before the
Lord. Whilst they be foremost, the people will be forward. If the heart be
right, of what degree soever we be, our necks are not perverse, nor our knees
stubborn; well composed our bodies, to show our souls are sanctified: we go
not our own ways, nor keep our own times; what, and as God has prescribed
we are ready to execute without scruple. It is kindly not to render other
service then he has set forth, but it were sacrilege to bar him any of
that. Be it how he wills, whilst his Name is hallowed by us, our consciences
find peace in him. At the Name then, and to the person, without shame, or
flattery, or pusillanimity, bend we heart and knee. Because the Name is
supereminent, and by God made the highest; that at the Name of Jesus every knee
should bow of those things in Heaven, and in earth, and under the earth.

These are the three ranks of knees, and follow next to be discovered.

Tract. VI.
(...), etc.
Of things in Heaven, and of things in earth, and of things under the earth.
EVery Knee should bow, quod in Coelo, in terra, and subter terram est, which
is in Heaven, in earth, and under the earth, is the Syriack interpretation, and
the full expression of the Greek. Every knee of the celestials, terrestrials,
and infernals, as the Vulgar, Arias Montanus, Erasmus, Beza, the Rhemist, etc.
Whether then it be every Knee, which is above, below, and beneath; or of those
things which are there, all is one. Wheresoever the Knees are, humility ought
to be their glory, end bowing the ensign.

I bring not bruits, plants, vegetables, and all creatures to this our
reasonable adoration. Who know Christ, or have facultatem cognoscendi, the
faculty thereto, Angels and men, just and unjust: all, that shall account
before the tribunal of Christ, are bound to this homage at the Name of Jesus.
These and no other, for no other but these are capable of such knowledge.
Though all creatures shall subject, yet not all in one manner of subjection.
Scio quidem omnem creaturam velit nolit subjectam esse Creatori, I know indeed,
that every creature must be subject to the Creator, says Saint Bernard; but
of the reasonable creature, Bern de subject. nostrae volunt.
voluntaria subjectio quaeritur, whatsoever be paid, voluntary subjection is
demanded. Who pay it not willingly, unwillingly shall. According then to the
dispositions of the subjects the subjection here is twofold. Of the elect the
one; of the reprobate the other. The first being that whereby the Apostles and
all Saints are subject unto Christ, Orig. de princip. l. 1. c. 6.
salutem, quae a Christo est, indicat subjectorum, declares the salvation by
Christ of the subjects, says Origin. I will rest in, and be subject unto God:
Why? Because, ab ipso salus mea, from him is my salvation, was the free
resolution of King David, Psalm. 62.2. The other of the damned is coacted; For
they are victi, non ad p^ ati, the conquered, not adopted they. Their place
therefore is not, l^^ us g^ atiae, of grace; the locus paenae, the place of
torment's theirs. August. in Psalm. 109.
So Saint Augustine. Being vessels of Gods wrath, they are made the foot^ tool
of his ire. So the Psalmist, Psalm. 110.1.

Though all then be not subject in the first way of obedience unto glory, yet
all ought to be, and who will not, shall at last be compelled in the other to
destruction. For the same saving power is confounding also. The enabled
therefore either for eternal life, or death eternal, are the intended subjects
at Isa. 45.23. Romans 14.11. and Phil. 2.10. The Fathers understand it so. In the
three sorts mentioned, omnis universitas indicatur, the whole universe of
Angels and men is set forth, as Origin explaines; Cyprian so restrains it,
Ori^. de prin^. l. 1 c. ^.

Cypr. d^. (...). patt^ nt.

Atha. cont. Arr. orat. ^.

Ambr^ s. in loc. and Exam lib. 6. c. 9.

Chrysostom. in l^^.


so does Athanasius, Ambrosius, Hieronymus, and Saint Chrysostom says, that
the things in Heaven, in earth, and under the earth, are (...), the whole
world, Angels, Men, and Devils Not one Ancient and Modern writer secludes
either of these. If any include more, it is more then they can prove the
Apostle minded at this place. True, all things are under the commanding will,
but none save these can come within the practice of this precept. Nor
compassing all these do I carry all unto one end answerable to their first
original. For in horror many, whilst the rest, in grace, and glory, pay this
duty.

To prosecute our intent, it is first demanded here, whether by (...), heavenly
things, be meant the good Angels only.

(...).
Theodoret understands all creatures, and principalities, quae sub aspectum non
eadum, which come not within the reach of our eyes, Angels and Spirits, good
and bad. This Zanchius likes, though Beza would not determine it. For (...),
concludes the airy also, and who take it thus may mind the Devils there.
Because Ephesians. 6.12. they are said to be, (...), in Heavenly places; that is,
Princes of the air, Ephesians. 2.2.

Saint Chrysostom intends, (...), the just; they are, (...), the things which
are in Heaven, and Heaven is prepared for the just only. Good Angels, and
blessed souls departed fall down of themselves before him that sits on the
Throne, and adore him that lives for ever and ever, Rev. 4.10. This we are
sure of; with the learned therefore and judicious at home and abroad follow we
Chrysostom.

Secondly, how can the Angels bow at the Name when they are called Spirits?
Psalm. 104.4. Heb. 1.7. Has a Spirit a body that it should bow the knee?

To this I answer, that the Aristotelians hold the Angels simple, and
abstracted intelligences, and the Platoniks say they have bodies. Those the
Schoolmen follow, after these the Fathers go, though not after these in the
matter. Tertullian says, Omne quod est, corpus est sui generis, whatsoever is,
is a body of its kind. Tertul. lib. de. carn. Chr. c. 11. Ad Praxe. c. 7.
And of the Angels he writes thus, Invisibilia illa, quaecunque sunt, habeat
apud Deum and suum corpus, and suam formam, per quae soli Deo visibilia sunt;
those visibles, whatsoever they are, have before God their own body, and their
own form, by which they are visible to God alone. They have their bodies,
that is, other then we have, and their forms, as we also have ours. It is
only peculiar to God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, if we may
believe Origin, sine materia i substantia, and absque ulla corporcae
adjectionis societate subsistere, to subsist without material substance, Orig.
(...) l. 1. c. 6.
and any alliance of corporal adjection. Saint Augustine does not only
attribute bodies to the Angels, but calls them, Aug. de Trin. l. 3 c. 1. and de
Gene. ad lue^. l. 3. c. 10

Lod. v. Viv. in August. de civi^. Dei l. 15. c. 22.


acrea animalia, airy animals. He followed Origin, Lactantius, Basil, and that
was the consent of Writers in his time, as Lodovicus Vives notes. And in his
Notes he induces Michael Psellus saying, Oporret, ut divinus asserit Paulus,
Spiritus ministros, qui mittuntur, corpus habere, etc. Spirits, ministers, as
Saint Paul affirms, ought to have a body, wherein they may move, stand still,
and openly appear. In this sense Gregory the Great terms an Angel, rationale
animal, Greg. in Evang. Hemil. 10.
a reasonable living creature, such a one as is composed of body and soul.
Saint Bernard also on the words of the Apostle, Berr. sup. Cant. ser. 5.
Heb. 1.14. Are they not all ministering spirits? reasons thus; How can they
fulfill their ministry without a body, praesertim apud viventes in corpare?
especially with those which live in a body.

If in Scriptures we read they are incorporeall; I answer, that we usually call
the more gross, bodies, and the more subtle, which come not under our sense,
Spirits. With Saint Gregory therefore I determine, Comparatione nostrorum
corporum spiritus sunt, Greg. Moral. in Job l. 2. c. 2.
sed comparatione summi Spiritus, sunt corpora, that in respect of our bodies
they are Spirits; but in respect of the incircumscribed Spirit, Damasc. Ortho.
Fid. l. ^. c. 3. Zanch. de^ per. Dei l. ^. c. 3.
they are bodies. Conferred with us, spiritual; with God, corporeal, as
Damascene. More probable therefore says Zanchius, is the opinion of the
Fathers, that the Angels be not simply without body, then of the Schoolmen,
that they are simple and immateriall Spirits; especially seeing the Schoolmen
approve the distinction of Gregory, that comparatively they are bodies, and
Spirits comparatively.

But what bodies they naturally have, we are men and know not; certainly more
excellent then ours, more subtle then the Heavens, invisible to our blind
eyes, finite, local, and the fittest for their ministry.

May we say the Angels have their bodies, and can we not think they have their
knees? Saint Paul at 1 Cor. 13.1. gives them tongues, and shall he not as well
at Phil. 2.10. allow them knees? They have one said the learned Bishop
Andrews, as much as the other. And in both places, humanum dicit, he speaks
to us after the manner of men: that we by our own language might conceive what
they do. They do reverence, and we find in the Scriptures that they have
expressions of what they do. Consider what is at Rev. 4.10. and 5.8.14. and in
the 7. chapter 11, 12. verses, nothing can be more plain. All the Angels stood
in the compass of the Throne, and of the Elders, and of the four beasts, and
fell before the Throne on their faces, and worshipped God; saying Amen;
Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and power, and might
be unto our God for ever more, Amen. They stand, and have they no legs? they
fall down, and may they not bow? Having faces, must they want knees? speaking
out, are they without tongues? They have theirs, we ours. Though not as
carnally we, they hold (...), with us, whereby their obedience is set forth.
And it is confessed by all, that genuflection is but an outward, and some say
any outward, humble expression of that within. Because therefore the Angels
some way express it, they are some way said to bow, and that way too, which is
answerable to the knee. Their obedientiall bowing power they yield in a
supermorall perfection. The do so, and going before in that practice we need
not fear to follow after. What ever some plead for themselves, I am sure the
Apostle has left none of us out For to every knee of heavenly things he
subjoynes every knee of things terrestrial.

(...).
And of things in Earth.
The conjunction, (...), and, (...).
shows that all living men ought to perform the bowing at the Name, verified
in the Angels. All ought, and though all do not, yet good Christians begin
it now, and will go on with it unto perfection. For they in Heaven bowing
strongly infer that there are no men in Earth privileged not to bow. I say
not that every individual man, (...).
(...), which is on earth, does or will now bow. For Turks, Jews, Infidels,
out of the Church do not, and too many Christians in the Church will not. But
that every one voluntarily, or involuntarily shall truly fulfill this Scripture
at the last day. Though therefore it be principally intended then, it does not
follow that it may not be in practice now. For the Apostle will have us be
presently humble, verse. 5. And presently, because our humility, that reaches,
goes not out, but is perfected in glory. Orig. in Ies. c. 1. hom. 1. Athan. ad
Adel. cont. Arria. or. 5. Cyril. Alexand. ad piissim. Reg. erat. 1. in annot.
ex Philip.
Origin says, omne genu flectitur, every knee does bow; Flectebatur and
flectetur, every knee did bow, and every knee shall bow, so Athanasius. J am
incurvetur, every knee ought now to bow; so Cyrillus Alexandrinus. Now to do
it, and every one now, will admit of no prorogation till the last day. Christi
regnum crescit indies, Christ's Kingdom has a daily increase, and is not at
highest until it be wholly triumphant. So these propositions are both true.
All things are now subjected unto Christ: All things are not in full subjection
until the Resurrection. Calv. in loc.
Proinde vaticinium hoc non absque ratione diversis temporibus vary
accommodatur, says Master Calvin, this prophecy therefore is not without
reason diversely fitted to diverse times, as other prophesies do not perfect
Christ's Kingdom in a moment, but describe it unto us in the whole circuit. And
though it be a prophecy, yet under this prophecy is a duty required of us.
For it is not a prophecy instantly fulfilled, but by degrees.

A good Christian then will argue thus, Must all knees bow at the Name of Jesus
in the last day? I ought therefore to bow now. Pia civilitas est, it is a pious
civility so to do in the time of grace, says Osiander. Non interiore modo
cordis affectu, Osiand. in loc.
sed externa quoque professione colendus est Deus, si velimus illi reddere quod
suum est; God is to be worshipped not in the interior affection of the heart,
Marl. in loc.
but by external profession also if we will render him what is his, says
Marlorat. The better sort therefore g^ t them to their knees gladly, says the
reverend Bishop. They do so, or else how can they pray, Thy will be done in
earth as it is in Heaven? Matthew. 6.10. If it be so done in Heaven, it should be
done so on earth, or else our Lords Prayer must be, as it is among the
Puritans, out of use with us.

Nor do we this as if God had need of our bowing: but we would be thankful,
and we, of us I speak, we have need to bow. For by bowing, prostration,
extending the hands, Et siquid aliud visibiliter, or if we do any other
visible thing, by these we become the more humble and servent at our devotions.
Neseio quomodo, cum by motus corporis fieri, nisi motu animi praecedente, non
possunt, August. de cura pro mort. geren. c. 5.
iisdem rursus externis visibiliter factis, ille interior invisibilis, qui eos
fecit, augetur, etc. I know not how, says Saint Augustine, but so it is, that
whereas these motions of the body cannot be done, save by a preceding motion of
the mind, yet by these visibly external deeds, that interior and invisible,
which caused them, is enlarged. As if there were reaction between the inward
and the outward; the inward affection, which moves the knee to bow, is by the
bowing of the knee the more inflamed. Who therefore dislike the posture, we
have just cause to doubt their intentions. For though God judge the outward by
the inward, yet we discern not the inward, but by the outward.

Nor let any think to be excused, because multitudes do it not. For if that
be sufficient plea, it is in vain to plead any longer for the truth. But the
truth will stand against all opposition, and the pleaders shall be upheld by
him for whose sake they plead the truth. By whom was it said, Mar. 13.13. Luke
21.14. Ye shall be hated of all men, (...), for my Name sake? What? Were they
hated of all men? No, but of the prevailing number. And does not Christ there
say, persevere, and ye shall be saved, not a hair of your head shall perish,
by patience ye shall possess your souls? These things were written for us,
and God be thanked, they are enough, and so let his Grace ever make them to us.
Can we recall those myriades of Martyrs that have died in several persecutions
for the Name of Jesus, and shall we be ashamed who live in peace, eat the
fruits of our own labors, and enjoy the free passage of the Gospel, shall we,
we be ashamed in all humility to extol the Name? The Name, which in life and
death is the sweetest tune, and most melodious harmony, the Name of all Names,
even the Name of Jesus.

Let the stoutest opposers produce one of the Fathers that mislikes our bowing
at the Name. I except none, no not the most allegorical. For Origin, of whom
they most boast, Orig. in loc. citatis.
says as much as we desire, and more then many would willingly hear. Let this
be done, and by my consent, they shall gain their will against our practice.
All the late Writers, that I have seen, except the known perturbers of the
Church peace, with us by sensible demonstration to declare our inward humility
all.

But if we look back unto the 22. Psalm. 28.29, 30, 31. it will appear what
scope this duty has among Christians on earth. All ends of the earth shall
remember, and turn unto the Lord; and all the families of the Heathen shall bow
down themselves before thee. That is, Osiand. in Psalm. 22.
Divinis honoribus Dominum Jesum Christum colent Christiani, the Christians
shall worship the Lord Jesus Christ with divine honors, says Osiander. And
reason good: For to the Lord pertaines the Kingdom, and he is ruler among the
Nations. All the fat ones of the earth shall eat and bow down themselves:
that is, the mighty of the earth, Kings, Queens, Princes, Nobles, shall
acknowledge, and adore Jesus. All that go down into the dust shall bend down
before him; that is, the poor, wretched, contemned people, that are even trod
in the dust, shall show themselves devout in the service of Jesus. All sorts of
Christians are set out by bowing down. As if the outward man were made to
interpret the inward; or visible expressions should tell forth our sincere
affection unto Jesus. Who will not endeavor to discharge what here they owe
unto Christ, will they, nill they, they shall pay this duty in the utmost
rigor. Not for a time, but eternally, nor any other way, then with the Devil,
and by everlasting torments. No avoiding it who contemn the other; For every
knee comprehends the infernal also.

(...).
And of things under the earth.
God has made Jesus King of Heaven, and of Earth, (...), and, (...).
and him over Hell the most triumphant. Whom the two former chearefully obey,
to his glorious person, the conjunctive particle, (...), and, brings the third
rank of bowers, bound hand and foot, crouching in their fetters. And the same
connexive infers that these are reasonable creatures too. It does, and all
expositers agree in that, but which they are, not so well. Theodoret,
understanding the good and evil Angels in the first place, places here the
dead men, elect and reprobate, which lie in their graves. Who assent to the
former may like this. But if the words before be thoroughly inspected, the
bodies of the dead are included there. For, till the general day, they are
more properly in, then beneath, the earth, and more in then any other. There
they are laid up, and shall not be carried either over, or under, before the
universal account be taken. There till then and no where else they.

In the next word therefore we with Saint Chrysostom comprehend the Devils and
damned souls. Chrysostom. in loc.
For them Tophet is prepared, and that, (...).
(...), below the earth. The air indeed, and the earth are places of the
Devils seeing and assaulting us, but Hell is their home, D. Bilson. Survey page
633
said the learned Bishop Bilson. Thither they be remanded, upon any, the least
occasion, when pleases God. Their place, from whence at the last they shall
never start, is, (...), the bottomless pit, Luke 8.31. (...), the most
inconspicuous to the face of the earth, Luke 16.23. (...), the lowest, and
beneath our thought of lowness, 2 Pet. 2.4. No light, and no darkness there
without intolerable horror. Where it is we know not, and I pray God it may
never know any of us wheresoever it be. For whom it is we know, and being we
do, it behooves us to do here as he wills, whose power constraines the damned
there.

We dream not then of a Purgatory, and souls to be released thence. They are
stated in Hell that are the subterraneall, and being trampled under Christ's
feet shall never rise up into his glory. It is a mere delusion of the Devil,
that the Papists at this text teach redemption from the infernal parts. For
the Apostle discovers in what subjection the Devils and condemned men shall,
full sore against their wills, Novat. de Trin. c. 15. and 17. Ruffin. in ex pos.
Symb. Apost.
be unto our Savior. Novatianus, Ruffin, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Theopylact,
Anselme, Haymo, Hugo, Cajetan, Tho. Aquinas, Gorran, Illiricus, Hunnius,
Hyperius, Salmeron, Zanchius, Aretius, Estius, on this text expound the bowing
of those things in Hell to be not in charity, but forced by the uncontrolled
power of Jesus.

It is plain, Psalm. 110.1. where his enemies are (...), the footstool of his
feet. God has subjected them, (...), under, 1 Cor. 15.27. and (...), under
and under his feet, Heb. 2.8. So under as they shall never be able to rise.
Under him now; for now illum meruere coguntur, they are compelled to fear him;
and under this fear, contremiscunt ad illius memoriam, they tremble at the
mentioning and memory of Jesus, says Aretius. Aret. in (...)
Now under fear of that to come, but when that is come, which they so fear,
bow they must, and be bound in everlasting chains of torments so to bow. The
very recognition of Jesus, whose Name the blessed glory to record one to
another, being perpetual to the damned, shall be as bellows to blow the fire,
whilst they are fuel to maintain it. They despair to forget him, because
his revengefull power will never leave them. Fly from him they cannot, nor are
they able to endure, what they must for ever and ever abide under him. Thus
having no where else to be, nor any means not at all to be, nor any hope that
he will in time be satisfied, they yield, because they cannot but yield; and
suffer, because they ever shall suffer the rigor of his justice. In this
thraldom they dreading advance his Name, whose person was despited, and
applaud his justice, whose mercy they refused. That justice keeps them on
their everlasting knees, whilst their Lord cannot be, and not be victorious.

All therefore shall bow, but how bow all at the Name? Shall Jesus be named at
the general day? or ever after?

Who question this may doubt all. All that Christ did, and suffered all. For
what gain I by him crucified, if he be not glorified for me? I acknowledge him
humbled, much more exalted him, and my self through him. Believe and search
the Scriptures. They say the Lord shall be revealed, and shall he be revealed
without the memorial of his Name? Not so. The day of the Lord is the
revelation of the Lord Jesus, 2 These. 1.7. And at the 12. v. all that is then
done, the clarification of the good, and confusion of the bad, all, that is, is
that the Name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in us, and we in him.

Again, 2 Cor. 1.14. The general day is the day of the Lord Jesus. Shall he
have a day, and not he be mentioned in the day? How has he it, when it is not
acknowledged his? But his it is, and will be acknowledged. For in that day God
shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to the Gospel, Romans
2.16.

Thirdly, when we consider, Isa. 25.21. Romans 14.11. Phil. 2.11. that every
tongue at the general day shall to the full confess that Jesus Christ is
Lord, what may we say of those men that thus contradict this truth? If they be
Scholars, can they be thus ignorant? If Divines, be they not infatuated? and
if both, are they not in contempt? I fear they have projected so many waves of
serving God, that if his mercy prevent not, the best will be forsaken, or
troubled very much.

But grant that the Name shall be mentioned then, shall it never be expressed
after then?

Yes, for by what Name he was vilified on earth, in the same Name will he be
magnified in Heaven. All the servants of God shall there see his face, and his
Name in their foreheads, Rev. 22.4. What is the Name there? The Lamb of God is
not it, but it is Jesus. For he is the eternal Sacrifice signified by the
Lamb. And because our comfort shall be always full, the Name, for which we
suffer on earth, shall ever be present with us in Heaven. We shall hear it
always, see it always, glory in it always, it will be always in our
foreheads. Nay how can we be perfect in him, if his Name shall not be glorified
in us? 2 These. 1.12. Or how may his glory be perfect in us, if his titles of
greatest glory be withdrawn from us? Is there any other Name wherein we must
be saved? Acts 4.12. we are saved only in it; if saved, then glorified in it
only. For without glory is no salvation. Possess we so much in it, and shall
it be without regard, when we have all we can possess? The four and twenty
Elders, and the thousands of thousands sing the praises of his Name, Rev. 5.12.
and Rev. 19. the voice of much people, as the voice of many waters, and as the
voice of strong thundrings, is Allelu-jah; because the marriage of the Lamb is
come, verse. 1.3, 4, 6, 7. We shall for ever sup with him, and magnify his Name
for ever. Ipse finis erit desideriorum nostrorum, August. de ^ ivit* Dei l. 22.
c. 30.
qui sine fine videbitur, sine fastidio amabitur, sine fatigatione laudabitur,
he will be the end* of of our desires, who shall be seen without end, loved
without disdain, and praised without ceasing, says Saint Augustine. This is
the office, this the affect, this the act for all, and all they do is done in
the Name of Jesus. Gloria nostra est, Athana^ A^^^^.
quod cum potestates eum semper adoraverint, nunc adorent sub Nomine Jesu, it
is our glory, that whereas the Angels ever adored the Son of God, now they
adore him under the Name of Jesus, says Athanasius. Beda inferres that as
Christ received at his corporal circumcision this Name Jesus, so the Elect in
their spiritual circumcision partake of the Name; Beda in (...)
ut sicut ipsi a Christo dicti sunt Christiani, ita a Salvatore vocentur
salvati, that as they of Christ are denominated Christians, so of the Savior
they are called the saved. Ludolphus Saxo thereupon affirms that in glory, ab
ipso Jesu dicemur Jesuitae. His meaning is, Lud ^ ph^ de vita C^ p^^ t 1. (...)
c. cu^ ncis mini.

B^^ n. sup^ se^. 15.


that Jesus will be unto us the Name of glory, as Christ is of grace. Oleum
effusum Nomentuum: effusum plane, quod non solum Caelos, terrasque persudit,
sed aspersit and inferos, as Saint Bernard preached; the Name is Oil poured
forth, and fully poured forth, which runs not all over the Heavens only, but
comes at Hell also: So that at the Name of Jesus every knee celestial,
terrestrial, and infernal must bow, and every tongue confess and say his
Name is Oil poured forth. Ecce Christus, Ecce Jesus, behold Christ, behold
Jesus, both poured out to the Angels, both poured forth on men. Shall it be
poured forth to them, and not be received? or how can they receive, and not
take notice of it? It was the hope of all the Fathers, and the joy of the
Martyrs in the Church, that they should magnify this Name in Heaven, which
they professed on earth. And if we examine the modern writers, no Divines will
be found, that deny the fulfilling of* Phil. 2.10. in the life to come. Yea
they who not only neglect, but decry also the duty here, confess the full
payment hereafter. What discording music is theirs? Hereafter it shall be
perfectly performed, and yet the Name never named hereafter. When their
doctrine is known to be at odds, they will stand amazed, and keep the
distance of those men that frighten each other.

It is time to conclude; who will not believe, can never learn their duty,
because a duty is never learned till it be practiced, nor practiced till it be
well believed. Have some faith, and we shall have more, and the more we have
the greater will our practice be. The Name is most glorious in Heaven,
therefore the blessed bow at the Name: The Name is most sweet to Christians on
earth; therefore good Christians begin here to bow at the Name. The Name is
most dreadful in Hell; therefore the damned bow at the Name: These against the
will, most willingly the other.

The Simonians, Caimies, Angelicies, etc. that against the Scriptures bring in,
and maintain the worshipping of Angels; the Collirydians, Papists, that adore
the Virgin Mary, also, pray unto Saints, and bow the knee at their Images; the
Aristotelians, and the Fanatiks of our time, that make the Angels such simple
intelligences as may no way bow the knee, are condemned at (...). For there the
Angels, and Saints receive no divine worship, but submissively bow down at the
Name. The Manichees, that say Jesus is the Redeemer of the soul only, and
therefore yield not the body unto his honor; the Jews, Turks, Pagans,
Infidels, that on earth deny his Name; the Zuinglians, and our very late
Reformists, that stand covered as stiff as stakes, or sit as senseless of
Grace, without any expression of honor at the Name of Jesus, are condemned at
(...). For there believing Christians, hoping to partake of glory with their
Savior, show their delight in, and high esteem of him by bowing at his Name.
The Carpocratians, Marcits, Severians, that fall down before familiar Devils;
the Pythagoreans, Origenists, and many profane Famulists in these days, that
teach a revolution of souls, as if Hell were but for a time, and in time the
Devil and all the wicked with him should remove thence, as the Popelings say
souls do out of Purgatory, are condemned at (...). For there the Devil, his
Angels, and all the Damned, chained for ever on their knees, justify the
righteousness of our Savior in bowing with horror at the Name of Jesus. This
and all we maintain from (...), and still the argument is the union, and our
salvation.

True Christians we believe that though the Angels have not knees like ours,
yet will bend the knees they have. We think them not elementary, spiritual
they be. Devoid of body in respect of us, but if God be considered corporeal
they. For where now they are, they cannot now be elsewhere; and being ministers
to us must have such a being wherein they may administer. In a being they
assist us, which sometimes they either make visible, or assume another visible,
and by the same, in an analogy to us, humbly express the honor due unto our
Savior. Not coacted, but with alacrity, and such, as if we could behold it,
our hottest zeal would seem stone-cold. They are endued above us, and can do
much, much more, yet we in a holy emulation praying to do, as they do,
contend after them. We shift nothing off that ought to be done, because when we
have done the most, it is known we have done too little here. If the Angels
and Spirits, good and bad, properly have no knees, it is certain we have. Whom
it concerns, look we to ourselves. We cannot be too forward, no fear of
that, in goodness; but our backwardness brings evil enough on us. Whilst
others then be backward, we will be as forward as we can, that our forwardness
may prevene Gods anger. We dare not forbear the knees, and withold what else
we owe at the Name, lest he take his Name from, and we be not reputed his. To
whom he is most precious, most honorable he among sinners. Whilst therefore
we have the use of our bodies they shall set forth our obedience. For we find
who will, because they will be in contempt, shall at last be compelled with
smiting knees to honor that Name wherein they will then despair of comfort.
We may conceive the Devils in their kind, and the other damned in theirs,
manacled without hope of release, crouching at the Name of Jesus under the
immense and eternal weight of Gods wrath. So it is decreed, and cannot be
altered, that who will not now do, what he should, shall against the will
hereafter do what he would not. Jesus will be honored in Heaven, and in Hell,
we are in the midst to make our choice: who will have Heaven does his duty
unto Christ voluntarily on earth; who does not so shall be tormented to it in
Hell. For God has given him a Name above every Name, that at the Name of Jesus
every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and in earth, and under the earth.

Tract. VII.
(...), etc.
And that every tongue should confess, etc.
WE are now at the duty, which is general, of the tongue, (...), every
tongue. Secondly, evident, (...), it should confess. Thirdly, veridicall,
(...), that Jesus Christ is Lord; And then kindly, (...), unto the glory of God
the Father.

(...).
(...), and, inferres this necessary as the former: nay more; Not exclusively
more, as if this being done, the other may not at all be done: But necessary
more, as more excellent the subject. And so excellent is the tongue, that of
all other members the Psalmist calls it, (...), our glory, Psalm. 16.9. Nor is it
spoken thereof the soul; for the Apostle expounds it of the tongue, Acts 2.26.
The tongue is the vocal instrument, wherewith we glorify God; the other make
but dumb acknowledgements. The knee then, being set before the tongue, does
not challenge the more worth, nor the tongue lose any of its own. They be
marshalled right, said the reverend Bishop. For having, by the knee bowed, put
our selves in mind of due regard, we are the fitter to speak of, Exodus 20.5.
Psalm. 95.6. Matthew. 26 38. Acts 20 36.
and to our Savior with meet respect. In the second Precept this order is
commanded; the practice frequent in the Old Testament: in the New Christ
himself fell on his face and prayed; the Apostles after him, and the Churches
too, betook themselves unto their knees at their devotions. As if bowing were
a proper preparative to the service of God, or a gesture so peculiar, that the
outward man, nothing else, might declare the humble heart. For this cause we
entering the house of prayer, bow our selves unto the Father; and, because we
must some way bow, toward the East observe we the custom of the Church.

Secondly, though (...), be copulative, it does not bind the knee and the
tongue inseparably together. As if the knee might not bow, unless the tongue
speak out. For these are duties under an affirmative precept, and being humane
acts are limited by circumstances. They are duties necessary, non ad semper,
but not at all times, to salvation, says Aquinas. Tho. Aquin. 12. q. 71. ar.
5. ad 3. and 22. q. 3. ar. 2. ad. 1.
Their times they have, and keep both in their place. Both may go together,
and when they may, for Gods sake let them. And let them in that place, and at
that time, where and when the omission of either substracts Gods honor, and
gives ill example to our brethren. When the tongue confesses be sure to bow at
the Name, though when the knee bows at the Name the tongue does not ever
confess. For this last includes the first, as the greater the less. The
particle (...), therefore does not tie the open confession to the implicit, but
rather the implicit as subservient to the open. Yea, it brings, (...), in the
former verse hither, and makes this another dependent on all we had under
(...), and after in the ninth verse. In which respect our English translatours
render, (...), not simply, and, but with the final, (...), and that: Thereby
denoting that this duty has the same ground with the former, and the former
the same end with this. For, (...), looks backward and forward. Backward for
the tongue, as (...), did for the knee, unto the exalted Person, and the Name
exalted by the union and for our salvation. Forward to direct the knee and
tongue unto the glory of God the Father. As the knee should bow at the Name to
the Person whose Name it is; so likewise should the tongue confess what one he
is, who is so named. And both knee and tongue to the honor of God, which
exalted him, and his Name, that his Name and he might be so acknowledged by us.

Before we brought all to humble the knee, and every knee; now all is at the
tongue: every spirit to give breath, and every tongue to be a Trumpet of his
glory, who is so illustrated.

(...), that proper instrument whereby we speak. (...).
We admit no Metonymie, a Synecdoche we do. Romans 10.10.
The tongue is not mental only, nor only corporal. The tongue moves from
the heart, and the heart should go with the tongue, (...).
Not the tongue extraordinarily endued only, but, (...), every tongue, of what
speech, dialect, or language soever in the world, stands charged with this
duty, Dan 7.14. In token hereof the title on the Cross was written in the
three principal, or sacred tongues, as Isidore terms them, Hebrew, Greek,
and Latin. Isid. Etym. l. 9. c. 1.
Not that these and no other be intended, but these being put down as the
excellent, no other, what, where, or whose soever, are left out. Bishop
Andrews says, the tongues sent from Heaven were the praeludium. For thereby
every Nation under Heaven, each in their own tongue, heard spoken, Magnalia
Dei, the glad tidings of the Gospel, Acts 2.6. Every Nation then; for every
Nation has a peculiar tongue. And every one that speaks the tongue of his
Nation: For, all peoples, since the confusion, being set forth by tongues,
every tongue implies every one of all peoples so distinguished.

None may deny the Author what he made. Not one of the Angels: Let all the
Angels of God worship him, Heb. 1.6. Not one of the Gods on earth; Worship him
all ye Gods, Psalm. 97.7. Not one of the Saints above; They all say, Thou O
Lord, art worthy to receive glory, and honor, and power, Rev. 4.10, 11. Not
one of the Saints below; They all cry out with* the Prophet; Exalt the Lord our
God, for the Lord our God is holy, Psalm. 99.5. Who will not fear thee O Lord,
and glorify thy Name? Rev. 15.4. Nay, who will not, shall in the end gnaw
their tongues, and roar out, Vicisti Galilaee. Devils, and all in Hell are
forced to yield their very tongues unto the divine justice, Rev. 16.10. The
tongues then of Angels and men, good and bad, (...), as Saint Chrysostom
expounds (...), Chrysostom. in loc.
the good in Heaven, and on earth, and the bad on earth and in Hell are the
full of every tongue, at Isa. 45.23. and Romans 14.11. and Phil. 2.11.

We have tongues, and the Angels too, as we have our, and they their knees. We
know ours, and they theirs. They do their part, we must do ours. Accept the
Synecdoche now, and every man from the soul by his tongue, and every Angel in
his power conclude every tongue that should confess. Their faculty of speaking
is required of them, and ours of us. Not of us in one sex only, and not in
the other, but of us in both. For the Hebrew word at Isa. 45.23. is of the
common gender. Women, and every woman come within every tongue. Whose tongues
be very profuse at other times, may not be oversparing in this. Nor do we
contradict the Apostle, who will have women silent in the Churches; 1 Cor.
14.34. For there he inhibits them the authority of teaching in public convent.
Prophetisses have no liberty; (...), because it is a shame for a woman, (...),
to speak, verse. 35. that is, (...), to teach in the Church, 1 Timothy 2.12. For,
as Saint Chrysostom said, (...), the women once taught, and she subverted all
things. Chrysostom. in 1 Timothy 2. Sermon 9.
Appositely here might I take up the complaint of the same Father against this
fault in his time; (...), etc. Now there is a great tumult, much clamor,
debate exceeding, nor are women's tongues any where more liberal, not in the
Market, not at the Bathes, then within the Church, of spiritual, and secular
affairs. (...), for this, this very thing, (...), all things are topsiturvie.
I heartily wish, that these days may no longer in this dangerous evil
parallel those. Let women learn to pray and praise God with the Congregation,
as they ought; but for them to prescribe, and administer, is to profane the
sacred things of the Temple.

We see the tongue is universal as the knee; in Heaven none are excepted, on
earth none, and none have privilege in Hell. All that shall come to the
general judgment, what ever they be, should confess all.

(...).
Should confess.
At Isa. 45.23. it is, (...), which the Septuagint published by Sixtus Quintus,
renders (...), and we translate, shall swear. Nor does this cross the
Apostles words, nay his explain this. For it is granted by all Expositours,
that, juramentum, an oath is cultus divini species, and (...), often put for
the whole worship of God. As Isa. 19.18. where swearing by the Lord of Hosts is
the true profession of him. So in Jer. 4.2. Thou shall swear the Lord lives,
etc. Swearing, pro confessione dicitur, is used for confession, said Saint
Hierome. And in this sense, Hieron. in Ier. 4 2.

Tiem. in. not. Psalm. 63.11.


Psalm. 63.11. to swear by him, is from the heart to worship him, as Tremellius
has observed. That therefore, which the Prophet calls swearing, Isa. 45.23.
the Apostle calls confessing unto God, Romans 14.11. And in the Copy Saint
Hierome had of the Seventy Interpreters, was expressed both, jurabit, and
confitebitur, every tongue shall swear, and confess. Both tend to one: Bez.
in annot. Romans 14.11.
For as Beza notes, swearing is no other, then, vera and aperta ejus Dei
confessio, quem ut testem and perjurii vindicem appellamus, a true and open
acknowledgement of that God, whom we call as the witness, and avenger of
perjury. A confession, that it is, and with the highest witness. Of God, and
to God it; of and to him above all. We are right, and to satisfy that we are,
see what may be had from the Apostles word, (...).

Chrysostom. in loc.


(...), should confess. The Latin translatours all signify no more, then our
English. Saint Chrysostom says the meaning is, (...), that all should speak
out. But the reverend Bishop considered three things it it; I will show four,
and in each one three. First is (...), speak we must, say somewhat. Secondly,
(...), do it together, not some speak, and some sit mute. Thirdly, (...),
speak out, not whisperingly, or between the teeth; but clearly, and audibly.
So far his; the next from the form of the Verb is this. The duty set out in
futuro, being an universal truth is required now. To day, whilst it is to
day, do it now; shift it not off to the last day, to be done then. Now and
then; the Tence contains both.

These four make all square; look back, and see how.

Cordis, oris, operis, of the heart, the mouth, the life; in, and by them
speak we.

consensus, ordinis, and finis, with one consent, in one order, and to one end:
All as one in every one.

sidei, spei, and charitatis, of faith, hope, and charity; All show gracious
lips, though every one yield not one and the same measure of grace.

necessitatis, voluntatis, and coactionis, of necessity, will, and compulsion.
When the honor of God, or the good of our neighbor may be advanced, then
because we ought, we will do it, and who will not then, shall be constrained,
when they would not.

Thus, (...), or the confession of the Church is sincere without dissimulation;
unanimous without distortion; loud without mumbling; Orig in Exodus 25. Hom. 13.
and voluntary without coaction. Omnia offerantur Deo, and sensus, and sermo,
and vox: there may be nothing at any time wanting in the house of God; not
gold, nor silver, nor brass: not faith, nor profession, nor dialects. The
sense, the sentence, the language, all must be offered unto God, says Origin.
Si sufficeret fides cordis, non creasset tibi Deus os, if faith in the heart
might suffice, Chrysostom. super illud Matthew. 10 32.
God would not have created the tongue, said Chrysostom. And to the tongue
Saint Augustine ascribes as much as any. Non perfect credunt, qui, quod
credunt, loqui nolunt, they believe not perfectly, who will not speak out what
in heart they believe. August. in Psalm. 115.
Because David believed, he therefore spoke, Psalm. 116.10. If faith be in the
heart, confession will be with the mouth, Romans 10.10. And if both be right, our
deeds are answerable: faith is consummate by work, James 2.22. Nam multi
confitentur verbis, sed factis negant, for many in tongue profess, but in life
deny Christ. Aug. in Epist. beat. Joan. Tract. 8.
Bind these together, and our Sacrifice is reasonable. A Sacrifice living,
holy, and acceptable unto God, Romans 12.1, 2.

Isaiah prophesied of this confession, and Saint Hierome says it is fulfilled,
in Christi ecclesiis, in the Churches of Christ. Isa. 45.23. Hierom. in Isa. 45.
Not in the Jews Synagogues: they contain not all tongues; but in the
Christian Churches, these do, Matthew 18.18, 19. It ever was, and shall be
ever their practice. When Christ was borne, the Angels confessed; whilst
Christ was on earth, he himself confessed, and taught his Disciples so to do,
witness the four Evangelists. The Apostles kept it in use their time,
witness their Acts, and Epistles. The Churches after, witness the Apostles
Creed, and the (...), or joint confession of the 318. Bishops at the Council
of Nice, Anno 335. Of the 150. at Constantinople, Anno 381. Of the 270. at
Ephesus, Anno 431. Of the 630. at Chalcedon, Anno 451. No question of it in the
Primitive times, and performed with such alacrity, that their Amen was like a
clap of thunder, satth Saint Hierome, and their Hallelujah as the roaring of
the Sea. Through the corrupted times downward came the Symbol or Confession
of the Apostles, a second of Nice and Constantinople, a third of Saint
Athanasius, and a fourth in the Canticle of Saint Ambrose and Saint Augustine.
And still, do the Devil and his agents what they can, these, God be thanked,
remain with us, and we do, and and will use them still.

What has ever been in the Church be it ever. Ever confessors militant on
earth, that of all times there may in Heaven be confessors triumphant ever. It
is most kindly for Saints to be seen in that exercise here, wherein the
glorious shall delight hereafter. Holy, holy, holy Lord God of Hoasts, Isa 6.3.
And blessing, and honor, and glory, and power be unto him that sits on the
Throne, and the Lamb for evermore, is the loud cry of the blessed, Rev. 5.11,
12, 13. and of them prostrated, Rev. 4.10. If this be not hearty and humble
confession, what is? If it be, why are we stiff, and bend not, tongue-tied,
and confess not? Are we ashamed to do that below, which all exult in above?
or be there but two duties in the text, and will we suppress them both? I know
not what our reserved Zelots mean, who either cast away the Creeds, or be as
still at the time of confession, as if they had no tongues, or will not, or
cannot give any reason of this, or other their cross presumptions. Is not
Christ the high Priest of our profession? Heb. 3.1. and does not he confess
them before his Father, who confess him before men? Matthew. 10.32. Which of our
Non-conformists dare deny this? would they then be denied of Christ? or why
deny they him his due? Take heed; the Apostle speaks it plain, Romans 14.11.
Phil. 2.11. and Jehovah having sworn, will not recall it, Isa. 45.23. Sponte
vel invite, as Gorran, Gorr. in loc.
with our good will therefore, or whether we will or no, he shall be exalted.
And by the tongue too, cantando, vel ululando, singing, or howling. For the
Father will be glorified in the Son by the glorious confession of them that
yield, or the glorious confusion of them that stand out, said the reverend
Bishop.

Zanch. in loc.
You may now observe with Zanchius, a twofold confession of Christ. Vna piorum,
altera impiorum. One of the godly, of the wicked the other.

Romans 10.10. the other of vision at the end of this life. Both with a good
will, and to salvation both; but with more joy, and the fullness thereof is the
last.

Judas, Mat. 27.4. The other from the event at the last day, when beholding
those things which before they would not believe, confess they shall, and to
their own damnation, Wisdom 5.2.3.4. etc. Both with an ill will, and to
confusion both: but with more torment, and the fullness thereof is the last.

First and last, good and bad, all confess; though not all alike, yet to the
high honor of God all. Chrysostom. ibid.
(...), For this that the whole world shall subject to the Son, is the glory
of the Father, says Saint Chrysostom. Suffice this here, more of, and to his
glory after.

All Jews, Turks, Pagans, Philosophers, Infidels, that believe not; All that
have been Christians, but now are Apostates; and all that are Christians, yet
have tongues more free to the devil, then unto God, are condemned at (...).
For God made every tongue, and only he. Who had no sharer in the work, admits
no sharer in the fruit. Every tongue ought to be his, and his only. All
Heracleonites, that to avoid persecution hold the confession of the mouth
unnecessary; all Helcesaits, that when troubles arise for the truths sake,
think it lawful, for their own sake, to abjure the Gospel; all
Pattalorinchites, or Silentiaries, that will have their holiness known by a
diuturnall silence; all Catharists, Donatists, Anabaptists, Separatists, that
are very open-tongued in justifying themselves, and damning others, but seal
up their lips as if it were an inexpiable offense for all to speak out, and
together in the public Service of God; all Pontificiaries, Mass Priests, and
other Papists, that lock up the public confession in some one tongue or two,
and send forth a supersedeas for all the rest; and all Justiciaries,
Hypocrites, careless Professors, or lukewarm Christians, whose loud words
win the applause of men, but their lewd doings dishonor God, and perturbe the
peace of his Church, are condemned at (...). For who provided the tongue for
man's glory, will have that glory of man sound forth his own praise. And not
like sounding brass, or a tinckling Cymball, but with an Echo of such grace
as may pierce the clouds, and resound honor unto God in the Highest. This, and
all we maintain from (...), and still the argument is the union, and our
salvation.

True Christians we, looking unto the deserving person, think not the duty
strange. We know there is a time to speak, and to be silent a time. Observing
therefore what ought to be done, we do it when, and where we ought. At the
Churches ordinary times, knees, and tongues show our hearts; but at an
extraordinary, if need require, we can spend our blood to testify the sweet
accordance of the inward and outward man. If sometimes our tongues go not with
our knees, yet our hearts do. If one, or other, or both be in action, both, or
either of them are animated ever. Nor can we imagine that any one of us may
take license to be otherwise then is prescribed. None should be in show only,
in earnest all. Nor will any ones earnest excuse another hypocrisy or
neglect. Every tongue must have its proper spirit, and every spirit its proper
tongue. We deny not any tongue the faculty here granted, nor bar any one the
duty here enjoined. Out with it say we; for it is an honor to conquer the
devil, and this the way. No magical spell, but Christ's own warrant; that the
powers of hell shall not prevail against it. It ever was, is, and will be ever
the glorious exercise of the blessed in heaven; and maugre all opposition, the
religious on earth hoping to be perfect Saints at last, with all our might
uphold the practice here. Yea who will not now, shall in the end be compelled,
and do it with the devil and his angels, in horror of heart and confusion of
face, with yelling tongues, and gnashing teeth for evermore. Considering this,
whom the love and fear of God can move, the Apostles argument suffices us. To
save his chosen, and confound our enemies, Christ at his going rode on the
triumphall Charet hence; and is set down on the Throne of God, to be the Judge
of quick and dead. All shall be subdued unto him, his is the power, the
Kingdom his, and therefore every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is
Lord, to the glory of God the Father.

Tract. VIII.
(...), etc,
That Jesus Christ is Lord, etc.
CHrist is the right object, we are denominated of him, and therefore very
kindly that he should be confessed by Christians. Who ransomed us, most meet
it is, we do acknowledge him. Most meet, and our chief glory to publish that
Lord, whose servants we cannot be, and not be free. But he has so adopted us
into the liberty of Sons, that he being heir we are sure to be heirs with
him. Him therefore at all times and in all places, as is prescribed, our
tongues extol him. The text directs us, and from it our Church varies not. It
is a plain Article of our Creed, and our humble Petitions throughout the
Liturgy are all concluded in the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord.

Prosecuting this in my former method, I doubt not, but they, who have had
patience hitherto, will see the last period, and at last give glory that our
evident practice is still in analogy of the truth.

There are three readings of this text: (...).
Rhemists, our Lord Jesus Christ is in the glory of God the Father. Here,
(...), that, is aitiologicall, and the glory of God the Father the predicate.

The Syriack is, every tongue should confess the Lord Jesus Christ, to the
glory of God the Father. Here, (...), that, is redundant,

Erasmus, Beza, and our Translatours say, every tongue that, is declarative;
Lord predicats of Christ, and the glory of God the Father is both the final of
our confessing and of Christ's Lordship.

I find them promiscuously among the Fathers, and therefore affirm with
Zanchius, that they may be joined thus. Zanch. in loc.


Every tongue should confess that Jesus, which was crucified, and whom we call
Christ, is the Lord in, and to the glory of God the Father. So that the Lord
Jesus Christ, who is in the glory of the Father, according to the Vulgar, is
the full of our confession, according to the Syriak, and all this to the glory
of God the Father, according to the rest.

Saint Athanasius has all three: Saint Augustine agrees with the Vulgar; and
Saint Chrysostom with our Translatours. Athan cont. Arria. orat. 2. August. de
Trin. l. 1. c. 13.

Chrysostom. in loc.


Though they differ among themselves, yet among them here is no distortion. The
full sense thereof shall be ours: Because we would leave out nothing that may
be comprehended to the glory of God the Father.

We have all can be said, whilst we say, (...), this, even this, Ibid.
that Jesus Christ is Lord, (...), for this, the confession and the object, is
the glory of the Father, according to Saint Chrysostom.

The object is now in hand, and under a threefold title we are bound to
acknowledge him. And that we may not be mistaken, (...), that, stands not
vacant here. It puts us again in mind of (...), and tells how, and why, Christ
is Jesus, and Jesus is Christ, and Jesus Christ is Lord. Even by the Union and
for our salvation. Had he not been man he could not have died, had he not
been God he could not have overcome death, and had he not been God and man in
one he could not have been anointed with the Spirit above measure. As God and
man then he was enabled to undertake for us, and to perform what he
undertook. Having done both, Jesus Christ is become the absolute Lord; the
Lord by right of Creation, and by right of Redemption the Lord.

(...).
In the Original we inspecting this threefold see an Hebrew Name compassed
with two Greek attributes. Whence may be inferred that at this confession the
mercies of God are declared toward us Gentiles more, then to the Jews. The
Oracles of God were once included in a particular Church: but now they extend
throughout the whole world. The Gentiles shall exceed at the restoration of
all things. Japhet is enlarged, and we are innumerous in the Tents of Shem,
Rev. 7.9. Yet lest our vaunt should be of their rejection, Christ has the Name
in Hebrew, to show that the Lord, whom we consent, was nearest to, and must be
the confessed Savior of the Jews. Though generally not yet called, they shall
be restored before the general call to judgment, Romans 11. If we therefore
will give Christ his due, we may not take from them theirs. The very Name of
our Savior remembers us that we should not (...), insult over them. And had
our zealous brethren thoroughly pondered this, they would not have dared, in
their Sermons, to call us, who are not of their Sects, and furious spirits,
dogs, toades, etc. My self have heard the worst; God forgive them. But if
they mind us no better, what say they of the Jews? Can they pray for them? if
they can, why blame they our general prayers in the Letany? God is merciful
toward all: and may we be uncharitable unto any? Most pitiful unto our selves
we are never cruel toward them. Our standing and their renewing may both go in
one Petition. God spared not the natural branches, we cannot be too cautelous,
lest it come to pass, that he spare not us. Romans 11.21.
Confess we then him only, and him always, the Savior of all; that when the
Jews are called we may be still his, who first was, and will be theirs at last.

This is something, and enough at this place for all those, who in a daring age
bound our Savior within their own lists. As if none without might ever come
into the Salvation of Jesus.

Zanchius found an emphasis in the Hebrew word, Ibid. (...).
and demonstrates it with an Iste. That Jesus, who was held a mere man, nay a
chief sinner, and so handled. He that at his birth took entertainment among
beasts, was persecuted by Herod in his infancy, tempted by the Devil in his
great Fast, hated of his own Contrymen as demonicall, disfigured on Mount
Olivet in a bloody sweat, betrayed of Judas, and crucified by the Jews. He it
is, whom we confess, and no other he. For he, and no other was, is, and may be
denominated, of his own habit and saving act, the Savior. obscurae imagines,
dark shadows of him. The Angel therefore naming him Jesus, in Saint Matthew.
1.21. tells how great a one he is, even the Son of the most High, Luke
1.32. So he shall be called, said the Angel. Not that he was not so before he
was so called, suo tamen tempore manifestatus in carne, Bez in Luc. 1.32.

Theophil. in Luc. 1.


but not known to be so before he was incarnate; as Beza notes. Then he was
so called, quando apparebat and miracula faciebat, when he appeared, and
wrought miracles; as Theophylact.

Matthew; and in Saint Luke, he sits on the Throne of David, Reigns over the
house of Jacob, and of his Kingdom shall be no end. Not then as other Saviors
he, who by his grace brought some temporal safety to a particular people. This
man came not to save the Jews only, but the whole world, John 4.42. The world
of sinners we, (...), are his peculiar people, Cyril. Alex in Religi. Regin.
so Cyrillus Alexandrinus on that of Saint Matthew. And on the other of Saint
Luke he argues thus: Shall we under the Empire of one like us, be pressed,
(...), perpetually, and without interruption, or not rather be subject unto God
reigning over us in Christ? The^ phyl. ibid.
Theophylact therefore will not have the seat, or Throne of David, sensibile
quoddam Regnum, sed divinum, some sensible Kingdom (as the Jews dream, and
the Apostles sometimes thought) but a divine, wherein Christ does rule over all
Nations by his word preached. And not ordinarily only, but extraordinarily
enlightening also by his Spirit, where the word consigned has not been, nor
is. For who are illuminated to believe, though they have not the Bible under
their arms, nor other books to read save the Creatures of God, are
undoubtedly, popu^ us suus, August de civit. Dei l. 18. c. 47.
his people too, wheresoever they be. Saint Augustine believed this, and who
will not, do deny the special operation of the Holy Ghost.

a peccatis, from the perpetual servitude of sin, and tyranny of Satan. Herein
we wonderfully spread abroad his Deity. Solius enim Dei est ignoscere peccatum,
for it is God only that forgiveth sins, was the confession of his enemies.
(...), etc. A Savior then, and such a Savior; there can be no such confessed,
who is not confessed God; is the inference of Cyrillus Alexandrinus. Ibid.
From the bondage of Egypt, out of the hands of the Canaanites, and Philistims,
or from the captivity of Babylon, such deliverance did but typifie this.

For this let his Name be high among men on earth. Let it be so, and cried up
in spite of Jews, Turks, Atheists, Philosophers, Puritans, Brownists, and
who ever contemn, or neglect the reverend esteem of it. If any thing be
precious, Nomen Jesu quam carum? How dear is the Name of Jesus? quam vile?
quam salubre? how vile was it made, in which was so great salvation? si vile
non esset mihi non effunderetur, if it had not been vile it had not been
poured out for me, Bern. sup. cant. ser. 15.
says Saint Bernard; if it had not been saving, it had not been gain to me.
It was poured out that it might be my gain. Sure my love of it may show sense
of sin, and my honoring it truth of love: But can no more make me a Jesuit
then my confession of Jesus in the Creed does proclaim me Antichristian. Happy
man who is sheltred under the skirts of God and man unto salvation.

Doubtless to confess Jesus by knee and tongue is no shame. For he is not
incidently a Savior, but (...), (...).
anointed to that end. Above his fellows anointed, Psalm. 45.7. Anointed to
all the three offices, which God from the beginning erected to save his people.
To all the three, B. B. Andrews in his Sermon on Luc. 2.10.11.
which never met in any other, that nothing in him might be wanting to the
perfecting of this work; said the late Oracle of our times.

As to the Romans, indumentum purpurae insigne est regiae dignitatis assumptae,
the putting on of purple is an ensign of regality assumed; so with the Jews,
Lactan. de vera Sapien. l. 4. c. 7.
unctio sacri unguenti nomen ac potestatem Regiam conferebat, the sacred
unction conferred the Regal Name and power, says Lactantius. And not the Name
and power of a King only, but of Priest, and Prophet also, say the Scriptures.
For Aaron the Priest was anointed, Levit. 8.12. Lact. ibid. Isrod. Erym. l 8.
c. 2.
So was Elisha the Prophet, 1 King. 19.16. and Saul the King, 1 Samuel 10.1. And
though Lactantius, Isidore, and others call the Name Christ, nuncupatio
potestatis, a declaration of power, yet they and we confess, with Tertullian,
that this vestitus Nominis, Tertul. adv. Prax. c. 28.
is the investing of Jesus unto his threefold office, and expresses, says
Damascene, his full prerogative of grace.

Melchisedec, Psalm. 110.4. Ad purgandum, to purge us from the evil we gained,
induing with the grace we lost. A Priest, that did not only offer, but
himself was the offering, and the Altar. The two first; for the man Christ
Jesus gave himself a ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2.5.6. Damasc. orthod. fid. l. 3.
c. 3. Matt. 23.17.
The third too; for unctio humanitatis est divinitas, as the Altar does
sanctify the gift, his Godhead sanctified the manhood. By his blood he
redeemed the Church, Acts 20.28. by his Deity his blood obtained power to
sanctify the elect, Heb. 9.14. The virtue of Christ's death lies on the
eternal Spirit that dwells in him, (...), on nothing else; says Saint
Chrysostom. Chrysostom. in Heb. c. 9 sermon. 15. 1 Cor. 1.30. Hieron. ad Paul.
And thus Christ is made unto us wisdom, sanctification, righteousness, and
redemption. He is Redemptor and precium (as Saint Hierome) the Redeemer and the
price. All that may be, that, who leave all for him, may find him for all. The
exultation of the Psalmist is the highest for every one: Pars mea, Dominus, the
Lord is my portion.

Isa. 61.1. When Moses should be silent, Deuteronomy. 18.18. Acts 3.22. Ad
illuminandum, to save us from the bypath of error, guiding our feet in the
way of peace. By his prophecy in external promulgation, and internal
illumination his Fathers will is before us. He is the Legate, the Angel, of God
and of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. (...), that Doctor, Mat. 23.8, 10. in whom are
the hidden mines of all knowledge, Job. 14.6.
Col. 2.3. Via, veritas, vita, the way, the truth, the life; walking, trusting,
abiding in him we shall never be lost. Qua vis ire? ego sum via: Quo vis ire?
ego sum veritas: Vbi vis permanere? ego sum via; said Saint Augustine on the
words of Christ. Aug. de ve^ b. Dom. in evang. secund. Joan. ^ er. 54.
In the way, in the truth, in the life, is no danger, no detriment, no death.
In whom we live, move, and have our being, be we, move we, live we, and through
this valley of humility he will exalt us unto the height of glory.

Psalm. 2.6. whose Name should be the Lord our righteousness, Jer. 32.6. Ad
perficiendum, to defend us by his power essentially, upholding us in goodness
by his grace personally. Inchoatively here, hereafter perfectly. He sets going,
keeps all right, and protecting in the Wilderness conducts unto Canaan. For
over sin, death, and the Law God has given us victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 15.57. In all things we are more then conquerours through him,
Romans 8.37. Be we wounded by enemies in our pilgrimage? Our King is the
Chirurgian to heal. Fall we into a burning Fever? fons est, he is the
Fountain to refresh. Are we over-burdened with sin? justitia est, he is the
righteousness to justify. Faint we? virtus est, he is the power to sustain.
Are we in darkness? Lux est, he is the light to enlighten. Fear we death?
vita est, he is the life to enlive us. Desire we Heaven? via est Christus,
Christ is the way to attain it, says Saint Ambrose.

Ambros.
ignorantiam, (...), reatum. First, ignorance, as well of evil wherein we were
drowned, as of good whereof we were deprived. Moses Prophet expels our
ignorance, Jeremiahs King orders our faculties, and David's Priest expiates our
guilt.

Is thus much gotten? and yet not lawful to confess the
protecting-instructing Mediator? Where nothing can be repayed it is gratitude
to speak out the super-abundant grace of the Donour. A blessed confession
sure, and most comfortable this, that a Savior, and he anointed to save
sinners; no Tyrant, no usurper, Jesus Christ is Lord.

Lord before, by that he is Son: (...).
And now Lord again by virtue of his proper quod, says Bishop Andrews. As
God he was ever Lord; but not ever Lord as God and man. At (...). we found he
had a time and a cause for this, who had no time nor cause beside himself for
the other. Nor yet may it be thought that he, assuming our flesh, received,
meliorationem in humiliatione, any melioration thereby, as Saint Athanasius
speaks. Athanas. cont. Arr. orat. 2. Chrysostom. in loc.
(...). For thereby he was imperfect, and made perfect for us, says S.
Chrysostom. For us the one and the other: Neither the one in himself, nor for
himself the other. No such thing, no: It is we, by his taking on himself our
infirmities, are made perfect in him. Not then anointed, that he might be God,
or King, or the Son, or the Word; but as God^ and the King, and the Son,
and the Word he anointed us in himself, that we also through him should be
the Lords anointed.

Thus we proclaim him Lord, and with great triumph now: because, we are now
sure he is our Lord. Lord in ours, and of us Lord. And being so ours, the
Rhemists, in their Paraphrase here, have not misinserted our.

Though he were iste, as before; that one whom the world contemned, yet in his
greatest obscurity, or hatred, he was ever the magnified Lord. When he lay in
the Manger a multitude of the heavenly host sung his praise: The Angel sent
Shepherds to tell him to the Jews; the Heavens sent a Star to show him to
the Gentiles; and the East Wisemen to worship him in Bethlehem. The very
infants left their Mothers breasts to yield their lives in testimony of his
Lordship. Who has heard, or read any thing, and has not read, or heard either
of the voice proclaiming him from Heaven; or of the Devils confessing him the
Son of God; or of his transfiguration on Mount Tabor; or of his commanding the
creatures, even the most lawless, the Wind, and the Sea; or of his miracles,
in multiplying a small quantity of food to satisfy thousands, in curing all
sorts of diseases, in casting Devils forth of the possessed, and in raising the
dead; or of the confounding of his apprehenders; or of the thieves request on
the Cross; or of the darkness then over all the Land; or of his giving up the
Ghost, the renting of the Temple, the quaking of the earth, the sundring of
stones, the opening of the graves, and the appearing of the dead? Who can mind
these, or any of these, and not confess that the Lord was here in our flesh?
But when we consider that Christ at his own set time resumed the life he laid
down, and trampled the powers of Hell under his feet: when we behold his
Ascension, and animadvert his visible sending of the Holy Ghost, do we not see
that Christ is Lord? when we hear of his Apostles losing their lives for their
Master, and of those multitudes of Martyrs throughout the ten persecutions,
under all manner of torments faithful to him; what will we say? Shall I teach
every one what to say? Even with Saint Thomas, My Lord, and my God, John 20.28.
(...); for how is he not to be reputed God, who crowns those, that truly
confess him, Cyril. Alexa. in orat. Relig. Reg. in Matthew. 12.32.
with the glory of Martyrdom? says Cyrillus Alexandrinus. All the Fathers in
the Councels of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, Chalcedon, and in the more and
more corrupted after giving him the place anathematize every one that decries
his Lordship. Our Church also, ever blessed be God, according to the Scriptures
in an holy emulation of the most religious and learned does in her Liturgy
promote him Lord. Who preaches the contrary let him be Anathema, Maran-atha.

Confessed he is Lord: But what Lord? is next. Even the Lord Paramount, no
mesin, or petty Lord. Lord of all: of the three Regions before, and of the
orders of confessors there. Lord of Heaven, says the reverend Bishop; he gave
the Keys of it, Matthew. 16.9. Lord of earth; he has the Key of David, and of
every Kingdom else, Rev. 3.7. Lord of Hell; the Keys of Hell and death are
his, Rev. 1.18. Heaven is his Throne, Earth is his footstool, Greg. sup. Ezec.
Hom. 8.
Hell his prison. Heaven, Earth, Hell, and all there are his Seigniory. He is
within, without, above, beneath, penetrating, compassing, guiding, sustaining
all things. Elohim, that being, which in three persons is individually one, and
of those three that one person which being neither the Father, nor the Holy
Ghost, is still the same with both. Jehovah, the Creator, Redeemer and
Sanctifier. Not that the Father, and the Holy Ghost are excluded in these
works, but neither does either without him. (...), as the Septuagint ever
translate (...), and is our Apostles here. He that is sure and makes all sure:
The gracious beginning, defensive continuing, and final ending. Sure in
election, sure in vocation, sure in justification, Verstega. Antiq.
and in glorification sure, Romans 8.29, 30. Lord, that is, as appears out of
the Saxon record, one that affords bread. And so does Christ; for he is the
true Laford, that once feasted the whole world with his own body and blood,
the bread, and drink of eternal life. He is still the food of our souls,
and we have no refection, but in, and through him. Nay he gives us all we have,
that all we have might be for his use. Lafdians then should we, the children of
his Spouse, be, that is, faithful distributers of the bread our Lord affords.

If you will here understand the temporal staff of bread, may I not truly
say; Never was more Lording in England, and in England less bread distributed
never? But if you intend it spiritually, I bless God, for the great care
taken, that the Word may be constantly distributed, and I would there was as
great, that it might be sincerely preached. I mean, that there might be no
perverting of the Scriptures, no denying of the public administration of the
Sacraments. But what pity it is, that who rightly and duly observe both should
lose the Name, and be counted Antichristian?

I tremble thinking what things of lower degree come within the bounds of
Sacrilege. Christ says, Who honor his, honor him; then who dishonor his,
dishonor him. But we are contented to be the contemned on earth, that none of
the poor in spirit may want the spiritual bread; and I wish, that the more
able were as forward, that none might beg their temporal. 2 Samuel 10.


Is it forgotten how David revenged the Shaving of his Ambassadors, and the
cutting off of their garments? Certainly if repentance do not prevene, the
Lord will remember those that preach down the Hierarchy of the Church: He will
remember, and not forget their followers, that run with violence not to
extirpate it only, but to trample it and all the Ministers of God under it in
the very filth of infamy. I write no unknown thing, but wish it were not so
known, that it might not be thus written. If I have been over bold; now in
the Apostles words, I beseech you brethren, that ye know them, which labor
among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; I beseech you, that
ye have them in singular love for their works sake. Be at peace among your
selves, 1 These. 5.12, 13.

Be at peace, and in this ye confess that Jesus Christ is Lord. For peace is
his: He is the God of peace, 1 These. 5.23. and our peace too, Ephesians. 2.14. He
cannot be acknowledged the peacemaker between God and us, nor we his members
whilst we be at hateful odds among our selves. Where love is not, the Holy
Ghost will not be, and where he is not, no man can, as he ought, say that Jesus
Christ is Lord, 1 Cor. 12.3. For confessing him Lord, we confess more then he
in himself is, our selves also to be in obedience unto him. Who keep not in
his service, deny him to be their Lord. For it is not enough with Saint Peter,
to cry, Lord save, I sink, Matthew. 14.30. unless also we can with Saint Paul,
say, Lord, what would thou, that I should do? Acts 9.6. and do what the
Lord wills. With the whole man too, outwardly and inwardly, where, and as he
requires. He being wholly ours, who are only his will be whole to him. Souls,
bodies, lands, goods, lives, and all are at his service. So he be ours, and we
his, let him do with us, as he pleases. He saved us, and we will be governed
by him. To whom he has been Lord Jesus, to us be he Jesus Lord.

The Ebionits, Samosatenians, that deny the greatness we affirm requisite in
our Mediator to salvation; The Anabaptists, Brownists, Barrowists,
Separatists, that seclude whom they please, as if none, save their holy on
earth, might ever be Saints in Heaven, and yet handle our Savior, as if he
were to serve their turns always, and they him only, when, and as they list:
And the Simonians, Menandrians, Pseudo-Christs, that sacrilegiously impropriate
his virtue, are condemned at (...). For there confessing our deliverance from
such evil, we confess the greatness of our Savior also, and acknowledge him
the only able for us, and not only for us, but for the sins of the whole
world. We say not whose he is not, but knowing him to be ours, rest in that.
The Valentinians, Marcionits, Manichees, with the other Opinats, or Docits,
that make Christ's death fictitious to take away the truth of his Sacrifice; The
Ethnicks, that, in opposition, prefer Apollonius Tyanaeus before Christ; the
Novatians, Rogatists, Maximinianists, Circumcelliones, that borrow the broom
of Donatus, to sweep the Church; The Jews, Chiliasts, Aeternals, that provide
for the Messiah, as if his Kingdom were of this world, and our happiness in
the various delights thereof; And the Papists, that like the Heathen have set
up a great Cauldron to purge souls in, equal traditions to the Scriptures, and
make the Pope head of the Church, are condemned at (...). For there we confess
him such a Priest, such a Prophet, such a King, as never the like. In his
propitiation the ransom is unvaluable, in his institution the doctrine
infallible, in his government the supremacy incommunicable. All these only in
him infinite, may not be held by any other. The Basilidians, Origenists,
Arrians, Apollinarists, Donatists, that, saying there was a time when Christ
was not, impiously call the Son of God the first begotten creature; The
Artemonits, Photinians, Monophysits, that will not have him God before he was
incarnate; The Semi-arrians, whether Acatians, that affirm the Son to be
like the Father; or Ennomians, that teach him of another nature then the
Father; or Aetians, that make him unlike in all things to the Father; or
Eudoxians, that hold him as a servant of the Father; The Carpocratians,
Messalians, Coluthians, that denying God the administration of the world bestow
the Lordship over men on the evil Angels; The Marcionits, Manichees, that
deeming the world a work unworthy of Divine providence substitute some Atlas
to sustain it; The Pontificiaries, Socinians, that question the sufficiency
of Christ's Lordship; And Schismatiks, or relapsed Protestants, that scorn to
give him due, and full worship, are condemned at (...). For there Christ is
confessed the eternal God, consubstantiall, and coequall with the Father. The
same before the Incarnation, and no other now. Lord of all, above, and below,
ruling his servants graciously in peace, and trampling his enemies under his
feet in ire. Nothing may control him, nor is any thing too little for his
providence. This, and all we maintain from (...), and still the argument is
the Union and our salvation.

True Christians we, considering humility the basis of glory, can value our
Savior even by his disrespect in the world. Who would save it, Jew and
Gentile, from sin must be reckoned among sinners. He therefore being the
Son of the Highest, the lower he appeared for us, the more he showed his
love. For in that estate not losing his own all his gains redound to us.
Because he could not be unlorded in ours, we are dignified in his. Not so, as
if he having served our turns, we should no longer serve him: but that, his
anointing descending on us, we might walk in the odor of his unguents. He
the constituted Priest, to mediate by redemption and intercession; we his
sanctified to offer in faith, the fruits of regeneration, prayers, praises,
good works, and a holy life. He the Prophet, by the Word and the Spirit to
instruct; we the Disciples to bear the characters of the one, and set forth
the graces of the other. He the King, ruling in might, and mercy to preserve;
we the subjects in fear, obedience, and faithfulness to observe his pleasure,
in fighting against the enemies, and maintaining the peace of his Kingdom. Such
we confess him, and our selves such confessors: through him. Nor is this all:
Our King, our Prophet, our Priest, our Savior is not transiently ours, but
eternal he. Not now and not hereafter, the same now and ever. What comfort
have we? We being anointed shall never be feared; nor ever fleeced being his
saved. For Jesus Christ is still that Lord, which, the Son of God he, was
before the Incarnation. He has the Keys to unlocke Heaven, and the Keys to
lock up Hell. In whose hands we are, none can snatch us from him. Because he
is that being whence all things have being; and the immutable God having
elected us will never alter his purpose. That he will not, we can domonstrate
that. He informs us by his Word, confirms us by his Sacraments, and
replenisheth our hearts with heavenly desires. Our thoughts, our words, our
works, tend to him. And such is our reverence in adoring, that if an
unbeleever should be present at our public service, he falling down would
say, Verily God is among us, and with us confess that Jesus Christ is Lord to
the glory of God the Father.

Tract. IX.
(...).
To the glory of God the Father.
WE may here, as Beza notes, interpret (...), (...). Bez. in loc. Novat. de
Trin. c. 7.

Ambros. in loc. Athanas. cont. Arr. orat. 2. Aug. in Ioh. trac. 104. c. 17.
and in locis citatis. Ambros. l. 6. Examer. c. 9.


by (...), and read in the glory. Novatianus does so; so does Saint Ambrose; so
says Saint Athanasius sometimes; Saint Hierome always, and Saint Augustine
too, as was observed before. (...), glory then involving all the excellencies
of nature boundless in the Creator, the sense must be; Christ is Lord in the
same Majesty, and of the same treasures with God the Father. Lord of glory, 1
Cor. 2.8. King of glory, Psalm. 24.7. God of glory, Acts 7.2. Fides aequat
Filium Patri, atque utriusque eandem gloriam confitetur, says Saint Ambrose.
The Father and the Son are in our faith both consubstantiall, and coequall.
Neither before, nor behind other in wisdom, counsel, understanding, power,
comeliness, graciousnesse, blessedness, or whatsoever is Gods, beyond our
comprehension infinitely.

In this immense and increated glory Christ, as the Son of God, ever was, is,
and with the Father shall be ever. He is in the form of God, and therefore no
robery for him to be equal to God, verse. 6. Immo non suit, quasi jam non sit,
nec erit, Aug. in Johan. Trac. 104. c. 17.
quasi nondum sit, sed sine initio, sine fine semper est claritas, Yea, it was
not, as if it were not now, nor shall be, as if it were not yet, but without
beginning, without end the glory is always, says Saint Augustine. He is the
brightness of Gods glory, and the Image of his substance, Heb. 1.3. The
Apostle there declares (...), his equality of substance, and propinquity with
the Father, Chrysostom. in Heb ser. 2.
as Saint Chrysostom expounds it. Nor did, or could his inhumanation breed any
disparity: God forbid, that we should think so: so, that the flesh brought
ignominy to the Word. The Son is not diminished in his Deity, sed potius caro
per verbum Dei glorificata est, Athanas. ad. Adelp. orat. 5.
but the flesh rather is glorified by the Word of God, says Athanasius. For as
man also, he from the very instant of the personal union, (...), was so
perfectly enriched with the glory of the invisible Deity, (...), Damas. in
orat. de Domini transf.
(...), that one and the same might be the glory of the Word and the flesh,
says Damascen. Veiled it in his visible body from the eyes of men, yet was
full in him. Witness his transfiguration; where taking nothing, nor changing
into any thing which was not, he to his Disciples opening their sight, showed
that which was.

Yet with Zanchius I affirm that as man he was not always in this glory, per
perfectissimam fruitionem, after the highest fruition. Thus only after death:
For his prayer was to be glorified with the Father in the glory, which he had
with him from eternity, John 17.5.

And though as man he by the union obtained this increated glory in respect of
his person, yet we deprive him not of the created, wherein his humane nature
resides by real participation. This, though finite, is so clear in him, that
he in it is refulgent throughout Heaven. Heaven wants no Sun, nor Moon; the
glory of God lightens it, and lucerna ejus est^ Agnus, and the light thereof is
the Lamb, Rev. 21.13. This visible all the blessed shall behold, and most happy
we in enjoying this. This is manant, not the essential. The Sun gives light,
yet the light is formally in the Sun; As the effect from the cause, so is
this. By personal union the one, by communication the other. And neither the
one way, nor the other for himself. For us Christ was assumed unto and abides
in both. Both are fully manifested in him, that we through him assured to be
glorified perfectly, might with full voice, heart, and tongue, confess him
Lord in, and of the glory. In it himself, without whom is no glory, and of it
Lord to glorify whom he pleases.

And all this to the glory of God the Father. To the glory that he is Lord; and
to the glory that we confess him Lord. The Fathers take both, and finding both
expressed in the Scriptures, we reject neither.

First, we should confess that all his Lordship is not to his own glory, but
to his Fathers. For, at his Nativity, the Angels give the glory thereof unto
God in the highest, Luke 2.13, 14. God the Father twice proclaimed by voice
from Heaven that he took the glory of him to himself. At his Baptism first
in the river Jordan, Matthew. 3.17. At his transfiguration next on Mount Tabor,
Matthew. 17.5. Christ professes also that he seeks not his own glory, but
honors the Father, John 8.49, 50. On earth he ever did so, John 17.5. and
the Father having glorified him by Super upon Super, he by his Lordship over
Heaven, Earth, and Hell, glorifieth the Father for ever and ever, John 17.1.

As he was, and what he did in his humiliation; as he is, and whatsoever he
does in his exaltation, all in himself, and for us is, ad gloriam, to the
glory of the Father. His humiliation was; non ad ignominiam Deitatis, sed ad
gloriam Dei Patris, not to the dishonor of the Deity, but to the glory of God
the Father. Because it is his glory, hominem jam conditum, and amissum
recuperari, etc. that man, now lost should be recovered, Athanas. cont. Arr.
orat. 2.
vivified being dead, and made the Temple of God. So Athanasius. Cyril.
Alexand. orat. Relig Reg. de recta fide.
So Cyrillus Alexandrinus; And of all in himself and for us has the Father
glory: Chrysostom. Chrysostom. in loc.
It is the Sons glory sets forth the Fathers, Heb. 1.2. Per filium
glorificari patrem, quis negat? No man denies that; so Saint Augustine. Aug.
cont. sermon. Arrian. c. 31.
Think not then that gloria filio, shall abate ought of gloria patri. Let the
fear be far from us, that in exalting the Son, we shall eclipse the glory
of the Father, says the reverend Bishop.

Nay, our confession, implicit, by the knee, and, explicit, of the tongue, is
to his glory. The Syriak interpreter renders it thus: Omnes lingua confiteatur
Dominum Jesum Christum ad gloriam Dei Patris sui, every tongue should confess
the Lord Jesus to the glory of God his Father. This also intended Arias
Montanus by observing two Comma's here; one before (...), the word, that,
another after, (...), the name, Christ; and therefore translates it in gloriam.
As if he had said, every tongue should confess unto the the glory of God the
Father, that Jesus Christ is Lord. Saint Chrysostom applies his (...), as
often as he uses it on the place, unto (...). This, that Christ is, (...), as
the Father, is the highest demonstration of the Fathers glory. Yet also, (...),
when I say that such a one he is, (...), even in this, that I so say, I do
again glorify God. As if the Father having glorified the Son, and himself
being glorified in him, we confessing it do our way somewhat glorify both.
Both: for the great things, Chrysostom. ibid.
we speak of the Son, go to the Father also. And but somewhat; (...), for
it is but little to the glory of God, (...), that the world should adore him,
says the same Father. Not that this little does add any thing to his glory,
but his glory is in our small measure set forth by such acknowledgement. Not
more, or less in it self for us, by us more, or less declared only. It is
our duty of thankfulness, 1 Cor. 6.20. He has redeemed us, and we have need
to cast our eyes on him. Aug. de civit. Dei l. 9. c. 5.
Totum quod recte colitur Deus, homini prodest, non Deo, as Saint Augustine.
Not for want in him, but for our supply. The Fountain gains not by our
drinking there, nor the light by our seeing it. Our recourse to him argues his
fullness, and our indigence. Yea, to return all in humility to him is the
only way to keep him most bountiful unto us. For whosoever shall confess
him before men, him will he confess before his Father which is in Heaven,
Matthew 10.32. Who deny him, by him shall be denied, v. 33.

Christ ever glorified the Father, John 17.5. He taught us so to do, Matthew.
6.9. the Apostles followed his example, Acts 2.47. the blessed are always in
the practice, Rev. 4. and 5. and. 7. the utmost end of the sacred Trinity is
the glory of God in all things, Rev. 5 13.
Isa. 63.12, 14. and if here we observe the pointing of the three verses, we
have no stay till all be brought thereto. For the ninth verse is divided by a
Colon, so is the tenth; which shows that neither of them are full without
eleventh. The eleventh then giving the period, the last Comma tells whereto all
before does tend. Begin therefore at the first word of the ninth verse, and
from wherefore, being the union of our salvation; proceed, and carry the
exaltation of the person, and Name by God; descend therewith, and take the
exaltation of the Name and Person by us, and what will become of all? What? I
speak it with alacrity, all comes to the glory of God the Father. The Person
before glorifying is now the Person glorified. Wherein the Son did for us;
wherein the Father did for the Son; and wherein we acknowledge both, thereof
God the Father takes all the glory.

The ever blessed, and glorious Virgin, the Mother of God, has no part herein:
Her soul does magnify the Lord, Luke 1.46. Nor any of the Saints: All the
Saints give thanks unto him, Psalm. 105.10. Nor any of the Angels: All his
Angels praise him, Psalm. 128.2. Nor any of the faithful: Not unto us Lord, not
unto us, but to thy Name be the glory, Psalm. 115.10. The Devil ambitious of it
was cast into hell, 2 Pet. 2.4. If any on earth entitle themselves thereto,
Tophet of old is prepared for the King, Isa. 30.33. And who attributes it unto
Idols, in the Law is accursed, Deuteronomy. 27.15. God is, in seipso sicut (...) and
(...), in himself as the first and the last; in the world, sicut rector and
author, as the author and orderer; in the Angels, Aug.
sicut sapor and decor, as delight and comeliness; in the Church, sicut
pater-familias in domo, as the goodman in the house; in the soul, sicut
sponsus in thalamo, as the bridegroom in the bride chamber; in the just, sicut
adjutor and protector, as an upholder and protector; in the reprobate, sicut
pavor and tremor, as dread and horror, says Saint Augustine. If he do all,
and be all in all, whose is the glory? That which is his peculiar he will not
communicate to another, Isa. 42.8.

Nor can he be defrauded; For he is (...), (...).
if you will (...), omnipresent, nothing may evade him; If as others (...), he
compasses all things nothing comprehending him. If from (...) rather, then he
is formidable; his children will not displease him, and his enemies yield him
glory in their trembling. The seventy Interpreters in the Old Testament, and
the Holy Ghost in the New express (...) by it. The God which is the Father,
and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, this is he. For the Hebrew word, in form
plural, and in signification mighty, implies the mystery of the Trinity.

Bring these together, and if Men or Devils arrogate his glory, they are sure
to pay the utmost farthing. But he giving all his to the Son, as before, does
neither put it from himself, nor from the Holy Ghost. Because they three being
one God and the same God, whatsoever is set forth in the one is not more or
less the others.

Let the mind be pure at all times, especially when we either speak or hear
any thing of God. (...), for neither is the tongue able to speak, nor the ear
to hear of him as his dignity requires, Chrys^ st in Heb. c. 1. ser. 1.
said Chrysostom. Be religious within, and consider: Can we worship one Person
and not another? Distinguish them without division, and we cannot. But when it
is expressed in the Scripture that, Bez. in loc.
as Beza notes, non possit nisi in filio gratus honor illi tribui, no honor
save in the Son can be acceptable, Why should any think the Son may have
too much? The more the Son is worshipped, is not the Father worshipped the
more? Reason will say so, when no other way may be found unto him. Who have
another, let them go by it. I am sure he points out the Son only to us:
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, Matthew. 3.17. and 17.5. Well
pleased, with whom? He ever was with him: and now without him displeased, in
him is well pleased with us also. And as sure I am that the Son sends us in
his own Name unto the Father. No man comes unto the Father, but by me, John
14.6. And whatsoever ye ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you, chap.
16. v. 23. I am in the Father, and the Father is in me, he is not seen without
me, nor will he hear, save in the sense of my Name. Come to me; for so ye go
to him. Come thus, bow, confess, and make an Idol if you can of me: Do what
ye can to honor me: and what you do is to the glory of God the Father.

Who gave all to the Son to him does all return. To him (...), (...).
by excellency. Because he is, (...), the preserver not only of things
Created, but of the Unity in Trinity also. (...) then is the beginning without
beginning: fons Deitatis, the fountain of the Deity, wherein the Son
subsists eternal with the Father, and the Holy Ghost with both.

The Father in respect of his own Son, and of us his adopted Sons. Nomen
pietatis, and potestatis est, a Name of piety it, Tertul. de orat. c. 2.
and of power, says Tertullian. Of piety to love, and of power to beget a
Son, and such a Son through whom we might be called the children of the
Highest. The Father therefore of the Son of God we mind: Ad gloriam Dei
patris sui, to the glory of God his Father it is, so the Syriak. Not that the
Son and Holy Ghost have not the glory. For with the Father the Son is
glorified, and the Holy Ghost. Because they three, (...), are one, 1 John 5.7.
One in substance, and in dignity one. Believe this, and the rest will follow.
Believe, (...), for we are not able to speak many things we understand of God;
Chrysostom. in Heb. c. 1 ser. 2.
and we speak many things which we are not fit to understand, says Saint
Chrysostom.

This reason you first have, and (...) it, why the Father is only expressed,
when the other may not be excluded. Athanas. cont. Arr. orat. 2. Ignat. in
epist. ad Phipp. Greg. Nazi. in orat. 2. de filio.
The Father is, (...), the greater, (...), in respect of the generation, so
Athanasius. As the cause, said Ignatius before him, and Gregory Nazianzen after.

A second is, to show that the Son is honored as the Father, and the Father
not honored without the Son. The worship of the one and the other, both one.
For we here see, (...), the Father glorified, Chrysostom. in loc.
when the Son is glorified. As Saint Chrysostom. Confessing the Son we
acknowledge the Father: the one cannot be without the other. And the substance
of both being one, one cannot be honored, and not another. Animadvert we our
Saviors words, John 5.22, 23. All judgment is given to the Son, that all
men should honor the Son, (...), as they honor the Father: Is it not
manifest there, that the Son is the Person, Bez. in Job. 5.23.
in quo coli vult Pater, as Beza notes, in whom the Father will be worshipped?
Why else is all judgment given him? And why else may not the Father be
honored without the Son? Yea, the conjunction, (...), as, does teach not
only an equal worship of the Father and the Son, but also that the worship
of the Father must be exhibited in, and through the Son. Believing in, and
adoring him, we believe in and adore the Father.

It is Christ's doctrine: He that believes in, and sees me, believes in, and
sees him, that sent me, John 12.44, 45. And this is, (...), the work of God,
that we believe in him whom he sent, Cyril. Alex in lib Reli^, Reg. sup. lo^. 6
^ 9.
John 6.29 If Gods work, and Christ's doctrine, then believing in Christ,
(...), we make perfect the will of God, says Cyrillus Alexandrinus. It may be
illustrated thus: The Agent is not without the Object, nor the Act without
both: in the Object then we see the Agent, and of both the Act: without it we
can do neither. The Father is not without the Son, nor the Holy Ghost
without both: the Son then being the Character of the Father, we behold the
Father in the Son, and the Holy Ghost too: because he proceeds from them
both. But without the Son we can do neither the one, nor the other. He is the
Word incarnate, God manifested in the flesh, that we in, and through him may be
directed unto the true apprehension of the three subsistences in one substance.
Who therefore does honor the first, or the third without, or not in the second
Person, does neither honor the Father, nor the Son, nor the Holy Ghost. This
is the cause why our Savior would by no means permit any thing to be asked of
the Father, but in his Name, John 16.23, 24. And this it, Tertul. in Apol.
advers. Gent. c. 21.
that made the persecuted so resolute, Dicimus and palam dicimus, Deum colimus
per Christum, we say, and we say it openly, and aloud to you tormentours, We
worship God through Christ, as Tertullian has recorded. Orig. cont. Cells. l.
8. c. 1.
Ascendit ad summum Deum is, etc. he ascends to the high God, who worships him
inseparably, and indivisibly through Jesus the Son of God, Cujus solius ductu
pervenitur ad patrem, by whom alone we go unto the Father; so Origin. Ambros.
de Isaac and any. c. 8.
Ipse oculus noster, ut per illum videamus Patrem, he is our eye, that by him
we may see the Father; ipse vox, he that voice, by which we may speak to the
Father; ipse dextera, he the right hand, by which we may offer our Sacrifice to
God the Father; Aug. in Psalm. 108
so Saint Ambrose. And Saint Augustine says, Prayer not made through Christ
does not only not blot out sin, sed etiam ipsa fit in peccatum, but also
becomes sin. Being in the harmony of the true Church keep we ever there. If
the Ass will feed on Thistles let him: to whom the Hony-combe is not denied,
we will not change our fare.

Who say that in bowing at the Name of Jesus, and by the open confession of the
tongue we worship him with other worship, then the Father, or prefer him
before the Father, may as well say, we worship, aliud, we know not what, and
not, alium, another, who is still the same with the Father.

One is as false as the other, and both as that which contradicts the truth.
For we never divide the three persons in our worship of any one; who do are
Idolaters. We honor one, and all; all in the Trinity, or none. Bowing then at
the Name unto the Person, through the sense of Jesus, the Father has glory and
the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost by the Apostle commands it: if obedience be
acceptable, I am sure in doing it we obey him. And if we can believe the
Apostle, our own eyes will tell us, that with the Son the Father is thereby
glorified. For the bowing to, and the confessing of Jesus enjoined by the
Spirit are both expressed, to the glory of God the Father. The Son admits of
no glory, which shall impair his Fathers in the least degree. And ever be it
our glory to give him all his due. Tibi, Bernard. sup. cant. s^ rm. 13.
Domine, tibi gloria tua mane at illibata.

The Arrians, and all other Heresiarchs, that oppose the Deity of Christ; The
Agnoits, that charge Christ with ignorance; The Manichees, Seleucians,
Hermians, Christolits, that deny him, as man, to be glorified in Heaven; The
Cerinthians, Chiliasts, Nepotians, that affirm our happiness shall be in the
fruition of carnalities; The Eutychians, Jacobits, that say the humane nature
is consumed by the Divine; The Nestorians, Servetans, Vbiquitaries, that aver
the manhood is turned into the Godhead; And the Macedonians, Messalians,
Priscillianists, that hold it no dishonor unto the Majesty of God to renounce
the faith, and profession of Christ, are condemned at (...). For there Christ,
ever equal with the Father, as God, is as man so glorified by the Deity in his
Person, that the beatificall vision of him shall be our eternal and
inconceiveable happiness. And though he be so full of Divine excellencies, yet
our nature in him remains entire, that who now confess him Lord may through
it be enabled to behold his glory hereafter. The Saturnians, Basilidians,
Cerdonians, that frame to themselves two Gods, one of the Jews contrary to the
other of the Christians; The Simonians, that style Simon Magus the true God;
The Carpocratians, Marcits, Severians, Menandrians, that repelling Christ, as
too infirm, honor their familiar Devils, as the authors and governors of
all things; The Gnostics, that privately and publicly maintain the
worshipping of Idols, as necessary; The Collyridians' Angeliks, Montanists,
Armenii, that either attribute Divine honor to the Virgin, or to the Angels,
or to the Image of Christ, or to his Cross; And the Papists, that, to the
former four idolatries, add the worshipping of Saints in, or by their
Pictures, are condemned at (...) For there one and the same God, the God of the
Jews and the Gentiles, infinite in all that he is, wonderful in all his
ways, the sole former, orderer, and controller of all things above and below,
will not permit the Name thereof to any other. The highest he, and therefore
the highest glory must be his only. The Ptolemaeans, Colarbasians, Praxeans,
Noetians, Sabellians, Patripassians, that confound the Persons in the Trinity;
The Metangismonits, that will have the Son contained in the Father, as the
lesser vessel in the greater; The Tritheits, Triformits, Tetratheits, that
make the three Persons three parts of God, and every Person imperfect of
himself; The Roman Pontificiaries, that run to the blessed Virgin, Saints,
Angels, as mediators to the Father; And our Socinian-Separatists, Puritans,
Brownists, etc. that think the bowing of the Knee at the Name of Jesus, and
open confession of him a disparagement rather, then glory to the Father, are
condemned at (...) For there, the Father only expressed, as first in order, in
him the three subsistences are included. Not confounded in the manner of being
are truly distinct not distinguished in substance. One and the same the three,
and thence it is that naming but one, we give equal glory unto all. This and
all we maintain from (...), and still the argument is the union and our
salvation.

True Christians we, looking unto Jesus exalted, behold him, in his triumphall
Charet, sweet, and delectable. Our faith shows us that he is girt with
strength, clothed with beauty; His understanding has no measure, nor his
goodness end: comeliness carries the Mace before him, and at his right hand
are pleasures for evermore. All increated perfection we acknowledge his by
nature, as the Son of God, and his by personal union, as the Son of man.
Not that whatsoever, he, as the Son of God, has in himself, is by real
participation communicated to his humane nature. We cannot say so, and in our
thoughts preserve the person of God and man in his essentials. Yet such manant
superexcellencies we consider in his flesh, as may fulfill our blessedness. So
we do; and exult that Jesus is the Lord in whom only Gods glory is concluded.
For of him God has glory before time, glory in time, glory beyond time. Glory
in filiation, glory in election; glory in creation, glory in redemption; glory
in the Old Testament, glory in the New; glory in salvation, glory in damnation
for ever and ever. The glory, above which no glory, is Christ's. The blessed
Virgin, Saints, and Angels, enjoy the peaee of it; but no man, save he that is
God, may challenge it. He may; for being one with the Father, and the Holy
Ghost, neither the Father nor the Holy Ghost can deprive him. Where there are
all, and all three one, the glory cannot be to one, and not full to every one.
For the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost being but one God, the manner of
their being, the second of the first, and the third from both, does not
separate one and another. It is Essence and Essence, not subsistence and
subsistence, that overthrowes Unity in Trinity. Nor may we infer that the
Son and Holy Ghost are not, or be less advanced here then the Father;
Because he is expressed, and not the other. No such conclusion: our sense
apprehends it otherwise: The Son has his manner of existing of the Father,
and the Holy Ghost from both. This glory therefore is ascribed to the Father as
the Fountain, which in absolute consideration does alike pertain to the other
persons. When the Father is mentioned, we in mind conceive the other persons
also. For no man knows the Father, but by the Son, nor any man the Son,
but by the Holy Ghost. Confessing then the Son we confess all, and the
Father having the glory of our confession the other have it also. The Father
has it to himself, the Son in the Father, and the holy Ghost in them both.

We can now tell what compasses the text, and goes all over it. The first
word we have brought through all unto the last, and carried the last clause
unto the first. The true pointing makes it clear, and sets forth the
exaltation, by God of the Person and Name, and of the Name and Person by us, in
these particulars. First, wherefore, that is, for the union, and for salvation
he gave him a Name above every Name in, and to the glory of God the Father.
There God has done his part, next is our.

Tract. X.
(...).
AT (...). if you remember, I referred something that may not be forgotten now.
It was only mentioned there, and this it. Christ's humility was propounded as
an example, that we might know how, and by whom to obtain glory.

First, how? By humility: For the same mind must be in us, that was in Christ
Jesus, v. 5.

Secondly, of whom? Of Jesus Christ: For he is the Lord of glory, v. 9.10, 11.

He is the example; humility our work; and glory the reward.

Chrysostom. in loc.
says Saint Chrysostom, in living to the glory of another. Indeed others may
move our emulation, imitandi imitatores Christi, but Christ should still be
seen in them, 1 Cor. 11.1. Saint Peter therefore, 1 Epist. 2.21. says, that
Christ has left himself, (...), an example to us that we may do after his
form. None may deprive him of that honor: for it was one of the principal
causes of his incarnation, that we which would be as Gods, Genesis 3.5. might be
conformed unto the Image of the Son of God, Romans 8.29. He only found out
that way, and would no other way turn the (...), or note of ironic, Genesis 3.22.
into an ecce of excellency.

But how are we conformed? By imitating him. Not that God justifies us for
this imitation, but being justified freely by his grace, we by such imitation
show our free justiftication in Christ. For who abide in, walk after him, 1
John 2.6. No fear of Socinianisme here. If sin be ours by propagation, and
righteousness by imputation, we have neither the one nor the other by
imitation. This granted, the proposition is very true. We ought to imitate
Christ wherein we may, and the more we do, the more we are sanctified through
him. For though the rightousnesse of justification be not inherent in us, yet
the righteousness of sanctification is, and is more and more by good works.
The other is perfect at once, this by degrees: That produces, and the
particulars of this be the proceeds.

Who are assured of the first, ever look after the second, and that way,
wherein they never shall miscarry. Christ is Janua, John 10. no other it, and
Via too, John 14. To enter and walk is, imitari vias, to imitate him, says
Saint Augustine. Aug. in Psalm. 90.
Who will go right must inspect Jesus, Heb. 12.2. They that aim to be
Artists, ought to heed their Masters. So we taking in certain rulles, (...),
at the optic sense, (...), imprint the Art in the mind, says Saint
Chrysostom. Chrysostom. in Heb. 12. v. 2. sermon. 28


And though Christ be now in Heaven, yet his Gospel is with us. Therein are,
(...), forms, and chief ones of institution. To be followed cum alaeritate,
says Theophylact, Theophyl. in Ioh. 13. v. 15.
though not equalled by our practice. What were for us consigned, we ought to
have recourse to them. Nor is there any thing not of special use. Omnis
Christi actio est nostra instructio, every action of Christ is our instruction.

qua Deus, as God; In these we cannot, nor are we bound to imitate him.

qua Mediator, as a Mediator of God and man; In these we are no farther tied,
then as he finished all things belonging to his vocation, so should we be
faithful in ours.

qua homo factus sub lege, as man subject to the Law: In these we ought to
follow him; and though we cannot exactly, yet in a conformity we must. If we
acknowledge our dissimilitude, deplore our negligence, and express our desire,
voluntas pro facto reputatur, the deed shall be reputed as the will, yea the
will accepted for the deed.

In what Christ did as God we worship him religiously, and follow him zealously
in what he did as man. Who loves and hates what Christ as God does love and
hate, imitates Christ as much as a man may imitate God: And he that does that,
which Christ did as man, does follow Christ as a Christian should. I will
conclude this in Saint Augustines words. Aug. sent. dec^ r. 111.
Imitatores magistri debent esse discipuli, non in faciendis miraculis, quae
nemo exigit, sed in custodienda humilitate and patientia, ad quae nos Dominus
invitavit suo exemplo, the Disciples ought to be imitatours of their Master,
not in doing miracles, which are not required, but in preserving humility and
patience, whereto the Lord invites us by his example.

Discite a me, learn it of me, Matthew. 11.29. Christ our president, Exemplum
dedi vobis; It is commended to us in himself, John 13.15. and he made it a
Law, Abneget seipsum, who will go after him must obey it, Matthew. 16.24.
Wherein his love exceeded thereto he holds us strictly. And the more, because
such humiliation is most contrary to the flesh. For pride which gave man his
fall must be ejected before he can rise. The Apostle therefore weighing this
prosecutes us with the highest argument. If the Son of God made himself of
no reputation in our nature humbling himself unto the most reproachful death
for us, will not the sons of men be humble before him? Whom this cannot move,
they may be called Christians not having part in Christ.

Humility was the sign, that the Angels gave at his coming into the world,
and must be our token to the world, that we are going unto him. For who are
taken up with divine greatness, renounce themselves in the expectation of
better supply from God. Not in words only, or in outward worship, or bodily
gesture, or manifest works, but, in sensu animi, according to the meaning of
the Apostle, verse 5. in the very affections of the heart also. Puro cordis
affectu exprimatur, says Saint Hierome, in the outward and inward, in both
together. Hier. ad Celant
Not in one and not in another, but being always right in the interior, will
never be false, or fail in any of the exterior. To God in the first place, to
our Superiors in the next, and to all sorts in preferring, and bearing with,
one another. For so Christ taught, and in his obedience fulfilled
righteousness, Mat. 5. It was his way in, nor is there other for any unto, the
truth. Est prima humilitas, secunda humilitas, tertia humilitas, and quoties
interrogares, hoc dicerem; Demosthenes could find no principle more special
in eloquence then pronunciation, Aug. in Epist. 56
nor Saint Augustine to Dioscorus a more principal virtue then humility for a
Christian. It is the first, the second, the third, and as often as thou
would ask, I would answer nothing else, says he.

Not as if there were no other precepts; but unless humility go before,
accompany, and follow; unless we behold it proposed, adhere to it apposed, and
be ordered by it imposed, we can exult of no good; Totum extorquet de manu
superbia, pride wresteth all out of our hands. Who then will be thoroughly
furnished must be humble all over, and always. For the first precept being
finished thereby, the last may not be consummate without it. Quisquis cupit
divinitatis tenore fastigia, humilitatis ima sectetur, who would be built up to
that perfection should lay a deep foundation, says Saint Ambrose. Ambros. in
sermon.
The lower we sink our selves, the nearer God comes to us, Psalm. 33.19. and
Prove. 11.2. Cum humilibus sapientia, his wisdom is with the humble: and his
greatest blessing too. For theirs is, regnum caelorum, the Kingdom of Heaven,
Matthew. 5.3. Tanto quisque preciosior Deo, quanto propter eum vilior sibi, the
more vile for God to our selves, the more precious we to him, said Gregory.
Greg. 18. l. Mor.
The examples of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and Fathers of
the Church might here be set forth to inflect our minds: but saying that in it
our Savior brought to pass the work of our redemption, have I not said all
that may extraordinarily commend it unto us? This all the faithful beheld, and
admiring it in him love it in themselves for him, and for the works sake.

Nor entertaining it in this manner do we turn any thing that is good out of
our selves. For Christ lost nothing thereby, but gained the more for us, and we
therein reap his gains. Humilibus dat gratiam, God gives his grace unto the
lowly, Prove. 4.34. James 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5. We then by it repressing innate evil
are established in goodness.

Bern. de consid. l. 5.
First, sure in our foundation, for it is virtutum bonum quoddam and stabile
fundamentum, the good and firm ground of virtues, says Saint Bernard.

Ad Hen. Seno. nens Epist. 42.
Secondly, right in our building; for servans acceptas, servatas consummat,
keeping, says he, the virtues we receive, it perfects them received. The Lord
respecting us therefore, Isa. 66.2. manifests his power, when we acknowledge
our infirmities, 2 Cor. 12.9.

And in this respect humility may be accounted, propugnaculum nostrum, our
Tower, and fortress against the many insults of vice. It goes with us
throughout the Kingdom of grace, and departs not from us, when we are exalted
into glory.

So stout it, that it yields to no attempt either of presumption or of
despair. Death it self frightens not; it went undaunted thither, Exodus 15.25.
even with an usque ad, unto the death of the Cross, verse. 7. Like the tree
that Moses cast into the waters of Mura, it makes the most bitter sweet. And
where the waters are deep it is as Moses Rod, or Eliuhs Cloak, smiting them
with it, they divide, and we walk on dry land. To gain the Crown set before
it the sharpest things seem pleasant.

So sublime it, that it gives no place to honors. It adds glory unto Kings on
earth; and it is the glory of the Saints in Heaven to cast down themselves
before the Throne of God, Rev. 5. and 7.

So strong, so sublime, who will not indue it? Nay who will not are sure to be
confounded. For God resists the proud, 1 Pet. 5.5. Pride goes before sorrow,
and the puffing up of the mind is unto ruin, Prove. 16.18. We must be very
cautelous then left this vice get into our humility. In recte factis cavenda
est superbia, Aug. Epist. 56.
pride is too often clothed therewith. Our Savior took the Scribes and
Pharisees in it, Matthew. 6.16. Saint Paul reproved the Colossians in that habit;
and, I much fear, these times are sore troubled with haughty spirits in an
humble hue. Show me the submission of our great Professors in humility, and I
will confess my error.

But Saint Chrysostom tells us that, Chrysostom. in loc.
when in pretent of Gods worship our doings are not feign, (...), then
especially we upbraid him. And if we do, is not his judgment at hand*
Derisores ipse deridet, he laugh^ us to scorn, Prove. 3.34. Domum evollet, he
will lay us waste; Prove. 15.25. Not far off, even under this Crown, non
hospes ab hospite tutus; and in this Kingdom where is truth, love, honesty?
Achitophels treachery, Rabshakes railing, Jezabels adultery, Esaus hate, Ammons
deceit, Nebuchadnezzars pride, Dives unmercifulness, and all manner of
impieties couch under the fear of the Lord. Shall the Lord see, and not be
avenged? Repent, repent; God is angry, and the vials of his wrath ready to be
poured out. Turn we therefore, and without delay, with humble, with contrite
hearts, and he will return with a blessing unto us. Sion shall have her
prosperity here, and her full glory hereafter.

Heb. 12.2. for the glory therefore he purchased to us be not we ashamed of the
price he paid. God chose the ignoble things, (...), and the most contemptible
in the world for his purpose, 1 Cor. 1.28. (...), verse. 6. exhausit, as
Tertullian, he drew out himself in his undertakings; or as Beza, ex omni
seipsum in nihil redogit, Text. adv. Mar. l. 5. c. 20.
he brought himself from all to nothing, Dan. 9.26. On the lowest basis he
built the highest glory. (...), he was made a servant, for this he is Lord of
all, so Saint Chrysostom. Magnus esse vis? a minimo incipe, Chrysostom. ibid.
Aug. de verb. Domini ser. 10.
who will be great must begin at the least, so Saint Augustine. Begin
there, and upon our Saviors word ye shall be exalted, Luke 18.14. Ye shall,
so says Saint James 4.10. and Saint Peter too, 1 Epist. 5.6.

Is it not then as Saint Paul here says, verse. 5. (...), a wise mind to be so
minded? It was wisdom in Christ, and why should it be foolishness with us? We
lay down temporal things, and take up everlasting. What comparison is there
between a drop and an Ocean; a point and the world; a moment and eternity? The
whole treasure, and pomp of the world is nothing to that immense weight of
glory, which follows our Christian contempt of earthly things. While we
looking on the things, which are not seen, the momentany lightness of our
tribulation prepares unto us a reward, (...), beyond the reach of our
apprehension, 2 Cor. 4.17. Quid dicam nescio: sed Deus habet, quod exhibeat, I
know not what to say of it; but God has what he can give, and what he will
give, August. de civit. Dei l. 22. c. 30.
erit ipse, shall be himself. For what else is it for him to be our God, and
we his people? He could promise nothing better, nothing greater, life,
salvation, glory, peace, all excellencies, he will be all in all. He will; and
therefore sure we that our measure shall be filled up with his goods. What they
are none can conceive, save who receive them. Nor they comprehend, because the
object of happiness is infinite. Indeed what is created for us will be
according to the receivers. Finite it, and therefore not the satisfying save in
the object. It is not the chief good, but enables us to contemplate in Christ
after our measure the Summum bonum, which God himself is. This is it; for it
is God that does ever satiate, and never cloy.

And though I have called this the reward of our humility, yet it may not be
said that our humility merits this. No, it was purchased for us by the
humiliation of Jesus. In whom we have it, without him we challenge nothing.
Hoping therefore to be glorified with him in Heaven, to him we conform on
earth. And because he has taught no other way to the inheritance, then he went
in the purchase, we seek no other, nor can we think there might be any other
more glorious. For in it we never do, Ibid.
says Saint Chrysostom, (...), descend from glory. The lowest degree is ever
an ascent unto the highest. (...), the high is low, the low high: this (...),
is made good in the contradiction, that Christ endured against himself, Heb.
12.2, 3. And when we see his humble members despising the world, yet despising
no man; contemning themselves, and yet contemning that contempt, which
persecutes them, do we not behold the mind exalted above all things below?
Yea when we find pride it self palliated with humility, know we not that the
proud confess there is glory both in, and for the virtue.

How in seeming not mistaken is the world mistaken much? men think humility
and glory opposits; as if of both in one could be no subsistence. It is pride
that refusing the one may never come at the other. Quisquis enim nunc sponte se
non humiliat, Greg. l. 8. Moral.
nequaquam hunc sequens gloria exaltat, for who does not here willingly, and
truly humiliate himself, following glory never exalts him, says Gregory.

My close is: for Christ, for the virtue, for the glories sake learn we the
Apostles counsel. Keep we our eyes fixed on the example of Jesus, and in
proceeding the nearer we come to our place, like natural bodies, we shall move
with the more celerity. Our humility will carry us, and with speed enough, unto
the same journies end it brought him. Who draws us in the way, Cant. 1.4. will
crown us in the end, Rev. 2.10. Doing what he commands, we shall receive what
he obtained, life eternal in and to the glory of God the Father.

The Samosatenians, and Socinians, that hold Christ's death neither
satisfactory, nor meritorious, but only exemplary for us; The Jews, Turks,
Pagans, Infidels, to whom Christ is a scorn, and his Cross an offense; The
Atheists, Nullifidians, Profane, that in dirision of Gods Religion, call his
Church Satan's Synagogue, the Communion Bacchus Sacrifice, and his professors
Solifidians; The Libertines of our age that count us fools for our Austerity;
The careless Professors that deem us over pitiful to others, too bitter to
our selves; Our Church Michals, Catharists, Brownists, Separatists, that deride
us for our humiliation in the service of God; The Anabaptists, Monks,
Hypocrites, that will be humble without submission, poor without want, and
rich without labor; The Sadduces, Simonians, Saturnians, etc. that hoping
there is no punishment after this life for the bad, will have no reward for the
good; The Cerinthians, Pepuzians, Mahumetans, that place happiness in the
eternal fruition of fleshly delights on earth; And the Montanists, Enthysiasts,
Papists, that in the argument of the glory put the merit on themselves, are
condemned by the Apostles counsel in the sixth verse, and his inference, at
the ninth verse. For there, the fabric of glory, that Christ built up for us,
being founded on his merits in such humiliation, we are taught to show our
gains by following his example. Whose redeemed we are, his humble servants we.
If glory be the reward, we have no cause to stand upon the work. Be it in what
degree he please, we need not be abashed at the humility. For who was the
lowest on earth we are sure our Savior is the highest exalted in Heaven. When
we have done our part God will give us our right in him. This and all we
maintain from (...), and still the argument is the Union and our salvation.

True Christians we, finding how hard we are beset with, and prone to evil,
look always on our Captain, and attend his word for fear we should mistake
his discipline. We know how great a Conqueror he is, and that he can never
fail in his direction; if our actions vary from, we have not well minded him.
And though he be taken out of our sight, his life is left with us, and reading
it we have instruction store and sure. Sure, if we follow it close, right, and
be always sure to it. Nor is it infallible in one and not in all. Whereof he
has given plenty, there is no doubt of any one. Nor is the number of his
precepts either large beyond our memory, or short to leave out any thing, that
might further us. The example he has given is most absolute. It demonstrates
all things that are to be contemned, and sustained all. In them is no felicity
to be had, in these no unhappiness to be feared. He bid us come and see, and
we most ambitious to enjoy, what here we believe, will go no other way, then
himself went, and appointed for us. A low way, Christ humble; a perfect way,
Christ the truth; and a comfortable way, Christ the life. Having truth we are
sure to have cheer in, and life by our humility. It is not the similitude
thereof, but the virtue we mean. That is it, and nothing being more acceptable
to God, we do in nothing more, nor in any thing without it, expect a blessing.
For nothing in us does more exalt God, and our innate evil is repressed by
nothing more. All the Lords commands are observed with it, and the virtue which
springs not from that root withers. Indeed love makes up all breaches, but we
have no other means to repair charity save humility. In whom all was made up,
all was done in humility, and who partake of all, we, like him, will be humble
to all. To God in the lowest degree; to his Vicegerent next; we have no envy
for our Superiors, nor hatred to our equals, nor contempt toward our
inferiors. Love for God, and such, as will permit nothing before him, not our
substance, not our lives. And love for our neighbor, and such, as will pray
for every one, and forgive every offense. The true knowledge of our
superexalted Head raises our conversation unto Heaven whilst we live on
earth. And well may: For we behold the eternal glory prepared for the meek
incomprehensible in the object. The faith whereof has made our appetites so
eager, that they can leave the greatest allectives of the world with contempt.
Whose servants we are to him faithful we may challenge of him our inheritance,
who purchased it for us. And with boldness, seeing in humility, and according
to his prescription we leave all to profess him our high exalted Lord in, and
to the glory of God the Father. To whom with the Son and the Holy Ghost be
the Kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen, Amen.


