AN ELEGY, On the Death of the Right Honorable and most Noble Hero, ROBERT
BLAKE, Late General of the English Fleet at Sea.
Together with a Commemoration of the most famous Victories by him heretofore
obained against the HOLLANDERS: And His remarkable Successes, to the Glory of
the ENGLISH Nation, afterward against the Spaniard and Turkish Pirates, in
clearing the Seas, and taking and drowning their Ships, and burning of many of
the best of them in their strongest and most Fenced Havens: Who departed this
Life on Friday, August the 7. 1657.
WHat sacred Flame is this? What glorious Guest
Is pleased to lodge in my unworthy breast?
And with a sudden touch my Soul inspires,
Rapt in amazements, and transporting sires?
It Is thou (great Shade) thou whosoere thou be
That leave the world in darkness, thou art he^
He who would truly mourn for such a man,
To find him tears should drain the Ocean,
Whiles dry all Navies through the world should stand,
Or else be sailing on a sloud by Land.
The End of man is glory, and her birth
Looks most to Heaven, and sometimes down to Earth;
Thou do partake of both, and now do know
How much they differ in degrees, as show.
Religion, Peace, and Wisdom, and the Stories,
Of Peace and War well-carried on, are Glories,
But with thy self to make the Country thrive,
Was thy true glory that is superlative.
How did the Ocean sweat with blood when War
Made thee triumphant against the Hollander^
How bravely did thy foes come on? yet hid
Their heads affrighted when thy Thunders chid,
And all the Monsters in the Seas did keep
Themselves retired 'ith' bottom of the Deep,
And amongst themselves made peace, afraid to hear
Thy dreadful Canons rattling in their care,
The Whale by Whale stood silent, and began
T'approach and comfort the Leviathan,
Who in his watery Realms'ne'r knew before,
Such lasting Terror in so loud a Roar,
Three days together Fleet against Fleet did stand,
And Thunders answered Thunders; the firm Land
Trembled, and feared it should to Isles be shook,
And Isles to be made Continents did look;
To crown the merit of an Act so high,
A glorious wound thou got'st with Victory,
And having after on the foaming Main
Made thy self Master of those foes again,
And slain their Admiral, who vowed that none
At Sea should govern but himself alone;
Thy Trumpets did on thy Return proclaim
With thine the honor of the English Name,
And ever since, where ere thy self did please
Thou saildst triumphant up and down the Seas,
Sometimes to make the Turkish Pirates know
By Fire and Sword what it is to be thy fo,
Or have the world more prone to understand
The strength of England both by Sea, and Land;
Sometimes t'examine, and with just disdain
Suppress the Power, and the Pride of Spain,
And in their Harbors burn their Ships, or make
The Pirates answer for the Goods they take;
And thus in several Oceans showing all
The parts of an accomplished General.
In thy return a sickness met thee, and
Death did ensue it e're thou came to land;
But that more fully we may here declare
Our plaints, we should lay by all tears, which are
Too weak for such a loss, we now should shake
With a just sigh the Center, and awake
The spirit of grief, that so our accents may
Make our love known, where e're his purer ray,
Where e're his Star does shine, if now he is
Spreading his light where rugged Parrhasis,
Shines at the Northern Pole, or if he please
Rather to grace the Southern Hyades,
Or where the beauties of the Morn their clear,
Reflections bend on Ganges streams, or where
When e're he in the Ocean dives, they run
From Calpe hill who mourn the fainting Sun,
Thou wheresoever thou do thy beams dispense,
It is no sin to beg their influence,
Whilst thus on us thou shall thy light employ;
We more shall crave it, and we shall enjoy
And mourn thee taken from us and a flight
Shall daily practice, till we reach that height,
Which thou have gained, O why should Heaven ordain
That when they there do joy, we here should plain,
Why should it urge to Good, yet from our view,
Steal the Example, and rejoice in it too.
Grief is of kin to Heaven, and does improve
The glorious Consorts, and blessed Quires above,
And unto us of greater power does seem,
Since their Joys move not us, our greifes help them,
But can tears ease us, or Complaints renew,
This matchless Hero which no Age can do?
Though Grief is not so mighty to revive,
Yet it is so happy to keep Fame alive:
Let us be proud of sorrow then, and make
His worth our theme, and since him overtake
We cannot, let us with devoted trust
Honor his Rellicks, and religious Dust;
How well these thoughts become us, we will indent
With Heaven, and him, to keep the argument
For ever in our breasts interred, and so
May grief befriend us, that our selves may grow
Rich in his Virtues, and be nobly bent,
On Sea and Land to love his Monument,
Which needs no Gravers Art, for every sigh
Shall better speak his Epitaph, and dye,
And learn a method to the world to grieve,
Which never could so great a loss outlive,
But that his Name recovers it as fast,
And it Embalms, as it away does wast.
R. C.

The End.
London, Printed for Tho. Vere and W. Gilbertson, and are to be sold as their
shops without Newgate. 1657.


