THE CASE Of the CITY of Londonderry in Ireland.
Humbly Represented to the Honorable House of Commons in Parliament Assembled.
THE said CITY having by Petition to the late Honorable House of Commons, and
by a Printed Case and Account of the Sufferings during the late Siege there,
truly set forth what they had Done and Suffered on the late Happy Revolution,
for Securing and Defense of that Important Place, need not now be repeated,
being generally Known, and Acknowledged by the Votes of that Honorable House,
of the 9th of April School, and their Address thereupon to His Majesty; as the
same likewise were by the Votes and Address of the Honorable House of Commons
in Ireland, in December, 1695, as by the said Petition, Votes and Addresses,
herewith Printed, may appear; but have hitherto had no Effect, no proper Fund
being found to answer that End: So that a great Part of their Suburbs, and many
Houses within the Walls, lie to this Day in Rubbish; besides the many other
Losses and Disbursements of the Inhabitants of that Place, for the Public
Service, they have hitherto had no Satisfaction for, yet are never without
Hopes to be at length Considered, according to the Circumstances of their Case.

AND forasmuch as the Services and Sufferings of the said City contributed much
to the Reduction of Ireland, by which the Estates of those there in Rebellion
became Forfeited: They therefore do now Humbly lay their Case before this
Honorable House, hoping, That in Appropriating the said Forfeitures, they may
be Remembered, and some Clause be inserted in the Act to be passed, touching the
same, for and in Behalf of that City, as may answer the Intent of the said
Petition, Votes and Addresses.

All which is Humbly Submitted to the Great Wisdom and Consideration of this
Honorable House.

The Humble PETITION of the Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of
Londonderry in Ireland.
Shows,
THAT Your Petitioners Services and Sufferings, on this late Happy Revolution,
and the Good Effects thereof, by the Mercy of God to these Kingdoms, are not
Unknown they hope to this Honorable House, nor as yet Forgotten, How early the
City of LONDONDERRY Appeared and Defended it self to the utmost, and was the
only Place in Protestant Hands, and for the Present Government, that endured
the Miseries and Calamities of a SIEGE, very Fatal to the Popish Interest and
Measures.

THAT Your Petitioners have been Great Sufferers thereby in many Respects, and
in a singular manner, not only in the Destruction of the far greatest Part of
the Suburbs of that City, and all Improvements about it, (as it still remains,)
and in the Ruin of many Houses within the Walls then laid in Rubbish, and the
rest greatly shattered by the Enemies Bombs and Cannon; but also by their many
Disbursements for Securing and Fortifying the Place; Buying and laying in Arms
and Ammunition; Raising, Paying, and Subsisting of Forces; Provisions of all
sorts consumed in the Siege by the Garrison; Clothes, and other Necessaries
afforded to the Officers and Soldiers that Defended the City; And Debts
contracted for the Public Use and Safety, amounting in all (as on a Moderate
Computation appeared) to about Thirty Thousand Pounds, besides Private Losses
in common with the rest of the Kingdom, and the Charge of Relieving many
Thousand Protestants, fled thither for Refuge. All which has brought them to
Great Poverty and the said City and Suburbs to a very Ruinous Condition.

THAT as they willingly Exposed Themselves and their All for the Public
Interest and Service; so they have patiently, these Eight Years past, lain
under their Losses, Supporting Themselves with the Hopes, That in good time,
especially if the Wars were once ended, and the great Affairs of the Kingdom
might admit, Such Consideration would be had of them, as they should no longer
remain a Poor Ruinous Spectacle to all, a Scorn to their Enemies, and
Discouragement to Others, as they now are: But should (as the Happy Result of
what they have undergone) be made (as they still hope they shall) a Lasting
Monument of His MAJESTY's Royal Favor and Bounty, if their CASE should then
come before Him, Recommended by this Honorable House.

YOUR Petitioners therefore Humbly Pray, That this Honorable House would
favorably please to look on them, and take their Case and Sufferings, and the
Ruinous Condition of the Poor City of Londonderry and its Suburbs, into
Consideration, and so to lay the same before His Sacred MAJESTY for His Royal
Favor, in order to Your Petitioners Relief in the Kingdom of Ireland, as to
Your Honors Great Wisdom shall seem meet.

And Your Petitioners will ever Pray, etc.
VOTES of the House of Commons of England.
Sabbati 90 die Aprilis, School.
SIR Robert Clayton Reported from the Committee, to whom the Petition of the
Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens of the City of Londonderry, in Ireland, was
Referred; That they had Examined and Considered the same, and come to several
Resolutions, which they had Directed him to Report to the House, which he Read
in his Place, and afterward Delivered in at the Table, where the same were
Read, and (with an Amendment of One of them) Agreed unto by the House, and are
as follow, (viz.)

Resolved, That the Allegations contained in the Petition, are True.

Resolved, That it appeared to the Committee, upon Examination of the Petition,
That the Public Losses, Disbursements and Damages sustained by the Inhabitants
of that City, are, in the said Petition, very moderately Computed; and that the
Losses, besides to particular and private Persons, are very great.

Resolved, That the Services and Sufferings of that City, on this late
Revolution, were very Eminent, and of great Consequence to his Majesty's
Service, and the Preservation of the Three Kingdoms.

Resolved, That in regard thereof, the said City has well Deserved to be
Considered, for the Damages in the Petition mentioned, and to have some special
Mark of His Majesty's Bounty, for a lasting Monument to Posterity.

That in order thereto, it is humbly Proposed, That something in particular,
which the Wisdom of this Honorable House shall think fit, be humbly
Recommended to His Majesty, to be done for the same.

Ordered, That it be Referred to the same Committee, to Draw up an Address, to
be Presented to his Majesty, setting forth the Substance of the said Petition,
and the said Resolutions, and humbly Praying, That His Majesty will please to
make some Compensation for the said Damages, out of the Customs of the said
City, or otherwise, as His Majesty, in his Princely Wisdom, shall think fit.

Jovis 23 die Junii, School.
Sir Robert Clayton Reported from the Committee, to whom the Address relating
to the City of Londonderry, in Ireland, was Committed; That they had Drawn up
an Address, which they had Directed him to Report to the House, which he Read
in his Place, and afterward Delivered in at the Table, where the same was
Read, and Agreed unto by the House; and is as follows, viz.

Most Gracious Sovereign,
WE Your Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the Commons in Parliament
Assembled, having Received a Petition from the Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens
in Your City of Londonderry, in Ireland; Setting forth their Early and
Singular Services and Sufferings on the late happy Revolution, by the Securing
and Defense of that City, against a Long and Cruel Siege (which Eminently
contributed to the destroying the Designs of the Enemies of these Kingdoms,)
And showing, That thereby not only the greatest Part of the City and Suburbs
was Demolished, or rendered Ruinous, but also that their Disbursements upon this
Occasion, for Fortifying, Providing Arms and Ammunition, Raising and Subsisting
Forces, and other Public Uses, did Amount to a very considerable Sum of Money.

And that as they had willingly Exposed Themselves, and their All, for the
Public Interest and Service, so they had patiently, these Eight Years, lain
under their Losses; in hopes, at the End of the War to be so considered, as
they should no longer remain a poor ruinous Spectacle to all, a Scorn to their
Enemies, and a Discouragement to Your Majesty's well-affected Subjects: And
Praying our Recommendation of their Case to Your Majesty, for Your Royal
Favor, in order to their Relief in the Kingdom of Ireland.

And it also appeared upon Examination, That the Governor and Garrison who,
through the utmost Sufferings and Extremities defended the same, do likewise
deserve to have so signal a Service taken into Consideration: And the said
City, who have so Eminently Suffered, to have some special Mark of Your
Majesty's Favor, for a lasting Monument to Posterity.

All which we do most humbly Represent to Your Majesty, Praying, That in
Consideration of the Premises, Your Majesty would be graciously Pleased to
make some Compensation to the said City, Governor, and Garrison, by such Ways
and Means, and in such Manner as Your Majesty, in your Princely Wisdom shall
think fit.


Resolved,

That the said Address be Presented to His Majesty by such Members of this
House as are of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

VOTES of the House of Commons of Ireland.
Jovis 5 die Decembris, 1695.
MR. Anderson Saunders Reported from the Committee appointed to take into
Consideration the Petition of the Mayor, Citizens and Commonalty of the City of
Londonderry; That they had come to several Resolutions in the Matter to them
Referred, which he Read in his Place, and after delivered in at the Table,
where the same were again Read, and are as follows.

Resolved,

That it appears fully to this Committee, That the Extraordinary Losses,
Disbursements and Debts, Contracted by the Inhabitants of Londonderry, from and
after November, School, in Securing and Fortifying the Place, in Buying and
Laying in of Arms and Ammunition, in Subsisting with Provisions of all sorts,
Clothes, and other Necessaries, those that were in that Garrison, for its
Defense, during the Siege, and in Houses ruined thereby, and for Defense of the
Place, does amount to a great Sum. And it further appears to us, That David
Cairnes, Esquire a Member of the said City, and now one of their Representatives in
Parliament, was Remarkably Instrumental in the first Securing the said City
against the Irish, and afterward underwent several hazardous Journeys for
Preserving the same; and that he was a great Sufferer by the Siege.

Resolved,

That it is the Opinion of this Committee, That in Regard of the Premises, and
of the Services and Sufferings of that City, on the late Revolution, that were
of such Consequence to these Kingdoms, and the whole Protestant Interest, That
an Humble Address be made by this House to His Excellency the Lord-Deputy, on
the Petitioners Behalf, That he would be pleased to lay their Case before His
Majesty, and to Recommend the same in the most Effectual manner to His Royal
Consideration and Favor, to do therein for the Petitioners Relief, as he in
his Princely Wisdom shall think fit.

To which Resolutions, the Question being severally put, the House did agree.

Ordered,

That it be Referred to the same Committee to Prepare an Address of this House
to His Excellency the Lord Deputy, Pursuant to the said Resolutions, and Report
the same to the House.

Which was accordingly done, and Agreed to by the House; and here follows.

To His Excellency Henry Lord Capel, Baron of Tewksbury, Lord Deputy-General,
and General, Governor of Ireland: The Humble ADDRESS of the Knights, Citizens,
and Burgesses, in Parliament Assembled.
May it Please Your Excellency,
THE Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens of the City of Londonderry, having, by a
Petition lately preferred unto us, set forth the Great Losses, Disbursements,
and Sufferings by them sustained in the late Revolution, and great Debts
contracted on the Public Account, by their early Securing and Fortifying that
Place, for Their Majesty's and the Protestant Interest, Buying of Arms,
Ammunition, and Subsisting with Provisions, Clothes, and other Necessaries,
those that were in that Garrison, for its Defense, during the Siege; and that a
great Part of their City and Suburbs were Ruined and Destroyed thereby, and for
Defense of the Place, to their great Impoverishment, praying us to Recommend
them to Your Excellency as proper Objects of His Majesty's Princely Favor, to
be Considered by His Majesty, as he in his Royal Wisdom should think fit.

We humbly lay before Your Excellency, That we have Considered the Matters in
the Petition contained, and Carefully Examined a Particular State or Account,
produced before us, of the Extraordinary Losses, Disbursements, and Debts
contracted by the Inhabitants of the said City, from November, 1688, on the
Grounds and Occasions in the Petition set forth, and do find that the same does
amount to a very great Sum.

And being very sensible how well that City has deserved by its Eminent
Services and Sufferings, that were of so great Importance to these Kingdoms,
and the whole Protestant Interest.

We therefore humbly desire, That Your Excellency would be Pleased to lay the
Petitioners Case before His Sacred Majesty, and to Recommend the same in the
most Effectual manner to his Princely Consideration. And that Your Excellency
would be also Pleased to take Notice therein of David Cairnes, Esquire a Member of
that City, and one of their now Representatives in Parliament, in Regard of his
Early Services, in the first Securing the said City against the Irish, and
several hazardous Journeys made by him, in order to the Relief of the same, and
his Great Losses by the Siege.



