The CASE of the Company of Cutlers in Hallamshire, and elsewhere within the
County of York; and others of the Cutlers and Smiths in Warwickshire and
Darbyshire; humbly offered to the Consideration of the Honorable the Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses in Parliament assembled.
AN Act was passed to charge 2 s. per annum Duty to the King upon every
Fire-hearth and Stove; 14 Car. 2.
In which Act it is provided, That the same should not extend to charge any
Blowing-House, and Stamp-Furnace, or Kiln, nor any other House wherein there
are but Two Chimneys, and for which the Rent paid is not above 20 s. yearly.

Upon former complaint made to the Parliament, by the Black-Smiths, of several
Abuses committed in the Collecting of Hearth-Money.

The said Smiths Petition was committed to the Committee of Grievances; Nov. 6.
1667.
Which Committee several times met, and Voted all the Matters complained of to
be Grievances: And amongst many other things, They

Resolved; That no private Oven, no Still, no Smiths-Forge or Blowing-House, no
Furnace, no places in Kitchins for keeping Dishes warm, or Stewing; no Lead or
Copper, nor any place used only for conveighing the Smoke, or for receving the
Coals drawn out of the said Ovens or Furnaces from under the said Leads or
Coppers, and not used as a Hearth for any other intent or purpose, ought by any
of the said Acts of Parliament to be charged as Fire-Hearths, and be liable to
the said Duty.

And that the best way to remedy the said Inconveniences, would be a New Bill.

The Committee made part of their Report to the House, Dec. 7. 1667.
and the House agreed all their Resolves to the 12th to be Grievances.

The House proceeding to take into further consideration the Committees Report
concerning Hearth-Money, December. 10. 1667.
and all Resolves from the 11th, with the Opinion of the Committee being read
the second time, were, upon the Question, severally agreed unto by the House to
be Grievances.

Resolved; That a Bill be brought in for the Redressing the Grievances and
Abuses in Collecting of Hearth-Money, and for the better ascertaining the Duty
upon the several Heads, and the Opinion of the Committee in their Report being
all agreed to by the House, it was referred to the same Committee to prepare
and bring in a Bill accordingly.

Accordingly a Bill was brought in, and twice read, and committed, but the
House was Prorogued before the Committee could come to make their Report.

Nevertheless the poor People in the several Counties in England did think
themselves secure in these Votes and Resolves of the House, and accordingly
were quiet in the Country for some years after, but are now disturbed in most
places of England: To instance all would be long, therefore shall insist only
upon one Place, whose Case is the same with all others of their Trades in other
parts of England.

In Hallamshire there are above One Thousand Cutlers, Sciser-Smiths,
Shere-Smiths, Sickle-Smiths, etc. And at Brimmingham are Sword-Smiths, Cutlers,
Spurriers, Bridle-Bit-Makers, Naylers, and diverse other Handicrafts Men who
live by Manufacturing of Iron and Steel, are very Poor, have numerous Families,
most of them Working at 6 d. or 8 d. a day Wages, cannot make any Work without
Blowing, and therefore must have Blowing-Forges in their Houses, (as well as
Thousands of others in other parts of England;) some of them (though the
poorest Men of all) have Two or Three.

These most of them live in poor Cottages, wherein there are not above two
Chimneys apeece, and for which there is not above 20 s. per annum Rent paid.

For several years after the Act, and Additional and Explanatory Acts, and
Votes and Resolves aforesaid concerning the Duty of Hearth-Money passed, there
was no demand made of these poor People of any Duty for their Forges.

But since the Collectors of the Chimney-Money have made Demands upon all those
poor People of 2 s. a Forge, (which is expressly against the Letter of the Acts
and Votes aforesaid) and for non-payment have made Distresses, taken away their
Goods, to their great prejudice, whereby they are discouraged from continuing
to work any longer. And which is most severe, they commonly destrain upon their
Working-Tools, which for want of Money they cannot sometimes redeem in four or
five days; all which time they stand still, and must lose the getting much more
than might have paid the Duty demanded.

Several have had Trials at the Assizes concerning this Demand, been put to
vast Charges, and upon the Trials special Verdicts being found, the Persons
have attended many years in London to have got them Argued, but cannot obtain
the same, which is their further Grievance; inasmuch as their Journeys,
Expenses in attending, and loss of their Time and Work by such delays, tend to
their and their Families ruin.

If these Forges be made liable, then the Case will be sad to the Poor, who
were (as appears by the Act) intended to be exempted, (having not above two
Chimneys apeece in their Houses, and not paying above 20 s. a year Rent) for if
they shall be judged as Hearths, then having two Chimneys, and most of them two
or three of these Blowing-Forges, they will be brought by this Contrivance to
pay 6, 8, or 10 shillings per annum to the King for a House of 20 s. a year
Rent, which they humbly conceive was not the Intention of the Parliament, their
Act being expressly to the contrary; And if it be not so, will tend to the Ruin
of those Manufactures, and thereby many thousands of his Majesty's poor
Subjects.

Therefore they most humbly pray the favor of this Honorable House to declare
their Intentions in this Matter, that they may be discharged from any further
Attendance upon the Court of Kings Bench for Arguing the said special Verdict,
and not be disturbed upon this Account for the future.

And they shall pray, etc.
The Copy of one of the Special Verdicts.
John Pearson against Richard Nicholson and Scanderbagg Proctor.
WE find the several Statutes concerning Hearth-Money, We find that the
Plantiff keeps a Cutlers Forge in Sheffield, which Forge cannot be used without
Blowing, and wherein he Heats all his Wares, and after stamps them with his
Mark; for which he was before that time, in which, etc. rated for the said
Forge at 2 s. per annum, as for a Fire-Hearth, within the said Acts. That at
and before the time in which, etc. 2 s. for one year for the said Forge at the
Rate aforesaid was Arrear; That the Defendants being Officers for Collecting
the Hearth-Money for this County, duly authorized according to the Statutes,
demanded the said 2 s. of the Plantiff, which he refused to pay; whereupon the
Defendants took the Goods mentioned in the Declaration as a Distress for the
said 2 s. And if a Cutlers Forge be a Hearth chargeable by the said Acts, or
any of them, we find for the Def. if not, for the Plant. and damages 12 d.
costs 40 s.

John Turner for the Plantiff. Richard Weston for the Defendant. John Bright
for the Plantiff. Thomas Jones for the Defendant.



