MINERVA, OR, THE Art of Weaving: Containing The ANTIQUITY, UTILITY and
EXCELLENCY of WEAVING.

Written in Verse, and divided into three Parts, By R. C.

In all thy Actions be upright and just,
So thou sincerely shall Weave Truth with Trust.
Judge not before you read, but read and judge,
And at your Censure I shall never grudg.
LONDON: Printed for Joseph Moxon, and sold at his Shop on Ludgate Hill at the
Sign of Atlas; and by James Moxon near Charing Cross in the Strand, right
against King Harry the Eighths Inn. 1677.

To the READER.
Courteous READER,
WOrks of this nature more often undergo the bitter Lash of the Tongue, than
better Language. The Proverb warns the Shoemaker not to go beyond his Last: I
have observed the Memento, and served my self with a matter agreeing: my
subject is Weaving, the worthiest of Trades; I am a Weaver, the unworthiest of
any to blazon the worth thereof, having done it in so worthless a manner.
Apelles intending to draw the Picture of Venus, called together the choicest
beauties of Greece, that by observing their amiableness, he might the better
amplify her perfection; so I have drawn together not only the chiefest Trades
that wholly depend on Weaving, but also many eminent persons who frequently
frequented the same, that so I might the more augment its reputation. But many
words will not fill a Bushel; To beg applause I disdain, to brag of praise I
disclaim: if you read, regard; and if you judge, do it judiciously; then I shall
with all willingness submit to your Censure; till when continuing doubtful
whether I shall gain your jeering Calumny or gentle Censure, I rest

Yours, R. C.

The First CANTO.
The Writer briefly does relate
Man's making, Bliss, fall, wretched state:
What his first Clothing was, and then
Who Weaving first devised, and When;
So far as he can learn relates:
Which done, the Praises Celebrates
Of Worthy Women, who thereby
And otherwise deservedly
Have purchased fame; which being done
This Canto to an end does Run.
WHen God the World did make and every Creature
That therein is, of every Form and Nature;
Man, the perfection, Crown, Epitome
Of all he did Create, reserved he
As his last and best work; that so he might
As in a lesser Frame present our sight
With whatsoever he before had wrought;
And this into so small a Form he brought,
That Man in him the whole does Comprehend,
Which were it not that I much time should spend
Beside my purpose, I partly could show
Nay Man in's first estate was more then so;
For he not only Microcosmos was,
But God in him did his own Image place;
Which our Divines say was his innocence,
(Till he by sinning razed it out from thence;)
And well might be, for God no sin does know,
Nor Man did, till he fell, as Scriptures show:
And had our Grand-sire Adam nere known sin
The Art of Weaving need not to have been:
For he before he did Commit offense,
As I have said, was Clothed with innocence;
But when through Satan's wiles, he folly wrought,
Sin brought forth shame, and shame a Covering sought
And (wanting fitter,) they Figg leaves did take,
Of which by shames constraint they Aprons make.
Thus as the Proverb says, Man's quickly run
Out of Gods blessing into the warm Sun:
For he that even now all knowledge knew,
And to whom all perfection did accrue,
In whom all Sapience and all Science rested,
Is now through disobedience so divested
Of all his former knowledge, that he had
Not understanding left him how to clad
His naked body: O most haples fate!
O alteration great! O wretched state!
O great unhappy loss! How could it be
When he thought what he late was, and now see
A change so strange, and that so suddenly,
But that he should forthwith despair and dye?
Doubtless the event had so been; had not he
Who his never fails at need, most graciously
Upheld him by his Mercy, and likewise
Promised God should descend, that Man might rise:
Nay more, when he in pity did behold
Man's naked body subject to the cold
Of Winters blastes, and heat of Summers Sun,
Also how ignorant he was become:
God made them Coats of Skins, in which array
They thought themselves (poor wretches) very gay.
See here how he that late was Lord of all
That had a being on this Earthy Ball,
Is of a sudden now become so poor
That he must thrust his servant out of door,
And force his goods his great need to supply,
Or he himself must cold and naked lie;
The best Man's servant must be stripped offs skin,
That Man the Master might be wrapped therein.
This their first Clothing was: but time that brings
All things about, and from whose being springs
Every invention, in time brought to pass
The Art of Weaving: but when that time was
It much uncertain is: report does go
Minerva did Invent it; but all know
Who are but meanly read in History,
That this report of her no truth can be:
For Authors of best Credit do relate
Minerva's life was of no elder date
Then in or somewhat after Moses days:
And let me tell you what this Moses says
Concerning Weaving, for it is only he
That must herein our chiefest witness be:
He being the first Historian that ere writ,
And whose writing none can except against it:
For he gives us to understand that when
The Tabernacle was erected, then
The Curtains of fine twined Linen were,
And Blew, Purple, and Scarlet Silk was there;
All which must needs be Weavers work, or how
It could Imbroydred be I do not know;
Also blew Riband to ty the Curtains were
Appointed, as the Text makes it appear.
And to Minerva this could not belong,
For she was then not born or very young
Nay, if you backward look you will Weaving see,
Above three hundred years elder to be:
For Abraham's Servant to Rebekah gave
Rayments, which Rayments I would gladly crave
Of any Man that can inform me whether
It were not rather Weavers work, then leather?
And that Esaus goodly Raiment Certainly
Was Cloth, or Silk, (not Leather,) none deny:
But here is as sure a proof, as can be had,
Against which no exceptions can be made,
That before this, when Lot was prisoner led,
And presently by Abraham rescued,
He told the King He would not one thread take
Of all the spoil: And what can any make
This thread to be, but Silk, Cloth, or apparel
That had been plundered in the former quarrel?
More backward yet, when Noah did plant the Vine,
And became drunk by drinking of the Wine,
And so (not being himself,) uncovered lay
When his two modest Sons did make no stay
To take a Garment, and going backward do
Cover his nakedness; and who can show
That this Garment was Leather? Rather I
Suppose it Cloth, and Weavings Antiquity
A Thousand years more ancient then Noah's Flood,
As probably it may be understood.
I Will one degree therefore more run retrograde
To enquire of what old Jabal's Tents were made?
If any say of boughs; doubtless those they
Had used before this time many a day;
If others say of Leather, that I suppose
(If Weaving were not) they wanted to make Clothes.
But why might not those Tents of Cloth be wrought,
And Weaving ere that time into use brought?
For the Worlds glass I ghess had then run out
At least five hundred years, or thereabout:
And might not the Weaver be as well then
As the Smith, the Mason, and Musician;
And doubtless many other Trades, whose use
That profit brings not which ours does produce?
And if (as says Josephus) Astronomy
Invented was by Seth, unto which he
Could not atain, but first he skilled must be
In Arithmetic, and in Geometry:
So others might as their Genius inclined
Employ their Studies other Arts to find;
And none could be more fit, nor was more needed
Then Weaving, if they their own welfare heeded.
But I must leave it doubtful, because none
Can certainly affirm when it begun.
Now I Will return again, and as I go
As far as my reading does reach will show,
Who, and what they were that are said to be
The first Inventers of our Mystery.
Here I must take my Rise, and to you show
What Lanquet or Cooper would have us know
Out of their Chronicle, for they do say
Weaving invented was by Naamah,
Sister to Tubal-cain, and so might be,
For she noting her Brethrens industry,
That each of them a several Art devised,
Might she not (also) thereby be surprised
With emulation of their far spread fame?
And perhaps hoping so to have her Name
Enrolled among theirs, bent all her powers
To bring to pass this worthy Art of ours?
And that Her Brother Jabals Tents might be
Of Cloth she wrought, none knows the contrary
But this may be a truth: for if we look
Judiciously into the Sacred Book
Among the Daughters born to Men before
The universal flood the World run ore,
You shall not read of any one but she
And Lamech's Wives, that named are expressly;
And for some special reason, (doubtless) she
Was mentioned above others, although we
Know not the cause, nor I think ever has
Reavealed been, more then what that Text says.
But leaving her, as very probably
To be the Inventor of our Mystery:
I do intend here also to declare
What others besides her recorded are
To be the first Devisers of it, that
What thereof written is, I may relate.
Poliodorus in his History
De Inventione Rerum does specify
Three worthy Women, and of these three one
Minerva is; and he says she alone
Devised first to make Wool into Cloth,
Which very likely is to be a troath:
For I remember that I formerly
Have read of Bacchus, who most Valiantly
Did lead an Army into India, where
He won much fame, as Histories declare:
And that Minerva as Courageously
Being his Sister bore him Company;
And many Countries and great Cities he
Conquered, being always Crowned with Victory,
Until he siedge did to one City lay
From before which he soon was driven away
By Lightning and Thunder, that did proceed
From off those Walls, as we do plainly read:
And what can any Man judge this to be
But Thundering Cannon shot? For certainly
It then in use among them was, though we
But late (yet much to soon) are come to be
Accquainted with it, not being yet three hundred years,
But they as many thousands, as appears;
For so long it is since Bacchus and Minerva did
Conquer East India, as of them we read.
So Printing has in Chyna and those parts
Been no Man knows how long: and other Arts
As Weaving, and such as did them concern,
And there Minerva might her knowledge learn;
Although it is very likely that they there
(The Country being hot) all Silk did wear:
But she to Greece returning, where the Sun
Being not so vehement, first begun
To exercise her Silk in Wool; and so
It may be true, what Poliodore does show:
And this is a good reason to produce
To us that Silk-weaving was first in use;
And those Garments of which we in Scripture read,
It Is very like did all from Silk proceed.
But let me mention Bacchus once again,
Who returning Victor back to Greece, did then
From India bring Vines with him home, and so
They Wine in Europe here first came to know:
And for this great and good Commodity,
They with a Godhead did him dignify,
Whose memory continues to these times,
We idely stiling Bacchus God of Wines;
Who has more followers then the greatest Sect
Of all these many that us so infect.
Minerva no less Honor (by our Trade,
And other Arts she taught) gained being made
The Goddess of Arts and Arms: so I
She being our Matron would show her deity:
And this their Weaving and their Vines I ghess,
They had from Noah, who did those parts possess
After the flood, who there the Vine did plant,
And being Drunk therewith did Covering want:
And I suppose that Garment which was brought,
Some kind of work was, by a Weaver wrought;
And Weaving be (as I did lately say)
Invented by, or before Naamah.
But I have long digrest; now I Will proceed
To show more what from Poliodore I read.
Linen Cloth says he, the invention was
Of one Arachne, being a Liddian Lass,
But what she was, or when lived, he does not Name,
But Ovid says she of mean Parents came.
He further writes, that one Pamphila who
The Daughter was of Platis, did first show,
The way of Weaving Silk, whose dwelling Place
As he relates, in the I Will of Ceos was:
But in what Age she lived he does not show:
Neither do I in my small reading know:
But that must be long since, otherwise she
Could not the Inventor of Silk-weaving be:
Further he goes on, and does relate
That Cloth of Gold and rich Roabs of estate
The Invention was of Attulus: Nay he
In one place says the Babilonians be
The Inventors of our Art; and in another
The Egyptians: but how this can hang together
Let others Censure, for some ingeniously
Think, he has herein dealt as faithfully
As when our Eighth King Henry did employ
Him, to compile one entire History,
Containing the Occurrences of our Nation,
Since People in it first had Habitation,
Unto those times, that the deeds of our I Will,
He into one sole Vollumne might compile:
And to that purpose our Chiefest Histories,
Ancient Reccords, Books of Antiquities,
Were to his Lodging, or his Study sent,
(As I have said,) only for that intent;
But he either envying our Isles fame should surpass,
The Italians praise, where he a Native was,
Or, for he was not able that to do,
Which by the King he was appointed to,
Or, through his negligence, they all were fired,
Without a rescue and suddenly expired.
Which work has since by learned Cambden been
Effected, as to his lasting praise is seen:
For his Brittama does Proclaim his worth,
And Englands Fame and Monuments set forth.
But for the other if the Abridgement be
Translated from his large Book faithfully,
He has dealt as careless with our Mystery;
For three things do complete a History:
That Is Persons, Time, and Place; two of which he
Has often ommitted here, but chiefly Time,
Which next to Persons is, herein the prime:
For if we knew the time when they did live,
We might a more exact conjecture give
Of their devising of it: but how ere,
We read Women the Inventors of it were;
And be it true, it is no disparagement,
That worthy Women did it first Invent.
For they in other things have famous been,
As may in History be plainly seen.
To instance in a few, Semiramis
Who lived in Abraham's time, renowned is,
Whose manly courage, and stout heart was such,
That Babels Empire, she enlarged much:
And India her high praise can testify,
Had she not fallen to sensuality.
So likewise Tomaris, a Sythian Queen,
By her brave valor, no less fame did win,
Who in the Field, durst the Persian Monarch meet,
Warlike Cyrus, though his Armies were great,
Him she orecame, and in a Tub of blood,
Did cast his Head, saying: if it be good
There drink thy fill, in blood thou did delight,
And much blood spilt: now blood shall thee requite:
So the Amasoman Queen, Penthasitia,
Stout Achilles could not her dismay;
Though he ('it is said,) was seven Cubits high,
His height nor strength, could not her terrify;
Neither did on his manly power stand,
But durst encounter with him, hand for hand;
Although, he Hector, and brave Troylus slew,
Yet she had hopes that she might him subdue;
And though she failed, What Man could more adventer
Then in the Lists, with such a Champion enter?
So in Philosophy, Hippacia, was
Learned so well, she many did surpass;
For to her lasting praise it is write that she,
In the open Schools, often read Philosophy.
So Sapho was an excellent Poet known
As by those that have writ of her is shown:
So an English Woman at Rome frequently,
In man's apparel read Divinity;
Whose Learning, and whose Zeal was thought so great
That she thereby attained the Papal seat;
And by the name of John the Eight, (it is true)
Was Pope of Rome until she fell in two.
So Mercia, a Noble Lady who
A King of Britains Wife was, long ago;
Here devised Laws, which long after her name,
Were Mercian Laws called to her greater fame:
To omit others, Queen Elizabeth,
Even from her Crowning to her latest breath,
No Man could her excel, in each degree;
As it is known, to her famous memory.
So our Silk-weaving here in London was
Wrought first by Women (may report take place;)
Who did not only work it, but also
Kept Shops themselves, and sold it, many know:
And to the World the same to signify,
They Linen Cloth about their Shops poasts ty:
Which in their memory is used still
By many that such sorts of Ware do sell.
And to maintain this Weavings Credit I
Did take this task in hand, and that thereby,
I might take off reproach that lies on it
Was the Chief cause these lines by me were writ;
Whose true worth to uphold, and blaze his praise,
I will endeavor to my last of days.
Thus a few worthy Women I have shown
But many, many more are likewise known.
Many several ways as excellent
As Men, and full as able to invent
Rare works, would they their studies bend thereto;
As I for instance in a few here show.
Then Weavers think it no disgrace to you,
That Women found your Trade out. Be it true.
Thus to my skill, who our Art did devise,
I truly to you do Anatomize.
Now something in its praise I mean to show,
That the true worth of Weaving all may know,
And also stop their months who villifie
Our useful Science undeservedly.
The Second Canto.
He diverse Noble Persons here
Names that in Weaving frequent were.
Then he declares its usefulness;
And also sundry Trades express
That do depend upon it: and
What Multitudes of People stand
Engaged to it. Then, its praise
He amplifieth many ways:
And farther, to that purpose he
Shows the liberal Arts to be
Therein included; and likewise
Does them with Weaving Sympathize.
And diverse other matters couched
Are in this Canto; not here touched.
WEaving Invented, as before is writ,
Though much uncertain who devised it;
Yet does experience show, it is of such use
That a more needful Trade none could produce:
And in its infancy was found so rare,
That personages of worth, known frequent were,
To Spin and Weave: as Hercules for one
Whose like, (if true) no time has ever known;
His Twelve great Labors makes the World admire
That he such difficulties could acquire;
Yet he laid by his Club, and Lions skin,
And for a Ladies love sat down to Spin.
So likewise, Sardanapalus, although he,
Did sway the Assirian first great Monarchy,
Took much more pleasure with Women to Spin,
And use the Weaving Trade, then he took in
Such great Magnificence. Attulus likewise,
Though King of Asia minor, did devise,
First to Weave Gold and Silver with Silk, and
So gained as much fame, as by his command.
So famous Queens and Ladies frequent were
To Spin and Weave, as Writers do declare:
As Omphate and Yole, who Hercules loved dear,
Though famous for their beauty, did not forbear
To use our Trade. And Queen Penelope
Ulysses chaste and constant Wife, yet she
Was more delighted with the Weaving Trade,
Then in those many Woers that she had.
And so chaste Lucrece, wife to Collatine,
A worthy Roman Prince, did not decline
The Weaving Trade, for she late in the night,
Was with her maids found therein to delight;
And though it after proved her overthrow,
Yet she renowned is, for being so.
So great Augustus Caesar's Queen, though he
Were the head of the Worlds fourth Monarchy,
And she his Empress, the greatest Woman in
Europe, Asia, and Africa, yet was seen
Often to be frequent about Weaving, and
Not on her husbands Stately titles stand.
So Char-le-main, renowned King of France;
Who the Pope, and his own worth did advance
To be the Western Emperor; yet did
His Daughter Weave, neither were they forbid
By him for all his State, to use the same;
Nor did they in so doing impair their fame.
And doubtless many worthy Persons more
That my small reading, never came to know.
And it is out of question many of these
If 'twere not all of them, though Histories
Do not reveal the same, did rather choose
Both Gold and Silk, then courser stuf to use
In their thus exercising Weaving; as
We instance may in Attulus, who was
More noble numbered, and as was his state,
Most rich, more rich materials aimed at.
And so we may imagine of the rest,
But every one as to their mind seemed best.
But my aim is, Silk-weaving to prefer;
And none can say concerning these, I err.
How-ere, they are a Glory to our Trade,
And graced it much, although it now be made
Contemptible by some; Antiquity
Were proud to use so rare a Mystery.
Nor was our worthy Famous Science then,
Better approved of, or esteemed with men,
Then it deserved: and all may confess
That to this day it does deserve no less.
For ere it was invented, all Men know
The Beggar Clothed like the King must go;
For neither had wherewith Raiment to make,
Then what they from the backs of Beasts did take.
And is it not far more decent to behold
A Royal King araid in Cloth of Gold,
Of Tissew, or of Silk guarded with Lace,
Or rare Invention, as becomes his place,
Then see him Covered with a rough Bull hide,
Or Ravening Bears, or prancing Steeds, that died
Full of diseases? or a delicious Queen,
Clad in hard Leather, whose tenderness is seen
To shrink at the least wind, although she is Clad
In best and warmest Clothing may be had?
Or when they sit at meat, to see their board,
To ly uncovered, or at best affoard
No better furniture then what is got
From skins of Beasts? mee-thinks t beseems them not.
Or when they go to rest, to see Men bring
A heap of hides, to be their Covering?
Or see a babe new born, to be wrapped in
No softer swathing, then a hard rough skin,
Deserves pity? yet they had no more
Till Weaving furnished them with better store.
Yet now, for them, and others, as their degree
Requires, a fit supply of Cloth have we.
How many Trades, may likewise Bless the day.
When Weaving was devised? and yearly may
In memory of it, as we did Kings Coronations,
Keep one day Festival to all Generations?
And Weavers much respect, without whose aid
Their only maintenance were quite decaide?
A Philosopher did write, that if the Sun
A moment should forbear his course to run,
The World would ruined be: so, were our Trade
A while left off, what mines would be made
Among a world of Trades? As I shall show
Before my work I further do pursue;
And 'twill be requisite, for by the same
They Will find their disrespect deserves blame.
The Merchant that ore all the World does Trade,
By whom our Nation is so famous made,
Weavers work is the chief Commodity
That he transporteth hence, and therefore he
May much respect him, for if he were gone,
That gainful Trade of his, would be orethrown:
This is his lading as he is outward bound.
And is not Linnen-Cloath, brought hither, found
Likewise to be a great Commodity,
Gainful, and needful, unto each degree?
So were Silk-stuffs, but we being skilful grown,
To make them here, that Trade's well-nigh o'rthrown.
And Flax and Tow that is brought in, were not we
To make it Cloth, of little use would be:
So Cotton-Wool, without the Weaver were
As needless, as most plainly does appear:
Nay Silk, that great and rich Commodity,
Without our help, would like these, useless be,
And almost fit for nothing: but being we
Employ it to profit, by our industry;
Whither would not the Merchant venture, for
To gain so gainful a Commodity, or
What dangers not adventure to run through,
What unknown Seas, with his Ships keel to plough;
What perilous Climates pass, and what strange Lands,
Where he no word of their speech understands;
Where peoples manners from his different are,
Where other Customs (than among us) appear;
Where other Stars shine, than with us give light,
Where other Gods, other Religions, quite
Contrary to ours be; other beginnings too,
Of time, and Men, than we acknowledge do
Take place; and more strange Rites they use?
Yet he to run these hazards does not refuse,
To bring in a far-fetcht Commodity,
Which without Weaving, of no use would be;
But with our help, what numbers hereby do
Gain great Estates, as does experience show!
The Merchant (as is said) hereby does rise
Unto great wealth, and as great dignities.
The Mercer, not to him inferior is,
But he the Weaver may respect for this;
And both the Drapers may the Weaver love,
For by him, in so high a Sphere they move.
The Silk-man, that unto us silk does sell,
Beholding to the Weaver is as well
As any of these, which he knows well enough,
Oh that he would not wrong us with bad stuff!
The Other Silkman also, who does buy
Ware of the Weaver, may ingeniously
Confess, that by our Trade his wealth does rise,
Then, wherefore should he us so much despise?
Rather in Conscience, they might poor men give
A better price, that they might better live.
The Haberdasher too, with these may share,
Who might want wealth, if he wanted our ware;
And the Upholster lack his strong Bed-tike,
Rug, and Curtains, with other things such like.
Nor let the Printer ore the Weaver vapor,
For without Cloth, what would he do for paper?
The Stationer too would get but slender fees,
If men did write on bark, or leaves of Trees
As they have done: for if weaving were gone,
Could skins be spared to write or Print upon?
And many Handicrafts, as well as these,
But for the Weaver, were brought on their knees,
As the Cloathworker, who us disrespects,
For in his Motto, he, our Trade neglects;
Naming a Ram, a Lamb, a Sheep, and Wool,
From all which he would but little profit cull,
For what would Ram, Lamb, Sheep and wool all gain'im,
Without the Weaver? his Trade does sustain'im.
So the Cloath-drawer would want holes to stop,
If in the Weaver were not his whole hope.
So the Cloath-presser, and the Callender,
Without the Weaver, quite dissolved were;
And might (if possible) a new Trade learn,
If any be, that ours does not concern:
The Dyer likewise of Silk, of Stuff, or Cloth,
To want the Weaver, would be very loath,
For on him they rely; but the last two
I do not know, nor with them have to do:
But for the first, if I might speak my mind,
I Would say, he were not always honestly inclined;
For if Silk were uprightly died, it would
When it does come to using, better hold.
Nor could the Throster so many employ
Without the help of Weavings mystery:
For his gum'd ware would then lie on his hand,
And all his Mills and Wheels might idle stand.
So he that Gold and Silver Wire draws,
And those that spin it upon Silk, have cause
To love the Weaver, for if he were not,
There would but small gain by their Trades be got.
You Would think the Tailor I did not respect,
If I herein my lines should him neglect:
He being so gentile, and one of fashion,
Who to our Trade has very great relation;
We weave, and pick, and dye, and dress, and trim,
Our Cloth, Stuff, Ribond, Lace, and all for him;
He Is put in trust therewith; without his help,
It were but like a formless young Bear-whelp,
That has no shape, until the kind dam do
By painful labor, lick it thereinto;
So is our Weaving, until he by Art,
With it shapes Garments, fit for every part
Of us, wherein I hope he has the trick,
As she her whelp, so he will his fingers lick;
And as the greedy Bear too well is known
To be so cruel, that it will spare none
Her paw lights on, so will not he likewise
All that he can with safety, make his prize?
What though he flaunt it out, and like a Knight
Wear brave Apparel? all is not Gold that is bright;
He may respect the Weaver for it, and
Not on his sturdy Stilts so stately stand;
For he must fetch a number of hard stitches,
To flourish so with making Leather-Breeches.
Where would the Week-Merchant get Cloth to sell
To poor folks, to be weekly paid so well,
But by the Weaver? six in Centum we
May take for Use per Annum; but does not he
Tie tie unto the six, and sixty make it,
Which if you like not (Sir) you may forsake it.
I likewise might some other Trades set down,
That do the Weaver need, as it is well known;
As the Whitster, Bandseller, Painter, and
Th'Imbroiderer, though these two last do stand
Upon their points, and in their boasting say,
Their Trades do surpass Weaving every way:
But put the case they do, which is not true,
As presently I Will mak't appear to you;
Yet weaving is their Basis; were it gone,
What groundwork then had they to work upon?
But in their Trades there is nothing they can do,
But we the like can present to your view.
Do thou desire the shape of any Beast?
That in our work, by us can be expressed:
Or any Fowl, or any Fish to see?
These also, easily can produced be.
Or any Tree, or Herb, or Flower? likewise,
We can present them all before your eyes:
Do you desire a Tulip in your Hat?
The Weavers skill can furnish you with that.
Or would you wear a Rose or July-flower?
To make you any lies in Weavings power;
Or whatsoere you would have brought to sight,
For it is the Cornucopia of delight.
And can more be produced by theirs, than I
Have writ, or might, if need, more amplify?
Mistake me not, for I ascribe unto
Our God all power, for he does all things do;
Ours are but shadows, that resemblance bear
Of substances, that he has made appear.
But if compared with these Trades, ours be,
We do surpass them in a high degree;
For where theirs for the most part are for show,
Ours is for service likewise, all do know;
And like to Amalthea's Horn, has store
Of all variety, no Trade has more:
And useful is to all: nay further yet,
What several multitudes of people get
Their livelihood by Weaving, or some Trade
Depending thereupon; that were it decaid,
I am persuaded half the world would be,
Wanting employment, brought to misery.
So that all may, like as the Astronomer,
Before each Star does Jupiter prefer
For magnitude; they also (in our praise,
Above each Trade) the Weaver Crown with Bays:
Or, as the Tyrians their God Hercules,
(For fear they any time should him displease,
And he depart) did with a Golden thread,
To a pillar bind him, that so, at their need
They might implore his aid; so may each one,
With Cords of Love, our Trade; for were it gone,
All the world its help would quickly want.
Over the Weaver then, let no Trade vaunt.
Yet further to its praise, I make it appear,
The Liberal Arts in it included are;
Or, as my skill does serve, I will unfold,
How it with them, does nigh resemblance hold:
That Weavings worth I may augment thereby,
And its deserved praise more amplify.
First for Arithmetic, (the numbering Art)
We imitate (almost) in every part.
We add, substract, divide, and multiply,
Our Warp and Woof, as we occasions see;
And every suit we suit, Progression is
From one to millions, goes on our degrees.
The Rule of Three, of any Rule the best,
By our Stuff, our Loom, and Workman is expressed;
By these three known, and well employed in time,
We do produce a golden sum of Coin;
The Rule of Loss and Gain, we often use;
Sometime to Barter we do not refuse;
Proportion is the form our work does bear;
Reduction is the order we keep there;
And other Rules we use, some more, some less,
As need requires, and I need not express.
Fractions, too often, in our work are used,
Most when the Dyer has our Stuff abused.
To Extract a Root by us, you think it is much,
But you shall understand it is not such;
For there no figure is that we espy,
Though wrote most intricate, and cunningly,
But we can draw it forth, and in our frame
With much facility explain the same:
And as Arithmetic does daily grow
More perfect than the former times did know;
As Logarithmes, or John Nepiers bones,
And great Algebra, that not many owns;
And several other Instruments in use,
As time, by time, does to the world produce:
So is our Trade more ample many ways,
Than unto men was known in former days.
Geometry is next, to which we do
In diverse kinds agree, as I shall show:
The beginning of our work compared may be
To a point, the original of Geometry,
Our threads to lines, our work on either side,
To parallels which equally divide
Themselves at distance, and so forward run,
Ad infinitum, or till our work be done.
Our Leeses, Perpendiculars, you see,
Plattens, Triangles, or Semi-circles be;
Our Roll a Center is, each turn we commence
Of work thereon, is a Circumference.
And as by this Arts Instruments we may
The length, breadth, height, of any thing survey,
(Except that All in all) and by its skill,
The true dimensions give; so it is known well,
That of all forms under the imperial Heaven,
The perfect Figure may in our work begiv'n.
And as the word Geometry imports
A measuring of the Earth, and that all sorts
Of Nations need the same; so is our Trade
To all the world by us, most useful made.
Next for Astronomy; our Trade alludes
To that, in every one of these similitudes:
Cloath-weaving, to the Sun compared may be,
Keeping one constant course continually;
Silk-Stuffs, unto the Moon, never the same,
But always change the Figure or the Name.
Plain Ribond represents the fixed Stars,
Regular in its course, no change, no jars;
All other silk works, (may be compared) whatever,
Unto the wandering Planets, who do never
Keep any rule, but sometimes move direct,
Then Retrograde, often changing their Aspect:
So those Silk-weavers that employed be
In such like works, we very seldom see
At any constant stay, but always changing
To this, to that, like Planets ever ranging,
From good, to better, or from bad to worse,
Sometimes to empty, sometimes fill the Purse.
And as those Heavenly Lamps, in their Aspects,
By sundry forms, produce sundry effects;
From a Conjunction that is benevolent,
Astrologers affirm much good is sent;
So Malevolent Aspects they likewise say,
Much evil does unto Mankind convey:
So when the times fall cross, and opposite,
Bad Trading does upon the Weaver light;
But when Conjunctions that bring peace are sent,
That to our Calling proves benevolent.
But all this does not always fall out true,
No more than what they predict shall ensue;
For sometimes we in trouble most enjoy,
So when they threat most, we have least annoy.
This for Astronomy enough shall be,
To show how Weaving does with it agree.
Now Grammar shows it self, without whose aid,
Who rightly can unfold what is writ or said?
Thou on four feet as four sure props do stand,
By whom to aid each Art, thou art a hand:
Orthography, and Etymology;
Syntaxis also, and last Prosodie:
Thus are they named: the first does teach to spell
Each word aright, and then you would write it well:
The second shows from whence they are derived,
So of the true sense, you will not be deprived:
The third to place them truly, gives you light;
The last how to pronounce them all aright.
In imitation whereof, we likewise,
To spell, or frame our Figure first devise;
And as our words, composed of letters are,
Even so by threads, our figures do appear;
Which if not rightly placed, is as much shame,
As to write false Orthography is blame:
But when we thus far have proceeded true,
We then produce our Figure to the view;
And that resembles Etymology,
As words, so works, from whence derived they be.
As from infinite grounds, words sense does grow,
So from infinite forms our Figures flow:
To spell true, and know the words derivation,
Is here declared; so we in imitation,
Have formed our work, and drawn our Figures trace.
Our next is like Syntaxis, how to place,
As that each word, so we each Cord aright;
They to place true, we, that ours so may light,
Do pass each Cord with care, as Scholars, when
They Would speak true Latin, or write with their pen,
Lest Priscians head therein by them be broken.
Or our work false, both which, were a dunces token:
And as by Prosodia, they each accent weigh,
So we with care, each Cord and Thread surveigh;
They that their Verse may sweetly sound, and we
That our work may in every part agree.
And as he knows, who is in Grammar skilled,
Many subsequent Rules the Art does yield;
As needful explanations of each ground,
And trials to declare their knowledge sound;
Through which young Students with much labor wander
As in a Maze, or intricate Meander,
Ere he attain to a proficiencie,
Or perfect skill, in this Arts Mystery;
Which some (though very studious) hardly do
With all their painful Study reach unto:
So in Silk-weaving we have sorts of work,
Wherein there does great difficulty lurk;
That few attain to its profunditie,
Though they be of a quick capacity:
But these days (more than ever) do present
Quotidian proofs of its accomplishment.
See here, how Grammar, and the Weaving Trade,
To agree in most particulars is made.
Next I Will place Logic, wherein I will show
How we do correspond with it also:
Ten general Heads, named Predicaments,
The Rules of this Art unto us presents;
Which ten be these: Substance the first must be,
Quantity second, the third Quality,
The fourth Relation, Action the fifth, then
Passion the sixth, Where the seventh, the eighth When,
The ninth is Situation or the place,
The tenth is Habit, or the outward face:
These are the ten which I Will Anatomize,
By showing how we with them do sympathize.
Thus for the first, our Ware's a Substance wrought,
In Quantity it is large, or narrow brought;
In Quality it is useful, and has Relation
To all mankind; Active's the workmans fashion;
Passive the Loom is, it being in use,
Where, that is the place that we think fit to choose;
When, that is the time the workman works in it;
Situation the manner how it is made fit;
Habit is the form that it does bear.
And thus I briefly have made it appear,
That our Trade these includes; the next must be,
How it does with a Syllogism agree.
Those say that do well know the arguing Arts,
A Syllogism consists of three parts;
The Major, Minor, and Conclusion are
These three, which thus to you I will declare.
The Proposition, or the Major, must
The Master be; what he propounds in trust
Unto the Minor, or the Servant, he
Does then assume, and by his industry,
Brings it unto a right end or Conclusion;
Admitting of no Fallacies intrusion;
Of which I Will speak a word, it being a thing
That ever with it does some falsehood bring;
And it is my desire, that we have none,
That either do, or have in that path gone:
And adulterate Ware, that is fair to the eye,
Praised for good, which is a fallacy.
Thus I, as well as my skill could devise,
The Art of Reasoning here, anatomize,
And ours Consort therewith, that all may see,
How full our Trade is of variety.
Now Rhetoric claims its place among these seven,
Unto which, what Encomions may be given
To express its worth, and yield to it due praise,
Whose glorious luster, bright resplendant rays,
Through every learned Author shines as clear
As at noontide Apollo in his Sphere,
When he through burning Cancer guides his Car,
And to our sight his Beams most glorious are:
Thy Tropes are flowers, as some Writers say,
And well may be so named, because they
So numerous are, and like variety
With those, that do Dame Tellus beautify:
These flowers choice picked and placed delight the mind,
Ours does the Body garnish, which to mankind
Is much more needful; thine's an ornament
To Learning in particular, but the extent
Of ours, does reach to all; thine to the Schools
A handmaid is, ours serves wise and fools:
Thine needful is, but ours is much more so,
Yet who would not thee, rather than us forego?
But pardon me dear Rhetoric this style,
And I Will endeavor now, to reconcile
Thee and our Trade together, showing how we
In most particulars do both agree.
There Is not a Flower in thine Art, which I
Have not orelook'd, and weighed seriously;
(Although I have here, through my want of skill,
Made use of few or none, with my dull quill:)
But if as one should in a Garden walk,
He does not pluck a flower from every stalk;
But picks one here, one there, as does his eye
Direct him to, to please his fantasy:
So I, to show how the Silk-weaving Trade,
To consort with the Art of Rhetorick's made,
Choose here and there one thence, as my
Mind serves; and to avoid prolixity,
First for Synecdoche, or quick conceit,
On every workman that does always wait,
For whatsoever Figure he espies,
By quick conceit, he will it anatomize;
Or by Apostrophe turn it about,
Producing thence another fashion out;
As Gnome the director thinks it fit;
Or Synonymia who has store of wit.
Or otherwise, he will by Metaphore,
Change it into another form, that is more
Agreeing to his purpose; or by Allegory
Enlarge it, to set forth its greater glory;
Or by Brachiloga, he will contract it,
And into so small form thereby compact it;
Though Paradoxon, or Enigma there,
A Wonder or a Riddle seem t'appear.
Such hidden mysteries, no scruple shall
To an ingenious workman be at all;
Nay with Dilemma, though his Figure be
But on one side, on both he will presently
Make it alike. Let none in any wise,
Imagine I herein Hyperbolize.
Then Envy may, and Ignorance forbear
To spend their Ironie, their flout or jeer;
And with humble Metanoea, repent that
Their ignorance provoked their tongue to prate
Beyond their knowledge; for no Eclipsis here,
Or fault committed is, as may appear.
Sweet Rhetoric, I might go on, and more
Flowers pluck from thine inexhausted store;
And like a Gordian-knot, wove curiously,
Them, to augment Silk-weavings praise, here tie:
But Paranymia, or the Proverb says,
Enough is as good as feasting; therefore to raise
More similitudes, I thought it not fit,
Or, to my skill, I Would have endeavored it.
All hail sweet Music, thou bringst up these reres,
Delightful sounds, like Harmony of the Spheres.
How shall I frame a fit propinquitie,
Whereby with thee to gain affinity?
Thy Gamuth is the first step to thy Science,
To which our pricking patterns have alliance.
No one in thee, can a proficient prove,
That therein is not skilled; nor can we move
One degree forward, toward perfection,
If this be not our ground to build upon.
Nor a Musician can his melody
Make pleasing to himself, or standers by,
Unless a Concord in his strings be found;
Nor can our workmen any work make sound,
Whose tools and tackling remain out of frame,
But when by skill, both rectify the same:
Then thou and we, a Diapason strike;
Thy Musick's sweet, our Wares our Chapmen like;
And all thy Figures we do imitate,
Thy Large, Long, Brief, Semi-Brief, Sharp, and Flat;
All which I could demonstrate here, if so
My Time would time permit me it to do;
But I Will forbear, and briefly show how we
Do correspond with them in Melody.
Thy pleasing sounds proceed from Instruments;
Ours an Harmonious voice, whose rare accents
Have often forced sweet Philomel forbear
Her sugared notes, our sweeter tunes to hear;
Nay great Apollo, the Musicians God,
What time he here on earth made his abode,
Was so delighted, with the curious strains
Of well-tuned ditties, penned by pregnant brains,
That had he not engaged been to keep
The numerous flocks of King Admetus Sheep,
Then, when rude Pan, with his Pipes rustic play,
Durst to contend with his Harps lofty Lay;
The Weavers Songs, with ravishing Melody,
Did so delight the God of Harmony,
That with them he would here have sympathiz'd,
And such rare Songs to their sweet notes devised;
That like to Orpheus, their enchanting Ditties
Should tame wild Beasts, and build up Towns and Cities.
For this he did acknowledge, to their praise,
They did for Song, from all Trades bear the Bays.
Thus 'twixt Apollo, and Minerva, I
Though in rude sort, have wrought affinity;
But wanting her Invention, and his Wit,
My weak skill has not fashioned it so fit,
As better Artists might, that better know,
For my Pen here, my Ignorance does show.
Here I have showed you how our Mystery,
With the Seven Liberal Arts, does nigh agree.
And now I Will show, that ours more useful is
Than all of them; but pardon me in this:
For let none think, it is in the least my thought,
That those rare Arts should in contempt be brought,
Of which the World has so much use, and I
As dearly love, as my own liberty,
Or what is dearer to me; but to show
Our Trades true worth, and likewise let such know
Their ignorance, who do it so despise,
Though of its usefulness, before their eyes,
Nay on themselves, they every day partake,
Without regard thereof: but as the Snake,
Did (being nigh frozen dead) the man entreat
To put him in a place where he some heat
Might reassume, to save his nigh lost life,
Which being attained, he does repay with strife,
And foul ingratitude his love: even so,
Those Peacocks now in their great bravery know
No want of Clothing, (Nor of the supply
Silk-weaving yields, the same to beautify;
If not all Silk,) therefore us they scorn:
But should they go a while, as they were born,
Naked, or Clothed in Leather, then they would
Respect our Trade, and wish it ever should
Flourish in fame, and reputation till
Time the last minute of its course fulfill.
But to my purpose: first for the numbering Art,
What man is there that would not gladly part
With it, and promise never to use it more,
Rather than be debarred of that rich store,
And Comfort, that our Trade does yield? and so
Geometry, who would not it forego,
Before he would loose the part he does possess
In our rich Trades most happy usefulness?
Astronomy too, as useless is, compared
To our Arts worth, as any thereof debarred
Would soon acknowledge; and Music not at all
May with us into Competition fall:
For the other three, there need no more be sed,
But us our Mother Tongue would bring to bed:
And I suppose, it a much lesser harm were
To want them all, than Clothes to keep us warm there.
I do not mean, the plain part of each Art,
Which I to Leather-Garments may consort,
But the abstruse part of each one might be
Much better spared than our rich Mystery:
But to have both is best; for neither we
Could want without great loss; and blessed be he,
By whose Assistance we do both possess,
And daily partake of their usefulness.
But now a word or two, to show the cause
That such contempt upon Silk-weaving draws:
Then I herein have now no more to say;
But wish our Trade in good fame flourish may.
The end of the second Canto.
The third CANTO.
Here its worth repeating, he
Shows what the chifest causes be
Of its disparagement, and does show
From what weak grounds the same does flow;
To redress which, uses declamations,
With invective dehortations;
Then he extolleth such by whom
It Credit gains; and does come
To show what worth not long ago
It had in London, and also
Does now retain by means of some,
Who are Silk-weavers: and so from
One circumstance to another he
Proceeds, till his task ended be.
IF Weaving be of such Antiquity,
So useful, nay, of such necessity,
That all the world in general does it need,
And also stands other Trades instead:
And that Personages great and eminent,
Did with delight and pleasure it frequent;
What is the cause it is now despised so,
Or by what means into such contempt grow?
Being of most Trades, the Primum mobile,
Or the first mover, Pole, or Axel-tree;
By which they are, and principally move,
As the inferior Orbs, by that above;
Or as Learned Record terms his Arithmetic
The ground of Arts, so we, (justly) the like
May style our Trade the ground of Trades: or it
May (truly) be compared very fit
To the foundation of a house, for who
Is he, that does not by experience know,
That without it, the Building soon would fall?
So likewise many Trades, yea, almost all,
Were brought to ruin, having no remedy,
But by the help of our rare Mystery.
Four Causes here, I Will principally name,
That chiefly are the reasons of the same.
The first, some shopkeepers, that buy our Ware,
Who, when bad Trading is, so cruel are,
So griping, and unconscionable, that
When poor men come to sell, will bid a rate
Of so small profit, knowing they perforce
Must any money take, or do things worse;
Thus by the low rate they in hard times give
Poor Weavers, they constrained are to live
Meanly, and sometimes ready to want Bread,
While the other are both richly clothed and fed,
And in their Shops, (like Lords) most stately are,
With the profit they get by the Weavers Ware;
And the poor Weaver, by his cruelty,
Forced to spin out his Life in poverty;
Which brings a scandal on our Trade, while he
That is the cause, does flourish gallantly.
Of some this is the Custom; but there be
Others among them, deal more Christianly,
By giving unto those, of whom they buy,
A price that will maintain them decently:
Let a blessing be upon such men, nay they
Will blessings find, now or another day;
But the other their seared hearts are grown so hard,
That they nor Curse nor Blessing do regard,
For Griping gain, the god is they adore:
But by this means poor Weavers are kept poor;
For they having no way to raise a stock,
And the other no Conscience, hold them in this lock.
But there is other Silk-Weavers, who live brave,
And make those men pay well for what they have:
I wish the rest like these, could hold them to it,
And no way like good husbandry will do it.
Three other sorts of men, I likewise here,
Will, though unwillingly, to you declare;
Who, if my judgment do me not deceive,
Our Trade of much fame and repute bereave:
Of which three, one is the hard-hearted man,
Who has no mercy, neither pity can
Enter his breast, nor knows he Christianity,
Nor is i'th'least acquainted with Humanity;
But poor Children abuse, and do not beat
Only their backs, but bellies, by want of meat;
Which makes them heartless that service to do,
Which they by him are daily set unto:
Neither can he, without the same subsist,
If it be not by their hard labor increased,
Which they not able at all times to do,
His furious hot displeasure run into,
And some his storming rigor to prevent,
Too often aside step, to escape punishment;
And many too many Dames, rather than they
Will seek a means his chollar to allay,
The more will agravate his fury, though
It sometime proves to be their overthrow;
Rather if Boys want wit, have thou a care,
That want of patience fall not to thy share;
Allure him by good Counsel, and fair words,
Both which are known, to be more powerful cords,
And sooner will him draw t'amendment, than
The strictest course of the most cruel men:
But if that fair means will not win him to
That which is fitting, known for him to do;
Then use the rod, or wand, but careful be
Mercy to mix with thy severity:
If thou too strict art, and he run away,
Whither to seek him will thou take thy way?
And he then wanting, his wants to supply,
At best must beg, and in the streets often lie.
Whereby our Trade has been much scandalized,
For want of both being better advised:
Was not a M^ster and a Dame lately
In danger of life, for their great cruelty?
Let them a warning be to others, that they
By such doings work not their own decay;
But pity it is the Trade in general.
Should censured be by ones unhappy fall.
The other two, as shall to you be shown,
Are known the Drunkard and the idle droan;
The Drunkard does such unsit carriage show,
That we do now into a byword g^ow;
For if a man do any Drunkard meet,
As daily there is too many in the street,
There goes a drunken Weaver he does cry;
Thus our Trades brought to infamy thereby.
But though the Trade thereby does bear much blame,
Himself is also scourged for the same;
Witness his poverty, and poor array,
Witness his health and strength both which decay;
Witness his disrespect with honest men,
Witness his antic, frantic carriage, when
Drink has him overcome, that he thereby
Is jeered and scorned by the raskality;
And is unfit for labor made, whereby
He draws on him and his great poverty.
Philip the King of Macedonia, when
He against the Persians marched with an host of men,
Hearing they were inclined t'intemperancy,
He did forbear the war, saying, shortly
They would orethrow themselves: so, even so
The Drunkard seeks his own overthrow,
And the overthrow of his whole family;
And also on our Trade draws infamy.
You young men Weavers, that do yet stand free
From being acquainted with Ebriety
If you a master have, or if there are
Journy-men thus inclined, let it be far,
Ever far from you, to follow their example,
To take delight therein, no rather trample
Under your feet the thought of that which does
Both spoil the wit and memory of youth,
Wrongs their invention also, and does make
Them much incapable to undertake
What might them profit, and preferment bring,
For drunkenness behind it leaves a sting
That does the reputation wound of all,
Both old and young that in love with it fall;
And if a young man's Credit be once stained,
Much labor it will ask, ere it is regained.
Drink has these three effects, as one does say,
And we find it to prove true, day by day.
Pleasure, Drunkenness, and Sorrow be
Beyond exception taken for the three.
The first is ( Pleasure, that is) when it is taken
Moderately, but when that path's forsaken,
And we do swallow it down in excess,
That brings forth the second, (Drunkenness)
And if the Drunkard do live till the morrow,
He Will find the third effect, (which will be Sorrow)
Unless he be past hope, and wholly incline
Himself thereto, making himself a Swine:
Another says it is a Monster that
Has many heads, and who startles not at
So strange an Object? which heads are, says he,
Foul Talk, and Actions that much fouler be;
With Railing, Swearing, Cursing, Quarrelling, and
Wrath, Murder, which will then be all at hand.
Oh such a Monster shun, whose poison foul
Will overthrow both thy Body and Soul.
And no less hateful is base Idleness,
As every man tha'ts virtuous, will confess;
For it, like Drunkenness, does draw on need,
And many evils more from it proceed:
The idle man's unskilled in any Art;
The Idle Man in Virtue has no part;
The idle man the industrious displeases;
The idle man heaps on himself Diseases;
The idle man is unto no man friend;
No not to himself, who time does idly spend:
For dilgence attains to that, which he
Shall never do, for lack of industry.
The doing man has plenty still in store,
But idle negligence is always poor;
Labor gains Love, Credit and Reputation;
Negligence contempt and detestation.
Be thou a Master, Servant, or who-ere
These lines of mine does either read or hear,
Regard not who did write them, rather learn,
Between the good and evil to discern:
Fly drunkenness and sloth, both which all know
(That do know any thing) lead unto woe;
Strive to be temperate and industrious, so
You shall not only your wants overthrow,
But bring your selves in credit; and our Trade,
Which by such misdemeanors has been made
Contemptible, shall reputation gain,
And hell-bred envies Calumny restrain:
But I hope men of judgment are more wise,
Than to give ear unto such Calumnies:
For, as we say, One swallow does not make
A Summer, so, I hope no man will take
Advantage from a few despised men,
The Trade in general to disparage, when
There is not any Handycraft I know
In London, out of which there daily grow
Men of more wealth, or known abilities;
Or few or none to higher places rise
Than Weavers have and do: should I omit
To speak of some time past, which is not yet
Five hundred years, for then it is well known,
As truth by true relation has it shown,
The Weavers did in London bear great sway,
Wherein they continued many a day:
For those that have read ancient Records know,
No Company in London can out-go
The Weavers by Antiquity; for we
The first Society in London be,
That is confirmed by Charter, it being known
About five hundred years of age, and none,
Not any Company so ancient is,
Nor any Charter granted before this;
Which though it be no broader, nor in length
Exceeds a hand, it is known of that strength,
Being but about ten lines, that there is not many
Charters in this City, if there be any
Puts down our Charter for validity,
As many learned Clerks can testify.
And I once heard Recorder Littleton
Confess no less, when it he looked upon,
Who was much taken when he did it see,
And reverence showed it for antiquity:
And being it is truth, that we are known to be
The first incorporated Company,
That then in London was, Weavers might well
As they then stood, all other Trades excel;
And Candle-wick-Street, which is yet so named
For Weavers Looms there standing, is still famed.
I further might have boasted, telling you how
Our Master swaid here, as the Lord Mayor now,
And after 'twas a Mayoralty, they did ride
In Purple-Gowns often by the Mayors side,
But that I was not certain it was true,
And nothing on bare hearsay would I show;
But fame has ever told us it was so,
And from no cause no such report could flow.
I wish this City Peace, Plenty, Health; may honor
Be daily more and more conferred upon her;
Let her Societies flourish, let there be
Union within her Walls perpetually;
Let every several Corporation know
Its place and dignity, though ours below
Some others at this present does appear,
This I have writ, to show what once we were;
Not to detract from others, for some be
Honorable by their Titles, so are we
Expressed in our Charter, which has been
Confirmed by Parliament, as may be seen:
But the Proverb says, and all allow the same,
Tell me not what I was, but what I am.
What we have been my lines in part declare,
Nor need I shame to write what now we are;
For here is living at this present day,
A worthy Alderman late Lord Mayor, and may
I write without offense, although he be
Free of an Honorable Company,
I hope he will not blame me, nor deny
That he has used Silk-weaving formerly;
And also more, his honor to augment,
Has been a Member of our Parliament.
But of our own Members, of late had we
Two worthy Gentlemen, both seen to be
Aldermen of this City; also I
Have known them Masters of our Company,
Being Silk-weavers, and likewise we have
Common Council-men, who with other grave
And ancient Citizens, are known to be
Governors of Bride-well; besides have we
Some chosen to be of the Corporation,
Where poor men's children have good Education.
Also in Naval conduct now have we
Many brave Weavers, who Commanders be,
Who for this Kingdom have good service done,
And honor, fame, and Wealth gained; also run
Through many difficulties, and been made
Governors of strong holds, who by their Trade
Are all Silk-weavers: thus by what is writ you see
In The City and the Navy both have we
Weavers of note and worth, and many more,
Which would too long for me be to run ore;
Who naturally are otherwise inclined,
And unto several studies bend their mind.
Many proficients in Divinity,
And many studious in Philosophy:
Some very curious the Natures to know
Of natural things; one of which has to show
As many sorts of most strange rarities,
As I think ever one man saw with eyes:
Others in Physic, and Astrology,
Very well seen are, one especially,
Who I cannot pass over, nor omit
To write Encomions of him that are fit.
I formerly have read of an old Oak,
Among the Poets, that in old time spoke,
And gave forth doubtful Answers, and also
Of Delphos Oracle, that long ago
Answered demands, with words of double sense;
But here is plain and true intelligence:
Many to resolve doubts often to him come,
Returning with great satisfaction home,
For his knowledge in Physic, and herein
Has with successful proof approved been;
And from Blackfriars both Town and country can
Testify, he is a well deserving man.
It would be here too much, too long, to me,
Several men to name particularly,
For their known worth; only I will show,
That we have also many Silk-weavers who,
In their respective dwellings, live as brave,
And as good fame and reputation have,
As any Trade about them, none disprais'd,
And are as frequent in their Parishes raised,
All Offices to bear, as others be;
And not a few, but many such have we;
And may their number still increase, that so,
Weaving to be respected more might grow:
But as the purest Lawn may stained be,
And the sweet Rose has pricking thorns we see,
Or as among good Wheat some Darnel grows;
So we among these Gentlemen have those,
Who nor their own, nor the Trades fame regard,
But shame, disgrace and poverty is their reward:
Which I do name with grief; but for the rest,
Be they with Heaven and Earthly blessings blessed;
For by their means, the Credit of our Trade
Upheld is much, which but for such were made
Contemptible with some, although its worth
No pen is able fully to set forth;
Much less has mine here, who the unfittest am
Of (many) any to declare the same.
But I have long desired to do what here
You see is done; if well or mean, how-ere,
I hope my friends with good acceptance will,
Value my meaning, wave my want of skill:
For my intent was Silk-weaving to raise
One step out of disgrace, where many days
It has lain struggling, as wanting a hand,
To lift it on its former legs to stand;
This on its knees may set it, an abler pen
May if well ordered place it upright again:
Which being done, its glory than shall last,
Until the last Trump sounds its last blast;
For what ever does perish, Weaving will
Continue until Time his Time fulfill;
And Snow-Ball like, the further it does pass,
Gather fair fame to blot out foul disgrace.
Nil ultra now I Will set unto my pen,
And crave for favor of those Gentlemen,
Those well deserving Weavers, who time has made
To be the praise and glory of our Trade;
Hoping that they will no exceptions take
For what is here done, being partly for their sake,
And partly to admonish those that run
Out of the way, I did what here is done;
And also to take off that scandalous blot,
Which the Trade if considered deserves not:
And if I gain their loving favor, I
Have the chief end that I desire hereby.
Let Momus then jeer on, and flout his fill,
Let the defaming Critic censure still,
Let traducing Zoilus my lines reprehend;
Let them all their whole stock of malice spend,
And from their tongues their envious poison spit,
My harmless lines will gain more fame by it:
For Innocence the more it is deprest,
Will like the Palm, gain a more flourishing Crest.
And so relying on my friends good will,
I remain their obliged servant still;
And shall be ever willing them to serve,
If so my weakness may their loves deserve.
FINIS.

