The CASE of the East India Company.
A Petition was delivered to the Honorable House of Commons, in October 1691,
signed by several Merchants and others, praying the Erection of a new
East India Company, to preserve that Trade.

The same Day the East India Company also gave in a Petition, praying to be
confirmed.

A considerable part of that Sessions was spent in consideration of that Trade,
and a Bill was brought in to establish it; but the Delays occasioned by the
great Opposition of the Company and other Public Affairs, preventing its
Passing; the Honorable House of Commons resolved on the following Address.

Sabbati, 6. die Februarii, 1691.
Resolved, That an Humble Address be made to His Majesty, to dissolve the
present East India Company, according to his Power reserved in their Charter,
and to Constitute another East India Company, for the better preserving the
East India Trade to this Kingdom, in such a manner as His Majesty in His Royal
Wisdom shall think fit.

Resolved, That the said Address be presented by the whole House.

Jovis, 11. die Februarii. 1691.
Mr. Speaker Reported to the House, That he did yesterday Present to His
Majesty their Humble Address touching the East India Company, and that His
Majesty was pleased to Express himself to this Effect:

That it was a matter of very great Importance to the Trade of this Kingdom,
and that it could not be expected that he should give a present Answer to it,
but that he would take time to consider of it, and in a short time give them
His Positive Answer.

Hereupon a Committee of Lords appointed by His Majesty to consider thereof,
agreed on several Regulations, which were sent to the Company; who refused to
comply with most of the material Particulars, notwithstanding their Declaration
of Submission, as appears by the Message His Majesty sent the Honorable House
of Commons in the following Sessions.

Lunae, 14. die Novembris. 1693.
Sir Edward Seymour acquaints the House, That he had a Message from His
Majesty, in Answer to the Address of this House the last Sessions, in relation
to the East India Company, the which he delivered in Writing, where the same
were read.

Resolved, That this House will upon Wednesday Morning next, take the Matter
relating to the East India Company, into further Consideration.

Mercurii, 16. die Novembris, 1692.
Resolved, That this House will to Morrow Morning at Ten a Clock, take into
further Consideration the Matter relating to the East India Company.

Jovis, 17. die Novembris. 1692,
Then the House, according to the Order of the Day, proceeded to take into
Consideration the Matter relating to the East India Company. and the Message
from His Majesty, and the Papers relating thereunto being read.

Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, That a Bill be brought in for the Regulating,
Preserving and Establishing the East India Trade to this Kingdom.

Resolved, That this House will upon Wednesday Morning next at Ten of the
Clock, resolve it self into a Committee of the whole House, to consider of
Heads for the said Bill.

Orderd, That the said Message from His Majesty, and the Papers relating
thereunto, be referred to the said Committee.

Whereupon the Committee of the whole House proceeded on Heads of Regulations,
and a Bill was brought in accordingly, but meeting the same Delays and
Oppositions as the former, a Second Address was made to His Majesty, only to
dissolve them.

Sabbati, 25, die Februarii. 1692.
Resolved, That an Humble Address be presented to His Majesty, That he will
Dissolve the East India Company upon Three Years Warning to the said Company,
according to the Power reserved in their Charter.

Resolved, That the said Address be Presented by the whole House.

Veneris, 30. die Martis. 1692.
To which His Majesty was pleased to give the following Answer:

Gentlemen, I will do all the Good in My Power for this Kingdom, and I will
Consider your Address.

After the Parliaments rising, Regulations were agreed on before His Majesty's
Departure for Holland, for a Charter to pass, to establish the said Company; to
which a stop was put, by their making Default in paying the first Quarterly
Payment of the Tax charged on their joint Stock, whereby their Charters became
void by Act of Parliament. But Orders were soon given to prepare a Charter to
restore them with the same Regulations which were before agreed on.

Some time was spent in modelling it, and at last it was thought most
Expeditious, that a Charter of Restoration should first pass, and after that a
Charter of Regulations.

Caveats being entered at the several Offices, the Parties who opposed the
Passing the said Charter, were heard and offered their Reasons against it.

An Order of Council was made the 28th September, 1692. to prepare a Warrant
for a Charter, which past under the Great Seal the 7th October last, and soon
after, viz. the 11 th November last, a Charter of Regulations appointing Seven
hundred forty four thousand Pounds to be added to the Company's Stock by new
Subscriptions.

The said New Charters Restore and Confirm to the Company their former Charters
of 13 th, 20 th, 25 th, and 35 th Car. 2. and 2d Jac. 2, and grants them all
their Ports, etc. and all the Powers, etc. which were Lawfully used, exercised,
or enjoyed, by them in the same manner, to all intents and purposes; as if the
said Powers, etc. and other the Premises were particularly granted, and the
Letters Patents concerning the same at large recited.

These Charters which are restored, grant them among other things, the sole
Trade to and from the East Indies.

Power to Seize Ships and Goods for Trading thither, the Ships and Goods to be
Forfeited; and besides the Transgressors to incurr the King's Indignation, and
Imprisonment during the King's pleasure, and such other Punishments as the King
should think fit; and not to be released, 'till they had given Bond to the
Company, never more to Trade to to the East Indies.

Power to enter into the Ship or House of any one, Trading within the limits of
their Charters, and to Seize his Goods without Account.

Power to Seize the Persons of any Englishmen found in the East Indies, and to
send them home for England.

Power to Judge the King's Subjects in India, by their Governor and Council,
in all Causes, Civil and Criminal, and to execute Judgment upon them.

Power to Execute Martial Law.

Power to Muster Soldiers, to make Peace or War, to recover Satisfaction for
Injuries by Force of Arms.

Power to License any Persons, even Aliens and Infidels, to Trade; though the
King's Subjects are restrained from it.

It Is pretended, That no Powers are Restored by these Charters, but such only,
as have or might be Lawfully used; yet the Company have ever accounted all the
Powers which were granted them to be Lawful; and have accordingly executed them
on the Lives, Liberties, and Estates of their Fellow Subjects.

The Power of the Prerogative to restrain Foreign Trade from some, and grant it
to others, was vindicated and asserted for Law by the Companies Council; and
though the deciding it by a Legal Trial was proposed, yet it was declined.

Some of the Powers in their former Charters were acknowledged to be unlawful
by the Company's own Council, whereupon it was desired, they might be
distinguished in their new Charters, from those which were lawful; but for want
of such a distinction of the lawful from the unlawful Powers, it is left to the
Company, their Factors, Servants and Mariners, to determine which Powers may
and which may not be lawfully used; and if one may judge by their Proceedings,
they will account them all lawful, as it is plain they have done by the Petition
given into Council the 21 October, to stop the Ship Redbridge, by which they
claimed the sole Trade to the East Indies, granted them by Charter, and
pretended that the lawful Trading thither of others their Fellow Subjects was a
Contempt of their Majesty's Government, and of the known Laws of the Land. Upon
this Petition, and bare Allegation of the Company, the said Ship was stopped.

By which Proceeding its evident, what Construction is now put on the
Confirmation of their former Charters by these new Grants; which may further
appear by the not granting Protection for Four hundred Seamen to go to the
East Indies this Season, upon the several Petitions which were delivered into
Council, and the granting to them Protections for Twelve hundred Men, even
whilst they were no Company, nor had any Charter.

And how contradictory such an Exclusion of Trade, without an Act of
Parliament, is to the Laws of the Land, may appear by the several Judgments
which have been given in Westminster Hall, since their Majesty's happy
Accession to the Crown, upon Actions brought against several Persons for
seizing Ships and Goods for Trading within the limits of the East India and
African Company's Charter, and is likewise demonstrated by the Petition which
the Company delivered to the Honorable House of Commons in the former
Sessions, praying to be confirmed by an Act of Parliament.

And further appears by the time which was spent in Settling that Trade, during
the two last Sessions of Parliament, which would have been needless if the King
by his Charter could have legally excluded his Subjects without an Act of
Parliament, which is a Power His Majesty seems to disclaim in the aforesaid
Message sent the House of Commons last Sessions; for therein it is expressly
declared, That the Concurrence of the Parliament is necessary to make a
complete and useful Settlement of that Trade. -- And if their Concurrence is
necessary, its plain the King cannot do it by his own Authority alone without
their Concurrence, and the Company's being established contrary to their
repeated desires, it is humbly supposed, can never be thought an Inducement for
the Parliament to confirm them.

Having thus given an Account of the Means of obtaining their New Charters, it
may not be improper to consider how they have put it in Execution, and
especially as to the raising the additional Stock of Seven hundred forty four
thousand Pounds.

Wherein the Ways and Methods, which they have practiced to draw in others to
Subscribe, are so extraordinary, that they are worth observing, as may apppear
by the manner of their Addressing to those who need persuading, to Subscribe to
this or the like Effect: --

"Sir, If you will write into the East India Stock, you shall have Security to
your own Satisfaction. -- That you shall have Ten per Cent. Profit for what
Money you think fit to Subscribe, and your Money paid you at a Twelve Months
end, or else have liberty then to keep the Stock if you please.

And because all Men have not Money by them, there is an Expedient found out
for that too. Thus --

" Sir, If you are pleased to be concerned in the East India Company's Stock on
these Terms, though you have no Money by you, that shall be no Objection; for
you shall have it provided for you. --

And these Methods have produced an extraordinary effect in changing some Men's
Minds, and convincing others Understanding; and this has been the particular
Province of some of that Committee, who are but late Converts themselves, and
who have been so Zealous in this matter, and so Public and General in their
Proposals of this Nature, that they are become Notoriously Famous for it.

This is the easiest and cheapest way they have ever yet had of making Friends,
for if a Hundred and Fifty Thousand Pounds should be underwritten on these
Terms, the Ten per cent. Profit would amount to but Fifteen Thousand Pound, of
which the Interest for a Year comes to Seven Thousand Five Hundred Pound. -- So
that it would only cost Seven Thousand Five Hundred Pounds --, which may easily
be slid into an Account of Promiscuous Charges and Secret Services, among other
greater Articles, and this besides engaging so many new Friends, is done as a
means to draw in double as much to be Subscribed by others, who know nothing of
such Bargains, but are induced to Subscribe by the Influence of such Examples.

The Joining Seven Hundred Forty Four Thousand Pound to the Companies Imaginary
Stock, is in effect the giving them at least one half of it, which is Three
Hundred and Seventy Thousand Pounds for an Admittance into this Trade. Whereas
it (notwithstanding the Right which the Subject has to the Freedom of this
Trade by Law,) the Privilege of the admittance into the Exercise of it, were a
thing which was necessary to have been Purchased of a Subject, it would have
been a much Cheaper Bargain to have given Fifty Thousand Pounds for a new
Company, as was Proposed, than to give them Three Hundred and Seventy Thousand
Pounds, or more, for the Privilege of Coming into the Old One; but such a
Purchasing of a Subject the Privilege of this Trade for Fifty Thousand Pounds,
might well have been accounted a Prejudice to the Peoples Right thereunto, as
well as a diminution of the Respcet and Authority due to the Proceedings of the
Honorable House of Commons, who its not to be doubted will be very Cautious of
giving any seeming Countenance to a Proceeding wherein the Property of the
Subject is so highly Concerned, as that of being deprived of the Right which
they have to the Freedom of Trade without an Act of Parliament.


