Bartholinus Anatomy; MADE From the Precepts of his Father, And from the
Observations of all Modern Anatomists, together with his own. With one hundred
fifty and three Figures cut in Brass, much larger and better than any have been
heretofore Printed in English. IN FOUR BOOKS AND FOUR MANUALS, Answering to the
said BOOKS. Book I. Of the Lower Belly. Book II. Of the Middle Venture or
Cavity. Book III. Of the uppermost Cavities, Viz. The Head. Book IV. Of the
Limbs.
The Four Manuals Answering to the four foregoing Books. Manual I. Of the
Veins, Answering to the First Book of the Lower Belly. Manual II. Of the
Arteries, Answering to the Second Book of the Middle Cavity or Chest. Manual
III. Of the Nerves, Answering to the Third Book of the Head. Manual IV. Of the
Bones, Answering to the Fourth Book of the Limbs.
Als Two Epistles of the Circulation of the Blood.

Published By Nich. Culpeper Gent. And, Abdiah Cole Doctor of Physic.

London, Printed by John Streater living in Clerken-well-Close 1668.

Books newly Imprinted, or Imprniting.
1. RIverius Practice of Physic and Observations. 2. Bartholinus An atomy with
large Brass figures. 3. Vestingus Anato my of the Body of Man. 4. Riolanus
Anatomy. 5. The London Dispensatory in English. 6. A Directory for Midwifes, or
a Guide for Women, the first and second part, newly enlarged and illustrated
with Pl^tes. 7. A Treatise of the Rickets. 8. Medicam ents for the Poor, or
Physic for the Common people. 9. Health for the Rich and Poor, by Diet without
Physic. 10. The English Physician enlarged. 11. Oriatrike or Physic refined.
The Common errors therein refuted, and the whole Art reformed, written by the
acute Philosopher Baptista Van Helmont. 12. The Hidden Treasures of the Art of
Physic fully discovered in 4 Books. The second Edition with Additions, By John
Tanner Student in Physic and Astrology. 13. Mathematical Collections and
Translations from the Original Copyes of Galilaeus and other famous Modern
Authors. By Tho. Salisbury Esquire.
To be sold by Geo. Sawbridge at his house on Clerkenwell-Green.

The Introduction.
ANthropologia or the Doctrine of Man's Nature, is, though commonly, yet rightly
divided into two Parts: Anatomia which treats of the Body and its Parts; and
Psychologia, which treats of the Soul.

Anatomia therefore [more rightly called Anatomy, that is Section, which Sr.
Ignatius reckons as a kind of Martyrdom, Caelius terms Apertio an opening, and
Tertulianus Prosectio a cutting up, whence the term Prosector, a Cutter up]
that I may come to that which is my business; in as much as it is a part of
Natural Philosophy [for The Subject of Anatomy.
Medicinal Anatomy how ever useful and of which Galen treats in his Anatomical
Administration, we must leave to Physitians] has for its Subject the Body of
any Animal or Live-wight whatsoever, whether frequenting the Land or or Waters,
flying in the Air, etc. and not only the Body of Man. But we are wont most of
all to search into the structure of Man's Body. 1. Because of the great
Perfection thereof, which Why Anatomy treats chiefly of the Body of Man.
is the Rule of Imperfection. 2. Because the sundry sorts of Animals are almost
infinite, so that to dissect and search into all of them, the life of man in
this Age of the World is not sufficient. 3. Because of the incredible profit
which thereby redounds to every man, who desires perfectly to know himself, and
this House of his earthy Tabernacle, both the better to preserve Health and to
cure Diseases: Nor can any man be a Natural Philosopher or deserve so to be
called, unless he have the Doctrine of Anatomy at his fingers end, above all
other Parts of Natural Philosophy. Yet is not the Dissection of other Creatures
therefore unprofitable, or to be The Dissection of other Animals is useful to
an Anatomist and why?
neglected by an Anatomist, partly by reason of the Analogy and Correspondence
they hold with the Body of Man, partly to attain to the Knowledge of the Motions
of Living Creatures, and partly, to conclude, for the Exercise of an Anatomist
and Surgeon. Democritus sought the Seat and Nature of Choler in Living
Creatures. After him Galen dissected Apes and other Living Creatures, as also
Severinus, Aldrovandus, Castellus, Br^nzerus, Panarolus and myself have cut up
diverse Living Creatures. By the cutting up of Creatures alive Asellius found
out the Ven^ lacteae ^^ milkie Veins, and Harvey and Walaeus found the motion
of the Blood.

Moreover, because in regard of the vari^^ of its Actions, the Body of Man does
not consist of one part all alike, but of sundry; therefore we must know that
the whole Body is divided The division of the whole Body of Man. ^
into Parts containing, Parts contained, and Parts moving, according to the
ancient Doctrine of Hippocrates: that is to say, into solid Parts, Humors and
Spirits. And in this large acceptance, all things are called Parts which make
up and complete the Body, even the Nails, Hairs, Fat and Marrow. But stricctly
and properly that is called a Pa^^ which partakes of the form, and life of the
whole, and such the Anatomists accounts (...) so^i^t Parts, And therefore ^lius
has well defined a Part to be A Body (...) to the whole, partaking of the
common Life (...) ^ted for the performance of some Functions or Use. But Galen
accounts that a Part, What a Part is?
which is a B^ ^^ some sort joined to the whole, and has in part its own
proper Circumsc^^^ (...) part is properly;

1. Tha^ (...) is (...) but does not nourish any other Part. And so they
exclude the S^ H^. (...) also t^^ Fa^, which sometimes nourishes the Parts, and
the What is the proper acceptance of the wor^ Part.
Marrow of the Bone* (...). 2. That which is solid. 3. Which has a proper
Circumscription of its own. The contrary whereof is in fat, which is terminated
by the figure of the Parts adjacent. 4. Which is continued with the whole,
Mathematically and Physically, both in respect of the Matter and Form jointly
considered. 5. Which is fitted for some Function or Use. And so Warts and
Swellings, with other things which grow upon the living Body praeternaturally,
are excluded.
And that we may understand what is meant by Function and Use, I shall briefly
open the same. An Action or Function may be either private or public. The
private Action is that whereby the Parts provide for themselves; the public is
that whereby they provide for the What is meant by the Action of a Part.
whole live Creature. A public Action as it is opposed to use, is the Action
of the principal Part of an Organ which performs the whole Action. For every
Action in the Body of a livewight, has according to Galen, a peculiar
Particle, by which it is performed. For Examples sake; The Skin has of it self
a private Action, such as the Attraction and Retention of Nourishment etc. it
has also a public action for the behoof of the whole Animal, viz. the
discerning of the tangible Qualities, such as are perceived by the Sense of
Feeling. So the action of the Liver^ ^od-making, of the Stones, Seed-making; of
the Dugs Milk-making.

But the ^^^e, is that help which the less principal Parts afford the more
principal, in the performance What by the ^^^.
^^ their Actions, which according to Galen is in all Parts, yea even in those
which have no action at all. It springs chiefly from three Fountains, and they
are,

1. The proper Temper of the Part, that is to say the Symmetry or even
proportion of the first Qualities. For Examples sake, The Skin is in respect of
the first Qualities temperate; and if you ask wherefore, I answer, that it may
be able to discern and judge of all tangible Qualities. 2. Such things as
follows the Temper, and they are the second Qualities: Hardness, Softness,
Thickness Thinness, Compactness, Rarity, etc. 3. Necessary Adjuncts, as
Magnitude, Number, Passages or Cavities, Figure, Conformation, Connection,
Situation, Surfase. But I, in these Institutions, for the convenience of
Learners, shall, with other Anatomists, seldom observe this accurate difference
between Action and Use* especially, that I may avoid the tedious repetition of
sundry things.
But before I proceed to the Division and Differences of Parts, I shall briefly
resolve this question, Which Part of the Body is first generated.
Which Part of the Body is first generated. We must therefore know, that
according to Hippocrates, all the Parts are formed and differenced at one and
the same time, as in a Circle, there is neither beginning nor end, but
altogether are both beginning and end. But all the Parts are not perfected and
adorned at one and the same time; but in the first place the Navil-vein. 2. The
Liver. 3. Afterward the Heart (which Aristotle would have to be first made, as
Galen would have the Liver to be) and lastly the brain. The Navil-vein
therefore, is first finished and perfected, in regard of the enlargement
thereof by the blood, but not in respect of its first Constitution of the Seed.
But others said that the Groundwork or underwarpe of the Parts is Seed, and the
Woof or Superstructure blood, supposing that there are two material Principles
of the body: Seed and blood. Which Opinion I have refuted and sufficiently
explained in my Anatomical Controversies, Quaest. 11. touching the Parts and
their Faculties and Functions.

And therefore the Vessels are said in respect of Perfection to be generated
before the bowels, Why the Vessels were to be made before the Bowels.
and that justly. For otherwise the bowels could not be nourished without a
proportionable Instrument to that end, namely a Vein, by which the blood is
conveyed for their Nutriment. For as out of a Kernel or Seed put into the
Earth, first a long Root descends into the Earth, after that other Roots spread
themselves round about the Surface of the Earth, out of which afterward, the
Trunk and branches spring up; so out of the Seed committed to the Womb, there
arises first the Navil-vein, receiving blood out of the Womb-cake; out of which
Navilvein arises the Vena Portae, with its Roots.

Let us now come to the Division or Differences of the Parts, which may be
diverse.

Taking the word in a large Sense, some divide them into parts of Necessity, as
the Heart, Liver, Division of the Parts.
Lungs, Stomach; and Parts of Commodity, and that either great as the Eyes and
Stones, or less as the Nails; and parts of Ornament, as the Hairs of the Head
and Beard.

But I shall divide the Parts, chiefly in respect of their End, or in respect
of their Matter. In respect of their End. *The principal Parts.


In respect of the worthiness of the End, some are Principal, others less
principal and (...).

The Principal are the Liver, Heart, Brain, which are the Principles of other
Parts. As, out of the brain arise the Nerves, according to the common Opinion,
out of the Heart, the Arteries, out of the Liver, the Veins. Others add the
Testicles, but without any need, because they make nothing to the Conservation
of the Individual, ^and Generation is caused without them, as I shall show by
Examples in the 7. Book Chap. 22.

Now we do not mean the beginning of Radication or Original; for so, the Seed
is the beginning The Beginning or principle of Radication. The Original of
Dispensation. Parts subservient or ministering.
of all the Parts, but of Dispensation and Distribution; that is such a
beginning as sends out of it self some Instrument, Force or common Matter. So
from the Heart, as the beginning or Original of Dispensation, the Arteries
arise, because they receive their Virtue from the heart. and seem there to have
their Original. The same may be said of the Veins and Nerves in respect of
their Originals. So the Gristles have their Original from the bones, and also
the Ligaments.

The Subservient Parts are necessary or not necessary.

The Necessary are those without which the Animal cann^^ (...) cannot live
well. So the Lungs serve the Heart, the Guts the Stomach; the Stoma^ ^aver and
Spleen; the Gallbladder, Choler-passage and Piss-bladder, serve the Liver; and
all the Instruments of the Senses serve the brain.

The Not-necessary, as simple flesh, etc. in respect of other Parts: for in
consumptive persons ^is wasted away, and in fleshie persons it is a burden, and
in sects according to Aristotle have no Flesh. In respect of their Matter. A
similar part what it is, and how manifold.


In respect of their immediate Matter, some are simple, Homogeneal or Similary;
others Compound Heterogeneal, or dissimilary.

A Similar Part, is that which is divided into Parts like it self, so that all
the Particles are of the same Substance with the whole, as every part of flesh
is flesh, etc.

Of such similar Parts, some reckons more, others fewer.

Aristotle in sundry places, thus reckons them: Blood, Phlegm, Choler, Sanies or
blood-water, Milk, Seed, Gall, Fat, Marrow, Flesh, Veins, Arteries, Nerves,
Fibers, Membranes, Skin, Bones, Gristles, Hairs, Nails, Horns, Feathers.

Averroes omits some of these, and adds Melancholy, Spirits, Muscles, Cords,
Ligaments, Suet.

Galen in sundry places, thus reckons them: A Bone, a Gristle, a Vein, an
Artery, a Nerve, a Membrane, a Fiber, a Tendon, a Ligament, a Nail, Skin, Fat,
Marrow, the Glassie and Chrystalline Humors, the flesh of the Muscles and
bowels, with the proper substance of the brain, Stomach, Guts and Womb.

Archangelus retains all the aforesaid, and adds three sorts of Spirits, four
Alimentary humors, and the Excrementitious humors, as Urin in the Bladder,
Choler in the Gallbladder, Excrementitious Phlegm, and all the Excrements of
all digestions, the Scarf-skin, and the internal Skin of ^^ (...) Cavities.
Moreover ^e adds to these, seventeen similar parts, not commonly reckoned, viz.
the proper substance (setting aside the other similar parts, Veins, Arteries,
etc.) of the Brain, Tongue, Lungs, Heart, Liver, Gallbladder, Spleen, Stomach,
Guts, Kidneys, Ureters, Piss-bladder, Womb, Yard, Stones, Muscles, Kernels. But
it is in Vain for him to reckon these parts as new: for all in a manner are
comprehended under Flesh. For according to Hippocrates and Galen, there is a
flesh of the Muscles, and a flesh of the Bowels, and a flesh of the Glandules
or Kernels. But in another place Galen propounds a threefold flesh. 1. In a
Muscle, which the Ancients did only call Flesh. 2. The Parenchyma, or proper
substance of the Liver, Heart, Kidneys, etc. 3. In the Stomach, Bladder, Veins.
4. In the Bones, though improperly.

Whence we may gather four sorts of Flesh. 1. Musculous flesh, which Galen
frequently How many sorts of Flesh there are?
terms Fibrous flesh, and it is soft and red and properly termed flesh. And in
Hippocrates his Language, by flesh many times is meant the Muscles. 2. Viscerous
flesh or the flesh of the Bowels. Erasistratus calls it Parenchyma or an
Affusion of blood; Galen calls it Similar and simple flesh, which supports the
Vessels of the bowels, fills up the empty spaces, and performs the Action. 3.
Membranous flesh, or the fleshy substance of every Membranous part, as in the
Gullet, Stomach, Guts, Womb, bladder. 4. Glandulous flesh, or the flesh of
Kernels, which serves. 1. For to support the divisions of Vessels. 2. To drink
up superfluous humors, especially wheyish humors, because the Kernels are of an
hollow Spungy substance; and therefore they are vulgarly termed Emunctories or
Clensers. Those in the Neck being counted Clensers of the Head; those in the
Armpits, of the Heart; those in the Groyns of the Liver. 3. To moisten the
parts for their more easy motion, or otherwise to prohibit dryness. Such are
those which are situate by the Tongue, Larynx, Eye-corners, etc.

But the similar parts are reckoned to be ten: A bone, a Gristle, a Ligament, a
Membrane, a The Number of the Similar Parts.
Fiber, a Nerve, an Artery, a Vein, Flesh and Skin.

Of these some are similar only in the judgment of Sense, as Veins, Arteries
(some add Muscles) others are simply and absolutely similar. That Veins,
Arteries, Nerves, Muscles are not truly simple and similar, has been rightly
taught by Aristotle: for a Muscle consists of Flesh, Fibers, and a Tendon:
Nerves are made up of the Dura and pia Matter, with Marrow: Arteries, of two
different coats; the Veins of a coat (and of Fibers as some will have it) and
Valves. Simply and truly similar parts are Bones, Gristles, Ligaments,
Membranes, Fibers, Flesh and Skin. To these some add the Ureters, the Air
implanted in the Ear, etc. but in vain. For, 1. They are not parts common ^^
the whole body, but proper to some parts. 2. The implanted Air of the Ears, is
nothing but an implanted spirit, which cannot be reckoned among solid parts.

Here we are to observe that all these parts are commonly divided, into
Spermatical, Sanguine, or mixed.

The Spermatical are made of seed, and such are the eight first reckoned; which
if they are cut What a Spermatical Part is?
asunder, they breed not again, nor can they be truly united, but they are
joined together by a Callus in the middle, by reason of defect of matter and
formative faculty, which acts not after the Conformation of the Parts.

The Sanguine or fleshy Parts, contrariwise are bred again, because they are
supposed to be What a Sanguine Part.
made of Blood, as the Flesh.

A mixed Part is the Skin, of which we shall treat hereafter, in Book 1. Chap. 2.

For feed and blood are commonly accounted the two general Principles of which
we are made: so that in the Seed there is very little of the material
principle, but much of the active, but in the blood much of the material
principle, and but a little and weak portion of the active or effective
principle. The first Rudiments and underwrap as it were of the parts, are said
to be made of Seed; and the woofe or superstructure of blood flowing in. But
what the Truth is in Contradiction to this vulgar opinion, we have taught in
our Anatomical Controversies. For we are rather to hold, that the parts are at
first made only of Seed, as of their matter; and that the Mothers blood does
nourish, and increase and amplify the Parts. The Skin in comparison to other
Parts, has an indifferent proportion of Seed, not so much as the Spermatical,
nor so little as the Sanguinary parts.

The Compound or dissimilar Parts are, those which may be divided into diverse
unlike parts, What a dissimilar part is?
as an Hand cannot be cut into other Hands, but into Bones, Muscles, Veins,
etc. The dissimilar parts are by the Philosopher called Members: but they are
vulgarly termed Organical or instrumental parts.

Now in every Organ, there are for the most part, four kinds of parts. For
example sake, Organical parts.
in the Eye there is, 1. That part by which the action, viz. Seeing is
performed, namely the Chrystalline Humor. 2. That without which it cannot be
performed, as the Optic Nerve. 3. That by which it is the better performed, as
the Coats and Muscles of the Eyes. 4. That by which the action is preserved, as
the Eyelids, etc.

And because the Dissimilar parts are more or less Compounded, they are divided
into four degrees or ranks.

The 1. Is such as are similar to the sense, as a Muscle, Vein, Artery. The 2.
Is made of the sormer and the rest of the similars, as a Finger. The 3. is
compounded of the second, as an Hand, Foot, etc. The 4. Is compounded of the
third, as an Arm or Leg.

Finally the Body is divided into its greatest Members, as by some into the
Head, Chest, Belly con^ a vision ^^
and Bladder; by others as Aristotle, Ruffus a (...) Oribasius into the Head,
Neck, Chest (under they comprehend the lower Belly) and therefore Hippocrates
placed the Liver in the Chest] the Arms and the Legs. But others have better
divided them into the Bellies and Limbs.

The Bellies are certain remarkable Cavities of the Body, wherein some noble
bowel is placed: and as there are three principal Members, so are there three
Bellies: the lowest belly, commonly called Abdomen or the Paunch, contains the
Liver and Natural parts. The Middle or Chest, contains the Heart and vital
parts. The uppermost or Head contains the brain and Animal parts. The Limbs
which were given us for more convenience of living, are the Arms and the Legs.

And therefore we shall make four books: 1. Of the Lower belly. 2. Of the
Middle belly. This whole Work divided into four Books and four Petty Books or
Manuals.
3, Of the supreme belly or Cavity, the Head. 4. Of the Limbs. And to these
shall answer four Petty Books: The first of the Veins which arise from the
Liver in the lower Cavity. The second of the Arteries which arise from the
Heart, in the middle Cavity. The third of the Nerves, which are commonly
thought to spring from the brain. The fourth of the bones, which are most what
in the Limbs: and as the bones joined together make a complete frame and bodies
as it were; so also do the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves.

We may find another division of the body in Fernelius, which nevertheless is
of no use save The division of the Body according to the Regions.
in Physic. He divides the body into pulplike Regions and Private.

Private Regions he calls the brain, Lungs, Kidneys, Womb, etc. Public or
common he makes three extended through the whole body. 1. Has the Vena porta,
and all the parts whereinto its branches are spread. 2. Begins at the Roots of
Vena Cava, and is terminated in the small Veins, before they become Capillary.
3. Has the Muscles, Bones, and Bulk of the body and ends in the Skin.

We purge the first Region chiefly by the Guts; The second by the Urinary
passages; The third by the Pores of the Skin.

The I. TABLE.
The Explication of the FIGURE.
This TABLE holds forth the Pourtraicture of a Living Man, wherein both the
external parts of the Abdomen, as all the Conspicuous Veins which are wont to
be opened by Surgeons, and the places where Issues are wont to be made, are
Represented.

A. The Hypochondrium. B. The Epigastrium. CC. The Hypogastrium. D. The Flanks.
EE. The Groins. F. The Region of the Share. G. The Navil. H. The Heart-pit. I.
The jugulum or hollow of the Throat. K. The Forehead Vein. L. The Temple Veins.
M. The jugular Vein. N. The Cephalica Vena. O. The Basilica Vena. P. The
Mediana or common Vein. Q. The Head vein of the left Arm. R. The Salvatella.
SSSS. The Saph^na Vein descending. T. The Saphaena Vein in the Foot it self. V.
The (...) Sciatica. XX (...) of Issues in (...) in the Thigh.


before page 1.



THE FIRST BOOK; OF THE Lower Belly.
ACcording to the Method The Reason of the Order. Why Dissection is begun in
the lower Belly.
of Anatomy, this belly or cavity comes in the first place, and is first of all
dissected that the Guts and Excrements may be the sooner removed, and the Body
preserved from putrefaction.

It is all that, which is distinguished, within, from the Chest by the Midrif;
it What the lower Belly is.
is circumscribed by the sword-like Gristle, the Share bones, Hip-bones, Os
Sacrum, the Vertebra's of the Loins, and the bastard Ribs on either side.

The former part thereof is called Epigastrium, The Parts of the lower Belly,
and their Names.
which compasses the stomach and guts next unto it. The Arabians call it
Mirath, which generally is used for the Belly, but in a particular sense it is
taken for those wrinkles of the belly, which remain after childbearing, and
for the skin gathered together upon the belly, as Giggejus informs us.

And the upper part hereof is termed Hypochondrium, neighboring upon the lower
gristles of the Ribs, and it is right or left: some term them Phrenes and
Praecordia.

The middle Region is termed Regio umbilicalis, whose lateral parts Aristotle
calls Lagonas by reason of their Laxity, and Galen, Cenen^nas from their
emptyness.

The lower part which reaches from the Navil to the Share, is termed
Hypogastrium, by Hypocrates, Galen, Ruffus, Pollux; the Latins term it Imus
venture and Aqualiculus. The lateral parts thereof, are termed Ilia, and in the
bending of the thigh by the Share Inguina the Groyns; and that part next over
the Privities, which is covered with Down or Hair, is called P^bes the Share.

The hinder part of the lower Belly, is either the upper, which makes the
Loins; or the lower, which makes the Buttocks.

Moreover this Belly consists of parts covering and covered, that is to say
External and Internal.

The covering or Containing parts (which they properly call Abdomen) are either
common, as the Scarfskin, the Skin, the Fat with its Membrane, the fleshy
Pannicle, and the Coat proper to every Muscle; or proper, and they are the
Muscles of the Abdomen, (...) the Peritonaeum.

The inner or contained parts, do serve All the Parts which a^e to be examined
in this Book.
either for Nutrition or Procreation.

For Nutrition or making of Chyle, are subservient more or less, the Stomach,
the Caul, the Sweetbread, the Guts with the Mesentery: to the making of Blood,
are subservient more or less, the Meseraick Veins, the Venae portae with their
Roots, the Cava with its Roots, the Liver, the Gallbladder, the Gall-passage,
the Spleen with the Vas breve, and the Haemorrhoides, the Arteria Caeliaca the
Kidneys, the Capsulae Atrabiliariae or black choler boxes, the Ureters and the
Piss bladder.

Those which serve for Generation, are either Masculine or Female: the
Masculine are, the Spermatick Vessels, the Corpora Varicosa or Parastatae, the
Stones, the carrying Vessels, the Prostratae, the Seminary bladders, the Yard,
etc. The Female are, the Spermatick Vessels, the Corpus Varicosum, the
Testicles, the Ejaculatory Vessels, the Womb with its parts, etc.

But when a Man is in the Womb, there are yet other things considerable, as the
Navil-vessels, the coats which infold the Child, etc. of which in their place.

CHAP. I. Of the Scarf-Skin.
THe Cuticula or Scarf-skin, in Greek The Scarfskin.
Epidormis, is by some called the highest or last skin, also the cream of the
skin, the cover of the skin, etc. It is a What it is.
thin skin void of life and sense, closecompacted, bloodless; bred of Oily,
sleek and clammy vapors thickened by the external cold, that it might be a cover
to the skin.

The Matter of which the Scarf-skin Whether the Scarf-skin be made of seed?
is made, is not seed. For 1. It is no part of the Body. 2. It is not
nourished. 3 A Spermatical part taken away breeds not again; but the scarf-skin
is easily lost by rubbing and wearing, or being raised into blisters, by
burning with Fire or scalding Water, etc.

Nor is the matter thereof Blood, For Or of Blood?
1. All Veins do end at or within the skin. 2. It has no spermatical Fibers,
whi^^ ^asis of all sanguine parts. 3. In long ^a^tin and Consumptions, it many
times grows thick. 4. Being cut or torn, it sends forth no Blood. 5. It is not
of a red color, etc.

Nor are the Excrements of any Digestion, the matter thereof. Not the Or of the
Excrement of concoction.
Excrements of the first or second digestion; for how should it be made of
Dung, Urin or Gall? Nor the Excrements of the third, For the third Digestion or
Concoction has a threefold Excrement. 1. Vaporous and thin which Expires. 2.
Thin, but more solid then the former, of a waterish substance, such as are
Ichors and Wheyish humors, which by their sharpness and Acrimony, would sooner
hinder the Generation of the Scarf-skin, or corrode the same after it is
generated. 3. Thick, Clammy, and sticking fast, which Archangelus and
Laurentius, do Laurentius and Archangelus confuted.
suppose to be dried and turned into the Scarf-skin, and they demonstrate the
same from the filth which is, in bathing, scraped from the foles of the Feet.
And if their opinion were true, the Scarf-skin would come off in Baths.

And therefore the matter thereof is another Excrement, viz. an Oily, The true
matter of the Scarfskin.
Thick, Clammy, and moist vapor (for of dry Exhalations the Hair is made)
proceeding from the Skin and Members under the same. So we see in a Skillet of
Water Gruel, a Skin grows over the top of the Gruel, being mad, of the vapors
thereout ascending, condensed by cold.

Now the Scarf-skin is bred, partly in the womb with the Skin, and partly
without the Womb. Within, For 1. So there are the rudiments and beginnings of
Hair, Teeth, Nails in the Child in the Womb, 2. Without the Scarf-skin, the
skin would be moist, and the Humor would sweat out with pain, as in gallings
and where Phoenigmi are applied. 3. Experience shows, that the Scarf-skin is
somewhat apparent in an Abortion, and may be separated by some fretting
Humidity. But whiles the Child is in the Womb, it is exceeding tender, soft,
and but as yet begun to be made: because there is not in the Womb so much cold,
only a small degree springing from the serous humor which surrounds the Child.
But it receives its Complement and perfection without the Womb, from the
coldness of the Air, which does more condense and dry, which is the Cause that
the skin of all Newborn Infants looks red.

Wherefore the remote and internal Efficient thereof is in the inward heat of
the The Efficient Cause thereof.
Body, thrusting forth a vapor into the surface thereof, as Exhalations are
made by the suns heat. The next and external, is the coldness of somebody, as
the Air, etc. compacting, and thickning. So Gruel, Hot milk, and other hot
dishes of meat, have a skin growing over them: sometimes also the dryness of
the Ambient Air, consuming the external humor, and compacting the remainders of
the matter. Now by how much the said vapor is more Earthy and Clammy, by so
much more solid is that which is bred thereof.

The Use thereof is to defend the Skin. And therefore it is somewhat hard,
howbeit exceeding thin Use.
and yet transparent, like the transparent skins of Onions; least if it were
thicker, the skin should not feel (...) it is sometimes bard and brauny, in the
Hands (...) by reason (...) of Labor and Travel.

(...) ^^d more compact than (...) And therefore it is that watery pustules
pass through the Skin but not the Scarf-skin. Yet not over close and compact,
least it should hinder the bodies transpiration And it is close wrought, not
only to defend the parts under it but that also too great an efflux of Vapor,
Blood, Spirit and heat might not happen. For it is the cover of the Mouths and
extremities of the Vessels. And therefore those cannot live in good health that
are born without a Scarf-skin; as was seen in Jews the King of Bohemia and
Hungaria, who became gray hair'd while he was but a Boy.

It is of a white color, and therefore of a The color of the Scarfskin.
cold and dry temper and quite void of Blood, For being torn or cut, it sends
forth no Blood. Nor is it nourished by Blood, as Lauremberg and Sperlinger
would have it; for it is not intrinfically nourished by attraction of its
proper Aliment; but by addition of parts* the vapor growing into the like
nature of the Scarf-skin, as Casserus rightly disputes, The Scarf-skin is black
in Blackmores, but not the skin beneath it.

As for number: there is but one Scarfskin; Its number.
only there was once two found by Aquapendent: the one being strongly fastened
in the pores of the skin, and inseparable: the other seperable without offense
to the skin. Which happens in some only, not in all parts of the Body. Also
Laurembergius, in applying Vesicatories, found the Scarf-skin double; but that
is a rare case, for that Vesicatories do peitce unto the skin is apparent from
the humor dropping out, and the pain. In brawny Callosities, indeed there are
many little skins, as it were the skins of Onyons; but they are besides nature,
whose Generation and cure is delivered by Fallopius.

In point of Connection, it sticks so Its Connection.
close to the Skin of a man, while he is alive, as if it were one continued
body therewith. Yet many times it is cast off as snakes and serpents cast their
skins, which Felix Platerus tells us did happen to himself; and which happens
in burning Fevers and the small Pox. Salmuth observed as much in some Gouty
persons, in an Ague, and some other cases. In dead persons it is separated by a
Candle, or scalding Water: in living Bodies with Phoenigmi. In the Nut of the
Yard, it sticks not to the skin, but to the flesh.

CHAP. II. Of the Skin.
CVtis, the skin, is in Greek called Derma, What the Skin is?
as it were Desma a band; it is the common covering of the Body; or a Temperate
Membrane bred of the seed by a proper faculty, to be the Instrument of feeling,
and to defend the parts beneath it.

It is called a Membrane, which must not be understood simply, but so as to be
a Membrane of a peculiar nature and proper temperament. And therefore
Piccolhomineus was mistaken Piccolhomine ^s refuted.
when he would have the skin to be simply a Membrane; for the skin is thicker,
has a substance proper to it self, and is temperate.

But the opinion of others is, that the matter hereof is Seed and Blood well
mixed together, so that the skin has a middle nature between Flesh (...)
Nerves. And therefore Galen Galens Opinion touching* the matter of the skin.
(...) that it is as it (...) a Nerve endued with blood: he says not simply,
but as it were. For he also likens it to a Membrane, because in some parts it
may be extended, feels exquisitely, and is white.

Aristotle would have the skin to consist of flesh dried and grown old as it
were. But Aristotle's Opinion.
the skin is easily flaid from the parts under it, and between the flesh and
skin there is fat, a Membrane, etc. to which Opinion Fernelius inclined, when
he said that the skin of the Face was a certain more dry portion of the flesh
beneath it. Wherein he also is to be blamed, Because 1. It may be separated
from the flesh. 2. It will admit of Scars as the skin in other places.

Others say it is made of the Extremities of the Vessels widened, because it
The Opinion of others.
every where lives and feels, and the extremities of the Vessels end thereinto:
but this may be said of all the parts of the Body.

Others, of the softer Nerves spread out in the surface of the Body, an
addition of blood concurring: but this Opinion is of no more force then the
formet.

The skin therefore is made of Seed taken in a moderate quantity: and for The
true matter of the skin.
its enlargement, it had a moderate quantity of blood; but seed seems to hold
the greater proportion. For the skin is naturally whi^ish; though it varies
according to the plenty of humors and Bodies beneath it. For such as the Humor
is, such will be the color of the skin. So Sanguine persons have it ruddy;
those that are Jaundized, have it yellow or black. Examples whereof see in
Marcellus Donatus and others. If flesh lie beneath it, the redder it is, if fat
the whiter.

It is in respect to the seed, that Authors say, the skin grows not together
AScar, what it is?
again after it is wounded. In respect of the blood, there is somewhat like the
skin produced, viz. a Scar: Which consists as it were of burnt and dried flesh.
Howbeit in Children, by reason of the moisture of their skin, as also the
abundance of glutinous humors, a wound has been observed to be closed up with
true skin; Witness Spigelius.

Wherefore the skin being made as it were of a Membranous, cold and dry, and of
a fleshy, hot and moist substance; becomes temperate in all the first and
second qualities, that it may rightly judge of all.

The Efficient Cause of the skin, is the Skin-generating faculty; as in a bone
The efficient cause of the skin.
the Bone-generating faculty, in a Nerve the Nerve-forming power or faculty,
etc. which faculty frames a part differing from all other similar parts. But
how does the faculty make of the same Seminal matter Nerves, Bones, etc. by an
hidden and divine power as it were.

The public Action of the skin, and which is necessary for the whole
Living-Creature The Action of the skin.
is, to be the primary Instrument of the sense of feeling, for every Membrane
is the Adaequate Organ, as may be seen in the Bones, Nerves, Stomach, etc. For
though all the Organs of the senses are dissimilar parts, yet one similar part
is the primary cause of the action, which is to be performed by the whole
Organ. For examples sake, the hand is indeed the Organ of feeling, and
especially that part of the skin, which covers the hollow of the Hands and
Feet, as being of all other most temperate. And because the skin is temperate
in the first qualities; it is therefore also temperate in the second, as (...)
hardness, thickness, thinness, and (...).

The first use of the Skin is, to be a Covering Its Use.
for the Body, and therefore it has received a Figure so round, long, etc. as
the subject parts required; and therefore also it is seared without the Body,
and because it was to be as it were the Emunctory of the Body. The professors
of Physiognomy commend unto us another use of the skin, as it is streaked with
lines; who are wont to tell men's Fortunes from the Lines and Hillocks in their
Hands, and from the Planetary and Adventitious Lines in their Foreheads. A
third use is Medicinal, being good for Anodin^ Emplasters. Being dried, it
helps women in Labor; Epileptick Convulsions, according to the experience of
Hildanus and Beckerus; Wounds of the Scul, according to Poppius. The fourth is
more illustrious, that it might give way to Excrements, and exclude insensible
sooty Fumes by way of insensible Transpiration, by which we are more
disburthened then by all our sensible Evacuations put together. By this,
Sanctorius through the statick Art, in the experience of thirty years, did
learn that many persons in the space of one natural day, do void more by
transpiration, then in fifteen days together by stool. The fifth is to attract.
1. Air in transpiration, in Apople^tick and Hysterical fits, and in such as
dive deep and bide long under the Water. 2. Juice, in long fasting, from
plasters applied, if we credit the Observations of Zacutus Lufitanus; and the
force of purgative and other external Medicaments. And for this cause.

It Is bored through in diverse places, for the ingress and egress of things
necessary. Now its holes are some of them visible, as the Mouth, the Ears, the
Nostrils, etc. others invisible and insensible, as the pores. Those pores of
the Body, being otherwise not Conspicuous, are seen in the winter, when the
Body is suddenly bared; for then the Scarf-skin looks like a Gooses skin when
the feathers are pulled of. By reason (it seems) of these pores it was, that a
certain Persian King made use of the skins of Men for windows, if we may
credit Orabasi^s.

The Skin is thick, six fold thicker then the Scarfskin, but thinner then it is
in other Animals, nor must any one judge of the thickness of the Skin after it
is made into Leather, for by Tanning it is much contracted and thickened, And it
seems to be made lighter, for a Man's skin Tanned according to the Observation
of Loselius, weighs four pounds and an half.

It is soft and exquisitely sensible, but softer and thinner in the Face, Yard,
and Cods; harder in the Neck, Thighs, soles of the Feet, Back; of a midling
constitution between hardness and softness, in the tops of the Fingers. So,
some part of the skin is extreme thick as in the Head, according to Aristotle,
falsely cited by Columbus. Some is thick, as in the Neck; some thin as in the
sides, whence proceeds tickling; some yet thinner as in the Palms of the Hands,
some thinnest of all, as in the Lips. In Children it is more thin and porous
then in grown persons, in women then in men; in an hot Country, then in a
cold. Also the Skin is more rare and open in the Summer then in the Winter; and
therefore it is that the skins of Animals flaid off in the Summer do more
hardly retain their hair, then such as are flaid off in the winter. Also it
varies very much according to the diversity of the suoject; so that in some it
has been of an admirable density and thickness, if we believe Petrus Ser^ who
tells of two Negro women, that could without hurt take up* carry, hold, and
almost extinguish burning oles with their bare Hands. Fallopius saw the skin of
(...) so (...) that he lost his feeling (...) ^easo^ of the Nerves

As to its Connection: some skin is easily separated from the parts under Its
Connection.
it; as in the lower and middle Belly, in the Arms and Thighs. From others with
more difficulty by reason of the thick Membrane to which it is fastened by the
Fibers, and by means of the Vessels. In the soles of the Feet and Palms of the
Hands, it is hardly separated, to which parts it grows that they might lay the
faster hold. Also hardly from the flesh of the Forehead and of the whole Face,
especially of the Ears and Lips, by reason of tendons and Muscles mixed
therewith, especially the Muscle Latus so called, mingled therewith. So, in the
Forehead it is moveable, and in the hinder part of the Head of some People by
reason of peculiar Muscles; but it is not so in the rest of the Body.

The skin has received common Vessels, for Nourishment, Life and Sense. It Its
Vessels.
has received two cutany Veins, through the Head and Neck, from the Jugulars;
two through the Arms, Breast and Back, from the Axillaries; two through the
lower Belly, Loins and Legs, from the Groyns, which are Conspicuous in women
after hard Labor, and in such as have the Varices in many branches. It has few
Art ^^ng. And those very small, in the temples and Forehead, Fingers, Cod and
Yard. It has no Nerves creeping in it, but it has many ending in it, as Galen
conceived: though Johannes Veslingus the prime Anatomist of Padua says there
are very small branches of Nerves running through the skin; and that rightly,
for their presence was necessary to cause the sense of Feeling.

CHAP. III. Of FAT.
FAt is a similary Body void of Life, What fat is?
growing together out of Oily blood, by reason of the coldness of the
Membranes, for the safeguard of the whole Body. That it is void of Life, appears
in that it is cut without pain, and Consumptions thereof show as much.
Therefore Pliny writes that living sowes are gnawn by Mice; and Aelian reports
that the Tyrant Dionysius was so Fat, that when he was a sleep, the pricking of
Needles could not awake him. Also in Greenland they cut fat out of living
Whales which they never feel nor perceive.

Pinguedo fat, which the Greeks term Pimele, is by Gaza ill translated Adeps:
The difference between Pinguedo and Adeps.
for Pinguedo is an Aerie hot and moist substance of the moister sorts of
Animals, and is more easily melted with heat, and will scarce ever become hard
again, nor can it be broken, and it is soft, laxe and rare: but understand the
contrary in Suet, which easily grows hard and stiff, but is hardly dissolved,
etc.

Now fat to speak properly, is not a part, but rather an humor, unless Fat is
not a part of the Body.
happily it be considered together with the Membrane, as many times it is by
Galen.

The (...) of our order is this; because fat in a man is between the skin and
the fleshy Membrane, in ^s under the Membrane which moves the

Those parts are void of fat, which what parts have Fat, and what not.
could receive no profit thereby but hindrance by resisting convenient
Complication and Distension, as the Brain, Eyelids, Yard, Cod, and Membranes of
the Testicles. Now it is chiefly in those parts which are more strongly moved
then the rest, hard like Suet, and interwoven between the Fibers and little
Veins, as in the Palm of the Hand, the inner sides of the Fingers (for there
are many tendons, Nerves and Vessels, which ought to be moistened) in the sole
of the Foot, especially the Heel. It is softer in sundry parts, of which in
their place.

Caecilius Folius has larely written It is not made of Chyle.
that the matter whereof fat is made, is the milky juice, or fatter portion of
the Chylus, and that therewith the Bones are nourished. To which opinion I
oppose. 1. That such as eat fat meats, do not presently grow fat. 2. That the
Chylus is too crude to nourish the parts. 3. That Children should presently
become fat as we see it happen in Children new born, who have been nourished
only with their Mothers Blood. 4. That the Chylus is necessarily changed before
it come unto the Parts. 5. There is no passage from the Mesentery to the
extreme parts of the body; for it is neither sucked through the Membranes, as
some learned men suppose, nor is it carried through the Glandules. Not the
former. 1. Because they are thicker, then to suck and draw as threads. 2. They
would appear swollen, and would in Anatomy discover some Oily moisture in them.
Nor the latter, 1. Because the Kernels are not continued with the fat parts. 2.
Nor do they receive any profitable humor, but Excrements, yea they abound with
a white, phlegmatic, but not a fat humor. 3. We observe that many creatures
grow fat which have no Kernels. Now the fatter part of the Chyle is the
material cause of fatness, but it is only the remote cause, and therefore in
deed and truth,

The Matter thereof is Unanimously But of Blood.
concluded to be Blood, whence Aristotle says, that such Creatures as have no
Blood, have neither Fat nor Suet: but it must be blood Purified and Absolutely
concocted, nor yet all such blood, but that which is thin, Aerie and Oily. It
resembles the buttery substance of Milk, and That blood is Aerie and oily
the Oily substance of Seed; and therefore Aristotle did well deny Fat to be
moist; with a watery moisture, his meaning was, not with an Aerie. Against whom
Fernelius and Columbus have written. And when fat is made of Oily Blood, much
of the heat is lost. Whence Aristotle says; Such things as are condensed by
cold, out of them much heat is forced and squeezed. And in another place:
Natural matters are such, as the place is wherein they are.

Therefore the nature of Fat is colder Fat is colder then Blood, yet moderately
hot.
then that of blood, yet is it moderately hot; For 1. Outwardly applied, it
Digests, Resolves, Discusses. 2. It is the thinner and more Oily part of the
blood. 3. It easily takes fire. 4. It increases the heat within, as the Caul
assists the Stomachs Concoction, etc.

Some will have it to be cold, because Aristotle says, whatever things grow
together by cold, and are melted by Heat, are cold. But Fat is congealed by
cold. I answer: Fat is cold in respect of the Heat which before it had, while
it was blood. But we must learn (...) the same Aristotle, that such things as
having been (...) cold, are melted with an easy Heat, have

In this TABLE are expressed the common Coverings of the Belly separated, and
on one side the Fat besprinkled with its Vessels, and on the other side certain
Muscles Detected*
The II. TABLE.
The Explication of the FIGURE.
AA. The Scarf-skin. BBBB. The Skin. CC. The Fat out of its place, separated
from the Pannicle or Coat. DD. The fleshy Pannicle. EEEEE. The Fat left in its
proper place half the Belly over. FFFF. The distribution of certain Vessels
through the Fat. G. Store of Kernels in the Groyn. HH. The White Line. I. The
Navil. K. Part of the Pectoral Muscle Detected. LLL. The Productions of the
greater Foreside-saw-Muscle. MM. The oblique descendent Muscle of the Breast in
its Situation. NNN. The right Muscle of the Belly appearing through the Tendon
of the oblique descendent. OOO. The Nervous Inscriptions of the right Muscle.
P. The Right-side Pyramidal Muscle in its proper place.


page 5.



The Efficient, or Generating Cause of Fatness, is moist and temperate Heat,
The efficient cause of Fat.
the Author of all Digestion. The cause Efficient of its growing together, is
the coldness of the Membranes (from whence it gains its white color) not simple
but respective; yet sufficient to coagulate the oily part of the blood
sweating forth, even as melted Lead grows congealed, when it is poured out into
a How Fat is bred?
place hot enough, yet colder then the fire. And Fat grows together It Is proved
that Fat is generated by cold.
by cold, in a certain degree as it were (for every thing is not made of every
thing) and therefore Fat is not bred in any part. Now that Fatness proceeds
from Coldness Galen and other Learned men have determined, so that the Fat,
light, and thin Part of the Blood, while in hotter Bodies it turns to
Nutriment, in colder it is reserved (and therefore hot and dry Animals are
hardly eyer fat) and when the Veins send it out of themselves, it lights upon
the Membranes, and grows together.

For 1. Even the Blood, when it is out of the Vessels, does after this manner
grow together, by meeting with the cold Air, though its internal Coldness do
also, help forward the mutation.

2. Aristotle says, among such things as melt, those that are melted by heat,
are congealed by cold, as Oil.

3. The colder Creatures are the fatter, as Gueldings, Foemales; also such as
lie long hid in the Earth without Exercise: So in the Winter, all Creatures are
fatter.

4. Fat is only bred in cold places, as How Fat is bred in the Call?
in the Membranes: So we see the Call is fat, by reason of its membranous
Substance, also in respect of its place, being far from the hot Bowels, for it
(...) upon the Guts, under the Peritonaeum, and beca^ stored with abundance of
Veins and Arteries, i^uch Fat; so about the Heart Fat is collected, for there
is the Pericardium, And about the Heart?
a cold and thick Membrane; also the wheyish Humor contained therein: below it
there is the Midriff as a Fan, on either fide the Lungs like Bellows, the
Mediastinum etc. So about the the Kidneys And the Kidneys?
Fat is gathered, because they abound with a wheyish Excrement, lie near the
Backbone, and are covered by the Guts.

5. A Cover hanging over boiling Water, coagulates the Vapors which arise unto
it, and turns them into water by its Coldness. For make the Air round about
exceeding hot, and then the Vapors striking against the cover, will not be
condensed.

Another Opinion is, that Fat is made by an hot Cause, because the matter
thereof An Opinion that Fat is caused by Heat.
is hot, and because Fat easily flames; also because all things are made in the
body, by Coction, and Heat. But the answer is clear from what has been said
before. And we do not mean mere Coldness, the Cause of Crudity, but a weak Heat.

Some say that Fat attains its consistency from the compactness of the An
Opinion that it is made by compactness. Refuted.
Membranes, for that which is itself compact makes other things so. I answer.
That cold things condense, and Condensation proceeds from Cold, nor can that
which is condensed condense, unless it were a first Quality, or should take the
assistance of Cold, for otherwise the thinness of the Membrane would make the
fat thin. And why does not the density or compactness of the Vessels make the
matter contained to be condensed and compact?

2. In like manner they object: By a thick cover though very hot, the Vapor
arising from boiling Water, when it meets therewith, is turned into Water, or
in a Distillation by an Alembick, the Exhalations arising from the subject
matter, meeting with the thick glass are stopped, and by reflection turned into
a thickened Substance. But the Answer, is clear from what has been said;
moreover, the Vapors which are raised up by boiling, if they are by the Vessel
so shut in, that there is no place to breath out, new Vapors continually
arising, that there may not be a Penetration of Bodies, it is necessary, that
they reassume their former consistency: But if they find egress, they turn to
Water, by reason of the cold Air surrounding the glassie Cover. And therefore
it is that, to make the Liquor issue more abundantly, Distillers ever and anon
cool the same with cold Water. So when the Air abroad is cold, hot Vapors
within do turn to Water upon the glass Windows; which does not happen when the
Air is hot abroad.

3. They say, that there are many cold Parts, as the Brain and its coats, etc.
which have no Fat about them. I answer, those Parts also are dense. Nor would
Nature have Fat in those Parts, for it would be both unprofitable and hurtful:
And a moderate Heat is there provided for, by the thickness of the Skin, the
Hair and the Skull.

Fabius Pacius makes the cause to An Opinion that it is caused by Dryness.
be also Dryness, by reason of the Fibers of Fat. To which is repugnant 1 That
Fat is not dry, but moist. 2 ^le Fibers, as the Blood has. Touch^e It has
^ing whi^ th^r.
Anatomical Contradictions of my Fa(...)

Other late Writers are pleased with a By a peculiar Form.
new conceit, that Fat is made, by a peculiar fat-making form, as a bone is
made by a bone-making form. Who doubtless are mistakens because 1 Fat does not
live. 2 It has no certain Dimension. And 3 The blood turns into the marrow of
the bones, without the help of such a form.

The Form of Fat as long as it is in the Vessels, is not congealed, but liquid
and The form of Fat.
melted, by reason of the Heat which as yet remains in the Vessels. It has
been voided liquid by Urin, as Helmo^t has observed, and in an healthy Woman
by stool, in the Observation of Hildanus. Folius conceives it is liquid in the
Vessels, by reason of likeness of Nature, but that it is congealed without,
because of the different Nature of the Fibers. But no man can easily observe
the dissimilitude of the fibers, either within the body, or without.

The Fat of the Belly has three Veins, the external Mammillary descending from
Its Vessels.
above the Vena Epigastrica, arising from beneath out of the crural Vein,
through the Groins, and very many Veins coming out of the Loins, accompanied
with Arteries. And through these, and the Vessels of the Skin, Cupping-glasses
and Scarifications draw Humors out of the inner Parts, as far as I can conceive.

It has a very great abundance of Kernels, Its Kernels.
which receive Excrements out of the Body into themselves. In sickly persons,
and such as abound with excrementitious Moisture, they are more plentiful.

The Use of Fat is 1 To keep warm like Its Uses.
a Garment, to cherish Natural Heat, by its Clammyness, hindering the going
forth thereof, and by its thickness, stopping the Passages, least Cold should
enter; and in Summer, they keep out the Heat.

2. In a special manner to help the Concoction of the Stomach. And therefore
the cutting out of the Call breeds Winds and Belchings, and to cause good
Digestion, it is necessary to provide some other covering for the Stomach.

3. To daub and moisten hot and dry parts, such as is the Heart.

4. To facilitate Motion, provided it be moderate, for abundance of Fat hinders
Motion and all other Actions, and to keep the Parts from being over dried,
distended, or broken. Hence it defends the ends of Gristles, the Joyntings of
the greater Bones; and it is placed on the outside of certain Ligaments, also
about the Vessels carried to the Skin. For this very cause, there is store of
Fat in the Socket of the Eye, least by reason of continual Motion, it should
become dry and withered as it were. And the Vena Coronalis of the Heart, is
fenced with much Fat, to accommodate the great Motion and Heat of the Heart.

5. It serves as a Pillow and Bulwark against Blows, Bruises, and Compressions.
And therefore it is that Nature has furnished the Buttocks, and the Hollow of
the Hands and Feet with plenty of Fat.

6. In times of Famine, it is turned Whether it may turn to nourishment?
into nourishment, for we are nourished with that which is sweet and fat, as
being familiar to us and our Nature, if we will believe Galen and other
Authors. Whose Intention Rondeletius interprets to be, that the Fat does only
relieve famished persons, and hold the parts ^^ the Body in play, till they
attain their proper Nou^shment.

7. It fills up the empty spaces between the Muscles, Vessels, and Skin, and
consequently renders the Body smooth, white, soft, fair, and beautiful. And
therefore persons in a Consumption and decrepit old Women are deformed, for
want of Fat.

CHAP. IV. Of Membranes in General, of the fleshy Membrane, and the Membrane
which is proper to the Muscles.
UNder the fat in a Man, the Membrana The fleshy Membrane, its situation.
carnosa, or fleshy Membrane lies, which in Apes, Dogs, and Sheep lies next the
Skin. Before we treat thereof, some things are to be known concerning the
Nature of a Membrane in general.

The Ancients called the Membranes Hymenas, and sometimes Chitona's Coats, also
Meningas; and otherwhiles Operimenta, and Tegumenta Coverings; and with Galen
and other Anatomists, speaking in a large Sense, a Coat and a Membrane, are one
and the same thing. But when they speak in a strickt and proper Sense.

That is a Membrane which compasses some bulkie Part, as the Peritonaeum, The
difference between a membrane and a Coat, and Meninx.
the Pleura, the Periostium, the Pericardium, and the peculiar Membranes of the
Muscles.

But the term Tunica or Coat in a strickt sense, is attributed properly to the
Vessels, as Veins, Arteries, Ureters, the Womb, the Gallbladder, and the
Piss-bladder, the Gullet, the Stomach, the Guts, the Stones.

The term Meninx is properly given and peculiarly to the Membranes of the Brain.

Now a Membrane is a similar part broad, plane, white, What a Membrane is?
and which may be stretched, made by a proper Membrane-making faculty, of
clammy and watery Seed, to the end that it might by clothing defend the Parts.

The Form thereof is the equality of its Surface, Thinness, and Lightness
(least it should burden) compactness and strength that it might be widened and
stretched.

Its Use is 1. To cloth and defend the Parts by reason of its hardness and
compactness; Its Use.
and to be the Instrument of feeling: For the Parts feel by help of the
Membranes. And so great is the necessity of Membranes, that Nature has covered
every Part with a Membrane. 2. To strengthen the parts. 3. To defend the parts
from the injury of the Cold, and to keep the Natural Heat from exhaling. 4. To
join parts with parts. So the Mesentery knits the Guts to the Back. 5. To shut
the mouths of the Vessels, least the Humors should flow out, or flow back: As
in the Bladder, where the Ureters are implanted, in the Ventricles of the
Heart, by the Valves.

Now a Membrane is thicker or thinner. The Difference of Membranes.


The thin Membrane differs in thinness. For the Periostium of the Ribs is
thinner then the Pleura, the Periostium of the Head, is thinner then the
Pericraneum; the pia matter is thinner then the dura matter.

The thick Membrane is the Membrana carnosa, which is not every where alike
thick; for it is thicker in the Neck then other places. And now let us speak of
the Membrana carnosa, or fleshy Membrane.

The Panniculus carnosus or Membrana The fleshy Membrane what for a thing it is?
carnosa is by some termed a membranous Muscle, by others a Nervie Coat, a
fattie Coat, etc. It is termed fleshy, because in some places, as about the
Forehead, the compass of the Neck, and the Ears, it turns to a musculous flesh,
and in such Creatures as by the help hereof can move their whole Skin, it seems
to be a Muscle: It is endued with such fleshy Fibers, especially in their
Necks, by the motion whereof they drive away flies. But in Man, save in his
Forehead, it is immovable; only Vesalius and Valverda report that there were
some men who could move the Skin on their Chest and Back, and in other parts,
just as oxen do. In whom doubtless this Membrane was made of the same
constitution, which it has in Brutes. Moreover in newborn Children, it
resembles flesh, by reason of plenty of blood; in grown persons it is like a
Membrane, by reason of continually being dried. In a Man's Body, if exact
Separation be made, it will appear to consist of four distinct Membranes.
Spigelius and others do take those membranous Fibers, which are every where
interwoven among the Fat, to be Panniculus carnosus, or Membrana carnosa.

Its Use is 1. To defend the neighboring Its Use.
Parts, yea, and to cover and defend the whole Body, and therefore it is
situate all over the body.

2. To keep in the Fat, that it flow not out, or melt by reason of the
continual motion of the Muscles.

3. To support those Vessels which are carried into the Skin (which go between
Connection.
the Skin and this Membrane) for it is knit unto the Skin by very many Veins,
some fewer Arteries, branches of Nerves, and membranous Fibers; and to the
Membranes under the Muscles, by the smaller Fibers. It is therefore false, that
when the Fat is consumed by fasting, the Skin sticks to the Muscles no
otherwise, then a Ball to a piece of cloth wherewith it is covered. It sticks
most Original.
firmly to the Back, in fashion of a Membrane, and therefore it is said to
arise from thence. In the former part of a Man's Neck and his Forehead, it can
hardly be separated from the Skin and the Musculus latus; it sticks so close,
and is thought to constitute the Musculus latus.

The Surface thereof is slippery, there where it touches the Muscles, by reason
of that clammy Humor, which is wont to be daubed upon the Membranes, least the
motion of the Muscles should be hindered. It is of exquisite sense; and
therefore if it be twitched by a sharp Humor, it causes shivering and shaking,
as by Choler in Agues.

The proper Membrane of the Muscles, The Membrane of the Muscles* what?
which some will have to spring from the Pericranium or Periostium, others from
the nervous Fibers of the Muscles, is thin, and is knit unto the Muscle, by
most thin filaments.

Its Use is 1. To cloth the Muscle (...) Use.
and separate them one from another 2. To impart unto them the Sense of (...)

CHAP. V. Of the Muscles in General.
A Muscle is termed in Greek Mus a Mouse, because it resembles a flaid Mouse;
and the Latins call it Lacertus a Lizard, from its similitude with that
Creature: Howbeit we cannot allot one certain figure to the Muscles, by reason
of their variety.

A Muscle is an Organical Part, the Instrument of voluntary motion. For What a
Muscle is?
only this part can receive the Iuflux of the motive faculty. Helmont allows
the muscles a life peculiar to themselves, which continues for a while, even
after death, as the convulsive motion in the Falling Sickness which continues
involuntarily. Which nevertheless does more truly arise, from the retraction
and dryness of the Nerves, and defect of Spirits. Also the same man is in an
error in conceiving that new fibers do arise in the muscles, and cause the
Palsy. No man ever saw them, nor can they be bred anew, because they are
Spermatick parts. The Palsy ought rather to be referred to a defect of some
fibers.

A muscle is an Organical part, because it consists 1. Of flesh. 2. Of A Muscle
is an Organical part.
a tendinous part (and these are the two parts of a muscle, which perform the
Action) 3. Of Veins to carry back the Nutriment. 4. Of Arteries preserving the
inbred Heat, and bringing the Nourishment to the part. 5. Of Nerves, which
contribute sense and especially motion. For the Brain sends the motive faculty
through the Nerves into the Muscles. 6. Of Membranes which encompass and keep
the muscles together. 7. Of Fat which moistens them, and hinders them from
being dried by over much motion.

The Muscles of the whole Body are most straightly conjoined one with The
Connection of the Muscles of the whole Body.
another: Yet sometimes they gape, and are at some distance, when Wind, wheyish
Humor, or some other matter gets between them; as in the bastard Pleurisy, and
concerning a Soldier whipped by the Turks. Veslingus told me that his muscles
were so widened and separated, that if he bent his body but a little, every
muscle would bear it self out from its Natural situation, bunching out as it
were, and swelling.

We divide the Muscles into two parts, a fleshy part, and a tendinous part. The
Parts of a Muscle only two. The tendinous Part how many fold.


Again, we make the tendinous part to be either united, or disgregated, and
severed.

United, where the whole tendinous part appears, white and hard, either in the
beginning, end, or middle; or in all these parts.

Contrariwise it is disgregated or severed, where it is divided into many small
fibers, scarce discernable to the sight, being compassed about with flesh*
which tendinous fibers may notwithstanding be discerned among the fleshy ones,
in boiled Hogs-flesh, and in the flesh of a Turkey-cock, etc. So in some
Muscles, especially (...) of the Thighs of a Turkey-cock, the tendinous (...)
appear whole and united from the beginning to (...). So in a man, sometimes the
Tendon descends (...) after its Original, mixe^ with flesh. Sometimes the
tendinous part appears, united in the end, and severed in the beginning, as in
the muscle Deltoides; sometimes it is tendinous in the middle, and sometimes not
at all.

With Aquapendent we define a What the Tendon of a Muscle is?
Tendon to be a Body continued from the beginning to the end of a Muscle, and
that it is a body of a peculiar Nature, cold and dry, made Its Beginning.
of Seed, as the principle of its Generation: But the beginning of its
dispensation is a bone, for it springs from a bone, and is inserted or
implanted into a bone. Yet some Muscles arise from Gristles, and some from
Tendons, and are implanted into them. And Why called Tendo?
it is rightly termed Tendo, from stretching, because it is bent and stretched
like the string of a bow.

A Muscle is otherwise divided into the Head, middle, and End.

The Reginning and Head of a Muscle, The Beginning and Head of a Muscle.
when it is tendinous, is by Galen and other Anatomists, called Ligamentum,
which they say is void of Sense, and that it is less then a Tendon, or the end
of a Muscle.

Now the beginning in a great part of Muscles, is tendinous, seldom Both the
beginning and end of a Muscle may be called a Tendon.
fleshy. And to speak the very truth, the beginning may as well be termed a
Tendon, as the end; seeing for the most part, such as is the Beginning, such is
the End, in Substance, in Thinness, Lightsomness, Whiteness, etc.

Now every Muscle is said to move toward its beginning, Two things observable
touching the beginning of a Muscle.
and every Muscle has a Nerve, which is inserted either into the Head, or
about the middle (and in some through the Surface of the muscle, in others
through the Substance) so that where the Nerve is implanted, there is the Head
of the Muscle: Which Galen lays down as Galens Rule.
a sure Rule, and says; that if the Nerve be implanted into the Tail, there is
the Head of the muscle. But Disliked by Walaeus; and why?
Johannes Walaeus an excellent learned Physician, likes not this Rule, and
conceives that it is all one, whether the Nerve be inserted into the beginning,
the middle, or the end. 1. Because that Rule renders the motions of many
muscles obscure. 2. Because it holds not true in the Pectoral muscle, nor
sometimes in other muscles of the Chest and Belly. 3. Because that Rule is not
founded upon any reason, for whether the Nerve be inserted into the beginning
of the muscle, or into any other part thereof, the Spirits flowing in by the
Nerve, may equally move the muscle: As we see in Wind-Instruments, the Air is
let in sometimes above, sometimes beneath, one way as conveniently as another. 4.
And whereas that Rule is oftentimes found true, it happens by accident, because
mostmuscles are moved upward, and because the Nerves descend from above, and
therefore could not be more safely implanted any where, then in the upper part
of the muscles. And that which Riolanus objects against The Objection of
Riolanus answered.
Walaeus, touching the Contorsion or Wreathing of the recurrent Nerve, is
nothing. For the Nerves run back, to avoid confusion, otherwise, if Nature
chiefly intended the Insertion into the Heads of Muscles, she might have
carried them right out into the Larynx, as she does other Nerves of the sixth
Pair. Some Muscles receive two branches of Nerves, as the Midrif; some five, as
the temporal Muscle.

The Middle of the Muscle, which they call the belly or body, does for the The
middle of a Muscle.
most part swell, and is fleshy; some few have a tendon in the middle, as the
Musculus Digastricus which opens the nether Jaw, and the second Pair belonging
to the Os Hyoides.

The end or tail of a Muscle, is by some called Tendo* by others Chorda, and
Aponeurosis. The end of a Muscle how known by Galen and other Anatomists?
And the end is sometimes round, sometimes broad, sometimes long, other whiles
short; sometimes one, otherwhiles more then one. Now this end, or tendon, is
commonly conceived to be made up of a Concourse of Fibers, Ligaments, and very
small Nerves, which by little and little grow into one Body. For they will have
a Nerve, when it comes to the place of a Muscle to be divided into diverse
slips, which are met by a Ligament, cleft after the same manner. Consequently
they Determine.

1. That the Tendon has the sense of Feeling, but not the Whether the Head of
a Muscle be void of sense?
Head, which they account void of sense and Motion. But this is false; because
the tendinous head of a Muscle, when it is pricked, breeds Convulsions and cruel
Symptoms, just as if the Head of the Muscle were pricked. Moreover, the
beginning of a Muscle has motion, and therefore sense. It has motion, because
a Muscle, even in its If it have Motion?
Head, is contracted and expanded, especially when it is fleshy.

2. They say also that the End is thicker then the Head: which notwithstanding
Whether the end be thicker then the Head.
is sometimes true and sometimes false, as in the Musculous Biceps, and others.

3. They will have the Tendon to be softer then the Ligament (as they call it)
or the beginning of the Muscle, namely so much softer, as it is harder then a
Nerve, But the contrary is true, viz. that the Tendon is harder then the
beginning, because it many times changes into a boney and gristley substance,
as in the feet of feathered foul; but the beginning does not so. Moreover, I
deny that Nerves enter into the Tendon. For Aquapendent Whether the Nerves go
into the Tendon.
and Riolanus have observed, by frequent dissections, that when they are entered
into the flesh of the Muscle, they are spread out into many little branches,
which go into a certain Membranous flexure, and so vanish or end, before they
come to the tendon. Moreover, a Nerve is soft, how therefore can it be mingled
with an hard body? Neither is the end less destitute of sense, then the Head,
seeing there come no more Nerves to it then the other: for the Nerve being
implanted, tends downwards, and not upwards.

The Action of a Muscle is voluntary Motion. The action of a Muscle is Motion.


The Motion of a Muscle, is threefold, 1. A Muscle is contracted within it
self, toward the Head; and when this is done the opposite Muscle is relaxed
and loosned. 2. Being contracted, it continues so. And these two motions are
primary, per se and not accidental. 3. After contraction it is relaxed* which
motion is accidental, and proceeds from another. And therefore Muscles are
always set one against another, as Antagonists.

Now the work of this Motion or Action, which is seen in the parts* whereinto
the Muscles are planted, does vary according to the Variety of Parts. For in
the throat it is swallowing; in the Arm bending and stretching forth, etc. Yea
and sometimes one follows upon another. For the Muscles of the Chest, when they
act, do diversely widen or contract the same, they draw in Air, or expel
Fuliginous sooty vapors, and cause Respiration.

This Motion of the Muscles, is sometimes And that Voluntary.
called Voluntary, sometimes Animal, to distinguish it from the natural, in
Brutes Spontaneous. For we can hasten, or slacken, or stop this motion as we
please. And in this motion, the will of a Man or the Appetite of Brutes, is
like an Horseman guiding and putting his Horse forward; the Nerves resemble the
Reins of the Bridle, and the Muscles are like the Horse. There are some
singular Muscles, as of the inside of the Ear, the Midrif, the Muscles of the
Chest, and Eyelids, whose motion is partly voluntary and partly natural,
because they many times perform their actions, when we have no thought nor will
thereto.

The use of all the Parts of the Muscle, is The use.
after the same manner, as in every perfect Organ. For 1. There is that by
which the action is primarily and of it self performed, and it is the Fibrous
flesh; [but especially according to the Fibers, for the flesh being wounded
according to the length of the Fibers, the motion remains unhurt, but it is not
so* when the fibers are wounded] for the most part the belly of the Muscle*
which is most of all contracted. Hence it is that if you cut a Muscle of in the
beginning end or middle, in a living person, or in one that is dead it purses
it self round and draws it self into it self like a ball: as also it does,
being cast into the water. Riolanus counts the principal part to be the tendon,
upon which the Action depends, because it has a peculiar substance of its own,
such as is no where to be seen out of a Muscle. But this is rather true of
fibrous flesh, which is in all Muscles, where as in some there is no tendon. 2.
That without which it cannot be performed as the Nerve: For if the Nerves be
hurt the Muscle looses its motion. 3. That by which it is more strongly and
better performed, as the tendons and tendinous fibers. Wherefore those Muscles
only, which perform continual Which Muscles do move more strongly?
and strong motions, have received united and Conspicuous tendons. For the
Muscles do either move themselves only, as those of the Fundament and Bladder;
or they move also the skin, as in the Lips, forehead and face: and in these
there is no tendon to be seen* or they move a bone, and these for the most part
evidently end in tendons, because the strong motion of an heavy member did
require as much: or they move some other light thing, as the Muscles of the
tongue and Larynx (some of which have tendons and some not) of the Eyes, Stones
and Yard. 4. Such parts as conserve and guard the action, as the Veins and
Arteries, the Membranes and fat.

CHAP. VI. Of the Muscles of the Belly, or Abdomen.
THose which are called Musculi Abdominis, the Belly-muscles, do cover the
lower Belly, and Galen reckons as many, as there are positions of fibers;
right, transverse, oblique, and these either upwards or downwards. So that
according to Galen there are eight, four on each side; two oblique descendents,
or external oblique ones, two oblique ascendents or internal ones, two right
and two transverse: But Massa found out two others, and after him Fallopius,
which they term Pyramidal Muscles, others Fallopian Muscles, and Sylvius calls
them Succenturiatos. And so hither Anatomists have made these muscles ten in
number. Casserius accounts the right Muscles to be many, and that rightly;
seeing there are for the most part four of them on each side; and so for the
most part.

This TABLE represents the Oblique Descendent Muscle of the Belly out of its
place, and the rest of the Muscles in their proper places.
The III. TABLE.
The Explication of the FIGURE.
A. Part of the Obliquely Descendent Muscle on the left side. A. The beginning
of the Obliquely Descendent Muscle removed out of its Situation, in the right
side, as also the insertion of many Nerves, and the oblique carriage of many
fibers. B. The Right Muscles, of which two are found above the Navil N. and one
beneath it. C. The fleshy part, or Belly of the obliquely descendent Muscle
ends here; and here begins the Tendon or Membranous end thereof. D. The hole in
the Tendon of this Muscle, through which the Spermatick Vessels, are sent into
the Stones toward the Cod. E. The obliquely ascendent Muscle, in its
situation, with the Fibers which run to the upward parts. F. The Fleshy
beginning of the obliquely ascendent Muscles, growing out of the sharp point
of Os Ilij, or the Appendix GG. G. The Spina, or that same Appendix of the Os
Ilium. H. The Line about which the Tendons of the oblique Muscles of the Belly
begin, which Spigelius calls Semilunaris, the half-moon-shap'd Line. I. The
straight Muscles transparent under the Tendons of the oblique ascendent Muscle.
K. Productions of the Peritonaeum, involving the spermatick Vessels, and
descending into the Cod. L. Holes in the end of the Ascendent and Right
Muscles, to let the spermatsck Vessels through. M. The Kernels of the Groyn
laid open. N. The Navil. O. The white Line of the Belly. P. The Thighs near the
Privities. Q. The (...) or Yard. 1. 2. 3. ^erves, which proceed from under each
Rib, to be distributed into the oblique descendent Muscle. 9. 10. 11 (...) ^e
four lower Ribs. a a a. The (...) of the oblique ascendent Muscle.


page 10:



In this TABLE are shown the right Muscles of the Belly, with their
Inscriptions, as also the Epigastric and Mammary Vessels, which are conspicuous
from their inner side. Also the transverse Muscle of the Belly, separated about
its beginning, and the Pyramidal Muscles in their Situation.
The IV. TABLE.
The Explication of the FIGURE.
A. The transversal or overthwart Muscle, made loose about its beginning. b b
b. Its beginning. c c. A portion of the Tendon. D. The right Muscle. e. Its
beginning. f f f. Nervous Inscriptions. g. The End. H. The backside of the
other right Muscle, wherein. I. Shows the Dug Vein and Artery descending. k k.
The Epigastry Vein and Artery descending. l l. The Concourse or Anastomosis of
the Veins. MM. The Peritonaeum freed from the Muscles. NNN. The Pyramidal
Muscles. OO. The productions of the Peritonaeum descending into the Cod.


page. 11:



there are sixteen Muscles of the Belly for the most part, at least and
seldomer fourteen, when there are only three right Muscles on either side;
sometimes eighteen, when there are five right ones found, on each side. Fontanus
found them all, folded and wrapped up in an Embryo or imperfect birth.

The first Pair obliquely descendent, [or the external] so called by reason of
the Fibers, which descend obliquely from the upper to the lower part; covers
all the Abdomen, on its own side, seeing it is very great and broad.

Its original is in the breast, from the lower part of the sixth, seventh and
eight The Original of the oblique descending Muscle.
Ribs, before they end in Gristles; and it arises from sundry triangular
beginnings, or spires, [near the great sawshap'd Muscle of the Brest] which
afterward grow into one. And to every triangular spire, from the spaces between
its Ribs, and Nerve is carried. Moreover, it arises also [a small space being
interposed] from the point of the transverse processes of the Vertebra's of the
Loins. So largly is the beginning thereof spread out, namely from the sixth Rib
to the lowest Vertebra of the Loins.

It ends in the middle of the Abdomen, where a white line appears, and it ends
into Its End.
a large Tendon, an infinite company of oblique Fibers running together in that
place.

Now the white Line, which is sometimes What the white Line is?
fringed with fat, is the meeting together of the Tendons of the Muscles of the
Belly, saving those of the right muscles. For the Tendons of the oblique
muscles are united. and do so meet form both parts, that they form as it were a
coat which covers the Belly, or as if it were but one Tendon.

It is white, because void of flesh, proceeding from the Mucronata Cartilago or
pointed Gristle which is seated at the Sharebone: and it is narrower below the
Navil then above.

The two muscles obliquely descendent are bored through. 1. At the Navil. 2. At
the Groyn in men, that the seed Vessels may pass through; in Women, to give
passage to the two round and Nervy Ligaments of the Womb, which are terminated
in the Privity near the Nymphs.

Now as touching the Original The Error of Aquapendent and Laurentius, touching
the Original of the oblique-descending Muscle.
of the obliquely-descending muscle, Aquapendant did long since hatch a
contrary Opinion, which Laurentius did afterward propound as new, and of his
own Invention, reprehending all other Anatomists, who were the said miserably
deceived. Now this contrary Opinion will have these muscles to be rather termed
external Ascendents, so that their Original should be from the upper part of
the Os pubis, Os Ilij, and from the transverse Processes of the Loins: And the
end. in the Ribs. They prove it thus:

1. Because a muscle ought to arise from some quiet and immovable Their first
Reason refuted.
part, such as is the Share-bone compared to the Ribs. I answer, the Ribs are
quiet and still, being compared to the white Line.

2. They say a muscle draws toward its beginning, and because the
obliquedescendent Their second Reason
serves for Respiration, it draws the Ribs toward the Share. I answer, this
muscle does not primarily answered.
serve for Respiration, as I shall show hereafter. It Is proved that these
Muscles arise from above, not from beneath.


Now our Opinion, which is Galens, is proved. 1. By the Ingress of Nerves,
which is about the beginning. 2. By the carriage of Fibers, which go here from
the beginning to the white Line. 3. All confess that there is a Concourse of
Tendons, yea of those which obliquely descend, into the white Line. Therefore
the End is there. 4. It

This TABLE presents the Obliquely-ascendent Muscle of the Belly, loosned from
its Originals; the Transverse Muscle, and the she one straight Muscle in its
Situation, and the other with its Pyramidals removed from its place.
The V. TABLE.
The Explication of the FIGURE.
A The Muscle of the Abdomen obliquely ascending, separated about the
beginning; wherein. bbb. Is the Beginning. cc. A Portion of that tendon which
covers the right Muscle. DDDD. The right Muscle in its Situation. E. The inner
side of the right Muscles drawn out of its place. f. The lower End of the right
Muscle, cleaving to the Share-bone. gh. The Epigastrick Vessels, which spring
from the Ramus Iliacus, of which g denotes the Vein h the Artery. ^. The End of
these Vessels which are joined with the Mammaria Descending from above. KK. The
Pyramidal Muscles removed from their place. l. The Tendon of those Muscles
which reaches to the Navil. MM. The transverse Muscle. nn. Its first Original
which is Nervous and membranous. OOO. Its second fleshy Beginning. ppp. Its
Tendon which grows to the Peritonaeum. qqq. The Nerves which come from the
marrow of the Back to this Muscle. rrrrr. The Boughs of the Vein and Artery of
the right Muscles, which are sent unto the transverse Muscle cut off. SSSS. The
Ribs. TTT The Intercostal Muscles. V. The Os Sternum or Breast Bone. XX. T Skin
separated and hanging down. Y. The Spine, or sharp point of Os Ilij. Z. Certain
Muscles which grow to the Os Ilij.


page. 12



is proved by the common Action, of which beneath.

The Use [according to Riolanus, who says that the Os pubis or Share-bone
being moveable, does move this boney structure forwards, the Chest resting, or
being lightly moved, in the Conjugal Embracement, and in the going of such as
want Legs and Thighs. But we daily observe the Belly to be moved, in single
persons that are chaste, nor does Nature frame Parts to supply unexpected
defects of muscles, but for Natural and Ordinary Actions. Spigelius suspects,
that from the same moveable beginning, that same bone is drawn obliquely
upward, and inclined toward the Chest, by the help of the muscles.

The second pare is the OBLIQUELY ASCENDENT [or internal] having Fibers
contrarily situated: It is situated next the former, and has a triangular
Figure.

Its Original is fleshy, from the Rib of Os Ilij: but membranous, both The
Original of the obliquely ascendent Muscles.
from the transverse Processes of the Vertebra's of the Loins, from which it
receives Nerves, and from the sharp points of Os sacrum.

It grows a little by a fleshy End, to Their double End.
each of the bastard Ribs, and to some of the true Ribs, but the rest its End
turns by little and little into a Tendon, which is double: The one part goes
upon the right muscles, the other beneath, so that the right does rest as it
were in a sheath, but near the white Line it is reunited, and inserted
thereinto. Which Riolanus has observed to happen only above the Navil, and not
beneath.

The third pare of the right Muscles, by reason of the right fibers. This pare
is commonly reckoned to be but one.

Galen does rightly make the beginning to be fleshy, arising from the The
Original of the right Muscles.
Breast Bone, on each side of the Sword-fashion'd Gristle, and from the
Gristles of the four bastard Ribs. It ends in a Tendon at the Os Pubis. Others
contrariwise, will have the beginning to be here in the Sharebone, and the End
above. But I answer. 1. That the right Muscles receive their Nerves in the
upper part, viz. one branch of those Nerves, which were inserted into the
oblique descending Muscle, and others also from the last of the Back, and from
the first pare of the Loins. 2. A Muscle uses not to have a tendinous
beginning, and a fleshy End. Other late Anatomists will have the right Muscles
to have two beginnings and two ends; one beginning and one end in the Breast,
and another in the Share-bones. Who are for this Conceit of theirs, beholden to
that new opinion touching the moveableness of the Share-bone, of which I shall
speak hereafter.

The Musculus rectus or straight muscle, has for the most part three.
Inscriptions That there are diverse right Muscles.
in Persons of a middle stature, and sometimes four in tall people, whose Belly
is long. But according to Carpus and Casserius, we say that suitable to the
multitude of Inscriptions, there are more muscles, because 1. To every Joynting
there comes a Nerve. 2. If it were but one, being contracted into itself, it
could not equally compress all parts. 3. There should be no such muscle in the
whole body, wherein nevertheless there are many long ones, without such a
number of Inscriptions.

In the internal Surface of the right muscles, there are two Veins conjoined,
with as many Arteries.

The upper called Mammaria, arise from the Vena cava, lying beneath the The
Veins.
Claves, the more remarkable branch whereof reaches unto the Duggs, and runs
out under the right Muscle, as far as to the Region of the Navil, where it is
terminated.

This is met by the other termed Epigastrica, which in Women springs from the
Womb, in men the Vena cava goes upwards toward the upper Vein, which before it
touches, it is for the most part obliterated. Yet these two Veins are sometimes
joined together by manifest Anastomosis, touching one another, at their ends.
Hence the Consent is supposed to arise between the Duggs and the Womb, the
Belly and the Nostrils. For when the Nose bleeds, we fix Cupping-glasses to the
belly, and the Duggs of Women being handled, it in cites them to Venery.

The Musculi recti receive Arteries from the Epigastrica Artery, and Nerves
which The Arteries and Nerves.
proceed from the last Vertebra's of the Chest.

The proper use of these Muscles according to Riolanus, is to move the
Share-bone forward in Generation, which has been already confuted. Spigelius
will have them to draw the Breast to the Ossa pubis or sharebones, and the
Share-bones to the Breast, in a straight motion, and so to bend the Chest;
whence it is, that in Dogs and Apes, they reach as far as to the Jugulum,
because their Chest did require very much bowing. But these contrary motions,
unless they be helped, with those incisions of the right muscles, do involve a
difficulty. Helmont suspects that they are stretched in going up hill, and that
from thence shortness of breath proceeds. Flud says, that by a general use,
they make the Belly round, and compress it centrally, or toward the middle
point thereof.

The fourth pare called the Pyramidal The Pyramidal Muscles.
Muscles, do rest upon the lower Tendons of the Musculi recti. Nor are they
parts of the right Muscles, as Vesalius and Columbus think; but distinct
muscles, as Fallopius proves with reasons, which are partly convincing, partly
vain. But that they are peculiar muscles is hence apparent. 1 Because they are
clothed with a peculiar membrane. 2. Their Fibers are different from those of
the Musculi recti.

They rise with a fleshy beginning, Their Original.
not very broad, from the external Share-bone, where also the Nerves do enter;
and the farther they go upwards, the narrower they grow, till they terminate
with a sharp point, into the Tendon of the transverse Muscle. And from this
place I have observed more then once, a small and round Tendon produced, as far
as to the Navil.

Riolanus has observed the left Pyramidal Muscle to be lesser then the right,
and when there is but one, it is oftener left then right.

The Use of the Pyramidal Muscles, is Their Use.
to assist the right muscles, in compressing the Parts beneath. Hereupon
according as the Tendons of the right muscles are more or less strong. so,
sometimes the Pyramidal muscles are wanting (though rarely) sometimes they are
strong, otherwhiles weak, and sometimes there is but one. Bauhine says* If they
are absent, then either the flesh joined to the Heads of the right ones [which
I have often observed] or the Fat performs their Office. And others will have
them to be as it were certain Coverings of the right muscles.

Fallopius will have the Pyramidal (...) to compress and squeez the Bladder,
when ^e Water, that the Urin may be forced out. Con^wise Aquapendent will have
it, that they raise and lift themselves up, and together with them the Abdomen
and Peritonaeum, that the parts beneath them, may not be too much burdened.
Now Columbus charges Fallopius, that he would have these muscles serve to erect
the Yard, whereas that is Massa his Opinion [whose Opinion is followed by Flud,
because of the situation of these Muscles] but they cannot serve for that
intent, because they reach not the foresaid part, and because they are found
likewise in Women.

The fifth pare called the Transverse Muscles, being lowest in situation, do
The transverse Muscles.
arise from a certain Ligament which springs out of the Os sacrum, and covers
the Musculus sacrolumbus, also from the lowest Rib, and the Os Ilij. They end
by a membranous Tendon, into the white Line, and do stick extreme fast to the
Peritonaeum, every where save about the Share. The proper Use of these Muscles,
is to compress the Gut Colon.

The Action of all the Muscles of the Belly, is as it were twofold. (...) An
equable The Action of the muscles of the Belly.
Retension and Compression of the Parts in the Belly: For ^y all act together,
the Midriff assisti^em, and this is the reason why the Fibers of all th^s, do
meet together in one and the same C^ing as they are thus described by Robert E^.

2. The Second Action (...) us upon the former, viz. the ^dance of Why there
are diverse muscles of the Belly?
Excrements. And because the number of parts to be compressed is great, as the
Guts, Womb, Bladder; one Muscle could not suffice, but there was need of
diverse, acting in diverse places, according to diverse Angels: Right, transverse,
oblique. Every part indeed has an expulsive Power; A Praeoccupation.
but those parts which are hollow, and often, and much burdened, do need the
help of these muscles; as in the Expulsion of Excrements, of Worms, of Urin, of
a Child, of a Mole, etc.

These are their true Actions, which are apparent from their Fabric. But A
Secondary action of the muscles of the Belly.
Nature sometimes abuses the muscles, to move the Chest, when there is need of a
great and violent Expiration, as in Outcries, Coughs, and the like. For then
they do not a little compress the Chest.

Their Use. They are of an hot and moist Temperament. because flesh is
prevalent in them: And therefore they cherish Heat and Concoction: They are
moderately thick; and therefore they defend the Parts, and are a Safeguard to
them, even when they rest: Also they conduce to the Comlyness of the Body: And
therefore extreme Fat, dropsied Persons, such as are very lean, etc. are
deformed.

CHAP. VII. Touching the Peritonaeum.
ALl the Muscles of the Abdomen Peritonaeum, how so called?
being removed, the Peritonaeum comes in sight, being spread over the Guts, and
having its Name a circumtendendo, from stretchin^ading about, because it is
drawn over all (...), which are between the Midriff and the Thighs.

Now the Peritonaeum is a membrane which does cloth the Bowels of the lower
What it is?
Belly.

It is a membrane, and that sufficiently thin and soft, that it may not be
burthensom; but strong and compact, that it may be loosned and distended. It is
thicker in Women, from the Navil to the Share, that it may stretch the more,
when they are with Child; in men that are great Feeders especially, it is
thicker from the Mucronata Cartilago, to the Navil, Laurentius conceives for
the Stomachs sake, which notwithstanding is hardly probable: for it was fit the
lower part should be thicker, least while we stand, it should become slackned
and loosned by the weight of the Bowels.

Some will have the Peritonaeum to be made of a ligamentous and nervous
Substance; others of Nerves only; others only of Ligaments; others of the Coats
of the Brain.

The Shape of the Peritonaeum is oval: The Shape of the Peritonaeum.
For it is like a Bladder, or a long-fashioned Egg. For it compasses all the
lo^^^ Belly, and therefore it is answerable ^unto in Longitude and Latitude.

Its Surface is inwardly smooth, and Its Surface.
(...) were daubed with moisture, by reason of the Guts which it touches;
without it is fibrous, and a little rough, that it may be fastened with the mus^.

Its Original is at the Backbone, at the Original.
first and third Vertebraes of the Loins, where the Peritonaeum is thicker; so
that it cannot in that place be separated without breaking.

It is knit also above most closely to Connection.
the Diaphragma (and therefore when it is inflamed, the Hypochondria are drawn
upwards) beneath to the Share-bone and the Os Ilij; before, to the white Line
and the Tendons of the transverse muscles.

Now it is in all places double (and Laurentius It is double.
with Cabrolius make al Membranes double, even the pia Matter it self) which
notwithstanding is most apparent upon the Backbone, above the Navil it sticks
so close, that its doubleness cannot be ^^seerned: But from the Navil to the
Share, it is manifestly divided into two Coats, so distant, that in their
capacious doubleing the Bladder is contained, which has been observed by few:
And that was so ordered. 1. That the membrane might be stronger there, where it
is burdened. 2. That the umbelical Vessels, which run out there, may be
carried more safely: For they pass through the Doublings of the Peritonaeum.
Therefore also.

The Peritonaeum is boared through before in a Child which is in the Womb: Also
above it has holes, where it grows to the Diaphragma, for the passage of the
Vessels. Fernelius has therefore The Error of Fernelius. How many Holes there
are?
done ill to contradict Galen, in denying that the Peritonaeum has Holes. They
are three; The first where Vena cava passes through; The second where the
Stomach passes; The third where the great Artery and the Sixth pare of the
Nerves do pass through the Midriff. Beneath about the Fundament, the Neck of
the Bladder and Womb, and the Vessels which pass through the Peritonaeum to the
Thighs, the Muscles of the Abdomen and the Skin.

It has two oblong Processes or Productions, Its Productions.
like Pipes and wide Channels, descending in men, into the Cod, by the Holes of
the Tendo^s of the oblique and transverse muscles, in which productions (called
by the Ancients Didymi) the Seminary Vessels descend and run back, and near the
Stone* These productions are more widened and become the Coats of the Testicles.

Whereof, if the outer Coat be widened, and the inner (which sticks most The
Cause of a Rupture.
exactly, save by the Share-bone, where it is separated) broken, a Rupture is
made, according as the Gut or Call, or both, slip down.

It receives Vessels from the neighboring Diaphragmatick, Mammary, and Its
Vessels.
Epigastrick Vessels, and sometimes from the Seminary. It receives small Nerves,
from those which are carried to the muscles of the Abdomen. And therefore the
Peritonaeum has the Sense of Feeling, contrary to what others have thought
before Vesalius, against whom Experience also bears witness.

The USE of the Peritonaeum, is the same with that of membranes in general. 1.
To Its Use.
contain the parts, and to send Connexions here and there. This the Peritonaenm
does most of all: for it covers It is the mother of the Coats in the lower
Belly.
all the Bowels of the lower Belly, and makes them more firm; lengthens out,
and bestows a Coat upon all of them, to some a thinner, as need requires, and
to others a thicker, as to the Stomach, Guts, Bladder, and

The Peritonaeum is here expressed, with its processes, under which the most of
the Bowels of the Lower Belly discover themselves.
The VI. TABLE.
The Explication of the FIGURE.
AAAA. The four common coverings of the Body dissected Crosswise. BBBB. The
Muscles of the Belly dissected after the same manner. CC. The Breast Bone or
Sternum. D. The sword-fashion'd Gristle. EEEE. The Peritonaeum covering the
whole Cavity of the Lower Belly and going about the same, under which the
Bowels seem to show themselves. FF. The liver appearing through the
Peritonaeum. a. A clift into which the Navil vein L. is inserted. GG. An
obscure appearance of the stomach. H. The figure of the Spleen appearing
situate in the left Hypochondrium. IIII. The manyfold turnings and windings of
the Guts, which appear obscurely in this place. K. The Navil. L. The Navil vein
freed from the covering of the Peritonaeum. MM. The two Navil Arteries. N. The
Urachus or Piss-pipe. OO. Vessels distributed, partly to the bottom of the
stomach, partly to the Call. PP. Productions of the Peritonaeum, wherein the
preparatory Vessels are contained. QQ. The Muscles of the stones called
Cremasteres or suspensores, of which the right is seen in its own place well
near, but the left hangs separated. RR. The stones freed from the Cod. S. The
Share Bone. T. The Prick or Yard. V. The Rise of the Epigastrick Vein. X. The
Epigastrick Artery, being a companion to the V^ir* Y. A certain branch of the
Epigastrick Vein* Z. (...) the (...)


page 15.



Womb. Also from it proceed two doubled members, the Call and the Mesentery.
This also, is an Office of the Peritonaeum, that Vessels which are to be
carried a great way, do run along between the two Coats thereof.

2. To shut the Orifices of the Veins. Hence the Liver, if it were not covered
with a membrane, the mouths of its Veins would come into veiw. Hence also those
parts in which there are more Arteries, have received a thicker Membrane, as
the Spleen. 3. To further the actions of the Muscles of the Belly; out of Galen.

Chap. VIII. Of the Call.
UNder the Peritonaeum is the Call as it The Etymology of the Call.
were a Covering, others name it Zirbus, Rete or Reticulum, by reason of the
straggling course of the Vessels; the Greeks term it Epiploon the Top-swimmer,
because it floates and swims as it were upon the Guts. For in all
Living-Creatures it is.

It is situate at the Liver, Spleen, and Its Situation
Bottom of the Stomach, and from thence spread upon the Guts, whose turnings it
involves and enters into. In some it ceases at the Navil, in others it reaches
below the Navil, and sometimes to the Os Pubis where it is inferted: [Somtimes
it is joined to the Womb with a strait Its Connection.
Connection, as the rarely learned Marcus Aurelius Severinus found at Naples in
a Shee-Fool; and in another it was knit to the bottom of the Womb* in Venice
when I was there] and when it comes between the bottom of the Bladder and of
the Womb, the mouth of the Womb is thought to be compressed, and Women thereby
made The cause of Barrenness.
barren. In men an Epiplocele is caused, when it descends into the Cod. And
because it is extended rather unto the left then the right side, therefore an
Epiplocele of the left side is more frequent. Epiplocele is a Rupture in which
the Call falls into the God.

Many times the Guts being left naked, Its situation in persons strangled.
the Call lies lurking under the Liver, which happens not from strangulation,

This TABLE expresses to the Life the Situation of the Guts and Call and the
Navil Vessels.
The VII. TABLE.
The Explication of the FIGURE.
AA. The coverings of the Belly dissected, and turned up every way, that the
inner parts may come into view. B. The Cartilago Mucronata, or Swordlike
Gristle. CC. The bunching side of the Liver. DD. The stomach. EE. Part of the
Gut Colon seated under the Liver. FFFF. The upper Membrane of the Call, fastened
to the bottom of the stomach. G. The Navil. HH. The Navil-Vein. II. The two
Navil-Arteries. K. The Urachus or Piss-pipe. L. The Bladder. aaa. The
Gastrepiploick or Belly-Call Vessels, sprinkled through the Call and stomach.
MM. The Guts.


page 16



seeing in strangled persons, it is found in its right place, and in persons not
strangled, we find it drawn back; but if we may credit Spigelius, it comes from
the Guts being puffed up with wind. In Hydropical persons I have found it quite
putrified. C. Stephanus unjustly denies it to hunters.

Infants, if we believe Riolanus In Infants.
are distitute of a Call over their Guts, which as they grow is spread out
downwards, and in declining (...) it is again diminished. ^t has two distinct
Originals from the Peritonaeum Its Origina.
and is as it were a doubled Peritonaeum. 1. It arises at the stomach, viz. the
bottom thereof. 2. At the Back and Gut Colon; and no beginning cleaves to
another. Hence it has two Its Parts.
Walls or two Membranes, thin and light (that they may not be troublesome with
their weight) which lie one upon another: the external or former, which is tied
to the outer membrane of the stomach at the bottom, and to the bunching part of
the Spleen. The inner and latter, which is tied to the Gut Colon, and arises
from the Peritonaeum, under the Midriff, just at the Back. And between these
Walls, it has a remarkable Cavity: in which some very foolishly conceive the
Natural spirit is contained. Riolanus will have it propagated from a Riolanus
refuted.
production of the Mesentery, because if you separate the Membranes of the
Mesentery, you may proceed as far as the Gut Colon; which he proves in another
place, out of Hippocrates. But in vain, seeing the Mesentery it self, springs
from the Peritonaeum, and he confesses the fourth part only of the Call to be
Mesenterical.

The Figure thereof resembles that of a Falconders pouch, for the upper Orifice
Its Figure.
thereof is Orbicular, and the lower part of the Call is round after a sort,
and sometimes unequal.

The magnitude thereof varies: for it passes in some men to the Navil, in
others it Its Magnitude.
goes further, as was said before. Naturally it hardly exceeds the weight of
half a pound, Riolanus observes. Howbeit Vesalius saw a Call of five pounds
weight.

The Call has this property above oother Its Vessels. ^
membranes, that through the substance thereof, very many Veins and Arteries
are sprinkled, from the Caeliacal and Mesenterical branches; and small Nerves
from a double branch of the sixth Pair. And by reason of the many Veins, there
is much Fat in the Call: and between the same innumerable Kernels are
interposed, which suck in and feed upon the dreggy humors. Which Fat I have
often observed to have been molten in such as have been sick of Consumptive
Fevers.

This Demonstrates the Lower Membrane of the Call. Also the Mesentery with the
Guts and Kernels adjoined thereto.
The VIII. TABLE.
The Explication of the FIGURE.
AAA. The lower Membrane of the Call, on which the Colon is suspended. aaa. The
Vessels of the Call. CC. The Ligament of the Gut Colon. DDDD. The Mesentery.
EEE. The smaller Kernels of the Mesentery. F. The greatest Kernel of the
Mesentery, situate in the midst thereof, called, by Asellius, Pancreas. GGG.
The Vessels of the Mesentery. HH. The thin and thick Guts. I. The bottom of the
Pissbladder. KK. The Umbilical Navil-Arteries. L. The Piss-pipe, or Urachus. M.
The Navil cut off.


page. ^7



It Is a most rare Case to find the Call perfectly fleshy such as I saw cut out
of a Body in the Hospital at Zeyden.

The Use, 1. By reason of the plenty of its Its use.
Fat it helps and cherishes the heat of the stomach, namely of the bottom
thereof; for the upper part of the stomach is cherished by the Liver, resting
upon it; also it cherishes the heat of the Guts, as being membranous and
blood-less parts. And therefore, that same Fencer whose Call was taken away by
Galen, was easily hurt by cold, and therefore he always covered his Belly with
Wool. The Call therefore is as it were a Pillow to the Stomach, and furthers
Digestion. For that is a rare case which Forestus relates of a young man, and
Riolanus of others who lived well enough, after their Calls were taken away:
Peradventure their Stomachs were some other way strengthened, or might be
Naturally more strong then ordinary. Otherwise ordinarily, by defect of the
Call, Catarrhs, Loosnesses, Lienteries, Consumptions do arise.

2. The Membranes afford this Use, that they prop up the Branches of a Vein and
an Artery, which go unto the Stomach, Duodenum, and Colon Guts so called, and
to the Spleen; also the Fat grows by benefit of the Membranes.

3. Walaeus supposes that Branches of Arteries and Veins are attributed in
greater quantity unto the Call, then is requisite to breed Fat, and nourish the
Call, and that they are there placed, being Branches of Venaporta, that the
greater quantity of Blood might return to the Heart.

Chap. IX. Of the Stomach.
THe Stomach called Ventriculus, The Stomach, why called Ventriculus?
that is a little Belly, is an Organical part seated in the lower Belly, just
under the Midriff, being the Instrument that makes Chyle. Paraeus observes that
it has through a Wound in the Midriff ascended into the Chest, and gone
downwards by reason of the increase of the Call. But Naturally;

It is seated in the Epigastrium, a place encompassed with no Bones, that it
Its Situation.
might stretch more easily, just under the Midriff, as it were in the middle of
the Body, and it rests upon the Backbone: Now its left side which is the
greater and rounder in the bottom, lies in the left Hypochondrium, to give way
to the Liver which lies on the right side, and that so the Body may be equally
as it were poised, and balanced* or trimmed, as the Watermen speak of their
boats: Toward the right hand it grows small by little and little, that the
meat may be gradually thrust thither. Whence we gather that it is better for
such as lie down to sleep, to lie first upon their left side till the Digestion
be finished, and afterward upon their right, otherwise then is commonly
imagined. But in the left side there is the bottom, where the meat ought to
tarry, for being rolled to the right side, it is nearer passing out. Howbeit in
this case, much must be allowed to Custom.

It Is only one in Number in man, and such live Creatures as have teeth in both
The Number of Stomachs in feathered Foul.
their Jaws. Riolanus bath twice observed a double Stomach in a man, continued,
but distinguished by a narrow passage out of one into another. Sperlingerus saw
the same in a Woman of Wittemberg* and Helmontius saw a bag full of stones
which grew to the Stomach. Yea, and that it has been double in one that chewed
the Cud, as Salmuth relates and others, is not to be doubted. In some Fowls
there are two Stomachs, the one membranous, which the Latins term Ingluvies the
Crap, which only receives the meat, that from thence being lightly digested,
they may cast it into the mouths of their young ones, whereas otherwise young
Birds could not be nourished. The other is very fleshy and hotter, having
within a hard Membrane, wherein hard meat is received. Petrus Castellus a rare
man, adds a third, which is in like manner fleshy. In Beasts that chew the Cud,
and have Horns, and teeth only in one Jaw In Beasts that chew the Cud.
there are four; The first Venture, the Reticulum, the Omasus, and the Abomasus;
of which Aristotle speaks. The Venture and the Reticulum which is a part
thereof, are ordained to hold the crude meat; The Omasus receives the Food
immediately from the mouth, if it be thin, if thick, it is first chewed, and
from hence after a short stay, it slips into the Abomasus. Now chewing the Cud,
is a second chewing of the meat in the mouth, for the more perfect Digestion
thereof, whence the Aliment proves excellent, and for that cause among the
Jews, such as chewed the Cud were counted clean Beasts. Chewing the Cud is
caused, not as some think, because the meat in the first Stomach gains such a
quality, that it provokes the Stomach to cast it up; for so in every sharp
biting of the Stomach, and in all Animals chewing the Cud, would happen against
their Wills: but it depends upon the voluntary Action of the Stomach, which by
a singular membrane, expels what it pleases, and when it pleases; as that some
Tosspot of Malta, whom I have seen, would as he pleased cast up what ever he
had drunk; and others will swallow down the Smoke of Tobacco, and turn it out
again. In great Sea-fishes I have observed a threefold Stomach, as in a Porpice
and others; but it grew so together, that there was rather three distinct
Cavities with passages from one to another, three perfect Stomachs.

It has two Orifices, and both of them in the upper Region of the stomach. Its
Orifices. The Symptoms of the Stomachs, Mouth, and why like Heart-passions?


The left is commonly called the upper Orifice, and sometimes singly the mouth
of the Stomach, and sometimes it is termed the Stomach, because of its largeness;
the Ancients did call it Cor the Heart, because the Diseases thereof caused
fainting Fits* and other Symptoms like those which happen to such as are
troubled with Passions of the Heart; also because of its most exquisite sense,
and because the Heart does sympathize therewith, both in regard of its
nearness, and they have Nerves proceeding from the same Branch. This Orifice is
greater, thicker, and larger, so that it may admit hard or half chewed meat.
It Is situate at the eleventh Vertebra of the Chest: It has circular fleshy
Fibers, that it may by Natural Instinct shut up the mouth of the Stomach, after
the meat is received in, least fumes should arise, and go into the Brain, and
breed Diseases; and that so Digestion may be more perfectly accomplished. So we
cover it as we do our Seething-pots with a potlid, to keep in the Fumes, and to
hinder the meat from falling back into our mouths, when we lie in bed, and
tumble this way and that way. Through this Orifice, meats and drinks are
received in. And it is but in the Epigastrick Region, and it is more near the
Backbone, then the swordfashion'd Gristle or Cartilago Ensiformis: And
therefore when it is diseased, we apply Epithems rather behind then before.
Helmont places the seat of the Soul, and the Principle of life Whether the Soul
be seated in the Orifice of the stomach?
in the Stomach, as it were in its central point, so that it governes and rules
over the Head and principal Faculties. If you ask him more particularly where
it is placed, he will answer you that it is there after an exorbitant manner,
centrally in a point, and as it were in the middle of an Atome of the thickness
of one Membrane. But the Stomach cannot be the Seat of the Soul, because. 1. It
is always full of impure meats. 2. No Faculties flow to us from thence. 3.
Great Feeders and persons of large Appetite, should have more Soul then other
people. 4. The Soul is not fixed to any Center. 5. When the Stomach is hurt,
death does not presently follow, as appears in him that swallowed the knife.
And any damage happen, it is by reason of the Nearness of the Heart, and
Community of Nerves, and consequently by accident. For the Soul sticks not in
the Nerves primarily; but there rather from whence the Nerves have their
Original* and it is a common Membrane. Yet in a large sense, it may be called
the Principle of Life, because there is the Seat of Appetite, and the first
Reception and Digestion of Aliments, whose fault in the following Concoctions,
is never amended. Now it rules over the Head, by reason of the Consent of the
Membranes, and the most undoubted arising of Vapors.

The right Orifice, commonly called the lower, is as far from the bottom, The
right Orifice, called Pylorus.
well near, as the left: It is narrower, and abides shut until the Digestion of
the meat be finished, that is to say until the meat be turned into a liquid
Cream, or Posset as irwere. Howbeit It is opened in the Distribution of Chylus.
Walaeus has observed, that it may and does let out the more liquid meats, and
such as are of easy Digestion, by peicemeal before the rest, which may easily
be done by opening it self a little way, so that the thicker and undigested
meats cannot pass through, as Riolanus objects, seeing they cannot pass through
a narrow chink: This Walaeus I say observed in his Dissertion of Living
Creatures. Helmont affirms that in Vomiting, it is shut upwards toward It is
shut sometimes, and opened in Vomiting.
the Pylorus, because it is inconvenient to Health, that the faculent matter of
Vomits should pass downwards. Yet he grants that it is sometimes opened between
the first and other Vomits, when somewhat ascends out of the Guts. And the truth
is, that it is also open to noxious Humors, Lienteries does witness, and other
fluxes of the Belly, Miserere mei, and other Diseases, which pass and repass
through the Pylorus. The same Person beleives that it remains shut after Death,
which does, I conceive no otherwise happen, then as other parts are then stiff
with Cold. It is a little

The Stomach-Nerves so called are Expressed.
The IX. TABLE.
The Explication of the FIGURE.
A. The Stomach. B. The Gullet or Oesophagus. C. The left and larger side of
the stomach. D. The upper Orifice of the Stomach called peculiarly Stomachus,
and Cardia the Heart. E. The right external Nerve of the sixth pare, compassing
the Orifice thereof. F. The external left Nerve of the sixth pare. G. The
Gastrick Vessels creeping along the Bottom. H. The lower Orifice or Mouth of
the Stomach called Pylorus, the Porter.


page ^^.



bowed back, and has transverse Fibers, and a thicker Circle cast about it
(others call them Glandulous Pustles) like an Orbicular or Sphincter Muscse
[some call it by the Name of a Valve, though it be seldom so closely shut, but
that both Dung and Choler, and other things do ever and anon ascend. But the
Chylus by a Natural propension, affects to go downwards, nor does it go the
other way, unless compelled] It is called the Pylorus or Porter, because it
lets out the Chyle: It may be exceedingly dilated, even It is sometimes
exceedingly widened.
as also the left. Hence it is that many examples testify, how that very great
things have been swallowed down, and voided out by Vomit, and by Stool; as
Goldrings, Nut-shels, small Knives, Pebble-stones, pieces of Iron, Frogs,
Lizards, Serpents, whole Eels, Pipes, Coins, etc. The Pylorus rules over all
the inferior parts, according Whether the Pylorus have any Rube over the
inferior Parts?
to the Opinion of Helmont, being Moderator of Digestion: From the Indignation
whereof, he fetches the cause of the Palsy, and Swimming Dizziness of the
Head; and says that a Flint having stopped the same, Want of Appetite, and
Death it self followed. Salmuth saw Death caused by the Gnawing and Scirrhous
Tumor thereof, which Evils depend upon viriated Concoction, or Digestion
hindered.

The stomach has three sorts of Fibers: straight, oblique, and transverse;
which are The Fibers of the Stomach and their use.
conceived to serve for Attraction, Retention, and Expulsion. But some do
peradventure more rightly determine, that the Fibers conduce to firmness and
strength, as when we would have a piece of Cloth strong, we cause more threeds
to be woven into it: Especially seeing many other parts, without these kind of
Fibers do attract, retain, and expel; as the Liver, Spleen, Brain, Stones,
Lungs, Duggs. And other parts, as Bones and Gristles, though they have Fibers,
yet do they not attract or expel any thing.

The Number of Fibers in the Membranes is uncertain, through the variance Their
Number.
of Authors. That the first or outmost Coat has more right Fibers, and the
second more transverse, is generally agreed upon by most Anatomists. The doubt
is touching the third or inner Coat. Galen, Abensina, Mundinus, Sylvus, and
Aquapendens, do allow it only right or straight Fibers. Vesalius says it has
right Fibers toward the Cavity, and oblique in the outward part. Costaeus
allows it only oblique. I with Fallopius and Laurentius, being led by
Experience and Reason, do admit al kinds of Fibers in this Membrane.

The Surface is smooth without, plain and whiteish within, when the stomach The
Surface.
does purse it self, it appears wrinkled and somewhat reddish.

It has a triple Membrane: The first The Membranes.
common and external, springing from the Peritonaeum, and the thickest of all
that have their Original from the Peritonaeum, though otherwise thin enough;
which Petrus Castellus conceives does chiefly concur in Vomiting. The second
more fleshy, which is the middlemost, and has fleshy Fibers to further
Concoction. The third is lowest and nervous, into which the Vessels are
terminated, and it is continued with the Coat of the Oesophagus, Mouth, and
Lips, that nothing may be received in, which ^ ungrateful to the Stomach, and
because the meat is prepared in the mouth. Hence it is, that when Choler is in
the Stomach, the Tongue is bitter and yellow: And contrariwise the Diseases of
the Mouth and Tongue are communicated to the Oesophagus and Sromach. This Coat
is wrinkled, that it may be the better dilated. And it has its Wrinkles from a
fleshy Crustiness sticking thereunto, the better to defend it from hard meats.
This Crust is thought to arise from the Excrements of the The Crustiness in the
stomach whence it proceeds?
third Concoction of the Stomach: and it is spungy, and has passages like
short Fibers, from the inner Surface to the outward; that the thinner Chylus
may be the better detained till the End of Digestion.

The Substance therefore of the Stomach being membranous and cold, is helped by
the Heat of the Neighboring Parts. For the Liver lies over the right side, and
middle part thereof; for it lies under the Heart-pit: At the left side lies the
Spleen; it is covered by the fat Call: Under it lies the Pancreas or
Sweetbread; also near it lie the Midriff, Colon-gut, the Trunk of Vena cava,
and of the Aorta.

The Stomach is knit in the left part Its Connection.
to the Midriff (not to the Backbone) by its Orifice; therefore when it is
over full, by hindering the motion of the Midriff, it causes shortness of
breath: On the right side it is joined to the Gut Duodenum, by its other
Orifice or the Pylorus.

At the Stomach, in the left side, under the Midriff, is formed a remarkable
Cavity enclosod with Membranes, partly from the Stomach, partly from the
Midriff, and partly from the Call. Tonching this Cavity, that place of
Hippocrates is to be understood in the 54 Aphorism of the 7. Section. Those who
have Phlegm shut up between the Septum transversum and the Stomach, which causes
pain, and can find no passage into either of the Bellies, when the Phlegm passes
through the Veins into the Bladder, their Disease is cured.

The Shape of the Stomach is round and Shape.
oblong, like a^ Bag-pipe, especially if you consider it together with the
Duodenum and Oesophagus. In the Forepart is is equally gibbous or bunching
forth; in the Hinder-part, while it lies enclosed in the Body, it has two*
bunchings, that on the right hand being the less, and that on the left hand the
greater, between which lie the Vertebra's of the Back, and the descending Trunk
of the Vena cava and the Artery.

Its Magnitude varies; commonly it is less in Women then in Men, that Its
Magnitude.
place may be made for the Womb when it swells. For Women are for the most part
lesser then men, and yet not more gluttonous then Men, as Aristotle beleives,
viz. being of the same size and equally healthy; yea, and they are inferior to
men in Heat to digest and concoct. Also in gluttonous persons and great
Drinkers, it is greater then ordinary, so that when it swells, it may be felt
as it were naked. For it is exceedingly dilated, and therefore it is thinner in
Drinkers, in whom it is sometimes so attenuated, that it can no more wrinkle it
self, whence follows long weakness. Which Walaeus in Diffection has observed
to happen chiefly to those old men, whose Stomachs in time of Concoction do
breed Wind; which oftentimes also in gluttonous persons, takes up more room
then their meat. Columbus will have it, when it is stretched, to reach as low
as the Navil, and Archangelus will have it to reach further, when it is over
stretched; but being contracted and wrinkled in such as live soberly, it is
thick, and lies hid under the Liver. Now the Largeness of the Stomach is known.
1. By the Greatness of the Mouth, for those that have large Mouths, are great
Eaters, but withal bold and magnanimous. 2. If from the Cartilago Ensiformis to
the Navil, the space is greater, then that of the Face or Breast.

The weight of the Stomach being dried with the Oesophagus, according to the
Observation of Loselius is two ounces and two drams; wherein notwithstanding I
have found a variety, according to the diversity of subjects.

It receives very many Vessels. Veins, as from the Spleen Vas breve, which is
inferted, Vessels.
not into the mouth but into the bottom thereof, and there insinuating it self
into the tunicles, it creeps upwards between them, toward the Orifice: but
before it reaches the same, it is obliterated; in some it is not visible,
because of its smalness, in some it is quite absent [and therefore peradventure
those persons have no good Concoction, or Nature Recompenses that defect with
other Arteries] in others I have seen it flourishing, with manyfold branches.
And because it is implanted into the bottom of the stomach, and blood emptied
there, cannot provoke Appetite, as many imagine. Others will have it that a
Melancholic Excrement which Whether blood cast out of the Spleen help Appetite
and Concoction.
could not be changed in the Spleen, is by this Vessel brought into the
stomach, that by its harsh and acid faculty, it might further the stomachs
Concoction, and make the meats abide therein, a convenient season. But
Concoction should rather be hindered, by the casting in of a strange
Excrementitious Humor. If we shall interpret it touching an acid fermenting
juice, the Opinion will be truer, which kind of juice, can come from no other
place but the Spleen. For according to the Observation of Walaeus, the Spleen,
especially of a Sow, being boiled and eaten, as coming nearest that of a man,
does wont to help the heavyness and dullness of the Stomach. Hence sharp things
are pleasing to the Spleen, and Hippocrates gives Vinegar to Spleenetick
persons, and Celsus makes a Cataplasm for the Spleen tempered with the sharpest
Vinegar. Moreover Riolanus has found the left side of the inner part of the
Stomach blacker then the right. Others suppose that nothing is carried into the
stomach by the Vas breve, but that somewhat is carried out of the stomach into
the Spleen; whether it be the thinner part of the Chyle, as Conringius,
Horstius, and Regius prove, or Blood as Hogeland conceives; they being informed
by Ligature in dissections of live Creatures: of which hereafter.

Moreover the stomach receives Veins from Vena Portae, viz. the Pyloric,
Gastric, and Gastroepiploic branches left and right.

There is one notable Vein called Gastrica, which creeps a long the bottom of
the stomach, but does not quite touch it least the stomach being very much
stretched, it should be in danger to be broken; but it spreds many branches to
the stomach: which Picolhomineus and Aquapendent will have to suck out the more
thin and subtle part of the Chyle, before it passes out of the stomach to the
Liver. And this Opinion seems probable. 1. Because otherwise no reason can be
given* of so sudden a passage, seeing they who have drunk much, do presently
Piss it out plentifully. 2. Otherwise the stomach would be ready to burst, when
it is overcharged. 3. Thence it comes, that strength is so soon repaired by
fragrant Wine, broaths, and other comfortable things.

In some Men a part of the Choler passage, is inserted into the bottom of the
stomach, by which our Countrymen Petrus Severinus, would have choler to be
carried into the stomach. But this is an Error of Nature, and therefore such
persons are apt to vomit Choler, for they are exceeding Choleric, such as
Galen, Vesalius, Fernelius, and Casserius have observed. Such persons are said
to be Picrocholoi ano, vomiters of Choler.

The stomach receives Arteries from me Caeliaca Arteria, which accompany the
Veins, not only for life's sake, but that blood may be supplied from the Heart,
for nourishment, for that the stomach should be nourished with Chyle, is a
false opinion and now out of date. Seeing it is nourished with blood, after the
manner of other parts (it is only delighted with the chyle) whichis brought out
of the Arteries; which blood flows back again to the Heart, according to the
Doctrine of Circulation proved and asserted by the renowned Walaeus in his
Epistles. By the Splenic Arteries an acid sharp juice is conveyed into the
stomach from the Spleen, as the said Waloeus and Hogeland conceive, which I
grant when there is no Vas breve, or in absence of the Spleen, wherein I easily
consent with Riolanus.

Also it has Nerves from the sixth pair, Its Nerves.
viz. a couple in its Orifice, from the stomach branches, being produced after
it has run back in the Chest and furnished the Lungs and Pericardium; which
because they are soft and go a great way, they are covered with strong
Membranes. And they do so cross one another, that they are carried obliquely
and consequently with greater safety. The right branch compasses the fore and
left part of the mouth of the stomach; the left the hinder and right part
thereof. And therefore because the Orifice is so compassed with Nerves, as if
it were altogether composed of Nerves^ thence it is that this Orifice of the
stomach is exceeding sensible; for there was to be the seat of Appetite and
hunger: even as those that are very hungry, do feel that part to be as it were
contracted and wrinkled together. Also branches of Nerves are sent from these
downwards to the very bottom. A branch goes from the left Nerve, a long the
upper part of the stomach to the Pylorus, which it infolds with certain
branches, and goes to the hollow of the Liver. Other two Nerves also go unto
the bottom of the Stomach, from the branches which run along by the Roots of
the Ribs. And therefore it is no wonder, that when the Brain is smitten and
hurt, the Stomach is disturbed, and falls a vomiting, especially in the pain
called Hemicranea: As also that when the Stomach is misaffected, the Animal
Faculty languishes.

In the Stomach Fermentation of the Meats goes before Concoction, which The
Stomachs Fermentation.
Hippocrates inculcates in his book de Prisca Medicina. Because hard things
ought to be broken to pieces; and thick things as bones and shells, etc. in the
stomachs of Beasts, seem impossible to be melted by the natural heat alone,
unless somewhat else do cut them in pieces. This labor Petrus Severinus
attributes to Choler, which nevertheless according to the ordinary Course of
Nature is not found in the stomach, nor does it dissolve any hard meat, though
Painters use to temper their colors. De la Chamber attributes it to Spirits,
without which it can hardly be performed, Riolanus supposes that it proceeds
from the Relics of the Chyle, which have attained a fermenting faculty; it
concurs indeed, for a fermentative quality may be communicated to any thing:
but we must come to some first, thing, by which the Chylus is fermented, and
from whence the ferment of the first meat was derived, before the Relics of
the Chyle could arise. The greater part of Doctors do attribute this whole work
to Melancholy, which is carried by the Vas breve into the stomach, and of which
Melancholic persons, who are otherwise no good digesters, do often complain by
reason of its sharp taste. Which Melancholy* if it be understood of the acid
juice, it may be allowed. For any acid or sharp things taken in, as Vinegar,
and Meats steeped therein, Juice of Citrons, Oil of Sulphur or Vitriol, Cream
of Tartar, and the like, do ^ase and amend the weakness of the stomach. Also
without the Body Vinegar ferments the Earth and Milk, even as blackcholer does,
and the acidity of Vitriol ferments Treacle, and sour leven makes the bread
arise, etc.

Now Johannes Walaeus requires three things to Concoction, first some Three
things requisite to Concoction,
moisture to temper the meat and make it liquid, viz. Drink and Spittle; in the
next place, somewhat to cut and mince it as it were, as the thin sharp humor,
and lastly somewhat to melt and make liquid that which is cut, such as is heat,
wherewith in ravenous beasts and some Men, the chyle is made fluid, though they
do not always drink, I should not doubt, but that the Excrements of the third
Concoction, sticking to the Crust, as being still impraegnated with the virtue
of the parts nourished, do give some assistance to the Concoction, which when
they are fretted of, is impared, and so in long fasting men are not so able to
digest: And that the spittle besides moistening and tempering the meats, does
perform some other more noble work in Concoction, viz. prepares the meat in the
mouth, whereupon it comes to change its smells; and heals Tetters, and either
kills or chases away Scorpions and Spiders.

But what becomes of that acid Juice, when it has performed its office of
fermentation? H. Regius beleives that it remains after the expulsion of the
Chylus, to prick the stomach and provoke Appetite. But hunger is raised in the
sensible mouth of the stomach, and not in the bottom thereof, where this acid
juice is; also there would be hunger after the stomach is full. I should think
that it is expelled with the Chyle, and that then it is either therewith turned
into blood, or that in obstructions of the Mesentery, it goes downwards, and
raises disturbance.

The Action of the stomach is Coction which is termed Chylification. For the
Concoction is the Stomachs Act.
stomach is the Organ of the first Concoction, the beginning and preparation of
which Concoction is performed in the mouth, the middle in the bottom of the
Stomach, and the Conclusion in the small Guts. Now this Concoction is performed
by heat, not How it is made.
of the stomach only, but also of the Neighboring parts; as also by a faculty
which is naturally bred in the stomach of every Animal. Now it turns the meats
into a white Chylus or Juice, of a like substance, whiles both its Orisices
being shut very well, it contracts it self, and closely embraces the food. But
touching the whole manner of Concoction see the forecited Epistles of Walaeus.

Its use is to receive the Meat and Drink, which it does by reason of its The
use of the Stomach.
notable and large Cavity. And whereas it sometimes contains and breeds little
stones, as Gentilis and Zacutus have observed, as also a Toad, Worms, and other
things by me often observed; this is beside the Intention of Nature. And the
like we may say of an Infant conceived and formed there and voided out at the
mouth, the History whereof is described by Salmuth.

CHAP. X. Of the Guts in General.
THe Guts are oblong, round, hollow The Guts.
bodies variously wreathed about, joining with the Pylorus and reaching to the
Fundament; serving to receive the Chylus and the Excrements of the first
Concoction.

They have their name of Intestina inwards, because they are in the inmost seat
Why called Intestina.
of the Body [whence Tirtullian called the Crosses, the Intestina Trophaeorum,
the inwards of the Trophies] and so the Greeks term them Entera; some have
termed them Chordaj, and thence the Barbarians had their term Chordae; for
which cause also the strings of musical Instruments because they are made of
dried Guts are termed Chordae, Chords.

Their Magnitude in respect of the Contents of their Cavities, and the Their
greatness
thickness of their substance, is different, as shall be shown hereafter. The
weight of all of them dried, is according to the observation of Loselius, a
pound. Their length, for the most part does exceed the length of the person
whose they are six times, little more or less. Picolhomineus says they are a
foot and half shorter; they are reckoned to be seven times as long by
Laurentius, Paraeus and Riolanus, and before them by Celsus, who nevertheless
began to measure from the Oesophagus. Hippocrates says they are near upon
thirteen cubits, or not less then twelve: but the full stature of a man, hardly
exceeds three Cubits and an half. Flud in a certain Body an ell and half long,
found the Guts to be but nine else in length, so that no certain Measure can be
determined. It varies according to the Multitude of the windings, and the
greediness of the person in point of eating.

They have turnings and windings all The use of the turnings and windings of
the Guts.
over save at the beginning and end, that the Ingress and Egress might not be
hindered. Now the reason why they have these windings and turnings is. 1. That
the nutriment may not slip away, before Concoction be perfectly finished. Also
least if it should presently slip away, before the Chylus be distributed, we
should be compelled presently to eat more meat, and so should be hindered from
our business through greedyness of eating. Hence it is that living Creatures by
how much the way is streighter from their stomach to their Vent, by so much the
more greedy they are of eating; and the more their Guts are coiled, the more
abstinent they are: which Cabrolius observed in a very great eater, who had one
only Gut, bowed after the manner of a Greek Sigma. 3. That we might not be
continually going to stool, as it is with greedy Animals, seeing the Excrements
may lie long in those windings.

They are situate in the lowest Belly, the greater Cavity whereof they The^r
Situation.
fill up, sometimes they are forced to the right side, as I have seen in an
Hydropick Woman dissected. They are knit together by the Mesentery, by which,
and the Call coming between, they are tied unto the Back, and are propped up in
the Cavities of the Os Ilij.

They have a membranous Substance, like that of the Stomach; so Their Substance.
that they may be distended by Chyle, Dung, and Wind. But their Substance is
thicker in the thicker Guts: And the nearer they grow to an end, the thicker
they are, as the End of the Colon, and the Intestinum rectum.

This Substance of the Guts may be divided into three Coats: The first is
proper Their Coats.
and internal, and is in the small Guts wrinkled, in the Colon stretched out
into little Cells, being otherwise sufficiently nervous. A certain membranous
Crust as it were compasses about, bred of the Excrements of the third Their
Crust.


The Stomach is seen open, and the Bowels beneath the same and Joined thereto,
much in their natural Situation.
The X. TABLE.
The Explication of the FIGURE.
A. The Oesophagus or Gullet. B. The upper Orifice of the Stomach. bb. The
Stomach Nerves embracing this Orifice, rudely expressed. C. Pylorus or the
Porter. DD. The common ventricle of the Stomach separated. E. The first proper
Coat of the Stomach, being the middlemost. F. The second proper Coat of the
stomach, which is inmost and wrinkled. G. A portion of Duodenum. h. The passage
for Gall. IIII. The Guts Jejunum and Ileum, with Vessels creeping through the
same. K. The blind Gut, or the Wormfashion'd Appendix. LLLLL. The Gut Colon. M.
The Valve in the beginning of the Gut Colon, opened. mmm. The Ligament
containing the Cells of the Colon. NN. The straight Gut is here seen, the thin
Guts lying thereon being removed. O. The Sphincter Muscle of the Fundament. PP.
The Muscles which lift up the Fundament.


page. 23



Concoction of the Guts. 1. That the Mouths of the Mesaraick Veins may not be
stopped. 2. That neither they nor the inner Coat might be made hard and
callous, by the continual thoroughfare of the Chylus. Also the second is
proper, and the middle most, being strong and furnished with fleshy Fibers. The
third is common and external, being bred immediately of the Membranes of the
Mesenterium [save that where the Duodenum and Colon cleave to the Stomach, it
arises from the lower Membrane of the Call] but mediately from the Peritonaeum.
Of these two proper Membranes, the inner is often hurt in a Dysentery or bloody
Flux, that other remaining unhurt.

They have Fibers. not only transverse, as is commonly conceived, but of Their
Fibers.
all kinds: The innermost has oblique ones. the middlemost has transverse
ones. The right Fibers which are allotted for the safeguard of the transverse
ones, are fewer in the thin or small Guts, more in the large, especially the
right or the last Gut, which was to be strong, because it did collect hard
Excrements.

The Guts are covered on the outside with Fat, on the inside with a slimy
snotty Substance, that the Dung may thereby pass more freely, and that the Guts
may be duller in point of feeling.

For Vessels they have the Venae Lacteae or milkie Veins, which are chiefly
distributed Their Vessels.
between the common and proper Membranes, which carry the Chyle to the Liver;
and others from the Vena Portae, which are conceived to bring Blood for
Nourishment, but they rather carry back to the Liver the Blood which remains
after the Guts have received their Nourishment. They have also Arteries from
the Caeliaca for life, which by their motion preserve from purrefaction, but
especially to bring Nourishment from the Spleen to the Guts, which wanted such
kind of sustenance. They have Nerves from the sixth pare of Nerves. But Walaeus
conceives that the Guts have such great plenty of Arteries and Veins. 1. That
Excrements might be conveyed to the common shore, which are contained in the
Vessels, whence the Child in the Womb, though it take no meat in at the mouth,
yet has it Excrements in the Guts. 2. That greater plenty of Blood might be
carried through the Vena portae and the Liver, and might come to be perfected
by the Liver.

All the Guts are commonly divided, into the thin, or small, and the thick, or
Difference of the Guts.
large Guts. For though they make one continued Channel from the Pylorus to the
Fundament: Yet because this passage does vary, in Magnitude, Number of
Turnings, Substance, Situation, Figure, and Office, therefore is it
distinguished into diverse Guts.

The thin or small Guts, so called by Whether the thin Guts may be right said
to be uppermost?
reason of the thinness of their Membranes, are situate partly above, partly
beneath the Navil; and therefore they possess both the Umbilical Region and
Hypogastrium, which is not so in Dogs. Whereupon the Ancients taking Example
from Dogs, called the upper Guts thin, the lower thick: which is false in
Mankind. For a Man has more of the thick Guts above his Navil, and more of the
thin Guts beneath; seeing that which is the longest, is beneath; and the
Jejunum which is short is above. And therefore all the small Guts are in the
middle Region about the Navil. 1. Because they are the more noble. 2. That they
may be the more near to the Center of the Mesenterie, and consequently receive
Veins and Arteries immediately from the Mesenterie, and quickly conveigh the
Blood to the Liver. Now the small Guts are three: Duodenum, Jejunum, and Ileon.
And these perfect and distribute the Chyle: In as much as by reason of their
narrowness, every part of the Chylus may be touched, by their Coat and Vessels.
This Distribution is helped by the inbred Peristaltick motion, whereby the Guts
are contracted from the upper part downwards.

The Crassa Intestina or thick Guts, The thick Guts.
are so called, because they have thicker Coats; they contain the thick part of
the Chyle: And are made to collect, and for a season retain the Dung. And they
are three; Caecum, Colon, and Rectum. And they are situate by the sides of the
small Guts, which they wall about as it were, that they might give way to the
thin Guts, and that the thin Guts might not be oppressed by the thick.

The Use of all the Guts is, to be like Their Use.
the Earth, out of which the Mesaraick Veins suck Blood, and the Venae Lacteae
or milkie Veins suck Chyle. And the use of the thin Guts is, to concoct the
Chylus yet more in the passage, and to distribute the same. Of the thick Guts
to contain the Excrementitious Relics of the Chyle. viz. the Dung; also Winds
and Choler proceeding from the Liver. A Secundary use of the Guts being dried,
is to cure pains of the Cholick, and other Diseases of the Guts; and being
preternaturally depraved, to contain several sorts of Worms, and Duggs, and
Stones; also variously to be affected, of which Physicians are wont to treat.

CHAP. XI. Of the Guts in Particular.
THe first thin Gut, under which The Gut Duodenum.
the Sweetbread lies, especially in Dogs, is called DUODENUM. Galen terms it
Ecphisis, Herophilus, Dodecadactylon, as if it were just twelve fingers long;
though in the days and Bodies of ours, it is not found so long; nay it is
hardly four fingers long, unless men are grown less of stature then they were
anciently, which is not credible. Nor can we understand the fingers breath, of
which this Gut hardly attains to eight, unless peradventure the Ancients did
also comprehend the Pylorus in there mesuring.

It proceeds in the right side, from the Pylorus toward the Backbone, or
under the Stomach, where being joined to the Vertebra's of the Loins, by
membranous Ligaments, it defends right along, without any Circumvolution, and
is terminated, where the Windings and Wreathings begin.

It is thicker then the rest of the thin Guts; but has a more narrow Cavity,
least the Chylus should slip in too fast. I saw a large one at Padua, and
Aquapendent describes such another being puffed with Wind, such as that was,
mentioned by Trafelman, which had in it many Stones as big as Nutmegs, of an
Ash-color.

It has two Holes beneath, toward the Gut Jejunum; the one being the The
Holes of the said Gut.
outlet of the Exoler or Gall-carrying passage, which is the reason we find it
yellow in our Dissections, the other is the new passage of the Pancreas or
Sweetbread, invented by Wirsungus; which I have notwithstanding sometimes seen
grow together, and joined with one only Mouth.

Its peculiar Use assigned by Helmont, is to change the acid Cream brought out
of the Stomach, forthwith into a brackish Salt.

It has a proper Vein called Vena duodena.

It has an Artery from the right Branch of the Caeliaca.

The second is called JEJUNUM, because for the most part it is more empty then
The Gut Jejunum.
the rest, especially in Dissections. 1. By reason of the plenty and greatness
of the Mesaraicks [the milkie Veins] which in that place are as it were
infinite, and do presently suck out of the greatest part of the Chyle. 2. By
reason of the moistness of the Chyle passing through. 3. By reason of the
nearness of the Liver. 4. By reason of the Acrimony of Choler. For the
choleric or Gall-passage, enters in at the beginning of this Gut, or at the
End of the Duodenum, bringing Choler from the Liver to provoke Expulsion.

Its inner Membrane is longer then the Outer, and therefore it is wrinkled into
Foles, the better to stop the Chyle, slipping by.

Riolanus falsely says that Women have no Jejunum Intestinum, being deceived by
those, who either were dull-sighted, or finding this Gut filled, thought it
could not be the Jejunum. Laurentius observes, that it appears somewhat reddish,
by reason of the Neighborhood of the Liver.

It has Veins from the Mesenterica dextra, which are common to the rest of the
Guts, excepting the last, or rectum Intestinum, the straight Gut.

It has Arteries from the upper Mesenterick Artery.

Nerves from a Branch of the sixth pare, which is spread out unto the Roots of
the Ribs.

The third is called Ileon, because it is rouled so and twined, it is also for
The Gut Ileon.
that cause termed Volvulus, by reason of many Circumvolutions, which make for
the tarriance of the Meat, and for that cause it has fewer pleites or foldings.

It arises presently after the Jejunum, where few mesaraick

The Coats and Vessels of the Guts are explained in this TABLE.
The XI. TABLE.
The FIGURES Explained.
FIG. I. A Portion of the Gut together with the Mesaraick Vessels. AA. A
Portion of the Gut, as yet whole. BB. The External Coat of the Gut separated,
that the Carriage of the Vessels under it may be discerned. CC. The middle Coat
of the Guts, or the first proper Coat. DEF. The Mesenterick Vessels, of which D
points out the Vein, E the Artery, F the Nerve.


FIG. II. Expresses the Coats by themselves. GG. The common Coat of the Guts
separated. H. The middle Coat of the Guts.


FIG. III. I. The inmost Coat of the Guts with its Plaites elegantly expressed.


FIG. IIII. Presents the Muscles of the Intestinum rectum, or straight Gut. K.
A Portion of Intestinum rectum, or straight Gut, or Arse-gut. LL. The two
Muscles called Levatores Any, or Lifters up of the Fundament. M. The Sphincter
Muscle of the Arse.


page 25.



Veins are inserted.

It ends at the Caecum.

It is situate under the Navil, at the Flanks and Hips on each side.

It is the longest Gut, being near upon twenty one hands breadths in length; it
is one finger broad. But the Jejunum is not so long, viz. about twelve or
thirteen Handsbreadth long, and the little fingers in breadth, unless it be
puffed up with Wind. And as the Ileon is under the Navil, so the Jejunum
possesses well near all the space about the Navil, with its very many turnings
and windings.

This Ileon may frequently slip into the Cod, whence proceeds the Hernia
Rupture of the Guts.
Intestinalis, or Rupture of the Guts. And in this Gut happens the Volvulus or
Iliaca Passio, in which the Patient commonly The Passio Iliaca.
vomits Dung.

Riolanus has observed sometimes three Appendices in this Gut, resembling the
Intestinum caecum

The first thick Gut is called Caecum. 1. Because of the obscure Use it has in
The thick Guts. The Gut caecum, or the blind Gut.
persons grown up, howbeit in the Infant in the Womb, it is said to receive the
Excrements. Knobleth indeed says that it has a double Orifice, severed with a
membranous Partition, that by one it may receive from the Ileon, and by the
other deliver into the Colon; but we have not yet found this in any man, in
whom one and the same Orifice takes in and gives out. 2. Because it has only
one Hole, whence it is also called Monocolon. For it is a little Appendix like
a long Worm, which arising from the beginning of Colon, and the End of Ilium,
of a substance sufficiently thick, spreds it self upon the Colon like a twined
worm, and is annexed to the Membrane of the Peritonaeum; but by its End, it is
joined to the right Kidneys, the Peritonaeum coming between, and is quite free
and loose from the Mesenterie.

It is four fingers long, and as broad as ones thumb, but the Cavity thereof is
very strait. Riolanus did find it exceeding wide, and equal to the Stoma it
self, as I also have seen it. Sylvius did in many find it solid, without any
Followness, and in such persons, the Dung does go immediately from the Ileon
into the Colon. And Massa suspects that this Appendix is only bred when the
Child being from its Birth troubled with a Looseness, the liquid Dung passing
speedily by the Caecum, and not abiding therein, being frustrated of its
Office, it grows lean. Howbeit, I have seen it of the same thinness in a Child
new born.

The Ancients by the Caecum understood The Intestinum caecum, or blind Gut of
the Ancients.
that globous and capacious part, at the beginning of the Colon, which Celsus
and Rufus Ephesius intimate. For that it was known to the Ancients, contrary to
what Laurembergius imagins, I do hence prove, because 1. They dissected Beasts.
2. Pollux and Aristotle have set it down distinctly. 3. Galen has
distinguished it from the Colon, both by Use and Situation, placing the Caecum
on the right Hand, and the Colon on the left.

The Use of the Caecum is, not to be only for a mark or sign, as Hofman
imagines, But first to receive Excrements, least they slip down violently into
the Colon, and breed pains, and force us to be contiually going to stool. And
there some imagine the Dreggs or Excrements proceeding from cherries and
cherrystones, which have been voided sorty days after they were eaten, did lie
lurking. The Conciliator contends, that the Dung is here separated from all
chylous Matter. Helmont places the Fermentum stercoreum or turdie Leaven, which
turns the Excrements of the Chyle into plain Turds, in this place. 2. It may
help somewhat toward the Elaboration of the Chyle, either by sucking out of
the white Mesaraick Veins some neglected parcels of Chyle, as Galen said, or by
digesting the inobedient Chylus, which could not be tamed, in the Stomach and
small Guts, by reason of the multitude of Food taken in, as Zerbus supposes. 3.
It may be instead of a Ligament to sustain the Peritonaeum, least it fall down.
But Riolanus observed this very Gut Caecum in a certain Apothecary rouled to
the Groin, and in little Boys into their Cod, in whom it rested upon the Os
sacrum. Severinus suspects that the Reason why Dogs void their Dung with more
then ordinary straining, is, because the caecum is in Dogs very narrow at the
beginning, and a little oblique.

The second thick Gut is called Colon, from the torment which is sometimes The
Gut Colon.
therein caused, by colic pains. Some think it is so called from its Hollowness,
and because it shapes the Belly. Others derive it from a word signifying to
delay, because it gives a stop to the Excrements that are in passage. The
Author of a Treatise falsely ascribed to Galen, derives it a colando, from
straining, because it is narrow like a strainner, and involved, that there may
be a Gradation of the Excrement, and that it may not descend all at once.

Its Situation is various, for its beginning which is capacious and round, is
in Its Situation and Progress.
the right Flank, arising from the caecum at the right Kidney to which it
sticks; then it is turned back upwards under the Liver; where it is sometimes
knit to the Gallbladder, and is thereby dyed with a clay-color yellowishness:
It passes further, athwart, under the bottom of the Stomach, and on the left
hand is joined to the Spleen, with thin Membranes, and then it is tied to the
left Kidney, where it has very crooked Turnings, which are apt to detain both
Dung and Wind; and from thence it ends st^ong, upon the Rectum. Wherefore it
does a^ compass the whole Belly, and sometimes ascends, and otherwhile descends
(hence such as do their business, have commonly one Harvest after another
distinct) that the Excrements may be the longer detained, and not flow out all
on a sudden, and that we may not every foot be solicited to go to stool. To
which intent also serve its Magnitude and Cells. For;

It is commonly eight or nine hands-breath in length, and the thickest and
widest of all the Guts.

It has received Cells, that any hard Matter, not before sufficiently
digested, might be perfectly concocted, and at last through the milkie
Mesaraicks, which are carried to the Colon, that said Matter being concocted,
might be sent unto the Liver. And that these Cells might not be dissolved, and
that being collected into themselves, they might make the Cavities at times,
sometimes greater, and sometimes less.

A Ligament described by few, or a certain Band, as broad as an half finger, is
implanted through the middle thereof, on the upper part long-wise, and arising
from the Caecum, is termined in the Rectum. Moreover by reason of its
largeness; it has two strong Ligaments, one upwards, another downwards, that
it may be tied to the upper and lower Parts. Riolanus nevertheless accounts
these two Ligaments to be but one, opposite to the upper Ligament.

According to the Longitude of the Colon, there are extrinsecally observed
certain fat Appendices, from the Spleen to the beginning of the Rectum
Intestinum, as Riolanus and Spigelius have observed. Whose use is to moisten
the Gut, that the Excrements may slide down the more easily.

At the beginning of the Colon, a A Valve in the Gut Colon.
Valve is placed sufficiently thick and membranous, invented by Baubinus,
looking upwards, not downwards, as Laurentius writes: for the Excrements do
ascend and not descend, when they pass out of the Ileon into the Colon, by
reason of upper Situation of the Guts. But if the Natural settling of the
Excrements be considered, they descend making have out of the Body: And thus
Bartholinus and Sperlingerus are reconciled. The first Invention of this Valve,
seems to be long unto Solomon Alberts an Anatomist of Witteberg, as appears in
an Appendix to three Orations set forth by him, about the End, and from the
Observations of Schenkius, Lib. 3. Title de Ilio. Howbeit, besides Bauhinus
Varolus did also attribute the Invention thereof unto himself, who was a well
known Anatomist in the University of Padua, in the year 1572. And therefore
Riolanus conceives the first Invention thereof, ought to be attributed rather
to him then Bauhinus; But truly, it is in vain that he seeks to bereave him of
this commendation, seeing diverse Persons may observe one and the same thing, at
one or sundry times, without stealing the Invention one from another. For
Nature lies open to all diligent Enquires.

It is found after this manner: Water How it is found out?
poured or wind blown into the Gut Ileon, cannot pass through unless violently:
But Water does a little mar the Gut.

Touching its Figure or Shape and Number, Authors do not consent. For omitting
such as wholly deny the same; Bauhinus determines that it is only one, having
the figure of a Nail. Archangelus says, that there are three Valves at the
Caecum, as in the Heart, looking downwards. I have sought it at Padua in many
Bodies, and at other places, and always found it, but never more then one, and
that of an orbicular or circular Shape. Pavius to Hildanus and afterward
Falcoburgius, did not find out a membranous Valve, but rather a Ring or Circle
with an hanging brim. But the said Circle is nothing but a Valve, for some
Valves are found of a circular Figure, both in the Heart, and in other Veins.
The whole constitution of this Valve is elegantly described by that great
Practitioner Nicholas Tulpius, that it is a Circle on which hangs a Membrane,
two fingers broad, and so shaped that it is fit to shut the egress of
Intestinum Ileum. Before which there hangs a Cortin or slack veil as it were;
now the latitude of this Pendulous Membrane is very unequal; for where it looks
toward the Ileum, it diffuses it self loosely, to the quantity of near two
fingers breadth, but the farther from the place it is, the closelyer it is
strait'ned, so that about the middle of the Gut (for so far it runs) it is
either quite obliterated, and ends in to that Membranous compass, which
inwardly severs the Intestinum Colon a Caeco. From which unequal latitude,
there follows necessarily that same circular form, which the value expresses
being artificially extended: as the smaller picture faithfully expresses. Now
this Membrane is fastened above to that same fibrous circle which ends the
Colon, but it is fastened below or rather strongly held, by two very little
Membranes, proceeding on both sides from the side of that Orifice, through
which the thinner Guts disburthen themselves into the wider: the use of which
bones, is to hinder that the value do not easily totter, for they bind it to
the Ileum: But the lower part of the value does wave up and down loosely.

The use thereof is, that nothing may pass back out of the thick Guts into the
thin, be it Wind or Excrement, especially in a strong excretion or straining at
stool, or in costiveness of the Belly. Hence it is, that the matter of Clysters
cannot naturally reach unto the small Guts.

The Colon has Veins and Arteries under the Stomach from the Epiplois postica.
But in the left side it has the Haemorrhoidal Vein, and from the lower
Mesenterick, the Haemorrhoidal Artery.

The last thick Gut is termed RECTUM, because it goes straight out, The
Intestinum rectum, or the straight Gut.
without any turning, and ends at the Fundament; for it goes straight
downwards, from the top of the Os Sacrum to the extremity of the Crupper-bone,
to which it is Knit firmly, by the Peritonaeum, least it fall of: also it grows
in men to the Pispipe in the Yard; to the Neck of the Womb in Women, by
mediation of a Musculous substance. Whence springs the consent of these parts
in Men and Women, especially of the Womb and this Gut in Women, for the Gut
being exulcerated, oft-times the Excrement is cast out the female Privity.

It is long, as it were an Hand-breath and an half, and three fingers broad;
and Corpulent and thick, having Fat Appurtenances, growing thereto on the
outside.

It has Veins from the Hypogastrick branch of the Vena Cava, and Haemorrhoidal
Veins.

Four Nerves are inserted into the end thereof, which make this Gut very
sensible, as is apparent in the Tenesmus.

Its end is termed Podex or Anus, the Arse or Fundament, having three Muscles,
Touching the Fundament.
of which peradventure five may be made. The,

This TABLE sets forth that Valve which is found in the Guts.
The XII. TABLE.
The Explication of the FIGURE.
a. The Gut Ileum. b. Caecum or the blind Gut. ccc. Colon. dddd. The valve
hanging. e. The entrance of the Gut Ileum. ffffff. The Gut Colon slit open. gg.
The inner coat of the Gut Colon. hhh. The Valve lifted up. i. The beginning of
the Gut Ileum. kkk. The Circle. l. Its Connection with the Ileum.
a. The Gut Ileum. b. Caecum or the blind Gut. ccc. Colon. dddd. The valve
hanging. e. The entrance of the Gut Ileum. ffffff. The Gut Colon slit open. gg.
The inner coat of the Gut Colon. hhh. The Valve lifted up. i. The beginning of
the Gut Ileum. kkk. The Circle. l. Its Connection with the Ileum.


page 27



I. Is termed Sphincter The Sphincter Muscle.
or Any Constricter, the shutter or contractor of the Fundament, so that though
some part thereof may be cut of in Fistula's or other Diseases, yet is not
therefore the whole use thereof, quite taken away.

Galen and Fallopius and others do make two of this Muscle, because its upper
part is thicker; the inferior part is inseparably annexed to the Skin, as is
seen in the Forehead and Eyelids, and therefore Galen called this part the
skinny Muscle, or the fleshy Skin.

It arises from the lower Vertebra's of Os sacrum and is compassed with
transverse Fibers all a long the Fundament.

It is fastened on the forepart. 1. To the passage of the Bladder, by Fibrous
couplings. 2. To the Yard, to the Muscles whereof it gives beginning. 3. To the
Neck of the Womb. Behind to the Crupper-bone which lies under it. At the sides,
by Ligaments produced from the Os sacrum, into the Os Corae.

Its use is, to purse up the Fundament, that we may do our business when we
please. And therefore being palsied or otherwise hurt, it makes the dung to
come from a man whether he will or no: even as the Sphincter of the Bladder
being hurt, the piss flows out involuntarily.

II. and III. Two other Muscles have insertions into the upper part The Muscles
called Any Levatores, or Arse-lifters.
of the Sphincter, very much Commixed therewith. They are called Any Levatores
Arse-lifters. Because,

Their use is to draw the Fundament upwards into its own place again, after the
Excrements are voided. especially when we have been forced to strain hard at
stool. And therefore when they have been weakened or slacked, sometimes the
Fundament is drawn up with difficulty, and sometimes it continues hanging forth.

These Muscles are under the Bladder broad and thin, arising from the Ligaments
of the Share, the Os sacrum and Hip: from whence they are carried downwards, to
the right and left sides of the Fundament, which they compass about. But they
have a certain peculiar and distinct portion, growing to the Root and Neck of
the Yard, which may be counted a third and distinct Muscle. The use of these
Muscles ceases in those who have their Fundament shut up. Such a Case Fernelius
saw, And I saw the like at Padua in one named Anna, whose Fundament was so shut
up, that he voided his Excements by his mouth when concoction was finished,
having an Horn to put into his mouth for that end.

Chap. XII. Of the Mesentery.
THe Mesenterium is so called, because Mesentery why so called.
it is in the middle of the Guts, not because it is the middle Gut as Cicero
will have it [and Macrobius who follows him; for it does not partake of the
nature of a Gut, save in that it is Membranous, nor is there any defense for
Laurembergius, because we are rightly said to dwell in the middle of the world,
supposing the Earth to be a part of the World. Spigelius does more rightly
interpret

Here are described four kinds of Vessels disseminated through the Mesenterium,
as also the Pancreas is discovered, in its Natural Situation.
The XIII. TABLE.
The Explication of the FIGURE.
AA. The Convexe part of the Liver. B. The Concave part of the Liver. C. The
Gallbladder. D. The passage for the Gall. E. Part of the Gut Duodenum. F. The
Pancreas or Sweetbread whole in its proper place. GG. The Spleenic Vessels
detected by opening the Pancreas. H. The Spleen. II. The Mesenterick branch of
the Vena Portae. K. The Mesenterick Artery. L. A Nerve of the sixth part spread
up and down in the Mesentery. MMMM. The Guts cleaving to the Mesentery. N. The
beginning of the Intestinum Jejunum. OOOO. The Mesentery. PPPPPP. The Vessels
of the Mesentery, of which the black ones the Veins, those by the black ones
the Arteries; and the white ones signify the Nerves and (...) Veins. QQQQQ.
(...) through (...)


page 28

This TABLE expresses the Mesentery taken out of the Body.
The XIV. TABLE.
The Explication of the Figure.
A. The Center of the Mesentery, and that part of the Back, where it arises
from the Membranes of the Peritonaeum, which knit the great Artery and the Vena
Cava in this place, to the Vertebra's. BB. The great Kernel of the Mesentery,
which Asellius terms Pancreas, into which all the milkie Veins are knit
together. CC. Glandules or Kernels placed between the Vessels, which reach as
far as to the Guts. DD. EEE. Part of the Mesentery which ties the thin Guts to
the Back. F. G. Part of the Mesentery which is fastened to the Colon, from the
right Kidney to the Liver. G. H. The Membrane of the lower Call, which in this
place supplies the Office of the Mesentery, fastening that part of the Colon,
which is stretched out under the bottom of the stomach, unto the Back. H. I.
Part of the Mesentery, knitting together the Colon, drawn out from the Spleen
to the straight Gut. I. K. Part of the Mesentery, fastening the straight Gut
unto the Back. L. The two Membranes of the Mesenterium, drawn asunder by the
Nails, between which Vessels are carried, and the Fat and Kernels are
contained. M. The first Membrane of the Mesentery. N. The other Membrane of the
Mesentery.


page 29



the word Iutestinum in Cicero, for some midling bowel] but because like a
Circle it embraces the Guts round, and gathers them together into the form of a
Globe, and clothes them. It Is called also Mesaraeon: Gaza in Aristotle
translates it Lactes [in a large sense] thereby understanding that which
involves and wraps up the Lactes that is the Guts, and what ever is contained
in them.

It is one; but others divide it into the Mesaraeon or Mesenterium, and the Its
Division.
Meso-Colon. The former being in the middle of the belly and knitting together
the small Guts: the latter which knits up the Colon, in the right and left side
and in the lower part thereof, cleaves to the right Gut.

It Figure is very near Circular, and after it has been narrow in its rise, in
its Its Figure.
progress, at the Circumference it degenerates into very many foldings, that it
might gather in the length of the Guts: for one hands breadth of the Mesentry,
does embrace more then fourteen handsbreadths of the Guts in a narrow space. In
the sides it becomes oblong, especially on the left side, where it descends to
the Intestinum rectum. Whereupon Galen made a threefold Mesentery: a right,
left and middle.

Its Magnitude from the Center to the Circumference is a span: but its Its
Magnitude.
Longitude and Circumference is three else.

It Arises at the first and third Vertebra of Its Rise.
of the Loins, [which is thought to be the Cause of that great consent which is
between the Loins and the Guts] where Membranous Fibers are produced from the
Peritonaeum, which turn into strong Membranes,

Through which the Mesaraick Veins Its Vessels.
[both the Blood and the Chyle-bearers] being exceeding small and numerous, and
by little and little running together into fewer and greater, are disseminated.
[But of these more largely in the first Manual Chap. 3.] And after the same
manner the Arteries: [from the Caliaca, that they may carry arterial blood with
heat to the Mesentery and Guts for the Nutrition and Fermentation of each of
them and in no wise to draw chyle in a sound state of Body, or other things as
Varolius and Spigelius conceit. And that the blood is Circulated even in the
Mesentery, by means of these Arteries, I shall demonstrate hereafter against
Riolanus.] It receives also Nerves from those which are carried from the sixth
pair, to the roots of the Ribs, as also from the Nerves proceeding from the
Vertebra's of the Loins, that they may give the sense of Feeling to the
Mesentery, as is manifest in the bastard colic and other pains; and an obscure
motion in distribution of the chyle.

It has Kernels interposed to fill up the Its Kernels.
spaces, and to cherish the heat: but one greater then the rest it has at its
original which Asellius following Fallopius, terms Pancreas: different from the
other Pancreas situate under the Stomach and Duodenum. Out of this he fetches
the Original of the milky Veins, with probability enough, because there they
grow all into one, and from hence are carried both downwards and upwards to the
Liver* Add hereunto, that it is in color like those Veins; and the Veins
themselves have in this place somewhat proper, viz. that they are interwoven in
the whole Body of this Pancreas, with wonderful turnings, twistings, and
twinings.

It is surrounded with Fat as in the Call, which proceeds from fat blood slipped
out of the Vessels, and retained by the density of the Membranes, and so
congeled; that it may cherish the Heat of those Parts, and further the
preparation of Chyle.

The Use of these Kernels is, 1. To prop up and support sundry Distributions
The Use of the Kernels.
of the Branches of Vena porta and Arteria magna. Hence it is, that about the
Center of the Mesenterie are the greatest Kernels, because there is the
Distribution of the greater and more collected Vessels. Moreover, these
Glandules or Kernels, when they are at any time troubled with a scirrhous hard
Tumor; there follows a Leanness of the whole Body, because they bear hard, and
lie upon the branches of the Vena portae, and of the milkie Vein, so that the
Nourishment cannot be freely carried through the said Veins. 2. To moisten the
Guts, with the Humors which they suck out of the Parts, and promote Digestion
by way of boiling as it were. Which Use Spigelius denies, because there are
Animals that have not these Glandules, and nevertheless are fat; and others
though they have these, are lean. Which may happen without any prejudice to my
assertion, because these former Animals have such good Juice, as needs no
purification; the latter have so little nutritive Juice, that it cannot
sufficiently be depurated by these Glandules. And therefore, 3. They serve to
suck superfluous Humors out of the Guts, which was Hippocrates his Opinion. I
add 4. A peculiar Use, viz. to receive that plenty of milkie Veins which passes
that way, and to keep some portion of the Chyle, because 1. It is of like use
with that greater middle Kernel, and its substance is the same with that which
exceeds this only in magnitude, because greater milkie Veins pass that way. 2.
I observed that in Fishes, especially in a Lump-fish male and female, besides
the great white one, the others did also send forth a white Juice. 3. This
being granted, both Atrophia and other Diseases are better understood, to which
Opinion also Asellius seems to have inclined. And whereas Riolanus makes the
Seat and Root of al King's Evil swellings to be in these Kernels, and says they
never show themselves on the outside of the Body, except the Mesenterie be
first diseased with the same kind of Swellings, is not likely, for 1. Though
they may be remote and accidental causes. 2. There is no communion between
these kind of Swellings in the Head, and the Kernels of the Mesenterie. 3. Many
have the King's Evil swellings, in whom these Kernels are perfectly sound. 4.
All would be subject to such Swellings, because all have these Kernels. 5.
Those people dwelling under the Alps, that are so subject to these Swellings,
should have their Mesenterie differing from those that are not so troubled. 6.
The said Swellings are filled by any kind of Humor proceeding from any Region
of the Body.

The Use of the Mesenterie is to be the common Band of the Guts, whereby The
Use of the Mesenterie.
they are knit to the Vertebra's of the Loins.

And the Use of its two Membranes, is And of its Membranes.
that through them the Vessels may pass safer unto the Guts.

Chap. XIII. Of the Pancreas, or Sweetbread.
THe Word Pancreas signifies Allflesh, The Substance of the Pancreas.
whereas this part should rather be called All-kernel, its Substance being
wholly glandulous, loose it is and shapeless, three or four fingers long,
sometimes six or seven, and more, clothed with a thin Membrane from the
Peritonaeum* and in fat Bodies, it seems all made of Fat, which others term
dirty fat and moisture; some Calicreas the Sweetbread or White-bread, and
Lactes; because of its milkie whiteness and softness.

Its Situation is under the lower part of the Stomach, and the bottom thereof,
Its Situation*
the Duodenum and Vena portae, as far as the Regions of the Liver and Spleen.

Now its Original is at the first Vertebra Original.
of the Loins. In the middle its Parenchyma is white.

And it has for Veins the Splenick Its Vessels.
Branch; for Arteries the left Branch of Arteria Coeliaca; for Nerves those of
the sixt-pares branches, which go to the Stomach and Duodenum, and it has also
little Kernels.

Besides all which, it has also another Passage which is membranous, and of a
peculiar Nature by it self, spread out all along the Pancreas, sometimes in a
strait Line, sometimes in a crooked Line, which has been as yet described by no
Anatomist, being first discovered at Padua, when I was there, in the year 1642.
by John George Versungus, a very diligent Anatomist, but killed by cruel Fate;
it is remarkable for its Cavity, and the strength of the Walls thereof. I
believe Fallopius did not know it. He mentions indeed small Passages, ending
into the Pancreas and Kernels next it; but because this passage is only one, he
rather saw through a mist the milkie Veins, dispersed into the Pancreas of the
Mesenterie and other Kernels. It is for the most part single, though the same
Party had found it double running one by another in parallel Lines: A short one
in the ordinary place, and beneath it a larger. The Orifice whereof opens
widely into the Gut Duodenum, near the Entrance of the Gal-passage, with which
it is sometimes joined by one and the same Mouth, but more frequently (as I
found with the Author) by a different but neighboring Circle. The little Valve
situate before the egress thereof, looking outward, keeps the Probe from
entering this new passage, being thrust in by the Duodenum. And therefore in a
Living creature, being bound toward the Gut, it swells more and more, but
beyond it is presently emptyed, if we believe Jacobus Baccius, which is an
Experiment hard to make for before that this passage which lies entangled and
encombred can be freed, or bound, the Creature dies. From thence this passage
creeps through the whole Body of the Pancreas, spreading out on both sides
infinite little Branches, until by narrower but orderly disposed twigs, it goes
by little and little straight forward, and is silently terminated toward the
Spleen. But it goes not into the Spleen, although Folius has assured me, that
he has observed it to go thereinto. Peradventure that was against Nature, nor
seems it feasible, because the Branches are first obliterated by an orderly
defect, ere they touch the Spleen, and there is no cavity there about, though
an eminent one toward In this TABLE both the Body of the Pancreas together
with the new Wirsungian Passage, as also the Vessels drawn there through to the
Spleen, are expressed.
The XV. TABLE.
The Explication of the FIGURES.
FIG. I. AAA. The Pancreas dissected. BB. The new Passage found in the
Pancrras. cccc. Little Branches of the said Passage. d. The Orifice thereof. e.
The Orifice of the Choler-passage. ff. The Choler-passage. ggg. Part of the Gut
Duodenum. HH. The Ramus Splenicus. II. The Spleenick Artery. K. A Portion of
the Arteria Caeliaca. LLL. Anastomoses or Conjunctions of the Mouths of the
Spleenick Vein and Artery. M. The Hemorrhoidal Branch of the Spleenick Vein.
NN. The Body of the Spleen. OO. The Ingress of the Vessels in the Spleen.


FIG. II. A. The unequal part of the Spleen. BB. The Spleens Membrane separated.
C. The flesh of the Spleen, which is blackish.


FIG. III. AAA. The concave part of the Spleen which receives the Vessels. B.
The spleenick Vein. C. The spleenick Artery.


page 31

the Guts. In which Cavity (truly) there is no conspicuous Humor, save that a
Probe being thrust in, is for the most part died with a yellow choleric
color, the Walls thereof being colored with the like tincture, so that Choler
seems to be therein contained, by the ordinary Law of Nature, which Johannes
van Horn likewise a Friend of mine saw at Venice, in a choleric looseness, the
said Vessel being evidently full of Gall or Choler. And therefore this new
found passages

Use, is not to carry Chylus ut of the Duodenum into the Spleen, bo use 1. Its
Use.
It does not reach to the Spleen. 2. A Valve hinders the Ingress. Nor does it
serve to carry Melancholy out of the Spleen, to which use serve the Capsulae
atrabilariae, the black Choler boxes. Nor to carry fermentative Juice unto the
Stomach, as Horstius Junior ingeniously feignes, Because 1. Such Juice is not
bred in the Pancreas, which is a glandulous Body. 2. The way is more ready to
that purpose, from the Spleen; this being a more troublesome and encombred
passage, for it would be troubled by meeting the Chylus in the Duodenum, and
would be infected by the nearness of the Gall-passage. 3. Never any such Juice
seen in this passage. 4. Who will be bound that it shall be able to pass beyond
the Pylorus? Nor is it to prepare Chylus, which Baccius affirms to be found in
living Creatures. Nor to nourish the Pancreas, seeing that Humor is therefore
unfit, and the coeliack Arteries do that work, but for the common good. But
how, or which way shall it return to the Liver? For he rightly denies it to the
Spleen. Shall it return to the Duodenum, and from thence to the Mesentery?
There would be an infinite Circulation. He shall not easily find it in living
Anatomies; also he confounds the Pancreas with the large Kernel of the
Mesentery. Nor finally does it send the Excrements of the Chyle to the
Duodenum, as Licetus, Riolanus, and Vestingus conceive; for in this Passage no
Chyle is seen, but yellow Walls. Moreover the refuse of the Chyle is already
voided by stool, nor does the Chyle part with any new Excrement, till it
undergo a new change in the Veins of the Liver. Now sure it is, that out of the
Pancreas it self, whose proper passage it is, and in which it begins, and is
ended, somewhat is thereby voided into the Guts, and it does as I conjecture.

1. Purge forth Choler, whether bred in the Digestion of the Pancreas, or in
the Spleen, for each of these are taken to be Auxiliary-Livers. And it is as it
were the Bladder-gall of the Spleen, which is conveniently joined by its mouth,
to the other passage of the Livers-Gall-bladder, by the Duodenum, so that look
what use the one affords to the Liver, the same the other may be supposed to
afford to the Spleen. And to prevent our doubting, the Humor of Choler daubs
the inside of this Passage. To which Opinion of mine, very many Learned men
have asserted, though in some things they dissent.

2. To receive into it self the Excrements of Arterial Blood from the Heart and
Spleen, though the neighboring Branches of Arteria Coeliaca.

3. Riolanus counts it a profitable Use, that by this Passage, in vomiting,
diverse Humors are purged out, and the Redundancies of the first Region; and
consequently the fomenting Humors which maintain longlasting and malignant
Fevers and chronical Diseases, and which lurks in the Pancreas, is this way
voided forth. And I may well ad somewhat to this most learned Invention. That
not only by Vomit, but also by stool, through the assistance of Choler-purgers,
hot choleric Distempers may be by this Passage discharged, which burn the
Mesentery, Spleen, Arteries, and Heart it self. And hence proceed choleric
stools in burning Fevers, and blood in a Dysentery or Bloody Flux, by reason
of the large Inundation of Choler, continually flowing from hence into the
Guts; which is so much the more hard to cure, by how much the Pancreas does lie
out of the reach of Medicaments, being deeply whelmed among the Bowels.

The Use of the Pancreas it self is, 1. To prop and support Vessels passing The
Use of the Pancreas.
through the same, as the Branches of Vena porta, of the Coeliack Artery, and
of the Nerves: Especially the Ramus Splenicus. 2. To assist the Concoction of
the Stomach, which is performed in Heat and Moisture. 3. To serve as a cushion
under the Stomach. And therefore that old Woman of Rome in whom it was become
stoney, fell first into a continual Vomiting, afterward into an Atrophy or
consuming of flesh, and at last died thereof, as Panarolus has it in his
Observations. 4. To suck out the wheyish Blood which slides along that way, and
through help of the Kernels to purge it. 5. In sickly and melancholic Bodies,
to perform the Office of the Spleen, which Riolanus shows from the Example of
the most renowned Thuanus: Whose Pancreas or Sweetbread, did equal the Liver in
amplitude and weight, yet was it wholly scirrhous; but his Liver hard and round
as a ball, and full of Phlegm like Potters-clay, and his Spleen was found so
small, that it hardly weighed an ounce.

CHAP. XIV. Touching the Liver.
ANd so much may suffice to have said touching the Organs destined to primary
Digestion or Chylification, we come now to those which are any ways assisting
the second Concoction or Sanguification. And the Principal of these is the
Liver.

The Liver is an Organick Part seated in the Lower Belly, just under the
Diaphragma or Midriff, on the right side, being the Organ of Blood-making, and
the beginning of the Veins.

It has its Name in Greek, from a Word that signifies want or Indigency, Why
the Liver is the Original of the Veins?
because it supplies the want of the Parts of the Body, the Latins call it
Jecur, as if you would say juxta Cor, near the Heart. It Is called the Principle
or Beginning of the Veins, because therein the Roots of two of the greatest
Veins appear dispersed, viz. of the Cava and Portae, as Roots implanted in the
Earth. The milkie Veins are supposed to arise from the Pancreas: Yet Trunks and
Branches of them are also to be seen in the Liver. Now the Roots of Trees
dispersed in the Earth, do grow together into a Trunk without the Earth. The
Vena arteriosa of the Heart, is in truth an Artery: And the Arteria venosa, is
a Vein, and may owe its Original to the Liver, because in a Child in the Womb,
it is joined with the cava, and opens it self thereinto by an Anastomosis: And
besides, it carries Blood to the Heart, but brings none from it, if there be
any force in this Argument.

The Liver is commonly but one in Number, seldom two: And more seldom Its
Number.
is the Liver quite wanting, as in Matthias Ortelius.

It is situate in the lowest Belly, under Its Situation.
the Septum transversum (which also Hippocrates and Aristotie acknowledged) by
the Ribs, and for the greater part in the right Hypochondrium, a fingers
breadth distant there from, that the motion thereof might not be hindered:
Therefore a Swelling in the Liver causes shortness of breath. In Birds it lies
equally on both sides: As also for the most part in Dogs which have a thin and
long Spleen. In Man it seldom changes its place, so as the Liver should be in
the left, the Spleen in the right side, which Gemma and Spererius have
observed. It rests lightly upon the former and upper part of the Stomach,
especially on the right side, for otherwise some part thereof reaches to the
left side also, and sometimes the greatest part, the Spleen being very small.
But some conceive that Aristotle was ignorant of the Situation of the Liver,
because the said Huper de to Diazoma, etc. which they interpret, above the
Septum is the Liver seated. But the Philosoper is thus to be translated: It is
placed on the other side, or beyond the Septum transversum; for Huper with an
Accusative signifies beyond, but with a Genetive, it signifies above.

And by reason of the Midriff, to which Its Figure.
it was to give way, it has its upper and outward Figure sufficiently round,
unequal or gibbous, even and smooth, where also there is an oblong Cavity,
behind at the Passage of Vena cava. And because of the Stomach it has received
a Figure which is hollow on the inner and lower side, which is termed its
simous or saddle side, and it is more uneven then the other having in it two
hollownesses: One on the right hand for the Gallbladder; another on the left,
for the Stomach to pass by. So that the Liver is on the right side of an ample
roundness, but on the left it is narrow and sharp.

The Liver is divided by some, into the Its Division.
right and left part: between which there is a small cleft or chink, where the
Umbilical A Man's Liver is not divided into Laps or Scollops.
Vein enters. Otherwise for the most part, it is entire in a Man and undivided,
save that Spigelius observed here The XVI. TABLE.
The Explication of the FIGURES.
FIG. I. Expresses the Liver taken out of the Body, and especially the hollow
side thereof. AAA. The Liver in its hollow side, clothed with its Coat and
ragged Nap. B. The Vena Portae, and its Egress out of the hollow side of the
Liver. CC. Two Trunks of Vena Cava, by the tuberant or bossie part of the
Liver. D. The going forth of the Navil-Vein from out the Liver. EE. The
Gallbladder seated in the hollow part of the Liver. F. The Gall-passage,
called Cysticus Felleus. G. The other Gall-passage called Hepaticus. H. An
Artery which comes from the Ramus Caeliacus to the hollow part of the Liver. I.
A branch of this Artery, which enters the Liver. KK. Another branch of the same
Artery which goes unto the Gallbladder. L. A Nerve of the sixth pair which goes
unto the Liver. M. A small Lap or Scollup stretched out unto the Call, by which
the Liver being full of water, is sometimes emptied. NN. Certain Eminencies of
the Liver, anciently termed Portae the Gates. a. The bottom of the
Gallbladder, hanging without the Liver. d. The common Channel, made up by the
passages of Ramus Hepaticus.


FIG. II. Shows the Vessels of the Liver freed from the Parenchyma or Fleshy
substance thereof, with the Gallbladder. AA. A portion of Vena Cava. BB. A
portion of the Trunk of Vena Porta, passing forth of the Liver. CC. The
Gallbladder. DD. The Navil-Vein ending into a branch of Vena Porta. EEEEEEE.
The branches of Vena* Porta, dispersed through the whole Parenchyma of the
Liver. FFFF. The branches of Vena Cava, especially those which are distributed
through the upper parts of the Liver, and joined in sundry places with the
branches of Porta. GGGG. The most remarkable Anastomoses or joining together of
the Mouths of Vena Cava and Porta. HHHH. The extremities of the said Veins,
called Capiliary Veins, because of their smalness. a. The Meatus Cysticus or
passage into the Gallbladder.


page 33*

a certain little lobe, of softer Flesh then the rest of the Liver, compassed
with a thin and subtle Membrane, which is carried out into the Call, and
sometimes empties the Liver when it is full of Blood. In this little and soft
lobe, I have manifestl^ (...) certain ^il^ Veins inserted in the cutting up of
Fishes; so that according to the diversity of the parts of the Liver, we have
now the Inserting of t^^^ ^essels* which has hitherto been unobserv^^* But in
B^^^^s (excepting an Ox and some others) it is divided into di^ which they call
Lobes of Scollops, wherewith they say the Stomach is covered and contained, as
with so many fingers. Galen therefore and Plempius have done ill to say that
Man's Liver is divided Naturally into Lobes, Laps, and Scollops, for
preternaturally and rarely it is indeed so divided, as Fernelius, Sylvius, and
Gemma have observed. Galen is to be excused, because he took the Extuberances
of the Liver made of the Trunks of the Vessels for Lobes. And Horstius junior
does learnedly refute Plempius, for giving out the Clefts, Cavities, and
Extuberances of the Liver, for Lobes perfectly distinct.

The Greatness and thickness thereof, is remarkable and exceeding great in Its
Magnitude.
a man (as is his Brain) not only for Nutrition as in brutes, but for the
breeding of Animal Spirits, which are often dissipated (and they are bred of
the Vital Spirit, as it is bred of Blood. Yet it is greater then ordinary in
bodies that are of a cold Complexion, and in fearful Persons and great Eaters,
to augment the Heat of the Heart. In persons dead of a Comsumption, I have
sometimes seen an exceeding great Liver, four or five times bigger then
ordinary, and sometimes again very exceeding little. And others have found a
very small Liver, and sometimes no Liver, or the Liver consumed away; and a
great and strong Spleen performing its Office. Rhasis and Abensina gather the
greatness of the Liver from the length of a bodies singers.

It is compassed with a thin Membrane, springing from one of the Its Membrane.
Membranes of the Veins, which has its Original from the Peritonaeum. In this
there arise little bladders of water, from whence the Dropsy come, Witness
Platerus. I have seen of these bladders in a she Goat, many in number,
whiteish, which being cut open, were found to contain within a single coat or
skin, wheyish Humor, with snotty Phlegm, and another yellow substance, whether
through a fault in Nature, or because the Goat was camed. I have more then once
found intertwisted ropes of Worms, in other Membranes of the Liver.

It is fastened by three strong Ligaments. 1. To the Belly, by the umbelicalis
Its Connection.
Vena, or Navil-vein, which after the Birth, is in grown Persons dried up, and
turns to a Ligament, least the Midriff should dangle too much, and should hang
too low down. 2. Above to the Midriff, on the right side, by a broad membranous
and thin Ligament, but yet a strong one arising from the Peritonaeum, which the
Midriff undercircles; and this is called the Ligamentum suspensorium or hanging
Ligament. 3. Also above to the Diaphragma, but on the left hand, by another
Ligament sprung from the Peritonaeum, round, and exceeding strong: Also in its
after-part where the Vena cava passes, i^ cleavs by its bunchy side to the
Peritonaeum. Riolanus reckons these three Ligaments for one, because he
contends that the umbelical Vein is dried up, which being carried through a
duplicature or folding of the Peritonaeum, has for its Companion the Membrane
it self, which being rouled back over the Liver, runs out upwards and downwards
to the Diaphragma it self, which it invests and fastens. But it is al one case.
For Ligaments are termed sundry, because they fasten and suspend diverse parts
of the Liver, although the two latter arise from the Peritonaeum. Now therefore
according to his reckoning, there will be two Ligaments, ^^^ one only; the
former from the Umbelical, and the other from the Peritonaeum. The fourth
Ligament annexed to the mucronata Cartilago, at the Cleft of the Liver, is no
pecular one, but must be reckoned as part of our second Ligament.

It has a Substance red and soft [so Its Substance.
that with a little stick it may be beaten off, and separated from the Vessels
interwoven, either when it is boiled or being raw] spread about the Vessels,
like congealed blood, for which cause it is termed Parenchyma, that is to say
an Effusion or shedding forth of blood, because it is poured about the Vessels,
and fills the spaces between them [in some kind of fishes it seems to be a
congealed Fat, out of which an Oil is boiled to burn in Lamps. Yet is it hardly
corrupted; for Riolanus has observed that a Liver having been accidentally
kept a year together, has remained incorrupt. In substance it is most like an
Oxes Liver, and being boiled; differs not therefrom, neither in consistence,
color, nor taste, and therefore our flesh is more like that of Oxen then of
Swine.

The Color of a sound Liver is ruddie [but Its Color.
if it be quite void of blood, or boiled, we may rightly say with Gordonius,
that it is whiteish, as in an Embryo, before affusion of blood be made. But we
shall find it very large and red, in Children new born, of a good Constitution.
I have demonstrated it to be yellow, in the fish called a Lump. In a Lamprey it
is green (which makes Bronzerus dispute touching the Principallity of the
Liver) though the blood be red, whether it have contracted its color here, or
in the Heart, or from it self] In some sick persons, as those which have the
Dropsy, it is very pale, as also the Spleen and Kidneys.

Now those Vessels in the Liver, are the Its Vessels.
Roots of Vena portae and cava, (with a few [to a man's first thinking, but upon
serious Examination according to the Observation of Walaeus, an innumerable
company of] small Arteries interposed, of a whiter color, dispersed from the
Coeliaca, through the saddle part thereof) [partly that they might nourish the
Liver, and warm it thoroughly with the heat of the heart the branches of Vena
portae assisting likewise to the same intent; partly that by the motion of the
Pulse, and the necessity of running back, it may assist and provoke the passage
of the blood out of the Liver according to the conjecture of Slegelius. For
whereas Galen tells us that the Liver is cooled by the Arteries, that is not
consonant to truth: For they are hot, and by their motion further the blood,
and draw it to those parts wherein they are implanted;] which appear distinct,
the flesh or Parenchyma of the Live* being taken away, how they are carried
this way and that way, without order, among which also small branches are
disseminated, which afterward unite into one common Passage, and so carry
Choler into the Gallbladder. Now it is conjoined with the Roots of Porta, that
there the Blood may be separated from the Choler. But more Roots of the Porta
are spread up and down here and there through the lower part of the Liver, very
few through the upper part: Contrariwise, more of the Roots of the Cava are
carried through the upper and tuberous, or bossie part thereof, and fewer
through the hollow or saddle part. To these must be added the Roots of the
Milkie Veins. Asellius did sometimes observe their trunk to be in the Liver. But
he did not precisely add the place, which I have determined to be in the third
Lobe.

The Anastomoses or Conjunctions of Their Anastomoses.
the Roots of Vena Porta and Vena Cava, are peculiarly to be observed. For
rejecting those who altogether deny the Union of these Veins, or who conceive
that they are obscurely and hardly known: [among whom Harvey and Riolanus are
lately come upon the stage, the former of whom could no where find any
Anastomosis, either in the Liver, Spleen, or any other Bowel, though they had
been boiled, till the whole Parenchyma would crumble in pieces, and was
separated like dust from all the strings of the Vessels, with a needle. Only he
observed this one thing, in a fresh Liver, viz. that all the branches of Vena
Cava creeping along the bossie part of the Liver, have Coats like selves full
of infinite little holes, as being made for the draught of the Body, to receive
such Blood as settles there: but that the branches of the Vena Portae are not
so but are divided into boughs, and that every where the branches of both, do
run out to the highest Eminency of the bossie side of the Bowel, without
Anastomoses. But the Porta has likewise very many holes great and little, as
the Cava has, some of which will admit the probe, others not, only they make
certain Cavities covered with a thin Membrane. Whence it is apparent, that the
blood is stayed by those closed holes and not strained out, some of them being*
covered with a Coat, Riolanus inspired by the same Spirit, does strongly oppose
the Anastomoses of the Vena Cava and Portae least he should be forced to admit
the Circulation of the Blood in that Place. He was afraid that the concocted
liquor should be confounded and mixed with the unconcocted. And what if they be
confounded and jumbled together? The Chymus being changed into imperfect blood
is confounded coming out of the milky Veins, with that which is contained in
the Cava, for both of them are to be perfected in the Heart. And the other
which flows out of Porta, prepares both with its acid juice. But be it how it
will be, the Authority of all Anatomists does assert those Anastomoses from the
times of Erasistratus and Galen to our days, because it is manifest to such as
search diligently, that these roots are joined together, sometimes athwart, so
that one lies over the middle of another as it were, sometimes the extremities
of one Vein touch the Extremities or ends of another, otherwhiles the ends of
one touch the middle of the other; and sometimes they touch not one another at
all; peradventure where the Branches of the Liver serve only for Nutrition.
Bauhinus wishes us chiefly to observe a remarkable Anastomosis, which resembles
a channel, and is as it were a common and continued passage, out of the Roots
of Porta into the Roots of Cava, admitting a pretty big Probe. But because we
cannot rely upon naked Authorities, experience must be called by us to counsel,
which does necessarily persuade us that there are such Anastomoses or Unions of
the Mouths of the Vesseis, by reason of the passage of the Blood out of the
milky Veins and the Venae Porrae, unto the Cava, and out of the manifest
Arteries, seeing the passage only through the flesh cannot suffice, in a quick
and plentiful Flux. I confess all the kinds of Anastomoses are not appearent to
the Eye as to be seen open, in dead bodies, though no man can therefore deny
that there are such things; but some of them are insensible, which admit
neither Probe not Wind, and some admit Wind and nothing else. The Renowned
Walaeus observed and found by experience, that the Veins of the Porta are in
the Liver no where opened into the greater branch of Vena Cava, but that the
very smallest branches of Vena Porta, do open into the smallest branches of the
Vena Cava, as he observed in a Liver blown up with wind, after the flesh was
taken away, and floating upon water. I have in an Oxes Liver curiously sought
for apparent Anastomoses, because there they must needs be visible because of
the greatness, following the example of the most learned Slegelius. But the
very truth is they are not visible to the Eye: the Vessels indeed are diverse
ways interwoven and twisted one among another; Trunk with Trunk, branches of
the Trunkes, either with the Trunk of another Vein, or with little branches;
and that either in the middle of those little branches, or in the extremities,
even as we see both the Vessels cleave together in the Womb-cake: But a Probe
finds no entrance, by any open hole of an Anastomosis. Nevertheless, it is not
to be denied, but that in living* Bodies there is a passage known to Nature
though unknown to us by reason of the necessity of a through passage. Which I
the rather believe, because that in the conjunction of the Vessels, yea even of
the greater, where the Anastomoses seems shut, the Coat is extraordinary thin
and for the most part single, as appears by its transparency, which in Living
Bodies being ratified by heat and motion, does easily suffer the blood to pass
through.

By these Unions therefore of the Roots of the Vena Cava and the Vena Portae,
the Blood may pass through: And by them likewise the peccant matter passes,
when we Evacuate the habit of the Body by Purgations. Not that it should be
carried out of the Porta to the Mesentery, as has been hitherto believed, but
so as thence to pass through the Heart, and be emptied out through the
Caeliacal Arteries, and thence through the stomach or the Gall-Conduits into
the Guts, forced along by virtue of the purging Medicament.

Those Anastomoses are likewise to be observed, by which the small Veins of the
Gallbladder, are joined to the Branches of Vena Portae and Vena Cava.

The Roots of Vena Portae, do by little The Original of the Veins.
and little toward the lower part become smaller and greater, until they make
one Trunk, which is called Vena Porta, the Gate-Vein: So also the Roots of the
Cava, above and in the forepart do altogether make up one Trunk; before the
going out whereof, certain Circles are placed, here and there in the greater
branches, being of a Membranous substance and very like to Valves, sometimes
thicker, other whiles thinner and like Cobwebs, which were first discovered by
Stephanus* and after by Conringius in an Oxes Liver; and I likewise found them,
looking toward the larger trunk, which hinder the return of blood, not so much
of that which is impure and dreggy, as of the pair being once gone out to the
Heart: afterward, as soon as it comes to the Liver, it is divided into two
great branches, the ascendent and descendent; and hence it is that they say,
the Cava arises from the upper or bossie part of the Liver, and the Vena Portae
from the lower and hollow part.

The Liver has two Nerves from the sixth pair, one from the Stomach, another
from the Costal, dispersed only through its Coat, and not through its substance
(as Vesalius will have it) that in its inmost body, it may be void of sense, in
regard of so many motions of humors. And therefore the pains in this part are,
dull and rather a kind of Heavyness then pain. Yet Riolanus has observed, that
two remarkable little Nerves do accompany the Vena Portae, and go into the very
substance of the Liver.

The Action of the Liver is Sanguification. The place of Blood-making, the
Matter and Efficien.
For of the Chylus ^rawn by the Mesaraick milky veins, ^^e Liver makes Blood;
and the Blood i^ made This TABLE shows both sides of the Liver and the
Gallbladder, Distinct one from another.
The XVII. TABLE*
The Explication of the FIGURE.
FIG. I. AA. The Convexe or Bossie side of the Liver. B. The Livers Membrane
Separated. CC. The Ligament of the Liver called Sep^ale. DD. The coming forth
of Vena Cava, out of the upper part of the Liver.


FIG. II. AA. The concave part of the Liver turned up. B. A Lobe or Scollup of
the Liver to which the Call joins. C. A cleft of the Liver, out of which the
Navil-Vein D. descends. E. The Gallbladder. F. The Gallbladder Channel. GG.
The Choler-passage, ending into the Duodenum H. I. The trunk of Vena Portae
descending from the Liver. K. The Right Hand Coeliacal Artery. L. A Nerve
brought unto the Liver.


FIG. III. A. The bottom of the Gallbladder. B. A Cavity at the rise of the
Neck of the Gallbladder. C. The Neck of the Gallbladder. DD. The Passage of
the Gallbladder between the roots of the Vena Portae F. and of the Cavae G.
dispersed through the substance of the Liver. E. The concourse of the passages
of the Gallbladder. H. The Porus Biliarius or Choler-pipe, broader then the
Neck of the Gallbladder. I. The common passage of the Cholerpipe and Neck of
the Gallbladder. K. The Orifice of the Choler-passage, in the Gut Duodenum. L.
M. The Gut Duodenum opened. N. An Artery dispersed into the Liver. O. A small
Nerve of the Liver and of the Heart of the Gallbladder: which the graver has
represented too large.


page 36

in the branches of the milkie veins; the substance of the Liver, does not only
sustain the Veins, as some would have it, but it is the efficient of
Sanguification: And together with Blood, it generates natural Spirit.

Sanguification therefore or Bloodmaking, is thus performed: the more The
Authors opinion how the blood is made.
unprofitable and thicker part of the Chyle (which is made first in the Stomach
and finally perfected in the thin Guts) is thrown out into the thick Guts, and
voided at the Fundament; but the more laudable and thin part* is drawn in by
the milky veins, spread up and down in the Guts; and ^le altered, and from them
by means of a power proceeding from the Liver, it receives the first Rudi^ of
Blood, and is then called Chymus. The greatest question is whether the Liver
draws it, or it is forced thither. It seems to be drawn by the heat of the
Liver, as Chaf or Straw is drawn by heated Amber, and as Blood is drawn into
the outward parts by hot Fomentations. Which is here visible by Ligatures and
live dissections, in which the attraction of the Liver is so great, that the
milky Veins are speedily emptied. There is not the same necessity, that it
should be forced thither, as other have thought, because the beginning of the
Motion or moving principle should either be without the Chylus, or within it.
It cannot be in it. 1. Because nothing thrusts or drives, but that which is
alive. 2. The Chyle newly drawn out of the Vessels, does not move it self. 3.
It is void of Appetite. 4. It should always be driven downwards* not up* to
the Liver. Nor can it be in any thing without it. 1. Because the Meseraick
Arteries have enough to do to drive out their own blood, and the Veins have
work enough to receive it. 2. And the milky Veins are exceeding small. 3. The
proper Fibers of the Veins, do serve more for strength, then for driving. 4.
The Stomach indeed, and the Guts are contracted, but they are not able to expel
the chyle; for their motion is obscure, and though it were evident, yet it
would not presently follow, that it must drive into the Liver. 5. Those Bowels
being contracted on all sides, and shut up, as much Chyle is retained, as is
expelled. 6. The Abdomen does ofttimes rest, according to our desire and
pleasure, being apt to be moved by the Muscles; but the motion of the Chylus is
performed continually and swiftly, viz. the due time of distribution being
come. 7. The dreggy Chyle should be sent unto the Liver, without difference, as
well as the pure. It is therefore principally drawn by the Liver, howbeit some
construction of the Guts, is secondarily assistant thereunto. This Chymus being
attracted in the Roots of the milky veins, as in the place where, is by the
Parenchyma or Substance of the Liver, as the Efficient cause, with the
assistance of the internal heat of the Chyle, changed into a new substance of
blood. Now it gains a Redness like the substance of the Liver, not so much from
the flesh of the Liver alone, which it self ows its color to blood shed about
it, which it lays away when it is washed or boiled, and in some other
Creatures we find it of a green color, as from its own proper and adventitious
Heat (as Grapes are red) which vanishing away, the redness ceases, as it
happens in blood-letting. Nor is that a sufficient cause, seeing in healthy
bodies it continues afterward red, and therefore we must take in light as
another Cause, of which there is a great quantity in red colors, subsisting
even without Heat, unless the subject happening to be dissolved, it come to be
extinguished and exhale. Hence it is, that boiled blood becomes black, and
putrid blood is duskie. Hence also, by how much the more Natural inbred light
any man has, the more he shines with bright blood; contrariwise, in
Melancholic persons, the same being darkened, the blood grows black and dark.
That light and fire are the cause hereof appears in Oil of Sulphur, by the
mixture whereof Liquors become red.

Now this Heat and Light, is partly planted in the liver, and the Chyle it
self, springing thereout, by reason of its previous preparation, and partly
kindled therein, either by reason of the nearness of the Heart, and bordering
parts, or by reason of the Arterial blood, derived from the Heart and Spleen.

The more crude Blood being thus made, is not distributed to nourish the Liver
or the Body, which Office is performed by the Hepatick Arteries, but by
insensible Anastomoses of the flesh and Vessels, it is expelled into the Roots
of Vena cava, where by longer tarriance, it is more elaborated, and soon after
with the returning blood of the Vena porta and the Arteries, it is poured out
into the Trunk of cava, going all straight along, through the upper part of the
Trunk to the heart, that it may there attain its last accomplishment whereby it
becomes fit to nourish all the Parts. Not any thing returns this way to the
Liver, the Valves hindering, which in the Liver look outward, in the Heart
inwards, as the whole Fabric and Ligatures do testify. By these it is, that
the Cava always swells toward the Liver, and is empty toward the Heart.

Afterward the Nourishment of all the Parts of the Body being accomplished by
the Capillary Arteries, because all the blood is not consumed, which by
continual Pulsations is sent forth, nor can that which is superfluous return
the same way, by reason of the Valves of the Heart seated by the Aorta, which
lets any thing pass from the Heart, but admits nothing back again; and because
any Artery being tied, is full, and swells toward the Heart, but is empty, and
lank toward the Veins: Therefore it must needs return as it were by a circular
motion, out of the smallest Vessels back again into the greatest Veins, and the
Trunk it self of the Cava, and thence into the Heart. As it passes through the
Liver, other blood there newly bred, is joined with that of the Vena porta, and
that which is redundant from the Arteries, for the restoring of that which is
spent, and so the Circulation is again repeated. Mean while, as has been said,
Choler is drawn out of the blood, by branches of vessels, terminating into the
Galbladder and Choler-passage. But the wheyish part, is because of its thinness
retained a while, that the blood may more easily pass every where, and
afterward it is sent away, partly to the Kidneys (with the wheyish blood,
which according to Galen is not concocted in the Kidneys, but because the Serum
is an Excrement of the Liver, the Kidneys do only separate the blood from the
whey) and from thence by the Ureters into the Bladder; whence the Urin does
afterward partly go into the Skin, and passes out by sweat and insensible
Transpiration.

CHAP. XV. Of the Receptacles of Choler, viz. the Gallbladder, and
Choler-passage.
ON the right hand and hollow part See Fig. III. Table 17.
of the Liver, for the Reception of two sorts of Choler, thick and thin, two
Conduits or Passages are engraven: The Vesica biliaria or Choler-bladder, and
the Canalis biliarius or Cholerchannel. Galen himself knew as much, when he
said that from the Liver a twofold choleric Excrement was purged; the one
unmixt and simple, the other mixed and thick, which I collect contrary to what
Hofman asserts, out of the fourth Book of the Use of the Parts, 12. and 13. and
from the fifth Book Chap. the 6. For the Channel poures out thick and dreggy
choler, but the Bladder such as is more thin and yellow. For the larter
bordering upon the Vena porta, sucks more plentifully out of the Spirituous and
Arterial Blood; the former being placed at the Roots of the Cava, draws a less
quantity of Choler, and such as is more thick, because that blood is thicker.

The Vesica biliaria or Gallbladder called The Shape of the Gal-bladder.
also folliculus Fellis, is a Vessel long and round, fashioned like a Pear,
hollow, furnished with a double Membrane, the one, whereby it is fastened to the
Liver, from the Peritonaeum [which is also the same, wherewith the Liver is
covered] without Fibers, and wherewith that part only is covered, which hangs
without the Liver: The other proper and more thick, but strong, having all
manner of Fibers; which a certain Crust encompasses, bred of the Excrements of
its third Digestion, to keep off the sharpness of the Gall.

This Gallbladder is small, compared* Its Greatness* to the Spleen and
Kidneys. Being two* fingers breadths in deepness: but the more choleric any
person is, the greater is this Gallbladder observed to be.

It Is divided into the Bottom and the Division.
Neck.

The Bottom is round, and seated lowermost, Bottom.
viz. when the Liver is in its Natural Situation, it is died with a yellow
color, and sometimes black, viz. when the Choler being over long kept, is
burned.

The Neck, being harder then the bottom, looks upward, grows long and narrow,
until Neck.
it end into a very small and narrow passage. At the Neck is observed, first a
certain peculiar hollowness, and also certain little Valves or Membranes,
sometimes two, otherwhiles three, which hinder the Regress of Choler. Regius
proves, that they are sometimes opened by Spirits, through a Nerve inserted
into the liver, and so let Choler return into the Liver; which appears by
anger, and the sudden boiling of the blood in angry persons, by admixtion of
burnt Choler. Howbeit by pressing, or squeezin^, and blowing, we cannot force
any Choler back. And if the force of the Spirits were so great, they might as
easily open and shut the valves of the Heart, when they are in the Arteries
more plentiful then ordinary. They pierce indeed by their fineness the valves,
when they are shut, but they carry not the blood with them. Choler, truly, may
by some other means be inflamed, which is every where among hot blood. Finally,
the valve would be broken by the violence of Spirits, and greater danger might
follow thereby, then if the Gallbladder were broken, an Example whereof
Salmuth relates.

The Gallbladder has received very many small Passages, furnished with sundry
little twigs, sowed up and down in the Liver, between the Roots of Cava and
Porta; which afterward being joined into one passage, do carry pure Choler
into the Gallbladder: and the Gallbladder having disgorged it self into the
Gut, is daily filled again, and so it continues that course. Contrary to the
Opinion of Arnisoeus; that the Bladder is filled with Choler, which being
hindered by the Chylus, from descending by the Porus biliarius, into the Guts,
does drive back again into the Bladder, For I have often seen Waloeus
demonstrate, how that the Bladder being never so little squeezed with a man's
hand, even when the Guts are full of Chyle, Choler is easily squirted into the
Guts.

It has two very small Veins to nourish it. Also it has very small Arteries
from Its Veins and Arteries.
the Coeliaca, to nourish and preserve Heat. It is not therefote nourished with
Choler, as Joubertus conceives. It has a little diminutive Nerve, scarce
visible, from a little Branch of the sixth pare, which crawls up and down the
Coat of the Liver.

Its use is to receive yellow excrementitious Choler, pure and thin (not the
Excrement Its Use.
mingled with the Blood, as the Kidneys do) and to retain it some while, and
then to expel it.

Now touching the use of this Choler, Learned men are of sundry minds. Some
with Aristotle will allow it no use, only it was a thing could not be avoided,
and is drawn away, that the Blood may not be defiled; which Opinion Conringius
maintains. Others attribute more to Choler, and make it useful to the whole
Body. 1. In that it (...) ^iver, according to Italy-Abbas and ^sina, and by
that means comforts ^e second Digestion, and helps the Natural Heat of the
Liver, like fire under a kettle. Yea, it heats the whole Body, if we will
credit Nemesius, especially the Stomach, to further its Digestion. If that be
true, we must understand it of a moderate quantity thereof; otherwise an over
great Heat of Choler would burn the Stomach.

2. Ofkin to these, is the Opinion of Helmont; that it is the balsom of the
Liver, and the whole Blood, brought from the Liver to the Mesentery, and that
therefore the Gall precedes in the work of Sanguification, and the Liver
follows; also he says it has the constitution of a necessary Bowel. But how
should it come into the Liver, since Anatomy does teach, that this humor is
brought out of the Liver, but not carried back thither. For, the way is too
long, through the Mesentery, where by reason of its acrimony, it makes have
out, or the edge thereof is blunted. And of what shall it be bred, if it go
before the Concoction of Blood? There are few Veins and Arteries dispersed
there abouts, but store of Choler is collected. That the Action of the Liver
goes before that of the Gall, Children in the Womb do show, in whom the Liver
is full of blood, before the Bladder swell with Gall, or be so much as lightly
colored therewith.

3. Their Opinion is not much unlike, who conceive that Choler preserves the
neighboring Parts, and the Liver it self from corruption, which Zerbus would
therefore prove, because when the Gallbladder is removed from the Liver, the
substance thereof where the Gallbladder lay, does presently dissolve and melt.

4. A greater number of Authors will have it to serve to expel the Excrements
of the Belly, by strengthening the Guts with its Heat, or provoking them to
Expulsion by its Acrimony. For although the Choler-passage, be implanted into
the beginning of the Gut Jejunum, or into the Duodenum; yet it has an easy
passage to the Colon and Ileum. That it passes through the Jejunum, is manifest
from its yellow color, and the quick passage of the Chyle there through.
Howbeit, it ought to be moderate in quantity, otherwise the Belly is dried and
made costive, or too much loosned.

5. I add that it makes the Dung liquid, and apt to pass, to which intent
Painters use it to temper their colors.

The other Receptacle of Choler, is Porus biliarius.
the Canalis or Porus biliarius, the Choler-passage, which is found even in
those Animals which have no Gallbladder, as the Heart, the Deer, the Camel, the
Roe, the Dolphin, the Sea-calf, etc. It is a vessel round and long, and the
passage thereof is twice as large as the Neck of the Gallbladder, and it goes
right out from the Liver [being sometimes forked, yet so that its two branches
do soon become one, according to the Observation of Riolanus] through the
common passage into the Gut (not into the Gallbladder, as Fallopius conceived)
receiving a thick choleric excrement, which may plainly be perceived, if the
said passage be opened and blown up, for then the Gut swells, and not the
Gallbladder. And Riolanus observed that some have died of a Dysentery
proceeding from Choler, in whom the Neck of the Gallbladder was obstructed,
but the Porus biliarius or Choler-passage, very much enlarged. Which also was
known to Galen, who will have Choler to be forced right forwards, even from the
Liver into the Gut Duodenum: And next to Galen we are beholden to Fallopius for
the true Description of this Choler-passage.

The Ductus communis or common Ductus communis, naturalis, the common passage
natural,
Passage, which goes into the beginning o^ the Gut Jejunum, or about the end of
Duodenum, is made up of the Necks of the Choler-passage, and of the
Gallbladder, and is obliquely inserted between the two Coats of the Gut, the
length of a finger, and sometimes it is parted into two, having loose Membranes,
from the inmost and middle Coat of the Guts, before its Orifice. Where there is
plenty of Choler, as in choleric Natures, it often flows back into the
Stomach, so that such persons fasting, are often griped in their Bellies.

Sometimes though seldom, this Passage goes into the bottom of the Stomach,
Pre^ernatural.
and there empties Choler. Whence proceeds Vomiting of Choler, and such persons
are termed Picrocholoi ano, Choler-vomitets. Which is seldom found in ravenous
Beasts, according to the Observation of Argenterius; as also in Dogs by the
Observation of Walaeus, contrary to the Opinion of Akakia. But in case this
passage be inserted into the end of the Gut Jejunum, such persons are ever
troubled with choleric Loosnesses, and are termed Picrocholoi ^ato,
Choler-purgers by stool. Such as he must needs have been, in whom the
Choler-passage was inserted into the Gut Colon, as Severinus observed, when he
dissected the said party at Naples.

Chap. XVI. Of the Spleen.
LIen or Splen the Spleen, is seated under Situation of the Spleen,
the short Ribs on the left side, just over against the Liver, as if it were a
second Liver, under the Midriff, between the Ribs and the Stomach, being in
some higher or lower then in others. Yet in all it is nearer to the hinder or
back-part, seeing it rests See Table XV.
upon the Vertebraes and the bastard Ribs, so that a man cannot feel it with
his hand, unless it swell, and so become nearer to the Belly-rim; and this
situation of the Spleen is seldom so changed, as to find the Liver in the left
side, and the Spleen on the right.

It is for the most part only one, seldom two (as Aristotle observes in the 4.
de Generatione Its Number.
Animalium, Chap. 4. And Posthius at Montpelier and Panarolus at Rome) and more
rarely three one upon another, though not all of like bigness (as Fallopius
observed) but a most rare case it is for the Spleen to be wanting (as Aristotle
has observed in the place forecited, and also Laurentius and Schenkius
concerning one Matthias Ortelius, and Hollerius in a certain Girl) nor can it
naturally be wanting, because Nature abounds not in things superfluous, nor is
wanting in things necessary. That vulgar Opinion is therefore fabulous, which
Whether the Spleen may be taken out of the Body.
holds that it may be taken out of the Body without danger of death, and that
in such as used to run Races, it was usually taken out, which never any man yet
saw or recorded, excepting Pliny, Flud, Fiorovanta, Roussetus, who if they
speak truth, doubtless those persons made a very bad shift to live, or died
soon after, for want of that most noble Bowel, or only the outward part of
their Spleen was cut off. For deep Wounds in the Spleen are to be accounted
mortal, because of the plenty of Arteries, and the consent it has with the
principal Parts of the Body. This Conceit sprung Questionless from that old
Opinion of Erasistratus, who conceived that Nature had made the Spleen in vain,
which Opinion Plautus also follows in his Comedy called the Merchant. And
others follow them, who are so far to be born with, if they shall say it is not
necessary in reference to all kinds of Live wights, but only in respect of some
sorts. For such live Creatures as have no bladder do want a Spleen without
detriment, as the Chamaeleon, and many others. Insects have no Spleen, and
therefore that Proverbial Speech is false: Habet and musca splenem, even a Fly
has a Spleen.

It is not so great as the Liver, yet in Mankind the Spleen is sufficiently
thick Why a man has a large Spleen.
and big, not so much because of the stubborn humor which it is to master, and
is hard to overcome, as because of the Arterial, fermentative, or leavening,
and yeasty Blood, which it was to contain. For it is six fingers long very
near, three fingers broad, one finger thick, of which greatness it is not found
in any other living Creature. Yet is its bigness various, according to the
variety of Subjects, and the several Constitutions of Men. It Is thought to be
larger in such persons, as have Naturally a greater quantity of Melancholy or
acid Juice then others have, which flowing thereunto, it is soon augmented by
reason of its loose and spungie substance. Those persons whose Spleen is over
grown, are lean, and bad colored. Whence it was that the Emperor Trajan termed
the Exchequer a Spleen, because as the Princes Excheque is enriched, the People
are impoverished; so as the Spleen increases, the Body pines. They who conceive
it elaborates the Chylus, do bring this for a reason, viz. that it draws too
much Ch^le by the Ramus splenicus, and defrauds the Liver. But because that
Action of the Spleen is questioned, another reason must be sought after. The
most renowned Conringius allows the Premises for true in a praeternatural
greatness of the Spleen, otherwise, if it be Natural and legitimate, the Body
flourishes when the spleen does flourish.

Be the state of the Spleen what it will, I conceive the Body is diminished,
when the Spleen is augmented, because it bereaves the rest of the Body of the
fermentative acid Juice, and either consumes it to nourish it self, if it be
naturally great; or is unable to prepare and expel it, when its greatness is
praeternatural and sickly.

Its Shape is for the most part like on Oxes tongue, whence some have called it
Its Shape.
linguosum Visous, the Tongue-bowel. On the outside toward the Ribs and the
Midriff, it is a little bunching and bossie; sometimes it has marks made in it
by the Ribs, being hollow on that side, which is toward the right hand, by
reason of the stomach which lies close by it: Where all along the middle part,
there is a certain white Line, with prominencies in it, which admits Veins and
Arteries with the Caul. Howbeit, praeternaturally it receives sundry Figures,
viz. exactly round, triangular, sharp-pointed, made rough with eminencies,
divided into two parts; as Archangelus has rightly observed.

Its Color in a Child in the Womb is red, Its Color.
like that of the Liver, because it is nourished with pure Mothers Blood: But
in persons come to age, it is blackish, because of the thick blood wherewith it
is nourished, and in such as are yet older, it becomes black and blew. I have
observed it red in grown persons, and Vesalius before me, as also Spigelius who
therefore beleives, that such as have it blackish are unhealthy. Conringius
thinks that black color is caused by Intemperance in eating, and in drinking
especially. I do attribute much to the temper of particular persons in this
case, and to the variety of Heat. Now the Spleen does praeternaturally put on
many colors, according to the Humor praedominant, as black and blew, ash-color,
etc. In Beasts of hot Constitution, it is blacker then in Mankind, and in Swine
it is whiter.

It is knit by thin Membranes arising from the Peritonaeum, to the Peritonaeum
Connection.
it self, the Call, and the left Kidney, sometimes also to the Septum, which
Fernelius denies, nor can he be excused, unless we shall say he intended the
Center of the Midriff, for thereto it is not fastened. But in its hollow part,
it is knit to the upper Membrane of the Caul, from which also (according to
others from the Peritonaeum, or as some will have it, proper to it self) it
receives,

A Coat thin and single, yet thicker then the Membrane of the Liver, which in
aged Its Coat.
persons is oftentimes hardened, so as to become bony and gristly. It ought to
be thicker, that it might be stronger to endure the force of the Arterial Blood.

Its Substance or Parenchyma, is like thick, black, and congealed blood.
Substance.


It has Vessels of all kinds.

It has from the Vena Porta a remarkable Its Veins.
Trunk, which is called Ramus splenicus, situate far beneath the Liver, and
sent ath wart unto the Spleen. The numerous branches of this bough, being for
the most part small as Fibers, are spent in the Spleen, saving two which
sometimes pass out of the Spleen: The one is called Vas breve entering into the
stomach, sometimes by one, otherwhiles by more branches [which more frequently,
as Walaeus informs us, is a little branch of Vena splenica, which when it is
come to the middle space betwixt the stomach and the Spleen, it is divided
forkwise into two twigs, one of which goes to the Spleen, the other to the
stomach] which vessel some will have to belch out acid blood to provoke
appetite, or to strengthen the stomach, which is afterward voided by the Guts.
Another branch goes unto the Fundament, and makes the internal Haemorrhoid
Veins.

It has many and great Arteries from a Its Arteries.
branch of the Coeliaca, which the Liver has not. 1. To cherish life and
inbred heat. 2. That the Blood might be more strongly altered. 3. That for its
own Nourishment, it might receive blood, and withal prepare acid Juice brought
thereunto, with Arterial blood, for to ferment the Chyle and all the Blood.

Now we are to take special notice of the frequent Anastomoses of the Arteries
Its Anastomoses.
of the Spleen, with the Veins thereof, especially one remarkable one, before
the Entrance of the Vessels into the Spleen: the rest are in the Spleen.

Also we must observe its little Nerves, arising from the left Costal branch of
the sixth pare, dispersed rather through the Coat, then the Substance thereof.

The Action of the Spleen is by such Doctors as follow the old Opinion said to
be chiesly threefold. 1. To draw melancholic, excrementitious, and slimy
Humors out of the Liver. 2. To separate the melancholic Excrement there from,
that it may be nourished by the good blood. 3. To void it being separated, into
the Stomach and Guts. Also they say that the nutriment of the Spleen is
elaborated and broken by the Arteries, because spongy and loose flesh ought to
be nourished with vaporous and subtle blood. The Passages by which the
melancholy Juice is said to be belched forth, are first the Vas breve, and then
the Haemorrhoidal Vein. They will have the Spleen therefore to be the
Receptacle of the melancholic Excrement, or of thick dreggie Blood separated
in the Liver (even as the Gallbladder receives the yellow Choler) and that
therefore the Spleen is set just over against the Liver.

Howbeit I deny that the Spleen is ordained Whether the Spleen receive
Melancholy from the Liver?
only to receive an Exerement; For

1. In the Spleen there is no large cavity receiving, as in the Gallbladder,
and in the membranous hollowness of the Kidneys, and in the Bladder. 2. If it
were a Receptacle for Excrements, why was it not seated in an inferior place,
that it might more conveniently receive the weighty Exerement as other
Receptacles? 3. Rondeletius denving that the spleen The argument of Rondeletius
invalid.
is the Receptacle of Melancholy, gives this reason: because that humor while
it is naturally disposed, is all consumed upon the bony, and other hard and dry
parts; and seeing it is in us the least in quantity of all humors therefore
there is no part ordained to receive it, no more then there is for bloody
Excrements, which pass away by Sweat and insensible Transpiration. Yet I
conceive this Argument is not very strong. 4. Why are there no Branches of this
Receptacle spread through the substance of the Liver, or at least of the Ramus
splenicus, even as the Gallbladder receives Branches spread up and down the
Liver? 5. Why are there not some Passages, which carry this Juice from the
Liver. 6. No part is nourished with an Excrement, notwithstanding the Saying of
Columbus, that no part is nourished with an Excrement saving the Spleen. 7. It
is absurd that an Excrement should flow back into the Vena porta, and
afterward into the Ramus splenicus. 8. It should receive in, and purge forth
Excrements, by the same Passages. 9. The strongest reason, that the Spleen is
no Receptacle of Melancholy is, In as much as it is another Organ of
Sanguification, as shall be proved by and by.
Later Anatomists have conceived, that the Spleen does elaborate Blood, as the
Whether the Spleen make Blood?
Liver does, but they are not agreed, touching the way, nor the Nature of the
Chyle. Casparus Bartholinus my Father was of Opinion, that the Spleen did make
a thick, but good sort of Blood, of the thicker part of the Chymus, which by an
inbred Faculty it has, it draws to it self, through the Ramus splenicus. This
he proved,

1. By the likeness of the structure of the Spleen, with that of the Liver. For
as the Liver is a fleshy Bowel, covered with a Coat, furnished with very many
Vessels, the flesh whereof resembles blood, shed round about: Even so, the
Spleen is a Bowel, furnished with a Coat, and with very many Vessels variously
interwoven, whose proper flesh is as it were congealed blood, shed round about
the Vessels. 2. In the Spleen, there are very many textures of the Vessels and
infinite Anastomoses. Now there are no where such textures, and plications, or
foldings of the Vessels, save for a new elaboration, as may be seen in the
Brain, Liver, Stones, Duggs, etc. 3. It appears from the Situation of the
Ramus splenicus, which is far beneath the Liver, out of the Trunk of Vena
porta, where part of the Chymus is attracted, or of the Chyle, which has some
disposition toward blood* If therefore it receives matter there, of which
blood is made, why therefore shall not the Spleen make blood? 4. Nature is wont
either to double the Parts of the Body, and set one on each side, as appears in
the Kidneys, Stones, Lungs, Duggs, Organs of the Senses, etc. or if she makes
only one, she is wont to place it in the middle. as the Heart, Stomach, Womb,
Bladder, Nose, Tongue, Mouth, etc. Therefore the Spleen must needs be another
Liver. 5. Diseases of the Spleen, as well as of the Liver, do hurt Blood-making
or Sanguification. 6. Sometimes the Situation of the Liver is changed, so that
it is in the left side, and the Spleen on the right. 7. The Liver failing and
growing less, the Spleen is augmented, and assists the Liver, as is known by
many Examples, whence the Spleen has been often seen in Dissections, to be
greater and redder then the liver. 8. It Is unlikely that so many Arteries enter
into the Spleen, for the sake of Excrements, but rather to digest and concoct
thick Blood, that so by contrary thinness, the stubborn thinness of the said
Blood may be overcome. 9. In a Child in the Womb, the Spleen is red as is the
Liver, by reason of the cause aforesaid. 10. Such as the Diseases of the Liver
are, such in a manner are those of the Spleen. 11. And the Diseases of the
Spleen and Liver, are cured well near with the self same Remedies. 12. If
Authorities are of force, enter Aristotle in the 3. Book of the Parts of living
Creatures, Chap. 7. where he says, that the Liver and Spleen are of a like
Nature; also, that the Spleen is as it were an adulterate Liver, and where the
Spleen is very little, there the Liver is Bipartite, or of two parts, and that
all parts in the Body almost are double. Plato calls the Spleen an express
image of the Liver. Others call it the Livers Vicar, the left Liver, etc. The
Author of the Book touching the use of Respiration, has confirmed this, as
also Apbrodisaeus, Araeteus, and others. Archangelus makes another use of the
Spleen to be, to make more plenty of Blood.
If any shall demand, To what and serves the Blood which the Spleen makes? For
what Parts the Spleen makes Blood?


Some conceive it serves to the same end, with that of the liver, viz. to
nourish the whole body, and to assist the liver.

But he was of Opinion, that this was not done save when necessity requires, in
some defect or Disease of the Liver.

But he conceives that ordinarily the Spleen is an Organ to make blood, to
nourish the Bowels of the lower Belly, as the Stomach, Guts, Call, Mesentery,
Sweetbread, etc. and that the Spleen it self is nourished with some portion of
the said Blood, and sends the rest to the parts of the body. And he conceives
that the liver makes blood for the rest of the parts, especially the musculous
parts. And he proves it,

1. Because the bowels of the lower Belly receive their nourishment from the
Vena splenica, or from the branches yssueing therefrom, namely from the
branches of Vena port^ only, and not from the Vena cava. 2. Because those
bowels are thick, more earthy and base: And such as the like parts are not
found in the body besides, and therefore these parts stood in need to receive
such blood from the Spleen. 3. And therefore the liver is greater, because it
makes blood for the whole body besides: The Spleen less, because it makes blood
only for the lower Belly, save when in cases of necessity it is forced to help
the Liver. 4. In Dogs the Spleen is long and thin, because the Parts or Bowels
of the lower Belly are smaller in a Dog, and less wreathed and folded, then in
a Man. 5. There is an evident difference between the Fat bred in the musculous
Parts, or those which are nourished by the Vena cava, and that dirty, and soon
pu^rifiing Fat, which is bred in the lower Belly, as in the Call, Guts,
Mesentery, etc. Hence arise so many Putrefactions in the mesenterick Parts. And
by how much an Humor is thicker (as is the muddie Fat we speak of) so much the
sooner it putrifies: As the dreggie fat does sooner, then the Fat in musculous
parts. So the Blood of the Spleen is more disposed to Putrefaction, then that
of the liver, and this then the blood of the right Ventricle of the Heart.
Moreover, the blood of the Arteries is less subject to Putrefaction, then any
of the former; and the Spirit least of all. 6 He believes this to be a most
strong Argument, that where a part is found having the substance of the Bowels,
there also there are Veins from the Vena portae, or the branches of the Spleen:
but where a part is consisting of musculous flesh, there are Veins which have
their Original from Vena cava, as appears in the Intestinum rectum, in which by
reason of its twofold substance, Nature has placed two sorts of Veins. In the
musculous Part, there are the external Haemorrhoid Veins, which arise from the
Cava: In the ^owellie or guttie substance, there are veins from the Vena
portae.
These, and such like Reasons prevailed with my Father of pious Memory, to
prove that the Spleen drew Chymus, by the Ramus spenicus. Which Opinion was at
that time embraced by most Anatomists, as Varolus, Posthius, Jessenus,
Platerus, Baubinus, Sennertus, and Riolanus in his first Anthropographia. But
that Age deserves excuse, as being ignorant of what Posterity has since found
out. For the milkie veins discovered by Asellius, do show, that no Chyle thick
or thin, is drawn by the Mesaraick Veins, or carried any whether, but by the
milkie Veins only to the Liver, and not to the Spleen. Moreover, a Ligature in
live Dissections declares, that nothing is carried through the Mesaraicks to
the Spleen, but contrariwise from the Spleen to the Mesaraicks. Yet I allow
thus much to the foresaid reasons, that there is a certain Generation of Blood
made in the Spleen, by the manner hereafter to be explained, not of Chyle,
which has here no Passages, but of Arterial Blood, sent from the Heart.

Hofmaannus and Spigelius bring the Whether any portion of Chyle be carried to
the Spleen, and what way?
dreggie part of the Chyle, through the mesaraick Veins unto the Spleen, that
it may be there concocted into Blood. Who are in the same fault. For the
Arteries are ordained to carry blood to the Mesentery, which is very manifest
by Ligatures, and it is contrary to the course of Nature, for the blood to be
carried, and the Chyle brought back the same way, least they should be mingled
together. Moreover, in live Anatomists, there was never any Chyle observed
there. And the dreggie Portion of the Chyle, which no part stands in need of to
nourish it self, is more fitly purged out by the Guts.

Sperlingerus a learned Man, conceives that this work is performed by the
milkie Veins, as to the Liver. Which were a ready way, if the milkie Veins do
go to the Spleen, which no man as yet has been able to observe. Those that
thought otherwise were deceived by nervie Fiberkies.

Others who very well saw, that the Mesentery sent nothing to the Spleen, would
have the Chyle to come right out from the Stomach to the Spleen, by ways
manifest or hidden. They account the manifest ways to be the Vas breve, and
its branches, by which the spleen sucks the more wa^ry part of the Chyle. But
the Vas breve, carries acid Juice from the Spleen, but nothing to the Spleen,
no more then the other Veins. Moreover, sometimes it is not inserted into the
Spleen, but there is a Branch of the Splenica without it. I omit, that the Vas
breve is never full of the white liquor. Daniel Florstius indeed has in this
case substituted the Vena splenica, but contrary to Experience, and the Office
of the Veins. The splenick Vein receives all its blood from the Spleen and its
Arteries, and returns nothing, and therefore being bound in living Anatomies,
it is filled, and swells toward the Spleen, according to the Observation of
Walaeus, but toward the Liver it is emptied. Howbeit Regius appeals to the
Ligature, that the Vas breve swells betwixt the Ligature and the Stomach, and
that it is lank between the Ligature and the Spleen. Bachius is nothing moved
herewith, though he cannot untie the knot, and Hogeland is various in this
Observation; so that I much doubt, whether the Vas breve is alone so filled,
before I shall see it attested by the Eyes of some others.

Besides the Vas breve, Carolus Piso proves that the wheyish and potulent
matter, is drawn out of the Stomach, by the Gastrick and Epiploick Veins; who
was ignorant of the motion of humors in these veins. Both the vessels
disburthen themselves into the Ramus splenicus, and then the blood is sent by a
straight Passage unto the Liver, and returns unto the Spleen, without any
hindrance of the Valves.

Those who are for hidden Passages, would force upon us, either the Pores of
the Stomach, or a distinct vessel, to us as yet invisible and unknown. Among
the former is Veslingus, among the latter Conringius, who nevertheless differ,
touching the Concoction of the Humor. Veslingus will have the Spleen to make
blood of the more ^arry Portion of the Chyle, with the earthy and slimy parts
mixed therewith, drawn by the invisible Pores, like the milkie veins, resting
upon the stomach it self, and the Pancreas. Conringius will have only the
potulent liquor to pass by a vessel to us invisible, by reason of the close
sticking of the Spleen to the stomach, and the Serum therein contained, which
is not so white: Which Vessel will at one time or other be discovered. But all
would be well, if those men that have eyes in their heads, would show us either
those Passages, or that peculiar Vessel. The Pores are too narrow for the
dreggie parts of the Chyle to pass through, and who can hinder them sweating
out some other way, rather then into the Spleen? Many times when the Spleen
stuck not so close to the stomach, I could see no vessel, nor could I see any
such thing in a Youth, who having largely drunk, was here lately choked with a
bit of a Neates-tongue.

Howbeit, Reusner, Piso, and Conringius lately praised, do suppose, that only
potulent matter, is by the Spleen presently sucked out, and that therefore it
makes only watery Blood ordinarily. But there is no strong and sufficient reason
for this Opinion, seeing there are no manifest Passages. Nor must it only draw
that which is thin, which both the Blood and Chylus stand in need of, as a
vehicle or carrier, though it flow not alone, but is variously mixed with
grosser matter, according to the Constitution of the blood; till having played
its part, it is either separated by the Kidneys, or sweats through the whole
Habit of the Body. If the wheyish moisture be praeternaturally separated in the
stomach, from the thicker Chyle, either it is voided by Vomit, and the grosser
Chyle wanting the help thereof to carry it, will make the Colic in the Guts,
as I saw in our famous Wormius; or it is voided through the Pylorus, which is
always open for liquid meats, and such as are easily digested, according to
the Observation of our most desired Walaeus; much more after much drinking,
which is sometimes in great Drinkers, quickly voided by urin, not passing
through the Spleen, but through the Guts, if there be a convenience of quality,
thinness of Humors, looseness of the Vessels, and strength of the attractive
Faculty. All which conspiring, Asellius rightly avouches there is no way so
long, which is not soon passed over. In such as are otherwise constituted,
Drink does not so soon slip away by Urin. For some will drink all day, and
never use a Chamber Pot. In some also their Belly becomes loose, and the Drink
goes away, questionless, by the Guts. The blood, indeed, of Splenetick persons,
is thin and warry, not that it comes such immediately from the stomach, but the
fault is in the whole blood, communicated by the Arteries to the Spleen. I pass
over, how that these are the signs of a disordered Spleen, from the
praeternatural state whereof, no good Argument can be drawn to prove any thing,
touching its Natural condition; by which Answer, all other Arguments brought by
most learned men, for this potulent Chylus are answered.

It is a doubtful question, why only What Creatures have no Spleen
such Creatures have Spleens, which have Kidneys and Bladders, according to
Aristotle, which Panarolus found true in a Chamaeleon. Is it because of the
Attraction of wheyish Humors? I cannot believe it. But they have no Spleen,
because they make little blood, and therefore the wheyish Humor did not want
peculiar Receptacles, but the Superfluities of the blood is spent upon
Feathers, Skin, Scales, etc. They are therefore without a Spleen, because
Fermentation was not necessary, in the imperfect Concoction of those kind of
Creatures, who have a perpetual and Natural Lientery.

Riolanus has lately in his Enchiridion out of all these Opinions, hammered a
mixed action of the Spleen, to attract slimy Blood for its own Nourishment, and
after that to pour out a certain particular fermentative Whey, through the
splenetick Arteries into the stomach, and because its flesh is of a drinking
Nature, to draw and suck superfluous Liquor through the Veins out of the
stomach. To which I have already answered, part by part. The Action verily of
the Spleen is more noble, then to receive superfluous Humors out of the
stomach. And through what Passages should it do that? For the Office of the
Veins is, to carry back the blood in the parts, out of the Arteries to the
Trunk, according to the Doctrine of the Circulation, which Riolanus does here
vainly oppose. And Ligatures in living Anatomies do show the same.

Franciscus Ulmus, Carolus Piso, and Aemilius Parisanus, will needs have it
that the Spleen makes Arterial blood, for the left Ventricle of the Heart, as
the Liver does for the right Ventricle. Which Opinion is coufuted, because, 1.
There is no way by which the blood here made, can go into the left Ventricle of
the Heart; for it cannot go by the Aorta, because of the Valves there placed at
the mouth thereof. 2. There would ^^ a mixture of perfect and imperfect Juice,
if by the same way, and at the same time the Heart should receive and return
blood. 3. Many Creatures live without a Spleen, which generate Vital Spirits
nevertheless.

Mr. De la Chamber in his Treatise of Digestion, supposes that the Spleen makes
Spirits for the use of the Belly. But there is Spirit enough to nourish and
vivifie the inferior Parts, supplied from the Aorta. But if he understand some
qualification of the spirituous blood accommodated to the use of the belly, he
deserves to be excused.

Helmont a late Writer, has destined Whether the Spleen be an Organ of the
sensitive Soul?
the Spleen for more noble Actions. He gives it out to be the seat of his
Archeus, which being the immediate Organ of the sensitive Soul, determines the
Actions of the ^i^^l Soul residing in the stomach. He calls it the Seat. 1. Of
the Understanding, wherein the Conceptions thereof are formed, because it is of
all the Bowels the fullest of Blood, and enriched with very many Arteries; and
the Brain does only keep the Conceptions sent to it from the Spleen. 2. Of
Sleep and Dreaming. 3. Of Venery, because Pollutions are in the dig^^; and
there about the stomach, the first motions of lust are perceived: For they are
said to proceed out of the Loins, in which the Spleen is the principal Vital
Member. Finally, persons troubled with the Quartan Ague, are not subject to
lust, because their Spleen is diseased. 4. Of sundry Diseases, which are
accounted to be Diseases of the Brain and Chest, as the Tissick, Pleurisy,
Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, Nightmare, Swimming of the Head, etc. But 1. All
these Conceits bottom upon a false Foundation. 2. No sound Anatomist will grant
that the stomach and not the brain is the seat of the Soul. 3. The Spleen is
full of blood for other uses, that it may prepare acid blood for the
fermentation of the whole blood and the Chylus. 4. There are Living-Creatures,
that both sleep, and are addicted to Venery without any Spleen, or though they
have a Spleen, when the same is diseased. 5. Nocturnal Pollutions spring from
an hot Constirution of the Spermatick Vessels, and wheyish sharp Blood, as the
Dissection of the said Parts does declare. 6. That is rather to be affirmed
touching the Kidneys in the Loins, as shall hereafter appear. 7. Other Parts in
the Belly are diseased besides the Spleen; in such as have Quartan Agues. Yet
it cannot be denied, but that the Spleen does assist in some measure, by
administering acid blood 8. The Spleen is but the remote seat of the foresaid
Diseases, by reason of Vapors raised from thence; but proper Diseases which
spring not from Sympathy, do primarily depend upon the Brain.

The last and truest Opinion, is that of Walaeus, my quondam most worthy The
Opinion of Walaeus touching the use of the Spleen.
Master, founded upon ocular Inspection, and most certain reason. He finding in
live Anatomies no motion of Humors through the Ramus splenicus of Vena portoe
to the Spleen, did certainly conclude, that it was unlikely, that either
Melancholy or Chyle is carried out of the Liver into the Spleen, by the Ramus
splenicus; and that therefore the Spleen receives no melancholic Excrement
from the Liver, not that any blood is made in the Spleen of Melancholy or
Chylus. But contrariwise he observed always, that all the blood was carried,
both swiftly and strongly enough perpetually out of the Spleen into the Liver,
as also the blood which comes out of the Haemorrhoidal Vein, the Vas breve, and
other Veins which are joined to the Ramus splenicus. And that there is no
motion of Humors to the Spleen, unless by the Ramus splenicus of the Arteria
Coeliaca: And therefore the Spleen does not receive any matter to change and
alter from any place, save the Arteria Coeliaca. And he conceives that it is
most likely, that the blood being further to be perfected, is dissolved by the
Heat of the Heart, and that when it is forced from the Heart, through the
Coeliacal d^^eries into the Spleen, the whole mass of blood is not retained by
the Spleen, but as the Gallbladder contains only Choler, so the Spleen holds
only the acid or sharp part of the Blood, which you may call Melancholy, just
as we see the acid Spirit separated from things that are distilled: And that
the said acid Humor is perfected by the Spleen, by means of which the Spleen
appears black and acid. And that this sharp humor is afterward mingled with
Blood in the Veins, and with Chyle in the Stomach, and makes them thin: And
that therefore the Spleen being obstructed, gross Humors are multiplied in the
Body, not because thick Humors are not drawn by the Spleen, which naturally are
never found there; but because the Spleen cannot communicate that attenuating
acid Humor to the Blood or Chyle. And that as much of this acid Humor, as is
unfit for Digestion, is voided with the Serum by Urin, for such acid Liquors,
as Vinegar, Spirit of Sulphur, etc. are easily mingled with Water; and the said
acid Humor by Distillation may again be separated from the Urin.

In as much therefore as the Spleen How the Spleen may be said to be the seat
of Laughter.
draws the sharp part of the blood out of the Heart, and ^^^^ds it prepared to
the Mesentery, that the rest thereof being to be wrought by the Liver, may
become more pure and clear; the Opinion of the Ancients may be allowed, which
held the Spleen to be the seat of Laughter. For the cheerfuller, and livelier
Animals, or live Wights, have great spleens; the more lascivious have great
livers; the gentler have little galbladders; the fearfuller have great hearts,
and the loudest, have large lungs, etc. Whence that Verse had its Original.

Cor ardet, pulmo loquitur, fell commovet iras,
Splen ridere facit, coget amare secur.
Heart fears, Lungs speak, the Gall moves' anger fell,
Spleen makes us laugh, It Is called Lover in the North of England, and possibly
that is the Etymology of the Word.
Liver does Love compel.
The Spleen therefore perpares blood to accommodate the Bowels of the lower
Belly, and of the whole Body after the manner aforesaid. And the
excrementitious part of the blood, which cannot be separated by the Spleen, if
it be thin and watery, it is purged out. 1. By the Arteries, not only to the
Guts, but also to the Kidneys by the emulgent Veins. Hence in Diseases of the
Spleen, Urins are many times black, for which cause in such cases we administer
Diuretics. And splenerick and melancholic persons so called, abound with
wheyish Humors, as is well known from Hippocrates and Galen, for serum ought to
be the vehicle or carrier of the grossest Humor. Hence is it, that persons
troubled with the Quartan Ague, do most plentifully sweat and piss: Also when
it is very plentiful, by the Haemorrhoid Veins. 2. By the stomach, whence in
the S^urvey, the Patients spit exceedingly, as also in the Quartan Ague, so
that Galen places spitting and spawling among the signs of that Disease. Hence
also melancholic persons are wont to be extreme spitters. Now it comes from
the Spleen to the stomach, not only by the Vas breve, but also by other near
Vessels.

If the Excrement of the Spleen be How its thick.
thick and earthy, it is voided directly by the Fundament, and comes not at the
stomach, for 1. From Melancholy as Galen cells us, comes the blackness of the
Excrements. 2. By reason of its weight and heaviness, it setles downwards. 3.
The evacuation of Melancholy by the internal Haemorrhoid Veins, does free men
from melancholic Diseases present, and preserves from future, as the divine
Hippocrates teaches in many places.

Chap. XVII. Of the Kidneys.
A Threefold Excrement is purged The threefold excrement of the Blood.
from the Blood; thin Choler into the Gallbladder, thick Choler into the
Canalis bilarius, and Whey into the Kidneys. And because we have already spoken
of the Receptacles of the two former Excrements, we shall now also speak of the
third.

The Kidneys are termed RENES, from The true Exposition of the Kidneys.
flowing, because the Matter of Urin does flow through them. In Greek they are
termed Nephroi, as if you would say Pissers: From which Etymology that taken
out of Varro, differs not much. viz. that they are called R^n^s, as if you
would say Rivuli Rivole^s or little Springs. This FIGURE shows the Urinary
Instruments, and Parts serving for Generation in Men, in their Natural
Situation.
The XVIII. TABLE.
The Explication of the FIGURE.
AAA. The hollow part of the Liver. B. The Gallbladder. C. The Choler-passage
or Ductus bilarius. D. The Vena Cystica or Gallbladder Vein. E. An Artery
distributed both into the Liver and the Gallbladder. F. The Navil-vein turned
upwards. GG. The descendent Trunk of Vena cava. HH. The descending Trunk of the
Arteteria magna. II. The Emulgent Veins. KK. The Kidneys in their Natural
Place. LL. The Emulgent Arteries. MM. The Capsulae atrabilariae, with Branches
distributed into them from the Emulgens Vein. NN. Ureters descending from the
Kidneys to the Bladder. O. The bottom of the Piss-bladder. PP. Insertion of the
Ureters, into th sides of the Bladder. QQ. A Portion of the Urachus or
Pisspip^. R. A Portion of the right or straight Gut cut off. SS. The
preparatorie Vessels, of which that on the right hand is bred* out of the
Trunk, that on the left out of the Emulgent Vein. T. The Pyramidal Body arising
from the Union of the Veins and Arteries preparatorie, expressed on the left
^ide. V. The Original of the preparatorie Arteries from the Trunk of Aorta. XX.
The Stones, the left being laid open from its common Coat. YY. The Vasa
deferentia which ascend from the Stones to the Belly. Z. The Yard. aa. The Cod,
which covered the left Stone, separated therefrom. bb. The Ilia or Flanks. cc.
The Share-bones. dd. The Loins.


page 44*

The Kidneys are two in number, Their Number
because among all Excrements, the wheyish is most plentiful, and exceeds the
two excrementitious Cholers, by reason of the Blood, whose vehiculum it was to
be, until it come into the large Veins of the Cava; and that one being
diseased, the other might draw the wheyish Humor; Whether when one Kidney is
diseased the other ceases to perform its office?
but I am not of the Opinion of Beverovi^ius and of Loselius after him, that
one Kidney being diseased, the other draws the wheyish Humor. For the contrary
is seen in such as have one Kidney only stopped with a great stone, or consumed
by an Ulcer; and the contrary to what he imagines, is seen in other parts, for
one Eye being hurt, the other sees; and all the scollups of the Lungs being
consumed on one side, that on the other side does further Respiration, unless
happily both parts be affected by some common Cause, for otherwise they must be
forced to say, that that happens only sometimes. There is seldom found only one,
and then it is a great one placed in the middle, for otherwise the body should
not be well balanced, nor could the Vessels be conveniently carried. It Is
monstrous, when both the Kidneys are joined into one beneath, and cleave
together, as I have seen at Padua. It Is more rare to find three or four placed
one upon another, or one beneath another.

They are situate under the Liver and Spleen, where they rest upon the Their
Situation.
Muscles of the Loins, between the two Coats of the Peritonaeum, at the sides
of the Vena cava and Arteria magna, under which very great Nerves lie hid, both
of the Muscle Psoas, and others, which evidently pass this way unto the Thighs.
Whence it is that a stone being in the Kidney, a numness is felt in the Thigh
of the same side. It is a rare case which Cabrolius has observed, for the
Kidneys to rest upon the Backbone of the Loins. Nor are the Kidneys seated
just one against another, Which Kidney is the highest?
least there should be some impediment to attraction, and least some part of
the wheyish humor should slip aside. But the rightside Kidney is lowest in Men,
to give way to the Liver, under which it rests immediately, reaching by its
end, the third Vertebra of the Loins. It is seldom higher then the left, and
seldom are the two Kidneys seated one just against another. The left Kidney for
the most part, lies partly under the spleen, but is seldom higher then the
spleen. Contrariwise in Brutes, the spleen goes more downwards, and the right
Kidney lies higher, and therefore there is a Cavity in the Liver by means of
the Kidney, which does not Naturally happen in men. Here some observe that the
right Kidney is nearer to the Cava, and the left more remote, by reason of the
left Emulgent Vein, which is much longer then the right.

They are not always both just of one bigness, but for the most part they are.
Their Bigness.
They are commonly of the length of four Vertebra's; their latitude for the
most part, three fingers, their thickness that of a thumb, yet the right Kidney
is very many times larger then the left, because by reason of the heat of the
right part, it draws the wheyish blood more vehemently, unless it be fretted by
some Disease, for then it grows lean and thin. Also such as are given to fleshy
desires, have larger Kidneys then ordinary. But their Proportion is not always
alike convenient for the body.

The Surface of the Kidneys, as in the liver is slippery and smooth: It is
seldom Surface.
in Mankind uneven, as if it were composed of many Kidneys or kernels, which
any man may frequently find in a Child yet in the Womb. But the Kidney is
always so made, in an Ox and Bear, in a Calf, and most curiously of all in a
Sturgeon, in which the Kidneys are made up like bunches of Grapes, of
triangular and quadrangular dies or tiles as it were after an Artificial
manner, as I have demonstrated in the Anatomy of that Creature.

The Color of the Kidneys is a dark Their Color.
red, but seldom intensely red. In diseased persons the Kidneys are variously
colored, even as the Liver and Spleen are.

The Kidney is shaped like a kidney-bean so Shape.
called, also like an Asarum leaf, if you respect the plane surface. Externally
in the Back or about the Flanks, it is of a round, bunching shape* beneath
toward the upper and lower part it is bossie, but in the middle concave and
hollow. Helmont has seen the left Kidney triangular, and in the same person
the right Kidney not so big as an Hazel-nut. Hippocrates compares the kidneys
to Apples: Without doubt to the broader sort of red Apples; unless by the word
meloisin he intended the likeness of the kidneys in man to other Creatures.

They are knit by an external Membrane, Connection.
which is from the Peritonaeum, to the Loins and Midriff, and by the emulgent
Vessels to the Cava and Aorta Vessels, by the Ureters to the Bladder. And the
right kidney, to the blind Gut, sometimes also to the Liver, the left to the
Spleen and Colon. Hence pains of the kidneys are exasperated by plenty of Winds
and Excrements.

They have a double Membrane: The Membranes.
first internal one near and proper, being very thin without Fat and Veins,
from the external and common Coat of the ingredient Vessels dilated (for a Vein
only goes in with but one Coat) which growing very close, makes the flesh more
compact, and being turned back inwards, it accompanies the Vessels, enters
into, and invests their Bellies. Another external from the Peritonaeum, which
adhaeres but loosely, whence they term it the Swath-band of the kidneys. For it
is as it were a coverlid or blanket of the kidneys; and because it is
encompassed with much Fat, for the sake thereof, it has received the Vena
adiposa so called, that is to say the Fat-vein, so that in fat persons, the
kidneys lie quite hidden. Whence he that knows or searches into hidden things,
is said to What it is to search the Reins?
search the Reins. For the Scripture uses two words Pela^oth and Ta^oth, the
former of which Mercerus will have to be derived from a word signifying to
perfect and finish, because there is in the Kidneys a power of consulting, and
finishing things consulted upon: The latter they derive from Tiach a blot, and
from the Radical word tivvach to daub, or plaster, and crust over, because the
Kidneys are crusted, and hidden as it were with Fat. Some indeed explain the
Phrase of searching the Reins to be meant of Concupiscence carnal and venereal
Delectation, from the word Calah to desire, Witness Rabbi David, and Pagnine,
or from Celi a Vessel, because in and from the Kidneys is the desire of
Venereal pleasures. Howbeit this also is a secret Quest, stolen pleasures
Venereal seeking the night and dark places and secret carriages, which I have
largely demonstrated in my Vindicae anatomicae against Hofman. Fat is bestowed
upon them to preserve the Heat of the Kidneys in regard of plenty of Serum
which would overcool them, and to defend the Vessels. There is less about the
right Kidney if we believe Aristotle, more about the left, because the Heat of
the right Kidney, either suffers it not to congeale, or melts it when it is
congealed.

They have a substance or flesh hard compact Substance.
and dense. (...) like that of the This TABLE propounds the Kidneys both whole
and cut asunder, that the Ingress and Egress of the Vessels might be discerned.
The XIX. TABLE.
The FIGURES explained.
FIG. I. Shows the Form of the Kidneys and of the Emulgent Vessels. AA. The
common Membrane of the Kidneys compassed about with Fat, and here separated.
BB. The Capsulae atrabilariae, or auxiliary Kidneys. CC. The Kidneys. D. A
Particle of the proper Membrane of the Kidneys separated from the rest. EE. The
Trunk of Vena cava descendent. FF. The Trunk of the Arteria magna descendent.
GG. The Ureters or Piss-channels. HH. The Emulgent Veins. II The Emulgent
Arteries. KK. The Spermatick Veins, or Seed-veins. LL. The spermatick or
Seed-arteries. m. The Vena adiposa or fat Vein from the Emulgent. n. The
Arteria adiposa, the fat Artery.


FIG. II. Shows the Entrance of the Emulgent Vessels, into the hollow part of
the Kidneys. AAA. The inside of the Kidney cut open, B. The Basin of the
Ureter. C. The Emulgent Vein spread by sundry Branches into the Kidney. D. The
Emulgent Artery variously divided, joining it self to the little Branches of
the Veins.


The III. FIG. Shows the Rise of the Aorta. AAA. The Kidney cut open. B. A
large Cavity, or the Basin of the Ureter, about the Kidney. C. The Ureter
looking downwards. DDD. Little Pipes embracing the Caruncles of the Ureter.
EEE. The Teat fashioned Caruncles or Bits of Flesh, which do strain the Urin
into the Kidneys.


The IV. FIG. Shows the Caruncles. AAA. The appearance of a Kidney split open.
BBB. The Mouths of the Ureters, which compass the Caruncles opened. CCC. The
Papillary Caruncles so called, which strain the Urin into the Kidneys.


The V. FIG. Shows the Kidney cut open to its Belly. AAA. The Kidney divided
through the bossie part. BBB. The Caruncles cut through the middle. CCC. The
Pipes of the Ureters. D. A Wound piercing into the Belly of the Kidney.


page 46

Heart, but not so fibrous, because the Fibers of the vessels are there. But on
both sides of the internal Cavity, the Fat being removed, there appears a loose
substance, uneven and hollow. This flesh sometimes is consumed and putrefies,
whence comes worms in the kidneys. In a Dog I have seen a worm so great in the
right kidney which lay hid like a snail, that beside the external Coat of the
kidney, there was none of the flesh left.

The kidneys have two Bellies as it were, Their Bellies.
the outermost in the hollow part which Fallopius calls Porta; through which
the emulgent vessels are carried, and first they enter bipartite or divided
into two, and soon after they are commonly divided into four, and so spread
abroad into the whole substance of the kidneys, till at last they are consumed
and spent into very small and fine threads. The inner Belly is nothing but the
large Cavity of the Ureter, that is to say a membranous Cavity, made of the
Ureters, spread out and widened in the Cavity of the kidneys. But the Ureters in
their progress are not attenuated within, as other Vessels are, but they have
the ends of their branches (eight or ten for the most part) broad and open like
Pipes, embracing certain Caruncles, or little fleshy Eminences.

These Caruncles are like kernels, less colored and harder then the rest of
The Caruncles.
the flesh. Carpus was the Finder out of them, though Rondeletius says that he
did first observe them, and calls them Mammilary productions. Others call them
Papillary Caruncles, because they are very like the Nipples upon Women's Duggs:
They are as big as Pease, somewhat broad above, unequal beneath, and they have
very little holes bored through them, so that they will hardly permit an hair
to enter, which furrows and little channels may be observed, if the kidneys be
cut long-wise. I have instead of these found stones in an Ox. The holes were to
be exceeding small, least the blood which is requisite to nourish the kidneys,
should with the Serum and Choler flow into the Ureters, which indeed happens
when the kidneys are diseased or the Passages too open.

They have Vessels of all kinds. Veins from the Cava. 1. The emulgent or
milking Veins so called from their Office, which are great The emulgent Veins
and Arteries.
and remarkable by reason of abundance of wheyish humor in the Body: In which
Baubinus says there are Valves to be seen, which hinder the return A Valve in
the Vein.
of serum into the Vena cava. But Experience teaches otherwise, for with their
broad end they look toward the Cava, and with their sharp and lunary part they
respect the kidneys, by which they are opened, according to the Opinon of Dr.
Harvey, which I have found true, and demonstrated by visible Inspection, so
that any matter may easily repass, from the kidneys by the Emulgents to the
Vena cava, in the solemn Circulation of the Blood. By a short and crooked
passage they are carried downwards to the hollow part of the kidneys, as also
the emulgent Arteries, which are remarkable and large, derived from the Trunk
of the Aorta, unto the kidneys, not so much to furnish vital Heat, to resist
coldness, as to nourish the kidneys, and to purge away the wheyish humor, which
is most plentifully contained in the Arterial blood. For these emulgent Vessels
are seldom one like another, or one in number, sometimes with six, five, four,
three, and for the most part two branches, they go distinctly to the kidneys,
and that either on the one or both sides, seldom on one alone. And when they
have entered the hollow part of the kidney, each branch is suddenly subdivided
into four or five little ones, which being again divided into other lesser
ones, they are at last spent into Veins and Arteries as small as hairs, which
end at the the Heads of the Caruncles, into which they shed their wheyish
humor, that it may distill into the little Pipes of the Ureters: Yet are the
Emulgents never opened at the Pipes of the Ureters. For wind or water being
forced in, it flows indeed through the Emulgents, but it goes not out by the
Pipes. Into the left Emulgent in some bodies there is implanted a branch of the
Vena azugos so called, which is thought to be the cause of that Consent which
is between the Chest and the Kidneys, which the Arteries do not a little
further.

2. The Venae adiposae. The right being drawn from the Emulgent, seldom Venae
adiposae.
from the Trunk, the left from the Cava to the outward Coat, which contain
blood to nourish the Fat. Moreover, the kidneys need no other Vessels to
nourish them besides the Arteries, as the Vesica bilaria or Choler-bladder, and
the Piss-bladder; for they do not draw a pure Excrement as those do.

The Kidney has one very small Nerve on each side, from the Stomachbranch
Their Nerves.
of the sixth pare, distributed into its proper Membrane, whence arises Why such
as have a stone in their kidney are subject to vomit?
the Sympathy between the kidneys and the stomach, as when persons diseased in
their kidneys, are troubled with stomach-sickness and vomiting. But there are a
few branches of Nerves, which proceed from about the beginnings of the Arteries
of the Mesentery, part of which enters into the hollow of the kidneys with the
Emulgents, and is disseminated through their substance. Hence persons having
the stone in their kidneys, have more vehement gravative and stretching pains:
But their pain becomes more sharp, when the stone enters into the narrow and
very sensible Ureters.

Now this is the structure of the Kidneys The structure of a Dogs kidney.
in Mankind. For in a Dog it is otherwise, in whose kidneys there are other
Cavities; but in the kidneys of a Man there are none, save what are formed by
the Emulgents and Ureters variously divided.

Also there is a feigned Dream of some The Cribrum benedictum of the Ancients.
of the Ancients, touching the Cribrum benedictum by them so called. For they
feigned that there were in the kidneys, two Cavities seated according to their
length: The one uppermost, into which the wheyish blood should be poured out of
the Emulgents, the other lowermost, which a certain transverse Membrane was
thought to sever like a seive bored through with very small holes, which made
them call it the Colander, and the blessed seive, through which they would have
the Serum strained into the Ureters, and the good blood to stay behind to
nourish the kidneys. These Dreams of the Ancients Vesalius did rightly reject;
The Error of Vesalius.
but he is mean while deceived, while he would have such Cavities in the
kidneys of men, as there are in Dogs kidneys, and will not have the kidneys of a
man or sheep to be cut up, because of the Fat. Riolanus defends this Opinion of
the Colander or Seive, but he explaines it only of the Caruncles (as I do)
which are pierced through with very small holes.

Their Use. Erasistratus and the followers Aristoles Error touching the use of
the Kidneys.
of Asclepiades did conceive that Nature had made the kidneys in vain. And
Aristotle sometimes says, that there is no need of them. But

Their Use is to draw the wheyish How the Urin is made?
blood, by the emulgent Arteries, that so the mass of blood may be purged. The
blood therefore going out through these Vessels, is always carried through the
branches of the Emulgents, which are spread abroad through the whole flesh of
the kidneys, and go at last into very small passages, so that at last the
wheyish Humor is poured right out into the flesh of the kidneys: But the
sanguine and laudable portion, does partly remain to nourish the kidneys, and
partly returns by little emulgent Veins which are open into the Cava, and so to
the Heart. The wheyish and watery part is strained through the Papillary
Caruncles, which have holes into the branches of the Ureters, which grow
together into one large Cavity or Expansion of the Ureter, into which the
wheyish humor is emptied, and through the Ureters into the Bladder, where it
becomes urin. And because urin is yellow, a portion of yellow Choler not drawn
out by the Gallbladder, is thought to pass along with the Serum or wheyish
humor that the Ureters might be cleansed by Choler, as the Guts are.

Olhafius, Sennertus, Olaus Wormius, whom a great many others have followed,
Whether the Kidneys prepare Seed?
as Hofman, Meybome, Horstius, Loseleus, Eichstadius, Sperlinger, and others
have attributed to the Kidneys the preparation of Seed, because hot Kidneys
cause a propensity to fleshy lust, and cold Kidneys indispose to Venery, and
because in Creatures that use Venery, the kidneys have a rank smell and taste of
Seed, which in guelded Animals they have not. Because in a Gonorrhaea
proceeding from abundance of Sperm, Remedies are successfully applied to the
kidneys: because men are said to proceed from the Loins of their Progenitors,
and they have been famed for the seat of Lust: Because the Loins being whipped,
do raise an Appetite to Venery: And finally because in persons given up to
lust, the kidneys are consumed. Which Arguments are indeed of some weight,
unless peradventure that smell and rast happen to the kidneys, because they are
nourished with such a nutriment as is the matter of Seed, which is carried for
the Generation thereof in bordering Vessels. And when the kidneys are hot or
cold, the neighboring places are also hot or cold, through which the matter of
Seed is carried, and in which it is altered, and therefore Seed may have
affinity to the Constitution of the kidneys. For Johannes Walaeus conceives
This Opinion reconciled with the Doctrine of Circulation.
that the Circulation of the blood cannot admit this use of the kidneys, for
blood is not carried from the kidneys to the stones, by the Emulgents and
Veins: but it falls down only out of the Aorta by the Spermatick Arteries. But
this action of the kidneys defended by such Learned men, may be reconciled with
the circular motion of the blood, if we shall say. 1. That the more wheyish
part of the Arterial blood is drawn by the kidneys through the emulgent
Arteries, whereby the rest which descends right along through the Spermatick
Arteries, becomes more pure and fitter to make Seed. Of which this is a sign,
that when the attraction of the kidneys is weak, and the blood comes to the
stones more wheyish then it ought to be, the seed which is voided, is unfit for
Generation, though plentiful in quantity. 2. That the neighboring Spermatick
Vessels are irradiated and virtuated by the kidneys, even as the Brain
irradiates the lower Parts, by an inbred property resembling light. 3. If any
thing should be carried from the kidneys to the stones, we might very well say,
it is a wheyish substance, which stirs up a sharp titillation and strong
provocation and desire to Venery. For I am not persuaded by the Arguments of
Helmont, that the salt of the Urin takes away the fruitfulness of the Seed, if
it be moderate, seeing it helps the Seed both by its acrimony and fluidity or
thinness of substance. Little Birds, indeed, though very lascivious, have
neither kidneys nor bladder; yet they have somewhat that supplies the Office of
the kidneys, viz. certain Caruncles or little parcels of flesh, which resemble
the kidneys, which are continued with the Vena cava and Aorta, Witness
Aristotle and others.

Beverovicius artributes a kind of Sanguification or Blood-making to Whether
the Kidneys make Blood?
the kidneys. 1. Because they have a Parenchy^^ and very many Vessels. But they
might have their Parenchyma because of their Vessels, that they might not be
entangled one with another. And it was requisite they should have very many
Vessels, to the end they might plentifully purge away the Serum or wheyish part
of the Blood, so that through very many and very small outlets, the Whey might
be issued out into the Caruncles, without any considerable quantity of Blood
therewith. 2. Because the Kidneys which in healthy persons are red, clear,
solid; according to the kind of the Disease, become sometimes obscure and
blackish, sometimes whiteish; otherwhiles loose, brittle, and as it were rotten;
and sometimes again, hard and dried. But that might happen, because as some
other parts, so the kidneys might be sick, or through sickness of the Body,
Concoction being somwhere hurt, they could not be nourished with good blood. 3.
Because the Urins of persons troubled with the stone are crude: But of that
another cause is commonly rendered. Viz. in that the kidneys being stopped, the
thinner part only of the Urin can make its way forth. 4. Because persons
troubled with the stone are wont to swell and look pale, like those that are
termed Leucophlegmatici. But this may easily happen, because the kidneys either
through weakness cannot sufficiently draw the wheyish humor out of the blood,
or being stopped it cannot be duly expelled. But if he or any other shall
affirm, that allowing the Circulation of the blood in these parts, the blood is
there somewhat more changed, then it was in its simple Vessel, I shall not
disagree with them therein. For themselves it is that they change the blood,
but it is for the rest of the body only, that they purge out the wheyish
Excrement.

Chap. XVIII. Of the Capsulae Atrabilariae, or Blackcholer Cases.
THese Vessels are by most Anatomists neglected and not observed, though they
are evermore found in all Bodies, what ever Archangelus says to the contrary.
Nor must we say that these Capsulae are made of a superfluous Matter, as a sixth
finger uses to be.

We are beholden to Bartholomew Eustachius Their first finder out.
for the first discovery of these small Bodies, who mentions them by the name
of Kernels, and after him Archangelus and Bauhinus. Casserius calls them Renes
succenturiatos Deputy-kidneys or Auxiliary kidneys. I shall call them, in
regard of the use I allot them, Capsulas atrabilarias, Black-choler Cases.

Now these Cases are so scated, that they rest upon the upper part of the
kidneys on the outside, where they look toward the Vena cava, being covered
with Fat and Membranes.

Their number is the same with that Their Number.
of the kidneys. For upon each kidney there rests a Case. I have once seen four
of them, of which the two greater being four square were seated above, and the
two smaller being round, uneven, and rough, were placed beneath the emulgent
Veins.

Their Magnitude is not always alike; commonly that on the right side Their
Magnitude.
is bigger then that on the left, yet sometimes the latter is bigger then the
for^* In a Child new born, they are near as big as the kidneys, peradventure
because they are moister then ordinary, and contain a more thin melancholy
Juice, which because they do not strongly enough expel, but treasure it up
rather, therefore these Cases are widened. But in grown persons they are
straightened, and become less, though they abound more with Melancholy, partly
because the Melancholy being gathered by degrees, is through the strength of
nature by degrees expelled; partly, because the Serum in hotter persons is
dried up, wherewith the new born Infant abounded; and partly because as the
Reins grow bigger, they are compressed. Yet I have once observed them in a
grown person, by reason of abundance of black Choler, twice as big as
ordinary, whereas commonly they are no bigger then a large vomiting Nut.

They have an apparent internal Cavity, both in persons grown and newborn Their
Cavity.
babes, compassing the inner circumference of the whole Case as it were, in
which they are found to contain a dreggie and black humor, so that even the
inner sides are colored with the said blackness. In Infants I have seen to my
thinking wheyish blood in them. I admire that Riolanus could not, or would not
see this Cavity, for though he cries that it is so small, that it will hardly
admit a little Pea, yet is it sometimes wider, and always so large, as to
contain many peasen compressed, and we can thrust a Probe into it, this way and
that way, without violence. It contains therefore a large Cavity, respecting
the smalness of its Body. Nor has Nature ever labored in vain, no not in the
smallest spaces of the Capillary Veins. It is a small matter which they can
hold, yet it may be counted much, because it is successively received in, and
cast out again. This Humor might have been indeed allayed and sweetened by the
admixture of blood, as Choler also might, yet Vessels and Receptacles are
ordained for both these Excrements, that the blood might not be polluted.

In Shape and Substance they many times resemble the kidneys, save that Their
Shape and Substance.
their substance is a little looser; so that they seem little kidneys resting
upon the great ones. Which perhaps was the Reason that Casserius did call them
Auxiliary kidneys: But more frequently their substance is flat like a Cake
(howbeit hollow within) and their shape is round-long and somewhat square.
Sometimes they are three cornered, seldom round; for they are seldom seen in one
and the same shape.

They are knit where they rest unto the external Membrane of the kidneys Their
Connection.
so fast, that negligent Dissecters, when they take out the kidneys, leave them
sticking to the Membrane of the Diaphragma or Midriff. And this is the Reason
that many observe them not.

They have Vessels: Veins, and Arteries, derived to them from the middle of the
Their Vessels.
Emulgents. Sometimes also a Vein is sent thither from the kidney, and sometimes
also a branch near the Liver from the Cava is brought thereto, sometimes also
from the Vena adiposa, and sometimes from all those places, sometimes with a
single, otherwhiles with a double branch. Sometimes they have a single Artery
from the Emulgents, sometimes a double one; and otherwhiles they have from the
Trunk of the Aorta, one while a single branch, otherwhiles three together.

These Cases have Nerves also. For about the beginnings of the Arteries of the
Mesentery, some branches of Nerves mixed together are produced, one part of
which goes unto the kidneys, and these Cases which rest upon them.

Their use has been hitherto unknown. The use according to the Authors Opinion.
If it may be allowed to conjecture, as doubtless it is, due consideration
being had to the Structure and Passages; we may say, that a thick and
excrementitious black-cholerick humor, is detained in these Cases, which had
not been purged from the Blood made in the Liver, or Spleen, or both, but
especially that blood which we formerly proved to be made in the Spleen; which
is here kept and digested, because it could not pass through the narrow ways
of the kidneys. Nor let the ascending of an heavy substance trouble us, which
ever and anon happens in the Body, by means of the expulsive and attractive
Faculty of some Part; yea and vehement attraction is advantaged by the highness
of Situation in motions Spiritual. Hence also peradventure it is that Urins are
sometimes black, when at any time this Humor is collected in the Cases, in too
great a quantity. Where also may be often doubtless, the seat of some morbifick
cause, especially of Melancholy. And the reason why melancholic persons are
thereby little pained, is because the smallness of the Nerves, and the
thickness of the Humor, do render the Sense dull. The renowned According to
Veslingus.
Veslingus agrees with me in this use, but he shows not whence, nor how the
humor comes. For he conceives they help to draw the wheyish humor, and that
they treasure up a parcel of black Choler, which furthers the separation of
Whey from the Blood, like Runner. Olhafius will have them to receive the
According to Olhafius.
thick and terrestrial Excrements of the kidneys, which remain after their
Digestion. And therefore because a greater Bowel has more Excrements then a
lesser, the Conceptacle for the right kidney was to be larger, and that for the
left lesser, and therefore the right side Case is greater then the left side,
because the right kidney is greater then the left. But no man has thought of
the ways by which the black blood should be discharged into these Capsulae or
Cases. The Arteries do easily occur to such as hold the Circulation of the
blood. For according to the old Opinion, a way is readily found to these
Capsulae from the Emulgent, or from the Trunk of the Aota it self, which
bringing Nutriment such as it is, do withal unlade the Excrement of the
Arterial blood, which was not evacuated formerly. But how it returns out of the
Capsulae, how How the Humor comes out of the Cases into the Kidneys.
it comes to the kidneys to color the urins black, is not so easy to show,
for the Veins end in the Emulgents, or in the Cava it self, seldom in the
kidneys, and so either they should perpetually keep that excrementitious Juice,
which is unlikely, or send it back again to the Cava and the Heart, or they
ought, verily, to enter the kidneys directly by the Emulgent Veins, without any
hindrance by the contrary motion of the blood going out of the kidneys. This
contrary motion a thicker and stronger humor can easily overcome, manifold
branches also opposing the same, as in Rivers we now and then see waters run
contrary to the stream, by the banks and in the middle, by reason of some
fountains opened. But oftentimes the Vein of the right side Case, is
immediately inserted out of the Trunk ^f the Cava. And in such a chance, truly,
either Capsula or Case is not sufficiently purged, whence arises some hidden
Disease; or the circular motion ^e there neglected, which in the The Capsulae
Atrabilariae in Men and other Creatures, are here described. In all which
FIGURES.
The XX. TABLE.
The FIGURES explained.
The Capsulae or Cases, being round in men

The Capsulae or Cases, being Trianguler in men

The Capsulae or Cases, being square and O^ all in men

The Capsulae or Cases, in a Lamb^

The Capsulae or Cases, in the fish, Tu^sio

The Capsulae or Cases, in an Ox^

A. Represents the Cases whole. B. Shows them dissected, that the internal
Cavities may be seen, which are of various Forms. C. Points out their Veins and
Arteries, arising from the Aorta and Cava, and from the Emulgents. D. Is the
Vena cava. E. Is the Arteria Aorta. F. The Vessels on both sides, called
Emulgents. G. The Kidneys cropped off.


Page 5^

smallest Vessels does frequently vary; or if it must be Religiously observed,
we must here conceive a Reverberation of the Kidneys; for the Blood flowing
back out of the Kidneys through the Emulgent Veins up to the Cava, because it
discharged only Whey and no thicker Juice in the kidneys, it insinuates it self
by the Vein next the Capsula, and coming back out of the Capsula by the little
Arteries, with the Emulgent Arteries it goes again to the kidneys, and from
thence is purged by urin. He that can give the best Conjecture, let him be
counted the best Prophet. Spigelius whom Laurenbergius of Rostoch, does Their
use according to Spigelius and Laurenbergius.
faithfully imitate, has assigned other uses to these Capsulae. 1 To fill the
empty space between the Kidneys and the Midriff. 2. To prop up the Stomach, in
that place which is above the emulgent Veins and Arteries. But I answer, 1.
Nature makes, nor does nothing in vain or inconsiderately, much less does she
appoint a noble animated Part, only to fill a space, which she might have
filled by making the kidney a little bigger. 2. These props would have been too
weak by reason of their smalness. Nor should this use belong to the Stomach
alone, but to other neighboring Parts. Riolanus writes that they have no use
in grown persons, Whether they have any use in grown persons.
but that after the Child is born they become useless, and therefore we must
seek for their use in the Child in the Womb, when it is great, whose kidneys
being void of Fat, the Juice ordained to breed kidney-fat, is received into
these Cases. But, 1. Their Cavity, Veins, Arteries, Humors, etc. will not allow
us to say they are withered up in grown persons. 2. The use of the
Navil-vessels ceases, because the Child is no longer to be tied to its Mother,
nor to draw its nutriment from her. And that these Ca^r Capsulae are
serviceable to grown persons, was ^ed before, for ^therwise their Veins,
Arteries, ^uld be ^o^ end. 3. That the kidneys of Children in the Womb should
be always void of Far, I have found to be false. 4. The kidney-fat is never
made of that wheyish black Juice, and hardly any man ever saw an oily Juice in
these Capsulae.

Chap. XIX. Of the Vreters, or Vrin-channels.
THe Ureters or Urin-carryers, are The Ureters.
round-long Vessels or Channels, arising out of the Kidneys, planted into the
Bladder, into which they carry the Urin from the Kidneys.

The Ureters are commonly two in Number, on each side one, sometimes Their
Number.
two, and sometimes more, yet al growing into one before their Insertion, as
also Carolus Stephanus observed in a certain Body. But the far renowned
Riolanus, in a body infected with the venereal Pox, saw two Ureters on either
side, inserted into the bladder at ^s places, the one toward the neck, the
other in the bottom thereof. Solomon Albertus observed three on the right side,
and but one on the left. I have frequently observed the like difference, as
among other things I show in my Rare Anatomical Histories.

Their Situation. They run through many parts in their beginning, middle, Their
Situation.
and end. Their beginning is in the kidneys themselves, what ever Hofman,
Riolanus, Laurenberg, and Plempius say to the contrary; in which they rise like
Roots out of the Earth, and as a Vein out of the Liver. Nor does their
similitude with the Bladder move me; because, 1. The Nature of the Ureters is
peculiar and distinct from them both. 2. They are not much unlike the belly of
the kidneys. 3. All Parts do carry with them the nature and color of their
Original, as we see in the Aorta and the Cava. Nor does their cleaving fast to
the Bladder infer any thing, seeing the connection is not greater there then in
the kidneys, being conveniently separable, between the Membrane of the Bladder
and the Muscle. And therefore this Original The Original of the Ureters.
is in the kidneys, out of nine or ten little Pipes or Channels, to each of
which the Caruncles aforesaid are applied, though the Caruncles may be also
applied to their middle part being bored through. Now those Pipes go into fewer
and greater branches, commonly into three, distributed into the upper, middle,
and lower Region of the kidney. These grow afterward into one large Cavity
which goes out of the flat side of the kidney. The middle part, is the whole
Their Middle.
long-round Pipe or Channel, resting upon the Muscles of the Loins, between two
Membranes of the Peritonaeum, with which

The Ureters are fastened; above to the kidneys, below to the Bladder, Their
Connection.
with the inner substance whereof they make one continued Body, so that they
cannot be plucked away without breaking. Their End is, where they are implanted,
being Their End.
carried obliquely a fingers breadth, between the proper Membrane of the
Bladder, and its circumvolved Muscle, not far from the Neck of the Bladder, in
its hinder part. And besides the oblique Insertion of the Ureters Why the Urin
cannot go out into the Emulgents.
(which cannot at al, or very highly hinder the regress of the wheyish Humor
into the Ureters, because it is broad) two little Membranes are placed in the
Implantation, like the Valves in bellows, shutting up the passage of the
Ureters, so that the Urin cannot go back. Hence it is, that the Bladder being
blown up, will not admit so much as any wind. Laurentius, Riolanus, and
Plempius deny these Valves, contrary to all other Anatomists. But though the
passage be crooked, yet is it open enough. The Gut Colon is not a little
wreathed, and the Ileon more then that, and yet they have a Valve affixed. Yea
they are themselves forced to confess, that the two Membranes clapped together,
do exactly shut up the passage of the Ureters, and what hinders but that they
may be termed Valves.

As for their Magnitude. They are long-round Vessels, thick and Their Magnitude.
hollow, as big as straws. But in Dissections of persons troubled with the
Stone, we have often seen their Cavity so wide as to admit two fingers, yea and
as big as the Guts.

As to there Figure, they are round Vessels like Water-pipes, a little crooked
like the letter, Figure.
S.

They have a double Membrane: The Membranes.
one common from the Peritonaeum for strength sake, the other proper, like the
inner substance of the Bladder, and continued therewith, white (whence some and
Celsus among the rest call them the white Veins) bloodles, nervous, thick,
strong furnished with straight and crooked Fibers, that they may be stretched.

They receive small Veins and Arteries from Vessels.
the neighboring Parts.

They have Nerves from the sixth pare, and the Marrow of the Loins. Whence they
have an exquisite sense, and are pained when stones pass through them, which
sense of pain is increased, by the distention of these membranous Bodies,
caused by great stones.

Their Use is, that through them as Conduitpipes, Use.
the Urin separated from the Blood by the kidneys, may be carried into the
Bladder; and sometimes Gravel and Stones, Worms, Pins, Ha^^, Quittor, Blood,
etc. Now the Urin is carried by a manifest Passage formerly explained into the
bladder, which Passage, because Asclepiades was ignorant of, he would have the
Urin The Error of Asclepiades and Paracelsus.
carried into the bladder, after a blind manner, as if it were first resolved
into a vapor, and did so sweat through, and afterward became an humor as
before: Which transudation Paracelsus likewise held.

Chap. XX. Of the Piss-bladder
THis Bladder is seated in the lowest The Situation of the Piss-bladder.
part of the Belly, between two Coats of the Peritonaeum, in a Cavity fashioned
by the Os sacrum, the Hip and Share-bones (as it were in a little belly of its
own, separate from the Paunch) in men above the (...) rectum or Arse-gut; in
women between the (...) the Womb, and the Os pubis, and the Shar^.

Its Magnitude varies, for the greater the Lungs are, the greater is the
bladder, so Its Magnitude.
that those Live-wights which have no Lungs, have no bladder; and according as
it is variously distended. For sometimes being full, it does so strout in the
belly, that it may be felt by the hand, and sometimes being empty, it is in
Dissections hardly discerned at first, by reason of its smallness, being no
bigger then a large Pear.

Its Figure is long-round and globous, Its Figure.
that it may hold the more: And it has within one Cavity, seldom two,
distinguished by a Membrane as a partition wall. Such were found in a Maid of
thirty five years old, by Voltherus Coiter, and Casparus Bauhinus, and Raphael
Thorius, and Brovardus, have described unto us the like which they found in the
body of the great Casaubon, the one of which being the left and praeternatural,
had a passage into the right by a round hole, which would admit the tops of
four fingers, being full of the urin, which at set times, and its usual
endeavor, it voided by the right Cavity, which was six times as great as it,
being continued thereunto, with as many Membranes thick, and common to the rest
of the greater bladder. This double Cavity in these and the like, is not formed
of the dilatation of the Ureter, within the foldings of the bladder, which may
nevertheless often happen, but in Casaubon each Ureter did end in the bladder
^^Spannd that it was originally so, the said persons demo^e. It being the
pleasure of nature, The XXI TABLE.
This TABLE expresses the Coats of the Bladder, as also the Seedbladders seated
in the Hinder-part thereof.
The FIGURES Explained.
FIG. I. AA. The common Coat of the Bladder. BBB. Its middle Coat, furnished
with musculous Fibers. C. Its inmost wrinkled Coat. DD. The Neck of the
Bladder. E. The Sphincter Muscle of the Bladder. FF. The Kernels called
Prostarae. GG. A Portion of the Ureters. hh. Their Insertion between the two
Coats of the Bladder.


FIG. II. A. The inner Coat of the Bladder being opened. BB. Part of the
Ureters. CC. The Orifices of the Ureters widened in the Bladder. DD. A Portion
of the Vasa deferentia, or carrying Vessels. EE. The Seminal Bladders displaid.
FF. The Kernels called Prostatae divided. G. An Hole going from the Bladders
into the beginning of the Piss-pipe, furnishe with a Valve. H. The common
Passage of Piss and Seed.


FIG. III. A. The Hinder side of the Bladder, with its External Coat taken off.
BB. The Ureters. CC. A Portion of the Vessels which carry away the Seed. DD.
The Seed-cases, or Capsulae Seminales. dd. Their End. EE. The Seed-bladders
expressing diverse Cells. FF. The Kernels called Prostatae. G. The Piss-pipe.


page 52

that as his mind was above that of other Mortals, so the unusual structure of
his body, should afford like admiration to Posterity. From the bottom, it is by
little and little straightened into a narrow neck, whence arise two parts of the
Bladder, The Bottom and the Neck.

The Bottom is fastened to the Peritonaeum, also to the Navil, by an
intermediate Its Connection.
Ligament, called Urachus, and the two Navil-arteries dried up, least when a
man walks upright, the bottom should rest upon the Neck. Hence is the Sympathy
between the neck of the bladder and the Navil. The neck of the bladder is
fastened in Women to the Neck of the Womb, and the neighboring Hip-bones; in Men
to (...) Rectum Intestinum.

Its Substan^ ^tly membranous for strengths (...) because of exten^ Its
Substance.
and w^ether, ^ly fleshy, because of motion. For it has two Membranes, and one
Muscle enfolding the whole bladder, which all other Anatomists except
Aquapendent, do make to be a third Membrane, and not a Muscle.

The first Membrane is outmost and common, from the Peritonaeum, strong
Membranes.
and thick.

The other is inmost, and proper, thin, of exquisite sense, interwoven with all
kind of Fibers, that it may admit of much distention and contraction [wherein
there are very many wrinkles, in persons troubled with the stone, and little
cavities are engraven which hold stones, being caused through long want of
distention] And it is covered with a The Crust of the Bladder.
fleshy Crust, or wrinkled Coat as it were, made of the Excrements of the
^igestion, least the innemost Coar should be by the sharpness of the Urine.

That which is in the middle, betwixt this proper and the outmost Coat, is by
others called the second proper Membrane, which nevertheless they grant to be
thick, and furnished with fleshy Fibers.

But it is rather a Muscle encompassing the whole Bladder: because it has
Fibers The expulsive Muscle of the Bladder.
visibly fleshy, inserted into the beginning of the bladder: So that, as the
circular Muscle called Sphincter, does cloze the bladder, that our water may
not pass from us against our wills, so this Muscle does help the voidance of
our water, whilst by contracting it self, it squeezes the bladder. And this
is, indeed, the Opinion of my Master Aquapendent; the truth whereof Walaeus was
wont thus to prove in the Dissection of live Dogs: having cut off all the
Muscles of the Abdomen, he makes a small piercing wound into the bladder, out
of which wound or hole, the urin spins out as far, as naturally it does from
the Yard: yet I shall not refuse to grant thus much to other Authors: Viz. that
the Muscles of the Abdomen or Belly, do also help forward the Expulsion of
Urin. It ma es nothing against us, that the stomach, and Guts, and Womb, have
the like fleshy membrane; for they also did need such an one, that they might
more easily be widened and contracted. Hence, though the Membrane of the
Bladder be more fleshy, yet in a large sense, the Membrane of these other parts
may likewise be termed musculous. But the condition of Spirituous blood,
forcibly issuing forth, and of a dull and lazy urin are different. Moreover,
in the Veins, the precedent blood is forced on by that which follows, according
to the Laws of Circulation, and the inbred Faculty.

The Bladder has three Holes: Two a little before the Neck, where the Ureters
Its Holes.
are inserted, of which before, the third is in the Neck, to let out the Urin.

Now the Neck of the Bladder, is its narrower Its Neck.
part, through which the Urin is voided. In Men this Neck is more long-round,
narrow, and a little writhen, because being placed under the bodies which
compose the Yard, it is carried upwards, under the Share-bones, from the
Fundament to the Original of the Yard: To which in the hinder part two Kernels
are adjoined, called the Prostatae. In Women the Neck of the Bladder is short
and broad, stretched forthright downwards, and implanted above into the Neck of
their Womb. In both Sexes the Neck is fleshy (which therefore heals, being
wounded, whereas wounds in other parts of the bladder are deadly) interwoven
with very many Fibers, especially such as run athwart, which purse up the Neck
of the bladder, that our water may not pass from us against our wills, and this
orbicular Muscle is The Sphincter Muscle.
therefore called the Sphincter. Which if it be over cooled, or troubled with
the Palsy, or any other Disease, the Patient cannot hold his water.

The Bladder has Veins, termed Venae Hypogastricae, implanted into the sides
of its Its Vessels.
Neck, which being variously distributed through the bladder, are mutually
conjoined one with another, and with the Arteries, and are penetrable by mutual
holes from one to another, so that the blood may easily pass out of one branch
into another, according to the Observation of Sylvius, that the nutritive blood
brought in by the Arteries, may return by the Veins. Now the reason why the
Bladder has Veins, is, because it draws a mere Excrement, viz. the Urin, with
which it cannot be nourished.

It has Arteries from the Hypogastrica in Men, in Women from the Vessels which
go into the Neck of the Womb.

It has considerable Nerves from the sixth pare, and from the Medulla of
Ossacrum.

Its Use is, to contain Urin, and to be the Its Use.
Bodies Chamber Pot; also Stones it contains and Gravel, and sometimes other
things, as Hairs, Witness Galen, Donatus, Hollerius, Shenkius, Tulpius; Worms,
by report of Hollerius, Mundanella, Dodonaeus, of which there was a late
Instance at Hafnia, Pinns, and which is most strange, Pot Herbs, according to
the late Observation of John van Horn. And its next use is to expel the said
Urin contained.

Chap. XXI. Of the Seedpraeparatory Vessels in Men.
HItherto we have handled the Organs of Nutrition; those of Procrea ion or
Generation come next to be spoken of, which are different in Men from those in
Women. In Men those which first present themselves, are

The twofold Spermatick Vessels, viz. The Spermatick Vessels and their Original.
the two Spermatick Veins, and the two Spermatick Arteries.

The right hand Vein, arises from the Trunk of Vena cava, a little below the
Rise of the Emulgent: The left springs from the Emulgent, for otherwise it
should go over the Aorta, and there would be danger of breaking, or ^ather
least by the Pulse of the Artery, the motion of the blood in the Vein, should
be in some sort stopped and hindered. Therefore it has its Rise seldom from
the Cava, and sometimes from both places.

Both the Seminal Arteries do arise from the Arteria magna, or great Artery:
Almost two fingers breadths distance from the Emulgents.

These Vessels are in Men greater Their Magnitude.
then in Women; and the Arteries are larger then the Veins, because very much
Heat, and Vital Spirit, and Arterial blood are requisite, for to make the Seed.
Sometimes one Artery is wanting, and sometimes both, peradventure in such as
cannot engender.

These Vessels are somewhat distant Their Passage.
one from the other; they are obliquely carried above the Ureters to the
Groyns, but in their progress, these Veins and Arteries are joined by infinite
Anastomoses (so that the Arteries are so coupled within the Coat of the Veins,
as if they were but one Vessel) and they are knit together by a Membrane
arising from the Peritonaeum, and are afterward carried to the beginning of
the Stone, like the tendrils of a Vine, being so interwoven, that a curious eye
cannot distinguish a Vein from an Artery.

And this Intertexture of Veins and Arteries The Corpus varicosum.
thus made, is by some called Corpus varicosum, pampiniform, Pyramidal, etc.
which others do thus distinguish: Where the praeparatory Vessels do from a
narrow beginning, first widen themselves into a broader Basis, they are termed
Pyramidalia. And when afterward before their entrance into the Stones, they
become here and there crisped like the Tendre^ Vine, they are called
Pampiniformia. Howb^e Vessels do not pass through the Peritonae^m^ but are
carried between The XXII. TABLE.
This TABLE comprehends the Kidneys, Bladder, Yard, and Seminary Vessels, as
they are wont to be showed, taken out of the Body.
The FIGURE explained.
AA. The Auxiliary Kidneys, or Deputykidneys. BB. The true Kidneys. CC. The
Emulgent Veins. DD. The Emulgent Arteries. EE. The Spermatick Veins. FF. The
Spermatick Arteries. GG. The trunk of Vena cava, divided into the Iliack
Branches. HH. The trunk of the great Artery, divided in like manner. IIII. The
Ureters. KK. The Vessels which prepare the Seed. LL. The same Vessels where
they make the Vasa pampiniformia. MM. The Stones covered with all their Coats.
NN. The Vessels which carry away the Seed going behind the Bladder. O. The
Piss-bladder. P. The Neck of the said Bladder. QQ. The Kernels called
Prostatae. RR. The Muscles which raise the Yard. SS. Two other Muscles which
widen the Piss-pipe. T. The Body of the Yard. V. The Foreskin covering the Nut
of the Yard.


page 54

its double Coat, with a small Nerve, from the sixth Conjugation, and the Muscle
Cremaster.

These Praeparatory Vessels of Generation, when they come unto the Stone, are
not changed into the carrying Vessels, as if one continued body with them as
many imagine. But they pierce through the proper Coat of the Stone, and are
spread through the substance thereof, and so obliterated.

The use of the Spermatick Arteries, is to carry Blood and Spirit to the
Stones, and Their Use.
in those various interweavings to prepare the same, by a virtue which they
fetch from the stones, by reason of its long stay and accurate Concoction, and
sifting in those crooked Mazes, that it may become Seed, and may nourish the
Stones, for which nourishments sake, in those that are not yet of ripe age,
these Arteries carry blood, before they can labor and make Seed. Now the use of
the Spermatick Veins, closely interwoven with the Arteries about the Stones,
and joined to them by mutual Anastomoses, is, to carry back that blood which
remains superfluous, after the Stones are nourished, and the Seed made, unto
the left Emulgent, or to the Vena ^ediately, on the right side, where the S^in
is commonly propagated from t^ there an^ need to fear, least this return of the
blood through the Veins should withdraw matter from the Seed, or that the
generating Spirit, should return upwards from the stones. For by reason of the
intricate mixture and intertexture of the Vessels, no part goes back, save what
the stones dismiss, as not necessary for themselves, nor the whole Body. And
therefore we do for the most part find the Arteries which bring the blood
greater, and the Veins which carry it back lesser, because the Stones do not
return so much as they receive. And that the Spirit is retained, the silent
course of the blood through the Veins, is a token. Which blood, verily, is
retained in the stones from flowing back, by the same power whereby it is
retained in other Parts of the Body.

CHAP. XXII. Concerning the Stones.
THe Stones or Testicles so called, as witnessing The Stones.
the courage and strength of a man, without which a man was no sufficient
witness in the Roman Court, are also called Did^^^i or Gemelli Twins, because
commonly

They are in Number two. Seldom one great one and no more, as in Sylla Their
Number.
and Cotta, Witness A^rianus; seldomer three, as in Agathocles the Tyrant of
Sicilie, and some Families of Italy of the Colci, especially at Bergoma, and
others at Paris, according to the Observation of Fernelius, which is also
proper to a renowned Family in Germany,; and four, which Aristotle partly
observed, and Riolanus the Father, so small that they proved barren, because
either they do not sufficiently digest the matter of Seed, or they do not
easily receive the same, because of the straitness of their passages.

They are seated externally in Men, Why placed without in Men?
without the Abdomen, under the Belly, at the Root of the Yard, in their Cod or
Covering. 1. For Chastities sake, if we believe Aristotle. For such live-wights
as have their Stones hid within their Body, are very lecherous, do often
couple, and get many young ones. 2. That by reason of the longer passage, the
greater stay of the Seminal matter, may cause the better preparation. 3.
Laurembergius would have them nearer that external place wherein they were to
generate, viz. the Womb. But that nearness, doubtless, helps nothing to
Generation, though the nearness of the Yard does: Nor do we find this observed
in many Animals which generate out of themselves.

That the Stones have lain hid in the Cavity of the Abdomen, until Puberty or
Ripeness of Age fit for Generation, Martinus Rulandus proves in two Histories,
Pareus in one, and Riolanus in a story not unlike. In which kind of persons, if
the Yard should also lie hid, we should ever and anon have an appearing change
of Sexes.

The Epididymides rest athwart upon the Stones, and compass them as it were,
being a kind of little Stones, oblong, round, white, and wreathed, but at both
ends, somewhat sharp, of which see the following Chapter.

Their Magnitude in men does commonly answer that of a small Their Greatness.
Hens Eg. And in men the Stones are greater then in women.

The Figure of the Stones is Oval. Their Figure.
Which Figure varies sometimes, by reason of the neighboring Vessels more or
less turgent: And therefore some say the right Testicle is more full vein'd,
and it is thought to be more hot, and have seed better digested. Whence
Hippocrates calls it the Boygetter, because it receives more pure and hot blood
and Spirits out of the great Vessel, viz. the great Artery. The left Stone is
Whether the left Stone be colder then the right.
thought to contain colder Seed, more wheyish and and weak, because for the
most part, the matter is believed to be brought from the Emulgent, and
therefore Hippocrates calls this Stone the Girl-getter. Whence that common
Saying, Wenches are begot by the left Stone in the left side of the Womb; Boys
by the right Stone in the right side. And Hippocrates says, there is in a man
as well as in a woman both male and foemale Seed, that is to say, hotter and
colder. But I am not of Opinion, that wenches are always begotten by the left
Stone, and that it receives a colder sort of Seed, for, 1. There are ever and
anon Virago's or manly Women, which exceed Men in strength and courage. 2.
Blood is communicated from the great Artery, as well to the left Stone as to
the right. 3. The Arteria Spermatica is oftener wanting on the right side then
on the left. But the Generation of the fra^ler Sex, depends not so much upon
the coldness of the left Testicle, as upon the cold Constitution of both the
Stones, or rather of the whole body, which administers Matter for the Seed.
Howbeit the left parts of the body are generally said to be colder then the
right.

Moreover the right Stone is fuller of Seed, does swel more, and has a greater
Vein and Artery, so that Nature seems to design the Generation of Foemales more
then of Males. It was therefore ill said of Aristotle, that Nature of her self
did always The Error of Aristotle.
intend the Generation of Males, as being most perfect, and that a Foemale is
engendered, when Nature being hindered, could not engender a Male, so that a
Woman is in his account a kind of Monster in Nature. Howbeit Nature seems more
sollicitous for the Whether Nature always intends to beget Boys.
Generation of Women then of Men, for the Causes aforesaid, nor does Nature
always regard that which is best or most perfect, but that which is most
necessary, as a woman is: For many of them are but enough for one man. For
women when they are big with Child, are useless to a man; also they are short
lived, nor can they bear so long, as a man can beget. But of this, I have
discoursed more fully, in my 12. Anatomical Controversy de patribus.

The Testicles have Coats and Coverings, Their Coats.
some proper, others common.

They have two Coats common to them Common.
and other parts, to defend them from external injuries.

The first is formed of a thinner skin The Cod.
and scarf-skin, then is to be found in other parts of the Body, and is called
Scrotum or Scortum, hanging out like a purse or bag, and subject to the touch.
It Is soft and wrinkled, void of Fat, that it might be more easily extended and
Why void of Fat.
wrinkled together: because the oily matter which should make Fat, goes into
the Stones to make Seed. In the lower part it has a line running out according
to the length thereof, which divides it into a right and left part, and is
called a suture or seam,

The second Coat consists of a fleshy Pannicle, which is also thinner then is
found in other places, full of Veins and Arteries, and called dartos. Which
Covering is by others comprehended under the term Scrotum.

The proper Coat or Coverings, which on Porper.
either side do cloth each Stone are three.

The first proper Coat is called Vaginalis the scabberd Coat, and by some
Helico^ides, by reason of its shape, which is thin, but yet strong, full of
Veins, arising from the processes of the Peritonaeum. It cleavs to the Dartos,
by many membranous Fibers, which others have reckoned for a peculiar Coat.
Whence it is externally rough, internally smooth.

The second is termed Eruthroeides the red Coat, being furnished with some
fleshy Fibers, bred out of the Cremaster, and inwardly spread over the former.
Rufus names this in the first place, and Riolanus and Veslingus following him,
account it the first Coat, because it compasses the former, and is propagated
from the Cremaster.

The third last and lowest, immediately encompassing the substance of the
Stone, and is as it were binding the same, is termed Albuginea, and by some
Nervea, The XXIII. TABLE.
The Coats of the Stones, their Substance, and Vessels are propounded in this
TABLE.
The Explication of the FIGURES.
FIG. I. AA. The Skin of the Cod separated. BBB. The fleshy Membrane which ^^
here called Dartos. CC. The first Coat of the Stones called Elythroeides. DD.
The Muscle Cremaster. E. The second Coat of the Stones, which the Author calls
Erythroides. FF. The Coat of the Stones called Albuginea. G. The kernelly
Substance of the Stone. H. The Pyramidal or Pampiniform Vessel. II. Epididymis.
DD. The Parastates variciformis.


FIG. II. A. A Portion of the preparatory Vessels. BB. The Pyramidal Vessel.
CC. Epididymis. DD. Parastates variciformis. E. The Stone covered with its
proper Membrane. F. A Portion of the Vas deferens.


FIG. III AA. The Veins and Arteries in the Pyramidal Vessel laid open. B. The
Epididymis. CC. The Parastates variciformis. D. The Vas deferens.


Page 56

because it is white, thick, and strong, arising from the Coat of the Seminal
Vessels.

The Substance of the Stones is glandulous, white, soft, loose and spongy, by
The Substance of the Stones.
reason of very many Vessels there dispersed and loose, though without Cavity,
as the Liver also and the Spleen have no Cavities. They have Vessels of all
Vessels.
kinds. Veins and Arteries from the Seminary Vessels: An indifferent large
Nerve from the sixth pare; sometimes also they have two Nerves from the one and
twentieth pare of the Spinal Marrow, conjoined to the Seminal Vessels, carried
with them through the production of the Peritonaeum, and disseminated into the
Tunicles.

They have on each side one Muscle, arising from a strong Ligament, which is in
the Muscles.
Share-bone, where the transverse Muscles of the Belly end, of which they seem
to the Parts. They go along through the production of the Peritonaeum, which
they compass about well-near, and grow to the beginnings of the Stones. They
are ^^^^ed Cremasteres or Suspensores, hangers or sustainers, for they hold up
the Stones, that they may not too much draw down the Seminal Vessels. Also in
the Carnal conjunction, they draw back the Stones, that the Seed-channel being
shortened, the Sperm may be sooner and easier conveyed into the Womb. In some
persons these Muscles are capable of voluntary motion, who can draw up, and let
down their Stones as they list: where these Muscles are doubtless stronger then
ordinary, that they may not only hold the Stones suspended, but move them from
place to place.

The Use of the Stones is, by their The Efficiens cause of the Seed.
Heat and inbred Faculty, to make seed. For the Efficient cause of Seed is the
proper flesh or substance of the Stones, both in regard of their hot and moist
temper of their specific Property; since no flesh in the Body is found like
that of the Stones. Now they turn the blood being prepared into Seed, which is
requisite to preserve the Species of Mankind: And that which remains over and
above, either goes back by the Spermatick Veins into the Heart, or turns to
nourishment for the Stones. Nor can Seed be ordinarily Without the Stones there
is no Generation.
bred without the Stones, nor perfect Animals without them, for from them the
Seed receives both its form and color. That some have engendered without
Stones, though not according to the ordinary Course of Nature, Smetius in his
Miscellanies, Fontanus in his Physica, Cabrolius, Hofmannus de Generatione, and
others, do testify. Now the place wherein the Seed is bred, is not any large
Cavity in the Stone, but certain very small Vessels therein formed, covered
with a very delicate thin Coat, as Vesalius rightly teaches. Now these
following Authors after Aristotle, have taken away the faculty of Seed-making
from the Stones, viz. Fallopius, Cabrolius, Posthius, Casparus Hofmannus,
Caesar Cremoninus, Adrianus Spigelius, Regius, and others, because the Matter
of Seed does not go into the Stones, nor is there ever any Seed found in them.
But they will have them principally to be Receptacles for the wheyish Humor
which flows in with the Blood; which they collect from their glandulous
substance, and the largeness of the left Stone. But they are confuted by
Eunuchs and gelt persons, whose Stones being cut out or bruised, they become
unable to engender. Also Seed has been frequently observed in the Stones.
Witness Dodonaeus in his 39. Observation touching a Spanish Soldier, Hofman de
Generatione Chap. 18. Carpus and Riolanus. It is indeed not to be found in some
Bodies, because it was not bred, by reason of some sickness, or Imprisonment,
or upon Death the Spirits being dissipated, a watery Liquor appears instead
thereof. Nor can the Seed come to the Vasa deferentia otherwise then by the
Testicles, which begin at the Stones, as the praeparatory Vessels end in them,
by the Observation of very many Anatomists, and why the left Stone is greater
then the right, another reason is alleged by learned men.

Also the Stones seems to give strength and courage to Men's bodies, as may The
Sympathy of the Stones with the whole Body,
be seen in gelded persons, who are changed well-near into Women, in their
Habit of Body, Temperament, Manners, etc. And doubtless the stones do
exceedingly sympathize with the upper Parts of the Body, especially with the
Heart. For we see that cordial and cooling Epithems in fainting Fits and
bleeding at the Nose, being applied to the Stones, do help as if they were
applied to the very Heart and Part affected. The Cause hereof is hard to tell;
Jaccbinus, Laurentius, Hofmannus, conceive that it comes to pass by reason of
Passions of the Mind, which are joined with fleshly Lust. But Eunuchs also are
lustful, for they are great Lovers of Women: And Eunuchs are often transported
with anger and other Passions of the Mind, but they receive not never the more
the Habit of Men. Galen seems to have been of Opinion, that a Spirit was bred
in the Stones and diffused thence all the Body over. But glandulous Bodies of
the number of which the Stones are, are unfit to engender an hot Spirit; nor
are there any Passages about the Stones, for the distribution of that new
Spirit, according to the Opinion of Galen. Nor is therefore the Opinion of
Mercatus allowable, viz. that those Spirits are not indeed bred there; but that
the Vital Spirits are collected in the Stones in great quantity, that from them
they may return back into the whole Body; for those which are there collected,
are collected to engender Seed. But the Opinion of Thomas a Vega does better
please me, til I shall find a more probable, viz. that a Seminal Air is raised
up in the Generation of Seed, which thus changes the whole Body. The flesh
truly of ungelt Creatures, has a rammish taste of the Seed, which the flesh of
such as are gelt has not. This Vapor or Air of the Seed is carried to the
Heart, either by the inner Pores of the Body, or by the Veins which reconveigh
to the Heart the superfluities of the generated Seed. Helmont imagines the
Stones do act by a ruling power, at a distance, as the stomach does upon the
Womb, the Womb upon the upper Parts, and that without any right ways or marks;
which nevertheless an Anatomist seeks to find, if it be possible. Vestingus
ingeniously makes the reason of the change of voice, temperament, strength,
etc. in persons guelded, to be the oppression of their inbred Heat by plenty of
Matter, which ought to turn to Seed. Now their Sympathy with the Heart, depends
partly upon the Nerves, partly (for we hold the Circulation in the Stones) from
the foresaid Veins, returning back to the Heart, by which both the virtues of
Cordials ascend, and of cooling Medicaments, even as we apply Cordials and
Coolers to the Hands, with like success.

Chap. XXIII. Of the Vasa deferentia, the Ejaculatoria, the Parastatae, Seminal
Bladders, and the Prostatae.
WE have propounded the Spermatick praeparatory Vessels above, which end into
the Stones, to which they carry Matter to make Seed.

Now there are other Vessels, which begin at the Stones, and end at the Root of
the Yard, whither they carry and there squirt out the Seed, which has been
made in the Stones. And these are termed Vasa deferentia, or Vessels that carry
away the Seed; and they are two in number, on each side one.

Now we divide these Vessels into the Beginning, Middle, and End.

The Beginning are termed Parastatae, The Parastatae.
as if you would say idle attenders upon the stones, ceremonious waiters, also
Corpora varicosa or variciformia, because they are twisted and wreathed, like
those crooked black Veins called Varices. Galen in his Interpretation of hard
words used by Hippocrates calls them Epididymides, Names.
because they rest upon the stones, which nevertheless others distinguish by a
peculiar use, as that they prepare the seed; and the Parastatae do add more
perfection thereto: Others invert the Matter, and persuade themselves that the
Parastatae prepare the seed, and the Epididymides finish it, which Opinion of
theirs they have received, I know not how well, from the ancient Physicians.
And they are oblong Vessels, placed upon the stones, white, thick, and round, a
little depressed, and solid, growing narrow by little and little.

As for their Substance, it is of a middle nature betwixt that of the stones
Their Substance.
and that of the Vasa deferentia. For their substance is softer then the
latter, and harder then the former, because they are glandulous within, and
fungous; and externally membranous.

As to their Original, the Opinion of Their Rise.
Spigelius and other late Anatomists, does against all former Authority thus
determine: viz. that they arise by continuation from the Seminary Vessels, so
that both the Praeparatory Vessels, and the Parastatae, and the Out-carrying
Vessels, are but one continued Body, receiving diverse Names according to its
different Parts, and their respective Offices and Situations.

But Walaeus conceives, that it is more suitable to what appears in Dissection,
to say, that these Vessels do not arise from the praeparatory Vessels, but are
rather mixed with them, fastened to, and opened into them: and that as he
supposes, to the end that the blood forced in by the Praeparatory Vessels, may
deposite that Matter which it contains fit to breed seed, into the little
branches of the Vasa deferentia. But the rest of the blood, which is unfit for
Nutrition and Generation of Seed, is by other Anastomoses shed into the Veins,
and by Circulation returns to the Heart.

Now they have their Original from the stones. by means of innumerable small
Pipes or white Fibers. And there is no communion at all between the Vessel that
carries away the Seed, and the Veins, and Arteries of the stones, which
Vesalius conceives to be apparent in Dissections. Yet are they fastened to the
inmost Coat of the stones, though they have a proper Coat of their own.

The Use of the Parastatae, is to perfect and finish the seed, by a power which
they Their Use.
receive from the stones. Moreover, while the seed abides in them, it comes to
pass that vehement and frequent Lust is not provoked.

The Ejaculatory or squirting Vessels, are simply termed the Middle, because
they carry seed from the stones and the Corpora varicosa, to the seminal
bladders: for they are seen to carry a whiteish Humor, yea and the Parastatae
are frequently found full of seed.

They have a Substance white and nervous; and their Figure is round and long:
They have an obscure Cavity, because the seed by means of the spirits whereof
it is full, does easily pass.

Their Situation is partly in the Cod, partly in the Cavity of the Belly, above
the Os pubis or Share-bone. For they are carried upwards, and are knit to the
Praeparatory Vessels, by a thin Membrane, and so pass along to the Flanks and
the Share-bone, which for that cause have a slight Cavity. And afterward being
turned back downwards, they are carried above the Ureters, and under the hinder
part of the Bladder, above the rectum Intestinum, they are on each side widened
at the Neck of the Bladder, where

Their End is, and these Vessels so widened do constitute

The seminary Bladders, which are many in number like little Cells, and seem
See Fig. III. Tab. XXI.
to make on each side one remarkable, great, and winding one, because one goes
into another, which you cannot compare to anything better then to a bunch of
Grapes. The Cavities do neatly represent the Cells of a Pomegranate in order
and figure. Rondeletius did first of al describe these Bladders, and after him
Fallopius. These nervous Bladders are seated between the Ligaments of the
Pissbladder and the Arse-gut, by the sides of the deferent Vessels, a little
before the said Vessels grow thick, and unite.

Their Use is, to contain the seed being wrought, and to reserve the same til
time of Copulation, so that there may be seed sufficient to beget many
Children. And therefore that ^ouder which Aristotle relates of a Bull that
engendered Whether a Bull may engender after he is guel
after his sto^^s were cut off: though others attribute this effect to the
Prostatae, as Archangelus and Columbus. Now the seed may be contained in these
Cells many months together, and in regard of the multitude of these little
Bladders, seed may be voided in many Acts of Copulation; and all not spent at
one Essay.

And that seed is contained in these Whether seed is contained in the
Bladderkies.
little Bladderkies, besides the Authority of Fallopius, Platerus, Laurentius,
Aquapendent, and Casserius, it is manifest by this Experiment: If you squeez
them, presently feed is forced into the Pipe of the Yard, just like Milk out of
the Dug, or piss out of the Piss-bladder, etc. But if you press the Prostatae
with your finger, yet nothing comes Whether in the Prostatae?
away, unless you press the Bladders also. And that the seed does not
continually distill and drop out of them, into Urinary passage, a little
Caruncle hinders, which stops their hole* The perpetual seat of a virulent
Gonorrhaea, has been by the Observation of late Anatomists found to be in
these Bladders, for upon Dissection there has been found an evident
Imposthumation in these parts. From the situation of these Bladders and of the
stones, without the Cavity of the Abdomen, Riolanus would give a reason why men
are not so cruelly infested with the filthy vapors of corrupt seed, as women
are. But the Peritonaeum does not hinder the evaporations of the seed, because
the Veins do inwardly open upwards. Also Viragoes or mannish women, are not
troubled with the said vapors. The reason must therefore be sought in the
quality of the seed, which being in men and manly women more benign, does
neither go to, nor infect the Heart.

After the Constitution of the seminary Bladders these deferent Vessels are
united into one small passage which goes into the Prostatae.

Now the Prostatae, as if you See Tab. XXII. Let. QQ.
would say the Waiters, are two Kernels, manifesty differing from the seed
bladders, in use, form, situation, and magnitude, though Hofman think
otherwise; their

Situation is at the Root of the Yard, above the Sphincter or Muscle of the
Bladder, on each side, at the neck thereof. Columbus calls them Prostatae,
Vesalius glandulosum corpus, Fallopius glandulosion assistens, others call them
the little stones, to difference them from the true stones. Before and behind
they are flat, on the sides round.

They are commonly as big as a Walnut.

Their Substance is spongy, and yet harder and whiter then that of other
Kernels, and they are covered with a thicker Membrane; all which is to hinder
the ovlie substance, of it self apt to run, from passing out. And because they
are of exquisite sense, therefore they cause pleasure in Copulation. These
Kernels are open by certain Pores into the Urethra or Piss-pipe, which is
evidently apparent in such as have died of the Gonorrhaea, of which Gonorrhaea
these Pores being dilated are many times the seat.

Their Use is to contain an oily, slippery, and sat Humor, which is pressed
forth when need requires, to daub the Urinary passage, to defend it from the
acrimony of the seed or urin, and that it may not fall in through dryness, but
may remain slippery; because through it in Copulation, the said Humor does
suddenly flow out of the seed.

This is that which Galen meant, when he said that they contained a certain
Humor like seed, but much thinner, the use of which Humor, is to excite Lust,
and to cause Delight in Carnal Copulation.

Mean while, Spigelius, Riolanus, and others do conceive that they contain
Whether the Prostatae do make seed.
seed, which is there collected, and thence voided, having attained some
further perfection, as Veslingus conceives. Others as Laurentius, conceive they
do both; for he will have the Prostatae both to thicken the seed, and to breed
a thin humor, and excite titillation. But that they do not contain seed, their
compression shows, which voides none, unless the Vesicles or seed-bladders be
withal compressed. And seeing the seat of the Gonorrhaea is here, The seat of
the Gonorrhaea.
which we frequently observe to continue many years, without any remarkable
Detriment to Health, it is unlikely that the seed flows from the Prostatae. I
saw a man at Padua, who was troubled thirty years with the Gonorrhaea, and has
it still, being otherwise in Health. The seed therefore is not contained in
them, nor does it stay there, though it may pass through.

Others do conceive, that they help to make the seed, yea that they and the The
Prostatae do not help to make seed.
bladders are the only seed-makers, as Regius endeavors to prove. Which if it
were true, guelded persons might engender. Guelded persons do indeed send forth
a moist matter resembling seed, and they are provoked to Venery, but they can
get no Children. And if they have been observed at any time to engender,
according to what is related of guelded Horses and Bulls; there was doubtless
remaining in the seed-bladders, so much seed made by the stones, as might serve
for one bout of Generation. But if they engendered more then once, doubtless one
stone was left behind, when they were guelded.

Chap. XXIV. Of the Yard.
THe Genital Member of a Man is commonly Its Names.
called in Latin Penis a pendendo, because it hangs, also Virga the Rod or
Yard, Colis, etc. Many other Names are wont to be put upon it, which are better
past over then mentioned. In English it is most usually termed the Yard or Prick.
Plato in his Timaeus compares it to a certain living Creature, because it has
an Appetite to Generation. Howbeit, it is indeed the Part and Instrument of a
Live-wight, and the Faculty of Appetite is seated in the Brain.

It Is seated at the Roots of Os pubis, that carnal Copulation might more
conveniently Situation.
be accomplished, and that it might be no impediment to other parts* it is
placed in the middle, because only one in number. Yet there was once a man
dissected at Bononia who had two Yards. Which also Obsequens relates of a Boy,
among his Prodigies. Another named Anna, being lately a vagrant in Italy, had
no Yard, but instead thereof a certain piece of spongy flesh under his Navil,
which Nature had provided him to piss withal.

Its Figure is round and long; but not exactly, because it is broader on the
upper ^ide, Figure.
which they call the Back of the Yard.

Its Magnitude consisting in thickness and Magnitude.
length, does vary, both in the several sorts of Animals, and in the Individual
Creatures of the same sort. Particularly, it is in Man so great as was necessary
to propagate his species or kind: But proportionally shorter then in many
Brutes, because Mankind couples after another manner then those beasts do. In
particular Men, there is exceeding great variety. For it is for the most part
greater then ordinary, 1. In little Men. 2. In such as abstain from carnal
Embracements, if we believe Galen. 3. If the Navilstrings be not tied close to
the Navil in Infants; for otherwise, by reason of the Urachus or Piss-pipe, the
Bladder and neighboring Parts, are drawn more upwards. Yet Spigelius is herein
of a quite contrary mind. 4. In such as have large Noses. For the proportion of
the Yard answers that of the Nose very much, if we will believe Physiognomists.
5. In Block-heads and dull-pated Asses. Some Nations have this Member larger
then ordinary, as the Aethiopians or Blackmores.

It consists of the Scarf-skin, Skin, fleshy Membrane, and a proper substance
of its own.

It is void of Fat, even in the fattest Why the Yard is void of Fat, the first
Opinion. Laurentius his Error.
men. And it is a great question why there is no Fat found either in it or
about it. Some, as Laurentius, think it is because fat through its softness
would hinder its erection: But the Yard will stand, as long as the Bodies
thereof are blown up. Others make the Cause to be least the weight thereof
should do hurt, and that the Yard might not grow too great. But if there were a
little Fat, it would add nothing to the weight, nor would it enlarge the Yard
over much. The truer Cause therefore is this, that there is therefore no Fat,
that its sense might not be dulled, and the pleasure of Copulation abated, when
the Fat should melt by rubbing the Yard.

Its proper Substance is not boney as it is in a Dog, a Wolf, a Fox, a Whale,
Its Substance.
etc. but peculiar and proper to it self, such as is no where to be found in
any The four Parts of the Yard.
other Part of the Body. Now there are four proper Parts of the Yard, the
Urethra or Piss-pipe, the Nut, and the two nervous Bodies.

The URETHRA or Piss-pipe, is a nervous Urethra.
Pipe or Channel, always of the same size, from the neck of the bladder (to
which it is joined, but does not arise therefrom, nor communicate therewith)
like a long neck, to the End of the Yard; save where the Nut is joined with the
nervous Bodies. For there indeed it has a superficial Cavern or Hollowness, in
which an Ulcer and intolerable pain does sometimes happen* when some corro^i^e
humor is th^^^ collected, by means of a Gonorrhaea, or some other occasion. It
is exceedingly widened in persons troubled with the stone. Alpinus saw it so
wide in Egypt, that it would receive a large Hazel-nut. And therefore it is
easily blown up, to draw out the stone.

In the beginning thereof are those Pores, through which we said before the
seed stills forth. There is also a little Membrane or Caruncle like a Valve
stretched before it, to keep the seed and urin from returning into the
spermatick Vessels. It is eroded or fretted by sharp Humors, or by use of the
Catheter, whence follows a perpetual Gonorrhaea. Riolanus observes that it is
found in Boys, till the twentieth year of their Age, but I see no cause why it
should not remain in their after Age, when the increase of seed, makes it more
necessary then formerly.

The Bodies of the Yard do embrace and touch this Urethra, and it is ^d back
with them, and so reaches to the N^ the figure of an S.

Moreover th^ath a double Membrane and a (...) also ^it self* The XXIV. TABLE.
All the Parts of the Yard are represented in this TABLE.
The Explication of the FIGURES.
FIG. I AA. The inner Surface of the Urethra being dissected. B. A Part of the
Urethra which makes its way into the Nut. CC. The Nut of the Yard. DD. The two
Nervous Bodies of the Yard.


FIG. II. A. The Membrane of the Nervous Body separated. B. The blackish Pith
of the said Body. C. The Nut of the Yard made ^are.


FIG. III. AAA. The inner Part of the Nervous Body, all the spongy Substance
being taken out of it. B. The Nerve which goes into the said Body. CCC. The
Artery of the said Body. DD. The transparent Partition, by Spigelius so called.


FIG. IV. AAA. Veins running along the Back of the Yard. BB. Arteries. CC. The
Nerves of the Yard. D. The Nut of the Yard.


FIG. V. Shows the Muscles of the Yard in their places. AA. The Parts about the
Buttocks. B. The Region of the Share. C. The Yard with its Skin ^^ead off DD.
The two Nervous Bodies. E. The Urethra or Piss-pipe. FF. Two Muscles which
widen the Piss-pipe. GG. Two Muscles which raise the Yard. aa. Their Beginning
cut off from the Hip-bone. H. The Fundament. I. The Sphincter Muscle of the
Fundament. KK. Two Muscles which draw up the Arse-gut.


page 60



One Membrane is internal and thin, of exquisite sense, as those can witness
who are troubled with the stone. With which also the Nut is covered; and it is
bred out of the thin Membrane, which clothes the Nerves of the Yard. The other
is external, more fleshy and furnished with transverse Nerves. The middle part
of its proper substance, is loose, spongy, and black, that it may be distended
together with the nervous Bodies.

The Use of the Urethra^mon passage for the Urin, Seed, and o^

The Nut or Head of the Yard, is the The Nut of the Yard. ^
outmost swelling part thereof, roundish or pointed, even and compassed with a
Circle like a Crown.

It has Flesh more sensible and solid then the rest of the Yard, covered with
an exceeding thin Membrane.

It is soft and of exquisite sense, for Titillations sake. In some Men it is
more sharp, in others more blunt.

It has a Coat or Covering called the Foreskin, or Praeputium a putando, from
cutting off, for the Jews and Turks cut it off, and therefore they are
nick-nam'd Apellae and Recutiti, skinless or skin-cut. In which Nations it is
wonderful what Vestingus told me himself saw, viz. that in young Boys it grows
out so long and pointed, that it resembles a tail. Hildanus observed it in a
certain person very great and fleshy. At the lower end it is tied to the Nut by
a Membrane or Band termed Fraenum the Bridle, which is terminated in the hole
of the Nut. Some will have it to be made up of the extremities of the Nerves.
Carolus Stephanus thinks it is composed of a Combination of the Tendons of the
Muscles of the Yard, and a Nerve.

The two nervous Bodies, on each side The nervous Bodies.
one, do make up the remaining and greatest part of the Yard: the whole
substance whereof is like a most thick spungy Artery, stuffed with flesh.

For the substance thereof is twofold, the first external, compact, hard, and
nervous; the other internal, spungy, thin, and hollow, and of a dark-red color
enclining to black; and therefore Vesalius says it is filled with a great deal
of black Blood, like a Pudding.

Now this substance is rare and pory, Whence the hardness and Erection of the
Yard proceeds.
that it may be filled with Spirit, and Venal and Arterial Blood; by which
means the nervous substance thereof is the more stretched, and the Spirits are
not soon dissipated, whence proceeds the hardness and stiffness of the Yard,
not so much for Copulations sake, as that the man might squirt his seed right
out as far as might be, even to the Orifice of the Womb, after the Yard has
been moved in the female Privity.

These two Bodies have their Original from the lower parts of the Hip-bones, as
from a firm and stable Foundation, to which they are strongly tied with two
Ligaments; where in their Rise they keep some distance, that place may be
allowed to the Urethra; and then they are carried upwards, and grow into one
about the middle of the Share-bone (like the two horns of the letter y) but so
as they do not both remain perfect, but they loose near a third part of their
nervous substance. Howbeit they remain distinct, by the coming between of some
membranous partition (which consists not of a double Membrane, as at the Rise
of the Bodies, but of one single one) very thin and transparent, strengthened
with nervous and strong transverse fibers; which fibers are ranked and ordered
like a Weavers Comb.

All kind of Vessels enter into the Yard, Nerves, Veins, and Arteries. 1.
External ones running in the Skin, very frequent, from the Pudenda, and also
internal ones spread through its Body. They are therefore mistaken, that think
the Yard is destitute of Veins. Its internal Arteries are two remarkable ones,
arising from the Hypogastrica, which are inserted at the beginning of the
growing together of the Bodies, and are spread up and down, according to the
length of the Yard, But in the middle, where the Septum or partition is
thinnest, they send branches up and down, through the spaces of the Fibers, the
right Artery into the left Body, and the left Artery into the right Body,
carrying Spirit and Blood, to blow up, erect, and nourish the Yard. The Nerves
also are disseminated from the Marrow of Os sacrum, through the Yard, as well
the external and Skin-nerves, as the internal, and those remarkable ones, which
ascend through the middle of the forked division, and are thence disseminated
into the Muscles, the whole Body, and the Nut; that there might be an exquisite
sense and delectation.

Also the Yard has two pare of Muscles. The Muscles of the Yard.


The first pare short and thick, are the Yard Erectors; this pare arises
nervous, under the beginning of the Yard, from an Appendix of the Hip, and
growing fleshy, it is carried to the bodies of the Yard, into which it is
inserted, not far from their Original.

Their Use is to raise and keep the Yard up in Copulation.

The second Pare which widens the Urethra is longer, but thinner or leaner.
These two fleshy Muscles arise from the Sphincter of the Fundament, following
the length of the Yard: then they are carried beneath and inserted into the
sides of the Urethra, about the middle thereof.

Its Use is to widen the lower part of the Piss-pipe, both in pissing, and
especially in Copulation, when the bodies of the Yard are full, that the Egress
of the Seed may not be hindered. And in these Muscles is the place where
Surgeons do commonly take out stones. The Line of the Cod being drawn to one
side, according to their length, and not according to their breadth as Marianus
sanctus notes against the Ancients, an hollow Catheter being thrust into the
Ureter, upon which, the Incision is to be made, which manner of cutting
Aquapendent describes and approves of.

The Use of the Yard is for Copulation: Copulation.
which a man cannot rightly perform without the Erection of his Yard, and the
squirting out of the Seed which follows thereupon. For the man squirts his Seed
right out into the Mouth of the Womb, where being afterward joined with the
woman's Seed, an drawn in, and retained by the Womb, Conception is said
Conception.
to be made.

A secondary Use thereof is to void urin, yet was it not therefore made, seeing
women do make water without it. By reason of this twofold use of the yard, the
Arabians make two passages, as Vesalius tells us, who observed such a like
Conformation in a certain person.

In some the Nut of their Yard is not bored through in the sore part where it
ought to be, but in the lower part, as Hofman has noted out of Aristotle and
Paulus, who cannot make water if their Yard do not stand, or when they sit.
Others, and that more frequently, have it imperforated in the upper part. They
are both unapt for Generation. Sometimes the Yard has no passage at all as
Julius Obsequens has observed.

Chap. XXV. Of the Parts serving for Generation in Women, and first of the
Spermatick Praeparatory Vessels.
THe Parts serving for Generation in The Genitals in Women quite different from
those in men.
Women, do some of them agree after a sort with those in Men, as the spermatick
Vessels, the Stones, and the Vasa deferentia, or Vessels that carry away the
Seed. Others are wholly different, as the Womb with its Bottom, Orifice, and
Neck, the Hymen, the M^^tle-shap'd Caruncles, the Vulva with its Wings,
t^itoris, and the little Hillocks.

The XXV. TABLE.
The Parts which in Women serve for Generation are represented in this TABLE,
in their Natural Order and Situation; also the internal Structure of a Woman's
Dug, is represented in the same TABLE.
The Explication of the FIGURE.
AA. The Liver in its proper Place. B. The Gallbladder with the Porus bilarius
or Gall-passage. C. A Part of the Gut Duodenum. DD. The Pancreas or Sweetbread
in its proper Situation, through which Vessels go into the Spleen. E. The Body
of the Spleen. FF. The descendent Trunk of Vena cava with its Branchings. GG.
The descendent Trunk of the great Artery, which is variously branched beneath.
HH. The Emulgent Vessels. II. The true Kidneys. KK. The Auxiliary or Deputy
Kidneys. LL. The Ureters going down to the Bladder. MM. The Bottom of the
Piss-bladder. N. The Insertion of the Uracbus into the bottom thereof. O. A
Portion of the Arse-gut. PP. Praeparatory Vessels from both sides. Q. The Rise
of the Praeparatory Vessels from the Trunk. R. The Place where the Trunks of
the Cava and Aorta do branch themselves, where an Artery goes over a Vein. SS.
Portions of the Navil-arteries. T. The Bottom of the Womb. VV. The Woman's
Stones. XX. Vessels which carry the Seed from their Stones to the Womb. ZZ. The
Trumpets of the Womb, by Fallopius so called, or the blind Passage of the Seed.
YY. The two upper Ligaments of the Womb, resembling the Wings of Batts or
Flitter-mice. aa. The two lower Ligaments of the Womb, round, cut off from the
Share. bb. The Hollow of the Flank-bone or Os Ilij, which is in Women larger
then in Men.


The Characters of the Dug explained.
ccc. Vessels spread over the Surface of the Dug. d. The greatest and middlemost
Kernel. e. The Nipple.


page 62



For we must not think with Galen, Archangelus, Fallopius, and others, that
these Female Genital Members, differ from those of Men only in Situation. Which
Opinion was hatched by those who accounted a Woman to be only an imperfect Man;
and that her Genital Members could not be thrust out by reason of the coldness
of her temper; as in Men they are thrust out by virtue of their greater Heat.

Howbeit, the generative Parts in Women differ from those in Men, not only in
Situation, but in their universal Fabric, in respect of Numbe^* Surface,
Magnitude, Cavity, Figure, Office, and (...) sufficiently manifest to a skilful
(...) to any (...) that will compare what follows to what went before.

And the falsity of their Opinion is The similitude of the Yard and of the Womb
ridiculous.
sufficiently apparent, by means of the sundry Conjectures which they bring.
For some liken the Womb to the Cod of a Man, and some to the Nut of the Yard.
Some will have the Neck of the Womb to answer the Man's Yard, and others will
have the Clitoris. Which Conceits falling to the ground by their own weakness,
I shall proceed to explain the Parts.

The Spermatick praeparatory Vessels The praeparatory Vessels in women.
in Women agree with those of Men, in their Number, Original, and Office, etc.
I must now therefore only tell you wherein they differ.

They differ first in Magnitude. These Vessels in women are shorter, because
How they differ from those in Men.
of the short way they are to go, but therefore they have many turnings and
windings which make up the Corpus varicosum: to the end the seed may stay long
enough to receive due preparation. In the next place they differ in their
Implantation. For in women they are not totally carried to the stones, but they
are divided in the middle way: and the greater part goes to the stone, and
makes the Corpus varicosum, and the lesser part ends into the womb, into whose
sides it is disseminated, especially to the upper part of the bottom, for to
nourish the Womb and the Child therein; and that by those Vessels some part of
the menstrual blood may be purged forth in such as are not with Child. For the
lesser branch being tripartite, is below the stone divided into three branches,
one of which, as was said, runs out into the womb, the other is distributed to
the deferent Vessel or Trumper of the Womb, and to the round Ligament; the
third branch creeping along the side of the Womb through the common Membrane,
ends near the trueneck of the womb, insinuating it self also among the
Hypogastrick Veins, with which and the Arteries, they are joined by
Anastomoses. Of which see Zerbus, Fallopius, Platerus, and others, who have
shown Riolanus and my self the way. That is a rare case, which is figured out
by Beslerus, viz. for the spermatick Arteries to be joined by way of
Anastomosis with the Emulgent Artery. For this cause in women these Vessels go
not out of the Peritonaeum, nor reach to the Sharebone: because the Stones and
Womb are seated within.

These seminal Veins and Arteries are intertwined with many wonderful
Anastomoses, for the preparation of seed. Yea and the Veins do receive into
themselves the Hypogastrick Arteries of the Womb, according to the Observation
of Arantius and Riolanus. Yet I remember the Arteries were wanting in a woman
that had bore male Children, and Franciscus Zanchez relates how they were
turned into stone in a woman of Tolouse.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Women's Stones.
NOw the Stones of Women, though How the Stones of Women differ from those of
Men.
as to their use, they partly agree with those in Men; yet in many things
respecting their structure, they differ from them. And

1. in respect of their Situation; which they have within in the Cavity of the
Belly, two fingers breadth above the bottom, in such as are not with Child, and
are knit by means of certain Ligaments above the same: viz. to the end they
might be hotter, and Why Women's stones are placed within their Bodies.
consequently more fruitful; since they were to work a matter of which alone
Mankind was to be generated, the seed of the man being added not as a material,
but an efficient Cause. 2. In Magnitude, which is not so great in women as in
men, unless very seldom. For by reason of the increase of Heat, they are
contracted after a woman is past fourteen, whereas they are before that time
distended more largely being full of a white Juice. 3. In their external
Surface which is more uneven, then that of a man's stones. 4. In Figure, which
is not so round, but broad and flat on the fore and hinder-parts. Also the
stones are within more hollow, and more full of spermatick moisture. 5. In
Substance which some conceive to be harder then that of men's stones, but others
conceive, and that more truly, that it is softer, and if you take off the
Membrane, you shall find them conglomerated or knobbed together of diverse
little Kernels and Bladders, but seldom like those of men. In some great
seafish, there is no difference of the stones of the Males and Females, in
substance, but only in the size. 6. In Temperament, which is commonly accounted
more cold, and that the seed contained in them, is more moist, thin, and
waterish. 7. In Coats. For they are covered with one only Coat, because they
are otherwise in a close place. And that Coat sticks exceeding strongly to
them, and is by Galen termed Dartos. Howbeit, where the stones receive the
seminal Vessels, they are covered half over with the Peritonaeum. 8. In
Connection; for they are knit unto the womb by two manifest passages, or rather
the one of them is an obscure one, out of which during carnal Copulation, there
is shed, not a wheyish substance, but the woman's seed.
Their Use is to make seed which helps to generate after its way and manner:
which Aristotle against all Reason and Experience, was bold to deny to women,
in some places of his Writings, contrary to the express Doctrine of Hippocrates
de Genitura, where he tells us that women also send forth seed out of their
Bodies, sometimes into their womb, whereby it is moistened, and sometimes without,
if the Orifice thereof do gape over much. Now that in the Womb it helps to the
Generation, he thereby demonstrates, in that if after Copulation. The woman
shall not conceive, the seed which they have both of them voided, does flow out
of the womb. But some other Anatomists deny that these stones do make seed. But
they will have them to be meet Kernels, to receive that moisture which needs
abound in the womb, which is the Opinion of Cremoninus; or that they are only
made for a mark and sign, which was the Conceits of Rhodiginus, and of Hofman
since him, who account them rather Carcasses of stones then true stones,
because they are small, void of Juice, and uncompact. But as for what concerns
Humidity we deny that Argument, and say 1. That there was no need of so much
preparation to water the womb. One Vessel gently carrying a wheyish Humor,
might have served that turn, yea the Pores alone might have sufficed, as it is
well known to happen in a clammy humor distilling into the Knee. 2. They may
answer both Intents, viz. Generation and Irrigation. 3. Experience tells us
that seed and no other humor has issued out of the stones of women being
dissected. Guinterius was hindered in his Dissection, by the plentiful eruption
thereof. The nocturnal pollutions of women testify the same, and women became
barren, when in ancient times they were guelded or spayed, Witness Athenaeus.
Galen experimented the same in Sows. Varro writes that Cows being guelt, do
conceive if they go to Bull presently after. 4. The said seed is found in the
Dissections of women, if they are lusty and free from D^^ases* In them and in
Women with Child, Beslerus ha^und the stones swelling with seed, which he has
expressed by a neat Picture. 5. That it is true seed, we may gather from a real
and sensible effect thereof, like that of the seed of men, as Moles, and
imperfect Eggs, by reason of the difference of Sex, to which the Male adds Life
and Perfection. 6. Women have sufficient heat to make seed, and sufficient
instruments to that end; yea, and some of them are better provided then men.
Their stones are indeed small and little, but not void of Juice. Their number
does recompense their smalness, even as we sometimes see more Juice pressed out of
a Bunch of Grapes, then a solid and whole Apple.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Vessels that carry away the Seed, especially the Trumpet
of the Womb.
COncerning the Vessels which carry away the Female-seed, the Doctrine of
Anatomists has been hitherto somewhat intricate, partly through varity of
opinions, and partly the obscurity of the matter it self, which nevertheless I
shall endeavor to reduce, and as much as may be to illustrate the same.

The deferent Vessels are taken either in a large or a strict signification.
Strictly for those same obscure Passages and Vessels only, which carry part of
the seed bred in the stones, into the womb. Largely and generally, 1. For the
preparatory Vessels also, 2. For them and the Womb-trumpet, which others refer
to the servatory and jaculatory Vessel. I shall speak of both briefly and
distinctly.

The deferent Vessels are properly those small passages derived from the
stones, either to the bottom of the womb, with a very short passage, or
disseminated at the trumpets of the womb, with sundry, and those exceeding
small Twigs, resembling the Venae lacteae, arising from the spermatick
preparatory Vessels, and continued with them, however here they change their
name and use, because they immediately pass over, and lick the stones.

Galen conceives that the former is only inserted into the sides of the womb,
which are termed Cornua, or the wombs horns, and other Anatomists are of the
same opinion, who profess they could find no other Insertion. But Zerbus,
Fernelius, Laurentius, found another Branch herefrom, which goes not into the
bottom as the former, but into the Neck, so that one part of this deferent
Vessel which is the shorter but larger, is inserted into the middle of the Horn
of the same side, and there poures out such seed as it has, into the Cavity of
the womb: but the other part being the narrower and longer, is carried along
the sides of the womb, below the Mouth, to the beginning of the Neck. Varolius
has also made mention of this Part, and says it is so small in such as have
never conceived, that it cannot be found, save by a skilful Anatomist, but in
Women with Child it is very large. Spigelius, because he could not sometimes
find it, did count it a sport of Nature. Vestingus does seem to allow of it,
seeing he brings seminal Matter from the stones, to the bottom and sheath of
the womb, this way. I should willingly assent to the Opinion of Spigelius,
because it is seldom seen. Little Branches indeed are always disseminated unto
the neck of the womb, but the^ (...) directly from the preparatory Vessels, and
bring blood rather then seed, of which see other Anatomists, especially
Platerus, Riolanus, and my Father Bartholinus beneath.

The Use of these Vessels is, partly to carry the seminal Matter to the
Trumpets, that it may be there further accomplished, and better wrought, and
reserved for further use, and partly to the bottom of the womb. Where another
Branch ends into the Neck, the seminal Humidity is voided this way also,
causing greater delight by reason of the length of the way.

The other deferent Vessel, which ought to keep the Seed before it be squirted
out, is the Trumpet of the Womb, by Fallopius so called, from the likeness it
has to a Trumpet of War, which he thus describes. There arises a seminal
Passage, small and very strait, nervous, and white, from the Horn of the womb
it self, and when it has gone a little therefrom, it grows broader by little
and little, and crisps it self like the tendrel of a Vine, till it comes
toward the end. Then dismissing its wrinkled Crispations, and becoming very
broad, it ends into a certain Extremity, which seems membranous and fleshy, by
reason of its red Color, and at last becomes very torn and ragged, like the
jagged edges of worn clouts, and has a large hole, which lies always shut,
those jagged ends always falling in upon it, which nevertheless if they be
diligently opened and widened, they represent the broad end of a brazen Trumpet.

I shall handle the Particulars more distinctly. The Trumpets arise from the
bottom of the womb by one end, nor do they reach with their other end to the
Stones, or any other remarkable Part. And therefore they are not manifestly
passable in this other Part, but shut up and blind, so that they are like the
Intestinum caecum, and are as it were an Appendix of the Womb. But this
shutting up may be made according to the Opinion of Fallopius, which Riolanus
who was since him, challenges for his own, by the fringes and jagged ends of
the Trumpets, falling together, like Rags of Cloth.

They are two in Number, on each side one.

They are seated so as to compass half the Stones, but they are distant from
the Stones, on every side, near half a fingers breadth, unless the womb be
diseased, by which they are drawn up nearer to the Stones. They are ordinarily
fastened only by very thin Membranes, not unlike the wings of Bats or
Flitter-mice, through which many Veins and Arteries are disseminated, carried
from the Stones into these Passages, and carrying Seed out of the Stones.

Their Substance is nervous, white, thick and hard.

Their Figure is round and hollow. Sometimes their Cavity so praeternaturally
widened, as to contain a Mole, which Marquardus relates in his Empirica Praxi;
sometimes a Child, Examples whereof are recited by Riolanus. Nor could he see
any other ways for the man's seed to enter, save the turning and winding
Passages of those Vessels. But in a living woman, the man's seed full of
spirits, might easily be drawn thither, by the widened ways of the womb
misaffected, which Passages being afterward (Conception being made, and the
Trumpets distended) shut up, were not seen by Dissectors. Or whether has there
not been a shapeless Mole, or a Child without life been shaped, without the
seed of a Man, of the Mothers seed only contained in the Trumpets; which having
received no life from any Father, and the passages being shut up, it grew
great, and killed the Mother?

In the Natural Figure let us consider the Beginning, Middle, and End. The
Insertion o^ Beginning is at the bottom of the womb large, where it attains a
nervous Pipe, stretched out to the middle well-near of the Trumpet, hollow,
that it may transmit the Seed to the bottom of the womb. The Middle being
capacious, shows certain little Cells, containing white seed. The End is
narrower, though it carry some wideness with it. Howbeit before the End, it is
wreathed and crisped like the tendrel of a Vine, as is visible in Men and
Beasts.

The Passage therefore of the Trumpets, is not in all parts straight, but
winding, because the way is short from the stones to the womb. But the pleasure
ought not to be short, when the seed is poured plentifully out of the stones
into the horns of the womb in Copulation. And look what the Seed-bladders are
in Men, as to preserve the seed, these blind passages may be the same in Women,
when they couple oftentimes, and still void seed. For they may be so termed,
because they are annexed to the stones by little Membranes, that by Vessels
brought to them from the stones, as by the milkie and mesaraick Veins, they may
easily draw the seed by them concocted, and lay it up within themselves for
future occasion, and send it forth when need requires.

Their Use is, 1. According to Fallopius to serve as Chimneys, by which the
sooty vapors of the womb may exhale. Which I for my part cannot believe. For
the sooty Vapors are condensed, and being resolved into water, are reserved
till the time of Childbirth, or ascend by insensible Pores, or breath out at
the mouth of the womb, both in Women with Child, because the mouth of the womb
is never so close shut as to hinder, as the Examples of Superfoetation
testify, as in such as are not with Child. Nor can I well tell how the sooty
vapors should find way through these crooked Passages. 2. According to the said
Fallopius in his Observations, they make seed, because he always found seed in
them, but never saw any in the stones; to which I answered before. 3. Their
true Use is, to draw seed out of the stones, by blind passages of the Vessels
dispersed through the Membrane, and when it is drawn to perfect the same by
some tarriance in the Tendrels and Cells, by the irradiation of the virtue of
the stones; that it may be more fit for a Child to be made of; finally to carry
it to the womb, especially in the Act of Copulation, by those little Pipes
implanted in the Horns of the womb, that it may meet the man's seed in the
Cavity of the womb or its Neck, to cause Conception.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Womb in General.
THe Womb is by the Latins termed Uterus, from Uter a Bottle by reason of its
hollowness, in which Sense Tacitus does use Uterum Navis for the Keel of a
Ship. Isidorus says it is so called, because it is on each side one: in a more
large signification it is termed Venture in the Digests and Institutes. Also it is
called Matrix, Utriculus, and Loci muliebres, where consist the beginnings of
Generation, according to Varro. In other Animals, according to Pliny, it is
termed Vulva, especially in Sows, which the ancient Romans did account a
delicate Dish: Of which see Plutrach, and Langius in his Epistles, also
Martial, Horace, Apitius, Athenaeus, and among late Writers Castellanus. Hofman
conceives that Vulva is corrupted from Bulga, and Bulga a Word used by Lucilius
and Varro, is originally French, if we believe Festus, who renders it a Bag.
Nonius interprets it to be a Satchel or Knapsack hanging about a Man's Arm. See
hereof Vossius. But the term Vulva is approved by Celsus, and the Authors
formerly commended.

It is situate in the Hypogastrium, or Why the womb is placed in the
Hypogastrium.
the lower Part of the lower Belly, which is framed in the Cavity termed
Pelvis, by the Ossacrum and the Flankbones. And therefore that Pelvis or Basin,
is larger in Women: and therefore they have Buttocks greater and wider. Now it
was requisite that it should be so placed, that the Womb might be distended
according to the greatness of the Child, and that the Child might be
conveniently excluded.

Moreover the Womb is placed in the middle inclining to no side, save sometimes
when a Woman is of Child with a Boy or a Girl: for then the Child lies more to
the right or left side, though that be no certain Rule.

Now it lies between the Intestinum rectum or Arsegut, which is beneath it, and
the Bladder which lies upon it, as between two Pillows. Why therefore should we
be proud who are bred between Dung and Urin?

Its Magnitude is considered in length Its Magnitude.
depth, and thickness, and all these vary in respect of Bodies, Age, and Venery.

Its Length in those of a middle stature, who use Venery, from the external
Privity to the bottoms end, is commonly eleven fingers; the bottom is three
fingers.

The Breadth of the bottom, is two or three fingers, because in Women not with
Child the latitude of the bottom and neck is one and the same. And hence the
amplitude may easily be conjectured.

But in Virgins, which have not attained to ripeness of Age, it is little and
less then the Bladder: in such as are full of Age it is greater: yet if they
abstain from Venery it is small enough, though thick, as it is also in very old
Women. But it is greater in such as have often conceived, and bore Children: that
a man may well near grasp it in his hand, unless when the Women are great with
Child: for then it is more and more enlarged, and whereas before Gravidation,
the bottom of the Womb did not pass beyond the beginning of Ossacrum, it
reaches afterward to the Navil and beyond, so that it rests upon the thin Guts.

The thickness of the Womb does vary Whether the womb becomes thinner in women
with Child.
after the same manner. For in Virgins the substance thereof is thin, in grown
persons thick; and by how much a Woman has been oftener with Child, by so much
is the substance of her womb the thicker. When the Courses flow, the womb grows
thick; and when the voidance of the Courses is at hand, the substance of the
womb appears swelling and thick. In Women with Child, Galen, Vesalius, and
other Anatomists An Error of Galen and Vesalius.
conceive, that the womb the more it is stretched, the more it is attenuated,
and that its thickness is spent in its length, as Galen speaks. But ocular
Experience makes against this, and the Authorities of Sylvius, Mundellus a
Surgeon of Paris, Aranthus, Varolus, Platerus, Bauhinus, Heurnius, Rousettus,
and Laurentius. For from the first Conception until the Birth, it is increased
according to all Dimensions, and becom^ as larger ^o a little thicker and
softer, so that in the last ^onths ^^e wombs substance is two The XXVI. TABLE*
This TABLE presents t^^ Generative Parts of Women taken out of the Body.
The Explication of the FIGURE.
A. The right side deputy-Kidney. B. The left deputy-Kidney. CC. The Kidney on
both sides. DD. The right side emulgent Veins. EE. The right side emulgent
Arteries. F. The Trunk of Vena cava. G. The left emulgent Vein. HH. The left
emulgent Arteries. II. The right spermatick Vein. K. The right spermatick
Artery. L. The left spermatick Artery. M. The left spermatick Vein. NN. The
Trunk of the great Artery. OO. The Stones in Women. PP. A broad Ligament, like
the wings of Bats or Flitter-mice. QQ. The Trumpets of the Womb. R. The Bottom
of the Womb. SS. The round Ligaments of the Womb, cut off at the Share. T. The
Neck of the Womb. VV. The Hypogastrick Veins on both sides. XX. The
Hypogastrick Arteries on both sides, carried unto the Neck. Y. The Sheath or
Scabberd of the Womb. Z. A Portion of the Intestinum rectum, or Arse-gut. aa.
The Ureters cut off. bb. The Vasa pampiniformia, or Vessels crisped like the
Tendrels of a Vine. cc. A Passage or deferent Vessel to carry from the Stones
to the Horns of the Womb.


page 66

fingers thick. The Womb does then so far depart from a membranous Substance,
and becomes red, and of a fungous and spungie Substance, and full of holes like
a Pumice-stone, divisible as it were into many Barks and Shells: which happens
because of the plentiful Afflux of Blood and Spirits for the Child. Touching
both Opinion Falcobergius thus judges; that the Substance of the Womb does
indeed become more thin, as he observed in Dissections of Women with Child; but
that it seemed thicker, because the Womb-liver does grow exceeding close
thereto, and that this might deceive many. But Nicolas Fontanus says, that in
the womb of a Woman with Child, he has separated the Womb-liver from the
Membrane, and that he has found the Membrane to be exceeding thick. Which may
very well be, for the Membrane being spungie, drinks in the affluent moisture
of the womb, and puts on a thicker condition of Substance. If at any time it
happen to be praeternaturally thin, either through defect of Humor, or through
much Distension, it is easily broken. And Salmuth has observed as much in a
Childbed woman, by reason of strong Forcers. Now the Substance of the womb is
thickest of all about the internal O^ which is strait, whence proceeds that ^e
adm^e Dilata^ion in Child^, and Co^ of (...)*

The Figure of the Womb is by some The true Figure of the Womb.
counted round, by others Pear-fashion'd. But though the Womb incline to
roundness that it may be of the greater capacity; yet we conceive with Soranus
and Fallopius, that its bottom may best of all be resembled to a Gourd; because
it is by little and little straightened downwards. But the Neck of the Womb
resembles an oblong and round Pipe or Channel.

The Connection is either of the Neck of the Womb or of the Bottom.

The Neck is tied by its own substance, and by membranes; but the Bottom by
peculiar Ligaments.

On the foreside the Neck grows to the Piss-bladder and the Share-bones, by
Membranes arising from the Peritonaeum. In the hinder part to the Ossacrum, and
the rectum Intestinum, with some Fatness. But about the Privity it grows
together with the Fundament. On the sides, it is loosely knit by certain
Membranes to the Peritonaeum.

The Bottom is not fastened by its The Ligaments of the Womb.
Substance, but is free, because it ought to be moved, as shall be said in its
Action (w^^refore a Venetian woman died of pains in her womb, the bottom
thereof being tied by the Call) but in the sides it is knit by two pare of
Ligaments, whose use is to hold the womb suspended or dangling.

One upper pare is broad and membranous, and is held to arise from the Muscles
The upper Ligaments of the Womb.
of the Loins; and it ends into the bottom of the womb, near the horns. It is
loose and soft, that it may be distended and contracted. Aretaeus likens it to
the wings of Bats or Flitter-mice. And by help of this pare, the bottom is
fastened to the Bones of the Flank. But because it is interwoven with fleshy
Fibers, therefore Vesalius and Archangelus have, perhaps not unjustly, reckoned
them to be Muscles. Now they carry along the praeparatory and deferent Vessels,
even as they contain the Stones. Now this pare of Ligaments or Muscles, is
sometimes loosned The falling down of the Womb.
by violence, difficult Labor in Childbed, weight of the Child in the Womb,
etc. so that the Bottom of the Womb falls into the Privity, sometimes with the
Neck inverted; also sometimes it hangs out, and is cut off; in which case also
it is necessary that there be a Solution of the Connection of the Neck.

The other pare is lower, being round like Earthworms, reddish like Muscles
The Lower.
(whereupon some have conceived them to be Muscles, that perform the Office of
the Cremasters in Men, so that the Womb is by them moved up and down, or at
least is established and strengthened, in carrying Burdens, expelling the
Child, Outcries, and Labors, in Deflux of Humors into this Part, which Opinion
Pinaeus embraces. Also it is hollow, especially in the end. It arises from the
sides of the Bottom of the Womb, and at its beginning touching the deferent
Vessels, it ascends to the Groins, and as the spermatick Vessels in men, so
these Ligaments in Women, pass along through the productions of the
Peritonaeum, and the Tendons of the obliquely descendent Muscles of the Belly,
and there they are obliterated into Fat, or Membranes of the Bones near the
Clitoris, to which they are fastened, and degenerated into a broad and nervous
thinness. Where two other Muscles begin, without the Belly, being thin and
broad, clothing the whole inner face of the Lips; by help of which, some women
move the Lips. The remaining part of the foresaid Ligament, runs to the Knee,
and afterward into a Membrane of the inner part of the Thigh. Hence it is, as
Riolanus acquaints us, that women with Child do in their first months complain
of a pain in the inside of their Thighs.

The Use of this Part is, 1. As has been said, to draw the Bottom of the Womb
upwards, least it should fall down in relaxations, in bearing of weights, and
in taking off pains; which nevertheless be more rightly said of the pare. 2. To
hinder the ascent of the womb toward the upper parts, which of it self cannot
happen, unless wi^hal the Privities which are continued therewith, and the
sheath be drawn upwards, but in the womb relaxed, and distended, it often
happens. 3. Riolanus suspects that the excrementitious Humors of the womb are
sometimes carried into the Kernels of the Groins, by these Ligaments, where also
he has found venereous B^bo's raised. Otherwise, Hippocrates draws the Bubo's
in the Groins of Women from their Courses, which Aurelius Severinus refers to
critical Abscesses, and Arantius seeks out their Passages in the Veins, by
which the turgent Humer is carried from the womb to the Groins. I put the
Arteries in place of Veins, whereby Excrements are both here and in other
parts, carried to the extremities or outmost places in the Body. 4. Spigelius
in a Woman killed with over much carnal Copulation, observed these Ligaments
near the Womb, full of Seed. Which makes me suspect that these Ligaments,
having received a Seminal Moisture, do moisten the neighboring Parts in Women
with Child, that all Parts may more easily be loosned and stretched in Virgins
and barren Women, they are mere Ligaments, and by their Moisture defend the
womb from the violence of burning Heat.

The Substance of the womb is membranous, Its Substance.
that it may be dilated and contracted, as need shall require, furnished with
many pleits and folds, which in Women with Child are stretched our, to widen
the womb, but they are contracted when the Child is excluded, and in aged
women. Besides these pleits, it has in women with child Pipes and large
Cavities, or Cells exceeding manifest. Now the Substance of the womb is made up
of a common and proper Membrane.

The common is doubled, and grows Its Membranes.
to the sides on each hand, arising from the Peritonaeum, being exceeding
thick, and most firm for strength, smooth every where, save where the
Spermatick Vessels enter, or the Ligaments go out.

The proper and internal is also double; though it is hard to discern so much,
by reason of its close adhaesion, save in Exulcerations. And be^ween both there
were fleshy Fibers, such as are found in the Stomach: which some call the
proper Substance and Parenchyma of the womb (whereinto a spungie Body is here
and there strewed) and the use thereof is to heat the womb. But these Membranes
are not of the same thickness always: as was said before, when I spoke of the
Magnitude.

The Vessels of the womb are Veins, Arteries, Its Vessels.
and Nerves.

The Veins and Arteries accompanying one another, are carried between the Coats
of the womb, and pour forth their Blood into those membranous Pipes of the
womb, but are not carried into the inmost Cavity of the womb. And they are
twofold: some arise from above, others from beneath. For, from the upper and
lower parts, that is to say, from the whole Body, the Blood ought to come, both
that in the monthly terms, the whole Body may be purged, and also that in the
time of a woman's going with child, her Fruit might be nourished. Those which
come from above, do creep all the womb over, but especially in the bottom
thereof, and they are Branches derived from the Seminal Vessels, before the
praeparatory Vessels are constituted, and also from the Haemorrhoidal Branch,
whence there is so great a Consent between the Womb and the Spleen. The left
ends of the Veins and Arteries are joined with the right ends: that Why the
left Veins of the Womb are joined to the right
the right part may also be augmented with plenty of Blood. The Menstrual blood
is shed forth by the Arteries in Women not with Child: and therefore according
to the Observation of Walaeus, if about the time of the Menstrual Flux, the
Pulse of the Heart and Arteries may be made greater, then the blood is more
vehemently forced into the womb by the Arteries, and so the Menstrual Flux
furthered. We see also when we have given Cordials appropriate to the womb, and
stirring the Spirituous part of the Blood, that then the Courses incline to
flow. Finally, the color of the Menstrual blood in healthy women, declares
that it is Arterial blood. Now it r^ns back again to the Heart, by the Veins*
^d to the Arteries* for all that Blood neither can, nor must be voided out of
the Body, when they are obstructed, because the blood cannot freely pass upward
out of the lesser Veins of the womb into the greater, the Menstrual blood is
collected in great quantity, and makes great commotions of the womb. Those
Veins and Arteries which come from beneath and ascend, do arise from the
Hypogastrick Branches of the Cava and the Aorta, and creep through the neck of
the womb, and the lower part of the bottom, where they are every where joined
with the superior ones. For very broad Vessels are united through the bottom,
both without, and Anastomoses in the womb.
in the substance of the womb, which Anastomoses do more appear in menstrual
women, and in such as are with Child. And they may be easily observed, if in
dead Bodies some of them be blown up. For they all swell by that blast into
one. The Mouths of these Vessels or Pipes rather, do enter into the Cavity of
the bottom, and are called Acetabula or Cotylidones Cups or Saucers: which gape
and are opened, when the Menstrua are purged. And in Women with Child, when the
womb-liver is joined to them (in Beasts the Verticilli or Tufts) drawing blood
for the Child. And because Branches are carried into the neck of the womb from
these Vessels, by them women with Child that are Plethorick, may void Menstrual
blood in their first months, when there is more blood then needs to nourish the
Child. For it is not probable, that that blood comes out of the womb: for the
Child would be suffocated, and through too great opening of the internal mouth
of the womb, Abortion might follow.

Now it is observable, that the Vessels The Largeness of the Uterine Vessels.
of the womb, do in the time of a a woman's going with Child so swell with
blood, especially about the time of Childbirth, that they are as big as the
Emulgent Veins, or half as big as the Vena cava or Aorta.

Nerves very many in number, are carried from the pares of the Nerves of Os
sacrum, and from the sixth Conjugation of the Brain, to the Neck of the Womb,
and the parts about the Privities for pleasures sake: as also to the lower part
of the Bottom. Whence there is a great Sympathy betwixt the Womb and the Brain.
To the upper part of the Bottom few Nerves are carried, and they are
intertwisted like a Net.

The Action and Use of the womb, is to attract and retain the woman's The Action
and use of the womb.
seed expelled by her Stones, and the man's seed, cast in by his Yard. Both
these Seeds are drawn into the bottom, retained, conserved, and cherished,
whence proceeds Conception. For the Womb is like a Garden or Field, which
receives, preserves, and nourishes the Seed: and therefore Aristotle calls it
the Field of Nature. For even the womb is also a Field of Generation, the place
or matter wherein, affording also Nutriment of Arterial blood, yea and the
Matter of which viz. the woman's Seed; for the Spirituous substance of the Man's
Seed, is the Architect which performs the work, and gives life to the woman's
Seed. Now the Seed of both of them, ought to be fruitful with the formative
virtue which falls from the whole Body, and well and duly constituted; the
woman's being fit to receive the animated form, and the man's to give the same.
To the internal Heat of which two Seeds joined together, the external Heat of
the womb joins it self, and by a singular virtue, stirs up that same inbred
^ative faculty, to perform its work, by a way to (...) together unknown.
Hogelandius adds the Fer^ Action it self impressed upon the Seed, and the due
Situation of a certain Mass in the Seed, because we see that of an Eg never so
little shaken, no Chicken is ever hatched, and always in the midst of the
Seed of Animals, a little after Conception, we find a certain chrystalline
transparent Mass. Certain it is, that all the Particles of the Seed, have a
peculiar Determination, referring to that Part of the Body of the Parents, from
whence they came, and which they are to form in the Child. But the change of
this, or that determinate clotter of the Seed, does only vary the Situation of
the Child formed in the Womb, which is the cause that we find the Child
variously situate in the Womb. Eggs that have been shaken, seem to be less
fruitful, by reason of the confusion and rupture as it were, of the singular
determinate parts, and the loss of the Heat. Fabricius, Pacius, and Harvey do
attribute the formative or shaping Faculty to the Womb, and deny the same to be
in the Seed; wherein they are mistaken. For, 1. Chickens are hatched out of the
Eggs, only by the sitting of the Hen or some other Bird, also in a bed, in the
artificial Furnaces of Egypt, Tuscany, Denmark, and Seeds of corn do sprout
upon Chamber-floures, without the assistance of any womb. 2. The external
Members would sooner be shaped then the internal. 3. The Father should
contribute nothing to the sormation of the Child. 4. No cause could be given of
the likeness of the Child, sometimes to the Father, otherwhiles to the Mother.
Now the Followers of Des Crates* and amongst the rest Regius do aver, that the
Particles of the Seed are agitated only by the Heat of the womb and of the
Seed, and they being agitated, in regard of their figures, do necessarily fall
into the Branch of a Livewight, just as when the oblong Particles of Salt,
agitated in water by the force of Heat, and joined one with another, do first
make a plate, and by the frequent multiplication thereof a four square grain or
corn, and as of six little balls agitated upon some plane and united together a
Rose is made; and as of the Particles of Vapors arising out of Cellars in cold
weather and variously smiteing upon their doors, with a whirling motion, sundry
pictures of the patts of Plants are formed. And out of the said Branch or
Stalk, by little and little the whole shaping of the Child is perfected without
any understanding of the Soul, or any corporeal Faculty, directing the same, as
in the Workhouses of Glassmakers after a Bubble of Glass is rudely cut, Gloves,
Boots, and other things are blown by ignorant persons that come to see the
works; and in some Fountains, by reason of the figures of the Pores in the
Pipes, we see Images formed by force of the water breaking forth. A neat way,
truly, of Conception and Formation in the womb, if it were true. No man is able
in this Matter to trace the Workmanship of Nature. But I cannot as yet persuade
my self, that all things are done rudely and mechanically in the Body, who have
always had an higher Opinion of Nature then so. By this means a Man were an
accidental Being, and his first shaping would be accidental and fortuitous, o^
by chance medley. The figures of the foresaid things happen by accident and
contingently, and vary in the Particulars, whereas the Divine Shape of the most
noble Creature Man, is always one and the same, and happens of it self after
the same manner. How could that Branch be formed without the Mind, which is not
in our Hands? I profess I know not. For a Glass is formed by the widening and
working of an inanimate Matter, and as in the formation thereof, there is
required the blast and the hand of the Artificer, with the assistance of ^^e
fire; so in an animated Child, the internal The XXVII. TABLE*
The Womb taken out of the Body, with the Stones, and all kind of Vessels
fastened thereunto, and the Piss-bladder.
The FIGURES Explained.
FIG. I. A. The Piss-bladder turned upside down. BB. The Insertion of the
Ureters into the Bladder. CC. The Neck or Sheath of the Womb into which very
many Vessels are disseminated. D. The Bottom of the Womb. EEEE. The two low and
round Ligaments of the Womb cut off. FF. The Vas caecum. or trumpet of the
Womb, as yet fastened to this upper and broad Ligament. GG. The same Vessel on
the opposite side, separate from the broad Ligament. HH. The deferent Vessels
of both sides, ending from the Stones to the Bottom of the Womb. II. The upper
and membranous Ligament of the Womb, resembled to the wings of Batts, through
which very many Vessels are disseminated, arising from the praeparatory
Vessels. K. The praeparatory Vessels of one side, as yet not freed from the
membranous Ligament. L. The praeparatory Vessels of the other side, freed from
the membranous Ligament, that their Insertion into the Stone may be discerned.
MM. The Stones of which the right is covered with its Membrane and the left
quite naked. NN. Very many Veins and Arteries spread abroad into the Neck and
Bottom of the Womb, serving for the monthly Purgation and the Nourishment of
the Child. OO. Nerves spread up and down through the Body of the Womb, which are
represented by the Graver too large.


FIG. II. A. The bottom of the womb. BB. The lowermore round Ligaments of the
womb cut off. C. The Region wherein the inner Mouth of the womb is placed. D.
The right Stone covered with its Membrane. EE. The deferent Vessels reaching
from the Stones to the Horns of the womb. F. The upper and membranous Ligament
of the womb, fastening the deferent Vessels to the Stones. G. The Membrane of
the Stone separated therefrom. H. The glandulous or kernelly Substance of the
Stone. I. The Neck of the womb, commonly called the Sheath. KK. Passages
arising from the deferent Vessel, and carried into the Neck of the womb, into
which they say Women with Child do squirt their Seed.


page 69

formative Faculty of the Animated Seed. does jovn it self to the Heat of the
womb and of the Seed. Nor is the Formation of the Child only apparent, as the
artificial Images of water are, but true, constant, and permanent. Abensina,
Paracelsus, and Am^^tus Lusitanus, have contrariwise been persuaded that a
Child may be generated our of the Mothers womb: but nob^^ will be forward to
believe them, unless they could snew us some example, which their Followers
will never be able to do. For that a little child should be made in a Glass of
a Man's Seed and Menstrual Blood, placed in Horse-dung, it has never been my
hap to see as yet, and it ought to be doubted, because the Experiment cannot be
made. For the Heat and Virtue of the Seed and Blood would expire, before they
could be mingled in the Glass, and it would be a very hard matter, to get the
Seed of a woman to mingle among the rest.

That Conception has been made, and a Child formed out of the womb, some
Examples testify. Touching the Trumpet of the womb, I spoke before, from the
Relation of Riolanus. A Child conceived in a woman's Stomach.
That a Child was conceived in the Stomach of a young woman the Wife of an
abominable Tailor, and voided by her mouth the length of a man's finger, but
well shaped in all Parts external and internal. Salmuth informs us, describing
the Story from the Letters of Komelerius to Gothofredus Hofmannus, nor does he
doubt of the truth of the Story. That the same may be performed in the neck of
the womb, those Superfoetations, seem to demonstrate, which are voided in the
first place to make more room for the larger Conception in the womb. But these
are to be accounted very rare and praeternatural cases, if true. But
Superfoetation, whether in the womb or without, depends from the virtue of the
womb, reaching all over the whole Body thereof.

The womb is therefore necessary to preserve the Species or kind. Howbeit it
contributes also to the health of the Individual, as the emunctory or clenser
of the whole Body. Howbeit very many women have lived very long, and happily
without it, witness Abenzoar, Aegineta, Wierus, Zacutus. When it has fallen
out putrified, it has been all in a manner cut off without danger, according
to the Observations of Rhases, Carpus, Mercurialis, Langius, a Vega, Paraeus,
Baubinus, and others. Fernelius tells us he saw a childing woman, who voided
with her Child her whole womb, plucked away by the roots, without danger of
life. Saxonius relates other Stories of like Nature. Saronus says that Sows
are made more corpulent in Galatia, by cutting out their wombs. Pliny tells us
that Sows were hung up by their sore Legs, and had their stones and wombs cut
out, that so looseing the use of Venery, they might become more fat and
delectable to the Palate. Nor is it without reason, because the womb is the
Mother of many Diseases, by reason of the Obstruction of the narrow Vessels,
and the ready falling down of Humors, which when the womb is away, are more
readily purged out by a larger passage.

Moreover another action of the womb is said to be a certain Natural motion:
The wombs motion.
whence Plate would have the womb to be a certain Animal or Live-wight, and
Aretius says it is an Animal in an Animal, because of its motion. For in
carnal Copulation, and when it is poffessed with a desire to conceive, it is
moved now up and then down, and gapes to receive the Yard, as a Beast gapes for
its Food. And sometimes it is moved downwards, to expel the Child and Secondine,
with so much violence, that it falls out.

Moreover it is moved with, rejoices in, and is delighted with sweet smelling
things: but it shuns stinking and strong smelling things, as Castoreum,
Asafoetida, etc. Hence Aristotle says, that women with child will miscarry at
the smell of a Candle-^^uff.

But the womb is sensible of C^ not under the formality of Odours, but is only
affected by the delicate and subtle vaporous matter conjoined. Even as we see
all the Spirits recreated, by sweet smelling things, not in respect of the smell
precisely, but of the vapor conjoined therewith, which is familiar and
acceptable to the Spirit. And therefore the Genital parts of women are the
sooner affected, because they have an exceeding quick Sense. And because sweet
smelling things have good and pleasing Vapors joined with them; and stinking
things have filthy and ugly Vapors; therefore by the latter, the Spirits are
made more impure, and because the womb is full of Spirits, therefore she is
delighted with sweet and fragrant things, and abominates such as are stinking.

And nevertheless, some women are Why sweet smelling things do hurt some women.
found whose wombs are badly constituted, who are put into Fits of the Mother
by sweet smelling things, and cured by such as stink: because Nature being
provoked to Expulsion by the latter, does with the stinking Vapors expel the
morbifick Matter. But with the former filthy Vapors are stirred up in the womb,
which before lay hid, so that they ascend to the Midriff, Heart, Brain, etc.
whence proceed strangling Fits of the Mother. Now these Vapors ascend partly by
the sensible Pores, and partly by the Veins running back, and carrying the said
Vapors with the uterine Blood: for I cannot allow of the power Helmont assigns
to his ruling Parts, without manifest and known Passages. Now the womb it self
does not ascend, nor is it moved out of its place, unless being distended, it
takes up more room then ordinary, nor does it roll up and down like a Bowl or
Globe in the Cavity of the Belly, as Hippocrates and Fernelius have imagined.
Nor do the horns of the womb being swelled, move any more then the womb it
self, as Riolanus suspects, for they are fastened by their Membranes, and they
cannot shed their Seed into the Belly, the ways being stopped, but Vapors have
an ^asie motion, which being dissipated, the Swelling of the Belly presently
falls.

Besides its Sense of Smelling, Tasting, Feeling, it is furnished according to
Helment, with a kind of brutish Understanding, which makes it rage, if all
things go not according to its desire. But these things favor of the Opinion of
Plato, who improperly did compare the womb to a living Creature. Whence that
fury proceeds, I have already declared. As for what that same Novellist Helmont
says, that it lives many times, and keeps a coile after a woman is dead, no
man will easily believe it. For its life depends upon the life of the whole
Body; and if it stir after death, either that motion proceeds from winds, or
from a Child seeking its way out, after the Mother is dead, as sundry Examples
demonstrate. Sphinx Theologico-Philosophica, tells us that the Mother being
dead, a Child suddenly issued out of her womb, and cried lustily. After which
manner Laurentius describes the Birth of Scipio and Manilius. Eberus has two
Examples of a Child born after the Mothers death, as also Johannes Matthaeus,
and the like cases are fresh in the memory of many here at Hafnia. But in
opposition to Winchlerus, Sperlingerus, and others that deny it, we must
observe, 1. That the Child must necessarily be strong. 2. That the Orifice of
the Mothers womb must be large. 3. That the Mother being dead, the mouth of the
womb must be widened, and her Thighs spread, or else the Child will be strangled
before it can come forth.

Chap. XXIX. Of the Bottom of the Womb, and its Mouth.
WE have treated hitherto of See Tab. XXVII.
the Womb in General, and its similar Parts. The dissimilar Parts follow, into
which we have divided the same: viz. the Bottom, the Neck, and the Privity,
with the Parts annexed.

The Fundus or Bottom of the womb, is that part which reaches from the internal
Orifice to the End upwards. We divide it into the lower and narrower part and
the larger upper part; to which we ad a third part viz. the Mouth.

The lower and narrow part, is that between the Mouth of the womb, and The
short Neck of the womb.
the beginning, largeness thereof, and it may be called the short Neck, to
difference it from the true and long Neck. For before the wideness of the womb
begins, between it and the inner Mouth, there interceeds another Neck as it
were, or narrower Channel, then the largeness of the Bottom, and this is
observed both in Man and Beast. And Fallopius is of Opinion, that this part was
called the Neck of the womb by the Ancients, as Galen, Soranus, etc. Pinaeus
reckons this part to be as long as a man's thumb, I have observed it to be five
fingers breadth, long in a Do.

The Cavity hereof is not large, but such as will admit a Probe or large Quil.
Some Cause of Barrenness.
It is rough, least the Seed which has been drawn in, should flow out again,
as happens in some barren women, which have this part slippery, by reason of
bad Humors. This roughness arises from wrinkles, which according to the
Observation of Pinaeus, have their Roots situate beneath, and their Edg tending
inwards or upwards, that they may easily admit, hardly let go any thing.

The large and upper Part is chiefly termed Fundus or the Bottom, and this Part
The Bottom.
is properly called the Womb or Matrix, and it is the principal Part for whose
sake the rest were made, being wider and larger then the rest.

It is seated above the Os pubis or Share-bone, that it may be there dilated
and widened.

The womb has in a woman only one Cavity, not distinguished into any No
Cavities or Cells in the womb of a woman.
Cells, as some falsely attribute thereunto seven Cells. In Brutes it is commonly
divided into two parts, and therefore those parts are called the two Horns of
the womb: though the Why Horns are said to be in the wombs of women.
form of Horns is not conspicuous in all Brutes, but in Cows, Does, Sheep,
Goats, etc. Howbeit in imitation thereof, Authors have attributed horns to the
wombs of women, because on the sides of the bottom thereof, there is on each
side some protuberancy, where the deferent Vessels are inserted. But the womb
of a woman is very seldom divided into two parts, as it is in Beasts, as it
has been observed in some by the Brother of Baubinus, Sylvius, Riolanus, and
Obsequens before them. And I doubt whether their wombs be so divided, who bear
two or more Children at a Birth. The last year many women at Hafnia bore Twins
contrary to their custom, yea and some three Children at a Birth, which they
never did before nor since. We must not therefore account that to be proper to
Families, or attribute the same to the wombs being double, which properly
belongs to the Seed. Also that they are not conceived in a double womb, the
womb-cake testifies, which alone is sufficient for many Children, only it has
so many strings fastened to it in several places, as there are Children, as
Besterus has lately described it in a like History.

Yet is it divided into the right and left part. In the former Boys are for the
most part engendered: in the latter Girls. And it seldom happens otherwise, if
we believe Hippocrates and Galen. Hunters have this sign whereby they known
whether the Beast they hunt have a male or female in her belly, for if when she
is struck dead, she fall on her right side, they conclude she is big of a Male,
because the burden she goes with is most weighty on the right side; if on the
left she fall, they judge it is a Female. It Is reported that women with child of
a Boy, do lift their right foot higher then their left, as they walk, as
Salmuth gives us to understand, all which signs are nevertheless fallacious.
Hippocrates and his followers do reckon other signs, which are not proper for
this place.

The right and left side are differenced by a Line or Seam which sticks up
obscurely, which Aristotle terms the Median Line. The like Line is seen in the
lower Belly under the Navil, dividing that Region into two parts, which they
conceive to be then more visible, when women bear twins. But in some women with
child I have seen this Line manifest, who bore afterward only one Child.

The outward Surface is smooth and even, and covered as it were with a watery
Humor. The inner part has many Porosities, which are Mouths, through which in
the time of a woman's going with child, blood easily passes out of the Veins of
the womb to nourish the Infant.

Its Use is to receive the Seed, contain the Child, nourish it, etc.

The Orifice or inner Mouth of the womb The inner Orifice of the womb.
is oblong, and transverse, but very narrow (but when it gapes, it is round and
orbicular, which is perhaps the cause why the German Midwives call it the Rose,
and the French Midwives, the Crown of the Mother) like the Hole of the Nut of
the Yard, that no hurtful thing may enter in, nor the Seed drawn thither,
easily pass out. If at any time it fall out of the Privity, or be turned inside
out, it resembles exactly the Mouth of a Tench.

If the Situation thereof be changed, so that it be not just in the middle,
looking towardst he bottom, it is conceived a Man cannot squirt his Seed
thereinto, and that the Seed will sooner flow back, then the woman conceive. If
it be quite absent, which seldom falls out, an uncurable Barrenness Some Causes
of Barrenness.
is thereby caused. As also Barrenness is caused, if it be otherwise affected,
viz. with Cancers, scirrhous Tumors, Obstructions, Callosity, over much
Fatness: especially through over much Humectation and Relaxation, either
through over much Copulation as in Whores, or through too great a Flux of
Humors.

In women with child a glewish clammy Matter grows to the Orifice, and fills
the short Neck wellnear; that these Parts being moistened, may more easily be
opened in the time of Travel.

Within the Channel of this Mouth to the lower part thereof, grows its little
bunch, which does more exactly shut ^ole, according to the Observation of
Riolanus* He also informs us that about this little bunch, there are to be seen
Pores or little Holes, which seem to be the ends of the deferent Vessels,
ending at the Neck. Columbus found those Vessels implanted like the teeth of a
comb, full of Blood.

By this Orifice, the womb draws the Seed into it, which being conceived, it is
The Use of the Orifice of the womb
said to be shut so close, that the point of a needle cannot enter. And
therefore Physicians do vainly squirt Liquors thereinto with a Syringe, and
Whores endeavor in When the Mouth of the womb is opened.
vain to draw out the Conception. But it is opened in Superfoetation, in the
Ejection of a bad Conception without hurt to the Child, which sometimes happens
in the Emission of Seed, but it is especially opened after a wonderful manner
at the time of Childbirth, when it ought to be widened according to the
greatness of the Child, so that the wideness is in a manner equal from the
bottom of the womb to the Privity, whereout the Child passes. And this says
Galen we may wonder at, but we cannot understand. And he admonishes us upon
this occasion, that it is our duty to acknowledge the Wisdom and Power of him
that made us. But this Orifice as well as the womb, does chiefly consist of
wrinkled Membranes, which being smoothed out, will admit of unimaginable
Dilatation.

Chap. XXX. Of the greater Neck of the Womb.
IN the Bottom of the Womb we have See Tab. XXVII.
observed three things; the Bottom it self, the lesser Neck, and the Orifice.
In the greater Neck also, three things are to be noted. The Neck it self, the
Hymen, and the Mouth of the Bladder. Of the Hymen we shall treat in the
following Chapter.

The Neck or Channel of the womb, is by Aristotle also sometimes called Matrix,
and the Door of the Womb, Fallopius calls it Sinus pudoris, the Privity. It is
a long Channel, being hollow even when the Child is in the womb, admitting both
a Probe and a man's finger, as may be seen in such as are new born.

It is situate between the external and the internal Mouth, receiving the Yard
like a sheath.

Its Figure. The Neck is somewhat writhen and crooked, also it is shorter and
straiter, when it is loose, and falls together; that the internal parts may not
be refrigerated. But it is straight and widened 1. In carnal Copulation. 2. In
the monthly Flux. 3. In the time of Childbirth, when it is exceedingly
stretched according to the Shape of the Child; whence also proceeds the
exceeding great pains of women in travel: and then as also during their
Courses, women are very much cooled.

Its Magnitude. The length thereof is eight fingers breadth commonly, or seven;
so as to be as long as a Man's longest finger. It is as wide as the Intestinum
rectum or Arse-gut. But the longitude and latitude of this part are so various,
that it is hard to describe them. For in carnal Copulation, it accommodates it
self to the length of the Yard, and this Neck becomes longer or shorter,
broader, or narrower, and swells sundry ways according to the lust of the
woman. And when that happens, the Caruncles swell with Spirits which fill them,
as appears in Cows and Bitche^ desire Copulation; but the Channel is made
narrower and less, as also in the Act of Generation, that it may more close
embrace the Yard: and therefore its

Substance is of an hard and nervous flesh, and somewhat spungy, like the Yard;
that it may be widened and contracted within, the upper part is wrinkled, when
it is not distended, but Wrinkles in the Neck of the womb.
being widened, it is more slippery and smooth. Howbeit in the Neck of the womb
also when it is distended, there are many orbicular wrinkles in the beginning
of the channel near the Privity, most of all in the fore part next the Bladder,
less toward the Intestinum rectum on which it rests; and they serve for the
greater Titillation caused by the rubbing of the Nut of the Yard against the
said wrinkles. And in young Maids these wrinkles are straiter, and the Neck
narrower, through which the Menstrual blood is voided; also in grown persons
that are yet Virgins. But the wrinkles are worn out, and the sides become
callous, by reason of frequent rubbing, 1. In old women. 2. In such as have
used much Copulation, or have frequently bore Children. 3. In those that have
been troubled with a long Flux of the Courses, or of the Whites. And in all
these the substance does also become harder, so that it becomes at last
gristley, as it were old women, and such as have born many Children. But in
young Maidens, it is more soft and delicate.

The Use of the Neck is to receive the Yard being raised, and to draw out the
Seed.

Finally, beyond the middle toward The Orifice of the Bladder.
the end of the Neck, in the fore and upper part, not far from the Privity,
comes the Insertion of the Bladder into sight, that the Urin may there be
voided by the common Passage. It is as long as a knucle of ones finger, without
fleshy, or rather covered with a fleshy Sphincter. Pinaeus observes that it is
black within, of the same substance with the Piss-pipe in Men, as any man may
see, now Riolanus that told us so.

Wierus has noted in his Observations, that the outer extremity of the Neck of
the Bladder, does not in all women appear in the same place, in many it is seen
above the outer straits of the neck of the womb, under the Nymph; in some few
it lies hid inwardly, in the upper part of the Privity. But the entrance into
the Bladder, is sound on the backside, when the Membrane called Hymen is
there: of which we are now to speak.

Chap. XXXI. Of the Membrane called Hymen.
THe Hymen or Membrane called See Fig. IV. and V. of Ta^. XXVIII.
Eugion, is by others called the closure of Virginity, and the Flower of
Virginity, because where it is, there is a sign of Virginity.

Now whether or no there is any sign of That there is some true sign of
Virginity.
Virginity, ought not to be doubted. For all Men find that marry Virgins, that
there is somewhat that hinders their Yard from going in, unless it be thrust
forward with great force and strength. Whence Terence says the first
Copulation of a Virgin is exceeding painful. And at that time for the most
part, blood issue with great pain, more or less; which Blood is also called ^er
of Viro.

For by reason of the widening of the Why Virgins are pained in their first
carnal Copulation.
strait Neck of the Womb, and the tearring of the Hymen, all Virgins have pain
and a Flux of blood in their first Copulation. Younger Virgins have more pain
and less Flux of blood, because of the dryness of the Hymen and the smallness
of their Vessels; but those that are older, and have had their Courses, have
less pain and greater flux of blood, for the contrary causes.

But if her Courses flow, or have flowed a little before: the Yard is easily An
Exception.
admitted, by reason of the Relaxation of those Parts, whence there is little
or no pain, and little or no flux of blood. And therefore Maids ought not to be
married at that season, least the Bridegroom come to suspect the Virginity of
his Bride.

Now what it is that hinders the Yard from entering, that is to say, in What is
the token of Virginity.
what part the token of Virginity consists, there are sundry Opinions and
Differences.

I. The Arabians say the Hymen is The I. Opinion of the Arabians.
a piece formed of five Veins at the middle of the Neck of the womb, inserted
on either side, so that the Mouths of the rightside Veins are joined with those
on the left.

These are Fancies.

II. Others (among whom are Fernelius and Ulmus) do say that the The II.
Opinion.
sides of the Neck grow together, and when they are separated and widened, the
Veins are broken which run in those Parts. But this is contrary to Experience,
which witnesses, that in little Girls the Neck has its Cavity, nor do the
sides thereof stick together.

III. Others say it is a transverse Membrane. The III. Opinion.


And herein they are right. But they are deceived, who have feigned it to have
Holes in it like a Seive, and placed it in the lowest end of the Neck: through
which they would have the Urin to be voided.

IV. The newest Opinion of all, is that of Severinus Pinaeus, a most The IV.
Opinion.
expert Surgeon of Paris, who has wrote an whole Book of the Notes of
Virginity, not unprofitable to be read. Now he accounts the four Myrtle-shap'd
Caruncles to be the Hymen, tied together by a small Membrane, placed in the
outer part of the neck of the womb; of which hereafter. And some learned men
are at this day of his Opinion, as Bauhinus for one. I could find no other in a
young Girl, lately dissected in this place.

V. The more common Opinion is, that the Hymen is a transverse Membrane The V.
Opinion strengthened by many Authors.
going athwart the neck of the womb, a little above the Neck of the Bladder,
which resists the first Entrance of the Yard. And many Experiments and
Authorities stand up for this Opinion. And in the first place of four most
renowned Anatomists, of Padua, Vesalius, Fallopius, Aquapendent, and Casserius.
And all Antiquity had some knowledge hereof. Hence the Author of that old Friars
verse, or riming verse.

Est magnum crimen perrumpere virginis hymen. It Is a huge sin to break the skin
of a Virgins Gim. Archangelus, Alexander Benedictus, and Wierus assent
hereunto. Carpus also knew as m^ger seem to have been ignorant hereof in the 1.
Sect. of his 175. Exercitation, where he speaks of a Root that extremely
excites Lust. For he says; If any shall piss thereon, they say he will
presently be full of fleshy desires: Virgins that look to Cattle in the fields,
if they sit thereon or make water, it is said the skin in their Privity will
break, as if they had been defloured by a Man. Columbus and Sebizius did three
times find it, Baubinus twice, as he averrs in his Book of the similar Parts,
and Wolfius seems in his Institutions to assent thereunto, who witnesses that
he found it at Padua. Adrianus Spigelius affirms that he found it in all the
Virgins that ever he did cut up, and I my self and Veslingus at the same time
saw it at Padua. Nor is it necessary to bring all the Authorities which might
be had in this subject to this place.

And whereas Columbus and Paraeus The Confutation of such as deny it to be
always found in Virgins.
deny that it is always found, and Laurentius says he could never find it:
the reason was that they wanted Bodies to dissect, or were negligent in their
work: or they might dissect supposed Virgins who had been defloured. Or if they
dissected young Virgins, they through wantonness do sometimes with their fingers
break the said Skin or Membrane. But if they shall say they did cut up abortive
Births, Girls of two or three years old etc. I answer it is incredible that the
Hymen should be wanting in such, seeing the Authorities and Experiences of
skilful Anatomists forecited, are against it. Again, if in some by them
dissected, it was wanting; by the same right that they say this Membrane is
praeternaturally present, we shall say it was praeternaturally absent. For it
is seldom absent, and for the most part present. And others that are for
Laurentius against us, such as Capivaccius and Augenius, are to be rejected as
persons not skilled in Astronomy.

VI. There is a midling Opinion The VI. Opinion.
of Melchior Sebizius, viz. that all the signs of Virginity must be joined
together, when they are present. And when the Hymen or Skin so called is
absent, we must rest in the straitness of the Neck and other marks, which being
widened in the first Copulation, pain and effusion of blood follows by reason
of the Solution of Continuity.

These things thus promised, let us come to the Structure of this Hymen or thin
Skin which goes cross the neck of the womb.

It Is situate in the neck of the womb, near the end thereof, just behind the
Insertion of the Neck of the Bladder, or a little more inward. For the
Situation does now and then vary, though the difference is but little. And
there this Membrane goes cross the Cavity, like the Diaphragma or Midriff.

Its Figure. In the middle it has an hole like a ring, so that in grown Maids,
it will admit the top of ones little finger, through which hole the Courses
flow.

But Aquapendent has many times found this hole in a threefold difference. The
hole in the middle of the Hymen, is of several fashions.


I. As being Naturally constituted, and just opposite to the external Privity.

II. Higher, and not just against the Privity.

III. That in the middle was no round hole, but a chink somewhat long. Sebezius
likens it to the horned Moon a little full. For Nature sports her self in the
variety of Shape.

But seldom is the Hymen without any holes (...) then the Courses cannot come
away, whence f^ last Dis^ Death, unless it be open

Its Magnitude. On its sides, where it grows to the neck of the womb, it is
thicker then in the middle.

Its Connection. It is continued to the Substance of the Neck, as if it grew out
of the same.

Its Substance is partly membranous, partly fleshy, nor yet very thick. And in
some it is thinner and weaker then in others. As in the Prayan Virgins of
Campania, who are there all devirginated after twelve years of age, partly by
the Heat of the Sun, partly of their own Bodies breaking the Membrane, as I was
told by Relation of Friends there. In some it is more soild and thick, and
sometimes so strong, that it must be cut open, especially when the Bridegroom is
lazy and impotent: for if he be a lusty Carle, he is wont after some months
labor, to make his way through.

This Membrane is furnished with many little Veins, which being broken in the
first Copulation, pain and bloodshed arises. Finally, it wears away at last,
either through Copulation, or wanton rubbing; even as in men the Fraenum or
bridle of the Yard is sometimes torn.

But there is a great and serious Question, whether or no in the first carnal
Act, all A Question touching the shedding of blood in the first Copulation.
Virgins must needs void Blood, as a certain sign of their Virginity?

I answer, that it happens so for the most part, and ought always so to
happen. And therefore in 22. of Deuteronomie, at Marriages the bloody cloth
was showed to the Elders, as a witness of the Virginity of the Bride. Leo
Africanus says the same custom was used in Mauritania, and I was told by a
Syrian, that it is observed at this very day in Syria. Augenius indeed out of
Rabbi Solomon and Lyranus, do understand this Text Metaphorically, as if the
spreading of the Garment did signify, the words of witnesses, by which the
Chastity of the Bride was diligently enquired into and declared. But the best
Interpreters retain the Litteral Sense of the Words. Sebizius proves that it
was to them a perpetual sign, because 1. Their Virgins were married very young.
2. Every one was careful of himseif because of the Law of Jehova^. Others
contrariwise conceive that it was a sign for the most part. Marius excepts when
the Bridegroom is impotent, and a Surgeon may easily judge in such a case.
Sennertus says in that Law the affirmative Inference is good, but not the
negative; and that nothing else can be concluded, but that where it is, it is a
sign of Virginity. Therefore it may be hindered, and not appear.

1. If Virgins break it through wantonness with their fingers, or some other
Instrument. Hence it is that some Nations, sow up the Privities of Girls new
born, leaving a little way for the Urin to come forth; nor do they open it till
the time of Marriage: and then the Bridegroom causes it to be opened, that he
may be sure he has a Virgin. 2. If it be the time of her Courses, or she have
had them a little before. 3. If the Chink in the Hymen be very long, for then
there happens only a Dilatation and no breaking. 4. If the Neck of the Womb be
very wide, and the Yard not sufficiently thick. 5. If the Man thrust in his
Yard cleverly. 6. If the Virgin have had the falling down of the womb, whereby
the Hymen was broke. 7. If the Virgin be in years before she is married. 8. If
by continual Deflux of sharp Humors, the ^n be either moistued or fretted,
which frequen^pens in sickly men, through fault of their Con^ badness of the
Climate (...) healthly Hebrew Virgins, being in a good Climate, and of a strong
Constitution, did easily by care avoid these Inconveniences.
The Use of the Hymen is, to defend the internal Parts from external Injury. 2.
To testify a Maids Virginity.

Now a Maid may conceive without Whether Conception may be made without hurting
the Hymen.
hurting the token of her Virginity, which Americus Vesputius relates to have
been common in the Indies, and Speronus and Peramatus prove the same. It Is
reported that at Paris a certain woman in this present Age wherein we live, was
got with Child, without any Detriment to her Virginal Parts, and a like History
is related by Clementina. Which we may conceive to be done five manner of
ways, reckoned up by Plempius and Sinibaldus, which for Honors sake, I shall
here omit. Nor does this any ways prejudice the Conception of our Savior,
which was performed without any of these ways, without the Embracement of any
Man, and only by the overshadowing of the Holy Spirit, of which it belongs to
Divines to treat. If we believe Suidas, the Membrance was by the Midwives found
in the Virgin Mary, when it was questioned, whether she had lost her Virginity
or no; which I conceive to have been inconsistent with the Modesty of that
blessed Virgin. The living Simon Magus, that he might be reputed for a God,
boasted that he was born of his Mother Rachel, she being a Virgin. St.
Augustine conceits that in the State of Innocence, the Seed of the Man might be
conveyed into the Womb of the Woman, her Virginity remaining uncorrupted,
even as now Menstrual blood comes out of the womb of a Virgin, without any
Detriment to her Virginity. Which Opinion Vives does explain and approve.

But that Women can become fruitful without the Seed of a Man, is incredible.
For Caranza judges that Story of Pomponius Mela, of certain hairy women in an
Island, which are fruitful without any Copulation of Men, to be a Fable.
Touching Incuboe, the Question is different, which I have handled in another
place. It was lately reported in France, that Magdalena ^^ A^vermont the Wife
of Hieronymus Augustus de Montelione a French Knight, did conceive a Son called
Emmanuel, only by imagination, which de Lord a Professer at Monpelier, made to
be suspected, and P. Sanchius in the same place did wish me not to believe it.
Old Authors relate that Mares in Portugal, do conceive by the wind, Ludovicus
Carrius does justify their report. But Justinus the Epitomizer, does more
rightly explain their meaning to have been only to note the fruitfulness of
those Mares, and the speediness of their Conception

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Woman's external Privity in General.
WHere the Neck of the Womb ends, there begins the last and outmost part of the
womb, viz. The Woman's Privity, or the outward Orifice, or Mouth of the Neck of
the womb; others call it Vulva quasi valva, as if you would say a folding Door,
also Cunnus a cuneo from a wedg, or from an Impression [ whence in a Manuscript
of English Receipts, I have found it called the Print] Plautus calls it Saltus,
a Wood or Grove, or straight. Also by another Metaphor he calls it Concha the
Shellfish, and Na^^^ the Ship; others commonly call it Natura muliebris, the
Woman's Nature. Varre tells us the Romans called it Porca the Furrow or
Parsley-bed, the Sow. And what Experience of biting made, Suidas and Eustathius
call it cuneiron or cuona, the Dog, let those judge that can speak by Experience.

It is only one in Number. Obsequens tells of a Woman that had two Privities,
and Licetus has observed many such as Monsters.

Its Situation is external, in the former Region of the Share-bones, where very
Parts of the Privitie.
many parts are to be seen without Dissection, and some without drawing open
the Lips; as the Hairs of the Share, the Lips, and the Hillocks themselves; the
great external Chink, the Wings, the Tentigo; but some parts cannot be seen
without drawing the Lips aside, as the fossa navicularis, the two smaller
Chinks by the Nymphs, the bodies of the Clitoris, the Hole of the Neck of the
Bladder, with with a fleshy Valve, the wrinkled Chink or immediate Mouth of the
Neck, with four Caruncles, and as many Membranes: where afterward the Channel
begins of which we have spoken.

The Hairs of the Share in such as are ripe, break out about the Lips, the
better to close the Chink. And they are in Women more curled then in Maids; of
sundry colors, being produced by Nature, partly the shelter, and partly to
cover these parts, which she judges ought in decency to be covered. But the
Italian and Eastern Women out of a desire of cleanliness and neatness, do by
Art remove these Hairs as unprofitable.

The Lips being drawn open, there appears 1. MAGNA FOSSA the large See Fig. II.
and III. of the XXVIII. Tab.
Trench or Ditch, with the outer GREAT CHINK, and we may call the foresaid
Ditch Fossa navicularis the Boat trench, because of its likeness to a little
Boat or Ship. For it is backwards more deep and broad, that the lower and
after-end might degenerate as it were the Ditch or Trench. In this Ditch the
Lips being opened, two Holes appear, but hardly visible, save in live bodies,
out of which a good quantity of wheyish Humor Issues, which moistens the Man's
Share in the time of Copulation. The Orifice or Beginning of the Neck of the
Womb, is in the middle of this Ditch.

Now this Ditch with the external Chink were to be large, that the Child might
in the external part come out more easily, seeing the Skin cannot be so
stretched, as the membranous Substance within may be.

Then we meet with two COLLATERAL CHINKS, which are less: the right and the
left, and they are between the Lips and the Wings.

Now in this large Ditch, there are first of all to be seen certain Caruncles
or little Parcels of flesh, of which we are now to discourse.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Myrtle-shaped Caruncles.
IN the Middle of the Ditch or See. Fig. IV. of Tab. XXVIII.
Trench aforesaid, appear four CARUNCLES or little Particles of flesh,
presently after the Wings.

They are so situate that each possesses a corner, and oppose one another in
manner of a quadrangle.

One of them is before in the circumference of the hole of the urinary Passage,
to shut the same (it being greater then the rest, and forked) least after the
water is voided, any external thing as Air, etc. should enter into the Bladder.

The secon opposite to the former, is situate behind, the two remaining ones
are Collateral.

Their Shape resembles the Berries of Myrtle.

Their Size varies, for some have their shorter, longer, thicker, and thinner
then others. Howbeit they abide til extreme old Age, and wear not away so much
as in those that have used frequent Copulation and frequent Childbearing.

They have some Membranes joined to them, which Pinaeus together with the
Caruncles terms Valves: so that their substance is partly fleshy and partly
membranous.

The Hole in the middle between these Caruncles, is of various size, according
to the age of the Party. Howbeit Riolanus has observed, that in Virgins it
equals a third part of the great Chink.

Also He conceives, these Caruncles are made by the wrinkling of the fleshy
sheath of the Privity, that the external part being narrower then the sheath,
may in time of travel be widened as much as it. And therefore in a Childbed
Woman, after she was brought to bed, he observed them for seven days quite
obliterated, by reason of the great distention of the Privity, nor is there any
appearance of them till the Privity be again straightened and reduced to its
Natural form.

Their Use is, I. to defend the internal parts, while they immediately shut the
Orifice of the Neck, that no Air, Dust, etc. may enter. To which end also the
Nymphs and Lips of the Privity do serve.

II. Fortitillation and pleasure, while they are swolen, and strongly strain,
and milk the Yard as it were, especially in young Lasses.

But Pinaeus will have their use to be far different. For he says these
Caruncles, whose Extremities are fleshy Membranes, are so bound together, as to
leave only a little hole, and so to make the Hymen or true Mark of Virginity.
Nor will he have it seated across or athwart, but long-waies, so that the
figure of the whole Hymen should make an obtuse cone, or a cone with the sharp
end cut off.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the CLITORIS.
FAllopius arrogates unto himself the Invention or first Observation of this
Part. And Columbus gloriously, as in other things he is wont, attributes it to
himself. Whereas nevertheless Avicenna, Albucasis, Ruffus, Pollux and others,
have made mention hereof in their Writings.

Some call it the Nymph, as Actius and The Names of this Part.
Aegineta. Columbus terms it Dulcedo amoris the Sweerness of Love, and the
Sting of Venus; because this part is the chief Seat of Delight in carnal
Copulation: which if it be gently touched in such as have long abstained from
carnal Embracements, and are desirous thereof, Seed easily comes away. The
Greeks call it Cleitoris, Cleitoris.
others name it Tentigo, others the woman's Yard or Prick: both because it
resembles Its likeness to a Man's Yard.
a Man's Yard, in Situation, Substance, Composit Repletion, with Spirits and The
XXVIII, TABLE
This TABLE comprehends the Sheath of the Womb, the Body of the Clitoris, and
the external Female Privity, both in Virgins, and such as are defloured.
The FIGURES Explained.
FIG. I. AA. The Bottom of the Womb dissected cross-waies. BB. The Cavity of
the Bottom. C. The Neck of the Womb. D. The Mouth of the Neck in a woman that
has bore a child. EE. The rugged inside of the Neck cut open. FF. The round
Ligaments of the Womb cut off.


FIG. II. A. The Nymph or Clitoris rather in its proper Situation. BB. The
Hairs of the Privities. C. The Insertion of the Neck of the Bladder near the
Privity. DD. The Privity. EE. The wings of the Privity. FF. The Neck of the
Womb cut off.


FIG. III. A. The Body of the Clitoris sticking up under the Skin. BB. The
outer Lips of the Privity separated one from another. CC. The Alae or wings,
and the Nymphs likewise separated. D. The Caruncle placed about the Urin-hole
(a) EE. Two fleshy Myrtle-shap'd Productions. FF. Membranous Expansions which
contain the Chink.


FIG. IV. Presents the Privity of a Girl. a. The Clitoris. bb. The Lips of the
Privity. cc. The Wings or Nymphs. d. The Orisice of the Urethra or Piss-pipe.
^. ff. h. Four Myrtle-shap'd Caruncles. e. The upmost Caruncle which is divided
into two, and shuts the Passage of the Piss-pipe. ^. The Hole of the Hymen or
Virginity-skin. ^. The lowest Caruncle. ^. The Fundament. k. The Perinaeum.


FIG. V. Letter A. Shows the Membrane drawn cross the Privity, which some have
taken to be the Hymen or Virginal-skin.

FIG. VI. Shows the Clitoris separated from the Privity. A. The top of the
Clitoris resembling the Nut of a Man's Yard. B. The Foreskin thereof. CC. The
two Thighs of the Clitoris cut off from the protuberancy of the Hip or Huckle.


FIG. VII. The Clitoris cut asunder athwart, its inward spungy Substance is
apparent.

page 76

Erection. And also because it has somewhat like the Nut and Foreskin of a
Man's Yard, and in some Women it grows as big as the Yard of a man: so that some
women abuse the same, and make use thereof in place of a man's Yard, exercising
carnal Copulation one with another, and they are termed Confricatrices
Rubsters. ^ich lascivious Practice is said to have been inven^ Pbilaenis and
Sappho the (...) ^oetress, is reported to have practiced the same. And of these
I conceive the Apostle Paul speaks in the I. of Romans 26. And therefore this
part is called Contemptus virorum the Contempt of Mankind.

Now the CLITORIS is a small Production. See Tab. XXVIII.


It is seated in the middle of the Share, in the upper and former end of the
great Chink, where

Its Size is commonly small; it lies hid for the most part under the Nymphs in
its beginning, and afterward it sticks out a little. For in Lasses that begin
to be amorous, the Clitoris does first discover it self. It is in several
persons greater or lesser: in some it hangs out like a man's Yard, namely when
young Wenches do frequently and continually handle and rub the same, as
Examples restifie. But that it should grow as big as a Gooses neck, as Platerus
relates of one, is altogether praeternatural and monstrous. Tulpius has a like
Story of one that had it as long as half a man's finger, and as thick as a Boys
Prick, which made her willing to have to do with Women in a Carnal way. But the
more this part increases, the more does it hinder a man in his business. For in
the time of Copulation it swells like a man's Yard, and being erected, provokes
to Lust.

Its Substance is not boney (though it was so in a Venetian Courtezan, who Its
Substance.
had it cut off, and the hardness whereof did inflame the Yards of the Lovers)
but as that of a man's Yard, it consists of two nervous Bodies hard and thick,
within porous and spungy (that this part might rise and fall) arising
distinctly from the Hip-bones, about the brims of the said Bones. But they are
joined together about the Share-bone, and make up the Body of the Yard. Its
Muscles are, according to Pinaeus three, according to Riolanus Its Muscles.
and Veslingus four, like as in a man's Yard, and serving to the same Intent.
The two uppermost round ones, rest upon longer Ligaments, and proceed from one
and the same place; the two others being lower, broad, and fleshy, proceed from
the Sphincter of the Fundament.

The outmost End or Head, sticking out like the nut of a man's Yard (the rest
lying hid) is called TENTIGO, having an hole as a man's Tentigo.
Yard, but no thoroughfar.

It seems to be covered with a Foreskin as it were, which is made of a small
Skin arising from the Conjunction of the Wings.

Also it has Vessels of all sorts brought unto it. Its Vessels.


Veins and Arteries common to it and the Privity, a Nerve from the sixth
Conjugation, all more large then the Nature of its Body might seem to require,
to cause an exact Feeling and Erection.

Its Use is to be the Seat of Delectation and Love. And it is like the
Froenulum or Bridle Its Use.
on the Nut of a man's Yard. For by the rubbing thereof, the Seed is brought
away.

Howbeit Aquapendent conceives that the Use of the Clitoris, is to sustain the
Neck of the Womb in the time of Copulation.

Bellonius and Iovius do conceive that this is the part wherein the Aethiopians
were wont to circumcise women. Aetius and Aegineta do show us how to cut it
off, confounding it with the Nymph. And even at this day, the Eastern Nations,
in regard of its bigness extraordinary, do sear it, that it may grow no more.
And they hire ancient women to perform this Piece of Surgery, which they
improperly term Circumcision. And it is to those people as necessary, in regard
of the deformed greatness of the Clitoris, as it is comely; for at Alcair in
Egypt, Wenches go naked after this Circumcision, and when they are married,
they wear a Smock only. Of which things is also this kind of Circumcision, I
have discoursed at large in my Puerperial Antiquities.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Wings and Lips.
TWo red Productions offer themselves to our view between the Lips, which they
term pterugia and ALAS, that is the Wings.

Galen calls them NYMPHS, either See FIG. III. and IV. of the Tab. XXVIII.
because they do first admit the bridegroom, or because they have charge of the
Waters and Humors issuing forth. For between them as it were two walls, the
urin is cast out to a good distance with an hissing noise, without wetting the
Lips of the Privity. Others call them the Curicular Caruncles.

They are seated between the two Lips.

Their Magnitude is not always alike: for sometimes one Wing, otherwhiles both,
seldomer in Virgins then in women, do grow so big, especially being frequently
drawn by the fingers, or otherwise by an Afflux of Humors* that by reason of
the impediments thereby happening, it is necessary to cut them. And Galen tells
us that this Disease is frequent among the Egyptians; so that they are fallen to
cut them in Virgins that are to marry, and in other women also; and Aeetius and
Aegineta do speak to the same purpose, which others will have to be understood
of the Clitoris. And they are in the right as I conceive, because the Clitoris
being over long, may hinder the amorous Embracement, and may be raised like the
Yard; but the Nymphs cannot be this way troublesome, which are softer, and in
some do hang down very long, yea in Whores that trade with these Parts.

They are in Number two; the right and the left, now they are in the beginning
commonly joined together, where they make a fleshy Production, like a Foreskin
clothing the Clitoris.

Their Figure is triangular, but one angle is blunter then the rest, viz. that
which comes without the Lips. It is like a Cocks-comb: and for that cause happily
by Juvenal termed Crista.

Its Coloi^ is red like a Cocks-comb under his throat.

It Is covered with a thin Coat rather then Skin, as the Lips and other parts of
the Mouth.

Its Substance is partly membranous, soft, and spungy (bred peradventure of the
doubling in of the Skin, at the sides of the great Chink) and partly fleshy.

Their Use is the same with that of the Myrtle-shap'd Caruncles. And moreover
that the Urin might be conveyed between them, as between two walls. Some
conceive they serve as a Ligament, to suspend and straiten as it were, in
Virgins, the lower part of the external Chink, which seems unlikely. The Lips
perform that Office, and the Nymphs should rather straiten such as are
defloured, in whom they are longer.

The two LIPS, between which the external Chink consists, have certain The Lips
and Venus Hillocks.
risings adorned with hair, which are termed Monticuli Veneris, the Hillocks of
Venus. In women they are flatter then in maidens. This Part is that which is
properly termed the Privity. These Hillocks are longish, soft Bodies, of such a
Substance, the like whereof is not to be found in the whole Body again* for it
consists partly of Skin, and partly of spungy Flesh, under which is placed a
parcel of hard Fat.

(...) Juncture of the Lips, is in Virgins right, strait, as it were a
ligamentish Substance for firmness; but in such as have lost their Maidenhead,
it is loose, and in such as have had a Child, yet looser; as Riolanus has
found by Experience, and any body else may find that covers the Glory of such
Experiments.

The Use has been hinted before.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Membranes which infold the Child in the Womb.
ALL the Parts serving for Generation, both in Men and Women are explained. But
because my design is to discourse of what ever comes under knife of an
Anatomist, I must also propound some things which are contained in the Womb of
a woman with child, such as are

I. The Infant, whose Structure differs Wher^^n the Child in the Womb differs
from a grown person
only in some things, from that of a grown person. Which I shall briefly
recount, as I did publicly, not long since demonstrate the same, at the
Diffection of a Child. Now the parts of a large Child differ from those of a
render Embryo, and the parts of both these from those of a grown Man. 1. In
Magnitude, either proportionate to the whole Body, or less proportionate. 2. In
Color, some parts are more red, some more pale then in a grown person. 3. In
Shape, as may be seen in the Kidneys and Head. 4. In Cavity, as in the Vessels
of the Navil and Heart. 5. In Number, either abounding, as in the Bones of the
Head, Breast, and Sutures of the Skull; or deficient, as in the Call, some
Bones, of the Back, Wrist, etc. 6. In Hardness, as in the said Bones. 7. In
Situation, as the Teeth. 8. In Use, as the Navil-vessels, and those of the
Heart, the Gut Caecum, etc. 9. In Motion, as the Lungs, etc. 10. In Excrements.
11. In Strength and Perfection of the Whole.

The XXIX. TABLE.
This TABLE shows how the Parts of a Child in the Womb differ from those of a
grown Person.
The FIGURES Explained.
FIG. I. AA. The Deputy-kidneys. BB. The true Kidneys, as yet distinguished
into sundry Kernels, il expressed by the Graver, in respect of their Situation.
C. The Arteria magna, out of which branches go to the Deputies and the Kidneys.
D. The Vena cava out of which the Emulgents proceed, and the little Veins of
the Deputies.


FIG. II. Shows the Posture of a Child in the Womb, which does nevertheless
sometimes vary. A. The Head of the Child hanging downwards, so as its Nose is
bid between its Knees. BB. The Buttocks to which the Heels are applied. CC. The
Arms. D. The Cord drawn along its Neck, and turned back over its Forehead,
which is continued with the Womb-cake, expressed in the next Figure.


FIG. III. AAA. The Membrane Chorion divided. BB. The Membrane Amnios, as yet
covering the Cord. CC. The hollow and inner side of the wombcake which looks
toward the Child, with the Twigs of Vessels. D. A Portion of the twisted Cord.


FIG. IV. Shows the outside of the Placenta, which cleavs to the Womb, though
here separated, with the Clifts and Chinks [EEEE] which vary in Number and
Depth.

FIG. V. Shows the Skeleton of a young Child, in very many things differing
from that of a Person grown up; as appears by the Text

FIG. I. AA. The Deputy-kidneys. BB. The true Kidneys, as yet distinguished
into sundry Kernels, il expressed by the Graver, in respect of their Situation.
C. The Arteria magna, out of which branches go to the Deputies and the Kidneys.
D. The Vena cava out of which the Emulgents proceed, and the little Veins of
the Deputies.


FIG. II. Shows the Posture of a Child in the Womb, which does nevertheless
sometimes vary. A. The Head of the Child hanging downwards, so as its Nose is
bid between its Knees. BB. The Buttocks to which the Heels are applied. CC. The
Arms. D. The Cord drawn along its Neck, and turned back over its Forehead,
which is continued with the Womb-cake, expressed in the next Figure.


FIG. III. AAA. The Membrane Chorion divided. BB. The Membrane Amnios, as yet
covering the Cord. CC. The hollow and inner side of the wombcake which looks
toward the Child, with the Twigs of Vessels. D. A Portion of the twisted Cord.


FIG. IV. Shows the outside of the Placenta, which cleavs to the Womb, though
here separated, with the Clifts and Chinks [EEEE] which vary in Number and
Depth.

FIG. V. Shows the Skeleton of a young Child, in very many things differing
from that of a Person grown up; as appears by the Text



These things will be more evident, if we shall run over all the particles
which are in a Child different from the parts of our Bodies,

1. The Umbilical or Navil-Vessels, vulgarly called the Navil strings, are
three, and hollow throughout to pass and repass the Mothers blood, which in
grown persons turn to Ligaments. 2. There is little or no appearance of the
Call, because there is as yet no public digestion of the Stomach or Guts, and
they are sufficiently cherished by the Members of the Child folded together and
the hear of the Womb. 3. The stomach is small, no bigger then a Wall-nut, and
for the most part empty, there being no public Concoction, or it is moistened
with a clammy Humor. 4. The Caecum intestinum is large, sometimes thick, other
whiles long, for the most part full of Excrements, of which I spoke before. 5.
The thin Guts appear contracted, colored with yellow Excrements descending
through the Gallbladder. 6. The thick Guts especially the Rectum, do contain
thick black Excrements, from the private digestion, of the Stomach, Guts, Liver
and Spleen or of the Spleen only, voided hither by the Caeliaca, or of the
Liver alone, purged out by the Choler-passage. They are black, through their
long stay. 7. The true Kidneys, are compacted of very many Kernels. The deputy
Kidneys are large and more hollow. 8. The Liver with its (...) fills both the
Hypochondria. The Spleen is small, because there is yet no fermentation in the
Stomach and Veins. The color of both, is more bright and red, then in a grown
person. 9. In the Dugs there are no kernels, only a little sign of a Nipple.
10. The Thymus growing to the Vessels, is visible beyond the Heart with a
threefold large kernel. 11. The Ears of the Heart are large, especially the
right Ear, and pale. 12. The Unions of the Vessels in the Heart, by Anastomosis
and a little Channel, are singular, of which we shall speak in the following
Book. 13. The Lungs shine with a yellow redness, which is afterward allayed by
their motion. Because they are at present immovable, because transpiration
alone and the Ventilation of the Mothers Blood do suffice the Child in the
Womb, unless it happen to cry in the Womb. 14. In the Head all things are
large. The Eyes stick out, the skull is exceeding big, but divided into many
parts, the brain is soft and commonly overflows with moisture; the Pericranium
continued with the Dura matter, passes through the Sutures. 15. In the Skeleton,
the Bones of the whole Body are soft in the first months, afterward some are
hard, according as they are of use, as the Ribs; some are gristly, as the
Brest-bone, the Wrist-bone, and the Tarsus or beginning of the Foot (all
without any hard Apophyses or Epiphyses) which nevertheless in tract of time do
grow to a bony hardness, the middle parts growing hard first: and after their
hardening some remain one continued bone, others are divided into many
Particles. 16. The Crown of the Head remains very long open, covered only with
a Membrane, which by little and little with age grows close up. The Sagittal
future reaches to the Nose. The greater Conjunctions of the bones are moveable,
placed one upon another, that in the coming out of the Womb, the skul being
pressed, may give way to the straitness of the passage. The Os Cuneiforme is
divided into four parts. The Bones of the Nose and both the Jaws are divided,
a Gristle coming between. The Teeth lie hid in their sockets, covered with the
Gums. The Vertebrae of the Back, have no sharp productions, that they may not
hurt the Womb. The Breast Bone being soft, has in the middle according to the
length thereof, four little round bones, Plane and Pory. Also the Planke, Hip
and Share-bones are distinguished by Gristles. The Carpus and Tarsus are
Gristly, and afterward as the Child grows bigger, they are spread out into
diverse bones, when there is a necessity of using the Hands and Feet, to handle
and go. 17. In the outward parts, as the Skin, Hairs, Nails, etc. there is some
difference, known to all.
II. The Membranes which invest the Child, cloth and cover it: of which in
this Chapter.

III. The Navil-vessels, of which in the Chapter following.

The MEMBRANES which infold the Child; are the first thing bred in the Womb
after Conception, to fence the nobler part of the Seed as may be seen with the
Eyes, even in the smallest Conceptions, and as the Authority of all Authors
well-near does testify.

Their Efficient cause, is the formative faculty, and not only Whether the heat
of the Womb only ^e the Efficient cause of the Membranes.
the Heat of the Womb; as the Heat is wont to cause a crust upon Bread or
Gruel. For then,

I. The Crust would stick hard to the Child and could not be separated. II. The
Heat of the Womb is not so great, as to be able to bake the substance of the
Seed in so short a time; whereas these Membranes are bred well near immediately
after the Conception. And if there were so great Heat in the Womb, no
Conception could be made, according to Hippocrates in the 62. Aphorism of his
fifth Book.
We conceive their matter to be Sundry opinions concerning the matter of the
said Membranes.
the thicker part of the woman's seed. Others, as Arantius, will have them to be
productions of the inner Tunicles, the Chorion of the Peritonaeum, and the
Amnion of the Membrana (...). Others that the Mothers seed alone makes these
Memibranes: others, that they are made as well of the man's as the Woman's seed.

These Membranes in Mankind Their Number. What the Secondine is, and why so
called?
are two, in brute Beasts three: which being joined and growing together, do
make the SECUNDINE so called.

1. Because it is the second tabernacle of the Child, next the Womb. 2. Because
it comes away by a second birth, after the Child. [Hence in English we call it
the Afterbirth.]
The first Membrane is termed AMNIOS because of of its softness and thinness,
also Agnina, Charta Virginea, Indusium, etc. And it is the thinnest of them
all, white, soft, transparent, furnished with a few very small Veins and
Arteries, dispersed within the foldings thereof. It compasses the Child
immediately and cleaves every where almost to the Chorion, especially at the
ends, about the Womb-Cake, united in the middle thereof, where the Umbilical
Vessels come forth. Yet we can easily separate it from the Chorion. There is in
it plenty of Moisture and Humors wherein the child swims which proceeds in
Brutes from Sweat, in Mankind from Sweat and Urin. But Aquapendent having
observed that in Brutes Whence the Liquor proceeds that is in the Amnios.
the Sweat and Urin were contained in several little Membranes, the latter more
low and externally in the Chorion, the former higher, and more inwardly in the
Amnion; he thought it was so in Mankind much more. But Experience and Reason
are against it, because there are no Passages to the Chorion. And because we do
not find the Urachus open in Mankind, therefore the Urin cannot be thence
collected in the Amnios, but is voided by the Yard if it be troublesome, and the
remainder is kept till the time of the Birth, in the Bladder, which in Children
new born is for the most part distended and full, but in Brutes empty. Nor does
the sharpness of the Urin offend the Child in the Womb, because 1. It is but
little in a Child in the Womb, because of the benignity and purity of its
Nourishment. 2. The Skin is daubed with a clammy Humor, and Brutes are defended
by their hairiness. Therefore the Use is

I. That the Child floating therein as in a Bath, may be higher and less
burthensom to the Mother.

II. That the Child may not strike against any neighboring hard Parts.

III. That in the Birth, the Membrane being broke, this Humor running out, may
make the way through the Neck of the Womb, smooth, easy, and slippery.

Part of the Amnios does ever and anon hang about the Head of the Child when it
comes forth, and then the Child is said to be Galeatus or Helmeted. This Helmet
the Midwives diligently observe for diverse respects, and they prognosticate
good fortune to the Child, and others that use it, if it be red; but if it be
black, the praesage bad fortune.

Paraeus, Lemnius and others, conceive that the happy and strong Labor of the
Mother, is the cause that the foresaid Helmet comes out with the child, but in
a troublesome Labor it is left behind. Spigelius contrariwife, thinks that when
the Mother and child are weak, it comes away. Besterus makes the Reason to be
the roughness of the Amnios, which the child is not able to break through, or
the weakness of the child, for which cause it seldom lives to ripeness of Age.
I have seen both those that have come into the world with this Helmet, and
those without it, miserable; and by chance it comes to cleave both to the Heads
of strong and weak children.

The second Membrane is termed Chorion, because it compasses the child like a
Circle.

This immediately compasses the former, and lies beneath it in a round shape
like a Pancake, whose inner or hollow part it covers and invelops, spreading it
self out according to the measure thereof. It is hardly separated therefrom,
and it strongly unites the Vessels to the Womb-liver, and bears them up.
Toward the child it is more smooth and slippery, but where it is spread under
the Womb-cake, and fastened thereto, it is more rough: also it is sufficiently
thick and double. In Brutes the Cotyledons What the Cotyledons are.
cleave hereunto, which consist of a fleshy and spungy substance. But in
Mankind, this Membrane cleavs immediately to the womb, by a certain round and
reddish lump of flesh, fastened to one part only of the womb (commonly the upper
and former part) nor does it compass the whole child; being framed of an
innumerable company of Branches, of Veins, and Arteries, among which bl^^d out
of the Vessels seems to be shed and interlarded.

That same round Mass is called PLACENTA UTERI the Womb-pancake, by reason of
its Shape; also the WOMB LIVER: which I will now exactly describe according as
it has been my hap to see it.

Its Figure is circular, but the Circumference unequal, in which I have
observed five Prominences ranked in due order, and the Membrane Chorion in the
intermediate spaces, thicker then ordinary. Where it looks toward the Womb, it
is rough and waved, like baked bread that has chinks in it; and being cut in
this part, it discovers an infinite number of fibers, which if you follow, they
will bring you to the Trunks of the Veins.

It is one in Number, even in those who bear two or more children at a burden.
For into one Wombcake, so many Cords are inserted in diverse places, as there
are children.

Its Magnitude varies according to the condition of the Bodies and the
children^ Yet it is about a foot in the Diameter.

The Substance thereof seems to be a Body wove together of infinite little
fibers, blood as it were congealed being interposed, which is easily separated.
Seeing therefore it has a Parenchyma, it is no wonder, if like a kind of,
Liver it make or prepare blood to nourish the child.

The Nature and Appearance of the Substance, is not every where alike. For here
and there it is glandulous, especially in the tops of the Hillocks, as being
the Emunctories of the child's Workhouse, placed in the outmost Verges. It is
thicker in the middle of the hillocks; and thin about the brims, variously
interwoven with the Capillary Veins: For,

It has Vessels, viz. Veins and Arteries running through the same, from the
Umbelical Vessels, which by little and little are all extenuated about the
brims of the Womb-cake, making wonderful contextures, closely sticking to the
Substance thereof, so that no part of the Branches is void. They are joined
together by various Anastomoses, which shall be hereafter described, through
which the blood in the child runs back, out of the Arteries into the Veins. For
I have observed in the Veins of the Womb-cake, how that the blood contained,
may easily by ones finger or an instrument, be forced toward the Trunk or
Cord, but not toward the Womb-cake. The contrary where to happens in the
Arteries, which by impulse of the finger, do easily send the blood to the
Womb-liver, but hardly to the Trunk.

Its Use is 1. To support the Navil-vessels, under which it is spread as a
Pillow.

2. Because it has a singular kind of Parenchyma, to prepare blood to nourish
the Child, as the true Liver does in grown persons. For it mediately sucks the
Mothers blood through its Veins, out of the Veins of the womb, and prepares and
tempers it for use, and soon after sends it through the greater Navil-vein,
into the Liver of the child, that it may be carried right forth unto the Heart,
by the Anastomosis and little Channel; out of which by the Arteries it is
distributed into the whole body of the child to nourish the same. But part of
the blood returns through the Iliack Arteries, to the Womb-cake, as an
appurtenance to the child; partly to preserve the same by its heat, and to
nourismit with Arterial blood, partly that it may be there further perfected;
which Labor being finished, it returns back again into the concomitant Veins,
that together with other blood, newly supplied by the Pipes of the womb, it may
pass back again by the Umbelical Veins, and repeat the foresaid Circle. The
XXX. TABLE.
This TABLE presents a Child in the Womb naked, all the Coats both proper and
common being divided.
The FIGURE Explained.
AA. Portions of the Chorion dissected and removed from their place. B. A
portion of the Amnios. CC. The Membrane of the Womb dissected. DD. The
Womb-cake or wombliver, being a Lump of Flesh furnished with diverse Vessels,
through which the Child receives its nourishment. E. The Branching of the
Vessels, which in this place make one Ligament to cover the Umbilical Vessels.
FF. The Band or Ligament, through which the Umbelical Vessels are carried from
the Womb-cake to the Navil. GG. The Situaton of a perfect Child in the Womb,
ready to be born. H. The Implantation of the Umbilical or Navil-vessels into
the Navil.




The third called ALLANTOIDES the Pudding-membrane, does not cloth the whole
conception, but compasses it round like a Girdle, or a Pudding.

Its Use is, to receive Urin from the Urachus in Brutes. For in Mankind there
is no such Membrane: for the child in a woman, its Urin is received by the
Amnios mingled with Sweat: or is kept in the Bladder till the Birth-time. And
therefore Spigelius cannot be excused, for admitting this Membrane in Mankind;
whose Description (because it belongs not to this Anatomy) he that desires to
see, let him look in Aquapendent.

Chap. XXXVII. Of the Vmbelical or Navil-vessels.
THe Membranes being diffected and removed, the UMBELICAL Vessels come in view,
so called, because in the Region of the Navil, the child being excluded, and
the blood a little forced up to nourish the some, they are cut off, and being
tied in a knot, do make

The NAVIL which is in the (...) What the Navil is, and of what parts it
consists.
of the Belly, yea and of the whole Body, if you measure it with a circle, the
Arms being stretched out.

Now there are four Navil-vessels: ONE VEIN, TWO ARTERIES, and the URACHUS.
Which are covered and veiled as it were with a certain common

Coat or Crust, which some call Intestinulus, Funiculus, Laqueus, etc. which
does not only wrap up all the Vessels, but also distinguishes them one from
another.

And the Use of this Coat, is to keep the Vessels from being entangled one
within another, broken, or any other way hurt.

The VENA UMBILICALIS, much The Vena umbilicalis.
greater then the Artery, being carried through the two Coats of the
Peritonaeum, is bred in the first place before all other Veins, in respect of
Perfection, because it ought to afford nourishment to the rest.

It is seen inserted into the Liver by a Its Insertion.
Cleft, and goes through the Navil, sometimes simple, otherwhiles double, and
divided into two Branches, the length of about an F^ll and half, as far as to
the Womb-cake. And it is variously coiled or rouled about, that its
length-might prove no hinderance. From the Navil it goes over the Breast, and
from thence it is obliquely carried over the right and left side of the Throat
and Neck, turning it self back at the hinder-part of the Head, and so over the
middle of the Forehead unto the Womb-cake; sometimes also by this simple
flexure on the left hand, it compasses the Neck like a chain. All which is to
be understood of the whole Cord, and the rest of the Vessels contained therein.
And this Journey being finished, it spreads infinite Branches through the
Secondine, till it loose it self into exceeding delicate fine hairy thrids.

Its Use is to draw Blood to nourish the Child, and to carry it into its Liver,
Now Its Use.
the way is doubtful. Most men persuade themselves, that the Veins and Arteries
of the Womb, are joined with the little Veins and Arteries of the Womb-cake,
and that from them jointly blood is derived into the Navil-vessels to the
Child. But the Arteries are to be excluded from this Office, because they are
not joined to the womb, nor ought they to carry any thing to the child, but to
carry back from the child to the womb-cake. The Veins do only bring thither,
and that by a twofold way, either immediately from the womb, or mediately.
Immediately, when they are joined to the Vessels of the womb; mediately, when
by the interceeding or going between of any fleshy Substance whatsoever, both
in Mankind and Beasts (which is always for the most part glewed to the womb,
and violently broke off in the Birth) it is sucked through Pipes, first out of
the womb into the outer parts of the womb-cake, and thence into the Capillary
Veins thereof, out of the least into the greater, till at last it is carried to
the Umbilical Trunk, and to the Liver. Nor does it slip through the Veins of
the womb into the Pipes, because the Blood of the Veins does not nourish, but
it is brought in by the Arteries in a woman with child, and goes up back again
by the Veins, in a woman not with child.

This Vein seems full of certain Knots: which are nothing but a more thick and
The Knots.
fleshy Constitution of the Membrana carnosa in those Parts; and a wider
opening, wherewith as a spoon, the Blood is drawn in, in its long Journey, and
is by little and little stopped, least it flow too violently; that the Blood
may be there the longer labored, as we see in the Spermatick Vessels: and that
the Vessels may be stronger.

By the Number of these Knots, the Midwives do guess the number of Children
that a woman shall bear: and if the Knot which first follows, be white and
narrow, they foretell that the next child will be a Girl, if red, round, and
swelling, that it will be a Boy. The first Divination is vain; for there are as
many Knots in the Navil of the last child, as of the first. But the latter may
be excused by the defect or abundance of Natural heat, whence the Diversity of
Sexes arises. From the distance of the Knots one from another, they foretell
that the Conceptions will be sooner or longer one after another, and that there
will be Twins, if one Knot rest upon, or be near to another. Which we have
often found to be false, though chance, do now and then confirm the hope of
credulous women.

Two ARTERIES are inserted into the Iliack Arteries, and are carried with the
Vein Arteries.
after the foresaid manner to the womb-cake, where it is spread about in diverse
Branches, whose Use is not, as has hitherto been believed, to bring to the
child vital Spirit with Arterial blood, because these Arteries are not joined
to the Arteries of the Womb, according to the most certain Observation of
Arantius; but to carry back part of the Arterial blood, which is superfluous to
the Nourishment of the Child, by the two Iliack Branches into the Placenta or
Womb-cake, partly to nourish the same, and fill it with vital Spirit. Partly
that the Blood may there be made more perfect, being weakened by a long Journey,
and nourishing the Membranes; which afterward runs back again to the Child, by
the hairy twigs of the veins joined thereto, with that new blood coming out of
the womb.

This Motion is confirmed by Experience. I have often pressed the swelling
veins with my finger, and have observed that the blood is easily forced out of
the vein toward the Child, not to the Womb-cake, where the knots like valves
do stop the same; contrariwise, it is easily forced out of the Arteries into
the Wombcake. The same is manifest by Ligatures. For the Umbilical Arteries of
a live Child being bound, as yet cleaving to the Mother being alive, Walaeus
has observed and others after him, that they pulse between the Ligature and
the Child, but have no Pulse between the Ligature and the Mothers womb.

For this Motions sake the venal and Anastomoses of the umbilical Vessels.
Arterial branches are joined together by Anastomoses, within the Womb-cake,
that the Passage might be ready for the blood to run back out of the little
Arteries, into the little Veins.

I have here, following my own sight, observed several ways of Anastomoses.
For sometimes the twigs of the Veins and Arteries, do go one over another
crosswise, both internally and externally. Sometimes they are joined by
Insertion, sometimes they couple side to side, and sometimes they are wreathed.
The smallest Twigs of the Branches are inoculated into the greater, united in
like manner, but with more blunt Anastomoses, till the Arteries are reduced to
four Branches, the Vein to two, which at last grow into the trunks of their own
kind, springing out of the Womb-cake. The Arteries go about the veins, and do
partly accompany them, and partly creep alone by themselves. I suspect that
there are Anastomoses only in those places, wherein they are necessary for the
passing Blood out of the Arteries into the veins, and that the solitary veins
do suck fresh Blood out of the Womb.

Without the Navil and Wombcake, Their Twisting.
these vessels being united, as they pass along like a Rope, they are well
twisted one with another, yet for the most part by an orderly Circumvolution,
even as a larger Rope is made of smaller cords twisted together, representing
the wreathings of our Unicorns Horn, which we could easily perceive by holding
it to the light. Which is so contrived 1. Least by the winding passage of the
Navil-vessels, the motion of the Blood should be hindered, seeing every vessel
that is twisted, keeps it course. 2. That the Child in the womb might receive
its pittance of Nourishment by little and little, without danger of choking.
3. That by this wreathed and crooked Journey, the future A^^ment of the Child,
might be by little and little purged and clarified.

Moreover, it is to be noted in the twisting of the cord 1. That knots and
spots are transparent in the vein and not in the Arteries, by reason of the
Blood appearing through a thinner Coat. 2. That a spans distance from the
Conjunction there appears, a wonderful contexture, and a rougher and more
confused twisting then in other Parts. 3. In the outer Coat of the
Intestinulum, infinite cuts and lines are seen imprinted as it were, according
to the length thereof, colored on the outside with blood, such as are to be
seen in the Cerebellum.

Its Length was before noted, viz. an ell and an half, in a grown child, or
three The length of the Rope.
spans, that the child may stir more easily, the blood may be better prepared,
and the secondine drawn out. If this cord be sometime either overtwisted, or by
motion wrapped about the Neck of the child, there is danger that the child will
be strangled, and the Mother have an hard labor, because the child is drawn
back by reason of the shortness of the cord, nor can it bear the violence of an
indiscreet Midwife. I have seen it twisted diverse times about the Neck of a
child, whereby the birth was retarded for diverse hours, and when the child came
forth it could hardly breath: if in such a case the child's Face be red it is a
good sign, but a deadly token if the Face be black and blew.

It Is as thick as a man's Finger, because Its thickness.
strength and a just capacity is requisite to sustain the Vessels. When it is
dry it becomes smaller, and it is kept to procure other births,

The XXXI. TABLE.
It shows the Child taken out of the Womb, but fastened still to the Womb-Cake,
the Umbilical Vessels being separated about their Rise.
The Explication of the FIGURE.
AAA. The Abdomen or Belly opened. B. The Liver of the Child. C. The
Piss-bladder. DD. The Guts. E. The Umbilical Vein. FF. The Umbilical Arteries.
G. The Urachus or Piss-pipe. H. The Umbilical Vessels out of the Body joined
together by one Membrane. III. The Umbilical or Navil-vessels extended from the
Chorion to the Child. K. A Ligature which makes the Veins beneath it full and
the Arteries lanke and empty. LLLL. The Veins and Arteries dispersed through
the Womb-cake. MMM. The Womb-cake.


page 83.



The Child being The binding of the Navil.
born, the rope must be tied near the Belly, the distance of two or three
Fingers breadths, with a strong thread wound often about, and about three
Fingers from the binding, it must be cut off, and the Navil must be looked to,
till it dry and fall off, of its own accord. Now the times of its falling of
are uncertain, in respect of the Constitution of the child, and the plenty of
Blood which flows thereto, from whence the Midwives Prognosticate how long the
child shall live. If it fall of the fifth day from the hour it was tied, they
foretell the children will be long-lived; if on the third day, they say they
shall be short-lived.

The Navil being thus shaped and confirmed, is covered with a strong Skin,
which may be preternaturally stretched to an immense degree, to receive the
Guts in a Rupture of the Navil, such as Severinus has described in a Picture,
and as my self have seen at Hafnia in an ancient Woman.

In some there is a passage through the Navil into the Belly. Alpinus reports
that the Egyptians cure a bloody Flux, by thrusting their Fingers into the
Patients Navil, and turning it diverse times about. Dung came out of the Navil
of a Student, and Worms like Earthworms with quittor came out of the Navil of
a Boy, according to the Observation of Salmuth. Tulpius saw quittor which
Nature sent from the Chest, come out at the Navil, and Folius found Stones bred
here. I. D. Horstius observed blood flow from the Navil in a certain Gentleman,
monthly. And he tells us of a Boy who had a wheyish liquor like Urin dropping
from his Navil, and sometimes fresh blood. For the inner Vessels are many times
opened, by the Acrimony of the blood and wheyish humors. Also the Navil does
insensibly open it self when purgatives, Medicines for the Mother and to kill
the Worms, etc. are applied thereto.

Now these Vessels, after the Child is born, do within the Belly degenerate
into Ligaments: the Vein to a Ligament of the Liver, the Arteries into lateral
Ligaments of the Bladder. Because their use is now lost, and there is no longer
any passage of the Mothers blood, unless they be sometimes preternaturally
opened as in the examples alleged. Yet are they not of so great moment, that
The Dignity of the Navil is not much.
their breaking or cutting off, should cause death, as some and among them
Laurentius imagine, being questionles abused by some Fabulous story. For they
report that the Egyptians punish Robbers by flaying them alive, and that they
leave the Navil untoucht, that they may be tormented the longer: for they think
when the Navil is cut off a man must needs die, the four Vessels being
destroyed. But Riolanus a man of great experience saw contrary examples, and
any man may judge by a Rupture of the Navil. If death follow, it is by accident,
the inner parts being also hurt, and a wide door opened for all hurtful things
to enter. Sperlinger conceives that they are choked, because the Navil being
cut off, the Liver falls down and draws the Midriff, the Organ of breathing.
But 1. This shortness of breath does not cause sudden death. 2. The Liver is
held up by another strong Ligament from the Peritonaeum.

The fourth Vessel, the Urachus or Pisspipe, which is half as little again as
the Urachus.
Artery, consists of two parts, according to the Observation of Riolanus; the
inner, which is Nervous, arising from the inner coat of the Bladder the outer
which is more Membranous, from the bottom of the bladder. It is not after the
same manner in Beasts as in Mankind.

In Beasts it is carried without the Navil between two Arteries, and is at last
spread out and widened into the Coat which is termed Allantoides, where Urin is
collected and reserved, till the young one is brought forth. And therefore this
Vessel is termed Urachus, that is to say the Piss-pipe.

In Mankind, 1. It does not go without the Navil, and therefore it does not
make the Coat Allantoides, for which cause the Child has only two Coats.

2. The Urachus is not hollow throughout according to the experiments The
Urachus is not hollow in Mankind.
of Carpus, Arantius, Cortesius, Riolanus and others, whom I have found to be
in the right, in such Bodies as I have dissected both old and young, though
Aquapendens and Spigelius would* persuade us otherwise. But it is a little Cord
or Ligament, wherewith the bladder is fastened to the Peritonaeum and sustained,
least when it is distended with Urin, its Neck should be squeezed: Though I
deny not but that the same thing is done by the Arteries.

But a Child in the Womb voids Urin by its Yard into the Membarne Amnios (which
makes it so full of Liquor) and a great part is retained also in the bladder,
which is the cause that new born Children, for the first days are in a manner
continually pissing. Aqua-pendens denies this because, 1. The motive faculty
does not exercise it self in a Child in the Womb. 2. No Muscle Acts. 3. Neither
does Nature use so different a manner of voiding Urin in Men and Beasts. But I
answer, 1. That the various moving of a Child in the Womb, which Big-bellied
Women feel, does witness that the Child has a moving faculty though imperfect.
2. The bladder is provoked to excretion, by the over great quantity and
sharpness of the Serum, or wheyish humor. 3. The Coat called Allantoides which
is not in Mankind, does show the difference between Man and beast.

Uarolus will have all the Urin to be contained in the bladder, till the birth
time. But then it would be broken with over stretching; and whence comes all
the liquor which is in the Coat Amnios.

Aqua-pendens, Spigelius and almost all others will have it go out by the
Urachus, and be collected between the Amnios and Allantoides, as in beasts. But
seeing it is not perforated, but solid in Mankind, it cannot admit the Urin.
For it cannot be strained through, without a manifest passage, because it is
thick, and the same way might hold in grown Persons. Veslingius propounds both
these opinions and determins nothing. Now it is no more Porous in a young child
then a grown person. And Laurentius eagerly defends this opinion out of Galen,
bringing the examples of some, who when their Urin was stopped, did void it at
their Navil.

But I answer: This is done praeternaturally, The Error of Laurentius.
as it is also a known opinion of many, that the Umbilical Vein has been
preternaturally opened in Hydropical persons, and voided the Water. And
Laurentius himself confesses, that all the four Umbilical Vessels do turn to
Ligaments; wherein he is right, for they are dried. How therefore can they be
opened unless preternaturally? So it was I conceive preternaturally opened in
the same Italian called Anna, who has no Yard, in stead whereof a spungy bit
of flesh hung out under his Navil, whence the Urin dropped. Fernelius and others
have other examples of the Urachus opened.

Before the Production of all the Umbilical Vessels in the Womb, the seed being
curdled in the top of the hinder part, two certain Roots are inserted, on each
side one from the horns of the Womb, first observed by Varolius and called
Radices Dorsales, the back Roots which are obliterated, when the rudiments of
the Child are framed, touching which Riolanus explains Abensina.

THE SECOND BOOK; OF THE Middle Venture or Cavity.
THe middle Venture or Belly termed Thorax the Chest, and by The middle Venture
what it is.
some absolutely Venture, is all that which is circumscribed above, by Clavicles
or Channel-bones; beneath the Midriff; on the foreside by the Breastbone; on
the hinder part by the Bones of the Back, and on the sides by the Ribs.

The forepart is called Sternon and Pectus, etc. the Hinder-part, the Back;
the Lateral Parts are termed the Sides.

Howbeit the Ancients as Hypocrates and Aristotle, etc. did comprehend all
Hypocrates and Aristotle.
from the Channel-bones as far as to the Privities, that is to say, the middle
and lower Belly under the Name of Chest. And therefore in this Sense Hypocrates
did well write, that the Liver is seated in the Chest: which other unskilful
persons not understanding, did imagine that Hypocrates was ill versed in
Anatomy.

Its Figure is after a sort Oval, though not exactly, and Hypocrates compares
it Its Figure.
to a Tortoise or the Belly of a Lute. In Mankind, it is more bunching in the
forepart, but in the middle of the Brest-bone it is flatter, about the sides
round, because of the bowing of the Ribs, in the Back more flat.

Its Magnitude in General, varies according to the different degree of Heat:
Magnitude.
for by the wideness of the Chest we measure the Heat of the Heart. But in
particular persons it is larger toward the lower Belly, where the vital bowels
are concealed, and grows narrower by little and little at the beginning of the
Neck.

Its outer Substance is partly bony, partly fleshy. Substance.


This middle Belly is not wholly fleshy as the lower is, 1. Because it was not
to contain any Parts, that were very much to be stretched. 2. That overmuch
Fat might be bred there, and hinder Respiration.

Yet is it partly fleshy, because it contains Parts whichought to be moved, as
the Heart and Lungs, and for the same Cause,

It could not be altogether bony, like the Skull; for that is a very rare case
which Cardan mentions in his 11. Book of Subtilties, Page 458. in my Edition,
of a Man that instead of Ribs, had one continued Bone from the Throat to the
Flanks.

Yet is it in part bony, for to safeguard the noble Parts. For,

Its Use is, to contain the vital Parts as the Its Use.
lower and first Belly contains the Natural.

Now the Parts likewise of this Belly are Its Parts.
either containing or contained: and the former either common or proper.

The Common are the same which are in Common.
the lower Belly. Howbeit these things following are here to be observed.

The Skin of the middle Belly is hairy The Use of the hair under the armpits.
under the Armpits. These Hairs are called Subalares Pili, being useful to
keep those Parts from wearing and fretting, in the Motion of the Arms, seeing
they exceedingly and quickly sweat, because they are termed the Emunctories of
the Heart, receiving the Excrements thereof (in some also that are hotter of
constitution and strong-hearted the breast is hairy) as the Groins are called
the Emunctories of the Liver.

Moreover, there is little Fat found in the Chest, if you except the Dugs, that
Why there is little Fat in the Chest.
Respiration may not be hurt by the weight thereof. For by reason of its bony
part, so great plenty of the matter of Fat could not flow into it, as in the
lower Belly, which is wholly fleshy, and therefore always the fattest part of
the body; the middle belly or Cavity is indifferently stored with Fat; the Head
is least fat of all. But the fat it self being otherwise white, is wont in the
chest to appear a little more yellow then ordinary, by reason of the heat of
the vital Parts which lie under the same*

The proper Parts besides the Muscles, Bones, etc. are the Dugs of both Sexes,
The proper Parts.
the Midriff, the Membrane of the Sides termed Pleura, and the Mediastinum or
Partition Wall.

The Parts contained are the Bowels and Vessels. The Bowels, are the Heart with
its Heart-bag or Pericardium, the Lungs and part of the Wesand or Windpipe, o^
aspera Arteria. The Vessels are the Branches of the Venae cava and Arteria
magna, underpropped with the Thymus or Kernel in the Throat. and sundry Nerves.

Chap. I. Of the Dugs.
ACcording to our Anatomical Method, See Tab. XXV. Lib. I.
the first Parts in the Chest which we dissect, as soon as we have done with
the lower Belly, are the Dugs. Now we shall treat of the Dugs of Women, casting
in between while, wherein those of Men differ therefrom.

The Situation of the Dugs, is in the middle of the Breast, above the Pectoral
Why the Dugs in Mankind are seated in the Breast.
Muscle, which draws to the Shoulder. 1. Because of the nearness of the Heart,
from whence they receive heat. 2. For Comeliness sake. 3. For the more
convenient giving of suck: because the Infant cannot presently walk after the
manner of Brutes, but being embraced in his Mothers Arms, it is applied to the
Dugs. No other Creatures have Dugs in their Breasts saving the Apes, who hold
their young ones in their Arms likewise. Laurentius tells us the Elephant does
the like, and Riolanus says as much of the Bat or Flitter-mouse. Some great
Sea-fishes of the Whale-kind have Dugs on their Breasts, full of Milk, as we
lately observed in a Whale that came out of Norwey.

They are two in Number: not because of Twins; but that one being hurt, the
Number of the Dugs
other might supply its Office. Howbeit Varro reports, that Sows will have so
many Pigs as they have teats. Walaeus in a certain woman observed three Dugs,
two on the left side of her Breast, and one on the right. And Cabrolius observed
in a certain woman four Dugs, on each side two.

As to their Magnitude. In Girls new born, there is only a Print or Mark
visible Magnitude.
on the breast, and afterward by little and little it swells, and in little
wenches hardly any thing appears beside the teats, until by degrees they grow
to the bigness and shape of Apples; and when they are raised two fingers high,
their Courses begin to flow. In old women they wither away, so that nothing
appears but the Nipples, the Fat and Kernels being consumed.

In women they swel more, and in women with child the last months, they are
more and more increased.

In men they do not rise so high as in women, because ordinarily they were The
difference of the Dugs in men and women.
not to breed milk [yet because of the equality of the kind, it was convenient
that men should have them as well as women.] And therefore in men, the Dugs are
commonly without Kernels: yet in burly people, the Fat which is under them
raised the breasts. In the Kingdom of Sengea, the Dugs of women hang as low as
their Bellies; and in the Isle of Arnabo, it is said they turn them over their
shoulders to their backs, and there suckle their children.

Their Shape is roundish. They represent as it were an half Globe. And in Their
Shape.
some because of their overgreat weight they hang down.

The Dug is divided into the Nipple Their Parts.
and the Dug it self. For in the middle of the Dug there is to be seen a
peculiar Substance, which,

Is called Papilla, the Teat or Nipple, being spungy, like the Nut of a How the
Nipples come to have so exquisite Sense.
Man's Yard, and therefore it will fall and rise when it is sucked or handled.
For it has an excellent and exquisite Sense of feeling, because it is as it
were the Center, into which the ends of the Nerves* Veins, and Arteries do
meet. Which is apparent from the Delicacy of its Sense, and the redness of its
color, a sure token of Blood brought in by the Arteries, by reason of the
Concourse whereof, Chyrurgeons do judge Cancers and other Tumors about the
Nipple pernicious.

Riolanus believes that the Skin is doubled, and as it were compressed: but the
doubling would make it thicker. But the Skin is exceeding tender, easily rubbed
off, and apt to be pained when the Child sucks very freely. Only in old women
it grows thick. Not is the Nipple any other where made of the Skin straightened or
folded.

If the Nipples turn upwards, a Male child is in the Mothers womb, if downwards
a Girl according to the Tradition of Hypocrates, which has not been as yet
ratified by the confession of women with child.

As to Number, there is one Nipple on each Dug. Hollerius saw two Nipples upon
one Dug, which both yielded Milk.

Their Color in Virgins is red, in such as give suck it enclines to black and
blew, and in them also they are more sticking out, by reason of the Infants
sucking; in such as are past Childbearing, the Nipples are of a black color.

They have a Circle round about them which is called Areola the little
Parsley-bed, in Virgins pale and knotty, in such as are with child and give
suck, brown, in old women black.

It Is bored through the middle, with very small holes for the Milk to pass
through: For

The Use of the Nipple is to be instead of a Pipe or Funnel, to put into the
Mouth of the Infant, whereout it may suck the Milk: Secondly, to serve for a
pleasing Titillation, whereby Mothers and Nurses are enticed the more
willingly, and with a certain Sense of pleasure to give their children suck.

The Dugs do inwardly consist of a Membrane, The Dug.
Vessels, Kernels, or rather kernellish Bodies, and Fat: though the two last do
chiefly make up the Dugs; the Kernels and Fat lie concealed between the
Membrane and the Skin.

Now the fleshy Membrane does fasten the kernellish Substance which it
compasses, unto the Muscles which lie thereunder.

The Kernels are many: In Virgins more hard, in old women consumed, in such as
are with child and give suck, more swelling and pappie. Yet there is one great
one, just under the Nipple, which the other lesser ones do compass about, and
infinite textures of Vessels lie between them. Riolanus has observed a woman's
Dug to consist of one continued Kernel, and not of many, the contrary whereto
we see in scirrhous and cancerous Tumors.

The Use thereof is, to turn Blood into Milk. And the use of the fat of the Dug
is to increase heat, and to make the Dug of an even round shape. And therefore
such as have the Fat consumed by some Disease or old Age, they hang ill
favoredly like empty Bladders, and are unfit to make Milk.

The Vessels. The Dugs receive their Skin and external Veins from the Axillary,
which are called the Thoracicae Superiores, the upper Chest-veins, which in
women with child and such as give suck, are often black and blew visible. They
receive other internal Veins, brought thither a long way, that the Blood might
be the longer therein wrought, which are termed Mammariae Venae or Dug-veins,
which descend The Venae Mammariae.
on each side one, from the Trunk of the Axillary Vein, under the Brest-bone,
to the Glandules or Kernels of the Dugs. These are met by other ascendent
Veins, by the right Muscles, of which before: and therefore the Infant being
born, the Blood is carried no longer Why Milk is bred after the child is born.
to the womb, but to the Dugs, and is turned into Milk. And hence it is that
women which give suck, have seldom their Courses. Hence also, when the Children
suck overmuch, Blood comes out at the nipples. Yea, it has been observed that
a woman's courses have come away through her Dugs, and Milk by her womb;
howbeit, this is a rare chance.

But the Matter of Milk, be it what it will, cannot according to the Principles
of the Bloods Circulation, be carried by the Veins to the Dugs. The Venae
mammariae or Dug-veins, do only carry back what remains superfluous, after the
Child is nourished, and Milk made. Moreover, they are seldom joined with the
Epigastrick Veins, and they are too few and small, alone to carry so much blood
from the womb, as may suffice a Child that is a liberal Sucker.

Their Arteries proceed from the upper Trunk of the great Artery: and Their
Arteries.
from the Subclavian branches, which are joined after the same manner with the
Epigastrick Arteries, as was said of the Veins. The Th racicae Arteriae or
Chest arteries, so plentifully and evidently, that in cancerous Tumors of the
Dugs, a woman has bled to death by them, of which case I remember some
Examples. Hence it seems more likely, blood is carried to the Dugs to make
Milk, which blood being consumed in fat and elderly women they are therefore
none of the best Nurses. Hence it is that women which give suck, receive great
damage by loosing their blood; contrariwise they are advantaged, by whatever
may draw and provoke their blood to their Dugs, as by rubbing them, etc.

Now Prosper Martianus and Petrus Castellus do maintain out of Hypocrates, that
The matter of Milk is not Blood as Martianus holds.
the matter of Milk is twofold, viz. Blood and Chyle: and that the greatest
part of the matter thereof, is pressed out of Meats and Drinks, not yet
digested in the Stomach, into the Dugs, by the Child swelling in the womb, and
after the Child is born, by the passages made wide by sucking: and that another
small part is made of blood ascending from the womb, which is rather to be
reckoned as an Efficient cause, by reason of its Heat, then of a Material cause.

That Blood alone is not the matter of Milk, besides the Authority of
Hypocrates, they prove, because

1. Otherwise it were impossible that a woman should live, voiding two pounds
of blood every day, in the form of Milk. 2. When a woman gives suck, her
Courses flow, which in the first months of her going with child, are
suppressed. 3. When a woman left breeding Milk, she would fall into a dangerous
Pl^thory, or fullness of Blood. 4. There would be no Childbed Purgations at
all, the Milk being so violently carried into the Dugs, the second day after
Childbirth, that it causes a Fever. 5. Nature would then have framed greater
Vessels from the womb unto the Dugs. 6. The Milk would not retain the smell,
and virtue or operation of the Meats eaten, because these things are changed in
the blood. 7 The Blood collected into the Dugs, does breed Madness. Aphor. 40.
Sect. 5.
But that it depends upon the Stomach But arises from the Stomach and the Chyle.
and the Chyle, these following Reasons evince.

1. The force and efficacy of Purgatives, is after some hours violently carried
into the Dugs, as diverse Experiments do teach. Yea and our Country-women, when
children that have the cough, suck at their breasts, they drink pectoral
Decoctions, and believe that the sucking child does presently draw them. 2. If
a Nurse do swallow an hair in her meat and drink; it comes into her Dugs
according to Aristotle, and sticking in the Nipples, it causes the Disease
Trichiasis or Hair in the Nipple. 3. A branch of Cichory according to the
Observation of Martianus, has come out of a woman's Dug, which she had eaten
the night before at Supper: and bran has been seen in the Excrements of a
child that only lived with sucking. 4. Nurses perceive as soon as ever they
have eaten and drunken, the going down of the Milk, and the swelling fullness of
their Dugs. Yea, and our Nurses are extraordinary careful not to eat, while
they give their children suck, for otherwise the children should suck
undigested Milk. 5. Castellus pleads their Situation over the Stomach, not
near the Liver or Womb, excepting in beasts. 6. The Milk is colder then the
Blood, and leaves more Excrement in her that gives suck, then blood does in the
Embryo or child in the womb.
Howbeit we find many difficulties in this new Opinion, and those of no small
moment.

1. There are no manifest passages from The said Opinion refuced.
the Stomach to the Dugs, which if any man can find, I shall willingly
acknowledge my self convinced. Martianus, indeed, Castellus, Vestingus, and
Horstius do talk of invisible passages, like the milkie Veins, which cannot be
discerned in a dead body; or at least they conceive the Pores of the flesh may
suffice to admit a passage for milkie Vapors. But the Pores seem too narrow for
thick Chyle to pass through, which in the Mesentery did require large milkie
Veins, which any body may discern. A subtle Spirit and thin Vapors with
smoakie steams, do pass through the Pores, and not the Chylus, nor blood,
according to Nature; for if so, then there were no use of Vessels. Nor is the
Infant satisfied only with Vapors. I willingly acknowledge, that Nature
endeavors the translation of Humors from one part to another by unknown ways,
but she does it compelled, and besides her customary Course, whereas the
breeding of Milk is a constant and ordinary thing. 2. The Dugs being heated by
any other cause whatsoever, do not breed Milk, but the action is hindered by the
said Heat. 3. Nurses confess, that after they have drunk, the Milk does
manifestly descend out of their backs, and from about their Channel-bones, and
puts them to some little pain. For there the Chest-arteries are seated, and not
the Stomach. 4. A tender Infant should be ill nourished with undigested meat,
having been used to be nourished with blood before. 5. Out of the Nipples of
Children newly come out of the Womb, before the use of meat, a wheyish matter
drops like Milk, before they have eaten any meat. 6. What shall we say to that
Aphorism of Hypocrates? If a Woman want her Courses, neither any shivering o
Fever following thereupon, and she loath her Meat: Make account that she is
with Child. 7. Cows, when they eat grass after hay, or hay after grass, before
the fifteenth day, there is no perfect change either in the Constitution or
color of their Milk or Butter, according to the Observation of Walaeus; yet
they perfectly change their Chyle the first day, but their Blood more slowly.
Also our Nurses observe, that after they have slept, and their Meat is
digested, their Dugs make Milk, which does not so happen, if they want sleep.
8. Hogeland proves by Famines and Seiges, that when all the Nutriment of the
Nurse is turned into perfect blood, yet nevertheless Milk is bred in the Dugs.
Wherefore until some diligent hand shall have found evident ways and
passages, And the Argument of Martianus and others are answered*
for the Answering of the contrary Arguments: You are to Note. 1. That we admit
of the Chyle as the remote matter of Milk, but not as the immediate matter
thereof. 2. That the Blood being plentifully evacuated by the Milk, is bred
again by plentiful meat and drink; and therefore the plenty of Milk ceases when
there is little drink taken in, as all Nurses do testify. Morcover, such as
are of a Sanguin complexion afford most Milk, whereas those that are of a
tender constitution grow lean by giving Suck. 3. That all the blood which is
poured out of the Arteries into the Dugs, is not turned into Milk, but only the
more wheyish part, a great deal running back by the Veins into the Heart. 4.
That Women which give suck have their Courses, because the Vessels of the Womb
are then more enlarged, then in the first months of their going with Child:
and ever and anon they flow sparingly from Nurses, and leave off by fits. Also
Women that give suck seldom conceive, unless they be of a Plethorick habit of
body, that is to say full of good blood. Our Women when they would wean a Boy,
if their Dugs swell, they do by certain Medicines keep back the Milk, by
straitning the Vessels, that the matter thereof may not enter nor be drawn that
way. 6. That the Breast and Dug-Arteries are large, and are more and more
widened by continual sucking. 7. That the Milk does drink in the faculty of
Meats and Purgatives, even by mediation of the Blood, which conserves the color
and faculty of the meats, though sundry digestions have preceded; though vapors
alone be raised, and the substance ascend not. 8. That many things are
performed in the body, according to the singular constitution of particular
persons, yea and many things which rarely happen, which is to be understood of
the Milk, which was in the Dugs of that Man at Cous, and of other things thence
voided.

Nerves are carried from the Nerves of the Chest, especially the fifth, for to
cause Their Nerves.
sense, and they end in the Nipple.

Besides these Vessels, the Dugs have also white Pipes, according to the
observation Their Pipes.
of later Anatomists, springing from the whole Circumference of the lower part
which growing narrower, do always meet together, wherein Milk being made, is
preserved for use. Whether or no they are nothing but widened Arteries,
becoming white, because of the change of the milk and the bordering kernels
(which I am willing to believe) I leave to acuter Eyes and Wits to determine.
They treasure up the Milk, when there is occasion of omitting to give the
Infant suck: and when that use is over, they grow as small as the most
Capillary Veins.

Their Use is, 1. General in Women and Men, to be safeguards to the The use of
the Dugs.
Heart: hence Nature has given Men of cold Complexions larger Dugs then
ordinary; and Women that loose their Dugs become rough-voiced, according to
Hypocrates. Nor does the pectoral Muscle hinder, which performs the same
Office, which is Riolanus his Objection; for the more noble parts require great
fencing, even by the smallest thing, as the Eyes from the Eyebrows, the Heart
from the water in the Heart-bag or Pericardium, etc.

II. In women their use is to breed Milk, to nourish the young Infant. For the
Child was nourisht by blood in the Womb, and milk is the same blood only
whitened, so that Nature seems to have put a trick upon living Creatures by
obtruding upon them the gentler appearance of white milk, in place of red
blood, as Plato has it. Which is the Cause that the People of Savoy and
Daulphine did anciently prohibit their Priests, the use of milk, as well as of
Blood.

Now the Efficient Cause of milk, The Efficient cause of Milk.
is not the Womb, where milk was never observed, nor do the Dugs breed milk, by
that virtue thereof which it self wants; nor of the Veins or Arteries, unless
it be the nearest, can the virtue be communicated from the Dugs. For as for
what Baronius relates of St. Paul, how when he was beheaded, not blood but milk
ran from his Neck, either it was a miracle, if true; or a serous humor flowed
out, which sometimes flows from the Arm, when a Vein is opened, and I have seen
it very like to milk, or finally the Liquor of Kernels being cut, did resemble
milk. But the true efficient cause of the milk, is that same kernelly flesh of
the Dugs, unto which there is none like, in the whole body. Now it works this
moderate Concoction by the propriety of its substance, and by reason of its
proper temperament. Aulus Gellius conceives the milk becomes white, by Reason
of plenty of heat and spirit Book 12. Chap. 1. But I am more inclined to
believe, that milk is white, because it is assimilated to the Dugs that are of
the same color.

Sometimes therefore (though it Milk may breed in Virgins, Men, Women not with
Child, etc.
happen seldom) milk may be bred in Virgins, and in Women not with Child,
according to the Observation of Bodinus in his Theater of Nature, of Joachinus
Camerarius in Schenkius, of Petrus Castell^s touching one Angela of Messina, of
A. Benedictus and Christopher a Vega concerning a Girl of Bridges, and of
others. In Scania in our Country, a maid was lately accused to have played the
Whore, because she had milk in her Dugs, which nevertheless she proved to be a
propriety of her Family, by producing her young brother who likewise had milk
in his Breasts. Infants new born shed a wheyish milky liquor out of their
Nipples. These examples are confirmed by the Authority o^ Hypocrates in the 39.
Aphorism of his fifth Section, where Women have milk though neither with Child,
nor lately delivered. And this happens, when the Dugs are filled with abundance
of spirituous blood, and suppression of Courses be joined thereto: for then the
Glandulous substance digests more then is necessary to nourish the Woman. Yea,
in men that are fleshy, large-dug'd, and cold, of constitution, a milky humor,
and as it were milk is frequently seen; especially if their Nipples be
frequently suck'r, and their Dugs rubbed, as the examples of many do testfie.
Aristotle writes of a certain Hee-goat in the I stand Le^s, who yielded so much
milk, that C^rds were made thereof. Matthiolus, tells us that in sundry places
of Bohemia, three Goat-Bucks were found, that gave milk, by which persons that
had the Falling Sickness were Cured. Others have seen Men, out of whose Dugs
store of milk came. Aben-sina saw so much milk milked from a Man, that a Cheese
was made thereof. C. Schenkius relates that Laurentius Wolfius had store of
milk in his Breasts, from his youth, till he was fifty years old. Jo. Rhodius
had such an Host in England, and Santorellus knew a Calabrian, who his Wife
being dead, and he unable to give wages to a Nurse, did nourish his own Child
with his own milk. Walaeus saw a Flemming of like Nature, who being even forty
years of Age, could milk abundance of milk out of huge Dugs which he had. A.
Benedictus relates the story of a Father that gave his Son suck. And Nicolaus
Gemma, Vesalius, M. Donatus, Aqua-pendens, H. Eugubius, Baricellus, do witness
the same thing, and I have already told you as much of a Boy of Scania in our
Country of Denmark, and Cardan saw a man thirty four years old, out of whose
Dugs so much milk did run, as would have suffised to suckle a Child. They
relate how that in the new world, all men well-near abound with milk. Now that
this was true milk which we have related did run from men, is hence apparent
because, it was as fit to nourish children, as that of Women.

III. The use of the Dugs in Women is to adorn them, and render them the more
delectable to Men.

IV. They serve to receive Excrementious moisture. Whereupon their Dugs being
cut off, Women incur sundry Diseases; because the blood which ascends finding
no Vessels to receive it, runs hastily into the principal parts, the Heart,
Lungs, etc, Which danger I conceive the Amazones did study to avoid, by their
so vehement exercising themselves in warfare. Some cut the Dug off when it is
cancered, but the operation is dangerous, by reason of the bleeding which
follows.

CHAP. II. Of the Intercostal, or Ribbetween Muscles.
SUndry Muscles which we meet See the Figure of the following Chapter.
within the Chest shall be first of all explained in the fourth Book, by reason
of the Method of Section. But the Intercostal or Rib-between Muscles, so
called; because they are interwoven between the Ribs, must be explained in this
place.

Now they are totally fleshy, forty four in number, on each side two and Their
Number.
twenty; eleven external; and as many internal. For evermore between two Ribs,
two Muscles rest one upon another: and there are eleven Intervals or Spaces
between the Ribs. Others have done ill to make their Number The Error of others.
sixty eight. For in the Intervals of the true Ribs, they have made diverse
Muscles lying hid between the boney parts of those Ribs, differing from those
which are found between the Gristley parts.

The External ones arise from the lower parts of the upper Ribs, and descending
obliquely toward the back-parts, they are inserted into the upper parts of the
lower Ribs. The Internal contrary wi^e.

The External end at the Cartilages: The Internal fill the spaces, both of the
Ribs and Gristles.

They have oblique Fibers and mutually cross one the other like this Le^^^ X,
because the Muscles are otherwise short, because of the smalness of the
Intervals. Hence in the opening such as have a suppuration in their Chest,
Section is to be made straight according to the Course of the Fibers, nor
overthwart,

They have received sundry Vessels. Veins from the Azygos and upper
Intercostal, Arteries from both the Intercostals. Nerves from the sixth pare;
joined to them which proceed from the Marrow of the Back.

Their use, is to Dilate and Contract Their use.
the Chest; the external imitate the drawing of the Subclavius: By raising the
Ribs, and straitning the Chest, and help toward Exspiration. The internal draw
away the Ribs, and by enlarging the Chest help the Drawing in of the breath.
Galen, contrariwise, makes the external serve for drawing in, and the internal
for blowing out of the Air, whose opinion is favored by Vestingius,

Others with Vesalius, will have the external Muscles to thrust the lower Ribs
upwards, and the internal ones to draw the upper Muscles downwards, that they
might so mutually assist one another in straitning of the Chest. But we should
rather think, that when the Internal ones are quiet, the External do act by
themselves.

Fallopius, Arantius, Riolanus, do account them only to be fleshy Ligaments of
the Ribs, whereby they are knit one to another, because the Ribs cannot be
moved of themselves, save by the Muscles of the Chest. But the Thorachick or
Chest Muscles being unmoved, the Ribs are often moved by help of these Muscles,
receiving some impulse also from the Diaphragma or Midriff. The Ligaments of a
Muscle are never bare. The Ribs may be fastened one to another, and likewise
moved by these, which is common to all other Muscles. Howbeit the motion of the
Ribs is obscure, because they are inarticulated in one part only, and the parts
between the Ribs are narrow; But their Number supplies their smalness.

Chap. III. Of the Diaphragma or Midriff.
The DIAPHRAGMA or Midriff, is The Diaphragma or Midriff, why so called.
so termed from distinguishing or separating, some term it Praecordia because
it is ordinarily stretched ou^ before the Heart, and Phrenes, because it being
affected, the Mind and Sense are disturbed by reason of the Consent it has
with the brain, so that when the Midriff is inflamed a Paraphrenitis or petty
Phrenzy is caused. The Cause of this consent is very doubtful. Hippocrates
says, the Heart becomes foolish through blood flowing back unto the Heart and
Midriff, from the multitude thereof, which foolishness makes it dull and nummed
as it were, and that nummedness makes it Phrentick. But the more firm
experience of latter Physicians, has proved that the brain and not the Heart,
is the seat of Madness. Aristotle attributes The I* TABLE*
The Explication of the FIGURE.
This Figure presents the External proper Parts of the Breast, also Delineates
the Situation of the Midriff in the Body.
A. The Pectoral Muscle in its proper place. B. The same out of its Situation.
C. The Muscle Serratus major Anticus, or Greaterfore-side-Saw-muscle in its own
place, being partly visible. D. The same out of its place. E. The Serratus
anticus minor, lesser foreside-Sawmuscle. FF. The Claviculae or Chanel bones.
G. The Subclavian Muscle. HHH. The Intercostal, or Ribbetween Muscles. III. The
Diaphragma or Midriff. K. Part of the great descendent Artery. L. An Hole for
the Vena Cava descendent. M. An Hole for the Gullet passing through the
Diaphragma. nn. The Venae Phrenicae or Phrenick Veins so called. oo. The
Phrenick Arteries. PP. The two Appendices or Appurtenances of the Diaphragma.
QQ. The Muscles termed Psoas. RR. The Musculi Quadrati or square Muscles of the
Loins. SS. The internal Cavity of Os Ilium, or the Flanck-bone.


page ^^

prudence to the midriff, and when it draws out of the neighboring Liver and
Heart Excrementitious Humors, the mind is thereby hurt, and the external
Senses. Yet, Neither does he solve the doubt, for many other parts draw like
Humors, without causing madness; nor does he unfold, how the Midriff imprints
these ravings upon the Brain. The consent of Vicinity makes nothing to the
purpose, because it is nearer other parts, nor society in the same Office,
because the Lungs being diseased in a Peripneumonia, do not cause a Delirium;
nor finally, the communion of Nerves and Vessels, because in the Inflammations
of other Nervous parts no such thing happens; Castrensis does therefore
necessarily fly to an occult consent, peculiar to this part alone. Others term
it Septum transversum the Cross-partition, because it goes cross, and divides
the Body, and separates the middle belly from the lowermost. Some call it
Cinetus, Disseptum, Discretorium, and the Greeks also call it Z^ne, Di^zoma,
Perizoma, etc. Now it is a singular What it is?
and peculiar kind of Muscle, having an action and figure differing from all
others.

Its Situation is overthwart, or across Its Situation.
the body, and because it enclines a little downwards, oblique.

Its Figure is circularly round, saving Its Figure.
the long Appurtenances.

This Muscle is in Number only one, because Its Number.
of the unity of its Action common to both sides, but it is a great one.
Meyssonerius saw a double Midriff at Lions.

Its Magnitude answers the Diametral Magnitude.
wideness of the lower Belly, which is comprehended between the lower
Vertebra's of the back and the Ribs. Hence great and whaley flesh, because they
have longer and more Ribs then we have, have a larger midriff, creeping
meanwhile as far as to the extremities of the Ribs. For,

For it seems to arise from the Vertebra's of the Loins, by two somewhat An Head
and Tail in the Midriff.
long fleshy parts (which cleave to the muscles of the Loins, at the sides of
the great Artery, and growing by little and little wider, about the lowest
Vertebra's of the Chest they grow together, where this Muscle begins to grow
Circular) and is fastened to the Chest round about, beingknit where it is fleshy
to the extremities of the Ribs: though we should do peradventure more rightly,
to make the beginning thereof, in its whole Circumference, as well from the
Loins as the Ribs, which Galen does also somwhere insinuate: For seeing it
could not be knit to the eleventh Vertebra, because of the great Artery, and
the beginning of the Lumbal muscle, it is strongly inserted, by its two small
appurtenances to the Vertebra's of the Loins.

Galen somwhere (whom Sylvius, Vesalius, Aquapendens, Spigelius and many more
follow) will have the middle of the Diaphragma to be the Head thereof, because
the Nerves are there inserted, and the Center in a Circle, upon which one point
of the compass does rest, while the other is carried about, may be well taken
for the Head of the said Circle. But as it is a peculiar muscle, in Situation,
Action, Figure, Nobility, etc. so has it somewhat peculiar in this point. But
the beginning or Head cannot be in this Center, because it is moveable, and the
Ribs and Vertebrae of the Loins, in respect thereof immovable. Moreover, the
Nervous or Tendinous part, is the End of the muscles, and not their Head.

Its Substance is fleshy, in the middle Its substance.
Nervous and Membranous, where a Membranous Center shows it self and a Nervous
circle in stead of a Tendon, to which fleshy Fibers do run, from the
Circumference of the Chest, as to their Center. Whence necessarily the middle
part of the motive muscle is Nervous, for otherwise it could not be moved.
Secondarily, it helps to strength, in a perpetual motion, and in the suspension
of the bowels which adhere thereunto; moreover it serves to secure the Vessels
which pass through. To sustain the beating of the Heart, it was not to be
strong, as Riolanus suspects, because 1. A soft part does easily give way and
yield to a blow. 2. The point of the Heart does not strike against the Midriff
in its pulsation, for the Heart smites the breast when it is erected in the
Systole, and is contracted at the sides; in the Diastole when it descends to
the Diaphragma, it becomes soft and flaggy, and gives no pulsation.

Note that Wounds in the Nervous Center of the Diaphragma, are by all accounted
deadly, whether because a Nervous part being offended, does induce a
Convulsion, or because it cleaves to the Pericardium or Heart-bag and to the
Liver, or because respiration perishes, and the Heart placed over the same is
likewise hurt; for the Pericardium and Liver being hurt, do admit cure. A wound
is more safely made in the fleshy Circumference thereof.

It is clothed with a double membrane, for strength. The upper is Its Membrane.
from the Pleura, to which the Pericardium or Heart-bag is firmly fastened, and
sometimes also the Lobes or Laps of the Lungs by little small Fiberkies; the
lower is from the Peritonaeum. Also it has its proper substance, formerly
described.

It has Holes: some being very exceeding Its Holes.
little, and others great. Those very little ones are the Pores, through which
vapors arise from the inferior parts. They are widned by the perpetual motion
of the Diaphragma, not by Odours and Fumes, as Helmont believes. Otherwise,
because the Membrane is thick, it hinders the drinking in of thick vapors, and
will not let them ascend without the Vessels. Among the greater, there is one
on the right hand, in the middle of the Nervous part, to give a passage to the
Vena Cava: Another on the left hand greater and somewhat backwarder, for the
letting through of the Gullet or Oesophagus with tw^ Nerves which go unto the
Stomach. And where it arises about the Vertebra's of the Loins, there appears a
division, for the through-fare of the great Artery, and the Vena sine Pari, or
Vein without fellow. These wide holes do admit from the inferior parts, the
passage of thick Vapors with the blood, which cannot be prohibited by the
Diaphragma. Hence in the 29. Aphorism of the fifth Section it is said, in a
Fruitful Women, her lower parts being perfumed, the scent goes up to her
Nostrils.

As to its Vessels. It has Veins and Arteries Vessels.
from the Neighboring Vessels vena cava and Arteria magna, called Venae
phrenicae: and sometimes from the Vena adiposa

Nerves are spread through its whole Substance, being* brought from the spinal
marrow of the Neck, between the fourth and fifth Vertebra: which is proper to
this part, and common to no other internal part under the Channel bones,
because according to the Conjecture of the renowned Hofman, it was not to lie
open to external wounds or Blows, least we should be masters of our own Life
or Death. But instruments of death are every where obvious, which the Love of
Life and Fear of God hinders us from making use of. Now they are carried
through the Cavity of the Chest, and are propped up by the mediastinum. Other
Anatomists have observed other Nervs passing that way from beneath, proceeding
from the costal and stomachick Branches. And because the Nervs of the
Diaphragma or Midriff are Sardonian Laughter*
in their passage mingled with certain little twigs, which are spread abroad
into the muscles of the Jaws and Lips; hence when the Diaphragma is smitten
there arises a kind of Laughter, which is no real Laughter, but a counterfeit
one such as they call Risus Sardonius the Sardonian Laughter, because the
muscles of the Face suffering a Convulsion at the same time, and the Jaws and
Lips being moved this way and that way, the party seems to laugh. Such was the
laughter of Thycenis in Hippocrates and of Agnerus in our Countryman Sarco his
relations, who was cut asunder in the middle with a sharp sword: also of that
man in Aristotle whose Midriff being in the fight pierced with a Dart, made him
die laughing. Pliny relates as much of other Fencers, and Homer tells us that
Juno laughed with her Lips when her Forehead scowled.

Galen makes the Cause of the Sardonian Laughter* to be in the Musculus latus
quadratus, the broad square Muscle. But it reaches not to the Lips, Laurentinus
Politianus, makes the spirits to be the cause of this Convulsion, which because
of the sense they have of some troublesome thing, run back to the upper parts.
Mancinius will have the Heart to be widened, and the face drawn into the
posture of laughing, by the hear which is raised by tickling and wounds,
because he will have the Heart to be the seat of Laughter, in defense of
Aristotle whom Physicians have confuted. Riolanus has sometimes observed
laughter to arise in the guelding of a man, which was the forerunner of a
deadly Convulsion; for which cause he condemns our reason drawn from the
Nerves, not giving us in the mean time any better reason viz. why laughter
should arise upon the wounding or hurting the nerves of the Midriff and
Privities, and not when any other nerves are wounded.

Its Use is 1 To help free Respiration; for violent respiration is assisted by
the muscles Use.
of the Chest; the former Respiration Galen ^erms gentle or small, which
depends only upon the Midriff, the other strong, the intercostal muscles
assisting thereto, a third sublime, where the Diaphragma, intercostal or rib
between muscles, and muscles of the Chest do act all together. Birds indeed,
though they breathe have no Midriff, but their breathing which is light and
scarce perceptible, because of the lightness of their bodies, is performed by
their Lungs and Chest. Contrariwise Fishes which breathe not have a Midriff,
but membranous, to separate one Belly from another. In the greater sort of Sea
fishes of the whaley kind, I have observed a fleshy Midriff like that of
Creatures which live on the Land.

Now the motion thereof is thus: when the Breath is drawn in, the How the
motion of the Diaphragma is performed.
Midriff is stretched, when it is blown out, it is remitted or slackned,
contrary to the Opinion of Arantius and Laurentius. Of whom the latter will
have the Midriff contrary to all other muscles to draw toward its end, and he
will have the fibers which run out from the Circumference of the Chest, to be
equally contracted, and the ribs to be drawn to the nervous Circle, and so to
cause respiration. But how can the membranous Center of the Septum, draw the
ribs to its self and contract the whole Chest unless happily because it is
fastened to the Mediastinum. But I have observed more then once in dissections
of living Bodies, that the Midriff is stretched out, when the Creature draws in
its Breath. For the Guts are driven downwards by the Midriff when the Breath is
blown out, and they ascend again when the Breath is drawn in, which also any
man without Anatomical Section, may perceive in himself, by laying his Hand
upon his Belly. In Wounds of the Diaphragma, the Guts and Stomach, when the
Breath is drawn in ascend into the Chest, which Paraeus twice observed, which
differs only according to more or less, from the natural course of breathing.
Now the motion of the Midriff ought to be such, because the Chest when the
Breath is drawn in, must be widened to receive and contain the Air and swollen
Lungs; and contrariwise, when the Air is breathed out, the Chest ought to be
straightened, because then the sooty vapors are expelled, and the Lungs flag and
become small again, and therefore in the former case the Midriff is lifted up,
and in the latter depressed.

Jo. Walaeus besides that motion, whereby the fleshy part gives way inwardly,
has observed another motion in the Diaphragma during the drawing in of the
breath, whereby the fleshy part thereof being contracted into it self, comes to
have folds in it, so that one portion of the fleshy part is placed upon
another: and he observed that this folding is chiefly about the Appendices or
Appurtenances, and when the breath is strongly drawn in: and he conceivs that
by this means the Midriff is the more shortened, and the Chest by the lifting
up of the Ribs, more widened.

II. To assist the muscles of the belly, in their compression, when they would
force out the Excrements and the Child in the womb: for from above it thrusts
the Guts downwards. Hence, according to the Observation of Platerus, when the
belly is costive, Sneezing and Coughing do help, because thereby the Midriff
and Dung contained in the Guts, are driven downwards, because of the Struggling
of the said Midriff and its bearing down, the Excrements of the belly and Urine
come away of themselves in live Anatomies and in such as are put to death by
hanging.

III. To distinguish the lower belly with the natural parts, from the middle
belly with its vital parts, least from the Ignoble parts frequent vapors
should ascend, to the parts more noble, as the Heart etc.

IV. According to Hippocrates, it is the Fan of the lower belly, which fannes
and cooles the Hypocondria or parts under the snort ribs.

V. Others suppose it causes natural respiration, because it depends not upon
our will and pleasure, and moves when we are asleep, and never so much as think
of it, and by help thereof, Men in Apoplexies do for a season breathe. But
Piccolhomineus does more rightly assign a voluntary motion thereunto, howbeit
only when some necessity constrains, as in easing of the belly, pissing, and
fetching of breath, because it is a Muscle of a nature by it self; but not a
motion absolutely or simply voluntary, which is discerned in progression and
apprehension, that is to say in going and handleing.

Its motion ceases in a strong Apoplexy, only transpiration does then remain:
but in a light Apoplexy, we see the Diaphragma also moved with the Chest
muscles.

CHAP. IV. Of the Pleura, Mediastinum, and Thymus.
THe PLEURA or Rib-coate, which the Greeks call Chiton What the Pleura is, and
its Original.
hupezocos, or absolutely bumen, is a membrane which on the inside clothes the
cavity of the Chest, hard and white, but in some pleuretick persons according
to Hippocrates, black and blew, whence it is that Practitioners conceive that
this is affected in the Pleurisy, which notwithstanding is demonstrated to
happen secondarily, by Manelphus, Cletus, Platerus, Zacchius, Vitaglianus,
Benedictus. It is somewhat thicker and stronger then the Peritoneum. Its
Thickness.
Ariseing from the Coats, which cover the intercostal nerves which proceed out
of the Backbone, by means of which it is continued with the Coats of the Brain.
And therefore it is thicker in the Back, to whose vertebra's it cleavs as it
were inseperably. Hofmannus will have it arise from the Breast Bone rather than
the vertebra's of the Back, wherein he is out, as I have proved in my
Animadversions upon Hofman, and in my Anatomical College. In diseases of the
Chest, it becomes many times ten-fold thicker: though others say it is so
attenuated in pleuritick persons, that it can hardly be descerned. Fallopius
saw it of a thick callous substance, in a Dropsy of the Lungs, and Platerus
saw it in like manner swollen by a Scirrhous Tumor.

It is every where double, that the Vessels may be carried within the folding
thereof. The outer part which looks toward the Chest, is harder and thicker,
the inner part being The place of the matter which causes a Pleurisy.
fastened to the Ribs is thinner. Between these the matter of the Pleurisy is
often collected, and not only between the Pleura and Muscles. Galen makes it to
be single, and will allow it to be double, only about the Mediastinum. Riolanus
explains that same Duplicature to mean its thickness, which cannot be showed
without tearing. The contrary whereto is manifest in the swollen sides of such as
have the Pleurisy.

It has its inner surface smooth, least it should by its roughness hurt the
Lungs; its outer more rough that it might be the stronglyer fastened.

Sometimes it is found furnished with a little fat (as there is also now and
then in the Peritonaeum) near the Vertebra's of the back, where the Vessels are
greater then ordinary.

The Ribs also have their Periosteum or Membrane so called, which some call the
third coat of the Pleura, and others Membrana Circumossalis the bone-about
Membrane.

It has very many Holes, the lowermore Its Holes.
of which I have reckoned up in the History of the Diaphragma, the upper are
there where it affords passage to the Vena Cava, the Arteria aorta, the Wezand
or Aspera arteria, the Gullet and the Nerves of the sixth Pare.

As for its VESSELS. It has Veins from the solitary Vein or Vena fine Pari,
and the upper Intercostal or Rib-between Vein; Arteries from the Intercostal or
Rib-between Artery, and from the great Artery; Nerves, twelve in number,
proceeding from the foreside of the Vertebra's of the Chest. And therefore
wounds in this part are attended with most grievous pains.

Its USE is. 1. According to Galen to plaster over the whole Cavity of the
Chest and to render it smooth and even, that the Lungs migt not be hurt in
their motion. 2. To cloth the Chest and its parts on the inside (even as the
Peritonaeum affords coats to the parts of the lower Belly) and to constitute
the Partition Membrane. Or,

MEDIASTINUM, Which is an offspring of the Pleura, being a doubl^ Membrane;
separating the Cavity of the Chest and the Lungs into two parts. For after that
the Pleura having taken its Original about the Back has ascended by the sides
to the Brestbone, taking its course again toward the Backbone, it is carried
right out from the middle of the Breast to the Back. Being fastened on each hand
to the sides of the Brest-bone, this Membrane is not obscurely double, as is
the Pleura, but visibly, being constituted of the Pleura doubled; and there
seems at first sight to be as great a space between both, under the Brestbone,
as the breadth of the Breast Bone comes to. But this is only in appearance and
not really so; for that same Cavity under the Breast Bone, is then only caused,
when the Breast Bone is in dissection, plucked from the Mediastinum, for before
the Membranes of the Mediastinum are most closely united one to another. Which
it is strange that no Anatomist did observe before Ad Falcoburgius. After him,
I have often made the Experiment, in grown persons and Children new born, in
Land-beasts and large Sea-fishes; nor could I show any Cavity betwixt the
Mediastinum and Breast Bone, no not to the most expert Spectators, but I found
the Membranes of the former sticking close by certain Fibers to the latter,
which we forcibly separated with a Penknife. Which that it might be more
apparent, the inwards of the Belly and the Midriff being taken away, I made it
visible to the Eyes of all that were present. These things are to be understood
of the lesser Cavity (to satisfy Riolanus who is my Adversary in this point)
between the Membranes of the Mediastinum and the sternum: For the greater,
wherein the evermoveing Heart is seated, no man in his right wits will ever
deny. In this greater Cavity, or in this Duplicature^ if a wound inflicted on
the foreside shall penetrate, lightly, so that the Heart settling beneath
remain unhurt, it is sufficiently void of Peril and safe enough; which one
unskillfull in Anatomy would pronounce deadly, But toward the Vertebrae, the
Cavity grows narrow by little and little, and the Membranes meet together. But
in the middle the Cavity is wider, and in the fore part of the said Cavity, the
Heart and Vena Cava are placed; in the latter part the Gullet, with the Stomach
Nerves. If in this Cavity humors praeternaturally assemble and putrify, they
may safely be let out by boreing an hole in the Breast Bone, if we believe
Columbus and Hofmannus, which Nicolaus Fontanus does notwithstanding deny.

It is of a thinner and softer substance then the Pleura; and about the Vessels
Its substance.
it is frequently full of fat like the Call.

For Vessels, it has Veins and Arteries from the Dug-vessels and the solitary
Vein or Vena Vessels.
sine Pari, applied inwardly to the breastbone, which being taken away they
become visible: Also it has its own proper Vein called Mediastana, which is
sometimes one and large, other whiles double and small.

Also the Phrenick and Stomachick Nerves are carried through this Duplicature,
and afford branches to the Mediastinum.

The use of the Mediastinum is, I. To The use of the Mediastinum
divide the Chest into two parts, that one Division of the Lungs being hurt by
a wound or otherwise, the other might perform its office.

II. To hang the Heart and Heart-bag dangling in so free a posture, as to
strike against no part of the Chest.

III. To sustain the Vessels running through the same, as also the Midriff in
Mankind, least it should by the weight of the Bowels be drawn too much
downwards.

The Thymus grows thereto in the Jugulum or Throat-pit the highest part The
Thymus what it is?
of the Chest, whereunto in ordinary Anatomical Figures it is fastened, and has
its name from the leaf of time which it resembles, not from Thumos the Mind,
as if in disturbances thereof by passion, the blood and Spirit should work or
grow hot within this Kernel, in the Vena Cava, as Riolanus interprets the
meaning of the word; for the blood grows hot in the Heart, here it has only a
passage and tarries not, seeing few branches are discernable in the body of the
Thymus, unless somewhat be left by the Arteries for Nutrition sake. In children
and the Embryo in the Womb, less subject to passions, the Thymus is greater and
more Numerous, in persons of ripe years who are soon angry, we find it dried
and co^. Now it is a kernellish, soft, spungy, (...) (some term it the
Sweetbread, because The II. TABLE.
The FIGURES Explained.
This TABLE represents the Brest-bone cut off and lifted up, also the
Mediastinum and the Lungs, with the Midriff.
FIG. I. AAA. The inner surface of the Brest-bone and the Gristles interwoven
therein. BB. The Dug-Veins and Arteries descending beneath the Brest-bone. C.
The Glandulous Body called Thymus. DDDD. The sides of the Mediastinum pluck^
asunder. EE. The distance between the two Membranes of the Mediastinum which is
caused by its forcible separation from the Brest-bone. F. The Protuberancy of
the Mediastinum, where the Heart is seated. GG. The Lungs. HH. The Midriff. I.
Cartilago Ensiformis, the Sword-like Gristle.


FIG. II. A. The left Nerve of the Midriff. B. The right Nerve thereof. C. The
upper Membrane of the Midriff a little separated. D. The naked substance of the
Midriff. E. The Hole for the Gullet to descend through. F. The hole or the Vena
Cava. GGG. The Membranous part or Center of the Midriff. HHH. The Portions or
Appendices thereof, between which the great Artery descends.


FIG. III. Represents that same Glandulous Body, seated by the Larynx* AAA. The
Glandules or Kernels which naturally breed upon the Larynx. B. A portion of the
jugular Vein, out of which two small twigs proceeding, do spread themselves
through the substance of the Glandules or Kernels.


page 94

in a Calfe it is counted a dainty bit)* In a Child new born it is distinguished
into a threefold Kernel sufficiently big. In grown persons, it is extenuated, its
moisture being consumed by heat. Howbeit I have seen it large in great
Seafish, from which many other Kernels were diffused on either hand, about the
Mediastinum and sides of the Lungs.

Blood-conveighing Vessels do pass through this Thymus or Sweetbread; howbeit
in the substance thereof, being dissected, we cannot manifestly disscerne any.

The use therefore of the Thymus is 1. To underprop those great Vessels which
ascend that way, as the Vena Cava, Arteria magna, and their branches passing
along to the Arms and Shoulder-blades. 2. Also for safeguard, as is usual, and
that the Vessels may not be hurt by touching upon the bones. 3. That it may be
as it were a cover and fence for the Heart, for I have seen it as a Bulwork to
the Heart, which the Heart of a Child in the Womb stands in need of, because as
yet it stirs not. And therefore it has a large Thymus, as a Sturgeon also has
and other Creatures which live in the Water, by reason of the external cold.

Chap. V. Of the Heart-bag and the Humor contained therein.
THe Pericardium which some term The Pericardium. See Tab. 3. of Book 2.
the Coat, Case, Box, Chamber, Cover of the Heart, or Heart-bag, etc. is a
Membrane compassing the whole Heart, whose Figure it therefore Emulates, as
also its Magnitude: But it is so far distant from the Heart, as is necessary
for the Hearts motion, and the reception of the Liquor contained in this Bag.
Columbus assures us, that a Scholar of his had no Pericardium.

It arises at the Basis from the Coats which compass the Vessels of the Its
Original.
Heart, which proceed from the Pleura (for this Coat is not between the Basis
of the Heart and the Pericardium) where for their sakes.

It has five Holes; viz. for the ingate and outgate of the Vena Cava, and for
the Its Holes.
letting out of the other three Vessels.

Its Situation is more to the left side then the right; and more to the fore
then the Situation.
hinder part of the Body.

It is knit circularly to the Mediastinum, with very many Fibers, and to Its
Connection.
the neighboring parts, but especially the Nervous circle of the Midriff, it
cleaves exceeding close, which is a thing peculiar to Mankind: For herein a Man
differs from Dogs and Apes, and in all other Creatures likewise, the difference
holes.

Its External Surface is Fibrous, the Internal slippery, and both void of fat.
Its Surface.


Its Substance is thick and hard, and so much harder then the Lungs, as it is
Its Substance.
softer then a bone.

Its Vessels. It has small Veins. below Its Vessels.
from the Phrenick Vessels, above from the Axillary.

It has no Arteries that can well be seen; peradventure, because it is so near
the Heart. Yet doubtless it has some although hard to be discerned.

It has very small Nerves, from the left Recurrent, and the little twigs of the
Septum.

Its Use is I. To be a firm tabernacle for the Heart, that in its motion it
might not Its Use.
strike against the hard parts of the Body.

II. To contain a wheyish or Watery Humor, like Urin to see to, though neither
sharp nor Salt, transparently clear, in some like water, wherein flesh has
been washed; Guil. Toletus in Burgensis calls it a phlegmatic Humor of an
unpleasing taste. And because of this Liquor Galen resembles the Heart to a
Bladder.

This Humor is found in all Animals naturally constituted, both Whether all
Live-Wights have this wherish Liquor in their Heart-bags.
living and dead, yea and in the Child in the Womb, as appears by the
dissection of bodies both living and dead: But in some more in others less; in
persons that are in a Consumption, it is very little and inclining to
yellowness. In persons Pleuritick it is now and then of a quittorish nature,
according to the Observation of Salmuth.

In dead bodies it is more plentyful: Because then very many Spirits are Why more
plentiful in dead Bodies.
in the cooled parts of the body condensed into water. In Women* Children, and
aged persons, it is more plentyful, by reason of the debility of their heat.

If it happen to be in two great a quantity, Palpitation of Heart, and a
suffocating death follows therefrom: if it be quite consumed, a Consumption of
the body happens. But that it may be bread a fresh when it is spent, we see
clearly in those whose Heartbag being wounded, the said Liquor has run out;
for in Johannes Saviolus, his Heart-bag being wounded with a Dagger, water
issued at every Pulse of his Heart, out of the wound, yet was he happily cured
by the Renowned Veslingus.

Whence this water should have Whence the liquor in the Heart-bag proceeds? The
first Opinion.
its original, the opinions of learned men are different.

I. The first Opinion is of those, who will have it to be sent out of the
Vessels of the Heart, seeing Blood-letting cures the Panting of the Heart
proceeding from the Super abundance of this Liquor: And they conceive that this
waterish Liquor is forced out by the fervent heat of the Heart, as in a stick
of wood when it burns the sap runs out. Of kin to this is the Opinion of
Nicolas Massa, which will have it to proceed from the strainings of the blood,
which come from the Liver to the Ear of the Heart. And Hofman is much of his
mind, who maintains that it is part of that wheyish moisture which ascends to
the Heart with the blood; but because the motion thereof is perpetual, there
would no small danger arise, from so large an Afflux of Humors. I let pass, how
that the stronger persons, whose blood is moved most swiftly, have less
quantity of this Water then those that are weaker.

II. Others, and among them Hippocrates seems to make one, will have it to
proceed from our drink, some portion whereof they conceive peirces like Dew out
of the Asperia Arteria, into the Arteria Venosa.

III. Some conceive it proceeds from a Watery matter in the Seed, as the inbred
Air of the Ears, is thought to proceed from a windy matter in the said seed.

IV. Of kin hereunto is the opinion of Jasolinus, who will have it to be a
select, most perfect and Elaborate portion of the serons Humor, sent thither by
Nature it self, happily in the first formation of the Child, through the Veins
and Arteries, besides another part of the drink, of which Hippocrates speaks,
and he has experiments touching the same.

V. Some say it proceeds from the watery Excrements of the third digestion.

VI. Others from the spittle, slipping out of the Kernels of the Tongue into
the Wezand, and from thence into the Arteries and Heart.

VII. Others, from the fat of the Heart, by agitation turned into water.

VIII. Others from the thicker part of the Air which we draw in, being changed
into water.

IX. And lastly, some think (which I conceive to be most likely) that it
proceeds from moist Vapors and Exhalations, forced out of the Humors of the
Heart by the motion and Heat theerof, and thrust forth into the Heart-bag and
there congealed into water, in regard of the compactness of the said Heartbag.

Its Use is, I. To moisten and cool the Its Use.
Heart, and to facilitate the motion thereof. And therefore those in whom it is
consumed, have their Hearts roasted: As it happened to Casimire the Marquis of
Brandenburg: And to that young man of Rome, mentioned by Panarolus. Hofmannus
being of a contrary mind, will needs have it to be as a Spur and Incitement of
Heat; as Smiths are wont to dip their wisps of Straw in Water that they may
burn the longer: And as Wood is sprinkled with Water to make it burn more
lustily. But those bundles of Straw are preserved by the water, because their
substance being made more moist and Tenacious, is not so soon consumed. But the
heat of the Heart is preserved by its radical moisture, and by the blood
continually flowing in, nor does it need any Incitement from the Water, for if
so, then the Heart would be more hot and lusty in old persons, who have most
water in their Heart-bags, II. It serves to make fat by congelation. III. That
the Heart by swimming therein, may be less ponderous, and may not strike
against any part.

An HUMOR likewise is commonly found in the Cavity of the Chest, resembling
blood and water mingled together, wherewith the parts of the Chest are smeared,
that they may not be overheated nor overdryed. Hence the side of our Savior
being opened, blood and water flowed out, which by the suddan flux, and mixture
of blood and the Authorities of the Ancients, I have at large proved, in my
Dispute of the side of Christ, against Laurentius, Arias Montanus, Bertinus,
Nancelius, Poza, Tremellius, Beza, Tirinus, Grotius and others, who would have
it to proceed from his Pericardium or Heart-bag, also against Collius,
Tarnovius, Brentius, Laurenbergius among the late writers, and Cyprianus,
Prudentius, Brigitta, Vida, Sannazarius, Vigerius, etc. who would fetch it from
the Vessels of the Heart being wounded. Now the Objection of P. Laurenbergius
is not worth a button, who says there was not enough of the said Liquor in the
Cavity of the Chest; because 1. The natural quantity might suffice, seeing the
Evangelists do not record that it come away in a great quantity. 2. It might be
augmented in that last conflict for life, notwithstanding the great perfection
of his Body, which being for our Redemption made liable to temporary passions,
underwent death it self. 3. I have at Padua sometimes observed so great a
quantity of Water in this part, that it hung down like a great purse, the
Midriff being depressed by its weight. Jasolinus in wound of the Chest (the
inner parts being unhurt) did sometimes collect every day five measures of water
called Heminae, for thirty days together, which the Membranes being inflamed,
was dried up and diminished, but when the Inflammation was cured, it returned
in its former Quantity.

In a Boy at Paris, who died of the small pox, I being present, store of water
was found in this part, but of a green color, of which elsewhere.

Chap. VI. Of the Heart in General.
THe Heart is called in Latin COR a currendo from running, because of its
motion; some peradventure will derive it from the Greek name Ker which they
derive from ceo which signifies to burn: the Greeks term it cardia, we the
Heart, quasi bieron a sacred thing. It is the principal part of a living
Creature, which none is found to want according to Aristotle, and by the
hurting whereof the Creaure does for the most part immediately die, because it
is the fountain of Life, and labors the vital Spirits, which having made, it
distributes, by the Arteries arising from it self, into the whole body, Yet may
you find examples in Schenkius of those that have had no Hearts. See also
Gellius book the 16. Chap. 15. Galen relates that beasts sacrificed have lowed
at the Altar, after their Hearts were taken out; and the Lord Verulam tells of
a man who spoke three or four words of a prayer, when his Heart was plucked out
of his Body, and in the hand of the Executioner. Pliny tells us the entrails
were twice found without any Heart, when Caesar sacrificed, and Julius
Obsequens says the same. The Lives of such persons were maintained by the
remainders of arterial Blood. And Spigelius suspects that among the Bowels,
the Heart was rather hid, and unfound then wanting, who saw so much fat in an
Ostrich, that a man might easily have bin deceived, so as to think the Fowl had
no Heart. Peradventure those Hearts of the sacrifices were stole away by the
Devil.

A Live-wight dies not with every hurt of the Heart. For the Heart undergoes
all kind of diseases. 1. Putrefaction, witness Galen, in a pestilential and a
putrid Fever. 2. The Consumption according to Pliny, to be dried like a
roasted warden, according to Jordanus. to be wholly consumed by immoderate
Heat, as Tileseus averr's. 3. Inflammation, in which Case it cannot live a
natural day, as Saxonius found by experience in a certain Reader. 4. Filthy
hollow Ulcers have bin found therein by Fernelius, Trincavellius, Riverius. 5.
Diverse kinds of Tumors, Columbus saw an hard Tumor in the left ventricle of a
Cardinal, as big as an Egg. Benevenius saw a swelling of black flesh. Massa,
Hollerius, Bauhinus, and Joubertus, have other like Stories. I lately found in
the Parenchyma of an Oxes Heart on the left side a swelling as big as a Pigeons
Egg, in a double Coat, full of Whey and Phlegm.

On the out side Gesner saw an Excrescence of Flesh, in the Basis the quantity
of an ounce and six drams Bavius makes mention of the Membrane eaten and
fretted away round about.

Also Histories show that it will bear wounds for a season. Paraeus tells of
one wounded in the Heart who ran two hundred paces. Jacotius tells of an Heart
that carried an old arrow fixed in its Heart, which is confirmed by Thomas a
Vega and Alexandrius. Galen saw an Hare wounded in the Heart, run a darts cast
after the wound received. Of a Student at Ingolstade, Sennertus and Iohnstonus
tells us, who had both the ventricles of his Heart peirced through with a
weapon, and Nicholas Mullerus of a Soldier who lived fifteen days after he
had received a wound in his Heart, of which he hung up a Table at Groeningen.
He recounts many like examples seen by himself, and Tulpius tells us of one
that lived two days, being wounded in the right ventricle. Glandorpius tells
us after Sanctorius, that the Heart of a Rabbit was pierced with a sharp
Instrument, and yet it lived many months after.

We must therefore note

1. That the Heart can endure Diseases, but because it lies far from the way of
medicines, it cannot hold out so well as other parts. 2. That, as Galen tells
us, if the wounds do pierce into the belly thereof, the party or Creature
wounded dies, of necessity, but if they be in the Substance thereof, it may
live a day and a night, but then Inflammation arising death follows. 3 That the
right Ventricle does more easily bear an hurt, because upon the left depends
the life of the whole Body. 4. Both Ventricles may endure a small time after
they are hurt, if the Vessels that continue the motion of the blood, be
undamnified.
The Heart is one in Number, Theophrastus writes, that in Paphlagonia
Partridges have two Hearts, an example whereof Galen relates in a man, in his
anatomical administrations.

It is situate in the middle of the body, not considering the legs, as it is
Why the Heart ^^ in the midst of the Body.
in brutes; in which the Heart is in the middle, for moveableness and
Securities sake, and in the middle of the Chest likewise, where it is on all
sides compassed with the Lungs. Now the Heart in respect of its basis, is
exactly in the middle, that nourshing blood and spirit might more commodiously
be distributed into the whole body.

Howbeit the Motion thereof is more discernable in the left side.

1 Because in its left Ventricle the vital spirit is contained, and from A
vulgar Error that the Heart is in the left side.
thence arises the Arteria magna, hence the common people imagine that a Man's
Heart resides in his left Side, but Practitioners apply Cordials to the left
side.

2 Because the point of the Heart enclines toward the left side, under Why the
point of the Heart enclines to the left side.
the left nipple, that it may give way to the Diaphragma: now to the right hand
it could not decline, by reason of the Vena cava, which ascends there through
the midst of the Chest. Sometimes the upper part of the Heart enclines to the
left side, and such persons are left handed if we believe Massa, those whose
Heart is exactly in the middle, use both hands alike.

As to its Magnitude. In a man proportionably the Heart is greater then Who
have the greatest Hearts.
in other Creatures, as also the brain and Liver. According to the common
Course of Nature, it equals six fingers breadths in length, and four in
breadth. Otherwise, the greatness of the Heart differs according to the
Difference of the Age and Temperament. For persons cold of Constitution, and
fearful have great Hearts, but such as are more hot and confident, have little
Hearts: Of which see Donatus. Hence Aristotle says of fearful Creatures, as
the Hare, Deer, Mouse, Hyena, Ass, Weazel, etc. that they have a great Heart,
considering the proportion of their bodies. The Philosiphers of Egypt, in
ancient times, as appears by Herodotus in his Euterpe, have dreamed these
things of the greatness of the Heart. That the Heart of such Persons, as are not
wasted by any violent disease, does every year grow two drams heavier, till
they become fifty years old, so that a man of fifty years Age, his Heart weighs
an hundred drams: but from the fiftyeth year to the hundredth, by a retrograde
or back motion, it looses every year two drams, till it vanish away, and the
party die.

Its Figure is conick, because it ends in a point. Its upper part by reason of
the full vessels therein, is broad and round, although not exactly, and is
called the Root and Head, and Basis of the Heart: the lower part being sharper
is called conus, mucro, vertex, cuspis and apex Cordis; the cone, point, top of
the Heart. Hippocrates calls it the end and tail. On the foreside the Heart is
more bossie, on the hinder side more flat. In the contractions the whole Heart
is longer as some hold, but broader and more drawn together according to
others; in its Dilatations or Widenings it is greatest, and of a globous
figure, of which I shall speak more exactly hereafter.

Its Connection is to the Mediastinum and the Midriff by the Pericardium; but to
Connection.
other parts by its Vessels, they are joined to the Basis. the point being
free, and hanging dangling like a bell in the Steeple, that it may the more
easily be drawn back to its Basis, or moved to the Sides.

Its Substance is first membranous, like a Bladder, in the Child in the Womb,
afterward from the mothers blood there grows flesh or a solid, thick and
compacted parenchyma.

1. That it might endure the perpetuity Why the Substance of the Heart is so
thick.
of the Motion: for a fence, and that it might more forcibly drive the blood to
places far distant in the whole Body. 2 Least the subtle and lightfull Spirits
contained even in the moveable blood should exhale together with the inbred
heat.
In the right side the wall is less thick, because it sends blood only to the
Lungs, which have their venal blood not so subtle. The strength of the left
side is greater, by reason of stronger motion to drive on the blood, to supply
the necessity of the whole body. In the point, the flesh is thicker and harder
not so much because it ought not to be moved, as Riolanus conceives, as because
it is free, contracting the whole Heart in a brief manner, and destiture of
Vessels and Ears. In its Basis, it is not so much softer as thinner. whose
Vessels and Ears do recompense what it wants of firmness. Now this flesh has
all kinds of Fibers, so mingled one with another, and so compact, that they
cannot be easily discerned; partly for strength, partly for motion. For all
these Fibers being stretched in the Systole of the Heart they draw together the
Ventricles and the inner sides, to help the Protrysion or thrusting forward of
the blood.

This substance is clothed with a Coat Its Coat.
hardly separable, for the greater firmness, to which it grows in respect of
the matter, not of the efficient Cause.

There is Fat about the Pasis of the Heart but hardly about the Cone or sharp
End thereof, because it is moistened by the liquor of the Heart-bag, 1. To
anoint the Veins about the Heart. 2. And to moisten the Heart, that it may not
be dried by motion. 3. To heat the water in the Heart-bag, as the fat of the
Kidneys does, according to the conjecture of John Daniel Horstius. Sometimes it
is quite hid with the said fat, which Spegelius, Riolanus, Jessenius observed
in a prince of Lunaeburg, so that the bystanders are apt to be deluded and
think there is no Heart.

It was nevertheless rightly said by Whether Fat is found about the Heart?
Aristotle, Galen and Avicenna, that fat called Pimele could not grow about any
hot part, as the Heart, the Liver, the Arteries, the Veins, etc. For this kind
of Fat is easily melted by heat; but in the mean while, to stea^ Adeps or
Tallow, which differs much from Pimele or Greasy fat, in substance,
consistency and place, as I have demonstrated in my Vindiciae Anatomicae from
Pollux, Suidas, Erotianus and others, may grow about such parts, because it is
not easily melted. Which makes a sputtering when it is put to the flame of a
Candle, because of a watery substance mingled therewith, according to the
Observation of Jasolinus, which hinders it from sudden congealing: so that it
is no wonder that it is not melted by the heat of the Heart. Now this same
Tallow is bred about the Heart, either because the Heart being of a very hard
substance is nourished with thick blood, of which suet is bred; or because
Excrementitious dregs are bred of the Nutriment of the Heart; or because the
blood is much stirred, as by the great Agitation of Milk, better is extracted,
which is the opinion of Achillinus.

As for Vessels. The Heart has a Vein which is termed Coronaria the The
Coronary Vein of the Heart.
Crown-vein, because it incircles the Heart, and is sometimes double. It arises
from the Cava, without the right Ventricle, about whose Basis it Expatiates in
a large tract from the right Ear, and with a wide Channel it compasses about
externally to the left Ear, which it does not enter, but turns aside into the
Parenchyma of the Heart. Hence it spreads its branches downwards through the
surface of the Heart, but the greatest store through the left side thereof,
because the flesh is there thicker. A small valve is fastened in its original,
which grants entrance to the blood into the right Ventricle, but will not
suffer it to go out.

The III. TABLE.
The FIGURE Explained.
This TABLE shows the Situation of the Heart in the Body and the going out of
certain Vessels therefrom.
A. The Heart in its natural Situation enclosed in the Heart-bag. BB. The
Lungs. CC. The Nervous part of the Midriff. DDD. The flesby portion thereof. E.
A portion of the Vena Cava above the Heart, going upwards. F. Part of the said
Vein peircing the Midriff. G. The great Artery arising out of the Heart. HH.
Its branches to med Carotides, the Drowsie-Arteries. I. The point of the Heart
enclining to the left side of the Body. KK. The Nerves of the sixth Conjugation,
from which the recurrent Nerves do spring, which distribute five branches to
the Heart-bag and the Heart. L. The left Ear of the Heart. M. The right Ear. N.
The Vessels of the Heartbag. O. The Cartilago Scutiformis, Sheild-fashioned
Gristle. P. The first pare of the Muscles of the Larynx in their proper place,
Q. The Situation of Os Hyoides. R. The Aspera Arteria or Wezand. S. The
Axillary Artery, about the Original whereof, the Right Hand Recurrent Nerve
begins.


page 98



As for its Use. Some have persuaded themselves, that it serves to nourish the
external part, because it is lesser then ordinary, creeps about the external
surface only, and the Heart is nourished with Arterial blood. Others will have
it to nourish the whole Heart. Licetus assigns its Office to strain the blood
to the left Ventricle of the Heart, which I wonder at, Because 1. It is
exceeding small. 2. It creeps about the External parts. 3. It arises externally
from the Vena Cava. and not from the right Ventricle of the Heart. Botallus
seems to have acknowledged the same way, whose opinion examined by Walaeus.
Others, as Riolanus, make it serve not so much for Nutrition, as to repair the
fat; but, first it reaches farther then the fat. 2. No branches thereof are to
be seen in the fat. 3. The fat may be generated from Vapors of the Heart,
without any Veins. The true Use of the Coronary Vein is, to bring back the
blood of the other Veins, when it returns from nourishing the heart, into the
right Ventricle again, which the Situation of the Valves does hint unto us, and
the unfitness of this blood to nourish the solid substance or Parenclyma of the
heart.

It has two Coronary Arteries from the great one, at the same place, in its
original, before it passes out of the Pericardium, furnished with a Valve which
prohibits the regress of the Blood. Through these, because they are moved and
Pulse, blood is carried to nourish the heart and Ears, and here is made a
peculiar kind of Circulation, as Harvy teaches, out of the left Ventricle into
the Arteries, out of them into the Coronary Veins, out of which it slides into
the right Ventricle, being to be forced again through the Lungs into the left
Ventricle.

Now some men persuade themselves, and especially Hogelandius, that the Blood
which remains after Nutrition, does not all pass back through the Veins, but
that some particles thereof sweat through the Parenchyma into the Ventricles,
and cause Fermentation in the Generation of Arterial blood. But 1. The
Fermentation, if there be any, may be made by the relics contained in the
Cavities. 2. The coronary Vessels, do not reach unto the Ventricles. 3. It Is
hard when the body is in health, for the blood to sweat through so hard and
compact a flesh, unless the blood be very wheyish, and the body of a thin
Texture. 4. Why does not the blood sweat through the Skin, which in some parts
is very thin? 5. No particle remains in the flesh, save what is ordained for
the nourishment thereof.

Nerves it has likewise, obscure ones, from the sixth conjugation, inserted
into three places: One being terminated into the heart it self: Another into
its Ears; A third among its greater Vessels, to cause sense and not motion
according to Piccolhomineus, because the Nerve being cut asunder the heart
moves nevertheless. The heart has not many Nerves, but a great Contexture of
Fibers like to the Nerves, which Aristotle perhaps reckoning for Nerves, said
the heart was the Original of the Nerves. But that may be Materially true, not
formally. Yet I have seen in the heart of a Sow, the branches of the Nerves
with entangled twigs toward the Cone or Point, carried from the Septum to the
Wall of the Belly.

Yet that is false which Fallopius tells us, that a great Squadron of Nerves is
An Error of Fallopius.
spread up and down the Basis of the heart, resembling a Net: For the motion of
the heart, is no Animal motion, but a natural motion, because the heart is no
Muscle: For the heart is moved without our will, and it beats in the Child in
the Womb, before the Child has received the Animal faculty. And Galen did
rightly deny that the heart was a Muscle. Whether the Heart be a Muscle?
1. Because it has all kind of Fibers. 2. Because a Muscle is the Instrument
of voluntary motion. But if any one shall say the heart is a Muscle subservient
to natural motion, I shall oppose such an improper manner of speaking: And so
that of Hippocrates may be true, that the heart is a muscle. For he defines a
Muscle to be flesh made up into an Orbicular shape. Others conceive that being
long boiled it resembles a Muscle, and that then it is not one, but diverse
Muscles, by reason of diverse motions contracted into themselves. Others grant
it to be a Muscle of a nature by it self, as the Midrifl, which is perpetually
moved. Walaeus most rightly of all others calls it not a Muscle, but says it
is contracted in its motion like a Muscle, by Fibers interwoven in the flesh,
and especially in the Ventricles, like the temporal Muscle in such as chew
their meat.

The Temperament of the heart in respect The Error of Averroes.
of active Qualities is hot, yea the hottest of all the parts of the Body. How
beit with a gentle and light-ful heat, not scorching and burning, if it be
rightly disposed. And therefore it is no wonder, that in live dissections,
sometimes we feel so little heat in the heart with our Finger, especially when
our Skin is thick, we hold it but a little while, and the external Air is not
rightly prepared before hand. It communicates the same heat to other parts, and
renders ths Arterial blood fit to nourish, which heat being assuaged in the
Veins by reason of the long jorney, it must of necessity run back again to the
heart, that it may be refurnished and restored with the same heat. But vain is
the opinion of Averroes, that the heart is cold, because of the cold parts
which it contains, viz. its Vessels and Valves: Unless happily he meant the heart
void of Spirit, as many will have it.

Those whose heart is hotter then ordinary An Hairy Breast what it signifies?
have their Breast rough with hair, and the parts near their Hypochondria; and
those men are angryly inclind, and daring.

Seldom is the heat of the heart so An Hairy Heart what it signifie^?
great, as that it self should thereby become rough with hair, such as Pliny
and Valerius Maximus tell us was found in Aristomenes a Micenian; and in
Hermogenes^ a ^cian, Coelius Rodiginus relates: and Benevenius, Z^ Lusitanus
and Murelus avouch that they saw such ^^^^ry heart in certain Famous Theives.
Now such (...) are audacious in the highest degree, extreme (...) crasty, and
for the most part wicked. Riola^^^ ^^us, that the matter of these hairs, is
the thi^^ ^or things of that wheyish humor which is in the Heartbag. But I am
more apt to believe, that it is the plenty of Fuliginous Excrements springing
from an hot heart.

As to the passive Quallities, the Heart is moist, viz. more moist then the
Skin, but drier then the Muscles, because harder: for the parts of the body,
look how much softer they are then the Skin, by so much are they moister then
it. It is a most rare Case for a man's Heart to be so solid, dense and compact,
as that it will not burn, such as was the Heart of Germanicus the son of
Drusus; or cartilaginous, such as Riolanus observed in a wicked fellow.

The primary Use of the Heart.

1. According to Harvey, Baccius, and other of his followers, is no other then
to be the Instrument of the Soul, to force and urge the venal blood received
from the Ears into the Arteries, by whose assistance it dispenses Nutriment to
the whole body, and is rather joined as an Assistant to the Ears, that being of
greater force, it may supply the defect of the Ears.

But this is a secondary use of the Heart. For 1. Nutriment was to be prepared
and filled with vital heat, which it has not else where save from the heart. 2.
Nature might have provided for this passage of the blood, by some other member
not so laboriously framed, 3. The necessity of the Heart would not be so great
as it is. 4. It is a sign that some farther thing is performed i^ the Heart,
in that venal blood does not nourish, before it enters the Heart.

Now the primary action of the Heart is to be.

II. The Fountain of Heat, whence it is spread into the whole body, whereby the
parts are animated and sustained. Swowneing teaches so much and other defects
of the Heart, in which the heat of the Heart being intercepted, the Members of
the Body begin to flag and being destitute of heat, become stupid. And
therefore cordials do good in such cases, which stir up the languishing and
nummed heat of the Heart. Also the Dissection of living Creatures does show,
that the Heart is hot, yea that the heart of a Creature being taken out and
newly dead, a warm finger, or some other warm thing being laid upon it, is seen
to come to its self again and to stir, which the Lord Bacon Constantine,
Harvey, and others have observed in a Dove, an Eele, a Salmon, and a Man.

It is therefore the Fountain of Heat, both in respect of its Substance and of
the Blood contained in it. I join both together. For the Heat springs not from
the blood alone, as Harvey would have it, for the Heart in an Egg, and a Child
in the Womb, before it is perfect and hollowed with ventricles, is hot and
moves, and the same heat remains in Hearts taken out of the Body and cut up.
The blood which flows thither from the Coronary Vessels, flows thither for
Nutritions sake and to preserve the Heat. Nor are the rest of the sanguine
parts, therefore judged to be hotter then other parts because they more abound
with any heat, but because they have Arteries full of arterial blood, and
depend upon the influence of the heart, wherewith the blood is heated. So that
unless all the blood did pass through the heart, the parts would never grow
hot, and the further the blood goes from the heart, by so much the sloer in its
motion, and the colder it grows. That the coldness of the heart makes the
parts of the Body cold, though full of blood, the slowness of the Pulse is a
sign.

Nor do the Blood and Heart grow hot only from the motion of the Heart, as the
followers of Des Carts will have it, for 1. they grant that the fiery atoms or
indivisible particles of fire, are excited and put into action by motion,
though they are only brought into play, but not produced by the said motion. 2.
Many things are moved without waxeing hot, as water, unless they have an inbred
principle of heat. 3. Before motion there was heat proceeding from the seminary
original, which is afterward preserved by continual motion.

III. Not so much to make as to perfect the Blood.

It makes Arterial Blood and perfects the venal, or that which Whether the
Heart do perfect the Blood.
is contained in the Veins. For they are out who attribute too much to the
heart, as if the heart alone did make blood of the Chylus, they also are
mistaken, who maintain that the heart contributes nothing to blood-makeing. I
go in a middle way. The Liver challenges the first making of the blood of the
Chylus, as I have formerly demonstrated, which because it is not there
perfected, being to thick and unfit to nourish, it is necessary that it should
receive its perfection from other parts. No part is fit for this work save the
heart, which is one of the first parts generated in the Womb, and through which
in a grown person all the blood in the body has its passage. That the Lungs and
heart-ears should perform their Office, no man will believe.

The heart perfects two sorts of Blood, that of the Liver and that of the
Veins. That of the Liver is twofold, the ^^^ of the Vena portae, the other a
cruder sort newly ^f Chyle. The Vein blood i^ likewise twofold one of the
descendent trunk of vena cava, and the other of the ascendent trunk of the said
vein. It receivs the Liver blood through the Cava, to which another joins it
self out of the lower and upper Truuk, which remaining over and above after the
parts are nourished, by its long journey is become pauled and sluggish, and has
lost its heat, which is necessary for pulsation and nutrition.

This perfection which the Blood receivs from the heart, is hereby confirmed,
in that the blood when it comes out of the left Ventricle, has not altogether
the same Consistence nor Color, which it had when it entered the right
Ventricle. The diversity consists in Heat and plenty of Spirits, wherewith it
is furnished when it goes out of the heart, and which it wants when it enters
thereinto; and in Effect or Operation, for that which goes out is fit to
nourish, but that which enters in is most unfit, Vital Spirits are added by the
inbred faculty of the heart, and the sooty vapors are taken away by that most
short Concoction, being evacuated by the Lungs and Pericardium or heart-bag.

For what parts does the heart perfect and renew the blood.

The ancients did believe that the Heart made blood only to nourish the Lungs.
But the Vessels of the lungs are greater then is requisite only for their
Nutrition, and there is continually more blood forced thither by the pulsation
of the right Ventricle, then could any ways be useful for the Lungs, unless
they were to be nourished with as much blood as is sufficient for the whole
Body. And that all is not consumed upon the substance of the Lungs, the blood
which returns is a witness, which runs in great plenty at every pulsation, to
the left Ventricle, through the Arteria venosa, which in live anatomies being
tied, is seen to swell betwixt the ligature and the Lungs. For there is no way
for it to return into the right Ventricle, the passage being stopped by the
close shutting of the mitre-fashionned Valves.

The right Ventricle therefore is busied about blood which is to be sent to
nourish the Lungs; the left does perfect the blood which flows back from the
Lungs, being there impraegnated with air, for the Nutrition of the whole Body.
For the arterial blood alone is that which nourishes, because it is only fit
for nutrition, and it alone is forced through the Arteries into the utmost
parts of the Body.

To perfect this blood many things What things are requisite to perfect the
Blood?
concur. 1. Heat, which is very dull and lasie, as well in the crude blood of
the Liver, as in the returning blood of the whole Body. 2. Vital Spirit which
by the confession of all men, ought to be joined therewith, 3. Light the
companion of the Spirits, by which the blood receives a more Illustrious color,
is moved and made fit for Nutrition. 4. A certain light and momentary
Concoction, sweetning the crude: parts, attenuating the whole substance, and
drawing forth the latent flame. 5. The whole Fabric of the heart, internal and
external, and the Vessels both receiving and expelling. 6. The separation of
Excrements, though the receptacles of the said Excrements are not very
manifest. The sooty Vapors of the right Ventricle do evaporate through the Vena
Arteriosa. The Watery Vapors of both the Ventricles, are congealed into the
water of the Heart-bag, and are spent into the substance of the Hairs under the
Arms. The remaining Excrements continue mixed with the Blood, and are carried
into the Arteries, and the wheyish parts are purged by the emulgent Arteries
into the Kidneys, and by sweats into the habit of the Body, the thicker parts
by the Hemorrhoidal Arteries and the Ramus Mesentericus. Some parts return with
the blood through the Veins into the Heart, that by several repeated courses,
there, they may be at last mastered and overcome.

Whether or no is the Blood equally perfected in the right and left Ventricle?
In which Ventricle the Blood is perfected.


Although the heat of both the Ventricles does seem to be equal, because in
Mankind they are both made of spiritful seed, and as much is afforded to the
right Ventricle by the Liver-blood, and the returning blood of the Veins, as to
the left by the Lungs; moreover in Live Anatomies we can hardly perceive that
the one is hotter then the other.

Yet that in the left the blood receives greater perfection, these signs and
tokens do persuade me; because

1. It receives the Blood in some measure prepared from the Lungs. 2. It ought
to perfect it for the whole Body, whereas the right perfects it only for the
Lungs. 3. It has thicker Walls, more compacted fleshy Pillars, wherewith the
heat is both more easily preserved and reverberated, and the blood more
strongly driven. 4. The blood is therein more frequently clottered by heat, and
Cartilaginous and boney substances appear being dried by heat. 5. When the left
Ventricle is hurt, there is greater danger of death, then when the right is
hurt. 6. Many Live-wights want the right Ventricle. 7. In dying persons it is
sooner dead and void of motion then the right. 8. The Cavity thereof is more
narrow, and therefore it does more easily preserve and perfect that which is
contained therein.
We cannot exactly define the place. It is the whole Cavity, endued with the
virtue of the Parenchyma, because the blood fills the whole in the Diastole, and
the inbred spirit, is every where diffused. Nor is there any token, of any stay
which the whole blood makes in one place more then another, nor of any peculiar
virtue of any particle.

The Time. It is perfected in a Moment, because

1. It is forthwith received and expelled, and makes no tarriance. 2. From its
abidance there, the blood would not be perfected but become adust. 3. The flame
on the Candle snuf, lights another Candle in the twinkling of an Eye. 4. The
Arterial Blood does continually run to the extremities of the Body, and
therefore it ought to be continually and suddenly perfected in the Heart.
IV. A fourth use of the Heart is perpetually to move. 1. That it might
preserve the Blood and all parts of the Body from putrefaction. 2. That it may
help the heat and Elaboration of the Blood. 3. That it might kindle and stir up
the vital Light. 4. That it might send fitting nourishment to all parts.

This motion of the Heart is termed PULSUS the PULSE, which is continual What
the Pulse is.
without ceasing, raised by the influent Blood, and the Pulsifick or Pulsative
faculty, there resident.

It consists of a Systole, Diastole ^systole. Its Parts.
Which must be diligently ^ned by all their causes, according as Oc^ Inspection
of living Bodies and reason shall Dictate.

Systole, being the proper and natural motion of the heart, is a contraction
and drawing of the heart into a narrow compass, that the blood may by that
means be forced out of the right Ventricle through the Vena Arterialis, into
the Lungs, and out of the left Ventricle through the Aorta into the whole Body.

Diastole, being an accidental motion, is the widning of the heart, that Blood
may be drawn in through the Vena Cava into the right Ventricle, and through the
Arteria venosa into the left,

Peri-systole is a certain rest and stop going between both motions, when the
Blood is about to enter into or go out of the Ventricles, so small in healthy
persons that it cannot be discerned, being very manifest in such as are at the
point of death, It is only one between the Systole and Diastole, or between the
Diastole and Systole. This is the natural state of the heart.

Besides these motions two others are Observed.

1. A certain Undation or waving toward one side according to the carriage of
the right Ventricle, as if it did gently wreath it self, as we see in an horse
when he is drinking; of which Harvey speaks. 2. A trembling motion of the
Heart, when it is cut in sunder. The former depends upon the Situation of the
right Ventricle: The latter is preternatural to the heart, not arising from
other particles or small Bodies, sent in by the Coronaria, which is then cut in
sunder, but from the remainders of the vital Spirits.

We are taught by the testimony of The Heart takes in Blood in the Diastole.
our Eyes, that in every Diastole blood is plentifully received in, and in
every Systole plentyfully expelled, both into the Vena Arteriosa and the Aorta.
This appears I say to our Eyesight.

1. By Ligatures or bindings in live Anatomies. If the Cava and the Aorta with
the Vessels of the Lungs shall be bound or pressed down with the Finger or any
other Instrument on either side; we shall manifestly perceive that the part of
the Cava which is inserted into the Heart is made empty; that in the Diastole
of the Ear, it is filled, and thereby the Heart; and that the other part of the
Ascendent and Descendent Vein, on this side the Ligature, does swel. In like
manner, the Arteria Venosa being tied near the heart, by the Diastole of the
left Ear, it is made void and empty on this side the Ligature where it looks
toward the heart, but toward the Lungs it arises and swells. The Arterial
Vessels of the heart, do show themselves in a contrary fashion: For the Vena
Arteriosa being tied, it swells toward the heart, because it is filled by the
Systole of the right Ventricle; the Arteria Magna being bound, swells between
the heart and the Ligature, being filled by the Systole of the left Ventricle.

2. Besides the Ligatures, we may gather as much from the vessels being opened
or wounded. The Vena Arteriosa and the Aorta Arteria being opned by a Lancet,
at every Systole or Elevation and Contraction of the heart, it pours forth
plenty of blood, as long as the heart continues strong, for when it languishes,
it intermits some Pulses, before it voids any Blood. Now we observe no such
thing, when the Cava or Arteria Venosa, are opened between the heart and the
Ligature.

3. The point of a living Heart being cut off, or the (...) being cut asunder
through the middle, in every ^ction blood issues out, as long as the (...)
vigorous, which by the Information The IV. TABLE.
The FIGURES Explained.
This TABLE does in some measure express the Systole of the Heart in a
Living-Creature, and the Circulation of the Blood.
FIG. I. AA. The Lungs drawn back. B. The Aorta Artery bound, and swelling
toward the Heart. C. An Orifice made in the swollen part. D. The Vena Arteriosa
tied, in like manner swelling toward the Heart, growing yellow where it looks
toward the Lungs. ee. The Ears on both sides. FF. The Fore-side of the Heart,
being in the Systole somewhat hard, and bent, and with its sides extended, its
point being drawn back to the Basis or broad End. gg. The Coronary Vessels.


FIG. II. Shows the form of the Heart in its Diastole, and the motion of Humors
in its vessels. aa. The Arteria Venosa without binding, being full toward the
Lungs, empty toward the Heart. b. The left Ear, which receives blood from the
Arteria Venosa. C. The Vena Cava tied, empty toward the Heart, full toward the
Liver. d. The right Ear swollen or heaving. E. The hinder-side of the Heart, as
it is in its Diastole, flagging. ff. The hinder part of the Lungs, which are
bunching or Bossie.


FIG. III. and IV. Represents the Inside of the Earlets or little Ears of the
heart. The third Figure Represents the left Earlet; The fourth, shows the Right
aaa. 3. 4. The Plane Membrane of the Earlet. b. 3. The Orifice of Arteria
venosa. 4. The Orifice of Vena Cava. cccc. 3. The three-pointed Valves with
seven Fibers, in 4. the same with five only. ddd. The larger fleshy Pillars.
eeee. The lesser fleshy Pillars, Interwoven one within another with wonderful
artifice. fff. Many-fold Cavities formed between the Pillars.


page 102

of Harvey, I have often seen in the Dissections of Walaeus.

4. The swelling of the Heart and the Flagging thereof, being Palpable and
visible to the external sense, do sufficiently demonstrate, when it is made
strait in the Systole, that of necessity somewhat must be squeezed out as it
were forcibly, and that when it is widened in the Diastole, it must needs be
filled with humors.

5. The Ventricles in the Diastole appear greater, and in the Systole lesser.

6. From the largness of the Vessels of the Heart: the Vena Cava and Arteria
Venosa, do open into the heart with wider mouths, then to suffer only a small
quantity of blood to enter. Also the Arterial vein and the Aorta are larger,
then to send forth nothing, or only Spirits.

The Quantity of Blood which fills The Quantity of blood in the Heart.
the Heart in the Diastole, and which goes out by the Systole at every pulsa^
not be exactly measured* be^ies according to the different state of the heart,
and the temper of Animals, their Age, Sex, course of Diet and Life, etc. It is
apparent to our Eyes in live Anatomies, that much is received and expelled. But
it moves not in and out in so great quantities in persons that are well in
health, when the Heart is more quiet and has the command of it self. The
Ancients supposed that a drop or two was enough at a time, and that the blood
did freely pass and repass the same way. But one drop of blood unaltered, is
not able to fill the heart, nor does provoke it to pulsation, not to speak how
the foresaid experiments do show the plenty that passes to and fro. Now the
Valves do hinder the free passage and repassage of the blood by the same ways,
of which the three pointed ones or Tricuspides so called, do hinder the blood
which enters the heart from passing back the same way, and the Mitre-shap'd
Valves do hinder the blood which goes out of the heart from returning the same
way.

Later Physicians, are divided in their opinions. Some suppose that a drop or
two is either so rarefied as to fill the heart, amongst whom is Des Carts; or
is turned into spirit, as Riolanu's Primrose, Leichner and others suppose, who
measure it by grains, whom we shall answer when we come to the Causes: Others
being Patrons and favorers of the circular motion of the blood, as Harvey,
Walaeus, Conringius, Slegelius, etc. do calculate the quantity, by ounces,
drams and scruples.

To clear up this Question, three things are to be considered, 1. How much
blood is contained in the Diastole of the heart. 2. How much is expelled or
driven out of the heart, in its Systole; whether all that enters the Heart in
its Diastole, is squirted out in the next Systole. 3. How many pulsations the
heart makes in one hour; or how often the heart receives somewhat by its
Diastole, and expels somewhat by its Systole, in the space of an hour.

1. In the heart being in its Diastole, Harvey has found above two ounces of
blood. Also Plempius found near upon two ounces of blood, in the left Ventricle
of the heart of a man that was hanged. Riolanus will hardly allow half an ounce
in the left Ventricle of one that was hanged, and says there was more blood in
the right Ventricle. Hogeland also will have half an ounce or a dram at least,
to enter, at every opening of the Ear.

Now the quantity of all the blood contained in the body, does seldom exceed
twenty four pounds, or come short of fifteen.

2. In the Systole there is expelled either a fourth part, or a fist, or a
sixth, or at least an eight, or all together that is contained in the heart.

Harvey supposes half an ounce in a man, or three drams, or one dram, in a
Sheep and a Dog he says a scruple. And he proves the same by that sudden
effusion of all the blood, if the very least Artery be cut, and because in the
space of one half hour, all the blood may be passed through the heart, he
certainly concludes, that in every Systole of the heart, much blood is
expelled. Conringius approves of his Computation. Walaeus admits of half an
ounce, but he supposes only one scruple, as does Slegelius. Regius has many
times observed half an ounce, sometimes two or three drams, in the heart of a
Dog dissected. Hogeland contents himself with a dram. I being more sparing
suppose half a scruple, in the smallest proportion to the quantity which issues
in such as ^ded. For there goes not out so much i^ free heart, ^s in one that
is bound and forced; (...) there so much expelled in the following Systole, as
was drawn in by the Diastole, some part sticks in the hollow pits of the heart,
much states in the Cavity formed by the production of the three pointed Valves
and Distinct as it were from the Ventricle; finally, the heart cannot be so
straightly contracted in the Systole, as to squeeze out every jot of the Blood
therein contained. Therefore Conringius does rightly suspect that abides there
the space of one or two Pulses, till by little and little it raise it self,
which I understand of the relics and part of the Blood, not of the whole
received by the foregoing Diastole.

3. Primrose numbered in one hour 700 pulsations of the Heart. Riolanus 2000.
Walaeus and Regius 3000, Harvey, 2000. in some 4000, 6000, 8000. Cardan 4000.
Plempius 4450. Slegelius 4876. I have told upon mine own wrist about 4400, But
the number varies according to the Age, Temperament, Diet etc. of every person.
So many Systoles therefore and so many Diastoles there will be in one hour, as
long as the Heart is vigorous, for a languishing heart has more Diastoles then
Systoles.

From these three Praemises I have calculated, how much blood may in an hour be
squirted out of the Heart, by its sundry pulsations.

From 1 scruple 3000 times repeated, arise. 10l. 5 ounces. 1 scruple 4000 13l.
10 oun. 5 dr. 1 scr. 1 scruple 4450 15l. 5 oun. 3 dr. 1 scr. half a scruple
4400 7l. 7 oun. 5 dra^s, 1 scr 1 dram 2000 20 l. 10 ounces. 2 drams 2000 41 l.
8 ounces. half an ounce 2000 83 l. 4 ounces. 1 ounce 2000 166 l. 8 ounces.

Now supposeing all the blood contained in a man's body to be fifteen pounds, if
that be taken away which goes into the Nutriment of the parts, the defect
whereof is suplied by new blood bred in the Liver, it will follow,

1 That more blood passes through the Heart every hour, then can be afforded by
the Concoction of the Liver and the Stomach. 2 That all the Blood in the Body
passes through the Heart, in the space of a quarter of an hour, or half an
hour, or an hour, or an hour and an half, or two hours at the most. For I
cannot agree to Riolanus his conceit, that the blood is circulated only once or
twice in a day, because he builds upon a false supposition of drops, and that
only half the blood is circulated. 3 That the parts to be nourished do not need
so much blood for their nourishment. 4 Because neither the Vessels are broken,
nor the Arterial blood can run back again because of the valves nor is
elsewhere dissipated, of necessity it runs back through the Veins into the
Heart, and the Circulation is performed, of which I shall speak more in my book
of Veins and Arteries.
What the form of the Heart is in its Systole and Diastole, is known by The
form of the Heart in the Systole.
three tokens. 1 By the Anatomy of living Creatures 2 By the Comodity and
Convenience of motion and Rest. 3. By the carriage of the fibers and the
situation of the parts.

In the Systole

1 The Point of the Heart draws up to the basis or broad end, and it becomes
broader because it is busied in expelling the blood, the length (...) being
changed, into breadth, because the basis ^^^ broad and is immovable in respect
of the point, which is tied to no Vessels. But according to the observation of
Walaeus in those living Creatures, whose Aorta Arteria does not proceed from
the Basis, the broad end or basis of the Heart withdraws it self from the
Point. Riolanus will have the Pasis of the Heart always to draw toward the
Cone or Point thereof, because the said Cone is harder then to be drawn or
bended backwards. But else where, he denies that the Basis being strongly
fastened to the vessels, can be drawn toward the Point. And therefore other,
whom he and Slegelius do follow, conceive that it is extended long-waies, that
its walls being contracted, it may expel the Blood. But then the Orifices of
the Vessels being drawn downwards in the lengthening of the Heart, would be
shut, and a contrary motion would happen; besides that living Anatomies do
show, that the heart becomes shorter in its Systole. Nor can it appear longer
but shorter, if either the point draws to the Basis or the Basis to the point.
Both forms serve for expulsion of the blood, for whether you press a bladder
full of water longwaies or broadwaies, you will squeeze out the water as soon
one way as another. 2. The inner walls are on each side, drawn up to themselves
toward the Ribs, because they are contracted and straightened, as we find by
putting our Finger in: But the outer parts being swelled, seem to be made
broader, by reason of the contraction of all the parts, blown up in the
distension. It differs therefore from Galens Systole, which Leichnerus will
have to be drawn likewise into it self, the Longitude of the Heart being
changed into Latitude. For indeed and in truth the Diastole is, when the heart
is made wider, either long-waies or broad-waies, to the intent that it may be
filled, unless the inner parts be straightened. 3. The foreside of the heart is
lift up toward the Breast Bone, especially obout the Basis. For the Broad end
or Basis of the heart, smites the Breast where the Pulse is felt, because that
part is raised, and nearest the Breast Bone; in the Systole the Heart is,
vigorated and mettlesome, not in the Diastole, and then the Arteries are
dilated and filled, whereas the heart is emptied in the Systole, and at the
same time the Pulse is felt, in the Wrist and the Breast, at one and the same
time. But the Pulse is most of all discerned, in the left side of the Breast,
because there is the Orisice of the Arteria Aorta. 4. The whole heart becomes
every where tight and hard. 5. It is more contracted and straiter then within,
and less in bulk, which we judge by our sight and feeling. 6. It appears white,
especially in the more imperfect sort of Animals, by reason of the voidance of
blood in its Systole.
In the Perisystole, when the heart is loose and soft, before the Diastole
follows, and the heart is in its properstate.

1. The point withdraws it self from the Basis, and the Basis from the point in
some persons. 2. The lateral parts internal and external do extend themselves
toward the Ribs. 3. The foreside falls in, the hinder part is depressed,
especially above at the Orifice of the Aorta, according to the accurate
Observation of Walaeus.
The other Perisystole which goes before the Systole, is hardly by any notes
discernable from the Diastole*

In the Diastole, which Backius tells us The shape of the Heart in the Diastole.
begins in the middle way to Dilatation, and ends in the middle way to
contraction,

1. The upper side is lifted up and swollen by blood flowing in on either hand
by the Venal Vessels, the swelling proceeding by little and little to the
point. But it does not then smite the Breast, as Laurentius and Rosellus would
have it, because the Arteries undergo the Systole, and the heart ceases from
expulsion, for which cause it is not Vigorated. 2. It is more flagging and
softer, because it suffers in its reception of blood. 3. The fides remain more
lank and extended, and the Cavities remain wider, and therefore when a man puts
his Finger into a living heart, he feels no constriction. 4. It is red, because
of the thinness of the walls, and the Blood received in, which is Transparent.
5. The Cone departing from the Basis in the Perisystole, renders the heart more
long. that it may be more capacious to receive the blood. That it is drawn back
toward the Cone, as many write, our Eyesight will not allow us to believe,
nor can it or ought it so to be. It cannot because the Fibers are relaxed and
not bent; nor ought it, because it must be enlarged to receive, which you may
in vain expect, the Ventricles being straightened and revelled. Nor do I assent to
Des Carts and Regius men of most subtle wits, that in the Diastole the point
draws near to the Basis, in the Systole it departs therefrom; for they confound
the Perisystole or quiet posture of the heart, in which the heart is soft,
loose and void of blood, before the Diastole is performed, after the Systole is
ended. Moreover, Walaeus believes, that those men were deceived, who in a
wounded living heart, pretend to have seen blood expelled in the Diastole;
because they took that to be the Dilatation, which was indeed and in truth the
contraction. The blood which goes out of the wound, goes out in the Diastole,
not driven by the Pulse, but because the way lies open downwards, it gently
slides out, drop by drop.
The Efficient Cause of the motion The next Efficient Cause of the motion of
the Heart.
of the heart, is either immediate or remote. The Immediate is twofold, the
Blood and the Pulsifick faculty. Pulsifick or Pulsative faculty.

The Blood either remains in the same quantity as it flowed in, or it is
changed in quantity by boiling, working and rarifying.

1. Pure blood and sincere, flowing in through the Vena Cava and Arteria
Venosa, and remaining such, only becoming more perfect and vital, raises the
heart into a Tumor like water in a Bladder or Skinbottle, which being for the
greatest part distended, because the plenty of blood is burdensome, it raises
its self to expel the same, by gathering together its Fibers; and this motion
happens to the heart in this case, as the motions of other Members, viz, the
stomach, Guts, Bladder, Womb, which are extended by the reception of Chylus,
Whey, Wine, Blood, etc. which being expelled they fall again; and like the
Muscles, which are stretched being swollen with Animal Spirits. By this Blood the
Heart is continually moved, as a Mill-wheele is by the perpetual falling down
of the Water, which ceasing the Wheel stands still. There is plenty of blood
enough to distend it, no^ so much furnished from the Liver, as from the (...)
and descendent branches of the Cava, running back from the remotest Veinulets
or smallest branches of the Veins, and it is continually forced along, with
Celerity and Vehemence, according to the Demonstrations and Doctrine of Harvey
and Walaeus. I shall justify what I now say with only one experiment: If the
Vessels which bring into the heart be tied and so stopped, the Hearts motion
ceases, and there remains nothing but a Wavering and a Palpitation; but the
Ligature being loosned, it recovers its motion.

Aristotle makes the Cause to be Blood which is not pure, nor in so great
quantity as to be able of it self to distend the Heart, but boiling and
working, which boiling of the blood many have followed, though explained after
a different manner. Caesar Cremoninus makes the cause to be the resistency of
the Heart, and the swelling thereof by reason of the Ebullition, which
afterward falls, by reason of the inbred heavyness of the heart, as parts puffed
up with wind, do of their own accord settle when the wind is out, and the
heaving of the Earth caused by repletion and blowing up of wind, settles again,
by the peculiar heavyness of the Earth. Caspar Hofman flies to the inaequality
of the boiling blood, which is like boiling water, part whereof ascends and
part descends.

Others do interpret the matter with greater subtilty saying that the blood is
changed into an Airie spirit. Primerose says, that blood just as Milk, Honey,
and very many things besides, does exceeding swel and rise, so as to become
nothing but a kind of Spirit or light Air. Leichnerus says that of one grain
of good blood a great quantity of Cordial Balsam is made: even as by one grain
of Odoriferous Gum cast upon a Cole, an whole Chamber is filled with a
delitious smell.

But many difficulties stand in the way of this Opinion.

1. No boiling is of it self equal, but the Pulse is sometimes equal. 2. The
Pulse should be greater according as the Boiling is greater. But the boiling of
the blood is greatest in burning Fevers, by reason of the extremity of bubbling
heat and the various nature of the Blood, yet is the Pulse in such cases very
small, and in Putrid Fevers it is evermore little in the beginning according to
Galen. 3. In live Anatomies, if you wound the heart or the Arteries near the
heart, pure blood leaps out abundantly, not frothy, nor boiling, nor heaving,
and it continues as it came forth. Nor can it in a moment of time, either boil
in the Heart or Leave boiling, if it did boil. Yea and if in two Vessels you
shall receive the veiny blood out of the Cava near the heart and the Arterial
blood out of the Aorta near its orignal, you shall find no difference: neither
at the first, nor afterward. This Harvey, Walaeus, and as many as have made
trial can witness with me. 4. It cannot all be turned into pure spirit by the
heart, nor ought it so to be. Not the former, because there is not so much heat
in a sound heart, nor can the blood taken out of the Arteries set over a great
fire be all extenuated, as Conringius has observed. Not the latter, because
the parts for whose nourishment it is ordained, are not merely spiritual. 5.
Plunging into cold water would assuage the boiling. But the Arm being hard
bound till it swel and grow red again, and then thrust into most cold Water or
Snow, when you unbind the same you shall perceive how much the Blood returning
to the Heart does cool the same, as Harvey has taught us.
The most subtle Renatus des Crates and Cornelius Hogelandius, and Henricus
Regius who tread in his footsteps, with equal commendation, do after another
manner demonstrate the motion of the Heart to proceed from a Drop or two of
blood rarefied: when the Ventricles of the Heart are not distended with blood,
of necessity two large drops do fall thereinto, one out of the Cava into the
right Ventricle, another out of the venosa Arteria into the left, because those
two Vessels are always full, and their Mouths toward the Heart are open,
which drops because of their aptness to be dilated, and the heat of the Heart,
and the remainders of blood therein burning, presently they are set on fire and
dilated by rarefaction, by which the Valves through which the drops entered are
shut and the Heart is distended. But because of the straitness of the
Ventricles, the blood rarifying more and more cannot there abide, therefore at
the same moment of time, it opens in the right Ventricle the three Valves of
the Vena Arteriosa which look from without inwards, and being agitated by heat,
it breaks out through the said Vena Arteriosa, and by distending the same and
al its branches and driving on the blood, makes them beat the Pulse: but in the
left ventricle it opens the three valves of Arteria magna looking from without
inwards, and through them breaks into the great Artery, which it widens, and
drives the next blood warmed and ex^led by the former pulsations, into the rest
of the Arteries of the whole body, that they might be thereby distended. And so
they conceive the Diastole is caused. And they say the reason of the Systole
is, because the blood being expelled out of the ventricles of the Heart, the
Heart is in part evacuated, and the blood it self in the Arteries cooled,
wherefore of necessity the heart and Arteries must flag and sink, whereupon way
is again made for two drops more to enter, that so the Diastole may be repeated.

I dare not deny a light Rarefaction from a gentle heat, such as we observe in
the opening of a Vein, and I grant that it may be sometimes praeternaturally
augmented; but that a few drops should be rarefied into so great a bulk, as to
cause the motion of the Heart, and that they should be cooled in the Arteries,
many Arguments, besides those before those opposed to the Ebullition of the
blood, do dissuade.

1. Living Dissections, in which neither when the Heart, nor when the Arteries
are wounded, does the blood come out drop by drop or rarefied, but pure, such
as the Ear had forced out. 2. The Heart being cut in pieces or pricked, is seen
to pulse, without any rarefaction of blood, which is but imaginary. 3. In
strong Dogs the point of the Heart being cut off, Walaeus observed, that when
by reason of the Efflux of Blood, it was not half full, it was nevertheless
erected, but not filled by rarefaction: but when it was contracted, that
portion of blood which remained in the Heart, was cast out to the distance of
more then four Feet. It is in vain to call in the outward Coldness of the Air
as an assistant cause: for the blood in the Heart does not grow cold in a
moment, the heat thereof being yet Vigorous, as a boiling pot taken from the
fire and uncovered does not immediately cease to boil but after some time. 4.
Jacobus Back does elegantly devince the same from the structure of the heart
and its Vessels. For the Musculous flesh of the heart being firm and strong,
is unapt to rise and fall by the bare Rarefaction of the blood. A more vehement
action is requisite to move this vast bulk. Also the Arteries of the heart
should have had a greater Orifice, and the rarefied blood being to go forth
would require a larger space, then then was necessary for its entrance. 5. A
Confusion would arise in the motions of the Heart and valves, as he observes.
The Diastole of both of them would be performed in the same time, and so the
valves should be useless, both which is repugnant to experience. Moreover the
valves must, be both shut and open, in the Systole of the Artery. 6. That it
should be cooled in the Arteries, neither reason or occular inspection will
permit. It is drawn hot out of the Arteries, differing little or nothing from
that which is contained either in the Heart, or near it. In the small Arteries
there is indeed no Pulse felt, but that is to be imputed to the smalness of the
vessels and their distance from the Heart which forces the blood. Nor ought it
because it enters into the Capillary Vessels, that it may nourish the parts
with hot Blood, not with such as is cooled and thickened, before it is changed
into the secondary humors. And what use is there of rarefaction, if it
presently settle again.
The Experiments and Reasons which learned men bring to the contrary, from an
Eele and an hunting dog, from the contraction of the members by Cold from
palpitations, from spirit of wine resembling the Pulse, from vehement
protrusion etc. are easily answered if you consider

1 That a certain motion is restored even in Hearts that are dead, by exciteing
their heat as in Muscles. 2 The Fault is in the Vessels contracted by Colds not
in the Blood. when they fall in and flag. 3 Palpitations arise from plenty of
blood, as examples testify, suppression of the Courses, and the cure by
blood-letting. 4 In the Heart there is an even motion, different from that
which raised by spirit of wine or any thing else. 5. The protrusion by pure
blood is more vehement, if the faculty concur, and the Fibers of the Heart be
united. 6. The Heart is in its Perisystole or very near it, when in the point
cut off, no dilatation is observed, if it continue still in the Systole, the
dilatation is not felt, till the Diastole follow.
The pulsifick Faculty implanted in the Heart, must needs be joined with
Whether there be a pulsifick Faculty.
the blood as the cause of its motion, either that it may guide the influx and
egress of blood, and assist the same, which would otherwise proceed disorderly,
as I explain the matter; or that it might of it self produce the motion,
according to the Opinion of the Ancients, which cannot be conserved, if the
perpetual flux of the blood should be stopped. That the Heart stands in need of
such a faculty I prove

1. Because the Pulse would be always unequal, the influx being unequal,
unless directed by some Faculty. 2. When the Heart in Fevers is more
vehemently moved then ordinary, through the urgency of heat, and in dying
persons Nature being at the last pinch, and using all her might, yet is the
motion of the heart weak, as appears by the Pulse, because the inbred Faculty
is either lost or weakened. Contrariwise, though the said Faculty be strong, and
the influx of the blood cease or be hindered, after large bleedings, or by
reason of Obstruction of the Vessels, either in the whole Habit of the Body, or
the passages thereof, or near the Heart, the Motion of the Heart fails. And
therefore both are to be joined together as primary Causes. 3. Any Particles of
the Heart being cut off, do pulse by reason of the relics of this Faculty or
Spirit remaining. 4. The Heart being taken out of the Body, or cut in pieces,
lightly pricked with a pin, does presently pulse, as Walaeus has observed. 5.
It were contrary to the Majesty of the principal Part, to be moved by another
whether it will or no, without any assistance from itself, and so to receive a
violent Impression.
Regius has substituted the influx of Animal Spirits into the fibers of the
Heart instead of Animal Spirits, and Hogeland the little petite Atoms of the
blood moved in the Parenchyma. But we must know in the first place 1. That the
motion of the Heart is Natural which lasts perpetually, yea against our wills,
and when we are asleep, and not Animal. 2. That we exclude not the Spirits,
which are the Souls Servants and Instruments. 3. The small Boddikies or
indivisible Particles of the Blood, have all dropped out in dis^ected Hearts,
because the Vena coronaria was cut asunder. And that if any relics of the
said Bodikies did remain, they could not be excited to motion, either by
pricking alone, or by raising heat, unless a Spirit or Faculty be allowed,
which being extinguished, though the pieces of the Heart be laid in never so
hot a place, they will never pant.

Among the Remote Causes there is

1 The vital Spirit, as well that Remote Causes of the motion of the Heart.
which is implanted in the Heart, as that which comes thither from without,
with beat sufficiently manifest in live dissections, and which warms the whole
Body. And that either not shineing with light, as most will have it, or*
shineing. That a lightfull heat of the Heart is requisite in this case, many
things argue. 1 The motion of the Elements is simple, never circular, and light
moves it self and the humors with a circular motion. 2 The Heart and the Blood
are more quickly moved by light then otherwise they could be, which in the
twinkleing of an eye, dazeles all things, illuminates all things. 3. There is
in all particular parts besides the obscure principles of the Elements, also a
lightfull part propagated from the seed, which ought to be preserved by a like
flame, kindled from the Heart 4 In Hippocrates to dream of pure and brightly
shining stars, signifies Health of Body. 5 No Homor although hot, does pant
and move it self, unless a burning flame, as we see in spirit of wine, a
Candle, and other things. 6 In Glow-wormes their hinderpart only pants and
shines, where their Heart is, of whose light I have discoursed in my Second
Book of the light of Animals Chap 11 and 12. That the vital spirit is really
endued with light, and that there is an inbred light in the Blood and Heart,
which helps forward the circular motion of the blood, I have demonstrated in my
said Treatise Lib. 7. Cap. 5. 23. H^^mont consents that the animated spirit, in
the left Ventricle of the Heart, enlightened by the former light, is the Mover
of the Heart. After Caimus and other ancient Authors, Ent asserts the same
thing touching the flame, raised out of the Seed in the first bladder of the
Heart raised by the heat of the Hen which hatcheth, and first of all shineing
forth, when the Lungs perform their office. yet he errs, that in the external
widening he begs, in the Construction more inwardly he tends to the beginning:
for in the Systole all that illuminats is expelled, and then it is vigorated in
a narrow heart, which is evident in optic tubes and hollow glasses. I ad that
in the Diastole of the left Ventricle, it sets on fire and kindles by the
Systole from the Lungs, the vital flame.

2. The Shape and Conformation of the Heart and Vessels being exceeding well
fitted to receive and expel the blood. Especially the fibers of the Heart, and
the fleshy columns. These make not so much for the Strength of the Heart alone,
as for the motion. For all the fibers being contracted greater and lesser, in
the walls and septum, which according to Harvey are circular, as in an
artificial Net, or Purse squeezed, the contents are expelled. They are
stretched in the Systole, and remitted in the Diastole. By help of the smaller
fibers, wherewith the flesh is interwoven, a languishing constriction is made,
but to a stronger, those greater fleshy ones concur contained in the
Ventricles, which Walaeus often observed in live Bodies dissected.

3 The Pulse of the Heart, the Blood and the extreme parts, the pulse is from
the Heart, which ceasing, the motion also ceases. Now it begins from the vena
cava, and is continued from the Auricula dextra, by and by from the right
ventricle into the Vena arteriosa, or if the point be cut off, externally from
the Arteria venosa into the left Earelet, thence into the left Venricle, out of
which the Pulse is felt by a manifest constriction to go into the Aorta, in
the Anatomy of living Creatures.

They drive, because 1 The Blood is offensive by its Quantity. 2 They are moved
being irritated by any external force. 3 Blood is continually suppeditated. For
Blood thrusts and drives on Blood, so that even after the Heart has bin taken
out of Bodies, Walaeus has seen a quick motion of the blood in the veins. Which
nevertheless did not happen by any proper power, which the Blood has to move it
self, but partly by the driveing of the external parts, which remitt or send
back that which remains after nutrition as bur^ensome and superfluous, partly
by a spontaneous contraction of the Vessels filled with Blood, whose Arteries
in living Bodies being bound toward the Heart, do swell; toward the extreme
parts they are empty: But the Veins too near the smallest branches and the
parts from which they bring back the Blood are puffed up, but are flat where
they look toward the Heart, to which they drive the Blood; in a word, partly
by the contraction of the muscles and their driving, in the fleshy and outward
parts, as Harvey observes.

4 The Attraction of the Heart and Parts, least they be destitute of aliment
profitable and sufficient for them, which we observe according to Nature in
those parts that are nourished; but besides nature in wounds, Ulcers, Tumors,
etc. And this may easily be done, because the blood dispersed in all places, is
immediately fastened to the Heart and Parts which draw it, the Pulse of the
cava and Arteries assisting the same.

Chap. VII. Of the parts of the Heart in special, viz. the Earlets, Cavities,
Septum, Vessels, and Valves.
THe parts of the Heart which are specially to be considered are either
externally seen as the Earlets; or within only, as the Ventricles or two
Cavities, the Septum or partition, and the Vessels with the Valves.

The Earlets or little Ears, were so termed, not from hearing, but because The
Earlets of the Heart why so called?
of some resemblance in their shape. For from a long Basis they end in a blunt
point (howbeit the left is more accumulated) of an obtuse triangle; and they
have a Cavity, that the Ventricles might be produced before the Heart. For that
same pulsing Bladder in an Eg, is the Earlets, What pulses first in an Eg.
because they were necessary in the Child in the Womb, though the Heart were
not so soon necessary, which afterward grows upon the Bladder. Others give
another reason, because the Earlets observe the same proportion in their
pulsing as the Bladder had. But this is very hard to distinguish in the first
Generation. Others take the Bladder for the Heart, whose Expansions or Earlets
appear red, because they are transparent, but the Heart is not seen by reason
of the plenty of Seed, and Pulse intermitted. I suspect that both may lie hid
under the Vesicula or bladderkie, but that the Earlets are presently drawn and
moved, because of their use. Otherwise it would seem inconvenient that the
Appendix should be greater then the whole Body. Nor is the Heart a bare
Parenchyma or affusion of blood. It has Cavities produced doubtless out of the
foresaid Bladderkie.

Now the EARLETS are Processes or Appendixes; and according to Hofman, nothing
but the Substance of the Heart attenuated and widened. Which I know not how
true it is. I should rather say they seem to be the substance of the
neighboring Vessels dilated, although they are made first of Seed out of the
bladder, and are the first motion, and the last in dying.

They are situate at the Basis of the Heart, before the Orifices of the vessels
Their Situation.
venal to which they cleave, and whereby they are mediately joined to the
heart. They are on each ^ide one

For two they are in Number, answerable Number.
to the number of the Hearts Ventricles, the right Earlet being greater, and
the left smaller. And both are large in an Embryo or Child in the Womb: the
former is joined to the Vena cava, with which it seems to be one common body;
the latter to the Vena arteriosa.

The Substance of the Earlets is peculiar, Substance.
such as there is none in any other part; by reason of their singular use.
Howbeit they are thin and soft, for their more easy contraction and nervous
for strengths sake. But the left is more hard, a little more fleshy and
thicker: yet the Heart is not so. Howbeit they answer in a certain proportion
to the Ventricles of the Heart.

Their external Surface, when they Their Surface.
are extended and full, is even and bossie or bunching (but their circumference
unequal) when they are contracted, it is wrinkled; and in the left it is more
wrinkled then in the right, because the inner fabric is more turning and
winding, and has more pits in it, for

The Earlets being inwardly dissected and spread open, do discover unto us 1. a
certain flesh-membranous plain, stretched out to the extremities of the treble
pointed Valves, to which the fibers of the Valves are fastened. 2. About the
whole circumference fleshie Columns grow out, first the great crooked ones,
out of which Spring many lesser ones, with a wonderful and neat contexture,
sometimes single, sometimes wreathed, and infolded either with the great ones, or
with one another. See Tab. IV. of Book II.
3. Between these Columns deep Pits are seen, more in the left, fewer in the
right. In the middle partition of each Earlet. Folius has found out many
little Holes, which I have also seen, through which he conceives the blood is
carried into the left Ventricle, when there is need of less matter. But seeing
they are rarely to be seen, nor do they penetrate into the Ventricles, yea they
are less, I am more apt to think they are Pores common to many, serving for
motion, or the nutrition of the Part.

Botallus has found a Passage sufficiently visible near the right Earlet,
which goes presently right out, into the left Ventricle. This Walaeus explains
to be meant of the oval hole, or that passage by him observed, which goes
obliquely out of one Earlet into the other. Such an one I have often seen in
Oxen and Goats, but it is the coronal Vein, nor does it pierce into the left
Earlet, but descends into the Parenchyma of the heart.

As to their Color: In an Infant in the Womb some months old, they are Their
Color.
red, by reason of the abundance of purple blood, according to the Observation
of Harvey. I have observed the same in the Conceptions of beasts, the Heart
being white and bloodless, and the Earlets The V. TABLE.
The FIGURES Explained.
FIG. I. Shows the Heart cut in sunder athwart. A. The Basis of the Heart. B.
The Point of the Heart. C. The right Earlet. D. The left Earlet. EE. The Shape
of the left Ventricle like an half Moon. FF. The Cavity of the left Ventricle.
GG. The partition between the Ventricles.


FIG. II. Shows the Vena cava with the right Ventricle dissected. A. The
Orifice of the Coronary Vein. B. The Appearance of an Anastomosis, between the
Vena cava and Vena pulmonalis. CCC. The trebble-pointed Valves with the
Fiberkies wherewith they are fastened. D. The Ventricle cut long-waies.


FIG. III. A. The right Ventricle of the Heart opened. BBB. The Sigma-fashion'd
Valves, visible in the Vena arteriosa.


FIG. IIII. AA. The Arteria venosa dissected. B. The Print of an Anastomosis
between the Arteria venosa and Vena cava. CC. The two Mitre-shap'd Valves. D.
The left Ventricle opened.


FIG. V. A. The great Artery cut asunder near the Heart. BBB. The Semilunary
Valves, in the Orifice of the great Artery.


page 108

full of blood and ruddy. In grown persons they are commonly more obscure then
the Heart it self, when they move not, but in their motion they successively
change their color, as the Heart does; for being moved they are pale, because
they expel the blood in their contractions, which does most of all appear in
their extremities; they grow red again in their Diastole, when they have
received blood.

Their Motion is manifest to the sense in live Anatomies, by reason of the
Their Motion.
blood rushing in, and filling them, wherewith they swell in living bodies, and
by their contracting themselves, by means of their fleshy fibers contracted
into themselves, endeavoring to force the blood out into the Ventricles.

There are three parts of their motion; Systole, Diastole, and the rest or
pause which comes between them, which cannot be discerned, save in persons
ready to die, for they are performed so swiftly in sound persons, that they
seem to be confounded, and to be performed all at once, as in the discharge of
a Gun, all seems to be performed in the twinkling of the eye, and in
swallowing, as Harvey informs us.

The Diastole is caused by the blood received from the Vena Cava and Arteria
Venosa. The Systole is performed, when the Earlets being filled, do by
contracting themselves, expel the Blood into the Ventricles.

The Diastole and Systole of both the Earlets, do happen at one and the same
time. When the right Earlet undergoes its Diastole, at the same time the left
Ear undergoes the same; when the latter is contracted in the Systole, the
former also expels. But the Diastole of the Heart and Earlets, happens at
different times, as also both their Systoles. The Systole of the Earlets
happens at the same time with the Diastole of the Ventricles, and contrarily,
and the constriction of the Earlets does always forego the Diastole of the
Ventricles, both in healthy persons and in such as are at the point of death.
But the motion of the former is more lasting then the motion of the latter,
When the left ventricle ceases, the left Earlet still continues pulsing, which
being extinct, the remaining motion is in the right ventricle, and that
ceasing, the right Earlet proceeds panting, being the last that dies, save that
when it ceases, a certain trembling motion does as yet continue in the blood
which flows in, by reason of the driving of the extreme parts.

Their use, is

I. To be Storehouses to the Heart; for they first received the Their use.
Blood and Air, that they may not suddenly rush into the heart, whence the
heart might be hurt, and the Animal faculty suffocated. And hence it is that
they are placed only at the vessels which pour into the heart, and not at the
Arteries which void the blood forth. II. To safeguard the vessels to which they
are joined. III. To be instead of a cooling Fan to the Heart, according to
Hippocrates. IV. According to Walaeus, to be in place of a measure, by which
the vena Cava and Arteriosa do measure the blood into the heart, for seeing all
the blood was not to go out, at every pulse, but the greatest part was to stay
behind to be further perfected, nature joined the Earlets to the heart, as
vessels which should give in so much blood to the Heart, as was naturally to be
cast forth at every pulsation. For which cause he thinks it is, that the right
Earlet is greater then the left, because the right Ventricle is more Capacious
then the left, and like-more is voided therefrom then from the left, viz. sooty
Exhalations and the Nutriment of the Lungs.
The CAVITIES of the Heart or its Ventricles, Chambers, or Caves etc. The
Ventricles of the Heart. Aristotle's Error.
are not three, as Aristotle falsely ascribes to greater Beasts, for three are
not found, no not in a Whale, but only two, as Walaeus and Sylvius have
observed in the dissection of a young Whale. Nor did Galen at Rome find more in
an Elephant. And by a very rare chance three were observed by Aemilius
Parisanus at Venice in the Heart of a certain Coverlid-maker. And Veslingius
twice observed the like. Also Walaeus saw a third Ventricle in the Heart of an
Ox. Caesalpinus observed three in Birds and Fishes, and the right Ventricle
does easily appear to be divided into two near the point, by a certain thin
Partition, yet in truth both come into one. Licetus understands that same third
Ventricle of Aristole, to be the Prominency of the right Ventricle, turned in
beyond the left, so that the left Ventricle commonly so called is Aristotle's
middle Ventricle. Conringius does otherwise excuse Aristotle, viz. that the
right Ventricle in his account is whence the Cava arises, the middle whence the
Aorta springs and the left, whence the Arteria Venosa or left Earlet arises,
which being the least of all, is in small Live-Creatures hardly visible. But so
there should be four Ventricles, the Vena Arteriosa being added, as at first
sight may seem, not three only. There are therefore only two Cavities found in
the Heart of a Live-wight, the right and the left, having their inner surface
uneven and rough, especially the left. The Heart of a certain Polander cut up
by Riolanus, was perfectly solid, having no Ventricles at all.

Many Pits are formed in them by the fleshy Fibers, in the right more, but
narrower, in the left fewer, but deeper, that they might contain the blood
received in, hence in the Constriction of a Living Heart they are lesser, in
the Dilatation wider. The Pits are constituted and fenced by

Those fleshy Particles termed La^ertuli Musclekies, sometimes round, sometimes
Fleshy Pillars in the Ventricles of the Heart.
thin, being five or more in the right, two only visible in the left, but very
thick ends. Veslingus observes that the larger have Pores which pass through
them. The use of them, is according to some, to be Ligaments of the Heart.
Massa counts them little Muscles. Vesalius and Riolanus call them Columnae
carneae, fleshy Pillars, which being contracted, do further the Diastole of the
Heart. Parisanus says by help of them the Heart contracts it self, Walaeus
also has observed in live Dissections, that they assist the Contraction or
Systole of the Heart, especially when it is strong and vehement, at what time
their swelling begins at their Basis, and goes on by little and little unto the
point. Harvey says they draw the Cone or Point of the Heart to the Basis or
broad end thereof, by their obliqu^ fibers. And he is apt to think that heat is
carried through all of them. A. Benedictus and Ent, that they hinder the blood
from going into Clotters, while it is shaken and agitated by them. Ba^^^us,
that they are instead of Ropes and Bands, to hinder least in the Contractions
of the Heart, the Valves being forced beyond their pitch and overshot, should
be unable to retain the Blood. Slegelius will have it that they are contracted,
that they may shut the Orifices of the Vessels of the Cava and Vena Arteriosa
by their Fibrekies. All these Opinions are true and must be joined together, as
will manifestly appear to him that shall accurately consider the times of the
motions of the Heart.

Many things are preternaturally Things preternatural found in the Heart.
found in the ventricles of the Heart. Bauhin has sound bits of far, and our
most expert Countryman Wormius has took out of both the ventricles certain
Caruncles or small particles of Flesh, whiteish within, but of a shining red
color without; which I also have long since found, at Padua and at Hasnia in my
Dissections, both of Men and Beasts, Erastus has found a Phlegmatic
concretion, like yellow marrow, which is found, in the boiled bones of Oxen.
Vesalius two pounds of Glandulous and blackish flesh, Benivenius a Gobbit of
flesh like a Medlar.

Salvius has observed Worms, as also I. D. Horstius at Confluentia; May a
twibladed Snake like a Whip at London, and M, A. Severinus much such another at
Naples. Hollerius found stones (with an Impostume) in a woman troubled with the
stone; and Wierus stones as big as Pease.

Bones are more rarely found in the Hearts of Men. Yet Gemma did once A Bone in
the Heart.
find some, and Riolanus twice, in the dead body of president Nicolas being
eighty years of Age, at the beginning of the Aorta, and in the Queen Mother of
Lewis the thirteen King of France, being after her decease opened to be
Imbalmed. Johannes Trullus sound one in the Heart of Pope Urban the eighth of a
triangular Figure representing the letter T. Simon Pauli my Renowned
Praedecessor in the Anatomical Theater, took a bone as hard as a stone of a
Figure of the Pythagoraean letter Y, out of the Heart of a Man of Hasnia forty
years of Age, the bigness of a Wallnut, and the shape not unlike the Heart. I
conceive they are all bred through the dryness and slow motion of the Humors in
aged and sick Persons. Yet nature makes use of this defect to provoke and
quicken the motion of the blood, when it passes slowly, as waters flow more
easily when a piece of wood is cast in, or that all the blood may not clotter,
as our Women and Butchers stir their blood about with a stick, when they intend
thereof to make Puddings, that it may not go into Clotters.

The right Ventricle receives blood out of the Vena cava, which Vein it
receives into The right Ventricle.
it self: And therefore it has not so thick a flesh or wall, as the left has,
that their might be an even poise, seeing it contains more matter, and bears a
greater weight then the left. Nor is there so perfect a Concoction made in this
Ventricle, as in the left in which there is more heat.

It is not exactly round but semicircular, resembling the Moon increasing, nor
does it reach to the End of the Point, but it seems to be as it were an
Appendix to the left Ventricle, which when the left is taken away, seems still
as it were to represent an whole Heart.

Yet is it deeper and larger then the left, by reason of the store of blood,
which it was to contain, both to nourish the Lungs, and to make vital Spirits
in the left Ventricle. For

Its Use is

1. To receive blood out of the vena cava, to nourish the Lungs, the said blood
being poured into the Lungs through the Vena arteriosa. Therefore Fishes which
have no Lungs, and draw no Air in at their Mouths, are without this Ventricle,
having no more then one. This right Ventricle therefore, does concoct and
attenuate the Blood, for the Nourishment of the Lungs. II. To send the thinner
part of the Blood through the Septum or partition, into the left Ventricle, to
make vital Spirits; and the thicker part through the Lungs, both to nourish
them, and that it may return to the left ventricle, for the Nutriment of the
whole Body. III. Further to perfect and prepare the blood which runs back as
superfluous after the extreme parts are nourished, and the crude blood which is
bred in the Liver.
The left Ventricle is narrower, but more noble; having a round Cavity, The
left Ventricle.
and which reaches unto the point of the Heart. Its flesh or wall is three
times as thick as that of the right ventricle. Also it is harder, that the
vital Spirits may not exhale, and that the motion of the blood might be
stronger, being to be forced into the farthest parts of the body.

Its Use is to make vital Spirit and Arterial blood, of a twofold matter, I. Of
blood prepared in the right ventricle, and passed through the Septum and the
Lungs. II. Of Air drawn in by the Mouth and Nostrils, prepared in the Lungs,
and transmitted through the Arteria venosa with the blood into the left
ventricle of the Heart, to kindle and ventilate the vital flame, yea and to
nourish the same. The latter fishes stand in need of and Leucophlegmatick
persons, the former such as are seated in a narrow or infected place, or are
under extreme heat, for fear of suffocation and extinction of the flame in the
Heart.

The Use therefore of both ventricles is in a manner the same, viz. to generate
Arterial blood, and to perfect the venal, and to receive the same running back
from all parts of the body through the veins, and to expel the perfect blood
through the Arteries into the farthest parts of the body, that they may be
thereby nourished. This is proved by the Conformations of the ventricles, which
in part are like one to the other, in the right two vessels, a Vein and an
Artery carrying out, and bringing back and as many in the left. In the former
are two sorts of Valves the trebble pointed, and Mitre-shap'd, and the like in
the latter. The left expels and receives as much as the right, save that it is
consumed in nourishing the Lungs and the Heart. Yet their different
Constitution and Magnitude, argues some difference. Whence 1. There is a
different Coction in the one and other, as has been demonstrated above. 2. The
right works for the Lungs the left for the whole Body. 3. The right sends sooty
Exhalations and blood to the Lungs; the left receives from the Lungs Blood
Impraegnated with Air.

There is a Septum or Partition between the two Ventricles, which is thick like
the other Wall of the left ventricle (which Columbus once observed to be
Gristley) hollow on the left side, on the right bunching, full of hollownesses
and holes. which some suppose to be the third ventricle of Aristotle; which
hollownesses or Caves are more large toward the right side, but their utmost
ends toward the left side are hardly discernable. Helmont describes them to be
triangular, whose Cone ending in the left ventricle, is easily stopped, but the
Basis of the said triangle in the right ventricle, is never stopped save in
Death. But I have seen them Circular so that they could easily admit a Pease,
but* obtuse toward the left Hand.

That they are open is the opinion Manifest Pores in the Septum of the Heart.
of the Ancients and of many Anatomists which follow them. Gassendus* saw
Payanus at Ajax show the Septum of the Heart to have through-fares, by reason
of sundry windings and crooked Con^-holes as it were, and that by lightly
putting in his Probe, without any violence, which he wreathed gently and turned
it upwards and downwards and to the sides. And although by a Probe breaking the
tender flesh of the Septum, we may easily make a way, yet we may not doubt of
the Eyewitness of Gassendus nor of the Dexterity of Payanus; seeing I also of
late found the partion of a Sows Heart, in many places obliquely perforated
with manifest great Pores, which were open of themselves without the use of a
Probe, so as to admit a large Pease; but when I put in my Probe, it brought me
to the left ventricle, where a thin Membrane as it were an Anastomosis was
placed, hindering any regress. Riolanus also has seen it bored through toward
the point, where it is most thin. Walaeus in the Partition of an Oxes Heart,
did sometimes find a Cavity in the upper part according to the length of the
Heart, open into the left ventricle about the point of the Heart, the length
and breadth of a Man's Forefinger, which he conceives to be the third Ventricle
mentioned by Aristotle.

Yet are they not always open in dead bodies, because in living bodies they
are kept open, by the continual agitation of the Heart, which ceasing, they are
not so visible to the Eyesight, even as we see no manifest passages, when the
sweat breaks out plentifully through the Skin, nor when the seed breaks out of
the Kernels and Spermatick vessels, into the Urinary passage: nor the Pores by
which the Empyema or out of the blood out of the vena Arteriosa peirces into
the Arteria venosa, through the substance of the Lungs, or the blood in the
Liver, out of the branches of Porta into the Cava. Caelsus is in the right,
where he says, that nothing is more foolish, then to think that look what and
how it is in a living Man, so it must needs be in one that is dying, Yea that
is dead. Whence many (as Columbus, Spigelius, Hofman, Harvey, etc.) have denied
that any thing passes through this Septum or Partition. But it is no wonder
that they make a doubt of it: For,

I. They are so crooked and winding, that a Probe cannot easily pass through
them. Howbeit these Pores become more conspicuous, in the Heart of an Ox long
boiled, as Bauhinus, Riolanus, my self with others can witness. And you are to
observe, in opposition to Hofman and Plempius that deny it. that in the boiling
a moderation must be used, and that the Fibers in living Bodies do never stick
so close together, but that they leave Pores, as the Nerves do show, finally,
that the quickest-sighted Anatomists can see no Membrane in the boiled Hearts
of Oxen. II. In dead Bodies all passages fall in and shrink together. III. That
an extreme straitness was requisite in the End; because the thinnest part of
the Blood, is strained as it were in that part: And in the mean time, because
these holes are not in vain, therefore,

The Use of the Septum or Partition of the Heart, is, that the thinner Whether
the Blood pass through the partition of the Heart?
blood may pass there-through into the lef ventricle, for the Generation of
vital blood and spirit, which is afterward distributed through the Arteries
into the whole Body, for to preserve and stir up the life and natural heat. But
the thicker and greater part of the blood, by a natural and ordinary way, and
not a violent only, is communicated to the Arteria venosa, through the vena
Arteriosa, by mediation of the Lungs, that in the left ventricle it may be
mingled with that which sweats through the Septum. The thicker part is ordained
to nourish the Lungs, and that it may return back to the left ventricle it is
tempered with Air. The thinner part passing through the Septum, nourishes the
same in its passage, because the external Coronary vessels do only creep
through, and in that long and dangerous journey through the Lungs, it would
vanish away and come to nothing. By this way only such as dive deep into the
Sea, and those that are hanged for a small while, do live a while and come to
themselves, after the motion of their Lungs is ceased.

The Motion of the Septum or Partition does help forward this passage, which
that it is moved according to the motion of the Ventricles, I have these signs
and tokens; Because 1. It is furnished with Circular Fibers, as well as the
Walls, in a boiled Heart, such in a manner as are in the Sphincter Muscle, as
Harvey testifies, which seeing them move the Ventricles, they must as well move
the Septum. 2. A certain Palpitation is felt, if you put in your Finger into a
living Heart, according to the observation of Walaeus. 3. In Creatures ready to
die, when the motion of the left ventricle ceases, the Septum follows the
motion of the right Ventricle, as the same Harvey observes: and if the right
Ventricle be wounded, Riolanus tells us, that the motion remains in the Septum
in his Observations. Yet the same Riolanus in another place being wiser, denies
that it is moveable, unless toward the Basis where it is soft gives way a
little, and that so it ought to be that the passage may be maintained, because
when the Ventricles are dilated above the through-far'd Septum, and straightened
again like Bellows, the little holes would be shut up. But there is no fear.
For in the Systole, when the point is drawn back to the Basis, the Pores are
opened in the Septum moved upwards, that the blood may at once pass both the
Septum and the Lungs. Contrariwise in the Diastole, because the Heart is
distended long ways, the pores are drawn back with the Septum, and are shut
up, until the Heart be filled.

As to the Heart-vessels there are found Vessels of the Heart.
four remarkable ones going out of the Heart which Hippocrates calls the
Fountanes of Humane Nature. Into the right Ventricle are inserted two Veins;
the Vena Cava and Vena Arteriosa; into the left, as many Arteries; Arteria
Venosa and Arteria Magna. Before all which are placed within eleven Valves or
little doors, made of the Tunicles of their Vessels widened and stretched out.
The Veins which bring in to the Heart, viz. the Cava and Arteria venosa, have
trebble-pointed valves, looking from without inwards; the Arteries which carry
away, viz. the Aorta and the Vena Arteriosa, have Sigmashap'd or
Mitre-fashion'd valves open inwards, shut outward. The former admit blood into
the Heart; being open they suffer the blood to flow out, being shut they hinder
it from returning the same way. The trebble-pointed valves do not only wink,
but they are close shut by the blood distending the Heart, and by the
constriction of the Heart which straitens the vessels. The Sigmoides or
Sigma-shap'd are shut by the Relaxation and falling in of the Heart in the
Diastole, whereby the Fibers being stretched out long-waies, they are drawn
downwards with the Walls and so shut, like the Chains in Draw-bridges.

The Trebble-pointed or Tricuspides, are opened by the impulse of new blood
through the Cava, and Arteria venosa, and the Diastole of the Heart, whereby
the Fibers being drawn downwards, they are opened; But the Mitre-shap'd valves,
are opened in the Systole by the Constriction of the Heart, and the blood
urgeing its way out. Also they may be praeternaturally shut, by the blood
expelled and standing seated in the full vessels, to which, endeavoring to
run back, they make resistance by reason of their conformation, which Artifice
of Nature, we see every where imitated by the Floodgates and Locks made upon
Rivers. But that according to nature they are not shut by the returning of the
expulsed blood, as some conceive Walaeus proves, Because 1. Our senses observe
that the blood is carried from the Heart, not to the Heart by the Arteries. 2.
In a rare and languishing Pulse, the Artery does not rise or swel last in the
upper part toward the Heart, but it swells there first. 3. If an Artery be tied
two fingers from the Heart, and it be so opened betwixt the Ligature and the
valves, that the blood may freely pass forth, yet the valves will diverse times
straightly be shut, and the Heart is orderly moved.

TABLE VI.
The Explication of the FIGURES.
This first FIGURE shows the right side of the Heart entire, and withal the
Earlet cut off, and the Vessels which go out of the Heart, but especially the
Anastomosis by which Folius will have the Blood to flow from the right into the
left Ventricle.
FIG. I. AAA. The Heart in its proper posture, over the Surface whereof, the
Vena Coronaria is disseminated. BB. The right Earlet of the Heart, partly
dissected, partly entire. C. A certain white and circular place between the
Earlets, in which on one side, under a certain little skin like a valve, an
Anastomosis is found, that is a wreathed winding hole, through which Folius
will have the Blood to pass, into the left Ventricle. D. The vena cava
dissected, as far as to the Situation of the Liver. E. The Vena Aorta which
goes to the Throat and Arms dissected. F. The Arteria magna ascending. G. The
same descending near the Backbone. H. An Arterial Pipe, which joines the great
Artery with the Arteria venosa. I. The Arteria venesa yssuing out of the right
Ventricle of the Heart. K. The Vena Arteriosa, Nurse of the Lungs, yssueing out
of the left Ventricle. aaaa. The Vena coronaria radicated and diffused through
the surface of the Heart. b. The beginning of this Vena coronaria, in the
Earlet near the Vena cava. cccc. A certain portion of the Earlet dissected. dd.
The other part remaining yet entire. ee. A Probe thrust into the Anastomosis.
f. A little skin like a Valve placed at the mouth of the Anastomosis. gggg. The
Branches of vena cava, spread up and down and rooted in the Liver. hhh.
Ascendent branches of the Arteria Magna.


FIG. II. This other Figure shows the left Ventricle of the Heart, as also the
Earlet dissected, together with the going out of the Probe, demonstrated in the
first Figure. AA. The Heart cut open through the whole left Ventricle. BBB. An
exact Representation of the said Ventricle. C. The Egress of the Probe, through
the Anastomosis, from the right into the left Earlet. D. A Valve placed at the
mouth of the great Artery. EE. The left Earlet of the Heart dissected, being
less then the right. FF. The Arteria Venosa going out of the right Ventricle of
the Heart. GG. The Arteria Magna ascending. H. The said Artery descending near
the Backbone. I. The Arterial Pipe knitting the Vena Arteriosa to the Magna
Arteria. K. The Trunk of the great Artery, ascending to the Arms and Throat.
aa. A certain part of Vena Coronaria dispersed through the surface of the
Heart, the smallest part thereof is visible. bb. The Arteria Coronaria
dissected. cccc. The left Earlet cut open as far as to the Vena Arteriosa.
dddd. Certain Nervous particles, in the very Ventricle of the Heart, accounted
Nerves by Aristotle. ee. The Probe thrust in through the Anastomosis. fff.
Certain small holes, through which Folius will have the blood to pass, while the
Anastomosis grows together, and there is need of less matter. g. A Valve on the
side also set before the Anastomosis.


page 112



And therefore many of the Ancients and later writers are deceived, who
imagined that the blood did freely pass out of the Heart, and back again
thereto. And that the valves do not naturally close and open, appears by a
Tumor in the Arteries between the Ligature and the Heart, and the emptying of
the veins near the Heart.

The first vessel is the VENA CAVA inserted into the right Ventricle, with a
very large and Vena Cava.
gaping Orifice, three times greater then the Orifice of the Aorta, and
therefore it seems rather to arise from the heart, then from the Liver,
especially seeing it sticks so firmly to the right Ventricle, that it cannot be
separated therefrom.

Whether it has any motion is hard to determine. Aristotle and Galen seem to
have been of that opinion; but the Interpreters expound those places to mean an
obscure motion. But Walaeus has discovered a manifest motion therein, from the
Jugulum as far as to the Liver, but most evident near the heart: and that
therefore even in that place the Vena Cava is furnished with fleshy Fibers,
whereof it is destitute in other places. Also Ent has observed that the vena
Cava of a dead Beast, being with a man's Finger lightly touched in the Belly
near the Thighs of the Beast, did express a trembling motion.

Its Use is, to bring in Blood from the Liver, and the whole body, by its
ascending and descending Trunks.

A Membranous Circle grows to the Orifice thereof, to strengthen the heart:
Which is presently split into three strong Membranous.

VALVES, termed Janitrices, Gatewarders, looking from without inwards, that the
blood may indeed enter; but not return back into the Cava.

They are termed TRICUSPIDES, trebble-pointed, by the Greeks Trichlochines, Its
treble pointed Valves.
because they are like the Triangular heads of Darts, when they are shut, and
fall close one to another.

They grow, as also the rest of the valves do, to many shreds (in the Cava
commonly each one to five remarkable Threads, intertwisted with many little
ones) whereby they are joined to that fleshy particle, before explained; which
some call the Ligaments of the heart, others as Aristotle perhaps, the Nerves
of the heart.

The VENA ARTERIALIS or vas Arteriosum, the Arterial veins or Arterial vessel.
The Vena Arteriosa, why called a Vein?
Others call it Arteria Pulmonaris, the Lungs Artery, because it is in truth an
Artery, both in Substance and Use.

It Was called a Vein first by Herophilus and afterward by most other
Anatomists, before the Circulation of the blood was found out, from its Office,
because it sends blood to nourish the Lungs.

It Is termed an Artery, I. By reason of its Substance, which consists not of a
Why called an Artery?
single Coat, as a vein does, but of a double one. II. Because in a Child in
the Womb it performs the Office of an Artery, and Pulses as shall be said in
the next Chapter, As also in a grown person, because it carries Nutritive blood
to the Lungs, which is partly wrought in the right ventricle.

This vessel passes out of the heart with a smaller Orifice, and yet greater
Its Original and Progress.
then the Lungs stand in need of: For Columbus and Arantius observe, that two
Fingers have been thrust thereinto; and it ought to be the greater, because it
receives blood from the continual pulsation of the right side of the heart.
Moreover, resting upon the Arteria Magna and inclining to the left side, it
goes to the right and left parts of the Lungs with a double branch, a right and
a left: Which afterward spend themselves into sundry branches in the Lungs.

It Use is, to receive blood out of the Its Use.
right Ventricle, and to carry it to the Lungs for their nourishment, and
according to the observations of latter Authors, to pass over the rest of the
blood through the Arteria venosa into the left Ventricle of the Heart, and to
hinder the blood from sliding back again into the heart.

Three VALVES are placed therein, The Sigma-fashioned Valves.
arising from the Coat of the vein it self, looking from without inwards, and
resembling an half Circle, or the letter Sigma, as it was anciently figured,
and did resemble the Latin letter C.

The ARTERIA VENOSA, which others The Arteria venosa, why an Artery?
call Vena Pulmonaria, is the third Vessel of the heart, which is seen in the
left Ventricle.

It is termed an Artery because of its Office: For I. It Pulses in a grown
person, because it is united to the left Ventricle, but it moves not by a
proper motion of its own, because it is neither an Artery, nor does it carry
pure Arterial blood. II. It is implanted into the left Ventricle.

It Is called a VEIN, 1. Because of its Why a vein.
Substance. 2. Because in a Child in the Womb, it performs the office of a
vein. And it is produced as it were from the Cava, to which it is joined, by
way of Anastomosis. Yea and in a grown person, it carries blood also to the
heart, as does the Cava.

It Arises with a round and great Orifice (greater then that of the Arteria
Magna) divided into two parts presently after its egress, just in a manner as
if it arose with a twofold mouth; and it is disseminated into the right and
left part of the Lungs.

The Use.

I. In its Dilatation to draw Air to Whether Air enters into the Heart?
the heart, not bare and simple Air, but mixed with the blood which returns
from the Lungs, for the Generation of vital spirits and Arterial blood, and to
nourish and kindle up the vital flame. For the Arteria venosa being opened in
living Anatomies, does pour blood and not pure air into the heart, which for
the most part we observe thicker then ordinary in the Carcasses of Men and
Beasts, because the motion of the left ventricle ceasing, the blood received in
this vein, cannot be driven or drawn to the heart. And when the Arteria venosa
is cut or opened, there appears no air, because the air is not pure and simple,
being mixed throughout with blood. And when the Lungs of a living or dead
Creature are by Art blown up, not a jot of air is perceived to come thence to
the heart, because the Carriage of blood is wanting, and the natural Drawer and
Driver is also wanting. But that the air such as it is, does come into the
heart, their Examples do testify, who have been stifled with the sums of
Quicksilver. Coals, Lime, etc. And otherwise the Lungs and Lung-pipes were
made in vain.

II. In the Contraction of the Heart to thrust out a portion of vital blood,
into the Lungs, together with sooty exhalations; which is an old opinion. But
that in the Systole of the heart, blood or sooty steams should be carried this
way. 1. The Valves hinder, which will not suffer any thing to return. 2. The
Arteria venosa being tied, does swel toward the Lungs, and is lank and emptied
near the heart. 3. Being opened it pours forth blood on this side the band, but
beyond it being opened it voids neither blood nor sooty exhalations. 4. The
sooty steams of the right Ventricle, do evaporate through the vena Arteriosa,
turn into water in the Pericardium or Heart-bag, breed the hairs in the
Armpits, and exale into the whole habit of the Body, through the Aorta. 5. The
air which goes into the heart, and the sooty steams which go out with the
blood, should be carried the same way, in contrary motions, which is a thing
unusal in the natural course observed in the body. For though ever and anon
Excrements are driven from and Nutriment is drawn to the same part, yet the way
is different, especially where the afflux is continual, as in the Arteria
venosa from the Lungs; or at least they are performed at different times.
Therefore.

III. In the contraction of the heart, it drives blood which is superfluous
after the nourishment of the Lungs, or that which runs back, out of the vena
Arteriosa, into the left Ventricle of the heart.

Two VALVES only are placed at the Orifice of this vessel, which look from The
Mitreshap'd Valves.
without inwards (bred out of the Nervous circle which grows out of the
substance of the heart) which being joined together do resemble a Bishops
Mitre, They are greater then the Valves of the Cava, have longer threads (and
each has seven large ones, besides little ones annexed to them, which from a
broad Basis do commonly end into a sharp point) and for strengths sake very
many fleshy Explantations. Therefore two were sufficient to shut the Orifice
close, because they are greater then others, the Fibers longer and larger, the
Columns or Pillars stronger, and the Orifice it self is more Ovall-shap'd,
then that of the rest.

The ARTERIA MAGNA or great Artery so called, because it is the root of all
others, The Arteria Magna.
is another vessel of the left Ventricle, from whence it proceeds and arises.

At the Orifice hereof, is placed instead of a Prop, not in Men, but in certain
Beasts, as Hearts, Oxen, Horses, etc. a certain hard substance, which is
sometimes Gristly, sometimes Boney, according to the greatness and Age of the
Beasts. In man the most noble and strongest, Harvey saw a portion of this
Artery turned into a round bone, near the Heart, whence he concludes that the
Diastole of the Arteries, is caused by the blood alone, not by any Pulsifick
faculty, derived through the Membranes. Also Johannes Schroderus writes that
the meeting together of the Arteries in the Basis of the Heart, was in an heart
degenerated into a bone.

The Use thereof is, to communicate the Vital spirit, with the Nutritive
Arterial Its Use.
blood, received from the heart, unto all parts of the Body, for Nutrition and
life; which that it may not pass back again into the heart, Three Valves are
placed (like those in the vena Arteriosa exactly shut) looking from Its Valves.
without inwards, which are termed Sigmiodes or Sigma-shap'd Valves.

Chap. VIII. How the Vessels are united in the Heart of a Child in the Womb.
THe Vessels in the heart are otherwise In the Child in the Womb.
disposed when the Child is in the Womb, then they are after it is born; which
though Galen knew and made mention thereof; yet the greatest part of Anatomists
have either neglected the same, or have delivered falsities thereabout, by
saying that the Unions of the vessels were some of them only made by a Chanel,
others only by way of Anastomosis.

But the Conjunctions or UNIONS The Union of the Vessels of the Heart.
of the VESSELS of the Heart in a Child in the Womb, are twofold:

One is made by an Anastomosis, another by a Chanel.

By Anastomosis an Union is made of the Vena Cava and the Arteria Venosa, under
the right Earlet, near the Coronaria, before the Cava does absolutely open it
self into the right Ventricle. The hole is large and of an Oval Figure.

Now Nature contrived this Union by way of Anastomosis, 1. By reason of
Vicinity. 2. Because of the likeness of substances.

Before this hole in the Cavity of Arteria venosa is placed a Pendulous, thin,
hard, little Membrane, larger then the hole.

Its Use is, I. According to the Doctrine Its various Uses.
of Galen and his Clients, that the blood may be carried through this hole, out
of the Cava into the Arteria venosa (not into the right ventricle, for vital
spirit is not yet bred, nor do the Lungs need blood so attenuated) to nourish
the Lungs; because they could not otherwise be nourished in a Child in the
Womb, because in it the heart has no motion whereby the blood might be forced
out of the right ventricle into the vena Arteriosa: And therefore this Arteria
venosa, is a vein in the Child in the Womb. But that it serves the turn of the
Heart, and not only to nourish the Lungs, diverse things Evince observed by the
favorers of the Circular Motion. For 1. The Heart is moved even in an imperfect
Child, after the third month, as Eggs and Embryo's do testify. But before the
third month only a little Bladder of the Earlet pants, as in Insects before
the Heart is perfectly hollowed. But this motion were in vain, if the Heart
should not receive or expel any thing. 2. The blood by the Anastomosis is
immediately poured into the left Ear, and is necessarily thence conveyed by
the Systole of the Heart, into the left ventricle. 3. All the blood is carried
through these Unions, doubtless not for the sake of the Lungs alone, which
might be nourished after the same manner as in grown persons, although void of
motion, the veins in part gaping. 4. The Child in the Womb is nourished with
Arterial blood, which can come from no place but the Heart, as shall be
demonstrated hereafter. Therefore,

II. The true use is, that it might conveigh part of the blood in a Child in
the Womb, out of the Cava of the Liver, into the left ventricle of the Heart,
which cannot go thither the ordinary way, the Lungs neither dilating themselves
nor Respireing. In which passage the right ventricle also draws somewhat to it
self*

And that the blood may not slide back into the Cava, a little Membrane The use
of the little Membrane.
there placed hinders, when it falls in and settles.

A little while after the Birth this It Is shut after the Birth.
Hole grows together and is dried up, so that a man would think the place had
never been perforated, and that by reason of the plenty of blood in a grown
person, forced out of the Lungs now opened and enlarged directly to the left
Earlet, which suffers not a small quantity of blood to flow out of the
Anastomosis, whereupon being shut it grows together. Howbeit in grown persons,
it remains for a season open. Pinaeus observed it thrice, Riolanus once, and my
self more then once. Botallus most frequently in Calves, Sows. Dogs of a large
size, and therefore he would have it to be always and naturally open, that
blood might pass this way out of the right to the left Ventricle. Caecilius
Folius treading in his Footsteps, thinks it is open in all Men, to the same
end, as in a Child in the Womb, but contrary to experience. For it is then only
open, when Nature has shut up other passages, as I saw at Padua in that old
Man, whose Arteria venosa was stopped with Phlegm. In Waterfowl and other
Animals that live in the Water, as Ducks, Castors, Swans, Bitturns, etc. it is
always open, because they live now and then in the Water, without the Use of
their Lungs. And I have sometimes observed in dead bodies the little Membrane
winking, and receiving the Probe without any violence, but I cannot allow that
it is so always. And that light opening would be unprofitable. For the passage
of so much blood.

Another Union is by a longish Channel, By a Chanel or Pipe.
viz. that of the vena Arterialis, and the Arteria Magna, because they are
distant one from another.

This Union is without the Heart (the other within the same) two Fingers from
the Basis, in grown persons four, for the Channel does not begin from the stock
of the Arteria Magna. It goes obliquely to the Arteriosa (therefore no valve is
annexed to it because the crookedness was able to hinder the Egress) [or rather
because the blood is forced thither, from the right ventricle of the Heart
through the vena Arteriosa but it is not in like manner driven back out of the
left, The VII. TABLE.
The Explication of the FIGURES.
In this TABLE are presented the Unions of the Vessels of the Heart in a Child
in the Womb, also the Heart incompast with the Lungs, and the small twigs of the
Wesand or Windpipe called Aspera Arteria.
FIG. I. A. The Heart. B. The Ascendent Trunk of Vena Cava. C. The Descendent
Trunk thereof. D. The Ascendent Trunk of Arteria Magna. e. The Axillary Artery.
f. The Descendent Trunk of the great Artery. g. The Earlet of the right
Ventricle. K. An Anastomosis as it appears in Vena Cava.


FIG. II. A. The little Heart of a Child in the Womb. B. The Trunk of the
Arteria Magna, springing out of the Heart. C. A Portion of the said Artery
going down-wards. D. The Vena Arteriosa drawn out of the Heart. ee. The Channel
between the Vena Arteriosa and Arteria Magna. ff. The Rise of the Arteries
termed Carotides or drousie Arteries. g. The beginning of the Subclavian right
Artery.


FIG. III. A. The right Nerve of the sixth Pare going toward the Lungs. B. The
same Nerve on the left side. C. The middle Branch between the two Nerves. D.
The Offspring thereof, which is carried to the Pericardium. EE. The two
greater Branches of Aspera Arteria, which on the back-sides are Membranous. FF.
The hinder part of the Lungs. G. The proper Membrane of the Lungs. HH. A
remaining portion of the Pericardium or Heartbag. I. The Heart in its proper
place.


FIG. IV. A. The Aspera Arteria or Wesand, cut off under the Larynx. B. Its
right Branch, divided first into two. C. The left Branch of the Arteria Aspera,
distributed in like manner into greater and lesser Branches. ddd. The
Extremities of the Branches,


page 115



by the Arteria venosa] where it is divided into two, as if it had three parts;
the least whereof notwithstanding is the Channel.

In Infants of three or four years old, it is still to be seen, but without any
throughpassage: Which is dried up.
in grown persons it is by little and little attenuated and dried, being
distitute of all Nutriment, because no Humors pass any longer through the same,
until through absence of Life and Nourishment, it Putrifies and Consumes quite
away.

The use thereof is, I. According to the Mind of Galen, that the vital Spirit
being received Its use.
from the Navil-Arteries into the Arteria Magna, may from hence be carried,
through that Channel into the vena Arteriosa and so straight into the Lungs, to
maintain Life. But, 1. It serves not the Lungs alone. 2. The Navil-Arteries do
bring out of the Arteria Magna, but carry nothing thereinto. 3. The Pipe is
greater then to serve only to carry Spirits. 4. The Lungs of a Child in the
Womb being red, are not nourished only with Spirits.

II. According to Petrejus and Hofmannus, to bring Arterial blood to nourish
the Lungs. Who had said well, if they had not omitted the good of the whole
body.

III. According to late Writers, that the blood which slides out of the upper
Trunk of Cava into the right ventricle may pass through this Pipe, the greatest
part thereof indeed to the Aorta, that so with the rest it may nourish and
enliven the whole body of the Embryo; but the least portion of all goes up to
the Lungs by the ordinary way.

Both the ventricles in the Child perform one and the same thing, and part the
blood which is to be carried, because the more perfect blood is supplied by the
Mother, and therefore the Walls are a like thick. And the two ventricles in the
Child which does not respire, perform the same, which in imperfect Animals void
of Lungs, is accomplished by one ventricle.

This Pipe therefore assists the Anastomosis in transporting the blood of the
Heart, because either of the ways would otherwise be two narrow. For I have
observed in a Girl newborn, by me publicly dissected, that the Pipe was
wanting, because the Anastomosis was larger then ordinary: and there is reason
for it. The Lungs must be nourished and the whole body must be nourished. Which
can never be effected, unless the Arterial Blood be distributed out of the
Aorta. It comes not from the Mother through the Iliack Arteries, because they
are not joined to the Arteries of the Womb, besides their motion is contrary,
as the binding of the Navil Arteries does show. For the Navil-Arteries derived
from the Child, do swel toward the Heart thereof, and toward the Placenta or
Womb-cake they are empty; for the Arterial blood in the Child* after it is
nourished, runs back through the Iliack veins to the Placenta, as a part of the
Child which must be nourished, out of which it passes again into the
Navil-veins, and is mixed with that other blood which comes out of the veins of
the Womb, and runs jointly back again to the Liver and Heart of the Child, that
the Circulation may be repeated. Now it flows conveniently out of this vena
Arteriosa through the Pipe or Channel into the Aorta, by reason of its
Situation downwards, and its crooked insertion into the Aorta. Therefore seeing
the Arterial blood, is not carried fr^^ the Mother, upwards to the Heart,
neither can the Lungs be nourished thereby.

Chap. IX. Touching the Lungs.
THe Lungs called i^ Latin Pulmones The Reason of their Name.
in Greek Pneumoe^'s or Pleumones, have their name from Respiration or drawing
in and blowing out the Air: because they are given to Animals living in their
Air and breathing, but not to fishes which have neither Neck nor Voice.

They are seated in the Cavity of the Their Situation.
Breast or Chest, which they fill, when they are distended.

They are divided into the right and Division.
left part by means of the Mediastinum: that one part being hurt, the other may
Into Lobes.
yet perform the Office. Each of these parts is divided into two Lobes, Laps or
Scollups, about the fourth Vertebra of the Chest, of which the upper is shorter
then the lower; seldom is one part divided into three Lobes, as in Brutes;
because a man goes bolt upright, Brutes looking downwards* nor by reason of the
shortness of the Chest, could any thing lie between the Heart and the Liver,
except the Midrif. Yet oftentimes Piccolhomineus, Riolanus and my self, have
after Hippocrates and Russus Ephesius observed three. Now the Lungs embrace the
Heart with their Scollups as with certain Fingers.

Their shape resembles that of an Their Figure.
Ox-hoofe. On the outside toward the Cavity of the Chest, the Lungs are Bossie
or bunching out, on the inside they are hollow, where they embrace the Heart.

Their Color in the Child is red like Their Color.
that of the Liver: by reason of the nourishment is receives from its Mother;
in grown persons it is yellowish Pale; sometime Ash-color'd: in such as have died
of a long sickness blackish. In some persons healthy enough. I have seen them
Party colored, like Marble. In that part where it is knit unto the Chest by
Fibers, it is red, as in a Child in the Womb.

It Is Knit in the Forepart to the Brestbone Connection.
by the Mediastinum, behind to the Vertebra's; sometimes the Lungs at the sides
grow to the Pleura by certain Fibrous bands, whence arises a lasting shortness
of Breath. Now this Connection does frequently deceive Physicians, nor knowing
or discerning Penetrating wounds of the Chest. Nicolas Massa conceives this
Connection profitable to the Heart, least it should be oppressed with the bulk
of the Lungs, or the facility or breathing should be hindered, and Riolanus
says he evermore found this a^^esion. I have chiefly observed it about the
lower Ribs. near the Diaphragma, least they should press and bear upon it.
Others say the Lungs are bound to Fibers, that in the wounds of the Chest, they
might follow the motion of the Chest, though with a weaker motion. Hippocrates
in his second Book de Morbis calls it the Lungs slipped A certain Cause of long
lasting Short-windedness.
down to the side; and this comes to pass either from ones Birth, or after a
Pleurisy, or by reason of Tenacious and clammy phlegm interposing it self; o^
from some external cause, as negligent Curing of a wounded or suppurated Chest.
Also the Lungs cleave to the Heart, by the Vena arteriosa and the Arteria
venosa.

The Substance in a Child in the Womb is compact and thick; so that The
Substance.
being cast into Water it sinks, which the Lungs of grown persons will not do.
But after the Birth, because it begins to be moved with the Heart, by heat and
motion the Heart becomes light and soft, lax, rare and spungy; so that the
Lungs will be easily raised and fall again, and easily receive the Air: Which
may be seen by the use of a Pare of bellows in dead bodies. Helmont has seen
the Lungs hard and stoney, in an Asthmatical person, and Salmuth observes that
little stones have been there generated in shortness of Breath. Also touching
stones we have the Testimony of Galen, Trallianus, Aegineta.

The Lungs are compassed with a thin light Membrane, furnished with many
Membrane.
Pores which Pores are sufficiently visible, when the Lungs are blown up with a
pair of bellows, and Job. Walaeus has observed the said Pores in live
Anatomies, as big as a large Pease. This way the Sanies or Corrupt matter of
the Chest may Penetrate and come away by Coughing. This Membrane is produced
from the encompassing Pleura. For when the Vessels enter into the Lungs, they
divest themselves of their Coat, which grows out of the Pleura, which does
afterward invest the Lungs.

The Vessels. The Substance of the Lungs is interwoven with three sorts of The
Vessels.
Vessels, which make not a little also for strength. Two proceed from the
Heart, of which before: The Vena Arterialis and Arteria Venalis.

The third is proper, viz. The Trachea or Aspera arteria so called, of which in
the following Chapter.

If these Vessels be fretted asunder as in persons Phcisical, or having the
Consumption of the Lungs, many times plenty of blood is cast forth, or some
Cartilaginous substance; yea and the Vessels themselves of the Lungs entire,
which I have seen, and Tulpius has two examples. And oftentimes persons in a
Consumption die suddenly, because the greater Vessels being fretted asunder,
the Heart is strangled with blood issuing there from.

These Vessels of the Lungs are great, not so much because they wanted Why the
Lungs ^at^ so great Vessels?
much blood, for their substance is very small, setting aside the Vessels, nor
needed they so much blood as is sufficient to nourish the whole body; but they
are great, because the greatest portion of the blood is carried this way out of
the right Ventricle of the Heart into the left by those wide passages, for the
more subtle blood can find its way through the obscure Pores of the Septum.
This passage is proved.

1. By the greatness of the vessels. For the vena arteriosa and the arteria
venosa are most large. And because the former is a vessel which carries out of
the Heart, it is furnished with the Mitre-fashion'd valves, which hinder the
blood from passing out of the Lungs the same way; and the latter bringing blood
out of the Lungs into the Heart, has the treble-pointed valves, hindering the
blood from returning. 2. Great Quantity of Blood is continually sent by the
Pulse of the Heart, through the vena arteriosa and thence through the arteria
venosa unto the left ventricle, which is further confirmed by Ocular
Inspection. 3. By Ligatures in living Anatomies. For the Vena arteriosa swells
toward the Sea Tab. 4. of Book 2.
Heart; but near the Lungs it is empty; the Arteria venosa contrariwise, swells
toward the Lungs, but is empty toward the Heart. 4. The left Ventricle of the
Heart being wounded, or the Arteria aorta, great plenty of blood will issue, as
long as life remains, till all the blood in the body be run out. And from what
other place can it come, seeing so much is not contained in the Heart, but out
of the Lungs through the Arteria venosa, which had drawn the Blood out of the
Vena arteriosa by the Anastomoses. 5. In the Arteria venosa as well of a living
as a dead Body, so much Blood is found, that it has often hindered me in my
public Dissections. 6. By the similitude of the Vessels one with another. The
Vena arteriosa carrying out of the Heart into the Lungs, is just like the Aorta
in substance, largeness, neighborhood, and Valves. The Arteria venosa does in
like manner resemble the Vena cava by straitness of Connection, substance of a
Vein, Earlets and treble-pointed Valves.
This Circulation through the Lungs How Circulation is caused in the Lungs.
is furthered, 1. By the widening of the Lungs when Air i^ drawn in, which
being every where filled, the vessels are distended, as when they cease, the
motion of the Blood is either retarded, or quite ceases. 2. By the Situation of
the vessels of the Lungs. The Vena arteriosa is Disseminated in the hinder or
Unequal part of the Lungs, because it is strongly moved by the Pulse of the
Heart, the Arteria venosa does chiefly possess the foremore and hollow part,
that the Blood might more readily slide into the Heart. In the Midst of which
the Branches of the Windpipe are seated, that in the blowing out of the Air,
they might receive sooty Exhalations from the Vena arteriosa, and in drawing
the Air in, they might communicate the same to the Arteria venosa. 3. The
anastomoses, by which the vessels are joined together, both the branches which
join mouth to mouth (though in dead bodies they cannot be discerned by the
Eyesight) and the Pores of the Parenchyma which is light and Porous.

It is to be noted for the answering Contrary objections answered.
the objections made against this Circulation.

1. That the Lungs are not oppressed or burdened so long as they being sound,
the Blood perpetually glides through by Peice-meal.

2. That the blood does not drop out through the Pipes of the Wesand, because
partly they draw in only Air or sooty Exhalations, and in no wise Blood of a
thicker nature then they, unless they be preternaturally fretted in persons
that have the Consumption, partly because nature never ceases to drive found
humors through the passages ordained for them, and retains what is necessary,
which would otherwise go out at the passages of the Body being opened.

3. Although the Lungs of Dead bodies are whitish, yet the vessels do
manifestly transpire through the external Coat. The Parenchyma it self is
frequently full, in persons strangled with blood, in others it is found emptied,
because in the Pangs of Death it is forcibly excluded.

4. In burning Fevers, both the Lungs are hot, and thereupon the voice is
Hoarse and dry, and they are oppressed, as appeared in the Epidemical Fever
which raged up and down this year, by which many were strangled.

5. It is no good judging of the healthy state of the Body, from the
preternatural state thereof.

Very small Nervulets from the sixth Pare are spread only through the Membrane
Why Ulcers of the Lungs are without pain.
thereof (which if it be inflamed, a pain will be felt, and communicated to the
side it self and to the Back) not through the substance of the Lungs, least by
Reason of their continual motion they should be pained. Hence the Ulcers of the
Lungs are without pain. Howbeit Riolanus allots very many Nerves to the
substance of the Lungs also, drawn from the Implication and Contexture of the
Stomach Nerves. I also have seen many spread abroad within the Lungs, proceeding
from the sixth Pare, and always in a manner accompanying the Bronchia or
Lung-pipes, derived from the hinder part, and only a little twig conveig'd to
the Membrane from the forepart.

What the Action of the Lungs is, Authors Question. That they never move at all
is Helmonts Paradox, but serve only as a seive, that the Air may pass pure into
the Chest, and that the Muscles of the Belly alone do suffice for Respiration.
But that they are indeed and in truth Whence the motion of the Lungs proceeds.
moved, the cutting up of live bodies shows, and Wounds of the Chest, that they
move long and strongly. Moreover that they may be moved, any one may try with a
pair of Bellows. Finally, They ought to be moved, for otherwise both the Heart
would ^e suffocated, and the motion of the blood in the Lungs, would be
hindered. The Muscles of the Belly do indeed concur, but secondarily, because
they are not joined to the Heart, and when they are moved Respiration may be
stopped, Yea, and when they are cut off in a living Anatomy, the Lungs are
moved nevertheless. But whether they are moved by their own proper force, or by
some other thing, is a further Question. Averrhoes who is followed among the
late writers by John Daniel Horstius, conceives the Lungs are moved by their
own proper force, not following the motion of the Chest, for otherwise says he
we must grant that a violent motion may be perpetual.

But we are to hold, that though the Lungs are the Vessel of Respiration, yet
they are so not by doing, but by suffering. For they have no motive force of
their own, as Averrhoes will have it (because at our pleasure we can stop our
breathing, or quicken or retard the same) nor do they receive the principle of
their motion from the Heart, or from the blood raising them, as Aristole
conceives, and his followers, For 1. The efflux of the blood Aristotle's Error.
out of the Heart, is made by the orninary motion, but the Respiration is
voluntary. 2. The Cause of the Pulse and Respiration would be one and the same,
and they would be performed at one and the same time. But thirty Pulses answer
one Respiration. 3. While we draw in our Breath strongly, and hold the air
drawn in for a season, the swelling of the Lungs should compel us to let our
breath go, because it lifts up the Chest, according to their opinion. 4. The
Blood of the Heart does not abide in the Lungs by an unequal retention, so as
to distend them, but it is forthwith expelled according to nature. 5. When it
tarries longest in diseased Lungs, it makes shortness of Breath or difficulty
in breathing, but no Tumor. 6. In a strong Apoplexy, the motion of the Lungs
ceases, the Pulse being safe and the Heart unhurt.

Nor are the Lungs raised up, by the The Opinion of Falcoburgius.
air forced in, which when the Chest is lifted up, because it has no other
space whither it can go to, it is carried through the Aspera arteria or Wesand
into the Lungs, as Falcoburgius and Des Carts conceive, and Hogelandius,
Regius, and Prataeus who follow him: For 1. The air may easily be condensed, as
may be proved by a thousand experiments, as by Cupping-glasses,
Weather-glasses, Whips, Trumpets, Winds and infinite things beside; and
therefore it may be most straightly compacted about the Chest, and compressed
within it self, as well by the internal subtle nature of the air and dispersed
by Atoms, easily recollected one within another, as by the external impulse of
the Chest, whereby it may more easily be condensed, then driven into another
place. 2, By the motion of the Chest or such a like body, we do not see the
lightest thing that is, Agitated. By an hole in a Wall all Chinks and Doors
being closely stopped, our Nostrils being stopped, we may with our Mouths draw
air out of the next Chamber, to which it is not credible that the air moved by
the Chest, can reach with a strong motion; and though air may penetrate into
the Chamber, through some chinks and Rifts, yet is it not in so great quantity,
as to stretch the Chest so much as it ought to be stretched, in free
Respiration. The same experiment may be made in a Glass or Silver vessel
applied close to ones Mouth. 4. While I have held my Breath, I have observed my
Belly to be moved above twenty times the while. But whether is the Air then
driven? Must it not needs be, because all places are full of bodies, that the
air next the Belly is compressed and condensed? See more of this subject in my
Vindiciae Anatomicae, and in a peculiar Discourse.

Therefore the Lungs do only follow the motion of the Chest to avoid Vacuum:
And therefore only they receive the air drawn in, because the Chest by widening
it self, fills the Lungs with air.

Now that the Motion of the Lungs The motion of the Lungs is proved to arise
from the Chest.
arises from the Chest experience shows. For 1. If air enter into the Chest,
being peirced through with a Wound, the Lungs remain immovable, because they
cannot follow the widening of the Chest, the air insinuating it self through
the wound, into the empty space. But the Chest being sound, the Lungs follow
the widening thereof, to avoid Vacuum; as in Pipes, Water is drawn upwards, and
Quittor, Bullets, Darts and other hard things are drawn out of body through the
avoidance of Vacuum. 2. If the Midriff of a live Creature be peirced through
with a light wound, Respiration is stopped, the Chest falling in.

But somewhat there is which hinders An Observation in live Anatomies.
many worthy men from assenting to this cause of the Lungs motion, because
after the Chest is perfectly opened, the Lungs are oftentimes moved along time,
with a vehement motion. But according to the Observation of Johannes Walaeus,
Franciscus Sylvius, and Franciscus Vander Shagen, that is not the motion of
Constriction and Dilatation, which is the natural motion of the Lungs; but it
is the motion of an whole Lobe upwards and downwards, which motion happens,
because the Lungs are fastened to the Mediastinum, the Mediastinum to the
Midriff, and the Lungs are also seated near the Midriff: whence it happens,
while the Creature continues yet strong, that either the Lungs with the
Mediastinum are drawn, or by the Midriff driven, the Diaphragma or Midriff, not
yet falling down nor loosing its motion, which I observe in contradiction to
the most learned Son of Horstius. Now that this motion proceeds not from the
inbred force of the Lungs, does hence appear, in that always when the Chest is
depressed, the Lungs are lifted up, being forced by the Midriff, which at that
time rises a good height into the Chest; and contrariwise the Chest being
lifted up, the Lungs are depressed. And because the Lungs are the Instrument of
Respiration, Hence it has these following,

Uses,

I. According to Plato, Galen, and Abensinae, to be a soft Pillow and Cushion
Its Use.
under the Heart. II. According to others who follow Columbus* to prepare and
wellnigh generate the vital Spirits (which are afterward to receive their
perfection in the heart) whiles in them the blood is as it were Circulated,
first boiling with the heat of the Heart, and afterward settled by the
coldness of the air. III. It has more proper uses when it is Dilated, and when
it is contracted.
When the Lungs are Dilated, they receive in the Air like a pair of Bellows
through the Branches of the Windpipe.

I. To prepare Air for the Heart, for the convenient nourishment of the All
kind of Air is not a friend to man's Spirit.
lightful Spirit. For every quality of the Air is not a friend to our Spirit,
as is seen in such, as are killed with the smoke of Charcole, and the steam of
newly whited Walls.

Helmont conceives that the Air is united to the spirit of the Heart, and that
it receives a fermentation in the Heart, which accompanying the same they do
both dispose the Blood to a total transpiration of it self, which is the reason
why in the extremity of cold weather and at Sea, we eat more heartily, because
the thinness of the Air disposes the blood to insensible transpiration. Backius
is somewhat of the same mind, who conceives that by the moist and thin body of
the Air, the blood is made apt to run, so as that it may be diffused into the
smallest passages of the Body. Others ascribe both these effects to the
abundance of Serosity in the Blood. Therefore Hippocrates says that water is
hungry; and we see that such as are given to drink, are inclined to sweat much,
as also Scorbutic persons.

II. To fan and cool the heat. For we see that the heat of our Bodies stands in
Our heat does want a Cooler.
need of somewhat that is cold, without which it is extinguished, as is apparent
in such as stay long in very hot Baths, as the flame of a Candle in a close
place, wanting Air goes out. And Why Fishes need no Lungs.
therefore the Lungs are called the Fan and cooler of the Heart, and the Fishes
in the Water and other Animals that have but on Ventricle in their Hearts, are
without Lungs, because they do not want such a cooling. As also Infants in the
The Lungs of Children in the Womb move not.
Womb, being fanned by their Mother, and the wide Anastomoses, have their Lungs
without motion. Hence it is that having seen only the Lungs, you may judge how
hot any Creature is; for Nature makes the Lungs the larger, by how much the
Heart is hotter. Therefore the Lungs are not absolutely necessary to Life, but
serve to accommodate the Heart. For instead of Lungs a boy of Amsterdam four
years old, had a little Bladder full of a Membranous wind, as Nicolas Fontanus a
Physician of that City does testify, which being guarded with very small
Veins, had its original from the Aspera Arteria or Wesand it self, whose office
it is to cool the Heart. Who nevertheless died of a Consumption, because happily,
his Heart was not furnished with a sufficient quantity of Air.

When the Lungs are contracted in Expiration, they do again afford us a twofold
use. I. Sooty Excrements do pass away through the same, being carried out of
the Heart with the blood, through the Vena Arteriosa. II. To make an articulate
voice in Men, and an inarticulate sound in Beasts, by affording Air to frame
the voice. And therefore Creatures that have no Lungs, are mute, according to
Aristotle.

Chap. X. Of the Lung-Pipe or Wesand.
THe Pipe or Channel of the Lungs, The Wesand.
is by the Ancients called Arteria, because it contains Air: Galen and others
Why called Trachea or Aspera Arteria?
call it Trachea arteria or the rough Artery, because of its unevenness, and to
difference it from the smooth Arteries. Lactantius terms it Spiritualis
Fistula, the Spirit or Air-Pipe, because the Air is breathed in and out
thereby, Now it is a Pipe or Channel entering into the lower part of the Lungs,
with many branches, which are by Hippocrates termed Syringae and Aortae, whose
head is termed Larynx, of which in the following Chapter; the rest of its Body
is termed Bronchus, because it is moistened with drink. For that some part of
the drink does pass even into the Windpipe and Whether any part of our drink
does pass into the Wesand and Lungs.
Lungs, Hippocrates does rightly prove by an Hog new killed, in whose Lungs
matter is found just so colored as the the drink was, which he drunk
immediately before he was killed. And that some drink may be carried through
the Windpipe, may be proved out of Julius Jasolinus an Anatomist of Naples,
who seeking in the body of a Noble person, the Cause of his death, found his
Pericardium or Heart-bag, so distended with Humor, that it being squeezed, some
of the said Humor came out at his mouth.

As to its Situation: in Mankind it Its Situation in Mankind.
rests upon the Gullet, for it goes down from the mouth straight along to the
Lungs: and at the fourth Vertebra of the Chest, it is divided into two
branches, each of which goes into the Lungs of its respective side: they are
again subdivided into two other branches, and these again into others till at
last they end into very small twigs in the surface of the Lungs. But the
branches thereof which are greater then the rest of the Vessels of the Lungs,
entering into the Lungs, do go through the middle thereof, between the Vena
Arteriosa which is hindermore, and the Arteria venosa which is before it: with
which it is joined by obscure Anastomoses, or conjunctions of Mouths, hardly
discernable by our Eyesight.

In Bruits it is Situate much after the same In a Swan.
manner. Yet we must note that it is different in a Swan, and after a manner
altogether singular. For being longer, it insinuates it self by a crooked
winding into a case of the Breast Bone, and soon after from the bottom of the
case, it returns upwards, and having mounted the Channel-bones, it bends it
self toward the Chest. But before it reaches the Lungs, it is propped by a
certain boney Pipe, broad above, narrow beneath, which in a Duck is round, then
it is divided into two branches, which swel in the middle, but grow smaller
where they tend to the Lungs, till they enter into them.

It Is clothed with a double Membrane: one External, another Internal. Its
Membranes.


The External is a thin one arising from the Pleura, and sticks close to the
intermediate Lingaments of the Gristles, and Ushers along the recurrent Nerves.

The Internal being furnished with straight Fibers is thicker and more solid
(most of all in the Larynx, least of all in the branches of the Lungs,
indifferently in the middle Pipe) to the end it may not easily be hurt by
Acrimonious drinks, or other Liquors voided by Coughing, or falling down from
the Head.

It arises from the Coat which compasses the Palate, and therefore is continued
with the Mouth.

It is smeared with a fat Humor to hinder its being dried up by motions, loud
cryings, drawing in of hot Air, going out of sharp sooty Exhalations, etc. And
by the Superaboundance The Voice hurt.
or Deficiency hereof the Voice is hurt. For in the former contracted by
Distillations, it becomes Hoarse; in the latter through burning Fevers, etc.
It becomes squea^ing. If it overabound, we are quite Dumb and unable to speak,
and the moisture being consumed our Speech returns again: which might happen in
that same dumb Son of Craesus mentioned by Herodotus, and in Aegle a Samian
wrastler, mentioned by Valerius Maximus, and Zacharias Orphanus a Fool, of whom
Nicolas Fontanus tells a story in his Observations.

This Coat is of exquisite sense, that it may raise it self to expel what ever
is trouble-some thereunto.

Between these two Membranes is the proper substance of the Trachea arteria,
which is partly of the nature of a Gristle, and partly of a Ligament.

The VIII. TABLE.
The FIGURES Explained.
This TABLE represents the Aspera Arteria, the Oesophagus, the recurrent Nerves
about the Arteria Magna and the Arteria Axillaris, behind
FIG I AA. The Muscle contracting the Oesophagus. BBB. The Oesophagus or
Gullet. CCC. The Aspera arteria or Wesand placed under the Throat. D. The
Membrane between the Wesand and the Gullet. EEEE. The Nerves of the sixth
Conjugation. FF. Nerves of the Tongue inserted behind. GG. The right recurrent
Nerve, turned back to the Artery of the Shoulder. HH. The left recurrent Nerve
about the Descendent Trunk of the Arteria Magna. II. A Nerve tending to the
left Orifice of the Stomach and to the Diaphragma. KK. A Nerve descending to
the Diaphragma. L. The jugular Arteries on each side one. M. The left humeral
Artery. N. The right Humeral or Shoulder Artery. OO. The Arteria Magna or great
Artery. PP. The Trunks of the Arteries descending to the Lungs.


FIG. II. This Figure shows the upper part of the Gullet with its Muscles. AA.
The Musculi Cephalo-pharyngaei s^ called. BB. The Musculi Spheno-pharvngaei.
CC. The Musculi S^^lopharyngaei. DD. The S^luncterd awn from the Gullet. E. The
In^de of the Gullet. F. The Descending part of the Gullet.


page 120



I. For the Voices sake: because that which makes a sound must be solid. Why
the Wefand is in part Gristly?
II. Otherwise by reason of its softness it would always fall together, and
would not easily be opened in Respiration.
It was to be partly Ligamental, and not wholly of a Gristly substance: for if
it Why in part Ligamental.
should consist of one only Gristle, or many circular ones,

I. It would be evermore open, and not sometimes widen and then fall together.
II. It would bear hard upon the Gullet, to which nevertheless, it ought to give
way, especially in the swallowing down of solid meats, that the Throat or
Gullet might be sufficiently widned. And so the Gristles help to frame the
Voice; and the Membranous Ligaments for Respiration.
The Gristles are many, round like Rings, but not exactly. For on their
backside, where they touch the Gullet, a fourth part of a circle is wanting, in
place whereof there is a Membranous substance.

From their shape they are termed Sigma-shap'd resembling the old Greek letter
C, til they are fixed in the Lungs, for then changing their Fignre, they change
their name. For the Wind-Pipes do there consist of perfect Gristles, Round,
four square, or Triangular, but where they are joined to the rest of the
Vessels of the Lungs they become Membranous.

These Gristles are joined together by Ligaments going between, which in Men
are more fleshy, in brute Beasts more Membranous; and in men the show like
little Muscles. And the Gristles do every where keep an equal di^n from
another, and the higher, the ^ey ^hey are.

It has Vessels ^^mmon wi^^ others. Veins from the the external Jugulars;
Arteries from the Carotides; Nerves, from the Recurrent Nerves of the sixth
pair.

Its Use is, I. In drawing in the Air, that by it as a Pipe, the Air may be
received The Use of the Wesand.
from the Lungs, as from a pair of Bellows. Hence comes that same Wheezing in
such as have the Tissick, the Pipes of the Wesand being stopped, so that the
Air coming and going and not finding a free passage makes that Hissing noise.

II. In blowing the Air out, I. That through it Fuliginous Excrements may be
voided at the Mouth and Nostrils. For which intent the mouths of the Vena
arteriosa do so artificially join with the Mouths of the Aspera arteria, that
there is passage only for sooty steams but not for blood, unless it come away
by force and violent Coughing. In the next place, that it may help to form the
voice, which it does by expiration likewise, though some Juglers frame their
Voice by inspiration only or drawing in of their Breath. And therefore
Hippocrates calls it the breathing and vocal Organ. A wonder therefore it is
that some Men can live long in the Water like Fishes, by Nature and not by Art,
if Cardan is to be believed in the second Book de Subtilitate, when he makes
relation of one Calanus a Diver in Sicily, who would lie three or four hours
under the Water. And how in the West Indies everywhere, such as dive for
Pearloysters, will lie an hour together under the Water. If they did this by
some art, it were not so wonderful. So the Egyptians are most perfect diverse,
and exercise Robberies that way. For as appears by the Description of Nicolus
Christophori Radzivilij his journey to Jerusalem, they lie lurking under the
Waters, and not being content to steal on land, what ever they can catch they
draw into the water, and carry it away: and frequently they catch a man as he
lies upon a Ships deck draw him under the water and kill and strip him of his
clothes: So that such as sail are said many times to watch all night armed,
And in the same parts, abundance of fisher men will dive under the water and
catch fish with their hands, and they will come up with a fish in cach Hand and
a third in their mouths. These persons doubtless, do either live only by
Transpiration, as such do that have fits of the Apoplexy and the Mother; or
they have Anastomoses open in their Hearts, by means of which as in the Womb,
the blood is freely moved* without any motion of the Lungs.

Chap. XI. Of the Larynx.
THe Head or beginning of this The Larynx.
Lung-Pipe, is termed LARYNX, which is the voices Organ.

It Is Situate in the Neck, and that in Its Situation.
the middle thereof, for it is

In Number one, that there may be only Number.
one voice.

Its Figure is round and almost circular; Shape.
because it was to be hollow for the voices sake; but on the foreside it is
more Extuberant, on the hinder side depressed, that it may give way to the
Gullet, especially in the time of swallowing, in which while the Oesophagus is
depressed, the Larynx runs back upwards, and so assists the swallowing, both by
giving way and bearing down that which is to be swallowed.

Its Magnitude varies according to Magnitude.
the Ages of persons. For in younger persons the Larynx is strait which How the
voice becomes shril, or big?
makes their voice shril: in grown persons it is wider, and therefore their voice
is bigger. To which also the length or shortness of the Larynx does contribute:
and if plenty of Air or Spirit be drawn and expelled, the Voice becomes big; if
little, it becomes small.

And therefore according to Galen there are two causes of a great Voice: What
the Causes are of a great Voice?
the Largeness of the Aspera arteria, and the strong blowing out of the air,
and Hippocrates says both these are caused by great hear. And therefore How
the Voice comes to change.
in his Book of the Seed, he teaches us that the stones do contribute to the
formation of the Voice, Hence Males when they grow of ripe years change their
voice. A Guelded Horse looses his neighing. A Capon leaves his crowing or crows
after a weaker fashion, different from his former crowing.

The Parts of the Larynx or about the Larynx: are Gristles, Muscles, Membranes,
Vessels and Kernels.

Its Muscles do first of all offer themselves, which move the Gristles, which
Its Muscles.
the Larynx is possessed of, that it may be moved with a voluntary motion, seeing
we utter our Speech, as we please our selves.

Now the Muscles of a Man's Larynx, are but thirteen, four common and nine
proper: though some make twenty, other eighteen, others fourteen.

The IX. TABLE.
The FIGURES Explained.
This TABLE Represents the Larynx, with its Muscles and Gristles.
FIG. I. A. The Gristle called Shyroides or Scutiformis, Sheild-fashioned. BBBB.
A Pair of common Muscles called Sternothyroides. CC. Another pair of common
Muscles called Hyothyroides.


FIG. II. A. The Epiglottis lying yet hid under the Scutiformis. B. The
Scutiformis or Sheild-fashion'd Gristle. CC. Its Process. DD. Two Muscles
proper to the Larynx, of which that on the left Hand is removed from its place,
that the Ring-fashion ^ Gristle E. may be seen. F. The Extuberancy of the
Ring-fashon'd Gristle, or Cartilago Annularis. G. A portion of the Aspera
Arteria.


FIG. III. AAA. The Bone Hyoides with three Extuberancies. B. The Epiglottis.
CC. The Sheild-fashion'd Gristle, hollow on the Backside. DD. The two Muscles
called Cucullares, or the hinder pair of the Cricoarythenoides so called. E. The
hinder and Membranous part of the Aspera Arteria. FF. The Muscles called
Arytenoides, by some the ninth pair.


FIG. IV. A. The Concave part of Cartilago Scutiformis dilated. B. The third
pair of proper Muscles called Cricoarythenoides laterale. C. The first pair of
proper Muscles. D. The fourth pair called Thyroarythenoides internum. EE.
Insertion of the recurrent Nerve. FF. The hinder and Membranous part of the
Aspera Arteria.


FIG. V. AA. The Cartilago Thyroides or Scutiformis. BB. The inferior processes
thereof. C. Its Concave Part.


FIG. VI. A. The inside of the Cartilago Annularis. B. Its lower and fore-side.
C. Its hinder and upper-side.


FIG. VII. A. B. The Cartilago Arythenoides according to its hinder side
joined, as yet to the Annularis. C. The broader and Back-part of the Annularis.


FIG. VIII. IX. Shows the Gristles which constitute the Arythenoides, Separate
from the Annularis.

page 122.



The Common are those which are implanted into the Larynx, and yet The Common.
do not arise therefrom.

The Proper have both their original The Proper.
and termination in the Larynx.

The first pair of the common, called by the Ancient Sternothyroides, being
lower more, arises within from the Breast Bone, its original being broad and
fleshy, and going a long by the Wezand, it is inserted beneath into the sides
of the Sheild-fashion'd Gristle.

Its Use is to straiten the Chink of the Larynx, by drawing down the
Scutiformis.

The second Pair called Hyothyroides, being the uppermore, arises from the
lower side of the Os hyoides, being broad and fleshy, and touches the
Scutiformis, being implanted into the Basis of the said Scutiformis.

Its Use is to widen the Chink, by lifting up the Scutiformis,

Spigelius and Vestingius assign contrary offices to these: for they will have
the first pair to widen and the second to straiten the Chink of the Larynx.

Others do here add a third pair, which Columbus nevertheless and Casserius do
account but one Muscle.

But this is rather Musculus Deglutitorius, or a Swallowing muscle, because
arising from the Scutiformis it is wrapped about the Gullet.

It is judged, by contracting the sides of the Scutiformis, to straiten the
Chink: but it is no Servant to the Larynx unless by accident.

The first proper Pair, arises on the foreside, from the lowest part of the The
Proper.
Scutiformis, as the Insertion of the Nerves does show, and ends at the
Annularis. And therefore this pair may be termed Thyrocricoides; but not, as
most Anatomists will have it, Cricothyroides. Some will have it to arise from
the fore-side of the Cricoides, and to end into the lowest side of the
Scutiformis. If it be broad and spread out side-waies, it may be divided into
two pair, the foremore and the side pair, and so Riolanus divides it. But it is
for the most part single and small enough.

Its Use is to draw the Cartilago Annularis to the Scutiformis. (lightly,
because it is almost immovable) so that they may be joined together, and kept
in that posture. Others who differ about its original, will have it to widen
the Chink or the Scutiformis.

The second Pair rises from the back side of the Annularis, with a fleshy
orignal, and is implanted into the lower part of the Glottalis or Arytaenoides,
with a Nervous end, opening the Larynx, by drawing asunder the two Gristles
called Arytaenoides. And therefore they are called Par Cricoarythenoides
posticum. Casserius calls them Par Cucullare.

The third pair, Cricoarythenoides laterale, arises above from the sides of the
Annularis, and is inserted at the sides of the Glottalis, into the joint, there
where it is not touched by the former, and opens the Larynx, with the same
oblique carriage of the Gristles.

The fourth pair, called Thyroarytenoides, being inward and very broad,
proceeds from the Scutiformis, viz. from its inner and fore part, and from the
Cricoides likewise, as Riolanus suspects, and ends into the sides of the
Glottalis, or the Arytaenoides, which while it contracts and draws to the
Thyroides, it shuts the Larynx, by a straight passage. When this pair is
inflamed in a Sq^ie, it makes the Disease deadly, because it exactly shurs the
Chink.

The ninth Muscle, which others term Quintum par Arytenoides, arises from the
hinder line of the Guttalis, and being carried along with transverse Fibers, it
is inserted into the sides thereof, shutting the Larynx, while it straitens the
Cartilago Arytaenoides.

For it is to be noted, that all the proper Muscles of the Larynx, are ordained
either to contract or widen the Chink, which that it may be the more
conveniently accomplished, some of them widen and straiten the Thyroides,
others the Arytaenoides, which Gristles do compass the Chink, which being drawn
in, or widenest, the Chink is withal made narrower or wider. Whence it appears,
that I have not unskillfully propounded the Muscles of the Larynx, as Riolanus
upbraides me.

The Epiglottis in Mankind has no Muscle; for it is not voluntarily moved in
Men, as some vainly persuade themselves; but is only depressed by the weight of
such things as are swallowed.

But in brute Beasts, the Epiglottis has Muscles, because they are continually
eating, and chewing the Cud, and they have a very great Epiglottis. And in them
some Muscles arise from the Hyoides, and are implanted into the Basis of the
Epiglottis, which they lift up; (and this pair Vesalius reckons to be the fifth
common pair) and others are seated between the Coat of the Epiglottis and the
Cartilage, shutting the same.

The Gristles of the Larynx are five: Its Gristles.
which in elderly persons do sometimes attain a boney hardness; by means
whereof, some have escaped the danger of suffocation, when they hung upon the
Gallows.

The first Gristle is termed Cartilago Thuroides, or Scutiformis, Scutalis,
Clypealis, Peltalis, etc. from its shape; because it resembles a shield, being
in a manner apiece, hollow within, Bossie and bunching without, but more
in Men then in Women: because their Necks are made even, for beauties sake, by
those Kernels placed by the Larynx. That same bunch which is seen on the
foreside Adams Apple is more bunching out in Men then in Women.
of the Nec^s called Adams Apple, because (...) common people have a belief,
that by the judgment of God, a part of that fatal Apple, abode sticking in
Adams Thro^^, and is so communicated to his posterit^. It is distinguished in
the middle with a line, and therefore some have made it double, whereas in
truth it is very rarely found otherwise then single.

In its Corners it has processes, above two long ones, wherewith by help of a
Li^ment, it is joined to the lower sides of Os hyoides; and beneath two
likewise, by which it is j^d to the following Gristle.

The second is the Cricoeides or Annularis, because it is round like a Ring,
and compasses the whole Larynx. Now it resembles the Turks Ring, wherewith
they Arm their Thumbs when they shoot, for the hinder part is broad and very
thick. The fore part is straiter and drawn in like one of our Rings. It Is
vulgarly termed Innominata, or the nameless Gristle, because the ancients gave
it no name. It Is the Basis of the rest of the Gristles, by help whereof they are
joined to the Aspera Artera, and therefore it is immovable.

The third and fourth, which others count for one, when the Membrane is taken
of appears to be double. It Is called Arutainoeides, Guttalis, by reason of its
resembling the spout of an Ewer, whereout the Water is poured, if the two
processes of the upper part are considered, which being joined together do make
up that little Chink which modulates the voice, which others term ^gula, Parva
Lingua, or Glottis, the (...) Tongue, for the voice The Glottis.
cannot be (...) through a narrow passage. This rests upon the upper and hinder
side of the Cricoides, in the Cavity of the Thyroides.

In this place is to be observed a certain Hollowness, which is formed between
the Guttalis and the Scutalis, by the Membranes which gather up the Cartilages;
into which if peradventure while one is speaking or laughing, and the
Epiglottis is open, a cru^^ of bread or a drop of drink do happen to fall, it
causes Coughing, because it goes against the Course of the wind. But if any
thing slide leasurely down the Chink, by the Walls of the Larynx, it hinders
not the wind, and so causes no Coughing.

The fifth is termed Epiglottis, which covers and shuts the Chink, least an
considerable Epiglottis.
quantity of meat or drink should fall into the Wesand, but that the Epiglottis
being shur, they might pass down the Gullet. But it is not exactly shut, so
that some small quantity of drink may slip down the sides. For when we say that
drink passes not into the Wesand and the Lungs, it is to be understood of the
greatest part; for that some is carried thither, I have showed you before. And
therefore in Diseases of the Chest, we prescribe Electuaries and Lozenges,
which are to be held in the patients mouth, his Head leaning backwards, till
they melt away, that some portion of them may slip in by the Walls of the
Wesand. It Is opened when we Laugh, and therefore Men must be careful that the^
do not Laugh when they are supping of broth (...) the like. Also let such as
are greedy eaters take ^eah, any meat get between the Epiglottis and the (...)
whence immediately suffocation follows, as I have se^^ in a young man of Hafnia,
who was suddenly choked by a piece of Neats-tongue weighing an ounce and an
halt, greedily eaten.

Now the Substance of the Epiglottis is soft, and its Shape resembles a Tongue,
or an I vie leaf, according to Hippocrates. And on either side a Membrane is
fastend to the common mouth; such an one as that which being daubed with a
clammy Humor, does compass the inner Cavity of the Larynx, and the outside
thereof is likewise covered thereby.

As for Vessels. Vessels


The Larynx has Veins from the internal Jugular.

It has Arteries from the larger branch of the Carotides.

It has Nerves which Galen terms Vocales, for the motion of the Muscles, from
the recurrent branch of the sixth pair.

Two parcels of Kernels attend the same. Kernels.


One Parcel at the upper part of the Larynx, viz. at the sides of the Uvula
(...) Gargareon which are called Tonsilla or Amyg^ also Paristhima and Antiades
the Almonds of the Ears: which being Spongy (on each side one) ^o (...) the
moisture of the Brain, t^^^ it into Spittle and therewith m^^sten the Throat,
Larynx, Spittle
Tongue and Oesophagus; though it helps also our Tasting, which cannot be
performed without moisture. These Kernels are about the Root of the Tongue, and
are covered with the common Coat of the Mouth, and receive Veins from the
Jugulars.

They have placed by them two little white Bladderkeys, which receive ^ero^ity
out of the Kernels, and void forth into the Mouth. Riolanus does acknowledge no
such in a Man, but Sustitutes in their stead Ligamental Membranes, stretched
out from the Uvula to the Almonds.

Others stand by the lowerside of the Larynx, on each side one, at the sides of
Cricoides and of the first ring of the Wesand, being great and spongy, through
which Veins are spread, from the Jugularis externa. In Women it is more
Perspicuous; in a Man and in an Ox, more fleshy and red.

The Use is, to bedew the Larynx, with a clammy and fat, but not fluid
moisture, that the Gristles may be more fit for motion, and the voice may be
made sweeter: which is imitated by those who anoint their pipes with Oil.

The Use of the Larynx is to be the Organ of the Voice.

For the Organs of the Voice are either Remote or Immediate.

The Remote are the Chest and the Lungs, without the Assistance of the Heart;
for if the four Vessels of the Heart should be tied, and the Heart cut off, yet
a Dog can both run and bark, as besides later Authors, Galen did often
experiment: and the illustrious Sr. Francis Bacon, in his History of Life and
Death, Article 15. tells of an unbowelled Man, who after his Heart was taken
out, uttered three or four words of his Prayers.

The Immediate are either preparatory, as the Trachea; or assistant as the
Muscles and Nerves; or conservatory, as the Mouth and Throat. But the most
principal part is the Larynx: and that part thereof termed Glottis is the next
and adequate Organ of the Voice.

Now the Voice is made after this How the Voice is made?
ma^^er: the Air is suddenly and strongly blown out by the Lungs, and the Chink
is moderately straightened, where by the smiting of the Air the Voice is made, as
we perceive the wind to whistle through the Chink of a Door. And therefore
Aristotle calls the Voice a smiting of the Air; understanding, in a causal way
of expression, the Acton for the quality springing therefrom. And if the breath
go out, the Organ being wide open, it causes a Sig^. Sig^ing.


And therefore, that noise which Animals make cannot properly be termed a
voice, they wanting this Organ; as the noise which some sishes make, the
croaking of Frogs, and the ^re^king of Grass-hoppers. Aristotle tells us that
the croaking of a Frog is made, when the Lip of the lower Jaw being equally let
down, and a little water being in their Throats' the upper Jaw which remains
immovable, is so forcibly bent, that their Eyes seem to sparkle. But, it is
evident, that a Frog has Lungs, and a Chink in stead of a Larynx. And
therefore the Voice is an Animal sound, made by the Glottis through What is
properly a Voice?
smiting the Air as it is breathed in and out, being produced to signify the
Conceptions of the Mind. And therefore Voice is only in living Creatures, nor
is every sound in them a Voice, but that which is made in the Glottis; not
Coughing, nor hawking, If any Fishes make a noise, it is by their Gills or some
such thing, but not by their Mouths. Creatures without Blood and Insects, as
Bees Waspes, Locusts and the like, utter no Voice, but as Aristotle rightly
observes in his fourth Book de Historia Animalium, they make a noise which
proceeds from their Back, as for example sake, a Grasshopper makes a noise, by
rubbing its wings one against another; For in these insects there is contained
a certain Spirit and Air, in a Membrane beneath the Septum Transversum. Others
will have it that insects make such noises by beating the Air after sundry
manners with their wings.

The Differences of Voices are infinite, The differences of Voices, or Speeches.
which are made, 1. By the Figuration of the Mouth. 2. By the different
Percussion and Modulation of the Air, as we see in Pipes. 3. From the largeness
and other qualities of the Instruments, viz. the Larynx, Wesand, Lungs and
Chest. 4. According as the Voice comes to the Ear, entire or mangled. And
besides these differences, every particular Beast has a voice of its own,
which the Brutes themselves can accurately distinguish, having herein a better
hearing then Men. For a Lamb newly brought forth, knows its Mothers bleating
among a thousand Sheep, and the Ew likewise knows the bleating of her own Lamb
from all others. Which is also true of Henns and Chickens. For the same voice
never happens, because the Instruments do never agree in all things: even as
Bells made of the same matter, the same weight, the same form, and by the same
workman, do nevertheless always differ in sound.

The Parts of the Voice or Speech, are Parts of Voice or Speech.
Vowels and Consonants. We represent the Vowels only by five Letters, because
the root of the Tongue is only moved by so many motions. But when a Vowel is
further cut and modified, in the fore part of the Tongue, by the Lips and
Teeth, it becomes a consonant, which therefore cannot be uttered without a
Vowel, because that is its matter, seeing it arises only from a Vowel modified
and cut: just as from the confused sound of a Pipe, an Articulate and
Harmonious sound is made, when after a certain Method, the sounding Air is
again stopped and cut by the Fingers.

Chap. XII. Of the OESOPHAGUS or Gullet.
THe OESOPHAGUS which some term Gula, others stomachus, and Coelius Aurelianus
Via stomachi and Ventris the way of the Stomach and Belly, in English the
Gullet, is the Pipe or Funnel of the Stomach, as the Wesand is the Pipe of the
Lungs.

It Is so Situate, as that it begins in the Throat, where it is termed Pharynx,
Its Situation.
and from thence goes down right forward, under the Wesand, into the Stomach.
And when it is come as far as to the fifth Vertebra of the Chest, giving way to
the Aorta, which passes through the middle thereof, it bends to the right Hand;
afterward it rises again to the left great Artery, and at the eleventh
Vertebra, through the Diaphragma or Midriff it enters the left mouth of the
Stomach, accompanied by two Nerves arising from the sixth pair.

It has a few Veins from the Cava, the Azygos, Intercostal and Jugular Its
Vessels.
Veins.

It has Arteries from the Intercostal Arteries, and the internal Carotides.

And Nerves from the sixth pair.

Its Connection is, at the beginning with the Jaws and Larynx, by the Coat of
Connection.
the Mouth, which is common to it and the Stomach. To the Vertebrae, the
Trachea and neighboring parts it is joined by Membranes arising out of the
Ligaments of the Back. And because it lies upon the Spina When the Gullet is
diseased, Medicaments are applied to the Back.
or Backbone, therefore when it is Diseased, we apply external remedies to the
Backbone.

A Glandulous Body grows to the hinder part of it, which affords Its Kernels.
moisture, to wet the Cavity thereof, the better to assist the swallowing of
things. And sometimes it swells so much, as to hinder the swallowing of all
liquid meats and drink.

Its Substance consists of a triple Coat, that it might more easily be
stretched Substance.
long-wayes and broad-wayes.

The first is common with the Stomach. This some will have to arise from the
Ligaments of the Vertebra's, others from the Pleura, who are therein both
mistaken. For it has its rise, there where the Membrane of the Stomach arises,
viz. from the Peritonaeum, for it is one continued Body with the Membrane of
the Stomach, it is exceeding thin and in a manner destitute of all Fibers.

The second is the first Proper one, the external being more fleshy, thicker
and softer, then the other; being as it were a Muscle bored through, being
commonly reputed to be interwoven with round and transverse Fibers. Also Hofman
does thereby prove it to be a Muscle, because it suffers Convulsions and
Palsies.

The third is the second Proper one, internal, more Nervous, somewhat subtle
and harder, being commonly said to be interwoven with straight and long Fibers.
It is contained with that Membrane which covers the Palate, Throat and Lips,
and therefore when a Man is ready to vomit, his lower Lip trembles.

Howbeit, contrary to the vulgar opinion aforesaid, our Eyes can witness, that
the inner Coat is furnished with transverse and circular Fibers, the external
with straight and longish ones.

The Muscles of the Gullet which other Muscles.
have passed over in silence, are four.

The first, is the same I spoke of before, treating de Larynge. It is only one
like a Sphincter Muscle compassing the Gullet. And therefore Riolanus,
Spigelius, and Ves^ingus term it Musculus Oesophagus, being the Authors of that
name.

The second, is the Sphaenopharyngaeus by them so called, arising from the
internal acute process of the Sphaenoides, and being obliquely implanted into
the sides of the Oesophagus, that it being drawn upwards and widened, it may be
the more wide to receive in meat.

The third is Stylopharyngaeus, which arising from the Bodkin-shap'd acute
process, is stretched out to the sides of Oesophagus; which both Dilates and
Amplifies.

The fourth, is Cephalo-pharyngaeus, commonly said to arise from the Chin, but
according to late Authors, from the lowest part of the Heads-top where it is
nearest the Neck; and is inserted with a various contexture of Fibers into the
beginning of the Oesophagus, where it is larger: and therefore because of its
Latitude and Fabric, it seems to be two.

The Action therefore of the Oesophagus Whether Swallowing be a Natural or
Animal Action?
is Animal; seeing it is performed by Muscles and not natural, as the vulgar
opinion is of all Authors, and swallowing does doubtless depend upon our free
will and liberty.

Now swallowing is performed after this manner: when any thing is to be
swallowed, that same first Muscle which Galen terms Sphincter does every way
contract it self, whereupon its oblique Fibers, which reach from the Oesophagus
to the Larynx, are made transverse, which being done, the Larynx is lifted up,
and the Gullet is depressed; and the Cavity of the Gullet so depressed, is made
more narrow. Hereunto the fourth Muscle is assistant. For as the first being
contracted, embraces the meat which by chewing is brought into a round Mass,
and so bears it down: so this fourth Muscle also contracting it self, comes out
as it were to help, and that the meats received in at the Mouth may not go
back, it straitens and repels them on every side, and transmits them into the
Gullet, so that by both these Muscles contracted, and the Semicircular joined
therewith a perfect circle as it were and Sphincter is made, viz. by the fourth
in the upper part of the Pharynx, and by the first in the lower.

The Use of the Gullet is, that by it as by a Funnel, meat and drink may be
passed into the Stomach. And liquid things are indeed more easily swallowed
then solid; contrariwise in Why sometimes solid meats are more easily swallowed
then liquid.
some sick persons solid meats are more readily swallowed then liquid, because
the faculty is more provoked by a stronger object, being otherwise lulled a
sleep as it were; especially in the Palsy.

Chap. XIII. Of the Neck.
AN Appendix or Appurtenance to the The Neck.
middle Belly. is the NECK, as a medium between the Head and the Chest.

It Is termed Collum a Colendo, because it is wont to be adorned: or a Colle Why
called Collum.
from an Hillock, for it arises out of the Body, as an Hill out of the rest of
the Earth.

It Is oblong for the modulation of the Its Magnitude.
Voice; and therefore Animals which utter no true Voice, as Fishes and Frogs,
have no Necks: and those which make the greatest Voice, have the longest Necks,
as Cranes and Geese, etc. By the use of Venery the thickness of the Neck is
altered, because heat distends the Aspera Arteria, the Carotides, and the
Jugular Veins. Whence it was an ordinary Practice among the Romans to measure
the Brides Neck the day after the Wedding, by which they knew whether she were
a Virgin or Corrupted, as we learn out of Catullus and Mercurialis.

The hinder part of the Neck is properly termed Cervix. Now the parts of the
Its Parts.
Neck are either external, as the Skin, Muscles, etc. or internal; as the
Vessels which run through the Trachea and Oesophagus: of the latter I have
spoken, of the rest I shall speak in their proper places.

The Use of the Neck is, 1. For the Oesophagus, Wesand, and Lungs. Hence
Creatures Its Use.
that have no Lungs, as Fishes, have no Necks. 2. To be instead of an Hand to
some Creatures, to take their meat with, according to Galen. 3. That it may
afford Nerves to the fore-parts, the Shoulder, Cubit, Hand, Midriff; for those
creatures only have these parts who have Necks.

THE THIRD BOOK OF THE Uppermost Cavity, VIZ. THE HEAD.
THe third or upper Venture or Cavity is the Head, the chief mansion house Why
the Head is placed so high.
of the sensitive Soul which is placed in the top of the Body, for the Eyes
sake, which are there placed as in a Watchtower; and requisite it was that the
Brain should be near the Eyes, because they have soft Nerves, which cannot be
carried far.

The Head is round like a Globe, but a little flatned withal, and longish. Its
Figure.


It Is greater in Man then other Creatures, because of the Largeness of his
Greatness.
Brain.

And for more safeguard, the Head is Substance.
altogether bony.

The Head is divided into the Hairy Division.
part, and that which is without Hair.

The former is termed Calva, the latter Facies.

The external parts of the Calva are these following. Calva.


Sinciput, which is the forepart reaching from the Forehead to the coronal
Suture.

Occiput, which is the hinder part, reaching from the Lambda-fashion'd Suture,
to the first Vertebra of the Neck.

Vertex, which is the part situate between the two former, bunching out.

Tempora, the Temples, which are the Side-parts, between the Eyes and the Ears.

Now the parts which constitute the Calva, are some of them external and
clothing, others internal and contained. The former are either common, as the
Scarfskin, the Hairy-skin, the Fat, the fleshy Membrane: or proper as the
Pericardium, Periostium, the Muscles, the Bones, the Menings. The contained are
the Brain, the Petty-brain, and the Marrow, which is partly in the Skull,
partly in the Backbone.

The smooth part of the Head, called the Face besides the parts containing,
has The Face.
parts proper to it self, viz. the upper part which is called the Forehead, and
the lower in which are the Organs of the Senses; as the Eyes, Nostrils, Ears,
and Mouth, wherein the Tongue and other parts are concealed.

Chap. I. Of the Hairs.
IN the Head there is the greatest plenty of Hair, therefore the Nature of the
Hair may conveniently be delivered in this place: though considered as an
Excrement, it does not belong to this place.

Hairs are found well-near in all Creatures What creatures have Hair.
that engender their young ones within their bodies, as Aristotle assures us:
instead whereof Fishes have scales, Birds feathers, and some Beasts as the
Hedg-hog, have long sharp prickles.

Now the Hairs are indeed Bodies, but not parts of the body, unless in a very
large signification, as when we say some parts serve only to adorn the body.

The immediate material Cause of which the hairs are made, is certain
fuliginous and excrementitious Vapors, thick and earthy, yet somewhat glewish
and clammy.

Its therefore false, which some affirm, Whether Hair and Nails grow of good
nutriment.
that the Hairs and Nails are nourished and generated of good and laudable
nutriment. For they grow even in persons consumed and pined away, and being
cut, they grow again in all ages of a man's life; and the oftener they are cut,
the sooner they grow again. Yea in dead men, as on thieves upon the Gibbet,
etc. they grow. See Paraeus at the end of his Book, who had an embalmed body in
his house twenty four years together, the Hairs and Nails whereof grew again as
often as they cut them. They are therefore bred of sooty Steams and Vapors, of
the third Concoction, or of the fleshy substance it self, by whatsoever heat
resolved into vapors.

The remote Matter, is nothing The remote matter of Hair.
seminal out of which the hair sprouts as a flower, nor any fat substance
enclining to the Nature of the Seed or Blood, but a superfluous moisture;
especially that which is contained in the Kernels. And therefore where there
are Kernels, in those places there Where Hair b^eede.
are commonly Hairs, as at the Ears, in the Armpits, in the Groins, etc. And
if sometimes there are Kernels without Hairs, this want of hair springs from a
too great quantity of humors.

For the Matter in which, or the Place where hairs are bred, ought not to be
too moist, nor too dry; as we see nothing grow in a wet fuliginous Soil, nor
in ground over dry and parched.

And therefore the Skin, because it is a temperate part, as the place of
Generation Why crusted Animals have no hairs.
of hairs; but if it be too moist, or too dry, as in some persons it is, the
hair does not shoot forth: and therefore crusted Animals, as Crabs, Lobsters,
Oysters, etc. have no hairs.

The Skin therefore on which hairs must be bred, ought to be moderately dry,
least the hair should fall from its root; but it must not be immoderately, but
laxe and rare, least otherwise the hair should not make its way through. And
therefore hairs may grow all over the skin, because it is every where porous,
and every Pore has the root of an hair fastened therein, excepting the palms
of the hands and the soles of the feet, which parts because of their continual
motion and wearing, have no hairs, and because they were to be of an exquisite
sense. And for this cause there grows no hair upon a Scar, because it has no
Pores.

Hairs also do sometimes grow on the inner Membranes of the Body, in the Heart
as was said before, in the Womb, in the Urinary passages, Witness Hypocrates,
Galen, Schenkius. Hair was found in the stomach by ^^eer, and lately in Norway
bairs were voided by vomit from the Stomach, whether bred there, or taken in.
At the Danish Hellespont red hairs were lately taken out of the musculous flesh
of an Ox leg.

The Efficient Cause of hair, is not the Soul, nor any vegetative hair-making
faculty, but moderate heat, drying up those fuliginous vapors, and thrusting
them forth into the pores of the Skin.

These three things already explained, are the chief Requisites for the
Generation Requisites to the Generation of hair.
of Hair, viz. The Matter, the Place convenient, and Heat.

From whence by the Rule of Contraries, the Cause of Baldness may be Cause of
baldness.
gathered, viz.

1. When Matter is wanting. 2. When the Skin is Originally too dry, and
afterward grows drier, and is not moistened by any neighboring part. Now the
forepart of the Head is here to be understood, which is commonly the only bald
place; for no man, according to Aristotle, becomes bald on the hinder-part of
his Head. For either Fat or other moisture in the hinder-part and the Temples
keep them from baldness; fat in the forepart, the Skin becomes dry and hard
like a shell, and therefore is bald. 3. By reason of too much or too little
heat. For weak heat does not sufficiently dry the matter, as in cold and moist
persons, and such as are in years. And therefore the humor growing over hot by
carnal Copulation, is the cause of baldness, and for this cause Boys and
Eunuchs do not become bald. 4. Also four Husbandmen near Bruxells became bald
by poison, as Franciscus de Paz the King of Spains Physician observed, and
wrote thereof ^o Nicholas Fontanus; And Hamelmannus in his Annals tells of an
Horse of the Count of Oldenburg, which by poison was made bald hither, because
this poison had some specifical contrariety to the Hairs, or because the
Spirits being extinguished, and the vigor of the Body quelled, the roots of the
hairs could not be retained in the Skin. Such a poison is the fat of a certain
Whale in the Island of Feroe, newly taken out, by which Copper-vessels are also
broken.
The Hairs are commonly divided into such as are bred in the womb, and such as
grow afterward.

Those bred in the Womb are threefold, those of the Head, of the Eyelids,
Hairs bred in the womb.
and the Eyebrows.

The Hairs which grow afterward, are such as spring up when a man comes to a
just age; that is, in a boy when he begins to breed Sperm, and in a Maid when
her Courses break forth, for then the Skin grows open.

Also these are threefold: for 1. Hairs breed on the Share, seldom in the Womb
and the Heart. 2. In the Armpits, also in the Nostrils and Ears. 3. On the
Chins of men but not of women; for in women their Courses spend the matter of
hair which should make a beard, and therefore sometimes, when their Courses are
poxt, women have hairs growing on their Chins. It was a rare case for a young
woman of thirty years of age, one of the Arch-dutches of Austria's Women, to
have ever since she was a Girl, before her courses brake forth, a long beard
with mustachios like a man. And I saw such a like Girl not long since in the
Low Countries, who was also hairy all her Body over. Lately Helena Marswin in
Fionia, had a Girl with a long beard of a reddish yellow color.

The End or Use of Hairs, Use of Hair.


I. Is to cover the Parts. II. To adorn them. And this is chiefly seen in the
Hairs of the Head and Face. For 1. The Hairs of the Head do shield Why a man
has plenty of hair?
the Brain from external injuries of cold and heat, etc. So in Aethiopia by a
peculiar thrumming of their hairs, they are defended from the heat. And as a
man has the greatest Brain of all Creatures, so has he thereon most plenty of
hairs. 2. They moderately heat, as otherwise in the Head there is no Fat to
keep it warm: but rather a bony substance, and that far distant from the Heart.
Now the hairs according to the advice of the Physician, are to be let grow, or
to be cut off in this or that person, but they must not be shaven off, because
thereby Defluxions are caused. So also the beard does cherish and moderately
warm the Chin. In persons that are recovering out of sickness, the hair must
not be cut off, for fear of a relapse, touching which Question see Sitonus. 3.
They adorn: for bald persons and The Beard adorns.
thin-hair'd are deformed. So the Beard also adorns a man, and makes him
venetable, especially if the hairs be spread all about. But in women there was
no need of so venerable an appearance.
III. To purge the Humors and Spirits, and the whole Body of superfluous sooty
steams. And therefore frequent cutting the hair, quickens the ^ight, and Celsus
in a long Defluxion of Rheum, bids us cut the hair to the skin. C. Aurelianus
says that in the Phrenzie, when the hair is cut off, the parts transpire,
being freed from a great burden. Hence a reason may be drawn why Helmont.
^asting an Asses milk, could tell whether she had been curried and combed that
morning or not. IV. To afford signs whereby to know the Temperament, Manners
and hidden Diseases of every person.
The Form of Hairs is not the Soul, as many would have it, because in persons
Their Form.
that consume, and such as are dead, the hairs grow; and those who conceive
with Plempius, that there is a Soul in persons dead twenty four years, I leave
the Readers to make an estimate of their Wisdom. Nor do they retain a
vegetative life in dead persons, for so the whole man should not die, nor is
there any thing in a dead Carcass, that should rather preserve this life, then
the sensitive or rational, not to say that these ignoble Parts by the
long-lasting of their lives, should excel all other parts. Plants indeed spring
living from the lifeless Earth, but out of a living Seed, which I deny to be in
the Hairs, and therefore they stick not in the Body like Plants, nor are bred
thereout. Nor must we say with Plotinus, that certain relics of life remain
after death, as warmed rooms remain hot, when the fire is out; for such
Relics of life could not remain so many years. The form therefore of the hairs
may be described by their accidents, which are these following.

I. Magnitude: Now the Head-hairs are longest, because the Brain is greater
Magnitude.
then the rest of the Kernels: also they are thickest, because the Skin of the
Head is most thick, howbeit it is laxe and open, and contains sufficient
moisture.

According therefore as the Skin is thick or thin, rare or compact, and the
humor plentiful or scanty, and the heat weak or strong, the hairs become thick
or thin, hard or soft, plentiful or scanty, etc. He had store of hair on his
Head, who could suffer himself to be shot in the head with a bullet, and had no
hurt, whom Busbequius saw in his Voyage to Constantinople. Yet they grow not
infinitely, because the Exhalations are not so plentiful, nor does the
expulsive Faculty work infinitely.

2. Their Figure: The hairs are straight and flat, in such as abound with
moisture, but curled Figure.
in such as are dry. Therefore curled hair is harder then that which lies flat.
Hence all Blackmores are curle-pated, because of their dry Temperament. But the
Scythians and Thracians have long flat hair, because they are moist, according
to Aristotle. Again the hairs are straight because of the straightness of the
passages through which they break forth; and crisp because of the crookedness
of the said passages. The augmenting Glass informs us that the hairs are
quadrangular; though others will have them to be round because of the roundness
of the Pores.

Also they are porous or hollow within, as the Disease Plica in Poland does
show, and the hairs of an Elk. Again because they may be split, they have
Pores, according to Aristotle's maxim.

III. Their Color: which in Brutes follows the color of the Skin; and in The
cause of the color of the hair.
men is exceeding variable, according to the Country, ambient Air predominant
Humor, Age, etc.

For those that dwell in hot and dry Countries, have their hair not only dry,
crisp and brittle, but also black, as the Aegypians, Arabians, Indians; also
the Spaniards, Italians, and part of the French have their hair for the most
part black. They who dwell in cold and moist Countries, have their hairs not
only soft and ^t^aight, but for the most part yellow or white, as the
Inhabitants of Denmark, England, Norway, Swedland, Scythia, etc.

Again the predominant Humor makes the Color of the hairs: as in phlegmatic
persons, the hairs are for the most part white, and so of the rest.

Also the Variety of Heat makes variety of Colors: for immoderate heat makes
black hairs: for a vaporous Excrement is raised by the heat, and is changed
into an exact sooty stream. But temperate heat makes the hairs yellow; more
temperate makes them red; a weak heat makes them white. But both these causes
of Colors do easily concur in the hair, as when phlegm abounds, weakness of
heat is joined therewith, and when Blood abounds, heat is moderate, etc.

Also a change in the Color is made in respect of Age, as also of other
accidents. For grown persons have their hair not only thicker, harder, stronger
and more plentiful, but at length also gray and whiteish.

But no Hairs on the Body of Man are Naturally green, or blew, though there are
both green and leek-colour'd Choler in Man's Body; the cause whereof is not the
thickness of the hair, incapable of light, as Cardan imagined, because the hair
is capable of being yellow, its thickness nothing hindering; but, as Scaliger
rightly philosophizes, seeinge, ^ry color is not agreeable to every Plant, no
more is it to the hairs. Yet I have seen green hair'd men at Hafnia, and those
as work Metals have their hair commonly green. Marcellus Donatus relates of
Antonius Maria Catabenus, gray hair'd through Age, how that much Choler mixed
with blood abounding in his Body, not only his Skin became of a Verdigreese or
yellow-green color, but his gray hairs were also died of the same hue.

The Ancients conceived that gray hairs The cause of gray hairs.
did proceed from dryness, as the Leaves of Trees when they are dried, look
white.

But Aristotle confutes them. For those who go with their heads covered, do
sooner grow gray, and yet are not so dried, as those that expose their heads
bare to the air. Again some are gray as soon as they are born or quickly after,
which cannot proceed from Dryness.

Now they grow soonest gray that go Why they are soonest grey-hair'd that go
with their Heads covered?
always with their Heads covered, because the heat cannot be fanned, but is
overwhelmed and strangled, which being extinguished, an external heat is
introduced; so that putrefaction is the cause of gray hairs, which sprung from
scarsity of innate heat, which cannot so digest the humors as in youth. And the
outmost and smallest end of the hair is whitest, where there is least heat.

Now why a white Humor should arise from putrefaction, the Cause is, Why Men
are soonest gray about their temples?
according to Aristotle, because a great part is turned into Air, which being
well mixed with an earthy and warry Substance makes whiteness. Hence also it is
apparent, why men are soonest gray about their Temples, because there great and
fleshy Muscles are placed under the Skin, which through moisture do easily
putrify. Add hereunto, that the Bones of the Temples are very thin, and
therefore extraneous heat can easily pass through them.

Chap. II Of the Membranes without and within the Skull.
THe EXTERNAL MEMBRANES which compass the Skull, are two: The PERICRANIUM and
the PERIOSTIUM which compass the Brain; also there are two Meninges or Matres
so called, viz. DURA MATTER and PIA MATTER, that is to say a thick Membrane and a
thin one, which perform the same Office in their Cavity, which the Pleura
performs in the middle Cavity and the Peritonaeum in the lowest.

The PERICRANEUM is a Membrane thin and soft, compassing the Skull, and The
Pericraneum.
springing from the dura Matter coming out at the Sutures of the Skull.

That it springs from the dura Matter, the extraordinary Consent between the
Brain with its Meninges and the Pericraneum, does sufficiently prove, which
cannot be by any other way more conveniently made forth. Moreover, this
production of the Pericranium from the dura Matter, is manifestly visible in
Infants, in whom the Moles of their Heads are not yet sufficiently closed.
Those Fibers wherewith Horstius, Spigelius, and Laurenbergius do conceive that
the Pericraneum is only fastened to the dura Matter, do not go unto the Throat:
for the Bones being by little and little hardened and compressed, that same
Continuity of the Pericraneum and dura Matter, was broken off with Age, from
whence arose that appearance of Fibers which has deceived some.

The PERIOSTIUM is a most thin and nervous Membrane, and therefore exceeding
Periostium.
sensible, by help whereof, all the bones saving the teeth being compassed
therewith, become sensible.

I distinguish these two Membranes with Vesalius and Bauhinus against
Fallopius, Laurentius and others, who confound them, seeing they may be
accurately separated by a skilful Anatomist.

Now the various Muscles about the Head shall be explained in their proper
place.

The CRASSA MENINX or harder Membrane called also DURA MATTER, Crassa Meninx.
because of its thickness and hardness, and because many conceive all the
Membranes of the Body do arise out of this and the tenuis Membrana or pia
Matter, does cover the Skull all over on the inside, and all its Cavities and
hollowness; and sticks strongly to its Basis, so that some have thought it took
its Original from thence.

Now it compasses the Brain also loosely, on the upper side, and covers the
inside of the Skull. (For whereas Hildanus and Varolius have observed that it is
straightly fastened to the Skull, that was besides the ordinary Course of Nature)
that there may be some distance between, as there is between the Heart and the
Heartbag, both in living and dead bodies, though in the latter it is greater,
by reason of the defect of Spirits and the falling in of the Brain, which I
grant Olbafius and Hofmannus; and this is so contrived that the swelling
Vessels of the Brain, may not be compressed, and that there may be no hindrance
of the

Motion of the Brain, which is made up of Systole and Diastole, and is
continual, The Brain moves.
as may be seen in Wounds of the Head, newborn Children, and most vehement
pains of the head, as Fabricius Hildanus has observed: And I my self have
frequently seen this motion in wounded persons. Strange therefore it is that
some learned men will needs deny this motion. But it is a very hard task to
assign the true Cause of this motion: Some make it to be the Meninges; others
the Arteries; others the Substance of the Brain. But it is ill ascribed to the
Meninges: for a great portion of the brain being taken away, and the Meninges
themselves, the brain was observed to move in a living Sheep, by the renowned
Riolanus. They judge better who ascribe the same to the Arteries, for the
motions of the Brain and Arteries do happen both at one and the same time, as
may easily be observed in Fractures of the Skul, and in the Heads of Infants.
Yea and Walaeus observes that in those who being wounded in the Head to the
Brain, have extreme anguish, only certain conspicuous Arteries do move, and not
the Substance of the Brain; and when the parties wounded gather strength, the
motion of their Brain evidently returns. Also Coiter has observed in living
Lambs, Kids and Dogs, that the brain it self has no motion but only the
Arteries. To him Olbafius gives consent, because the motion is most observable
about the Cavities of the dura matter, where are most Arteries. And therefore I
conceive we must not have recourse to the substance of the brain: which is also
soft and flaggie, and sufficiently indisposed for motion. But the chiefest
motion is observed at the full of the Moon, by reason of the working of the
humors at that season. But that also springs from the Arteries, which are more
distended with blood: for the motion of the Heart becomes quicker or slower,
according to the various Influence of the Stars. That the motion of the brain
should answer the motion of the Lungs, I have no sufficient sign to prove.

Now it is fastened to the pia matter and the brain, by Vessels; to the Skul by
thin membranous fibers springing out of it self, passing out through the
futures, and constituting the Pericranium.

This Meninx or Coat is double, as the rest of the Membranes are. The external
part respecting the Cranium, is hard, rough, and of a small sense, because of
the hardness of the Skull which it was to touch.

The inner part is smooth, slippery, brightly shineing and white, being more
drenched with a waterish moisture.

It is fourfold where it distinguishes the Brain from the petty-brain, in which
place Dogs have a bone underpropping their brain, that it may not bear hard
upon the Cerebellum, Branilet, or petty-brain.

But on the Crown of the Head it is doubled, The Sickle.
where it divides the brain into the right and left part: and because the
Reduplication is in the hinder-part broad, and grows afterward narrow by
degrees, yet not to a point, so as to represent a Reapers Sickle, therefore See
Tab. 11.
they term this Body Falx the Sickle. And while it is thus multiplied, it
constitutes.

Cavities hollownesses, being receptacles of abounding blood and Spirits, and
they The upper Cavities.
are four in number; which Galen sometimes calls the Ventricles of dura Matter;
and others call them Sanguiductus, Cisternes of Blood.

The first two begin at the Basis of the Hind-part of the Head, by the sides of
The first two.
the Lambda-shap'd Suture, where the Veins and Arteries disburthen themselves.
The Veins truly, of the jugular branch are manifestly inserted, and receive
blood out of the Cavities; but the Arteries, whether mediately by certain
branches of the The I. TABLE.
The FIGURES Explained.
This TABLE Represents the Coverings of the Brain both proper and common, in
the same order in which they are represented in Anatomical Dessections.
FIG. I. Shows the enternal Parts. AAA. The Skin and the Scarf-skin with the
Roots of the Hairs. B. The true Skin separated from the Scarf-skin, C. DDD. The
Membrana Carnosa furnished with little Veins. EE. The Muscle of the Forehead
out of its own proper place, receiving the Nerres which come out of the hole,
O. FF. Fat spread over the Skull. G. The Pericranium lying upon the Periostium
in its natural Situation. I. The same separated from the Periostium and turned
inside out. K. The Periostium spread out upon the Skull. L. The same plucked of
from the Skull. MM. The Skull naked. N. The Coronal suture. PP. The Sagittal
suture. QQ. The temporal Muscle as yet covered with the Pericranium.


FIG. II. The Skull being taken away this Figure discovers the Coats of the
Brain. AA. The dura Matter covering the left side of the Brain. bbb. Veins and
Arteries sprinkled up and down the same. CCC. The Brain covered only with the
p^a Matter. dd. The turnings and windings of the Brain. eeee. Vessels sprinkled
up and down the pia Matter. F. The dura Matter drawn downwards. GGG. The upper
Cavity engraven in the dura matter.


page 131



Cavities, as Walaeus suspects, or knit immediately to the Cavities themselves,
do disburthen themselves, into the Cavities, And these two being afterward
united, do make up.

The third which is longest of all: For it goes all along the Head to the tops
of The third.
the Nostrils. Galen sometimes calls it a Vein, because it contains store of
Blood. And when these Cavities are opened, an immeasurable quantity of Blood
comes out by the Nose, which is supplied from the Arteries.

The fourth Cavity, not reaching to the Skul as the former, is short, and goes
inwardly between the Brain and the Brainelet, unto the Glandula pinealis.

It arises, where the three former meet together, and this beginning some from
Herophilus call Torcular the Wine-prest; and Nymmannus conceives that this part
is chiefly obstructed in the Apoplexy. But 1. We do sometimes allow thereof, as
a remore Cause* for all that accident is to be referred to the noble Ventricle.
2. Vital blood may be brought to the Brain by the rete Mirabile, whence Vessels
go for Nutriments sake, to the substance of the Brain

The third, or the uppermost of the sickle; and the fourth Cavities, do seem to
me to end into the two former, or greater lateral ones; in which I follow Fr.
Sylvius exceedingly verst in the Anatomy of the Brain: and that not by a
straight passage, but inclining to the sides; so that there is no common
concourse of these four Ventricles; though these greater lateral ones are
joined by an intermediate passage or Channel. Yet here also I have found some
diversity according to the variety See Tab. II.
of subjects, so that they have sometimes met, and sometimes been separated.
Riolanus makes the Torcular with Galen to be in the third longitudinal Cavity,
beca^se it distributes blood into all parts of the Brain and Brainlet or
Cerebellum, which Reason holds truer in reference to the Arteries.

Besides those four Cavities or Ventricles already described, three others, by
the Information The lower Cavities.
of Sylvius have in dissection presented themselves to me; which nevertheless,
I have not always, and I tell you so much, least any man not finding them
presently in one or two Bodies, should accuse me of falsehood. Riolanus accounts
them to be Coherences of the Duglicated Brain, spread under the greater once* by
the intercedency of the pia Matter. Which is nothing, for they have Cavities as
the others have, nor are they naked Coherences.

The one of these, which was also observed by Vesalius, is carried through the Sea Tab. II.
lowest part of the Sickle, and therefore I have termed it, the lower Ventricle
of the Sickle; and for distinctions sake, I have termed that which is commonly
called the third, the upper Ventricle of the Sickle. This lower Ventricle of
the Sickle, ends into the fourth Ventricle.

The other two smaller lateral ones, on each side one, are distant about a
thumbs breadth from the greater, situate in the dura Matter which distinguishes
the Brain from the Brainlet, not being so long as they. The one of them goes
into the great lateral Cavity; I have also seen them ending into the fourth.

From the Cavities* arise the branches or creeping jugular Veins, and into them
the Arteriae Carotides, being distributed upwards and round about, and opening
into them by mutual Anastomoses.

Now the blood is contained in these Cavities in very great plenty, because the
bulk of the Brains substance is very great, and they perform the office not
only of Veins but of Arteries also, seeing they Pulse as The II. TABLE.
The FIGURE Explained.
This Figure Represents the right side of the Brain, cut away to a great depth,
according to the passage of the Ventricle.
A. The Nose. B. The right Ear. CCCC. A portion of the Skin of the Head hanging
down. D. A Rudiment of the Muscle of the Hind-part of the Head. E. The Socket
of the Eye. F. The Forehead Bone. G. The Bone of the Hinder-Head or Occiput.
HH. The left side of the Brain, covered as yet with its dura Matter. III. The
dura Matter of the right side hanging down. KKK. The Falx or Sickle. L. The End
of the Sickle at the Galli Crista or Cocks-Comb. MMM. The upper Cavity of the
Sickle. NN. The lower Cavity of the Sickle. O. The greater Right Hand lateral
Cavity. P. The ingress of the upper Cavity of the Sickle into the greater
lateral Cavity. Q. The fourth Ventricle between the Brain and the Brainlet. R.
The ingress of the fourth Ventricle into the greater Lateral one. S. The common
passage of the greater lateral cavities. TT. A portion of those great Vessels
which pass into the upper cavity of the Sickle. VV. Part of the great cleft in
the Brain. ^ The lower and outer part of the right Ventricle, where a little
twig of the corotick Artery, peirces as far as the Plexus Choroides. y. The
hinder and larger part of the right Ventricle. z. A roundish cavity of the
right Ventricle resembling the finger of a Glove. a. The upper and inner part
of the right Ventricle, under the Corpus callosum. b. The descent and orifice
of the right Ventricle going into the third or middle-most. ccc. The Glandulous
intertexture called Chorocides. dd. The Root of the spinal Marrow. e. The Brain
continued to the root of the spinal Marrow. ff. The Corpus callosum so called.
gggg. The hinder and lower part of the Brain, continued to the Corpus callosum,
and forming the cavity of the right Ventricle. hh. A portion of the left side
of the Brain appearing under the Falx or Sickle. ii Little Arteries creeping
along the Surface of the right Ventricle.


page 132

the Arteries do. Which Walaeus could never perceive in the dissected brains of
live Creatures, nor in fractures of the Skull. Though it be evedent even to
those that open the Skull with a Trepan, as Riolanus confesses.

The Use therefore of the Ventricles, is not so much to contain the two sorts
of The Use.
Blood, received from the Veins and Arteries; as only to receive the Arterial
blood, by means whereof they Pulse. For the Arterial blood communicated to the
Brain by the Arteria Cervicalis, which remains over and above after the
Nutriment of the Brain and Brainlet, and the Generation of Animal spirits, is
voided into these Caveties, either immediately or mediately, by the little
twigs of the Cavities, as Walaeus suspects; and from thence through the jugular
Veins which are joined to the Ventricles, together with a thin Skin cleaving to
their Walls, it runs back downwards to the Heart, that it may be wrought over
again. For that the blood is circularly moved in the Brain also, appears
likewise by the Ligatures of live Creatures; seeing the jugular being bound,
swells toward the Head, but is empty and lank toward the Cava and Heart.

P. Laurenberg conceives ^^^ Animal Spirits are generated in the Cavities,
without any firm judgment or probable Reason.

A. Kyperus a most learned Man, conceives that a special use of these Cavities
is, to ventilate and cool the blood, for the better service of the Brain and
the Generation of Animal Spirits; seeing the extremities of the Arteries do end
in them, and the Ventricles themselves are closed in by a single, cold
Membrane. But in my Judgment the Arterial blood does not come into the
Cavities, before it be cooled, when it returns from the Generation of Spirits.
And then it needs no cooling, being to return immediately through the Veins
into the Heart.

The Use of the dura Matter is, I. To cover the brain with the Marrow and Nerves
thence arising.

II. To distinguish the Brain from the Brainlet, and the Brain it self into two
parts.

III. To constitute the Pericranium, while it sends Ligaments therefore,
through the Sutures.

The pia Matter called so because of its thinness, does immediately enclose the
Pia Matter.
Brain, and its Parts and Ventricles, least they should run about; therefore it
was to be thin and soft; and it is of most exquisite sense. It is thicker in
the third Ventricle, then the rest, if we will believe Olhofius. The sense of
this Membrane was more dull in him that had three bones growing thereto without
hurt, which were seen at Paris by my Cosin-German Henricus Fuiren: and in that
Venetian, who had a pretty large tooched Bone, growing in Falce or the
Duplicature of the Meninx, which Folius did show me.

Its Use is; To cloth the Brain, the Brainlet, the Marrow and the Nerves.

Chap. III. Of the Brain and its Marrow in General.
WIthin the Skul a threefold soft and white substance is to be considered: the
BRAIN or foremore Part, the BRAINLET or Cerebellum the hindmost part, and the
inmost partwhich lies deep under the Brain being a white MARROW; which because
others do ignorantly confound with the Brain it self; I do thus truly set down
the truth of the matter.

The Brain commonly so called has two parts, the one Internal the other
External.

The External part is properly and What is properly the Brain.
stricktly called the BRAIN and is all that which appears outwardly soft, of an
Ash color or yellowish white; which color some conceive to arise from an
innumerable company of Veins there disseminated; and this External substance is
as it were the bark.

The Internal is the remaining substance The Marrow what?
which lies hidden beneath the the former, being more hard compact and white,
which we may call the MARROW, in which are seated the Ventricles commonly so
called, but not in the Brain it self; so that

The Brain and Marrow it self Differ, How they differ?
1. In Situation. 2. In Color. 3. In Consistency. 4. By the going between of
Lines. 5. In Magnitude. 6. In Figure. 7. In Cavities, which are in the Marrow,
not in the Brain. 8. In Nobility.

The white part therefore of the Brain seems to be buried in the Ash-color'd
part, as the Chrystalline Humor is in the Glassie. And though these two
substances, the White and the Ash-color'd, do in dead Carcasses putrified seem
very closely united and continued one to another; yet in the fresh bodies of
healthy persons suddenly killed, they are separated with sundry lines, so that
they may be very well actually severed, if great Dexterity be used, and
Dissection be begun presently after the parties death, otherwise they are
overflowed with much moisture and fall in.

This middlemost white substance or Parts of the Marrow.
Marrow, I divide into the round and long Parts.

The Globous or round part, which I The Head of the Marrow, what?
shall call the Head of the Marrow, resembles the Figure of the Skul, and is of
great bulk, having in it three Cavities or Ventricles commonly so called.

The long part, which I will call the Tail of the Marrow, arises immediately
out of the former like a certain Tail, wherein is engraven the Calamus
Scriptorius or fourth A new opinion concerning the place where the Animal
spirits are made.
Ventricle so called by some; wherein I hold the true Generation of Animal
Spirits to be affected.

And this long Portion of the Marrow, is the beginning and original of all
Nerves whatsoever that are in that place; contrary to what is commonly thought.

Also this lengthened Marrow may be considered in a twofold manner: either as
it remains still within the Skul, and then the Nerves arise therefrom, which
are vulgarly; attributed to the Brain: or as it is without the Skull, and
slides into the Backbone, gaining the title of the Spinal Marrow.

But that young Learners may not be confounded, I shall now propound the
structure of the whole Brain commonly so called.

The greatness of a Man's Brain is The Magnitude of the Brain.
remarkable in proportion to the rest of his body, as Aristotle observes. And
for the most part a man has twice as much Brain as an Ox, viz. the quantity of
four or five pound weight, because he is a more noble Creature, and perpaps
because he goes bolt upright: for when when we would have any thing that is
moveable to stand upright we put a great weight on the top, to prevent its
falling. Yet the scull of a monstrous beast lately found in Scania, might
preternaturally contain twice that quantity of Brain. The Skull it self is kept
in the study of Wormius. And among Mankind, Men have Who have most Brains.
more Brains then women. For to them the greatest brain is given, that have
most need of brains, and greatest use of them, for the exercise of sundry
excellent Animal faculties. Yet Spigelius or Bucretius will not allow of this
difference of the brains of the two Sexes, moved doubtless by Ocular
Inspection, and the great Minds and Endowments of some Women, which the
foregoing Age and this of ours have brought forth. But Women are therefore said
to have less brains then men, because for the most part they have less bodies.

It is of a roundish shape answerable Knobs of the Brain.
to the Skul; yet inwardly the brain has certain knobs, which by some are
cal-Processus mammillares The III. TABLE.
The Explication of the FIGURE
This FIGURE presents the left side of the Brain bowed back into the place of
the right, which according to the foregoing Figure is taken away, as also the
great Clift of the said Side.
aa. The left Ear. bb. The Skin of the Head hanging down. cc. Part of the
^^rehead-Bone. d. The Socket of the Eye. eee. The Hollowness of the Skull,
wherein the lower part of the Brain was contained. ff. The dura Matter hanging
down. hhhhh. The left side of the Brain invested with the pia matter iii. The
great Clift of the left side of the Brain, seated over the Root of the Spinal
Marrow. kk. The left Root of the Spinal Marrow, appearing in the Bottom of the
great Clift, with new Rudiments of the winding, and Vessels there distributed.
llll. The windings of the Brain, according to which the Branches of the
Carotick Artery are distributed. mmmm. The Branches of the Carotick Artery,
ending into the larger left-side Ventricle. nn. The greater left-side lateral
Cavity or Ventricle. oo. The smaller left hand lateral Ventricle. p. The
Entrance of the smaller lateral Ventricle into the greater


page 134



The outward surface of the brain is full of turnings and windings like Why the
Brain has windings.
those of the Guts: which we must not say were made for understanding with
Erasistratus, seeing Asses also have them; nor for lightness sake as Aristotle
would have it; nor that they are without End or Use, as others conceit; but
that the Vessels of the brain might be more safely conveyed through those
turnings and windings, least they might by continual motion be in danger of
breaking, especially at the full of the Moon, when the brain does most of all
swel within the Skul.

The windings of the brain (which I first learnt of Fr. Sylvius a great
Anatomist) The winding Clift of the Brain
if you diligently examine the matter, you shall find to descend a good depth,
and that the brain does gape on each side, over and above that same middle
division made by the Sickle, with a winding clift, which begins in the
forepart, about the roots of the Eyes, See Tab. 3.
whence according to the bones of the Temples, it goes back above the Root of
the spinal Marrow, and divides the upper part of the brain from the lower part.
Yet now and then, that same great Chink cannot be found or very hardly. Instead
thereof I have found a certain small lateral clift on each side easily
separable, even in the common section, near the Ventricles, full of the Carotick
Arteries.

The inner Surface has sundry Extuberances and Cavities, as shall be said in
the following discourse*

The Color is white, because the brain, as all other parts has its original
from The Color.
the Seed, but so, that it has less of Amplification then of Constitution: and
therefore in extreme fastings the brain suffers no diminution.

Its Temperament is cold and moist, which appears from its whiteness and Its
temperament.
moistness. And therefore Hippocrates says the brain is the seat of cold and
clammy humors. For the overgreat heat of the brain is an hinderance both to
Reason and Sleep, as appears in Phrenetick persons. Yet is it by reason of the
spirits hotter then any Air, as Galen rightly says; yet is it not so exceeding
hot* as the Heart

Its substance is proper to it self, such as is not in the whole body besides.
Why the substance of the brain is moderately soft?
Hippocrates does liken it to a Kernel, by reason of the Color and plenty of
moisture. It is soft and moist for the more easy impression of Images and
Conceptions, for it is the seat of Imagination: Yet is it not so soft as to run
about, but has a consistent softness, so that what is imprinted therein, may
continue for a season: for the brain is also the seat of Memory.

The followers of Descartes does weave the brain together of soft and pliable
Fiberkies, mutually touching one another, with intermediate spaces of the
pores, by which Fiberkies the Images of Objects are imprinted upon the brain.
They do indeed excellently explain the reason of Sense, if this Hypothesis of
theirs were true. But such Fiberkies are not found in the soft substance of the
brain, unless we shall mean the beginning of the Spinal Marrow, out of which
the little Ropes of Nerves do arise.

It is a rare case for the substance of the brain to be quite wanting, but
Horstius saw it sometimes much diminished by over great use of carnal
Embracements, as his Epistles show. Howbeit Schenckius, Valleriola, Carpus,
etc. saw a Boy without any brain; as also Nicolas Fontanus at Amsterdam in the
year 1629, who instead of a brain and spinal marrow, found a very clear water
enclosed in a Membrane.

Sundry Vessels are Disseminated through the brain. For if you There are Veins
in the Brain.
squeeze the substance thereof, many little Dripplekies of blood do sweat out:
and therefore I conclude with Galen that very many capillary Veins and Arteries
are there disseminated: which I have also diverse times beheld with mine Eyes.
Which will then principally happen, as Fr. Silvius observes, when the brain is
Flaccid and Friable, because he observed that then it would come of it self
from the Vessels, in dissection; and especially if the Vessels by means of Age,
or any other ways, are become more solid then ordinary.

Now there are no Nerves Disseminated through the Brain and therefore it is
Void of all Sense.

The Veins which are carried through the substance of the brain are, 1. The
five branches of the jugular Veins, some of which go into the Cavity of the
dura matter, others are spread up and down through the Coats and substance of the
brain. But they, according to the Observation of Walaeus, are no other then, 2.
very small twigs, which on either side go into the substance of the brain, out
of the Cavities of dura matter.

There are four Arteries from the Carotides and Cervicales, whereof the former
are disseminated into the brain upwards and downwards, the latter into the
Brainlet or Cerebellum. In the Chinks the same Carotick Arteries are carried in
very great number, both in the surface and the bottom, which Fr. Sylvius
conceives to be the cause of that same troublesome pulsing about the Temples in
some kinds of Headache: though in the judgment of A. Kyperus the pulsation of
the external Arteries adds somewhat hereunto, as the Cure of the pain does show,
by opening the said Arteries.

The Use of the Brain according to Aristotle, The Use of the Brain.
is to cool the Heart, which Galen justly refutes, because the brain is far
from the Heart. But there are some Peripatericks who deny that Aristotle
dissents from the Physicians, while he says the brain is made to temper the
heat of the Heart, and they will have it made to produce Animal spirits: In as
much as the Animal spirits cannot be generated, unless the vital Spirits be
first cooled But,

The Use thereof is, 1. To be the Mansion of the sensitive Soul, for the
performance of Animal Functions. Now the brain is no particular Organ of Sense,
as the Eyes, Ears, etc. but an universal one: for judgment is made in the brain
of the Objects of all the Senses.

Also it passes judgment touching Of the brains Motion.
Animal Motion, whereas it self has no Animal Motion: But it has a Natural
Motion, communicated from the Arteries, and that a perpetual one of widening
and contracting it self, as appears in Wounds of the Head and newborn
Children, in the forepart of whose Head, the brain is seen to pant, because
their bones are as yet exceeding soft and pliable.

In its Dilatation the brain draws vital Spirit with arterial blood out of the
Carotick Arteries, and Air by the Nostrils.

In its contraction it forces the Animal spirits into the Nerves, which like
Conduit pipes carry the said Spirit into the whole body, and therewith the
faculties of Sense and Motion. And by the same Contraction, the blood is forced
out of the Ventricles through the Veins unto the Heart.

The Matter therefore of the Animal The Matter of the Animal Spirits.
Spirits is two fold; viz. Arterial blood full of vital Spirit, and Air.
Touching the place of its Generation we shall speak hereafter. For I am not of
their opinion who confirm that this Spirit is Generated in the substance of
the Brain, or in those Ventricles in the forepart thereof.

2. That the Animal spirit may be contained and kept in the brain as in a
Storehouse, after it is generated. And the substance, truly, of the Brain is a
convenient House and Receptacle for the Animal spirit, seeing it is the same
with the internal Marrowy substance of the Nerves, which also contains the said
Animal Spirit.

Now I am of Opinion that in the A new opinion of the Author, touching the use
of the Brain and the Marrow.
Brain, properly so called, or the Rind, is contained Animal Spirit for Sense;
and that in the whole Marrow Head and Tail, Spirits is kept for Motion, which
shall be made manifest in the following Chapter.

Chap. IV. Of the Parts of the Brain in Particular, and I. of the lengthened
and Spinal Marrow, and its noble Ventricle.
SOme with Galen, Vesalius, Fallopius, The right Dissection of the Head must
begin at the lower Part.
intending to contemplate what is contained in the Brain, begin their
Dissection in the upper part and proceed to the lower, and therefore they do
unfitly propound See the Figure of the Section in the Manual of Nerves.
and explain many parts. I, treading in the steps of Constantinus Varolus,
shall take a quite contrary Course, yet such as is true and accurate, beginning
at the lower part of the brain and so passing to the uppermost: and I shall
afterward propound the order of parts from top to bottom, for their sakes that
will needs follow the vulgar and common way of Dissection; where also a third
way of Dissection shall be propounded.

Beginning therefore at the lowest part of the Brain, we meet The beginning of
the Spinal Marrow.
first with the beginning of the lengthened Marrow; the progress whereof
because it is contained in the Vertebra's of the Spina or Backbone, therefore
it is termed Spinalis and Dorsalis, Medulla, the Spinal or Back-marrow.

And if any one shall think we An Objection.
ought therefore to begin with the brain, because the Spinal Marrow is said to
take its beginning therefrom; The Answer.
we answer, that we make the Marrow both as it is within the Skull and in A new
Opinion of the Author, that the Marrow is the Original of the brain.
the Backbone, to be the beginning rather of the brain; and that the brain
being divided into two parts, is as it were a certain double process or
production of the Marrow it self.

Which is yet more manifest to those that A proof hereof.
behold the Anatomy of Fishes; for there the Head and Tail of the Marrow, is
very great, but the process of the Marrow, or the brain is very little: the
Cause whereof is, that Fishes use motion more then sense, intimating that the
brain or bark contributes more to sense* and the Marrow it self to Motion.
Hence Fish are dull of Sense, but very nimble in motion. And according to this
opinion of ours that saying will be verified, than an hard body is fittest for
motion, and softer for sense.

The IV. TABLE.
The FIGURES Explained.
This TABLE presents the fourth Ventricle of the Brain, the Brainlet, and the
Corpus Callosum, in several Figures.
FIG. I. AA. The Brainlet or Cerebellum and its Globes. B. The Worm-like
process of the Cerebellum or Brainlet. CCCC. The processes of the Brainlet,
which make the bridge of Varolius. D. The beginning of the spinal Marrow. EE.
Two roots or smaller Processes of the spinal Marrow arising from the Brainlet.
F. The fourth Ventricle likened to a Pen* GG. A portion of the Brain cleaving
to the Brainlet.


FIG. II. AA. The inner whiteish substance of the Brainlet. BBB. The outer and
more duskish substance compassing the white about. CCCC. An Elegant structure
of the Brainlet Representing the branchings of Trees.


FIG. III. AA. The appearance of the brain cut off in the middle as far as to
the Ventricles. BB. The corp^s callosum drawn a little to the left ^ide. C. A
portion of the Sickle turned backwards. DD. The right fore Ventricle uncovered
above. EE. The left Ventricle open in like manner. FF. The Plexus choroides. G.
A portion of the Speculum or Septum Lucidum. HH. The dura Matter drawn away on
both ^ides. ^^. The two Thighs or portions of the Fornix.


page 136



The lengthened Marrow arises as some conceive from the brain alone, according
to others from the Brainlet or Cerebellum. But it has both (to speak now at a
vulgar rate) for its beginning.

For it arises from four Roots or Foundations; two of which are greater from
the forepart of the brain commonly so called, two are lesser from the inner
part of the Brainlet or petty Brain. From these united, the spinal Marrow seems
to be constituted. But it is peradventure a more true opinion to think, that
those originals are processes of the Marrow it self, as was said before.

The Substance of the Medulla oblongata or lengthened Marrow, is a little
harder then that of the brain.

One part thereof is within the Skull, four Fingers breadths above the great
Hole of The spinal Marrow divided.
the Hind-part of the Head. Another and the longest part thereof is without the
Skull in the Vertebra's, from the first of the Neck to the last of Os sacrum.

Its Figure is longish and round, The Scripture calls it the Silver Cord. In
its beginning it is thicker and larger then elsewhere.

It is further divided into the right and left part, even as the brain is, by
the pia Matter Another division.
which immediately invests the same, which may be seen in the Marrow of an Ox
indifferently boiled. Hence there may be a Palsy of only one side of the body.

Now it is divided into many little Cords as it were, about the sixth and
seventh Vertebra Another division.
of the Chest: and if the spinal Marrow of a body newly dead* be presently
plunged in cold water, and a separation of these cords made, you may see the
shape of an Horses tail, (especially toward the end) divided into many long
Hairs: so that according to Laurentius, the Nerves also of the Back and Loins,
do spring from the Marrow of the Neck.

It is covered with a tripple Membrane, the first which immediately The Coats
of the Marrow.
covers it, is from the pia Matter.

The second is from the dura Matter and cleaves to the former, Which two,
according to the Observation of Spigelius, are not separated any distance one
from another, as they were within the Skul, but touch one the other.

The third being external springs according to Galen from a strong Ligament,
which binds together the foreparts of the Vertebra's, and in the hinder part
ends into a strong Coat, least in bending or extending the Backbone, the
Marrow should be hurt.

A thick and clammy humor is poured round about this Coat, to moisten the same.

Afterward the Marrow is shut up in the Vertebrae, least it should be hurt (as
the brain is shut up in the Skul) seeing it is a noble part, and the original
of the Nerves. Therefore the Ancients called the Cavity of the Spina or
Backbone Hieran Surigga, the holy Pipe.

In the beginning of this Marrow, while it is yet in the Skul, there appears
engraven.

An Hollow Cavity, which Galen calls the Ventricle of the Brainlet; others A
noble Ventricle in the Marrow.
call it the fourth Ventricle of the brain, though it is not in the brain. But
I shall term it the noble Ventricle of the Marrow. This is most solid, most
pure, most subtle, but least of all, for it contains a matter of geater force
and faculty then the rest, as Galen says.

And because, after a straight even progress, it is widened on each side, and
sharpened afterward into a point, because of this shape it is called Calamus
Scriptorius, the Writing Pen or Quil.

Now from the Cerebellum or The cover of the noble Ventricle is from the
Brainlet.
Brainlet, which is joined to this Marrow, another and middle half of this
Ventricle is constituted, as it were a cover; so that all this Cavity is
between the brainlet and Medulla oblongata, or production of the Marrow, but
the chief Cavity is the lowermost, which is in the Marrow.

The Use of this Ventricle I hold to The true place where Animal Spirits are
generated according to our Author.
be this, viz. that it should be the place where Animal spirits are Generated
and Elaborated. For this Ventricle is 1. The most pure and subtle. 2. It has
a Cavity sufficient for that purpose. 3. It is seated in such a place, that it
can pour forth Animal spirits, into all the Nerves round about it. And
therefore Herophilus did rightly judge, that this was the most principal
Ventricle.

Nor can I devise how it came to pass A Proof.
that certain learned Men could not see these weighty Arguments, who have
written without cause, that I assigned the Generation of Animal Spirits to the
Calamus Scriptorius, without any reasons moving me thereto.

Now must we think with Spigelius, that this Ventricle did only result by
consequence, out of the round particles of the Brain, touching one another
without any design of Nature: for Nature does nothing to no end, no not when
she seems most of all to do so.

Others conceive that the Animal Spirit is bred in the fore Ventricles of the
Brain.

But they are full of Excrements, whose receptacles they rather are, as appears
by the Glandula Pituitaria unto them, and in that they are often found filled
with Phlegm, and abundance of water.

Others in the Rete Mirabile, others The preparation of the Animal Spirits
where it is?
in the Plexus Choroides.

But in these we hold the Animal Spirit is prepared, but not Generated, For
nature is wont to provide intertwinings of Vessels for the preparation of any
matter: and seeing these Vessels are so small, how can it be generated in them,
especially seeing so many Excrements of the brain flow through the Ventricles.

Others will have them to be wrought in the substance of the brain. Others in
the lengthened body of the spinal Marrow. But the Generation of so subtle a
Spirit, did require some Cavity, which is also allowed to the Generation of the
vital Spirits.

For which cause some have been induced to allot the making of the natural
spirit to be in the right Vencle of the Heart, because there is no Cavity in
the Liver.

I am therefore of opinion that the Animal Spirit is prepared in the Rete
Mirable, and yet more in the Plexus Choroides, and that is generated and
wrought up in this Cavity of the Medulla Elongata, or in the noble Ventricle;
and afterward, as much of it as not derived into the spinal Marrow and the
Nerves of the brain, is preserved and retained in the whole brain, as in a
Storehouse.

The Use of the lengthened and spinal Marrow, is to be the original of all the
This Marrow the beginning of all Nerves.
Nerves. For from that part thereof within the Skull, those Nerves arise which
are commonly attributed to the Brain, being usually reckoned to be seven pair.
But from the longest part thereof which is in the Backbone, Anatomists do
reckon thirty pair of Nerves to arise, viz. as many as there are holes in the
Vertebrae.

Mean while we must not so understand the matter, as though only so many
branches or Cords did thence arise. For every Nerve arise* with many little
strings or Fibers, which going out at the hole of any Vertebra, are there
joined together by the Membranes, as if the Nerve came out of one branch.

Chap. V. Of the Cerebellum Brainlet, Or Petty-Brain.
THe Brainlet being as it were a little The Brainlet what it is?
and private kind of Brain, is a certain smaller portion, placed under the
Brain in the lower and after-part of the Occiput or Minder-Head: In Brutes it
takes up commonly the whole Region of the Occiput.

It has the same Substance, Consistency, Color, Motion, etc. with the Brain.

In the Turnings and Windings it differs from the Brain. The brain Its
Structure.
has sundry Circumvolutions with out any Method or Order; the Brainlet has
circular and ordinate ones, stretched one over another like Plates. They are
differenced partly by interposed Vessels, partly by the pia matter, which being
separated, the several Circles may be taken out after another.

The inner Substance is various, whiteish and Ashcoloured, which distributed
certain Vessels as it were.

The Vessels interposed betwixt the several plates, are carried through the pia
matter like nets, which according to the accurate Observation of Francis
Sylvins, arising from the Branches of the Arteria cervicalis, do at last end
into the fourth Ventricle.

It is constituted chiefly of two lateral parts, on each side making a Globe as
it were.

It has two Processes or Excrescences, termed Vermiformis or Worm-like,
because they are variously orbiculated, and consist of many transverse
portions, coupled with a thin Membrane. Their Extremity being thin and unequal,
is as big as a small ^a^e.

And they are situate at the seat of the noble Cavity, one before, the other
behind.

About the hinder-part of the Trunk of the Spinal Marrow, in the Circumference
of the noble Ventricle, out of the same brainlet there proceed two other
globous processes, sometimes two of each side, sometimes three. Those are
greatest which are seated by the Vermiformis, the rest are See Tab. 4. Fig. 1.
smaller. Varolius calls it the bridge of the brainlet.

The Use of all the Processes is to hinder the noble Ventricle from being
obstructed, by pressure of the brainlet. Laurentius says they help the motion
of the Ventricles like a Valve, because the Vermiformis being shortened opens
the way, which goes from the third to the fourth Ventricle; when it is extended
it shuts the Chink, least the Spirits should go back into the upper Cavities.
Riolanus dissents but little from him, for he will have it to open and shut the
entrance of the fourth Ventricle. But it is not moved of it self, because, as
the brain, so is it void of any proper motion, unless you assign it to the
Vessels or pia Matter, which are very small, or at least to the neighboring
Animal Spirits.

Now I believe the use of the bridge is, to combine and keep in compass the
Circles of the brain, and as a bulwark to defend the noble Ventricle. And
therefore it would more properly be called a Sconce or Fence, then a bridge.

The Use of the brainlet is the same with The Use.
that of the brain. But Galen would have it to be the Original of the hard
Nerves; which is false. For no Nerves have their Original from it.

Chap. VI. Of the rest of the Parts observed in the Brain; viz. the Rete
mirabile, Glandula pituitaria, Infundibulum, Ventricles of the Brain, Corpus
callosum, Fornix, Plexus, Choroides, Glandula pinealis.
THe precedent parts being considered, we must come now to those things, which
are presently visible, about the Conjunction of the Optic Nerves, such as are;
the Rete mirable, Glandula pituitaria, and the Infundibulum.

The Rete mirable or wonderful Net, Rete mirabile
which some call Plexus retiformis, is so called by reason of its artificial
and wonderful structure, for it shows like many Nets heaped together. Now it
has another structure in Calves and Oxen, in which Creatures it is also more
manifestly discernable then in mankind, though we must not say that it is not
in Men as Vesalius does, Vesalius his Error.
though hard to discern. I remember nevertheles that it has been wanting.

This Net lies under the Basis of the Brain, encompasses the Glandula, at the
sides of the Cavity of Os Sphaenoides.

It consists (not of the Nerves of the third Conjugation as Volcherus would
have it, but) of the Carotick and Cervical Arteries, carried up from the Heart,
to the Basis of the Brain, which convey blood and Spirit in to this Net.

Riolanus places the Rete mirabile at the same Basis of the Brain, viz. The
offspring of the Plexus Choroides, which creeps through the former Ventricles.

The Use of this Net is, that therein the blood and vital Spirit may be a very
long time detained, that the first preparation toward the Generation of
Annimal Spirits may there be made. Also Waloeus has observed that this Net
does consist of small twigs of the jugular Veins; that they may doubtless carry
back such blood as is superfluous after the preparation of the Animal Spirits.

The Glandula pituitaria or Rheumkernel, Glandula pituitaria.
is so called from its use, because it receives the Excrements of the brain out
of the Ventricles through the Funnel. And Its Seat.
therefore it is placed at the end of the Funnel in the saddle of the
Sphaenoides. Galen calls it barely Glandula.

On the upper-side it is hollow, beneath bossie or bunching. Its Figure.


Its Substance is harder and more compact then that of other Kernels. Its
Substance.


It is clothed with the Pia Matter.

Its Use is the same, with that of other Its Use.
Kernels, viz. by its drinking spungy flesh to receive grosser Excrements (for
the thin Vapor out at the Sutures) collected in the Ventricles of the brain,
many times in great quantities. For the brain being of The Brain full of
Excrements.
great bulk, did need much Aliment, and therefore it breeds many Excrements,
especially when it is in any measure disordered. These Excrements the Kernel
does sometimes cast into the Palate of the Mouth, and sometimes suffers them to
drain away by the holes in the basis of the Skull.

Others suppose the use of this Kernel to be, to shut the Funnel, least the
Animal Spirits should go forth. For just over the Glandula Pituitaria or
Rheum-Kernel, is

Infundibulum or Funnel, so called Infundibulum.
from its shape, for above the Head thereof is large, the lower part is a long
and strait pipe. Others call it Pelvis the Basin, which words does more
properly belong to the Head, or beginning of the Funnel then to the whole body
thereof.

The Funnel therefore is an Orbicular Cavity (sometimes triangular with sharp or
blunt Angels) made of the pia Matter, where it ingirts the basis of the brain.
Its beginning is large, at the hole of the third Ventricle, as they call it;
through which the Excrements are packt away out of the Ventricles into this
Funnel.

Riolanus informs us that it has four little pipes, which distill Rheum or
Phlegmatic serum through the four holes resting upon the Sellae Sphenoideae.

Its of a dark Color, and if you open it you shall find it full of thick Phlegm.

The V. TABLE.
The FIGURE Explained.
The Fornix being removed the Glandula Pinealis is here to be seen as also the
third Ventricle of the Brain, which is in the middle between the two foremore
Ventricles.
AA. The Brain cut smooth off through the middle. B. The Fornix took away and
turned back. CC. Its Expansions or binder Thighs. DDDD. The bottom of the right
and left Ventricles, wherein the Vessels appear before. EE. Their Walls or
Sides. F. The foremore hole of the third Ventricle, which some call Vulva. G. A
chink denoting the third Ventricle. HH. Bunchings of the Brain called Nates,
the Buttocks. II. The Protuberances or bunchings called Testes the Stones. K.
The Glandula Pinealis or Pine-kernel-^^^p'd Glan-dulae.


page 139



Two little whiteish Kernels or Portuberancies of the brain are placed before
this passage, which are to be seen, the brain being turned upside down, there
where the Funnel receives wheyish E^c^^men^^ ^^^ of the Ventricles.

These things being thus handled, the Original of the Nerves follows in course
the Section to be observed, which every where arise from the Marrow; of which I
shall speak in our Manual of the Nerves.

The Ventricles or Cavities of the Brain do follow.

These according to the common manner of Section, beginning from above, are
thought to be three: two foremore and uppermore as they call them, and one in
the middle, to which some add a fourth, of which we spoke before.

But if dissection be made after the new manner, beginning from beneath; there
appear only two, so that the third is common, being a portion of the other two.

I conceive that there is but one Ventricle of the brain, which is in the The
Authors opinion that there is but one Ventricle of the Brain.
middle, but the beginning thereof is divided into two; or there are two
processes, which receiving the Excrements, carry them into the middle it self,
which they call the third. For there is one continued Cavity of the brain, and
the two Ventricles so called, do end into a common Cavity.

Mean while, because this and that part of the Cavity seem diversely formed,
some distinction may be allowed for Doctrins sake.

Those two Ventricles which are ill termed the foremore and uppermore (because
The foremore Ventricle described.
they consist also in the hinder and lower part of the Brain, perhaps they
might better be called the lateral Ventricles, and with Vesalius the right and
left) are the largest of all, crooked, full of windings, Semicircular, and
clothed with the pia Matter.

They are commonly and not unfitly liken'd to the Moon when she is in the Wane;
although they are hardly ever demonstrated to be such in dissection. But seeing
they are both oblong, and very large in their hinder part, they may also be
likened to Horse-shoes. This round form of the Ventricles was first discovered
by the most accurate Fr. Sylvius, and after him I have often demonstrated the
same. But if you would find the true Figure, you must cut the brain deep
toward the Skul, or the Temples, on each side, because it is deeply sunk into
the Corpus Callosum. For that part of the Ventricles toward the Septum lucidum
is higher, and that which is toward the lateral part of the Skull is lower.
The foremore and deeper parts, are near to the Mammillary processes, and if we
believe Piccolhomineus, Bauhinus, Riolanus, they are in some manner
transpassable, especially in elderly persons.

Moreover they run out in their hinder part by a straight Course, where they
form a Cavity which is somewhat round, not unlike the Finger of a Glove; this I
remember has been sometimes wanting.

Moreover it is to be noted, that these Ventricles do environ the lateral and
hind parts of the Roots of the Spinal Marrow, which also, under the Plexus
Choroides, a part of the brain being wreathed and attenuated inwards, and
upwards making the Concameration of the Ventricles, does embrace with a
selvidge as it were and a Fringe or lace, which the praise worthy Sylvius wont
so to call for likeness sake, it being knit to the was foresaid roots by
exceeding thin threads. If gently lifting up the Plexus, you shall remove this
lace from the Root, you shall find little Arteries creeping through the lower
surface of the Ventricle, continued to the Ne^-like Coronet of little Arteries
investing the root; by help of which, this Lace seems to stick more close to
the Root.

But here you shall observe, that there is an easy outgate for the Humors
contained in the said Ventricles, which may descend down along the spinal
Marrow.

They are therefore formed, not in Corpus Callosum.
the Brain, but in the marrow, where they call it Corpus Callosum, because the
substance is there harder like a Callus, where the Ventricles seem to rest upon
the two foremore Extuberancies.

The Conformation of the Ventricles The Conformation of the Ventricles of the
Brain.
of the brain, which all cannot easily discern, I have by Anatomical
Inspection and the Guidance of Sylvius, learnt to be thus.

Two Roots of the Spinal Morrow do penetrate a good depth into the substance of
the brain; to the upper and former whereof, especially where it looks inward,
the brain being continued (now I mean the whiteish and Ash-colored part by the
term Brain) it spreads it self every way, especially outward and backwards and
by little and little wreathes and contracts its lower extremities inward and
upwards, till at last being attenuated, it does on all sides embrace the Root
of the spinal Marrow with a lace, a little below the place where it springs
therefrom, as was said before; and so forms the lateral Ventricles.

But in the foremore and inner part, and whiteish substance ascending from each
Root, and making one body called Corpus Callosum, it is carried back; and
covering the middle distance between the Roots, which is the third Ventricle,
and the wide mouths of the lateral Ventricles opened thereinto* framed by it
self, it makes the Fornix, Arch or Vault; and is continued to the hinder and
inner part of the Limbus or edge of each Ventricle.

Regius adds many pores in the Ventricles; looking into the Fiberkies of the
substance of the brain, in which the Animal spirit is bred. But those pores and
Fiberkies are invisible to the Eyes of Anatomists.

They are distinguished by a loose and Septum lucidum.
wrinkeld Partition-Skin: which if it be stretched out and held against the
light, it shines because of its transparency, and is therefore called Septum
lucidum: which some will have to spring from a most thin portion of the brain
it self, others from the pia Matter doubled. But the former opinion is truer,
which you may perceive, if after the manner of Sylvius having removed the brain
and sickle of the other side, you shall search the Ventricle of the opposite
part, and shall lift up that part of the brain which is continued with the
Corpus Callosum, at the Orifice of the third ventricle; for then it may easily
be seen, and discerned to be a small portion of the brain.

The lower, whiteish part, where the ventricles Fornix.
are joined, is termed

FORNIX the Arch, or Testudo the Belly of a Li^e, being of a Triangular Figure,
consisting of three shanks, one before and two behind. In the common Method of
Dissection, this body is supposed to be spread out over the third ventricle, and
to lie beneath the Corpus Callosum.

Under the Fornix according to the observation of Sylvius the Cheroides plexus
of both sides, is immediately carried, tending toward the Glandula pinealis;
under which Plexus, in its upper part, the two Roots of the spinal Marrow grow
together; so that here the Testudo, is not seated immediately under the third
ventricle.

The VI. TABLE.
The FIGURE Explained.
This Figure presents the left Ventricle of the Brain, being bent back, as it
is represented in the fifth Figure.
a. The right Ear. b. The left Ear. cccc. The bone of the Forehead. dd. Part of
the Skin of the Head hanging down on either side. eeeeeee. The dura Matter of
both sides hanging down. fffffff. The Brain according to the passage of the
left Ventricle, divided from that part which lies over the Root of the spinal
Marrow, and turned backwards. ggg. Part of the Brain resting upon the spinal
Marrow. hh. A great chink of the Brain going over the Root. iiiiiii. The inner
face and form of the left Ventricle resembling the sharp cornered Moon. k. The
Cavity of the Ventricle like a Gloves-finger. l. An orifice going into the
third Ventricle. mmm. The lace sticking to the Root of the spinal Marrow nn.
The lace removed from the said Root. ooo. The Plexus Choroides. ppp. The Root
of the spinal Marrow raised up. qqq. Vessels creeping up and down the inner
surface of the Ventricle, and springing for a great part, from the small
Arteries which compass the Root. r. The Septum lucidum.


page 141



The third Ventricle commonly so called, The third Ventricle.
or the long Chink, is the meeting together of the Ventricles aforesaid, which
is formed in the Center, as it were of the Marrow of the Brain, by reason of
the Conjuction of two round Trunks proceeding out of the Brain. It has in it
two passages, the first foremore, going downwards to the Glandula pituitaria,
that it may there void its Excrements: the other is hindermore, clothed with a
Membrane; which hole some call Anus, the Fundament; it goes beneath the
Buttocks to the noble Ventricle, that the prepared matter of the Animal
spirits, may pass into the place and Womb as it were of their Generation.

This hole is nothing else but a space arising upon the mutual contact of the
The Anus, what it is?
four Trunks of the spinal Marrow,

Now the Nates or Buttocks, and the Testes or Stones are four Orbicular
prominences, The Nates and Testes.
which they say are in the Brain, which is falf. They call the two portions of
the Roots of the Medulla oblongata, which arise from the Brainlet, Nates; and
those two little ones of the Roots from the Brain, they call Testes. And these
parts are lower, the other upper.

These differences, as Fr. Sylvius notes, between the Testes and the Nates,
have place in Brutes rather then in Men; for the Men they are commonly equal,
and many times the Testes are the bigger.

But it is a trifling piece of business to impose such Names as these; as also
when they Penis. Vulva.
call the Glandula pinealis, Penis, and a certain long ditch between the
Eminences they term Vulva.

Between the fore-more Ventricles so called, and the Seat of the Testudo, there
The Plexus Choroidis, what?
is, the Plexus Choroidis or Reticularis so called, being a contexture of very
small Veins and Arteries, sent partly from the Arteries, partly from the Vessels
of the dura Matter in the fourth Ventricle. There is a glandulous substance
interwoven within this Plexus, and a portion of the pia Matter. The Plexus
Choroides being truly glandulous, does receive a little branch of the Carotick
artery, which pierces into the lower part of the brain, which ends about the
Glandula pinealis, where it branches up and down through the lower Surface of
the Ventricle.

The Use hereof is the same with that of the Rete mirabile.

At the beginning of that hole, which passes from the middle Ventricle into the
noble Glandula pinealis.
Ventricle, there is placed a certain Glandule or Kernel, termed Pinealia the
Pine-kernel Glandule, because it is fashioned like the Kernel of a Pineapple.
The Greeks call it conarion or some cono^ides, some term it the Yard of the
brain* It is of an hard substance, of a yellowish and sometimes dark color, and
is covered with a thin Membrane. In Creatures newly killed it is large, in old
karcasses, being melted it is scarce apparent, or is very small, as also in
men, whose brains cannot be opened whilst they are warm. And therefore they
say it spends like Camphire exposed to the air, being also partly melted, as
Salt is in a moist place.

According to the Observation of Sylvius a nervous little string does fasten
this Kernel as it stands betwixt the Testes.

Who also observed more then once certain granes of sand in this Kernel, and
sometimes also a little stone as big as the fourth part of a pease, and somewhat
round.

The Use of this Pine-kernel is like that of other kernels, and especially to
help the distribution of Vessels through the brain. Some will have it placed
like a Valve before the hole which passes into the fourth Ventricle.

Des Carts and his Followers Meyssonerius, Regius, Hogelandius, do conceive
that this Kernel being placed in the middle of the Ventricles, which when a man
is awake are distended with Spirits perpetually, does 1. Receive the motions of
all Objects. 2. That the Soul in this part done by these motions, does
apprehend all external sensible Objects, and all the Ideas proceeding from the
five Senses, as in a Center, and discern the same, and does afterward by help
thereof send Spirits into all parts; as in a small Sphaerical glass, all things
are received in the same order in which they are either in a Field or Chamber.

For this cause Meyssonerius will have it to be of a conick Figure, because
Individuals require more space then sorts or kinds of things. And that these
Idea's are diversely moved by the motion of the animal spirit, but are always
found joined by the Verb EST, and according to their equality or inequality,
truth or falsehood is compounded, being compared together like two Lines.

And that for this cause Infants do not presently speak nor reason, because the
slappiness of their brain gives not passage to the Idea's. And that the
overgreat and confused motion of these Idea's in the Pine-shap'd kernel, makes
ravenings, as in persons drunk, phrentick, etc.

But many things there are which will not suffer me to embrace this new and
witty Opinion. For

1. It is too small and obscure a body, to be able to represent clearly the
Species of all things. 2. The Species of all Senses do not come hither, because
the Nerves do not touch the Kernel. 3. It is placed in the Quarter of
Excrements, whether they are purged out, by the third, and two foremore
Ventricles, where the Species or Representations of things would be defiled. 4.
The Species of things are perceived rather there whereto they are carried. But
every sensory Nerve each in its place carries the Species to the beginning of
the spinal Marrow, and therefore each in their place are judged and received by
the Soul, in the beginning of the spinal Marrow. Moreover this Marrow is big
enough, globous, hard, and of a brighter color. 5. Several Idea's would be
confounded in this little body. The Eye indeed being likewise very small,
receives the Species or Representations of things without Consusion, but they
are only the visible Species; whereas in this Kernel the diverse Species of
different Senses are to be received. 6. There is hence no open or known passage
to the Nerves, as from the beginning of the Marrow, nor any communion with some
Nerves of the external senses.
The Use of the Cavities or Ventricles That the Ventricles of the Brain serve
to receive Excrements.
of the brain is, to be the Receptacles of Excrements, which is apparent.

1. From their Structure: for an hole goes from the Cavities to the Glandula
pituitaria. 2. The Surface of the Ventricles is continually moistened with a
watery Humor. 3. They are often found topful of phlegm and watery moisture.
Howbeit in this new Section after The order of the parts to be shown in the
new way of Dissection.
the neck of the funnel is showed with the Glandula: the Marrow being lifted
up, first of all the Nates and the Testes are seen, and then the hole into the
noble Ventricle; afterward diverse Nerves, the, Ventricles of the brain with
the hole into the funnel the Corpus callosum, the Fornix, the Plexus Choroides,
and the Glandula pinealis.

But in the old and common way of The order of the parts in the old Dissection.
Dissection, these parts of the brain are showed in order: The Corpus callosum,
the Septum tenue, the two Extuberances, upon which the Ventricles rest; the two
Ventricles, commonly called the foremore; the Fornix, the Plexus Choroidis, the
third Ventricle, its two holes, the Glandula pinealis; and the brainlet being a
little removed, the Nates and Testes the brainlet, the worm-fashion'd
Processes, the noble Ventricle, the Pelvis, Glandula pituitaria, and Rete
mirabile.

But if you will use the middle way of Dissection, familiar to Fr. Sylvius,
thus The order in the middle way of Dissection.
you shall proceed. Take off the Skull as deep as conveniently you can. Then
suffering the left side of the brain to remain untoucht, with its Membrane;
begin your Dissection on the right side, first of all cutting asunder and
removing the dura Matter; then take away some particles of the brain with the
pia Matter, til you come to the Cavity of the Ventricle, and then follow both
its upper and lower passage with your Dissection, as you see The Dissection of
the right side.
it done in the second Table. Separate the Limbus if you please, with a blunt
probe, from the root of the Spinal Marrow, and show it; though that may be more
conveniently done in the opposite side of the Brain. The greatest part of the
right side of the Brain being thus taken away, the upper and lower Cavities of
the Sickle are to be shown, as also the greater right side lateral Cavity, and
the oblique descend of the upper Cavity thereinto, all which you have expressed
in the foresaid Table.

These things being thus done, go to the left side, and therein first cut
asunder The Dissection of the left side.
the dura Matter, and remove it with the Falx or Sickle; then gently remove the
left side of the Brain, into the place of the right side newly removed; and as
you are doing this observe from Tab. 3. the Vessels going into the lateral
Cavity, and how they rise up about the optic nerves, and are distributed into
very many branches, creeping every where up and down the inner Substance of the
brain, and especially the winding Surface thereof, til at last they end into
the Carotick Arteries. Then search out that same notable chink or clift,
between the windings, which is figured out in the Table aforesaid; and having
cut the pia Matter, open the sides thereof a litlittle with a Spa^^er, that the
branches of the Carotides may better appear, which are carried through the
bottom of the turnings, with the Rudiments of new windings. But if, before you
shall begin to show the brain, you shall free the An excellent Argument for the
Circulation of the Blood.
Carotick Arteries and the jugular Veins from the parts adjacent in the Neck,
and bind them distinctly; and then by a Wound made in an Artery shall put in a
crooked hollow probe and blow; the vessels disseminated through the whole brain
will swel, as being branches of the Carotick Arteries, until the air with the
forced blood shall at length empty it self into the Ventricles: if by the
foresaid hollow probe, you shall in like manner blow into the Ventricles, you
will perceive their continuation and communion with the jugular Veins, by the
swelling and distention of the said Veins; and will acknowledge that the
Circulation of the blood, is not a little confirmed by this pleasant Spectacle.

Hence, returning to a farther search into the fabric of the brain, and a wary
Incision being made in the hinder part of the side propounded, search there for
the larger Cavity of the Ventricle, and follow it with your Dissection to both
the Ends; then turn back every way the outer part of that which is dissected,
the middle part being kept upright, which rests upon the root of the Spinal
Marrow, and is continued therewith, which is excellently well expressed in
Table the sixth, in the Explication whereof, what you see set down, weigh in
order.

Finally, taking away the Brain, observe again all the Cavities and that more
distinctly; and then when you have seen the third Ventricle, the Funnel, the
Glandula pituitaria, the pares of Nerves, after the usual manner; go back again
to the Penis, Anus, Testes, Nates, etc. and examine the brainlet and its parts.

Nor will it be unprofitable, as often as a new occasion of Dissection is
offered, so often to change the section in some part; for so it will come to
pass, that you will always observe somewhat which was unobserved before, or
neglected, or not distinctly enough considered.

Chap. VII. Touching the Forehead.
THe Hairy part of the Head being Why Men's Face, is void of Hair?
explained, the smooth part or FACE follows, which in man is void of Hairs,
otherwise then i^ is in Beasts, for Beauties sake; it is also called Vultus
because of the judgment of the will, which is Conspicuous of the Face.

The upper part thereof, viz. the Forehead is termed Frons a ferendo from
carrying, Frons why so called?
as some conceive, because it carries in it tokens of the mind: the rest
thereof, from the Eyebrows to the Chins end, is the lower part, in which are
many other parts, which are hereafter to be explained in order, external and
internal, the Organs of the Senses, Muscles of the Eyes, Nose, Lips, etc.

The Skin of the Forehead, because it is moved, therefore it has Muscles,
which Its Skin.
Platerus terms the signifiers of the Affections of the Mind. Now the Muscles
of the Muscles.
Forehead do lift up the Eyebrows, and are thickest at the said Eyebrows.

They arise from the Skull, near the coronal Suture, and are knit at the sides
to the temporal Muscles, but in the middle they are distinguished a little
above, but beneath they are so nearly associated, that they seem to be one
Muscle, and end at the Eyebrows. Yet I have observed in a large nosed person,
that an Appendix of the said Muscles did reach to the Gristles of the Nose.

They have straight Fibers. Surgeons therefore must not cut them athwart, least
they destroy the lifting up of the Eyebrows; but upwards, according to their
length. Hosman after Aquapendent stands for oblique fibers, on the right side
from the right hand to the left, on the left side from the left hand to the
right. But this they do against Experience, ocular Inspection, and Reason. For
the skin of the Forehead is by a straight course, either elevated or depressed
by help of right fibers, which are the cause of straight motion. In the point
of right fibers, we have the Consent of great Anatomists Vesalius, Laurentius,
Bauhinus, Platerus, Veslingus, etc.

And because the skin of the Forehead grows close to these Muscles, therefore
both the Forehead and the Eyebrows are moved.

Howbeit there are sometimes also two Muscles in the binder part of the Head,
which move the skin thereof, short, thin and broad, with straight fibers,
ending above into a broad Tendon, and touching the hindermore Muscles of the
Ears, in their sides. Some men that are furnished with these Muscles, can draw
the skin of their Heads backwards.

Chap. VIII. Of the Eyes.
THe Eyes are termed Oculi ab occultando The Eyes why called Oculi?
or occludendo from shutting or hiding, because they are hid under the
Eyelids; they are the Instruments of Sight made of Humors, Membranes, Muscles,
Vessels, and other Parts.

They are seated in an eminent place Their Situation.
like Watchmen, in boney Sockets covered with the Periostium for better
Safeguards sake.

They are in Number two, for the Their Number.
perfection of Sight, and that one being defective, the other may supply its
place and office. Howbeit both-Eyes see but one Object, at one and the same
time, and not a double one, whether because the knowing and judging Faculty is
one, as Aquapendent conceives, or because the Axle-tree of the two visual
Pyramides, do pass along upon the same Surface of a plane as Galen expounds the
matter; or because of the exact similitude they have received from particular
things from whence they came, the internal sense judging only one and the same
species, as Aquiloniu^ does philosophize. They are in Mankind very little
distant one from another, both for the Nobility and perfection of their Action,
and the Reception of visible species.

They are round; but a little longish, Their Shape.
like bulbous Roots whereupon

Two Angles or Corners are made, at the Socket of the Eyes, which are termed
Canthi; the inner and greater at the Nose, the outer and lesser at the Temples.

In and about the Eye, there are sundry parts, some without the Eye, for
safeguard Its Parts.
or commodities sake, as the Eyelids with their Hair and the Eyebrows, also
Caruncles in the Corners of the Eyes; other parts there are which con^ the Eye
it self, and they are Fat, Muscles, Membranes and Humors.

Palpebrae the Eyelids are parts which cover and shut the Eye, which cleanse
The Eyelids.
and putrify the Cornea Tunica, and likewise by their overshadowing render the
Picture in the Retina more illustrious, according to the opinion of Averrhoes,
Varolius* Plempius.

The are made up of the Skin, the Membrana carnosa, Muscles, a Coat, the Tarsi
and Hairs: and therefore their substance is soft,

The Eyelid, is either the lower which if we believe Galen, is of it self
immovable, Whether the lower Eyelid be moved?
save in some birds. Yet Bauhin and Aqua-pendent do aver that they are really
moved, and Fallopius proves it by the example of a Sea-Calf, and any one may
prove the same in a Looking-glass, wherein he may see his lower Eyelid meet
the upper. But either this motion is obscure or we must say with Vesalias and
Sylvius that the upper part of the circular Muscle does lift up the upper part
of the Eyelid, and that the lower part is drawn down, by the other part of the
Muscle, which notwithstanding is not true, because the straight Muscle lift up;
or we must say with Piccolhomineus that they follow the motion of the Cheeks;
or finally, the Orbicular Muscles only moves the upper Eyelid, and does but
embrace the lower, and knit it is a coupler. The other is the upper, which is
moved and that most swiftly. so that we compare a quick motion to the twinkling
of the Eye.

Now they are moved upwards, that is to say are opened and lifted up by The
Muscles of the Eyelids.
the right Muscle which is less then the other. It arises about the Optic
Nerve, and ends with a Tendon into the Extremities of the Eyelid. They are
moved downwards, that is The VII. TABLE.
The Explication of the FIGURES.
This TABLE represents the Muscles of the Eye in their natural Situation, and
the Muscle of the Eyelid by it self.
FIG. I. AAAA. The hollow part of the Skul cut off. BB. The inner and whiteish
portion of the Brain dissected. CC. The Brainlet or Cerebellum D. The meeting
and union of the Optic Nerves. EE. The parting of the said Nerves going to
each Eye. F. The Caruncula Lachrymalis drawn out of its place. GG. The first
Muscle of the Eye called Attollens. H. In the right Eye, shows the second
Eye-muscle, or the Musculus deprimens. II. In both Eyes shows the Musculi recti
interni or Adducentes. KK. In each Eye shows the recti externi or Abducentes.
L. The Musculus quintus, or obliquus externus, is showed in the right Eye. MM.
The sixth Muscle or the obliquus, internus, whose Tendon passes through the
Pully, N. O. Shows the optic Nerve in the right Eye. P. The Cornea Tunica, in
the midst whereof is the Pupilla.


FIG. II. A. The optic Nerve. B. The Nerves which moves the Eye. C. The
Trochlearis Musculus, whose Tendon, E. goes through the Pulley, D. F. G. The
Musculi recti, internal and external. H. The Muscle proper to the upper
Eyelid, contained within the Socket of the Eye. III. The Eyelids cut out off.
KK. The Cilia, that is the Ends of the Eyelids adorned with Hair.


page 144

to say are shut and covered, by a certain Orbicular or Circular Muscle, which
is every way half a Fingures breadth, arising from the Root of the Nose, which
afterward runs back with circular Fibers, under the lower Eyelid, through the
outward corner, and ends above the upper Eyelid, at the same place of the
inner corner. Spigelius and others do divide it into the upper and lower
Muscle, because each has a different Nerve coming from diverse places, and they
observed that in the Convulsio canina so called, sometime the lower Eyelid was
stif, the upper being moveable. But no division of this Muscle can be discerned
by the sharpest Eyesight, the Fibers being every where continued, though the
insertion of the Nerves be different as it is in some other Muscles, of the
Nose etc.

The Membrana carnosa is thin in this place, together with the Muscles, like
The Membranes.
another simple thin Membrane; and therefore Aristotle said that the Skin of
the Eyelid was without flesh, and being cut off, like the Foreskin, it grows
not again.

They are clothed with an inner Coat springing from the Pericranium, exceeding
thin and soft, least they should hurt the Eyes, which they touch.

The Extremities of the Eyelids are hard and Gristley; but soft like small
Gristles, and Semicircular, the Greeks term them Tarsous, the Latins CILIA
whereon the Hairs are fastened The Cilia, what?
(which some term Cilia) being straight because situate in an hard place,
keeping all ways in a manner the same greatness hindering small and light
matters from falling into the Eye, and serving to direct the fight which Galen
proves from such as have them fallen or pulled off, who can hardly discern
things afar off, especially if they be of a dark color, which Montaltus does
prove by the example of a youth at Lisbon.

The SUPERCILIA or Eyebrows, are Hairs growing at the bottom of the The use of
the Eye-brow.
Forehead, above the Eyes, intercepting such things, as fall from the Head that
they may not light into the Eyes.

CARUNCULA a small portion of flesh, is placed at each great corner of the Eye,
containing Humor to moisten the Eye; and it is placed over an hole bored in the
Nose-bone, which is Punctum lachrmyale
called Punctum lachrymale (distinct from these two holes in the edge of the
Eyelids, which Galen call Tremata, and are most visible in living bodies,
especially of such as are inclined to weeping) least we should continually
weep. But in an Ox there is moreover a moveable Membrane, which can shut the
Eye, though the Eyelid be open, by help whereof Brutes wink and cover their
Eyes, when they fear any thing should fall into or hit them.

In the spaces between the muscles and sundry Vessels, there is fat, which The
use of fat in the Eye.
heats, moistens, and so helps the motion of the Eye, and makes it round and
even.

The MUSCLES of Men's Eyes are The Eye muscles.
six. Because they have so many distinct motions: four straight and two
circular: all are seated within the Cavity of the Skul, and accompany the
optic Nerve. All their Tendons being joined together at the tunica Cornea,
under the Adnata, do make that Coat which Columbus call Tunica innominata, the
Nameless coat, as if it Columbus his Error.
had not been known to the ancients, whereas Galen has made mention thereof,
in his tenth Book de Usu partium Chap. 2. and 8. though it be not properly a
Coat, but only diverse Tendons of Muscles, nor does it compass the whole Eye.
Yet by some it is called Tunica Tendinosa or Tendinea, the Tendinous Coat.

The first Muscle being the upper and The first Muscle of the Eye.
thicker is called Attollens the lefter up or Superbus, the proud Muscle.

The second opposite to the other, being the smaller in the lower part, is
termed The second
Deprimens the depresser, and Musculus humilis the lowly Muscle, because it
draws the Eye downwards toward the Cheek-balls.

The third placed in the greater Angle is The third.
called Adducens, the drawer to, and Bibitorius the drinking Muscle, moving the
Eye inwards toward the Nose.

The fourth is called Abducens the drawer The fourth.
from, drawing the Eye toward the side of the Face to the small cornerward; it is
also termed Indignatorius the Muscle of indgnation.

All these four Muscles have the same beginning, the same progress and end: for
the beginning of them all is acute, near the hole where the optic Nerve enters
into the Socket of the Eye, from the Membrane whereof they do arise: they have
all a fleshy and round belly: their end is a very small Tendon, as was said, at
the Cornea.

By these four acting together the Eye is drawn inwards, and is kept from
strring, which holding is by Physicians called Motus tonicus.

The fifth is lean, round, short, oblique, The fifth.
seated between the Eyes and the Tendons of the second and third Muscle, and
ascending by the outer corner of the Eye, to the upper part of the Eye, is
inserted into the Cornea tunica by the Region of the Iris. It whirles about the
Eye obliquely downwards to the external Angle, or corner.

The sixth being the smallest of all, and The sixth or pulley Muscle.
having the longest Tendon, wheels the Eye about unto the inner Corner. For
arising from a common beginning with the first four, it is carried right out to
the inner Corner; there it passes through the Pulley, and ascends in a right
Angle to that place where the fifth was inserted. It Is called Trochlea Musculus
the Pully-muscle, because it wheeled about as it were through a Pulley which
Pulley is a Gristle in the Eye sticking out, first observed by Fallopius,
though Riolanus do also attribute the Invention thereof to Rondeletius who
lived at the same time with him. It Is situate at the upper Jaw Bone, by the
inner corner of the Eye, and therefore in the Cure of Fistula lachrymalis, the
Surgeons ought to have a great care, least they wrong this Pully,

These two last are termed Amatorij, love Muscles, and Circumactores, rolling
Muscles the upper and lower. For by the help of these Muscles lovers cast
Sheeps-Eyes one at another.

There is yet a seventh Muscle in Brutes, A seventh Muscle in Brutes.
which may be divided into two, three, or four.

This is a short Muscle, compassing the optic Nerve, fat coming between, and
being fleshy it is inserted into an hard Coat.

Its Use is; to hold up the Eyes of Brutes which look down toward the Ground,
and to enwrap the soft optic Nerve.

An eigth membranous Muscle may be added, wherewith Brutes do wink.

Some Animals have no Muscles. Scaliger proved it by Dissection in Cats, yet
Casserius pictures out the Muscle of a Cats Eye. A Chameleon indeed has no
Muscles, and yet moves his Eyes every way, and either of them backwards, and
that by a wrinkled membrane furnished with Fibers, as Panarolus does aver.

Vessels are sent to the Eye, a Vein from the Jugulars, an Artery from the
Caroticks, Vessels of the Eye.
disseminated through the Muscles, Fat, and Membrane.

The Eyes have the two first pare of Nerves, as they are commonly reckoned: The
Nerves.
The first is the Optic or seeing pare being thick and porous, carrying from
the Brain the Faculty of seeing with the Spirit, or carrying the visible
Representations of things to the Brain. It is inserted behind, into the Center
of the Tunica cornea, to which from the hard Tunicle or external Membrane it
communicates a Coat, and passes more inward to the Center of the Retina, into
which its marrowy substance is spread abroad; and sometimes a portion of the
vitrea tunica, sticks to the inner part of the Marrow. In Brutes it is inserted
obliquely, and not into the Center of the cornea tunica, but into the side. The
second is the Moving pare, which goes into the Membranes, and sends a little
Branch into every muscle. ^ut touching these Nerves I shall discourse more
largely in my Manual of the Nerves.

The Membranes besides the external and the conjunctive (which is The Membranes
of the Eyes but three.
common) are but three and the Humors three. And as in a Nerve, there is a
threefold substance which enters the Eye: so these three substances do make the
three Coats of the Eye. For the first Coat arises from the dura Matter; the
second from the pia Matter; the third from the marrowy substance in the Brain.

The Tunica adnata alba or conjunctiva is smooth and thin, arising from Adnata
Tunica.
the Pericraneum. Some will have it arise from the Periosteum, and end at the
Circle of the Iris, after it has communicated a Coat to the Eyelid. It is the
outmost Coat of all, next the bone. Hippocrates calls it the White of the Eye.

It fastens the Eye to the Socket and inner Bones like a Ligament. Its Use.


It is of exquisite Sense.

It is sprinkled about with very many little Veins and Arteries, not appearing
The Seat of the Ophthalmia or Blearey'dness.
save when there is an Afflux of Humors, for then they swell and are very red
as in the Opththalmia or Blearey'd soreness, which Disease is seated in the
Part.

This Adnata being removed, the first that offers it self, is the Sclirotica or
dura 1. Tunicle of the Eye.
so called, which arises from the dura Matter, and it is thick, stretched,
equal, and dark on the back part. The forepart of this they call tunica Cornea,
because Cornea.
it is polished and transparent like an horn: for it may be scaled into four
plates, over which the Epidermis is placed, and involves the whole forepart of
the Eye. It is next the sclirotica or dura, firmly cleaving in the hinder part
of the Choroides, yet joined with the Chrystalline in the middle, that it may
separate the watery and glassie Humors.

The second is called Choroides, because it is like the Chorion, and Vessels
are 2. Tunicle of the Eye.
sprinkled up and down. It arises from pia Matter, being from the first Original
blackish, especially within, that the Idea's received in a dark place, might be
the more illustrious. In Brutes it is of several Colors, sometimes watchet,
etc. Under the transparent Cornea it is in men sometimes skiecolour'd, sometimes
blew, or gray, which Colors are seen through the Cornea. This in its forepart
is termed Uvea, by reason it is of the color of a Grape, in which part it is
thick and doubled: it is moveable and according to the diversity of the Object
or Light, it is contracted and dilated, as we may very well discern in Cats.
This forepart is also perforated in the middle, to let in the Species or
Representations of visible Objects, where

The Pupilla or sight of the Eye is formed, The Pupilla.
which in Mankind is round: in some Brutes of an oblong shape, or long and
round. Riolanus has observed the compass of this hole or the Crown thereof,
being drawn with the point of a Penknife, to have been cut off orbicularly,
which may better be seen in an Ox eye boiled, which makes him think this
Circumference to be a distinct Membrane from the Uvea, since it has peculiar
fibers. But this is confuted by Plempius, and because the Verge of the uvea
tunica has diverse colors, hence arises

The Iris or Circle, which Galen, Casserius, Riolanus Iris.
reckon to be sixfold, and Plempius but threefold: a double narrow one at the
White of the Eye, a third at the Sight true and larger, illustrated with a
constant color. This Circle is seen variously colored, and where it makes the
Iris, it is sometimes skie-coloured, otherwhiles fiery, gray, black, etc.

From the Circumference of the Uvea, where its duplicated Membrane Ligamentum
ciliare.
bends it self back to the Chrystalline, there arises a Ligament or
Interstitium ciliare so called, which are certain then filaments produced out
of the Uvea representing the black Lines of the Eyelids, like Hairs, and they
compass the Chrystalline humor, which by help of these is knit to the
neighboring parts: it is moved with the Uvea being moveable. Cartesius will
have its use to be to move the Chrystalline, that the Situation thereof may be
changed, according to the various necessity of sight.

The third is the Retina or Amphiblestroides as the Greeks call it, that is the
Netfashion'd The third Coat.
Coat, made of the inner substance of the Brain or of some Nerve spread out as
it were, the pia Matter withal accompanying in the same, if we believe Galen and
Casserius. Therefore this soft, and as it were snotty matter may be gathered
together, compassing the vitreous Humor and its vitreous Coat like a Net. It is
an exceeding thin coat, but more dark then lightsom, mixed with an obscure
Redness, because the Species received, are here stopped and represented; yet is
it a little snotty, with which Snot is sometimes white, for the illustration of
the Species received. In my Judgment, it is the sliminess of the marrowy
Substance.

Its Figure is semicircular, like a Mitre, and its sides are near the
Chrystalline, for the distinct Representation of the Species.

Platerus says it has no Vessels; contrary to Galen, Casserius, Sylvius and
others, and Experience it self: for the hinder part of the Choroides and the
sclirotica tunica, have Vessels manifestly apparent in this Coat, and there
they ought to be, that it may be nourished with its contents. This compassing
yet farther becomes the Aranea or Chrystalloides, Aranea.
the proper Tunicle of the Chrystalline Humor, clothing the fore and hinder
part thereof, white, most thin and transparent, so that it is called the
Looking-glass.

The VIII. TABLE.
The Explication of the FIGURE.
The TABLE shows the Muscles of the Eye, the Tunicles and the Humors.
FIG. I. A. The horney tunicle with the Pupilla or sight to be seen through it.
B. The right Muscle that lifts up the Eye. C. The internal right Muscle or
the Muscle drawing to, or shutting. D. The right internal Muscle or the drawing
from, or opening. E. The right external or opening Muscle. F. The internal
crooked Muscle called Trochlearis. G. The external oblique Muscle below.


FIG. II. Shows the Muscles in a Sheeps Eye. A. The Optic Nerves. BB. The
seventh Muscle that is about the Optic Nerve proper to Beasts. CCCC. The
straight Muscles. D. The trochlear Muscle. E. The lowest oblique Muscle.


FIG. III. aa. The adnata tunicle in its place. bb. The Cornea or horney
tunicle. cc. The uvea tunicle. dd. The tunicle sclorotis. ee. The hard Membrane
of the Optic Nerve. ff. The tunicle Choroides. gg. The thin Membrane of the
Optic Nerve. hh. The Net-tunicle called Retina ii. The marrowy Substance of
the Optic Nerve. l. The inward Marrow affixed to the Vitrea. mm. The Crystal
tunicle. nn. The Pupilla. oo. The shineing part of the Cornea. A. The watery
Humor. B. The Chrystalline Humor. C. The glassie Humor.


FIG. IV. The adnata Tunicle separated from its place, with many Veins and
Arteries.

FIG. V. A. The Nerve Optic taken from the dura Matter. BB. The dura Matter
going about the Optic Nerve. CC The Sclerotis opened, through which the Uvea
is seen.


FIG. VI. A. The Optic Nerve covered only with the pia Matter. BB. The
Choroides taken from the Sclerotis. CCCC. The Veins of the Sclerotis. DD The
Sclerotis turned inside out. EE. The Rupture of the Sclerotis.


FIG. VII. A. The Nerve Optic. BB. The Uvea unfolded and separated in part
from the Retina. CC. Part of the Retina laid bare from the Uvea, made too
obscure.


FIG. VIII. A. The Retina laid bare. BB. The White of the Eye or tunica
conjunctiva. C. The Cornea. D. The Pupilla.


FIG. IX. The glassie tunicles with the Hairs of the Eyelids.

FIG. X. The watery Humor thickened in the middle of which there is a hollow to
receive the forepart of the Chrystalline.

FIG. XI. The glassie Humor with the Christalline in the middle.

FIG. XII. The Chrystalline tunicle.

FIG. XIII. The Chrystalline Humor in its proportion.

page 147



I add the tunica Vitrea, which covers the vitreous Vitrea.
or glassie Humor on all sides, that it run not about, and separates it from
the Chrystalline Humor. It is of exceeding smoothness and thinness, shed about
the Humor like a thin Skin, not only in the unequal part of the said Humor, but
also in its concave part, where it receives the Chrystalline, where indeed it
cleaves close to the Chrystalline Coat, but is different from it. It is
furnished with many, but very little Veins, and the inner portion of the
marrowy Substance of the Optic Nerve, cleaves to the Center thereof. The form
is such as that of the glassie Humor, large and unequal behind, and concave
before.

The Humors of the Eyes are three, the watery, the glassie, and the
Chrystalline: of Humors of the Eyes.
which the last is the most noble, and by some termed the Soul and Center of
the eyes.

The watery because thin and fluxive like The watery Humor.
water, occupies the whole space between the Tunica cornea, and the fore part
of the Chrystalline. Riolanus also proves that it is poured round about the
vitreous Humor, and that all of it is contained within the whole uvea tunica;
because the Eye being cut in the hinder part, water flows out as much as if it
were cut before. But if the vitrea tunica be also cut with a large Wound, no
wonder if water flow from thence, which Plempius also notes; not to say how
easily the inner parts are broken, when they are rudely fingred. In the Humor
Suffusions are made.

This Humor is no animated part, The watery Humor is no animated part, the other
Humors are.
but seems only to be an Excrement remaining after the Nutrition of the
Chrystalline Humor: for it is both consumed in Diseases, and lost in Wounds of
the Eyes; the other two humors are animated parts, seeing they have their
proper circumscription, are nourished with blood brought Veinlets, when
perished they are not restored, and are bred in the Womb: and the Chrystalline
of the most pure lightful part of the Seed.

The Use of the watery Humor is to defend the bordering parts from dryness:
others add, that as a medium it serves to break the brightness continually
flowing in, and to greaten the Representations of the Objects, being straightened
in the Pupilla or Sight.

The Vitreous or glassie Humor is seen behind, like molten Glass, softer then
The vitreous of glassie bumor.
the Chrystalline, then which it is nevertheless five times bigger, and twice
as big as the watery Humor. It is round in its hinder part, plane before, but
being concave in the middle, it makes an hollowness wherein the Chrystalline
Humor is placed as in a Pillow. Its Use is not barely to nourish the
Chrystalline, as Galen conceived, but to prepare and communicate Nourishment
thereto. According to Aquapendent from whom Riolanus had the notion, that the
light carried beyond the chrystalline may not return defiled by dark and other
colored tinctures, and so disturb the Sight. Platerus more rightly, that the
splendid vitreous Humor might fill up a necessary space between the
Chrystalline and the Retina, which others explain more clearly, that the
glassie. Humor may give a passage to the Species to the Retina, and may refract
them from Perpendiculars.

The Chrystalline (which some call the icie because of its firmness) is so
called The Chrystalline.
from its exceeding bright and shineing color, which it has, being free from
all other colors, that it may receive all colors, it is shineing,
indifferently ^^rd round behind, with some longness, flat on the foreside:
howbeit according to the sundry affections of the Eye, this form is variously
changed.

Its Use is, to be the chief Medium of sight, as a glass held before the hole,
receives the external species into a dark Closet, even so the Chrystalline
Humor, both receives and collects the Species or Representations of things. And
because the humor is transparent, the Species are no^ stopped therein, nor
colors perceived, which most Anatomists have believed after Galen; for
otherwise there were no reason why they should not be as well perceived in the
Cornea, and vitreous Humor, both transparent and animated. Therefore the sight
is not primarily made in this Humor, but the Species are discerned in the
retina tunica, because there they are stopped by a dark Body, as we seen on the
Wall of a Chamber, when the Windows are shut.

Scheinerus conceives, that the Species which did represent all things the
bottom upwards, are corrected and refracted in the Chrystalline Humor, so as to
represent all things in their due posture. But according to the Observation of
Job. Walaeus, Fr. Sylvius, and Fr. Vander Schagen, the Choroides, the
Sclirotica, and Retina tunica, being taken away from behind, all things are
seen by the Eye, and represented with the bottom upwards; very small in an Oxes
Eye, somewhat greater in a Man's. Plempius proves the same by an Experiment of a
glass Instrument filled with the three Humors, placed before the hole of the
Window, where all things appear on the Wall with the wrong side upwards. And
doubtless the Species must needs be represented with the bottom upwards in the
Retina, otherwise we should see all things the wrong end upwards, and not
right, which Keplerus hereby demonstrates, because in passion the Patients must
be just opposite against the Agents.

Others will have it, that our Judgment corrects the depraved Figure, which
discerns the just Magnitude of things by very small Species received. Others
alledg the common Sense, which seeing the inverted species, behind and above
the Cavity of the Retina, apprehends them in their true posture. Finally others
say that a true Judgment is therefore made, because it is made by a right Line.

Chap. IX. Concerning the Ears.
THe Organ of Hearing, viz. the EARS are either external or internal.

The external which are by some termed Auriculae the Earlets, are in Mankind of
a semicircular Figure, unequal without, concave within.

The outer Ear is divided into the upper and lower part.

The upper is broader, and by some Names of the parts of the outer Ear.
called Pinna, by others Ala. The lower is soft and hanging down, termed Fibra,
Auricula infima, Lobus.

The outer Circumference of the Ear is called Helix, also Capreolus, because of
its wreathed formed. The inner part opposite to the former, is termed Scapha or
Anthelix. In the middle hereof is a large Cavity, the principal part of the
external Ear, called Concha. But the Cavity near the Meatus auditorius or
Hearing-passage, where Ear-wax is collected, is called Alvearium. Toward the
Temples there grows a certain eminency like a covering, which either receives
or hinders things that would go into the Ear, and is termed Hircus the Goat,
because Hairs grow thereon.

The Parts whereof the external Ear is composed, are either common, as the
Skarf-Skin, the Skin, a Nervous Membrane, Flesh, and a little Fat in the Lobe:
Or Proper, as Muscles, Vessels, and a Gristle.

The Skin is exceeding thin, cleaving to a little Flesh with a firm Gristle;
and as in Its Skin.
the Palms of the Hands a Nervous Membrane is firmly fastened thereto; by the
sense whereof it happens that cold water sprinkled on the Lap or Lobe of the
Ear does cool the whole Body. In the Lobe it is so mingled with Flesh, that it
becomes thereby fattish, fleshy and spungy: Hence the Lobe is soft and
flexible, so that it may be bored with no great trouble, and therefore some
hang Jewels and Earrings thereon.

As to Vessels: it has Veins from the Jugulars. It Vessels.


Arteries from the Carotides.

Little Nerves, two from behind, and two from the sides, arising from the
second pair termed Cervicale.

Muscles rightly conspicuous in such as move their Ears, are common or The
Muscles.
proper. which it was my luck once to see, and such Justinian must have had,
whose Ears could move as Procopius describes him. But in most people the Ears
are unmovable, both because of the smalness of the Muscles, and Why few move
their Ears?
because there was little need of their motion, because a Man can do that with
his Hands which Beasts do with their Ears, wherewith they drive away flies.

The first Muscle is common to the Ear The use of the first
and each Lip; and it is a part of the first Muscle which moves the Cheeks, and
the Skin of the Face, and it is termed Quadratus, the square Muscle,
sufficiently thin and broad. It is implanted into the Root of the Ear under the
Lobe, that it may draw the Ear to one side downwards.

The second is proper and seated more foreward, leaning upon the temporal The
use of the second Muscle.
Muscle, from the end of the Muscle of the Forehead (from which it differs by
the carriage of the Fibers) arising sometimes with a round, otherwhiles with a
cornered beginning, and being Tendinous, it is implanted into the upper part of
the Ear, where it is narrower, that it may move the Ear upwards and forewards.

The third and hinder more arises above the Processus mammillaris, from The use
of the third Muscle.
the hind-part of the Head and its Muscle, with a narrow beginning; afterward
growing broader and divided as it were into three parts, it goes hindlongs to
the Ear, that it may draw it, somewhat backwards and upwards.

The fourth arising from the Processus mammillaris, being broad, grows narrower
The use of the fourth,
by little and little, till at last it ends in a Tendon. This Muscle is rather
threefold, because it has three Insertions, yet all spring confused from one
place. Some of these are sometimes wanting, otherwhiles they are all found;
sometimes there are more, nature variously sporting her self in the Muscles of
the Ear.

The Ears Gristle, is a substance tied to the Os petrosum, by a strong The Ear
Gristle.
Ligament springing from the Pericranium.

Certain Kernels there are outwardly The Kernels cal^d Parotides.
about the Ears, thick and large, which are termed Parotides, though this word
do also signify the swellings of the said Kernels.

They are not only behind the Their Situation.
Ears, as is commonly imagined, but on both sides and under the Ear, but not
above.

These Kernels by the Ears are called the Emunctories of the Brain, because
they receive the Excrements thereof.

There are also many other Kernels in The s^at of King's Evil swellings.
the whole space which is under the lower Jaw, in which many Diseases are bred,
and swellings called Scophulae in some Creatures, as wild Swine. The common
people count these Kernels a dainty dish and call them Sweetbreads.

Their Use is, to moisten the parts, and to assist in the divisions of the
Vessels.

The Use of the External Ear is,

I. For Ornament, and therefore the English, Dutch and other Nations punish
Male-factors by cutting of their Ears.

II. To saveguard the Brain, that it may not be hurt by the Air suddenly
rushing in.

III. To be the Organ of Hearing, The External Organ of Hearing.
not principal, but assistant. The true Organ lies within, as does that of the
swelling. And as the Nose being cut off a Man can smell though imperfectly; so
if the Ears be quite cut off close to a Man's Head, he can Hear, but dully,
confusedly, with a m^^mering noise, so that Articulate words will seem as the
noise of Waterstreams, or the screekings of Grass-hoppers, as they know who
have lost their Ears. Yea, and the Hearing of that Ear which is not cut off, is
dammaged, unless the cut Ear be stopped.

The Use therefore of the External Ear, is more readily and rightly to receive
sounds; and to gather them when they are scattered in the Air into the Cavity
of the Ear, that they may come unto the Drum without violence, being first
moderated and allayed in the hollow and winding passages. Hence, least sounds
which are diven toward the Ears, should slip beside, Beasts turn their Ears
this way and that way to sounds. Hence also the Emperor Hadrianus; that he
might heat more distinctly, would hold the hollow of his Hand before his Ears,
which also deaf persons frequently practice. Hence some Scythians, whose
earlets ar mortified and rottted of with cold, does apply a Fish-shell to their
Ears, that the Air being detained in the Cavity thereof, may be more easily
received, that so they may hear the better. Hence, they hear most exactly,
whose Ears stick furthest out from their Heads, and if our Ears were not too
much pressed down, what by long lying upon them. what by the binding of Nurses,
we should hear better then we do.

The Internal Ear has also sundry parts The Internal Ear.
contained in the Os petrosum, and besides the parts and little cavernes of the
Bones, there are: The Drum, two Muscles, the Vessels and inbred Air.

In the auditory passage clothed with Skin, through which sounds are carried,
is found a Choleric clammy humor, which the Ancients called Cerumen. Earwax,
being purged from the Brain* but Intrinsically it is obliquely placed before
this hole or passage of Hearing.

There is a certain Partition, or little Orbicular Menbrane, compassed with a
boney circle, which some call Myrinx, others Sextum Membraneum and Mediastinum,
others Tympanum, but some rightly mympani Membranula. For it is Tympanum.
stretched before the internal Cavity containing the congenit Air, as the
Parchment or Velam on a Drum Head. Casserius conceives that it arises from the
Pericranium, but Veslingius believe that it is an expansion of the Periosteum,
who has also observed it to be double, and also frequently crusted over by
thickened Excrements.

It is exceeding dry, that it may sound the better, for dry bodies are fittest
for sound.

It is Transparent thin and subtle, that the sounds may more easily pass
through A cause of Deafness.
to the implanted Air: For those that have it thick from their birth, have an
incurable Deafness, as those also who have a thick Coat growing over the same
without, the Cure whereof is nevertheless taught by Paulus; and if this happen
from the birth, such persons continue for the most part Dumb, because they can
neither conceive in their mind nor utter with their Tongue such words as they
have never hard. But if a Snotty matter cleave thereto within, or a thick Humor
A Cause of thickness of Hearing.
flow thereto, a thickness of Hearing or a Deafness incurbale is thereby
caused. If a thin Humor flow thereto, there arise tinklings and noises in the
Ears.

Finally it is Nervous, of so exquisite a Sense that, it can neither bear the
putting in of a Probe, nor sharp Humors; yet is it strong so as to endure
against external Injuries; for being hurt or corroded it causes thickness of
Hearing or Deafness, as they find by experience, who have it hurt by the noise
of great Guns or Bells, or in whom it is broken by swimming. For the safeguard
therefore hereof, there are three little Bones added within (of which, the
Hammer sticks fast to the Drum, and is seen through the same) and two Muscles.

The Use thereof is, to shut the passage of hearing, and to separate the innate
Air from that which is external, and to keep it within. Also to save it from
Dust, Water, creeping things, etc.

Within the Membrane of the Tympanum, thereis an Internal Cavity in the The
Cavity of the Drum.
Bone, containing a certain Air, which some term the inbred, Congenit and
complanted Air, because it is placed in the Ears at the first formation, being
pure, subtle and immovable: which some count the internal Medium of Hearing,
others the Organ it self of that Sense.

There are two Muscles of the inner Ear according to Anatomists. Muscles of the
inner Ear.


They call the first the Internal, seated in the Os petreum, with a double
Tendon: The one being fixed to the higher process of the Hammer, the other to
its Neck.

Its Use is to draw the Head of the Hammer obliquely inwards, and to carry it
inwards from the Anvil, and the process of the Hammer being bowed back, to
drive the little Membrane inwards.

The second is external, found out by Casserius, though Aquapendent does
likewise attribute to himself the Invention thereof; it is exceeding small,
fleshy, and consisting in the upper Region of the Auditory passage, with its
Tendon implanted into the Center of the Membrane, there where the Hammer is
inwardly joined to the said Membrane. So that Parisanus labors in Vain by
denying this Membrane in contradiction to Casserius.

Its Use is to draw the Membrane with the Hammer outward.

A certain small Gristly passage is to be observed, which goes from the Concha
of the Ear near the sides of the Pterygoidean process, to the Palate. Fallopius
says it is a conveighance of Water, furnished with a small Valve, Riolanus in
the mean while, an old Master of Anatomy, denying that there is any such Valve
to be found.

The Use hereof is, 1. To purge the Why Masticatories help in Diseases of the
Ears?
inbred Air, for this way Excrements pass from the Ear into the mouth, but, not
back again, because there is a Valve to hinder. And this is the Reason that
Masticatories are very helpful in Diseases of the Ears.

II. To let in sound in Deaf and stopped Ears.

Varro writes and Pliny with Archelaus, that Goats draw in Breath at their
Ears, which Aristotle reports of Alcmeon. And such as are somewhat thick of
hearing, do perceive words more distinctly when they Gape, and when our Ears
are stopped, we can hear our own Speech though weakly. Such as have the
Venereal Disease, are hurt not only with cold Air, but with any other uneven
noise, passing through their Mouth into their Ears, as Tulpius observes, who
also has observed that two persons troubled with the Orthopnaea, were saved
from choking, by voiding their Breath out at their Ears, by means of this
passage. Those do abuse this passage, who render the smoke of Tobacco which
they take, through their Ears.

Finally, we meet with the Nervous Auditories or Hearing Nerve, which proceeds
from the fifth pair of the Brain, entering the Ear through the hole of Os
Petrosum. It touches the Cochlea and the Labyrinth with a double branch that it
may in both places perfect the Hearing. To which a Branch is added to move the
Muscles, proceeding from the fourth pair, and cleft in two.

Chap. X. Of the Nose.
ANother Organ of Sense follows, viz. The Nose the Instrument of smelling,
given to Men and fourfooted Beast that bring fourth living Creatures.

Now it is divided, as the Ear, into the External and Internal Nose.

The Internal has Bones and Nerves, The Names of the parts of the Nose.
with the Mammillary processes, of which in their place.

The External is Extrinsecally divided into the upper and lower part.

The upper part which is boney and immovable, is termed the Back of the Nose,
and its Acuminated part, Spina. The lower part is Gristley and moveable, the
utmost end whereof is termed Globulus and Orbiculus, by the only feeling whereof
Michael Scotus pretends to tell whether a Maiden have lost her Virginity. The
lateral or side parts are termed Pterugia alae, Pinnae; that is Wings or
Pinnacles, that fleshy part which sticks out in the middle near the Lips, is
called Columna the Pillar.

The Nose is divided within, by a partition Wall, into two Holes or Cavities
which they call Nares the Nostrils: that one hole being stopped, we may draw in
and pass out the Air by the other. And when both are stopped, the Mouth
supplies the Office of the Nostrils. Now each hole is again divided about the
middle of the Nose into two parts: the one ascends upwards, to the Os
Spongiosum; the other goes above the Palate into the Throat and upper part of
the Mouth. Hence drink sometimes comes out at the Nostrils: and things put into
the Nostrils, the Nose being shut, are wont to slip into the Mouth. Hence also
the thicker Excrements also of the Brain, while they are carried downward to
the Nostrils, may slide into the Mouth, or be brought thither by Hawking, and
so purged out at the Mouth.

It is situate in an high place, viz. between the Eyes. 1. For comelyness Sake.
2. Because all smells mount upwards.

The Magnitude varies, as also the Figure, for some have great Noses, others
little Noses, some Hawkenoses and Roman-noses, and others saddle-noses etc.
Touching which Physiognomists Discourse.

Its Substance consists of the Scarf^-Skin, The parts of the Nose.
Skin, Muscles, Bones, Gristles, Vessels, and Tunicles.

Its Skin is thin, and void of fat, that The Skin.
it may not grow too much; under the partion in the Colomme it is thick and
Spungy; so that it is like a Gristle and is compast with Hairs termed Vibrissae.

There are eight Muscles of the Nose, Muscles of the Nose.
especially in large Nosed people, but they are small because the motion of the
Nose is little. Four serve to widen the Nose, while the Alae or Wings being
drawn upwards, they open the holes of the Nostrils. And there are four more
which straiten the Nose.

The two first widners being fleshy, do arise from the Cheek-bone, near the
Muscle of the Lips, which they make a third. They are inserted partly into a
part of the upper Lip, partly into the lower Wing. Casserius found them
resembling the leaves of Myrtle.

The IX. TABLE.
The FIGURE Explained.
This TABLE represents the Muscles of the Forehead, Eyelids, Nose, Cheeks,
Lips, lower Jaw and Ear-let.
a. The Pericranium. b. The Periosteum. c. The Hairy Skin or Scalpe. d. The
Skull made bare. e. The temporal Muscle. f. The upper Muscle of the Ear. g. The
Muscle of the Hind-part of the Head, stretched out to the hinder Muscles of the
Ears. h. The Muscle of the Forehead. i. A frontal Appendix spread out upon the
Back of the Nose. kkk. The orbicular Muscle of the Eye. l. The triangular
Muscle of the Nostrils. m. The common muscle of the Lips, which lefts up. n.
The first proper muscle of the upper Lip. o. The second proper Muscle of the
upper Lip. p. The trumpeters Muscle. q. The chewing Muscle. r. The common
Muscle depressing the Lips. s. The proper Muscle of the lower Lip, caled
Mentalis deprimens. tt. The third commmon Orbicular Muscle of the Lips. u. The
Circular Muscle of the Nose. xxx. The part of the Earlet termed Helix. y. The
opposite Part called Anthelix. z. The part of the Ear-let called Tragus. A. The
Antitragus. V. The Lobe or lap of the Earlet.


page 151



The other two which are commonly triangular, and like the Greek letter D on
each side one, with a sharp and fleshy beginning, do grow from the Suture of
the Forehead by the Foramen lachrymale or Tear-hole, and are implanted into the
Spina or the Pinnae of the Nose. I have sometimes observed an Appendix thereof
to have descended to the upper Lip, viz, in such as cannot lift up their Nose
without their Lips. Casserius against the mind of all Anatomists, draws its
original from the Pinnae of the Nose; but they are moveable.

The two first Str^itners, which are little do arise fleshy, about the Root of
the Pinnae, are carried along transversly, and inserted into the corners of the
Alae. Casserius did first of all observe a portion thereof and describe it,
which is not always found; for more often the circular Sphincter involves the
Pinnae of the Nose orbicularly. The Use thereof is a little to shut the
Nostrils, depressing the Pinnae.

The remaining two are exceeding firm and membranous, lying hid under the Coat
of the Nostrils, in the inner part. They arise from the Extremity of the
Nose-bone, and are implanted into the Pinnae or Wings.

Besides these Muscles of the Nose aforesaid, I have found on the Nose-back of
a certain person, a fleshy Muscle, thin, stretched right out from the frontal
muscle, with a broad Basis, and ending soon after, narrower about the outmost
Gristle of the Nose.

Gristles do make up the Substance of the lower part of the Nose, and are five
The Gristles of the Nose.
in number.

The two uppermost being broad ones, do stick unto the Bones of the Nose, and
the more they descend, the softer they grow, so that the end of the Nose has a
substance, partly gristly and partly ligamental.

The third being in the middle of the other two, make sthe partition wall
between the two Nostrils.

By these are placed the other two, of which the Pinnae of the Nose are
constituted, and they are tied together by membranous Ligaments.

As to Vessels. It has Veins from the Jugulars. Its Vessels.


Arteries from the Carotides.

Nerves from the third pare, on each side one, which goes through the holes
common to the Nose and eyes, at the greater corner into the Coat of the Nose,
and the Muscles, and the Palate.

The Coat which clothes the Nostrils is from the dura Matter, and common to The
Coat of the Nostrils.
the Mouth, Palate, Tongue, Larynx, Gullet and Stomach; but in the Nostrils it
is thinner and of exquisite sense; for being vexed it causes Sneezing: it is
The cause of Sneezing.
bred with many little holes which go into the Os cribrosum.

Riolanus informs us that within the Cavities of the Nostrils, there are spungy
parcels of flesh to be seen, of a reddish color, wherewith the spungy bones of
the Nose are filled, of which being swelled, the Disease in the Nostrils,
called Polypus, is bred, touching the pulling out and cure whereof, read
Tulpius.

The Use of the outer Nose is 1. That through it air may enter into The use of
the Nose.
the Brain for the needs of the Animal Spirits. 2. That by it air may enter
into the Lungs, for the cooling of the Heart, and to breed vital Spirits. 3.
That by the Nostrils Odours may be carried to the Mammillary processes, which
lie concealed above the Os cribrosum. And therefore they whose Nose is cut off
at the Roots, cannot smell at all, or badly. 4. That the Excrements of the
Brain may flow down there through, as by a Channel. Which is but a secondary
use of the Nose, because Jo. Walaeus, Jo. Dom. Sala my Masters and my self,
have known some persons that never voided any Excrements at their Nose 5. It is
also sometimes assistant to the Voice. 6. It adds an Ornament to the Face. It is
storied in the Chronicles of England, how a company of honest Maidens of that
Country, in the time of the Daneish War, did cut off their own Noses, that they
might preserve their Maidenheads from the violence of the Daneish Soldiers, by
this deformity. This was the punishment of Adulterers in Egypt, which also
Jebovah threatens to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, by the Prophet Ezekiel. In
our Historiographer Saxo, we read how Hialto deformed a Curtezan by cutting off
her Nose, when she asked him who should be her next Lover. And therefore
because it makes much for the Ornament of the Face, the Chirurgia Curtorum was
invented, teaching how to supply a Nose in the room of that which is cut off,
of which see Tagliacotius.
Chap. XI. Of the Mouth, Cheeks and Lips.
THe last Organ of Sense remains, viz. the Tongue the Organ of Tasting, which
before I explain, I must propound the external parts about the Mouth, and the
internal parts in the Mouth.

The external parts about the mouth are sundry. The upper part under the The
Names of the outward parts about the Mouth.
Eyes, between the Nose and the Ears, by reason of its usual Redness, and the
unusual by reason of blushing, is called Pudoris seeds the Seat of
shamefastness, Maium or Pomum the Apple, also Circulus Faciei, the Circle of
the Face.

The lower and looser part which may be blown up, as we see in Trumpeters, is
termed Bucca the Cheek, the upper part of the Lip is called Mystax. The Cavity
imprinted therein and dividing the same, is called Philtrum, from its
loveliness. Now the Lips are two, the upper and the lower, and the chink
between both, is termed Os the Mouth. The outer parts of the Lips which hang
over, are called Prolabia. The lower part under the lower Lip is called Mentum
the Chin; the fleshy part under the Chin is termed Buccula.

Now the Mouth consists of parts, partly boney, as the upper and lower Jaw with
the teeth; partly fleshy, as the Lips, Lip-muscles, Cheek-muscles, and lower
Jaw-muscles.

The whole inner capacity of the Mouth is cloarhed with a thick Coat, which
goes also about the Gums and Lips, and is thought to be doubled when it
constitutes the Uvula.

The Uses of the Mouth are: The use of the Mouth.
1. To receive in Meat and Drink, and to prepare the same, or begin
Chylification the beginning, of which is performed in the Mouth. 2. To receive
in and let out the Air. 3. To speak and frame the Voice. 4. To give passage to
the Excrements of the lungs, the Head and Stomach, by hawking, spitting, and
vomiting.
Two pare of Muscles there are, common Two pare of Muscles common to the Cheeks
and Lips.
to the Cheeks and Lips, on each side two Muscles.

The first is that same broad and square muscle lying under the skin of the
neck, which the Ancients did not distinguish from the Skin.

It arises about the Channel-bones, and the hinderpart of the Neck; and with
oblique Fibers (which a Surgeon must diligently observe, least he cut them
freely and athwart, and so make the Cheeks to be pulled away to one side) it is
implanted into the Chin, the Lips and Root of the Nose, and sometimes of the
Ears: which parts also it moves to the part, and this is first cramped in
Spasmus Cynicus.
the Spasmus Cynicus.

The second lies under this, which makes the Cheeks with its Bulk, and
therefore is termed Buccinator the trumpetting Muscle, which is most
conspicuous in Trumpetters.

It Is round like a Circle, thin and membranous; interwoven with sundry Fibers,
The Figure of the Muscle Buccinator.
inseparably clothed with the coat of the Mouth.

In the Center hereof Casserius has observed a certain strong band, breeding
from without, and creeping to the Cheek-bone, where it is terminated into a
certain small and lean Muscle, directly opposite to the Bucca.

This Muscle arises from the upper Cheek-bone, is inserted into the lower, at
the Roo^s of the Gums.

Its Use is to move the Cheeks and Lips: and it is to the teeth instead of an
hand, while it thrusts the meat this way and that way to the teeth, that it may
be more exactly chewed.

The Lips consist of undigested spungy flesh ( Fallopius reckons it for the
ninth pare The Lips.
of Muscles which move the Lips) whose Skin is so mingled with Muscles, that it
seems to be a musculous Skin, or a skinny Muscle.

They are covered with a Coat common to the Mouth and Stomath: Trembling of the
Lip in such as are ready to cast, how caused?
and thence it is that in such as are ready to vomit, the lower Lip trembles.

The parts of the Lips which touch one another are red, because of the afflux
of blood.

Their Use is,

1. To shut in the Mouth and Teeth, and to defend the inner parts from cold and
external Injuries. 2. For the convenience of Eating and Drinking. 3. For the
Voice and Speech. 4. To cast out the Spittle, and therefore that Servants might
not spit nor speak, they were bound with Skins, as Ammianus Marcellinus informs
us. 5. For Ornament.
There are some proper Muscles of the Lips besides the common ones aforesaid,
which nevertheless may vary in respect of number. Some reckon fewer, and others
more: for some are by some Authors counted simple, which others reckon to be
manifold.

The proper Muscles which move the upper Lip, are on each side two. Three there
are which move both Lips. The lower Lip is moved only by one proper pare.

The first pare proper to the upper lip, is a remarkable pare described by
Fallopius, Four pare of muscles moving the upper Lip.
which slipping down from the corner betwixt the Eyes and Nose, is straight way
sunk into the Substance of the upper Lip.

The other pare, arising from the upper Jaw Bone, just in the Cavity of the
Cheeks under the Socket of the Eye, thin but broad, fleshy, sunk into store of
Fat, is carried down wards right on, to the upper Lip, which moves it directly
upwards with the first pare. Sometimes also it is obliquely inserted into the
confines of both the Lips, wherefore some do make two pare thereof.

The first pare common to both Lips, is long, fleshy, broad at the Muscles
common to both Lips.
beginning; arises outwardly from the Jugal process, and descending obliquely
through the Cheeks, it is terminated in the space between the two Lips.
Sometimes I have seen it from the beginning drawn out as a Rope to the first
proper pare. Its Use is; to draw both the Lips obliquely upwards toward the
Temples.

The second common pare of the Lips, from the lower Jaw Bone to the sides of
the chin, fleshy, arises with a broad beginning, and sometimes stretched out to
the middle of the chin, grows by little and little narrower' till it is
obliquely inserted into the same confine of each Lip, but lower, which draws
away the Lips obliquely downwards and outward, in such as grin and gern for
anger.

The third Muscle common to the two Lips is circular like a Sphincter
encompassing and constituting the whole Mouth, spungy, and firmly sticking to
the ruddy Skin, it draws the Mouth together, when people simper as Virgins are
wont to do.

The proper pare of the lower Lip is called Muscles of the lower Lip.
Par Mentale, the Chin-pare; arising from the middle of the Chin with a broad
beginning, and aseends directly to the middle of the lower Lip, which it moves
downwards.

Now all the Muscles of the Lips, are so mixed with the Skin, that the Fibers
do cross one another mutually, and therefore the motions of the Lips are very
diverse.

To cause that exquisite Sense which is in the Lips, Branches of Nerves are
sent thither, and Veins and Arteries from the neighboring places: from whence
that same ruddy splendour of the Lips proceeds, a note of Beauty and of Health.

The Muscles of the lower Jaw (for it is Muscles of the lower Jaw.
moved) the upper being immovable) some reckon eight, others ten, called
Masticatorij, Mansorij, Molares, Chewers, Eaters, Grinders, because they serve
for the chewing or grinding of the meat. One only pare depresses the Jaw,
because it is apt to go downwards of it self: the other pares setch it up,
which are exceeding strong ones. Hence it is that some can take heavy weights
from the ground with their teeth, and so carry them. Hence phrantick and
otherwise distracted persons do shut their mouths with so much stubbornness and
strength, that they can hardly be opened with great force and iron Instruments.
Contrariwise, the stubbornest person in the World may be compelled without much
ado, to shut his or her mouth.

The first Muscle is termed Crotaphites, Temporalis.
the temporal Muscle from its Situation, because it possesses the Cavity of
the Temples.

This is the greatest of them all, firm and strong, yet firmer and stronger in
some Beasts, as Lions, Wolves, Dogs, Swine, etc. which were naturally to bite
hard*

Forth End of the temporal Muscle, is in the beginning of the lower Jaw, which
The use of the temporal^ muscle.
it moves and draws upwards, and so shuts the mouth; and it is terminated in a
sharp process, with a tendinous Nerve short and strong.

Now it arises from the Temples which a beginning broad, fleshy, and
semicircular, and by little and little grows narrower as it descends.

Three Nerves are on each side inserted Why it is dangerous to hurt the temporal
muscle.
thereinto, two from the third pare, another from the fifth pare. And therefore
this Muscle being wounded or bruised, there is great danger of Convulsion and
of Death in conclusion; especially if the lower part be hurt which is most
Nervous. And because of the distention hereof, Hypocrates did pronounce the
Luxation of the lower Jaw Bone to be deadly; unless it were put presently in
joint again.

For safeguard sake, Nature has given it, 1. A Membrane thick and hard, and
black and blew in color, wherewith it is covered, and shines with a neat color;
the Pericraneum, so that the inner part of the Muscle being all fleshy, does
there stick to the bone without the Pericranium. 2. The Os jugale over the
lower part Tendinous and Nervous. 3. She has fenced the Tendon with flesh
above and beneath.

The second Muscle is the Mansorius primus, first chewer, called Masseter,
Molitor, Mansorius primus.
and Mandibularis, or Lateralis, seated in the Cheeks.

It arises from a double Head: the one fleshy, the other Nervous, from the Os
jugale, and the first bone of the upper Jaw. It is implanted into the lower
part of the Jaw Bone (by a Connection sufficiently broad and strong) which it
turns this way and that way, in such as are eating. For the Fibers of the Head
do so interfere and cross one another, that they move the Jaw both forwards and
backwards and sidewayes.

The third pair is the Pterygoides or Alare externum, the outward Wing-muscle,
the Alaris.
finding whereof we owe to Fallopius; but Vesalius accounts it a part of the
temporal Muscle. It Is seated under the temporal.

It arises from the Os Sphaenoideum and the external processus Alaris, with a
beginning partly Nervous and partly fleshy. It Is implanted into the Neck of the
lower Jaw Bone, and the inner seat of the Head thereof.

Its Use is to move forwards and thrust out.

The fourth is termed Mansorius alter, the other Chewer, or Alaris internus,
being Mansorius alter.
thick and short.

It arises Nervous from the Productions of Os Sphaenoideum called Alatae
internae; and is inserted into the inner and hinder part of the Jaw, with a
broad and strong Tendon.

Its Use is to draw the Jaw upward and backward, to assist the temporal Muscle.

The fifth is termed Graphyoides, because Graphyoides.


It arises from the Appendix Styloides, Membranou,s and broad, and soon
becoming round and fleshy, it is inserted into the Chin. Hence it is seen to have
a double belly, and therefore it is also termed Digastricus, twi-belly. It Is
fastened to a Ligament least it should go too far back. For,

Its Use is to draw the Jaw downwards and so to open the Mouth.

Others do reckon for another pair, part of the Musculus quadratus, fixed in
the middle of the Chin. Which broadest Muscle, arising from the upper part of
the Brest-bone, the Channel bone and the Shoulder tip, and covering the Neck
and the whole Face, after Galen, Sylvius, and Theophilus, Riolanus describes in
this place. I spoke thereof, in the beginning of the Chapter.

Chap. 12. Of the Parts contained in the Mouth, viz. the Gums, Palate, Uvula,
Fauces, and Throat-bone.
PArts contained in the Mouth besides the Teeth: are the Gums, Palate, Uvula,
Fauces, Tonguebone, Tongue, Almonds or Tonsillae, Larrnx, and beginning of the
Gullet. Of the three later I spoke in my second Book, because of the Connection
of Parts. Of the five former, we will treat in this Chapter and of the Tongue
in the Chapter following.

GINGIVA the Gum, is an hard flesh compassing the Teeth like a Rampart, and in
Gingiva.
such as have lost their Teeth, serving in some measure to chew their meat:
which being either eaten away, or too much relaxed, or overdryed, the Teeth
become loose, or fall out.

PALATUM the Palate, is the upper part of the Mouth moderately hollow, like the
Palatum.
Roof of an House, whence it is called the Heaven of the Mouth, and is the
Basis or Foundation on which the Brain rests, being made of the Os Sphaenoideum.

It Is invested with a thick Coat arising from the dura Matter, which covers the
Cheeks and whole mouth on their Insides, and is common to the Gullet and
Stomach, and therefore there is also a consent between these parts. Nor can we
purge the Head with Masticatories, unless we purge also the Stomach by the
Palate.

It Is furnished with small Nerves for Sense.

The UVULA hangs from the Palate further into the Mouth near the passages The
Uvula how seated.
of the Nostrils, over the Chink of the Larynx among the Almonds or Kernels so
called. Some call it Gargareon, from the noise it makes when we Gargle any
Liquor; it is also called Gurgulio and Columna.

It is a Process made of a Glandulous, Spungy and red Substance, which Columbus
does suppose to be made of the Coat of the Palate Reduplicated in that place.
Riolanus rather believes that it is flesh, arising from the extremity of the
Muscles, which are carried to the Body.

It is roundel' long, thicker above, and ends in an acute Figure obtusely. It
is Its Muscles.
suspended and held up by two little Muscles, an Internal and an External pair,
either to stir the Uvula Forward and Backward in the time of swallowing, or
when it is relaxed with Humors and falls down, to draw it up again.

Riolanus, from Aretaeus, the Author of Anatomia Vivorum, Abensina and Carpus,
describes two broad Ligaments fastening the Uvula on both sides, like to wings
spread abroad, which the Arabians term Galsamach of which he is worthy to be
consulted.

Sometimes by reason of Humors too much flowing in, it hangs two much The
falling o^ the Uvula.
down, which is called Casus Uvulae the falling down of the Palate of the
Mouth. Which if it cannot be restored to its place by Medicaments nor manual
operation,s it is wont to be burnt and cut by Skilful Chirurgeo^u.

The X. TABLE.
The FIGURES Explained.
In this TABLE are shown Os Hyoides, Uvula, and certain Muscles of the Tongue.
FIG. I. A. The Gargareon or Uvula, in English the Palate of the Mouth. BB. An
outward pair of Muscles. CC. Its tendon. DD. An inner pair of Muscles, a little
compressed. E. Part of the Roof of the Mouto, at which the Uvula bangs.


FIG. II. and III. AA. The Basis of Os Hyoides. BBBB. The sides or borns of the
said Bone. CC. Two Gristly Appendixes.


FIG. IV. A. The first Muscle of the tongue, arising from the external Face of
the Styloides. B. The second Muscle of the tongue. C. A Muscle of the third
pair called Genio-glossum. DD. The fifth pair Cerato-glossum, situate without.
EE. The tasting Nerves. FF. The tongue moving Nerves. G. A muscle of Os
Hyoides. H. The Processus Still formis. II. The Os Hyoidis. K. The Cartilago
Scutiformis. LL. Two muscles proper to the Larynz.


page 155



Its Use is to moderate, the coldness of the Air, that it may not suddenly rush
into the Lungs: and therefore those that have lost the Palate of their Mouths
dye of a Consumption.

Some think it helps to modulate the Voice, and therefore they call it Plectrum
vocis, the Vulgar Error.
striking quil of the Voice. But though it be wounded or quite cut off, yet is
not the voice hurt, unless some neighboring parts, which assist the voice are
also damaged: for then by the roughness of those parts, caused by those
Catarrhes, which have eaten the Uvula, the Voice becomes Hoarse.

A second Use is, to hinder drink from passing out of the Mouth into the
Nostrils. And therefore Salmuth tells of the Son of a Man called John, who being
born without any Uvula or Almonds, voided the Milk which he sucked, out of his
Nose, and did not live long.

By FAUCES sometimes we understand the whole wideness of the Mouth: but more
strictly it is meant of the hinder and lower part, which cannot be seen, but
when the Mouth is wide open and the Tongue held down, the Greeks term it
Pharynx, howbeit that word in Hypocrates does oftentimes signify the Diseases
of this part, as Inflammation, etc. Galen calls it Isthmus because of the
narrowness of the place.

In the Fauces is that Bone which from the shape of the Greek letter v is Names
of the Os hyoides.
called Hyoides, Hypsiloides, also from resemblance to the letter L Lambdoides,
that is the Upsilon or Lambda-shaped Bone. It Is also called Os gutturis, the
Throat-bone, and Os linguae, the Tongue-bone, of which I must treat in this
place, and not in the History of the Bones, because it is not fastened to the
other parts of the Skeleton.

Now the Bone is the Basis and Foundation of the Tongue, upon which it is
placed and moved: and it is set before the Larynx.

It consists of sundry little bones, three at least, sometimes of five, seven,
Its Construction.
nine.

The middle Bone is the greatest, bunching without, hollow within, under which
sticks the Epiglottis; it has processes termed Cornua, borns two in Number,
consisting of Bones more or fewer, greater or lesser.

Four Gristles are added, two are somewhat great, long and round, in the Belly
of Os hyoides, two also besides the Horns, which in some persons become bony.

Its processes are fastened to the Ligaments and ends of the Styloides, also
with the Cartilago guttalis.

This Bone is moved, but not except the Tongue be moved; and therefore it Its
Muscles.
has four pair of Muscles common to the Tongue, nor can the Muscles of the
Tongue be showed till they are removed.

The first pair lies concealed in the forepart, under the Skin, resting upon
the Wesand and the Cartilago Scutalis.

It arises with a broad and fleshy beginning, from the higher and inner Region
of the Breast Bone; and therefore this pair is called Sterno-hyoides. Its End
is fleshy, in the Basis of Os hyoides. And in the middle according to their
leng^h, these Muscles are divided with a line.

Their Use is to draw right down.

The second being under the Chin and the fifth pair of the lower Jaw; is large,
short and all fleshy.

It arises from the inner part of the lower Jaw, with a various carriage of
Fibers: it is ended in the middle seat of the Hyoides. Some call it
Genio-hyoides.

Its Use is to draw right upwards and a little forwards.

The third is lean and round, seated under the Chin, arising from the Root of
the Appendix of Styloides; it ends into the horns of the Hyoides. Sometimes they
are bored through the middle, for the Muscle which opens the Jaw.

The Use is, to move sidewayes, and a little obliquely upwards. It Is called
Stylo-cerato-hyoides.

The fourth being lean and long, lies concealed under that Muscle of the
Scapula which they count the fourth, moving downwards and obliquely sidewayes.

It arises from the upper side of the Scapula, near the processus Coracoides,
and therefore it is called Coraco-hyoides: it is carried upwards obliquely to
the sides of the Os hyoides, under that Muscle of the Head which is counted the
seventh. And this pair is long, has two Bellies, and is extenuated in the
middle like a Tendon, like that which draws down the lower Jaw.

Some add to these a fifth pair, which is indeed proper to the Tongue, Riolanus
indeed the Mylo-glossum and therefore he terms it Mylo-hyoideum; but Vestingus
the Genio-glossum, and therefore he calls it the Geniohyoides internum: which
arising inwardly from the Chin under the Par Genio-hyoideum, is inserted into
the Basis of the Hyoides, which it draws straight upwards.

The Use of this Os hyoides, is The Use of Os hyoides.


I. To be the Basis of the tongue, and yet but obscurely moveable: least as
Walaeus conceives, it should perpetually hang in the Throat, and hinder the
swallowing of Meat; but it moves forward in swallowing, and so makes the
Orifice of the Guller more wide.

II. That from it many Muscles might arise of the tongue and Larynx.

Chap. 13. Of the Tongue.
THe TONGUE called Lingua a lingendo The tongue.
from licking.

Is placed in Mankind, in the Mouth Its Situation.
under the Palate thereof:

Is in Number one, in Sea-Calfes two, in Number.
Serpents divided into three parts, in Lizards and Snakes divided into two
parts.

In Man it is long, broad and thick, and Figure.
thicker at the Root, thinner and sharper at the End.

Its size is moderate answerable to the mouth, which if it be too great, so
that Magnitude.
it cannot move readily, it makes a man Lispe and Stutter; and if it be
oversoft and moist as in young Children, they cannot speak plainly. Galen,
Carnerarius, Zacutus Lusitanus and M. Donatus, have observed the tongue grown
to so monstrous a greatness, that it could not be contained within the mouth.

As to the Connection, in fishes the whole tongue cleaves to their mouth; Its
Connection.
in mankind, it is in its hinder part fastened to the Larynx, and the Os
hyoides, also to the Fauces and Tonsillae. Beneath in the middle of its body
it is fastened with a strong membranous Ligament for strength and stabilities
sake; also for the insertion of its proper muscles, whose extremity is termed
Fraenulum; nor can any other string be found different from this. This in many
new born Children, does so tie the whole tongue, that it is wont to be torn by
the Nail of the Midwife (which is nevertheless a Pernicious course and A
Pernicious Practice of midwives.
not to be allowed) or the small Knife of a Surgeon, that it may not hinder
the Child's sucking or future speaking, and that it may freely turn and move it
self. Howbeit for want of skill, they cut it in all Infants indifferently,
whereas not one of a thousand, when it is let alone, does stammer.

It Is clothed with a Coat (hard in such Its Coat.
as use to swallow very hot Liquors) ordinarily thin, soft, and porous, that
tastes may easily pierce into the tongues fleshy

Substance, which is a peculiar kind of Substance.
flesh, such as is not in the Body besides (and it is the Organ of taste, not
the Coat, as Galen would have it, nor the Nervus Gustatorius, as some from
Columbus) soft, loose, rare and spungy, to drink in the tastes brought to it
with some humidity. In Fishes and some other Animals it is bony. It is rather of
a kernelly then a Musculous substance, especially about the Basis thereof.

For the tongue is no Muscle, seeing Whether the tongue be a muscle.
it has no Fibers, nor moves any other part, but is moved by its Muscles.
Others add this Reason, because then motion would be made toward the end of a
Muscle, and the tail of a Muscle should be moveable* the head immovable. But
this Reason is false. For the beginning of the tongue is near the Larynx, and
arises as it were from the Os Hyoides.

As to Vessels. Two remarkable Veins Its Vessels.
are to be seen under the tongue, which are wont to be opened in Quinzies and
Diseases of the Fauces, termed Raninae from their color, arising from the
external Jugulars, these

Two pretty big Arteries do accompany, from the Carotides.

Nerves are inserted into the Tongue, both those of motion, and those of Sense:
a thicker pair creeping through the inner parts, from the seventh conjugation,
which being obstructed or not reaching to the Tongue, the taste is lost
according to the observation of Columbus. A thinner pair runs through the outer
parts of the Tongues Coat, arising from the fourth conjugation, or as some say,
from the third.

The Tongue is distinguished in the middle of its surface, into the right and
The line of the tongue.
left part, by a certain white line, which Hippocrates terms Mediana.

The muscles proper to the Tongue, ending Its muscles
in its substance, are by some Anatomists reckoned to be six, by others nine,
by some ten, by others eleven, which move the Tongue, upwards and downwards;
forewards and backwards; to the right hand and to the left.

The first pair, which in Oxen is double fleshy and thick, arises from the out
side of the Appendix Styloides, being Maigre in Mankind: it ends with
transverse Fibers, into both sides of the Tongue, about the middle thereof.

Its Use is to move the Tongue inwards. But by reason of the Fibers interwoven,
they lift the Tongue upwards if they act both together; but upwards only to one
side, if only one of them act. This pair is called Styloglossum.

The second pair is called Myloglossum, arising from the sides of the lower
jaw, at the Roots of the grinding Teeth. It Is inserted under the Basis of the
tongue, into the tongues Ligament. Riolanus will have it belong to the Os
hyoides, because it touches not the tongue. But it suffices to move the tongue,
if it be affixed to the Ligament thereof.

Its Use; when one acts, the tongue is moved obliquely upwards; when both act,
it moves with its point right to the Palate and upper teeth.

The XI. TABLE.
The FIGURE Explained.
This TABLE expresses the Muscles of Os Hyoides and of the Tongue.
AAA. The Body of the lower Jaw. BB. The Body of Os Hyoides. CC. The first pair
of Muscles called Sternohyoides. D. One Muscle of the second pair in its
situation, the other removed therefrom. EE. The third pair bored in the middle.
FF. The fourth pair Coraco-hyoides. G. A Muscle of the fourth pair of the
Muscles of the tongue. HH. The Parenchyma of the tongue into which the Nerves
are inserted. I. A Muscle of the fifth pair of tongue Muscles. KK. A Muscle of
the first pair of tongue Muscles. LL. The common muscles of the Larynx, called
Sternothyroidei. MM. Other common muscles of the Larynx, Hyothyroidei. NN. The
Gristles of the Aspera Arteria. OO. A muscle of the lower Jaw called
Digastricus, Twibelly. PP. Portions of the processus Styloides.


page 157



The third pair arises inwardly at the middle of the Chin, whence it is called
Geneo-glossum; it ends, wellnear into the middle of the tongue inwardly.
Veslingius will have it fastened into the Basis of the Os hyoides, and therefore
he reckons it amongst the Muscles thereof. And by reason of the diversity of
its Fibers, it seems to perform contrary actions: for the greatest part of the
Fibers, which is toward the Root of the tongue, being drawn toward the
Original, the tongue is thrust without the Lips; but the smallest part of the
Fibers acting, it is drawn inwards. This pair has inscriptions as if it were
many Muscles.

The fourth pair arises fleshy out of the upper and middle Region of the Os
hyoides, and is terminated in the middle, after it is drawn out according to
the length of the tongue. It is sometimes obscurely divided, as if it were many
Muscles.

Its Use is, to draw the tongue right in, and so to depress the same. And it is
called Basioglossum, or Hypsiloglossum.

The fifth pair is called Cerato-glossum, because it arises from the upper horns
of the Hyoides, and is obliquely inserted into the sides of the tongue, near
the Root thereof.

Its arises sometimes from the lower horns, viz. when the higher are wanting,
especially in Women. And this pair is double in Oxen.

Its Use is, to move the tongue directly downwards toward the inner parts,
when both act; but if only one be contracted, it moves it to the right or left
side.

By others an eleventh Muscle is added, which yet is no Muscle, because it
consists not of fleshy Fibers; but it is a parcel of flesh, consisting of very
many Kernels and far, situate at the Root of the tongue, and appearing when the
foresaid Muscles are taken away.

Its Use is, that the tongue may be moistened by this plenty of Kernels.

The Use of the Tongue is: The use of the Tongue.


I. To be the Instrument of Taste. II. Of Speech. III. To further the chewing of
Meat, by turning it this way and that way. IV. To lick with.
By all which it appears, that the tongue is not necessary to the very being of
life, but to the well being: for the part thereof may be cut off without danger
of life or health, Zacutus, Walaeus and others after Galen, have found by
experience. Abenzoar, Joubertus, Forestus, have observed that Stones have bred
under the tongue, hindering Speech, till they were cut out; and I remember that
long since such stones were taken out at Padua.

THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE LIMBS.
BY Limbs we understand those Members which grow as it were The Limbs what?
out from the Trunk of the Body, viz. the ARMS above, the LEGS beneath. In
which are chiefly considered the Muscles, Veins, Arteries, Nerves Why the
muscles also of the Head, Neck, Back etc. are handled in this Book?
and Bones. Of the four last I shall treat, in the four following Manuals: but
of the Muscles of the Limbs in this Book, as also of the neighboring Parts,
viz. the Head, Neck, Chest, Back, etc. their Muscles; not because they
appertain to the Limbs, but because in the Order of Dissection, an Anatomist
cannot show them before the Muscles of the Limbs.

Chap. I. Of the Arm and Hand in General with the Nails.
ARistotle calls the Arm with its Hand, The use of the Hand.
Organon Organon, the Instrument of Instruments, wherewith Man otherwise naked
and unarmed is guifted, that he may not be inferior to the Brute-beasts and
conquered by them; but may overcome them, making for himself Weapons, and other
necessary Instruments. Man therefore has received Reason and Hands, which
Beasts have not; and the Hand is his Servant and Instrument.

Now the old Writers Hippocrates and Galen by HAND did understand that Manus
what?
Part of the Body, from the top of the Shoulder to the ends of the Fingers, and
this is termed summa Manus.

And it is divided into the Arm and Hand strictly so called, or the extrema
manus.

And the Arm is divided again, into the Shoulder and Cubit, the Shoulder is the
part of the Arm from the Shoulder-tip to the bending of the Elbow.

The Cubit is that part from the bending of the Elbow unto the Wrist.

The Manus extrema or Hand properly so called, is divided into the Brachiale or
Wrist, which is the part between the Elbow and Palm; into the Postbrachiale or
Metacarpum, after-wrist, which is the part between the Wrist and beginning of
the Fingers, and into the Fingers. The Postbrachial part internal is called the
Palm of the Hand, the external part is called the Back of the Hand.

There are many Fingers, that the action Why many Fingers on the Hand?
of the Hand might be the better performed, which is laying hold: also that we
might be able to take up the smallest matters, which we do by two fingers, and
other things of many-shaped Figures: and because all things could not be
comprehended with one hand, two were made that meeting together, the one might
help the other.

The right Hand is more active commonly and more ready for motion, not Why the
right Hand is more active then the left?
for those causes which others childishly cite, but 1. Because in a man's right
side is the Vena sine pari so called, which peradventure is double in such as
can use both hands alike. 2. Because the bones are more heavy in the Shoulder,
Shoulder Blade and whole arm, then on the other side, as some men know for
certain; which may proceed from an impression of more plentiful Heat in the
Mothers Womb, the right part whereof is hotter then the other. Hence Aristotle
teaches, that naturally the right hand excels the left; and in another place,
he tells us the first endeavor of motion is on the right side; so that when a
man is about to walk, first moves his right Leg; a Bird about to fly, moves
first its right wing. 3. Because the trunk of the Subclavian Artery is greater
on the right side then the left, as they know that have diligently considered
the matter in opposition to Riolanus, though the difference is not, neither
needed to be very great. Plato conceives that all men are naturally
ambidexters, viz. that they can use both hands alike, and that it is men's
unskilfulness and ignorance that makes them right handed only or left handed.
But Aristotle is of Opinion, that from our first Formation, the right sides of
our Bodies, are always in a manner hotter and stronger then the left, unless
any man by much custom, and much exercise, do draw much Heat and Spirit to his
left Hand that he may become Ambidexter, and able to use it as his right.

Now the Fingers for perfection of Action The number of the Fingers.
are made five in number, differing in length and thickness. It Is besides
nature, if either the Fingers be quite wanting, which I have seen at Malta and
at Florence; or if in place of true Fingers there appear only certain soft
marks as big as Peason, which I lately observed here at Hafnia.

The first is called Pollex a Pollendo because of its strength, and it alone is
opposed to the whole four, when any thing is to be taken up, and therefore it
is thick.

The second is called Index and Demonstrator, the shewer, or pointer: because
therewith we point at any thing.

The third is the longest and middlemost, called Impudicus the shameless,
because Physicians use it in filthy and stinking places; not is it wont to be
adorned with Rings.

The fourth is termed Medicus, also Annularis, the Ring-finger, because it is
adorned with a Gold Ring before any of the rest, by reason of a common bu^
false opinion Repugnant to Anatomy, viz. that a Vein should come from the Heart
to this Finger above all the rest; now the Heart is comforted with Gold.

The fifth called Auricularis the Ear-finger, because fittest to pick the Ears,
is smallest, and by us called the little Finger.

The Cause therefore of laying hold, which is the action of the Hand, or Laying
hold.
as others speak less accurately, its chiefest use, is the apt composition of
the How the Hand is compounded?
whole Hand. Yet the chief Organ of this motion is a Muscle: the strength is in
the Bones, which are three in every finger, the lower of which as the sustainer
is always greater then that which is above it and stronger, and in the Joints
they are furnished on each fide with a Gristle, on which an Oily moisture is
poured out for Hummectations sake, and to Facilitate the motion.

A secondary use of the Arms and Hands as Kyperus learnedly Discourses, is the
better to help our going by their weight and ballancing; Yea and to speed our
going; and therefore dancers on the Ropes, whose Foot is broader then that
which they tread on, do bear themselves up with long Poles, and when they dance
a pace, they balance themselves with their Hands, which they move this way and
that way.

The Nails are placed externally on the tops of the Fingers, as also of Of the
Nails.
the Toes: whose upmost part being white, is called the Root of the Nails, the
white half Moon, and the little Skin which grows to the Root.

Their matter is not Alimentary Humors; as Aemilius, Parisanus and Plempius
would have it, and others, but thick Excrements, not which ascend from the
Heart, as Rosa Anglicana conceives; or from the Arteries, but from the Bones
and Gristles, as the great Hippocrates does affirm.

The Efficient is that heat which the Soul directs to this rather then any
other part of the Body. But the Nails are not made by the Soul, as Parisanus
and Plempius contend, because in Cacochymick and Phlegmatic persons they grow
more abundantly, in such as have been twenty five years dead, according to the
observation of Pareus. Nor are we moved when they say that there is a great
variety of colors in horns and shells of Fishes, for they no more prove the
action of the Soul in such things, then in party colored and speckled Marble.

Their End and Use is,

I. To fence the ends of the Fingers and Toes which are exceeding soft, and to
saveguard them by their hardness, so that they may more easily take up any
thing. So in the Feet, that they may be able to resist the hardness of the
Ground and stand firm. And therefore it was ill said by him of old, that the
Gods had erred in their placeing the Nails. II. For ornament: and therefore we
cover our Fingers when the Nails are impaired. III. To rub, scrarch and defend,
which is a secondary use. IV. To free the Body from superfluous Humors and
steams Fuliginous. V. To afford Physiognomists and Physicians tokens of Life
and Health, which may be seen in diverse authors. And Achmetes chapter 74. 75.
interprets dreams concerning them, according to the Tradition of the Indians,
Persians and Egyptians.
Their form we gather from the Accidents.

Their Figure is somewhat unequal, that they may apply themselves to the Fingers.

They have a substance indifferently hard that they may resist, but yet
flexible, that they may yield a little and not break.

They are Transparent and therefore Color of the Nails and signs from thence.
variously colored: for according to the flesh beneath them, they are red,
bluish, etc. And therefore Physicians are wont to observe the Color of the
Nails; for the Nails, for examples sake, grow pale when the heat of the Heart
is deficient; in such as are at deaths door they are livid and brown. Those
same white spots which in young people sometimes appear in their Nails, spring
from a vigorous heat, which drives hidden Excrements to the Nails, and
separates them from others of a different Nature.

They are knit about the Root with a Whence the sense of the nails proceeds
Ligament, and Skin grows about them without; and flesh grows under them, or
rather the tendons of Muscles, there dilated: there is therefore in that place
an exquisite sense, and great pain when they are hurt.

And so much may suffice to have spoken of the Nails, briefly, and by way of
Compendium.

Chap. II. Of the Muscles of the Humerus, or of the Brachium, peculiarly so
called.
THe common containing Parts being removed, viz. the Scarf-skin, the Skin, the
Fat, the Membrana carnosa, etc. the MUSCLES show themselves, by which the
motion is made, of which I am to treat in this whole Book; in a convenient
place, though Hofman think otherwise, especially because the Doctrine of the
Muscles is useful and necessary, by reason of Issues, Wounds, etc. And in the
other parts they could not be treated off.

Now touching the action of the Muscles of the Arm in general, it is to be
noted, that the inner Muscles do mostly serve to bend, and the outer to extend.
And in the whole Arm the internal Muscles are more and stronger then the
external, because bending is more worthy then the extension.

The Humerus is variously moved, The Muscles of the Humerus how many?
and therefore it has sundry Muscles, partly lying upon the Chest, and partly
growing to the Scapulae or Shoulder-blades, etc. Some reckon them seven, others

The FIGURE Explained.
This TABLE represents all the Muscles of the Body described by the Author,
which are to be seen before.
AA. The Muscles of the Neck, called Musculi long. B. The Muscles Scalenus. C.
The Muscle Mastoides which bends the Head. dd. The Vertebra's of the Neck. E.
The Levator Scapulae, lifter of the Shoulder. FF. The Claviculae or Chanel
bones. G. The Breast Bone, called Sternum. H. The Acromon or Shoulder-tip. ii.
The Musculus Subclavius. K. The Pectoral Muscle. L. The Muscles Deltoides. MM.
The Muscle Biceps. N. The Musculus perforatus, or bored Muscle. O. The Serratus
minor, or Smaller-saw-muscle. PP. The greater Saw-muscle, or Serratus ma^or.
qqqq. The Intercostal or Rib between Muscles. RRRR. The branchiaeus on each
Arm, conspicuous from each part of the Biceps. SS. The first Arm extender, or
the Longus. TT. The Musculus Radij pronator rotundus. V. Radij Pronator
Quadratus. W. Supinator Radij primus. X. Carpi flexor primus or externus. Y.
Musculus palmaris. Z. Carpi flexor alter, or the internus. (...). The Os Radij.
(...). The Os Cubiti. (...). The Ligament which fastens the Cubitus to the
Radi^^? (...). The Digitorum flexor sublimus or Perforatus. (...). The
Profundus or Perforans, under the former. (...). The Musculi Lumbricales.
(...). The Flexor pollicis or Thumb-bender. (...). The Muscles which draw the
Thumb toward the Hand.
The following Characters serve to point out those Muscles, which run out from
the Region of the Loins to the End of the Feet, in the forepart of the Body.
A. The Muscle Ps^as or Lumbaris. B. The Muscle Iliacus. C. The Obturator
internus. DDDD. The Musculus Triceps, or Tripple-headed Muscle. EE. The
Musculus Lividus. FF. The Rectus in its situation, but on the right Leg
hanging by its End. GG. The Vastus internus. H. The Vastus externus, which on
the right Leg hangs separated. H. The Musculus membranosus, or the Fascia lata.
KK. The Musculus Crureus. LL. The Musculus longus, Fascialis or Sartorius. MM.
The Musculus gracilis. NN. The Musculus Tabiaeus anticus. O. The Musculus
peroneus Biceps. PP. The Muscle which extends the four Toes of the Foot. Q. The
Muscle which extends the great Toe. R. The Musculus Gastroenemius. rrrr. The
Musculi Interossei. S. The transverse Ligament of the Foot. T. The Tibia. V.
The Fibula. X. The Patella.




eight and Casserius nine. For the Arm is said to be lift up by two Muscles,
Deltoides and Supra-spinatus; and downwards by two, the Any scalptor and
Rotundus major: forewards by one alone, viz. the Pectoralis; backwards by
three, the Infra-spinatus and Sub-scapularis, and the Transversus brevior. But
they conceive the circular motion thereof is caused by all of them acting one
after another: but others will have the Arm to be wheeled about by the
Infra-spinatus, Supraspinatus, and Sub-scapularis. But I shall in recounting
them follow the order of Dissection.

The first is termed Pectoralis, because it takes up the Breast or forepart of
the Chest being great and fleshy; which Galen conceived might be divided into
three or four.

It arises from wellnigh the whole Brest-bone, and the Gristles thereto
annexed; where it is a little tendinous in part of the Clavicula, and the fifth,
sixth and seventh true Ribs. It Is implanted with a short, broad Nervous and
strong tendon, into the Os Humeri, between the Deltoides and the Biceps.

Its Use is, to move the Arm to the Breast, and as the Fibers are contracted
more to the upper or lower part or right forward, so does the Arm incline this
way or that way. This is the Muscle which suffers in that torment which the
Italians call Tratta de corda, the Strappado. For it is very much haled and
drawn a sunder, when the Arms are pulled forcibly backwards.

The second is called Deltoides, from its likeness to the Greek letter D also
Triangularis Humeralis, which is fleshy and so abides, and is spread upon the
Head of the Shoulder.

It arises from the middle of the Clavicula, looking toward the Scapula, and
from the top of the Humerus, with a fleshy end indeed, but yet a strong tendon
lies concealed therein.

Its Use is to lift up the Arm. In the The place of an Issue in the Arm.
middle hereof the Ancients were wont to make Fontanels or Issues; but others
in the external part of the said Muscles: but an Issue is better made in the
space between the Deltoides and the Biceps, as I show in my Treatise of Issues,
because 1. There is the Cephalic or Head Vein. 2. It is between two Muscles.
3. It may be very well seen and dressed by the Patient. Now the place is
exactly found below the Shoulder joint, four or five Fingers breadth, where when
you bend the Arm you may feel the space between the two Muscles, and the Arm
being lift up, it is Circumscribed in fat persons with a small Cavity, as
Claudinus, Solenander and others observe. Ferrara measures four Fingers breadth
from the Elbow upwards. See also Glandorpius.

The third is broadest of all, and with its fellow covers almost the whole
Back. It Is called Any Scalptor, Clawbreech, because it draws the Arm backwards
and downwards.

It arises with a membranous and very broad beginning, from the points of the
Vertebra's of the Back bone, from the Os sacrum and Ilium, as far as to the
six: Vertebra of the Chest. It is inserted between the Pectoral and the round
Muscle, with a strong, short and broad Tendon. Its shape is triangular.

Fallopius out of Galen against Vesalius, does teach that this Muscle is
furnished with a new, but very small beginning, while from the lower Corner of
the Shoulder-blades, it receives very many fleshy Fibers. This Muscle because
it has a large beginning, and therefore diverse Fibers; according as they are
variously contracted, so the Shoulder is either drawn more upwards or depressed
more downwards. And because it also passes through the lower corner of the
Shoulder blade therefore it lightly draws the same also away with the Shoulder.

The fourth is called Rotundus major, and it is obliquely seated behind, under
the Axilla, being fleshy, thick, and rounder then the rest.

It arises fleshy from the Rib of the lower Scapula, and ascending a little
with its tendon, short, broad, and strong, it is implanted with the Pectoral,
into the upper and lower part of the Humerus.

Its Use is, to draw the Arm downwards and backwards, and to work contrary to
the Deltoides.

The first is short and round, quite fleshy, which arises with a sharp
beginning out of the lowest corner of the Scapula; after it grows thicker and
thicker to the middle of its belly, and thence growing smaller by little and
little, it terminates with an acute end into that Ligament, wherewith the Head
of the Shoulder is involved.

It has an oblique Situation, and some call it Transversus musculus brevior,
others Rotundus minor. And it is the eighth in Fallopius his account: which
Muscle others suppose to be a certain portion of the fourth.

The sixth is called Infra-spinatus, also Superscapularis inferior, because it
covers the whole external bunching part of the Scapula, whose form also it
bears; but becoming more narrow, it is with a broad and short Ligament inserted
into the Shoulder.

It is thought to wheel the Arm backwards and outward. Its Use.


The seventh is the Supraspinatus, also Superscapularis superior, also Rotundus
minor; it is fleshy and somewhat longish, over the Armpit; it fills the Cavity
between the upper Rib of the scapula, and the Spina thereof, out of which it
grows.

Now it is inserted with a broad and strong tendon, into the Neck of the
Humerus, at the Ligament of the joint, being carried above the first joint.

The Use of this is thought to be the same with that of the former. Others
conceive it moves upwards with the Deltois.

The eighth is termed Subscapularis or Immersus; being very fleshy, it quarters
betwixt the Scapula and the Ribs, and takes up the inner part of the Scapula;
but it is inserted with a broad tendon, internally, into the second Ligament of
the Humerus.

Its Use is to bring about the Arm inwards.

The ninth Muscle was first observed by Arantius and Placentinus, being in the
former part of the Arm and called Perforatus.

It arises from the Coracoides Processus of the Scapula (and is therefore by
Riolanus called Coracordeus, or Coracobrachiaeus) it is inserted into the inner
part of the Shoulder about the middle, by the tendon of the Deltoides. It has
a beginning nervous and short, a long round Belly sufficiently corpulent, and a
strong tendon. Its Belly has an hole bored in it, and gives passage to the
Nerves, which are distributed to the Muscles of the Cubit. This Muscle others
have only termed a Musculous Portion of the Biceps.

It Is useful to draw the Arm to the Process of the Scapula; or draw it forward
upon the Breast.

Chap. 3. Of the Muscles of the Scapula or Shoulder Blade.
BEcause the Scapula is moved forward and backward; upward, and downward;
therefore it has received four Muscles. To which nevertheless others add two
more, The Error of other Anatomists.
viz. the Serratus major and the Digastricus, but they do not well. For the
later is proper to the Oshyoides, the former to the Chest.

I. The first is called SERRATUS MINOR, and it is spread under the Musculus
pectoralis.

It arises from the four upper Ribs, excepting the first and ascending
obliquely upwards, with an end partly fleshy, and partly tendinous, it is
inserted into the Scapula by the Proceslus ancoriformis.

Its Use is to draw forward into the Breast.

II. The second is by Galen called Trapezius, others term it Cucullaris,
because it resembles a Friars Cowl. But that this Muscle was given our first
Parents, as the Badge of a religious life, as Riolanus conjectures, I do not
believe, because others are religious that wear no Cowles, and many are
irreligious that wear them, whether you look at their Profession or Manners.
However this Name was given this Muscle by Christian Physicians, because of its
likeness to a Monks Cowl.

It arises fleshy and thin from the hinder-part of the Head. From whence it
descends to the eighth Vertebra of the Chest, and from thence as also from the
hinder part of the Head growing small by little and little, it is inserted into
the Backbone, the Scapula, the top of the Shoulder and the Clavicula.

But because of its various Original and various Fibers,

It variously moves the Scapula, upwards, obliquely, by reason of Fibers
obliquely descending from the hind-part of the head to the Omoplata, which
Riolanus denies in vain; downwards, by reason of the carriage of fibers,
ascending from the eighth Vertebra of the Back; and right out to the Back, by
reason of right fibers in the middle of the Muscle, stretched out to the
Scapula.

III. The third is the Rhomboides from its figure like a Diamond, situate
under the Cucullaris, thin and broad.

It arises from the three lower Vertebra's of the Neck and the three upper
Vertebra's of the Chest, and with, the same latitude is inserted into the Basis
of the Scapula.

Its Use is to draw back a little obliquely upwards.

IV. Is the Levator, which others call the Muscle of Patience; because those
whose Affairs go cross, are wont to lift up their Shoulders: it is above the
Clavicula.

It arises from the five transverse Processes of the Vertebra's of the Neck,
with sundry beginnings (which makes it seem diverse Muscles) which soon grow
into one: and its Insertion is in the higher and lower corner of the Scapula,
with a broad and fleshy tendon. Its Use is, to draw forward and lift up the
Scapula and the Humerus.

With these Muscles the Scapula is moved directly or of it self, and the
Brachium per accidens, accidentally; as the Scapula is accidentally moved by
the Muscles of the Brachium.

Chap. 4. Of the Muscles of the Chest, or which serve for Respiration.
VEry many Muscles serve for Respiration; as the Midriff, all the Intercostal
Muscles, some of the Belly (of which I have treated in the first and second
Book) and some

Proper to the CHEST, which are reckoned on each side six; to which
nevertheless Fallopius adds three in the Neck; which in Vesalius are parts of
Muscles possessing the Breast and Back.

The proper Muscles of the Chest do grow thereto: two in the forepart,
subclavius and triangularis; Serratus major possesses the Sides; the rest are
in the hinderpart, viz. the two Serrati postici and the Sacrolumbus.

I. The SUBCLAVIUS, because it is seated under the Clavicula, fills the place
between it and the first Rib. Platerus reckons it amongst the Intercostals.

It arises fleshy from the inner and lower part of the Clavicula: it is
inserted fleshy into the upper part of the first Rib, which it draws upwards
and outward. And this is the first muscle which dilates or distends the Chest.
To this Spigelius assigns a contrary use, viz. to draw the Clavicula downwards*
which nevertheless is of it self immovable, and therefore he ascribes
thereunto a Rise and an Insertion contrary to it.

II. The SERRATUS MAJOR, is a great, broad, and every way fleshy muscle, with
the oblique descendent of the Abdomen, it makes a Saw-like Combination.

It arises fleshy, from the internal Basis of the Scapula. Riolanus has
observed an higher Original thereof, from the two upper Ribs, as far as to the
Clavicula, which two Ribs seem immovable. It is carried by its tendon, with
five unequal ends, to the five true Ribs, and sometimes to two bastard Ribs;
which it lifts up. Spigelius also and Veslingus do ascribe a contrary Use
hereunto, and consequently a contrary Original, and Insertion,

III. SERRATUS POSTICUS SUPERIOR minor, does quarter under the Rhomboides in
the Back, between the two Shoulder-blades.

It arises membranous from the lower Spines of the Neck, and the first of the
Back: it is inserted into the three Intervals of the four upper Ribs, being
tripartite: and it draws those Ribs upwards.

IV. SERRATUS POSTICUS INFERIOR major, is membranons and broad almost in the
middle of the Back, under the Musculus latissimus or Any scalptor arising from
the Spines or sharp points of the lower Vertebra's of the Back. It is inserted
into the Intervals of the four lower Ribs, being parted as it were into
Fingers. Its Use to widen the lower part of the Chest.

V. Is spread under the former, and by others supposed to be common to the Back
and Chest. It Is called SACROLUMBUS, because it arises from the lower part of Os
sacrum, and the sharp points of the Vertebra's of the Loins. It is fleshy
within, nervous without. It is inserted into the lower Ribs, with a double
tendon, one external which is strongest, the other internal. It is not easily
separated from the lowest muscle of the Back, so that it seems to be a parcel
thereof. Its Use according to Veslingus, to contract the Chest. Spigelius
conceives as I do, that because it grows out of one beginning with the Musculus
longissimus of the Back, that therefore it extends and raises up the Chest.

VI. Is the TRIANGULARIS, small and subtle, in lean persons scarce fleshy, it
lies inwardly concealed under the Breast Bone, out of the lower part whereof,
it has its Original. And therefore it may conveniently be called the Muscle of
the Breast Bone. Its obliquely inserted into the lower Gristles, which it draws
to, and straitens the Chest.

Chap. V. Of the Muscles of the Head.
THe HEAD is moved, either secondarily by the muscles of the Neck, according to
the motion thereof; or primarily upon the first Vertebra, to which it is
immediately and closely joined, bein bent forward and backward. It is turned
round upon the tooth-fashioned Process of the second Vertebra (on which the
hind-part of the Head rests, and to which it is firmly fastened) as it were upon
an Axle-tree; which motion is performed by nine pare of Muscles.

The first pare is long and thick, by some called Splenium, spread out on each
side upon the Vertebrae. It arises from a double beginning, one from the Spinae
of the upper Vertebra's of the Chest, another from the five lower Spinae of the
Vertebra's of the Neck, from which it is carried to the middle of the Occiput.
Its Use is, to draw the Head directly backwards. But if only one do act, the
motion is thought to be made circularly to one side.

The second is implicated and complicated, and therefore termed Complexum. It
seems to consist as it were of three Muscles. It has diverse beginnings, at the
seventh Vertebra of the Neck, at the first, third and fourth of the Chest, and
it is after a different manner implanted into the Occiput.

Riolanus observes touching the Fibers of the Splenium and the Complexus, that
they are cross-wayes intersected, and disposed for the strength of both the
Muscles.

The third Pare is situate under the second, small and thick, which Vesalius
would have to be the fourth part of the former Muscle. It is inserted into the
hindermore Root of the Processus mammillaris Its Use is, lightly to bring the
Head backwards; and if but one act, to bring it backwards to one side.

The fourth pare is called Rectum majus, being small, fleshy and lean. It
arises from the second Vertebra of the Neck; ends into the middle of the
Occiput.

The fifth pare called Rectum minus, lies concealed under the former pare. Its
Rise is from the first Vertebra of the Neck, its insertion and Use is as of the
third and fourth.

The sixth is the Obliquum superius, which lies also beneath. It rises according
to some, out of the middle of the Occiput, and descending is inserted athwart,
into the points of the Processes of the Neck. But others among whom Veslingus
do rightly think it arises from the Process of the first Vertebra, and ends
into the Occiput* by the outward side of the Recti.

The seventh called Obliquum inferius, arises from the second Vertebra of the
Neck, and is inserted into the transverse Process of the first Vertebra.

The Use of the two oblique Muscles, is to bring the Head about to the Sides.

The eighth called Mastoides, arises long and round in the forepart of the
Neck, for the most part double, from the upper part of the Brest-bone and the
Clavicula: it is inserted with a fleshy and thick End, into the Mammillary
Process, which it embraces. Its Use is to turn the Head.

A ninth pare is added by Fallopius, under the Throat, in the forepart of the
Neck, lying near the first pare of the Neck. It arises nervous from the
Ligaments of the Vertebra's of the Neck; and is inserted into the Basis of the
Head, which it turns in like manner with the former.

Chap. 6. Of the Muscles of the Neck*
THe Muscles of the Neck are on each side four. The two first extend, the two
others do bend the same.

I. The two LONG ONES lie hid under the Oesophagus or Gullet, arising from the
first Vertebra of the Chest, with a beginning fleshy and sharp, they ascend
into the extuberant Process of the first Vertebra, with an acute tendon, and
sometimes are inserted into the Occiput, near its great Hole.

Its Use is, to bend the Neck right forwards and the Head withal: and if but
one act, it turns it on the one side.

The SCALENI so called, which some count Muscles of the Chest, have a peculiar
Hole, through which Veins and Arteries enter into the Arms. They arise fleshy,
at the side of the Neck, from the first Rib; they are inserted inwardly into
all the Vertebra's for the most part of the Neck, and especially into their
transverse Processes.

III. The TRANSVERSALES duo, seated in the back, do rise from the six
Vertebra's of the Chest which are uppermost and outmost: they are inserted
externally into all the transverse Processes of the Vertebra's of the Neck. And
between these Nerves go out. Their Use is, to extend or to bend backwards, but
if one act alone, to move obliquely.

IV. The two SPINATI possess the whole Neck between the Spinae, and are long
and large. They arise from five Spines of the Vertebra's of the Neck, and seven
of the Chest. They are strongly implanted into the whole lower part of the
Spine of the second Vertebra. Their Use is the same as of the third pare.

Chap. 7. Of the Muscles of the Back and Loins.
THe Spine of the Back or Backbone is moved forward, backward, to the right
and to the left, and circularly. Yea, and in tumblers we may see infinite
motions of the Back. For tendons are brought to all the Vertebra's, as though
the Muscles were many and infinite; which tendons nevertheless many Anatomists
do refer to some one great Muscle, and say that one Muscle has many tendons.
But commonly, they make four pare of Muscles of the back: where it is to be
observed, if only one act, the backbone is moved side-wayes, if the pare acts,
it is either bended or extended.

The first pare is termed QUADRATUM, adhering to the transverse Processes of
the Vertebra's of the Loins; The FIGURE Explained.
This TABLE presents certain Muscles which do first offer themselves to sight,
in the Hinder-part of the Body.
aa. The Muscles of the Head called Complexi. BB. The Muscles called Splenij.
CC. The two Levators Scapulae. D. The Trapezius or Cucullaris out of its place.
E. The Supra-spinatus. F. The Infra-spinatus. G. The Rotundus major. h. The
Rotundus minor. II. The Rhomboides. KK. The Dorsi latissimus. L. The Serratus
posticus superior. M. The Serratus posticus inferior. NN. The Dorsi
longissimus. OO. The Sacrolumbus. P. The Quadratus. Q. The Sacer Dorsi
musculus. R. The Musculus longus which extends the Arm. S. The Musculus brevis,
the other Arm-extender. TT. The Supinator Brachij alter, according to our
Author, see the first pare in the next Table. V. The Extensor Carpi primus,
which some term Bicornis here hanging down* W. The Extensor Carpi secundus.
XXxx. The two Extensores Digitorum. Z. The External Apophysis of the Shoulder.
(...). The Deltoides. T. The Brachieus.
These following Characters demonstrate the Muscles of the lower Limbs.
A. The Glutaeus major out of its place. B. The Glutaeus medius in its place.
C. The Pyriformis Musculus. D. The Ob^uratus internus or Marsupialis. EE. The
Biceps which bends the Leg. ^g. The Seminervosus. hh. The Gracilis. III. The
Triceps of the left Side. K. The Vastus externus. (...). The Triceps of the
right Side. LL. The Popliteus. MM. The two Castro^nemij, which on the left side
are ^^ their proper Situation, on the right side out of the same. NN. The
Musculus soleus. O. The Musculus plantaris.


between 164 and 165

inwardly from the Bones Ilium and Sacrum, broad and fleshy. Riolanus would
rather bring them from the transverse Apophyses of the two lower Vertebra's of
the Back, and the last Rib, that it might with the oblique descending Muscles
and the right ones, agitate and move forwards the Fabric of the Ossa Ilij.
Howbeit, seeing that Hypothesis is as yet uncertain, and himself confesses with
Gajus, that the business is to be understood, of the bowing of the Loins, and
the frame of the Ilian Bones; according to the Original by me assigned, the Use
of this Muscle is rather to bend the Vertebra's of the Loins.

The second being called LONGISSIMUM, arises with an acute and strong Tendon,
without tendinous, within fleshy, from the end of Os sacrum, the Vertebra's of
the Loins, and the Os Ilij; having the same beginning with the Sacrolumbus,
wherewith it is in a manner confounded, til in the Progress it is separated the
refrom, by the lowest Vertebra of the Back. And it is joined afterward to each
transverse process of the Vertebra's of the Loins and Back, unto which it
affords tendons like Claspes, and at length ends sometimes into the first
Vertebra of the Chest, sometimes at the mammillary processes, near the
Temples-bone. Its Use is, to extend the Chest, Loins, and their Vertebra's.

The third under this, is that which is called SACRUM, because it arises from
the Os sacrum behind, being fleshy, and ends into the Spina of the twelfth
Vertebra of the Chest (or as others say, into the Spines also, and oblique
processes of the Vertebra's of the Loins) with sundry tendons. The Use is as of
the former.

The fourth the SEMISPINATUM, arising where the former ends, and embracing all
the Spines of the Vertebra's of the Chest, and giving them tendons; and it ends
into the Spine of the first Vertebra of the Chest. Its Use is to rear up the
Chest.

If all eight act, they hold the Back straight, and do as it were sustain a
man. Nor are there any muscles of the Loins, save these, and what have been
explained before, which I have omitted, as Riolanus objects, or whereof I have
been ignorant.

Chap. 8. Of the Muscles of the Cubitus and Radius.
THe Muscles of the CUBIT, according An Order in Dissection.
to the arbitrary Method of Dissection follow. Yet I do advise the Dissector,
that the Muscles of the Radius are not to be showed immediately after those,
but last of all; but after the Muscles of the Cubit, those of the fingers,
thumb and wrist; because the Muscles of these parts being shown and removed,
the Insertions of the Muscles of the Radius, are more couveniently discerned.
Otherwise the Brachium may follow next after the demonstration of the Muscles
of the Cubitus and Radius, by an Order free for any one to follow.

The Muscles of the Cubit are four, and of the RADIUS as many.

There are two Benders of the Cubit, as the Biceps and Brachiaeus: two
Extenders, viz. the Longus and the Brevis.

There are two Pronators of the Radius, the Rotundus and the Quadratus, and two
Supinators, the Longior and Brevior.

For the proper Motion of the Cubit is flexion and extension. But the Radius
makes the whole Arm prone or supine.

The first of the Cubit is termed BICEPS; because of its double distinct
Beginning, which is from the Scapula, the one tendinous and round, from the
upper lie of the Acerabulum, the other broader and less tendinous, from the
Processus ancoriformis. And it is inserted with the Head of the Radius, and
possesses the inner part of the Arm with its Body. The tendon of this Muscle
ought in Blood-letting to be taken heed of.

The second lying under this, and spread out upon the bone it self, being short,
is called BRACHIAEUS; it is all fleshy, less then the former; artses from the
middle bone of the Brachium, and is before inserted into the common beginning
of the Cubitus and Radius, and the Ligament of the Joint.

The third is the EXTENDENS primus and LONGUS, it arises with a double
beginning, from the lower Rib of the Scapula, is ended being fleshy in the
Olecranum.

The fourth is the EXTENDENS secundus and BREVIS; it arises from the Neck of
the Humerus, is behind mixed with the precedent, and occupies the Os Humeri;
and it ends into the part of the Olecranum on which we lean.

Casserius adds a fifth called tertius extendens, which others count a portion
of the fourth Muscle; but he counts it a distinct Muscle, as later Anatomists
Riolanus and Veslingus do, which they term Anconeus. But he would have it to be
a portion of his Brachiaeus, because it sticks sometimes close to the fleshy
Extremity thereof, and to answer to the Poplitaeus, that an equality may be
maintained between the foot and the hand. It springs out of the hinder
extremity of the Shoulder, by the end of the fourth and third Muscle, and
passing beyond the Joint of the Cubir, it is also inserted by its hinder and
lateral part, yet not above a fingers breadth beyond the Olecranum, into the Os
Cubiti.

Moreover Galen seems to add a sixth, which is the fourth Extender, viz. a
fleshy Lump hudled up of the two former, which Riolanus calls Brachiaeus
externus, to difference it from the Brachiaeus intern is flectens, because
being spread out upon the outside of the Brachium, it is placed under the two
former.

The first Muscle of the Radius is termed ROTUNDUS, or Teres; from the inner
Apophysis of the Arm by a strong and fleshy beginning, it ends obliquely very
near into the middle of the Radius, with a fleshy end, and likewise a
membranous tendon, which Spigelius writes, does go again to the middle of the
Radius, and is knit to the outward side of the said Radius.

The second QUADRATUS, reaching from the lowest part of the Cubita, into the
lowest of the Radiu^s, wholly fleshy, every where two fingers broad; it goes
above that Ligament common to the Radius and Cubitus. These are the Manus
pr^natores.

The third is the SUPINATOR PRIMUS, from the lower part of the Brachium growing
sharp, till it reach into the lower part of the Radius, fleshy, where it is
inserted with a tendinous End.

The fourth is the SUPINATOR ALTER, growing from the outward Apophysis of the
Arm, fleshy, membranous without, fleshy within, and is inserted into the middle
wel-near of the Radius.

Among the Muscles of the Radius Casserius once found two little ones, and very
small, about the Joint Cubit, and proceeding in an opposite fashion, and moving
the Radius Prone and Supine like a Pulley. Howbeit, I found them not as yet. I
have sometimes seen in their place, in a musculous man, one triangular Muscle,
arising from the top of the Shoulder, and ending about the middle of the same,
with a fleshy and narrow end, nor was it the portion of any Muscle, all which
we had before diligently separated.

Chap 9. Of the Muscles of the Wrist and Fingers.
TO the Muscles of the WRIST and the Hollow of the Hand, is the Musculus
PALMARIS referred, arising from the inner Apophysis of the Arm, with a round
and tendinous beginning, spread almost over all the Muscles of the Hand, it is
stretched out over the Hollow of the Hand, and cleaves exceeding fast to the
Skin: where under the Skin in the hollow of the hand is a broad Tendon; whence
proceeds that exquisite Sense which is in that part: and it ends into the first
Intervals between the Joints of the Fingers: it seems to have been made, that
the Hand might take the better hold, when the Skin of the Palm is wrinkled.

To this they add the Membrana carnosa which they will have to open the Palm of
the Hand when it is contracted; also a four squa e Parcel of Flesh growing out
of that Membrane, resembling certain Muscles; either to extend the Palm when
the Hand is open, as Spigelius conceives, or to make it hollow, which Riolanus
would have.

The Muscles of the Wrist or CARPUS are four; two Benders which are internal;
two Extenders, which are external.

The first Bender (which Riolanus calls Cubiteus internus, to whom we are
beholden for these Names) arising from the internal Apophysis of the Arm, and
being stretched over the Elbow, it is implanted with a thick Tendon, into the
fourth Bone of the Wrist.

The other, Radius internus because it is drawn along the Radius, arising from
the same beginning, ends into the first Bone of the Metacarpium, under the
forefinger.

The Extensor primus, or Radius externus, arises with a broad Beginning, from
the external Apophysis of the Arm, and then growing more fleshy and spread out
The Explication of the FIGURE.
This TABLE shows the rest of the Muscles, which are visible in the Hinder-part
of the Body, those which lay by them or over them being removed.
aa. The Muscles of the Head called Recti minores. bb. The Recti majores so
called. cc. The obliqui Superiores. dd. The obliqui Inferiores. (...). The
Levator Scapulae. (...). The Rotundus minor. (...). The Serratus major. EE. The
Musculi transversales belonging to the Neck. ffff. The Spinari duo. GG. The
Sacrolumbus. HH. The Dorsi longissimus in its proper Situation. II. The same
out of its place, that it may be seen. K. The Semispinatus of the Back. LL. The
sacer Musculus of the Back. MM. The Musculi Quadrati of the Back. N. The first
Supinator Brachij, O. The first Extensor Carpi, or the Bicornis out of its
proper place. P. The other Extensor Carpi. QQ. The two Extensores Digitorum out
of their place. R. The Extensor Indicis. SS. The two Pollicem extendentes.
These following Characters design the Muscles of the lower Limbs.
A. The Glutaeus medius out of its place. B. The Glutoeus minimus in its place.
CC. The same out of its place. DD. The Pyriformis on both sides. E. The
Marsupialis, or Obturator internus. F. The same in the left side out of its
place. G. The Marsupium neatly expressed. HH. The Obturator externus. K. The
fourth of the Quadragemini, by the Author called Quadratus. LL. The Biceps
which bends the Leg. MM. The Semimembranosus. NN. The Seminervosus. OO. The
Gracilis. (...). The Musculus triceps. ^. The Crureus. PP. The Tibieus
posticus. QQ. The Flexor Digitorum Pedis, Magn^^ or Perforans. R. The Flexor
minor or Perforatus. SSS. The Flexor Pollicis, t. The Pollicis Adductor. u. The
Pollicis Abductor. x. The Abductor minimi. z. The fleshy Mass in the Sole of
the Foot.


upon the Radius, and ends into a double Tendon, at the first and second Bone
of Os Metacarpi.

The other, Cubiteus externus, from the same beginning, through the length of
the Cubit, goes with one Tendon into the fourth Bone of the Metacarpe under the
little Finger.

The FINGERS are bended, extended, drawn to, and drawn away.

Bended by the Muscles Sublimis and Profundus.

The former from the inner Apophysis of the Arm, before it comes to the Wrist,
is divided into four Tendons, enclosed in a Ligament, as it were in a Ring:
they are inserted into the second Joynting of the Fingers, a Cleft being first
made, which the Tendons of the following Muscle do pass through, whence it is
termed Perforatus, the bored Muscle.

The later spread out under the former and like unto it, is inserted through the
Clifts of the former Tendons, into the Joynting. And therefore it is called
Perforans, the Borer.

Concerning these Ligaments of the Fingers, it is to be observed. 1. That by an
elegant Workmanship of Nature, a long slit is made in each of them, that the
Ligaments of the third Joynting may pass through them as through an Arch. 2.
That the membranous sheath does straightly embrace and keep in the said Tendons,
least in the bending of the hand; they should be removed out of their place. 3.
That a strong membranous Ring does in the wrist bind together all the Tendons
internal and external, which being cut asunder, they are easily removed out of
their places.

Iacobus Silvius reckons the Extensores for one Muscle; and calls it Tensor
Digitorum, whereas both their Originals and Insertions do vary. They are two
and arise commonly from the external Apophyfis of the Arm, and the
ring-fashioned ligament, and with their bored ligaments, being first collected,
they are then inserted confusedly into the second and third joint.

The Fingers are drawn to by four muscles called Lumbricales or Vermiculares
worm-fashioned muscles, from their shape and smallness. They arise from the
tendons of the Musculus profundus, and being drawn out along the sides of the
fingers, they are obliquely carried unto the third joynting. Spigelius and
Vestingus will have them to be inserted by a round tendon only into the first
joynting, whom I have sometimes found to be in the right, their tendon being
mixed with the membranes of the interjuncture.

The Abductores interossei are six, in the spaces of the Metacarp, three
external and three internal, which joining with the vermiculary do go along the
outsides and insides of the fingers, and stretch their tendons to the three
inter-joyntings. They serve in some measure for extension. The External rest
upon the Palm, the Internal upon the hollow of the Hand, between the bones of
the Metacarp.

The Muscles which bend the Thumb are two.

The first arising from the upper part of the radius is inserted into one of
the joints.

The other arising from the wrist bone, under the Thumb, is inserted into the
middle of the said Thumb. It lies wholly under the former.

There are two Extendentes or stretchers out, which arise from the Cubit. The
first reaches unto the third Interjuncture, the other unto the second, and the
rest, with many tendons; sometimes one, sometimes two, and otherwhiles three.

The Abducentes are three; two arising from the Metacarpium, and the third from
the bone of the Metacarp, which looks toward the forefinger: which Riolanus
calls Autithenar, as the other the former of the bringers to, Hypothenar
Pollicis.

The Abducentes or drawers away are three nameless muscles, save that the said
Riolanus calls one of them Thenar.

The Forefinger has two proper muscles, which some confound, the first is the
Abductor, arising from the first Interjoynting of the Thumb, and terminated
into the bones of the Forefinger, wherewith the said Forefinger is drawn from
the rest of the Fingers, toward the Thumb.

The other is the Indicis extensor the stretcher of the Forefinger which
Riolanus calls Indicatorem the pointer, as also Veslingus, though he confound
it with the Abductor. It arises from the middle and external part of the Cubit,
and ends with a double tendon, into the second interjointure of the forefinger.

There are also two muscles proper to the smallest finger, the Abductor and
Extensor. The former may be parted into many: It arises in the hollow of the
hand* from the third and fourth wrist bones of the second rank, and ends
externally into the side of the first joint of the said finger. Aquapendent and
others that have since followed him, do hold that it draws the little finger
outwardly, from the rest. Extensor proprius, which Riolanus exactly seperates
from the great one, arising from the upper part of the radius, and carried
along Cubitus and the Radius, is externally inserted into the finger, with a
double tendon,

Chap 10. Of the Leg and Thigh in general.
PES the Leg and Thigh, is all between Pes what?
the Buttocks and the Toes of the Feet: Others call it magnus pes, the great
Foot, and Crus. It is divided into its parts, as the Arm, in a manner not
unlike, viz. Into the Fem^, Tibia, and Parous Pes.

Again the Parous Pes is divided into Pedium, Metapedium, and Digiti.

The Use of the Leg and Thigh, is to be the Instrument of walking: which is
performed by stirring and sitting. For one Leg being firmly set upon the
ground, we move and bring about the other, and our Foot being firmly fixed,
keeps us from falling: and so we come to walk. The setting therefore of our Leg
is the Motion of the whole Body, but the motion proceeds from the Leg, which
the length or shortness of the Leg does either help or hinder; and therefore
birds because they were to fly, that their bulk might not hinder them, they
have a short Thigh and long Feet, which makes the going be slow. But Men go
slower then Dogs, bcause the successive putting on of their Foot from the Heel
to the Toes, slackens their motion; whereas Dogs with one motion of their
little Feet do pass along. Some do conceive that the length of a woman's Leg
helps to generation. Now there i^ an Incision made into our knees and heel,
that we might not go leaping.

This Motion is variously made by the muscles of the Thigh, Leg and Foot. We
are therefore now to treat of the Muscles of the whole Leg.

Chap 11. Of the Muscles of the Thigh.
THe Thigh is bended by two Muscles.

The first is in the Belly, and is termed Psoa or the Musculus Lumbaris it
arises with a fleshy beginning from the upper Vertebraes of the Loins, and is
inserted into the forepart of the small Trochanter, with a round and strong
tendon.

The other muscle called Psoas minor I found in a strong fleshy body at Hafnia,
1651. differing from that which Riolanus brags to have seen. For the greater
part i^^ay under, but outwardly inclined more to the sides. The beginning was
fleshy, and the whole muscle was three fingers broad. It was inserted fleshy,
into the upper brim of Os Ilij backwards, where the Iliacus internus arises. I
conceived that its use was to spread as a pillow under the greater muscle,
because the Os Ilij is of it self immovable, or to hold the Os Ilij upright,
that it might not burden a man too much when he stands. Michael Lyserus a most
expert Anatomist can witness the same with me.

The Ilia us secundus is inserted in the same place, with a tendon which grows
to the tendon of the precedent muscle, arising from the whole internal cavity
of the Os Ilij, by a small and fleshy beginning.

The Thigh is extended by three muscles of the Buttocks termed Glutaei.

I. Is the Major, externus and amplissimus, beginning at the Crupper, the spina
of Os Ilij, and the Os sacrum; and ends into the Os Femoris, under the great
Trochanter.

II. The other is the medius or middlemost in Situation and Magnitude. It
arises from the inner side of the Spina of Os Ilij, ending into this great
Trochanter with a broad and strong tendon.

III. The third called minimus the smallest, lies concealed under the
middlemost; It arises from the back of Os Ilij near the Acetabulum with a broad
and strong tendon, and Ends into the great Trochanter.

These three do make up the fleshy Substance of the Buttocks.

The Thigh is drawn to, and wheeled about inwards by three muscles, which many
do reckon for one, and call it triceps triple headed, because of its threefold
beginning. 1. Is from the upper joynting of the Os pubis. 2. Is from the lowest
joynting of Os pubis. 3. Is from the middle part of the said bone. They are
inserted first of all into the inner head of the Thigh bone, near the Ham, with
a round tendon or into the rough line of the Thigh. 2. To the upper, partly. 3.
Partly to the lower, at the Rorator minor. Riolanus has other insertions: For
he will have the first to be inserted into the middle of the Thigh, the second
to be produced with a very strong Tendon as far as to the End of the Thigh, the
third below the neck of the Thighbone.

To these Spigelius and Veslingus do add one which they call Lividus arising at
the joining of Os pubis, near the Gristle, and implanted with a short tendon,
into the inner side of the thigh: but they grant that this is a portion of the
Triceps. But they do ill to reckon it among the bending Muscles. But Riolanus
calls it Pectineus and reckons it for a bender, yet acknowledges that it is the
uppermost and fourth portion of the triceps, which with Fallopius he divides
into four Muscles, and indeed it seems to have so many parts.

It is drawn away and turned about outward by six Muscles* the Quadrigemini
and the two Obturatores.

The Quadrigemini are in a manner one like another, and little, placed as it
were athwart, arising from the lower and outer part of the Os Sacrum, the bunch
of Os Ischij, and the Appendix of the Hip-bone. They are inserted into that
space which is between the two Trochanters. The first Quadrigeminus is called
Pyriformis Pear-fashioned, because of its shape, and Iliaeus externus from its
Situation; the rest want names, save the fourth, which is called Quadratus.

The Obturatores stoppers, take up the wide hole between the Os pubis and Os
Isehij. And they are external or internal, the former arising from the outer
Circle of the hole of the share: the latter from the inner and they are
inserted into the great Trochanter: the inner may be termed Bursalis or
purse-fashioned because it hides the fourfold tendons in a fleshy purse as it
were, nearly shaped by the third and fourth quadrigeminal Muscles.

Chap. 12. Of the Muscles of the Leg.
THe Leg is bent by the four musculi postici.

One of them has two Heads, termed Bioeps, the first from the joining of the Os
pubis, the second from the outer part of the thigh, and both of them are
inserted with one tendon, the fleshy substance being first increased in the
middle, into the hinder part of the Leg.

The second called Semimembranosus arises from the swelling of the Ischium, and
is inserted into the inner side of the Leg, backwards.

The third is the Seminervosus, and has the same beginning and the same end
with the former, save that in the hinder parts it is carried little forward
obliquely, before it terminates at the inside of the Leg.

The fourth is the Gracilis, which is inserted into the same place, and arises
from the joining of the sharebone.

Four Muscles extend the Leg.

The first is the Rectus, arising with an acute tendon from the outer and lower
Spine of the Ilium.

The second and third are the two Vasti, the external arising from the whole
root, the great Trochanters, and the bone of the Thigh which lies under: the
Inner from the small Trochanter: they are terminated on each hand at the side
of the Rectus.

The fourth is the Crureus, fixed to the Thigh bone, as the Brachiaeus is to
the Brachium.

These four Muscles, are terminated into one tendon, which embracing the
substance of the flesh into it self, it is inserted before into the beginning
of the Leg, and is there instead of a Ligament for it.

Two Muscles, pull it to, inwards.

The first is the longus, fascialis or sartorius which Spigelius and Veslingus
reckon among the benders, on which Tailors or Borchers rest themselves when
they sit cross-leg'd. It is well nigh the longest of all muscles, arising from
the former Spina of Os Ilij, and descending obliquely unto the inner and
forepart of the Leg.

The other is the Popliteus arising from the lower and outer extuberancy of the
Thigh, and being inserted apiece into the inner and upper part of the leg
obliquely.

The Abductor is one, which is called Membranosus and fascia lata.

It arises fleshy from the Spina of Os Ilij, and is carried obliquely, into the
outer part of the Leg, and with its most broad and long tendon, invests
well-near all the Muscles of the Thigh.

Chap. 13. Of the Muscles of the Feet.
THe Foot is bended and extended. Two muscles bend it forwards.

The first is termed tibiaeus anticus, affixed to the Leg arising from the
upper process thereof, it is inserted into the Os Pedij, before the great Toe,
with a tendon which at the end is divided into two.

The other is Peroneus biceps, which others count for two muscles, one head
arising from the upper Epiphisis of the Fibula, the other from the middle of
the Perone. It has a double tendon the lesser carried into the bone of the
little toe; and the greater going obliquely under the sole of the Foot, is
inserted into the Os pedij just against the great toe.

It Is extended backwards by the four Postici, duo gemelli, the internal and the
external, called Gastrocnemij, because they constitute the ankle, and arise
from the inner and outer head of the thigh under the Ham. The third being called
soleus is added to these beneath, arising from the hindermore appendix of the
fibula. These three muscles are terminated into a most thick and strong tendon,
to be inserted into the beginning of the Heel and Pterna, by which beasts being
killed, are usually hung up. Hypocrates did term it chorda: where by reason of
the fracture of the Heel, he says that hiccuping and convulsive fevers do
follow.

The last is called plantaris and answers to the palmaris in the hand; it is
lean and meagre, and degenerates into a long tendon, and covering the whole
sole of the foot, it arises from the outward head of the Thigh bone, under the
Ham: and is inserted into the five toes, and has the same use here which it has
in the Hand: though the comparison of one to the other holds not out very
exact. Veslingus has observed that this muscle has sometimes been wanting.

The Tibiaeus posticus must be added to these, which Spigelius reckons amongst
the oblique movers, and Riolanus among the extenders.

Chap. 14. Of the Muscles of the Toes.
THe Toes of the foot are moved by muscles, as well as the fingers of the hand.

Two muscles bend the Toes, the Magnus which answers to the profundus, arising
from the upper Epiphisis of the Tibia, under the sole is divided into four
tendons, which boreing through the minor, they are implanted into the third
Articulation of the four toes. The Minor answering to the sublimis, is the
midst of the sole of the foot, arising from the lower part of the pterna or
heel bone, it is carried into the second articulation of the four toes, to
which before it comes it is bored thorough, that it may transmit the tendons of
the foremost Muscle: and therefore this is called perforatus, the other
perforans.

One muscle extends the four toes of the foot, which is by some divided into
two; arising from the upper and outer part of the tibia, and having four
tendons, which are inserted into the second and third Interjuncture.

The four wormfashioned Muscles do draw them to, answering to those in the
Hand, some flesh being intersprinkled from the Heel: They are fastened by so
many tendons to the first interjoynting.

The ten Interossei do draw them away, arising from the bones of the pedium,
and falling the void spaces of the Metapedium, they are external or internal,
the former with a broad tendon do arise by the sides, to the first
interjoynting of the toes by the sides; the latter at the second interjoynting:
but the ninth serves for the drawing-to of the great Toe, the tenth for the
drawing to of the little toe.

The great Toe has peculiar muscles.

It is bent by one only, proceeding from the upper part of the fibula, and
inserted into the third interjointing ( Riolanus says the first) of the great
toe.

It is extended by another, arising from the middle of the Fibula (or as some
say from the outside of the tibia, where it recedes from the Fibula) which is
oftentimes divided into two tendons.

It is brought to, with one, inwardly fastened to the greatest bone of the
pedium.

It is drawn away by one arising fleshy from the inner part of the heel, and
entering extrinsecally into the first bone of the great toe.

Now there is a new muscle found out above the Interosseans, the first Inventor
whereof is Casserius; who calls it tranversalis, because of its situation.
Veslingus call it the Adductor pollicis minor, which use nature seems to have
intended.

It arises nervous and broad, from the ligament of the first interjuncture of
the little Toe, and sometime from one of the toes next the little toe; and by
and by becoming fleshy and so continuing, it is carried athwart over the first
joints of the fingers, and with a short and broad tendon, it is implanted into
the first joint of the Great-toe, a little inwards.

The Use hereof is, to secure our walking, when we pass through rough ways,
full of round flints, or over any other small, slippery, or rolling passage.
For by help of this muscle, the foot does accommodate it self, to the figure of
the Bodies we tread on, and lays hold thereon as it were, that it might make
its passage more stead-fast.

The Abductor of the little toe, sticking in the outside of the foot broad and
vast, arising from the same part of the heel, is inserted into the outside of
the first Interjuncture.

I have observed a peculiar bender of the little toe, long, round, arising from
the head of the Tibia, and divided with two tendons about the insertion of the
toe.

Finally a fleshy mass is to be observed in the sole of the foot, as well as in
the Palm of the hand, wherewith our footing is fastened as with a cushion, and
the tendons of the muscles do lie hidden, in a soft Pillow.

THE FIRST MANUAL Concerning the Veins, Answering to the FIRST BOOK OF THE
Lower Belly.
ABove, in the Proaem of this Anatomical work, I promised four Books, and four
little Books or Manuals. Four Books touching the three Cavities and the Limbs;
Four Manuals, viz. touching the Veins, Arteries, Nerves and Bones. Now every
Manual answers to its Book. Because from the lower Cavity, namely, the
principal part thereof, the Liver arise the Veins; from the Heart in the middle
Cavity the Arteries; from the Marrow in the third Cavity the Nerves, and to the
Limbs the Bones do answer. And even as the Bones joined together do make a
peculiar Fabric or Skeleton, representing the form of the whole Animal; so also
do the Veins, Arteries and Nerves. And Gulielmus Fabricius Hildanus a Famous
Chyrurgeon has such a Frame of all the Veins of the Body artificially
separated; and at Padua by the Instruction of Ad. Spigelius, and John
Veslingius, and John Leonicenus such Frames of the Veins Arteries and Nerves
separated from the body, are commonly to be seen at Padua; and the like is to
be seen here at Hafnia acurately made, and explained in four very great Tables,
in the Custody of the renowned D. D. Henricus Fuiren my Cousin Germane.

The Veins, Arteries and Nerves are Organs or common vessels of the Body,
through which some spirit, with or without Blood, is carried from some
principal member, into sundry parts of the Body.

Chap. 1. Of a Vein in General.
AVein is a common Organ, round, long, What a Vein is?
hollow like a channel or Conduit pipe, fit to carry or bring back Blood and
Natural Spirit.

The term Vein was by the Ancients given both to Veins and Arteries; but they
called the Arteries pulsing Veins, and the Veins not pulsing Veins, and some
called Vein, the greater Vein, and an Artery the lesser Vein and the Aorta.

The Efficient of a Vein, is the proper vein-making power or faculty.

The Matter according to Hippocrates is a clammy and cold portion of the Seed.
And this is the principle of a Veins Original.

But the Principle of Dispensation It Is proved against Aristotle that the
Liver, not the Heart is the Original of the Veins.
from whence the Veins arise, is the Liver (not to speak of some ancient
triflers, who would derive the Veins from the Brain) and not the Heart, as
Aristotle would have it. For,

1. Blood is made in the Liver. And Blood is not made in the Heart.
therefore it is like the original and rise of the Veins is there* and that the
first sanguisication is not made in the Heart is apparent, because there are no
passages to conveigh the Chylus to the Heart; again there are no receptacles
for the Excrements of the first concoction placed by the Heart. But all these
requisites are found in the Liver. 2. Blood is carried from the Liver to the
Heart, but not from the Heart immediately to the Liver. For Blood cannot go out
of the Heart into the Liver, because of the Valves; though mediately when it
runs back out of the Arteries, it may be carried thither. 3. Fishes have no
right Ventricle in their Hearts, in which they would have Blood to be made; and
out of which they would have the Veins to arise, and the Fishes have both Veins
and Blood. 4. The Vena portae touches not the Heart but the Liver, which the
Cava also touches: which two Veins are the greatest in the whole body. But
according to Aristotle all Veins ought to be continued with the Heart. You will
say; the Vena arteriosa does not touch the Liver. I answer, neither ought if so
to do: because it has the substance of an Artery, and therefore arises from
the Heart. But Arteria Venosa, is a Vein in substance and use, and in the Child
in the womb, was continued with the Cava. 5. In the Child in the womb, the
Navil-vein with Blood goes into the Liver, not into the Heart. 6. If the Veins
should arise from the Heart, they would pulse as the Arteries do, for the whole
Heart pulses. 7. Sanguification is never hurt, but when the Liver is hurt, as
in a Dropsy, etc.
These are the chief reasons for this Opinion: but many other reasons of other
men against Aristot^^ I reject as weak and easily refuted, as also many weak
reasons of the Peripateticks, against this Opinion which we assert, which any
one may easily answer, if he be at least but lightly skilled in Anatomy.

The End and Use of a Vein is,

I. According to the Opinion of the Ancient^ The Use of the Veins. According to
the Ancients.
to carry Blood and Natural Spirit with the Natural faculty, from the Liver
into all parts of the Body to nourish the same.

But Nature has revealed otherwise to their Posterity: for neither do the
Veins According ^o later Authors the Primary Use.
carry any thing from the Liver to nourish the parts with, nor is the Venal
Blood useful for nutrition. But they bring*back all the Blood, only to the
Heart by Circulation, either mediately by the ^iver, as the Mesaraick Veins, or
immediately, as the Cava; and that either from the whole body, from the
smallest branches to the greatest, by the upper and lower branch; or from the
Liver whether it be there generated, or is derived from the Mesaraicks and
Arteries.

And that they bring the Blood to the Heart as to the Center, and that they
bring it from the smallest parts as from the Circumference, is evidently
provided by ocular Inspection, Experiments, and Reason.

1. In Blood-letting, the Arm being bound above the Elbow, beyond the Ligature,
the Vein swells not, nor if you should open a Vein would the Blood flow out
(which is to be observed in opposition to the Authority of Scribonius Largu^)
unless very little, or if there were some Anastomosis of a Vein, with an Artery
in some parts above. But on this side the Ligature under the Elbow, both the
Veins of the Arm swel, and being opened they void as much Blood as you will, yea
all that is in the body. Likewise if with your finger you press the Vein below
the Orifice, the blood stops, if you take away your finger it runs again:
whence we gather that the blood runs from the outmost small Veins of the body
upwards unto the great Veins and the Heart; and not from the upper and greater
Veins into the lower, smaller, and more remote. 2. Without Blood-letting, the
Veins being pressed with the finger show as much: for if in an Arm either hot,
or whose Veins naturally swell, you force the blood downwards with your finger
toward the fingers, there follows no blood in the upper part of the Vein, but
it appears empty. Contrariwise, if you force the blood from the Fingers-ward
upwards, you shall presently see the Veins full, more blood following that
which you forced up. 3. If you shall plunge your Arms and Legs into cold Water
or Snow, being first bound, when you unbind the same, you shall perceive your
Heart offended and made cold, by the cold blood ascending thereunto; and it
will be warmed if you put your Legs or Arms as aforesaid into hot water. Nor is
it any other way by which cordial Epithems applied to the Wrists and Privities
do good. 4. In persons that are hanged, their Heads and Faces become red, the
Veins being distended, because the recourse of the Blood into the Heart i^
hindered* as in opening of the Veins of the Head, the upper parts in the Head
swell, the other parts toward the Heart being empty. But the Halter being
loosed from the dead body, the swelling and redness of the Face does fall by
little and little, unless the Blood which is forced into the smallest Veins
cannot run back again because of the coldness of the parts. 5. In Dissections
of Live-Animals, the matter is most evident. For in what part of the body
soever you bind a Vein, it appears lank and empty on that side of the Ligature
next the Heart, and on the other side it swells where it is furthest from the
Heart, and nearest the extreme parts of the Body. 6. In a living Anatomy, if
you lift up a Vein and open it being tied, beyond the Ligature plenty of Blood
flows out, on this side nothing at all, which you shall find true in the crural
and jugular Veins of any Creature whatsoever, though you cut the Veins quite in
sunder, as I have often experimented with the great Walaeus, and Harvey was not
ignorant thereof. 7, The Valves of the Veins do conspire to this end, which are
so contrived, that they stand all wide open toward the Heart, and afford an
easy passage from the smallest Veins to the greatest, and from thence to the
Heart. But from the Heart and great Veins, being shut they suffer nothing to go
back, no not Water driven by force, or a Probe, unless being hurt they gape. 8.
The Liver sends only to the Heart; the Heart only to the Lungs, and all the
Arteries; as has been already demonstrated concerning the Heart. Seeing
therefore the Blood by continual pulsation is sent in so great quantity in all
parts, and yet cannot be repaired by Diet, nor can return back to the Heart by
reason of the Miter-fashioned Valves of the Aorta, nor abide still in the
Arteries which are continually driving the same, nor finally is there so much
spent by the parts to be nourished; it follows, that what remains over and
above is brought back again to the heart, and enters the Veins by Circulation.
Whereof although some dark Footsteps are extant in the writings of the
Ancients, as I have proved in my Book de Luce Animalium, and Walaeus and
Riolanus do afterward declare the same at large; yet it has been more ^^^erly
manifested in this Age of ours to that most ingenious Venetian Paul Sarpias
Fulgentius as relates from his papers, and soon after to Harvey an Englishman,
to whom the commendations and praise of first publishing the same to the World
and proving i^ by many Arguments and Experiments, are justly due, finally to
Walaeus and others approving the same.
The Primary End therefore of the Veins is to carry and recarry Blood unto the
Heart the secondary ends may be these following.

II. A little to prepare the said Blood, Their secondary Use.
as do the Rami Lactei, or to finish and perfect the same, as a small portion
of Vena Cavae between the Liver and the Heart.

III. To perserve the Blood, as the proper place preserves that which is placed
therein, as much as may be in a speedy passage, and to retain it within its
bounds. For extravenated Blood, or Blood out of its natural place, viz. Veins
and Arteries, curdles and putrefies. Also in the Veins themselves, when they
are ill affected, and the course of the Blood is* stopped, sometimes the Blood
is found congealed, witness Fernelius: sometimes a fatty substance is found
instead of Blood, as in the Nerves, which Bontius saw among the Indians.

IV. Some would have the red veins to make Blood, and the milkie veins to make
Chyle, but they are quite mistaken.

The Form of the Veins is taken from sundry Accidents.

Its Figure is that of a Conduit pipe. Figure.


Its Magnitude varies. For the Veins are great in the Livet, as in their
Original; in the Magnitude.
Lungs because they are hot, soft, and in perpepetual motion, and theresote
they need much nourishment, because much of their substance spends; but
especially because all the Blood in the Body passes this way, out of the right
into the left Venrricle of the Heart, as has been proved already. In the Heart
by reason of its heat, and because it is to furnish the whole Body with
Arterial Blood, received in and sent out by continual pulsings. Also the
emulgent Veins are great, by reason of plenty of blood and serosities, which is
brought back from the Kidneys to the Vena Cava. But where the substance of a
part is lasting, and is not easily dissipated, by reason of the small quantity
of Heat, the Veins are lesser as in the Brain, where the Veins do not always
easily appear, and in the Bones, where they never manifestly appear, though the
Animal be great.

In all parts toward the ends they are very small, and are divided into
Capillary Veins, sprinkled into, and commonly confounded with the flesh, that
the superfluous Blood may be better received into them; which is one way, by
which the Arterial Blood is mediately passed through the porous flesh to the
Veins, which way also Blood made of Chyle in the Liver, is infused into the
little branches of the Venae Cava. The other is, by the Arteries immediately.
For,

The Connection is such with the Arteries, that every Vein is for the most part
attended Connection.
with an Artery, over which it lies and which it touches. Gale^ tells us a a
Vein is seldom found without Arteries; but no Artery is ever found without a
Vein.

But there is in the Body a mutual Anastomosis of Veins and Arteries: that
Anastomosis of Veins and Arteries.
they may conspire together, and the Veins receive out of the Arteries Spirit
and Blood; which is apparent from reason, because, 1. If the Veins be quite
emptied, the Arteries are empty also. Moreover out of a Vein opened in the Arm
or Hand, all the Blood in the Body may be let out, which, because it cannot be
contained or generated in the Hand, it must necessarily come out of the
Arteries beneath and round about, by means of the Anastomoses: whereof this
also is a token, that if the Vein and Artery of the Arm be tied very hard, the
Blood ceases running and the pulse stops it beating, til the band be slackned.
2. They are necessary in respect of the Circular motion of the blood, seeing
the pores of the Flesh are not sufficient, save in a slow course, and subtle
Blood.

Moreover they may be demonstrated in many places to the Eyesight, where the
Conjunctions of the Veins with the Arteries are visible, viz. in the Brain, in
the Plexus Chorides, the Cavities, in the Lungs of the Vena Arteriosa. and the
Arteria Venosa, with the Branches of the Aspera Arteria or Wesand. Of the
Thoracick branches descending, with the intercostal Veins. Also the
Hypogastrick Veins and Arteries, with the Mammary vessels are joined mouth to
mouth under the Musculi Recti in the Abdomen. But the Anastomoses or mutual
conjunction of the mouths of the Cava and Portae in the Liver, and of the Veins
and Arteries in the Spleen, are in a special manner manifest; so in the Veins
of the Womb, the seminary vessels, the Navil-strings, and the extemities of the
Hands and Feet.

Though the Anastomoses or conjunctions Anastomoses of the Veins in the Liver.
of vessels, are in reason necessary, and manifest to the Eyesight, yet are
they not all manifestly discernable by the Sight.. I made experiment in the
Liver of an Ox and of a Man, diligently separating all the substance from the
vessels; yet could I not either with a Probe, or a Knife, or a pair of Bellows
find the Anastomoses of Vena Cavae and Vena Porta open, but all blind, in dead
bodies, though it is not to be doubted, but that they are open in in living
bodies, where all the passages are enlarged by Heat.

This TABLE presents the Anast^mases of Vena Cava and Porta in the Liver.
TABLE I.
The Explication of the FIGURE.
A The descending Trunk of Vena Cava and Porta in the Liver. BB. The Vena
porta. C. The Gall-Badder. dddddd. The greater branches of Vena Cavae
Dissemina^^d through the Liver. ^^^. The branches of Vena Porta. ffff. The
first Paral^l Anastomosis of the Vena Cava with the Vena Portae. gg. The second
Anastomosis of Trunk wi^h Trunk. hh. The third cross Anastomosis. ii. The
fourth Anastomosis mixed. kk. The fif^ Anastomosis, which is oblique or angular.


page 303



I found them to be of diverse kinds. The first Parallel when the utmost twigs
are joined Of sundry kinds.
one to another in right lines. The second is of Trunk with Trunk, a transverse
vessel going between. The third is cross-fashion'd, when either the Branches go
over the Trunk, or the Trunk go over the Branches cross-wise, or the Branches
over the Branches in the same manner. The fourth is mixed of the Crossfashion'd
and the oblique. The fist is oblique or angular, when the Branches are mutually
inserted obliquely. I have before explained the Anastomoses of the
Navilvessels. Now the Anastomoses between the Veins and Arteries, are either in
the Trunks or the Capillary Vessels.

The Veins are sometimes invested with a common Membrane, or some external Why
the Veins are in some places invested with Coats, in others not.
thick one, borrowed from the Neighboring parts, when either they are suspended
and carried a long way, and are without the Bowels and Muscles; or when they
rest upon hard bodies. This happens in the lowest Belly, to the Veins and
Arteries from the Peritoneum, and in the Chest from the Pleura.

But where a Vein is inserted either into some Bowell or a Muscle, it needs not
this common coat, because 1. It is otherwise sufficiently sustained. 2.
Otherwise the ready sweating through of the blood would be hindered. 3. And the
laying down of the Excrements of the Vein. 4. It would not so soon be sensible
of the force of the substance of any Bowell. 5. It would more hardly imbibe the
Blood which is superfluous after the nourishment of the parts.

Now the Veins being so compassed with Membranes do not feel (unless they have
Nerves near them) of themselves and by their own Nature, neither the acrimony
of the Humors contained, nor cutting or burning. And therefore Aristotle says
in his third Book de Historia Animalium chap. 5. A Nerve cannot endure the
Fire, but a Vein can. And Galen in his sixth de usu partium chap* ^^. says that
if Veins and Arteries be cut, burnt, or tied, they feel it not at all.

CHAP. II. Of the Substance of the Veins and of the Valves.
THe Substance of the Veins is Membranous, that they may more easily stretch
and shrink in again.

They have only one Coat, which is proper to them (the Arteries have two) being
thin and rare; because through it the blood is to be received after the parts
are nourished. it carries not back such stirring and hot blood as the Arteries
carry; because it is grown cold and returns quietly to the Heart without any
beating of the Pulse that it may be there again perfected.

Some conceive that a Vein is interwoven Whether the Veins have Fibers.
with a triple kind of Fibers: but they ad, that those fibers are there
obscurely, and only potentially, nor can be moved out of their place, by reason
of the most strait contexture. But I rather conceive with Vesalius, that others
imagine Fibers to be there, which are no more there than in Leather. for when we
pull the substance of the Reins all in pieces, no fibers are there to be seen.
But some Authors attribute fibers to the Veins, because they have praeconceived
this opinion, that Attraction, Expulsion and Retention are performed by sundry
sorts of fibers, whenas the fibers if they have any are to strengthen them.

Harvey and W^ do suspect that the Blood in the Veins is driven to the Heart,
by the fibers, which nevertheless I conceive to be done, by the motion and
contraction of the Muscles, with which the Veins are mingled, they not
resisting. Yea, and it may be driven by the blood continually following, from
the parts and Arteries moved by the Pulse. But others allege attraction to be
made by heat, without the fibers.

Within the Veins are found certain Who first observed the Valves in the Veins.
Valves or little folding Gates, which Bauhine says are mentioned by Avicenna,
under the name of Cells. Aquapendens says himself was the finder of them in
the year 1574. to whom Paulus Servita or Sarpi the Venetian gave the first hint
though it seems apparent by his Isagoge, that Jacobus Silvius had also some
knowledge of them. But after him or with him mention was made of these Valves by
Solomon Albertus, Axc^^ng^l^s Pi^holhomineus, and Casper^^ Bauhinus; Laurentius
does hardly once speak of them.

The occasion of Aquapendents finding of them was this: he observed that How
the Valves of the Veins were found.
if he pressed the Veins, or by rubbing endeavored to force the Blood downwards,
its course did seem to be stopped. Also in the Arms of persons bound to be let
Blood, certain knots apper to swell by reason of the Valves; and in some
persons, as Porters and Plough-men, they are seen to swel in their Thighs like
the Varices.

And here seems to consist the Cause of the Varices; because thick Blood and by
The Cause of the Varices.
its heaviness unapt to move upwards, being long retained in the Valves, makes
a dilatation of the said Valves: for without the Valves the Veins would swel
uniformly and all of an equal Bigness, and not in the manner of Varices.

And because this Doctrine of the Valves in the Veins, is known to few, I shall
propound the same more exactly, according to my manner of handling rare
subjects.

These Valves are most, thin little Membranes (thicker in the Orifices of The
Valves of the Veins what?
of the Veins of the Heart) in the inner Cavity of the Veins; and certain
particles as it were of the coat of the Veins; because there the body of the
Veins is most thin, where th^se Membranes do go from it.

They are seated in the Cavity of the Where they are not found at the original
of the Veins?
Veins, but especially in the Veins of the Limbs, viz. of the Arms and Legs,
after the Kernels of the Armpits and and Groyns. Beginning presently after the
rise of the Branches, not in the Rises themselves. Now there are two found in
the inner orifice of the jugular Vein, looking from above downwards; the rest
look from below upwards, as many in the Cephalica, the Basilica, and in the
Veins of the Legs and Thighs.

No Valves are found in the Trunk of Cava, because the Valves placed in Why
Valves are not found in the Trunk of Cava, the jugulars, the external small
Veins, nor in the Arteries?
the Divarications do sufficiently hinder the regress of the Blood, nor does
the Trunk make any delay. nor are there any in the Jugulars (besides those
aforesaid in the Orifice of the inner Veins) because the venal Blood of it self
heavy, does hardly ascend upwards, nor does it there need any stop. In like
manner there are none in the external small Veins; because in regard of their
smallness, they needed none, nor is there any danger of the Bloods regress, by
reason of the neerness of the parts and Arteries which drives the same. We also
with Harvey have found Valves in the emulgents, and in the Branches of the
Mesentery, looking toward the Venae cava and Porta. Nature endeavored the same
in the Milkie Veins; also Dogs and Oxen have them in the division of the crural
Veins. Also there are none in the Arteries, because in them there always is
and ought to be TABLE II.
The FIGURE Explained.
This TABLE in Fig. 1. shows the Valves of the Veins in a bound Arm, in Fig. 2.
and 3. The crural Veins the inside outward, with their Valves.
A. A Branch of the Vena Cephalica. BF. A part of the Vena Basilica. D. The
Vena Mediana. E. A Branch of Vena Cephalica, to which the Mediana was joined.
HHHH. Represent the knots in the Veins, caused by the Valves there placed. IK.
One Crural Vein. LM. The other Crural vein. NNNN. The valves of the Veins filled
with Cotton-wool. OOO. The said valves of the Veins empty. FIG. V. Shows the
single valves of the Vena Basilica looking upwards. FIG. VI. In the Crural vein
opened double valves are seen.


page 30^

a Flux of spirituous Blood, which begins successively and ends with the
Systole and Diastole of the whole Body; nor is there any thing to urge a
Reflux; moreover the the Arteries are of themselves sufficiently strong. Yet I
have sometimes observed the footsteps of a Valve in the Artery of the Arm, and
it may be to stay the Blood running in the Arteries in that subject, that it
may not return, as we see in the beginning of the Aorta, and the Vena Arteriosa.

Now the Valves are so situate, that they have their Orifices upwards toward
the roots of the Veins, and are shut beneath, and always look toward the
Heart. And the workmanship of Nature is remarkable in their situation, in that
they have their postures looking the same way one following another, as knots
in the Branches and Stalks of Plants. that is to say, they are not in a right
line one against another, or placed on the same side, least the whole Blood
should flow straight in through the free part of the vessel. So the lower
Valves do stop, what the upper have let slip: and if all the doors of the
Valves had been disposed in one right line, there had been little or no delay
made in the regress.

Moreover they are situate at Distances, according to the length of the vessel,
sometimes two, three, four, or five fingers distance; that if the Blood by some
default should be compelled to flow backwards, and should pass the upper
Valves, falling on upon the other Valves following, it might be stopped and
hindered.

As to their Magnitude they are greater where by reason of the plenty of Blood
Their Magnitude.
the Recourse is most vehement, and therefore greater inconvenience was to be
feared to happen, either to the parts which would be too much oppressed, or to
the Heart least it should be destitute of Blood; as we see in the Basilica and
in the Crar^^ Vein at the Groyns.

The Number of all the Valves varies, In what Persons there are most Valves.
as also their distances; for there are more Valves in those*

1. Who abound with melancholy Blood, or contrarily with very choleric and
thin Blood; because both those humors do not only easily resist the Driver, but
when they are driven, by their weight and tenuity, they easily flow back. 2. In
great or more fleshy Bodies and consequently having more Veins. 3. In such as
have the broadest vessels. 4. In such who have long and straight Veins; for in
such as are oblique, the crookedness of the vessels gives some stop to the
running back of the Blood.
Moreover, the number of Valves in one and the same place does not exceed two.
For they are seated at distances, sometimes one, otherwhiles two at most; not a^
any time three, as we find in the Vessels of the Heartt* because in the Heart a
greater orifice is to be shut, and the Ventricle underneath is larger, yea and
the greate^ violence of the Blood in the hot Heart, did require more stops, But
in the progress of the Veins, their Branching diminishes their Magnitude, and
the blood is slower in motion. Therefore where the Veins are yet pretty big,
and there is danger from the plenty of Blood, there are two doors, but
otherwise but only one.

Its Figure likens the Nail on a Man's finger or the horned Moon, such as you
see in Its Figure.
the sigma-shap'd Valves of the Heart.

Its Substance is exceeding thin, but withal Substance.
very compact, lest they should break by a strong incourse of the blood. And
this is apparent from the Varices, where they can contein the blood a very long
time.

The Use is I. To strengthen the Veins, whereas the Arteries are otherwise made
strong by the Use.
doubleness of their coats.

II. The chief use according to Aquapendent and most Anatomists following him,
is to stop the motion of heavy and fluid Blood, which runs violently into the
Arms and Thighs, and Legs, because of their downward position; but especially
in most vehement motion and exercise, where through the power of exceeding
heat, the Blood would rush impetuously into the Limbs, and so 1. The inner and
more noble parts would be defrauded of their nutriment. 2. The Veins of the
Limbs would be too much stretched, and in danger of breaking, and consequently
the Arms and Legs would be always swelled.

But this use is rejected by Harvey, because 1. In the Jugulars they look
downwards. According to Harvey.
2. In the emulgent and Mesenterick branches, they look toward the Porta and
Cavae. 3. There are none ^o the Arteries. 4. Dogs and Oxen have the same, in
the division of the crural Veins, in whom because of their going downwards,
there is no such thing as aforesaid to be feared. 5. The Blood of its own
accord is slowly enough driven, out of the greater Veins into the lesser
Branches, and out of hotter into colder places. And therefore according to his
principles, and the principles of Circulation, the use of the Valves is,

III. Lest the Blood should move out of the great veins into the little ones
and so tear them; or from the Center of the Body into the outmost parts, but
rather from the extremities to the Center. And therefore they do the same thing
in the Veins, which the Sigma and Mitershap'd Valves do in the Heart.

But in the Orifice of the Jugular Vein internal they perform the same Office,
least in the bowing back of the Head, the Blood should return into the Brain,
and like a Flood oppress the same, disturb the Animal Functions, and breed a
sanguine Apoplexy.

Chap. 3. Of the Division of the Veins of the Body, and of the Vena Portae and
the Venae Lacteae.
ALL the Veins of the whole Body are referred unto two as their Mothers; viz.
the Vena Portae and the Vena Cava, to which is joined a third kind of vessels
found out by Asellius viz, the Milky Veins, of which we shall speak by and by.

The Ven^ Portae its Original and Root is the Vena Umbilicalis, of which I
spoke in the first Book, the first of all the Veins, arising from the Seed.

Now it is termed Vena Portae, or Quae ad Portas est, the Gate-vein, and The
Vena Portae, why so called.
Vein at the Gates, and Vena ostiaria, the Door-vein; because through the roots
thereof, or, as others will have it, its branches, viz. the Mesaraick Veins, the
Chyle being su^t out of the Stomach and Guts was anciently thought to be
carried, as it were by Gates into the Liver. The Arabians called it Vena Lactea,
because they thought it drew the Chyle, white like Milk.

This is the greatest Vein in the Body next the Cava, and is commonly said to
arise out of the hollow part of the Liver. And it is not so compact as the
Cava, but more loose and soft.

It is divided into the Trunk and Branches.

The Branches are upper and lower: The Branches of the Portae in the Liver,
termed Roots.
and some call the former Roots, others the latter.

They call the former Roots* because this Vein is said to have its original out
of the Liver: the latter, because as Roots suck matter out of the Earth, and
carry it into the Trunk of the Tree: even so also the Venae Mes^raicae, which
are the lower branches of Portae, do suck Chyle like Roots (according to the
Ancients, but according to out late opinion blood out of the Mesentery) and
carry it to the Liver by the Trunk and upper Branches; and therefore the
Meseraick Veins are termed the Livers Hands. We may therefore call them all,
both branches and roots, in a different respect.

The upper Branches, four or five of them are spread up and down the hollow part
of the Liver, which afterward, beneath and without the Liver, grow into one
Trunk. Touching these and their Anastomoses, see above, in the Chap. of the
Liver, Book the 1.

The Trunk before it is divided into lower Branches, sends two small Veins to
the Gallbladder which are termed Cysticae gemellae; another Vein to the
Stomach, which is therefore called Gastrica dextra.

Afterward the Trunk inclining to the left hand, it is divided into two
remarkable lower Branches: the one higher and lesser, going toward the left
side; the other lower and larger on the right side.

The former is called Splenicus, because it The Spleen-Veins of the Stomach.
goes into the Spleen, and before it is divided it spreads from it self two
upper Branches to the Stomach, the Gastrica minor and Gastrica major, the
largest of all the Stomach Veins, which afterward constitutes the Call.
Pancreas.
the Coronaria. Then it sends lower branches to the Call and one to the
Pancreas.

These being thus constituted, the Truncus Spleen.
Splenicus is divided, into the upper and lower Branch. The ^o mer produces the
Call.
Vas breve and other little branches carried into the Spleen. The latter
produces Stomach.
two Veins for the Call and Stomach which are termed Epiplois sinistra and
Gastroepiplois sinistra. Finally, the rest of its small branches, are spent up
and down in the Spleen.

The Ramus dexter of the Vena portae, before it is divided, produces two Veins,
Of the Stomach. Call. Guts.
1. To the right side of the Stomach and Call. 2. To the Guts, viz. the middle
of Duodenum, and the beginning of the Jejunum: whence certain capillary twigs
go through the Pancreas and Call upwards.

Afterward an whole large Branch goes into the Mesentery, and being carried
between Of the Mesentery.
the two coats thereof, it is distributed into three notable Branches, called
Rami mesenterici, the Mesenteric branches.

The right hand mesenteric branch is twofold, which spends it self into
fourteen nameless branches, and these again into innumerable Offsprings of
Veins termed the Mesaraick Veins in the Guts, Iejunum, Ileon and Caecum and
part of Colon. The Meseraick Veins.
whose

Use is, 1. According to the Ancients, to suck the Chylus out of the Guts, and
to Their Use.
carry it by the Trunk of Vena port^ into the Liver. but the milkie juice of
the Chylus is TABLE III*
The FIGURE Explained.
This TABLE shows the Branchings of the Vena portae within and without the
Liver.
AAA. The Trunk of the Vena port^ going out of the Liver. bbbbb. Its branchings
in the Liver. C. The Umbilical or Navil-vein. D. The Venae Cystica. ^. The
Implantation of the Coronary Vein of the Stomach. FF. The right Branch of the
Venae portae. G. The left splenick Branch thereof. h. The Rise of the Coronaria
of the Stomach, which after it has bestowed many branches upon the Stomach it
self, being turned back toward the Pylorus, it is implanted into the Trunk of
the Venae portae it self, where the letter ^ stands. iii Little branches of the
Vena splenica, distributed through the Pancreas. kkkk. The manifold ingress of
the said Ven^ splenica into the Spleen. L. The Vas breve so called. m. The
Gastroepiploica sinistra, which runs out upon the bottom of the Stomach, and
affords many branches both to to the Stomach it self, and to the Call. n. The
Vena Epiploica sinistra. ooo. Little branches disseminated through the bottom
of the Stomach. ppp. Branches which run out through the Call. q. Another
Epiploica superior to the precedent, for it runs before it, through the lower
part of the Call, which comes nearest the Loins. R. The Rise of the internal
Haemorrhoidal Vein, which SSS. Diffuses Branches through the Mesentery, and at
last where this mark stands ^ it sends forth the Haemorrhoid Veins so called.
V. The Gastro-epiploica dextra, from which many branches arise that are
disseminated through the Call and Stomach.


page 307

never found in these, they being always full of Blood. Moreover the finding
out of the Milkie Veins is repugnant to this Use. Howbeit in time of necessity
when the milkie veins are totally obstructed, Riolanus grants that the Chylus
is carried by these without any Argument. For they do not open themselves into
the Guts, for then blood would be poured into them, and in my judgment,
nutrition should rather cease, as we see in the Lientery, when they are
obstructed.

Harvey to refute the milkie veins, and withal to maintain his Circulation in
the According ^o Harvey.
Mesentery, does suppose that as the Navilveins draw in alimentary juice from
the Liquors of the Egg, and carry it to nourish and increase the Chick^ even so
the Mesaraick Veins do suck Chyle out of the Guts, and carry it into the Liver,
even in a grown person. But then they should carry Chyle and Blood together,
and so diverse juyces would be jumbled together, such as were digested with
those that are indigested. And what need is there to confound Vessels that
Nature has distinguished. And every one knows, that the use of the
Navil-vessels, is different in a Child in the womb and, grown person.

2. According to the same Ancients, to prepare the said Chyle in some measure,
and to give it the rudiments of Blood. which would be true if the Hypothesis
were true.

3. According to the said Ancients, to carry the Blood back from the Liver, to
nourish the Guts. But so a contrary TABLE IV.
The Explication of the FIGURE.
This TABLE represents the milkie Veins in the Fish called Orbis, or the
Lump-fish.
AA. The Stomach. BB. Appendixes of the Stomach in which the Venae Lacteae or
milkie Veins are evident. CCCC. The Guts drawn to one side. D. The Intestinum
Rectum or Arse-Gut. E. The Liver. F. The third Lobe of the Liver, into which
the milkie veins are inserted. G. A white kernel of the Mesentery swelling
with Chyle, out of which Veins are carried unto third the Lobe. hhh. The milkie
Veins. iii. The Branches of the Mesaraick Veins. k. The Trunck of the Vena
portae. lll. The Mesentery. m. The Gall-Blidder.


Page 308

motion would happen the same way, at the same time, viz. of the Chyle to the
Liver, and of the Blood back again to the Guts, and those humors being
confounded would hinder the motion of one another. I forbear to say, that this
blood not being perfected in the Heart, is unfit for nourishment.

4 According to others and my Father Bartholinus amongst the rest, to carry
thick blood made in the Spleen from thence to the Guts to nourish them. which
were true did not the Circulation teach otherwise, which has been found out
since his time. And that same blood would be more fit to nourish, by reason of
the abundance of Arteries in the Spleen. The Vessels being changed, this
Opinion would be absolutely true.

5. Asellius, who rightly assigns the milkie veins to carry Chyle to the Liver,
has shown that these common mesaraick Veins do serve to no other intent, then
to bring blood out of the Liver to nourish the Guts. which use, being before
refuted, he is therein to be excused, who was likewise ignorant of the true
motion of the blood.

6. Their true Use is to bring the Blood back after the the nutriment of the
Guts, into the Liver, which had bin carried to the Guts, by the mesaraick
Arteries. This is apparent by Ligatures in living Creatures, which Walaeus
practiced, in which they swell toward the Liver, but are empty toward the
Guts. The Valves show as much, which were by Harvey found out in the mesaraick
veins, looking toward the Cava and the venae portae, which Columbus also
observed, and which hinder the blood of vena portae from passing into the Guts.
Nor does the Conflux of humors out of the Body about the Guts hinder, whither
the Humors flow thither of their own accord or provoked by medicaments; because
this passage of the Humors is certainly through the mesenterick Arteries which
neither Spigelius denies, nor those that maintain the Circulation of the Blood.

The left Mesenterick branch is spread abroad into the left and middlemost part
of the Mesenterie, and part of the Colon from the left side of the Stomach, and
to the Iniestinum rectum. Hence arises the Vena Haemorrhoidalis interna so
called, of which in the following and proper Chapter.

This Age of ours being clearer sighted then the former, has found The History
of the Milkie Veins.
out the milkie Veins in the Mesentery so called, from the white color of the
Chyle in them, which besides the Mesaraicks, make a fourth kind of vessels,
through which the Chylus is carried into the Liver. Erasistratus in Galen had a
glimpse of these veins, but after him, the first that discovered them was
Caspar Asellius an Anatomist of Ticinum, in the dissection of a living dog well
fed, on the twenty third of July in, the year 1622. In whose footsteps accurate
Anatomists treading, who prised nothing more then truth, have found by
testimony of their eyes, that those same vessels full of a milkie juice, are
peculiar passages different from the Mesaraicks. For in living Creatures they
are always to be seen, if they be dissected about four hours after they have
been well fed, viz. when the Chylus is distributed: for after that time they
are not to be seen, howbeit, though empty, they always appear like little
fibers which have deceived some, making them to take these vessels for nervs:
but they are out, because nervs neither have such a Chyle as this, nor Valves
nor any cavity. Nor are the Mesentery and Guts so sensible, although they have
a few nervs from the sixth Conjugation. Some have conceived these vessels to be
Arteries, but contrary to sense, which acknowledges here a simple coat, and no
motion. Only the not knowing of their Trunk, does keep some learned men as yet
in suspense, which if it could be demonstrated to be in the Liver, they would
be of out mind. But although their Trunk and Original be unknown yet no man
should doubt of the existency of these Veins any more then the Inhabitants
about Nilus doubt of the Existency of that River, whose Head is unknown. And
others account it no impossible thing, that they may by their twigs be
implanted into the Liver without any Trunk. Yea and it seems not improbable to
the renowned Kyperus and Regius, that the milkie veins being confounded with
the Mesaraicks in the Pancreas or great kernel, do there empty their Chyle into
the Vena Portae, and so it is carried by the Veins into the Liver, that it may
be mixed with the Fermentum brought from the Spleen, and so receive the
Rudiments of Blood. But I shall by and by show that the milkie veins have
branches which reach into the Liver, where they are inserted.

But I will briefly relate the History of these milkie veins, following the
guidance The History of the Vena Lacteae.
of Asellius and others, and mine own Experience, who have diligently viewed
them, in live Animals, and Men newly hanged and choked.

These vessels are termed Lactes or Lactea Their Name.
Vasa also Venae lacteae either from Lacio a word out of date, signifying
Allicio, I draw, or a lacte from Milk, which they resemble in whiteness,
softness and fatness; even as the Ancients and later Writers have given the
same name, to the small Guts, the mesaraick Veins, and the Mesentery, for the
same cause, though the agreement and verity be not the like.

They were quite unknown to the Ancients, if you except Erasistratus, who in
Kids that had lately sukt, saw certain obscure Arteries which were soon filled
with milk, yet most Ancients were ignorant, that there were one sort of vessels
to carry the Chyle, and others to carry the Blood. But they may be easily
excused, by indifferent Censurers, because they commonly dissected Animals that
had been strangled, in which bodies, unless they ^e tied, they suddenly
disappear. Galen who had made more than six hundred live Anatomies, did without
doubt take them for Nerves.

Their Situation is in the lower Belly, where they are for the most part Their
Situation.
accompanied with Fat, which cherishes that Heat which is necessary for the
attraction and preparation of the Chylus.

They are carried through the Mesenterium, from the Guts, by an oblique
passage, between its two coats, partly separate from the other vessels, partly
together with them, sometimes straight along, otherwhiles going over the same,
and cutting them crosswise as it were, through many Kernels, placed chiefly at
the parting of the branches; they are carried, I say as far as to the Pancreas.
In the Pancreas or great kernel of the Mesentery, which Asellius after
Fallopius calls Pancreas, they are wreathed and wrought together like a
Lattice, this way and that way, into very many and those inexplicable
wreathings and Labyrinths.

From thence again, having sent greater branches by the sides of Vena portae,
and sometimes also twigs to the Vena Cava, they enter with small Branches into
the Cavity of the Liver. From thence, being carried to the Liver it self, and
split into very small fibers, they are so long spread up and down into the flesh
thereof, every way, til they are at length quite obliterated.

But into what part of the Liver, either the Trunk or Branches are inserted,
Their Insertion in the Liver.
I have not found by any as yet determined, by reason of the sudden Efflux of
the Humors. I, in the dissection of the fish called Orbis, by our Countrymen
Steenbud, by G^s^er Sea-Hare, by Clusius the frog-mouth'd Orbis, by the
Islanders Roemaffue from the color of its Belly; both Male and Female here at
Hasnia frequently repeated, in the presence of the most learned Wormius,
Sperlingerus, Simon Pauli, Fuerinus, and others, have found and demonstrated
not only many days after, great plenty of milkie veins, full of the white
milkie humor, but also the true place of their Insertion. which was the third
Lobe of the Liver, that same little soft one described by Spigelius, into which
there entered a milkey branch sufficiently great, from the large kernel seated
not far off, and swelling with the milkey humor, unto which kernel, the most of
the milky veins out of the Mesentery, and the appurtenances of the Stomach, had
their Course. Nor is it to be doubted, but that the same betides in men and
other Creatures Nature so sharing the business, that to each Lobe its Trunk may
be assigned. Now from this they go further, with the branches of Vena portae,
inwardly to the rest of the Lobes, and their Parenchyma. And it is to be
observed, that about this third Lobe, where the milkey veins are inserted, the
Gallbladder is placed, either to assist Concoction which begins there, or to
receive the choleric Excrement, which in the Concoction of the Chylus is
separated therefrom.

Now they are inserted into all the Guts, vea even the Duodenum, but especially
into the smaller Guts, not so many into thick ones, nor are any of them carried
to the Stomach or the Spleen. And least the Chylus once received should slip
back again into the Guts, they are furnished with Valves which look from within
outward, which will not admit the Chyle though driven back with Violence.

Its Substance is of a Vein, which it resembles Its Substance.
in structure and all things else, excepting the milkie juice. Of which there
are th^^^ compounding parts, Fibers, a Membrane, and Flesh. They have but one
single Membrane, wherein they differ from Arteries, neither are they here
clothed with so thick a coat, no more than in other remote parts, though in
the Mesentery they receive from it another external coat. Asellius does
attribute to them all kinds of fibers, Right, Transverse, Oblique, for Drawing,
Retaining, and Expelling; though Walaeus by Ligature do teach, that the Chyle
is rather thrust in them to the Liver, by the Guts contracted and driving the
same; and others conceive that it is drawn by the Liver it self.

The Flesh which grows to the Membrane, fills up the spaces between the fibers,
whose use besides is, to prepare the Chyle before it comes to the Liver.

As for Quantity they grow continually Their Quantity.
one to another, being all of one Trunk though their magnitude be not equal,
some being greater others lesser. Now they are small, least the thick and
unprofitable parts of the Chyle, should go into them together, and least
distribution should be made too suddenly and tumultuously, which Frambesarius
observes.

They are infinite in Number, dispersed Number.
through the Liver, Guts, Mesentery and Pancreas, and so much more in number
than the vulgar Mesenterick Veins, that their plenty may make amends for their
smallness.

As to the first active Qualities, they are colder than ordinary Veins, because
the Chyle which they carry is colder than Blood. In respect of the passive
qualities, they are dry, yet moister than the common Veins.

In respect of the second Qualities, they are thin and exceeding subtle, where
they enter into the body of the Liver; Tender, Smooth, Rare, Rough by reason of
the Fibers within them. From these qualities follows their color which is
white, partly because they were made of cold seed, partly because of the white
Liquor which they carry, For TABLE V*
The Explication of the FIGURE.
This TABLE Represents the milkie Veins, or Venae Lacteae.
AA. etc. The Mesaraick branches of the Venae portae, and the branches of the
Arteria Coeliaca, which accompany the same. BB. etc. The Venae Lacteae or
milkie Veins, which being bound in the lower parts do discocover the Valves.
CC. The Nerves running up and down through the Mesentery. D. The Bottom of the
Stomach. E. The Pylorus. F. The Gut Duodenum. G. The Gut Iejunum. H The Gut
Ileum. I. A Vein and Artery creeping through the bottom of the Stomach. K. Pa t
of the Call. L. The great Kernel in the rise of the Mesentery which Asellius
calls the Pancreas.


page 310



Their Action and proper Their Use.
Use is 1. To deliver up the Chylus to the Liver, not by the Mesaraicks as has
been hitherto believed, by which neither the Chylus ascends to the Liver, nor
the blood descends to the Guts, as was said before. Nor let the abundance of
the said Mesaraicks trouble us, which the cold and bloodless Guts do not need;
because doubtless they need ^ore of Heat and much nourishment, administered by
the abundance of mesaraick Arteries, and therefore plenty of Veins ought to
answer the plenty of Arteries, that they might carry back the superfluous blood
to the Liver.

II To render the Chyle more fit to receive the form of Blood in the Liver. But
they are deceived who do assign to them the blood-makeing faculty, for the
Chylus is not at all changed in color till it come unto the Liver, where it
begins by little and little to grow reddish or paleish.

III They much conduce to facilitate the Art of Physic. For 1 They discover a
ready way for distribution of the Chylus, which has hitherto bin very much
controverted, without any fear of a contrary motion or confu^^on. 2 They show
that the Blood is made in the Liver and its flesh, and not in the veins. 3 That
the sucking of the Veins is no cause of Hunger, because none are carried to the
Stomach.

IV They declare the Causes of some Diseases of the Body which were before
obscure, viz. of the chylous flux of the Guts; of pineing away of the Body, for
want of N^, by reason of the kernels of the Mesentery (...) with ^s swellings,
of intermitting Agues ^d in the Mesar^um, Hypocondriacal Melancholy etc.

V The learned Gassendus conceives that by the milkie Veins the white juice
contained in them is carried over the whole Body, to breed Fat; and that the
true Chylus is brought the nearest way by the Porus biliarius, out of the
Stomach unto the Liver; But neither of these may be granted. Not the former,
because of the reasons brought before, Book the 7 against Folius, touching the
matter of Fat which Riolanus approves and commends; nor the latter, because the
Chyle would be infected by meeting with bitter Choler, though that renowned man
allows in case of necessity, the Jejunum being obstructed, it may so be done.

And so much may suffice touching the History so the Venae Lacteae, to which
there is hardly any thing remainning to be added, unless the cause of their
sudden disappearing, which is sufficiently controverted* which is not to be
imputed to the spiritual disposition of the Chylus which suddenly vanishes
away, as Asellius did at first believe, because the Chylus being drawn out of
the Veins does keep its color a very long time, not vanishing away, but
becoming waterish. But to that which did afterward seem probable to Asellius
viz. the strong drawing of the Liver, in so great Anxiety of the Ainmal, all
this may be attributed, by which the spirits being consumed, they need new
Blood and Chyle speedily to be digested. And hence a reason may be rendered, why
the Venae lacteae in a man hanged at Amsterdam cut up by Dr. Tulpiu^, remained
visible many days after; such as have bin diverse times s^en by Veslingius at
Padua, and Folius at Venice: For by reason of the pains broke off by choking,
there could be no drawing of the Liver. For whereas in a Girl ten months old,
Veslingus found these Veins swelling: I ascribe that to a like weakness of the
Liver, or the thickness of the milkie humor. I also saw at Hafnia the last
year, the milkey veins in Sueno Olai of Vardberg (who was immediately choked
with a piece of neats-tongue, having before eaten and drank plentifully)
visible in the Mesentery, because respiration being hindered by the bit of
tongue, and his heart being suffocated, there was no necessity for the Liver to
draw any Chylus. But P. Laurembergius as a man ignorant of this Anatomy does
vainly imagine with himself, that these veins do disappear, because of the
recourse of the Chylus to the Guts, the Valves being loose and flaggie: for, 1
Do all you can, you shall never bring the Chylus back, in dead bodies into the
Guts. 2 If a vein be tied in the middle, so that a passage is left open on both
sides, both toward the Liver and the Guts: where it looks to the Liver it is
empty, but it swells exceedingly toward the Guts, and if it be left in that
posture for some days together the Chyle will not slip back into the Guts.

CHAP. IV. Of the Haemorrhoid Veins.
THe Haemorrhoidal Veins are those which are in the Fundament, The Haemorrhoid
Veins what?
or Intestinum rectum, and are also extrinsecally visible, which in some men at
set times do open of their own accord, and void forth dreggie Blood, which
evacuation does much conduce to Health.

These Veins are not of one kind, as the Ancients and many The Error of other
Anatomists.
later writers have Imagined: But some are termed internal, which arise from
the Vena portae, others external, from the Cava, with which the haemorrhoidal
Arteries are associated, through which the Humors to be evacuated, are carried.

The Ancients knew only the Internal ones, as being commended in melancholic
and spleenetick diseases: and they may be opened about the fundament, or
leeches may be applied to them, whereas otherwise no branches of the Vena
portae which lies concealed within, do go out to the skin, which can be opened.

The internal and external Haemorrhoid Veins differ one from The Differences
between the internal and external Haemorrhoides.
another.

I In their Original. For the Internal arises as was said before, From the Vena
portae, and descends along the end of the Colon, under the right gut, the end
whereof or Fundament, it circularly embraces with certain small twigs. It arises
sometimes from the Ramus splenicus, from whence is the Vas breve. But seldom
which Casserius once observed, from the Spleen it self. Veslingus observed it
twice or thrice, and therefore Robert Flud is out, who condemns the opening of
the Haemorrhoid Veins, because they void not from the Spleen* but rather from
the Mesenterie, to the great damage of the Guts and Stomach.

But the external Haemorrhoides arise from the Hypogastri^k branch of the Cava.

II By their Insertion For the internal is inserted into the substance of the
Intestinum rectum, which is membranous, and required thick Blood made in the
Spleen, and communicated by the Arteria Coeliaca or Splenica.

The external are inserted into the Musculous Substance of the Fundament, which
required purer Blood, elaborated in the Heart, and brought hither by the
branches of the Arteries.

III In Number, the Internal is one in number, the external is threefold.

IV In the Quality of the Blood contained. The Blood of the inner is thick and
black, the Blood of the outer is thinner and redder.

V In their Use The internal empty the Vena port^ successively, but first the
Spleenick Arteries, and help the Obstructions of the Spleen: the external empty
the Vena Cava, the Liver by accident, but primarily the great Artery, and the
Heart; yea their evacuation cures diseases springing from Blood, of the Head,
Chest, etc. Which Hippocrates hints in his Aphorisms, and therefore the
internal are said to cure the Cacochymia, or badness of Humors, the external
the Ple^horia or fullness of good Blood.

VI In the plentiful profusion of Blood. The flux of the internal ones is not
so plentiful; that of the external is sometimes so large, that men die by the
extremity thereof, or fall into grievous diseases.

VII In the Evacuation of the external ones, there is no Pain nor Gripeing of
the Eelly; and some times also no pain in the Fundament; but in the flux of
the inner Haemorrhoides, there is grievous pain.

VIII The Internal do alone descend, unaccompanyed with the Arteries, howbeit
either the Arteries are hidden, or they depend of Arteries in the upper-more.

The external descend with the Arteries to the Muscles of the Fundament,
manifestly; and therefore the external are more properly called Vasa
Haemorrhoidalia, to include the Arteries with the Veins.

Chap. V. Of the ascending Trunk of Vena Cava, especially of the Vena sine pari.
VEna Cava called also Vena magna The Vena Cava what?
and maxima, the great vein and the greatest vein, by the Ancients, because of
its exceeding largness, and by Aurelianus, Venae crassa the thick Vein, is the
largest Vein in our whole Body, and the Mother of all other Veins which do not
proceed from the Vena Portae; coming out of the bunching or unequal side of the
Liver, and therefore by Hippocrates termed the Liver vein, having spread many
Veins through the Its division into great Trunks.
upper part of the Liver, which about the top are collected into one Trunk it
is presently divided into the upper or ascendent, and the lower and descendent
Trunks.

The Ascendent Trunk peirces the Midrif, The ascendent Trunk what?
is spread about through the Chest, Neck, Head and Arms. Now it is carried
undivided, as far as to the Jugulum. Mean while four branches arise there from.

1 Phreni^^s or the Midrif vein, on The Vein of the Midrif pericardium and
mediastinum.
each side one, whence also branches are sent to the Pericardium and
Mediastinum. That Quittor in such as have the Empyema, is carried by this Vein
to the Kidneys and Bladder M. A. Severinus ingeniously proves, because 1. The
quittor must needs rest at the bottom of the Midriff. 2. By the motion of the
Septum it is easily made thin. 3. By the same motion the mouths of the vessels
are opened. which may more truly be said of the Arteries, which carry Blood to
the Kidneys by their emulgent Branches, and with the Blood sundry excrements,
as quittor, Serum etc.

Afterward the Vena cavae ascends by the Septum, and boring its passage
through the Pericardium, it goes a little toward the left hand, and infinuates
it self into the right Ventricle of the Heart, with a large hole, where it is
joined on all sides to the left Ear-let: and there is made,

2 The Vena Coronaria, which is sometimes double, compassing the Basis of the
Heart, at the Rise whereof a little Valve is placed, not suffering the Blood to
return into the Trunk. For it is joined with a continued passage to the Artery,
that it may therefrom receive blood, which is to return to the Cavae.

Afterward the ascendent Trunk does at last, bore its way through the
Pericardium, and taking the former shape, it had under the Heart, but smaller,
thorugh the middle division of the Lungs (no more upon the Vertebra's of the
Chest, where now the Gullet and Wesand rest) it ascends to the Jugulum. Mean
while there is bred

3. A remarkable Vein above the Heart called Ayzgos, sine pari, the Vein
without a fellow, because in a Man and a Dog, it is commonly but one,
quartering on the one side, without another on the other side. But there are
two in some Creatures which chew the cud, as Goats, and in Swine etc. And in
the Body of Man I have often seen two, once I found none at all, instead
whereof on each side there descended a Branch from the Vena Subclavia.

It arises from the hinder part of the Cava but more toward the right hand,
and descends through the right Cavity of the Chest: but in Sheep contrariwise,
it arises from the left side of the Cavae, and descends through the left. In a
Man after its Beginning, which is between the fourth and fist Vertebra of the
Chest, it bends a little back toward the right side and outwardly, unto the
eighth or ninth Vertebra of the Chest; where it begins to possess the very
middle space. Howbeit, I have observed it presently after its rise, to descend
right forward, above the middle of the Backbone, and to send out branches on
each side.

This Truncus sine pari, for the space of eight lower Ribs, sends out on each
hand Intercostal branches, which are sometimes here and there joined by way of
Anastomosis, with the branches of the Anastomosis.
Thoracica inferior which arises from the Basilica, and with the Intercostal
Arteries. And therefore a Vein is not always The Error of Vesalius.
to be opened in a Pleurisy of the right side, as Vesalius would have it.

Near the Eighth Rib, it is divided into two Branches.

The one being sometimes the greater, ascends under the Diaphragma to the left
side, and is inserted sometimes into the Cavae above or beneath the Emulgents,
sometimes into the Emulgent it self. This way, according to the vulgar Doctrine,
pleuritick How pleuritick persons are purged by Urine.
persous, are many times critically purged by Urine, and void out that way
abundance of Quittor: which matter may more truly be said to be purged out by
the emulgent Arteries, by mediation of the Heart.

The other on the right hand, goes to the Cavae and is joined thereto, seldom
to the Emulgent, sometimes bove, the Emulgent. Often times it is implanted into
the last sometimes into the first lumbal Vessel; for which cause, in the
beginning Why the Ham-vein is profitably opened in a Pleurisy.
of a Pleurisy, the Ham-vein may be opened, to draw away the Blood, which
would otherwise ascend out of the Arteries and small Veins, into this Vein.

And whereas Hollerius and Amatus dream that this Vein has Valves in its The
Error of Amatus Lusitanus and Hollerius touching Valves.
Beginning, it is false. and therefore false it is, that the Cavae being
evacuated, the Vena sine pari is not evacuated, because the Regurgitation is
hindered by the Valves. Fallopius denies them, because he saw both Wind and
Blood regurgitate from thence.

4. The Intercostalis superior, on each side one, which is sent to the
Intervals of the four upper Ribs, when the Azygos has not sent branches to all
the Intervals of the Ribs.

Chap. 6. Of the Vena subclavia and its Branches, and the Jugulars.
THe Branches aforesaid being constituted, The Error of other Anatomists.
the Cavae ascends to the Claviculae, underpropped with the Thymus, where it is
commonly thought to be divided, and in many Anatomical Tables is so
represented, into four parts, on either side into an upper part and a lower.
whence a common Error of An Error of Practitioners in Blood-letting.
Practitioners arises who scrupulously open the Basilica Vein, in parts
affected beneath the Neck; the Cephalica in Diseases of the Head. But at the
Claviculae ^ channelbones the truncus vena cavae is divided not into four
branches but two only, on each side one, the right and left, which are termed
Subclavij and by some Axillares.

Wherefore it matters not in Diseases below the Neck, whether you open the The
most apparent Vein is to be opened.
Basilica or Cephalic Vein: for the Trunk of Vena Cavae is alike emptied, for
the Cephalica and Basilica proceed from one root. The Chyrurgeon ought to cut
that which of the two is most apparent.

Howbeit in Diseases of the Head (if the Circulation did not persuade the
contrary) the opening of the Cephalic Vein would help a little more, because
there is a branch inserted thereinto proceeding from the external jugular;
which I have observed more than once in diverse Bodies. But the Case is all one,
because the Carotick Arteries exclude all this Difference.

From the Subclavian Veins there arise both upper and lower Veins; and the
lower both before and after division: before the division, four.

1. The Mammaria (whose original does notwithstanding many times vary) on each
side one, sometimes without a fellow, descending into the Duggs, of which I have
made frequent mention. This by way of Anastomosis, is sometimes joined to the
Epigastrica under the right Muscles of the Abdomen. 2. The Mediastina which
comes to the Mediastinum and the Thymus. 3. Cervicalis for the Muscles which
lie upon the Vertebra's and for the Marrow of the Neck. 4. Muscula inferior,
for the lower Muscles of the Neck and the upper of the Breast. and this also
arises sometimes, from the external Jugular.
The Subclavian Trunk, being gone out of the Cavity of the Chest, is then
properly termed Axillaris and the Scapularis duplex does from hence arise, for
the external and internal muscles of the Scapula, and for the kernels of the
Armpits. Afterward the Axillaris is divided into the upper branch or Vena
Cephalica, and the lower or The FIGURE Explained.
This TABLE propounds the chief distribution of Vena cavae through the whole
Body.
A. The Trunk of Vena Cavae below the Heart. B. Its Trunk above the Heart. C.
An hole whereby it gapes into the Heart. DD. The Subclavian Branches. ee. The
mammary Veins. f. The Vena Mediastina. gg. The Venae cervicales. hh. The Venae
Vertebrales. iiii. The Jugulares externae. kkkk. The Jugulares internae. Lllll.
The Vena Azygos or sine Pari. mm. The Intercostalis superior. nn. The Rami
phrenici. ooooo. The Branches of Cava through the Liver. p. The Scapularis
intern^. q. The Scapularis extern^. r. The Thoracica superior. s. The Thoracica
inferior. T. The Cephalica. V. Its external Branch. X. Its internal branch
which in part constitutes the Mediana. ZZ. The Basilica Vein. (...). Its first
Bough. (...). The external Branch of the second Bough. (...). The internal
branch of the second Bough. (...). The third Bough constituting the other part
of the Mediana. (...). The Salvatella.
These following Characters design the lower Veins.
AA. The Emulgent Veins. BBBB. The Spermatick Veins. ccc. The Veins of the
Kidney-kernels. dddd. The Lumbal Veins. EE. The Rami Iliaci. ff. The Muscula
superior. gg. The Sacra. HH. The Ramus Iliacus externus. II. The Ramus Iliacus
Internus. kk. The Muscula media. LL. The Venae Epigastricae. mmmm. The
Hypogastricae Venae. nn. The Muscula inferior. oo. The Vena pudenda. PP. The
Crural Branch. Qqqq. The Venae Saphaena. rr. The Ischias minor. ssss. The
Muscula. ttt. The Poplitaea. uu. The Suralis. xx. The Ischias major.


page 313



Basilica, as shall be said in the following Chapter touching Veins of the Head.

From the Axillary after its division from the Trunk of the Basilica arise two
Veins.

1. Thoracica superior spent into the Muscles spread upon the Chest, and into
Women's Dugs.

2. Inferior which sometimes grows out of the superior creeping all over the
side of the Chest, whose branches are joined by Anastomos^s.
way of Anastomosis with the Branches of Vena sine pari which proceed out of
the Chest.

From the upper part of the subclavian trunk, there first arises muscula
superior, spread out near the jugularis externa, into the skin, and muscles of
the hinder-part of the Neck. And afterward,

The jugular Veins, so called, because they ascend in the Jugulum at the sides
of Jugular veins why so called.
the Neck; and they are internal or external.

External, which sometimes, either in its original, or in the middle of its
passage, is twofold, creeping upwards under the Skin, and provides for the
external parts of the Head, Face, Neck, and Fauces. For under the root of the
Ear, it is divided into the internal and external branch. The internal goes
unto the muscles of the Mouth, Fauces, Hyoides, etc. The exterior being under
the Ear propped with kernels, is divided into two parts; one part is carried
into the fore-parts of the Face, the Nose and Cheeks, and in the middle of the
Forehead being joined with a Branch of the other side, it makes the Vein of the
Forehead which is usually opened. The other is carried through the sides, the
Temples, and the Occiput. This the wise Severinus opens with very great
success, in the Headache, Hoarsness, Shortness of Breath, Pleurisy, pain of
the Spleen, Tetters, Squinzy, and which I was present and saw, in Varices of
the Face. Mean while these branches are variously mingled in the Head and the
Crown of the Head.

The internal Jugular in men is the greater, because of their abundance of
Brains, but in Beasts it is contrariwise It Is called Apaplecta, and does ascend
to the side of the Trachea, to which it sends branches. Reaching to the Basis
of the Skull in its hinder-part, it is divided into two branches. The one which
is the greater, is carried backwards with the lesser branch of the Carotick
Artery, through the hole of the Os Occipitis, which is made for the sixth Pare
of Nerves, and enters into the cavity of the dura matter. The other being
lesser, entering at the hole of the third and fourth pare, is spent into the
Dura Matter.

Chap. 7. Of the Veins of the Arms and Hands.
THe axillary Vein as we have observed in the foregoing Chapter, is divided at
the beginning of the Arm, into two remarkable Branches: the upper and lesser,
or the Vena Cephalica, and the lower and greater or Easilica.

The upper is called Vena humeraria Cubiti inferior, Cephalica or Capitalis,
the Head-vein, because it is wont to be opened in Diseases of the Head, by the
Ancients, and by later Surgeons also either out of Ignorance or Superstition.

In Brutes it arises from the external Jugular, in Men allwaies from the
axillary, yet so that from the external Jugular a short twig may be inserted
into the Cephalica.

It is carried in the Surface of the Body, between the fleshy Membrane and Coat
of the Muscles.

Its external branch termed Funis Brachii, at the middle of the wrist, in the
lower part, is joined to a branch of the Basilica, and afterward arising into
the outer side of the wrist, passing along between the ring finger and the
little finger, it is called Salvatella, which is that which the Arabians term
Siele, who as others at this day, commend the opening thereof in the left hand,
against melancholic diseases, acute Fevers, and tertian Agues, but in vain,
and upon no ground at all. As Joh. Bap^. Sylvaticus has proved in a distinct
Treatise, and Severinus lately, whatever Spigelius may dispute touching
Anastomoses of the Arteries, in the extreme parts, wherewith the Spleen
abounds: For the Spleen is more remote, and any other part may be as well opened
for there are Anastomoses in a manner every where.

They make that the inner branch of the Cephalica which constitutes the mediana.

Basilica by some called Cubiti interior, Epatica, Jecoraria, etc. the Liver
vein, because in diseases of the Liver it is usually opened: but in the left
side it is termed Lienaris the Spleen vein because the opening thereof is
commended in Diseases of the Spleen, upon no ground at all.

But let Surgeons take heed when they open this Vein, least they A Caution in
opening the Basilica or Liver vein.
wound a Nerve of the third and fourth pare, which lies near the same, whence
follows great pain, a Fever, Convulsion, and Death. Also Arteries lie beneath
the same, which being hurt, causes au Aueurisma and effusion of Blood.

This Vein is divided into more Boughs then the Head vein. Under the tendon of
the pectoral muscle it is divided into three Branches.

I The first goes along with that Nerve of the Arm, which they call the fourth.

II The next is termed Medius and Profundus, beneath the Elboe Joint divided
into an external and an internal branch, separated but a little way one from
another. The former provides for the Thumb, Forefinger, and Middlefinger; as
also for the external muscles of the Hand. The latter being stretched along the
middle bone of the Cubit, servs the Middlefinger, the Rinfinger, and the little
finger, as also the internal Muscles of the Hand.

III The Subcutaneus is divided at the inner swelling of the Arm, is divided
into a foremore and hindermore Branch: The latter descends under the Ulna by
the little finger, where it is joined to a Branch of the Cephalica. The former
as it passes along the Cubit, produces another remarkable Vein, which proceeds
sometimes directly, otherwhiles with various turnings unto the wrist. And then
as it is carried along the Cubit, with the inner Branch of the Cephalica, it
makes a common Vein which is called

Mediana by Avicen nigra, it is called the mediana or middle Vein because of its
Sitnation in the midst of the Arm. It is frequently opened without danger,
because there is no Nerve beneath it, but only the Tendon of a Muscle. From
this or rather from that part of the Basilica, whence this arises, a branch is
sent forth, which being divided above the Radius, produces an exterior branch,
between the Thumb and the Forefinger, which some call Cephalica, others
Occularis, and some again as Mundinus, Salvatella, and another more inward,
betwixt the middle finger, and the Ring finger, which some as Rhasis count the
Sielc or rather Seilem of Avicenna.

But touching the Distribution of all these Veins it is to be observed, that
The Variation of the Veins of the Arm.
they differ in several Bodies, and are seldom in one man, as they are in
another; yea the right side of the same man does rarely agree with the lest;
and in like manner they vary in Magnitude, in several persons.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Trunk of Vena cava descending as far as to the Thighs.
THe lower Trunk of Vena Cava proceeding out of the Liver, called the
descendent Trunk, is more narrow then the upper or ascendent (which servs very
many parts) and proceeds undivided accompanied with with a great Artery, as
far as to the fourth Vertebra of the Loins. Mean while it sends forth these
following Boughs.

I The Vene adiposae which servs the Coat of the Kidneyes and their Fat, the
left of which, is commonly higher then the right. II The emulgent Veins,
descending to the Kidneyes by a short and crooked passage, sometimes with a
threefold Rise, bringing back the wheyish Blood being purified from the Kidnyes
into the Vena Cava. 3. The Spermatick Veins of which in the first Book. 4. The
Lumbaces or Loyn-veins sometimes two, sometimes three, which are carried betwixt
the four Vertebra's of the Loins. From these some write that they have observed
two Veins ascending, within the Vertebra's, on each hand to the side of the
spinal marrow in the Brain, which makes them conjecture, that a portion of the
seminary matter is brought from the Brain.
These being thus constituted, the Trunk going toward Os sacrum, at the fourth
Vertebra of the Loins, it goes under the Aorta, which before was under it, and
is divided into two equal Branches, termed Rami Ilij or Iliaci, because they go
over the Os Ilij and Os pubis unto the Thighs.

About the division it self, there arise two Veins; the Muscula superior
serving the Peritonaeum and the Muscles of the Loins and Belly, and the Sacra,
sometimes single, otherwhiles double, for the Marrow of Os sacrum.

Afterward the Ramus Iliacus is forked out on each side into the external
greater, and the internal lesser.

From the inner two Veins sprout; the Muscula media without, serving the
Muscles seated on the outside of the Hip, and the skin of the Buttocks; and the
Hypogastrica which is remarkable, sometimes double, serving very many parts of
the Hypogastrium, as the Muscles of Intestinum rectum, whence are the
Haemorhoides externae; the Bladder and its Neck, the Yard, the lower side and
neck of the womb. whence are those Veins by which menstrual Blood is many times
thought to be purged in Virgins and Women with Child; which nevertheless seldom
happens, when the Venae Hypogastricae do cumulate thick Blood, and send it not
back unto the Trunck, then they may be opened, but otherwise, they are indeed
suppressed; but they ascend unto the Heart by the Vena Cavae, and cause
palpitations and other symptoms. But when they are right, the Courses are
naturally voided by the Arteries, which appears by their florid color, and the
common Office of the Arteries, which is to carry unto the parts of body.
Walaeus proves this also by other tokens in his Epistles. This branch when it
is joined with the crural branch internal, does cease.

From the outer, three: two before it goes out of the Peritoneum, and one
afterward: the first is the Epigastricae (which seldom arises from the crural)
to serve the Peritoneum and Muscles of the Belly; the chief part ascends, under
the right Muscles to the Mammariae, to which they are often joined about the
Navil.

2. The Vena pudendae, which serves the Privy Parts in Men and Women; it goes
athwart to the middle of Os pubis.

3. Muscula inferior, going over the side of the Hip-joynt, to serve the
Muscles and skin of that part.

Afterward its Branches are termed Crurals.

Chap. 9. Of the Crural Veins.
THe Venae Crurales, as also the Arteries and Nerves passing along, are in the
bending of the Thigh interwoven with frequent kernels, for firmness sake.
Afterward there arise from the crural Ve^^ six branches.

1. Saphaeda (so called because of its apparency more than other foot-Veins) or
Venae m^leoli the Anckle-vein, is long and remarkable, it is carried along in
the Inside of the Thigh, with a Nerve stretched by it, between the Skin and
Membran^ Carnosa to the Knee, and along the inner part of the Leg, it goes to
the inner Anckle. And it is variously distributed into the upper parts of the
Foot, toward the Toes, especially the great Toe. This is opened about the
Ankle, in Diseases of the Womb, especially when the Courses are stopped, and in
the Gonorrhaea to evacuate or revell the Blood which otherwise would ascend too
plentifully unto the Womb and Genitals. Now it must be opened where it is most
apparent, whether it be on the Back or side of the Foot. 2. Ischias minor is
opposite to the former. for it is a short outer branch, springing from the
crural: it is carried outwardly and athwart into the skin of the Hip, and the
Muscles of that place. 3. Muscula, arises from a Trunk, which lies hid among
the Muscles: it is a double and remarkable Branch, distributed among the
Muscles seated in the Thigh. 4. Poplitea the Ham-vein, is made of a double
Crural branch mingled together, and runs straight along under the Skin, behind,
through the midst of the bending of the Ham, as far as to the Heel, sometimes to
the Skin of the Outer Ankle. This Vein is commonly supposed to have been
frequently opened by the Ancients, under the Knee, and Paulus Magnus a
Chyrurgeon of Rome, did once open it. But because it lies exceeding deep, and
cannot be seen, we must suppose it cannot be opened: and perhaps this is not
the Venae poplitea of the Ancients, especially seeing Galen is exceeding
various in his description thereof, and calls it sometimes the Vein in the Ham,
sometimes about the Ham, sometimes at the Knee, otherwhiles under the Knee;
peradventure he meant the Ankle-vein, which descends to the inner bunching of
the Leg, and is indeed conspicuous enough under the Knee. 5. Is called Suralis,
which is a great Vein; and is divided into the external and lesser, and the
internal and greater branch, and each of them again into exterior and interior.
It is distributed amongst the Muscles of the calf of the Leg. On the back of
the Foot, being mixed with the branches of the Poplitea, it makes that same
various texture of Veins, which is apparent under the Skin. 6. Ischias Major
gives a part to the Muscles of the Calf, and then spends it self into ten
branches, bestowing a couple upon each Toe.
Touching all these it is to be noted:

1. That all these branches, do send diverse tigs outward to the Skin, which
are termed Skin-veins. 2. That all these branches are diversely disposed in
different men, as was said in the Arms; nor is there always the same carriage
of Veins, in both the Legs of the same person. 3. That there is also no great
choice to be made in opening the Veins of the Feet; seeing they are all derived
from one Trunk, and the Blood ascends from the extreme parts and Arteries.
THE SECOND MANUAL Of the Arteries, Answering to the SECOND BOOK Touching the
Middle Cavity or Chest.
CHAP. 1. Of the Arteries in General.
ARteria an Artery so called from containing The name Artery.
and preserving Air or spirit; was by the Ancients Hippocrates, Plato and
Aristotle the name of the Windpipe, which also Hippocrates calls Arteria
magna. Galen makes a distinction and calls the Windpipe Aspera Arteria the
rough Artery, and those whereof we are now to treat Arteriae leves the smooth
Arteries, which Hippocrates calls Arterias parvas, Aristotle sometimes Venam
Aortam, otherwhiles simply Aorta.

Now an Artery properly so called, is a common Organ, round, long, hollow like
a What an Artery is.
pipe; consisting of a double Coat, proceeding from the Heart, fit to carry
Blood and vital spirits to all parts.

The Efficient is the proper Artery-making faculty, which may be called
Artoropoietice.

The matter whereof it is made, is a clammy and cold part of the seed,
according to Hippocrates. And this is the Beginning of its Generation.

The Beginning of its Dispensation, is not the Brain, as Pelops Galen's Master
would have it, but the Heart by the Consent of all Philosophers and Physicians.
And indeed the Arteries proceed out of the left Chamber or Ventricle of the
Heart, not the middlemost, which Aristotle seigns to himself, and would have
the Aorta to proceed therefrom. And therefore the Arteria magna proceeds from
the Heart, as also the Venosa Arteria, and the Vena Arteriosa, but these out of
the right Ventricle; of which we have spoken already in the second Book.

Their End or Use is, 1. Inasmuch as The End of the Arteries.
they are Conduit-pipes, they carry the Blood and vital or arterial spirit made
in the Heart (for Spirit alone without Blood is not contained in the Arteries)
to all parts of the Body. 1. To communicate life or vital faculty, that the
vital spirit implanted in the parts, and their Native heat may be sustained and
cherished. 2. That animal spirit may be bred, in the noble Ventricle of the
Marrow. 3. For the nourishment of all the parts, which are nourished by these
only and their Blood and not by the venal Blood or Veins. 4. To carry the
Excrements of the Body and the Blood therewith mingled, either to the outer
parts of the body to the Kidneys, or the Mesentery, or the Womb, or the
haemorrhoid Veins, etc.

II. Inasmuch as they are moved and Why the Arteries pulse.
pulse perpetually; they afford this benefit. 1. That the heat of the parts is
fanned, cooled and tempered, and so a symmetrie or due proportion of Heat is
preserved. which is caused, not so much by the Airs being drawn in, when the
Artery is widened, to avoid Vacuum, as by the arterial Blood continually
flowing in, impregnated with Air. 2. That this nourishing arterial Blood, may
be continually poured into the smallest Arteries, and from thence into the
parts of the Body. For in the first place, the Heart by continual pulsing,
drives the Blood into the greater Arteries, which because they cannot let it
return because of the Valves, and are too strong to break, it must needs be
driven to to the very smallest Arteries and the parts of the Body. And those
parts not being nourished with all that is forced in, do send back that which
is superfluous into the Veins, that so it may be circulated. Moreover, an
Artery being bound in any part of the Body, it is filled toward the Heart,
otherwise than the Veins; contrariwise toward the smallest Arteries and the
parts it is emptied. Thirdly, In Blood-letting, the Arm being indifferently
hard bound and the pulse remaining, the Arm is filled, and a Vein being opened
below the band, Blood plentifully issues, which because it cannot come out of
the Veins which lying higher are stopped by the Ligature, it must needs be
brought from the Arteries beneath. Fourthly, in live-Creatures dissected, this
Tumor of the Arteries is observed near their Original, and a lankness toward
the extreme parts of Body, into which they go; and when they are opened, there
is a mighty flux of blood, on this side the band, none beyond it. Lastly, the
same is to be seen by an Aneurisma. 3. Least the Blood of the Veins to which
they are joined, should be still, and putrify like standing waters, and that
the Heart may not be destitute of Blood in its continual expulsion, by the
driving Arteries it is continually filled again through the Veins.

This Motion of the Arteries called the Pulse, is caused, either by the faculty
alone, The Pulse how caused.
whether seated in the Arteries themselves, as Praxagoras would have it, or
flowing from the Heart by the coats of the Arteries, as Galen and infinite
Physicians after him have taught, especially by reason of a little Reed put
into the Arteries, under which they are not moved, by reason of the Intercepton
of their coat, til it be taken away. again, because as the Heart is contracted
and widened, so are the Arteries, as appears by laying one hand to the region
of the Heart, and the other to the Wrist, and by wounds in the Heart and
Arteries: or by the Blood either boiling according to Aristotle, or rarefied
according to Des Carts, or merely distending as Harvey has proved: or from
both the Blood filling, and the faculty directing, which is my opinion. For
that the Arteries are moved and distended by the Blood, I prove. 1. The Heart
by its perpetual pulsing, expels great store of Blood, as I have demostrated in
my Chapter of the Heart. 2. That the same Blood does fill and move the
Arteries, the Artery it self shows, being laid bare, into which at every pulse,
you shall feel with your fingers the Blood driven in to flow down, with which
it is dilated. 3. When an Artery is opened, Blood leaps out, at every pulse, as
out of the Heart. 4. Harvey saw a portion of the descendent Artery with two
crural branches a span long taken out of the Body of a Gentleman, which was
turned into a fistulous hollow bone, and nevertheless the Blood which when he
was living, descended through the the Cavity thereof into his Legs, did move
the Arteries beneath, by its impulse. The same has been observed by others in
the Arteria Aorta 5. In an Aneurisma the flesh is manifestly seen to pulse, as
formerly the Artery being sound was wont to do by the afflux of Blood. 6. The
waving, Worm-creeping pulse, do argue the same, in the judgment of Walaeus. 7.
Harvey gives us another rare experiment, made with the Guts of a Dog, Wolf or
other Creature dried, blown up and filled with Water. For if we smite one end
with our Finger, and lay our fingers to the other end, we may clearly perceive
every stroke, and the difference of the motion. Howbeit I conceive the faculty
ought to be joined hereto, communicated to the Coats from the Heart, by help
whereof, they are contracted and widned; because, 1. Otherwise the Flux of the
Blood would be inordinate, and the pulse always unequal. 2. All the Arteries
are dilated or contracted in one moment, but the Blood alone fills the Arteries
successively and moves them part after part. Indeed, Gloves being blown into,
all the fingers are puffed up at once, which Harvey objects, and in a Basin the
blow and motion are at once in both ends: but corporeal blood is of another
Nature, which cannot be moved like species or Winds. 3. The Faculties or
Irradiation of vital light, may run through all parts in the twinkling of an
Eve, like the Light of the Sun. See more of this in the Chapter of the Heart.
4. Hence within Galen his Reed the Artery is obscurely moved, because the swift
motion of the Blood ceases when the Faculty is hindered. Howbeit, Harvey and
Walaeus argue differently about this difficult Experiment.

Now all the Arteries are widened Whether the Arteries are dilated together
with the Heart or no.
when the Heart is contracted, and contracted when the Heart is widened, which
is certain from the dissection of an Artery and the Heart, and from Ligatures,
nor was it so long ago unknown to Erasistratus, and reason confirms the same,
because when the Heart expels, then are the the Arteries filled with its Blood.
Yet have they not contrary pulses, as we find by laying our hand to the wrist
and the Region of the Heart, at one and the same time, for the pulse of the
Heart is perceived by us in its Systole, but that of the Arteries in the
Diastole, when they are filled, because the two motions, are at one and the
same time. The smallest capillary Arteries are not perceived to pulse, because
there is not so much force in them, and therefore we can hardly discern them
from the Veins. also they have thin Coats, so that the Blood is seen through
them, as through the Veins.

The Form is apparent from the Accidents; howbeit the form of an Artery is the
Substancial Soul, as it is of the whole Body besides.

Its Situation is deep, allwaies under the Veins, that they might be more safe,
and that not only in the external, but the internal parts also, if you except
the Belly, a little below the Kidneies: For after that the Vena Cava and the
Aorta, descending from the Diaphragma, have passed the Region of the Kidneies,
the Cava hides it self under the Aorta through all that region, til they pass
out of the Abdomen; for then the Artery does again side it self under the
Cava. The Cause whereof Plempius conceives to be this; that otherwise there
would have bin danger, least the bending of the Body often happening in that
place, the Vena cava having but a single Coat, would have resisted the said
motion.

Its Magnitude is sufficiently great, but Its Magnitude.
the descending part of the Arterle is greater, the ascendent lesser, because
the Number of the internal parts is greater then of the external.

The Number of the Arteries is fewer then of the Veins, because the passage of
the Blood is quick through the Arteries, slow through the Veins, and therefore
there are many receptacles provided for that Blood which is collected by
certain pulses. Yet there are more Arteries then we think, or can be discerned
by us, because the capillary Arteries are exceeding like to Veins.

Their Shape is like a Pipe or Channel, smooth, round, and long.

As to their Passages. Some Arteries are terminated into the Guts, by which
expulsion of Excrements is caused; some have their mouths terminated into the
Skin, through which the external air is attracted (in Transpiration which is
performed also by the Veins) and sooty steams expelled. Platerus denies that
they are inserted into the Bones, but Spigelius observed at Padua, in a great
corruption of the O^ Tibiae, that the substance of the Bone was bored through
by an Artery. which perhaps Aristotle had likewise seen, because he says that
Arteries end into a solid Substance.

They are compassed (like the Whether the Arteries do feel.
Veins) sometimes with a membrane thick and common, from the Neighboring
parts, when they are without the B^wels and the Muscles; and such Arteries as
have a membran^ joined to them with Nerves in it, do feel; whence Galen said
the Pulse was inflamed, also that an Artery did feel, and was pained, which
one at Padua found in his inner parts, who dying with a mighty pain in his
Loins, Stones like a Man's Nails were found in his Lumbal Arteries. But other
Arteries are without Sense.

The Substance of the Arteries is membranous, Their Substance.
so that they may be distended and compressed more then the Veins. Fallopius
thought their Substance to be gristly, because he observed that it did
degenerate into a boney nature; which also Vestingus, saw, as well as Harvey,
in the great Artery above the Valves, near the Heart of an old Man. But that
many things are changed into a boney substance, which were not grisley How many
Coats an Artery has.
Columbus teaches in the septum Cordis. Now an Artery consists of two peculiar
Coats.

The Exterior is thin, soft, rare, as the Coat of a Vein is.

The interior is compact, hard, and very thick, viz. five times thicker then
the Coat of the Veins: And therefore Herophilus said, that the Arteries were
six times thicker then the Veins, for this Cause, that they might be strong in
their perpetual motion, and that their thin Blood should not soon vanish and
fly away, being spirituous and vaporous. And therefore in the opening of an
Artery, the incision must be made deep, with a broad and sharp Lancet, because
of the deep Situation of the Artery, and thickness of the Skin. The opening of
an Artery is allowed of by these Whether an Artery may be opened, and how.
ancients Oribasius, Aegineta, Aetius, Actuarius, Aurelianus, Abensina. With
good success Galen practiced it, in a disease of the Eyes proceeding from hot
Blood, full of vapors, and in pains of the Hips. Panarolus at Rome uses the same
kind of remedy in a Phrenzie, and Alpinus writes that it is frequent in
Aegipt, which Paraeus did likewise exercise in France, M. Aurelius Severinus at
Naples, and Paulus Moth with us, excellent Physicians and Surgeons, do happily
open them, to the great good of their Patients, especially in diseases of the
Head; in which nevertheless, the opening of an Artery may seem usless, because
1 Vaporous and hot Blood is as well carried by the inner carotick Arteries unto
the Brain, from the Basis to the plexus retiformis, as well as by the external
ones, which are opened. 2 The same Blood returns through the jugular Veins,
according to the sure Laws of Circulation. But seeing it did certainly profit
the Patients, I conceive it was practiced rather by way of preservation, then
of Cure. For the antecedent cause being somewhat evacuated by the outer
Arteries, the conjunct cause is easily extruded by the jugular Veins. More
over, some external Vein or Artery may be obstructed, so that neither the
latter can send, nor the former receive, unless they be opened.

Galen ads a third Coat, in their inner Surface, like a Cobweb for Thinness,
appearing in great Arteries about the Original.

Chap. 2. Of the ascendent Trunk of the great Artery.
THe distribution of the Arteries which always in a manner, accompany the
Veins, will be more easy and short; because the dessemination of the Veins is
already understood from what has bin said before.

The Arteria magna or crassa, the great or thick Artery the mother of the other
Arteries, comes out of the left Ventricle of the Heart with a gapeing Orifice
or vvide mouth; where within the Pericardium or Heart-Bag, it breeds from it
self the Arteria

Coronaria, compassing the Basis of the Heart sometimes single, sometimes
double, afterward, going out of the Heart-bag, it is divided into the lesser
Trunk ascending, and the greater Trunk descending.

The lesser and upper Trunk resting upon the Wesand, does provide for all parts
quartered above the Heart: and is divided into the Subclavius Ramus dexter,
which is higher and much the larger, and the sinister, rising more low and
going obliquely to the Arm.

Afterward the whole Trunk sustained by the Thymus, divides it self into two
Carotides or Sleep-arteries unequal, which go right upwards.

The Arteriae subclaviae before they go out of the Chest (for then they are
termed Axillares when they are out) from their lower part, do produce the
Intercostales superiores to the Intervals of three or four of the upper Ribs;
from their upper part. 1. The Mammariae. 2. The Cervicales. 3. The Musculae.

From the Axillaris before it comes to the Arm, in the lower part, does arise
the Thoracica superior, Thoracica inferior, and Scapularis: in the upper part,
the Humeraria. The remainder, goes from the Axillary on each side to the Arm.

CHAP. III. Of the Arteria Carotides.
THe Arteriae Carotides do ascend upwards right to the Head by the sides of the
Wesand, being knit unto the internal Jugulars: for the internal Veins do not
accompany the Arteries. When they come to the Fauces, before they enter the
Skul, they give branches to the Larynx and the Tongue: and then a division is
made into the outer and inner branch.

The outer being the smaller, furnishes the Cheeks and Muscles of the Face; and
then at the root of the Ears, it is divided into two branches; the one is sent
to the hinder parts of the Ear, whence arise two branches entering the lower
Jaw, to furnish the Lip, and the roots of all the lower Teeth: the other goes
to the Temples, the Forehead, and the Muscles of the Face.

The inner at the saddle of Os Sphaenodes under the dura matter, makes the Rete
mirabile, and then passes through the dura matter, and sends forth two branches.
1. The lesser with the Nerve optic to the Eyes. 2. The greater ascending to to
the side of the Glandula pituitaria, and distributed through the pia mayor and
the substance of the Brain.

Chap. 4. Of the Arteries of the whole Hand.
THe Axillary Artery, is carried along through the Arm, descending between the
Muscles, with a Vein and Nerve of the Arm which they count to be the fourth.

Under the bending of the Elbow, it is divided into two fair branches; the
upper and the lower.

The upper goes right on through the middle to the Wrist, where Physicians feel
the Pulse; afterward proceeding under the ring-shap'd Ligament, it bestows
branches upon the Thumb, Forefinger, and Middlefinger.

The lower running through the Ulna to the Wrist; furnishes the Mid-finger
Ring-finger and little finger: and so it proceeds to the Wrist, whence we feel
the motion of the Pulse beneath, especially in lean persons, or such as have a
great Pulse. But we better perceive the pulsing of the former branch, because
it is less obscured and hid by Tendons.

The FIGURE Explained.
This TABLE presents the distribution of the Arteria Magna or Aorta, through
the whole Body.
A. The Beginning of the Arteria magna arising cut of the Heart. aa. Its Trunk
ascending, from whence arise CC. The Arteriae Subclaviae, and from these dd.
The Arteriae carotides, which afterward produce ee. The Ramus exterior and ff.
The Ramus interior. gg. The Arteriae Vertebrales or Cervicales. hh. The
Arteriae Musculae. ii. The Arteriae Mammariae. kk. The upper intercostal
Arteries. ll. The Scapularis interna. mm. Scapularis externa. nn. Thoracica
superior. oo. Thoracica inferior. pp. The Ramus axillaris. Qq Its upper branch
dispersed through the Arm to the Wrist. Rr. Its inferior branch going also to
the Hand.
These following Characters denote the Arteries which spring from the
descendent Trunk.
B. The Trunk of the Artery descending. aaaa. The lower Intercostal Arteries.
bb. The Phrenicae Arteriae. C. The Arteria Caeliaca. d. The right branch
thereof. e. Its left branch or Arteria Splenica, sprinkled with very small
twigs through the Spleen. f. The Arteria Gastrica dextra. g. The Arteria
Gastrepiploica. h. The Arteria Epiploica. kk. The Arteria Mesenterica superior.
ll. The emulgent Arteries. mm. The Spermatick Arteries. nnnn. The Arteriae
Lumbares. oo. The Mesenterica inferior. pp. The Rami Iliaci. Qq. The Arteria
Iliaca externa. Rr. The Iliaca interna. S. The Arteria Sacra. tt. Arteriae
Hypogastricae going to the Arse-gu* and the Privities. uu. The Hypogastricae
which go to the Womb. XX. The Umbilical Arteries. ZZ. The Arteria Epigastricae.
(...) The Arteria Cruralis. (...) The Arteria pudenda. (...) The Muscula
inferior. (...) The Arteria Muscula, Cruralis, external (...) The Muscula
cruralis interna. (...) The Poplitaeus Ramus. (...) The Ramus Suralis. (...)
Branches spent upon the Foot and its To^s*


page 319



CHAP. V. Of the descending Trunk of the great Artery.
THe Trunk of the Aorta or great Artery descending is greater, because it
sends out branches from it self, into the middle and lower belly, as also into
the Thighs.

In the Chest or middle Belly, two Arteries proceed from the greater Trunk.

I The Intercostales inferiores which go unto the Intervalls of eight Ribs, and
the neighboring Muscles. For it seldom happens, that the Vein sine pari, has
to accompany it an Artery sine pari, ariseing from the Trunk. By these
intercostals if we believe Spigelius, quittor and water collected in the Chest,
are received into the great Artery, and thence by the* emulgent Veins carried
into the Bladder, which has also reason to back it, because the congested
matter is more easily hurried through the Arteries, and the way is shorter. I
add that quittor more readily follows the natural motion of the Arterial Blood
then of the venal.

II. The Phrenica to serve the Midriff and Pericardium, or Heart-bag.

The rest of the Trunk peirces through the Clift of the Septum, and spreads
branches through the lower Belly, some of which accompany the branches of vena
portae, others the Branches of Vena Cava. Those which accompany the Branches of
vena portae are three;

Coeliaca Arteria, Mesenterica Superior and Inferior.

The Caeliaca, so called because it sends many branches unto the Stomach,
proceeds foreward from the Aorta, being under propped by the Call, and is
divided into the Ramus dexter which is the smaller, and the Sinister Ramus
which is the larger, which under the hinder region of the Stomach, are knit to
the Vena Portae in the Pancreas.

The Dexter ascending to the Cavity of the Liver, and proceeding a little
forwards, on the higher side produces Gastrica dextra, and the Cysticae
gemellae; from its lower part, Epiploe dextra, Intestinalis, and Gastroepiplois
dextra, in imitation of the Vena portae. therefore let what was said there, be
here repeated. The Remainder from the Ramus dexter goes into the hollow surface
of the Liver.

The Sinister or Arteria Splenica, is greater than the Dexter, least it should
be easily obstructed by thick juyces, and that it may pour sufficient vital
blood, into the Spleen. This Artery drawn out into the Vena Splenica, by a
bending and crooked Course goes to the Spleen, and then spreads branches after
the same manner as the Vena Splenica.

The Mesenterica superior is distributed welnigh into the whole Mesentery, and
constitutes the Arteriae Mesaraicae, in the Gut Jejunum, Ileon and part of
Colon: whose use is, 1. To communicate native heat into the neighboring parts,
and those whereinto they are inserted. 2. In a sickly state to receive the
Excrement- of the whole body, as the Mesaraick Veins do, to empty them into the
Guts, which use was first found out by Spigelius. 3. Some conceive the
Mesaraick Arteries draw Chyle. 1. Because of their Carriage. 2. Because of
their Ends. 3. Of their Contents. 4. The Authority of Galen in his 4. de usu
partium and in his Treatise An in Arteria sit sanguis chapter 5. whom Hofman
follows. But they cannot draw Chyle, because Chyle was never seen in them, and
the Arteries receive nothing from the parts, but communicate somewhat to those
parts whereinto they are inserted. Nor do they draw to the Heart, as Varolus
would have it, for the valves hinder: and the Chyle is not natural to the
Heart. Nor to the Liver or Spleen, as others suppose, because only the Splenick
Arteries do carry vital Blood to the Spleen, and there is only one little
Artery implanted in the Liver. Nor is it returned out of the Arteries into the
Veins, as Spigelius imagins, for so there would be labor in vain; Nor do they
carry this Chyle to the Caeliaca: because nothing ascends by the Arteries, but
all descends by them to the parts. Therefore 4. The true use of the Mesaraick
Arteries according to the Principles of Walaeus is, to carry Arterial blood to
the Guts, for their nutriment. Which motion of the Humors, Ligatures do show in
live-Anatomies. For the Mesaraick Arteries being bound, do swell toward the
Trunk and the Heart, and are empty toward the Guts, which suck in the blood,
and send back what is superfluous, through the mesaraick Veins to the Liver.

For the Blood is also circularly Whether the Blood of the Belly be circulated.
moved in the Abdomen, out of the coeliac and mesenterick Arteries, into the
Vena portae, notwithstanding Riolanus his denying the same, by his motion
through the Trunks, because

1. There is the same Necessity which is in the Heart and other parts, the same
Profit and the same Urgency. 2. Seeing there is an impulse of Blood without
intermission, into the Meseraic and Coeliack Arteries, of necessity, they must
either break, or Tumors and other Diseases must arise in the Mesentery, or it
must run back again to the branches of the Portae 3. Ligatures demonstrate the
same here, as in other places. 4. The Valves observed by Harvey in the Ramus
splenicus, permit the Blood to run back by the Vena portae.
As to the contrary reasons it is to be observed.

1. That the Blood of the Vena portae is not so impure, if it be compared with
that of the Cava, but that it is sometimes purer than it; and though it be more
dreggy, there is the more need for it to run back, to be made more pure by the
Liver and Heart. 2. That there are in the Liver Anastomoses either of the Vena
portae and Vena cava (though they are not so apparent in a dead body) or such
as open into the parenchyma of the Liver. 3. Sometimes there is a remarkable
palpitation of the Arteria coeliaca in hypochondriacal disorders, which also
Mercatus and Fernelius have observed, without any mutation of the Pulse, viz.
the Hypochondrium being ill affected with Wind, or with some distemper, whereby
the same Blood coming from the Heart, may be changed in this Region: but that
by the Palpitation of the lower parts, the Heart is many times changed, Tulpius
has an Example. See also other Arguments, learnedly resuted by Slegelius.
The Mesenterica inferior, is distributed into the lower part of the Mesentery,
and the left side of Colon.

But the other Arteries which accompany the Branches of Cava, are these
following, excepting the Mesenterica inferior. For in this order the branches
break forth from the Arteria magna, in the lower Belly. 1. Caeliaca. 2.
Mesenterica superior. 3. The Emulgent. 4. The Spermatick. 5. The Mesenterica
inferior. 6. The Lumbares; from which two Arteries are thought to accompany two
Veins of the Brain. 7. Muscula superior.

Afterward the Aorta at the beginning of the Ossacrum, goes above the Vena
Cava and no longer under, least smiting against some Bone in its perpetual
motion, it should be hurt; also that the fore-parts, the shops of generation,
because of their need of Heat, might be near the great Artery. And in this
place it is called*

Iliaca, where it is divided like the Cava into the two Iliac Trunks, and each
of them into the inner and and lesser branch, and the outer and greater which
go to the Thigh.

But before they become crural, they send out on each side six branches. The
Sacra presently after the bipartition: from the inner Trunk the Muscula
inferior, the Hypogastrica and ^mbilical Arteries: from the Epigastrica and
Pudenda; The rest of the Artery is carried into the Thigh and makes the Crural
Arteries.

Chap. 6. Of the Crural Arteries.
OF the Crural Arteries, on each side, are constituted these following Arteries.

Above the Ham, for the exterior parts of the Trunk, Muscula curalis externa,
to the foremore Muscles of the Thighs, from the inner, the Muscula crutalis
interna, to the inner Muscles of the Thigh; and this is mingled at the Knee,
with a small branch or twig of the Hypogastrica.

Under the Ham arise three branches:

1. The Popliteus, into the hinder Muscles of the Thigh. 2. The Suralis, which
is divided into the Tibicus exterior, the posterior altus and posterior
humilis, ^^^ the Muscles of the Leg. 3. The rest is spent upon the Foot and its
^oes*
THE THIRD MANUAL Of the Nerves, Answering to the THIRD BOOK OF THE HEAD.
CHAP. I. Of the Nerves in General.
BY the Term Nervus the Ancients did The significations of the term Nervus.
sometimes signify a Ligament or Band, hence the Comaedian says, He will come
to the Halter, in Nervum ibit: but it properly signifies a common Organ, which
together with animal spirits, carries the faculty of moving and feeling,
wherefore Aurelianus calls the Nerves seasuales vi^.

A Nerve therefore is a common Organ long and round, to carry the Animal
faculty A Nerve what.
lodged in the Animal spirit, into the parts of the Body.

The Efficient is the Nerve-making faculty.

The Matter according to Hypocrates, is a clammy and cold part of the Seed,
heated but not burnt: and Galen says it is a matter white, thick and roapie.
And this is the Beginning of its Generation.

The Beginning of the Dispensation of Nerves or the part whence the Nerves
immediately The Beginning of the Nerves.
arise, is the Medulla oblongata, partly as it is within the Skull, and partly
as it is in the Backbone. Within the Skull arise those which are commonly said
to arise from the Brain, viz. the seven pair of Nerves: and in the Backbone
thirty. And this most true opinion is confirmed, not only by the similitude of
the Marrowie and Nervie Substance, but also by ocular experience.

Aristotle would have them arise from the Heart, who is followed by Alexander,
Averroes The Error of Aristotle.
and Apo^easis, who nevertheless say it comes by mediation of the Brain.

Others would have the Nerves to be nothing else but the Veins and Arteries
continued, and degenerating into Nerves: as Praxagoras of old, in our days
Cesalpinus, Reusnerus, Hofmannus, and Martianus, but they are out; seeing 1. In
the Brain there is no Conjunction of Arteries and Nerves by Anastomoses. 2. An
Artery being hurt or cut in the Head, no Convulsion follows. 3. The distinct
Rise of the Nerves in the Brain is apparent, as of the Arteries in the Heart.

Erasistratus did conceive they came from the Dura Matter.

At this day many Physicians conceive with Galen, that some Nerves arise from
the Brain, others from the Spinal Marrow: who are all confuted by Ocular
inspection.

Their End and Use is, to carry the Animal faculty with the Animal spirit, from
the Brain, like conduit pipes, into the parts.

1. Sensory, as the Eyes, Ears, etc. 2. Motive, as the Muscles. 3. All in a
manner, that they may in general perceive and understand what causes pain.
And therefore the Nerves inserted into the parts, do give to the said parts
either Sense alone, or Motion alone, or both Sense and Motion: nor is there any
voluntary motion or sense without the help of a Nerve; and therefore a Nerve
being cut, that part is presently deprived of Sense and Motion.

The Nerves therefore, I say, do afford Whether the moving Nerves and the
sensitive differ.
to the parts either Sense or Motion, according as they are disseminated into
such and such parts, because the Nerves of themselves are not sensitive or
motive. So that if they be implanted into Muscles the Organs of Motion, they
are termed motive Nerves; if into the Instruments of sense, sensitive. Many
times also according to the Nature of the Parts, one pare of Nerves affords
both sense and motion. As the sixth pare of the Nerves of the Brain, commonly so
called, is communicated to the Bowels of the middle and lower Belly to cause
the Sense of Feeling; and when it becomes recurrent, it bestows motion upon the
Muscles of the Larynx. The optic pare so called, gives only sense, because
implanted into the Eyes only. But the other pare which is termed motorium part,
the moving pare, and arises from the marrow as well as the former, causes
motion because it is implanted into the Muscles of the Eyes.

The Situation of the Nerves, for securities sake, is more profound and deep
than that of the Arteries.

The Magnitude is various, according to the condition of the Organs and dignity
of the Actions, their Assiduity and Magnitude. The optic Nerves are great,
because the action of the Eyes is so; also those Nerves are most thick which
are sent to remote and many parts, as the Limbs; indifferent in the sensory
parts; for because they were to be soft, they could not be very small: the
Nerves of the nearest parts are smallest of all, as in the Muscles of the Face.

The Nerves are commonly said to be seven and thirty pare in number; seven pare
A new opinion of the Author touching the number of the Nerves.
from the Brain, which I say arise not from the Brain, but from the Medulla
oblongata within the Skull, and thirty from the Marrow in the Backbone. But I
say that indeed and in truth, those seven pare, are ten pare, as shall be made
apparent in the following Chapter: and so I make forty pare of Nerves: ten
arising within the Skull, and thirty without in the Backbone.

The former were indeed by the Ancients reckoned to be only seven in number,
and to arise from the Brain, which they comprehended in this verse.

Optica prima, Oculos movet altera, tertia gustat
Quartaque Quinta audit, vaga sexta est, septima linguae.
First sees, next moves the Eyes; third, fourth do taste,
Fist hears, sixth roams, seventh moves the Tongue too fast.
But the smelling pare was by them omitted, and that which they make the third
pare, is double and distinct; so the fist is double; one pare of which
duplicity, some have made to be an eighth pare, for Archangelus reckoned eight
pare, Columbus nine, and I ten, as stall be said hereafter.

Now the thirty pare of the Marrow of the Back are so divided, that seven are
of the Neck, twelve of the Chest or Back (others say eleven) five of the Loins
(sometimes four) and six of the Os sacrum.

All these Nerves do sprout out of both sides, and therefore they are termed
Pares of Nerves, Susug^^^ conjugations or coupling of Nerves. And it is
necessary for a Physician to know their originals The use of this Doctrine in
Physic.
and distinctions, that he may understand to which part of the Backbone
Topics are to be applied, when motion or sense, or both are impaired in the
Face, Neck, Hands, Muscles of the Belly, Yard, Fundament, Womb, Bladder, etc.

Moreover as to number, you must know that every Nerve has its mate or
Companion, The Nervus sine pari.
except the last or lowest proceeding from the spinal Marrow.

The figure of the Nerves is long, round, and Why the Nerves are not hollow.
smooth like Conduit pipes; but without any hollowness as the Veins and
Arteries have: because the later with Spirit were to carry Blood, but the
Nerves carry only Spirit.

Riolanus the Father excepts the Nerves of the Privity manifestly hollow, which
nevertheless his Son excuses to have been meant of the hollow Ligaments of the
Privity, who is better verst in Anatomy than his Father was, and so also
Laurentius spoke. Severinus in his Zootome, says, the Nerves of a Bulls pizzle
are hollow. Galen also adds the Optic Nerves, Whether the Optic Nerves are
hollow.
which he will have to be hollow and perforated, sensibly and manifestly: for
the discerning whereof he conceives three things are necessary, viz. That 1.
The Animal be great. 2. That it be cut up as soon as killed. 3. That the Air be
clear and bright. Plempius does also require three things more, that the Nerve
be cut asunder with a most sharp Knife, that it be not squeezed nor stretched,
and that it be cut beyond the growing together of the two Nerves. Cornclius
Gemma subscribes to Galen, who attributes rather a passage to be seen like a
prick in the inner substance of the Nerves.

Others conceive the porosity is better seen in the optic Nerves being boiled.
Fallopius says that Galen thought thus, because in the Bodies of Apes which he
dissected, all Nerves are pervions. Howbeit Spigelius admits only certain
passages in the beginnings of Nerves, where they grow together, and soon after
toward the Eyes it vanishes. I also saw a Cavity and Publicly did show the
same in a dead body, after they were joined, and before they entered into the
Eye.

But Vesalius, Eustachius, and Coiterus, deny these Nerves to have any Cavity
against Galen, and so do others, and produce experiments which succeed not,
unless the conditions aforesaid be observed.

All the rest of the Nerves do want a manifest Cavity, but they have Pores,
through which the subtle spirit^ pa^s, least we should grant penetration of
bodies which is impossible. These pores are double according to Hogeland,
lesser and greater, through the former subtle aerial bodies pass to move the
parts; by the later, bodies less subtle. Neither of them is discernable to the
Sense. Nor are there two sorts of Spirits in the Brain. I am rather apt to
believe that according to the Indigence of every part and the pleasure of the
will and the Imagination, sometimes more spirit passes through the greater,
sometimes less through the lesser, which the more plentiful or scanty influx of
the Spirit does make.

Moreover all the Nerves do consist, none excepted, of many nervous fibers or
filaments which grow mutually together by little Membranes. I my self, with
Johannes Leonicenus, a right diligent Anatomist, have observed the Trunk of
Nerves near the Hips, if it be dissected, to show a Cavity as it were,
consisting of an infinite contexture of fibers, like little Worms, whereas
elsewhere it is one continued body, with cohaering and continued fibers.

The Substance of the Nerves is thought to be threefold: the internal, white,
and marrowish (by which as the Center the action is performed) from the marrow
of the Brain, but more compact and thickened; and an external, being a twofold
coat; the outer harder, proceeding from the Dura Matter; the inner finer, from
the Pia Matter. Which Membranes do the same for the Nerves, which the Dura and
Pia Matter do for the Brain. Howbeit this distinction of Substances, is to be
searched out, rather by Reason than by Sense.

Cartefius supposes that there are Valves in the Nerves, which stop the Spirit
that it may not flow back, otherwise the parts cannot be moved. But it seems to
me, the Spirits may not be retained in the parts, which the Soul that directed
the Spirit as far as to the Valve, shall direct it into the very parts. For no
Anatomist as yet has observed any Valves. Nor can subtle Spirits be stopped
by Valves. Nor would Apoplexies or Palsies so easily happen, if the Spirits
could be detained in the parts by Valves.

Besides Valves H. Regius introduces likewise a circulation of the animal
Spirits in the Nerves. For after they are distributed from the Brain to the
whole Body, he conceives part is dissipated by insensible Transpiration, and
part being insinuated into the Veins, is mingled with the Blood, and returns
with it into the Heart, and thence again into the Brain and Nerves. He proves
this by the example of a Snail enclosed in a glass, in which the spirits
through its transparent Body, are seen to move and pass from the Tail through
the Belly, to the Head; and from the Head through the Back, to return to the
Tail, and from thence to the Head again*

But some doubts withold me from assenting to this witty conjecture, because

1. Walaeus searching out the Motion of the Animal spirits with all his
diligence, could find nothing but the motion and distention of the Muscles.
For the Nerves being bound, do not swell, nor are distended, and being cut
^sonder, they show no other motion, but that they are contracted into
themselves. 2. There is no need that the spirits should run back to the Veins,
because being subtle they are easily consumed, and by his own Confession do
insensibly exhale. 3. New spirit is evermore supplied from the Brain, which may
supply the Defect of that which is consumed. 4. The Veins need none, because
they possess that spirit which is proper to the Blood, nor are they moved with
animal motion. 5. The Nerves themselves are not moved by Systole and Diastole,
nor of themselves as was said, because it appears not when they are bound, and
they move with a voluntary motion by the Muscles, and not by the arteries
because they are smaller and go not into them: finally the Nerves are unfit for
such a motion because of their Slipperiness. 6. In a Snail the Spirit aforesaid
is instead of Blood, which Snails have not. 7. I have seen those who had their
senses perfect, and the motion of all their parts free to the last gasp, whose
Pulse did nevertheless intermit for certain days, where there was no regress
of the Spirits to the Veins, freely passing nevertheless from the Brain to the
parts of the Body, as long as there was any left.
It is now to be observed that all the Nerves are not alike hard or soft;
whence Galen reckons Nerves hard or soft.
some Nerves soft, others hard: the former he calls sensitive, the later
motive. Now the Nerve become harder,

1. Because of their Production, as being to go a great wav^ or through some
hard Body, or by a crooked way. And by how much they are further from the
Brain, by so much the harder they are. Hence the short Nerves, as those of the
Sight. Taste, Hearing are soft, and those of the Smelling softest of all. 2.
For use, for hard Nerves are held to be fitter for motion, soft ones for sense.
And therefore the Organs of the Senses have received soft Nerves, that they
might be the sooner affected by a sensible object occurring. Now all parts
which have voluntary Why the moving Nerves are hardest.
motion have hard Nerves, because that which is hard is fittest to act, that
which is soft to suffer.
The ^se therefore of all the Nerves is,

1. To carry animal Spirits to all parts for sense and motion, which appears
when they are hurt. For if they are obstructed in the beginning or totally,
they both perish and an Apoplexy is caused: or in part, and then one part of
the Body is deprived of sense and motion. If they are cut asunder, the motion
of that part is lost, into which they were inserted. 2. To diffuse Animal light
into the parts. For the animal Spirits could not so soon be taken away, either
in a Ligature, or Obstruction of the Nerves, but that those Spirits which
remain in the part, might cause motion or sense. Therefore the direction of the
Brain proceeds from some what else, which being taken away, the parts presently
cease from performing their functions, even as the Hammer is by the Hand
directed unto the Anvil, and a Staff is directed when it is hurled, which
others endeavor to explain by some hot Acci^ent beside the Animal Spirit. But
I suppose these things are done by a light which irradiates from the Brain,
with the spirits, which being intercepted, the parts are immediately deprived
of Sense and Motion, as the light of the Sun is taken away by a Cloud, and the
light of a Candle, by holding a man's hand before it. For,
1. No other influent cause, can slow in so suddenly, and be withdrawn so
suddenly. 2. Light is the cause of all motion wellnear in the Univers^ and
nothing is swifter than it is. 3. Sometimes it remains after interception, but
not long, as light received into the Bononian Stone, and a Stick by me
violently darted, and broken in the middle way, does fly yet further, by the
motion impressed from my hand. 3. The Temper of the Body follows the Figure and
Temper of the Nerves, and therefore Jo^. Damascenus in the seventh Aphorism to
his Son, advises, in giving of Medicaments to avoid such as dissolve the force
of the Nerves.
Chap. 2. Of the ten Pare of Nervs, which arise within the Skull, from the
Medulla Oblongata, and their progress.
I Make the first Pare to be Par Olfactorium the Smellingpare, whose processes
are termed Mammillares. And these processes have been sufficiently known to
all: but the Nerves, to which they are fastened behind, and well near continued,
to none or very few.

These Nerves slip out of the Marrow about Whether there be any smelting Nerves.
the Saddle of the Sphaenoides, near the foremore Ventricles, and have the
carriage, color, and use of Nerves, and therefore I reckon them for Nerves.

For they must not therefore be robbed A Praeocupation*
of the Name of Nerves, because they pass not without the Skul, and Dura Matter,
and are not afterward invested herewith, for then all the other Nerves as long
as they are within the Skull, must not be called Nerves, which were absurd.

To these Nerves are adjoined two thick Processus Mammillares.
portions or processes called Processus Mammillares, papillares: the Teat-like
processes.

They are in Number, two, white, soft, broad, longish, in men thin and sruall,
in Brutes greater, especially in Dogs, and other Creatures that have an
exquisite Smell.

For,

The use of these Processes, is to be the true The Organ of Smelling.
Organs of Smelling* and not the Nose nor its coat.

These Processes are placed in the forepart of the Brain, behind the
Colander-bone, and to it being covered with the Dura Meniax they put a face.
Through the Colanderbone the Odours ascend.

The Second Pare, which others count the first, is the Optic or seeing pare,
because it carries the seeing Spirits to the Eyes, or the representations of
visible objects to the Brain, but not humors from the Brain to the Eye to
nourish it, which is the fiction of Caesalpinis. Hicro^hilus calls them poros
opticos or meatus, the optic pores or passages, because they are thought to be
hollow.

These Nerves, of all the ten pare, are the greatest and thickest, but softer
than the rest.

They arise, not as the common Opinion is, The Error of others about the rise
of the Optic Nerves.
from the forepart of the Basis of the Brain; for their original must be
sought further, toward the hinder part of the Head, where they are carried
between the Brain, and the beginning of the spinal Marrow, and arise out of the
beginning of the first Trunks of the Medulla oblongata, growing out of the
Brain. But Riolanus demonstrates, that they are turned round about those great
Eminencies of the Brain, which G^^^ c^^s Thata^os nervorum opticorum, which
reach unto the foremore Ventricles, that they may fetch optic spirits from
thence.

And having proceeded a while, they are near the middle way united above The
Union of the optic Nerves and the true Cause thereof.
the saddle of Os Sphaeno^des, not by a simple touch or intersection, in
Mankind, but a total confusion and mingling of their Substances, that they
might suffer the less, in the middle of a long passage, by reason of their
softness. Vesalius, Aquapendens and Valverda have observed that they have
sometimes continued divided, in their whole Course. Vesalius also observed that
in a Woman they were joined only by mutual Contact, whose right Eye had been
withered from a Child; because the right Nerve was smaller than the left,
beyond the Conjunction. But in most bodies the inner substance of the Nerves is
confounded, as I have observed by accurate Inquisition.

The growing together of the optic nerves, was therefore contrived by Nature,
either left the sensible object being received in by both Eyes should seem
double, or that the Visive spirit might, if need were, be all conveyed into
one Eye which are the conjectures of Galen, or finally for strength and
stability here necessary, least in Concussions of the Brain they might hap to
be broken or distorted, or least through the softness and moistness of the
Brain and optic Nerves, by reason of distillations and other Excrements they
might become flaggie, and so driven out of their right station; which is the
opinion of Plempius.

Soon after being separated they go out of the Skull into the Center of the
Eyes in Mankind, but much lower in Beasts, because they look more sidewaies.

Within the Skull they are clothed only with the Pia matter; but from the
holes, which pass to the Eyes, they are covered with the dura matter. Afterward
it spreads the latter to the Sclirotica tunica, the former to the Tunica
choroides, and its inner marrowy substance to the Retina.

The third pare, which others count the second, is the motorium oculorum, the
Eye-mover, next unto the former.

This pare is thought by vulgar Anatomists to arise from the Brain, The Error
of others about the Rise of the Eye-movers.
near the original of the first pare. But it reaches to the middle of the Head,
goes beneath the Optics cross-wise, and

Arises at the inmost part of the Why one Eye being moved, the other moves also.
Beginning of the medulla oblongata, where in their Rise, these two
motive-nerves are so united as to touch one another, yea to become one
continued Body, which is the cause, that when one Eye moves, the other is moved
also.

This Pare is lesser and harder than the former and stretched out by the visive
Why sometimes when the temporal muscle is hurt, the Eye is hurt likewise.
pare; goes out of the Skull at other holes to the Muscles of the Eyes and
Eylids. It sometimes though seldom sends a branch to the temporal Muscle; and
that is the Cause that the said Muscle being hurt, the Eye is hurt, and the Eye
being hurt that is hurt.

The Fourth, Fifth and Sixth pares are much confounded by Anatomists. For some
make the fourth and fifth Pare one, and call it the third Pare, consisting of
two roots; the lesser of which some do make the third pare, and they themselves
do make the fifth and sixth pare one, viz, the fourth pare by them so called. But
those who reckon it for one, they count the fourth pare, according to my
reckoning, for the lesser root of the third pares and the sixth pare for the
fourth. whereas we distinguish all these pares.

The fourth pare therefore, which others as Bauhin^ count the third; others as
Fallopius the eighth pare; others badly, the lesser root of the third pare: for
it has nothing common with the following pare, is not joined to it, either in
the Beginning or the Progress, and grows out of the order of other pares ^
according to some

From the side of the Beginning of the Medulla oblongata; according to others
it grows with a very small Nerve, out of the lowest and hinder seat of the
Medulla Cerebri or marrow of the Brain: then it is carried forwards, and
fastened to the second pare, it goes with it out at the common hole, enters the
socket of the Eye and sends one from it self branches

Into the fat of the Eye, the fifth Muscle, and by a peculiar hole of the Bone
of the Forehead, it goes out to the Skin of the Forehead, and the upper
Eyelid. And these are furnished by its first branch.

The second furnishes the Muscles of the upper Lip, and some of the Nose, and
the Lip it self and Gums.

The third by the Cavity of the Nostrils serves the coat of the said Nostrils.

The fourth serves the inner part of the temporal Muscle. All which branches
Fallopius does attribute to the two following Conjugations: but my distribution
is propounded by Vesalius, Columbus, P^uerus, and Bauhinus.

The fifth Pare, which others count the thicker root of the third pare; is
commonly thought to furnish the Tongue with the sense of Tasting.

This arises near the following Conjugation, out of the sides of the Medulla
oblongata, and presently after its passage through the Os sphenoides, a writhen
branch comes out like a tendrel of a Vine (which some think is done to make it
harder) and is united with two little twigs of the auditory Nerve.

It furnishes the Muscles of the Face, the Temporal Muscle, the chewing Muscle
of the Cheeks, the Skin of the Face, the Gums and Teeth (for by their means the
Teeth have all the sense they have) the Muscle that lies concealed in the mouth
and the lower Lip.

The sixth pare, which some call Quarta Conjugatio, others the smaller root of
the fourth Conjugation,

Has a smaller Original, next the former, and somewhat harder than it.

It goes through a common hole with Whether the sixth pare be the same with the
fifth.
the former, and yet it does not therefore become one pare with the former: for
the third, fourth, and seventh pare, as I reckon them, do also pass through one
and the same hole.

It is carried into the Palate. Others would have this pare also to serve the
sense of Tasting.

The seventh pare, which others count the eighth, others the ninth, others the
smaller portion of the fifth pare, when as in the mean while it is a peculiar
pare smaller and harder than the fifth, also distinct therefrom in its original
and progress:

For it arises a little before the fifth commonly so called, in the midst of
the Medulla oblongata, and going over the third pare, and cutting the same, it
proceeds along between the third and fourth pare, where it is carried upwards
and forewards, toward the sides.

It goes out of the hole with the third and fourth pare, and is commonly quite
spent upon the Musculus abducen^ of the Eye. But that is a question, which
others say, that it is carried into the temporal Muscle, and into that which
lies concealed in the Mouth.

The Eighth pare which others count the fifth, which is called Auditorium, the
Hearing pare, arises close by the sides of the former, only a little below. It
enters the Os petrosum, and is divid^d into the greater branch, which being
spread out, they will have to make the Drum, and the lesser broad below, as if it
would accompany the sixth Conjugation.

TABLE* ^*
The Explication of the FIGURE.
This TABLE presents the Original of the Nerves to be seen in the Brain turned
underside upwards.
AA. The Smelling Nerves reckoned by our Author for the first pare. bb. Their
mammillary processes, or Teat-like productions. CC. The optic Nerves cut off
near the Eye-holes; the second pare. D. The Glandula pituitaria. E. The
Inf^ndibilum or Funnel. ff. Two white kernels set before the passage of the
Brain. GG. The greater Branch of the Carotick Artery. HH. The Arteria
Cervicalis. III. The Beginning of the spinal marrow within the Skul. Kkk. The
small branches of the Arteries, which others call the Ret^ mirabile, LL. Nerves
of the third pare according to our Author. MM. The Beginnings of the Nerves of
the fifth pare. OO. The Nervi Auditorij, or the eighth pare. PP. The Beginnings
of the ninth Pare. QQ. The Rise of the tenth Pare. SS. The Cerebellum or
Brainlet.


page 326



It sends branches through the first and Why we cough when the Earp^cker goes
far into our Ear.
second Vertebra to the proper Musces of the Larynx: and therefore it is that
picking our Ears too deep, a dry Cough is caused. It is thought sometimes to
send branches to the Arm, with the fourth, fifth and sixth of the Arm; and
sometimes into the whole Foot, with the Nerves of the Backbone, after it has
accompanied the Spinal Marrow going downwards.

The ninth pare which others call par sextum and vagum, the fixed and roaming or
wandering pare; because it furnishes very many parts here and there, yea and all
the internal parts seated in the middle and lower Bellies, which receive
branches for sense, seeing they are soft bodies, nor can away with the harder
sort of Nerves springing from the spinal Marrow. And because of the long way
they go, they are clothed with strong Membranes, and are carried united to the
neighboring parts.

This Pare arises a little beneath the foregoing, sundry fibers being presently
united.

It goes out through the hole of the Occiput, through which the Ramus major
jugularis internae had ascended: and not fa^ from its egress it provides for
the Muscles seated in the Neck, especially the Cucularis. Then the Trunk
descends, and is knit with the last pare, the Carotick Artery, and Jugular
Vein; and sends branches ath^art, through the Membrane and Muscles of the
Larynx, also the Muscles of the Hyoides and the Fauces, as also to the Tongue.

Then descending between the Carotick and Jugularis, to the side of the Wesand
above the Jugulum, it is divided on each side into the exterior and interior
branch.

The Exterior constitutes the recurrent The Recurrent Nerves.
Nerves or vocal Nerves so called, because they being wounded the living
Creature looses ^^^ voice; so that if one be cut asunder, half the Voice is
los^* if both, the animal becomes dumb. they are also termed reversivi or
recursivi, running-back; for first they descend, and they turn afterward back
again as it were about an Axle-tree on each side, the right about the Arteria
axillaris, the left about the descending Trunk of the Artery: and afterward
they ascend as high as the Muscles of the Larynx, to which they give numerous
branches* which recursion was to be made, because the Muscles of the Larynx
have their Heads, not above but beneath.

And therefore the Exterior dexter of the sixth pare, presently after the
division, furnishes the Muscles arising from the Breast Bone and Clavicula;
then the right Recurrent being constituted for the most part of three little
twigs bended back and united, it descends obliquely under the Jugulum, and in
its passage shoots out little branches for the Coat of the Lungs, the Pleura,
the Pericardium and the Heart; and then makes the right stomachic, under the
Gullet joined to the lest; and passing through the Septum, it goes into the
right Ventricle of the Stomach to the lest branch.

The Exterior Sinister, furnishing the Parts in the same manner as the former,
and constituting the left Recurrent, it sends forth the Stomachicus ^sinister*
which with its fellow compasses the orifice of the Stomach and the remainder
goes to the Pylorus and hollow of the Liver.

The Interior dexter first of all gives a Branch of it self, at the roots of
the ribs, to every intercostal Nerve; and then with the great Artery it passes
through the Septum, and furnishes the whole lower Belly, till it reach as far
as to the Os Sacrum. And then it goes into three Branches.

I. Goes to the Call, from whence arise other three twigs, 1 To the Colon, How
Hoars-ness comes after the Cholick.
hence after a long Colic comes hoarsness. 2 the smallest scarsely visible, to
the beginning of the Guts. 3 To the right side of the Bottom of the Stomach,
the upper Membrane of the Call, the Coat of the Liver, and the Gallbladder.
II. The inferior to the right Kidney. Hence they assign the cause Why Vomiting
in the stone of the Kidney.
of Vomiting, in fits of the Stone in the Kidney. III. The greatest to the
Mesentery, Guts, and right side of the Bladder.
The Interior sinister in its side is distributed after the same manner, save
that in stead of the Liver part thereof goes unto the Spleen. But from both the
interiors, sometimes Branches are sent unto the Womb.

This is the distribution of the sixth Pare according to the vulgar computation,
the Ninth according to my account.

The II. TABLE.
The FIGURE Explained*
This TABLE presents the lower Branchings of the sixth pare of Nerves, which our
Author calls the Ninth others the wandering or roaming pare.
aa. The comeing of the said Nerves out of the Skull. bb. The Ramus externus on
both sides. cc. The Ramus internus on both sides. dd. A remarkable Branch spread
into the Tongue. ee. A Branch ariseing from the same on each side, which goes
to the Muscles of the Larynx. ff. Another twig which goes with the former to
the Larynx. gg. Twigs ariseing from the external Branch, and propagated to the
Muscles of the Neck. hh. The conjunction externi Rami singularis, with Nerves
which arise from the plexus of the Neck. ii. The recurrent Nerve on each side*
k. The more internal Branch ariseing near the first Rib of the Chest, which
bestows the twig thus X marked upon the Trunk of the Wesand, and then
descending ends into the Pericardium or Heart-bag. l. A little Branch arising
from the recurrent, which descending produces another twig out of it self, and
goes into the pericardium, and at last is implanted into the external Branch m.
The twig arising, as was said, from the same, and diffused into the
pericardium. nn. Two twigs arising from the external Branch, the one of which
is implanted into the Substance of the Heart, and the other tends to the
Beginnings of the Vessels* o. The aforesaid Branch implanted into the
pericardium. pppp. The Plexus or contexture of both Branches, viz. of the right
and left, about the Gulles, near the upper Ori^^^^ of the Stomach. qqqq. Twigs
spread abroad into the Lungs. rrrr. Branches propagated into the upper parts,
especially of the Stomach. ffff. Four remarkable Branches, which descending
into the Mesentery, are spread abroad ^^ the gu^^s. tt. The right and left
Nerve-twig of the Kidneyes. u. The Nerv-twig of the Spleen. x. The Nerve of the
Liver.


page 327



The tenth and last pare of Nerves, arising within the skul in the hind part of
the Head, out of the Medulla oblongata when in is ready to slide into the
Backbone, is as others reckon the seventh pare.

This is harder then the rest, and it springs from diverse roots afterward
united, and goes out of the Skul at a crooked hole propper to it self. And soon
after it is with strong membranes joined, not mixed with the precedent pare,
for safe-gaurd sake. And then it is separated again, and goes the greatest part
of it into the tongue, and some small part into the Muscles of Os hyoides and
the Larynx.

CHAP. III. Of the Nerves which proceed from the spinal Marrow, and first of
the Nerves arising from the Neck, and so of the Nerves of the whole Arm.
ANd so much for those ten pare of Nerves, which proceed from the Medulla
oblongata within the skul: the other pares do now follow, which are thirty in
number, sometimes nine and twenty, from the same beginning, viz. the Medulla
oblongata being passed out of the Skull into the Backbone: where it is termed
Medulla* spinalis or Dorsalis, the Marrow of the Back. Now the little Nerves
proceed out of the holes of the Backbone, in a continued course bending
themselves inward, from the uppermost to the lowermost.

Out of the Marrow, while it is in the Neck, there arise seven pare of Nerves
as some reckon, eight pare as others count, disseminated into the whole outward
Head and the neighboring Muscles.

The first and second pare have this peculiar above all the rest, that they
proceed not from the sides, but from the fore and hinder part, by reason of the
peculiar Articulation of the first and second Vertebra.

Now the first pare arises between the hinder-part of the Head and the first
Vertebra. Joh. Leonicenus of Padua, a dextrous Anatomist in taking out of the
Nerves, denied that there was any such pare as this, because he could neither
see it, nor can ^^ come out of the first Vertebra having no hole, and sticking
closely to the second Vertebra and the Occiput.

The second pare arises between the first and second Vertebra, and so of the
rest in order.

The first and second pare are disseminated into the Muscles of the Head, and
to the Ears.

The third and fourth into the Muscles of the Cheeks, also those which are
common to the Head and Neck.

The fifth with the branches of the fourth and sixth, do make the remarkable
midrif Nerves: and the fifth with the foresaid, sends a part backwards, and a
part forward into the Muscles bowing the Head; those of the Arms,
Shoulderblades, and the Skin there.

The sixth to the Arms and the hollow of the Shoulderblades.

The seventh is joined with two of its Neighbors, viz. the sixth of the Neck
and first of the Chest, whose greatest part goes to the Arms and as far as the
Hands.

For there are carried into the Arms five or six pare of Nerves, viz. from the
fifth, sixth, and seventh pares of the Neck, also from the first and second pares
of the Chest. which when they first break forth, they are all mixed and united,
nor are separated without damage, and soon after they are severally divided
into the foresaid Pares; to the End happily, that by that light concourse, a
collection might be made of animal spirits. Hence Topic Medicaments, in a
Palsy, or Convulsion of the Arm, the upper part of the Arm being affected must
be applied on the side of the upper part of the Back and the Neck, from whence
the Nerves proceed, not directly in the middle, either of the Back or Neck,
unless by reason of the common beginning of the Nerves.

The first Pare, from the fifth pare of the The Nerves of the whole Arm.
Neck, goes chiefly into the Deltoides Muscle, and the Skin of the Arm, leaving
a part which accompanies the Vena humeraria.

The second being thicker, is carried through the Middle and Forepart of the
Cubit, where it furnishes the Musculus biceps, whereupon it is joined with the
third Nerve, and afterward going downwards, it salutes the Supinator longior
with a twig: but at the bending of the Cubit, it is divided sometimes into Two,
otherwhites into three branches.

1. The upper and lesser, goes along the outside of the Arm, to the outer part
of the first or second Interjuncture of the Thumb. 2. The middle and thicker
descends obliquely within the Cubit to the Wrist. 3. The lower, being stretched
along by the inner branch of the Basilica, is spent into the Skin of the Cubit
and Hand.
The third is joined with the former, under the Muscle Biceps, it provides for
the Brachiaeus and the inside of the Hand.

The fourth being the thickest, goes along with the Vena profunda and the
Artery, Afterward is variously divided. Now it furnishes the Muscles which
extend the Cubit, the Wrist, the Thumb, the fore and the middle Finger, and the
Muscles which stretch the Fingers out.

The fifth stretched along by the former, between the Muscles of the Cubit, which
it furnishes descending through the lower and hinder part of the Cubit (where
when we strike against any thing or compress the Nerve, we feel a nummedness in
our fingers) in the middle thereof it is divided into two.

One branch goes externally through the Ulna to the Middle Finger, Ring-finger,
and little Finger. On the Inside of the Fingers for securities sake, that they
may give place in laying hold of any thing, for there Wounds are more
pernicious than in the middle.

The other goes inwardly through the Ulna betwixt the Finger-bending Muscles as
far as the Wrist, and sends branches to the same parts as the former sent to.

The sixth is spent into the Skin of the Cubit, going betwixt the Skin and the
Membrane.

The FIGURE Explained.
This FIGURE presents the spinal Marrow and the Nerves derived therefrom to the
Limbs.
A. The beginning of the spinal Marrow ^e^r the Skull. bbbb. The Boughs orderly
propagated from the Medulla. ccc. The Body it self of the Marrrow, half
included within the Vertebrae, above which little Veins and Arteries spread
themselves. DDdd. Branches arising from three pare of Nerves of the Neck, and
two of the Chest, to be distributed into the Hand. E. The Contexture and
Commixion of those Nerves. ff. The first pare of Nerves of the Hands. gg. The
second Pare. hh. The third Pare. ii. The fourth Pare bigger than the rest. kk.
The fifth pare. l. The sixth pare which is under the Skin. M. The first Nerve of
the Thigh. N. The second Nerve. ooo. The branch of the second Nerve which
accompanies the Saphaena. PP. The third Nerve of the Thigh. QQQ. The fourth
Nerve of the Thigh, thickest of all. rr. The Ramus externus. ss. The Ramus
internus.


page 333



CHAP. IV. Of the Nerves of the Chest, the Back and Loins.
FRom the Marrow of the Back arise twelve pare, or as some reckon eleven all
and every of which after their* Egress are divided into the greater and lesser
branches: the one of which is carried forward, the other backward, being bowed
backwards.

The foremore branches, are sent into all the Intercostal spaces, the internal
and external ones (both which I have sometimes seen divided into two branches)
for the Muscles which lie upon the Chest, also for the oblique descendent of
the Belly.

The hindermore and lesser branches go backwards to the spines of the Back,
betwixt the Muscles which grow to the Vertebrae, into which they are partly
consumed, and partly into those which grow from these points of the Spines, as
into the Rhomboides, Cuculares, etc.

Out of the spinal Marow when it is in the Vertebrae of the Loins, there arise
sometimes five, sometimes four pare of Nerves: which pares are greater than those
of the Back. And each of these is divided into the foremore and hinder
branches, which are disseminated, partly into the Muscles of the Loins and
Hypogastrium, and partly into the Thighs. For

1. This Pare gives a branch to the fleshy parts of the Midriff; and then
provides for the Muscles of the Belly and Loins. 2. It affords branches to some
of the Muscles of the Thigh and Leg, and as many suppose, a branch to the
Spermatick Vessels. 3. It goes to the Knee and its Skin, and part accompanies
the Saphaena, and part goes to the Muscles which rest upon the Loins. 4. Among
the Lumbal ones, it is the greatest, proceeding to the fore Muscles of the
Thigh and Leg, as far as to the Knee. 5. I passes through the hole, which is
betwixt the Hipbone, the Share and Flank bones, and bestows branches upon some
of the Muscles of the Thigh, Yard, neck of the Womb and Bladder.
But the greatest branches go from these three parts, unto the Thighs as shall
be said in the following Chapter.

CHAP. V. Of the Nerves which proceed from the Marrow of Os sacrum, and of the
Nerves of the whole Foot.
OUt of the spinal Marrow contained in the Os sacrum, there arises five pare of
Nerves, or as some reckon them six pare, out of the four, uppermost of which,
and the three lowest of the Loins, arise the crural Nerves, descending between
the Feet, which being in their Rise joined like a little Net, do soon after
sprinkle three branches from themselves, as shall be said by and by touching
the Nerves of the Feet.

Now the first part of Nerves of Os sacrum, is divided like the Lumbal Nerves,
into a foremore and hindermore branch. But the five following Pares otherwise.
For before they go out, they are on each side double, and on each side one
Nerve goes into the fore parts, another into the hinder parts. The hindermore
branches are dissminated like the hinder Lumbals, viz, into the hindermore
neighboring parts.

The three foremore which are uppermost, do go into the Thigh, the two lower to
the Muscles of the Fundament and Bladder; and some to the Interfoemineum and
Scrotum.

Moreover, the end of the Marrow of the The Nerve Sine part.
Back, does produce only one branch out of it self which is therefore termed
Sine pari, without a Ma^e or fellow; yet sometimes it has a fellow. It spends
it self into the Skin, between the Buttocks and the Fundament, and into certain
Muscles of the Thigh.

Now follow the Nerves which go into the Thigh, which before were said to be
four in number.

The first and third are shorter, and reach only to the Thigh, the second is
longer, and goes also to the Leg, the fourth is longest of all.

The first being made up of the third and fourth pares of the Loins, descending
to the small Trochanter, spends it self into the Skin and Muscles of the Thigh,
and some of the Leg, and is ended above the Knee.

The second arising from the same place, descends with the Vein and Artery to
the Thigh through the Groyns, it goes to the foremore Muscles of the Thigh, and
is spread about the Knee. But it sends a remarkable branch inwardly with the
Saphaena to the Ankle.

The third arises in the Articulation of the fourth and fifth Vertebra, passes
through the hole of Os pubis, to some upper Muscles of the Thigh and Yard,
arising out of the Os pubis; and to the Skin of the Thigh in the Groyn.

The fourth is the thickest, longest, hardest and driest in the whole body,
made up of four pare of the Os sacrum; it furnishes the Skin of the Thigh, and
certain Muscles thereof, as also of the Log and Foot. I have sometimes observed
this to have a double rise, and a double progress, the one External the other
Internal.

But that same great Trunk under the Ham, is divided into an external and an
internal Branch.

The external goes to the Ham, the outside of the Foot, the Musculi peronaei,
and the outer Ankle.

The Internal and greater goes along the Leg to the Muscles of the Feet and
Foes; the inner Ankle, the great Toe and sole of the Foot: and bestows two
twigs upon each Toe.

All the Nerves therefore well-neer, which go into the whole Leg and Foot, do
arise from the only greatest crural Nerve.

THE Fourth and last Manual OF THE BONES And also of the Gristles and Ligaments
Answering the FOURTH BOOK Of the Limbs.
IN the last place, I shall briefly (as I The reason of the Authors Method. Why
he treats last of the Bones.
have done other things) explain the Doctrine of the Bones.

In the last place, I say, because when all things else are removed and
separated, then only the Bones come in view, and are subject to examination.
The most diligent Riolanus treats in two places of his Enchiridion, of the
Bones, once as they appear in the dead Carkas, when the Mu^scles are cut off,
and again as they are dried in a Skeleton. But this Ostentation is superfluous
in a compendium. For by the same reason we should make a new Anatomical
discourse, of the Veins, Arteries, Nerves, Guts, Stomach, Womb, and other Parts
taken out, and dried, and commonly hung up for show in the Anatmoical Theaters.
There is no use of the latter Doctrine of the Bones, unless to help the Memory,
nor is it perfectly understood without the former. And therefore other
Anatomists, with the parts demonstrate the Bones lying beneath them, in the
dead body. I shall therefore only busy my self with the first, and therewith.

Join the Doctrine of Gristles and Ligaments.

1. Because of the similitude of their substance: for these three similar Why
he treats of the Gristles and Ligaments with the Bones.
parts are very near of kin, A Bone, a Gristle, and a Ligament, so that they
seem to differ only gradually in respect of more and less one from another. For
a Bone is the hardest, a Gristle, a little softer, yet so as that it may turn
to a Bone, as we see in the tender Bones of Infants, which at first were
gristy. A Ligament is yet softer than a Gristle, which also it self sometimes
turns to a Bone, as in decrepit Persons. Hence many attribute the same matter
to a Bone, a Gristle, a Ligament, yea and a Tendon.

2. Because of the Nearness of Place; for a Bone, a Gristle, and a Ligament do
for the most part accompany one another, and are found joined together. For the
Bones are tied with the Ligaments, and where they are tied, they are covered
about their Heads, with a Gristly Crust or Cover.

CHAP. I. Of the Bones in General.
THe Nature of the Bones is easily known, if we shall but orderly propound their
Causes and Accident^ or Adjuncts.

The Ma^^^ out of which the Bones are bred in the Womb, according to
Hippocrates, is an earthy Excrement, with Fat and Moisture added thereto.
Aristotle also calls it Excrementum seminale, an excrement of the Seed. Galen
says it is the thicker and harder part of the Seed dried.

Now some Bones are perfectly generated in the Womb, as those in the Ear which
serve the Sense of Hearing, being the smallest in the whole body; others
imperfectly, as the Teeth and all the rest of the Bones, in which at first
somewhat is wanting* either a process, o^ an Appendix, etc.*

Moreover, all other Bones save the Teeth have a certain determination of their
growth: but the Teeth grow continually, for if one Tooth be removed, that just
against it grows longer: which Nature therefore ordained, because they are
always wearing through grinding and chewing the Meat.

Their remote nutritive Matter, is thought to be the thicker and more earthy
part of Whether the* Marrow be the Nutriment of the Bones.
the Blood, and that which is as it were excrementitious, flowing in through
the Veins into the Marrow, where in the Caverns of the Bones it may be
digested, for Platerus denies that the Bones have Arteries, wherein Spigelius
contradicts him: if there be Veins, there will doubtless be Arteries, which are
as inconspicuous to the sight as the Veins are. Hence it is, that in the
Cavities of the Bones of Animals newly brought forth, the Marrow is as yet
bloody.

The Immediate nutritive Matter of the hollowed Bones, according to Hippocrates
and Galen, is the Marrow contained in the said Bones (who are contradicted by
Aristotle and other Peripetaticks, who will have the Marrow to be rather the
excrement of the Bones) as in Gristles that same snotty matter which lies round
about them, is their immediate nutritive Matter; and in Ligaments, Membranes
and Nerves, that same clammy humor shed in amongst them.

Of the solid Bones not hollowed, the immediate Nutritive matter, is thick
Blood sent in through the pores; because 1. Being broken they are joined with a
Callus, bred of the Remainders of the alimentary Blood. 2. They are liable to
Imposthumation in their Substance, the superfluities of the nourishment
putrefying in the pores. Hofman allows that they are nourished with Blood
contained in the Marrow, and that the Marrow serves the Blood, by carrying the
solid part.

The Efficient is the Vis o^^ifica, or Bone-making faculty, or the innate
faculty, acting by the Assistance of Heat.

The Form of a Bone is the Soul, as of the whole, and in the next place the
ratio^ formalis whereby a Bone is a Bone and no other thing, 2. de Genesis Anim.
cap. 1. And therefore the Bones of dead persons are not properly but
equivocally Bones. The Accidents or Adjuncts of Bones, are their sundry
Figures, Solidity, Strength, etc. of which hereafter.

The End or Use of the Bones, is,

1. To be the Foundations and Supporters of the whole Body, like Pillars or
Foundations in Houses. 2. To be as a Safeguard for some parts, as the Skull
saveguards the Brain. 3. To serve for going, as is apparent in the Thighs and
Legs. and therefore Serpents, Why creeping things cannot go.
Worms and other Creepers, which have no Legs, cannot go, but are forced to
crawl. 4. There are some private uses of diverse Bones, of which in the special
History of Bones. 5. Certain Medicinal Uses there are of Bones. Their Powder
cures a Cancer, Fevers, any Fluxes. Their Oil is good for the Gout, the
Magistery of a Man's Skull is good against the Falling Sickness, as also the
triangular Bones of the Occiput, etc.
The Situation of the Bones is deep, because they are the Foundations and
Upholders of the Body.

They vary in Magnitude according to the variety of their Utilities. Great are
the Bones of the Leg, Thigh, Arm, Shoulder, etc. Small those of the Ear serving
for Hearing, the Sesamoidean Bones, the Teeth, the Wristbones, etc.

They are many in number and not one only, because of the variety Why many
Bones in a living Creature.
of motions; and lest that one being hurt, all should be hurt.

Now a monstrous thing it is for a Child to be born without Bones, such an one
as Hippocrates speaks of, being a Boy, four fingers big, but not long-lived the
like to which Forestus also saw.

The Number of all the Bones of the Body, is not the same in all Persons. For
in Children they are more, which by degrees grow together and become fewer.
Others may number the Epiphysis by themselves as distinct Bones, and so make a
mighty number. Others may omit the Sesamoidean and other small Bones, or such
as are seldom found, as in the Carotick Arteries: and so does Archangelus who
reckons but two hundred forty nine: others make commonly three hundred and
four. Others as many as there are days in the year.

They vary in Figure some are round, others flat, some sharp, others blunt,
etc. as shall be showed when we come to speak severally of the particulars.

The Color in such as are naturally constituted, is white, mixed with a very
little red.

They are all of them externally enclosed (not internally) with the Periostium,
excepting the Teeth, sesamoidean Bones, and the sides of the other Bones where
they are mutually joined one to another. And the Periostium is exquisitely
sensible: The Periostium feels, but not the Bones. The Sense of the Teeth.
but the Bones themselves want the sense of Feeling, excepting the Teeth, to
whom we may attribute some Sense, seeing they feel exceeding cold Air or Water,
yea with their Ends: especially when the Teeth are on Edge, before it reach to
the little Membranes and Nerves, by help whereof they are thought to Feel.

The Connection of the Bones is various. But the mutual and artificial hanging
together of all the Bones is by the Greeks called Skeleton, as if you would say
a dried Carcass from Skellein to dry. Being compacted partly with the natural
Ligaments dried with the Bones, and partly with artificial ones, sometimes bolt
upright, otherwhiles in the posture of sitting; which does not properly belong
to Anatomy, but the other Natural Osteology, framed by Nature, and adorned with
its own moist Ligaments.

And this natural Cohaerence or Connection, according to Galen, is made either
Cat' arthron by way of Joynting; or cata sumphusin, by way of growing together.

He makes Arthron a Joint to be double; viz. Diarthrosis or by way of
Diarticulation or joynting, such as are Enarthrosis, Arthrodia and Gigglumos:
or Sunarthrosis, such as he reckons Suture, Harmony and Gomphosis

Moreover Symphysis or growing together, is said to be with or without a Medium.

But I shall thus divide the Connexions of the Bones.

The Bones are fastened together either by Articulation or Joynting; or by
Symphysis or growing together.

Articulation or Joynting is with motion, and that either obscure (which others
call neuter or doubtful Articulation) as that of the Ribs with the Vertebrae,
also of the Bones of the Wrist and Pedium; or evident loose and manifest, and
it is called

Diarthrosis, of which there are three sorts:

I. Enarthrosis Inarticulation, which is when there is a great quantity both of
the Cavity of the Bone receiving, and of the Head of the Bone which is
received: as in the Articulation of the Thigh with the Huckle-bone. II.
Arthrodia, is where the Cavity receiving is superficial, and the Head received
flat: as is that of the lower Jaw with the Bone of the Temples. III. Gigglumos,
when the same Bone both receives, so that contiguous bones do mutually enter
one into another. And it is done three manner of ways: 1. When the same bone
is received by one bone which receives the same again mutually; as we see in
the Articulation of the Shoulder Bone with the Cubit. 2. When one bone receives
and is received of another, as in the Vertebrae. For the Vertebra being placed
in the middle, receives the upper and is received by the lower. 3. In manner of
a wheel, as that of the second Vertebra of the Neck with the first; where upon
the Axel-tree as it were of one Vertebra, another is turned and wheeled about,

By Sumphusis or growing together, Bones are fastened, when the Connection is
without motion, and two Bones do only touch one another, or approach mutually
one to another, as in the former.

And this growing together is either without a medium or with it.

Without a Medium:

1. Rhaphe a Suture as in the Skul. 2. Harmonia, which is a joining of Bones by
a single Line, straight, oblique, or circular: as in bones of the upper Jaw and
the Nose. And so all Epiphyses in a manner are joined. 3. Gomphosis that is to
say Nailing, when one Bone is fastened into another as a Nail in a Post, as the
Teeth in the Jaw-bones.
These three sorts Galen and others following him, have comprehended under
Synarthrosis as the Genus or kind. But they are out: because Bones thus joined
have no motion* yet peradventure they may some ways pertain to Synarthrosis,
because of the firmness they afford to the parts of the body.

With a Medium there is also a threefold growing together of the Bones, by
reason of a threefold body coming between as the Medium:

1. A Gristle and the conjunction is called Sunchondrosis. as in the Bones of
the lower Jaw, and the Sharebones. 2. A Ligament and it is termed Sunneurosis,
as is seen in the Union of the Huckle-bone with the Thigh bone. 3. Flesh or a
Muscle, and it is called Sussarcosis, as in the Os hyoides with the Scapula.
The Substance of the Bones is hard, but not with dryness in an healthy State,
but with a shining fattiness. to which others join an acid or sharp spirit and
a volatile Salt, in which regard they easily take fire and are burnt instead of
Wood, as the Rogus of the Romans or their Funeral-fires did witness [ and our
English Bonefires, for anciently (and yet in the A Bonefire properly what.
North) they kept their Bones of Beef etc. til an occasion of Triumph, and then
brought them out for joy to make Bone-fires] otherwise they would easily be
broken, as we see in calcined Bones, and in that old Woman, whose Members would
break at the least touch, as Nic. Fontanus relates in his Observations. And
Galen tells of some bones that would turn to Sand and Dust, like rotten wood,
which is the effect of dryness.

The Less this Hardness of the Bones is, the better do broken bones grow
together and unite.

But in Persons that are come to years, they do not truly grow together, nor
are regenerated, but are as it were glewed together, by the coming between of
another substance like Glue, which they term Callus. Galen calls it Porus. Now a
Callus sometimes happens beside the Intent of Nature, through overgreat plenty
of Aliment and bad Nutrition: viz. when by a boney callus, the three upper
Vertebra's of the Neck are so glewed together as they seem to be but one bone:
or when the first Vetebra is glewed to the Skul; and such persons cannot
express their consent or dissent, by moving their Head forwards or backwards as
the manner is.

There is a greater hardness in some Bones than in others, as the Thigh, etc.
But other Bones are softer, as of the Os Spongiosum, the last bones of the
Fingers etc. Fernelius, Ruellius, Hollerius have found all the bones so
preternaturally soft, that they might be bowed like Wax, and that chiefly by
the venereal Pox, witness M. Donatus. The Cartilago insiformis proves sometimes
so soft and flaggie, that it falls, of which see Codronchius.

The parts of the Bones are solid or Hollow, yet Pliny tells us, that there
were some that lived whose bones were solid, without any hollowness, who are by
him called Cornei, and that such persons are known, in that they never sweat
nor thirst. which Salinus avouches of one Lyddanus a Syracusian. But both these
Authors can sometimes drop leasings.

The Cavities are either within where the Marrow is, which cavities
nevertheless are not every where conspicuous; or without at the joyntings;
which hollownesses if they are deep, they are called Cotulai or Cotulides (not
co^ul^dones) also Acetabula, Sawcers. Cotyle was among the Ancients, a measure
of Liquors, containing as much as their Hemina; also a kind of Drinking Cup, as
some suppose If the Cavities are shallow, they are called Glenai and
Glenoeideis from the form of the Eyes hollowness when the Eyelids are shut.

The solid parts of the Bones are three.

The first and principal is called Os, and is the hardest part, seated commonly
in the middle.

The second is by the Greeks called Apophysis, also they term it Probolen and
Ecph^se^in etc. the Latins call it Processus, Productio, Projectura,
Extuberantia etc. It is a part of a bone, not only touching as Epiphusis, but
continued bunching out beyond the plain surface of the Bone: such as many are
in the Vertebra's of the Back, also in the lower Jaw Bone.

Its chief Use is for the original and Insertion of parts, as Muscles.

The third is Epiphusis, or Appendix, Adnascentia, Additamentum; being a bone
growing upon a bone, by a simple and immediate Contact, though not with so very
plain a Surface, but a little mutual Ingress of Heads and Hollows, like
Ginglumus, though without motion.

The Substance of the Epiphyses is rare and loose, being at first for the most
part gristly; but in persons grown to years, it is hardened, and turns to a
bone: yea in elderly persons, the Epiphysis is so united to the bone, as if
they were but one contined bone,

At the Ends of the Epiphysis a Gristle is placed.

But all Bones have not these Epiphuses growing to them: yet there are diverse
of them; as in the Scapula, on the Bones of the Tibia and the Fibula, viz. on
each side, at the Tree and Foot etc. Also the Tooth of the second Vertebra, the
Rotator magnus, the Appendices Styloydes, are Epiphyses.

The Use of Eppiphyses.

1. In soft bones they are instead of covers, that the Marrow may not run out.
2. They serve for firmness, for that Basis is most firm which is broadest and
largest. 3. That from them Ligaments may arise. 4. According to Pavius, that
they might be as it were an intermediate matter, to be inserted betwixt a bone
and Ligaments, as the Membranes betwixt the Brain and Skull.
The Apophysis are in some places called Capita Heads; in other places,
Cervices Necks; in other places Tubercula bunches; in some place Spina thorns;
in other places Mucrones sharp points. But the parts which at the round of the
Cavities, stick out and hang over like Lips, are called Supercilia Brows, and
Labra Lips.

Chap. II. Of Gristles in General.
GRistles next to Bones are the hardest similar parts* and almost just of the
same Nature with Bones, for such Beasts as have no Bones, have Gristles instead
of Bones according to Aristotle.

But they differ, because they are softer than Bones, though harder than
Ligaments: and though very many Gristles are in process of time turned into
Bones [as Cardan* shows by the example of a Thief of Milaine, whose wesand was
become boney. Also many Sceletons of my Kinsman Henry Fuirenus declare, that
the Cartilago scutiformis, or sheid-fashion'd Gristle, is changed into the hard
substance of a Bone, which I also have observed in Dissections] yet all
Gristles are not so, as the Ensiformis, that of the Share, of the Spines of the
Back, of the Nostrils and Ears: which nevertheless sometime, in aged persons are
turned into Bones. Moreover a Gristle has no Marrow, no Cavities nor Caverns.

The Efficient is the Gristl-making power or faculty.

The Matter according to Aristotle is the same with that of the Bones, from
which he will have them to differ only gradually. According to Galen it is an
earthy but withal moist part of the Seed, partly clammy and glewish, partly
fat: but more clammy than fat.

Its Use

1. Is principally to render motion more easy and lasting in the Joints,
whiles it anoynts the parts of the Bones, least by mutual rubbing one against
another, they should wear and fret. Hence in some Joints are found Gristles
which crustover two bones joined together. 2. To defend the parts from external
injuries. For they are not easily bruised and broken, because they are hard and
not friable, nor are they easily cut and squeezed as the soft and fleshy parts.
Hence the extreme parts of the Nose are gristly. Hence Gristles are joined to
the Breastbone and Ribs, to defend the Heart and Lungs, and the Gristle
Ensiformis, to defend the Midriff and the mouth of the Stomach. 3. To make such
a Connection of the Bones as is termed Sunchondrosis. 4. To shape parts
prominent or hollow; as appears in the Ears, Larynx and Wesand. 5. To fill up
hollownesses, especially in the Joints, as is seen in the Knee. 6. To serve for
a cover, as in the Epiglottis. 7. To be as an underpropper to sustain somewhat,
as the Gristles of the Eyelids bear the Hairs.
Their Situation is various, for Gristles are found in sundry parts, in the
Eyelids, Nose, Ear, Larynx, Wezand, Spine, Chest, Ear-lets, of all and every
of which in their places.

Their Magnitude also varies: so also

Their Figure is diverse, as ring-fashion'd, Sheild-shap'd, Sword-like, etc.

As to their Connection. Some Gristles constitute parts of themselves, as that
of the Nose, Xyphoidis, the Coccyx: others grow to bones, which knit them
together, either without any other medium, as in the Share and Breastbones, or
by common Ligaments coming between, as in the Connection by Diarthrosis.

In Substance, some are harder, as those which in time become boney; others are
softer, fastening the Joints, and resembling the Nature in a manner of
Ligaments, and are therefore called Chondro-syndusmoi, Gristly Ligaments.

Now though their Substance be hard, yet it is flexible and tough because less
cold and dry than a bone, and because compassed with a snotty matter.

And this Substance of theirs is void of sense; because it has no acquaintance
with Nerves nor Membranes. Nor was it requisite that it should feel, least in
motion when the Gristles rub and strike one against another, pain should be
caused.

In other things they agree with Bones.

Chap. III. Of Ligaments in General.
LIgamentum a Band or Tie, is by the Greeks called Sundesmos. The Ancients, as
Hippocrates, Aristotle and Galen somwhere, call it Nervum and Nervum colligatum
a Nerve, and a twisted Nerve or Nerve tied together; because in shape and
color it counterfets a Nerve: and otherwise the term Ligament, may in a large
signification be applied to any part, which fastens diverse parts together. Also
Galen calls the beginning of a Muscle Ligamentum, part whereof is thought to
turn to a Tendon. All these are improper acceptations. I shall now decipher a
Ligament properly so called.

Its Efficient is the Ligament-making Power.

Its Matter is a clammy roaping part of the Seed.

Its Use is, like a cord to bind together the parts of the body, especially the
Bones, and so to keep them together, in the Head, Chest, Back, and Limbs, that
they may not be dislocated or dispointed.

Because of its most strong cleaving thereunto, a Ligagament is said to arise
(though it be indeed made of the Seed) from the Bone primarily, sometimes from a
Gristle, gristly bone or Membrane: and its said to be inserted into a Bone,
Gristle, Muscle, or some part. Or if you would rather have it so; Ligaments
grow among the Bones, of in the Bones.

Their Situation. Some are without among the Bones, as the grisly Ligaments so
called, which are thick and commonly round: others are wound externally about
the bones which are thin and membranous.

As to Figure: some are broader which Anatomists term membranous Ligaments, as
has been said; others are longer, which are called Nervous Ligaments. And they
call them so because of their resemblance, not as if a Ligament were truly
membranous or nervous. So they are called membranous, which being broad and
thin do compass the Joints, also which are wrapped about Tendons and Muscles.

Its Substance is solid, white, bloodless, softer than a Gristle, harder than
Nerves and Membranes: for it is as it were of a middle Nature betwixt a Gristle
and a Nerve.

It is without Cavity, Sense or Motion. It was to be without Sense, least it
should be always pained in Motions; when as the Ligaments are made sometimes
longer and shorter, that is to say, are contracted and extended. Some
nevertheless will have membranous Ligaments to feel, but they must grant it to
be so, by means of membranes and not of their own proper substance.

For this substance of theirs is as Galen tells us divisible into fibers visible
to the sight, which experience also confirms.

Now this Substance is in some places softer and more membranous than in
others, as in all Ligaments wel-neer, which go round about the Joints; and
among these, it is softer about the Joint of the Shoulder, than about that of
the Hip; and yet softer where it goes about the interjoyntings of the fingers.
But in other places the substance is harder* and as it were in part gristly,
and therefore they are in such places termed gristly Ligaments; and they are
such as lie concealed among the Bones, as that which goes from the Head of the
Thigh, into the Hip-joynt.

Chap. IV. Of the Skull in General.
WE divide all the Bones of the Skeleton The division of the Skeleton.
into the HEAD, TRUNK, and LIMBS; and them into the Arms and Legs.

The whole structure of the Bones of the Head is termed CRANIUM the Skul,
because it is as it were Cranos an Helmet; some term it Calva and Calvaria.

Its Situation and Magnitude follow the Brain and correspond thereunto.

Its Figure is natural or non-natural and depraved.

Its natural figure is round, that it may hold the more, yet a little longish
toward the fore and hindparts, where it branches forth, that it may contain
the Brain and Brainlet; on the sides it is flatted, but more toward the
foreparts; and therefore the hind-part of the Head is of greater capacity than
the forepart: of which Albovinus King of the Longbeards or Lombards made a
Drinking Cup for Festival days, as Diaconus relates in his History.

The depraved and non-natural Figure thereof is manifold. Depraved shapes of
the Head eleven in number.


1. When the foremore protuberancie of the Head is wanting; and such persons
are counted foolish and mad, for want of Brain, which ought to be most
plentiful in the forepart of the Head. 2. When the Hinder Protuberancy or
bunching forth is wanting. 3. When both are wantings so that the Head is round
as a Ball, such as the Heads of the Turks and Greenlanders are thought to be.
And these three depraved figures Hippocrates does acknowledge. 4. The fourth
Figure Galen adds, which he conceives may be imagined but not really found,
when the length is changed into breadth. But Vesalius says he saw such an one
at Venice, and at Bononia. 5. The fifth way may be added also out of
Hippocrates, an acuminated or oval Figure, when the Head rises up like a
Sugar Loaf: which shape in some Nations Hippocrates tells us had a great
reputation of Gentility, and may be formed by Midwives, when they swathe the
Child's Head into such a shape and so preserve it; and at last Nature transfers
such kind of Heads from Parents to Children. The same Hippocrates in his
Epidemicks, brings in two kinds of thus shaped Heads, one with the strength of
the parts, the other with weakness of the said parts. And such a figure of
Heads, is at this day more frequent in some Countries than in others.

But now I will add other figures which I have observed in many Skuls,
especially in Italy.

6. When the right side branches out. Other shapes of the Head observed by the
Author.
7. When the left side sticks out. 8. When the right part of that bunchiness
which naturally should be before is wanting, and the left sticks out very much,
in some more. others less. 9. When the left side of the said Protuberancy is
wanting, and the right sticks out more than ordinary. 10. When the right part
of the Hinder Prominency is away. 11. When the left part of the said hinder
Protuberancy is away.
And thus I make twelve shapes of the Head in all, one natural and eleven
depraved,

The Substance of the Skul is boney, to secure the soft Brain. But in Children
new born it is softer then ordinary, and in some places cartilaginous and
membranous, especially about the Sutures, and most of all in the middle and
upper region of the Head: and all these for the making the Birth more easy,
that it might give a little way when it is pressed. But the Substance of the
Skul is.

1. Thick, not thin, that it may more strongly resist external injuries. 2.
Rare not compact. 1. Least it should weigh too much. 2. That it might contain
Juice for nourishment, 3. That vapors may exhale.
Now this Substance of the Skul does consist as it were of a double board or
plate. It is seldom simple and single without a Meditullium or middle matter,
as I found it in the Dissection of a certain person, and seldomer has it three
boords, But for the most part two as has been said. some call them Diploas,
the outer whereof being unhurt, the inner may be hurt. And each of these plates
is commonly polished within and without, smooth and thick. Hence it appears how
thick the Skul is, seeing it is every where in a manner double.

I say in a manner or wel-neer, which others do not observe: for in some places
the Skul is single, thin and transparent. without any distance of plates. And
therefore some Surgeons The Error of Surgeons
are deceived, who in taking away the first Plate do think they must so long
cut and prick, til blood comes out. The external Plate is sometimes eaten off by
the Venereal Disease, and sometimes it sprouts forth Gums by force of the said
Disease.

But the rarity or light composure of the Skul appears from that middle
substance between each Plate, which they call meditullium. This Substance, I
say, is rare or light, lax, and receives little Veins: which also Hippocrates
knew, who therefore warns us that the Skul is very easily inflamed, and
therefore when the Trepan is used, the Iron must diverse times be dipped in Milk
and Water.

The Surface of the Skul, is external or internal.

The upper External is smooth and even; the lower or Basis, is rough and
uneven, by reason of sundry Appendices and Processes.

The upper Internal is hollow, smooth; save that it has the Marks of Veins,
and certain Cavities, wherein the dura matter grows: the lower is very uneven by
reason of diverse protuberancies.

And every where there are frequent holes in the Skull, very small and placed
without order, through which small Veins and Arteries pass, to the inner Cavity
of the Bones, and the dura Menynx. But sometimes they are not to be found.

At length, that we may come to the parts of the Skull, we must know that the
Skul does not consist of one only Bone, least by one wound the whole Skul
should be broken in pieces; but of diverse: which are fastened together by the
Sutures, of which in the following Chapter.

And some are Bones of the Skull, others of the Jaw.

The Bones of the Skull in persons grown to ripe years are eight. whereof two
are common to the Skul, with the upper Jaw Bone, viz. the cundiforme and the
spongiosum. But there are six proper bones, which make up the Skul it self: One
of the Forehead (in new born Children two) two of the Forepart of the Head, one
of the Hind-part (in an Infant four) two of the Temples. And there lie hid in
the Auditory passages, other six bones, on each side three little ones: the
Hammer, the Anvil, and the Stirrup, to which a fourth is added called
Orbiculare.

And thus there are perpetually in the Skull fourteen or sixteen Bones.

The Use of the Skul:

1. To be the Mansion and Bulwork of the Brain, which of it self is soft. 2.
That through it Vapors may pass.
To the former use, its thickness and hardness is subservient; to the latter
its rarity and Sutures.

On the Skul of a Man sometimes Horns grow, one whiles soft, another while hard
like Rams Horns; sometimes fixed to the Skul, otherwhiles to the Skin, and they
proceed from a thick, clammy and melancholic humor. There are examples hereof
in Paraeus, Thuanus, Hildanus, Renodaeus, Zacutus, Severinus, and others; I
also saw two horns, one at Padua in a Nunn, another at Purmeraem in Holland in
an old Woman, which was sufficiently long and hard: I have discoursed of these
Horns in my new Observations de Unicornu, of the Unicorn.

Chap. V. Of the Sutures of the Skull.
A Suture is a sort of connection resembling the putting together of two Saws,
tooth within tooth, or the making up of a Garment of many torn patches.

Such Sutures there are many in a man's Head: for an Head is seldom found
without any Suture, such as Aristotle saw, and at Helmstadt and the An Head
without Sutures.
Monastery of Heilbrun in France such an one is showed (as a Rarity) and is
every where to be met with.

And such persons have not their Heads so liable to external injuries, but very
much to inward Infirmities, because transpiration is thereby made more
difficult. By which distinction, Falopius and Columbus do reconcile Celsus and
Robertus Constantinus, the former of whom wrote, that the Head which had no
Sutures was most liable to sickness, the latter that the Head without Sutures
was more subject.

Sometimes through Age and Dryness, the Sutures do so grow together in aged
persons, that they are scarce to be seen; whereas they are in the mean season,
more visible in young persons. Sometimes the coronal suture is only seen
obliterated; but the temporal do hardly vanish, except all the other be first
defaced.

The Number and Situation of the Sutures, is the same in a Woman and in a Man,
contrary to what Aristotle thought; nor does it vary in respect The Error of
Aristotle.
of figures, as Hippocrates and Galen would have it, unless very rarely. For M.
A. Severinus observed between the saggiteal and Lambdafashion'd suture, another
over and above of a triangular shape, and near the end of the said Sutures in
another Skul, a new oval Suture.

Moreover, the Sutures of the Head of a certain Fool, did vary in figure, which
all stuck up with one Hillock as it were. which I saw in three Epileptick
Children at Naples, especially in the coronal Suture, which did suggest a new
Cause and Cure of the Epilepsie or Falling Sickness.

The Sutures which knit the Bones of the Skul, are some of them called true and
proper, others false and Bastard Sutures.

They are termed true, which meet together like the teeth of Combs, or like
Saws, put together, which I have sometimes seen after Contusion movable, which
also in most Skuls that are over dried in the Earth is common. They are also
loose in Children, and therefore they open in Hydrocephalic or Water-headed
Children, as I saw in a Boy at Hafnia, like to that which Severinus pictures
out in his Treatise of Imposthumes, and Donatus describes.

The bastard Sutures are joined like Scales and Tiles on an housetop, and
therefore they are termed Squamosae conglu^inationes, Scaley-conjunctions, and
may rather be termed joynings, seeing they are more like to an Harmonia then a
Suture.

There are three true ones.

1. Is the foremore, and is called Coronalis. 1. Because the Ancients wore The
coronal Suture why so called.
Crowns on that part of their Heads. 2. Because it has some resemblance to a
Crown or Circle:
For from the Temples it ascends on both sides, athwart, to the top of the
Head. The Arabians call this suture Arcualis and Puppis.

Its Use is to join the Forehead bone with the bones of the Hinder-head, and
to distinguish them therefrom. The place of the coronal Suture is sound out in
a living person, either by carrying the hand upwards from the Wrist along the
Nose, or by drawing a Thread out from Ear to Ear, and another cross the same
from the end of the Nose.

2. That which is opposite to this, is behind and in the Occiput or
Hinder-head. It Is called Lamdoeides the Lamda-shap'd, from the Greek letter A.
some call it hupsiloides from the letter upsilon, also prorae sutura.

This ascends obliquely, from the Base of the Hinderhead, to each Ear, grows
into an Angle. Sometimes when the Hinder-head is large or otherwise, it is
divided by a transverse suture, simple, or double: sometimes there is a double
triple Suture as if a greater triangle did contain one or two lesser Triangles
within the same: where the Bones so comprehended, The triangular Bones of the
Skul.
are termed ossicula triangularia, the little three-cornerd bones, commended,
in the Falling Sickness.

Besides these triangular bones, Olaus Worm a rare man, found others in the
Lambda-like Suture, which perforated both the Boards of the Skull, observed as
yet by very sew. Three for the most part on the right, as many on the left
side, differing in magnitude, figure and situation, which also are accurately
discerned and distinguished in Infants. The lowest is seen at the Processus
mammillares, the middlemost a little higher, scarce half a Fingers breadth, the
third a little further distinct from the second. Pavius found only two like to
these, circumscribed with their little Sutures or seams, which he doubts
whether he should refer them to the Bones of the Occiput or the Bregma.

In Shape they are Various, Triangular, Oblong, Oval. sometimes in living
persons I have observed them to grow so high, that I could Feel them with my
Fingers, as if they had been Epiphysis or somewhat growing upon the Bone.

All are larger on the left side. but the greatest exceeds not the Nail of a
Man's thumb.

They appear more distinct on the inner and Concave side of the Skul, than in
the outward and unequal, and therefore they are all more clearly discerned when
the Skul is taken away,

We are nevertheless to observe that these bones of Worm do in diverse Skuls
vary, both in Number, Magnitude, Figure, Situation; so that sometimes there are
four, sometimes two, and in a Right line only, sometimes in the very Juncture of
the Sagittal with the Lambda-shap'd; sometimes also in the Scaley temporal
Sutures.

Their Use, I believe, is 1. That the Sutures being enlarged thereabouts, might
afford a more free passage for Excrements.

2. That the Skul being made up of more bones, might be more safe in Blows and
Contusions.

The Use of this Lambda-like Suture, is to distinguish the bone of the Occiput
or Hinder-head, from the bones of the Temples, and the forepart of the Head.

3. In the middle betwixt these two is the Suture ter^red Sagittalis or
Arrow-shap'd, because it runs in a straight line all along the Head, like an
Arrow, betwixt the Coronal and Lambda-shap'd Sutures.

Sometimes it proceeds through the middle of the Coronal Suture and the midst
of the Forehead, as far as to the Nose, especially in Infants: in some also it
cuts part of the Bone of the Occiput or Hinder-head. I remember it has been
sometimes wanting.

This Suture is termed Virgata and Recta.

Its Use is to distinguish and join together the two bones of the Sinciput or
Forepart of the Head.

Those two Suture are commonly called Why some Sutures are like Scales.
Nendosae or Bastard sutures, which are wont to be called Squamosae Scaly,
Corticales and Temporales, because they circumscribe the Bones of the Temples.
Now this Connection like Scales was necessary, because the Temple-bones, being
in the lower part very thick would have been to heavy, if they had not been
made by little and little thinner in their upper part, and joined to the bones
of the Sinciput atenuated by little and little like Scales.

Now there are many spurious Sutures A great number of Sutures.
every where in the Skul, also many harmonies, where the bones are joined
together: in the Palate bone a peculiar Suture is seen.

The Use of the Sutures.

1. They serve for the free transpiration of fuliginous vapors. And therefore
Hippocrates pronounces, that they have soundest Heads, who have most Sutures:
and those that have their Heads without Sutures, are troubled with TABLE I.
The FIGURE Explained.
A. A Portion of the Sagittal Suture. B. The Lambda-like Suture. C. The Skull
cut with a Saw. D. The first Bone of Worm, on the left quarter. E. The second.
F. The third. G. The first of the right Quarter. H. The second. I. The third.
K. The great hole of the Skull. LL. The mammillary productions.


page 341

an inveterate Headache. And Galen saw so great an Inflammation caused by over
strait binding of the Head, whereby the Sutures were shut up, and the
Excrements kept in, that the Patients Eyes came out of their holes.

II. That by them the Dura matter may be tied and held up, least it should
squeez the inner parts of the Brain. III. That the said dura matter might by
them send out fibers to constitute the Pericraneum and the Periosteum. IV. That
Vessels may go in and out, to nourish and in^iven the parts; which Vessels are
by Fallopius called Venae puppis. V. That one Bone being broken the others might
remain whole. And therefore Galen, Paulus, Guido and Fallopius, deny that there
can be any contra^issure or Countercleft, save in a solid Head without Sutures:
Hippocrates writes the Contrary, and calls it a Misfortune, as also Celsus and
others, and Fallopius himself, Paraeus and Pavius relate examples, and before
them Soranus, taking a similitude from a Glass Bottle, which oftentimes, being
struck on the one side, is crakt on the opposite part. VI. That Topical
Medicines being outwardly applied, may more easily penetrate.
Chap. 6. Of the proper Bones of the Skull in particular.
THe first Bone is the OS FRONTIS, the Forehead bone, which some call Coronale,
Inverecundum, Os puppis: which has

A Figure imperfectly circular; more perfect where it is circumscribed with the
Coronal Suture, more imperfect near the Eyes.

Its Substance is thinner than that of the Os occipitis or Hinder-head bone,
and thicker than the Ossa sincipitis, or bones of the foremore part of the Head.

It is twofold in Children newborn, distinguished by the sagittal Suture: also
framed of a twofold Plate, an external and internal.

At the top of the Nose above the Eyebrows, there are large Cavities commonly
See Tab. 4. Fig. 1.
two in number, between the two plates, sometimes clothed with a green Membrane
and separated, containing a certain soft and marrowish body. But these Cavities
are not 1. In Children til they are a year old. 2. In such as have a flat and
Saddle-face. 3. In such whose Forehead is divided.

The said Cavities have holes which end into the wide spaces of the Nostrils:
and another which ends into the Skul, above the Septum of the Os spongiosum to
distinguish the Organs of Smelling.

The Use of these Cavities.

1. To make the Voice Melod^^^^ and Sounding; because they are not in such who
have a bad Speech. 2. Some conceive they serve for the Air to be elaborated in,
to generate animal spirits. 3. That they may contain the Air which is drawn
into the Nostrils and brings the smells of things along with it, from whence it
passes leisurely to the Organs of Smelling, and to the Brain to alter the ^ame,
and reduce it to its natural State, when it is disordered. And therefore it is
that many times an whole day together a smell is perceived in the top of the
Nostrils. 4. Others suppose, they serve to collect Excrements, not only thick
but watery, which being carried to the Glandula lachrymalis, do make Tears. 5.
some conceive that the marrowy matter therein contained, does pass through the
hole of the greater Corner of the Eye, and moisten the Eye make it glib and
slippery, that it may move the Easier.
This Bone has Processes: one at the greater Corner of the Eye, another at the
lesser, to constitute the upper pare of the Eye-hole or Socket. There are also
two cornerd Eminencies or risings on each side o^e, toward the Temples, which
are termed Horns; by Albucasis, Dionysisci the Author of the Definitions and
Heliodorus the Physician; and if that boney Tumor be only on one side
Ingrassias calls it Dionysiscus.

It has three holes; one more inward of which before, which ends into the
Skul: two outward, at the middle of the Eyebrows, for the thorough-fare, of
the Nerves of the third Conjugation to the Forehead.

The Second and Third are the two Bones of the Sincipu^ or Vertex, which some
call Parietalia, others Arcualia, Nervalia, Rationis or Cogitationis, of reason
or thought: the Greeks Breg^a^os o^^a, because the most moist and sofe Brain,
is placed under them.

In Shape they are four square and unequal.

Their Substance is more rare and infirm Why the wounds of the Sinciput are
deadly.
then of other Bones, because the Head in this part, wants very much
evaporation: and therefore the Wounds of the Sinciput are deadly.

TABLE. II.
The FIGURES Explained.
In this TABLE are presented the Bones and Sutures of the Skul, as also the
parts of both the Jawbones.
FIG. I. AA. The Coronal Suture. B. A part of the sagittal Suture. CC. The
scaly Suture of the Bones of the Temples. D. The Os frontis, or Bone of the
Forehead. EE. Processes of the said Bone, to the grater corner of the Eye. F.
Another process to the lesser corner. G. An hole for the passage of Nerves
expressed on one side. H. Os Bregmatis. I. The Bone of the Temples. K. Its
Appendix called Styloides. L. Its mamillary process. M. Another process thereof,
which makes the Os jugale. N. The first bone of the lower Jaw according to our
Author. O. The second Bone. P. The hole of this Bone, near which is the
Caruncula Lachrymalis. QQ. The third Bone of the upper Jaw. RR. The fourth Bone
thereof. S. The Partition of the Nostrils. T. The lower Jaw Bone. u. Its outer
and lesser hole, the greater is to be seen within. X. The process of that
Jaw Bone, termed Corone. Z. The other blunted Process called Condilodes. (...).
The Dent^s Incisores or Cutting Teeth. (...). The Dog-teeth. (...) The Grinders
or Grinding-teeth, Molares.


FIG. II. AAA. The Coronal Suture. BB. The Sagittal Suture. CC. The Lambdoidea.
D. The Os frontis. EE. The Bone, of the Sinciput, Bregma, or ^or^ of ^^^ Head.
FF. A portion of Os Occipitis or Hinder-head (...)


page 342



In Infants, that part which is at the Conjunction of the coronal and Sagittal
Sutures is found Membranous, and soft, and among all the Bones of the Head, it
last receives a boney hardness, then when the Child begins to speak distinctly
and intelligibly* while it remains Membranous and soft, it is not so thick as
afterward, but transparent. Hence in Children there is observed in that place
a Gap or Chink, which some term Fontanella and ^ons pulsatilis; where also they
are wont to make Issues in desparate Catarrhs. I have once observed this part
in a person grown up, to have been not yet boney, but membranous as in
Children, viz. in a man of years of Age. (...) Woman of twenty six years old,
found it re^ open.

There are within superficial Cavities, being the in ^sions of Veins, and
without certain small holes.

The fourth Bone of the Occiput which some call (...) Os prorae, Os memorioe,
Os pixidis, the G^ does constitute almost the whole hinde^ part of the Skul.

Which in grown persons is commonly b^ double or treble; in Children it con^
part of four seldom of five bones*

Its Figure is of a Sphaetical triangle*

Its Substance is the thickest and most compact of all the rest (because there
the noble Ventricle is seated, and there the Nerves arise as from a Fountain)
especially at the Basis of the Skul, save at the sides of the great hole, where
it is most thin (and therefore in this respect Aristotle did well say, that
this was the thinnest Bone of all, which Columbus taxes) and therefore for
safeties sake, there is in the middle thereof a long Prominency.

It has five holes, one which is the greatest near the first Vertebra, through
which the Medulla oblongata passes forth; the rest are lesser serving for the
going out of Nerves and the entrance of Veins and Arteries.

It has nine Cavities, seven within and two without.

It has before two broad Processes at the Basis (in Children they are
Epiphyses) covered with a Gristle, within more eminent, inserted into the
Cavities of the first Vertebra, for the motion of the Head. There is another
small Process behind, joined to the first Vertebra.

In the Hinder-head of Dogs, there is another small bone between the Brain The
triangular bone in Dogs.
and the Brainlet, which is triangular: that it may as a Prop sustain their
going with their heads downwards.

The fifth and sixth, are the Temple Bones, by the Ears; some call them Lapidos^,
Petrosa, Sa^ea, Squamiformia Mendofa, and others Parietalia and Aercualia.

Their Shape is uneven (but rather circular than three square) because of their
manifold Substance, which is like Rocks and craggy Clifts; for which cause they
are also called Ossa petrosa the rocky bones. But in their upper part they are
attenuated, so as to be transparent, where they lie under the temporal Muscles,
and are joined to the bones of the Sinciput, like Scales.

They have six holes without, two within* the first external hole is large,
viz. The Auditory passage; the rest are small, for Vessels to pass thorough.

They have two Cavities. The outer is covered with a Gristle*, and receives the
lower Jaw Bone. The inner is longish, common to the Os occipitis.

TABLE III.
The FIGURES Explained.
This TABLE demonstrates the inner structure of the Organ of Hearing, with the
little Auditory Bones.
FIG. I. AA. Os temporis, the Temple Bone. bbb. The scaly Suture of the said
Bone. cc. The Os spongiosum, or Spungy-bone. D. The Cavity into which the
Auditory Nerve is inserted. e. The boney Circle. ff. The greater winding of the
Cochlea. ggg. Three boney half-circles, which form the Labyrinth. h. The
Malleus or Hammer in its situation. i. The Anvil or Incus. k. The Stapes or
Stirrup. l. The external Muscle of the Ear. m. The internal Muscle of the Ear,
of which see B. 3. chap. 9.


FIG. II. aaa. The Labyrinth. b. The Cochlea. c. The oval hole where the Stapes
is seated. d. Fallopius his Aquae-ductus. e. The Fenestra Rotunda, round
window. ff. Little holes to let out Veins and Arteries.


FIG. III. aa. The Cochlea dissected. bb. An intermediate space or thing
dividing the Cochlea into two wreaths. c. A round hole, ending into the Cavity
of Hearing, and the lower wreath of Cochlea. ddd. The wreathings or
Circumvolutions of the Labyrinth opened. e. The Fenestra ovalis, or oval window.


FIG. IV. a. The round Head of the Malleus or Hammer. b. Its end whereby it is
fastened to the Drum. c. The smaller process of the Malleus, Mallet or Hammer.
d. The larger and more fine process thereof, first observed by Folius. e. The
Incus or Anvil, whose upper part has a Cavity to receive the Head of the
Hammer. f. The longer process of the Anvil, to which the Stirrup is fastened. h.
The Stapes or Stirrup. i. A fourth little bone fastened to the Stapes or Stirrup
by a Ligament, first observed by Fr. Sylvius.


FIG. V. Shows the boney Circle in Infants, to which the Membrane of the Drum
is fastened.


page 343



It has a certain Appendix, sharp, long and small, and therefore called
Styloi^des, Belenoines, Graphioides, Plectrum, etc. It is soon broke off, and
therefore it is not in all Skuls, especially such as are dug out of the ground.
In grown persons it is honey, in Infants Gristly. It is a little crooked, like a
Cocks Spur.

It has three Processes.

1. Is external and obtuse, thick, short and cavernous, id est, having holes
like a Sponge in it; its called from its shape, Mammillaris, Dug like. 2. Is
External also, and a portion of Os jugale. For the Os jugale or Lygomatis,
seated under the Eye, is not a peculiar bone, but is made up of the Processes
of two bones; the one is that newly mentioned, the other is that of the Jaw,
joined by an oblique Suture, making as it were a Bridge: whose use is to defend
the Tendon of the temporal Muscle, the Skul being otherwise but thin in that
place. 3. Is Internal with a long protuberancy, wherein there is a threefold
Cavity: the Drum, the Labyrinth, the Cochlea, also the bones which serve the
Hearing. But if the outer passage before the Membrane of the Tympanum be
reckoned, there will be four Cavities of the Auditory passage. The Ancients
makes mention but of one Cavern.
I. The first Cavity, which is the Tympanum or Concha, or as some call it
Pelvis, The Cavities in the Ossa petrosa.
and by Aristotle termed Cochlea, is situate presently after the little
Membrane of the Tympanum (about which goes a boney circle, easily separable in
Infants, in elderly persons hardly) wherein is the Congenit or inbred Air, also
four little bones, a Ligament and Muscles, little Windows and a water-passage;
and from this Cavity a Channel goes into the palate of the Mouth. It does not
transmit the Congenit Air, which Nature studies to retain.

The Fenestrae or Windows, are two little holes in this Cavity: the one oval,
is in the middle of the Cavity, more toward the forepart, and higher, upon
which the Basis of the Stapes or Sti^rups rests, and in a great measure shuts
the same: in the hinder part, it opens it self into the Cochlea with a large
overture, and joins it self also to the hinder hole which is lower in mankind,
lesser and narrower? and this is divided into two channels, divided by a very
thin bony Scale: with the one it goes, together with the oval window unto the
Cochlea, with the other to the Labyrinth; and the hindermore channel is called
Aquae-ductus, also Meatus cochlearis, Tortuosus, Caecus, Capreolaris, by reason
of the crooked winding passage, through which the greater part of the Auditory
Nerve is carried with the Artery.

II. The second being round and less than the former, is called Cabyrinthus and
fodina the Maze and Mettal-mine or Cole-mine, because of its crooked manyfold
turnings: behind the Fenestra ovals, it joins it self to the following Cavity.
From this, many ways run out* which they call Semicirculos osse^s excavatos,
hollowed boney Half-circles, or funiculos little Ropes, three for the most
part, large at the beginning, and then by little and little growing narrower,
clothed with a little thin Membrane, that the sounds may become more acute,
and being by little and little broken may so ascend unto the Brain. It has
four holes besides the oval, and a fifth which is terminated into the Cochlea.

III. The third is termed Cochlea because of its wreathed turning, others call
it Cavitas cochleata, Buccinata, An^rum buccinosum, etc. for it has three or
four windings (those who are thick of Hearing have only one or two) mutually
receiving one another, and is clothed with a very exceeding thin and most soft
Membrane, and is adorned with infinite little Veins, which being twined about
the wreathings of the Cochlea, does by many branches creep into the secret
turnings of the Labyrinth.

Chap. 7. Of the Bones which serve the Sense of Hearing.
THere follow eight other Bones of the Head, which are least of all, on each
side four, being the Bones subservient to the sense of Hearing, called from
their shapes, Malleus the Mallet or Hammer, Incus the Anvil, Stapes the
Stirrup, and the Orbicular bone: all which were unknown to the Ancients. The
two first were found out by Jacobus Carpus, who was afterward followed by
Massa, Jacobus Sylvius, and Vesalius: and he being admonished by Fallopius, at
last made mention of the third, whose first finder out was Ingrassias; although
Eustachius and Columbus do arrogate the Invention hereof unto themselves.

The fourth Auditory Bone, was found out and showed to me by Franciscus
Sylvius, being round and small, and by N. Fontanus likened to the Scale of a
Pike: annexed by a small Ligament to the Stirrup side, where it is joined to
the Anvil; which you shall more easily find in the boiled Calves Heads, in
which they are bigger than in the Heads of Men: howbeit in a Man it is visible
enough. Pavius found in the Head of an Ox a year old, one like this, of a
sesamoidean shape.

They are situate in the first Cavity or Concha.

They have a Substance hard and dense, hollow within, that they might be
lighter, and might contain in them, Marrow for their nourishment, without any
Periosteum about them: also that they might make the Ai^ drie^, and carry it
along, like those Ropes which are fastened to doors to make them open and shut
again of themselves. They are as perfect in newborn Children as in those that
are grown up; though not so hard, but more moist, for which cause Infants are
dull of Hearing.

The Connection. The Hammer by its process sticks fast to the Membrane of the
Drum, beyond the middle, like a tail turned back; the head whereof is
articulated into the Cavity of of the Anvil, having a small Process, that the
Tendon of the Musculus rotundus may be applied thereto; it has also a longer
Process, but smaller, first observed by Caecilius Folius, to which another
Muscle is fastened, which belongs to the external Ear. It rests athwart upon
the bony circle, with which perhaps it grows together in persons that are of
years, for commonly in Children it is only visible, in others it is easily
broken because of its fineness, when the bones are taken out.

The Anvil resembling a grinding Tooth, lies under the Hammer, having beneath
two processes; the one shorter resting upon the Os squamosum, the other longer,
sustaining the top of the Stirup or triangular bone, which rests upon the
Cochlea, till it is sunk into the broad Basis of the Fenestra ovalis, or oval
window, to which it is fastened by a loose Ligament, so that it may be lightly
raised, but not moved upwards and downwards.

These three little bones, are joined with a very fine Ligament, which is
stretched over the whole Membrane, as the strings over the bottom of a Drum.

The Use of these little bones is not to make a sound, but that the species of
sound being received, may pass to the lower parts, and that there may be a
passage for the excrements of the Ears. For the Stirrup shutting the oval or
upper window, is moved by the Anvil (whereupon the window is opened, that the
species or representation of Sounds may pass into the Nerve, and the Anvil
being smitten by the Hammer, and the Hammer by the Membrane of the Drum,
through the impulse of the external Air (which the Hammer hinders from being
driven too far forwards) which while it is in doing, the membrane of the Drum
is droven inwards* and becomes bunching out, whereby the inbred Air is
affected, which wandering through the Cochlea causes, that the branches of the
Auditory Nerve, do receive the species of sounds, brought in by the windows,
and communicate the same to the Brain. And thus the Hammer is moved only
inwards. But in the recourse, it is moved outward, with the Membrane of the
Drum, by that very little Muscle found out by Casserius.

Chap. VIII. Of the Bones common to the Head and upper Jaw, viz. Os cuneiforme
and Os spongiosum.
THe Os Sphaenoides or Cuneiforme, or Wedg-fashion'd Bone, so called because as
they say, it has the shape of a Wedg; was by the Ancients called Polumorphos
or many-form'd, by reason of sundry processes within and without whereby it is
made rugged and uneven: others call it Os Paxillare, Os Colatorij, Os Palati,
etc.

It Is seated in the middle of the Basis of the Head, and is placed under the
Brain as a foundation, so that it touches well-neer all the Bones of the Head
and upper Jaw.

It is one Bone in grown persons: but it is at first made of four which are
afterward united.

The Processes are sundry.

Outwardly there are two remarkable ones, at the sides of the palate, called
Pterigoeides, aliformes, Wing-fashion'd, because they resemble the wings of
Batts or Flittermice, and are furnished with a longish Cavity.

Inwardly there are four little ones, on each side two, having the shape of a
Turkish Saddle. and therefore this process is termed Sella Sphaenoidis, the
saddle of Os Sphaenoides; in which process being square and broad, there is a
Cavity to hold the Glandula pituitaria.

At the Saddle, there is a Cave full of little holes, that the inbreathed Air,
may be elaborated to make Spirits, and that phlegmatic excrements, may distill
through the funnel, out of the Ventricles of the Brain.

It has sundry holes for the passage of the Vessels this way and that.

OS SPONGOIDES, spongiosum or Spongiforme, the spungelike bone, being seated in
the middle basis of the Forehead, and filling the Cavity of the Nostrils, is
also called ethmoeides, Cribriforme or Cribrosum, the Seive-fashion'd bone:
because

Its inner side, where it joins to the Head, is pierced through with many holes
like a Sieve, winding and turning, but not straight; and this part properly is,
and ought to be called Cribros^, Sieve-fashion'd.

It has in its middle a sharp Process, resembling a Cocks comb, by which as a
Partition this bone is divided into two parts: And to this upper process
another is opposed below, distinguishing the Nostrils, where the outer part of
this bone is, which is contained in the Cavity of the Nostrils without the
Skul, being light and spungie, and therefore there properly so called.

It has also another part thin, solid and smooth, where it is joined to the
socket of the Eye, a small portion whereof it constitutes, but it is not a part
of the upper Jaw Bone, as Vesalius would have it.

The Use of the spongie part is, to alter the Air drawn in with Smells.

The chief Use of the Sieve-fashion'd part is,

1. To admit the Air for Animal spirits. 2. That the Species of odours may with
the Air be carried to the mammillary processes, the Organs of smelling, which
end into these holes. And therefore in the Disease Co^yza, this bone being
obstructed, the smelling is lost.
A secondary use, is the purging of the Brain* for phlegm is not only voided by
the Glandul^ pituitaria into the Palate, but it drops down also into the Os
cribrosum and the Nostrils, if the upper Ventricles of the Brain so called, do
abound with too much Phlegm. Howbeit, this Flux is preternatural.

Chap. IX. Of the Bones of the Jaw in General.
THe Jaw-Bones are the foundations of the whole Face, the upper above the mouth
the lower beneath.

For the upper, which Celsus calls Mala, is the boney part of the Face,
comprehending the lower and lateral parts of the Eye-socket, the Nostrils, the
Cheeks, the Palate, and the whole row of the upper Teeth.

And this Jaw Bone in Mankind, is shorter and rounder than in Brutes, for
Beauties sake, also it is immovable as it is in Beasts, saving the Parrot, the
Phaenicopterus, and the Crocodile as well that which lives in the water, as the
Land-Crocodile; yet do they not move the upper Jaw only, but their whole Head
withal being straightly fastened thereto, as Vipers do, and the like is to be
said of the Parrot.

But the lower Jaw Bone in Mankind and other Creatures, is only movable, save
in the Crocodile, which has it so united to the Bones of the Temples, that it
can no ways be stirred; but the Parrot moves both.

The Connection is without motion in the upper Jaw, by a Suture or Harmony
whereby it is joined with many bones of its own, of which it is composed, and
other bones placed round about; in the lower by way of Sunchondrosis, which is
in the middle of the Chin. But in grown persons, the Gristle is so turned into
a Bone, that the lower Jaw seems to be one only bone, whereas before it
consisted of two.

In the Brim or Circuit of each Jaw Bone, which place Galen calls Ph^^^^an, we
meet with Cavities, wherein the Teeth are fastened, which Galen terms Bothria,
the Latins Alveolos, Loculos, Fossulas, Praesepiola, Mortariola.

These holes according to the nature of the teeth in them, are sometimes single,
otherwhiles threfold: sometimes they are obliterated and shut up, the Teeth
being fallen or plucked out. Sometimes they breed anew, by fresh Teeth breaking
out. In old Age, frequently these holes are obliterated, the Teeth being lost,
and the Gums become sharper and harder, so that old folks chew their meat with
them instead of Teeth.

Chap. X. Of the Bones proper to the upper Jaw.
THe Bones proper to the upper Jaw, are eleven on each side five, and one
without a fellow.

The first being in a manner triangular, does make up the lower part of the
socket of the Eye, the lesser Eye-corner* and part of the Os jugale and of the
Cheek-bone.

The second makes the greater Eye-corner where there is an hole which passes
into the Nostrils, by which a Caruncle is placed.

Here those Imposthumes are made which they call aegilopas, which if they be
unskilfully or negligently handled, they pierce to the Bone, and cause the
Fistula Lachrymalis.

This is a little Bone, and the least among the upper Jaw-bones, Thin,
Transparent, Loosly, Adhereing, so that it is easily broken and lost: and
therefore it is seldom found in Skuls dug out of the Earth.

The third is a very great one, by which are constituted the large region of
the Palate, and the great lower socket containing the Teeth. It has large
Cavities (and holes through which vessels pass) on both sides remarkable, both
for to make it lighter, and that it might contain Marrow to nourish the Bones
and the upper Teeth. Others say to help to frame the Voice. In Children they
are not hollowed til after some years, and they are then covered with a very
thin Membrane.

The fourth with its companion, does constitute the upper and more eminent
boney part of the Nose.

It is thin, hard, solid and quadrangular.

And these two external bones of the Nose are divided with a Suture. Within
they are rough, that the Gristles of the Nose, may be the better fastened.

There is another inner bone (which is the third of the Nose) cleaving to the
process of the Os spongiosum, which is called Septum narium because it
distinguishes the Nostrils.

The fifth is seated at the end of the Palate, where the holes of the Nostrils
go into the Throat or Fauces. They TABLE IV.
The FIGURES Explained.
This TABLE presents the lower part of the Skul, to be seen within and without.
FIG. I. AAAA. The two Boards of the Skull with the marrowy substance between
them. B. The Cavity in the Forehead bone, ending into the wideness of the
Nostrils. cc. The Os Cribrosum or Sieve-like bone full of little holes. D. Its
acute process resembling a Cocks comb. EE. The two inmore and foremore
processes of the Os Sphaenoides or Cuneiforme. FF. The two inner and hindermore
processes of the said Bone. GG. The holes of the said bone for the optic
Nerves to pass out. H. The Cavity cut in the middle of the Saddle, wherein the
Glandula pituitaria is contained. I. Another cavity where^^^^ the conjunction
of the optic Nerves does rest. KK. Show the holes of the Os cuneiforme, for
the passage of the vessels, LL. Show the holes of the Os cuneiforme, for the
passage of the vessels, MM. Show the holes of the Os cuneiforme, for the
passage of the vessels, NN. The Processus petrosus of the Temples-bone. oo. An
hole in the said process, for the Auditory Nerve to pass through. pp. An
Additament or Appendix of the Os Occipitis. Q. The greatest hole of the Os
occipitis through which the spinal marrow passes. RR. The Cavities of the Os
occipitis within the Skull, in which the Cerebellum or Brainlet rests.


FIG. II. AA. The fifth bone of the upper Jaw, distinguished by a Suture. BB.
The Os jugale. CC. Holes opening into the wideness of the Nostrils. D. The
partition of the Nostril. E. The eleventh bone of the upper Jaw, which Columbus
calls Aratrum. FF. The external processes of Os cuneiforme, like Bats wings. gg.
The Cavity of these Processes. HH. The Cavity of the Temple-bone, receiving the
Head of the bower Jawbone. I. An Additament or Appendix to the Os occipitis.
KK. The processes of the Temple-bones, called Styloides processus. LL. The
mammillary processes. MM. Two Heads or processes at the Basis of Os Occipitis,
whereby it is articulated into the first Vertebra. N. The greatest hole of the
said Bone. OO. The two sides of Os Occipitis, furnished with diverse
protuberancies.


are distinguished one from another by the middle Suture of the Palate, and
make the hinder part of the Cavity of the Palate and Nostrils, they are thin,
solid and broad.

To these ten Columbus ads the eleventh, like a Plough, the inmost and
middlemost above the Palate, shutting the lower part of the Nostrils, like a
partition wall.

Chap. XI. Of the lower Jaw Bone.
THe lower Jaw Bone in grown persons, consists of one Bone only, in Children
till seven year old of two, which are joined together by way of Sunchondrosis.

Its Figure is that of the Greek letter u or like a Bow.

Its Substance is exceeding hard and strong, that it may hold out in biting and
chewing; within hollow, where Marrow is contained to nourish it and the teeth.

It has two Holes on each side, which go quite through the Jaw Bone like a
Pipe, so that a bristle put in at one hole will come out of the other.

The one is more inward, hindermore and greater, receiving in a part of those
Nerves which we reckon to be the fifth pare, to the Roots of the teeth, with a
little Vein and Artery.

The other is more outward, less round, by which a Branch of the foresaid Nerve
received in, is sent out to the lower Lip.

It has sundry Asperities and Cavities for the Risings and Insertions of
Muscles.

Also on each side two Processes called Horns, carried upwards.

One goes out forwards broad and thin, whose point or sharp end is called
Corone, into which the Tendon of the Temporal Muscle is implanted. And
therefore Hippocrates counts the Luxation of the lower Jaw Bone deadly.

The other hindermore, is carried backwards; representing a little bunch and is
called condulodes, having a little Head coverd with a gristly crust, under
which there is a longish Neck.

By this Process the Articulation is made with the Temple bones, where yet
another Gristle is placed between the Cavity and the gristly head, to
facilitate the motion. Also a common membranous Ligament does cover this
Articulation.

Chap. XII. Of the Teeth in General.
THe Teeth are called DENTES as if you would say Edentes, Eaters, and by the
Greeks odontes as it were edountes Eaters; and they are Bones properly so
called, hard and solid, smooth and white, like other Bones.

They have some things peculiar which other bones have not, which nevertheless
How the Teeth do differ from other Bones.
does not exclude them from the number of Bones.

1. They are harder than other Bones, that they may bite and chew hard things;
and they are little less harder tha Stones, nor can they easily be burnt in the
Fire, and whereas in the Sarcophagus or Flesheating Stone, the whole body is
consumed in forty days, the Teeth remain unimpaired* and therefore Tertullian
writes that in them is the Seed of our future Resurrection. 2. The Teeth are
naked without any Periosteum, least they should pain us when we chew. 3. Yet
they have a Sense, but more of the first than of the second Qualities, and
especially rather of what is cold than what is hot contrary to the Nature of
flesh, according to Hippocrates. and hence they are so an^ to be set on edg.
But the whole Tooth does not feel of it self, but the inner, softer and more
Which part of the Tooth feels.
marrowy part; which is covered over with an hard external part, which is not
pained, neither by Fire, nor Iron, as in a Sword under the most hard rind of
the Steel, an Irony marrow less hard lies within, and the Skin through the
senseless Skars-skin does feel, so the inner part of the Tooth feels through the
outmost, into which inner part being hollow, little soft Nerves enter and
little clothing Membranes. Hereupon a certain Nun at Padua causing a very long
Tooth she had above all the rest to be cut off to avoid the Deformity thereof,
she presently fell down into a Convulsion and Epileptick fit. Now in the part
of her Tooth which was cut off, there appeared the tokens of a Nerve. 4. Hence,
they receive Nerves into their Cavity which other bones do not. 5. They grow
longer than any other of the Bones, almost all a man's life, because they are
daily worn, by biting and grinding; as Gutta cavat lapidem non vi sed saepe
cadendo. The hardest Stone a dropping House-Eve hollows,
Cause drop upon drop, drop after drop still follows,
But not by force.

And look how much they wear away, so much are they still augmented* which
hence appears; in that if any Tooth fall out and grow not again, the opposite
Tooth grows so much the longer, as the empty space of the former Tooth comes to.

Fallopius considering the praemises, and how new Teeth are thought to breed,
he collects that the formative faculty remains alive in the Teeth to extreme
old age.

Helmont counts the matter of the Bone not to be merely boney, but as it were
of a middle nature betwixt Bone and Stone; because the Teeth turn to Stone
whatever kind of food sticks long to them, be it Bread, Flesh, Herbs, Fish,
Apples, Beans, or Pease, etc. But there is no petrification or turning to
Stone, unless the things eaten be of a tartareous Nature, but only a drying,
the moisture being consumed by the Spittle; nor are the Teeth made bigger by
that addition, which sometimes is scraped off, sometimes turn to clammy filth.

The Teeth are bred in the Womb, after The Teeth are bred in the Womb.
the Generation of the Jaw-bones, twelve in each Jaw, or a few more, as I shall
speak hereafter touching their number, four Cutters, two Dog-teeth, six
Grinders: which lie somewhat imperfect and concealed within the Jaws (for it is
rare for an Infant to be born toothed) least the child as it sucks should hurt
the Nipple. And therefore in an Abortion, or a young Infant, small teeth may be
pulled out

They break out of the Gums sooner in Brutes (though Varro be otherwise minded
as touching Horses) because they are sooner capable of solid meat; in mankind
at the seventh month or later, after the Child is a year old: and the upper
sooner than the lower, yet in some the lowest first, and among the rest,

The fore-teeth in the first place, because

1. They are most sharp. 2. They are less then the rest. 3. Because the
Jaw Bone is there thinnest. 4. Because there is most need of them both to speak
with and to cut and bite the meat.
And at that time when the Teeth Why Children are sick of Teeth-breeding.
of Infants shoot forth, Hippocrates tells us that Fevers, Convulsions, Fluxes
of the Belly arise, especially when the Dog-teeeth come forth: because when the
Teeth make their way through the Gums, they torment more than pricks in the
Flesh.

These Teeth have a Substance boney, hard, and hollow where they break out, but
in their hinder part they have a soft substance, covered with a thin and
transparent Membrane.

And about the seventh and fourteenth year, other Teeth are wont to break out
(the Why and when young ones loose their Teeth.
former falling away) in both the Jaws ten, four Cutters, two Dog-teeth, and
four Grinders. And the former fall out in the fourth, fifth, and sixth year.
because the holes grow wider, and therefore the Teeth being at that time soft,
do grow loose and fall out. Nicephorus in his Interpretation of Dreams says,
that for a man to dream he looses a Tooth another comes in the Rome, betokens
gain and unexpected Joy. If their Teeth do not shed, the latter Teeth come out
at new holes, the upper commonly on the outside, the lower on the inside, as
there were new ranks of Teeth. More frequently they spring out on the sides and
augment the number.

But these Teeth are not bred anew without the Womb: for then likewise Whether
new Teeth are bred out of the womb?
Membranes, Nerves, Vessels and Ligaments might be bred anew: but the seeds of
them lie within the Jaws. For Eustachius and Riolanus have observed some
smaller Teeth at the back of the rest which fall out, a very thin partition
being removed which is found between the two sorts of Teeth. But a rare case it
is for Teeth to breed again, after many years and in old age. As Thuanus
relates of a man that was an hundred year old: in our Fionia a man of an
hundred and forty years of age, had new Teeth. Helmont saw an old Man and Woman
of sixty three years of age, whose Teeth grew again with such pains as Children
have when breed they teeth, which was no token of their long living, for both
of them died that year. Sir Francis Bacon has the like Example touching an old
Man.

But now let us speak of the Teeth in grown persons.

The Teeth are seated in the Compass of the two Jawbones, in Mankind, shut up
within his mouth; in a Boar they stick out, as also in the Whale-fish called
Narhual in our Greenland; which sends out an exceeding long wreathed Tooth, ^ut
of the left side of his upper Jaw, which is commonly taken for the Unicorns
horn, and is yet of great value among Noble Men and Princes.

In Magnitude they come short of the Teeth of other Animals, because of the
smallness of Man's mouth. And in Mankind some have greater, others less.

They vary in Figure. In Man they are of a threefold figure: Cutters,
Dog-teeth, and Grinders, as shall be said in the following Chapter; save that
Fontanus observed in a certain Man, that they were all Grinders which he had.
In Creatures that chew the Cud they are double; Cutters and Grinders. In Fishes
they are in a manner all perfectly sharp, excepting one kind of Whale, which
the Islanders call Springwall, whose teeth are blunt, but broad.

The Surface is smooth and even.

The Color white, and shining, unless negligence, Age, or sickness hinder.

The Number is not the same in all Men, for to let pass rarities, viz. that
some men are born with one continued tooth in their upper Jaw Bone (which they
relate of Pyrrhus, and a certain Groenlander brought hither in the Kings Ships)
also of a double and tripple row of teeth, such as I have seen in some Fishes,
and such as Lewis the thirteenth King of France had, and which Solinus writes
of Mantichora, and is known of the Lamia, which has five ranks, strangely
ordered, and among them exceeding sharp teeth, resembling the stones called
Glossopetrae, and therefore Columna took the teeth of a Lamian turned to stone,
to be the Glossopetrae or precious Stones of Malta so called, of which I have
spoke elsewhere. In a Sea-wolf, I have observed a double rank, the former of
sharp teeth, the inner of grinders, close joined together, which possess the
lower part of the Palate. A man has ordinarily but one rank in each Jaw Bone,
and twenty eight in all, sometimes thirty, in the upper Jaw sixteen, in the
lower fourteen; but for the most part thirty two, sixteen in each Jaw.

But this number is seldom changed, save in the grinders, which sometimes are on
each side five, sometimes sour; otherwhiles five above, four beneath, or five on
the right, and four on the left side, or contrarily.

A great number of teeth argues length Many teeth argue long life.
of life, few teeth a short life, according to Galen and Hippocrates. And
rightly. For the rarity and fewness of teeth is bad as a Sign and a Cause: for
it argues want of matter, and the weakness of the formative faculty. As a
Cause: because few teeth cannot well prepare the meat, and so the first
digestion is hurt, and consequently the second. But we must understand that
this prediction holds for the most part, but not always, as Scaliger well
disputes against Cardan in his 271. Exercitation. For Augustus who lived
seventy six years, is said to have had thin, few, and scaly teeth; and so
likewise Forestus who lived above eighty years.

Their Connection is by way of Gomphosis, for they seem to be fixed in their
holes as nails in a post. Also they are tied by strong Bands unto their nests,
which bands stick to their roots; and then the Gums compass them, of which
before.

The outer Substance is more solid and hard, not feeling; the inner is a little
more soft, endued with sense, by reason of the neighborhood of a Nerve and
Membrane, and has in it a Cavity, larger in Children then Elder persons, and
compassed about till they be seven years old, with a thin Scale like the Combs
of Bees, and full of snotty matter; in grown persons the humor being dried up,
it is diminished.

This Cavity is clothed with a little Membrane The Diseases and Pains of the
Teeth, how caused?
of exquisite Sense, which if it imbibes some Humor flowing from the Brain,
extreme Toothache follows. In this begin Erosions, Putrefactions, and most
painful Rottenness; and herein sometimes grow the smallest sort of worms, which
exceedingly torment men.

Vessels are carried to this Cavity, by the holes of the Roots of the Teeth.

As Veins to carry back the blood after nutrition and continual augmentation.
Which are not seen so apparently in Mankind (as neither the Veins of the adnata
tunica of the Eyes) but they are manifestly seen in Oxen, and are gathered from
the sprinkling of blood in the Cavity.

Little Arteries to afford Natural Heat and Blood for Nutrition and Alteration.
And therefore upon an Inflammation, a pulsative pain of the teeth is sometimes
caused* which Galen experimented in himself. Hence much lightful, shineing
blood, comes sometimes from a tooth that has an hole made in it, and sometimes so
as to cause death.

Little Nerves tender and fine, are carried to them from the first pare,
according as we reckon, which go through the Roots into the Cavity, where they
are spread abroad within, and by small twigs mingled with a certain mucilaginous
Substance sound in the middle of the teeth.

The Use of the Teeth

In the first and chiefest place, is to chew and grind the meat. And therefore
such as have lost their teeth are fain to content themselves with suppings; and
therefore Nicephorus reckons that it is bad to dream of a man's teeth falling
out, and says it signifies the loss of a Friend. 2. They serve to form the
voice (and therefore Children do not speak, till their mouths are full of
teeth) especially the fore teeth which help the framing of some certain
Letters. Hence those that have lost their teeth, cannot pronounce some Letters,
as for Example T. and R. in the speaking whereof, the tongue Speech him.
being widened, ^ought to rest upon the foreteeth. Also the loss of the
grinders hurts the Explication or plain Expression of the Words, according to
Galen, so that the Speech becomes slower, and less clear and easy. Let
therefore such as have lost their teeth, procure artificial ones to be set in,
and with a golden wire to be firmly fastened. 3. For Ornament. For such as want
their teeth are thereby deformed. 4. Homer conceives the teeth are an edg to
the tongue and Speech, to keep in a man's words, and prevent prating. 5. In
Brutes they serve to fight withal, in which case a man uses his hands. 6. In
the said Brutes, also to show their Age. For the Age of an Horse is known, by
looking into his Mouth, where before he is four years old that tooth to be seen
which they term Gnomon, when he is four year old, there is another tooth seen
with an hole in it that will hold a Pease, which every year grows less and
less, till at eight years the tooth is filled up, becomes smooth, and no hole
to be seen therein.
Chap. XIII. Of the Teeth in Particular.
IN respect of their threefold Shape, their Situation, and Office, there are in
Mankind three sort of Teeth: The Fore-teeth, the Dog-teeth, and the Grinders.

The Fore-teeth, from their Office which is to cut the meat, are termed
Incisores and Incisorij Cutters, also Gelasinoi the laughing teeth, because in
laughing they are first discovered.

They are placed before, in the middle of the rest, in each Jaw four (some have
only two in a Jaw, as large as four) broad and sharp like Swords, shorter then
the Dogteeth, and fixed in their Sockets with single Roots; and therefore they
fall the sooner out, especially the uppermore. After these follow on either side

The Dog-teeth, so called, because of their sharpness, hardness, and use; for
what the former cannot cut these do bruise and grind. They are commonly termed
the Eye-teeth, not as some think, because they do almost touch the
circumference of the Eye, seeing they hardly reach the lower part of the L^ps
of the Nostrils, but because a portion of that Nerve which moves the Eye, is
carried unto them, and they are deeply rooted, and therefore it is counted
dangerous to draw them, also when they are pained, the Eyelids do pant a
little.

These teeth are two in each Jaw, on each side one, broad and thick in their
basis, and Why Men have few dog teeth.
sharp above. For a Man did not need many of these kind of teeth, seeing he is
a gentle Creature, and has hands to defend and offend.

They are fastened with simple Roots as the Fore-teeth are, but they are more
deeply and firmly rooted: for their Roots exceed all the other teeth in depth,
and they are longer then the upper teeth.

The remaining hindermore teeth are called Molares, both from their shape
resembling Millstones and their use, because they grind the meat after it is
cut, they are rough and great, hard and broad. The Germans call them the
Cheek-teeth.

In men they are more in number then the Cutters; but the contrary holds in
fierce Beasts, which use their sharp also to fight with.

They are commonly twenty, on each hand in both the Jaws sive, although the
number varies, as was said beor.

The two last of these are termed Dentes Sapientiae, the Teeth of Wisdom, also
the teeth of Sense and Understanding, because they do then first break out
(sometimes with very great pains, and otherwailes without any pain) when men
begin to be wise, about the twenty eighth or thirtieth year of their Age, and
sometimes when they are very old; Aristotle saw them break out in some when they
were fourscore, and Walaeus at the Age of eighty three years. Sometimes they
hardly appear, and otherwhiles they are scarce created; the Latins call them
Genuinos.

These Teeth are fastened by diverse roots, Why the upper Grinders have more
roots then the lower?
either two and three, as the lower Jawteeth, or with three and four, as the
upper Jaw-teeth, which have more roots then the other: Because,

1. They hang of themselves, otherwise then the lower teeth which are fastened
partly by their own heaviness. 2. Because the Substance of the upper Jaw is
more rare and soft.
And so much for the first part of the A Transition.
Skeleton, viz. the Head: Now follows the second Part, or Trunk.

Chap. 14. Of the Backbone and its Vertebra's in General.
IN the Trunk or other Part of the Skeleton, all the Vertebrae of the Backbone
are to be examined, also the Ossa Ischij, the Ribs, the Breast Bone, the
Chennel-bones, and the Shoulder-blades.

All that is termed the Spina or Backbone, What the Spina is?
which reaches from the first Vertebra of the Neck to the Os coccygis, or
Crupper-bone. It is called Spina the Thorn, because the ^inder part thereof is
all along sharp-pointed like a thorn branch.

The Parts of the Spine or Backbone are termed Sponduloi in Greek, in Latin
Vertebrae Whirl-bones, or Turningbones, because by means of them the Body is
turned several ways.

And these Bones of the Spina are divided into seven Vertebrae of the Neck;
twelve of the Back; five of the Loins, and five or fix of the Os sacrum; to
which is added the Crupper-bone.

All the Vertebrae are hollowed, to contain the Spinal Marrow, they were to be
many, not one, both for Motion which ought to be made forward and backward;
also that the hurting of one might not draw the whole Spine into consent. The
Father of Nic. Fontanus saw five Vertebrae or Whirle-bones of the Spina in a
cluster like a round ball, in the Body of a Porter that carried burdens. And
Pavius has observed that in decrepit old people these Vertebrae grow together
into one, the moisture being dried up, and the intermediate Ligaments hardened,
which he represents by a Picture. Tulpius saw the Backbone in a Boy divided
into two parts, and Salmuth has seen it broke asunder in persons that were
hanged.

The Figure of the whole Back is, that sometimes it inclines inwards, as the
Vertebrae of the Neck, to sustain the Gullet and aspera Arteria; and those of
the Loins, for the Trunk of the Aorta and the Cava descending. Sometimes
outward, as of the Back, and a little of the Os sacrum; that there may be a
larger space for the Heart, Lungs, Bladder, Fundament and Womb.

And these Parts do bend more outward in Women, for the sake of the Child in
the Womb.

The Figure of each Vertebra above and beneath, is plane and broad, that
luxation may not easily be caused, round within, unequal and bunching out; but
in the neck broader and more even, by reason of the Wezand and Gullet resting
thereupon. On the outer or Back-point, the Vertebrae are furnished with many
prominencies.

For there are three kind of Processes in every Vertebra.

I. Four oblique ones, two on the upper part ascending, two in the neither part
descending. II. Two transverse, for the Original and Insertion of the Muscles.
And they are in the Vertebrae of the Neck broad and bored through; in the Back
thick, solid and round, excepting the eleventh and twelfth. III. One sharp one,
in the hinder part, which is properly called the Spine or Thorn, and is wanting
in the first Vertebra.
They have five Appendixes. Two above and beneath at their Body; as many at
their transverse Processes, and one at the extremity of the Spine.

There is a most wide hole in the midst of each Vertebra for to keep the
Spinal Marrow in. Also there are other holes in the sides, which are lesser, to
let the nerves out, which John Leonicenus affirm to go out only at the
joyntings of the Vertebrae.

The Substance of each Vertebra, is thicker and more spungie in the inside: to
which grow the Epiphyses and Gristles. For the extreme Parts of the Vertebrae,
excepting the first of the Neck, are furnished with Appendixes, between which
there come thick and soft Gristles, that they may be more easily moved; so that
above and beneath, they have Gristles, which in the Os sacrum are harder and
drier, because this Bone is immovable.

The Vertebrae are knit together by Articulation in the hinder part, viz. by
the way of Ginglumos, but in the fore part by way of Symphysis, and that by
very strong Ligaments or Bands.

Now the Ligaments of the Vertebrae are twofold.

Some do knit the Vertebrae above and beneath, and are shaped like the half
Moon, thick, strong, fibrous, and snottie.

Others arise from the Epiphyses, as well the transverse as the sharp ones,
which are membranous, by which the Processes are more strongly tied.

Chap. XV. Of the Vertebroe or Whirl-bones of the Back in Particular
THe Vertebrae of the Neck are commonly seven. In Brutes for the most part six
only, and Busbequius relates that the Hyena has none, who is confuted by the
Skeleton of that Beast in the custody of P. Castellus. These Vertebrae of the
Neck, have some Peculiarities, whereby they differ from the rest.

I. Some of them have their transverse Processes cleft in two. II. Also they
have them bored, for the cervical Veins and Arteries, ascending into the Brain.
III. They have a cloven Spine or thorny Point.
The two first are joined by Ligaments to the hinderpart of the Head, that they
may stick most close to the Head, and have somewhat peculiar to themselves,
which the other five have not.

I. Is termed Atlas, because it seems to bear the Head up, which rests upon the
Why the first Vertebra has no Spine?
two hollows thereof. Some call it Epistropheus, though more give that Name to
the second. It has no Spine or sharp Point, least the two small Muscles of the
Head which arise from the second Vertebra, should be hurt when the Head is
stretched out.

It has a thinner, but more compact Substance. It receives, and is not
received: and therefore it has its Cavity covered with a Cartilage, to receive
the tooth of the following Vertebra.

II. Is called Epistropheus from turning: for out of the middle of its Body,
there rises an Appendix (others call it a Process) round and oblong, like a
Dogs tooth, about which the Head with the first Vertebra is turned.

Hence that Appendix is called a tooth; yea and the whole Vertebra is by
Hippoerates An incurable Squinzie by Luxation of the Tooth.
so called, by the Luxation whereof, he conceives an incurable Squinzie, is
often caused.

The Surface of the Tooth is in some sort rough, because thence proceeds the
Ligament, whereby it is bound to the Occiput or hind-part of the Head, about
which also is wound a solid and round Ligament, like a Nerve in shape,
wondrous artificially twisted, that the Marrow may not be compressed and hurt.

Now this second Vertebra is joined with the first, by a broad Ligament, turned
round.

The last does more agree with the Vertebra's of the Chest, and has its last
Process not always cloven.

The Vertebrae of the Back are commonly twelve in number; to which so many Ribs
on each side are articulated: seldom one is wanting; and there is seldomer one
more.

They are thicker then those of the Neck; less solid, and full of little holes,
for the passage of the nourishing Vessels.

I. Is by the Ancients called Liphia, because it is higher, and sticks out more
then the rest. II. Is termed Maschalister Axillaris the Arm-pit Vertebra.
The rest are called Costales the Rib-vertebrae.

The eleventh is termed Arrhep^s, because the Spine or sharp point thereof is
straight.

The twelfth is called Diazoster the Girder.

The five of the Loins are the thickest and greatest, being full of little
holes, whose motion is looser then that of the Back, that we may more easily
stoop to the ground.

The transverse Processes are longer, but thinner, excepting the first and
fifth; but the Spines are thicker and broader, to which the Muscles and
Ligaments of the Back are fastened.

1. Is termed Nephrites, from the Kidneys which re^ thereupon.

The last, is by some called Asphalites, the stablisher or underpropper.

The rest agree with the others aforesaid.

The Os sacrum or holy Bone follows, so The Os sacrum why so called.
called, because it is the biggest of the Spine or Backbone, for the Ancients
termed that which was great, Sacred. Or because it lies under the obscaene or
privy Parts, which Nature herself covers and hides: For Sacrum did also
signify execrable, as Servius shows from Petronius, commenting upon that
Expression of Virgil; Auri sacra fames: the cursed thirst of Gold.

It is broad and immovable, being the Basis or Foundation of the Back.

Its Figure is commonly triangular. It is in its forepart hollow, smooth and
even; behind it is bunching and rough.

Its Vertebrae so called, not in regard Os sacrum properly has no Vertebrae.
of use but similitude, are five, sometimes six, in young Children easily
separable, in grown persons so glewed together, that they seem to be but one
Bone. Solomon Albertus and Pavius have sometimes observed them to be seven in
Number.

Galen makes the Os sacrum to consist of three Bones; because he comprehends
the other Bones of Os sacrum under the Crupper-bone, and calls that an
Epiphysis, which others call Os Coccygis.

The Holes are not in its sides, as those of the former, but in the forepart
(which are greater, because there are greater Nerves) and the hinder-part:
because at the sides in the Os Ilion or Flank-bone.

In the three upper Cavities are engraven, where the Ossa Ilij cleave ^o it.

OS COCCYGIS the Cockow-bone, so called from the Shape it has of a
Cuckows-bill, is under the former, consisting of three or four Bones, and two
Gristles. But I conceive there was a greater number of Bones and Gristles in
that Danish Boy, who had a Tail growing out at his Rump.

Their Connection is loose, and in Women looser then in Men, that they The Os
coccygis may be loosned.
may give way.

1. In the Voidance of large Excrements.

2. In the time of Women's Travel, that the cavity may be more wide. And
therefore some conceive that this Bone only gives way in the Birth, though
Pinaeus be against it, and that the Pains of Women in Travel depend upon the
Concourse of little Nerves in that place. Afterward in sitting it comes
forwards, and of its own accord returns into its place.

This Bone in Men bends more inward to sustain the Intestinum rectum; in Women
outward, because of the Neck of the Womb, and that the Cavity might be wider.

This Bone being hurt or broken, exceeding great, pains are raised, as the
Stories related by Amatus and Donatus, do witness. Hofman believes it is of no
use, but is only the mark of a tail, as the Nipples in Men are only the signs
or marks of Duggs. But the constant Doctrine of Galen is, that all Parts of the
Body are made for some Use.

Chap. 16. Of the Nameless Bone, or Os Innominatum.
THe OS INNOMINATUM or NAMELESS BONE, which some term OS COXAE or ILIUM, the
Flank-bone, consists of three Bones, Ilium, Pubis, and Ischium joined together
by Gristles, till the seventh year it appears distinguished by a threefold
Line, but in grown persons it is one.

The Os Ilion so called, because it contains the Gut Ilium, is the first part,
which is the uppermore and broadest, knit to the Os sacrum, by a common
membranous and most strong Ligament, although a Gristle also comes between.

Its semicircular and uneven Circumference, is termed Spina Ossis Ilij, whose
inner part hollow and broad, is termed Costa, the Rib; the outer part formed
with unequal Lines, is termed Dorsum, the Back.

This Bone is larger in Women, and its Spine is drawn more out sidewaies, that
Why the Os Ilium is larger in Women?
the Womb of a Woman with Child may better rest upon it. And therefore women
with Child do a little complain of this Part, as if it were pulled asunder from
the Os sacrum and other neighboring Parts to which it cleaves.

Os pubis or Pectinis, the Share-bone, is the second middlemore and foremore
The Share-bones are loosned in Childbirth.
Part; which Bone is joined to the Bone of the other side, by way of
Sunchondrosis, that is to say, by a gristle coming between; which in Women is
twice as thick and loose or wide as in Men, that these Bones in Childbirth may
be (not dislocated or disjoynted, but) loosned and made to gape, when the Child
strives to come forth. But now and then when the Child's greatness, or the
narrowness of the place requires, the Share-bones are pulled asunder, as,
besides the Authority of the Ancients, Paraeus and Riolanus have observed in
the Dissections of Childing-women, etc. and it is largely proved in the
Anatomical Controversies of my Father Bartholinus: But this is not always so,
namely when the Child is soft and apt to bend it self and comply with the
straitness of the place when the way is slippery, the Bones much widened, etc.
for then the loosning of the Gristle does suffice.

But whether the Share-bones are moved is another question. Joh. Cajus affirms
they are moved by help of the right Muscle of the Belly. Spigelius also says
they are moved after a peculiar manner upwards, whiles the Body roules in the
bed, the Legs being lifted upwards Riolanus proves that the Share-bones are
moved, not alone, but with the Hip-bone, by help of the same Muscles, this I
say he proves by the Venereal Embracements, in which these Parts are moved; by
the going of such whose Legs are cut off, and lastly by dancing.

But some doubts do as yet make me scruple this Motion.

1. Because Cajus himself confesses, that the Share-bones (I add the rest) are
not moved of their own Nature, but by the bending of the Backbone. 2. These
Bones being joined together by Symphysis, can have no motion, which Riolanus
himself confesses. 3. I have assigned another Use for the right Muscles, above
in Book the first. 4. These seeming Motions of the Bones, are not proper to
them, but are motions of the Thigh or Back, whose motion they follow. For in
the Examples alleged, any man may experiment in himself, that both his Thighs
and Back are moved; also he may by his hand perceive, that both the Muscles of
the Thigh called Glutaei, and the other adjacent Muscles are moved. 5. They
ought to be immovable, because the upper Parts rest upon them as on a
Foundation, and we rest by sitting upon this Part.
In Women that have been lately delivered, these bones may be separated with
the back of a thin knife, which they cannot be in others. Moreover, though the
Share-bones are joined by a Gristle, yet they have likewise two

Ligaments 1. compasses them about circularly. 2. Is membranous, which
possesses the hole.

They are thin, and for highness sake Why there are great Holes in the
Sharebones.
furnished with very great Holes, which in women are more large and capacious,
because of the Womb and Child, for the inner and lower Processes do bunch more
outward.

With the Os sacrum they constitute that Cavity which is termed Pelvis the The
Share-bones larger in women.
Basin or Bowl, wherein are seated the Bladder, the Womb, and Part of the Guts.

OS ISCHION or the Hip-bone is the third part, which is lower and more outward,
wherein is a large and deep Cavity, (they call it Acerabulum, the Saucer, and
Pixis the Box) to receive the large Head of the Thigh Bone, which if it fall
out, either by reason of some internal humore, or outward chance, a Luxation or
Semiluxation is thereby caused. The gristley Process of this Cavity, is termed
Supercilium, the Brow.

The lowest Parts of this Bone are more distant in women then in men, and
therefore their Pelvis or Basin is larger then that in men.

This Bone is knit to the Os sacrum, with a double Ligament, growing out of the
Os sacrum: The one is inserted into the sharp Process of the Hip, the other
behind, into its Appendix, that the Intestinum rectum and its Muscles may be
thereby sustained.

Chap. 17 Of the Ribs.
AS the Os Innominatum or Nameless Bone, is at the sides of the Os sacrum, so
at the sides of the Vertebrae of the Back, are the RIBS. And therefore,
ascending in the Explication of the Skeleton, these are now to be explained, as
being the lateral Parts of the Chest.

TABLE V.
The FIGURES Explained.
This TABLE presents some of the Vertebrae, the Os sacrum, Os innominatum, the
Ribs and Shoulder Blade peculiarly, and their Particles.
FIG. I. AAA. The foreside of the first Vertebra of the Neck termed Atlas. B.
The hole through which the Spinal Marrow descends. CC. The transverse or
lateral Processes. dd. The lateral Holes through which the Arteries ascend to
the Brain. EE. Two Cavities receiving the Occiput.


FIG. II. AA. The backside of the second Vertebra of the Nick. B. Its Appendix
or Process, like a Tooth. C. Its forked Spine.


FIG. III. AA. The hinderside of the Backvertebra. B. Its upper Surface, less
solid and full of small Holes. CC. Its transversal Processes. D. Its hinder
Process or Spina.


FIG. IV. AA. The foreside of the Vertebra of the Loins. B. Its lower Surface,
for the most part covered with a Gristle. C. An Hole for the Marrow to pass
through. DD. The transverse or Literal Processes. E. The latter Process or the
Spina. II. Its oblique Processes.


FIG. V. AAAA. The hinder-side of Os sacrum, conspicuous by reason of its Knobs
and Roughness. B. The Hole for the descent of the Spinal Marrow. CC. Its
oblique Processes. ddd. Its hindermore Processes. eeee. Its Holes for the going
out of the Nerves. ffff. Its hinder Process which is forked.


FIG. VI. Shows the Os coccygis or Crupper-bone, consisting of four little
Bones or Gristles.

FIG. VII. Shows the Os Innominatum or Nameless Bone. AA. Os Ilium one part of
the Nameless Bone. bbb. The Spine thereof. C. Its Back. DDD Os Pubis the
Share-bone, another part of Os Innominatum. E. Its large Hole. FFF. The Os
Ischion or Huckle-bone, a third part of the Nameless (...). GG. The large
Cavity or Saucer hh. The Brim thereof. I. The Knob. K. The Appendix of the
Huckle-bone.


FIG. VIII. AAA. The Vertebrae of the Back. BBB. The Ribs. CCCC. The Cavity
engraven in the lower part of the Ribs. DD. The two Knobs of the Ribs, by help
whereof they are joined to. E. Transverse Process of the Vertebrae.The
Hollowness of the Vertebrae, and to the F. G. The lowest Rib, having a simple
Knob.


FIG. IX. A. The Clavicula or Channel-bone. b. Its small Head whereby it is
joined to the Breast Bone. c. Its other end whereby it is joined to the
Shoulder Blade. D. The Scapula or Shoulder Blade. E. Its first Process, called
acromion. F. Its lesser, lower, and sharp Process called coracoeides. G. Its
shortest Process called Cervix the Neck. hh. The Basis of the Shoulder Blade.
i. Its upper Corner. k. Its lower Corner.


page 352



The Situation of the Ribs in the Sides, and the Greeks call them pleurai,
because they form the Sides.

In Shape they resemble a bow, or the lesser Segment of a Circle, that the
Chest might be the larger. Johan. Fontanus found a forked Rib; and my self at
Hafnia showed the third Rib of the leftside, as thick as two Ribs, joined to
the Breast Bone with two shanks.

At their rise they are narrower and rounder, but the nearer they come to the
Breast, the broader they grow. In their upper part they are thicker. And the
upper Ribs are more crooked, and also shorter; the middlemore are longer and
broader; the lower are cut again shorter.

The external Surface is rough, where they are fastened to the Vertebrae,
because the Ligaments which tie them do thence proceed: And there they are
furnished with two little knobs: 1. Is articulated to the hollow of the
Vertebra. 2. Is joined to the transverse Process of the Vertebra. But the five
lower are joined by a simple knob.

The inner side is smooth, because of the Membrane Pleura.

In the lowest part there are Cavities according to the length of the Ribs, for
the Vein, Artery, and Nerve; which appears the more, by how much they are
nearer the Vertebra's.

Where let Surgeons observe in the opening of the Chest, which is made
between An Admonition for Surgeons.
the fifth and sixth Rib, the Section must be made from the top toward the
bottom, but not contrariwaies* least these Vessels should be hurt.

The Ribs have Connexions; one with the Vertebrae of the Back, another with the
Gristles of the Breast Bone.

The Substance of the Ribs, is partly bony, and partly gristly. The Gristles of
the Ribs.


1 That the Chest may more easily be contracted and distended.

2 That a Fracture may not easily happen.

It Is bony in the part near the Back, and the lateral part.

Its gristly near the Breast Bone to which they are joined.

For all the Ribs in the forepart, have Gristles like Epiphyses, which in women
(not in men unless very old) through tract of time, do grow hard as bones, that
they may more strongly sustain the Bulk of the Dugs resting upon them.

The Gristles of the upper Ribs are harder, because they are coupled with the
bones of the Sternon or Brest-bone; those of the lower are softer, because they
are joined to Gristles. Moreover in its hinder part each has a Gristle, which
is articulated with a Vertebra.

The Ribs are many in Number, that the Chest may be more easily moved. Pa^samas
Why the Ribs are many is number?
in his Relations of Athens, tell us, that Protophanes Magnesius, had his Ribs
fastened one to another from his shoulders to his bastard Ribs. Nicholas
Fa^tanus saw three united and unseparable. For the most part they are on each
fide twelve, both in men and women. Seldom thirteen, more rarely eleven. But
often there is only one superfluous. It Is therefore likely that in one side How
many Ribs Adam had.
of Adam there were thirteen ribs, one of which Jehovah took out with the
musculous flesh growing thereto and turned into Eve; or he had twelve ribs on
one side, and eleven on the other.

The Ribs are divided into true, genuine and legitimate; and bastard,
adulterate and illegitimate ribs.

The true are the seven upper ones, so called, because they do more perfect the
How many true Ribs there are.
Circle, and touch the Brest-bone, wherewith they have a perfect Articulation;
and with the Vertebrae by a double knob as was said before.

The two uppermore are called antistrophoi, retortae, turned backwards.

The two following are termed stertai, solidae, the solid Ribs.

The remaining three are called sternitides, the Pectoral Ribs.

The five lowest are called bastard Ribs, because The bastard Ribs.
they are lesser, softer, shorter, not do they reach to the Breast Bone (that
dilatation may be there better made, at the beginning of the lower Belly) nor
have they a perfect Articulation therewith, but being knit only to the
Vertebrae, as if some part of them were cut off, they end into longer Gristles
than the true ones: Which being turned back upwards, do stick one to the other,
as if they were glewed together, the last excepted, which is the least, and
sticks to none, and therefore it is truly spurious, that a larger space may be
for the Liver, Spleen, and upper Guts being distended. Howbeit, the eleventh
sometimes and the twelfth, are tied to the Septum tranversum: Sometimes, the
last grows to the oblique descendent Muscle of the Belly, without the Midriff;
sometimes it has the Circumscription of its proper Muscle, which pulls it from.

The Use of the Ribs is:

1. [Especially of the true ones] to defend the Breast and Bowels therein
contained, as the Heart, etc. 2. To sustain the Muscles that serve for
Respiration, and some others of the Belly. [3. Of the bastard one,] to serve
the Natural parts contained in the Belly.
CHAP. XVIII. Of the Sternon or Breast Bone.
THe Bone of the Breast, which in the forepart of the Chest rests upon the
Ribs, and is spread thereupon (whence they suppose it is called Sternum) is by
Hypocrates termed Stethos: which Word nevertheless sometimes signifies.

1 The whole forepart of the Chest. 2 Its Pain. 3 The Breast Bone as in this
place. 4 The Orifice of the Stomach. 5 The Sword-fashion'd Gristle.
Others call this bone Os Gladiale or Ensisorme the Swordbone or
Sword-fashion'd bone, because of the shape of a Sword or rather such a Dagger
as was used by the Ancients: for it is unequal, long and broad.

Its Substance is partly bony, but fungous and red, partly Gristly.

It consists of diverse bones, not of one, as is commonly seen in old Men, the
diversity of its bones appears, when you remove its Membrances. In Infants it
is wholly gristly, excepting its first bone. Moreover, the upper bones are
sooner made than the lower, and the middle parts, than the outmost: so that in
conclusion, eight bones are found in the Breast of a Child, which after seven
years grow together, and become fewer, so that in grown persons there are
sometimes three, sometimes four, sometimes more bones. But the first and last
remain in grown persons as in Children; but the middle ones growing together,
the number of bones comes to vary in that place.

These Bones are distinguished by transverse lines, and are knit together by
Sanchondrosis; for the Gristles are interposed like Ligaments.

The first and uppermost bone, is large and thick, plain and uneven, of an
Halfmoon fashion above, representing the joining of a Dagger blade into the
haft, some term it Jugulum the Throat-pit, others call it Furculam the little
fork.

It has on each side an hollowness in the upper part, to receive the Heads of
the Claviculae or Channel-bones, in which copulation Gristles come between.

And another Hollowness within engraven in the middle, that it may give way to
the descending Trachea or Wesand.

The second is more narrow and has many hollownesses on each side to receive
the Gristles of the Ribs.

The third is yet less, but broader than the second, and ends into the Gristle
The Cartilago Ensiformis.
which is termed Kup^o ides Sword-fashion'd, and Mucronata pointed, because
toward the end it is sharp like the point of a Sword. The Arabians term it,
the Pomegranate; Avicen calls it Epiglottalis, and the common name is
Scutiformis Shield-fashioned.

This Gristle is triangular and oblong, sometimes round at the End, and
sometimes broad, otherwhiles cloven, whence some call it Furc^lla the little
fork; it is seldom double.

Sometimes it is perforated, for the Dug-veins and Arteries, which are
accompanied by a Nerve. Sometimes in aged persons, it attains a bony Substance,
Vestingus has found it a Fingers length not without great hurt to the Stomach,
and trouble when a man bows himself. Pavius also saw here a bony Substance, in
a person troubled with extreme shortness of breath.

This if it be too much pressed and bowed inwards, the parts beneath it are
hurt, viz. the Liver and Stomach, and the Infants perish for want of Nutriment:
of which see Condronchius and Septalius, Zacutus, Wilhelmus Piso. This Disease
is by some Women called, the Hearts compression.

Folius has observed two Muscles placed on the side hereof, by which this
Gristle is lightly moved downwards and inwards.

The Cavity appearing outwardly in this place, is called Fovea, or Scrobiculus
Cordis.

The Use of the Sternum or Breast Bone,

1. Like a shield to defend the Heart from external dangers. 2. To sustain the
Mediastinum. 3. To collect the Ribs and fasten themselves one to another.
CHAP. XIX. Of the Channel-bones and Shoulder-blades.
THe Channel-bones are called Claviculae, Cle^des in Greek, that is the Keys;
because they shut up the Chest, and like Keys do lock the Shoulder Blade to
the Breast Bone, or because they resemble the Keys used by the Ancients, which
Spigelius saw in an old house at Padua. Celsus calls them Jugula a jungendo
from joining, others call them Ligulas, Os furcale, Furcalem superi^rem.

They are seated athwart under the lower part of the Neck, on the top of the
Breast, on each side one.

They have the Shape of a long Latin S, that is to say, of two Semicircles,
set one to another contrariwise, at the Throat externally they are unequal,
inwardly a little hollowed, that the velsels An ^^llow^e ^ about the
channel^^nt.
carried that way may not be compressed. But in Men they are more crooked, that
the motion of their Arms may be less hindered, in Women less, for beauties sake,
seeing the hollows in that place are not so visible in Women as in Men, and
therefore Women are not so nimble to throw Stones as Men are.

Their Substance is thick, but fistulous and fungous; and therefore they are
often broken.

Their Surface is rough and uneven.

They are knit to the upper process of the Shoulderblade (by a Gristle, which
nevertheless grows not thereto, that it may give way a little in the motions of
the Shoulder Blade and Arm, only it is detained by Ligaments embracing the
Joint) by a broad and longish head, and with the Sternon or Breast Bone, it is
joined, by another little head, as was said before.

Its Use is to serve the sundry motions of the Arm, which because it rests upon
this bone as on a prop, therefore it is more easily moved upwards and
backwards. And therefore it is that Brutes have no channel-bones, excepting the
Ape, Squiril, Mouse, and Hedgehog or Urchin.

Os Scapulae the Shoulder Blade is by the Greeks termed Omopla^e^* because it
makes What the Scapula is.
the breadth of the Shoulder, those that speak barbarously calls it Spatula. It
is a bone broad and thin, especially in the midst, but in its processes
thick, on each side one, resting upon the upper Ribs, behind, like a Shield.

Its Figure is in a manner triangular.

Its Parts are sundry. The Internal is hollow, the other part (which has both
a corner and an upper and lower Rib) is gibbous, which is termed Testudo the
Tortoise, also the Back of the Shoulder Blade. There is also a certain Spine or
sharp-point, looking above and beneath the cavities which are termed
Interscapulia.

It has three Processes.

I. Is the extreme part of the Spine lately spoke of, and is called Aoro^miom
the Shoulder-tip, or Summus Humerus, whereby it is joined to the Clavicula or
Channelbone. II. Is lesser, lower and sharp, and from its likeness to a Crows
bill, 'cis called Coracoeid^s; also A^churod^s from the likeness it has to one
part of an Anchor, also Sigmo^ides and by this process, the Shoulder bone is
contained in its place. III. The shortest is termed Auche cervix, the Neck; in
the end whereof there is a superficial cavity, whereunto the Head of the
Shoulder is inserted, which that it may not easily slip cut, the deepness of
the Cavity is increased by a thick Gristle, compassing the Lips. And by this
process and Cavity, the Shoulder Blade is joined with the Arm.
It has five Epiphyses, three at the inside, and at the Basis near the
carriage of the Spina. Two of them produce Ligaments, which join its head to
the Shoulder, and the Shoulder-tip to the Clavicula. But common Ligaments thin
and Membranous, do compass the Joint of the Shoulder Blade and Arm.

Use of the Scapula or Shoulder Blade.

1. It serves to strengthen the Ribs. 2. For the Articulation of the Shoulder
and Channelbones, and for their security. And therefore the Shoulder is seldom
(without very great violence) dislocated or disjoynted upwards, or to one side,
but for the most part downwards, where no Shoulder Blade hinders. 3. For the
implantation of Muscles. 4. Primarily for the action of laying hold according
to Hofman, to which they are subservient, by inarticulation partly, and partly
by the explanation of certain Muscles of the Arm. 5. Secondarily to cover the
Heart.
CHAP. XX. Of the Bones of the whole Arm and Hand.
THe Bones of the Arm and Hand, are divided into the Brachium or Arm peculiarly
so called, Cubitus the Cubit, and Extrema manus the Hand.

The Os Brachii or Arm-bone, is a single Bone, great and strong, long, round,
and uneven. In its upper part it has an Appendix or great Head, growing to it,
which is round, covered with a Gristle, and articulated with the Scapula by
Diarthrosis.

The FIGURE Explained.
This TABLE shows the Skeleton of a grown Body, that the contexture of the
Bones may be seen one with another.
A. The Bone of the Forehead. bb. The Coronal Suture. C. The Temple Bones. d.
The Teat-like production or Processus mammillaris. E. The Os jugula. F. The
upper Jaw Bone. GG. The lower Jaw Bone. hhh. The Vertebrae of the Neck, iiiiii.
The Ribs. KK. The Sternum or Breast Bone. LL. The Claviculae. MM. The
inner-side of each Shoulder Blade. NN. The Arm-bone or Os humeri. OO. The Head
thereof joynting into the Shoulder. PP. Its lower part articulated with the
Cubitus and Radius' where is qq. The inward knob thereof. rr. The outer knob.
SS. The Cubit bone called Ulna. TT. The other Cubit bone called Radius. uu. The
Process of the Ulna, crooked backwards, which Galen calls olecranum. xx. The
lesser process of the Ulna. YY. The Wrist consisting of eight little Bones. ZZ.
The M^tacarpus consisting of four Bones. (...) The Finger rows. (...) The Thumb
compounded of three bones.
These following Characters, do point to the lower Bones of the Skleleton.
Aaaaa. The five Vertebrae of the Loins. BB. The innerside of Os Sacrum with
its holes. CC. The Cavity of Os Ilii, constituting a great part of the Pelvis
or Basin. DD. The Os Coxendicis with its Acetabulum or Sawcer. EE. The
Share-bones with their Holes. F. A line knitting the Share-bones by help of a
Gristle. GG. The Thigh Bone. hh. The round head of the said bone. ii. The Neck
thereof. kk. The external process of the Neck, or the great Trochanter. ll. The
other process or less Trochanter. mmmm. The lower heads of the Thigh Bone. NN.
The Mola ^^atella or Knee pan. OO. The Tibia right and left, in which pppp.
Shows the two upper Hollownesses, rr. Shows the Spina, ss. The lower Process of
the Ankle-bone. TT. The Fibula or other Leg-bone so called, or the Pe^one. uu.
Its lower part constituting the external Ankle. XX. Seven Bones of the Tarsus.
(...) The Astragalus. (...) The Calx, Calcantum or Heel-bone. (...) The Os
cubiforme, Die-fashioned-bone. YY. The bones of the Metatarsus. ZZ. The bones
of the Toes, of which two are reckoned to the Great Toe and to the other Toes
three a piece.


Place in here, The Skeleton of a grown body.



The lower part is articulated to the Cubitus and Radius, where there are two
processes; the External which is less and crusted with a Gristle; the Internal
having two Hollows; representing a Pulley, whereby the Cubit being joined by
way of Ginglymos, may be bent to a most acute angle, but not extended beyond a
right line.

The Boats of the Cubit are two, shorter than the Shoulder, and having
Appendixes on either side, resting mutually one upon another, and joined one to
another by a Membranous Ligament.

The first being lower, greater and longer than the other, is termed Ulna,
Cubitus, by the barbarous Writers focile majus; the other being upper and
lesser, is termed Radius, or focile minus.

The Ulna or Ell, so called for some resemblance it has to the Drapers Metwand
termed an Ell, in its upper part is articulated with the Shoulder by Ginglymos,
and therefore it has there Processes, and Hollows.

The Processes are two, longwise shaped, and as it were triangular, rough, that
the Ligaments might strongly close upon the Joint and compass the same fast.
They are termed Co^d^ai, that is Beaks, Bills or Acorns. The foremore and
uppermore is less, and goes into the hollow of the Shoulder: the later is
thicker and larger and ends in an obtuse angle, and goes into the hinder hollow
of the Shoulder. Galen calls it Olecranum, Hippocrates Ancona, the Latins
Gibberum.

In the midst of these is a great Cavity or Hollow, like an half Circle,
whence it is called Sigmocides from the letter Sigma so shaped of old by the
Greeks. It has as yet another smooth external lateral Cavity, for the head of
the Radius.

In the lower part it is articulated with the Wrist, both by a Gristle going
between, as also by an acute process therefore termed Styloides, Bodkin-like;
whence a Ligament arises, which fastens the Cubit to the Wrist-joynt.

The other Bone called Radius is more oblique or crooked, and is a little
distant from the other in the middle, where a thin Ligament comes between: but
above, the Ulna receives the Radius; beneath, the Radius receives it.

The upper part thereof is articulated with the outward part of the Brachium,
by way of Diarthrosis, whence proceeds the forward and backward motion.

The lower is articulated with an Appendix with the Wrist-bone, at the greatest
Finger.

The upper part of this, is thinner, the lower thicker; contrary to what is in
the former.

The Hand has four sorts of Bones: those of the Carpus, Brachiale or Wrist;
those of the Matacarpus or post brachiale, the After-wrist; those of the
Fingers and the Sesamus-seedbones.

The Carpus or Wrist, which the Arabians call Rasetta, has eight distinct
nameless Bones, very unequal, differing in Shape and Magnitude.

At their first original they are Gristles, afterward they become Spungie
Bones.

They are covered with very strong Gristly Ligaments and withal so fastened
together, as if they were but one Bone.

And these Ligaments arising from the lower processes of the Radius and
Cubitus, do serve for Articulation.

But there are other Ligaments, which are transverse and shaped like rings, for
to strengthen and safely to carry along the Tendons, the internal, containing
the tendons of the Muscles which bend the Fingers; and the external, containing
the Tendons of the Muscles which extend the Fingers, which Ligaments or Bands,
though they seem to be one, may be divided into many.

The bones of the Wrist are dispersed in a certain order: for above, there are
four, articulated with the Radius and the Cubitus: beneath as many, knit to the
four bones of the Metacarpus or After-wrist.

The Metacarpium, After-wrist, or Palm, has four bones (others say five,
reckoning the first of the Thumb amongst them) shaped longwise and small.

They are joined to the Wrist by a Connection of obscure motion, and by Gristly
Ligaments: with the Fingers by way of Ginglymos.

These Bones are fistulous containing Marrow, hollow within, bossie without.

They have Appendixes on each side, which near the fingers are round and
longish heads, going into the hollowness of the Fingers. In the middle they
gape one from another, where the Muscles called Inner^^ss^i do lie concealed.

The bones of the Fingers are fiftee^, in each Finger three. For the first of
the Thumb is reckoned in this number, because it has a looser articulation
than the post-brachialia.

The row of Fingers on a hand the Greeks call Phalangas* because they resemble
a rank of Soldiers in battle array.

Each of the Fingers have Ligaments on their insides, according to their length
like Channels, whereby they are fastened one to another.

The bones of the Finger differ in Magnitude. For in every Finger, the first is
greates than the second, the second than the third: and they are all thicker at
the Joint, where their knobs are termed ^duloi, ^odi, kno^.

Without they are bunching, within hollow and plain the better to lay hold.

They have Processes above and beneath, besides the bones of the third
Interjuncture, which they did not need above where they are joined to the Nails.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Bones of the whole Leg, Foot and Thigh.
THe Pes or Leg (taking the word in a large sense) is divided into three pa^ts,
as the Arm was: viz. into Femur the Thigh, Tibiam the Shank, and E^ tr^mum
pedem the Foot.

^emur (the Thigh) is so termed a ferendo from bearing, because it bears and
holds the Creature up, it consists of one only Bone, but the greatest and
longest in the whole body, whose fore and external part is more bunching, the
inner and hinder, more Saddle-shap'd.

For it descends obliquely inwards unto the Knee; which Surgeons are to
observe, A Memento for Chyrurgions.
lest in the Fracture thereof they come to disorder this situation.

The upper part has three Processes, which are rather Epiphyses, and are
easily sepaarated in young Children.

I. Is a most great and round Head, made of an Appendix, which is inserted into
the Acetabulum or hollow Sawcer of the Coxendix, and is by a double Ligament
fastened to the said Coxendix or Hip-bone: the o^e common, broad, membranous,
but thick enough, compassing the Joint round about; the other, round, as it
were a Gristle (as if it were a Gristly Nerve) betwixt the head of the Thigh
and the Depth of the Cavity, least the head of the Thigh fall out.

The Neck hereof has a double process furnished with an Appendix, which
Appendixes are easily plucked asunder in Infants, but not in grown persons.

II. Is external, which is called Magnus Trochanter or Rotator, the great
whirler or wheeler about, having hollows, Impressions, and Lines.

III. Is internal, called parvus Rotator.

Whose Use is, for the original and Insertion of those Muscles by which the
motions are caused ^^ and therefore also it is, that they are called
Trochanteres, Wheelers of Whirlers about.

The lower part is articulated or joynted with the shank by way of Ginglymos.
For at the Knees, with a double head, the inner more thick, the outer more
broad and flat, it enters the Cavity of the Tibia; between which heads there is
a large space, of a Thumbs-breadth, through which the vessels do pass unto the
Thighs with a Nerve of the fourth pare; and wounds in this part are dangerous,
by reason of Convulsions.

Mola so called from its likeness to a millstone; is a round and broad Bone;
it is in this place put upon the joynting of the Thigh and Shank, where the
Knee is compas'd with a membranous Ligament, all save the Mola; others call it
Rotula, Patella, Mola, Scutum, Os scutiforme, etc. the Kneepan, because it
constitutes the Knee.

Its Substance for some months in young Children, is Gristly, in grown persons
it becomes bony.

Its shaped like a Buckler, for in the middle, one part thicker than the rest,
bunches out.

It grow to, and is fastened by certain thick Tendons, of some Muscles of the
Thigh.

It is movable, and for to make the motion more easy, inwardly at the
Thigh Bone, it is covered with a slippery Gristle.

Its Use is: I. To strengthen the joint in that part, lest the Thigh should
slip and be dislocated inwards, and so a man shall fall, especially walking
downwards, and much bending his Knee. It Is reported, that in Nova Zembla, Men
bend their Knees as well backwarde as forwards.

II. To defend the Tendons of the Muscles.

Tibia the shank, being that part which is between the Kne^ and the Ankle,
consists of two Bones, as the Cubitus or lower half of the Arm.

The one being inner and greater, is called by the name of the whole, Tibia,
C^^me; by some focile majus, canna major, etc. In an Elephant alone of all
Creatures (as Bonitus informs us) there is a bending or joynting in the middle
of the Shanks, besides the other ordinary bendings common to all Creatures.

In the upper part it has a Process in the middle received by the Cavity of
the Thigh Bone, and two cavities framed long-wise, for the Heads of the
Thigh Bone; the depth of whose Hollows is increased by a Gristle, fastened
thereto by Ligaments, which is movable, soft, slippery, and smeared with an
Oily moisture, thick in its circuit, th^^ toward it Center, and therefore
termed Lunata, Moonshap'd.

A knob growing there, does separate the two Cavities, from the top whereof a
strong Ligament proceeding, it is fastened into the hollow of the Thigh Bone.

But from the fore and rough side come two Ligaments, which increase the
Moon-fashion'd Gristles.

Its foremore part which is sharp and long, is termed Spina, where the shape of
the Bone is as it were triangular, and so acute that it is like the edge of a
Knife, and therefore if the Bone of the Tibia or shank be stricken on this
forepart, it causes exceeding pain, because the neighboring Skin and the
Periosteum are cut by this sharp Bone as it were with a Knife.

In the lower part there is a Process void of flesh, sticking out with a bunch,
near the Foot, and it is called malleolus internus, the inner Ankle-bone; as the
process of the Fibula* is termed malleolus externus, the outer Ankle-b^ne.

Fibula pe^^^e, the Button, because it seems to button together and join the
Muscles of the shank; is also called Sura the Calf, Canna minor, Focile minus,
etc. and it is a smaller and lanker bone, drawn along before the Tibia without,
as the Radius before the Cubit.

In the Upper part, its round head does not touch the Knee, but it subsists
beneath: but with its lower ^^rt, it goes beneath the Tibia, and therefore it is
as long a bone as the Tibia is.

In the middle the Tibia and Fibula hold a gaping distance one from another, by
reason of the Muscles of the Feet there placed, in which space a thin broad
Ligament joins these Bones together, according to their longitude, it is joined
also to the Tibia, by a common Ligament, above and beneath.

Beneath, the Head becoming sharp, has an Appendix, which growing thick,
begets a process called Malleolus externus the outer Ankle-bone which is lower
than the inner Ankle-bone.

The Bones of the Foot are divided as the Bones of the Hand, into three parts:
into the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and the Toes.

The Bones of the Tarsus are seven, though some number only the last four to be
in the Tarsus, because the three first have no Bones in the Hand answering to
them.

I. It Is called Astragalos, in Latin Talus, and commonly Os Balistae the
Sling-bone, also Quatrio, because of its four sides.

It Is placed beneath the shank bones as a Basis or foundation: for it is joined
with the Appendix of the Tibia by way of Ginglumos; wherefore they have upon a
long Neck, on high, round, and smooth Head, covered over with a Gristle, in the
middle whereof is a smooth Cavity: whereupon it comes to have on each side a
brim or brow, like a pully or little wheel on which a Rope runs.

At the sides it receives on each hand the Ankle-bones: it is also joined with
the Os naviculare; also below to the Heel, with a double joint, where its lower
part is uneven, twice hollowed, and thrice bunched. It receives the Head of the
Heel-bone.

In the midst of these Joints a Cavity is to be observed (to which the hollow
of the Heel answers) wherein is contained fat and a slimy substance, to moisten
the gristly Ligaments, which knit the Talus to the Bone* least in their motion
they should be dried. Hence I have observed as often as there is scarsity of
this moist and fat Substance or none at all, either by means of a wound in that
place, or any other cause, that there is a noise in a man's Foot when he walks,
by the knocking of the two bones one against another, yet without pain* because
there is no sensitive part within, but only Bones, Gristles and Ligaments.

II. Is the greatest and thickest in the Foot, as being the chiefest stability
thereof (as the Talus is chief for motion) and therefore it is joined by many
Ligaments to the Talus or Ankle, and other adjacent Bones

It Is called P^er^^ ^alx; C^lcaneum, pedis cal^^^, the Spur of the Foot or
Heel-bone* into which the greatest and strongest Chord or Tendon in the whole
Body is fastened, being made up of the Tendons of three Muscles of the Foot.

Its lower part is somewhat broad, where it turns backwards, that the Foot may
more firmly be settled and strengthened, otherwise a man would easily fall
backwards.

In its upper part, it has a large head, going into that shallow cavity which
receives the knob of the Talus. But it is also joined to the Os Cubiforme or
Die-fashion'd bone with its flat head.

III. Is called Os naviculare, Scaphoeid^s from the similitude of a Boat: it is
knit to the Talus and the three hindermore bones

IV. From the form of a Die or four square solid body called a Cube, is termed
Cubo-eides cube-fashion'd, also Os t^sserae, the Dice-bone, by the Arabians
Gran li^^sum, by some others (...) many shaped or many-fac'd. Being greates
than the rest, it is placed before the Heel, joined by an uneven Surface; with
its other side it is joined to the fourth and fifth bone of the Pedium; but
within, to the seventh bone of the Tarsus.

The other three, anciently without names, called by Fallopius, Calcoide^,
Cuneiformia, wedg-shion'd, are articulated to the Naviculare or
Boat-fashion'd-bone: and they are a greater or middlesiz'd, and a lesser from a
broad Basis growing by little and little smaller and smaller.

The Bones of the Metatarsus or Sole, are five knit to the Bones of the Tarsus;
those of the Toes are fourteen; because the great Toe is made up only of two
Bones, and the Interjunctures are shorter than in the Hand, but those of the
great Toe, thicker than in the Hand.

The other are like the Bones in the Hand which answer to them; as the
Ligaments also commonly answer.

But under the sole of the Foot, the Skin and Fat being removed, there is a
Ligament broad and strong; and from the lowest Bone of the Heel Sesamoidean
little bones are inserted into all the ranks of Toes, for the greater firmness
of the whole Foot.

Chap. XXII. and last. Of the Sesamoidean Bones.
IN the Interjunctures of the Hands and Feet are found certain very little
Bones called Sesaminis or Sesamoidea because they answer in likeness to Sesamus
Seeds and also in their smallness.

They are round and a little flat. Their shape. Magnitude.


They are less in the Feet th^^^ in the Hands, excepting in the great Toe,
because it is greater than the Thumb is. In ancient persons they are greater
and a little plane.

They grow to the Tendons of the Muscles Situation.
which move the Toes, under which they lie concealed wrapped up in the Ligaments,
so that they come away with them in the clensing of the Bones unless great Care
be used.

Sometimes they are gristly, as in Children, in which they are not very
conspicuous; otherwhiles bony, covered with Gristles, and inwardly Spungy and
porous.

They are commonly twelve in number in each Foot and Hand, but sometimes
sixteen, nineteen, twenty and more: sometimes there are only ten. They are more
in number, greater and harder, in the inside of the hand than without, in which
Riolanus ^a^es there are none. Their number therefore is uncertain: for many
are so small that they are not observed: and Nature herein as in a matter of
small moment, sometimes abounds, and sometimes again comes short.

But those two are chiefly remarkable for their greatness which are joined to
the first Joint of the great Toe, at the Head of the Bone Metatarsus; one which
is the greater, placed under the Nervous part of that Muscle, which bends the
first Bone of the great Toe, and the form and Size thereof, is like the half of
a great Pease, the white skin being taken off: which little bone is by the
Arabians called Albadara. Some Ancient Philosophers held that a Man should grow
up again at length from this bone, as from a Seed, which Corn. Agrippa from the
tradition of the Hebrews calls Luz. But another much less, is placed under the
second Joint of the great Toe.

And though most commonly these same very small bones are found in the
Interjunctures of the Fingers and Toes, yet are they to be seen also in other
places.

As sometimes in the outside of the Hand, where the eighth Bone of the Wrist is
fastened to the bone of the Metatarsus which sustains the little Finger* there
is one which fills ^n hollow place there: and after the sa^ie manner here is
the like Bone in the Tarsus of the Foot, at the outside of the articulation of
the ^i^t Bone of the Metacarpus which sustains the little Toe, with the Os
cubiforme, or Diefashion'd bone: also two little bones in the Ham by the Os
fem^ri^, which grow not in the Tendons, but in the Beginnings of the two first
Feet-moving Muscles, which are found in old Men and in dry Creatures, as Deer,
Dogs, and Hares. Hereunto they refer that bony part in aged people, which is
placed against the (...).

Their Use is.

I. To defend the Tendons, and by their hardness to retain them in their
motion, least they should fall from the Joint when it bunches out. II. To
strengthen the Joint and preserve it from Luxation. III. To fill up empty
spaces. And while these things are performed by the said little Bones, the
Hands do thereby lay firmer and safer hold upon any; and the Feet can stand and
go more steadily, especially on rough ground.
To God our Creator be Praise, Honor and Glory, who has formed and fashioned
us so wonderfully.

FINIS.
TWO EPISTLES OF Johannes Walaeus Concerning the Motion of the Chyle And the
BLOOD. To Thomas Bartholinus The Son of CASPAR BARTHOLINUS.
THE FIRST EPISTLE Concerning the Motion of the Chyle and Blood, TO Thomas
Bartholinus the Son of Caspar. To PARIS.

THe chief men in Church and Commonwealth have in all Ages contended about
Primacy: but learned Men have in no Age more ambitiously striven who should
seem most learned, then at this present time. And to attain their desire very
many are not afraid to assist themselves by Calumnies and other worse Arts. No
man can publish in Print, or communicate to his Friend any writing, which some
account excellent, but he presently meets with a Detractor who will prick, cut,
and tear him most cruelly. Now for a man to seek nothing else by his Cares and
Labors, but Envy and Vexation of Mind, is extreme madness.

These Causes have (I confess) hindered me from satisfying your frequent
Request; and besides, because I am not willing to determine of those things,
which long experience of years cannot either prove, or sufficiently limit.
Howbeit you continue your Request, and I am much ashamed, always to deny you.
Also a certain learned Man has imposed a necessity upon me, in a manner, to
discover to others my opinion concerning the Motion of the Blood. For certain
Theses having been disputed concerning the Motion of The occasion of this
writing
the Blood, my self being President of the Dispute; though the Defendant truly
professes in his said Theses, that they are his own, yet he has undertaken to
tax and blame them, as if they were mine. And although that young man need not
be ashamed of those Theses, yet I would not have another man's Theses, though
disputed when I was President, to be accounted mine. Neither can he be ignorant
of the Reason, who is acquainted with my Liberty in Disputing, or the Custom
of our University.

Now therefore take my Opinion of the Motion of the Blood, as follows.

That some hot blood which leaps out of the great Arteries being opened is What
Blood it is which is moved?
thinner, more rare and of a more bright color, than that which flows out of
the Veins when they are opened: yet, I will not therefore say, that the
Arterial Blood differs formally from the Venal, Blood: for the Arterial Blood
may differ as aforesaid from the Venal, because it comes reaking hot as it were
from the fire, and abounds with greater store of Spirits, as we see boiling
Milk differs from it self being cooled, for the same* reason: for that Blood
which is in the smaller Arteries, and so farther from the Heart, is observed to
differ less from the venal Blood. And when we have taken Blood out of the
greater Arteries, yea, out of the Heart it self of a living Creature, and from
the same Creature, have taken some out of the Veins, and have let then, both
grow cold and congeal, we could never observe any difference betwixt them. So
that we can see no other, but that the Arterial Blood is of the same kind with
the Venal.

Some few will have, that the venal Blood is of two kinds, one which is
contained in the Vena cava, another in the Vena porta. But we cannot see any
difference of these Bloods either when they are included in their vessels, or
when they are let out: and that Reason does teach as much we shall see anon.

Besides these, we may likewise conceive another sort of Blood, which being
made of Chyle in the Liver, has not received any further perfection in the
Heart. And we are little concerned to know the Nature thereof, because we see
it continues such but a very little while. So that we are to enquire That it is
only one kind of blood.
into the motion of only one sort of Blood.

Now the Blood may be moved either in that part of the Vein or Artery wherein
it is contained, or out of that part into another.

In one part of a Vein or Artery, the Blood is not discerned to move up and It
is not moved up and down in the Vessels like boiled water.
down, like boiling water, neither when it is received into a Vessel, nor when
let out of a living and hot Body; nor yet in the Artery it self, if it being on
either hand tied, shall be opened in the upper part betwixt the two Ligatures.
Ye^, when we have many times cut off the point of a living Heart, and set it
upright, we have found the Blood to be hot, but never to boil.

But that the Blood is moved from one part of an Artery or Vein into another,
is But it is moved o^e of one part into another.
a thing very manifest. For Blood is contained in the Veins of the furthest
parts of the Body, which seeing it is not bred there, it must needs come from
some other place. And it is evident enough, that in living Creatures, the Blood
flows out of the Vena Cava into the Heart and out of the Heart into the Aorta.

But that this same whole Motion of the Blood may be by us the better
understood, Which motion perfectly to understan^, the motion of the Chylus must
be sought into.
I conceive our best way will be to begin at the very Fou^tain, and Original
thereof.

I have often seen solid Meat in Dogs hold the same order in the Stomach, just
as it was eaten by the Beasts; unless the Stomach being distended with too much
Drink, did make the Meat to float, and so to change its order and situation.

The Meat which the Stomach receives, although it be but two ounces, That meat
which is first eaten has the first place in the Stomach.
it evidently embraces the same round about; just as we see folded purses
contract themselves about a Bullet or round Ball within them, also the upper
and lower Orifice are both shut: which The Stomach closely embraces the same.
by making an hole near the same, and putting in your little finger, it is
easy to try. But the lower Orifice notwithstanding, when we find it perfectly
shut, seems rather to be fallen together, than straightly closed, that upon the
smallest pressure it may let the Chylus pass by. Also many times when the
Stomach and its Orifices are weak, they fail in their natural closeness, and
upon searching are found looser.

The meat retained in the Stomach, as thoroughly moistened with the Liquor It
is moistened with the moisture of the Stomach.
of our food, Drink and Spittle: and it quickly becomes porous and Spungie:
because as is most likely the said Liquor has drawn out and sucked into it self
some of the substance of the Meat.

A while after it is cut and torn as it It is cut and minced by an acid humor.
were into very small particles, both that of thin and that of gross Substance,
yea, in Dogs the very shells themselves of Eggs: which does questionless
proceed from some acid sharp humor that has in it a dissolving power. So we
find by experience that the Stomach burdened with the quantity or grossness
of meat, does find it self eased, by taking a little Vinegar, Juice of Citrons,
Oil of Sulphur, or Vitriol. Nor let any man assign the Cause thereof to Spittle
or Choler belching back into the Stomach, when he shall see Bread steeped some
hours in hot Spittle or the Gall of an Ox, by them not dissolved, moreover in
an hundred Dogs or more which I have cut up on purpose alive, I found Choler
flowed back into the Stomachs of only two of them, one of which had eaten
nothing for three days, and in his Stomach, which was wonderful to behold,
there was a Choleric froath so thick and full of bubbles, as that we see on
the Suds of such as wash in Lie.

Now I conceive this acid humor comes from the Spleen into the Stomach, because
Which comes from the spleer.
there is no other part in the body which we can perceive to be sharp or acid:
and because upon swallowing a bit of boiled Spleen especially of a ^ow,
heaviness of the Stomach proceeding from the Quantity or grossness of Meats, is
thereby helped.

Thus the Meat being mixed in its Afterward it is changed into Cream.
smallest particles with the Liquor, in tract of time by concoction it comes to
the consistence of thin Barley-cream: which when it has attained, then at last
it is thrust into the Guts.

Howbeit all Meat does net receive Tom. se^ 3. ^, s^^nt ^^t^r.
this change in the Stomach in the same space of tim^; it is sooner performed
in the day time, with a little meat thin of Substance and well chewed; it
requires a longer space in the night, where there is store of it, the meat is
gross, and swallowed down in great bits: so that the meat which is well grinded
with the Teeth, begins to be turned into Cream, when that continues yet solid,
which was swallowed down in great bits.

Milk and Broaths in the day time are perfectly digested in an hours space or
How soon or late it is concocted and distributed.
sooner, and if somewhat else hinder not, they are then also distributed; which
the voiding of Urin alone, after them, does evidently show, without any
Dissection: Herbs are more slowly changed. Bread in respect of Digestion seems
to be of a midling Substance, we find in the first hour and half very little
changed; in the following hour it is rare and light, just like a wet Sponge;
when that hour is past, it is divided into very small particles, and mixed so
with the Drink, that all appears liquid, and soon after it is most of all
digested, and at last as much of the Braad as is digested, between the fourth
and fifth hour after its eating, is by the Stomach forced through the Pylorus,
into the Guts. But some of the said Bread stays behind, which by little and
little is pertectly digested, as also if any other meat were eaten with the
Bread of harder digestion than it: which meats I have observed to be digested
in this order. First Beans and Pease, then Fish, then Flesh which is perfectly
digested and thrust out of the Stomach between the sixth and seventh hour: Beef
between the seventh and eighth: yea, and the membranous parts of the Animals
are longer in digestion, as also the shells of Eggs; I have seen Bones that have
abode in the Stomach unto the third day, during which space they were become
like Gristles.

Yea, and in the parts of these very meats, often times great variety is seen, as
All at once or by piecemeal.
of Bread and Flesh, though they seem whole in the Stomach, yet some portion
though very little, is distributed sometimes the first hour, unto the Milky
Veins.

So that whatever is digested, does not at all expect the digestion of the
rest, nor is staid by that which is undigested, but presently slips out, and is
carried into the Guts: yea, and you shall seldom find a Dogs Stomach empty,
although he have not eaten in sixteen hours before.

Now I could easily make all these Observations in Dogs, which I cut up alive,
at several distances after they had eaten their Meat.

In the Guts the Chyle is of an Ashcolour, and is seldom colored by the
yellowness Being digested it is distributed into the Guts and milky Veins.
of Choler: and presently now from the Duodenum it begins to enter the milky
Veins of Asellius, nor does this entrance cease in any of the Guts as long as
any Chyle remains in the said Guts, so that the Intestinum rectum or Arse-gut
it self, is endued with milky veins, which are many times seen to look white by
the afflux of Chyle. And that we may not think that same milkie See the Figure
of the milky Veins, page 563.
juice comes elsewhere than from the Guts, I have bound these milky Veins
inserted into the Body of the Guts, and observed that from the Cavity of the
Guts to the Ligature they are evidently full and swollen, but from the Ligature
toward the Mesentery they wax empty and fall in.

But the Chyle has never been observed to enter into any Vein in the body of
Not through the Meseraick veins
the Stomach, nor any Meseraick Vein, nor yet the Blood being by the binding of
Vena porta (whereof the reason shall hereafter appear) exceedingly augmented in
the Meseraick Veins, has ever been ^een to enter into the milky Veins. So that
I cannot see otherwise, but that Nature has ord^ined the milky Veins only to
carry Chyle, and the Stomach and Meseraick Veins only to carry Blood.

The Chyle in the milky Veins is always though it proceed from Ash-colored
Always white.
Chyle in the Guts or such as is dyed yellow by Choler.

By these Milky Veins the Chyle goes By one Continued passage of the milky
veins.
upwards, after what manners, is not very easy to say. This seems to me most
probable, which I observed in great and lean Greyhounds; that some of the
milkie Veins do go right on, to the Ramus Mesentericus, some into the Vena
porta it self, others into the hollow parts of the Liver, and very few do
sometimes end in the Vena cava, near the Emulgents. For these Animals have not
that single kernel in the beginning of the Mesentery, which Asellius has
termed Pancreas, and which is wont to obseure the passage of these Veins; but
they are furnished in that place with smaller kernels, for the most part five
in number, which being distant by a man fest space one from another, through
that space they afford free passage to some milky Veins. But seeing that above
these kernels, there are fewer branches of the milky Veins (and some of them
greater) than beneath, I am apt to believe, that near those kernels, the milky
Veins are divided into branches, and that the said kernels serve, as elsewhere
in the body, to accomodate the divarication or branching of Vessels.

Sometimes also I have been showed milky Veins, which entered into the Not to
the Spleen.
Liver, but when in the presence of the Shewers, I accurately examined the
matter, we found them to be Nerves.

The Chyle being carried through But to the Liver.
these milky Veins is mixed with the Blood in the Ramus Mesentericus, in the
Vena porta, and in the very Liver also it self: for in what place soever you
tie the milky Veins, they always swell, because they are hindered from passing
the Chyle to these parts, and the Ligature being loosed, they manifestly infuse
the same into those parts.

The Branches of the Vena Porta in the Liver although in sundry places they are
knit to the branches of Vena Cava, yet are they never opened into a great
branch of Vena Cava, but the smallest branches of Vena porta do transfuse this
Chyle mixed with Blood into the smallest branches of the Vena cava; as is easy
to observe in the Liver blown up when the Flesh is taken off, and it swims in
water. And that the same happens to the rest of the Chyle mingled with the
Blood, will be hereafter manifest. Out of the little branches of the Vena Cava
in the Liver, Gut of the Liver into the Vena Cava.
the Blood is in the Judgment of all men poured into the Vena Cava: and when
in live Anatomies it is tied above the Liver, it manifestly swells with blood
flowing in.

Out of the Vena Cava it enters into Out of the Vena cava into the heart.
the right Ventricle of the Heart, and either part of the Vena Cava being tied,
either that which is seared above, or that which is below the Heart, I have
many times observed, especially in an Eell, that it is quickly emptied toward
the Heart which also Harvey has observed chapter tenth of his Book.

Out of the right Ventricle of the Out of the right Ventricle of the Heart into
Vena arteriosa.
Heart, it enters manifestly enough into the Vena arteriosa, and by it into the
Lungs.

But I dare not say that any of the blood passes out of the right Ventricle of
the Heart, by the partition wall, (...) the left Ventricle thereof, seeing I
find open passages elsewhere, but none in this place. Purut Gassendus a General
Scholar But not through the Sep^^^^ inter^tium or partition of the Heart
and of a candid Spirit, in his Exercitations upon Fluds Philosophy part 3.
chap. 1^. relates how he had seen Payanus show the Partition wall of the Heart
to be transpassable, by sundry crooked and turning passages: and that they
might be found out, if putting a Probe gently into one of the pits, you shall
most leafurely thrust it upwards and downwards and to one side, and still seek
a further passage till you meet with the end thereof. And the truth is I have
diverse times found it to succeed as he says; but I have withal observed, that
those ways and turning passages, were not at all made by Nature, but by the
Probe or point of a Penknise, while we open a way already made, and seek one
farther: for the Flesh of the Heart is so tender and withal so consistent,
that with the smallest touch of any thing that can bo^e, it is presently
broken, and leaves a Cavity; so that we may also after this manner, find
passages through the sides of the Heart.

That the Blood being entered by the Vena arteriosa into the Lungs, does return
O^^ of the Vena arteriosa into the Arteria venosa and the left Ventricle of the
Heart.
through the Arteria Venosa unto the Left Ventricle of the Heart, I do hereby
collect, in that having bound the greater branch of the Arteaia Venosa (in a
live Anatomy) near the Pericardium or Heart-bag, we have seen it grow hard and
swell toward the circumference of the Lungs, that part being emptiod and
falling in which looks toward the Heart, and when the Ligature was loosed, we
saw the Blood move to the left Ventricle of the Heart: and this is very easily
observed in Rabbis. Now this Blood, because it can come from no other place,
must needs come from the Vena arteriosa hither.

Leonardus Botallus a most learned Man, at the end of his Book de Catarrho,
supposes he has found another way, by which the Blood may continually go,
out of the right, into the left Ventricle of the Heart. A little above the
coronal Artery (says he) I found a passage visible enough, near the right
Earlet, which goes immediately and right forth into the left Earlet.

This passage unless it be the progress of the Vena cava to the Vena arteriosa,
But not through the foramen ovale.
which we call Foramen ovale, or another passage which I have sometimes found in
a Sheeps Heart, as big as a Wheat straw, going with a crooked passage from one
Earlet to another; unless, I say, it were one of these, I know not what for a
passage it was.

And as for that Ovale foramen Eg-fashion'd-hole, it is not every where alike
shut up, and oftentimes there is a very thin and transparent little Membrane
growing in the middle thereof, which with the smallest touch of a Probe is
easily broken, but it is very seldom upon any occasion found open, in grown
persons. And the Blood flowing through the Arteria Venosa out of the Lungs,
does fasten the Membrane placed before that hole, so that even when it does not
grow to, hardly any thing can pass that way.

But that same oblique passage which I have seen in a Sheeps heart, does many
times pierce deep into the substance of the Earlet, but is very seldom carried
into the other Earlet. And I conceive it was given the Earlet for its
Nutrition, it not being wont to receive branches from the Coronaria.

Now from such things as seldom happen, we cannot conclude any thing touching
those things that constantly come to pass: for Nature frequently sports her
self in the Fabric of the Heart. So in the Septum Intermedium or partition
wall of an Oxes Heart, in the upper part according to the length of the Heart,
sometimes I have found a Cavity, opening at the left Ventricle, about the
point, which was as long and large as a man's Forefinger. The like whereunto
possibly Aristotle saw, when in his 3. de partibus Chap. 4. he says the
greater sort of Animals have three Ventricles in their Heart. For the greatest
Animals that are, have but two Ventricles, as I observed in the Dissection of a
young Whale.

So that the Blood cannot be thought to go ordinarily any other way, then
through the Lungs into the left Ventricle of the Heart.

The Blood being thus carried into the And thence into the Heart, the Arteria
aorta, and the rest of small Arteries.
left Ventricle of the Heart, goes from thence to the Arteria aorta, the middle
and smallest Arteries: for they being bound in living Anatomies, do wonderfully
swell toward the Heart, and toward the extreme parts they fall in, and the
Ligature being loosed, they evidently send the Blood to the remoter parts of
the Body.

The Blood out of the smaller Arteries Out of the Arteries the Blood by commen
mouths.
may enter into the Veins; for the Arteries have a way open into the Veins, by
the common mouths of one opened into another,. And to the intent we might be
sure that Blood may pass by those mouths, we have freed the Vein and Artery in
the Foot of a dead Dog, from such things as are wont to hinder their being
seen, and we emptied the greater crural Vein, and bound it in the flank, least
any Blood might flow in that way, and in the Knee we bound both this Vein and
its neighboring Artery: and then with our fingers we forced the Blood in the
Iliack Arteries, as far as to the Knee, and so we emptied the crural Artery,
but the crural Vein we saw manifestly replenished; and seeing into the Vein
tied above and beneath nothing could come or a very little out of its branches
and yet it was much filled, and the Artery quite emptied; we did gather that
the Blood wherewith the Vein was filled, was driven by the little mouths out of
the emptied Arteries, into the said Vein.

And that this Opinion is not new Galen Known to the Ancients.
himself shows in his 5. chap. de Usu pulsus. The Conjunctions of the mouths of
the Veins and Arteries are not visible to our Eyes: and if you shall justly
refuse to believe them as not credible enough, you may be brought by other
reasons dellvered by the Ancients to believe there are such things: and not a
^^l^ by this plain token, that in case a Man shall take any of those Creatures
in whom the Veins and Arteries are manifest, as an Ox, an Hog, an Ass, an
Horse, a Sheep, a Bear, a Libard, an Ape^ or a Man himself, and open many large
Arteries in the said Creature, he may draw all the Blood in its Body out
through the said Arteries. I have diverse times experimented the same, and
finding always that the Veins are emptied with the Arteries, I did persuade my
self that the Opinion was true concerning the common mouths of the Veins and
Arteries, and of the common passage of the Blood from one to another. Yea it is
a received and common opinion, that the Arterial blood does naturally enter
into the smallest Veins, to the end that the part might be nourished with
arterial and venal Blood.

And that indeed and in truth the Goes into the Veins.
Blood does naturally pass in living Creatures, out of the Arteries into the
Veins by those little mouths, these signs do cleenly witness.

He that in living Dissections shall As the store of Blood sent into the parts
does sh^^.
consider that Quantity of Blood, which by the Arteries is conveyed to the
parts and Veins, can hardly persuade himself to think, that it is all consumed
in nourishing the parts: especially if he shall consider that the Arterial
Blood is thick enough, and not a fourth part thinner than the Venal blood, as I
have often obs^^^ed* when I have suffered both of them to grow cold and (...)
whence we may justly conclude with Harvey, that the Blood which is communicated
from the Arteries to the Veins and Parts, does a great part of it, return back
again to the large Veins.

Moreover, when we open a vein in a bound Arm, if you press that The pressing a
Vein below the orifice in Blood-letting.
part of the swelling Vein with your Thumb which is near the orifice, betwixt
it and the Hand, or if you make such a ligature as the former betwixt the Hand
and the Orifice, you shall see that no blood will come forth; whence it seems
to follow, that the blood comes from the Hand, which flows from the orifice.
And seeing some pounds of Blood are drawn away by such a Blood-letting, and so
much cannot be contained in the lower part of the Veins of the Arm, it must
needs come thither from the Arteries, which are not stopped by that Ligature
above the orifice, as their Pulse remaining entire does testify.

But that we might see the same with our Eyes, we have diverse times in The
Ligature of a vein in living Anatomies.
great living Dogs, freed the large Vein and Artery in the groyn, from such
things as did hinder their sight; which may be easily done if they lie not
beneath the Muscles: and we bound the said vein with a thread, and we observed
that part of the Vein which looked toward the Vena cava to empty and fall in,
and the other part toward the Foot exceedingly to swel, so that in regard of
its fullness, it seemed harder than the Artery it self; but the ligature being
loosed, the Blood presently moved upwards, and the fullness and hardness of the
Vein was very much abated. And the Artery being bound, that part thereof did
wonderfully swell, which was nearest Aorta, and the other part more remote did
fall in through emptiness: nor did the Vein then bound evidently swell. And
this we did many times and the effect was still the same.

And that we might have no scruple remaining, and might observe withal,
Dissection of a Vein in living Creatures.
what was done within in the Vein, we did lift up the Vein and Artery being
thus made bare, and under them we firmly bound the Thigh it self, that the
Blood might not move upwards or downwards, by any other Vein ^ave that which we
had lift up. The^ the Vein being held up, and also shut with a Thread, as is
expressed in this Figure, we opened it above and below the Thread with a small
orifice. Now immediately from that part of the Vein which was farthest from the
Heart, the Blood flew out violently plentifully, and in a full stream. but that
part of the Vein which was on the other side of the thread toward the Heart,
did only drop out a few drops. whence it seemed to us to be a clear case, that
the Blood did not come downwards from the greater Vessels, but upwards out of
the smaller Vessels into the greater. Especially when having made another
Ligature upon the same Vein further from the Heart, betwixt the foresaid
Orifice and the Foot of the Beast, we saw no blood at all come from that
Orifice, whence before it issued with such violence. For we conceived those
drops which sell from the Orifice near the Heart, might proceed from Blood
which possibly was in the Vein when it was opened, or which it might
continually receive from some small Branch of the crural Vein situate above the
thread; but this cause will anon appear more evidently.

It is easy to make this experiment The emptying of the Veins appearing in the
Skin.
without any opening of a Vein in such persons as have the Veins of their Arms
very Conspicuous: In whom if you stop the Vein near the Hand with one Finger,
and with your other hand force the blood upwards, and the whole Vein will appear
empty ^* which will soon after be filled, when you take away your lower Finger,
but not if you take only your upper; as Harvey also observed in the 13. Chapter
of his Book. For the upper Blood goes into the greater Veins, and the Valve
hinders it from descending, which will hardly let anything pass by, unless the
vein be so far widened, that a great space remain between it and the Valves.

Seeing therefore the Blood comes out of the Hands and Feet, and they do not
breed new Blood, so as to supply the whole Body therewith, we doubt not but
that the Blood in those parts continually and naturally goes into the Veins,
and out of the lesser Veins into the greater.

TABLE I.
The Explication of the FIGURE.
A. The right Leg of the Dog. B. The left Leg of the Dog. CD. The Ligature made
under the Vein and Artery, which fast binds the Thigh, expressed in the right
Thigh, least the confusion of the lines might disturb the Spectator in the left
Thigh. E. The Crural Artery. F. The Crural Vein. G. The String wherewith the
Vein is tied and born up. H. The Needle through which the thread goes. I. The
upper part of the Vein which flags upon the binding. K. The lower part of the
Vein swelling after the Ligature. L. The drops of Blood which fall leisurely
from the orifice in the upper part of the Vein. M. The stream of Blood
continually spinning ^^^ of the (...) part of the Vein (...)


page. 362



Nor do I fear that the Arterial Blood cannot be contained in the single coat
of a Vein, which I see contained in the smallest little Arteries, and in an
Aneurisma, where the Artery has but one coat. And whereas the Arteries near
the Heart have a double Coat, that might be so contrived, least by violence of
the Blood issuing out of the Heart, the Artery might be loosned; as we see it
loosened by a strong palpitation of the Heart.

But does not the Blood flow as out of the Arteries, so out of the But the
Blood does not come out of the greater Veins into the lesser.
greatest Veins into the lesser? This that kind of Blood-letting seems to
argue, which is ordained for Revulsion sake: for the Vein of the Arm being
opened in a Pleurisy, that Blood seems to be revelled or drawn back, which
flowed out of the Vena cava into the Azygos, and out of the Azygos into the
Pleura. But there is no Sevulsory Bloodletting does not argue it.
token that the blood is so revelled; for the Basilica Vein being opened the
blood may be drawn out of the Arteries of the Arm; the Arteries of the Arm draw
out of the axillary Artery, the Axillaris out of the Aorta, by whose
intercostal branches it had flowed into the Thigh, and not by the twigs of
Azygos, as we shall see by and by. And doubtless, except in the Pleurisy, the
blood should be revelled through the Arteries, there were no reason to be given
why we should for Revul^ions sake rather open the Vein of the side affected,
then that on the right side always; since the Azygos arises from the right
side of the Vena cava, and that a Vein to be opened for Derivation is to be
opened on that side through which the blood flows into the part affected.

But what shall we say? Does not the Arm after a sort grow lean and fall away
Nor the Arms falling away occasioned by a Ligature.
(and so other parts) when it is bound, as in those who have it hollowed in a
Fistula? because the Vein being bound, the blood cannot descend as it ought,
unto the lower parts of the Arm? There is no necessity that it should be so.
For all that may happen because the Artery is bound. And really, this is an
Argument that it is so, in that many times that Arm in which there is an Issue,
is perceived to pulse less and more faintly than the other; the influx of the
blood and spirits, being in some measure hindered, by the the binding of the
Issue. Yet some part may peradventure fall away by binding of a Vein alone;
because Nature cannot plentifully infuse new blood through the Artery, seeing
it cannot freely go back by the Veins. And though the Veins and Arteries do
then contain store of Blood, yet is it peradventure not very fit to nourish the
parts as they should be, but this will better appear hereafter.

It is nevertheless manifest, that in such as have the Varices so called, the
Nor the Varices.
blood descends from the Vena cava to the greater, and out of the greater into
the lesser Veins. For that is easy to see in a Varix of the Thigh and Foot,
and in the Haemorrhoids. But that motion of Blood may happen besides Nature,
because the Veins being weakened do not send the Blood upwards, but gather the
same; and because the humors by that weight, do resist the Natural motion
upwards, and descend, and therefore being collected in great Quantity in the
lower Veins, new Blood still coming out of the Arteries; they cause their
dilatation and consequently a Varix. Thus artificial Fountains about those
places from which they ascend, are most frequently observed to make clefts,
being at last drawn asunder and torn by the Heaviness of the Water, which ought
nevertheless according to the Nature of Fountains to ascend upwards. And it is
altogether most likely that Varices are caused after this manner: because
humors in such as have Varices, do not enlarge the Vein, when they are
violently moved in exercise, but when they have rested after exercise; because
the humors can resist a smaller motion and descend by their own weight.

So that these are not tokens, that the But it flows ^^^ of the smaller vessels
into the Vena cava.
Blood goes out of the greater Veins into the lesser, but they argue rather
that the Blood goes out of the Arteries into the Veins, and out of the lesser
Veins into the greater, and the Vena cava it self.

We said before that the Blood goes Out of the Vena cava to the Heart again.
out of the Vena cava into the right ventricle of the Heart. But what! Does
that very self same Blood, which a little before had come out of the Vena cava
into the Heart, and out of the Heart was shed into the Arteries, and from
thence had returned into the Veins, does that enter again into the Heart? or
does that alone which being newly bred in the Liver does the first time enter
into the Vena cava, and has never yet past through the Heart? Truly both.

For that may easily be done, seeing Yea that Blood which has already past the
Heart.
both are alike near to the Heart: and it ought to be done; seeing that which
is returned out of the Arteries into the Cava, is more plentiful than that,
which is all of it consumed in the nourishment of the Vena cava, and that is
not carried to the lesser Veins. Doubtless it is a sign that this is so, in
that a Vein being tied nea^ the Heart, is not only a little but very much
emptied, and sends all the Blood it has, and not only some to the Heart.

Also the Heart seems to shed more Because the Meat affords not so much Blood
as the Heart passes through.
Blood into the Arteria aorta, then the Liver can supply it withal, at least
not in some days fasting. For I have diverse times experimented that in many
persons the Heart pulses above three thousand times in an hour. And the Heart
as long as it has any vigor left, expels somewhat at every pulsation: for the
Arteria aorta being bound near the Heart, between the Heart and the Ligature, I
opened the said Artery, and I saw some Blood come out at every pulse; till the
Heart grew quite to languish, for then somewhat came away after three or four
pulses only: because so little was thrust from the Heart, that it could not be
moved upwards till some quantity of it was collected, nor pass out at the upper
orifice of the Artery.

Also I cut off the tip of an Heart and setting the same upright, I observed
though the Ventricles were not full, at every pulse somewhat was shed forth;
which also Harvey notes in his 2. Chapter. Yea and when the Heart is cut
through the middle, there ceased not to come somewhat out, till either the Beast
died, or the Blood congealed so in the upper part, as to make a kind of small
Skin, so that the Blood could flow no more that way. And certainly somewhat must
needs come out of the Heart at every pulse, because there in the Heart is
always made more strait, as shall afterward appear.

Now, how much comes from the Viz. about half an ounce at every pulse.
Heart at every pulse, we cannot determine. this I can witness, that out of the
Heart of a Rabbit there has come at every pulse half a dram of blood, and out
of the Heart of a great Water-spaniel half an ounce: yet I conceive more comes
out, when a live Creature is Diffected, than when it is in health. And if a man
would determine by conjecture from what we have seen, how much may come out of
the Heart of a Man in health at every pulse, I shall not be against them who
say that out of the Heart of a Man at every pulse half an ounce of Blood is
shed into the Arteria aorta.

Butlet us suppose it is but a scruple; seeing the Heart makes above three
thousand pulses in one hour, there must above ten pound of blood pass every
hour through the Heart, which is more than we eat, and more than the Liver can
supply the Heart withal.

So that must needs be, that the Blood which has once past the So that the
Blood (...) circularly.
Heart, must flow thither again, and from it return again into the Arteries. So
that there is a circular motion of the Blood, from the Vena cava into the
Heart, from the Heart into the Arteries, from the Arteries into the Veins, out
of which it returns again into the Heart, and thence into the Arteries.

Truly, I cannot sufficiently wonder, that in so many Ages past, this Which
motion of the Blood was not unknown to the Ancients.
motion of the Blood has been unknown, seeing I find sundry, and those no
small intimations thereof in the ancient Writers.

In the Volume of the Works of Hippocrates, The Author of the first Book de
Victus ratione, attributes three circular motions to our Heat and Humors,
whereby they are moved inward and outward from diverse parts.

Hippocrates in the middle of his Book de Ossium Natura, The Veins To
Hippocrates in Foetins Edi^^on page 344.
(under which he comprehends the Arteries) being spread says he, through the
Body, do cause a fluxion and motion, sending many branches from one. And page
277.
this one, whence it has its original and where it ends I cannot find. For it
keeps in a circular course, so that you can find no beginning. and it will
appear plainly to him that examins the place, that he understands this Circle
to be chiefly in the distribution of the Humors.

As also in the End of his Book de Na^ura humana. The great Veins do mutually
afford page 229.
nourishment one to another the internal to the external, and then again to the
internal.

And more plainly the Author of the Book de alimen^^. There is one beginning of
all that nourish, and one end of all* and the same is the beginning and the
End: and therefore a little after he subjoyns these words: The Aliment (...)
into the Hair and Nails, and from the inner parts into the outer Surface; from
the external parts the nourishment comes from the outer surface to the most
inward parts: there is one conflux, one conspiration and one consent of all.

And Diogenes Apolloni^^a seems not to To Diogi^^^ Apolloniata.
have differed from this Opinion, in Aristotle his 3* de Historia Animalium
chap. 2. The must thick Blood is sucks by the fleshy parts, and that which
redounds into these places viz. the greater (...), becomes thin, hot, and
fro^^hy.

TABLE ^.
The FIGURE Explained.
AAAA. The Abdomen or Pa^ch of a Dog opened BB. The Midriff. CCCC. The Call
turned inside ^^^, toward the Chest, that the inner parts there of might be
more visible. DDD. Three lobes or laps of the Liver turned a little to the
right hand. ^EE. Certain little portions of the Pancreas which is cut off, that
the following Vessels might come into sight. F. The left Kidney covered with
its Coat. G. The upper hollow part of the Spleen, together with the adjacent
Fat. H. The middle part of the Spleen, about which Vessels are inserted. I. The
lowest part of the Spleen. KKKK. The G^^s moved downwards, that the following
Vessels might be visible. LLLL. The Mesentery. MM. The splenick Artery. N. Part
of the Vena splenica annexed to the Trunk of Vena porta, which falls in, upon
the Ligature. OOO. A portion of the Vena splenica and three branches arising
therefrom, which are implanted into the spleen, and do very much swell upon the
Ligature. PP. The left Mesenterick Artery. Q. A portion of the Vena Mesenterica
sinistra, next to the Trunk of Vena porta, falling in as empty, upon the
Ligature. R. The lower part of the Vena Mesenterica sinistra, ready to be
divided into branches, swelling by means of the Ligature. SSS. The Mesaraick
Veins, therefore more full and swollen, because the Mesenterick Vein is tied.
TTTT. The rest of the Mesaraicks, not so swollen, because their Trunk is not
(...)*


page 364



Yea and those things which Plato in his Timaeus delivers concerning the Blood,
are To Plato.
more suitable to this Opinion than the common.

Aristotle himself may easily be drawn to To Aristotle.
this Opinion. For thus says he in his Book de Somno chap. 3. Every i^ability
of Sense is not sleep, but that only which is caused by the v^poration of
Meats, for that which is rarefied, must needs after a sort be lifted up, and
afterward return and flow back like an Euripus: for the Heat of every Animal,
must needs naturally move upwards, and when it is come aloft, it soon after
circulates and discends again.

It is to be feared, that those Writers which followed the former did not
sufficiently study the motion of the blood, yea that they ob^cured the same,
because what the former attributed to their Veins, that is to say the Veins and
Arteries, these later attributed to the Veins in opposition to, and as distinct
from the Arteries. And seeing Galen a most excellent Physician, was not able to
reform all things perfectly: and the later Greeks, Arabians, and Latins, have
too close followed or transcribed him, hence I suppose it is, that this motion
of the blood has remained concealed till this present Age.

Wherein that incomparable Paulus Servita the Venetian, did acurately But in
this Age found out ^sh by Paulus Servita.
observe the Fabric of the Valves in the Veins, which Observation of his that
great Anatomist Fabritius ab Aquapendente afterward published, and out of that
constitution of the Valves and other Experiments he collected this motion of
the Blood, and asserted the same in an excellent Treat se, which I understand
is preserved to this very day amongst the Venetians.

The most learned William Harvey being taught by the foresaid Paulus Servita,
did more accurately search into this motion of the Blood, augmented the same
with Inventions of his own, proved it strongly, and published it to the World
in his own name.

Such has been the Invention and such the Fate of this motion of the Blood.

And let us now further enquire, whether through all the Veins and Arteries
Published in Print by William Harvey.
the Blood has this Motion or whether in some others it has some other
motion? Concerning which thing, that I might be more certainly informed, I
contemplated the motion of the Blood in many Veins and Arteries of liveing
Creatures, and I have found, besides what has been already said of the Veins
and Arteries of the Arms and Legs, that the Now this motion is made through all
the Arteries and Veins of the Body.
blood is moved through the Spermarick Arteries to the Stones; through the
Veins from the Stones to the left Emulgent or Vena cava in the right side:
through the Mesenterick Arteries, to the Guts: through the Veins to the ^am^s
mesentericus: through the Caeliack Arteries to the Spleen; through the Ramus
splenicus of Ve^a porta forthwith to the Liver: through the branches of the
Arteria caeliaca, which answer to the following Veins to the Stomach and Call;
through the Gastrick and Epiploick Veins, to the Ramus splenicus: that the
short Arterial and Venal Vessels, are branches of the caeliacal Artery and the
Vena splenica, which when they are come unto the middle space, betwixt the
Stomach and the Spleen, are divided into two branches* one of which goes to the
Stomach, the other to the Spleen; by this branch of the Artery the Blood goes
to the Spleen, and by the branch of the Stomach to the Stomach; and by the
venal branches to the Trunk of Vas breve, from the Stomach and the Spleen it is
moved through the emulgent Arteries to the Vena cava: by the coronal Artery of
the Heart into the Vein; out of the coronal vein of the Heart, into the Vena
cava: by the Intercostal Arteries into the Pleura; out of the (...) by the
Veins into the Azygos, and thence into Vena cava* And this I found by binding
the Veins and Arteries (...) live Anatomies; which did swell in that part which
di^ look toward those parts, from which we have showed the course of Blood to
come, and the other parts did not only grow empty but quite settle and fall in.
And I was very careful, not to bind an Artery with a Vein, for then the Artery
swelling toward the Heart, would have ra sed the Vein above it, and so it
would have seemed that the Vein was filled on both sides the Ligature.

Now in the Head and Neck I saw, and that in a live Goose most easily Yea of
the Head.
and in an Hen, that the jugular being tied, did swell from the Head toward
the Ligature, and was emptied from the Ligature toward the Cava, so that it is
there also man fest, that the Blood returns from the Head through the Veins
into the Heart. But if it should come to the jugular veins I cannot determine,
since by reason of the hardness of the Skull, I could not accurately dissect
the living Brain, but that the Beast would first die: but credible it is
nevertheless, that it flows through the carotick and cervical Arteries unto the
four Ventricles of the Brain, for they have passages open to the said
Ventricles, For those most learned Men Franciscus Sylvius and Franc. Vander
Shagen, have told me, that the fibrous substance being pulled away which
frequently is found congealed in the Veins and Arteries of dead bodies; when it
was drawn back in the carotick Artery, it discovered a certain motion, as far
as to the third Ventricle of the Brain, and veri^y, since the blood out of the
Ventricles, through the jugular veins, flows back into the Heart, the
Ventricles cannot receive it elsewhere, then from the Arteries. But whether the
Arteries do shed it immediately into the Ventricles, or into the branches which
arise from the Ventricles, is not very easily discerned* because the Arteries,
are hardly distinguished from those little branches, seeing the Arteries also
have only one Coat in the Brain: but I am apt to believe, that the Arteries
empty their blood, into those little branches of the Ventricles, rather then
into the Ventricles themselves; because I have observed those vessels which are
inserted into the Ventricles to be greatest near the ventricles, as branches
are wont to be at their Original.

And thus it is in grown persons; but in the Child in the Womb, the Circulation
Yea in the Child in the Womb.
seems to be somewhat otherwise, and thus I conceive it is. The Blood out of
the Mothers Womb, does not go into the Umbilical Arteries, which according to
the Observation of Arantius, are not joined to the Womb; but it enters into the
Umbilical Vein, and from thence into the Liver, the Vena cava, and right
Ventricle of the Heart; for the Heart beats in the Child though it be
imperfect. Out of the right Ventricle it goes into the Vena arteriosa; but
because the Lungs do not breath, and therefore are not opened, they cannot
receive the blood plentifully, no^ send it to the Arteria venosa; and therefore
it goes out of the Vena arteriosa by a peculiar passage into the Aorta, and
likewise by a peculiar passage or hole of the Vena cava getting into the
Arteria venosa, it is poured into the left Earlet of the Heart, and into the
left Ventricle thereof. Out of the left Ventricle of the Heart, just as that
out of the Vena Arteriosa, it enters into the Arteria Aorta; so that in the
Womb-child Nature uses the two Ventricles for one, least in the Child in the
womb, which ought to have much but no intense heat, and which must not be dry,
the Blood being twice boiled should be burnt, being destitute of the cooling
and Fanning action of the Lungs. Out of the Art^^ia Aorta the Blood-goes to the
Umbilical Arteries; for they being bound, the part toward the Child, does
pulse and swell: the other part toward the Womb is void of pulsation. Out of
the Umbilical Arteries it goes to the Placenta or Womb-cake; where the Arteries
are joined to the Veins by manifest. Anastomoses, and by those Anastomoses the
blood entering into the Vein, is again carried through all the forementioned
journey.

These are the Vessels by which the blood flows from the Heart. But from It
goes out of the Arteries into the Veins.
the Vessel of the Arteries it goes into the Veins after a double manner; first
and most usually by Anastomoses, by which the Arteries are joined to the Veins,
By Anastomoses.
which Anastomoses are sometimes great and in the greater Vessels as about the
Spleen, in the Bladder, in the Womb, in the Womb-liver. And the most accurate
B^slerus observes the like Anastomosis of the Arteria Aorta into the Vena cava
of the Belly, but I could never yet be so happy as to find it in the Body of
Man or Beast. And therefore they are not all in the extreme parts of the Body,
but some in the middle parts: and therefore we see in a Cripple whose limbs are
cut off, the same motion of the blood continued out of the Arteries into the
Veins. Secondly it seems also possible that Blood may pass out of the Arteries
into And through the Flesh.
the Veins, through the flesh it self: for we see when a Vein is opened till
the color change, Inflammations fall, because the Blood shed out of the
Vessels, is drawn out of the Flesh. But I conceive the passage of the Blood
this way is but seldom and in small quantity.

So that it is now, I conceive, clear, what the motion of the Blood is, and by
And that motion of the Blood.
what ways it is accomplished: it follows that we enquire, what kind of motion
it is, and how it is performed.

I have observed that this Motion of Is continual.
the Blood out of the Heart into the Veins, from the Veins into the Heart, is
continual never cleasing, nor once stopped or interrupted for a moment of time.
And the truth is, seeing the said motion is made, as we shall see anon, because
the Heart receives and transmits, and seeing this motion lasts perpetually all
the life long, the said motion of the blood, cannot but naturally be continual.

Also the motion of the Blood is quick, for an Artery or Vein being bound
compressed, it immediately Quick.
swells and grows round and hard: and when the ligature and compressure are
taken away, the blood is seen to be swiftly moved.

But how soon the blood performs its Circuit from the Heart and to So that the
whole Circuit or round is performed in less than a quarter of an hour.
the Heart again, I cannot precisely determine. We observe it is done sooner by
an Anastomosis near the Heart, than by one off; nor will I be much against him
that shall say the greatest Circuit from the remotest parts of the body is
performed in less than a quarter of an hour; for the blood passes with
exceeding celerity. Howbeit it goes not so swiftly, as we see it leap out when
a vein or Artery is opened, because then it is moved in the free and open Air;
but within the body it is compressed to lift up its vessels, and to thrust on
the foregoing blood.

And therefore we see an Artery being cut open especially if near the heart, is
sooner emptied than the heart can supply it with new blood.

But if this be true, why do Fevers return once in a quarter of an hour, Nor
do the Fits of Agues argue any other.
seeing the Fit seems then to happen, when the corrupt matter comes to the
heart? whereas now some fits come every day, others every third, and some every
fourth day. Truly, I will not deny, that it may fall out, that when the Corrupt
matter comes to the heart, the Fit may happen, as Harvey has an example
thereof, in the 16* chapter of his Book. But I do not think it is necessary,
for some portion may slip out of the corrupt Seminary, or some sooty stream may
arise, and go into the heart and so raise the Fever, as most Fevers are seen
to arise from the Inflammation of the Parts, which the Imposthume being opened
and the Quittor removed, do cease. And as such kind of symptomatick Fevers,
even so also may some intermitting Fevers and Agues happen, by reason of ^ome
matter shut up, within or without the Vessels, which by putrefying every day,
every third day, or every fourth day, regurgitating or fuming into the large
Vessels, may bring the Fit.

In continual Fevers I confess, whose Nor the Exacerbations of Fevers.
matter is to stick to the larger vessels, it is harder to show a reason why
there should not be a Fit or Exacerbation at every Circuit of the blood. But I
conceive I may alledg the same cause which is vulgarly given, why continual
Fevers are not allwaies alike feirce; because, though the matter be
sufficiently near the Heart, yet it does not cause a Paroxism till it have
attained a certain degree of putrefaction: and that the Fit lasts so long, till
that putrid matter be evacuated, which touches the Heart, or sends its Fumes
thereto. But I suppose no man, because of the reason of the return of
Ague-fits, which is altogether abstruse and unknown, will deny the motion of
the blood to be very quick, which is a very manifest thing.

Besides swiftness, the blood has vehemence in its motion, which appears This
motion is also vehement.
from what we have said touching the Hardness and Tension or stretching, which
the Veins and Arteries acquire when they are bound: for nothing can be
distended by a liquid Substance into an extreme hardness especially upwards,
unless it be vehemently driven thereinto or retained therein. But this
vehemence, of motion is chiefly near the Heart, Not of like vehemence in the
Arteries and Veins.
removed from which it grows by degrees lesser and lesser, so that the little
Arteries in the remote parts, do not pulse, unless some impulse of blood
greater than ordinary do happen, as we observe to happen in Fevers, therefore
it is that the Veins are not seen to pulse, because the impulse of the Blood is
less in them than it is in the smallest Arteries; and because the Veins ^oyned
to the Arteries by Anastomosis, when they go from them, divide themselves into
more little branches and twigs than the Arteries do, for when Rivers are
divided into diverse Arms the force of the waters motion is abated. And
therefore when some Arms of a Vein are shut, either by something pressing them,
as in certain Tumors, or somewhat which stops them, as in the Varices, the
blood slipping back by its own weight, the force of the bloods motion is then
again observed, and the Veins are seen to pulse: for I have often observed in
the Veins which are transparent through the Skin, that most of those
palpitations in the parts, which are thought to proceed from Winds, are nothing
else but the pussations of the veins.

And because the motion is more vehement Yet the same Quickness in both.
in the Arteries than in the Veins, it seems at first sight to be swifter also
in the Arteries than in the Veins just as Men, Horses, and other Animals which
move themselves with great labor, and through mistake judged many times to
make the greater speed. For the Blood forced through the Arteries cannot all
pass through the Anastomoses, because it comes out of a wide place into a
narrow, and therefore it is accumulated in the Arteries, they are dilated, in
which dilation they persist a small time, wherefore in the middle of the
dilation and in the whole time of the rest, that same force does very little
further the quickness of the bloods motion, which motion is in the mean time
more free in the veins, because it comes out of a strait into a wide place, and
is performed by more ways. Now Reason does teach us in this Case, that in this
motion of blood, the swiftness hereof must be alike in the Arteries and the
Veins; for as much blood as the Liver sends to the heart made of new Chyle, and
as much nourishment as the Arteries give to the parts, must be repayed, or the
Heart will at last be void of all moisture, which thing also sense confirms,
for the Vena cava pulses so often, in that whole Tract from the Liver to the
Jugulum, and therefore drives into the heart, as the Artery is observed to
pulse and therefore to receive from the heart. But we shall hereof speak more
anon.

Howbeit in the Arteries themselves, the blood is moved more Yet of greater
quickness when the Heart beats.
aimbly when the Heart drives it; from which Quickness it departs by little and
little, when the Heart begins to rest and is afterward dilated. Yea and in the
Veins themselves, the motion of blood is more vehement and quick when the Heart
pulses; which as we have observed in live Anatomies, so have we often noted the
same, when a Vein has been opened in the Arm, in which the Veins were not much
distended with the Ligature. Also the foresaid palpitations of the Veins, seem
to proceed from no other cause then that the Veins being straightened by the Blood
sliding back, or by some other means, when the blood cannot by its force make
it self way, it lifts the Vein up, which falls again, when that forcible
endeavor is abated or the Vein gives a freer passage to the Blood flowing
through the same.

But I do not conceive that the blood which is once carried, for One portion of
blood does not always go the same way.
examples sake to crural Veins, is continually carried the same ways, but that
when it is returned to the Heart, it is mixed with that blood which comes out of
other parts, and is so promiscuously distributed to the parts of the Body: for
so the parts may be the better nourished, if they have always new blood, out
of which they may draw, that which may best serve to nourish and strengthen
them: so Plants do best grow, when they are transplanted into new Soils.

This is the whole Manner of the Bloods motion: and also of The Vital Spirits
are moved with the Blood.
the motion of the Vital Spirits, seeing they are mingled with the Blood.

I have often endeavored to The Animal Spirits motion through the Nerves
cannot be observed.
search out the motion of the Animal Spirits, but I could not eisewhere observe
it save in the Muscles, which seemed to them to be distended broadwayes and
deepwayes, and being cut asunder to tremble and pant. For the Nerves being
bound neither swell nor are they extended, and being cut in sunder they show no
other motion, save that they contract themselves. And it is a very easy matter
to bind the Nerves of the sixth pare, which freely wander through the Chest.

But the motion of the Chyle through the milkie Veins, is most But the motion
of the Chylus easily through the milkie Veins.
manifest. Now it is not so continual as that of the Blood, because there is
not always a supply of Chylus. And* when it wanders What kind of motion that
i^.
out of the Guts through the milkie Veins, it goes quicker than the Blood it
self, and the Veins being bound do swell immediately. And therefore they do not
long appear in live Anatomies, nor are they found in dead Carcasses; unless
some obstacle do hinder the motion of the Chyle. And in that being bound they
do not so swell as to grow hard, it seems to be a Sign that the motion of the
Chyle, i^ not so vehement as that of the Blood: peradventure because ^h^ Chyle
is to be moved through a smaller space, the ^ike violence of motion was not
requisite.

But it is now time to enquire into The Cause of the Bloods motion.
the Causes of these motions, and first of the motion of the Blood.

Whatever the Cause is, either it must be moved by ^^ inbred virtue of faculty,
or by some motion which must ^^ referred to carrying, drawing, or thrusting.

That the Blood is moved in this manner by its own proper Virtue, we Is not an
i^b^^^ power thereof.
cannot observe, either from the Blood received in a Basin or shed into the
body, which that it should be in a moment corrupted is hard to say: nor can we
see such a spontaneous motion ^^ any inanimate thing. And whereas Harvey
relates Chap. 4. that when the Earlet was still, he observed the motion of the
Blood; I likewise have observed the same, and likewise when the Heart was
quiet; but withal, that motion was imparted to the Blood from the Vena ca^^,
and that in the Heart from the Earlet, as we shall see anon.

That the Blood is here carried by the Nor is the blood carried by the Spirits.
Spirits cannot by any Argument be proved: and they by their lightness should
move the Blood upwards, which we see here to be moved downwards and sidewayes.

And therefore it remains that either the blood must be drawn or thrust.

That the blood is thrust forwards, Nor is it voided by reason of rar^faction
only.
Men of excellent wits do conceive, because the Hearts heat immeasurably
rarifying the same, it requires a greater place, and that therefore it dilates
and lifts up the Heart; and seeing it cannot be contained in the dilated Heart,
it is poured with such violence into the Vena Anteriosa, and the Arteria Aorta,
that it distends all the Arteries and makes them pulse. And they bring this
Argument for their Opinion, that the Heart of an Eel or any other Animal when
it leaves pulsing, if it be warmed by Fire held under it, it is seen to pulse
again. But whether may not that pulse happen, because the Spirit being by that
heat made more lusty, can better assist that cause which moves the pulse in the
Heart; just as, when the Guts and Muscles are heated in a live Dissection, in
which nevertheless there is no ebullition, the motion seem* to be restored. For
there is indeed only a certain light Rarifaction proceeding from a certain
warmth in the Heart; no ebullition or sudden diffusion. And truly I have often
seen in strong Do^s, that the Blood does n^^ leap out of the Heart by reason of
Rarifaction; wh^^^ Heart the tip being cut off; when through the Efflux of
blood it was not half filled, being set upright, it was nofilled by
rarifaction: but the Constriction following, that portion of blood which was
left in the Heart, was spirt^^ out above four Foots distance, so that my self
and others by me (for many were present) were bespattered there with, whence it
is manifest, that the blood is driven by the part.

It is also driven because the blood being so changed, is troublesome to the
Heart and those parts. For if the whole Hearts or the tip thereof living and
Dissected, or other greater particle, be pricked with a Penknife or ^^ Pin; as
often as it is pricked, so often it will move it self as by Natural motion,
though it seem long ago to have lost all motion.

And that the Blood is driven by the Put it is drive: by the Vena cava into the
Earl^t.
Vena cava into the right Earlet of the Heart, I have manifestly seen in the
dissection of live Creatures: for in all motions of the Heart, the first
beginning of Motion is s^ or no, because the Cava was knit to the Earlet and
the Heart, we ^ut-the Heart and the Ea^let quite off i^ (...) D^^s, ^^ the Vena
(...), and we observe, that (...) the Vana cava did a very little pulse, and at
every time did send forth a little Blood. And therefore the Vena cava has
certain fleshy fibers, for the most part, about the Heart, which elsewhere you
shall not find in the Vena cava: but they may be seen very evidently in the
Vena cava of a Man, an O^, a Dog. Now the motion of the Vena cava is most
evident near the Heart, yet for the most part I have observed it also in live
Dogs, all along that passage from the Liver and from the Jugulum, as far as to
the Heart.

The right Earlet drives that Blood which it receives, by a certain tension and
Out of it into the Heart.
constriction into the right Ventricle of the Heart.: for also in the Earlet
the motion or constriction is a little sooner than it is in the Heart. And the
right Ventricle of the Heart being cut open as far as to the Earlet, at every
constriction there manifestly appeared somewhat to be droven out of the Earlet
into the Heart, which also Harvey observes in his fourth Chapter.

So that the Blood comes chiefly by pulsion, into the right Ventricle of the
Heart. Yet is it drawn also?
But is it not also drawn both into the Earlet, and the right Ventricle? I
conceive so: for with part of that Blood which they receive, they ought to be
nourished within: now that which must nourish, must be drawn, to the end the
part may receive that Blood which is most useful to it; for by pulsion also
that which is unprofitable is sent away, as Galen excellently (according to his
wonted manner in other Cases) does infer in his 1, 2, and 3. Books de N^^. fac.
Now this drawing is not only of that blood which is near, but also of that
which is far off, as all parts have that faculty, least they should be soon
destitute of nourishment.

But does not the Heart also draw, because it is widened, to avoid Vacuum, as
we are wont to say? It is not likely, because in its dilatation there can be no
fear of Vacuum, as shall hereafter more evidently appear.

As the Blood comes to the right Ventricle of the Heart, so also it comes to
the The cause of the motion into the left Ventricle, is the same.
left, save that we could not observe the impulse of the Blood, when the Lungs
fall, to be so strong out of the Arteria Venosa into the left Earlet, as out of
the Vena cava; yet there is manifestly some.

But the Impulse into both Earlets and And* happens in both places at one
moment.
into both the Ventricles, happens at one and the same moment of time: save in
Creatures ready to dye, in which we have observed, that both Earlets and both
Ventricles do not pulse at one and the same time.

But when the Blood is thus driven into the Ventricles of the Heart; the Heart
has no motion evident to the Eye, but putting our Finger upon the Heart, we
perceive somewhat to enter into the Heart, and that the Heart becomes fuller,
which also Harvey has observed, in his 4. Chapter. Yea, we have observed that
the Earlet has pulsed seventy, sometimes an hundred pulses, before any motion
of the Heart followed.

So that we see how the Blood is moved into the Heart. Let us now see how it is
moved into the Arteries.

The Blood is moved into the Arteries by way of pulsion or driving: The Blood
is driven out of the Heart into the Arteries when the Heart is contracted.
for^ an hole being made in the Heart, we saw Blood come forth, when the Heart
contracted it self; also the Aorta or Vena Arteriosa being cut off from the
Heart, we saw Blood poured forth when the Heart did straiten it self; the tip
of the Heart being cut off and the Heart ser upright, we saw the Blood expelled
and leaping out of the Heart; the Heart being cut a thwart in the middle, we
saw the Blood expelled in the Systole, but we never saw it go out in the
Diastole. And whereas some say they have seen in live Dissections the Blood
come out in the Diastole, I conceive they were deceived, by taking that to be a
Diastole, which is indeed the Systole, which also that rare Anatomist Columbus,
observed in his 14. Book de Re Anatomica.

For in the motion of the Heart, we must exactly distinguish betwixt the
Constriction, Quiet, and Dilatation thereof.

In the Constriction or Systole of the The Cause, of the Constriction of the
Heart.
Heart, the point of the Heart draws near to the Basis, and therefore it
becomes a little broader. And in his Animals in which the Aorta is inferred not
into the Basis of the Heart, but a little toward the middle, as in Rabbits,
E^ls and such like, the Basis also of the Heart draws toward the point. Now
the sides of the Heart, seated against the right and left Ribs, do come one
nearer to another, so that if you shall cut off the tip of either side, so that
it may hang, in the constriction it will return unto the sound side and as it
were into its place. But the side of the Heart against the Breast Bone, is
lifted up, and especially toward the Basis: and so the whole Heart is bent and
stretched on all sides, and that part mea^ the Basis being lift up, seems most
of all to smite the breast, and to make that beating which we feel; although
the point also may do it, which that great Anatomist Riolanus observed, in the
sixth Book of his Anthropologia Chapter, 12.

And that I might be the better assured, that this motion of the Heart now
described, is the Constriction thereof. I have sometimes cut off the tip of the
Heart, and sometimes cut it asunder athwart through the middle; And I
manifestly saw, when it made the foresaid motion, that the Cavity of the
Ventricles became less, and my Finger being put into the hole, I felt the
Ventricles contract themselves to ^y Finger. And the self same motion which I
have showed in the Heart makes externally when it contracts it self, it shows
also inwardly; save that there seems to be no motion in the Septum intermedium:
peradventure, least the Septum to straiten the left Ventricle, should come
nearer the left side of the Heart, it should leave the right Ventricle wider.

This is the ^ension and Constriction Which is performed by help of the fibers.
of the Heart, whereby the Blood is forced out of the Ventricles of the Heart,
into the Vena Arteriosa and the Aorta. And when it is languishing, it is made
only by the help of those fibers wherewith the flesh of the Heart is furnished;
but to make a stronger constriction, those greater fibers concur, which are
seen in the Ventricles of the Heart, as I have often observed, in Dissecting
the Ventricles of the Heart in live Anatomies.

Now those fibers in the Ventricles and in the substance of the Heart it self,
do manifestly cause the Constriction, because they are on all sides distended
broadwise, and therefore they are abbreviated as to length; just as all the
musculous parts of our Body, do in like manner perform their motion: and
therefore when we would chew ou^ meat we feel our temporal Muscle swell and
grow hard. By reason of this swelling the Cavity of the Ventricles of the
Heart, is made more sirait. And this Turor of the Flesh and greater fibers
begins at the Basis, and proceeds gradually unto the ^ip. In regard of which
Motion if Hypocrates in the Beginning of his Book de Cord, called the Heart a
strong Muscle, he did truly after an elegant manner express the manner of its
Motion.

When the Heart by its Constriction The Heart after its Constriction returns to
its Natural state.
has forced the Blood into the Arteries, it returns to its, Natural state. For
the point returns from the Basis, as also the Basis from the point, in those
Animals which have no passage into the Aorta, in their basis; but the left and
right side of the Heart, extends it self toward the Ribs, and that side which
looks toward the Breast Bone falls in, especially there where it answers to
the Orifice of the Aorta, and then the whole Heart rests and is found loose and
soft.

And unless that upper side did settle and fall in, the Heart would be dilated
in this return hereof to its natural state, as is easy to see and feel, when
the heart is dissected. But that upper side must needs fall in, least the heart
being emptied by foregoing constriction should admit a Vaccuum. But when out of
Vena Cava and the Arteria Venosa, new blood is forced into the heart, and the
Blood contained therein is rarefied by heat, then the upper side rises: and the
other sides, as we said before, remain extended. And so the And then it is
dilated.
heart is then in its dilatation; nor is there any other dilatation of the
heart save this, to be observed.

In the Particles of a live heart dissected and taken out of the Body, there
is no other dilatation then a remission or slackening from Constriction. Indeed
in those particles where constriction is ceased, there remains a seeing kind of
Palpitation; but that is another kind of motion proceeding from the spirit
contained in the flesh and seeking its way out; such as may also frequently be
seen in the muscles whole or dissected, in Creatures dissected presently upon
their death.

So that the Dilatation and Constriction of the heart happens after the same
manner as that of other parts, the Stomach, Gutts, Bladder, Womb, which are
distended by what is sent into them, which when they have voided, they return
to their natural state.

Now we cannot better observe this motion of the Heart, then in those Beasts
which have only one ventricle in their Hearts, or if they have two, when the
Animals begin to languish, otherwise when the Creatures are strong, the motion
is hardly discerned because of its Swistness; also because the two ventricles
present those motions doubled; and because the Cone of the right ventricle,
seeing it is less high then the left, when it is drawn back to the Basis, it
makes an oblique motion.

But let us return to our business, and let us see further how the blood The
Blood is driven out of the greater into the lesser Arteries.
out of the Arteries near the Heart, is spread through the Arteries of the whole
Body, now it is done by a manifest Impulse or driveing or any Artery being
bound, at the Ligature it swells very much, and is stretched to an extreme
hardness.

Notwithstanding the Heaviness of the Blood furthers its motion downwards, and
therefore the Heart seems to have been placed nearer the Head then the Heels.

It is also likely that the Blood is drawn into all the Arteries, to the end
that they Yet it is drawn withal.
and their neighboring parts may be nourished with convenient Blood.

But that the Arteries should draw by Not necessarily by dilatation of the
Artery.
being widened, there seems no necessity: for the Blood may be driven forward
only by impulse, and the Arteries may drive the same: for an Artery being broke
and an Aneurisma made in the Flesh, the Aneurisma in the flesh, is perceived to
pulse after the same manner as the Artery; wherein manifestly the flesh does
not draw the blood by dilatation, but the blood is driven into the same. A
miserable example whereof we latlely saw in the most expert Dr. Johannes
Elemannus, in whom an Artery breaking, the Aneurisma possessed a fourth part of
his Chest. And the like was observed by Riolanus in the 6. Book of his
Anshropologia chap. 12. And that indeed the pulse of the arteries is caused by
the Impulse of Blood, the waving, creeping, pismire pulses seem to show, and
many others which manifestly imitate the motion of the Blood in the artery.

True it is indeed, in that Book of Galen whether blood be contained in the Nor
does Galens experiment show any other thing.
Arteries, in the last words it is asserted* that an hollow Reed being thrust
into the arteries, and the artery tied above the Reed, the artery does not
pulse beyond the ligature, though the blood may be driven through the Reed. But
I suspect that place is mained and wants somewhat, because after the manner
there described, the operation can very rarely and hardly succeed* for a free
artery is there prescribed to be opened out of which when it is open, every
body knows what a world of blood leaps out, so that either the Creature will
die, or through its weakness, no arteries at least not those more remote can
pulse.

But suppose the place is perfect, and that the operation shall succeed as it
is there described, it may happen that the Creature quite languishing because
of the flux of Blood, the pulse might be felt on this side the Reed, because
the Reed being thrust in, rendering the artery more narrow, might in part stop
the blood, so that it might easily fill the artery and lift it up. So I have
many times seen, arreries which showed either a languishing or no pulse,
manifestly pulsing, when they were compressed not very far from the Heart. But
Galen observed no pulse beyond the Reed, because through the Reed much narrower
than the artery, the artery received little blood. And that such a thing might
easily happen, I have observed in a Rabbit, into the Aorta whereof, it being
tied on each side we thrust a little Reed, but because the ligature being
loosed the Beast died, we thought it not worth the while to bind the artery
above the Reed and we thought we saw some pulse as far as to the Reed, but we
could perceive none beyond the Reed.

Moreover we could never make that experiment succeed, because it is not easy
to find a convenient Artery, and when it is found and duly opened, the Creature
most speedily dies, either because of Bloodshed, or (which may seem strange) by
Convulsions.

So that we can see no other, but that the Blood being forced may pass through
the Arteries, and that by it also the Arteries may be distended* nor seems it
necessary to call any other Cause to make the Arteries pulse, seeing the
forealleadged Cause may suffice. Yet Nature is wont frequently Yet Galen has
certain tokens that the dilatation of the Arteries helps their motion. De usu
pulls. cap. 5. An sanguis in Art. c. 8.
to call more assistances to the performance of her works then do indeed to us
seem necessary, who cannot always dive into her Secrets. So here, some tokens
are observed by Galen, that besides that dilatation they receive from the
impulse of the Blood, the Arteries do also endeavor their own dilatation. That
all the Arteries of the body both in sound persons and Creatures, and in live
Anatomies, do pulse in one and the same moment: but nothing that is moved to
distance, can be every where at one moment; and therefore not at the same
moment make distention every where. The Guts when blown up by Anatomists, or
Pudding-makers, are seen to be distended in the parts near the Blower first,
before the remoter parts are distended. True indeed it is, that the Arteries
are not empts as the Guts, but they are distended being partlyfilled with
blood: yet, seeing that blood which comes out of the Heart must thrust forward
that which is next it, and that again that which is next it, and so forward
until the Arteries be filled and distended every where, it does not seem,
though the motion be performed out of a wide into a narrow place, that it can
be performed in one moment* just as we see twenty stones which the Boys set in
a row, the greatest first; when the first is beaten down, all the rest do not
fall in one moment. And therefore we may suspect, that the Diastole of the
Arteries, is caused by the impulse of blood, and by their own proper
dilatation: and that both these causes contribute to the bloods motion.

Hence also it appears, that this same But the impulse i here caused only by
the Heart.
impulse of the Blood is made only by the Heart, nor does one part of the
Arteries drive it into another: for that part which drives by constriction,
that cannot in the same moment be dilated, but all the Arteries are dilated in
a moment.

And thus the blood is moved through the Arteries; and out of the Out of the
Arteries into the Veins, out of the smaller Veins into the greater
Arteries into the Veins, out of the lesser Veins into the greater and the Vena
cava it self, the blood is moved also by Impulse. For any Vein being bound in
living Creatures, it falls in, and grows lank toward the Heart, and it is
filled in that part which is more remote from the Heart,

And this same Pulsion to the Heart, seems to happen from any part of a It is
driven.
Vein, for a Vein bound or compressed in a living Arm it is not only sttretched
in the part remoter from the Heart, but By every Particle of the Vein.
also in the rest there of nearer the Heart it falls in and is emptied; which
nearer part if you also tie that also will be distended beyond the Ligature,
and will swell. Now this Pulsion is caused by the Fibers whereof the Veins are
constituted.

We conceive nevertheless that the veins do also draw, least they should
receive And drawn.
the blood without choice, and that they may draw to themselves that which is
most useful: howbeit they seem to receive the blood more by Pulsion then by
traction or drawing, because the veins being bound, are wonderfully distended.

In the Vena cava there is a certain Storehouse of Blood, wherein blood is
treasured up for future Uses, when it is more plentiful then that all of it
need be sent unto the Heart.

And all these are Causes of the Natural motion of the blood. To which So also
by Pulsion the Chyle is moved out of the Stomach.
the causes of the motion of the Chyle, are not unlike: for the Stomach
contracting it self by its Fibers, squeezes out as much Chyle as is digested,
And by that pressure it seems also to open the Pylorus: for there seems not to
be any spontaneous motion in the Pylorus, such as is in the Stomach or the Guts.

The Chyle stays not long in the Guts, but is presently driven out by the
constriction Through the Guts.
of the transverse Fibers: and while many fibers, and which mutually follow one
another, do act, the Chyle is pressed, nor can it all slip downwards, whereupon
some of the pressed chyle slips into the milkie Veins; yet least that the
Chylus should slip too soon to the Fundament, it is stopped by the constriction
of the lower transverse Fiber: and being thus shut, and compressed above and
beneath, it is pressed through the wrinkled Coat of the Gut, as it were through
a strainer into the milkie Veins. Now this same constriction of the transverse
Fibers, happens in all the thin or small Guts, and in all the thick or round
Guts, in a certain order, and at certain distances of time.

That the Chyle is moved through the milkie Veins into the Veins of the Portae,
By the milkie Veins.
into the Liver, and sometimes also into the Vena cava by pulse, a Ligature does
show.

It is also likely that Chyle is drawn out of the Guts and milkie Veins, for it
is And also drawn.
moved more swiftly out of them, then the Guts or Venae lacteae do seem to
drive or force the same.

The Chylus in the Ramus mesentericus, Vena partae and Vena cava, being mingled
with the blood, is moved by the same cause, which there as we have said, does
move the blood.

Now the Chylus is carried by peculiar Why not through the mesaraick Veins.
Veins, rather then by the Mesaraicks which contain blood, because the
Mesaraicks being to admit blood, were to have their mouths opened into the
Guts, through which the blood would easily have slipped into the Guts. Nor could
the drawing Faculty prevent that inconveniency, which is here much obscurer and
much weaker then the expulsive Faculty.

As this Motion of the Chylus, so also the circular motion of the blood has
its uses and conveniences, of which the principal seem to be these.

That by the continual passage thereof The motion of the blood serves for the
utility of the parts.
through the Heart, the blood is also continually heated, and whiles some blood
goes through seldomer, other blood oftener, there is found in the Veins blood of
all Qualities: which while it is carried into all parts, and Nature unlocks,
and offers all the treasure to them, they may be the better heated, and receive
that Nourishment, which may be most convenient to feed and strengthen them.

But this motion does also contribute And that it may be preserved.
much to the preservation of the blood in its integrity, free from corruption
or putrefaction: for

Vitium capiunt, ni moveantur aquae. Unstirred waters easily corrupt. which is
also most true of the blood, as we may daily see when the Vessels are
obstructed.

It contributes also to the perfection And to perfect the Blood.
of the Blood, whilst by continual motion, it is rarefied and attenuated. But
it makes chiefly toward it perfection, in that the blood is sometimes
attenuated, grows hot, and is rarisied in the Heart, and sometimes again it is
condensed and congeales as it were in the Habit of the Body. For no part in the
Body is horter then the Heart, and none less hot then the Habit of the Body.
And therefore there happens a certain Circulation as it were, not unlike to
that whereby the Chemists make their Spirits most subtle and perfect. For the
blood which is attenuated by heat, after it is condensed by cold, is able to
persist in that thinness, nor does it return to its old thickness: from which
degree of thinness in tract of time it attains to a greater by means of heat,
in which being again condensed by cold, it comes to continue; and so at last it
becomes most fit for the making of vital Spirits.

For this end the blood is moved The blood which is carried to nourish the
part, is not moved circularly.
circularly; but has it not therefore elsewhere another motion? Out of the
smallest Arteries the blood is carried right out into the flesh, that it may
constitute the nameless humor, the Ros, Gluten, and Cambium, nor does it return
hither from whence it came, least the blood flowing through the least, should
hinder these humors from being gleued and assimilated to the parts.

It flows also sometimes chiefly, because it is driven out of the Arteries into
the flesh: and frequently also the chief moving cause is attraction: for the
bones cannot without attraction receive the thicker part of the humor for their
nourishment, and leave the remaining thinner part thereof, unfit to nourish
them in the Vessels.

TABLE. III.
The FIGURE Explained.
AAAA. The vulgar mesaraick Vein and Arteries, derived from the Gatevein called
Porta. BBBB. The milkie Veins discovered by Asellius. C. The Glandule or Kernel
in the Center of the Mesentery which Asellius calls the Pancreas or Sweetbread,
to which all the Branches of the milkie Veins do go. DD. Two milkie Branches
greater then the rest, ascending by the Porta, and inserted into the Liver by
the Opinion of Asellius. EE. The Lobes of the Liver. F. The Gall. GG. The empty
Gut called Jejunum. HH. The Ilium. OO. Glandulous Flesh in Dogs, by the
Duodenum and the Entrance of the Jejunum, which may be called in Dogs, the
lower part of the Pancreas.


page ^^^



Some also there are Nor is there any other motion of the Blood, whereby the
Valves of the Heart are shut.
who suppose, that the blood being carried out of the Heart does go back, and
return again by the Arteries into the Heart. Which they are therefore moved to
think, that they may be able to give a mechanic cause, why the Valves of the
Heart in the Orifice of the Arteries, do fall down and are closed up. I truly
have always esteem that a rare design of Erasistratus, to explain all things
that happen in our Body mechanically, but I account it a rash thing in him to
measure the Wisdom of God by his own Wisdom. And these are to be counted
Engines, which evident reason, and especially Sense do show to be such. Here
contrariwise our Senses observe, that the blood goes through the Arteries from
the Heart not to the Heart; and in a rare and languishing Pulse, that the
Artery does not swell last, where it is knit to the Heart, as it should do if
that Opinion were true, but first of all. Also that the Valves are not shut by
the blood running back, we have this sign, that in case the Artery be bound two
fingers from the Heart, and it be so opened betwixt the Ligature and the
Valves, that the blood may freely pass forth, and therefore go neither
backwards nor forwards; yet the Valves may be diverse times well sastned, the
Heart ordinarily moved, and so as not to s^ed forth the blood, save in its
constriction. And therefore if I would here allow of any mechanical Motion, I
should admit the common Opinion, which says, that the shutting, as of the
heart, so of the Valves, is performed by contraction of the Fibers. For that
same contraction of the fibers in the Heart, is every where obvious to the
Eyesight.

But we have truly no sign or ^oken Nor in Passion^ of the Mind.
that the Blood is any other ways directly moved through the Veins from the
Heart, or through the Arteries to the Heart. In Joy, truly, the Humors move
outward; but this may be betide by the Arteries alone. And in Sadness, the
Humors may be moved inwardly through the Veins alone: and they must needs do
so, for seeing the Pulse does not cease in Sadness, and by the Pulse there goes
continually somewhat through the Arteries outward, hardly can any thing be
moved through the Arteries inwards, and to the Heart.

Howbeit, praeternaturally the humors have another motion besides Yet there is
another praeternatural motion thereof.
that which we have here described, whilst by their lightness or other
activity, they mount upwards, or by their weight descend downwards, as is
manifest in such as have the Varices so called. Also that way being shut up, by
which they were wont to be moved, they are compelled to seek another. So in a
Duck I have diverse times seen in the Vessels of the Breast, the blood
parti-colored, some whiteish, some reddish, which the Artery being contracted,
was moved to and from the Heart, in diverse sides of the Artery: but that motion
lasted not long, nor did the blood ever enter into the Heart by that motion.

And thus (most worthy Friend Bartholine) I conceive I have answered your
Question touching the motion of the Blood. Whereinto I did enquire more
scrupulously, that I might better know the Nature of the Humors, and their
Deflux: from which Flux of Humors innumerable Diseases arise. I did also
believe that I might more exactly understand how good or bad blood was
generated, if I knew those Parts by which the Humor passing along might be
changed. Also I conceived that I should be better able to judge, how very many
Diseases ought to be cured, if I knew which Vein being opened, would evacuate
such and such parts, and through what parts the Remedy ought to pass, before it
can come to the part affected? Also innumerable things came into my mind,
diffused through our whole Art, as the Doctrine of Pulses, of Fevers, of
Inflammations, their Generation and Cure, and other things, which made me
desire to be acquainted with this Motion of Blood.

And the Experiments whereby I was brought into this Opinion, are so evident,
that I doubt not to affirm, that learned and discreer Physicians will
henceforwards, allow of this Motion of the Chyle and Blood. Howbeit in some
Causes and in certain circumstances of this Motion, I cannot promise the like
Agreement: for sundry men are Naturally inclined by a disparity of their
Judgments, to embrace different Opinions.

Touching the truth of these Experiments, you cannot (my Bartholine) make
Question, who have your self seen many of them: and there were frequently
present most learned Doctors of Physic not unknown to you, Franciscus Sylvius,
Johannes Van Horn, Ahasuerus Schmitnerus most accurate Dissecters; and those
persons of solid Learning Franciscus vander Schagen, and Antonius Vockestaert:
nor were they only present, but they also afforded their Counsels and Handiwork
to help make the said Experiments: to whom in that respect I am very much
obliged. And so farewell most learned Bartholine, and persist to love me. Dated
at Leyden the 10. of the Kalends of October, Anno 1640.

THE SECOND LETTER OF THE Motion of the Blood, To the said BARTHOLINUS.
SUch is the Fate of Writers, that they are comcompelled to write when they are
unwilling: that so they may answer their Adversaries, unless they would rather
be wanting to themselves, or the cause which they defend. A certain learned Man
would needs extort this from me, being busied about far other The occasion of
this second Letter.
matters. For those Theses which he had before objected against, he has
endeavored now lately by a peculiar Writing to refute. In which Writing there
are many witty and learned Passages: but I find that fault in the Author, which
the Ancients found in Albutius the Rhetoritian, who made it his Business in
every Cause he pleaded, not to say all that should be said, but all that he was
able to say. Also that Motion of the Blood which is evident in live
Dissections, he has never labored to observe: just as if the matter might
better be conceived by the Mind, then he could see it with his Eyes. But these
and other things concerning those Theses, I leave to the Answer to the
Objections.
Care of Roger Drak who is now a Doctor of Physic at London, a Man of an acute
Wit and solid Learning: I shall That in Blood letting the Vein does swest at
the binding.
only meddle with such things as shall seem to oppose the circular Motion of
Blood. And in the first place, what it is that Blood-letting does teach us in
this Case, concerning which that Not through Pain.
learned Man has observed things worthy of Consideration.

A Surgeon being to open a Vein, Not by straining the Vein;
makes a Ligature upon the Arm, that the Vein may swell. The Vein that swells,
not on this fide the Ligature toward the heart, but on that side the Ligature,
which is furthest from the Heart. Now the Cause of that Tumor is not Pain,
caused by binding the part: for oftentimes little, and commonly no pain in the
part bound. And when the Arm is pinced or pained by Burning or otherwise, it
has its Veins for the most part less swollen, then upon a simple and bare
Ligature.

Nor is it more likely, that the Veins swell upon the Ligature, because through
the Veins which are straiter because they are bound, greater pienty of Blood
comes and with more swiftness from the Liver; as about Bridges and in other
places, Rivers being straightened do run more swiftly. For the Water of a River
being gathered together in a narrow place, is manifestly lifted up into a
swelling, from which when it falls, it goes the faster: but the arm being bound
the contrary happens; for they are not the Veins nighest the Liver, from which
blood should come, but those farthest from the Liver which are most distended.

It remains therefore, that the Veins swell beyond the Ligature, because But
because the motion of the Blood is stopped.
the motion of the blood running from the small veins into the Heart, is
stopped by the Ligature, and being there gathered together, distends the Vein.
But to the end I might be more certain hereof, I bound the jugular and crural
branch, in living Creatures very strongly with a thread, so that no blood might
pass by; and I opened that part of the Vein which was more remote from the
Heart, it bled plentifully, swiftly, vehemently, soon after I loosed the band,
and cut the Vein asunder through the middle, and the part thereof farthest from
the Heart being drawn out of the body upwards, presently and swiftly fell a
bleeding: whilst in the mean time the part of the Vein nearest the heart, being
somewhat elevated, least the Creature struggling with pain should easily force
out the Blood; first it voided but little, and afterward no blood at all.
whence it seemed to me apparent, that the blood came out of the veins far from
the heart, into those near the same, and not out of the greater Veins into the
lesser; unless happily some neighboring blood finding a way might slip away. Any
one may easily try as much in opening a vein in the Arm: for if he force the
blood above the Ligature upwards with his finger, so that the vein appear
empty, yet shall he see the blood issue out as fast as ever below the Ligature;
which could not come through the upper branch being at present empty.

But if the Vein be thus distended with blood, which is moved from the smaller
Nor do the Arteries swel because of the Ligature.
veins to the Heart, how can the artery be distended upon the ligature, which
diverse excellent Physicians relate to have been so distended, that it has been
opened instead of a vein; the truth is, the Artery does not swell upon the
Ligatures being made, unless where it is near the Heart, but farther off it
falls in somewhat, and is diminished, as I have an hundred times and oftener
experimented in the Dissections of living Anatomies. But I do not think it was
any of the authors, meaning thar the remoter part of the Artery was distended
by means of the Ligature, but that their meaning only was, where the Vein did
not appear which was to be opened, that there the place where it lay was to be
sought by feeling; and that by a pit, by motion and swelling of the Blood it
was to be found: and when we feel a swelling, or otherwise discover the same,
we should not presently conclude that there was the Vein; for it might be an
Artery which by reason of the hard binding had lost its pulse, and which by
reason of the thickness of the Coats not quite falling in, might counterfeit a
certain tumor and puffingup as it were.

But moreover if the Vein swells by reason of the Blood returning to the But the
Veins swel also with two Ligatures, and wherefore.
Heart, why does the vein also swel and if opened, why void Blood, when there
is a Ligature made below as well as above the place phlebotomized? which Blood
cannot be thought possibly to come from the lower parts, by reason of the
Ligature made below the Orifice. But this does not always so happen, but but
sometimes, only when the Arm is tied at a certain distance, and then the
greater Veins in the place between those two Ligatures do receive that blood
from the smaller Veins, which smaller Veins receive from the smaller Arteries,
which are joined to the small veins by way of Anastomosis. And that indeed the
blood which flows out betwixt the two Ligatures, does come by way of
Anastomosis out of the Arteries, this is a sign and in that it flows more
hotter and with more violence, and more easy and sooner a Lipothymia or
fainting fit follows the efflux hereof. And this Ligature I am wont to make use
of, when I have signs that spirituous and hot blood is in fault, and I bid the
Surgeon seek out those Anastomoses, by his Ligature: for if the Ligature be
made above the Anastomosis, it stops the motion of the blood; but beneath it
does not stop it, but the blood leaps out hotter to the feeling of the Patient.

When a Vein is opened and the Why in bloodletting they unbind the Arm, when
the blood does not run apace.
blood runs out, as soon as it begins to stop or come away sparingly, or if it
did so at first, we loose the Ligature, that the blood might run out faster.
Now the Ligature seems not therefore to be slacked, to the intent the blood may
come from the Liver through the Veins. For though there be little or no blood
above the Ligature, yea only a pit appear in the Vein, yet will the course of
the Blood be increased by loosening the Ligature, which cannot possibly come
out of an empty Vein. But by the loosening of the band, the Blood may the
better descend by the Arteries, and pass out of them into the Veins; because
the Arteries being compressed by the Ligature, by loosening the said Ligature
become more free. Now that the Arteries are not always sufficiently at Liberty
when the arm is bound, the patient himself can witness, who often perceives the
pulse of the Arterse at the Ligature, which perception the compressed Artery
causes, when it smites against the flesh. And the Physician if he examine the
matter, shall often find a less pulse in the bound a^m then in the free. And I
can testify that I have diverse times applied my fingers to the Patients wrist,
when the band was to be loosed, and observed, that when by loosing the Ligature
Blood came in more plentifully, the Pulse became greater.

But if that Blood which flows Why much blood may be taken away.
out when a vein is opened, comes out of the Arteries into the veins, how can
it be plentifully taken away? for all the Arteries pulse equally, and therefore
they seem to afford blood to the Veins in one and the same measure: and if so
be therest of the arteries afford so much to their veins as the arteries of the
Arms do to theirs and is drawn out, shall not the heart be soon destitute of
all blood? There is truly no danger at all: For we have said the blood comes as
fast unto the heart, as it is driven thence

Yet I cannot conceive the Blood enters all veins alike, although the Arteries
seem to pulse equally; for all Liquors flow more easily and swiftly into an
empty place, in which there is nothing to drive and force them, and moreover in
this case the Blood is more forcibly drawn by the empty Veins then by the full
ones.

Now more store of Blood issues And more out of the Arm then out of the Hand.
from a* vein opened in the cubit, then in the Hand, because all that blood,
which comes to the Veins through all the Anastomoses of the Cubit of the Hand,
must return through the Cubit Veins; but less runs through the Veins of the
Hand, and that only, which comes through the Anastomoses of the Hand.

Out of a wounded Artery, indeed the blood presently flows, although Why it
flows out of a wounded Artery not bound.
it be not bound. But that happens because the Blood is carried with greater
vetiemence, though the arteries then through the Veins; by which vehemence, it
fills the Artery, lifts up and distends the Coat, and if it be opened,
necessarily flies out.

Our of a Vein opened when Blood has flowed sufficiently, we The Ligature being
loosed, the blood stops, and sometimes it runs, and why?
stop it by untieing the Ligature, because the Blood may be carried again its
old way, now it is at Liberty and the way free. But if it so happen, that too
much blood being gathered about the Ligature, the Veins cannot give it a free
passage; or so large an orifice be made* that the Blood may now go right out
that way, by which it went, when it was shut in, sometimes the Band being
loosened, the blood runs out in a full stream.

Which our Chyrurgeons at this very day, that they may effectually stop, they
frequently compress the vein with their Thumbs a little below the Orifice, and
so they stop the But is stopped by holding the finger in the Vein below the
Orifice.
blood; least if they should compress it above the orifice, the blood contained
therein should presently curdle, and hinder the healing up of the Vein. And
they that deny that the blood may thus be stopped, I know not wherein we should
credit them who would abuse us in a thing obvious to the Senses. And seeing the
Blood is stopped by compressing the lower part of the Vein, it is truly
manifest that the Blood ascends from the lower parts.

But in case it should happen, not in Blood-letting, but by some other Also
when the Vein is cut asunder in the middle and wherefore,
mischance, that a Vein should be so wounded, that the Blood could not be
stopped, the Vein is cut asunder in the midst: Whereupon, the Vein being no
longer strerched out as before, the parts cut asunder are drawn upwards and
downwards into the flesh, by which flesh the mouths of the Veins are compressed
and shut, and that so much the more easily because the Blood can move its self
so much the more easily through the neighboring veins which are extended and
open, the former being shut up, and therefore for the very same cause a small
Artery being cut asunder athwart, neither Bleeding nor Inflammation do follow.

Which things being so, I conceive it is evident to all Men, that such things
as happen in Blood-letting, do either prove the Circular motion of the Blood,
or at least are not against the same.

But seeing other Things are objected against us, we must answer No parts
receive Blood by the veins excepting the liver.
them also. And first whereas they prove that the Blood comes through the
Veins, not out of the Arteries, but from the Liver; because some parts receive
Blood, and have Tumors arising from the Afflux of the Blood, which parts have
no Arteries, amongst which they reckon the Pleura. But it does not follow, if
the parts have not Arteries, that their veins do not receive their blood from
the Arteries, but from the Liver; for as we said, the blood out of the
Mesenterick and Celiack Arteries does not enter the Mesenterick and Splenick
Veins, through which it is carried to the Liver: even so other veins may
receive blood from the Arteries, which they may carry into a part more remote
from Arteries. Howbeit there is no part of the Body of any bulk, wherein the
Anatomists do not rightly acknowledge Arteries to be. And infinite Arteries do
not as yet lie concealed from their knowledge, because the smallest Arteries
dispersed through the flesh, have only one Coat as the Veins have. Yea, and in
the Liver it self, there are so many branches of the Arteria Celiaca, as there
are Branches of the Vena Porta, and as many branches also there are of the
Ductus Cholidocus, all which have bin by Anatomists hitherto reckoned for
Branches of Vena Porta. because those three kinds of Vessels are in the Liver
enclosed in a common Coat. At least no man will ever deny the Arteries of the
Pleura, that has once seen the Chest of a living Creature opened; for whilst
the Chest is dissected, Blood is wont to leap out of the Arteries of the Pleura.

Moreover they prove that Blood does not come out of the Arteries into the
Veins, because the Arm being so bound, that the Arteries may still pulse, the
arm is not immeasurably swelled below the ligature, whereas it ought to be so
swollen and distended, if by reason of the Ligature nothing can flow back into
the greater Veins, and at every pulse, the Arteries drive somewhat into the
lower veins, at every contraction, of which Contractions there are more then
three thousand performed every hour. Nevertheles, it may come to pass that the
Arm is not extended to such a bulk when it is bound; because the veins are not
totally shut up, and the blood may by some creeping holes pass under the
ligature, and go into the greater veins: as we see a part being closely bound
to repel Humors, for diverse months or years, is nevertheless nourished by the
blood which flows through; also it may come to pass that so little Blood is
forced in through the Arteries of the bound Arm, as that it cannot distend, or
Swell the same under a long time, for that Blood only is forced in, the veins
being stretched with fullness, which is in the Arteries from the Ligature unto
the Hand; for that which is above the Ligature, can enter more easily into the
veins, by open Anastomoses. Yea it may come to pass, when the veins being
distended, do no longer permit the Blood to be forced into them by the
Arteries, that the pulse of the Arteries is stopped, or that the Blood
regurgitates upwards, and enters the Veins above the Ligature, through the
Anastomoses: the like whereto I saw in a Duck, as I formerly related. Unless
one of these things happen, the Arm would presently swel after it is bound, and
a suffocation of the innate Heat, by the Abundance of Blood driven in would
follow. For I have often bound mine own and others Arms above the Wrist, and I
always saw the veins distended, and the Flesh to swell somewhat and grow red;
and oftentimes though not always, the arteries abated by little and little of
their pulse, yea and sometimes intermitted; and afterward the red color of the
bound Arm was changed into black and blew: and therefore I presently undid the
Ligature, being frighted with this Example. A certain Countryman being wounded
in the inside of his Arm about the Cubit, when the Village Surgeon could not
stop the blood, he bound the Arm extreme close about the Wound, whence followed
an exceeding Inflammation of the lower part of his Arm, and such a swelling,
that deep pits were seen in the place of his fingers joints, and within
eighteen hours, the lower part of his Arm was gangrena^ed and sphacelated,
which Christianus Regius an expert Surgeon did cut off, in the presence of
my self, and E^aldus Screvelius an excellent Physician.

Moreover they object, if the venal Blood comes out of the Arteries, How and
why the venal blood differs from the arterial.
how can the arterial Blood differ so much from the venal? But we must know
that it differs less from the venal Blood, then most men imagine, who from the
violence wherewith the arterial Blood leaps forth, do collect the great plenty
of Spirits therein, and the great rarity or thinness thereof: whereas that
Leaping proceeds from the Force wherewith the Heart drives the Blood through
the arteries; for an Artery being opened below or beyond the ligature, the
Blood comes out only dropping. And the difference between these two bloods is
caused by the greater or less quantity of Heat and Spirits, according as the
Blood is more or less remote from the Heart the fountain of Heat. For the Blood
which is near the Heart differs much from that which is far off, in the
smallest arteries, which you can hardly distinguish from that which is in the
small veins. And the smaller veins have more thin and hot Blood, then the great
ones; which any one may easily try in opening veins of the Arm and Foot. Yea,
and if the Vein be opened with a double Ligature on each side the orifice, as I
said before, the Blood will come out hotter then with a single Ligature.

Now that the Blood does not go out of the smaller veins into the How menstrual
Blood is collected about the womb.
greater, they endeavor to prove by women's monthly purgations, which according
to their judgment, are gathered one whole month together in the Veins about the
Womb; and if they are carried from the Womb unto the Head, they conceive that
they do not pass through the Vena cava and the Heart. Howbeit, the common and
true opinion is, that about the time of the usual flux, the blood begins to be
moved to the Womb, from which motion of the humors, pains of the sides and
loins are wont to arise about that time, And I know by Experience, that about
the time of the menstrual Flux, if the Pulse of the Heart and arteries can be
made greater, the Courses will flow the better, because the Blood will through
the arteries be driven more forcibly into the Womb. It may nevertheless fall
out, that the Courses may be collected and make an Obstruction in the Womb, and
that then the Blood may not return into the greater veins, that motion being
stopped: but that is besides nature.

And when the menstrual blood is carried out of the Womb into How they are
carried out of the Womb into the Head.
the Head, the way is not inconvenient, through the Vena cava, the Heart, and
the ascending branch of the Arteria Aorta, and that they do indeed pass through
the Heart, those palpitations and light faintings do seem to argue, which are
wont to attend upon the Courses stopped.

But should we not conceive it to be a dangerous How it comes that the Humors
passing through the Heart, do not cause great Inconveniences.
thing, if all the ill humors in our bodies must pass into and through the
Heart. But we must know, that our bodies are so framed, as that they may be
most convenient for us when we are in Health, and not when we are sick.
Moreover the Humor which putrifies by reason of obstruction and is very bad,
comes not to the Heart, because its way is stopped up. Nor is the Heart so weak
as to be corrupted by an evil Humor, which stays not long therein: for those
great Physicians Galen, Hollerius, Laurentius have observed that the Quittor of
such as have an Empyema, and other sharp and stinking Humors, do critically and
without any bad symptoms, pass through the left ventricle of the Heart which
many times makes for the good of the sick Persons, in whom that bad Humor
passing through the Heart, is often vanquished by the Vigor and Virtue hereof.

The other Objections which they The Objections against circumstances.
make, do only respect the Causes of this motion or certain Circumstances,
wherein men are wont more freely to dissent, yet let us briefly consider
whether or no they have in them any weight, wherewith to burden our Opinion.

They say that at every contraction Nothing hinders, but that half an ounce of
Blood may be forced out of the Heart, at every pulse.
of the Heart, the blood is not driven out by half ounces, nor by drams, nor by
scruples, out of the Heart of a Man, for three Causes: first because that blood
is too spirituous, but I have already showed that it is not so spirituous as
men imagine commonly: secondly because those little Valves of the Heart, do
only gape a little, and then are close shut again, which also does not agree
with experience: for an Arteric being cut off from the heart, great streams of
Blood do issue from the Heart. Thirdly that the Arteries are too full then to
be able to admit half an ounce, a dram, or a scruple of Blood. But that is too
inconsiderately avouched; for when the Heart contracts it self, all the
arteries in the body are enlarged, and that on all sides, as I have diverse
times perceived with my hand, holding the naked artery betwixt my fingers. And
who will now say, that all the Arteries of the Body being dilated, cannot admit
of a Scruple, a Dram, yea half an Ounce of blood, more then they have?

Also they deny that in the child Nothing hinders but that the Blood may be
circularly moved in the child in the Womb.
in the Womb, the blood out of the Vena Cava, does through the Vessels of the
heart united enter into the Arteria Aorta, and go from thence out of the
umbilical Arteries into the umbilical Vein, and return back by it into the
Heart: because they think this great absurdity will follow, that one Vein
should carry the mothers blood and withal so much blood as the two umbilical
arteries do bring in. As if Rivers did not frequently carry as much water in
one Channel, as many Brooks are able to bring in. And here the umbilical Vein
when it is but one, is much greater then the Artery. There is often but one
artery or there are two veins; that the arteries may as much as may be answer
to the veins. In brute Beasts ( says Fallopius a rare Anatomist) there are
always two Veins and two Arteries, which with the Vrachus or pis-pipe do
reach as far as the Navil, and the Veins do presently grow into one before they
enter into the Abdomen which does reach to the Gates of the Liver, as I have
observed in all Sheep, Goats, and Cows, whose young ones I have dissected, But
if they speak of the Child in a Woman's Womb, I avouch that sometimes I have not
seen the two umbilical Arteries, but only one Artery and one Vein ascending
together with the Vrachus to the Navil: where the Artery is again divided into
two, which afterward go unto the sides of Os sacrnm. And that indeed those
Vessels of the Heart are united in a Child in the Womb, that the blood may pass
that way out of the Vena Cava into the Aorta, Waterfowl, A sign that it is so
indeed.
as the Duck, Goose, and such like do seem to teach us; which because they
cannot often breath under the water* no^ dilate their Lungs, nor consequently
admit the blood that way, they have those unions of the vessels of the Heart,
when they are grown up. Which also Harvey notes in his 6. Chapter.

Also they deny the frequent Anastomoses Though there be Anastomoses of the
Veins and arteries* yet Tumors may arise.
of the Veins and Arteries, for if such there were, they say tumors would not
arise by Fluxion and Congestion of Humors. As if Rivers though they have
outlets, receiving overgreat plenty of water, may not overflow the
neighboring fields; nor can the blood shed out of the Vessels, because it
congeals, easily return into them again. Moreover Tumors are many times caused,
for as much as by reason of Obstruction, the bloods passage is stopped; and
because by heat and pain it is drawn into the flesh.

Now those Tumors seem rather to favor the Doctrine of the bloods circular
motion, because they happen through cold, bruising, and all stoppage of the
passages of the Body; and because with Aqua vitae or some such medicine, the
Humors and the Tumors being often made fluid, it is by this motion of the blood
drawn into the Veins; and the Tumor by that means sooner cured then by
repulsion, revulsion, concoction or dissipation.

Touching the Cause of the Bloods motion, difficulties do also present
themselves Not by Rarifaction.
unto us; and when we deny that the blood according to the Course of Nature, is
so suddenly and vehemently rarefied in the Heart, as to be able to move the
Heart, the blood of the whole Body, and the Arteries themselves; those famous
men the Ringleaders of this opinion, do suppose that they do hereby prove it,
In that while we are cold, all the Veins of our Body are contracted, and can
hardly be seen, where as afterward when we grow hot, they do so swell, that
the blood contained in them, seems to take up ten times so much space as before
it did.

As for me, this truly is my Opinion, and thus I persuade my self, that seeing
they have now diverse times, so diligently endeavored in Public to persuade men
to embrace this their Opinion of Rarifaction; and have diffected and looked into
the Hearts of Living Creatures, nor have yet dared to say, that they could
sensibly perceive any such Rarifaction of the blood in the Heart; I say, my
Opinion is, that they could not indeed and in truth observe any such
Rarifaction of the blood in the Heart, and as they would in this place
maintain* And it will be easy for him that is a little verst in live
Dissections, to see that there is no such rarifaction. And therefore though it
might be proved, that such a Rarifaction of the blood, does sometimes happen
praeternaturally, yet ought not the cause of the Natural motion of the Heart,
Blood and Arteries be therefore attributed thereunto.

Yet in the Example which they propound, I do not see what certainty there is
that the blood by reason of its Rarifaction does possess ten times more space
then before. For might not that same Tumor of the external Veins easily arise,
because whereas before the veins were contracted and straightened through cold,
they could not receive much blood, and therefore they could not swell: Which
cold and straitning of the vessels being afterward taken away, and the Veins
being loosned by heat, they might admit much blood, which is driven into them
by the heart, and so appear full and swelling. That this is not the least cause
of the tumor of the Veins, persons that are feauerish seem to teach us, who if
they thrust their arms into the cold, have not their Veins so swelling, but if
they keep them warm under the clothes, they have them very full and swole,
which tumor if it came from Rarifaction, it ought to be in both cases alike,
seeing that in them, the bloods Rarifaction proceeds from an internal cause.

Nor do I conceive that it is also void of Question and undoubted, that when we
are first cold, and afterward grow hot, the inner Veins as well as the outer
do swell. For it is much to be suspected, that the inner parts do possess less
blood and heat before; because by that cold wherewith before they were not
hurt, if when we are so heated we drink cold drink, they are wonderfully
weakened. Doubtless as the inner veins are oftentimes the treasury of the
blood, wherein the blood is stored up for future uses, so may the external*
Veins be the like treasury, and they appear to be when they so swell as
aforesaid.

These men themselves when they But by constriction of the heart the blood is
driven in the Arteries.
observed that this also was much against their Opinion, that we asserted that
the blood was manifestly poured out, at the constriction of the Heart; they
avouch that that is not the constriction, but the dilatation of the heart which
we mean. But that we were deluded by a certain appearance, because in our
constriction, there was a constriction only at the Basis, but about the tip a
true Dilatation; which Invention when others saw that it could not hold, least
they also should seem to desert their cause, they invented that there is a
constriction indeed, in the Cavity of the whole Ventricle, but in the pits and
passages of the sides, especially in Dogs, there is a certain kind of Extension
and true Dilatation.

But truly, the upper part of the Heart is not seen to be dilated, when the
lower is contracted; save when the Creature is dying, and that the waving
motion of the Heart is caused by the impulse of the blood. Nor can we observe
one Dilatation or Constriction of the Pits, another of the ^avity of the
Ventricles. Only a certain progressive motion is observed in a large Heart,
because the Dilatation or constriction does evidently begin at the basis, and
sensibly proceeds to the tip, although it is performed all welnear in a moment.
And that I might be perfectly assured, that the Heart was contracted within
likewise, on all sides, having cut off the tip of each Ventricle, ^ put my
thumb and forefinger into the living heart of a Dog and a Rabbit; and I
manifestly felt the sides of the Heart to press my fingers to the middle
partition, equally in the middle, tip and Basis; and that the pits in greater
Beasts, became to Sense, not bigger but lesser. And soon after the Constriction
abating, that the sides of the heart above, beneath and in the middle were
loosned, and the pits did feel evidently larger. But in the Septum or partition
wall it self, no motion is felt, save that the Spirits seeking egress make a
kind of Palpitation, when in Creatures at the last gasp, the motion of the
right Ventricle ceases, the Septum follows the motion of the right Ventricle.

Now they would have it nevertheless Not in the dilatation, though sometimes
blood go out therein.
that naturally the blood is poured out in the widening of the heart, and not
in the Constriction or straitning thereof, because in the wounded Heart of
Living Creatures, the blood is seen to come out when the Heart is dilated. And
this is sometimes true; but that which they thence collect, our very Senses
teach us to be untrue. For either the Dog or other creature is placed with its
Head and breast elevated, and the belly low, and so the wound is inflicted into
the Heart, in which case, seeing the blood which enters through the Vena cava
and Arteria venosa into the Heart, is higher then any wound of the Heart, it,
as soon as it is entered, which is at the beginning of the Dilatation, flows
out, not because of the Pulse, but of its own heaviness, and therefore it is
not by any force made to fly out to some distance, as it happens in the Pulse
of the Arteries. But if as it ought to be, the dog be laid on his back, his
head and belly resting on the same plane, and the wounded Heart be raised with
a man's fingers, as long as there is any strength in the Heart, it sooner by
Constriction casts out the blood it has received, at a distance, then the
whole Heart is filled or widened. But when the strength of the heart decays,
and that it seldom straitens it self or not at all, because the Earlets are
more strong, and do still continue pulsing, even when the Heart quite gives
over; the blood being driven by the Earlets enters the heart, is there
collected, and when more is come in then the Heart can contain, it go out at
the wound, not with violence, as it must do to cause Pulsation, but with a
gentle motion, drop after drop. So that our Sense can perceive no strong motion
of the blood, save in the Hearts Constriction.

Now they will have the blood to return through the Veins into the And being
driven by all parts of the Veins, it returns to the Heart.
Heart, only because the blood being forcibly driven to the Parts, as water
poured into an horn, does regurgitate or abound back upwards, and so is carried
back unto the Heart. But I have already showed tokens, that the blood is either
drawn, or driven by all the parts of the Veins: besides which I have also these
following: in that the Heart being taken out of the body, the motion of the
blood, and that swift enough, is still seen in the Veins. And if a Vein, yea a
milkie one, be tied in two places, that same Ligature being only loosned, which
is nearest the Heart, while the parts are yet hot, the Chvle will still be
moved to the Liver, the blood unto the Heart, which could neither by any step
be driven from the Heart through the Arteries, nor from the Guts through the
Venae lacteae; nor would it by its own fluidity more rather upwards then
downwards.

But let us answer the remaining objections: By this motion the Veins and
Arteries may be nourished.
They suppose, if the blood should be moved so swiftly, that the Veins and
Arteries could not conveniently be nourished. But a dog can quench his thirst,
drinking at the River Nilus and running as he drinks; but here the parts stay
at the brook side: and whatever they have drawn from the blood, they treasure
up in their own substance, least it should be washed away, by the running by of
the humor.

Also they conceit this Motion is not useful for the blood. Seeing it may And
the blood ventilitated better.
sufficiently be conserved (since it abounds with native heat) by respiration
and transpiration. Yet most certain it is, that the blood is yet more
ventilated, if it be speedily moved, and its smallest Particles also agitated
with this motion. So the water of a lake or standing pool, though it be gently
moved and fanned on the Surface, yet is it corrupted; when in the mean while
Rivers that are totally and in all parts agitated, are found to continue most
incorrupt and wholesome.

These are the things (most excellent Bartholine) which I thought fit to join
to the former, that I might satisfy those who cannot receive a new opinion,
wherein they observe any difficulty or obscurity; who many times have neither
mind nor time to enquire exactly into the bowels thereof. But in my Judgment,
we ought not to deny things manifest, although we cannot resolve such as are
difficult.

But I never was disposed to contend and quarrel with any man about words.
There are very many excellent things about which time may be spent; which many
times also is not sufficient for our necessary occasions. Also from a Scoffer
that seeks after her, Knowledge does hide her self away, but to him that is
studious of the truth, she comes to meet, and presents her self to his view.
Farewell most Learned Bartholine. From the University of Leyden in Holland, the
Kalends of December 1640.

FINIS.

