The Frontispiece.
SCulptures are useless here, or Lines in praise,
The Soul of Poetry slights all weaker Bays;
As Sol invested in his best Array,
Takes not, but gives more glory to the day,
With His livening Beams gladding the teeming Earth,
To Budds, to Blossoms, and to Flowers gives Birth:
So do these three times three in Harmony
Give Birth to Arts, new life to Poetry.
Love offers here his Quiver, and his Bow,
Vowing henceforth he will a Pigrim go
Unto the Muses Temple, there to join
In Diapasons with these Sacred Nine.
Apollo here new-strings his golden Lyre,
And wise Minerva sings unto this Quire:
Venus slights Mars, not deigning once to look
On any other Object, but this Book.
THE HARMONY OF THE MUSES: OR, The Gentleman's and Ladies Choicest Recreation;
Full of various, pure, and transcendent Wit.

Containing several excellent Poems; Some, Fancies of Love, some of Disdain,
and all the subjects incident to the passionate Affections either of men or
women.

Heretofore written by those unimitable Masters of Learning and Invention, Dr.
Joh. Donn Dr. Hen. King Dr. W. Stroad Sr. Kenelm Digby Mr. Ben. Johnson, Mr.
Fra. Beamont J. Cleveland T. Randolph T. Carew.


And others of the most refined Wits of those TIMES.

Never before Published.

London, Printed by T. W. for William Gilbertson at the sign of the Bible in
Giltspur-street without Newgate. 1654.

TO THE READERS.
THere needs no Commendatory Epistle to persuade you to the entertaining of
this Book; The only Names of the Authors are eloquent enough: It were
unnecessary Art and labor to endeavor to present unto you the Transcendent
height of their meritorious Pens, and with what delight beauty they have
crowned Poetry, which is the Beauty and Delight of Learning. Poetry in their
days flourished, and they flourished with it, and gave a Crown unto that which
has crowned them with Honor, and perpetual Fame. The Genius of those times
produced many incomparable Wits, who being excellent in themselves, in a noble
emulation, contended who should (...) each other. From hence it is we have so
many admirable Pi^ces of Perfection derived to us, every Subject, in every
particular, being so choicely handled, that what room is left unto Posterity,
is rather to admire and imitate, then to equal them. There were never in one
Age so many contemporary Patterns of Invention, or ever Wit that wrought
higher or cleerer. For though our homely Progenitors, with too vain admiration
were accustomed to prosecute the Issues of outlandish Wits, and believed
nothing to be exquisite, but what came from France or Italy; yet this Age by
Experience has found, that without the least Imitation, we have given them
Examples of our own, and excelled them as much in soundness as in Beauty. If
any shall object, that here and there the Fancy seems some time too loose for
such Reverend Names, let him impute it to the lightness of the Subject, and to
the heat and vigor of their early Wits, when first those Airs were breathed
forth. The Fancyes of so many lettered and unequalled men are here united into
one Piece, and do challenge as much your applause, as entertainment; And being
never before made public, you may be the more obliged to take notice of them,
and to gratulate the friendly hand that traveled in this Collection, which was
only but to please you.

Farewell, Yours devoted, R. C. Esquire

THE HARMONY OF THE MUSES.
On the Choice of a Mistress.
WHen I do love, my Mistress must be fair,
Yet not extremely, so shall I despair:
When I do Love, my Mistress must be wise,
Yet not all Wit, I Will not be so precize:
When I do love, my Mistress chaste must be,
Not obstinate, for then she is not for me;
For when I love, my Mistress must be kind,
Yet not before I her with Merit bind;
She whom I love, needs not for to be rich,
For Virtue, and not wealth, does me bewitch;
She whom I love, must once have loved before,
For meeting equal, we may love the more:
And to conclude, my Mistress must be young,
And last, what is hardest, not have too much tongue.
An Elegy made by I. D.
COme Maddam come, all stay my powers deny,
Until I labor, I in labor ly
The foe oft-times having the foe in sight,
Is tired with standing, though he never fight:
Off with your girdle, like heaven's Zone glistering
But a far fairer World incompasing.
Un^in that spangled breast plate which you wear,
That eyes of busy fools may be stopped there.
Unlace your self, for that Harmonious chime
Tell's me from you, that now it is bedtime.
Off with that happy busk, which I envy,
That still can be, and still can stand so nie.
Your gown going off, such beauteous state reveals,
As when from flowery meads hills shadows steals.
Off with that wiery Corronet, and show
The happier diadem, which on you does grow.
Off with those shoo^, that thou may safely tread
In this (Loves hallowed Temple) this soft bed.
In such white roabs, heavens Angels use to be
Received by men; thou Angels bringst with thee.
A heavenly Mahomet^ Paradise* and though
Ill spirits walk in white, we easily know
By this, these Angels from an evil sprite,
They set our hairs, b^^ these our flesh upright.
License my roving hands, and let them go
Behind, before, above, between, below.
O my Americka! my New Foundland!
The Kingdom's safest, when by one man manned:
My Mine of precious stones! my Emperie!
How bl^st am I in this discovering thee.
To enter into these bonds, is to be free,
Then where my hand is set, my seal shall be;
As souls in bodies, bodies uncloath's must be
To taste these joys; Those Jems you Women use
Are as Atlanta's Balls cast in men's views,
That when a fools eye lights on a Jem,
His earthly soul may covet theirs, not them:
Like Pictures, or like Books gay covering made
For Laymen, are all Women thus arrayed:
Themselves are Mistick bodies, which hourly we
(Whom their imputed grace will dignifie)
Must see revealed: then since that I may know
(As liberally) as to a Midwife show
Thy self; Cast you all this white Linen hence,
There is no Penance due to Innocence;
To teach thee, I am naked first; Why than
Needst thou to have more covering then a man.
The Rapture, by J. D.
IS she not wondrous fair? but yet I see
She is so much too fair, too sweet for me:
That I forget my self, and a new fire
Has taught me not to love, but to admire!
Just as the Sun, methinks I see her face,
Which I may gaze upon, but not embrace:
For it is heavens pleasure sure she should be sent
As pure to heaven again, as she was lent
To us; And bids us, as we hope for bliss,
Not to profane her with one mortal kiss;
Then how cold grows my love, and oh how lot!
O how I love her, how I love her not:
Thus does my Ague-love torment by turns,
Now well-nigh friezeth, now again it burns.
The Extremes, by T. C.
I Will gaze no more on her bewitching face,
Sure ruin harbors there in every place:
I Will view no more those cruel eyes of hers,
Which pleased or angry, still are Murderers:
For my enchanted soul, alas she drowns,
With Calms and Tempests of her smiles and frowns.
If she but dart (as lightning) through the air
Her beams of warmth, they will kill me with despair
If she behold me with a pleasant eye,
I surfeit with excess of joy, and die.
A Sonnet.
THe World is nothing but inconstancy,
How can it be ought else; when 'bove the sky
Adultery is committed: mark these twins,
Earth, Air, and Water are heavens Concubines:
The Lustful Sun ingendereth with the earth,
And she, as fruitful, yields a happy birth
Of plants, of herbs, of flowers: the laboring skies
Hurl hailstones in the sea, the surges rise,
Swell, toss and wallow, like the throws of pain,
And monthly are delivered in the Maine.
The false Moon has her changes; why should men
Weak-temper'd Women then so much contemn:
If that the essential Powers congeminate,
How can this Earthly but incorporate?
Man's Misery, by Dr. K.
ILl busied man! why do thou take such care
To lengthen out thy life's short Callender?
When every spectacle thou lookst upon
Presents and acts thine execution:
Each dropping Season, and each flower does cry
Fool, as I fade and wither, thou must die.
The beating of the pulse, when thou art well,
Is just the towling of thy passing bell.
Night is the Hearse, whose sable Canopie
Covers alike diseased day and thee.
And all those weeping dews that nightly fall,
Are but as tears shed at thy funeral.
The Surfeit.
DIsdain me still, that I may ever love,
For who his Love injoyes, can love no more;
War but now past, with ease men cowards prove,
And ships returned do rot upon the shore.
Then though thou frown, I Will say thou art most fair,
And still I Will love, though still I must despair.
As heat to life, so is desire to love;
And those once gone, both love* and life are done,
Let not my sighs and tears thy virtue move;
Like baser Mettalls, do not melt so soon.
Laugh at my woes, although I ever mourn,
Love sufeits if enjoyed, and turns to scorn.
To his Mistress.
HEre let me War, in these Arms let me lie,
^ere let me parley, better, bleed and die;
Thy Arms imprison me, and my arms thee,
Thy heart my ransom is, take mine for thee:
Other men war, that they their rest may gain,
And we will rest, that we may fight again;
Those wars the Ignorant, these the experienced prove,
There we are always under, here above.
There Engines a far off move a just fear,
But Thrusts, Pricks, Stabs; nay, bullets hurt not here:
There lies are wrong; here we will uprightly lie;
There men kill men; we will make one by and by:
There nothing; I not half so much can do
In these Wars, as they which from us two
Shall spring; thousands we see which travel not
To wars, but stay at home, swords, guns and shot
D^ make for others; Shall not I do then
More glorious service, staying to make men.
An Encouragement for young Lovers.
LOve's like a game at Tables, where the die
Of women's minds does by affection fly:
If once you catch their fancy at a blot,
It Is ten to one if that you enter not:
However, like a gamester boldly venture,
And where you see the Point lie open, enter:
But mark it well, for by false play then,
Do what you can, they will be bearing men.
The choice of a Mistress.
HEr for a Mistress, feign would I enjoy,
That hangs the lip, and pouts at every toy,
Speaks like a wag, is fair, dare boldly stand,
And rear Loves Standard with a wanton hand,
Who in loves fight, for one blow gives me three,
And being stabbed, falls straight to kissing me;
For if she wants the Tricks of Venerie,
Were It Venus self, I would not love her, I,
If she be modest, wise, and chaste of life,
Hang her; she is good for nothing, but a wife.
To Mr. J. W. a Parson in Devon. Inviting him to come up to London. By Joh.
Myns.
HOw now John, what is it the care
Of thy small Flock that keeps thee there?
Or has the Bishop in a rage
Forbid thy coming on our Stage?
Or wantst thou coin, or wantst thou steed;
These are Impediments indeed:
Now for thy Flock, the Sexton may
In due time ring, and let them pray:
The Bishop with an offering,
Will be brought to any thing.
For two Sermons by the way,
Will Host and Hostis, Tapster pay:
A willing mind pawns Wedding ring,
Books, Wife, Children, Gown, any thing,
Naught unattempted, naught too dear
To see such friends as thou have here:
For want of Coin, I often see Vick
Trudge up the Town with hazzel stick.
I met a Priest upon the way,
Rid in a Wagon the other day,
Who told me that the venter'd forth
With one Tythe-Pigg of little worth,
With which, and saying grace at food,
And praying for Lord Carriers good,
He had arrived at's journeys end,
Without a penny, or a Friend;
And what great business do thou think,
Only to see a friend and drink:
One friend, why thou have hundreds here,
That can make thee far greater cheer.
Ships lately from the Island came,
With Wine thou never knewst the name.
Montefiasco, Frantiniack,
Leaticum, and that Old Sack
Young Herrick took to entertain
The Muses to his sprightly vein.
Come, come, and leave thy Muddy Ale,
That serves but for an old Wives tale,
And now and then to break a jest
At some poor silly neighbors feast.
Come quickly then, and learn to see
Thy friends expect thy Wit and thee:
And though thou can not come in state
On Cammels back, like Coriate,
Imagine that the Pack-horse be
The Cammell in his book you see;
I know thou have a fancy can
Conceive thy guide a Caravan:
Rather then stay, speak Treason there,
And come at Charges of the shire;
A London Goal, with friends and chink
Is worth your Viccaridge John I think.
But if besotted with that One
Thou have of Ten, stay there alone,
And too too late repent and cry
Thou have lost thy friends, and amongst them I.
A Farewell to the World by Sir K. D.
FArewell you gilded follies, pleasing troubles,
Farewell ye honored rags, ve crystal bubbles;
Fame is but hollow echo, Gold but clay,
Honor the darling but of one short day,
Beauties chief Idol but a Damask skin,
State but a golden prison to keep in,
And torture freeborn minds; embroidered trains
Merely but Pageants; proudly swelling Veins,
And blood allied to greatness, is but loan,
Inherited, and purchased, not her own;
Fame, Riches, Honor, Beauty, State, Trains, Birth,
Are but the fading blessings of the earth:
I would be great, but see the Sun does still,
Level his beams against the rising hill:
I would be rich, but see man too unkind,
Digs in the bowels of the richest Mine:
I would be fair, but see the Champion proud,
The worlds fair eye, often setting in a cloud:
I would be wise, but that the Fox I see
Suspected guilty, when the Ass goes free:
I would be poor, but see the humble grass,
Trampled upon by each unworthy Ass:
Rich hated, wise suspected, scorned if poor,
Great feared, fair tempted, high envied more.
Would the world now adopt me for her heir,
Would Beauties Queen entitle me the fair,
Fame speak me Honors Minion, could I vie
Angels with India, with a speaking eye,
Command bare heads, bowed knees, strike Justice dumb
As well as blind and lame, to give a tongue
To stones by Epitaphs, to be called great Master
In the loose Lines of every Po^taster;
Could I be more then any man that lives,
Great, wise, rich, fair, in all suparlatives,
I count one minute of my holy treasure
Beyond so much of all this empty pleasure;
Welcome pure thoughts, welcome ye careless grove
These are my guests, this is my cour^age love;
The winged people of the sky shall sing
My Anthemes, by my servants, gentle Springs;
A Prayer Book shall be my Looking-glass,
Wherein I will adore sweet Virtues face;
Here dwells no heatfull loves, no palsy fears,
No short joys purchased with eternal tears:
Here will I sigh, and sing my hot youths folly,
An learn to affect an holy Melancholy;
And if contentment be a stranger, then
I Will never look for it but in Heaven again.
An Elgie by Dr. K. occasioned by his own sickness.
WEll did the Prophet a^k, Lord what is man?
Implying by the question, that none can
But God resolve the doubt, much less define,
What Elements this child of dust combine.
Man is a stranger to himself, and knows
Nothing so natural, as his own woes;
He loves to travel countries, and confer
The Signs of vast Heavens Diameter;
Delights to sit in Niles or Betis lap,
Before he sayleth over his own Map;
By which means he returns, his Travels spent,
Less knowing of himself then when he went,
Who knowledge hunts, kept under foreign locks
May bring home wit to hold a Paradox,
Yet be^ools still: Therefore might I advise,
I would inform the Soul before the eyes.
Make man into his proper optics look,
And so become the Student, and the Book:
With his conception his first leaf begin,
What is he there, but complicated sin?
When Viper time, and the approaching birth
Ranks him among the creatures of the earth;
His wayling Mother sends him forth to greet
The World, wrapped in a bloody winding sheet,
As if he came into the world to crave
No place to dwell in, but bespeak a Grave;
Thus like a red or tempest boading morn,
His dawning is, for being newly born,
He hailes the evening tempest with shriek cries,
And fines for his admission with wet eyes.
How should that plant whose leaf is bathed in tears,
Bare but a bitter fruit in elder years?
Just such is his; and his maturer age,
Teems with the event more sad then the presage;
For view him higher then his childhoods span,
Is raised up to Youths Miridian,
When he goes proudly laden with the fruit,
Which health, or strength, or beauty contribute;
That as the mounted Canon batters down
The Towers and goodly structures of a Town;
So one short sickness will his force defeat,
And his frail Citadel to Rubbish beat.
How does a Dropsy melt him to a flood,
Making each vein run water more then blood?
A Colic racks him like a Northern gust,
And raging Fevers crumble him to dust.
In which unhappy he is made worse
By his diseases, then his Makers curse.
God said, with toils and sweat he should earn bread,
And without labor not be nourished:
Here (though like ropes of falling dew) his sweat
Hangs on his laboring brow, he cannot eat:
Thus are his sins scourged in opposing theames,
And Luxuries revenged in the extremes:
He who in health could never be content
With varieties fetched from each element,
Is now much more afflicted to delight
His tastless pallet, and lost appetite:
Besides, though God ordained, that with the light
Man should begin his work, yet he made night
For his repose, in which the weary sense,
Repairs it self by rests soft recompense;
But now his watchful nights and troubled days,
Confused heaps of fear and fancies raise:
His chamber seems a loose and trembling Mine,
His pillow quilted with a Porcupine;
Pain makes his downy Couch, sharp thorns appear
And every feather pricks him like a spear;
Thus when all storms of death about him keep,
He copies death in any form but sleep;
Poor walking Clay, have thou a mind to know,
To what unblest beginnings thou do owe
Thy wretched self; fall sick a while, and then
Thou will conceive the Pedigree of men;
Learn shall thou then from thine Anatomy,
That earth thy Mother, worms thy sisters be;
That he is a short-lived vapor upward wrought,
And by corruption into nothing brought;
A staggering meteor by cross Planets beat,
Which often reels, and falls before his seat;
A Tree that withers faster then it grows,
A Torch put out by every wind that blows,
A web of forty weeks, spun out in pain,
And in a moment ravel'd out again;
This is the model of frail man, then say,
That his duration's only for a day,
And in that day more fits of changes pass,
Then Attomes run in the turned Hower-glass,
So that the incessant cares which life invade,
Might for strange truth their Heresies persuade,
Who did maintain that humane souls were sent,
Into the body for their punishment;
At least with that Greek sage still make us cry,
Not to be born, or being born, to die.
Of Love and Death.
AS Love and Death once traveled on the way,
They met together, and together lay
Both in a bed; when Love for all his heat,
Found in the night Death's coldness was so great,
That all his flames could hardly keep him warm,
Betimes he rose, and speedily did arm
His naked body, but through too much haste,
Some of Deaths shafts he took, near his being placed
Leaving behind him many of his own,
Which change to him, being blind, is still unknown
Through which mistaking, and his want of eyes,
A double wrong to Nature did arise;
For when Love thinks to inflame a youthful heart
With his own shafts, he kills with deaths cold dart;
So Death intending to strike old Age dead,
Shoots one of Love's Darts with a golden head;
And this appears to me the reason why,
Old men do fall in love, and young men die.
Waltham Pool.
In praise of black Women; by T. R.
IF shadows be a Pictures excellence,
And makes the show more glorious to the sense;
If Stars in the bright day be hid from sight,
And shine more glorious in Masque of night,
Why should you think rare creaturs that you lack
Perfections, cause your hair and eyes be black;
Or that your Beauty, which so far exceeds,
The new sprung Lillies in their Maidenheads,
The cherry color of your cheeks and lips,
Should by that darkness suffer an eclips;
Nay, it is not fit that Nature should have made
So bright a Sun to shine without some shade;
It seems that Nature when she first did fancy
Your rare Composure, studied Negromancy,
And when to you those things she did impart,
She used altogether the Black Art;
She drew the Magic Circle in your eyes,
And made your hair the chains wherein she ties
Rebellious hearts: those blew veins which appear
Turned in Meanders like to either Sphere,
Misterious figures are; and when you list,
Your voice commands like an Exorcist;
O! if in Magic you have power so far,
Vouchsafe me to be your Familiar.
Nor has kind Nature her black Art revealed
On outward parts above, some lie concealed,
As by the Spring head men often times may know
The nature of the streams that run below,
So your black hair and eyes do give direction,
To make me think the rest of like complexion,
The rest where all rest lies that blesses man,
That Indian Mine, that Straight of Magollan,
That world-dividing gulf, which who so venters
With swelling sails and ravished senses, enters
Into a world of bliss, pardon I pray,
If my rude Muse presumes for to display
Secrets unknown, or has her bounds ore-past,
In praising sweetness which she never shall taste;
Starved men know there is food, and blind men may
Though hid from them, yet know there is a day.
A Rover in the mark his Arrow sticks
Sometimes as well as he that shoots at pricks;
But if I might direct my shaft aright,
The black mark would I hit, and not the white.
Loves Elysium.
I Will enjoy thee now, my Caelia, come,
And fly with me to Loves Elysium,
The Giant Honor that keeps Cowards out,
Is but a Masker, and the servile Rout
Of baser subjects, only bend in vain,
To the vast I doll, whilst the Nobler strain
Of valiant Lovers daily sail between
Thy huge Colossus legs, and pass unseen
Unto the blissful shore, be bold and wise,
And we shall enter; the grim Switz denies
Only tame fools a passage, who not know
He is but form, and only frights in show;
The duller eyes which look from far draw near,
And thou shall scorn what we were wont to fear;
We shall see how the stalking Pageant goes
With borrowed legs, a heavy load to those
That made and bear him, not ere we our thought,
The seed of gods, but a weak model wrought
By greedy men, that seek to enclose the Common,
And within private arms impale free woman;
Come then, and mounted on the wings of Love,
We Will cut the fleeting air, and soar above
The Monsters head, and in the Noblest seat
Of those blessed shades, quench and renew our heat:
There shall the Ce^een of Love and innocense,
Beauty and Nature banish all offense
From our close twines, there I Will behold
Thy bared snow, and thy unbreaded Gold,
There my unfranchis'd hand on every side,
Shall over thy naked polisht body slide,
No curtaln there (though) of transparent Lawn,
Before thy Virgin treasure shall be drawn,
But the rich Mine to the inquiring eye
Exposed, shall ready still for Mintage lie,
And we will coin young Cupids, there a-bed
Of Roses and fresh Mirtils shall be spread,
Under the cooling shady Cypres Groves,
Our pillow of the Down of Venus Doves,
Whereon our panting limbs we will gently lay,
In the faint respit of our active play,
That so our slumbers may in dreams have leisure,
To tell the nimble fancy of past pleasure,
And so our souls that cannot be imbraste,
Shall the embraces of our bodies taste;
Mean time the bubling stream shall court the shore,
The enamored cherping wood-quire shall adore,
In varied tunes the Deity of Love,
Gentle blasts of Western winds shall move
The trembling leaves, and through their close bows breath
Still Music, whilst we restore our selves beneath,
Their dancing shades, till a soft murmur sent
From souls entranc't in amorous languishment,
Rouse us, and shoot into our souls new fire,
Till we in their sweet ecstasy expire;
Then as the empty Be, that late^^ bore,
Into the common treasure all her ^tore,
Flyes'bout the painted fields with nimble wings,
Deflowring the fresh Virgins of the Springs;
So will I rifle all the sweets that dwell
In thy delicious Paradise, and swell
In ruggs of Honey, drawn forth by the power
Of servent kisses, from each spicie Bower;
I Will seize the Rose-buds in the perfumed bed,
The Violet knots like curious Mazes spread,
Through all the Gardens taste the ripened Cherries
The warm firm Apples tipped with crimson berries,
Then will I visit with a wandering kiss,
The Vail of Lillies, and the bower of bliss,
And where the beauteous Region does divide,
Into two milkey ways my lips shall slide
Down those smooth Allies, wearing as I go,
A Track for Lovers in the printed snow;
Then climbing over the swelling Appenine,
Retire into the Grove of Egliantine,
Where I will all those ravished sweets distill, (skill,
Through Loves moist Limbeck, and with Chymick
From the mixed mass of our sovereign Balm derive
And bring the great Elixar to the Hive;
Now in more subtler Wreathes I will intwine
My sinewy thighs, my legs and arms with thine,
Thou like a sea of Milk shall lie displayed,
Whilst I the smooth calm Ocean do invade
With such a tempest, as when Jove of old,
Set down with Danae in a shower of Gold;
Yet my tall Pine shall in thy Cyprian strait,
Ride safe at Anchor, and unlade his freight,
My Rudder with thy bold hand, like a tried
And skilful Pylot, thou shall steer, and guide
My Bark into Loves channel, where it shall
Dance, as the bounding waves do rise and fall,
Then shall thy twining arms embrace and clip
My naked body, and thy balmed lip
Bathe me in juice of kisses, whose perfume,
Like a Religious Incense shall consume,
And send up holy vapors to those powers,
That bless our Loves, and crown our happy howrs,
That with such Halcian joys do fix our souls,
In sted fast peace, that no annoy controuls;
There no rude sounds frights us with sudde^ starts,
No jealous echoes there shall gripe our hearts,
Suck our discourse in, nor are we betrayed
To Rivals, by the bribed Chamber maid;
No Wedlocks bond untwist our unreacht loves,
We seek no midnight Arbours, no dark groves,
To hide our kisses; There the hated name
Of husband, wife, lust, modest, chaste, or shame,
Are vain and empty words, whose very sound,
Was never heard in the Elizian ground;
All things are lawful there that may delight
Nature, or unrestrained Appetite,
Like, and enjoy, to will, and not his own,
We only sin when Loves Rights are undone;
The Roman Lucrece there heard the divine
Lectures of Love, Great Master Aratine,
And knows as well as Lais how to move,
Her pliant body in the act of Love,
To quench the burning Ravisher, she hurls
Her limbs into a thousand winding curls,
And studies artful policies, such as be
Carved on the bark of every neighboring tree,
By learned hands, that so adorn the rine
Of those fair plants, which as they lie in twine,
Have flamed their glowing fires, the Grecian Dame,
That in her endless well sought for a name,
As fruitless as her work, does now display,
Her self before the Youth of Ithaca,
And the amorous Games of sportful nights prefer
Before dull dreams of the lost traveller;
Daphne has broke her bark, and that swift foot,
Which the angry God had fastened to the root,
To the fixed earth, does now unfettered run,
To meet the embraces of the youthful Sun,
She hangs upon him like the Delphick Lyre,
Her kisses blow the old, and breath new fire;
Full of her God, she sings inspired Lays,
Soft Odes of Love, such as deserve the Bays,
Which she her self was next her Lawrellies,
In Petrarchs learned arms, drying those eyes,
Which did in such smooth sweet numbers flow,
Which made the world enamored of his woe;
These, and ten thousand beauties more that died
Slaves to the Tyrant; now enlarged deride
His cansell'd Laws, and for their time misspent,
Paying to Love's Exchequer double rent:
Come then my Caelia, we will no more forbear
To taste our Joys struck with a pannick fear,
But will depose from his terrestrial sway,
This proud usurper, and walk free as they
With necks unyoak'd; Nor is it just that he
Should fetter your soft sex with Chastity,
Whom nature made unapt for abstinence,
When yet the false imposture can dispense
With humane Justice, and with sacred right,
And maugre both their laws command me fight
With rivalls, or with emmulous Loves, that dare
Equal with thine, his Mistress eyes or hair:
If thou complain of wrong, and call my sword
To carve but thy revenge; upon that word,
He bids me fight, and kill, or else he brands
With mark of infamy my coward hands:
And yet Religion bids from bloodshed fly,
And damns me for the act; then tell me why
This Goblin Honor, the World so adores,
Should make men Athiests, and not women whores.
T^a Wench desiring Money.
AS fair as she that made two husbands jar,
Raising 'twixt Troy and Greece a ten years war
As white as feathered Laeda, great Jove's rape,
She that was changed into a Swan-like shape:
As red as is the Emony, even so bright
Were thou my Love, that which the Poets write
Of metamo^^hos'd Jove, how often love changd him,
And from his own celestial shape estranged him
Into an Eagle, or Bull, I fear lest he,
Should fr^ high Heaven likewise descend on thee.
I am not jealous now, my thoughts are vanished,
And the hot ardor of affection banished;
My fire is cooled, reason assumes the place,
And now methinks thou have not thine own face;
Do thou demand why I am changed, behold,
The cause, I Will tell thee, thou do ask me gold,
Thou look that for my pleasure I should pay,
And that alone still frighteth me away;
Whilst thou were simple, and in all things kind,
I with thy sweet content did like thy mind,
Now thou art cuning grown, what has that gaind?
Thy bodies beauty by thy mind is stained:
Look on the beasts that in the Medows play,
Shall women bear more savage minds then they?
What gifts do Kine from the rude Bull enforce?
What rate demands the Mare fro the proud horse?
Or from the Ram the Ewe? they couple twice,
Ere once they do debate upon a price;
Women have learned alone to bargain well,
Their pleasures born with them alone they sell,
Alone they prize the night, and at a rate
Chaffer themselves with strangers; O vild state!
Alone for mutual pastime, coin they crave,
And ever they sport, ask first, What shall I have?
That which delights both, to which both run,
And (but by joint assistance) is not done,
The pleasures which on even terms we try,
Why should one party sell, the other buy?
Why should the sweets which we alike sustain,
To me be double loss, thee double gain?
That which comes freely, much by that we set,
Thou giv'st it me, and I am still in debt;
Love that is hired, is plainly sold and bought,
Thou have thy price, and then I owe thee naught:
Then O ye fair ones, all such thoughts expel,
What Nature freely gives you, spare to sell;
Let not your bodies to base lust be lent,
Goods lewdly got, are ever loosly spent.
A Sonnet.
WHy do we love these things which we call women,
Which are like feathers, blown in every wind?
Regarding least those men do most esteem them;
And most deceitful when they seem most kind,
And all their Virtue, that their beauty graces,
It is but painted, like unto their faces.
Their greatest glory is in rich attire,
Which is extracted from some hopeful heirs,
Whose wits and wealth are lent to their desire,
When they regard the gifts, more then the givers:
And to increase their hopes of future bliss,
They Will sometimes rack their Conscience for a kiss.
Some love the winds, that bring in golden showers,
And some are merely won with commendations,
Some love and hat^, and all within two hours,
And that is a fault amongst them most in fashion,
But put them all within a scale together,
Their worth in weight will scarce pull down a feather.
And yet I would not discommend them all,
If I did know some worth to be in any,
It Is strange, that since the time of Adams fall,
That God did make none good, yet made so many:
And if he did, for these I truly mourn,
Because they died before that I was borne.
A Health.
TO her whose Beauty does excel
Story, we toss these cups, and sell
Sobriety a Sacrifice
To the bright Luster of her eyes;
Each soul that sips here is devine,
Her Beauty Deifies the Wine.
Upon his Mistress cut finger.
Sweetheart, to see thy blood fall down,
What Mortal can forbear?
But as thou dropst thy blood o^th groun,
So he must drop a tear:
Good counsel to such wounded Maids,
God Cupid thus alleges,
Hereafter use such harmless tools,
that have no cutting edges.
You force the ground you stand on blush,
But blushing we permit,
Our cheeks could wear a Scarlet Plush,
saw we as much as it:
Hereafter love those better parts,
Nay best of all indeed,
Which though they take a thousand wounds,
yet scorn they e're to bleed.
The Rubies soft in Diamond,
Are glorious for to see,
But if congealed what rarest Jems,
Those Ruby drops would be:
This wish I to my Mistress bring.
And that is all I bring her,
Would I had fingred her fine Cut,
When she cut her fine finger.
LOVE'S Hue and Cry.
IN Love's Name you are charged hereby,
To make a speedy Hue and Cry
After a face which the other day,
Came and stole my heart away;
For your proceeding, these in brief,
Are some few marks to know the Thief;
Her hair was gold, a field of snow,
Smooth and unfurrowed was her brow,
A sparkling eye, so pure and gray,
As when it smiles, there needs noday;
Ivory dwells on her nose,
Lilly married to the Rose,
Have made her cheek their Nuptial bed,
Lips dyed a Vermilian red
Make Crimson blush, beside the rest,
You shall know this Fellon best
By the tongue, for if your ear,
Do once a heavenly Music hear,
Such as neither gods nor men,
But from that mouth shall hear again,
That, that is she, O take her to ye,
None can rock Heaven asleep but she;
I hear have apprehended one,
Confederate in the action,
And that is my eye, which did let in,
The cunning thief to do the sin,
At his window, but for her,
My eye shall be a prisoner,
Till it the first offender see,
That lured it to the Felony;
Your diligence herein I crave,
That I again my heart may have;
O take Loves wings, fly, search, or I
Shall have no heart to live, but die.
Loves Progress by Dr. Don.
WHo ever loved, if he do not propose
The right end, love, he is as one that goes
To Sea for nothing but to make him sick,
And loves a Bear-whelp born, if we o're-lick
Our love, and force it strange new shapes to take,
We err, and of a lump a Monster make.
Were not a Calf a monster if it were grown,
Faced like a man, though better then his own;
Perfection is in unity, prefer
One woman first, and then one thing in her:
Or when I value gold, I think upon
The ductilness, the application,
The whole sums, the ingenuity,
From rust, from soil, from fire ever free;
But if I love, it is because it is made
By our new Natures use, the soul of Trade;
All this in women we might think upon,
If women have them, and yet love but one:
Can men more injure women then to say, (they
They love them for that by which they are not
Make Virtue woman, must I cool my blood,
Till I both be and find one wise and good?
May barren Angels love so, but if we
Make love to woman, virtue is not she,
As beauty is not, he then that strayes thus,
From her to hers, is more adulterous
Then he that takes her maid, search every sphere,
And Fi^mam^nt, our Cupid is not there,
He Is an infernal god, and under ground
With Pluto dwells, where gold and fire abound,
Men to such gods their sacrificing coals
Did not on Altars lay, but pits and holes;
Although we see celestial bodies move
Above the earth, the earth we till and love;
So we his heirs contemplate, wounds and heart,
And virtues, but we love the rendering part;
Nor is the soul more swarthy, nor more fit
For love then this, as infinite as it,
But in attaining this desired place,
How much they stray that set out at the face,
The hair a forest is of Ambushes,
Of springs, snares, fetters, and of manicles:
The brov becalmes us when it is smooth and plain
And when it wrinckles, shipwracks us again,
Smooth, it is a Paradise, where we would have
Immortal stay, and wrinckled it is our grave.
The nose like to the first Meridian runs,
Not'twixt the East and West, but'twixt two Suns:
Her swelling lips, to which when we are come,
We Anchor there, and think we are at home,
For they seem all the Sirens songs, and there
The Delphian Oracles do fill the ear:
Then in a creek where chosen pearls do swell,
The Remora her charming tongue does dwell;
These and the glorious promontory her chi^
O're-past, and the straight Hellespont between
The Cestos and Abidos of her breasts,
Not of two Lovers, but two loves the nests,
Succeeds a boundless Sea, but that thine eye
Some Island Moles may scattered there discry,
And sailing toward her India, in the way,
Shall at her fair Atlantic navel stay;
Though thence the current be thy Pilot made,
Yet er^ thou come where thou would be in-laid
Thou shall upon another Forest set,
Where some do shipwreck and no further get,
When thou art there, consider in this Chase,
What time they lose that set out at the face;
Rather set out below, practice my Art,
Some symitry the foot has with that part,
Which thou do seek, and is a Map for that,
Lovely enough to stop, but not stay at;
Least subject to disguise and change it is,
Men say the Devil never can change his;
It is the Emblem that has figured
Firmness, it is the first part that comes to bed;
Civility we see refined the kiss,
Which at the foot began, transplanted is
Since to the hand, then to the imperial knee,
Now at the Papal foot delights to be;
If Kings think it the nearest way, and do
Rise from the foot, Lovers may do so too,
And as free Spears move faster far then can
Birds whom the air resists, so may that man
Which goes this empty and aetherial way,
Then if at beauties Elements h^ stay:
Rich Nature has in women wisely made
Two purses, and their mouths aversly laid,
They then that to the lower tribute owe,
That way which that Exchequer looks must go,
He which does not, his error is as great,
As who by Clysters gives the stomach meat.
On Black eyes by J. D:
NO marvel if the Suns bright eye,
Shower down hot flames, that quality
Still waits on light, but when I see
The sparkling Balls of Ebonie,
Distill such heat, the gazer straight
Stands so amazed at the sight,
As when the Lightning makes a breach
Through pitchy clouds; can Lightning reach
The Marrow, and not hurt the skin?
Your eyes the same to me have been:
Can Jet invite the loving straw
With secret fire? so can they draw,
And can when ere they glance a Dart,
Make stubble of the strongest heart:
Often when I look, I may descry
A little face peep through thine eye;
Sure that is the boy, that wisely chose,
^is rays amongst such rays as those,
Which (if his Quiver chance to fail)
May serve for Darts to kill withal;
If at so strong a charge I yield,
If ^ounded so, I quit the Field;
Think me not Coward, when I lie,
Thus prostrate with your charming eye;
Did I but say your eye, I swear
Death's in your Beauty every where,
Your eye night spare it self, my own,
(Wh^ n all your parts are truly known)
From any one may filch a Dart,
To wound my self, and then my heart,
One with a thousand Arrows filled,
Cannot say this or that this killed,
No more can I, yet sure I am,
That you are she that wrought the same,
Wound me again, yea more and more,
So you again will me restore.
The Spring.
NOw that the winters gone, the earth has lost
Her snow-white robes, and now no more the frost,
Candies the grass, or casts an icie cream,
Upon the silver Lake or Crystal stream,
But the warm Sun thawes the benumbed earth,
And makes it tender, gives a second birth
To the dead Swallow, wakes in hollow Tree
The drowzie Cuckoo, and the Humble Be;
Now do a Quire of chirping Minstrels sing
In triumph to the world, the youthful Spring,
The valleys, hills, and woods in rich array,
Welcome the coming of the longed for May;
Now all things smile, only my Love does lower,
Nor has the scalding noon-day-sun the power,
To melt the Marble yet, which still does hold
Her heart congealed, and makes her pity cold;
The Ox which lately did for shelter fly
Into the stall, does now securely lie
In open field, and Love no more is made
By the fire side, but in the cooler shade;
A^intas now does by his Cl^r^^ sleep,
Under a Sycamore, and all things keep
Time with the season, only she does carry
June in her eyes, in her heart January.
His Mistress commanding the return of Letters.
SO grieves the adventerous Merchant when he throws,
All the long-toil'd-for treasure, his ship stowes
Into the angry Mayn, to save from wrack
Himself and men, as I grieve to give back
These Letters, yet so powerful is your sway,
As if you bid me die, I must obey;
Go then blessed Papers, you shall kiss those hands,
That gave you freedom, but held me in bands,
Which with a touch did give you life, but I
Because I may not touch those hands, must die;
Methinks as if they knew they should be sent
Home, to their native soil, from banishment;
I see them smile, like dying Saints that know,
They are to leave the earth and toward he'ven go,
When you return, pray tell your sovereign,
And mine, I gave you courteous entertain,
Each line received a tear, and then a kiss,
First bathed in that, it escaped unscorcht in this,
I kissed it 'cause your fair hand had been there,
Because it was not, then I shed a tear;
Tell her, no length of time, nor change of air,
No cruelty, disdain, absence, despair,
No, nor her steadfast constancy can deter,
My vassal heart from ever honoring her;
Though these be powerful arguments to prove
I love in vain, yet I must ever love;
Say if she frown when you that word rehearse,
(Service) in Prose is often called Love in Verse;
Then pray her since I send back on my part
Her Papers, she would send me back my heart,
If she refuse, warn her to come before
The God of Love, whom thus I will implore,
Travling in thy Countries rode, great god, I spied
By chance this Lady, and walked by her side,
From place to place, f^aring no violence,
For I was well armed, and had made defense
In former fights, against fiercer foes then she,
Did at our first encounter seem to be,
But going further, every step revealed
Some hidden weapon, till that time concealed,
Seeing those outward arms, I did begin,
To fear some greater strength was lodged within,
Looking into her mind, I might survey
An host of beauties that in Ambush lay,
And won the day before they fought the field,
For I unable to refist, did yield;
But the insulting Tyrant foe destroys,
My conquer^d mind, my ease, my peace, my joys,
Breaks my sweet sleeps, invades my harmless rest,
Robs me of all the treasure of my breast,
Spares not my heart, nor yet (a greater wrong)
For having stolen my heart, she binds my tongue;
But at the last her melting eyes unsealed
My lips, enlarged my tongue, then I revealed
To her own ears the story of my harms,
Wrought by her virtues and her Beauties charms;
Now hear just judge an act of savageness,
When I complain in hope to have redress,
She bends her angry brow, and from her eye,
Shoots thousand darts, I then well hope't to dye,
But in such sovereign Balm Love dips his shot,
That though they wound a heart, they kill it not;
She saw the blood guish forth from many a wound,
Yet fled and left me bleeding on the ground,
Nor sought my cure, nor saw me since, it is true,
Absence and time two cunning Leaches drew
The flesh together, yet sure though the skin
^e closed without, the wound festers within;
Thus has this cruel Lady used a true
Servant and subject to her self and you;
Nor know I, great love, if my life be lent,
To show thy mercy or my punishment,
Since by the only Magic of thine Art,
A Lover still may live that wants an heart;
If this enditement fright her so as she,
Seem willing to return my heart to me,
But cannot find it, for perhaps it may,
Amongst other trifling hearts be out oth' way;
If she repent, and will make me amends,
Bid her but send me hers, and we are friends.
To his coy Mistress.
THink not, 'cause men flattering say,
You^r fair as Hellen, fresh as May,
Bright as is the morning Star,
That you are so, though you are,
Be not therefore proud, or deem
All men unworthy your esteem,
For being so you lose the pleasure
Of being fair, for that rich treasure,
Of more beauty and sweet feature,
Was bestowed on you by Nature
To be enjoyed, and twere a sin,
There to be scarce where she has bin,
So prodigal of her best graces;
Thus common beauties and mean faces,
Shall have more pastime and enjoy
The sport you lose by being coy;
Did the thing for which I sue,
Only concern my self, not you?
Were men so framed as they alone
Reaped all the pleasure, women none,
Then had you reason to be scant,
But 'twere a madness not to grant,
That which affords, if you consent,
To you the giver more content
Then me the beggar, O then be
Kind to your self, if not to me;
Starve not your self, because you may
Thereby make me to pine away,
Nor let fading beauty make,
You your wiser thoughts forsake,
For that lovely face will fail,
Beauty's sweet, but beauty's frail,
It Is sooner past, it is sooner done,
Then Summers rain, or winters Sun,
Mo^^ fleeting, when it is most dear,
It Is gone while we say (but) it is here;
Those curious locks so aptly twined,
Whose every hair a soul does bind,
Will change their Aburn hue, and grow,
White and cold as Winters snow;
That eye which now is Cupids nest,
Will prove his grave, and all the rest
Will follow, in the cheek, chin, nose,
Nor Lilly shall be found, nor Rose,
And what will then become of all,
Those whom you now your servants call,
Like Swallows when the Summer's done,
They Will fly and seek some warmer Sun,
Then wisely choose one for your friend,
Whose love may (when your beauties end)
Remain still firm, be provident,
And think before the Summer's spent,
Of following Winter, like the Ant,
In plenty horod for time of scant,
Cull out amongst the multitude
Of Lovers that seek to intrude
Into your favor, one that may,
Love for an age, not for a day,
One that will quench your youthful fires,
And feed in age your hot desires,
For when the storms of time have moved
Waves on that cheek which was beloved;
When a fair Ladies face is pin'de,
And yellow spread where red once shin'de
When beauty, youth, and all sweets leave her,
Love may return, but Lover never;
And old folks say there is no pains,
Like itch of Love in aged veins;
O love me then, and now begin it,
Let Us not lose this present minute,
For time and age will work that wrack,
Which time or age shall never call back;
The Snake each year fresh skin resumes,
And Eagles change their aged plumes;
The faded Rose each Spring receives,
A fresh red tincture on her leaves;
But if your beauty once decay,
You Will never know a second May;
O then be wise, and whilst your season,
Affords you days for sport, do reason,
Spend not in vain your lives short hour,
But crop in time your Beauties flower,
Which will away, and does together,
Both bud, and fade, and blow, and wither.
On age, or an old Face.
NO Spring or Summer beauty has such grace
As I have seen in an Autumnall Face;
Young beauties force your love, and to a rape,
This does but council, yet you cannot escape;
If It were a shame to love, here 'twere no shame,
Affection here takes reverences name;
Were her first years the golden Age, that true,
But now she is gold often tried and ever new;
That was her fore- Ides and inflaming time,
This is her habitable tropic clime;
Fair eyes, who asks more heat then comes from thence,
He in a Fever wishes Pestilence;
Then call not wrinckles graves, if graves they are,
They are Loves graves, or else he lies no where,
Yet lies not Love dead here, but here does sit,
Vowed to this trench like as an Anchorite,
And here till hers which must be his death come,
He does not dig a Grave, but build a Tomb;
Here dwells he, though he sojourn every where
In brief, yet still his standing house is here;
Here where still evening is, not noon, or ^ight,
Where no voluptuousness, yet all delight
In all her words; unto all hearers fit,
You may at Revels, you at Council sit;
This is Loves Timber, youth her under-wood,
Wine fires in May, in August comforts blood,
Which then comes seasonablest, when your taste
And appetite to other things are past;
Xerxes strange Lydian love, the Platane Tree
Was loved for age, none being so old as she,
Or else because being young, Nature did bless
Her Youth with Ages glory barrenness;
If we love things long sought, Age is a thing,
Which we are fifty years in compassing;
If transitory things (which soon decay)
Age must be loveliest at the latest day,
But name not Winter faces, whose skin slack,
Lanck, like an unthrifts purse, or a souls sack,
Whose eyes seek light within, for all here is shade,
Whose mouths are holes, rather worn out then made
Whose every tooth to his several place is gone,
To vex their souls at the Resurrection;
Name not those living Deaths-Heads unto me, such I abhor;
I hate extremes, yet I had rather stay
With Tombs then Cradles, to wear out a day;
Since such Loves natural action is, may still
My love descend, not journey up the hill,
Not panting after growing beauties, so
I shall be one of those that homewards go.
A Maids Denial.
NAy pish, nay pew, nay faith, and will you, fie,
A Gentleman and use me thus, in faith I Will cry,
Gods body what means this? nay fie for shame,
Nay faith away, nay fie away, in troth you are to blame,
Hark, sombody comes, leave off I pray,
I Will pinch, I Will scratch, I Will spurn, I Will go away;
Infaith you strive in vain, you shall not speed,
You mar my ruff, you hurt my back, my nose will bleed
Look, look, the door is open, sombody sees
What will they say, nay fie you hurt my knees;
Your buttons scratch (O God) what a coil is here
You make me sweat, infaith here is goodly geere,
Nay faith let me entreat you if you list;
You mar my head, you tear my smock, but had I wist
So much before, I would have kept you out,
Is It not a pretty thing you went about;
I did not think you would have served me thus,
But now I see I took my mark amiss;
A little thing would make me not be friends,
You have used me well I hope you will make amends
Hold still, I Will wipe your face, you swet amain,
You have got a goodly thing with all your pain;
O God how hot am, what will you drink?
If you go swetting down what will they think;
Remember this how you have used me now,
Doubt not ere long but I will meet with you;
If any man but you had used me so,
Would I have put it up, in faith Sir no;
Nay go not yet, stay here and sup with me,
After at Cards we better will agree.
A Blush.
STay lusty blood, where can thou se^k,
So blessed a place as in her cheek;
How can thou from that place retire,
Where beauty does command desire;
But if thou can not stay, then flow
Down to her panting pap^ below*
Flow like a Deluge from her breast,
Where Venus Swans has built her n^st,
And so take glory to disdain,
With azure blew each swelling vain,
Then run boiling through each part,
Till thou have warmed her frozen heart;
If from love it would retire,
Martyr it with gentle Fire;
And having searched each secret place,
Fly thou back into her face,
Where live blessed in changing those
White Lillies to a Ruddy Rose.
To one that was like his Mistress.
FAir Copy of my Celia's Face,
Twin of my soul, thy perfect grace,
Claims in my soul an equal place.
Disdain not a divided heart,
Though all be hers you shall have part,
Love is not tied to Rules of Art:
For as my soul first to her flew,
Yet staid with me, so now it is true,
It (...) her, though fled to you.
Then entertain this wandering guest,
And if not love, allow it rest;
It left not, but mistook the nest.
Nor think my love, or your fair eyes
Cheaper, 'cause from the Sympathise
You hold with her the flames that rise.
To Lead, or Brass, or some such bad
Mettle, a Princes stamp may add
The value that it never had.
But to the pure refined Ore,
The stamp of Kings imparts no more
Worth, then it had before.
Only the Image gives the rate,
To Subjects of a Foreign State,
It Is prized as much for its own weight.
So though all other hearts resign
To your pure worth, yet you have mine,
Only because you are her Coin.
On a Fly that flew into Celia's Eye.
WHen this Fly lived, she used to play,
In the Sunshine all the day;
Till coming my in Coelia's sight,
She found a new and unknown light,
So full of Glory, as it made
The noonday Sun a gloomy shade:
Then this amorous Fly became
My Rival, and did court this Flame;
She did from hand to bosom^ skip,
And from her breath, her cheek and lip,
Sucked all the Incense and the Spice,
And grew a Bird of Paradise.
At last into her eye she flew,
There scorcht in Flames, and drowned in Dew;
Like Phaeton from the Suns bright Sphere
She fell, and from her dropped a tear;
Of which a Pearl was straight composed,
Wherein her Ashes lie enclosed:
Thus she receives from Caelia's eye,
Funeral, Flame, Tomb, Obsequye.
On the Snow falling on his Mistress breast.
I Saw fair Cloris walk alone,
When feathered Rain came softly down;
And Jove descended from his Tower,
To court her in a Silver shower:
The wanton Snow flew to her breast,
Like little Birds unto their Nest;
But overcome with whiteness there,
For grief it thawed into a tear:
Thence fal^^ng to her vestures hemme,
To deck her froze into a Iemme.
On the drawing his Mistress Picture.
SItting, and ready to be drawn,
What mean these Velvets, silk, and Lawn,
Embroideries, Feathers, Fringes, Lace?
When every limb takes like a face;
Send these suspected helps to aid,
Some form defective, or decayed;
Thy beauty without falsehood fair,
Need^ naught to cloth it but the air;
Yet som^thing for the Painters qew,
Were fitly enterpos'd for new;
He shall if he can understand,
Work mine own fancy with his hand,
Draw first a cloud all save her neck,
And out of that make day to break,
Till like her face it does appear,
That men might think all light rose there
Then let the beams thereof disperse
The cloud and show the universe;
But at such distance that the eye,
May rather (yet) ad^re then spy;
The heaven d^fin^d, draw then a Spring,
With all that youth and it can b^ing,
Four Rivers branching (out) like Seas,
And Paradise confining these:
Last draw the circle of this Globe,
And let there be a starry Robe
Of Constellations about it harl'd,
And thou have painted beautise world;
But Painter see thou do not sell
A Copy of this Piece, nor tell
Whose it is, but if it favor find,
Next fitting we will draw her mind.
A Pastoral, by T. R.
BEhold these Woods, and mark my Sweet
How all the boughs together meet!
The Cedar his fair arms displayes,
And mixes branches with the Bays.
The lofty Pine deigns to descend,
And sturdy Oaks do gently bend;
One with another subt'ly weaves
Into one Loom their various leaves,
As all ambitious were to be
Mine and my Phi^^is Canopie!
Let Us enter, and discourse our Loves;
These are my dear, no tell-tale Groves!
There dwells no Pyes, nor Parots there,
To prate again the words they hear:
Nor babbling Echo, that will tell
The neighboring hills one syllable.
Being entered, let us together lie,
Twined like the Zodiacks Gemini!
How soon the Flowers sweeter smell?
And all with emulation swell
To be thy pillow? These for thee
Were meant a bed, and thou for me;
And I may with as just esteem
Press thee, as thou may lie on them.
And why so coy? what do thou fear?
There lurks no speckled Serpent here:
No venomous Snake makes this his road,
No Canker, nor the loathsome Toad:
And yon poor Spider on the Tree,
Thy Spinster will, no poisoner be:
There is no Frog to leap, and fright
Thee from my arms, and break delight:
Nor Snail that over thy coat shall trace,
And leave behind a slimy Lace:
This is the hallowed Shrine of Love,
No Wasp nor Hornet haunts this Grove;
Nor Pismire to make pimples rise,
Upon thy smooth and Ivory thighs:
No danger in these shades does lie,
Nothing that wears a sting, but I;
And in it does no venom dwell,
Although perchance it make thee swell.
Being set, let us sport a while my Fair,
I will tie Love-knots in thy hair:
See Zephirus through the leaves does stray,
And has free liberty to play;
And braid thy locks: And shall I find
Less favor then a saucy wind?
Now let me sit, and fix my eyes,
On thee that art my Paradise:
Thou art my all, the Spring remains,
In the fair Violets in thy veyns:
And that it is a Summers day,
Ripe Cherries in thy lips display:
And when for Autumn I would seek,
It Is in the Apples of thy cheek:
But that which only moves my smart,
Is to see Winter in thy heart:
Strange, when at once in one appear,
All the four seasons of the year!
I Will clasp that neck where should be set
A rich and Orient Carkanet:
But Swains are poor, admit of then
More natural chains, the arms of men.
Come let me touch those breasts that swel
Like two fair Mountains, and may well
Be styled the Alps, but that I fear
The Snow has less of whiteness there.
But stay (my Love) a fault I spy,
Why are these two fair Fountains dry?
Which if they run, no Muse would please
To taste of any Spring but these;
And Ganimede employed should be,
To fetch his Jove Nectar from thee:
Thou shall be Nurse fair Venus swears,
To the next Cupid that she bears.
Were it not then discreetly done
To open one spring to let Woe run?
Fie, fie, this Belly, Beauty's mint,
Blushes to see no coin stamped in it,
Employ it then, for though it be
Our Wealth, it is your royalty;
And beauty well have cnrrant grace,
Lhat bears the Image of your face,
How to the touch the Ivory thiges,
Veil gently, rnd again do rise,
As pliable to impression,
As virgins wax, or parian stone,
Dissoly'd to softness; plump, and full,
More whire and soft then cotsall wool,
Or Cotton fron from the indian Tree,
or prdty silk worms huspifery,
These on two marbledellars raised,
Make me in donpt which should be praised;
They, or their Columns must; but when
I view those feet w^ic^ I nave seen
So nimbly trip it over the lawns
Thrt all the Srtyrs and the fawns
Have stood amazed, when they would pass
Over the lays, and not a grasle
Would feel the weight, nor rush, nor bent
Drooping betray which way you went,
O then I felt my hot desires,
Burn more, and flame with double fires,
Come let those thighs, those legs, those feet
With mine in thousand windings meet;
And woven in more subtle twiens
Then woodbine, Ivy, or the vines,
For when Love sees us csrcling thus
He Will like no Arbor more then us.
Now let us kiss, would you be gone?
Manners at least allows me one.
Blush you at this? pretty one stay,
And I will take that kiss away.
Thus with a second, and that too
A third wipes off; so will we go
To numbers that the stars outrun,
And all the Atoms in the Sun:
For though we kiss till Phoebus ray
Sink in the Seas, and kissing stay,
Till his bright beams return again,
There can of all but one remain:
And if for one good manners call,
In one, good manners, grant me all.
Are kisses all? they but fore-run
Another duty to be done.
What would ^ou of that Minstrell say
That tunes his pipes and will not play?
Say what are blossoms in their prime,
That ripen not in harvest time?
Or what are buds that never disclose
The longed for sweetness of the rose?
So kisses to a Lover;s guest
Are invitatiohs; ^ot the feast,
See every thing that we epsy
Is fruitful saving you and I:
View all the Fields, survey the Bowers,
The buds, the blossoms, and the Flowers,
And say if they so rich could be
In barren base Virginity:
Earth's not so coy as you are now,
But willingly admits the Plow;
For how had man or beast been fed,
If she had kept her Maidenhead?
Coelia once coy, as are the rest,
Hangs now a Babe on either breast:
And Cloris since a man she took,
Has less of greenness in her look:
Our Ewes have ean'd, and every Dam,
Gives suck unto her tender Lamb:
As by these Groves we walked along,
Some Birds were feeding of their young;
Some on their Eggs did brooding sit,
Sad that they had not hatched them yet;
Those that were slower then the rest,
Were busy building of their Nest:
You will not only pay the fine,
You vowed and owed to Valentine.
As you were angling in the Brook,
With silken Line and silver Hook,
Through Crystal streams you might desery
How vast and numberless a Fry
The Fish had spawnd, that all along
The bancks were crowded with the throng;
And shall fair Venus more command
By water, then she does by Land?
The Phoenix chaste, yet when she dies,
Her self with her own Ashes lies:
But let thy love more wisely thrive,
To do the act while the art alive:
It Is time we left our childish love,
That trades for toys, and now approve
Our abler skill; they are not wise,
Look Babies only in the eyes.
That smothered smile shows what you meant
And modest silence gives consent.
That which we now prepare, will be
Best done in silent secrecy:
Come do not weep, what is it you fear?
Lest some should know what we did here.
See not a flower you pressed is dead,
But re-erects his bended head;
That whosoere shall pass this way,
Knows not by these where Phillis lay;
And in your forehead there is none,
Can read the act that we have done.
Phillis.
Poor rediculous and simple Maid!
By what strange wiles art thou betrayed!
A treasure thou have lost to day,
For which thou can no ransom pay:
How black art thou transformed with sin?
How strange a guilt gnawes me within?
Grief will convert this red to pale,
When every Wake and Whitsun-A^e,
Shall talk my shame; break, break sad heart
There is no Medicine for my smart,
No herb nor balm can cure my sorrow,
Unlsse you meet again to morrow.
Two Gentlemen inviting each other to sing.
COme with our Voices let us war,
and challenge all the Spheres,
Till each of us be made a Star,
and all the world turn Deares.
Mix then our Notes that we may prove,
to stay the walking floods,
To make the Mountain Quaries move,
and call walking the Woods.
What need of me, do you but sing,
Sleep and the Graves shall wake;
No voice has sound, no voice has string,
but what your lips do make.
They say the Angels view each deed,
who exercise below,
And out of inward passion feed,
in what they see or know.
Sing we no more then, lest the best
of Angels should be driven,
To fall again at such a feast,
Mistakes Earth for Heaven.
Nay, rather let our Notes be strained,
to meet their high desire;
So they in state of Grace retained,
shall wish us of their Quire.
A Sonnet in praise of Music.
HAil, sacred Music! Queen of Souls! strike hie
Inspire me with Poetic Rhapsodie,
Else words cannot praise thee.
Thy Virtue tunes the discord of the Spheres,
Charming to it divine and Humane ears,
Nor can breath raise thee!
Whose Aires breath a more harmonious wind,
Mounting above it self, the heaviest mind,
In spite of Nature.
Thy ravishing Accents, with holy force,
Can 'twixt our Souls and bodies cause divorce,
Cheer sullenest creature!
Strike but thy Lute with thy more gentle hand,
The Nightingale will mute, with listening stand,
Charmed to thy pleasure.
And when thy Note but runs division,
The very Tree shall dance she sits upon,
keep mean and measure*
The Palm will dance, the Bay her root forgo
The Cedar, Myrtle, Vine will foot it too:
When in the midst of all their frolic train,
Thou strik'st sad note, they are fixed trees again.
On Jealousy.
WHen you sit musing Lady al alone,
Casting up all your cares with private moan
When your heart bleeds with grief, you are no more
Nearer comfort, then you were before;
You cannot mend your state with sighs or cares,
Sorrow's no Balsome for distrustful fears:
Have you a foe you hate? wish him no worse
A plague or torment then the Yellow curse;
Observe your Lord with nere so strict an eye,
You cannot go to piss without a spy;
If but a Mouse do stir about your bed,
He startles, and fears he is dishonored,
And when a jealous dream does cross his pate,
Straight he resolves he will be separate;
Tell me right worthy Cuckolds if you can,
What good this folly does reflect on man?
Are women made more loyal? Have ye power
To guard the tree, that none can pluck the flower
Is it within the brain of jealous heads,
To banish Lust from Court or Courtly beds:
I never knew that base and foul distrust,
Made any chaste that had a mind to lust;
Nor will it make her honest, who by kind,
To loose and vild affections is inclined;
Debar her Lord, she to supply his room,
Will take a hors-boy, or a Stable-Groom;
Keep her from men of lower rank and place*
She Will kiss the Scullion, and with knaves embrace,
Suspect her faith withal, and all distrust,
She Will buy a Monkey to supply her lust;
Lock her from man and beast, from all content,
She Will make thee Cuckold with an Instrument;
For women are like angry Mastiffs chained,
They bite at all, when they are all restrained;
We may set locks and guards to watch their fire,
But have no means to quench their hot desire,
Man may as well with cunning go about
To quench the Gun his motion, as by doubt
To keep a metled woman, if that she
Strongly dispose her self to Venery.
How many thousand women that were Saints,
Are now made sinful by unjust restraints?
How many do commit for very spite,
That take small pleasure in that sweet delight?
Some are for malice, some are for mirth unjust,
Some kiss for love, and some do love for lust,
But if that Fates intend to make me blessed,
And Hymen bind me to a female breast,
(As yet I thank my stars I am not tide;
In servile Bonds to any wanton Bride)
Let Cynthia be my Crest, yea let me wear
The Cuckolds Badge, if I distrust or fear:
It Is told me often, a smooth and gentle hand,
Keeps women more in awe of due command,
Then if we put a Quinsel on their Dock,
Ride them with Bitts, set on their geer a Lock,
For then like furious Colts they strike and fling,
But if we slack our Reins, to pleas their will,
Kindness will keep them from committing ill:
You blessed Creatures hold your female right,
Conquer by day, as you overcome by night,
And tell the jealous World this from me,
Bondage may make you bad, whose minds are free:
Had Colatine been jealous, say this more,
Without a Rape, Lucrece had been a Whore.
A Caveat to his Mistress.
BEware fair Maid of Musky Courtiers oaths;
Take heed what gifts and favors you receive,
Let not the fading gloss of silken clothes,
Dazzel your virtues, or your fame bereave;
For lose but once the hold you have of grace
Who will respect your fortune or your face.
Each greedy hand does strive to catch the flour
When none regards the stock it grew upon,
Each nature loves the fruit still to devour,
And leaves the Tree to grow, or fade alone;
Then this advice fair creature take from me,
Let none taste fruit, unless he take the Tree.
Take heed lest Caesar does corrupt thy heart,
Or fond Amibition scale thy modesty,
Say to a King, thou only courteth Art;
He cannot pardon thy impurity;
For do with one, with a thousand thou wilt turn Whore,
Break Ice in one place, and it cracks in more.
Do but with King, to Subject thou will fall,
From Lord to Lackey, and at last to all.
An Emblem of Youth, Age, and Death, expressed in a Cherry-stone, on the one
side is cut a young Damsel, on the other an old Beldam, The stone
Hyeroglifically expresses Death.
FAir Mistress be not over-coy,
In entertaining of this toy,
The Moral of its pretty Art,
D^serves a lodging next your heart,
^or it is an Emblem (fairest trust me)
Of what you are now, and what you must be,
Except that envious Death prevent,
Rich Natures first benign intent,
Then does the gospel of the Stone,
Prove life and death to dwell in one;
For this poor Moddel which you view,
Did sometimes wear as rich a hew,
As nature gives to any fair,
Whilst it grew blushing in the Air,
Whose tempting color, and whose taste,
Brought it to what you see at last;
Nay had it hung still on the Tree,
It would have proved the same you see,
Save that the Artists hand alone,
For your sake has his cunning shown;
Then rarest object of my sight,
Unfold this threefold Riddle right,
And learn from it, your April years,
Bloomes not more fruit of joy then fears,
And that your beauty is a treasure
By Nature lent you, at whose pleasure
You must restore it when she will call,
And give account for use and all,
And that your winter fro^ty days,
Brings Almond-buds instead of Bays
To crown your temples, and with glory
To close the period of your story.
If those rich Jems which should have lasted,
Have not in your youth been wasted,
But (Prodigal-like) if thou have spent
Natures bo^^ies being but lent,
And t^en your last of days is come,
To give you summons to your home,
You must with grief return to dust,
She will no longer lend on trust,
Your beauties Relics as this Stone,
Will be a dry contemned bone;
Perhaps like it some friend vouchsafe,
To grave thereon your Epitaph,
Which may be read if not neglected,
This is the most can be expected.
Sir S. Steward.
To his Lady.
SO may my Verses pleasing be,
So may you laugh at them; and not at me,
It Is something to you I would gladly say,
But how to do it, cannot find the way;
I would avoid the common trodden ways,
To Ladies used, which be of Love or praise,
As for the first, that little wit I have,
Is not yet grown so near unto the ^rave,
But that I can by that dim fading light,
Perceive of what, and unto whom I write,
Let such as in a hopeless, witless rage,
Can sigh a Quire, and read it to a Page;
Such as can make ten Sonnets ere they rest,
When each is but a great blot at the best,
Such as can backs of books and windows fill,
With their too furious Diamond or Quill,
Such as are well resolved to end their days,
With a loud laughter blown beyond the Seas;
Such as are mortified, that they can live,
Laughed at by all the world, and yet forgive:
Wright love to you I would not willingly,
Be pointed at in every company,
As was the little Tailor, who till death,
Was great in love with Queen Elizabeth;
And for the last in all my idle days,
^ never yet did living woman praise,
^n Verse or Prose, And when I do begin,
^le pick some woman out as full of sin,
^s you are full of Virtue, with a soul,
^s black as yours is white, a face as foul
^s yours is beautiful; for it shall be
^ut of the Rules of Phisiognomie;
^o far, that I do fear I must displace
^he Art a little, to let in the face;
^ shall at least four faces be below
^he Devils; and her parched corpse shall show,
^n her loose skin, as if some spirit she were,
K^pt in a bag by some great Conjurer;
Her breath shall be so horrible and vild,
As every word you speak is meet and mild,
It shall be such a one as will not be,
Covered with any Art or Policy,
But let her take all waters, fumes, and drink,
She shall make nothing but a dearer stink,
She shall have such a foot, and such a nose,
As will not stand in any thing but Prose;
If I bestow my praises upon such,
It Is Charity, and I shall merit much;
My praise will come to her like a full bowl,
Bestowed at most need on a thirsty soul;
Where if I sing your praises in my Rhyme,
I loose my Ink, my paper, and my ti^^,
Add nothing to your overflowing store,
And tell you naught but what you knew before
Nor do the virtuous minded (which I swear
Madam I think you are) endure to hear
Their own perfections into question brought,
But stop their ears at them, for if I thought,
You took a pride to have your virtues known,
Pardon me Madam, I should think them none*
But if you brave thoghts (which I must respect
Above your glorious Titles) shall accept
These harsh disordered Lines, I shall ere long,
Dress up your virtues new in a new Song,
Yet far from all base praise or flattery,
Although I know what ere my Verses be,
They will like the most servile flattery show,
If I write truth, and make my subject you.
A Description of a wished Mistress.
NOt that I wish my Mistress,
Or more or less then what she is
Write I ^^ese Lines, for it is too late,
^ules to prescribe unto my Fate:
^ut as those tender stomachs call,
^or some choice meats that like not all;
^o queafie Lovers do impart,
What Mistress it is must take their heart:
First I would have her richly sped,
With Natures blossoms white and red,
For flaming hearts will quickly dye,
That have no fuel from the eye;
Yet this alone will never win,
Unless some treasure lie within;
For where the spoil's not worthy stay,
Men raise the Siege and march away:
She should be wise enough to know,
When, and to whom a grace to show,
For she that does at random choose,
Will sure her choice as well refuse;
And yet methinks I Would have her mind,
To loving courtesy inclined,
And tenderhearted as a Maid,
And pity only when I prayed:
And I would wish her true to be,
Mistake me not, I mean to me,
She that loves one, and loves one more,
Will love the Kingdom, ore and ore*
I could wish her full of wit,
So she knew how to huswife it;
But she whose insolence makes her dare
To try her wit, will sell her Ware.
Some other things delight will bring,
As if she dance, or play, or sing;
If hers be safe, what though her parts,
Catch then a thousand foreign hearts?
But let me see, should she be proud,
A little pride must be allowed?
Each amourous boy will sport and prate
Too freely, if she find no state?
I care not much though I set down,
Sometime a chiding, or a frown:
Eut if she wholly quench desire,
It Is hard to kindle a new fire:
To smile, to toy, is not amiss,
Sometimes to enterpose a kiss,
But not cloy, sweet things are good,
And pleasant, but are naught for food*
But stay, Nature has overcaught my Art
In her, to whom I offer up my heart,
And evening-passengers shall sooner trace,
The wanto^ beams that dance on Thames smooth face
Or find the track where once the fowl did stray
Or the moist sands which tides have washed away
Then ere my heart be sound with taint or spot,
So a revolt of hers procure it not.
Ad Amicum.
THou art the Spring, and I the leaveless Tree,
Thou art the flower, and I the toyling Be;
Thou art the Flax, and I the kindling fire,
I your disdain, but you my hearts desire:
You are the Bride which does engage my breast,
My thoughts in yours, though yours elsewhere do rest:
Say that I rest my lips upon thy cheek,
A wearied love some place of rest must seek,
No pillow softer then those cheeks of thine,
No wearied love more wearied is then mine:
Then be not coy to answer what I require,
You need not blush at what I do defire,
Say that your love does some way else incline,
Yet I am yours, though you will not be mine.
The Question of a Lady that was newly wedded.
A Lady that of late did wed,
Not knowing sports of Marriage bed,
Asked of her Husband which he thought most right
For Marriage sports, the morning or the night,
He answered as he did think most meet,
The day more holsom but the night most sweet
If it be so, quoth she, and we have leisure,
We Will to it in the day for health, all night for pleasure
Dr. Dun's Answer to a Lady.
Lady.
SAy not you love unless you do,
For lying will not honor you.
Answer of the Doctors.
Lady I love, and love to do,
And will not love unless be you.
You say I lie, I say you lie, choose whether,
But if we both lie, let us lie together.
Of his estate with Love.
THe more I seek to find the depth of Love,
The more I find my self to seck therein;
For when I thought the fruit thereof to prove,
I was methought, as when I did begin;
In Love and Virtue wise men wisely say,
The more a man does go, the more he may.
For as it comes at first, I know not how,
So does it bring at lenghth I know not what;
And when we stand as tho we would not bow,
Then does it break our force, and ^ast us flat;
And making us to run an endless course,
Often seems to mend, but waxes wors and wors.
Some lay the fault in Love, and some again
In them that love, I mean the women kind,
I have just cause with others to complain,
But to complain I never had the mind;
For what does it avail me to complain,
If my complaint may not release my pain.
When I complain aright, she takes it ill,
And for amends she answers me no force,
When I complain amiss, she rages still,
And for amends, she makes it ever worse,
I find no fault in her I may excuse,
It Is my ill luck that she does ^e refuse.
Which makes me uncertain what, or how,
To say or think of me, or of my Love,
I saw before, with grief I see it now,
It Is labor lo^t, her settled mind to move;
Though she make more of me, then of the most
I count but ill, that count without my ^lost.
Then I deserve, she does a great deal more,
And yet a great deal less then I desire,
Would God she kept her courteous deeds in store
So that her self with love were set on fire:
Her deeds are such, as I may not complain,
It is her heart that puts my heart to pain.
She does to me that which to all she must,
And yet as though it were to me alone,
Her best she lays up for her best betrust,
Who is her all in all, and yet but one:
In love and virtue wise men wisely say,
The more we spend, still spend the more we may
Thus do I feed on leaves instead of fruit,
Instead of bodies, shadows me content,
In my account, Ciphers for Numbers go,
My feasting Christmas is a fasting Lent:
And yet no wrong, for my desert is small,
And all the world is subject to her call.
When he had written this, she read it, and said, that he writ it more to show
his wit, then for any good will, whereupon he thus replied.
BUt what do I in vain my paper spend,
without al hope against the stream to move
Needs must I end, although I know no end,
If not to lvoe, yet for to speak of Love,
She says that this, she says that all I writ,
was nothing else but for to show my wit.
And would to God my wit did show no more,
Then I delight to show my wit therein,
It were more wit to keep my love in store,
Then utter all, when none of hers is seen;
Mine is so much, she keeps her own in store,
If mine were less, her own would be the more
To his Love upon complaint of the uncertainty of his estate: She answered him,
that he should never have cause to repent.
MY heart the Ship, that was tossed to and fro,
By winds of fear, by waves of deep despair
In certian course, uncertain what to do,
Or how to find the weather ever fair,
At length is got into the Port of rest,
To wit, his only best beloved breast.
And knit with faith, as with a Cable Rope,
Which will not shrink, though all the world do fail,
Unto the Anchor of undoubted hope,
In hope at length with wind and tide to sail;
He cares not though winds do blow abroad
So he may find his harbor in the road.
A small assurance more contents the mind,
The greater hope of greater hope to come,
That which is loose, you may with ease unwind
The way to all, is to be sure of some,
Which since you grant, I hold my self content,
With that you say, I never shall repent.
He that hopes you said of him ^s you meant,
That he never should have cause to repent.
To his Love when she said that her love was a burden unto him.
MY Love, why do thou think thy love
a burden unto me,
I never felt a thing so light,
as it does seem to be,
Or if thy love a bu^then be,
as thou do say my dear,
Why think thou me unable, or
unwilling it to bear,
It is no burden for to have,
but for to want thy love,
From which I do not, cannot, ought
not, will not me remove:
The love is light, and does delight,
that has the greatest part:
The love is heavy that is least,
and makes a heavy heart;
Then if thy love a burden be,
as thou do seem to say,
Think that it never troubles me,
but when it goes away.
To his Mistress on New-years-day.
TO give a Gift, where all the Gifts
of God so much abound,
What is it else but even to add,
a penny to a pound?
To wish you years, though they be New,
which yet may make you old,
What is it, but to wish you years
of silver for your Gold?
Yet do I send a simple Gift,
to show my great good will,
And wish withal that all your years
be new and happy still.
To a Friend, on the word Wife.
THe W. is double woe, the I. naught else bu^ Jealousy,
The F. is fawning flattery, the E. what else bu^ enmity:
If in the Name there be such strife,
Then God defend me from a Wife.
Upon a Merchant.
THere was a man, and he was semper idem,
And to be brief he was mercator quidem,
He had a wife was neither tall nor brevis,
Yet in her carriage was accounted levis,
He to content her gave her all things satis,
She to requite him made him Cuckold gratis.
Ti his Love upon New Years Even, when they were upon parting.
IF you will leave me, leave me, dear,
Or now or never with the Year,
For now the Year is at an end,
And now each friend renews his friend,
And now the date of love expires,
And now the time truth requires,
And now your friends envy at me,
And now it must or never be.
If you do mean to love me, dear,
Begin to morrow with the year,
For then does love it self renew,
And every friend perform his due,
Then to and fro the Gifts are sent,
And paid as if it were for rent,
And then of friends the most we make,
Another Lease of Love to take.
If you will neither leave, nor love,
As by conjecture I can prove;
You do me wrong to hold me on,
You wrong your self to care for none;
You wrong the face that God you gave,
You wrong the other gifts you have,
And in revenge of this your wrong,
Shall love I hope, and lack as long:
Wherefore or love, or leave me, dear,
Or now, or never, with the Year,
To his Heart.
MY Heart why do thou bodily fear,
that thou do love in vain?
Why do thou fear that gentle means,
will make thee live in pain?
What though thy Love did never care,
for wearing of a man?
What though more craft lurk in her breast,
then she dissemble can?
Thy choice is good, thy love is great,
thy faith is true as steel:
She Is wise, what will thou more? why do
thou fear before thou feel?
The Hearts Answer.
ALas, what should I do but fear,
how I may be secure?
Of that which none could yet come near*
how may poor I be sure?
What though I have the name to be,
the greatest in her books?
What though she feed me once a day,
even with her kindest looks?
Her choice is past, her love bestowed,
hear faith no faith can move,
^ most unworthy; shall I hope
to gain so good a love?
A Reply to his Heart.
MY heart why do thou reason thus,
According to thy sense?
Why do thou make an evil cause,
the worse be thy defense?
What though her choice be past? her love
bestowed, her faith too true,
What though thou most unworthy be,
to such a one to sue?
In choice is change, in love mislike,
faith used ill may fail.
Full many speed unworthily,
why should thou strike the sail.
The Hearts Answer.
ALas, to reason for my self,
is but to breed my bane,
And to be proud of mine estate,
when I am in the wane.
What though in choice, in love, in faith,
we many changes see?
What though in my unworthiness,
she may esteem of me?
Such choice is chance, such love is light,
such faith is also frail,
And they that speed unworthily,
unworthily may fail.
Of Love.
WHat thing is love? the worst and yet the be^^,
A world of cares, and yet a mart of toys,
A sea of dangers, yet the Haven of rest,
A hell of torments, yet a Heaven of joys,
A world, a sea, a hell to tender hearts,
A Mart, a Haven, a heaven to ease their smarts
How does it come? that way it seems least,
It fisheth here, and hangs there a bait,
It hoisteth say I when it does Anchor cast,
And strikes Alarm when it sounds retreat,
And when we think we have it at the bay,
We may be sure it steals another way.
What are the works of love? more neat then fit
For any use, and more in skill then proof,
The fine conceits of every finest wit,
Of greater ca^^ and ^^bour then behoof,
Much lik^ (...) sh^t Spiders weave on hie
Which have no use but even to catch a Fly.
What is the end of Love? still to begin,
And not to have or sight, or hope of end,
About a little to be long, and in
An endless suit, a thankless time to spend;
Much like the wheel that turning ever round
Does run apace, and yet can get no ground.
When he was to go into the Country.
ANd must I go, from whom? what shall I say?
From hope, from health, from love, from life, from all,
Tha^ was, or is, or may be any way,
My greatest comfort in each kind of thrall,
And that beyond the Seas into an I Will,
Where from my joys I must my self exile.
What though my native Country be the place?
What though it be to see my Father dear?
What though it be my Mother to embrace?
And take her blessing for this whole two year?
What though it were 10000. friends to see,
^0000. times this one more pleases me.
To his only one when he was in the Country.
LEt fools believe that absence cures love*
Or cools the heart, that eye has set on fire,
I see, I see, the farther I remove,
The farther off I am from my desire;
And find too well the wound I took by sigh^
Is nothing less, but rather more by flight*
For though mine eye did daily wound my hear^
Yet did I see withal thy lovely face,
No^ every thought gives cause of greater smar^
Because I want the hope of wonted grace,
The only thing wherein I now delight,
Is that thou do to me so kindly write.
If thou did know what pleasure I do take*
In every line that thou do write to me,
How I do scan each letter for thy sake,
To pick what kindness I may out of thee:
I know that thou would write once a week to me*
In reading thine, methinks I talk with thee.
To her again.
HOw far? how long am I, and shall I be
From that sweet soul, whose looks do feed mine eye?
How far? how long shall she be kept from me,
In whom, with whom, to whom I live and die?
For place, I take each step a mile to be,
For time each hour does seem a year to me.
Methinks the Sun does greater leisure take,
Then he was wont, to linger out the day,
Methinks he goes, as if his legs did ache,
And time it self does make no haste away,
If I might rule the Chariot of the Sun,
I would be bound to make it night at noon.
But be I far; or be I long from thee,
I am thine own, and thine alone my dear,
No ^ime, no place shall change or alter me,
Though steps were miles, and every hour a year;
Persuade thy self that I am with thee still,
Though I be here, in part, against my will*
When she told him she loved as well as he.
AS well as I? too good for to be true,
As well as I? too sweet for to be sure,
As well as I? a speech too kind for you,
As well as I? too sudden to endure:
As well as I? As well as I, I say;
I ask no more, I wish no fairer play.
As well as I? then must you change your vain,
And watch your times to make your love be seen,
As well as I? then must you leave disdain,
And show your self more kind then you have been:
As well as I? As well as I, I say,
I ask no more* I wish no fairer play.
As well as I? then will I strive to do
More then I can, to make you do as much,
As well as I? then will I be to you,
More then I am, to make you to be such:
As well as I? As well as I, I say,
I ask no more, I wish no fairer play.
To his Love.
IF any be content with words, it is I,
If any not content with deeds, it is you;
If any fear your tongues like swords, it is I,
If any vex the heart that bleeds, it is you:
it is you and I that make these sayings true,
Disdained I, and most disdainful you.
If any man do live by looks, it is I,
If any woman loves by fits, it is you;
If any leave for love his books, it is I,
If any bats the edge of wits, it is you:
It Is you and I that make these sayings true,
Unhappy I, and more then happy you.
If any strive against the stream, it is I,
With wind and tide, if any go, it is you
If any be more then they seem, it is I,
If any think less then they know, it is you:
It Is you and I that make these sayings true,
Unfeigning I, and deep dissembling you.
If any pluck for prime, and miss, it is I,
If any pluck for flush, and hit, it is you,
When color holds, if any loose, it is I,
By contraries, if any get, it is you.
It Is you, to whom all gains prove for the best
It Is I that on all gains do loose my rest.
A Fancy of Love.
THe Sun had run his race, and now began
His Steeds to water in the Western Seas,
When suddenly the sky waxt pale and wan,
And night drew on the time of rest and ease:
I lay me down to take my sleep in bed,
And lo what fancies came into my head.
Fast by my side there seemed one to stand,
I know not how possessed on every part,
Possessed on either foot, on either hand,
Possessed on head, but most possessed on heart;
Ladies they seemed, that did divide him so,
And still at odds both draw him to and fro.
I sigh to think, how I did sigh in sleep,
And full of pity, pitied his estate,
I scarce can hold to think how he did weep,
And make complaint of his unhappy fate;
Yet went I on to see what Dames they were,
That did the silly soul in pieces tear.
Upon his heart, his tender heart I saw,
Love like a Prince sit in a Chair of State,
Under her feet lay all his thoughts in awe,
Not daring once their case for to debate;
The reason was, reason it self was fled,
And scarce did hold a corner of the head.
Upon this head did foolish fancy sit,
Devising toys his Mistress mind to move,
I never saw the like conceits of wit,
As thence were sent to get his Mistress love:
And though he sent unto her more and more
He never sent the same he sent before.
On either hand did sit a modest Dame,
One on the left, another on the right,
One called Hope, the other Faith by name,
Too constant both for love that was but light;
Yet winged both, as if they would aspire,
Faith with desert, and Hope with hot desire.
Upon his feet two spiteful ones did sit,
To weigh him down, and nail him to the ground
To clog his hope, his faith, his love his wit,
From getting her to whom he would be bound
To wit, distrust, that hindered faith to fly,
Despair, that hindered hope to mount on hye.
While I stood musing at his woeful case,
She passed by that puts him to this pain,
It grieved me to see so sweet a face,
To bear a hand so armed with disdain,
And as his faith began to plead desert,
With her disdain, she thrust him through the heart.
Do I say him? I feel my self her hand,
This very wound does drive my dream away,
Well may I dream that others by me stand,
But when I wake, I must the person play:
Well may I dream this deed by others true,
But when I wake, it can be none but you.
When he knew not how to please her.
IF any man an endless maze do tread,
Where neither in nor out he finds the way,
If any's fancy be by reason lead,
To one that does both dally and delay,
If any Anchor cast in careless Cost,
It Is only I that study to be lost.
My wit is snared within a Serpents head,
Where there are many turnings to and fro,
My foolish heart is yet with reason led,
To think it reason that it should be so:
And I my self, I grant, do study most
Conceits of wit, by which I may be lost.
What will you have me do? what will you not?
Shall I be yours? not so, mine own? nor so?
Go I away, I have a new love got,
Stay I, what get I, but but in faith Sir no?
Wish I your love, you say I wish no reason,
Touch I you breast, you say I offer treason.
How will you have me to behave me then?
Not yours, and yet but yours I may not be,
As touching, so not touching does offend,
Go I, or stay I, there is fault in me,
Yet must I still in this or that offend,
Until you tell how I may both amend.
In truth.
INn truth sometime it was a sweet conceit,
To think how Truth and Love did live together
But now in truth there is so much deceit,
That truth indeed is gone I know not whither;
Yet lives truth, and has its secret Love,
And Love in Truth deserves to be regarded;
And Love regard in conscience does approve,
Approved truth can never be discarded:
Then try me first, and if that true you prove me*
In truth you wrong me, if you do not love me.
Upon a Discourtesie.
CLose up thy lids mine eye, thy leaves mine ear,
Put up thy pipes my tongu, thy stripes my heart
Head hide thy self, wit leave thy fancies dear,
Hand, let thy pen no more it self impart;
For when eye sees, ear hears, heart feels disdain
How may I speak, or write, or think but pain.
Head aches with casting fancies in his mold,
Hand shakes with setting of these fancies down
Heart quaks to think that love should wax so cold
And each part takes my wrong to be his own;
But yet since you in them do me forsake,
It Is I, not they that ache, that shake, that quake.
My aching head can dream of nothing now,
But Agonies of a perplexed mind,
My shaking hand can write down nothing now
But fitts of Agues, shaking in their kind.
My quaking heart does pant within my breast
That so great love should find so little rest.
Upon May Day.
THis morning did I dream of merry May,
How I did rise, and forth a Maying go,
To take the pleasure of the pleasant day,
In which we may without all fear of no;
Methought into a Park of Dear I came,
A pleasant place, and full of pleasing game.
A goodly pale it had about it round,
As even as Art could make, or Nature bear,
Which did set forth the goodness of the ground
And compass in the hasty flying Dear,
The Gate was made with clasp of silver fast,
Where few or none without great favor past.
The froward Keeper did deny me way,
And asked me, how I durst to come so near?
Since it is May said I, I trust I may
Come in and out, so that I steal no Dear:
No, no, said he, go May it other where,
Though it be May, you may not May it here*
With that I stood aloof the Park to view,
And over pale the pleasures to behold,
Where I perceived a Lawn of perfect hew,
Which did abound in pleasures manifold,
Above the which a goodly hill there stood,
Upon the which, there grew a goodly wood.
Within the Gate I did a Cave espy,
Whence of sweet breath there blew a pleasant wind,
Happy were he that at the mouth might lie,
To cool his heart, when hot he does it find:
Yet farther in methought there did appear;
Two lively Springs, as any Crystal clear.
What kind of Dear it held, I need not tell,
It nothing held, that is not holden dear,
Each thing it held, became the Park so well,
It grieved me that I could not come near:
But woe is me that in this pleasant ground,
Beauty should be the Dear, and love the Hound.
Of his Love, upon his purpose to travel.
AS virtuous men pass mild away,
And wisper to their souls to go,
While some of their sad friends do say,
Now his breath goes, and some say no:
So let us melt, and make no noise,
Nor tear floods, nor sigh tempests move,
'Twere profanation of our joys,
To tell the Laity of our Love;
Movings of the earth cause harms and fear,
Men reck on what they did, and meant,
But trepidations of the Sphere,
Though greater far, are innocent:
Dull sublunary Lovers love,
Whose soul is sense, cannot admit
Absence, because it does remove
Those things, which elemented it.
But we, by love so much refined,
That our souls know not what it is,
Enter assured of the mind,
Careless, eyes, lips, and hands do miss:
Our two souls therefore which are one,
Though I must go^ endure not yet
A breach, but an expansion,
As gold to airy thinness beat.
If they be two, they are two so,
as stiff-^wind Compasses are two.
Thy soul, the fixed foot makes no shoo^
to move, yet does, if the other do:
And though it in the Center sit,
yet while the other far does rome,
It leanes and hearkens after it,
and grows erect, as that comes home.
Such then be thou to me, who must,
like the other foot obliquelie run:
Thy firmness draws my circle just,
and makes me End where I begun.
J. Dun.
To his Mistress of Love and Hate.
TAke heed of loving me,
at least remember I forbade it thee;
Not that I shall repair m^unthrifty waste
of breath and blood, upon thy sighs and tears,
And so recover my lost soul at last:
for so great joy my life at once out-weares,
Then least thy love by my death frustate be,
If thou love me, take heed of loving me.
Take heed of Hating me.
Or too much triumph in thy Victory;
Not that I shall be mine own Officer,
and Hate with Hate again Retaliate:
But thou will looose the name of Conquerar,
if I thy conquest perish by thy hate.
Then least my being nothing, lessen thee,
if thou hate me, take heed of hating me.
Yet Love and Hate me ^oo;
So these Extremes shall neithers Office do
Love me that I may dye the gentle way:
Hate me, because thy Love's too great for me,
Or let these two themselves, not me decay:
So shall I live thy Stage, not triumph be:
Then least thy Love, hate, and me thou undo,
O let me live, O Love, and Hate me too.
His Diet.
TO what a cumbersom unwealdiness,
And burd^nous corpulence my love had grown
But that I did to make it less,
And keep it in proportion,
Give it a Diet, made it feed upon,
That, which love worst endures, discretion.
Above one sigh a day I allowed him not,
Of which my fortune, and my faults had part,
And if sometimes by stealth hegot,
A she-sigh from my Mistress heart;
And though to feast on that, I let him see*
'Twas neither very sound, nor want to me,
If he wrung from me a tear, I burnt it so
With scorn or shame, that him it nourisht not,
If he sucked hers, I let him know,
'Twas not a tear which he had got,
His drink was counterfeit, as was his meat,
For eyes that roll toward all, weep not, but sweat.
What ever he would distaste, I wrote that,
But burnt my Letters, if she writ to me,
and that favor that made him fat,
I said, if any little be
Conveyed by this, ah, what does it avail,
To be the fortieth name in an entail.
Thus I reclaimed my Buzzard love to fly,
At what, and when, and how, and where I choose,
Now negligent of sport I lie,
And now as other Faulkners use,
I spring a Mistress, swear, write, sigh, and weep,
And the game killed, or lost, go talk, or sleep.
Against Marriage.
THere never lived that married woman yet,
(...) truly could commend the wives estate
Though some perhaps in modsty and wit,
Will rather prais't, then show their grief too late
This Marriage is a field of discontents,
All overgrown with a confused h^ap
Of wrongs, cares, and many ill events,
Which Husbands sow, but Wives are forced to reap.
Or like a prison with a painted door,
Which passengers suppose a Princely place;
But entered in, they do repent full sore,
Their former error, and their present case:
O Maids beware of this Tolossa gold,
It Is fair in show, but ruin does infold.
Against Melancholy.
GO damned Melancholy, get thee hence,
Thou hell-bred fury, torment of the mind,
Weakner of wit, abuser of the sense,
Within whose bounds al mischiefs are confined
Thou sullen sin, souls torture day and night,
Health-killing humor, Harbinger of Death,
Grave to content, darkner of beauties light,
Unto all good thou art the flood of Leath;
A waking dream, a spur to jealousy;
A fond conveyer of a thousand toys;
The ready path which leads to Lunacie,
Is this bereaver of our earthly joys:
The Gods, I think, when we deserv their curse,
Inflict this plague, because there is no worse.
Dr. John Dun's Will.
BEfore I sigh my last gasp, let me breathe
(Greet Love) some Legacies. Here I bequeath
Mine Eyes to Argus, if mine eyes can see;
If they be blind, then Love I give them thee;
My tongue to Fame; to Ambassadores mine ears;
to Women, or the Sea, my tears;
Thou Love have taught me heretofore,
By making me serve her wh'ad twenty more,
That I should give to none but such, as had too much before.
My Constancy I to the Plannets give,
My truth to them, who at the Court do live,
Mine Ingenuitie and openness
To Jesuits, to Buffocns my pensiveness;
My silence to any, who abroad have bin;
my Money to a Capuchin.
Thou, Love, taughts me, b' appointing me,
To love there, where no Love received could be,
Only to give to such as have an incapa^^^
I give my R^putation to those
That were my Friends; my (...)
To Schoolmen I be queath my (...)
My Sickness to Physicians, (...) Excti^^
To Nature all that I in Rhyme have writ,
and to my company, my wit.
Thou, Love, by making me adore
Her, who begot this love in me before,
Taughts me to make, as though I gave, when I did but restore.
To him, for whom the Passing Bell next towles,
I give my Physic Books; my written rowles,
Of moral Counsails, I to Bedlam give:
My brazen Meddalls unto them, which live
In want of bread; to them which pass among
all Forreiners, mine English tongue.
Thou Love, by making me Love one,
Who thinks her friendship a fit portion
For younger Loves, do all my gifts thus disproportion.
Therefore I Will give no more, but I Will undo
The world by dying, because Love dies too:
Then all your beauties will be no more worth
Then gold in Mines, where none does draw it forth.
And all your graces no more use shall have,
than a Sundyall in a Grave,
Thou Love taughtst me, by making me
Love her, who does neglect both me and thee.
T'intent and Practice this one way t'annihilate all three.
J. D.
Elegies by Mr. W. M.
An Elegy on a Sexton.
I Many Grave have made, but enjoyed none,
This which I made not, I possessed alone;
Each Corpse without embalming it did serve,
My life like precious Mummy to preserve;
Death, which then kind, now cruel found I have
Robbed me of life, which me my living gave;
No, Death is still more kind, for in the Grave
Where once I labor had, now rest I have;
I made good use of time, and night and day,
Had ear and heed how the hour did rass away;
I still was ready for a Grave, nor shall
Grive at what most I joy'd, a Funeral:
As I was wont, though not so soon as then,
Out of the Grave I shall come forth again.
On a Scrivener.
HEre to a period is the Scrivener come,
This is his last sheet, his full point, his Tomb
Of all Aspersions I excuse him not,
It Is plain he lived not without many a blot,
Yet he no ill example showed to any,
But rather gave good Copies unto many;
He in good Letters had been always bred,
And has writ more then many men have read;
He Rulers had at his command by Law,
Although he could not hang, yet he could draw
His force more bondmen had and made then any,
A dash alone of his Pen ruined many,
That not without great reason we may call,
His Letter great, or little Capital,
Yet it is the Scriveners fault, as sure as just,
When he has all done, then he turns to dust.
An Elegy on a Barber.
Here Is a mad' Shaver laid, a cutting Lad,
That many trim feats, and some bald ones had;
His actions were but barbarous, and he
More poling was then Pettifoggers be,
And if his fingers looked unto were not,
Twenty to one, but he would cut your throat,
But he that is not hair-brained needs not fear,
Maugre bald luck by him to lose an hair:
I wonder then he died that lived alone,
By excrements, hair, which can nourish none.
Such an hard workman we might hardly spar*
This accident fell out against the hair,
Since in deaths Empire, of a barbar's trade,
(For dead men's hair does grow) might use be made
Death takes and soundly pays him, how soere,
Here yet is left his equals to an hair.
An Elegy on a Mason.
SO long the Mason wrought on others walls,
That his own house of clay to ruin falls,
Which shall be new built and repaired alone,
When heaven and earth have dissolution;
He always kept his actions within square,
None of his doings but were regular;
He had a Trull, and that was vicious,
And climing high, he seemed ambitious;
Though much of him, yet truly said might be,
No Layman did more edify then he;
By laying Lime, he caught much foul, and none
Took with a hook more pain then he had done
No marvel spightful death wrought his annoy,
He sought to build, and death seeks to destroy.
On a Trumpeter.
IF that Fames Trumpet shall not speak thy worth,
Yet thou a Trumpet had to set it forth,
I thought at last thou wuldst fall dead to ground
Having been long accustomed to sound;
Thou were too much puffed up long time to last,
Needs must he dye whose life is but a blast;
Thee a sound fellow we did always find,
Or thou like him that is with the Colic pined
Preservd'st thy life by letting forth of wind;
Camelian-like of air thou had thy food,
And 'twas a bad wind did blow thee no good;
Robbed of thy windpipes once by cruel Death,
For want of breath thou dyd'st that liv'st by breath.
Pack up thy Pipes, here silent rest, till when,
A Trumpets sound make thee to live again.
An Elegy on a Sailour.
NOw on dry land the Sailor he does rest
Aborad, here seeming cabin'd in a Chest,
The frail bark of's life, which strange did sound
For want of wind, not water, here is aground.
It Is known some time a Landed man he was,
But had of late gone down the wind apace:
His life was fleeting and unstaid; but Death
Made him a Grave-man, and him settled has.
He could not but remember he must die,
That had his Shroud each day before his eye,
Needs must his Corpse long incorrupt abide,
Which seemed inbalm'd with Pitch before he did.
An Elegy on a Hunter.
HEre lies a dogged fellow, who has run
Out all his time, and now his course is don;
A running head he had, and did not scorn,
Though it did sound abroad, to wear the horn.
His course so open was, that whosoere
Observed it, soon might have him at a Hare.
He could not hunt thrift, yet his trace shall stand
He kept his Leases, though he sold his Land.
He cannot leave his lying, though he die,
For he being dead, yet in his grave does lie.
Lament his loss, that like a Hunter, he
Brought to his Grave, with a great cry might be.
An Elegy on a Tinker.
SIx foot at last, the wandering Tinker bound,
He silent rests, whose acts once loud did sound
At handy-stroakes he did no Valor lack,
Stout fellow that was metled at the back.
It seems a perfect Alchymist he was,
For into Silver he did turn his Brass.
It Is like he spoke to purpose what he said,
For he still struck the Nail upon the head.
He made two holes, while he did mend one hole,
And did his work by piece, and not the whole;
Often in Latin he would men beguile,
And yet speak naught but English all the while.
His Nose and Forehead, each a brazen one,
Carried the badge of his Occupation:
Yet had he not so soon come to an end,
T'had better been, for he each day did mend.
An Elegy on a Smith.
FArewell stowt Iron-side, not all thy Art
Could make a shield against Deaths envious dart.
Without a fault, no man his life does pass,
And to his Vice the Smith addicted was.
He often (as Choler is en creast by fire)
Was in his fumes, and much inclined to ire,
He had been long so used to forge, that he
Was with a black Cole marked for Forgery;
But he for whiteness needed not to care,
H'ad but a Blacksmith bin, though never so fair.
Pragmaticall he seemed by his desire,
Still to have many Irons in the fire;
And opportunities he lacked not,
That knew to strike then when the Irons hot;
As the door nails ho made he is now as dead,
He them, and him has Death knocked in the head
An Elegy on Squire Bug a Shooemaker.
HE that has made so many souls of late,
Now wants a soul himself to animate,
That he so wrung them, many did compalin,
But at the last he gave them ease again:
He sometimes did work booty for his frieads,
And whom soe'r he served, wrought his own ends;
But if to take the length of others foot
Show cunning, none knew better how to do it:
He kept the old worlds custom, by his trade
Revived, for he of Leather Money made;
The Leather lessened him to drink, which nere
Approved was, till it well Liquor'd were;
He well observed how he his life did spend,
Who saw each day that he was near his end;
His death might welcome be to those that use,
(Being bare themselves) to gape for dead men's shoes.
An Elegy on a Tapster.
HEre lies a man of reckning, often seen
to have born much drink, and not distemperd been.
He seemed a lusty Sword-man, for he would
Draw upon small occasion, and none should
Scot-free esape, that through his fingers past,
But they were sure to pay for it at last.
Of his hard measure many have complained,
He cared not while he out of measure gained;
Such was his pot-luck, that to high place when,
He had been called, soon he came down again;
Now this draw-drink being dead by fatal hap,
Soon you shall have a fresh one at the Tap.
FINIS.

