MERCY In the midst of JUDGMENT:

By a gracious discovery of a certain Remedy for LONDON'S Languishing TRADE.

In a Sermon Preached before the Right Honorable, the Lord Mayor and the
Citizens of London, on September 12. 1669. at the new repaired Chapel at
Guild Hall.

By D. BARTON, M. A. and Rector of Saint Margarets New Fish-street, London.

LONDON, Printed for James Allestry, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1670.

To the Right Honorable, Sir SAMVEL STARLING Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of
LONDON, AND THE Court of ALDERMEN.
Right Honorable,
THIS Sermon, savouring of the Country, in which it was conceived, and brought
forth, without the Midwifry of a Library (my own perishing in the same Flames
with your City, and the place of my now residence not affording an assistant)
was intended only for your religious ears, in them to have both its birth and
burial; but since it has pleased you to reprieve it to a longer and more
public life, where should it be more justly laid than at your doors? who for
your able parts and endowments have been fitted for the public employment, and
entrusted with the weightiest affairs of this City; and who by your Favor and
Countenance are able to cover the rawness, and rudeness, or what other defects
in my weak and unworthy handling so necessary a subject. I have in publishing
it, regarded more your Opinion than my own conceit; and I hope (because you
think so) that the matter will not be altogether unprofitable, or unseasonable;
although it be not handled so artificially, and rhetorically as it ought, my
main study being to be plain and to apply the things delivered to the present
times: whatever it be, (and I wish it much better) it is now no more mine but
yours; and if under the beams of your goodness, it shall so thrive, as to
become an Instrument for the furthering that important Work mentioned in it;
next under God your Honor and your worshipful assessors are to have the
Praise, and I therein shall receive a sufficient reward of my labor;
accounting it my greatest happiness on earth, to have been able to perform any
acceptable service to that Royal City, to which for many years past, and my
whole life for the future, I have dedicated all my endeavors. I will not
detain your Honor, etc. any longer from your more public and serious
affairs, but only beseech the Almighty and All-wise God, that he would give
you understanding and valiant hearts to manage them Courageously and Prudently,
that you may be instruments in Gods hand for the making up the breaches in our
Syon and Jerusalem; which is, and shall be the daily Prayer of,

Your Honors and Worships unfainedly devoted, in all Christian duty and
Observance, DAV: BARTON.

Haggai I. 9. Ye looked for much, and lo, it came to little; and when ye
brought it home, I did blow upon it; Why, says the Lord of Hosts? Because of
mine House that is waste, and ye run every Man unto his own House.
SOme Geographers have observed that there is no Land so placed in the World,
but from that Land a man may veiw some other Land: though between Land and Land
you may see Seas enraged with storms and tempests, yet land is still within
ken. An observation, perhaps, of more curiosity than verity in the material Sea
of this World: yet most certain if it be applied to the mistical Sea of Gods
Judgments, (which the Royal Prophet compares to a great deep) and the dry land
of his mercy: though between mercy, Psa. 36. 6.
and mercy God interposeth a raging Ocean of trouble and calamity, raised by
the storm of his indignation, so that men seem to be in the condition of the
material world, Genesis 7. When the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth,
and all the high hills that were under the whole Heaven were covered.

Omnia pontus erant, deerant quoque littora Ponto.

All was a Sea and that Sea had no shores, yet if they look but onward they
cannot miss of a prospect of dry land, of Mercy. The Almighty God has so
interwoven these two in the dispensation of his providence, that the one is
never discernable without the other. When God landeth his people in the Haven
of prosperity, he would have them look back on the tempestuous Sea from which
they are escaped, and fear his Justice: when he lancheth them forth into the
depth of misery he carries them not out of sight of land, that there may be
hope of mercy. Thus does the most Gracious God in the midst of Judgment
remember Mercy, and gives even the valley of Achor, Hos. 2 15.
the valley of trouble for a door of hope, and in the deepest Ocean of his
Judgments, discovers a little Island of Mercy to repair to. And thus did he of
old deal with his People the Jews; He caused the King of Babylon to arise like
waters out of the North, Jer. 47. 2.
and to become an overflowing flood, and to overflow the land and all that was
therein, whereby they were swept away into Captivity; yet then when these
waters did so overflow their heads that they said they were cut off, Lam. 3. 54.
the all-merciful God lifted up their heads, and showed them a prospect of
mercy, by a faithful promise of deliverance after seventy years: at which
harbor they are no sooner arrived, but their sins provoke God to bring them
back into the Sea of his Judgments, and he afflicts them with famine, ye have
sown much and bring in little: ye eat but have not enough: ye drink but ye are
not filled with drink: etc. verse. 6. of this Chapter; Yet even here though the
Sea roared, and the Heaven was black with Clouds, that God which gave to the
Sea his decree, saying, Thus far shall thou go and no farther, and there thy
proud waves shall be stayed; not only discovers a Cape of good Hope, and makes
a path in that mighty water for his ransomed to pass to it, Go up to the
Mountain, and bring wood, and build the House: and I will take pleasure in it,
and I will be glorified, says the Lord, verse. 8: but also gives them a
faithful representation of their present state and condition, with the by-path
that brought them into it, that so they might be induced to consider their
ways, and leave them and return into the way of peace, and this he does in the
words of my Text: Ye looked for much, and lo it comes to little, etc.

So that my Text is made up of the two parts of David's Song, Psalm 101. 1.
Mercy, and Judgment, which in God are always twisted together, Gracious and
righteous is the Lord, Psalm. 25. 8. and all his paths are mercy and truth, v.
10, Not one path of mercy, and another of truth, but every path mercy, and
truth both. The red Cross of his Justice (as in your City Arms) is born on the
white Field of his mercy: as these therefore were the burden of David's Ditty,
so they must be the support of my Meditations, and the object of your
Attentions Judgment and Mercy, the former included in the very words of my
Text, the latter in the design and scope of those words.

And first of the Judgment, that so I may end with that, which is not only the
end of all our aims, and desires, but of all Gods Judgments too, and that is
Mercy.

In the Judgment we may consider, First, The Judgment it self, which was Famine.

Secondly, The Author of it, the Lord of Host.

Thirdly, The cause moving God to it, the neglect of Gods House.

The Judgment very dreadful, the inflicter most powerful, the cause provoking
exceeding sinful.

And first of the Judgment, which we shall consider, first in it is nature:

Secondly, In it is severity.

First, Of the nature of it, it was Famine, a general want of the supports of
this life, because of the failing of the creature, both in the production and
breeding; Ye sow much and bring in little: and in the vigor, and nourishing
power of them; ye eat, but are not satisfied. And this is a sore, and dreadful
Judgment, King David choseth the Pestilence as the lesser evil, which yet was
so destructive, that there died of the people in less then three days space, 2 Samuel 24.
threescore and ten thousand men, of whose destructive nature too, he could not
be ignorant, having an instance in the law of Moses (wherein he meditated day
and night) of three and twenty thousand slain by it, while Aaron was putting
incense into the Censer; And as he prefers the Pestilence, so the Prophet
Jeremy, the Sword: They that be slain with the sword, are better than they that
be slain with hunger: for these pine away, stricken through for want of the
fruits of the field. Lam. 4. 9. and yet the Sword makes a deplorable
desolation; take it in the words of the prophet Joel: A fire devoureth before
them, and behind them a flame burns: the land is as the garden of Eden before
them, and behind them a desolate wilderness, yea and nothing shall escape them.

Neither is it less dismal in its effects, for necessity is an hard weapon, and
want will make a man part with any thing: fourscore pieces of Silver (ten pound
sterling) for an Asses head, and five pieces of Silver (12 s. and 6 d.) for the
fourth part of a Kab (which is but half a pint) of Doves dung, 2. King. 6. 25.
The Egyptians who were famous, or rather infamous for their covetousness, yet
can part with all their money for Corn. Genesis 47. It not only makes men forget
common humanity, for the people are ready to stone Moses, who had done so great
things for them, when they are ready to starve, Exodus 17: but it dissolves all
the bonds of nature, making men to eat, not only dogs, cats, and rats, but one
another; pone pretium humanae carni, was a proclamation in Rome in Honorius
days. And in England An. 1316. Men did eat one another, and thieves newly
brought into the Goal were torn in pieces and eaten half alive, by them that
had been longer in: nay it stifles natural affection. In this Famine of my
Text, Neh. 5. 5.
the Jews sold their Sons and their Daughters for bondslaves to buy Corn;
And in the before mentioned, in Samaria Parents did devour their own Children.
The Prophet Esaias foretells of one, Isa. 9. 29.
wherein every man should eat the flesh of his own arm; And our Chronicles
tell us of one in England about An. 700. So violent that not only many dyed for
hunger, but great numbers joined hand in hand 40 or 50 in a company, and threw
themselves headlong into the Sea.

But we shall better understand how sad, and dreadful this Judgment was, if we
shall consider it in relation to several circumstances hinted in the Text.

The first whereof is the country afflicted, a most plentiful and fruitful
land, A land like not only the Garden of Eden, but the Garden of God, full of
all kind of pleasant and delightful fruits; which cannot be described more
fully, and signally, than Moses has done it to our hands: Deuteronomy. 8. 7. A good
land, a land of brooks of waters, of fountains and depths that spring out of
the Valleys. A land of Wheat and Barley, and Vines, and Figtrees, and
Pomegranats: a land of Oyle-olive, and Honey: A land wherein they might eat
bread without scarceness: a land whose Stones were Iron, and out of whose Hills
they might dig Brass. And again, c. 32. 13. A land wherein they might suck
Honey out of the Rocks, and Oil out of the flinty Rocks; Butter of Kine, and
Milk of Sheep, with Fat of Lambs, and Rams of the breed of Bashan, and Goats,
with the fat of Kidneys of Wheat, and drink the pure blood of the Grape. A Land
which had not only plenty for it self, but bounty for others: For the Country
of Tire, Act 12. 20.
was nourished by this Country. That this fruitful Land should become barren;
that this Paradise should be turned into a Wilderness; that there should be
scarcity in such a fruitful Land, is the first aggravating circumstance.

The second is, That it was National, universal, an over-spreading Famine; a
comprehensive Judgment, like a Chain-shot bearing all before it, reaching to
all men, the great and good, as well the mean and wicked: Zerubbabel the
Governor, and Joshua the High Priest; for to them the Prophet speaks, verse 1.
They are included in this, Ye look for much, etc. Wisdom, Riches, or Strength
may secure from other annoyances, but Scarcity, and Famine strike at the Life
of every man. The King as well as the Clown must beg for daily bread; and the
profit of the Earth is for all. That the King himself is served by the Field,
was wise Solomon's observation. Ecc. 5. 9.
And King Ahab may be an evidence of it; who in time of Dearth could not help
himself, 2. King 6. 27.
much less others, out of the Barn-floor, or out of the Wine Press. Even the
Saints have their share, and portion in it, as being parts, and members of that
people which is to be punished; and though not actors in those gross impieties
which kindle the fire of Gods vengeance, yet are guilty of sins, though of a
smaller nature, which add to the fuel of Gods wrath. Zerubbabel and Joshua,
though perhaps not themselves in fault, or at least not so much, for they were
both very Religious, yet because not so forward, and putting forth as they
should have been, are liable to the common Judgment.

The third Character of the Severity of this Judgment, was the season of it,
which was immediately after their return from the Babylonian Captivity; They
had but a very little breathing space from the burden of that Yoke, when God
lays on an heavyer: there, to use Jeroboams expression, 1 King. 12. 24.
they were Chastised with Whips but here with Scorpions. There, very probably,
they had meat after their labor, and though they trod out the Corn, their
mouths were not muzled, their masters sometimes lifted up the Yoke, and set
meat before them. As in Egypt, although they had hard Taskes, and cruel
Taskmasters, yet they had their Fleshpots, and their Garlicks, and their
Onyons to the full; bnt now they labor, and have nothing to eat, thus the
Messengers of ill news, as to Job, did throng upon them, one at the heels of
another, which was none of the smallest aggravations of this Calamity, that it
followed so immediately on the neck of the other.

The fourth mark of the Severity of this Judgment, was the frustration of
their hopes, and expectations: Ye looked for much, and lo, it came to little.
If hope deferred makes the heart sick. Prove. 13. 12. Hope frustrate, and lost,
can do no less then break it. When men think themselves sure, as Esau did of
the blessing, and it then fails them, this is matter of bitter weeping. For
God to take away the Corn in the time thereof, and the Wine in the season
thereof, that is just at harvest, when it is to be inned: when the old store is
spent, and they look for a new recruit, then to have the meat cut from their
mouths, and the morsel from between their teeth, then to have their hopes
defeated, hightens the misery.

A fifth print of the Severity of this Judgment, was the loss of their labor.
It is very frequent, and scarce ever otherwise, to see the Sluggards hopes
blasted; he that will not sow in Winter, can never promise himself to reap in
Harvest; but after Plowing, Sowing, nay Reaping too, and bringing home, to find
but little, that adds to the weight of the want: Nothing so much discontents
men as labor in vain; to take pains, and to see nothing come of it, is enough
to make a Prophet complain; Isa. 49. 4.
to labor all night in fishing, and take nothing may tempt an Apostle to
desist. To labor in the fire, and to weary themselves for vanity, to lose
oleum and operam, cost and pains, is sufficient to bring men to desperation;
Especially when that little which is coming in, does no good; when God blows on
it, and takes away the nourishing virtues, so that either men dare not eat
their fill* for fear of want another day; or if they do eat, the Staff of
bread being broken for want of Gods concurrence, they are not satisfied A
Boulimy, or Canine appetite, being a disease common at such times, when in the
fullness of their sufficiency (as Zophar in Job speaks of the wicked) they are
in streights; Job. 20. 22.
that little is so far from abating, that it increases the Calamity: And so
much for the first Particular, the Judgment with the Severity of it.

The Second thing is the Author of this Judgment. I did blow upon it, Says the
Lord of Hosts. Shall there be Evil in the City, and I have not done it, Says
God himself, Am. 3. 6. God Challenges the execution of Justice to himself;
not only at the Last Day, but in this world, and it is as agreeable to his
nature now, as it will be hereafter. It is not luck, or fortune that tosseth or
tumbleth things below; but God sits at the stern, and steers the affairs of
this World. The Genealogy of all the good creatures is resolved by God into
himself, Hos. 2* 21. Unless he hear the Heavens, and the Heavens hear the
Earth, no Corn, or Wine, or Oil can be expected. The Earth is a kind Mother,
yet it cannot open her bowels to yield seed to the sower, or bread to the
eater, if it be not watered from above. The Heavens are the Storehouses of Gods
good treasure, which he opens to man's profit and nourishment, yet they cannot
drop down fatness on the earth, if God close it up, and withold the
seasonable showers, which he can do if he please, and will do, if he be
provoked.

First, He can do it easily.

Secondly, He will do it justly.

First, He can do it easily. It is but his blowing upon it, and it is done. As
he made all things, so he can dissolve them by the breath of his mouth. Psa.
104. 29. 30.
He hides his face, and the creatures are troubled; he takes away their
breath and they dye. He sends forth his breath and they are created, and
renews the face of the Earth. Psa. 90. 3.
He turns man to destruction, and again he says, come again ye children of
men. And this he can do so easily because he is the Lord of Hosts; a title
frequently used by these three last Prophets, Haggai, Zachary, and Malachy, who
prophesying after the Jews return from the Babylonian Captivity, when their
state was at the lowest, scarce ever name God by any other title; to denote
unto them, how easy it was for him to bring his Judgments upon them, and to
remove them again; all creatures being at his command as Lord of Hosts; and
like the Centurions Servants, if he say to one, Mat. 8. 9.
Go, he goes, to another, Come, he comes: and to a third, Do this, he does
it. When he will do a thing, who shall hinder him? Nature may be resisted, and
stopped in her course; Men and Devils, though never so potent, may want of
their will, and be crossed in their designs and desires; but the Lord of Hosts
does whatsoever he will, both in Heaven and Earth without control or
contradiction.

Secondly, He will do it justly. Gods Judgments are not always manifest, they
are always just. And he may say as David to his Brethren in another case; 1.
Sam. 17. 29.
What have I now done? is there not a cause? God never punishes a People: but
there is a just cause for it, and could men but see it, the root of the matter
would be found in themselves. Job. 19. 28.
It is the Plague of their own hearts, that procures them all their mischief;
and this might have been put among the aggravations of the Judgment, that it is
from themselves that they are the cause of their own ruin; that they may thank
themselves, and blame their sin, as the Mother of their misery, and cause of
their Calamity, Hos. 13. 9.
O Israel thou have destroyed thy self, Says God. So that there is no ground
of complaint: Lam. 3. 36.
why should a living man complain: a man for the punishment of his sin? Had man
never been sinful, he had never been miserable; had he never lift up his heart
against Heaven to provoke, God, God had never lift up his hand on earth to
punish man. If these Jews would but have considered their own ways, as God
himself exhorts them twice in a breath, verse 5. and 7. They might have easily
found the Serpent that bit them, to be lurking in their own bosom; the contempt
and neglect of Gods worship, which brings me to

The Third particular, The cause of this Judgment, why says the Lord of Hosts?
etc.

Wherein three things offer themselves to our Consideration:

First, The sin it is self, Gods House lies wast.

Secondly, The Aggravation of that sin, Ye run every man to his own house.

Thirdly, The Proportion between the sin, and the punishment.

First, The sin it self, is, that Gods House is suffered to lie wast. This
House, which God Challenges to himself, as his own possession, was that
glorious fabric of the Temple at Jerusalem, built by King Solomon, and
consecrated by him to Gods immediate worship, and which God was pleased to
accept of, and wherein he promises to dwell for ever. This is my rest for
ever, Psa. 132. 14.
here will I dwell, for I have desired it, says God. Although he be the high
and lofty one, that inhabiteth Eternity whose name is Holy; Although he be
infinite, and Comprehended in no place, and so dwells not in Temples made
with hands: yet it was his good pleasure, that Solomon should build him an
house, wherein as to his manifestative presence, he was resolved to dwell more
especialy among his people the Children of Israel, whither he would have the
Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord, Psalm. 122. 4.
unto the Testimony of Israel to give thanks unto the name of the Lord. And
this he calls his house. My House, says he, shall be called the House of
Prayer, and in my Text, Because of my House, which is wast.

Wast, the Hebrew word signifies properly dried up. A similitude taken from a
piece of ground, dried up, and parched by the Sun, so that nothing is able to
grow in it, and is used by the Holy Ghost to express an extreme desolation,
and destruction. His spring shall become dry, and his foundation dried up,
says the Prophet Hosea of Samaria, when he would set forth their utter ruin:
Hos. 13. 15.
so that their sin was the permitting Gods House to lie in it is ruins, and not
repair it.

And it is observable that these Jews had not demolished it themselves, they
had not laid it wast; that was done by Necuchadnezzar, and his Officers, it was
they which set fire to the Temple, these had no hand at all in it: and yet it
is looked on as a sin in them, that it is wast. Not only pulling down Churches,
but not repairing, when God gives opportunity is a sin. Omissions are sins with
God, as well as Commissions. It was the rich man's ruin, not that he robbed the
poor, but that he did not relieve them. Fasting as well as fullness may breed
diseases, and make work for the Sexton or Physician. Not only the commission
of evil sinks men to Hell, but the omission of goodness. The Fig Tree had no
bad fruit on it, and yet was cursed because it had none at all; the forbearance
of wickedness is not enough to acquit the soul, unless there be a performance
of Righteousness. These Jews are condemned, not for wasting Gods House, but
letting it lie waste. That Is the first, the sin.

The Second thing is the aggravation of this, by their self-seeking. Ye run
every man to his own House, or, Ye take pleasure every man in his own House: Ye
are all self-seekers private-spirited persons, all for your own Interest, none
for the honor and glory of God. They were like the Tortoyse, Toti in se,
wholly drawn up into themselves, and insensible of the public good, or common
danger of Church and Religion: Far from Nehemiah's temper, who drowned all
selfe-respect in Gods glory, and the public good; far from true goodness,
which will be public spirited, although it be to private disadvantage: And if
nature will venture its own particular good for the general, as heavy things
will ascend, to keep out a vacuity and preserve the Universe; much more will
grace make men in all their desires and designs to study Gods end more then
their own, and as Solomon did to build Gods House first, and afterward their
own; and not like these Jews, who so themselves were warm in their Feathers, in
their own houses, never did regard the ruins of Gods House.

Secondly, This self-seeking is aggravated in two particulars; First, In the
persons guilty; and Secondly, In their earnestness in that guilt.

First, In the persons guilty. The first universally; Secondly, Emphatically.

First, Ye; universally; every man of you, even the best of you, Zerubbabel,
and Joshua too. When all Flesh have corrupted their way, when all the
foundations are out of course, when as in Sodom, all the people from every
quarter, both old and young, are guilty; no wonder then that God punishes.
When not only private men, but public run into the same sin, it is then
incorrigible as to man, those that should punish it being themselves guilty,
and therefore then it is time for God to lay to his hand; for private men to
have private spirits and to run every man to his own House, to mind their own
particular good, is no such rare thing, but for public persons to have private
aims, to have such narrow souls as to mind themselves only, this is an
aggravation of the crime.

Secondly, Ye, emphatically; Ye that are so much concerned in it, when others
not so much, or not at all concerned in it, have been so zealous. When Cyrus
and Darius, a payr of outlandish, and Heathen Kings, shall not only give leave
to the Jews to return to their Country, and build both their City and Temple,
but also restore the Vessels and Jewels, which had been taken from it, and
allow the expenses of the building out of their own Revenues; and supply them
with Sacrifices, with a check to all Adversaries; be ye far from thence, and a
peremptory Decree, That whosoever should alter that sentence, that the Wood
should be pulled down from his House and he hanged thereon; And lastly, a
direful imprecation on all those, whether Kings or People, that should put
their hands to alter and destroy the House of God which is in Jerusalem; the
History whereof you may read at large in the books of Ezra and Nehemiah; when
these shall thus zealously, and earnestly promote the work, and the Jews
themselves universally, who were most concerned, be careless and negligent,
this is a first aggravation of the sin.

A Second is their diligence and earnestness in their own private interest, Ye
run every man, etc. When ye do not so much as creep, crawl, or go to Gods
House. They thought no time, no labor, no cost, too much for their own House;
and every little portion of either of them too much for Gods. The least cost is
esteemed misspent, saying with Judas, To what purpose is this wast; the lazyest
labor is accounted lost. It is in vain to serve the Lord, and what profit is
it that we have kept his Ordinance, say these very men, Mal. 3. 14. The
shortest time is thought cast away; The time is not come, The time that the
Lords House should be built, say they, verse. 2. They followed the business of
their own Houses earnestly and industriously, but of Gods very negligently;
which, if nothing else; were enough to condemn them.

The third considerable in the sin, is the proportion between that and the
punishment, (...)
they leave Gods House, Chareb, wast; God, (...)
verse. 11. calls for Chereb, a drought, or as the Septuagint probably read it,
(...)
Choreb, a Sword, which shall in like manner lay their Land wast, and their
House desolate, they had pinched on Gods side, and he pays them home in the
same kind, they thought in the Famine to have kept the more for themselves; and
they had less for keeping from him, that which was his own. A just hand of God
upon all such, who think every thing too much for his service, for the most
part they are always in want and needy, their wealth melting away like Snow
before the Sun. The Merchant that denies to pay his Customs, forfeits all his
Commodities; they forfeit their own portion, who withold Gods from him. God
tames his Prodigals, and starves their bodies, who by neglect of his worship
starve their own souls; God denies the same external things to them which they
deny to Gods House.

But might not these Jews have pleaded against this Sentence, and charged God
with too much severity, saying with their Forefathers, The way of the Lord is
not equal? What is this Temple more then another place? Cannot we worship God
in any House as well as this? Is not God a spirit, Joh 4. 24.
and will be worshipped in spirit and truth; and that we may do in any Mountain
as well as this?

Whereunto although it might be a sufficient answer to say with S. Paul, Romans
9. 20.
O man, who art thou that replyest against God? Shall the thing formed say to
him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Shall sinful man plead with his
Maker? Yet because this malapert sauciness is the temper of many in this age,
as well as that; that the most just God may be justified when he speaks, and
clear when he judges, we may take notice of the equity of it, by a twofold
consideration; First, Of the nature of the place; and Secondly, Of the nature
of the punishment,

First, Gods equity will be cleared from the nature of the place, which was,

First, A visible sign and token of Gods more immediate and gracious presence;
for although God dwells not in Temples made with hands; that is, so as we dwell
in our Houses to be comprehended in them, yet God is said to dwell there where
he manifests himself; and therefore what was done before the Temple, was said
to be done before God; called therefore, The Throne of his Glory; Jer. 14. 21.
The place of his rest; Psa. 132. 14.
The place of his habitation; Psa 76. 2.
His dwelling place: Now we know that affronts offered to the Kings Chair of
State although in his absence, are as much resented as when he is present.

Secondly, That House was the choicest, and chiefest instrument of Gods worship
in the Jewish administration, they were to direct all their worship toward it:
It was the King of Heavens Court of Requests, which he had appointed for the
hearing their prayers, and granting their Petitions; and which had the
privilege of an universally gracious audience; In this place will I give
peace, says the Lord, c. 2. 9. Now because the honor done to any part of Gods
service reflects on himself; as those that offered any polluted bread on Gods
Altar are said to despise his name, therefore to punish this offense so
grievously could be no over much severity.

Thirdly, That House was a type of Christ, it was a sacred Mystery representing
their Messiah to them, who was the true Temple made without hands; as himself
makes the application, John 2. 19. Destroy this Temple, and after three days I
will raise it up; which S. John who was his beloved Disciple, and lay in his
bosom, interprets as meant of his own body, Verse. 21. He spoke of the Temple
of his body; And this the Apostle asserts at large, in the ninth Chap. of the
Epistle to the Hebrews. Jesus Christ was that true Temple in which the Godhead
dwelt bodily; that is, really, fully, substantially; by the nearest union, and
most intimate conjuction as the soul dwells in the body; and so the neglect was
the neglect of Christ himself.

Fourthly, That place was the springhead of all their blessings; God had made
that the staple of all his favors; Exodus 20. 24.
In all places where I record my name, I will come to thee and bless thee. From
whence it is that in Scripture, Gods blessings are not said to be given from
Heaven immediately, but from Syon the place of Gods worship; There the Lord
commanded the blessing, even life for evermore, Psalm. 133. 3. And the Lord that
made Heaven and Earth, bless thee out of Syon, Psalm. 134. 3. The Ocean of
blessing is in Heaven, but the wellhead is Syon, and so by neglecting Gods
House they forsook their own mercy; so that the nature of the place acquits the
Lord of Hosts from the imputation of over-rigorous proceeding, which likewise
will appear,

Secondly, From the nature of the Judgment, if we shall consider those veins of
mercy which run through it, which is the Second general part, and is included
in the scope and design of the words of my Text.

And this mercy is visible in four particulars.

First, In the Judgment it self.

Secondly, In the matter of that Judgment

Thirdly, In the measure of it.

Fourthly, In the discovery of the cause, and consequently the means of
removing it.

First, It was mercy that they were punished at all, correction being a sign
of Gods paternal care; For every Son, whom he loves, Heb. 12. 6, 7.
he Chastneth; and Scourges every Son whom he receives. Immunity from
Chastisement and Correction, is the Bastards, not the Child's prerogative. Gods
forbearances are his most dreadful Severities; and a prosperous iniquity is the
most unprosperous condition in the world. It is cruelty, not mercy, to suffer
men to go on in sin unpunished, it being that which hardens men in sin, and
consignes them over to ruin and reprobation. It is a deplorable condition when
God shall say; Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and
more. Vis indignantis Dei terribilem vocem audire? will you here the terrible
voice of a provoked God? Hear it says Origin in that of Hos. 4. 14. I will not
punish your Daughters when they commit whoredom. Never was Jerusalem's case so
desperate as when God said to her; I will make my fury toward thee to rest,
and my jealousy shall depart from thee, and I will be quiet, and will be no
more angry. Ezekiel. 16. 42. That Is the first beam of mercy; that they are
punished.

A Second, is that their Punishment is in external temporal things, and not in
internal and Spiritual, which as they are most necessary, so the loss is most
dangerous: Man may be happy without the one, he cannot be so without the other.
The Lord of Hosts might instead of a famine of bread have sent a famine of the
word of God, which is the Souls proper food, and without which it cannot live,
which he threatens in another Prophet as the most dreadful Famine. Am. 8. 11.
Behold the day is come, says the Lord, that I will send a Famine in the Land,
not a Famine for Bread, nor a thirst for Water, but of hearing the Word of the
Lord. We never fear a dearth if we have Bread-Corne, though we want Apples and
Plums. Let God deny us the worldly toys of earthly enjoyments, if he continue
his spiritual blessings, we cannot be esteemed miserable.

A third Island of mercy appearing in this Sea of misery, is the measure of it.
They had a little, though not much; God did not take away all, but left them a
pittance, as we say, enough to keep life and soul together. I will correct thee
in measure, says God to his people, and not leave thee altogether unpunished.
Jer. 30. 11.
If he should have been extreme to have marked what had been done amiss, he
might have utterly destroyed them as he did Sodom and Gomorrha, and set them
forth as perpetual examples of divine vengeance, but it was of the Lords
mercies that they were not consumed, Lam. 3. 22.
because his mercies fail not. There is yet a fourth ray of mercy shining in
this judgment, and that is the discovery of the cause, which he does not only
in respect of himself, for the vindication of his justice, but also in respect
to them, that they might provide for deliverance. God by reason of that
independent dominion, which he has over all his creatures, which in their very
being depend upon him, has no obligation lying on him, to give any other
reason of his acting, than his Sic volo, sic jubeo; and therefore it must be an
act of great mercy, to come to debate and reason with his creature, to be
content to bring himself as it were before man's tribunal, and to plead his
cause, and make even sinners his judges, yet so he does frequently; Come now,
Esa. 1. 18.
and let us reason together. And now, Esa. 5. 3.
O Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge I pray you between me and
my Vineyard. Should he have made short work with them, and dispatched them in a
moment, yet he would have continued just and holy, and he might have justified
his proceedings; but to stoop so low as to give an account of his doings, and
to render a reason of his sentence, is a condescension of mercy that can be
never expressed, and never enough admired, or praised.

And thus having run through the two Stages of my Text, Judgment and Mercy; I
cannot dismiss you without making you partakers of some observations, which you
may improve to your advantage, As,

First, That all the industry and labor of man in his calling, is in vain, if
God withhold his blessing; he may sow, and reap, and bring in too, he may
export, nay import too, and little come of it, if God do but blow upon it. Not
but that men may, nay must take pains in their vocations. Adam even in his
innocence and integrity, before his fall, had his employment set out to him to
dress and keep the Garden; much more since the fall, when all the Creatures are
under the Curse for the sin of man; and the earth is so far from yielding
fruit without our labor, that it is often fruitless, and barren with it. So
that now it is not so much our curse as our duty, that in the sweat of our
brows we should eat our bread, and he that will not labor, as he does not
deserve, so he has no promise that he shall eat: Labor then they must, but in
that they must depend upon God for the success, whose blessing only can make
rich. Prove. 10. 22.
Moses, says, It is not bread that man lives by only, but by the word of God,
that is his blessing; and therefore, except the Lord build the House and watch
the City, Psa. 127. 1, 2.
man's labor and watching is to no purpose; It is but lost labor that ye rise
early, and so late take rest, and eat the bread of Carefulness if God does not
give sleep. Join then to your honest labor, trust in God, and fear not a good
success; you have King David's warrant for it. Trust in the Lord and do good,
and verily thou shall be sed. Psa. 37. 3. 1 Timothy 4. 5.
Let your labors as well as the Creatures for which you labor, be Sanctified
by the word of God, and Prayer.

Secondly, The use or abuse, the care or neglect of the Instruments of Gods
worship, is no indifferent thing, no matter of slight consequence it procures a
blessing or brings down a curse. These Jews neglect to build Gods House, and
God neglects to provide for their Families. They no sooner go up to the
Mountain and bring Wood, c. 2. 8.
and begin to build, but from that very day, God begins to bless them. Take one
instance more; The Arc, which before the building of the Temple, was the
dwelling place of Gods name, Psa. 74. 7.
was among the Philistines, 1 Samuel 5.
who profanely insult, and triumph over it, and are smitten with sore diseases,
and the hand of God is heavy upon them; c. 6. 19.
Afterward it comes to the Bethshemites, who are bold with it and pry into its
secrets, 2. Sam. 9. 9.
and fifty thousand of them are slain for it. After this Vzzah touches it
irreverently, and is struck dead before it; whereas Obed-Edom entertains it
reverently, and cheerfully, verse. 6.
and is blessed in all that he has. When God sends the instruments and means
of Religion among a people, it concerns them deeply to look about them; God
intends something toward them, either of judgment or mercy, and counts it an
high indignity, if men think he will do neither good or evil. Zeph. 1. 12.
The Prophet Isaiah compares Gods Word to Rain, Esa 55. 10.
which returns not void, but accomplisheth what he pleases, and prospers in
the thing whereunto he sends it; it either brings up wholesome Herbs, or noysom
Weeds, it either furthers our Salvation, or hastens our Destruction. The Gospel
of Christ is savor either of life unto life, 2. Cor. 2. 16.
or of death unto death. Gods Ordinances are all of the same nature, with the
Lords Supper, they are either for the better, 1. Cor. 11. 17.
or for the worse. Christ's coming to a Nation, Mat. 11. 23.
as to Capernaum, is fatal, it either lifts nearer to Heaven, or throws lower
into Hell.

Thirdly, The neglect of Gods worship forfeits all our temporal estate; as
Tenants that refuse to do their homage, to perform Suit and Service, and to pay
their Landlords rent, do make their Estates liable to a seizure. These outward
blessings are the appurtenances of Gods worship; And it is piety only which
has the promises both of this life and that which is to come. These provisions
are properly for Gods Household, and those that wait in the House of the Lord;
If a profane person that regards not Gods worship has them, it is but at
adventures, and they are so far from being a blessing to him that they
become a Snare, making him fall into many foolish and hurtful lusts, 1. Tim. 6.
9.
which drown men in destruction and perdition: search the Chronicles and
Annals of the Kings of Israel, and you shall still find those times wherein
Religion was advanced, as under David, Solomon, Asa, Jehoshaphat, and Hezekiah,
to be prosperous times, whereas under Idolatrous Kings all things went
contrary. So that the best way to secure what men have, is to employ part of it
in Gods service: Honor God with all thy increase, and thy Estate shall be
increased. Gods Storehouse is the best Assurance-Office; pay thy dues to that,
and the rest will be secured to thee. As Samson's strength and glory lay in his
Hair, so does the honor and prosperity of your City depend on the true
Religion, and sincere worship of God, which if it be once deprived of, it may
say with Phinees Wife Ichabod, 1 Samuel 4. 22.
The glory of London is departed.

Fourthly, God expects that our first care should be for his service, that his
glory and worship should have the precedence in our thoughts. These Jews upon
their return home from Babylon, set up their own Houses, fell to husbandry,
plowed and sowed their lands, they thought it not time to undertake so costly a
work as building the Temple; and flesh and blood might have thought that delay
excusable if not reasonable, but God counts it matter of just exception, and
sends them two Prophets to reprove them for it; what an obvious excuse had
they? That that God who had dwelt so long of old in a Tabernacle, and was now
worshipped at his new created Altar, would bear with them if they first built
their own Houses, intending afterward to build his with greater care and cost;
but what says God to them, Verse. 4. Is it time for you, O ye, to dwell in your
Ceiled Houses (not covered only, but Ceiled with Cedar, as the Chaldee renders
it, arched and garnished as the Greek) and my House to lie waste. The man after
Gods own heart was of another mind, he would not come into his House, nor go up
unto his bed, nor give sleep to his eyes, or slumber to his eyelids, Psa. 132.
3. 5.
until he had found out a place for the Lord,an habitation for the mighty God
of Jacob. Noah's first care after he came out of the Arc, was, not to build an
House for himself, but an Altar for Gods worship; he pleads not necessity of
preserving store, nor stays till the creatures are multiplied, but takes of
every clean creature that came out of the Arc, and offers them to God. True
Faith teaches to prefer God before our selves; the World as it is inferior in
worth to Religion, so it must be in our repute and respects; Seek ye first the
Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, was the council of our Savior.
God will crown such early piety with increase of store, for all these things
shall be added unto you: If the Widow make a little Cake for the Prophet first,
2 Kings. 17. 14.
and bring it to him, her Barrel of Meal shall never wast, nor her Cruise of
Oil fail.

Thirdly, If the not repairing the House of God be so severely punished, what
shall become of those that demolish his Houses: Pet. 4. 18.
If the Innocent be scarcely saved, where shall the wicked and sinner appear?
is S. Peter's way of arguing. If the labors and hopes of these Jews, who
only suffered the Temple to lie in its ruins, come to little, certainly
theirs shall come to nothing, or at least worse than nothing, eternal
destruction, that are the instruments of ruining it. If God shall destroy him
that defiles the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 3 17.
what shall he do to them that destroy it? If Ananias and Sapphira withholding
that which was their own, were accounted Church-robbers, and punished with
sudden death; what a severe revenger will God be against those that rob the
Temple of that which has been dedicated to it by others; Christ would not
suffer Gods House, which was to be called an House of prayer to all Nations, to
be made a den of thieves, by profane usage of it, much less will he endure to
have it destroyed after he has reformed it; this is sacrilege, and that the
Apostle ranks with Idolatry, as being full out as evil, if not worse than it;
for what Idolatry but pollutes, sacrilege quite pulls down; and easier it is
to new hallow a Temple polluted, than to build a new one out of an heap of
stones.

Once more, Sixthly, If the flood of Gods indignation arises so high against
those that suffer the material Temple dedicated to his service to be waste, how
shall it rage against them that do not repair his spiritual Temples, their own
souls and bodies which have been consecrated to him in Baptism; for so says
the Apostle, Ye are the Temples of the living God, 2 Cor. 6. 16.
as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them: And God takes more
delight in these, than in the other. For, thus says the high and lofty one,
Esa. 57. 15.
that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is holy, I dwell in the high and holy
place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit. And he refuses
all the services that are done him in his external Temple, as an abomination;
if the spiritual Temple be defiled with sin and demolished by inquity. Sin not
only defiles but destroys these Houses of God, let us therefore build them
again by our sincere Repentance and Reformation, let us cleanse them from all
Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit: we cry, shame! to see a Church turned into a
Barn, or Stable; to see a Christian all for the world is no better sight; Let
us take heed that we do not make this House of God a Den of Thieves, a Brothel
House for uncleaness, a Cage for unclean Birds, but let us adorn it with all
the grace of Gods Spirit, for Holiness becomes the Lords House for ever.
Especially since the ruins of this Spiritual House will draw with it the
ruins of the Material, as God threatens the Jews to do to their Temple, Jer.
^. 12, 14
as he did unto Shiloh for the wickedness of his people Israel.

And now to close up all. If any man shall think this concerns him not;
because God sends no Prophets now to tell us that for such and such sins, God
sends such and such Judgments. Let him know, that all these things that are
recorded in the Prophets, happened unto them for examples, and are written for
our admonition upon whom the ends of the world are come. 1 Cor. 10. 11. when
therefore we may see a parallel of sins and punishments with those registered in
sacred writ: we may without presumption conclude that those sins were the
provoking cause of those Judgments. And here the Parallel is so visible, that he
that runs may read; and I make no question but your own meditations have
run Parallel with my discourse so that most of my labor that way is already
saved.

For is it not the general complaint, and outcry of this City, that there is
an universal decay of Trade? Do not the Merchants complain? we look for much,
and that upon good ground; for we have sent forth our Ships richly laden and
ventured them on long and dangerous Voyages; but lce it comes to little, our
Ships return not, or if they do, the income does not answer the expense, our
Commodities hardly yield what they cost. Does not the Shopkeeper complain? we
look for much, having taken Houses at great Prices and Furnished our shops with
rich wares, but lo it comes to little, there are few Buyers, and but small
gains, we can scarce pay our rents. Does not the Handicrafts man complain we
look for much, for we labor hard and work good and sufficient wares; but lo
it comes to little; The Shopkeeper will not buy but at his own rates; so that
we have little more than our labor for our Pains. And that which adds to the
unhappiness of all this is, that every one of these is apt to impute this
Calamity to any thing, rather than the right cause and so hinder themselves of
the true remedy, because they will not understand the true cause of the
distemper: Either a Foreign Nations engrossing Trade abroad, or the
Magistrates neglect of Trade at home must bear the blame; who is it that
considers that Gods House lies wast, while every man runs to his own House?
Gods House said I, nay Gods Houses, how many of them lie in their ruins, in
their rubbish? for we must not fancy that God has no Houses now, and that
because that Temple at Jerusalem together with it is Ceremonial worship is
abolished that God has not adopted any other places, which he will own for
his; for before the foundations of that Temple were laid, and since they have
been razed, and one stone not left on another which was not thrown down, God
always had a place appropriated to his worship, and where he was pleased to
afford a more gracious Presence than elsewhere. Even in Paradise, Adam had a
place to present himself before God. Which was called Gods Presence or Face.
Genesis 3. 8. From which he hid himself, for from Gods general presence nothing
can be hid, but all things are naked and open. And his Sons out of Paradise had
their places where to bring their Sacrifices, Genesis 4. 3. From which when Cain
stood excommunicate for the Murder of his Brother Abel, he is said to be cast
out from the presence of the Lord. Verse. 16. Abraham, besides Altars in several
places, planted a grove, Genesis 21. 23. To be a fixed place for Gods worship, for
there he called on the name of the Lord. And so it is expounded by one that was
no great friend to our Churches. Ainsworth in l c.
And afterward when he is commanded to offer his Son Isaac, the very Mountain
is prescribed him, Genesis 21. 1. and Gods title to it ceased not with that one
act, for there Solomon's Temple was afterward built, which God in my Text calls
his House; nor did it then begin, if we may believe the general consent of the
Jewish Rabbis, Maimony in misnoth l. 8. and in Treatise of the Temple, c. 2.
s. 2.
who assert that to be the place where Cain and Abel, nay Adam himself offered:
When Jacob consecrated that place where he saw the Vision of the Ladder
reaching to Heaven, Genesis 28. 18. he called it Beth-el, Gods House, the ground
of which both consecration and name is rendered, Verse. 16, 17. Surely the Lord
is in this place and I knew it not, how dreadful is this place? This is none
other, but the House of God, the gate of Heaven. So that Gods Houses began not
with the Temple of Solomon, no nor that ambulatory Temple of Moses the
Tabernacle, Psa. 66. 13.
which is peculiarly by David called Gods House; nor while they were in being,
did they ingross that title to themselves, for there were both in Jerusalem and
in other places of the Land no small number of Synagogues for the People to
resort unto for their Devotions, which are called Synagogues of God, Psa. 74.
8. Psa. 83. 12.
and Houses of God, in the Plural Number: and these were Frequented by Christ
and his Apostles as well as the Temple. And since the Destruction of that
Temple, God was never destitute of Houses for his Worship. True it is that in
the Primitive times of Christianity, when they had not the Public allowance
and Countenance of authority, they could exercise their Religion only in
Private, yet then they had places for the Saints to meet in for Divine Worship,
such were the (...), the upper-roomes mentioned so frequently in the Acts of
the Apostles, and distinguished by St. Paul from Private Houses. 1 Cor. 11. 22.
Have ye not Houses to Eat and Drink, or despise ye the Church of God?
understood by most Interpreters both ancient and modern of the public place of
Gods Worship; those perhaps not so sumptous and stately as afterward, the
Churches mean Condition and the worlds envy would not permit that, but such as
their Poverty would allow they had. But when it pleased God to raise up Kings
and Emperors to favor sincerely the Christian Faith, Churches were then
erected in all places, and no cost spared, nothing thought to dear which that
way was spent and these were called (...), the Lords from whence the Scots
Kirk and our English Church does proceed, and is the same title which is given
to his day Rev 1. 10; And not improperly since we find the place and time of
Gods Worship Joined together by the Holy Ghost in Scripture, Lev. 19. 30. 8,
26. 2.
Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary; and then what the Son
of Syrach says of one may be applied to the other, and we may say why does one
place excel another? Ecclesasticus 33. 7.
by the knowledge of the Lord they are distinguished, and some of them he has
made high places and hallowed them, and some of them he has made ordinary
places. As the one is the Day of rest, and when we hallow it, it is called Gods
rest, so the other when Consecrated to his name is called Gods rest, Psalm. 132.
14.
This is my rest for ever. And such were those Houses in this City, which are
now wast, for they were Dedicated and Consecrated to Gods service, in them the
Saints were assembled, the Gospel of Jesus Christ was Preached, The Lords Holy
Name was Invocated, and the Sacraments of the new covenant duly administered, to
all which Christ under the Gospel has Promised a gracious presence. Where two
or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.
Mat. 18. 20. And to this promise he has set to his seal by Converting to, and
Confirming many a Soul in the doctrine of Jesus Christ from these places. Now,
that these are wast, is as legible, as if writ in Text; but where to lay the
blame is not perhaps so easily discovered. To impute it to the Magistracy of
this City, this Honorable Bench would be no less then Scandalum Magnatum. Their
Zeal in general is Sufficiently evidenced by this place wherein we are now
Assembled; and in particular many of them either by actual contribution, or
subscription, have testified abundantly their respects to these Houses: And of
the Commonalty, I have reason to have as good an opinion, if their abilities
were consonant to their desires, when I consider their ancient zeal while the
City was Flourishing to these Houses of God, how they opened their hands, and
filled with Blessings many Churches both at home and abroad, both in their own
and foreign Countries; yet even the best Sailors may be becalmed and want the
gale of a Prophet to encourage them, to go up to the Mountain and bring wood,
etc. Your hearts I am confident are good, it is but setting to your hands, and
the work will be done. Do but begin, and never fear the reproach of not
having wherewithal to finish; Do but lay the first stone, and never distrust
the providence of that God who is the Alpha and Omega, the Beginner and
Finisher of every good work. When Moses was about Building the Tabernacle, his
charge was no more but this, every one that is of a willing heart, Exodus 35. 5.
let him bring into the offering of the Lord, and they brought in so fast both
men and women, that there was too much; and a proclamation was made in the Camp
that they should bring in no more. When stuff was to be provided for the
Temple, 1. Cr^n. 29. 5.
King David left it at large: Whosoever is willing to consecrate his Service to the
Lord. and both Kings, Princes and People offered abundantly and willingly,
insomuch that he for himself and them gives thanks to the Lord in this form;
Who am I, verse 14.
and what is my People; that we should offer so willingly? Do but lead the
way, and I doubt not but God will stir up the hearts of others to follow; there
is not a Soul, that fears God but the Zeal of Gods House will eat it up,
there will be many a true hearted Araunah who will offer not his land but his
Timber for the House of the Lord; The Rich out of his abundance will give more,
and the poor Widow out of her Penury will give a mite. Even the labourer out
of his hire, the servant out of his wages, and the soldiers out of their pay,
will dedicate something, as the two Generals of Saul and David's armies did. 2.
Chr. 26. 28.
The Living will lay up in store for themselves a good foundation against the
time to come, that they may lay hold on Eternal life, and the dying, (I
persuade my self) will not make a will, but Gods House shall have a Legacy in
it. Even, the covetous usurer will out of compliance with the times, if not out
of remorse of conscience throw down some of his Silver with Judas into the
Temple: Do but propose the means, and you have a great and gracious King, the
Churches nursing Father, and faiths defender, who will promote the work, and
rather than it shall not go on, will with his Countryman Constantine the no
less religious than Magnificent Emperor, be content to carry stones on his own
shoulders toward it. You have a Loyal and Religious Parliament the Churches
Nursing Mother; ready to enact whatsoever shall be propounded to them for the
advancement of so great and glorious a work; nay do but set earnestly about
it, and God himself will go before you to make the crooked places straight,
and to break in pieces the Gates of Brass, Esa. 45. 2.
and to cut in sunder the bars of Iron, that is, to remove all rubs and
impediments, which would hinder the foundation of the Temple to be laid: and he
also will lay the head-stone thereof with shouting, saying, Grace, Grace unto
it. I cannot conclude better then with the exhortation of this Prophet. c 2. v.
4. Be now strong O Zerubbabel, says the Lord, and be strong O Josuah Son of
Josedech the high Priest and be strong all ye People of the Land, says the
Lord, and work for I am with you, says the Lord of Host; With you by my
help, and assistance; with you by my care and acceptance; with you by my
reward, and recompense: c. 2. 7.
for then will I fill these Houses with Glory, dwelling and having a delight in
them, and in them will I give peace, v. 9. verse. 19.
and in them will I furnish you with plenty too: and then happy would be the
People that are in such a Case yea blessed will this City be, which has this
Lord of Hosts to be their God. Now to this Lord of Hosts, Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, three Persons but one Infinite God, be ascribed in his holy Temple all
Praise Honor and Thanksgiving now and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

