The CASE
Of the Brewers, Innkeepers, and Victualers; touching the Grievances of
several Clauses, contained in several Acts of Parliament for Excise.
IN an Act made the last Session of Parliament, First.
Entitled; An Act for laying several Duties upon Low Wines or Spirits of the
First Extraction, and for preventing the Frauds and Abuses of Brewers,
Distillers, and other Persons, chargeable with the Duties of Excise: There is a
Clause that obliges all Brewers, Innkeepers, and Victualers, brewing party
Guiles to keep their Strong Beer in their Tuns until their Small Beer be all
carried out, and delivered upon pain of being charged for the whole Guile as
Strong Beer.

This is a hardship the Brewers are not able to undergo, for they cannot always
have Customers to take off all their Small Beer before their Strong is ready to
cleanse; and then they must be forced either to keep the Strong Beer in the
Tuns till it be spoiled, or to throw the Small Beer that remains into the
Gutter, or else pay for the whole Guile as Strong Beer.

The Brewers of Rochester and Chatham, and other Seaport Towns sell great
Quantities of Small Beer to the King: And if the Agents for Victualling have
not convenience to receive the same just as it is brewed, (as very often they
have not;) then must all the Strong of that Guile be kept till it be spoiled,
or if they cleanse any of it then the Brewers must pay for all the Small, as
Strong.

That the Brewers are now forced to deliver out their Small Beer before it is
fully brewed and worked, which makes it very unwholesome.

That the poor Innkeepers and Victualers in the Country have no opportunity to
sell their Small Beer, but used to utter the same in their own Houses. But as
this Clause is, they must be forced to throw it away; for they cannot keep any
in their House either for their Servants, or Family, or Soldiers when they are
quartered upon them, but all must live upon the Strong.

This Clause very much lessens the King's Duty of Excise: For many times when
the Brewers could sell their Strong Beer, they cannot sell their Small; and
therefore they are forced to forbear brewing for some time, and then many
private Families fall to brewing their own Beer, and so the King looses that
Duty.

It Is supposed the Intent of this Clause was to prevent mingling the Strong and
Small after 'twas Gauged: See 15 Car. 2d. 7, and 8. Will. Tertii.
But sure there are so good Provisions made by the Acts for Excise, and such
severe Penalties therein, that (without this unreasonable Clause) no Brewer
can, or will dare venture to do it.

In an Act made in the First Year of this King, Secondly.
and the late Queen Mary (of ever blessed Memory) Entitled; An Act for an
Additional Duty of Excise upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquors. It is declared
that Thirty four Gallons shall be charged upon all Brewers (except the Brewers
within the Cities of London and Westminster, and Weekly Bills of Mortality) for
a Barrel: And that all Brewers (except as aforesaid) shall be allowed for
Leakage, etc. Two Barrels and a Half.

This is an hardship upon the Brewers, also in the Country, that brew no Ale,
that they must sell Thirty six Gallons for a Barrel to their Customers, and be
allowed but Thirty four Gallons in their Excise.


