The CASE of the ORPHANS of the City of LONDON.
THE Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London for the time being, by
Ancient Usage and Custom of the said City, confirmed by several Acts of
Parliament, and saved to them by the Statute of 12 Car. 2. Cay. 24. That
enables the Fathers to appoint Guardians for their Children by Deed or Will,
Have been and are Guardians to the Children of all Freemen of London, being
Orphans, under the Age of One and twenty years, at the time of the Decease of
their Parents, till they attain such Age; and hold a Court before themselves
for the good Government of the Estates and Persons of such Orphans. The
Executor or Administrator of every Freeman, leaving any Orphan, by the said
Custom is obliged on pain of Imprisonment, forthwith after the Decease of the
Freeman, to deliver into the said Court upon Oath, a perfect Inventory of the
Estate of such Freeman, and within two Months after to pay into the Chamber
of, London such part thereof as shall belong to any Orphan, or to become bound
to the Chamberlain of London, with Three sufficient Sureties, Free men of
London, for payment of the same at such time as the Orphan shall attain the Age
of one and twenty years, be married, or die; and that in case any of the
Security die or become insolvent before the Money be paid, to bring in so many
other good and sfficient Sureties as the said Court should, accept and allow of
to be Security for the Payment as aforesaid.

The hardship of the said Custom, in relation to the Security required, rendered
it difficult in all Orphans Cases, and in most of them impossible to prevent
their Estates being put into the Chamber of London. And there is now due from
the City of London to about Fourteen hundred of Orphans, whose Estates, since
the Burning of London in the year 1666. and before the bringing of the Quo
Warranto against the said City, pursuant to the said Custom; and by Process and
Compulsion of the said Court of Orphans, and for want of Security, were paid
into the said Chamber of London, the Sum of 508314 li. 12 s. 4 d. Principal
Money, besides Finding Money, the non-payment whereof has reduced the greatest
part of the said Orphans, their whole Fortunes being in the said Chamber, to
extreme want and Misery.

This Honorable House were pleased the last Session, to order a Bill to be
prepared and brought in by a Committee of the House, for Relief of the Orphans,
upon the Heads under-mentioned; which Bill was accordingly brought in, and
twice read in the House, and committed to a Committee of the whole House, and
once read there, and thereupon the House Adjourned, and afterward was
Prorogued, and thereby the said Bill abated.

To Appropriate the City Lands toward payment of Four pounds per Cent. per
Ann. for ever, for every Hundred pounds of the Orphans principal Debt.

The Ancient Duty of Trovage, or Weighing of Un-freemens Goods.

The Ancient Duty or Water-bailage for Un-freemens Goods imported or exported
to and from London.

The Outropers Office for Goods sold by Outcry or Auction in London.

The Duty belonging to the Fifteen Cole-meeters of London after their Death.

For Eight pence per Chaldron on all Coals imported to London.

For One Penny per Quarter on all Corn, Grain, Seed, Malt, Meal or Flower
imported or brought to London.

For one Moiety of the Duties arising by Hackney-Coaches. All these with the
City-Lands to be applied for the Purpose abovesaid, viz. For the Use of the
said Orphans.

Since the said Orphans are reduced to this Deplorable Condition without any
default in themselves, their Estates having been forced into the Chamber of the
said City by the Law of the Land, and not voluntarily paid in, and it not
having been in their powers to prevent mis-applying the same by the Persons the
Law had fixed to be their Guardians,

It is humbly hoped, That the Parliament in commiseration thereof, will by
their Legislative Power provide such Relief to the Distressed Orphans, that
they may not remain so great Sufferers by their having yielded obedience to the
known Laws of the Land.


